Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The siege of Kenilworth: an historical romance
ΊΗ£
SIEGE OE KENILWORTH.
CHAPTER I. ŕ» i?-rJ-++4- *-*■ ^*- Л** Tht bani of othť ι tiiuebj holds thft^ourse with liis fatl. ers ■ X HE page which we open to our reader, is that eventful period in English history, when the pusillanimity and fickleness of our third Henry, stirred the nobles of the realm into rebellion and open defiance; when, setting at nought, their murmurs and their threats, he defied them in full parliament, clinging to his foreign favour¬ ites, and lavishing his treasures and his bounty, on the Gascons and Poictovines. Goadeä by just and maddened indigna- VOL. iv. в tion,
tion, the mere whisper of complaint swell¬ ed into invective and reproach ; irregular exactions had impoverished the people; arbitrary and despotic rule had crushed the buoyant spirits of men : England had become one scene of injustice, violi e, and crime ; and loss added to loss, injury crowded upon injury, rousing at length all of legitimate feeling, braced to the vaunt of opposition. Unmindful of his coronation-oath ; cold and dead to his natural subjects ; influenced and instigated by the ephemeral crowd— as flies in the sunbeam—fluttering around the bright blaze of majesty, Henry, daring the malice of his fortune, closed his ears and his heart to the pleading whispers of appeal. But it is not for us to thread the in¬ tricate maze leading to the memorable provisions of Oxford, or to linger over re¬ cords, perpetuating the shackles imposed on royalty, and the arbitrary policy ofthe bold and resolute barons. Those who have perused the swollen pages of that long and disastrous
disastrous reign, know, that nominal autho¬ rity was all which remained to the king; that tied down and bound by the iron thongs of compulsion, power was trans¬ ferred into the hands of an elected few :— and the head of the state, the chief spring in the body politic, sinking into a mere cipher, retained the empty title, without one privilege of supremacy :—know, that the crying wrongs of the nation, calling for prompt and peremptory interference, quick di vorcing the nobles from the throne, linked them in one firm and despotic con¬ federation. Alive to all the weaknesses of humani¬ ty, instigated by private feeling, and sway¬ ed by self-interest, policy, in an indemnity from future recognisance, marks each or¬ dinance savouring of reform. The king's especial authority for the enforcement of every decision—his solemn confirmation of the charter of king John—his abatement ofthe rigour ofthe feudal law, lightening, thereby, and benefiting the people — his в 2 solemn
solemn bond of obligation, to indemnify all the zealous organizers of the edict :— ñnd last of all, his sacred and volim tarv v' oath, sworn upon the altar and shrine of St. Edward, to correct all former abuses, and to act henceforth in concert with his¬ own natural subjects. Quick follows, the form of confederacy—the vow, leaguing the solemn association, administered to each individual baron—to the chosen go¬ vernors—to the chief justiciary—to the chancellor of England : each, and every¬ one, swearing upon the holy Gospels, dili¬ gently and faithfully to abet in the gene¬ ral reformation ; in counteracting the coun sels of evil men ; in expelling all rebels and disturbers of the public peace; and in the strict and uniform discharge of their several duties, under the pain and the pe¬ nalty, of forfeiting all the lands, tenements, and hereditaments, holden by them in the kingdom. We further read, how Henry, writhing beneath his chains, and weary of the mock show
show of royalty, gradually, and subtilly, obtaining írom pope Urban, a bull, to ab¬ solve himself and prince Edward from all oaths to the provisions of Oxford, cast off the imposed burden, declaring, in a con¬ voked council, or parliament, met at Lon¬ don, tliat, by putting himself under their government, he was become more their slave than their king: and loudly abjur¬ ing all of obligation, he, together with his queen, threw himself into the Tower, and manning the walls, and carefully fortify¬ ing against outward attack, defied all of en¬ treaty or menace. But though, by seced¬ ing and temporary concession, the feuds of civil war were for a brief season avert¬ ed, all the horrors of its blood-stained crest, were destined to burst upon devoted England ; though the mock show of con¬ ciliation and favour, marked the words, and glowed in the promises of the mo¬ narch, the transient sunbeam, vanishing, violence, and outrage, and confusion, and anarchy, rode on the tempest бЗ The
The chronicler, in transcribing the Pro¬ teus-character of Henry, notes the frequent altercations arising betwixt him and his brother-in-law, Simon de Montford : alter¬ nately do we trace him in favour and in disgrace; subject to the light breath of caprice; tossed and bandied by the hurri¬ cane of court storms. Landed in Eng¬ land; upheld by blind and lavish partiali¬ ty ; caressed, courted, trusted, enriched, en¬ nobled, wedded to the royal Eleanor, and raised to the earldom of Leicester. Quick follows, in the blank of neglect, the perishable, the sand-erected fabric of royal countenance: the earl shrinks beneath the ice-chill : and then again, through the che¬ quered mazes of fitful destiny, every frown of the capricious Henry is chased, and the heroic exploits of the gallant patriot, in reducing the rebellious Gascons, endears him alike to king and to subject Crown¬ ed with laurels and with honours, we be¬ hold him, laden with blessings, and en¬ riched with the hearťs meed of gratitude : but
but fortune's weather-vane varies; and Leicester, in his differences with his royal master, firmly upheld by the nobles, ex¬ cites in one, his jealousy and his hatred; ill will, bitterness, and recrimination, en¬ sues; reproach, invective, rancour, quick follows ; and open enmity, and biting ma¬ lice, mark each casual meeting. Chosen president of the committee ap¬ pointed for the redressing of grievances, the earl of Leicester next appears upon the busy theatre of action, as the main spring in the work of reform ; under the high sounding guise of patriotism, confederat¬ ing with Gloucester, Norfolk, Albemarle, Warwick, Hereford, and the long list of malcontent nobles : bearing all the prero¬ gative of power, and cramping, crippling the sway of royal rule, we see him, head¬ ing a tumultuary host, and igniting the scathing brand of civil discord. But although Henry quailed beneath the giant strides of the earľs policy, his spirit and his heart spurned at fear : when, в 4 in
in his passage to the Tower, the warring of the elements, drove him, for shelter, even to the steps of Durham House ; when step¬ ping from the boat, he met the lordly owner, smiling and greeting his approach —when, in the language of courtesy, Lei¬ cester exclaimed— "Sire, why are you afraid, the tempest is now passed?" the king, with a look of stern and piercing re¬ proach, replied — " J fear thunder and lightning above measure ; but, by ihc head of God, I do more fear thee, than all the thunder and lightning qf the world Γ " My liege, 9 ' pursued the earl, " it is in¬ jurious and incredible, that you should Hand in fear of me, who have always been loyal both to you and your realm, whereas you ought to fear your enemies, such as destroy the realm and abuse you with bad counsels" Brawls, and blood, and stripes, mark the jealousy and boiling ire of party: the • church, and the state, betray one scene of mad contention ; and the persevering con¬ sistency
sistency of Leicester and the barons, drove Henrv, and his adherents, once more to the security of the Tower. Again, the burning brand of discord scattered her sparks and her flames: temporary adjust¬ ments, and violent infringements, succes¬ sively succeeding ; the barons, strenuously maintaining the statutes of Oxford, and the misguided Henry, as pertinaciously adhering to all his self-arrogated privi¬ leges. Histoiy records also, the secret confe¬ deracy, existing betwixt Lewellcn prince of Wales, and the malcontent nobles of England ; and many a page, is blotted and bleared, with the fatal excesses of party : towns, and hamlets, and castles, disman¬ tled and burnt; many a city sacked; and many a fastness humbled. But to note the sunshine and storm, wdiich quick smil¬ ed and lowered on the era we commemo¬ rate, would be to enumerate every black and white square chequering the chess¬ board :—it was an era, in which, each day в 5 was
was fate-fraught; in which, the demon, said to tempt and mar the destinies of men, took rapine, ambition, and violence, for his auxiliaries. Proceed we then, to draw the attention of our readers, to the close ofthe last vamped-up peace, when Henry, in¬ flated with the brief gale of consequence, gathering in the growing strength of his party, and drifting him on, through all the horrors, and ventures, and mad exploits of revenge, accompanied, by prince Edward, his son ; by the king of the Romans, his brother; by John Comyn, and his host of valiant Scots ; by William de Valence, and Robert de Brus; by the lord of Galway; and by very many ofhis own subjects and liege friends—quitted his shelter in the Tower, and marched forthwith for Oxford, the appointed rendezvous, for his forces to rally round the legitimate standard of the realm ;—as though the place, in which the mortal blow was aimed at his prerogative, should be the witness of his first struggle, and zealous efforts for supremacy, From
From Oxford, having first summoned his military tenants, king Henry, and his swollen ranks, marched against North¬ ampton : the reduction ofthe city of Lei¬ cester, and of the town and castle of Not¬ tingham, succeeding, bear record of the smiles which Fortune continued to lavish on the monarch. It was at Nottingham, that king Henry, and his nobles, kept the feast of Easter—it was at Nottingham, that the baron of Hansiape, and sir Roger Mortimer, joined him with their well- armed followers*—it was at Nottingham, that news was heard, of the earl of Lei¬ cester, having, with a strong body of the Londoners, in passion-week, besieged the earl of Warren, iu the castle of Rochester: —and it was from Nottingham, that, with new-strung hatred, and party zeal, king Henry, heading his adherents, marched, to raise the siege, and to relieve it, at peril of life.
в 6
i-'IrlxÄ.Jr*»
CHAPTER II.
# *-+*r*hf ■*++*■++**+■*■
-VW empty ail these veins,
Ånd shed my dear blood drop by drop i* the dust y But I will lift the down-trod earl of Kent, Аь bigh ľ íhe air as this unthankful king, As this ingrate and cankerM Henry. Shakespeari.. The wild flush of transport glowed in every feature of De Maudit, when he re- sought the guard-room ; all of inquietude had given place to hope and joy ; he look¬ ed like one, buoyant on the dizzy wave of expectation, with the promised boon of bliss in view; like one, who dreaming nought of care, ne'er wrestled with the heart-pang of disappointment : his smile was as the herald of glad tidings; his elas¬ tic bound, as of hope, snatching at frui¬ tion ; and when he encountered the eye- beam of wonder and of sadness which greeted his entrance, he resolved it in de¬ jection,
jection, rather than reproach. How could the eye-beam be other than of wonder and of sadness ? They had parted in mutual uncontrollable agitation, and Hubert had worn the long hour of William's absence, in melancholy musing; he had passed from trial to trial, from woe to woe, until his own trials, and his own woes, had be-" come identified in the trials and the woes of the earl of Kent ;—until the trials and the woes of the earl of Kent, breathing sad consistency in each and every narra¬ tion, superseded the immediate pressure of his own. The castle of Hafeld, the once chosen resort of the deposed favourite, had given wing to fertile fancy : he had pierced every intricate fold of the labyrinth; he had threaded every subtle turning in the raa- chiavelian tissue, labouring the overthrow of the ill-starred De Burgh ; he had eli¬ cited, much to lament, and more to cen¬ sure; and his conclusions, spite ofthe ty¬ rant sway of early habit, had steeped the actions
actions of the fickle and inconstant Henry, in the thick haze of doubt and incongru¬ ity. He struggled hard, to divorce the íť Lord's anointed," from the trite charge of injustice, from the human passion of revenge; he strove to prove him other than ungrateful, to gift him in a semblance, as white, and as spotless, as that, in which devoted loyalty, would fain gift the mind and the actions of God's vicegerent upon earth ! He forgot, alas ! that elevated, as he was, and wrapped, as he was, in the awful fold of majesty, his heart was as frail, his judgment as imperfect, his foresight as weak, his motives as fallible, his actions as replete with error, as the heart, the judg¬ ment, the foresight, the motives, and the actions, of the meanest subject, dwelling within the shadow of his sceptred great¬ ness :—he forgot, that man, from the fall, has ever lived the dupe of his own wilful passions; that decked in " brief authority," elevated above the herd of his fellows, hemmed in by the servile flattery of venal followers,
followers, shut, as it were, from the whole¬ some medicine of self-scrutiny, he becomes as a feather, bandied by the breath of his own caprice, and trammelled in the iron gyves of his own prejudice! " You possess a heart," said De Maudit, attentively regarding him, " teeming and overflowing with every mild and generous attribute ; a spirit, to redress grievance, and strength, to crush oppression : you pos¬ sess a judgment, deep and penetrating : you possess feelings, sensitively alive to human ill ; and yet you cast yourself into the strong vortex of party spirit, and lose, at once, the play and the sway of your own reason : you relinquish, without struggle, the right of self-action, and renounce all the legitimate privileges of the mind : you hurl the stone upon the already fallen, not because your nature savours of severity, but because blind custom, urges you to bend the knee to arbitrary power." " Hold ! I implore you, hold," said Hu¬ bert; " your language is of fire: it is a language,
language, William, foreign to your home and your habits; a language, you have gathered, from the rash and dangerous ad¬ herents of a lawless cause." " Nay, you must be patient, you must hear further," resumed De Maudit —" you must visit the breathing ruin, now in Ha¬ feld castle—you must see, as I see, the full pressure of despotic tyranny—you must mourn, as I mourn, the bleeding victim of capricious hate, ere you lay check on the wholesome truths I utter. Would to Heaven"—and he clasped his hands with ardour—" I could know Hen¬ ry Plantagenet, here, in the castle of Ha¬ feld ! I could hold him to the stake—I could probe his heart, and prove whether it be of flesh or stone. I would offer no violence, save speech—I would violate no subject's duty— í would not raise a finger 'gainst the ť Lord's anointed :' but I would thunder De Burgh in his dull ear, until echo should bandy the sound, and the vaulted sky, ring with the name, so pro¬ scribed
scribed and hated. I would cast it forth to the white cliffs of England : De Burgh should quicken each ( spirit of a sound, 5 and rppord. in his own fall, the ingratitude of a perjured master : aye, and I would tell this king, this taskmaster, this cold ob¬ durate Henry, that tyranny dissolves obe¬ dience; that oppression, and scorn, and cruelty, loosens the chain, and snaps the rivet, forged, by enjoined duty, and long custom. I would preach to him of mu¬ tual obligation—I would tell him, that virtue is the best prop to an earthly throne ; that moderation and justice are the sure spells to fix the wild affections of the my¬ riad ; that self-control, gentleness, and ur¬ banity, calling forth the tribute of volun¬ tary homage, are the bonds of iron, which wed the hearts, and unite the interests, of monarch and of subject." " Alas !" faltered the heartstruck Hu¬ bert, " your laxity of speech, partakes but of your lawless darings. The human mind, quaffs not at one draught, the fell poison of
of guilt : it sips the deleterious chalice, until it become weakened, intoxicated, dead to virtue, and lost to exertion. Wil¬ liam, William, talk not of bleedino v\ reeks and breathing ruins : in you, cased as you are, in steel, and bearing, a<* you do, the proud crest of defiance, I behold—I mourn, a wreck, as complete, as fatally entire, as the wreck which wrought the ruin of the world." De Maudit smiled sceptically.—* f 'Tis of small import," he icmarked, " whether we condemn from impulsive feeling, or whether our condemnation spring in deli» berate opposition. I openly condemn the whole and entire system of Henry's arbi¬ trary rule :—you tacitly condemn his arbi¬ trary rule, in your pity for the earl of Kent." Hubert, in wild amaze, gazed on the animated faee of his friend ; he traced the lurking smile of mischief in his dark eye, the wonted flash of his native spirit, and he wondered, how, in a moment, so re¬ plete with agony and trial, he could har¬ bour
bour ought so light and frivolous. He guessed not the hidden spring, impelling nope, and spurring to exertion ; he sus-
»1Л/1+П/-1 »-!ƒ><- -ť-lia oiirvf In ! ! 1 vn ГЛ I 'i XT t f\ {\ Il f Itû pV-V/tVV* »IVI« HIV. OUUWV HUL) l'illjillii «JÍJ MIV warm heart and ardent nature of De Mau¬ dit, and binding him, the ready dupe, to the wiles and the blandishments of a trea¬ cherous association. The buglehorn, which had summoned from the guard-room, was a messenger from the castle of Kenilworth-—was the trusted page of the lady Ingeirica, borne* as De Maudit fondly fancied, on the light pinion of love, and bearing, on the vellum, close hid in his bosom, characters, more precious, than incense, burnt on the altar of Divinity—more sweet, than summer dew in the maiden rosebud ! The scrap was brief and energetic : it was addressed, a) sir William De Maudit, governor of IIa í eld; and it ran: u This comes, greeting you with warm wishes, in the great and glorious cause of reformation, and praying you to win to our
our banner, this friend, this envoy from Hansiape. He has a heart, however cased in prejudice, alive to the wrongs of the earl of Kent. In tlie tapestry-room, here, in the castle of Kenihvorth, we have probed, and we have proved, and we find him capable of great actions. The best weapon, be the generous ardour of his own feelings : bend him, and win him to us, and boundless be our gratitude." That promised gratitude ! that bound¬ less gratitude !—how did it intoxicate, and madden the brain, of the confiding credu¬ lous William !—how did it open to his view, the golden harvest, for which he had sacrificed peace, and dazzle him, with a gleam of bliss, too bright for ought save heaven !—how did it fan the lover-dream of his fancy, and waft him back, through all the magic tissue, and kindling haze of illusive passion ! Again, in imagination, did he behold—as he had often beheld— the beauteous semblance, of hope, and fear, and gentle, winning, half-yielding reluc¬ tance ;
tance ; lingering in the downcast eyes, and dappling, with radiant tints, a complexion, dazzling and pure, as the new-blown lily! -—did he see, the fair false face of Ingel- rica, playful and basîiful, half hid amid the raven clusters of her silken hair—did hc recall, all the witchery of the acted modesty; and alike blind, and alike wil¬ ful, believing her angel, as she seemed, did he feel again the tremour of her po¬ lished hand ; did he picture again the heaving of the snowy bosom, as though ivith the wild flutter of emotion! " And such a heart—.and such a prize, for me f " he articulated, covering with ar¬ dent kisses, the unconscious vellum. 'Ίη- gelrica ! angel of my destiny ! thy word is kuv; thy wish, the future standard of my ever}' action !" He forgot the heavy price demanded ; he forgot, that honour, and that principle, were alike to bleed, before the altar of in¬ satiate passion ; or, if lie had recalled tîıc fearful tax, if he could have remembered the
the tremendous recognition, he was not himself; he could, in the words of An¬ thony, have exclaimed : « ----- -------4j lC deseives More worlds titan ï сап 1оье ! Thus framed and fashioned for the fur¬ therance of subtle policy, De Maudiťs eye glowed with exultation, and his cheek with rapture, as he stood again in the pre¬ sence of his friend; as he dwelt upon the abuses of existing power, and strove to sap the native spring of loyalty : but Hu¬ bert parried each sophistic argument : firm in genuine integrity, he ceded not one tittle of his legitimate duty. " You may conquer by dint of words,' he sorrowfully exclaimed, " but you can« not turn my heart from its rightful bias." " I will conquer by more than words.'" quick rejoined De Maudit — " I will coib quer, by that never-failing medium, the heart. I know your heart, my friend ; and be your heart the auxiliary I covet. Come
Come with me; now, even now; and when you go hence, and when you return to Hansiape, your pity for the injured must aualifv the iust condemnation vour fealty will not utter." " Whither would you lead ?" ahked the wondering Hubert. " I will lead, where tears only shall be elicited. Trust to my guidance. I may be changed in outward seeming, but not in inward substance." " Lead on," said Hubert, firmly : " be the governor of Hafeld lost in William De Maudit." Crossing the court-yard, and quick threading many a winding intricacy, De Maudit paused not, until he gained the base of a tower, detached from the main body of the castle: it was trenched in, and it was closely guarded, with ought betokening strength : he turned an eye of sadness upon his companion, and he whis¬ pered : " Like unto the precincts of the dead, 1 approach this mausoleum for the living.
living. Feel you, no awe—-no lagging of the pulses?" ť * I fee more than I can body," thought Hubert ; but he spoke not ; he betrayed not those feelings, save, by the quiver of the lip, and the ashy tint ofthe cheek. William drew close to the low postern ; he thrice blew a shrill whistle, and the echo of the last blast, was quick followed, by the hollow rattle of a chain, and the harsh grating oi heavy bars. The door flew open : instinctively did he displace bis steel cap. and lowering it, so that tht 4 sable plume nearly sw T ept tlit 1 ground, and beckoning onwards, he advanced, with an uncovered head. It was respect, and iî was feeling, which tokened in the action , and Hubert, without knowing why, did so likewise. De Maudit did but bend to the lowly reverence of the porter; but when he had reached the stone landing- place of the first flight of stairs, he paused, as though to listen. Profound ;md awful was the stillness : it was a stillness, as deep,
deep, as is the stillness ofthe charnel-house, wheu the gloom of midnight thickens, and all of animate matter, is wrapped in deaths twin-bister, sleep. Though broad day, the sunny glory of the heavens was obscured and dim, for light whs admitted through high and narrow windows. Леер чтк în the massy walb, and darkened with the artist's toil, in manv a hero of ancient storv, and main an exploit, of moie than mortal hardihood. 41 Whither point yc V" asked Hubert. e * Hist, yet a moment," urged William; and then he softlj tapped at an opposite door, and the same grave-likv· silence fol¬ lowed. A light tbotsť, p sounded from within : the door was opened cautiously, and a woman, close muffled m her wimple, bowed to the courteous iccognition of De Maudit They stood apart, and they communed in ίι under tone. It seemed, to the wrapt interest of Hubert, as tliough no voice vol. ιν. v could
coidd rise higher than a whisper; it seem¬ ed, like unto « -_———Tlie hmd of Gi-lpotl a, inhabited by u<mc but by thr· de-td, Exceptuóme any shadows, and they're siient <l Wound to tbe very climax of expectan¬ cy, his blood curdling, and his heart over¬ flowing, he watched the varying features of his friend ; he read, interest, and hor¬ ror, and bleeding pity ; and hë traced the swollen tear, slow trickling dowm his pal¬ lid cheek ; and once, he saw indignation flash like scathing lightning ; and once, he saw him, raise his hands and eyes, as though in imprecation. Si Doubtless, he lends his ear, to some sad fearful story/ 5 thought Hubert ; "■ and tears, and pity, and indignation too, he yields in prodigal bounty. Strange incon¬ sistency ! e'en whilst his own kind father, writhes beneath the double pang, of his neglect and base desertion. Oh, world ! world ! Oh, monstrous, crying proof, of r ank perversion ' Well may we pray for grace;
grace; well, may we strive——" He ceased. Λ shriek, and such a shriek, rang through the tower! De Maudit sprang to his side : the dame fled back into the chamber. " What bodes that sound ?" demanded Hubert. " With other guide, ľd doubt of foul play." " Most foul—most fatally foul!" ex¬ claimed William. " Picture it as black as hell, and father it on Henry Plantagenet." Hubert could scarcely breathe ; a suffo¬ cating sensation pressed on his heart, sus¬ pending all his powers ; he felt a mortal chillness ; and though he was brave, even to the despite of life, yet did his spirit quail, and his knees smite each other. " You arc strangely agitated," said De Maudit " Guess you, the bleeding ruin you are about to visit ?" ť< Strangely—inexplicably," faltered Hu¬ bert, clinging to the shoulder of his friçnd, and raising his hand, to wipe the death- damps from his brow. с 2 Another,
Another, and another shriek, rose and died away ; and then, a long unbroken sound of mournful melody, so strangei} wild and touching, that it seemed, as chi chant of heaven's minstrels}, rising, and lingering, and melting, like softest breath of summer even. Hubert's breast heaved, and his eves flooded ; he 1шп*г his head, to hide his feelings ; but sensibility snapped the check-rein, and he sobbed aloud. " Be pacified," implored William. " T*s but the systematic usage of a scared and distraught brain." '' Sure, 'tis the music of the spheres 1 and Hubert bent forward, and held in lib breath. " Say, rather, the plaint of a broken heart," whispered De Maudit; ** the shriek, speaks a lingering gleam of the past ; the chaunt, savours instinctive piety : the one, denotes despair; the other—if we could so fancy·—submission." " And why not believe it piety ? and why not fancy it submission ?" said Hu¬ bert
bert. " Virgin mother !" and he bowed his head as though before the cross, " 'tis a chant, will live in my ears, even unto death !" " I tell you, she is mad, quite mad," re¬ joined De Maudit ; " and however there be method in madness, still------ ·" He ceased, for the door was again thrown open, and the same attendant beckoned onwards.—" The royal Marga¬ ret, will not see—will not heed you now," she said : " she has ended the miserere, and she kneels before the altar." De Maudit replied not ; he passed his arm within Hubert's, and they entered a kind of anti-room together. It ltd to a chamber, loftier and larger, better lighted and better fashioned ; for it was hung with tapestry, and covered with matting ; the settles Avere lined with rich velvet, and the gilded cornices, and the tastefully dis¬ posed decoration, spoke luxury and prince¬ ly splendour; yet did the same air of lone¬ liness prevail, the same profound blank, С 3 the
the same unbroken melancholy. They trod with soundless steps, and they fol¬ lowed the attendant across the chamber, with that sensation of indescribable reve¬ rence, with which the youthful mind, ho¬ vers around the bier of death. Three steps, and a winding passage branched from the chamber; and again, another flight of steps, and they found themselves in a room fit¬ ted up as a chapel. That too was covered with matting ; the high windows, darken¬ ed, with angels, and with saints ; the altar- piece, the Ascension of the Blessed Jesus ; the altar, of Parian marble: but the breath¬ ing statue, which stood before the altar, was to the eye, as bloodless, and as cold î She stood upon the last step, her eyes bent upon the earth, her features, fixed and wan, as though already sered in the mort-cloth ; for not one tint, of vital red, dappled her lips or cheeks ; her hair, long, and black, as the raven's wing, fell loosely on her neck and shoulders ; her hands were crossed upon her bosom ; and she looked,
looked, like Ossian's ghosts, as though borne on winds, and dissolving amid mists and dews. " View her well," whispered De Mau¬ dit. ťť It is the royal Margaret of Scot¬ land—the countess of Kent—the frenzied wife of the injured De Burgh !" Hubert uttered aery of horror, and she raised her dark eyes at the instant : a some¬ thing, like expression, momentarily flash¬ ed over her beautiful features, but it was gone, almost as quick, as the thought which awakened it : again she stood, as though marbled, nought of life appearing, save the heavings of the bosom. " Let us away,'* implored Hubert ; " ra¬ ther would I encounter death in the field, than a sight so harrowing." " 'Tis a sight, must probe to the very hearťs core," exclaimed William ; " yet does it but stamp the rancour of the crowned tyrant. 'Tis Henry's return for service—'tis his acknowledgment of favour — tis his acquittal, for all the zeal, and all с 4 the
the devoted loyalty, of' his once valued justiciary. Said I not, 'twas a bleeding wreck—'twas a breathing ruin ? Nay, nay, you must tarry yet a little longer ; you must mark her well ; you must see, you must hear her. Hubert, you·------" " Hubert! Hubert 1 " shrieked the lady; and Hubert trembled in every limb— Hubert felt the chilly dews of death fast gathering on his forehead, he could not speak; he could not answer; every feeling was in arms; every sensation wild¬ ly complex : he met the steadfast gaze of the hapless countess, and he traced such a volume of melancholy earnestness, of deep- seated woe, that all his sympathies were given to her, and to her sorrows. " Hist! hist!" she pronounced, descend¬ ing from the step of the altar, and moving, as though in darkness, or in caution. " 1 gave him to friar Laurence—I feared, lest the wrongs of the father, should be visited on the son. God keep us all ! Perchance I judged wrongfully"— and she pressed her shadowy hand upon her forehead— iS but
** but the world is so full of springes, ami lime-twigs, and gins, and snares. Lord ' Lord ! what if the poor bird had been trap¬ ped by the fowler ?" " Jesu Alaria ! M ejaculated Hubert. De Maudit tokened silence, and grasp¬ ing his arm, held him with a nerve of iron. The rovai Margaret advanced close be- side them ; her step w T as dignified ; her look majesty.—** You must hie to the Temple," she said ; " you must cite one friar Laurence. He can expound more than I can tell ye : he can confute the wicked perjuries, and the black lies, gen¬ dered in the court circle." Again she raised her hand to her forehead, and stood as ifin deep thought, till actuated by sud¬ den impulse—" Tis the sunshine of Hen¬ ry's smile which has hatched the precious brood," she pursued ; " 'tis the craving of Henry's avarice, which has aimed the downfall of De Burgh's glory—'tis Hen¬ ry, who sacks the treasure—'tis Henry, wdio despoils the land. A faithful steward, с 5 forsooth I
forsooth! a bright dispenser of law and justice! God a mercy on us all! vvhere the king lacks honesty, woe betide the people ! I tell you"— and the wild fire of her eye was wellnigh scathing—'" Henry Plantagenet has turned traitor to hi*« own honour, traitor to his best friend : he has wrested the treasure from the Knights- Templars ; he has damned his own soul for gold—-gold—gold—the price of many a man's blood ; the touchstone of many a man's honesty! Aye, and he has torn away my children—and he has murdered my husband—and he has bound me down. here, in chains, and tied a string of lire across my brain. But I will snap the rivet yet—I will arraign him at the judgment- seat—-I will heap red-hot coals upon his head, even as he heaps them upon mine. Come, away, away ; bear me to the pre¬ sence of my sovereign lord the king—to the feet of Alexander of Scotland. I will have justice—-justice—justice, on the per¬ jured king of England,'" %< Dreadful '*
" Dreadful î" faltered Hubert, yet could he not withdraw his eyes from the uncon¬ scious object of his tenderest pity. " Ts there no help?" he asked ; " no hope?" " Hope," shrieked the maniac; " aye, in the sky, among the stars : but not on earth—not among kings. God wot í they are blinder than their own subjects ; for they see through other men's eyes ; they act, through other men's judgments. If ye wouid crave justice, seek it in heaven ; yell never find it upon earth. Come to the altar—to the step of the altar: let us cast down our burdens together"— and she held forth her hand. But as Hubert advanced, the whole expression of her countenance varied ; she scanned him from head to foot, and tenderness, and grief, and wild amazement, spoke in every feature. It seemed, as though lingering intellect flashed through the blank of mental darkness; as though some deep, some buried remembrance, revi¬ ving in her heart, quickened all its lag- c 6 ging
ging pulses, and rallied, to bless, rather than to curse ; for the smile, wiiich hover¬ ed around her lip, was wellnigh thrilling; the gleam, which lived in her eye, was of almost unearthly graciousness ; yet was the ray electric ; it vanished with the ra¬ pidity of thouglit, and shrinking from the touch of* Hubert, and wildly shrieking, she flew back alone to the altar, mounted the last step, folded her arms, and fixed immoveable, stood, rooted, as it were, in statue-like rigidity. Not a word was exchanged in descend¬ ing from the tower: Hubert could not, and William, would not speak : the one was absorbed in the agony of strong¬ ly-excited feeling; the other, in conjec¬ turing the issue of the seeming struggle. They crossed the court-yard as before ; De Maudit would have passed the guard¬ room, but Hubert paused at the door.— "What further is required of me?" he asked. " Nought else," replied William. u 'Tis your
your own instinctive sense of right, must point your actions/ 1 " Then this hour will I depart for Han¬ siape," unhesitatingly rejoined Hubert; " this very hour, do I crave your promised pass from Hafeld." De Maudit looked reproach.—" And the royal Margaret," he asked, " the fren¬ zied wife of the earl of Kent ?" " (iod be w r ith her !" feelingly pro¬ nounced Hubert : " all aid from man is impotent." - And her wrongs, her crying wrongs/ 1 urged William ; " the redress of her grie¬ vances—the incarceration ofher husband. 1 ' " All rest alike in the hands of Hea¬ ven," firmly responded Hubert. " It is not the alleged precedent of error, can make me an apostate to positive duty. I am bound, by gratitude, and by love, to the baron of Hansiape ; by law, and by fealty, to the vantage and weilbeing of my king. I can mourn for you ; I can pray for you ; here, even here, William, in this
this strong hold of treason ; but I cannot advocate your cause : for neither the wrongs of the earl of Kent, or the afflic¬ tions of his unhappy countess, can annul the oath of allegiance, or indemnify the guilt of mad rebellion." " Then will I stand the brunt alone," said De Maudit, bitterly : tť where preju¬ dice surpasses feeling, the war of words is idle. My honour is the guarantee of your safe egress from Hafeld : you shall depart hence ; you shall journey through the pa¬ triot bands untouched." " And may we not part in peace-«- in individual good-will ?" said Hubert. " Though compelled to journey back in solitary regret, may I not bear one heart- balm to solace my loneliness ?" " Aye, a hundred," fervently exclaimed De Maudit, " if warm wishes, and anxi¬ ous interest, profiteth ought ! Thoughts are as air," striving at cheerfulness ; " they wing, o'er earth, and o'er ocean ; and my thoughts,
thoughts, and my heart, will not be dam¬ med up here in Hafeld Castle." " Perchance they may light on Han¬ siape," sighed Hubert. " Ah. William ! each little nook must be familiar; and each dear inhabitant·------" He ceased, for emo¬ tion choked him. " I shall remember all," said De Mau¬ dit, smothering down a sigh ; ťť every cor¬ ner, and every breathing member. If'tis ought of solace, Hubert"—and he spoke with impressive feeling—" know, that my heart owns dreadful discord : but strife is the destiny of man : even from the womb, we wrestle, and we jangle : 'twas so from the beginning, and 'twill be so to the end: we are but an epitome of the whole. Conduct is fate, dear Hubert, and man, the carver of his own fortune. No more — I pray you, no more"—checking the effort to speak-— " I know your reason co¬ gent, and your language fire—I know the whole kingdom at hazard : disasters, tu¬ mults, crowding on each other, and party- strife
strife riding higher than the waves of ocean—I know it all ; nay, more than you can tell me : but ï have pledged my faith to Leicester—I have sworn destruction to his foes. Tarry you then at Hansiape : comfort my father : and God be thanked, we cannot meet in hostile ranks !" Hubert knew the loyal zeal of the ba¬ ron of Hansiape, and the possibility of yet meeting, sword-point to sword-point, flashed on fancy : it was a dreadful possi¬ bility, and he shuddered, as though be¬ neath the death-pang.— 6( 1'erehance," he murmured, " we may meet no more on earth—or, wc know not how we nmy meet." He paused, for William had caught the wild terror, and his everv feature wa» convulsed ; he turned away his ilice ; he wrestled manfully with his feelings ; then. with a sigh, almost swelling into a sob, he pronounced :■— " As the hearťs comforter of my blessed father, you cannot quit Han¬ siape : 'tis my consolation—twill be my ' eonso«
consolation to the end. We rnay war in words, but w r e cannot war in action." " Wonld to Heaven," ejaculated Hu¬ bert, " we were as closely united in inter¬ est, as we are in real sentiment ! 'Tis not your judgment, which wars against us ; 'tis not your cool decision, which points your spear, and cases you in steel : no, no, 'tis your passions, not your principles, which chain you in the bonds of Leicester ; 'tis------" De Maudit struggled from the close embrace which held him ; he knew not how to chide, yet he feared to hear the name of Ingelrica coupled with the ana¬ thema of j ust indignation : and when Hu¬ bert concluded, " 'Tis the snare of insidi¬ ous woman"—when he looked up, he found himself alone in the guard-room, and the door closed,
CHAP-
CHAPTER III. I %ee a strange confession in thine eve . Thou shak'st thy head; and huld'st tt íear or bin, To speak a truth. Shakespeare. It was not William De Maudit —it was the collected and unbending governor of Hafeld Castle, who, in the brief space ofa few moments, accompanied by the lord Henry de Montford, re-entered the guard¬ room. His step bespoke command : and when he raised his plumed helm, in cour¬ teous obeisance» all of lingering tenderness had fled ; all, and every single trace, of the past struggle : he looked like one, whom philosophy, or stoicism, or severe disci¬ pline, hardens into stone ; like one, upon whom, the passing shifts and changes of busy life—as shadows o'er a still lake, darkening, not indenting—sheds but the one
one universal blank of apathy : he held a scrap of vellum in his hand ; and in a sup¬ pressed voice, he said something, as he en¬ tered, of compulsatory honour, and the nice distinctions of feeling. Hubert gazed in wonder, but he spoke not : alas ! he read not the heart-wound which bled beneath the cloak of policy ; he guessed not the inward violence, which checking the bound of affection, and the close clasp of agony, transformed De Maudit, into the hero, even whilst he felt the man·— ah, lower, far lower than the man, for all within was melting to woman's weakness ! Twas the eyes of the lord Henry de Mont¬ ford—of the son of Leicester—of the cou¬ sin of the lady Jngelrica^—which were upon him ; which nerving him to the painful conflict, fashioned him to the ar¬ duous task of dismissal. He extended the passport, which w*as to indemnify through the perils of strife and anarchy, and he said, with an averted eye, and a flushed cheek — " You are free to quit the
the castle of Hafeld: trusting to the just¬ ness of our intention, and the universal benefit of our cause, we detain none un willingly." " Ours is a service of the heart," said De Montford, haughtily :—" we war on the side of liberty ; we struggle to free England from the galling yoke of tyranny and op¬ pression. A king, who wields his sceptre in injustice and public abuse, annuls the fealty of his people : we openly renounce allegiance to Henry ^Plantagenet, and wield the standard of defiance in broad day." Hubert only bowed ; he smothered down the rising indignation, for he felt that his powers were inadequate to breast the double torrent ; he cast one look of speaking anguish on De Maudit —for the hand trembled from which he received the passport—and then he moved towards the door. " Hold," said William, " I will attend you to the last barrier""·—and then, in a suppressed tone, as he moved at his side, " God
** God speed you, and keep you at Hans¬ iape ! You know all I would say. Tarry, I adjure you, at Hansiape : the assurance uC illy tuuuuil·. Hubert wrang his hand; he bowed proudly to De Montford; and in the short space ofa few minutes, he beheld nought, save the d^rk walls, and armed out-posts of Hafeld Castle. With a heavy and a la¬ bouring spirit, he pursued his lonely jour¬ ney ; lie feared nought wdiich man could wage against him, for he felt crushed al- most to the dust : he had failed in his mis¬ sion of hope ; and he returned to the home of his youth, so sad, and so desolate ; so uncheered, and so uncheering; that like the patriarch's dove, he felt as though on earth, his heart could find no resting-place. He dreaded to meet the eye of the baron, to hear the plaint of his distress ; he dread¬ ed to crush the sanguine dreams of Isabel, and knoll into her ear, the total defalca¬ tion of her brother. It was not the threat of public ruin, not the
the calamities of civil war, not the raging conflicts, deluging England in native blood, which deepened the loneliness of his road, or darkened the visions of his fancy : all was lost in the individual pang of Wil¬ liam's estrangement ; all was absorbed in the possible trial of yet encountering in hostile ranks: it hung, as a death-damp on his feelings; it pressed, as a mound of lead, upon every rallying effort; it rose paramount to ought of worldly ill, and mocked him, with such conjured forms of horror, that his very brain seemed steeped in blood and ruin.—" God pre¬ serve—God defend me from the conflict !" he aspirated, and then he mentally in¬ voked pardon on the trespasses of his ill- judging friend, arid grace and intercession, yet, to stay the giant inroads of sin, and turn him to repentance. He strove to think of the baron, of the gentle Isabel, of father Gilbert; he strove, how best to frame the tale of his embassy : but not' the insidious arts of the lady In¬ gelrica,
gelrica, not the piteous detail of the earl of Kent's sorrows, not the wild shriek, and the ghost-like image of the royal Margaret, could divorce him from the governor of Hafeld Castle. It was De Maudit, fanning, blowing the incipient flame of treason—it was De Maudit, leading the ranks of the rebellious Leicester—it was De Maudiťs blood, shed by his hand—it was De Mau¬ dit, dying, struggling, gasping forth life at his feet, which swelled in every breeze which blew, and swam in every picture of the future ! Hubert returned no more to Kenil¬ worth, for it seemed, as though the whole air of Warwickshire, was tainted with the baleful poison of nonconformity : it had found way into the cloister ; it had poured its venom into the church : the convent of St. Margaret harboured one rebel to the bounden law of order, and he knew not, but the whole brotherhood, imbibing the subtle mischief, had ranged themselves on the side of the hostile leaders. 'Tis true, they
they could bear no arms in the field; but their heresy was destructive to the prin¬ ciples of the multitude: they might ab- solve from the crime of disloyalty, and playing on the weak aud superstitious minds of men, might cloak the standard of rebellion, in the great and glorious sem¬ blance of liberty and patriotism. Already, had the bishops of London, Winchester, Chichester, and Salisbury, favoured the barons' cause ; already, in the plenitude of their absolutions, had they gathered a host, to beard their lawful monarch—not, as in the holy zeal of Richard the lion-hearted, girding the sword upon their snow-white albs, and changing the pastoral staff, into the barbed spear, and death-dealing hal¬ berd—but as main springs in the body po¬ litic, wielding the double weapon of per¬ suasion and remission. The few scattered signs of industry and humble peace, wiiich had then escaped the spoiling hand of insatiate hate, in this se» cond pass through the country, were laid low
low and levelled. Hubert traced the de¬ solating brand of human malice, fresh and reeking ; he saw it in many a black and тппЫлппо' ruin · lip гаяг! if in rtnnnv я dismantled tower, and despoiled fastness : the very trees bore evidence of the wan¬ ton spoliation of party : not the smallest plot of culture, not the faintest sign of vegetation, which tokened not the dire enmity : the forest's pride was levelled ; and the pulse and grain, which had waved in golden promise, were trampled down, and seared even to the stubble. It was a sight, to appal, and awaken thought, in the breast of the most callous: the bless¬ ings dispensed to erring man by bounteous Providence, by erring man, were blasted and destroyed: brother thirsted for bro¬ ther's blood, and vengeance lived in the hand of weakness ! It was evening, and Hubert glanced around for shelter: the darkness gathered, and the shadows mingled earth and sky ; yet across the intervening morass, upon a vol. iv. d u rising
rising ground, he discerned a building, black and ruinous : he dismounted, and he led his horse around the sedgy border, and when he had gained the reeking pile, he found its huge and giant walls, mouldering, not beneath the ruthless hand of time, but beneath the more ruthless hand of human hate: the embers almost smoked, and the stained glass, broken and scattered, spoke lecent conflagration. It was evident he trud upon the skirt ofthe tempest; he did but shadow, the loose and lawless rabble, privileged, to devastate and pillage. Giving range to his beast, within the lette closed court-way, and threading a long aisle, or colonnade, of eloisterai arches, to seek shelter for himself from the night dews, he entered, vvhat had been the refec¬ tory of the convent; for that it had been a eonvent, and that the whole brother¬ hood had abandoned 4 to depredatory ene¬ mies, savoured, in the shattered fragments of saints and relics, vvhich lay scattered in the pathway. Hubert trod with awe and reverence :
reverence; for uninfluenced by the mad prejudices of the multitude, he looked upon the sanctuary oi rc-ugion аг> trie im¬ mediate house of God; for whether in the glory of its splendour, or in the waning of its greatncbs^—whether spiring its head to the skies, or battered down in shapeless masses, it had been a structure, reared to holiness, and dedicated by the creature, to the spiritual rites and pious wor. iip ofthe Creator ! With a mind, meditative, and saddened by local ill, worn out with weariness, and anxious ibr the return of morning, he rested against the hutment of a broken arch, wrapt in moody thought, and plen¬ tifully infested with that long train of İdeal phantasies, which so naturally tends on such spots and such circumstances. He peopled the deserted cloister; he conjured the rites of fanaticism; he almost fan¬ cied the low chant, arising· from the organ- loft : quick followed the dismay of the as¬ tounded brotherhood, disturbed in their i) 2 pious
pious duties, and hurled back into a world, from which, long habit, and devotional zeal, had divorced all their hopes, and all tlieir wishes. He heard the loud shouts of the sacrilegious assailants, the flight of missiles, the crush of falling walls, the shrieks of frenzied terror ; he saw r the crucifix grasped by feeble hands, and the shorn crown, humbled and trampled into the dust; he shuddered at the utter deso¬ lation of the picture, and that shudder aw r akened him to the blank of realitv. The storm had passed away; the thun¬ der had spent its fury ; the stilly trance of the grave had trod upon the wild din of conflict:—many had passed from life to death ; many had sunk into " 'Ihat dui! « nd drca пк***> sleep v\hıth kn >wS m> ranhk He glanced around ; he felt his spirit quail ; he heard the very throbbings of his temples ; and yet it w r as not fear, it was awe, it was a superstitious reverence, un¬ felt, unknown in this enlightened era, which
which drove the mantling blood from his cheek, and made his " seated heart knock 'gainst his ribs." Evening and night 4i were at odds :" it was too deep to call it twilight, yet the murky shades of ebon darkness usurped not the face of earth: he heard a sound; it was of footsteps, and it grew in the still¬ ness; he turned to the outward light, and he saw a human figure, approaching down the cloistered way he had himself trodden. He bent forward—he looked stedfastly: —it was a man, bending with the weight of years; and the steel casque upon his head, and the red cross upon his white habit, and the half hid, half revealed, coat- of-mail, beneath, bespoke him a brother oi the militia of the Temple. Hubert watched the stranger; he saw him pause near the arch against which he rested ; and he heard him sigh m grievous toil. " Abroad and at home, far and near," he murmured, " and all alike, is fevered hope, D 3 and
and sickening disappointment. Alack ! alack! well mightest thou, oh, thou wisest of the sons of men ! pronounce all be¬ neath the sun, to be vanity, and vexation of spirit!' 7 Again he sighed heavily, and seating himself on a loose fragment, took off his steel cap, and stroked his shorn crown: he muttered a paternoster; and then he said something of war and ruin ; and then he ejaculated— " England ! England ! country of my being ! home of my love í I left thee groaning beneath injustice—1 find thee, writhing in the jar of civil strife; thy teeming bowels seared, with the red- hot iron, of party-feud, and party-malice. Oh, king! oh, wretched Henry ! thou hast called down a weighty judgment ; thou hast lived to feel, that vows to heaven^ sa¬ vour not ofthe vows of this teorici. Thou ------*' He ceased, for Hubert was at his side, pale, panting, breathless. It was an impulsive bound—it w T as a spring of heart : for it was the self-arraigning tale of the baron of Hansiape—it was the solemn de¬ nounce-
nouncementof the Knight-Templar, at the grave ofthe earl of Pembroke, which lived in his memory. " Who art thou ?" he gasped out. * s If of this world, telime, where, and when, and how, thou hast before thundered that denouncement?" " And what is that to thee?" asked the Templar, starting on his feet, and clapping hand to swOrd. " Hold !" said Hubert " I am no ene¬ my—1 am a wayfarer, like unto thyself. Be brief: as thou hopest grace upon thy trespasses, answer me ?" " By our Lady of Bethlehem, thine is a strange inquisition !" replied the Templar. íť Thinkest thou, by dint of words, to turn the temper of fourscore? I tell thee, I have more than numbered nature's allot¬ ment of years, and I never yet cowered to mortal man." " By entreaty, not menace," urged Hu¬ bert. " Tell me, brave father*—for thy garb bespeaketh the close union of soldier в 4 and
and priest —where hast thou shed the mil¬ dew ofthat awful denunciation ?" " I have knolled it in the ear of hun¬ dreds," answered the Templar, " and I have lived to prove it. Nay, ask thy own heart, and it will tell thee, vows to heaven, savour not ofthe vows of this world. The one are made, by erring man, and to err¬ ing man ; and in a world, as erring, as frail, and as perishable as himself: the other, is registered on tablets, more stable than the base of earth, and far beyond the reach of chance and time :—vows of earth, may be broken, and forgiven, and forgotten ;— vows to heaven, never yet were broken, without a weighty, a thrice weighty re¬ cognisance." Hubert slu ddered beneath the ice-chill which crept o'er his feelings; he thought of the dire calamities, which one by one, had shrouded the golden hopes of the ba¬ ron of Hansiape, and he yielded full faith to the assertion ; he tliought of De Mau¬ dit, armed in the hostile cause, and he felt, that
that the fatal sin of omission, had been vi¬ sited by the teeming vial of retributive wrath. He bent forward«—he tried to de¬ cipher the features of the stranger ; but the gloom was too profound ; he could only trace the gaunt outline ; he could only dis¬ tinguish, the white cloak, and the red cross, indicative of his blood being conse¬ crated to the defence of Palestine.—" Tell me," he again implored, panting to resolve the mystery, " hast thou ever yet knolled those words—-those fatal words, amidst graves and death ?" " 1 have knolled them, in the ear of the believer, and ofthe unbeliever," solemnly rejoined the Templar : ' ť in this land of our forefathers; aye, and in a distant land, in bondage and in chains. Mine has been a chequered destiny ; a path, choked up with briars and with thorns. I have strove for the weak, but my strivings have been vain—I have laboured for the sore laden, but my labours, have been like unto my¬ self, inefficient : nevertheless" — and he d 5 spoke
spoke with pious fervour~" I * despise not the chastening of the Lord ; neither am 1 weary of his correction." Hubert was softened almost to tears ; he cast himself upon the stone beside the aged man ; he placed his hand upon his arm. — iS Father," he faltered, " I would lead you back, amidst tbe briars and the thorns of past years—I would implore your patience—I would direct your thoughts, to a season of mourning and woe ; to the death, to the funeral, of the protector—of the great earl of Pembroke. Know you the Temple-church ?—know you his grave, in the centre of the round in the Temple- church ?" " Know I that Heaven is all mercy— that man, in himself, is lost and fallen ?" pronounced the stranger. " Aye, my son, I know the Temple-church ; for I took up the cross, and laid down this world, and this worlďs fallacies, in the Temple-church. I know too, the bed of rest, of tlie gallant and the good earl of Pembroke : for I saw the
the cold clay committed to its kindred clay—I stood at the grave's foot, when the last earth was shovelled on the noblest of human beings." " And that night," said Hubert, eager¬ ly— si answer me, father—that night of moonshine and contemplation—recallest thou ought, through the veil of years, ap¬ pertaining to that night ?" " That night, passed with me, like unto the preceding, and like unto the succeed¬ ing night," responded the Templar ; " in prayer, and in adoration of the Great Be¬ ing, who brought light out of darkness, and breathed life into the atom man ! But what hast thou to do with that night? for verily, or sound and sense misgive me, that night, arose and closed, long ere na¬ ture brought thee into being." " Not of myself," rejoined Hubert.— ** Father, I would resolve the doubts of a being, dearer than life; a being, whose whole destiny, has been coloured by that eventful night. Vows to heaven 9 savour d 6 not
not qf the vows of this ivorld ! Said you not so? And that denouncement—that awful denouncement, pronounced, ere yet the clay was cold, at the grave of the earl of Pembroke—in the ear of the mourning ward of the earl of Pembroke, has drug¬ ged his cup of life with bitters." " Not the words, but the neglect ofthe words;—not the precept, but the non- observance of the precept," said the Tem¬ plar : " men wander from the track of duty ; they dare the sin of omission, and then they cast the burden upon fate, ra¬ ther than their own trespass. But tell me, my son, of what do I stand arraign¬ ed? for, as true as I am a sinful worm, like unto tbvself, so true is it, that I— and I alone—in the Temple-church, on the grave of the earl of Pembroke, and on St. Dunstan's fast, the night ofthe sepul¬ ture ofthe earl of Pembroke—proclaimed to the ear of one solitary mourner, that vows to heaven, savour not ofthe vows qf this world ŕ " Jesu
" Jesu Maria !" ejaculated Hubert, for in this one acknowledgment, he felt that his own myster\ous destiny, lay in the hands of this unknown man. et It was gloomy, and it was still, and the very heavings of the breath were audible," pursued the Templar, heedless of his emotion : " the mourner lay pro¬ strate on the earth; he was heartstruck ; and in the bitterness of his labouring spi¬ rit, he accused himself of lukewarmness in the cause of holiness. I heard his plaints and his lamentations—I heard him vow a pilgrimage to our Lady at Wal¬ singham; to offer at her shrine, the rich gifts of atonement for protracted duty—-I trembled for his faith : he was young, and experience told me, his vow u/as but lip- deep. I had been young—and the being I most loved, had vowed a vow to Hea¬ ven—and had slumbered upon that vow —and woful had been the reckoning for temerity. I spoke to him in the very spirit of inspiration ; for who was so fitted to
to the warning, as one, so culpable, and so conscience-seared, as myself? I bid him remember the grave of the earl-mar¬ shal—I bid him remember the fast of St. Dunstan—I bid him remember the church of the Knights-Templars—I bid him re¬ member his vow, nor sleep upon its ful¬ filment." " Ah, God ! he did sleep—he has slept upon its fulfilment," groaned Hubert, " and the weighty requisition, crushes wellnigh unto death." The pause was broken but by the low prayers of the Templar ; for his prayers were given to the sorrowing, as his sword to the oppressed : Hubert prayed with him, for Hubert's heart bled at the accu¬ mulated woes of his benefactor. " Ere I quitted the church," at length resumed the stranger, " I bid him, if he slighted my counsels, if he dared the pending evil, seek me yet again in the church of the Knights^Templars. I bid him—" "And
" And he did seek you," interrupted Hubert ; ťť he sought you, in lowliness and contrition : he confided his griefs and his trespasses to the ear of the preceptor : cased in haircloth, and strewed with ashes, he kept vigil on the grave of the earl· marshal ; and he quitted the Temple- church, impressed with the belief, of a spirit from another world, having breathed the emphatic warning, that vows to hea¬ ven, savour mi qf the vows qf this world.' " Did he fulfil his vow ?~did he jour¬ ney barefoot to Walsingham ?" asked the Templar—" did he lay his burden upon the altar, and take up the promised meed of peace ?" " He did-—he did," said Hubert, eager¬ ly. '* But, father, 1 would question yet further : bear wdt h me ; answer me : knowest thou ought of a storm—of a copse-wood—of a cross by the way-side— of a child—of*-—" The start of the Templar was as electric as
as had been his own.—" Virgin Mother !" he aspirated, " what of that child ?" and then he ceased, and trembled, as though struck by mortal palsy. " "Tis I, who would question of that child," said Hubert, in accents broken by emotion—" I, who would solicit light upon the astounding mystery. Answer me, father: as you crave mercy at the judgment-seat, know you ought of that child ?" The Templar shook almost to annihilation, yet he spoke not. 4t An¬ swer me," implored Hubert, falling at his feet, and clasping his knees with terrify¬ ing wildness. Still the Templar was si¬ lent. ťť Cruel ! cruel í of my parents— only of my parents," urged Hubert, scarcely conscious of what he spoke. The Templar uttered a cry of amaze¬ ment.— íť Holy Jesu !" he ejaculated— " your parents ! What are you ?—who are you? A light—a wondrous light, breaks in upon me ! A storm — a copse- wood — a cross by the way-side—a child! Explain
Explain, explain, lest thought grow wild, and madness follow ?" " I am that child," solemnly pronoun¬ ced Hubert—" I am that poor abandoned child, forced on the bounty ofa stranger." The struggle of the Templar was as the last struggle of the spirit ; he cast himself upon the neck of Hubert, and he lay, as though tranced in death ; his hands, cold and stiff; his forehead, bteeped in the dews of the grave ; his pulse, his very heart, ceasing to beat, and every spring of mortal strength suspended. Hubert upheld him on his knees; he unclasped the bosses of his war-gear ; he chafed his hands and his temples ; he essa} r ed every effort to woo back to life : alas ! the page ofhis own fate had lain open beiore him; and now, was it shut—shut, as though for e\ er ; defaced, lost, in the link which seemed to unite their destinies, it was an appalling moment ; a moment, of bit¬ ter agony; for he felt, as if his every earthly hope lay blasted, by the fell blight which
which had stricken the aged man. Long was it, ere the heart feebly fluttered be¬ neath the searching hand of anxiety, and longer still, ere the lips moved, and ought of sound returned. Streaks of ruddy hue painted the east, and glowing glory, fast brightening, fell askaunt the death-wan face of the Templar. Hubert bathed that death-wan face in tears—watched that death-wan face, until reviving hope fast drooped, and his own expectation, grew as languid, and his own cheek, as bloodless, as the cheek he pil¬ lowed. " Alas ! alas !" he faltered, " I have sought this hour—I have prayed for this hour—and now, am I plunged back, into crowding doubt, and torturing conjec¬ ture." The Templar raised his heavy head ; he struggled hard for voice and power.— " Tarry yet a little," he implored : " pray for patience ; pray for acquiescence to the end," «Of
ts Of my parents ?—alone of my pa¬ rents?" urged Hubert, falling back into all the wild tumult of his feelings. The Templar raised his hand to his forehead ; he sunk into deep thought ; he seemed to live again " the days of other years." ťí Why this computing policy ? —w r hy this ice-chill upon all my prayers ?" pursued Hubert. " Father, if the pang of mortal woe e'er struck at your heart— if pity for another's struggles e'er sapped your nature—tell me of my parents?— tell me of the dire storm, which cast me on a stranger's charity ?" The pang of mortal woe had struck at the Templar's heart, and nature too had oft been sapped with pity at another's struggles.; yet was there a cause for mys¬ tery, was there an insurmountable check to disclosure.—" You know not what you ask," he faltered. " I cannot, I dare not : safety, honour, life, all are at stake ; all compel concealment." Hubert
Hubert shuddered ; he trembled in eve¬ ry limb, and tightly he grasped his side, for emotion swelled almost to suffocation : here was a miidew on the harvest ; here was a cankerworm, in the brightest bud of promise ! he folded his arms, and he stood, submissive, though heartstr иск. The Templar read the language of his eye, marked the heaving agony of his bosom : he was softened—he was subdued —he drew close beside him—he bent his lip almost to his ear.— tfi Hide it, as you value life," he whispered : " bury it in the deepest fold of your heart : breathe but the name of your father; betray but the dignity of your illustrious house, and you tread upon a scorpion—you arouse an enemy, as powerful as fate, as relentless as death. You------" He ceased ; for at that moment, teem¬ ing with all oť human interest, with all of human feeling, a loud shout rang through the ruin: the crash, the threat, the
the action, was as one : an armed host, rushing up the aisle, crowded around them, and they awakened to the reality of bondage.
» ЧАГ-
CHAPTER IV.
Gii [.¡rout·*? spoetai le ! ISi-aki т'Ч.лде. ------------ , -------------------- Thťíb and ra pr í*, Suck'd towns, and midnight howlings thro' die realm, hecene iheir b.uıct.üiı. Hrooki. What were the shouts of exultation— what were the coarse jests of heartless merriment—what were the taunts of de¬ rision, to a mind, tortured, agitated, wound to the very climax of expectancy and hor¬ ror, and then cast back into doubt and gloom ! Hubert felt himself hurried forward, borne, as it were, in the simultaneous rush ofa whole multitude: and when the clamour ceased ; when a space was clear¬ ed; when a single voice accosted him, he looked
looked up, and he found himself before a group of warriors. The dignity, the graciousness, the cour¬ teous bend, the bland smile, wdiich met his eye, seemed, as that social link, propelling lieart to heart, and spreading universal fel¬ lowship ; yet when the name of the earl of Gloucester reached his ear, when he knew him, as the close ally, and sworn adherent of the rebellious Leicester, he stepped proudly back, as though to brave his sentence. The Templar stood beside him : he too looked stern defiance : and when Glou¬ cester coupled his sway with justice, and his martial hearing w T ith the ¿rood and the rescue of his country, the smile which curled the lip of the veteran, savoured biting irony, rather than approval. " I have journeyed far," he said—" I have lived to a goodly age; but in all my wanderings, and in all my life's experi¬ ence, 1 never yet found truth beneath the standard of rebellion. Lay down thy arms, proud lord : bow to thy lawful mo¬ narch ;
narch ; and woo, in his clemency, the sal¬ vation of bleeding England." " Knowest thou the tax of presump¬ tion ?" aked Gloucester, eyeing him with surprise and scorn " Doubtless, I have earned it, in wast¬ ing my breath on thee," responded the Templar : " 'twill be but one crime more to thy swollen catalogue. For me, I list not favour." Gloucester was noble, but Gloucester was subject to the frail gusts of human passion : to be bayed before his own fol¬ lowers, to be defied in all the strength of his power, was more than mortal man could meet with equanimity : the storm lowered on his brow : he spoke, and the Templar was seized, and hurried from the side of Hubert: the next instant, the smile veered back, and Gloucester's stri¬ king features wore all their native gentle¬ ness. Again he questioned : Hubert spoke of the Templar, of his age, of the impotence of his defiance ; but Gloucester stood
stood unmoved: firm as the rock which breasts the breaking of the billows, he re¬ sisted all his arguments ; he silenced with the look of firm decision. " I gage for the life of the hoary man," he exclaimed: "not a day of his protracted span shall be shortened : but his custody be in my keeping: we cast not forth a brand, to sear the cause we fight for." " The grace of a single interview," im¬ plored Hubert; ťť the limitation of one short hour." Gloucester was peremptory: in the hearing, in the presence of a witness: upon no other terms could the privilege be accorded. Hubert yielded, with a throbbing brain, and an aching heart ; he feared to trust himself on tlie score of in¬ dividual interest, lest hurried away by feeling, he should betray more than pru¬ dence warranted ; yet it felt as the aban¬ donment of all his sublunary hopes, and he bowed to the stern decree, as to an or¬ dinance of Heaven ; for it seemed, as though vol. iv. e the
the hand of Heaven itself, interposed, to thicken around him the haze of mystery. The passport, provided by De Maudit, and given in the moment of parting, was as a talisman to open a way through the legions of the self-named patriots : it en¬ sured respect and pilotage; it stayed every light inquiry, and yielded the freedom of journeying through the counties more par¬ ticularly under the contiol and influence ofthe hostile barons, without peril or mo¬ lestation : but it smoothed not the mental reveries of the wayfarer; it extracted not one thorn of the myriad so thickly scat¬ tered ; ah no ! rather did it furnish force and pungency to the probe destined to search and lacerate every wound of his heart; for it established the governor of Hafëld, as a main spring in the huge and overwhelming plan of rebellion; it stamp¬ ed him, a traitor to his king, and a bitter enemy to the legitimate government Where'er he turned, where'er he sought solace from despondence, gloom, and mi¬ sery,
sery, and ruin, and disappointment, hung like a murky vapour: in the bonds ofthe Knight-Templar, in the firm unbending decision of the earl of Gloucester, he traced the annihilation of his hopes; it was his love, his duty, his zeal, for the welfare and comfort of the baron, which urged his re¬ turn to Hansiape, else had he lingered in the army of Gloucester—had he clung to the glimmering ray which had dawned but to cozen. The Templar possessed the fearful secret of his birth; and in the very instant of disclosure, when that fearful secret was about to be revealed, had fate, or chance, wrested away the page, and closed it from his eyes. Restless, undecided, and doubt¬ ful ofhis own judgment, one moment, he thought to return to Hafeld Castle, and crave the interference of De Maudit : then again, he íèared to be tangled in the mesh of his treasons, to be confounded in the one dark plot, shrouding all the brightness of his fame; he remembered his zeal in E 2 tiıe
the cause he advocated, his energy, hie exertion, his anxiety to lure him to the same banner, and he relinquished the ex¬ pedient, as perilous to honour and to fame, " Father Gilbert shall be my counsel¬ lor," mused Hubert ; " to his ear, will I confide all my perplexities, and fashion my conduct by his experience." But a vision, brighter than the coun¬ sels of father Gilbert, dawned like a rising sun, as he neared the haunts of his youth, as he recognised the leafy boundaries of his early wanderings ! It was the vision of love and beauty ! it was Isabel, all radiant in innocence and gentleness ; her cheeks, out-blushing the rose; her ** eyes of dewy light," eloquent in the tender sensibilities of her nature ! A soft, a stealing, a trans¬ porting bewilderment, lived in her remem¬ bered smile, in her recalled confidence! Hubert's heart throbbed high—Hubert's whole soul joyed in the bosomed bliss. Time had been, when he had banished the contemplation, as dangerous to honour and to
to peace; as a snare, warring against his duty and his principles: but now, he yielded to the wild rhapsodies of feeling, to the intoxicating transport of anticipa* tion —for the voice of the Templar had spoken of his illustrious house—and his own firm and native principles, his own intuitive sense of honour, whispered, that his birth could not be other than noble. " I may lift my eyes, even to thee, Isa- bel," he mused, " and without crime, without ingratitude, '· τ οο the sunbeam of thy favour ! In truth, and in deed, I may become the son of the baron of Hansiape ; may sooth him, in the downhill of life, and minister to the wants of his declining nature ! And William——" Hubert trem¬ bled, and his enthusiasm faded—William, alas ! came, as the alloy to his Eden. 4i On earth," he articulated, " felicity, must not, cannot be complete, else, would man cling to this world, nor crave, beyond it, the promised joys of heaven." Every pulse quickened, as he approach- E 3 ed
ed the chase of Hansiape; as he traced in distance, the softly swelling hill, the church crowning its summit, the woody glen be¬ neath, embosoming the castle-turrets. The calm glories of sunset imparted a sombre colouring; for tliough the west 11 glow¬ ed with flickering tints of gold and purple —like unto the joys and promises of sum¬ mer-youth, it was fast yielding to the staid livery of night. Filling, to sue the mild blessing of the baron, to meet the kindly greeting of Isa¬ bel, to hail the glad welcome of lather Gilbert, of the aged Geoftry, of every member of the household, Hubert quick¬ ened his pace; yet as he crossed the bar¬ rier, hemming in the park, a mingled rush of hope and regret, of pleasure and pain, faded the colour of his cheek. It was a strange foreboding—it was an ice-chill, wdiich grew in every passing moment. An awful quietude, a profound stillness, reigned ; the sky, fast darkening into grey, was serene and cloudless; no swelling
gust, perturbed, as the unruly passions of men, marred the picture ; no outward to¬ ken of war and ruin, spoke the devastating strides of human violence : he thought of the scenes he had quitted, and he fervent¬ ly thanked God, that tumult and party- hate, had not extended to the home of his earliest interest. Dismounting, and leaving his horse to browse the green pasture, he turned into a bv-nath, winding' direct to the castle, and he pressed through the clustering boughs, and he bounded forward, with an impatience, mocking ought of restraint: he thought to enter by the back postern, and to calm his perturbation, by question- iiur, of the general welfare, ere he cncoun- tered the inquiries ofthe baron; he thought to curb the energy of his own feelings, and to discipline himself into something like control, ere he dared the presence of Isa¬ bel. The path he had chosen, leading to the chapel, opened to the back-front of the eastle; it was overhung with bushesand E 4 blossom-
blossoming shrubs, and the forest-trees, spiring to the skies, aiid commingling overhead, shut out, in one, tlie light and the prospect. He trod, as though upon hallowed ground, for it was the favourite haunt of the baron of Hansiape; thither would he wander to nurse sad fancies, and feeding meditation almost to madness, tarry until— 'i ._— __ Π iv tui 'h ihuu/uii! ]*I Dill TtU' ť ..чГ, Ν ίτ'.ιΛ I un* d turtanı tnun th" h va ν? ns vuihdiew," Hubert thought ofthe buried woes, ot the habitual despondence of his benefac¬ tor, until tears sprung to his eyes; recall- ed his soul of honour, his known zeal, his devotional lovalty, until his fancy sick¬ ened with the annihilating detail of De Maudiťs irremediable apostacy. *" 1 miLst bear the killing tale, even here," he sighed; "here, in this blessed nook of peace and security ; here—— ,! he would have added—vvhere the fire of contention, where the horrors of anarchy, have
have never reached—but the termination ofthe pathway, the sudden emerging from fho frpoi* Llccfti/1 iiii TA/lijm*· пт ъп+1г\гл Qr.fi I.I1V VJL l^V-iJ, lC/*l*kl */»-ч_» tili pv/ í» "-t ^.л uwiviiţ unu chilled the very stream of life. It was not the castle of Hansiape, as he had left it— it w r as the castle of Hansiape, one black, one shapeless ruin, which rose before him. No groan, no cry escaped ; he stood, root- bound, marbled, though in life; his arms outstretched; his breast, labouring almost to suffocation; struck, as though by Hea¬ ven's lightning; ruined in all his garnered hopes of felicity. The baron—Isabel—all he loved ; ail he had ever loved ; all he could ever love, swam, as on a sea of blood : he darted forward—lie strove to gain the reeky ruin, as though his was the power to save: but the overwrought stretch of agony yielded to the effort; stiff and powerless he fell on the sward, and lost, for a little season, the sense of anguish. The fast-falling dew, and the chilly breath of evening, fanning his death-wan foiehead, rallied the lagging powers of ani- E 5 mation ;
mation ; yet long after he had recovered perception, did he continue stretched upon the earth, his face buried in his hands, his eyes closed against the appalling spectacle. It was a blight of heart—it was a total subjection of spirit—it was a pang, pun¬ gent, wellnigh unto death, which stripped away every blossom, and steeped the com¬ ing years of life, in one unvarying die of woe. Vain are the powers of language, to portray the mighty struggles of the hu¬ man mind ; the quick transitions of grief. of agony, of despair, tending a blow, so keen, a blank, so desolate : not the remem¬ bered endurance of the baron ; not the pious resignation, he had taught and prac¬ tised, could stay the torrent, could ealm the tortured soul, could lure the grace of submission: not the annihilation of the baron, of the castle, of the whole house¬ hold, could excite one tear: it remained for Isabel—the helpless, tender, innocent, youthful Isabel, struggling, sinking, lost, suing
suing for mercy and for pity, to force the sluices of his pent-up heart, and save his brain from maddening—Isabel, shrieking, flitting amid the flames, perhaps dying in the arms of her father—perhaps, outraged, beyond all wish for life. " Mighty God!" he ejaculated, and every limb shook with the palsy of emo¬ tion : he wept with hysteric violence ; he wept, until all of frenzy, yielded to deep and settled grief; until he could think, and act, and mould his plans, to something like order: he would dare the worst; he would fly to the nigh hamlet of Hansiape; he would learn the source and the extent of the dire calamity : if hurled by the vengeance of the hostile barons, he would hasten back to Hafeld Castle, and pierce the heart of De Maudit, like unto his own. " He shall see," he exclaimed, springing from the damp earth, and turning from the blackened ruin, "the trust to be placed in the honour of traitors. Doubtless, he bartered, for the indemnification of his e 6 own
own kin, and his own home : but shallow- is the reliance, founded on bonds, gender¬ ed, and fostered, in conspiracy and crime. Oh, William ! William !" and his cry was from the heart—" what is this wreck— even this total wreck of worldly hope and worldly substance—to the wreck, the ir¬ remediable wreck, of thy honour !" He turned with wild affright, for a hol¬ low moan, proceeding from the dismantled chapel, rose in the succeeding stillness : he dared not trust himself to pause — to think; it augured misery, and his bound was impulse. He gained tbe middle of the aisle—he glaneed around—he saw a human figure, stretched amid the scattered fragments of the monument, dedicated to the late baroness. Was it the mourning widower?—-was it the self sacrificing ba¬ ron, rallying amid the ruin of his house, and wasting out life, on the shrouded dust of her he loved ? It was no time for con¬ jecture: Hubert cast himself upon his knees ; he raised the stricken head upon his
his breast; he spoke, and the heavy eyes unclosed : but not the eyes of the baron of Hansiape—no, it was the humblest, the truest, the faithfullest of his dependents ,¬ ϊ t was the eyes of the grey-headed Geoffry which rested on him—it was the 4 death- wan features of the grey-headed Geoffry, which relaxed with the smile of recogni¬ tion. Huberťs tears sprinkled the forehead of the aged man.—" Holy saints !" he sobbed out, " what a change ! what a woful change is here !" Geoffry raised himself upon his elbow. —" God be praised, 11 he ejaculated, and the fire of early heroism kindled as he spoke— " vengeance yet lives to my lord the ba¬ ron ; and every stone of Hansiape, shall be required, sevenfold, at the liands of the despoilers !" " Lives," repeated Hubert—" lives, say you ? Ah, Geoffry ! already have you lightened my heart of half its load of an¬ guish.
guish. But more—tell me more ? I pray ) ou, of the lady Isabel." Sadness and gloom again gathered on the brow of Geoffry.— tť There lies the weightiest ill." he exclaimed ; " there the direst blow aimed against us: but even there, the clouds break and let in hope ; for my reliance be, on the fortitude, on the wondrous courage of the maiden." " Her fortitude—her courage," echoed Hubert : " ah, Geoffry, the breeze of spicy May, is not softer, than is the nature of Isabel!" " Thou knowest not her nature," quick rejoined Geoffry—" I knew not her na¬ ture, until I saw it roused by peril and threatened ill. The softest heart, may kindle into the firmest heart ; and the gen¬ tlest of earth-born beings, in the cause of honour, become stable as fate. List to me, dear youth ; for this gleam of mercy, vouchsafed in thy presence, augurs of good to come. The lady Isabel is a tower of strength ;
strength : though a captive in the hands of our enemies, she------" He ceased, for the shudder of Hubert was appalling ; he spoke not, but he bow¬ ed his head in spiritless woe. " Take comfort—I pray thee, take com¬ fort," implored the veteran, feebly rising, and seating himself on the broken base of the baroness's tomb : " we are all in the hands ofa great and wise God, who chas¬ teneth for hidden ends; who dasheth life's cup with bitters, lest we quaff, and forget our duty. Alack ! the trials I have seen —the changes I have witnessed ! Father Gilbert would tell us—and he has often toid us, here, in this holy place—that sor¬ row, like unto sin, is the bounden inhe¬ ritance of man ; that naked and feeble------" " Of the baron—of Isabel—of the de¬ struction of Hansiape," interrupting him. " Dear Geoffry, I am submissive—I am calm, quite calm ;" and Hubert smothered down the choking sob. " 'Tis a wild tale of outrage and hor¬ ror,"
ror," rejoined Geoffry; " a tale, like unto a dream, but for these roofless walls, and this broken altar." And then, midst fre¬ quent pauses, and in broken disjointed sentences, he reported all wdiich had trans¬ pired, from the hour of Huberťs departure for Kenilworth : the very tears of Isabel in the moment of adieu ; and her mount¬ ing to the top of the warder's tower, to wrest the last glimpse from distance, was faithfully and systematically narrated. Hubert heaved a sigh in fond remem¬ brance; it was pleasure, it was gratifica¬ tion, it was tenderness, wdiich swam in his eyes: but when his eyes sought the war¬ der's tower—when they rested on the black and mouldering ruin wdiich remain¬ ed—the image of Isabel faded, and plea¬ sure, gratification, and tenderness, yielded to despair and rage. Quick followed, the arrival of sir Roger Mortimer—the fearful detail of the earl of Leicester's treasons— the open revolt of the hostile barons—the threatened ruin of England—king Henry's lack
lack of subsidies —and the speedy arming, and departure, of the baron, and his fol¬ lowers, for Oxford. Hubert writhed in the fatal confirmation ; hc groaned in tlie torture of the spirit; he cried aloud in the bitterness of his dismay : it was not De Maudit and himself in hostile ranks;—it was the father and the son, sword-point to sword-point, which felt as a dagger in his heart, and filled him with unutterable horror î " Evening had but newly closed upon the departure of the baron and sir Koger Morti mer," pursued Geoffry, €ť when an astounding din arose; a din, like unto the howls and the yells of the reprobate of God : it grew on the breeze, and it swelled into one universal clamour. We had ari¬ sen from the supper-board, and we were tarrying the benediction of father Gilbert, and we gazed on each other in utter dis¬ may. Suddenly, a parley was sounded; and because we did not cast wide the por¬ tal, and welcome to the halls of Hansiape, the
the gate was forced, and the castle fired, The lady Isabel stood at the side of father Gilbert: she gathered us around lier, as a hen gathereth her own chickens :—for young as she was, and lovely as she was, she wished to personify the absent baron, nor to disgrace his courage, in the helplessness of his representative ! She shrunk not—she shrieked not—she viewed the scene of de¬ vastation with an unbendinr>' brow: and gently did she reproach her terrror-struck maidens, and strive to impart fortitude in her own ensample. Never shall I forget lier face, all-radiant with the heroism of her soul; her spirit, kindling wellnigh in¬ to martial daring ! Ah ! hadst thou been with us—-had the heir of Hansiape------' Geoffry's voice failed him — he turned away—he wiped from his forehead the deadly damps : it was a theme too tende r to touch upon ; for it impugned the ho¬ nour of a De Maudit, and it struck, like an ice-bolt, on his pride, and on his feel¬ ings. « The
" The lady Isabel," he resumed, after a struggling pause, " spite of the raging storm, stood firmly in the hall, her mind fashioned unto death, and craving but the nower to hurl defiance : for alack ! the flower of our strength was gone, with the baron, and sir Roger Mortimer, to join king Henry at Oxford, and nought save grey hairs and wrinkles, remained to man the walls. The din waxed louder and louder; shouts, and blows, and falling raf¬ ters, commingled : and when the assailants rushed into the hall, though Ave would have covered her with our nearly spent lives, the lady Isabel pressed boldly for¬ ward.—* What crave vou at the hands of age and helplessness ?' she demanded, 4 Be brief, if ought the daughter of the baron of Hansiape can accord with honour/ —" Of Hansiape, 1 repeated a voice, and loud and general was the gathering murmur. xV stranger knight advanced— ť Sister of De Maudit,' he pronounced, and then he bent his knee, and laid his sword at the feet
feet of the lady Isabel She looked down upon him : a start, and a vivid blush, be¬ trayed amazement; but quick rallying in¬ to self-possession—' I crave not safety in the apostacy ofa De Maudit,' she proudly exclaimed; * rather w r ould I,that my blood crimson the halls of my father, than hold life through a De Maudiťs shame/' " Dear, matchless, heroic Isabel P ex¬ claimed Hubert. " But the stranger knight—proceed, dear Geoffry : what said he ?—what dared he further ?" ** It was respect, it was homage, it was adoration, which spoke in the looks, and in the actions, of the stranger knight," re¬ plied Geoffry. " Though the captive to his arms, the lady Isabel gave law r , in ought appertaining to Hansiape : the ham¬ let was spared ; the hand of violence stay¬ ed : and when, accompanied by father Gilbert, she was borne hence, she moved, as if in triumph, ratlier than in bonds." " As how ?" and Hubert's whole frame shook with emotion. "In
"In a closed litter, attended by the holy father, and one of her own maidens," said Geoffry ; 4i her ease, her comfort, studied, as though my lord the baron—or, as though —or—or—as though mounted on your own gelding, you ambled at her side." tk Could Isabel look content ?—could Isabel feel content, in the power of the sworn enemies of her king?" reproachfully questioned Hubert—" Could she accept favour, at the hands of rebels and traitors? —could she condescend—could she------" He paused; he bent his head, in shame, vexation, contrition, for he wondered at the bitterness of his own feelings. " Xot content, but submission," eagerly rejoined Geoffry. " The lady Isabel, look¬ ing more of iieaven than earth, visited us in our affliction : she administered a cor¬ dial-balm to our sick spirits; she bid us be of better ciieer ! she taught us—like unto the holy Gilbert — to look beyond the skies, nor to marvel, why, in a world, so 'ull of crime and woe, man should be other than
than happy. She talked, and she reason» ed, until she turned all our murmurs into tears, and our very indignation into ac¬ quiescence : she reposed her own cause in the hand of Heaven ; and she gloried, that her soul was firm and steadfast in the principles of her father : she bid me say to you, when you sought us here at Hans¬ iape, that the baron would need a com¬ forter; that«-----" " Did she—did she speak of me ?—did she think of me ?—did she couple me with her father?" and Hubert again yielded to the wild thrill of transport. " Aye, and she bid you seek her father, among the sworn adherents of the royal Henry," answered Geoffry ; " she bid me say, that in your keeping, she reposed her trust and her hopes, content to feel, that the baron could not lack of filial care, in you, her representative." " Dear—dearest Isabel," faltered Hubert, "be thy approval, the meed of all my wishes ! But proceed, good Geoffry : tell me
me more—tell me all—from the very mo¬ ment of assault, even until now ? I would fain learn further — I would familiarize mvself to the dire storv—I would fashion my movements, my very thoughts, to the wishes of Isabel, nor crave, on God's earth, a guerdon, like unto her confidence." " Alack · I know nought else, save my own selfish sorrows," resumed Geoffry. " I have wept, until my eyes have grown dim—I have dragged m ν limbs from the hamlet of Hansiape, here, to this ruined chapel, and stretched me on the marble, cc .cring my blessed lady, and thought of the past, and mourned the present, until night has steeped me in her cold tears, and morning dawned upon my wailings and my woe. Ah! and I have prayed for thee loo—and I have prayed for my lord the bi ron —and I have prayed for the poor de¬ luded boy, who has renounced us all, and bartered his peace and his honour, for a woman's smile. Saints and martyrs! to have sapped such principles; to have per¬ verted
verted such a heart; to have turned such rich promise into barrenness ! Curses light on the idle lure í curses light on the trea¬ cherous sex ! curses------" " On Isabel—on our own Isabel ;" and Hubert snatched his arm, and looked re¬ proachfully in his face. " Be the hdy Isabel, an indemnity to all, save this Ingeirica," pronounced the heart-wrung Geoffry. " God forgive me ! an erring worm, like unto herself, I will pray her pardon hereafter : but on earth —here upon earth—I would fain visit her with the like pangs, she has dealt among us all. What had been all the fury ofthe assailants, had a De Maudit mounted the battlements, and fashioned the defence! Our wasted vigour had been renewed ; our shrunken sinews re-strung : we should have fought with the fire of youth, and we should have conquered, for our cause was just; we should have drawn the re¬ bels from beneath our firm walls, and scat¬ tered
tered them, like chaff, on the blast of the tempest !" " We must not poison what is, with the contrast of what miirht be. m ν ¿rood Geof- fry," sighed Hubert : " rather must we, with Christian hope, cast our bread on the waters, aiid pray grace on our humble efforts.' " But we cannot forget," faltered Geof- fry—" w^e canno ι blot aw 7 ay remembrance. Alack ! when the dream of years returns, I can but marvel, how my lord the baron, stems the mighty conflict : thou too hadst marvelled, hadst thou seen him, bestride his war-horse, and head his armed fol¬ lowers." " The ivy may be rent away," remarked Hubert, " yet may the oak weather the tempest : it may be battered, bruised, and broken, yet may it live through the storm. Mighty God !" and he raised his elapsed hands in pious awe, " how hidden are thy ordinations ! how inexplicable are thy de¬ crees ! Thou speakest through the mouths vol. iv. f of
of babes and sucklings, yet thou scales! close the judgment and the foresight of man !" Geoffry arose ; he tottered towards the 8 defaced altar, and he bent his knee in men* tal prayer. Hubert too joined in the so¬ lemn rite: never, in the full burst of pon¬ tifical splendour, was zeal more fervent,, faith more firm ; and ere yet nighťs ebon shroud enveloped all of earth, their spirits were calmed, and their griefs softened. They couid gaze upon the castle's moul¬ dering walls without the start of frenzy ; they could dwell upon the dire ravage, without the sin-fraught feeling of rankling ire; they could consult and plan for the coming morrow : for Hubert, in the frank confidence of genuine humility, reposed on the known experience of his aged com¬ panion; and supporting his feeble steps back to the hamlet of Hansiape, and shar¬ ing the comforts of the thatch wiiich had yielded shelter in the hour of need, he watched
watched the dawn of that coming morrow, pining, when -> ------------------------------------- 'i\ iL j i [r\ f Oi manv a float ing cloud, ъпочш тимплеа\е í ť> bihei v \estuit, wiih oe 'e* n« ! ι mTsi, Ίυ wreath ibi ì thing inonaicu î" to exchange thought for action, and to fulfil, in one, his own duty, and the filial wishes of the absent Isabel, by tracking the route of the baron of Hansiape, and hastening tojóin the standard ofthe royal Henrv
ι 2 CHAP.
CHAPTER V. Tho time of my fading is near, the ЫаЧ that *-hall *catti·; my leaves». To-morrow shall the traveller corae ; he »-hat saw rae in my beauty shall come. His eyes will search the field, but they will not iind me. Oís ian. Cursorily scanning the miseries of Eng¬ land, during the eventful year of 1264, we light upon scenes of disorder and turmoil : we trace bloodshed, strife, and ruin, in every county : like unto the prophecies of the holy son of Pethuel—"That which the palmerworm left did the locust eat; and that wdiich the locust left did the can¬ kerworm eat ; and that wdiich the canker- worm left did the caterpillar eat :" for deso¬ lation, and burning, and slaughter, raged throughout the kingdom: cities, towns, and castles, paying heavy toll to exulting victors, and successively cowering, beneath the
the Standards of king Henry or his hostile nobles. The earl of Leicester, fearing to give battle to the royal forces, fled, at their approach, from the castle of Rochester: and the king, dizzy with his successes, and possessing himsclf of the fortress, de¬ tached prince Edward, and part of his army, into Derbyshire. Thither, did the ruthless scythe of party-hate and insatiate rancour, mow down, like unto the scythe of fate : and whilst the prince, dealing the death-stroke, razed the strong castle of* Tutbury, and laid waste the rich posses¬ sions of Robert de Ferrers, earl of Derby —the king, and his firm legions, first marching towards London, again, at the reported advance of a large and well arm¬ ed body of citizens, fell back into Kent, eager by fear, or by bribery, to secure the interest ofthe Cinque-Ports, and by block¬ ing up the mouth of the Thames, and cut¬ ting off all supplies, to starve the rebellious Londoners into subjection. But it is not for us to traverse the ground F 3 which
which they traversed, nor midst the hilly and picturesque wilds of Kent, to linger, as they lingered^ in strait and in durance ; tangled midst woody brakes, and followed, and sorely harassed, by the missiles of their light-armed enemies:—neither must we minute the siege of Tunbridge Castle—al¬ though in Tunbridge Castle, the young and lovely countess of Gloucester became the captive to their arms : but Henry, in¬ stinctively noble, scorned to war with wo¬ men, and without gage, and without ran¬ som, restored her to full liberty. Extend¬ ing his march to Pevensey and Winchel- sea, and thereby securing the fealty of the Cinque-Ports, the king led back his army to Lewes; and planting his standard in the priory, was speedily joined by his son, prince Edward, who together with his brave warriors, took up tlieir q^rters in the castle. The balmy breath of a May morning, imbued with the fragrance of the thyme- clad hills of Sussex, and freshened by the breeze
breeze of ocean, played o'er the pensive features of Hubert, as he first spied the distant spires of Lewes, glittering like gems in the sunbeams: thither had he tracked the movements of the royal forces; and thither, reckless of difficulty and pe¬ ril, had he journeyed, to aid in the coming struggle, and to fulfil the tender hopes of Isabel, by ministering to the comfort of her father. It was a day of " light and heat refulgent ;" yet moody care sat on his brow, and all his thoughts were sad : he traced the mighty phalanx of battlements and towers, darkening the horizon's limit, and swelling through the haze of distance; and many a sigh did he heave, in the dread conviction, that all those forces, and all that hostile strength, was waged against the lives of native brothers. The truth was appalling ; it fell like lead upon his spirits ; for it brought with it, the daring crest of De Maudit, and the possible en¬ counter of father and son; and not the loud din of drums, and the shrill flourish f 4 of
of trumpets, as he neared the camp, could dispossess him of the enervating horror. He crossed the intrenchment, and a busy and a novel scene presented itself: sol¬ diers, furbishing their arms ; and groups of warriors, scattered in idle pastime : the loud laugh, and the quaint jest, speaking their hearts, light, as the wavy plumes, nodding o'er their steel caps; for-— *' Their only lufcour was to kil! the time, And li-bour dire it was, and wear) woe." Hubert found the baron of Hansiape, though a sojourner in a camp, independent of the imn ied iate calls of duty, passing hours and days in almost hermit solitude : for though he devoted his time to the strict discipline of his own brave followers, beyond the converse of sir Roger Morti¬ mer, from his long banishment from the social haunts of men, he w r as well¬ nigh a stranger. No eye noted the strug¬ gles of strong emotion, or the tears shed in the close clasp of kindly greeting : it was
was a spontaneous burst of heart, and the baron thought of William—though he spoke not of William—whilst he pressed his foundling charge to his brave bosom. Schooled in the firm fortitude of Chris¬ tian philosophy—for it was his duty, ra¬ ther than the feelings of his nature, which seasoned him to the harsh peltings of way¬ ward fortune—he listened, with an unruf¬ fled brow, to the melancholy detail of the demolition of his hereditary home; and he piously r blessed God for the preserva¬ tion of Isabel, although he knew her a cap¬ tive in the hands of his enemies. Often did he break forth in praise of her magna¬ nimity ; and oftener still did he brush away the tear, indicative of the struggles of the father.—" Bless—bless thee, my child! my glorious child 1 " he would eja¬ culate; and again and again, would he bid Hubert repeat the very words of fhe aged Geoffry, and marvel at the courage which had sprung out of danger. " So young, ånd yet so firm ; so tender, and F 5 yet
yet so undaunted !" And then, dwelling on her filial love, and her fervent zeai, foi his comfort, and for his preservation—" In thee, my Isabel—in thee, my darling elüld, am I blessed, thrice blessed r he would pronounce. " God is indeed mer¬ ciful, and scourges not the sinner to the trespass ■" Fearful of probing anew the green and unhealed wounds of his heart, Hubert passed lightly over his pretended mission to the black canons at Kenilworth : but when, in his return, he first named his so¬ journ within the ruined monasteiy, and his encounter with the Knight-Templai- the attention of the baron became pain¬ full) steadfast. It was wonder, it was ex pectation, it was wild horror, vvhich lived in his eye : and at the deeplj -engraven sentence, which had e\er sounded as a death-knell to peace, his limbs shook, h\< features became convulsed, and every ves tige of colour fled his cheeks and lips,— " You
*' You are agitated, fearfully agitated, my lord ;" and Hubert ceased. " Did he—did he sav — Vows to heavciu mvour not qf the vows qf this world ?'* gasped out the baron. iť Swear to me that he said it"—and he grasped the arm of Hubert with terrifying earnestness— *' swear to me, that he breathed—that hu was in life—that he vanished not amidst mist and gloom." " I do swear it," solemnly replied Hu¬ bert—" I do swear, my lord, that he war> a fellow-sojourner in the flesh ; that hkt unto ourselves, he was heir—he π ï«eir. to all the infirmities, and all the perils ot this mortal state ; that stricken in year>, he yet lives, to confess to you, as he ha> confessed to me, that he, an inaugurated brother of the Temple—he alone, on the fast of St Dunstan, in the Temple-church —at the grave of the great earl of Pem¬ broke—knolled in the ear of one sorrow¬ ing moi.rier — Vows to heaven, savour ι 6 not
not of the vows of this world! That hc alone------" lie ceased, for the baron, sliding down upon his knees, cried out—" Thanks- thanks, oh, God !" and bursting into an hysteric laugh, fell senseless at his tett. It was long, ere anxious solicitude could rally back to life; and longer still, ere re¬ cognition and perfect sanity re-dawned : a confused, a bewildering haze, felt to shut out the light of pure reason, to hurry back, into all the doubts, perplexities, and ob¬ scurities of the past : and not until Hu¬ bert, had again and again, explained the Templar, as the active agent in the mys¬ terious scene of the copse-wood—as one, nearlv and closelv linked in hisown strange destiny·^—as one, now in life, and captive in the hands of the earl of Gloucester— could the baron divest himself of that su¬ perstitious credence, which had tinged the future in dread, and steeped the long years of the past, in awfulness and gloom. Relieved of a load, threatening tbeextine- tion
tion of energy, in the conviction,, tbat not a reproving spirit, not a visitant from ano¬ ther ivorld, had thundered the dire pre¬ diction, he still, agreeable to the bigotry of the times, attributed the sorrows, and pe¬ culiar woes, which had so effectuallv blight- ed his domestic promises, to his own fatal negligence in the cause of holiness; assign¬ ing unto the Almighty, retributive ven¬ geance, rather than the revealed attributes, of meekness, gentleness, patient endurance, and long iorbearance! and he relaxed not in his ascetic habits, still wearing the haircloth of penance beneath his coat-of- mail, and adhering to the lenten rules of fanaticism, v. ith the like religious exact¬ ness. But though he carefully confined himself to the narrowest limits of social intercourse, judging every thought with¬ held from Iieaven, as a hinderance to his own expiatory atonements, Hubert mixed with the vouthful nobles, and caught the fire of heroism, and studied the art of war, beneath the bright example ofthe gallant prince
prince Edward. Had De Maudit, joining the standard of his lawful monarch, been like unto himself, a candidate for honour and for fame—had he shadowed the foot¬ steps of his loyal father, and headed, with him, the brave vassals of his hereditary barony—had he led on to death or to vic¬ tory, the track had indeed been bright, the anticipation, fraught, with all that va¬ lour, all that youthful emulation, could picture glorious: as it was, glory, and emulation, and valour, was mixed with bitterness ; for it conveyed a torturing pang to his attached and feeling heart As a brother, he loved De Maudit ; with more than a brother's grief, he mourned the defalcation of De Maudit: labouring. as we have often shown, to lure frorn the tangled maze of error, and to awaken the grace of repentance, and the desire of ex¬ piation : and when he heard, that the earls of Leicester and Gloucester, accompanied by a strong body of Londoners, and at¬ tended by all the barons of their faction, had
had encamped themselves at Flexninge, within eight miles of Lewes, he dreaded it, as a forthcoming struggle, keener and heavier, than the parting struggle of soul and body. It was on the sixth morning of Hubert's joining the royal standard, that he left the baron, with his missal in his hand, and accompanied by the earls of bincoln and Pembroke, and by the lord Philip Basset, was pacing an open space within the intrench ments of the camp, when a herald, bearing a white pennon, and head¬ ing a troop of horsemen, steadily advanced, and a parley was quickly sounded. The shrill blast ofthat trumpet thrilled through every nerve of the astounded Hubert: İt was as a presentiment of what was to fol¬ low ; it was, as a dire foreboding, running an ice-chill through the human heart : and when the deputation from the hostile ba¬ rons, dismounted, and moved towards the priory, his eyes rested upon one steel-clad warrior, until every other object swam in dizziness.
dizziness. It was the step—it was the movement—it was the towering form of De Maudit ! Hubert fell back, unnoted by his companion^ he paused involun¬ tarily—he listened, and De Maudiťs ac¬ cent reached his ear ; his well-remember¬ ed laugh, following some light and spor¬ tive observation. De Maudit then was a sojourner in the camp at Flexninge, was one of the myriad enrolled beneath the standard of rebellion ; and the horrid phan¬ tasy, which had haunted wellnigh unto madness, would be accomplished—the fa¬ ther and the son would meet in hostile ranks: he smothered down the groan which rose in his heart ; he knew the eye of observation upon him ; and though he rivetted on William, a keen and piercing glance, still wrestling against the rebel¬ lious throes of his nature, with something like composure, he raised his plumed helm in passing courtesy. He saw De Mau¬ diťs cheek fade to a sickly white ; he saw the smile vanish, and thought and care usurp
usurp his features ; yet De Maudit, with a firm step, and an unbending mien, pass¬ ed on, as though all around were strangers, and Hubert lost him in the gateway of the priory. The letter, bearing date, the 12th of May 1264-, signed by the earls of Leicester and Gloucester, in the name of their whole faction, and proffering respect, and sub¬ mission, and oaths of fealty, unto the king; affirming, that they warred not against his acknowledged authority, but against their enemies, and his enemies, and the enemies of the whole kingdom, in the foreigners and aliens crowding around his person—produced but the retort of re¬ proach and defiance : the royal Henry, ac¬ cusing them, as the promoters, and busy workers, of all the desolation, misery, war, and rapine, which had drained the wealth, and depopulated the nation ; and dismiss* ing the deputation, with haughty disdain, and with the proud threat of unbending defiance. Hubert saw De Maudit emerge from
from the dark archway of the priory, and he watched him, until he had mounted his prancing steed, and until the steed, and 4·Γ»£4 l»irt£it* flinrl 4-1ϊ£» Cil t«tt/ л ιι vt j-I ivi ¿ν nfivfiT fnrír^rt fcfllV- J. lUCl , СЛЧ\Л \,U\~ OLII 1 V/M 11VİJIIİİ iniibj , iUUV-Uj and vanished, as a black speck in the dis¬ tance. We further learn, in the elaborate pages of ancient authors, that the barons, doubt¬ ful of their own strength, and aware of the superior numbers of the royal forces, upon the return of their successless envoys, dispatched forthwith, Henry, bishop of London, and Walter, bishop of Worces¬ ter, to sue for peace; and humbly to offer the king, in compensation for the mischief and ruin wrought throughout the realm, the sum of thirty thousand pounds, stipu¬ lating, at the same time, that the goad of contention, the statutes of Oxford, should remain inviolate. But the royal Henry, emboldened by his numbers, and upheld by his son, prince Edward, and his bro¬ ther, the king of the Romans, hurled fresh defiance into the teeth of the earl of Leicester
Leicester and his auxiliaries ; and which defiance, acting upon their galled and turbulent spirits, was hastily followed by ft.- ľ ______ ι _____„~:„4.:___ л 4? r«„i4--- ««J u,. СПе JoniJtti raiuiiviäuuii ui iccm-v, лпи Dy the determined and desperate resolve of speedy action. Hubert, for the night, had quitted the tent of the baron of Hansiape, leaving him to his devotions and his repose ; and lured by the freshness of the breeze, the starry beauty ofthe heavens, and the unbroken stillness of creation—for nought could be heard, save the measured tread of the sen¬ tinels, and the periodical exchange of the deep-toned watch-word—was musing, and lingering, at the canvassed entrance of his own tent, when a man, muffled in a cowl, and close wrapped in the black cloak of a religious order, glided swiftly towards him. His quick and agitated breathing, struck upon the ear of Hubert, ere yet the stran¬ ger had gained the spot on which he stood ; and a sensation, of awe and of wonder¬ ment,
ment, succeeded, when the monk—if monk he was—sprung beside him. " Hubert," he pronounced—and the vuiCe tiiiiiicii tuiOugii iiuuďts liCait—— *' I am a ruined, a fallen, a desperate man. The last die of my fortune has been thrown. and I am a wretch for ever." Hubert tottered back, and snatching the arm of De Maudit —for De Maudit it was —pulled him into the tent.—" Mighty God!" he ejaculated, and every nerve shook with strong emotion, '* how do I see you here ; in the camp of sworn foes—at night—alone ------Know you the peril?" * Aye, but I fear it not," said William. " There are situations, Hubert"—and he spoke with dreadful earnestness—" when life is as nought in the venture. How I am here—thanks to this garb of peace : it gained me passport within the camp of the royal Henry ; and when within the camp, I asked for the quarters of the baron of Hansiape, and kind and pitying Heaven led me thus to you." " Would
" Would you—would you, William"— and Hubert shuddered at the mere antici¬ pation—" unannounced, unexpected, have shot, like a ghost, into the presence of your father ? Would you——" " A despairing and a desperate spirit dares much," interrupted De Maudit. " Perchance, I might have gone back, blistered with a new curse. Ah, Hu¬ bert !" and his voice softened into sorrow, " that curse—that fatal curse, drove me into the hell of open defiance: it irritated; it galled ; it—it------" he buried his face in his spread hands, and all was lost in a broken sob. "Alas! alas ! " faltered Hubert, " how little—how very little, did you know your father ! That curse, dearest William, which passed his lips, lived not in his heart : it was the impulse of outraged sensibility, writhing in the throes of accredited disho¬ nour. Had you evinced one token of submission; had vou made one advance for grace ; he would have clasped you in his
his arms ; he would have washed out the curse in his own tears." " Oh, God!" exclaimed De Maudit, starting almost into frenzy, ** that I could live back the past! that I could blot out all since mv fatal visit to Warwick Castle ! that—that-----" " Forget it all—mourn it all," urged Hubert, " and the pang will lessen in the atonement. Repentance, expiation, bleach- eth sins of crimson even unto snow 7 . Dear, dearest William, forsw r ear the dire delu¬ sion, and the blessing of a father's pardon, the peace of an approving conscience, will redawn ! Isabel — father Gilbert — I — I too, will pray with you, pray for you : re¬ turn to us, the William of former days, and all, all our heart-achs, will be healed." " Hubert—Hubert, this kindness, this hoard of kindness will destroy me : did you hate, did you spurn, did you curse me, I could bear it better than this kind¬ ness"—and De Maudit, wept like an in¬ fant, on the neck of his early friend. " Be
" Be of better cheer, dearest William," implored Hubert, clasping him closer to his own tortured bosom, and striving to inspire a hope he could not himself feel; " we may yet joy iu the future; we may yet together glorify this behest of grace, in your change of sentiments." " Xot on earth—not on this side eter¬ nity," firmly pronounced De Maudit. * 4 The scales have indeed íallen from be* fore my eyes—I see myself) íallen, lost, degraded, disgraced, and the grave alone must be my shelter." Hubert breathed a shuddering cry,— "' The grave !" lie echoed. " Oh, no, no ! say not the grave: on earth—in life, there is balm to heal the broken-hearted, and hope to prop the braised spirit. Aye, and emollients too for every ill, dear William, if you have but faith," ^^ Villiam looked up ; he tried to smile* but the expression vas ghastly.—" Reach me—give me the cup," he faltered ; " let me
me dreg the precious nepenthe, to expel pain and care." *' It is not fabulous," said Hubert, eager¬ ly ; is it lives in prayer, in submission, in patient шеек conformity. Dearest Wil¬ liam, pray for grace, pray for a new spirit, and the world will lose all its powers to harm." ** The world and I have done with eacb other," and De Maudit spoke with bitter¬ ness : " it has used me like a credulous weak fool; scurvily, scurvily, Hubert: but there is one alternative, and that alter¬ native shall be mine." Hubert scarcely breathed ; he stood with hands clasped, and eyes fixed on the convulsed and black¬ ened features of his friend. íť The hottest qf the fray? concluded De Maudit, in a tone of dreadful import. Hubert stag¬ gered back; he felt as though his very heartstrings were burst ir·-; death-damps gathered on his brow ; his lips moved, but no sound escaped. " Mark me," pursued William, heedless of his agony, and grasp¬ ing
ing his arm with a nerve of iron ; " should you survive the conflict of to-morrow, seek not my mangled body : let it perish and rot witii the common nerd : ii you would win my blessing, if you would lay my restless ghost, let no proud honours note the spot, lest men hereafter pause, and say, there lies a traitor! Nay, nay, no tears ! I am not worthv this holy sorrow —*I am a wretch, Hubert, a very wretch, the slave, the dupe of a perfidious policy ; lured into dishonour, trapped, wheedled into a snare, (lämning both soul and body ; aye, and against my own principles, and against my own conscience. Pool! fool! but ibr this accursed woman, hooks of steel had grappici! me to the fortunes of king Henrv. I had lived in honour, or died beneath the standard of my dear, dear father." Hubert could only weep ; he felt a grief within, baffling all powers of resistance : William too was softened, and for many minutes, stood, with his face buried in his vol. iv. g hands,
hands, his breast labouring with sobs, and the swollen tears fast trickling through his fingers.^—" List to me," he at length pur¬ sued ; " list to me, as to the voice of a dy¬ ing man. I shall not see the issue of to¬ morrow's battle : should it turn against the royal Henry—mark me, Hubert—Leices¬ ter will hang a double yoke around the neck of Eng-land : he strives for universal power; he fights for sovereignty. I read the whole complotting—I unreave the hellish mesh. Ingeirica —her I had pic¬ tured scarce less perfect than Heaven's own angels-^Jngelriea aims to be queen of England !" " Virgin Mother!" aspirated Hubert, and he looked up, as if doubtful of his sa¬ nity. Rage, and indignation, and morti¬ fied bleeding feeling, spoke in the distort¬ ed visage of De Maudit : e\ ery limb qui¬ vered ; every feature was convulsed ; all the beauty of liis youth fled ; all the fire of expectation blighted : it was despair wdiiçh reigned;
reigned ; it was passion, demoniacal pas¬ sion, whicli lived in his eye. 4Í Ingeirica," he pronounced, and his shudder was almost death-fraught—" In- gelrica is the wife of Henry de Montford ! Curses—curses light on the sorceress ! In¬ gel rica, for wdiose love I have bartered heaven ; for whose smile I have braved a father's curse! Oh, Hubert!" and he paused and panted with hysteric violence, " 3 tis a disastrous story : bear with me, and I will tell you all." ťť You have been deceived—you have been wronged," said Hubert, soothingly. ** I can believe it all—-I can guess it all, my poor friend : human wisdom cannot always cope with human subtilty: your confidence has been abused, and the sting still rankles." " Here—here," said William, striking his bosom—here, rankles ť the worm that dieth noť —here, the gnawing anguish, the bitter pang of remorse : never more can my torn mind be healed ; never more G 2 can
can I partake the heartease of repose." Аь he spoke, he dropped upon the neck of Hubert, and again and again did their tears mingle. Suddenly starting up, and smothering down his anguish—" Time presses/' he exclaimed—" I must be brief, lest I forfeit the show of worldly honour, Recall you the hour, when I quitted Hansiape, with my uncle De Bellamont ; when 1 journeyed to Warwick Castle, with a fatheťs blessing on my head, and expectation in my heart?" * e Ah í well do I remember it," sighed Hubert : " mv heart failed me even then, as though it foreboded the woes wdiich were to follow." " That season was a season of revelry and joy," continued De Maudit: " the sons of Leicester were sojourning at War¬ wick Castle; and from Warwick Castle, as you well know, I repaired with them to Kenilworth. But w r hy linger over that disastrous season? it stamped the die of my destiny ; for I quaffed pernicious poison
poison at the eyes of Ingelrica Fitzparnel, and forgot the world, and all the world calls precious—I became the dupe of her arts ; the pliant easy tool in all her subtle windings. Tis true, my principles and my reason shrunk in horror at the gra·* dually unfolded policy ; but she held my passions captive, and she tortured, teazed, and soothed, until she dispossessed me of myself God of heaven ! wdien I recall that flitting season, it goads, it drives me into frenzy ! Fainter and fainter grew the combat of my principles : do not hate me, Hubert; but such was her as- cendence, that had she craved at my hands, the blood of my whole race, the stand had been feeble." Hubert shuddered, but he spoke not. " She flattered, she caressed, she wiled me on with honeyed lures, until she damn¬ ed me by the oath of confederacy and treason," pursued De Ma" *"' : " and when, as a toil of duty, as a task, a heavy painful task, I returned to Hansiape, I g 3 knew
knew all th з ramifications, and all the dark and fell plotters in the accursed policy :— we were as sworn brothers, linked in a chain, forged by the arch-enemy of man¬ kind. I sojourned at Hansiape, without a heart ; listless, dissatisfied, pining for free¬ dom, yet knowing not how to seek it ; impatient under restraint, and hating the trammels I could not fly. Alas í alas î my dear kind Hubert, you, even you, have galled me into rancour; your natural expostulations, your wholesome remon¬ strances, were but as oil upon consuming fire. Ingelrica, was father, sister, friend; all, all to me : for so despotic is love, that bereaved of its object, the whole universe is a blank ; yet do we constitute a world, in the possession of one single heart!" William sighed heavilv, but momentarv was the pause, for with impelling haste, he resumed : " The horn, which broke upon our devotions, and drew me so irre¬ verently from the chapel, was a signal, current among our sworn confederacy : and that
that very night, stealing from the calm of my once peaceful pillow, I met the assem¬ bled council, in the castle of the lord Fulk de Pagenel. Your appearance at day- dawn, in the road to Ne vvport-Pagnel, when, like a thief, I was returning to my own hereditary home, filled me with mo¬ mentary disquiet ; and when you sought my confidence, the feeble remnant c f na¬ tive feeling, ahnost precipitated me on your neck: but alas! my better angel yielded, and to hide my shameful defalca¬ tion, I parried all your anxieties, with senseless heartless radlery. How hard did I labour to hide mv own ignominv ! guilt, dearest Hubert, engenders mvsterv ; and mystery is ever the grave of peace: but soon did the obscuring muffle fade away ; the cloud, which eclipsed the sunshine of my father's hopes, whicli awakened him to the fatal perversion of my principles. The return of the holy Gilbert from visit¬ ing the brothers of his order at Tickford, broke the astounding news of open revolt ; с* 4 and
and I, mad and headlong, and blinded by- false zeal, and impelled by fitful passion, dared the mildew of a fatheťs curse. Ah î that scene, that appalling scene Γ shudder¬ ing at the bare recollection—" would to God, I had never awakened from the trance of living death!—would to God, I had breathed forth fill·, at the feet of my outraged rather } He might then have revoked the cur^e ofa moment, he might have blessed my senseless clay; ho might have bteepi-d it in the holy tears of affec¬ tion, imã mingled pity witli mourning, < re he ga\e it to tht earth." ** And you— лой, ^ijd the horror-struck Hub» rt, ■* uith such a weight of crime— with ruch ¿ι lo--d oí uurtpuited ел iL" ** I Laci betu pure as ice— I Iľdá been white ал snow» to wliat I am noi<\" firmly rephed l)e .Maudit: '' lu** then, was it the sin of intent, now, ь it the ъ'т oí сош- mission . then, was 1 the dupe of a false credence ; now, am I the active emissary of damning turpitude. But we cannot recall
recall the past," with forced calmness; 4 ' and we must bear the past, and we must cope with the present, as becomes men." ** Yours is a pernicious doctrine, my dear William, and savours of hardness of heart, rather than of repentance and self- accusation," sighed Hubert. " Alas ! the school of the world, has indeed defaced and superseded, the early school of morality and pious faith. Could I see you, humble in spirit, more patient, more submissive, more calm, I might hope of good to come." " When the sward shall have closed over me," said De Maudit, emphatically ; % * when mv bodv and rn ν shame shall lie buried together—then, and not till then, picture good to come. My shame—my shame—hoiv Jesu !" and his start was frenzy, ts where is the grave, which can òhut in shame—which can hide the mil¬ dew of ignoble actions? Branded, stig¬ matized» recorded as a rebel and a traitor» ages yet unborn, will live to curse me !" As he spoke, every nerve shook, and the g 5 Ш 8* П Е
raging throes of passion were wellnigh mortal. " There is a track of escape yet," said Hubert, anxious to pacify and to reassure. " Lay down your arms ; return to your allegiance; cast yourself on the known clemency of your king, and ------" " Be cursed—be doubly cursed, by both parties," interrupted De Maudit ; " be¬ come an apostate, first to my honour, and then to my oath. No, no, Hubert, on your life, no more of that : be the task ever so bitter, I re-seek the standard of Leicester—I die in the ranks of rebellion." " And be the enemy, the baleful ene¬ my of your own immortal soul !" and Hu¬ berťs crv was from the heart ; he felt in- deed the bitterness of death, in this ap¬ palling proof of stubborn nonconformity." " This is no time for disquisitions of faith," firmly rejoined De Maudit. " I have mo¬ delled a standard for my own actions ; and I will be firm to it, and true to it, as ever Ro¬ man was firm and true to his own unim¬ peachable
peachable honour. I will immolate my being, on the swords of those I have dared to injure—I will offer up myself, as the fittest sacrifice, for broken bonds and vio« lated allegiance- —I will not live with shame on my head. And now list to me, for I would fain mollify the anger of those I best value. When blistered with a fa¬ ther's curse, I escaped from Hansiape, I returned, with hell in my brain, to the plotting mischief-stirring assembly at Newport-Pagnel ; and from Newport-Pag- nel, on the whig of hope and dizzy ex¬ pectancy, I hastened back to Kenilworth. There, did every stand of principle yield to the Circean spell of fascination ; there, was every earthly care, quick hushed, in the approval of the arbitress of my des¬ tiny ! You have seen this Ingelrica ! this traitress ! this fiend in angel guise ! Fair as she is, and matchless as she is, in face and in form ; born with every grace, and every grace heightened by the rare polish of borrowed courtesy, wonder not, that I g 6 had
had no mind, no action, no conduct—no, not even thought of my own—I was an automaton in her keeping—I was a pup¬ pet, moving by the string of her subtilty ! Virgin Mother ! even now, when I know her false as the hell into which her machi¬ nations have plunged me; even now^—I shame to feel it—I shame to say it—even now, her smile could cozen me of a pend¬ ing world. Hubert! Hubert! I have not been myself: I have been under delirium, under delusion; fascinated, led, tangled, in a spell of the devil's weaving. When I recall the past, when I retrace the past, I see it all—I feel it all—I know myself, a fool, a fool, a dupe, marked out, fore¬ doomed, from the earliest moment of meeting. 1 have been jealous, madly jea¬ lous, because I loved, idolized, doted, as never man doted; but neither fear or doubt ever lived in Henry de Montford. I thought him as her brother—I felt se- suritv—I—I«-—'* Again the raging war of passions rose to
to suffocation, and De Maudit paced the tent, with every feature swollen, and the fiends of discord and mortal hate, tearing, rending his vitals.—" If I had had a crown to offer," abruptly pausing, " Ingeirica had been mine: it was the jewelled bait of royalty ; it was the splendour of the re¬ gal purple, which alienated her heart— her heart : holy God ! she has no heart for love: her heart is all made up, of subtilty, design, pride, ambition ; her heart—Hu¬ bert, I am scarce myself. When I first heard the astounding story, it fell like the thunderbolt of Heaven's wrath : she had cozened me with promises; she had bought me with the price of her plighted favour ; she had made me a traitor; she had damn¬ ed me with a father's curse. I heard it from the lips of Leicester himself—I lieard it in the camp at Fïexninge. It was the stated plea of Henry de Montford's ab¬ sence. I heard it, when I returned with the deputation ; when I felt doubly cursed, in the conviction of my fatheťs proximity —I lieard
—I heard it, and I lived. 'Tis well, Hen¬ ry de Montford was far absent : had he been at Flexninge» there had been mur- der; for when I broke from the presence of Leicester, hell raged in my heart. Ah ! ifi could have seen her—if I could now see her, I would upbraid her with her falsehood—I would curse her, and spurn her, as bane of my existence." 5 Again De Maudit paused, and stood, panting with rage, exhaustion, and horror: it was the heavy throes of wounded pride. struggling in the trammel of outraged ten¬ derness. Recovering himself, and turn¬ ing his death-wan face towards Hubert, he pursued—" All else is soon told. Much as I lament the wrongs ofthe earl of K< nt; much as I sympathize in the woes of the royal Margaret; it ъ not the wrongs of the earl of Kent, neither is it the woes of the royal Margaret, which could have di¬ vorced me from my allegiance. The wrongs of the earl of Kent s. ;ve but the pretext of party: taking captive the heart, and goading
goading througli the strong medium of the passions, it is the nominated incentive to rebellion and open violence :—but more, much more, lies hid beneath the surface. Leicester fights in the false-named cause ofthe earl of Kent; but he fights for self- aggrandizement: it is ambition, whicii sharpens his sword, and fashions every stroke of his policy : raised to supreme power, trampling down the legitimate rights of the throne, Henry de Montford, his first born-—his heir—oh ! do you not read it all?—do you not, with me, deci¬ pher, the black, black riddle? If it was preference— ifit was love—for well I know the wayward affections of the heart are not in our own keeping—I would pardon the treason ; I would pray for their happi¬ ness: but to know myself the dupe of systematic baseness ; the tool of cold po¬ licy ; the blind abettor of my own ruin ; the aider, the helper, the worker of my own disgrace : 'tis there, Hubert, 'tis there, that the sting rankles unto death. And now*
now, one embrace upon the grave's cold margin : honour need not grudge it ; for in name—in name alone, am I traitor: one embrace, dear Hubert," casting him¬ self on the neck of his tortured friend— *' one embrace, and tlien farewell for ever !" Hubert could not speak ; his heart felt swollen to bursting; with a convulsed and agonized pressure, he could only clasp De Maudit to his breast, as tliough he would hold him there for ever. i( You know, and you will grant, m) last, my dying, my most solemn request," faltered William, in accents, broken and interrupted by sobs. " Fromi.se me, H li¬ bert; say, that you promise to let my body moulder with the dust of the un¬ known and the humble; to let me sink away and be forgotten : 'tis the sole balm you can give to my sorrows; tis the best unction you can administer to my wounds. Say, that you will not seek me amidst the slain ; say, that you will not bear me to my father; say—" He
He stopped, for Hubert uttered a cry, so piercing, that it stayed even the set¬ tled and determined purpose ofhis sick soul. " I liad hoped better of your fortitude," resumed De Maudit. ίς Think me, on earth, the butt, for scorn and for reproach to point at; think me, wearing out life, with blotted honour, and with blasted hope; think me, stung, racked, tortured, with reproving conscience; think me------ ·'* *' Aught, aught, save a self-murderer; a deliberate, a determined, a fore-doomed self-murderer," gasped out Hubert. " Oh, God' oh, Virgin Mother! think ofthe eternal ban, denounced against the self- murderer, and have pity, have mercy on your own soul.' x\ blackening convulsion passed over the features of De Maudit; the conflict was heavv, but he struggled down the ► ' oo rising throes of sensibility,— ťí What, in the fight," he asked, ik in the strife and tumult of battle, call you it self-murder, to die the death of thousands?" " Not
" Not if it be the will of Heaven ; not if the shaft be pointed from above," said Hubert: " but voluntarily to cast aw r ay ine on the weapon oí an enemy, is mur¬ der, self-murder, William, in defiance of every fangled glozing term of sophi&try." " Then if we meet no more," continued De Maudit, after a long and solemn pause; " if to-morrow's battle be fatal to you or to me; if you survive the conflict, and I fall, will you calm my parting moments, with the assurance I crave?—will you, upon the principle, that the last actions of my life have been other than to nice the broad daylight of scrutiny, consent, that my bed of rest, be unmarked and humble?" " Aye, if it should be so," sobbed Hu¬ bert: " as far as on me rests, so help me Heaven !" William dropped upon his knee— ke God's blessing light upon you !" he as¬ pirated, then springing up, and once more precipitating himself upon the neck of
of Hubert, " and now, one word, one little word, of my dear father. Perchance, when he dreams over the past, in blessing my boyhood, he may expunge the curse upon my manhood. Should he recall the years of our innocent, peaceful, happy in¬ fancy; should he lament the blight upon his hopes, the woful blast, which has scat¬ tered every glowing promise; should he speak of me hereafter—speak of me, with kindness, compassion, pity—with—-with —tenderness;' 5 and the voice of William faltered, and sank almost inarticulate— ťf tell him, Hubert—and you will tell him gospel truth—that like unto a true peni¬ tent, my heart weeps blood for every tear I have wrung from his eyes: Tell him, I would purchase back my integrity, my unblenchcd fame, with the martyrdom of my vile body : I would brave all of cor¬ poreal suflering—the rack, and worse than the rack, to expunge from the name of De Maudit, the inky blot of treason. For our Isabel: say to her, when she can bear
it, Hubert—for I know her heart, her tenderness—I know the love she bears me: say to her, dearest Hubert, with all his crimes, and all his seeming apostacy, a dying brother dared to bless her. Say what your own feeling nature prompts of kindness: all that is consoling; all that can lure back peace. And for you—you —companion of my cradle ! friend of my innocence! twin brother of rny soul! for you, HuLert," snatching him with frenzied fervour to his breast, and holding him with a clasp of iron—" for you, Hubert ; pray for me—pray, wdien I can no more pray for myself." Hubert felt him break away without the power to stay him ; he made one ef¬ fort; he sprung forward to snatch at his cloak: but all his nerves collapsed, andali his strength receded in the failure: he fell prostrate upon the earth ; he lay, alive to all around, yet totally bereaved of power and motion.
CHAP-
CHATTER VI. As ЬГ'>' * ■*■ that bouilli Idun юс v i'- iw K ; л-, а\с οι с» !ю- íiiľ; woods, 'л- thuudt г ioi ■> hum iu I !o lull, ¡n tlbuui. bloktu peuli ; -> - bkm 4iUľ!ihi l )!iu, ioni dt atfı to death O-man. On the fourteenth of May Ií¿64, almost before the ruddv cast tokened the birth of day, an alarum signal, from a distant out¬ post, passing, like light, from sentinel to sentinel, pierced each corner of the royal camp; and like unto the great and final trump, roused each slumberer from the deathlike trammel of inaction. Confusion and bustle grew upon the blank of repose; warriors flying to arms; drums beating; trumpets braying; zeal and intrepidity nerving each arm, and defiance and party- hate speaking in each towering crest. The earl of Leicester, heading his rebel forces,
forces, with streaming banners, was press¬ ing onward towards Lewes: his whole army, first confessing themselves, had re¬ ceived at the hands of the bishop of Chi¬ chester, a general absolution; and bearing on their backs and breasts, a white cross, symbolical of the justness of their cause, and strengthened by assurances, like unto the militant wars of old, that the bliss of heaven awaited all who might chance to fall in a cause so meritorious—panted, as the hart for the water-brook, for the life- blood of their foes. Never had party ran¬ cour burnt with a fiercer fire ; never had vindicthe malice glowed with a keener rage : it gendered in the seeds of imagined wrong, of long bosomed injury; and on the royal, and on the rebel side, it alike sharpened the goad of contention. The earl of Leicester, whose superior talent for war, had so often and so deci¬ dedly evinced itself, led out his forces, with such skill and such secresy, that he had wellnigh stolen unsuspected upon the quarters
quarters of the royalists : and but for the zeal, vigilance, and activity, ofthe gallant prince Edward, who mighty in daring, and brave to the despite of life, quick rallied around him the flower of his strength, thousands, from the sleep of wearied na¬ ture, had passed into the sleep eternal. It was the shrill clarion ofa hundred trum¬ pets, stimulating into life and action; it was the deafening beat to arms ; it was the tramp of feet, and commingling shouts and voices, which served as a rallying spur to the bruised and stricken spirit of Hu¬ bert : he started from his waking trance ; he hailed the precursor of death in the ga¬ thering tumult ; and fastening the rivets of his own armour, and girdhiü' on his sword, he found himself at the side ofthe baron of Hansiape, who cased in steel, and dauntless in intrepidity, headed the brave vassals of his own hereditary barony. Hubert, with a sigh, and bleeding heart, gazed on the unfurled banner : he thought of William; thought ofhis torn and dis¬ tracted mind ; thought of his farewell words,
words, of his farewell embrace, until every thing upon this earth appeared joyless, and life itself scarce worth the holding. From the waving banner, hiseyes turned upon the erect and towering form ofthe unconscious father : lie saw courage and native daring in the luditnimr flash of his eve; and he almost groaned aloud, in the threatened despoliation, which hung over every hope and every promise, Quick passing into order and military discipline, prince Edward, with John earl of Warren and Surrey, and William de Valence, earl of Pembroke, leading the van; and the king of ihe Komans, with his son Henry, commanding the main bodv; and kimr Henrv himself in the rear. moving at the head of his chief nobilitv» marched from the town of Lewes. Day had but newly broken, and columns of mist, and thick and drizzling vapours, still clung to the uplands ; yet ere the heavens glowed in one broad bright ex- о о panse of glory, the earl of Leicester, and the barons of his party, seeing the move¬ ments
ments of the royal forces, halted on the hill above. It was a scene of splendid and imposing grandeur : a moving multitude, armed in battle-array, alike clothing the hill and stretching along the valley : un¬ furled banners, streaming on the breeze ; and spears, and battle-axes, and crested helms, and burnished coats-of-mail, bright as the gems of Golconda * The first division of the rebel army, was commanded by Guy de Montford, and Humphrey de Bohun, earl of Hereford : the second, by the earl of Gloucester, and the barons, William de Montchesney, and John Fitz-John : the third, composed of Londoners, was headed by Nicholas, baron de Segra ve : and the fourth, was led on by the earl of Leicester himself, and the lord Thomas de ľulyston. Enthusiasm glow¬ ed in every breast ; courage and intrepi¬ dity braced the nerves of every leader : each party, exulting alike in the strength and discipline of their followers, and holding forth to all ranks, recompense and glory ! Leicester and Gloucester, luring with the VOL, iv. η rich
rich promise of plunder ; vindicating their own dereliction, in the wrongs, and abuses. and misrule of legitimate power ; cloaking the turpitude of treason, in the false and hacknied designation of mere ¡ustice, and stimulating the wild and vagrant passions of men, through the inflated and high- sounding medium of patriotism. Prince Edward, who with the chiefs oi Erin might have exclaimed—" My soul grows in danger, and lejoices in the noise of steel," striding his war-horse, and mo¬ ving in the majesty of his fame, passed from phalanx to phalanx, animating, invi¬ gorating, inspiring with his own hardi¬ hood, and his own superhuman courage ! He spoke of temporal honours, of the mu¬ nificence of royal favour ; he opened to all a,nd every candidate, through personal va¬ lour, the meed of renown and future re¬ compense : and his harangue was echoed by the loud acclaim of all his followers ; they panted for the moment, close at hand, to shadow the crimson track of his darings ; they panted for the signal of strife :~-and the
the moment dawned, and the signal for human slaughter sounded, and tremendous was the onset ! The din of commingling sounds ; the beat of drums ; the shrill uia»L υι iiuiiiputs , me eitisii ui aiiiiö , tue neighing of horses; the shouts, and the groans, and the struggles, noting the work of death : the air was darkened with mis* siles, and soon was the earth covered with slain ; heaps of dead and dying lay scat¬ tered around, and huge and crimson masses, marked the hottest of the conflict. Prince Edward, eager and zealous, and spurred by revenge, for the indignity of¬ fered the queen his mother in her passage from the Tower, fell upon the baron de Se- graves division of Londoners, and ruin and overthrow marked his blood-red track : pouring like an impetuous flood, breaking their ranks, and spreading, far and wide* confusion and dismay ; his nervous arm, scattering the brands of death ; his falchion, as the scythe of fate ; his movements, swift and subtle as light. It seemed, as though hate and biting rancour grew out n c J of
of revenge : for nearly four miles he pur¬ sued the routed Londoners, indiscrimi¬ nately dealing death, nor yielding ought of quarter. But anger, like an unbridled horse, spurning check or restraint, plung¬ ing into hazard, loseth the straight line of moderation : he returned to the ensan¬ guined field, to mourn, in his own impe¬ tuous haste, the ruin, the total ruin of his hopes, the discomfiture of all his brightest promises ; to see his friends scattered, like thistle-beard on the wing of the tempest, and the dauntless crest of rebellion, tri¬ umphant through the land. Scarce had discretion yielded to the mad spur of rage ; scarce had prince Ed¬ ward, sacrificing policy to individual ran¬ cour, given the rein to passion, when the earls of Leicester and Gloucester, combi¬ ning all their strength, poured down upon the divisions, commanded by king Henry and his royal brother. The stand was long and desperate ; the conflict stubborn and fierce ; yet vain were the struggles of bravery, opposed to superior numbers, and equal
equal daring. The little phalanx, headed by the baron of Hansiape, and the heart- wrung Hubert, moved in the division commanded by the king of England : and whilst the baron, at the side of his mo¬ narch, dreaming back the prowess of his youth, stubbornly contested every inch of ground—Hubert, with De Maudit in his brain, and the interview of the past night goading wellnigh unto frenzy, turned his eagle-eyes to those points where the battle raged the fiercest. It was not hardihood, neither was it distaste of life, which with one desperate bound, plunged him into the thickest of the fray ; it was William, flit¬ ting as a ghost along the ensanguined field, and beckoning through all the din and horror of contention— Я Villiam, dying, gasping out life, a willing bleeding sacri¬ fice to his own fatal declension. Was it intuition? or was it the spirit of inspira¬ tion, graciously according balm to human agony, vouchsafing mercy, pouring forth grace on the last struggle of waning H S strength ?
strength ? Hubert saw a warrior, like unto De Maudit, cased in the like bright steel, and wearing the like sable crest, scouring the plain, daring the deadly and incessant vollev of the archers, and court- ing the brunt of peril : he heard a tremen¬ dous shout, and the succeeding instant, he saw the same warrior, unhorsed, beset with foes, and wrestling with countless adversa¬ ries. He rushed forward ; he sprung o'er heaps of slain ; he heeded not the throes of mortal anguish, or the distorted bloodless visages of death ; he felt it the friend ofhis youth—and in the friend of his youth, he lost sight of the partizan ofthe rebellious Leicester. Yet ere he gained the spot, he saw the battered shield fall powerless, and the bright polish ofthe coat-of-mail besmear* ed with blood and dust ; he saw the warrior stagger beneath the thunder of assailing blows ; he saw him fall, pierced with a death-dealing javelin, and he saw nought beside. Struck, as though by the same dart, he dropped his sword—he cast him¬ self
self beside him ; all his energy, all his ex¬ ertion, all his enterprise, dying within him ; all his feelings, all his thoughts, con¬ verging to the one point, of De Maudit slain. With a hand, tremulous and eager, he loosened the rivets of the casque, and raising the heavy head upon his knee, wiped away the cold sweat of agony. It was indeed De Maudit, stricken unto death; cold, ghastly, a sad, an awful image of our general doom! Hubert, with a piercing cry, pronounced his name : the heavy eyes unclosed, and De Maudit glanced upon him a beam of recognition : his lips quivered ; his features became convulsed : it seemed, as the agony of body, combined with the agony of remem¬ brance,—" Hubert," he faltered, and Hu¬ bert bent his ear almost to the death-wan lips of his friend : De Maudit spoke in short sentences, and with laboured respira¬ tion. " The world recedes ; the heavens and the earth appear to mingle :—all is darkness ;—all rnist and shade." и 4 " Not—
« Not—not the light within," fearfully urged Hubert : " nought of earth, de^r William, can quench the light of the spirit." De Maudit struggled for a moment, then feebly raising himself, " I die," he pursued, " firm in the faith of my fathers: trusting, confidently trusting, in the in¬ terposing mercy of my Saviour—I die, at peace, with all, save self—I die, sorely r la¬ den with the consciousness of my own de- merits: say so, to my father-to Isabel- tø the holy Gilbert. Tell them, I crave their prayers, for I feel myself crushed with the weight of my manifold trespasses. Oh, Hubert!" and he drooped his face upon the agonized breast which pillowed him—" every false colour vanishes ; the dim light of the grave expunges ail the nothingness of this world : even Ingel rica —even her, I sought to buy at a price so heavy. Hubert—-Hubert, the illusions of sense are all gone. Pray for me—pray with me"-*-»aud feebly he clasped his hands, and fervently he essayed a pater¬ noster ;
noster : but his powers were nearly spent ; his voice, weak and broken ; it smk to an indistinct murmur, and that murmur was lost in the din of sounds. Hubert had no ear for the shouts of the combatants, no perception for aught pass¬ ing around ; regardless of personal danger, he continued supporting the powerless body, leaning over, and gazing on features quick marbling into clay : not a tear es¬ caped ; not a word, not a sigh : it was the total blank of hope ; it was the mournful expectancy of the last struggle, which cast a spell upon every faculty. The ruin of a world was as nought ; the fate of the bat- tie, as feathered down in the scale of his computation : it was the soul of William —it was the eternal rest of William's flit¬ ting spirit, which tranced every power of his mind. With the sacrifice of life, would he have administered to his parch¬ ed lips, the heavenward balm of extreme unction : but alas ! the thought arose but to torture; the priest was wanting, and h 5 the
the coveted benefice vain.— u Not shrive» —not absolved : unsanctified, unblessed," ejaculated Hubert, and he groaned in the mortal pang of his feelings. William's eyes unclosed ; a thick film dimmed their wonted fire ; his pulse scarce fluttered, and the tide of life was ebbing fast ; yet did a lambent ray play over his features, and his lips settle in a smile—he struggled for strength and utterance—he gasped for breath.—" Anchored on pro¬ mised mercy," he feebly pronounced— " forgiveness— sanctification·— true peni¬ tence--»—-" The last gasp was final : he spoke no more—he looked no more—he moved no more on earth ! Scarce conscious of his own actions, Hu¬ bert continuexl clasping the breathless clay, supporting it in his arms, and holding it with iron pressure to his own labouring heart, as though he would fain impart vital heat, and lure back the dislodged tenant ; it was the bitterest hour in his whole lite ; the heaviest task fate had ever yet im¬ posed ;
posed : he watched for another sigh—he felt for another pulsation—he placed his cheek upon the livid lips : but he watch¬ ed, he felt in vain : the limbs gradually stiffened ; and the features, late dappled in health and life, and stamped in the per¬ fect mould of God's own image, became marbled and grim. A shudder, a palsied, deathlike shudder, crept through his whole frame ; his eyes, from the contemplation of De Maudit, turned upon nought, save desolation and horror : thousands, like un¬ to De Maudit, fC slept beneath the dusky wind ;" thousands, who had arisen in vi¬ gour, healthful, sanguine, nervous, craving after glory, panting for military fame— fallen, stretched on the gory bed of ho¬ nour—stricken in the full blow of strength —severed from all of mortal hope, and mortal daring ! He closed his eyes to shut out the as¬ tounding spectacle ; but it was no time for inactivity, no time for moody thought : a last, a loud, a prolengthened blast of n 6 trumpets
trumpets tokenee* of victory ; shouts too, and loud acclaims succeeded : was it the triumphant burst of the royal forces ? or was it the exultation of prosperous trea¬ son ? Hubert started up, and the body fell upon the ground. At that fate-fraught instant, an arrow, aimed from a crossbow, stuck quivering in his breast: he raised his hand to rend away the barb; but his powers failed ; nature grew sick within ; the shades of night seemed to gather ; and staggering in mortal faintness, without a groan, without a struggle, he sank upon the ice-cold corse of De Maudit.
CHAP-
CHAPTER VII. 1 shudder at the pabt and fear the future ; Like a poor sailor cast on some wild coast, Barbarian and unknown. Gonzanga. When Hubert awakened from his long- trance of seeming death, he found himself, no longer pillowed by the damp earth, and canopied by the blue sky ; no longer stretched upon the bloody field of Lewes, deafened by the din of conflict, and sur¬ rounded by every insignia of grim and horror-striking mortality ; but safe remo¬ ved to comfort and to ease, despoiled of his war-gear, reclining on a couch of down, and sheltered by the crimson hangings of luxury. He raised himself from his pil¬ low ; he glanced eagerly around, and his heart and his fancy sickened : it was the feeble accent of De Maudit which alone dwelt
dwelt on his ear—it was the mangled image of De Maudit, floating on a sea of blood, which lived in his eye— De Mau¬ dit, estranged from his natural ties, fitdit- ing in the hostile cause, uncheered by a father's blessing, strickened unto death, yet pierced by no wound, so keen, as the new-born pang of remorse— De Maudit, rallying to conviction amidst the bitterest throes of fate, invoking the mercy of Hea¬ ven, grovelling in dust and misery, and clinging to him for mercy and tor succour. Again did this world seem to close in mist and shade ; again did pulsation feel to cease. and all that he did love, and all that he had ever loved, to mingle in indistinct vision : it was the father and the son armed in hostile warfare:—it was Hansiape m flatnes, and Isabel, torn from security, whicii mock¬ ed the promised calm of the grave : palsied and universal was the Juddering which seized him ; death-damps oozed from his forehead ; he sunk back, and the groan he uttered, was as the last groan of the spirit. A hand,
A hand, gentle as clemency, ministered the renovating elixir which moistened his lips ; a voice, more gentle still, breathed the accent of pity and of sorrow! He looked up : the eye he met, was blue as the vault above ; the being he saw, was fair as the enskied spirits of love and bless¬ edness ! it was a creature, young and tremulous; with sml, so speaking in her look; with charity, so imprinted on her features, that man might gaze, and take her for its vestal emblem ! " More air," she whispered, and the casement was quick unclosed, and the breeze of heaven blew fresh upon the cheek of Hubert. He tried to rally, to speak, but she motioned silence. " Tarry yet a fitter season," she softly articulated : '* nought now, sir knight, save repose and quiet." And then she smoothed his pil¬ low, and whispering something to the damsel who bore her fellowship, stole with soundless step from the chamber. " The caution is vain," said Hubert, feebly.
feebly. " I know what is-^-and what has been—arid I would fain know to whom I am indebted for life." " The subiect is prohibited." said the и к. ' maiden. " Alas !" and Hubert looked the deso¬ lation he felt, " suspense is worse to en¬ dure." " Will you question no further, sir knight?" Hubert bowed his head in silence. ** Will you be content," quickly pur¬ sued the maiden, ' e to learn, that the coun¬ tess of Gloucester parted hence on the in¬ stant?" " The countess of Gloucester f " and dis¬ may drove the truant blood from the very lips of Hubert It was, as a rayless blank, as an utter despoliation of every hope, as a rank mildew to anticipation and to pro¬ mise ! In sharing the charity of the coun¬ tess of Gloucester, he must have become the prisoner of the earl of Gloucester;— and the earl of Gloucester, coequal with the earl
earl of Leicester, was one of the direst foes to the royal cause. In one brief instant, how did thought encompass all that was sad and mournful : it flew back to the field of Lewes—to the bold defiance of Henry Plantagenet —to the mad and intemperate ardour of prince Edward—to the zeal and intrepidity, vvhich had nerved each arm and each heart in the mortal strife. But the scene of blood closed in defeat and ruin : or was it a dream ? or was it the coinage of distempered fancy? he heard again the groarts of the dying; he saw again the ghastly relics of the dead ; he saw universal overthrow, and universal discomfiture, to all the high hopes, and all the dependance of legitimate rule. Strick¬ en, as by the ruthless barb of fate, he lay silent and still, his hand pressed upon his forehead, and striving to collect his scared and scattered remembrances ; now, bosom¬ ing something like hope ; and now r ? yield¬ ing to the mortal blank of despondence. " I would question, of the fate of thou¬ sands««
sands—of the fate of England—of the fate of the battle ?" he at length faintly articu¬ lated. " Dissipate, I implore you, the fearful mist which gathers o'er the past Tell me ------" " I know nought of battles, sir knight," interrupting him : " my life has been cra¬ dled in peace, and my days wane in uni¬ formity. 1 dwell with the countess of Gloucester, and my pleasure is to do her bidding." " I acknowledge the virtues ofthe coun¬ tess of Gloucester," mournfully observed Hubert—" I estimate her rare charity—I know her, under Heaven, to bc the good Samaritan, who has poured wine and oil into my wounds : but in sharing the be¬ nevolence of the countess of Gloucester, am I not the captive of her husband ?" " And what then ?" demanded the mai¬ den. " The gallantry, and noble daring of De Clare of Gloucester, achieveth more than the capture ofa simple knight." Si Would to God, the gallantry, and the noble
noble daring of De Clare of Gloucester, was exerted in a better cause!** firmly pronounced Hubert; " then might his name be enrolled among heroes ; then might his deeds be transmitted to poste¬ rity, without slur or blemish. But I crave pardon. Mine is the warmth of a hearr, wrung with the consciousness of Henry's wrongs." " I am but poorly fashioned for politics," remarked the damsel : " beside, I do but overstep bounds, in venturing within its tangled maze. My office is to tend and watch : tarry then, sir knight, until the healing simples of father Walter have wrought a cure, and then, perchance, my lord himself will expound all queries." " And will you not tell me, my good girl," importuned Hubert, " the fate of those I most love and honour ?—-will you not sooth the fever of suspense, and light¬ en the anguished throes of incertitude?" ťí Alack ! what would you of me?" and the
the maiden stole closer to the side of the couch. Hubert raised himself upon his elbow ; he baffled all of pain and weakness; and rivetting his eyes upon the pitying fea¬ tures of his kind attendant, " 1 would hear of the king and his gallant followers ; of prince Edward ; of—of—" and a sob rose in his throat — tr of the brave baron of Hansiape ?" " You would hear," murmured the dam¬ sel, and then she paused, and then she stood silent and thoughtful ; she wished, yet knew not how to evade reply : the na¬ tive gentleness of woman feared to wound one already stricken ; yet the enquiry was urgent, and the enquirer watched every movement of her tell-tale face. " Will you not answer me ?—will you not lighten the load which weighs so hea¬ vy ?" and Huberťs eyes swam in tears— and Huberťs eyes trembled with emotion. " I would the countess were here !" sighed the maiden. " If I err, I err in weakness,
weakness, rather than intention"—and then she spoke of the battle of Lewes, and stopped midst the horrors of its gory field. Hubert snatched her hand.—" Be brief —be brief," he implored. " We have fought, and God has given the victory against us." " Victory tends upon the fortunes of the earls of Gloucester and of Leicester," pursued the maiden ; " yet is the sunshine of joy obscured, for conquest mourns the havock she has wrought î Ah ! believe me, sir knight, many a scalding tear steeps the bier of those who have fought and fallen." 44 Of the king?—ofthe prince?—of— of—ofthe baron of Hansiape?" and he writhed beneath the almost death-pang within. " Know you the baron of Hansiape ?" Hubert gasped for breath. She bent her face upon her bosom—she dashed away the tears which wellnigh blinded her-—
her—she too seemed struggling with the pang of mortal anguish.—" Alas ! alas !" she sobbed out, ** it was the blood-stained bosom of his slaughtered son which pil¬ lowed your head on the field. Oh! if you love the father—if your sword hath made the father childless !" " Not so—blessed be God, not so!" groaned Hubert. i{ I would have ran¬ somed De Maudit with my own life : I would have shed my heart's-blood, drop by drop, to have purchased De Maudiťs safetv." " Then you may look up-—you may smile—you may be happy !" exclaimed the maiden : tr his blood be upon other hands ; his blood be------" " His blood be upon the cause he advo¬ cated !" solemnly pronounced Hubert ; " and all the blood which hath been shed ; and all the blood which may be shed ; and all the misery, which hath been, and is entailed !" Tiie fervour of his manner, the energy of
of his words, the solemnity of his invoca¬ tion, made the spirit of the maiden quail ; "she gazed upon him with foreboding dread, and as she crossed her bosom, she piously ejaculated—" Pardon and peace to all !" Hubert reclined for many moments si¬ lent and sad ; he felt not the anguish of bodily wounds; his were the more pun¬ gent wounds of the mind : his fears for the safety of the baron of Hansiape; his despair in the fatal termination of the battle ; the total extinction of hope, in the capture of the king and prince Edward, Hitting, as huge and terrifying appa¬ ritions, o'er his sick brain. Suddenly ral¬ lying, and chasing the swollen tear from his dim eye—" I would ask," he resumed, tft how many days have dawned on the blood-stained field of Lewes? I wouhl know, whether the rites of sepulture have seared up the fallen? Fear not to tell me, maiden," reading hesitation in her look : " well I know, 'tis the last office of humanity.
humanity, the sole respect the living can offer to the dead. Answer me, for my motive is imperative?" " Indeed, and in very truth, I know nought, beyond this, our own abiding place. Anon, sir knight, father Walter will minister to your ailings : his be the office, to heal both mind and body." " 'Tis mistaken mercy," faltered Hu¬ bert : but the maiden fled the chamber ; and when, with a feeble hand, he drew aside the canopy of the couch, he found himself alone. The fast-contracting limits of our story, forbid us to dwell, on the dark images, and dire reflections, which crowded on the moments of solitude—Hubert watched for the promised arrival of the monk, and he hailed him as a messenger of charity : he read, in his beneficent eye, the bland offices of love; in his venerable aspect, and holy bearing, the voluntary disciple of the Christian calling : he suffered him to apply the probe and the unction, ere he
he gave words to his own anxiety ; and then, prefacing his inquiry, with promised fortitude, and patient acquiescence, he besought the withdrawing of every mys¬ tery enveloping the battle of Lewes. 'Twas then he heard the total over¬ throw of the royal forces, the captivity of the king, the nobles, and the great men of his party : yet he blessed God, that the baron of Hansiape was in life and in safe¬ ty ; and that, with sir Roger Mortimer, the earls of Warren, Hereford, and Pembroke, he had escaped to Pevensey, and fled beyond sea, to the expected ren¬ dezvous of queen Eleanor. " Hope then is not quite dead," grate¬ fully exclaimed Hubert ; " the spark lives, and the bright flame may yet relumine !" '* Every thing is possible with God, my son," said the confessor : ** the vicissi¬ tudes of this mortal calling, are so fluctu¬ ating, and so varied, that the fevered visions of frenzy are scarce more wild* Alas! alas! we live in a world of strife vol, iv. ι and
and turmoil : 'tis man, who mars the pic* lure of perfection and peace!" Hubert thought of De Maudit, of his once light and buoyant spirits, of his gay promises, of his brilliant hopes; contrasted them, with his remorse, with his dread of hereafter shame, with his pathetic request for unmarked obsequies, with his death- pangs; and tremulous and anxious, he snatched at the cloak of the monk.— u Fa¬ ther," he implored, and every nerve siiook with inexpressible emotion, " tell me, of the cold, cold clay, which pillowed my head on the field ?" " Thou wouldst ask of the mortal part oî William de Mandit," solemnly replied the spiritual father. " Know then, my son, together with the baron, Ralph de Hernigande, and sir William Bland, the earl of Leicesters standard-bearer, with every rite of holy church, and every ho¬ nour due to bravery, their bodies were yesternight consigned to our mother earth.*' Hubert
Hubert fell back with a shuddering cry. " They sleep in consecrated mould," continued the monk, wondering at his agitation ; " they sleep, until the great trump shall summon to judgment: where¬ fore then this new sorrow, on a score which ought to wrest the thorn from sor¬ row ?" Hubert could only sob. " I vvould tent the wound I have unwittingly 7 inflicted," pursued the holy man. " Tell me, my son, lacket h thou ought, which prayer and shrift can yiehP" Hubert raised his aching head.— " Fa¬ ther," he faltered, u pity the infirmity you have lived to conquer. William de Mau¬ dit, was the companion of my cradle, the twin-brother of my soul, the dear, dear friend, on whom my hopes were anchor¬ ed : marvel not then, that humanity should bleed." *· Perchance, thou knowest the sister of De Maudit," said the monk, attentively regarding him ; ** the good, tlie pious lady Isabel f " '* Isabel!" echoed Hubert, and the first ι 2 pleasurable
pleasurable sensation he had known for many weeks thrilled through his bosom— " aye, father, I know her to be as perfect, as Nature ever fashioned the human heart ! At Nuneaton, she was the friend of the lady Margaret de Burgh : and much does my memory misgive me, if the lady Mar¬ garet de Burgh be not the countess of De Clare of Gloucester." ** The same," rejoined the monk. " But I speak the virtues of my own noting, not tbe representations of another." " Mean you, that the lady Isabel be a captive here ?" and fear and anguish lived in everv feature. " The lady Isabel was the captive of the baron de Hernigande," replied father Walter: " he bore her, with her maidens, and her confessor, from the ruined castle of Hansiape ; and she sojourned with the countess of Gloucester, until the solicita¬ tions and mad passion of her captor, poi¬ soned the peace of her retreat. She------ But thou art weary, my son, for thy cheek waxeth as tintless as the coverlet." " Not
" Not so, father ; anxious, not weary : there are feelings in the human heart, which mock the powders of language. I pray you, further of Isabel ?" The monk smiled significantly.—" There are feelings in youth," he observed, ť< whieh age forgets to elicit. Fear not, my son : the baron de Hernigande wooed the maiden, but she frow r ned upon his hopes; he would fain have won her to himself, but her favour was against him." " And did he pursue—did he persecute —did he torture with presumptuous pas¬ sion?" questioned Hubert. u He poisoned the peace of her retreat," repeated father Walter. " Virgin diffi- dence, like unto the sensitive leaf, shrink- eth away from every i n no vat ion.—Per¬ chance, she remembered her brother's friend"—and as he spoke, he fixed his eyes steadfastly upon Hubert. The paleness, he had noted, yielded to a crimson, almost scorching: Hubert felt his pulses quicken ; his very temples tin· í ii gle
gle with the burning flush—" It Jackets no cause," he remarked, after the pause of a moment, " to resolve the lady Isabel*.« rejection of the enemy of her king : her principles, and the principles ofthe baron de Hernigande, were too hostile, to make her decision doubtful." " Human prejudices," remarked the monk, " are far stronger than human ex¬ istence: 'tis meet it should be so, else 1 would ensample be wanting, and man re¬ main untried. Doubtless, in the eyes oí the baron de Hernigande, the act of apos- tacy wore not the crimson livery of sin he weighed it, as common justice toward-* his groaning brethren ; he felt the yoke which pressed upon the liberty of hi*- country, and he dared the struggle, not for self-benefit, but for universal freedom He has paid the debt entailed upon all flesh ; he has passed away ; he has vanish¬ ed from this world of care ; he is gone whither the dazzling illusions of sense availeth nothing. May the Virgin Mo- thti
ther of God, assoil him of all his sins and all his misdeeds ! Peace be to his spirit ! if virtue savoured his intentions, be that virtue his balm !" ťí Amen !" aspirated Hubert. " But, father"—for his thoughts, even from the fresh heaped grave of De Maudit, turned to the gentle companion of his infancy— " whither fled the lady Isabel, to escape the solicitations ofher persecutor?" *' I did not call him her persecutor, * rejoined the confessor, Si In truth, my son, the love of De Hernigande, was too sincere to betoken persecution. He sought her, when sojourning in St. Mary's mo* nastery at Nuneaton ; and he wooed her, and he strove to win her, with more than woman's favour justifies—with the sacri¬ fice, almost ofhis principles, certainly with the total renunciation of his patriotic cause : he would not have fought in the legions of king Henry ; but he would have hung up his spear and his shield in the hall of his fathers, and given the future ] f vears
years of his life, to the study of her hap¬ piness." " And she rejected him," said Hubert, eagerly ; and the wild exultation of the lover flashed in his eyes. f< She rejected him," resumed father Waiter, u and she cast him on the powers of his own mind. At first, the storm raged fiercely: man is ill fitted to the curb-rein, when blown on the gale of his own passions: he would act the victor; he would renounce the bland conciliation of his own nature ; he would claim her at the hands of the countess of Gloucester, and compel her to be grateful. But how iittle do we know ourselves ! The heart of the baron de Hernigande could not play the tyrant : gentleness was its native pro¬ vince: it could love with ardour, but it could not prosecute revenge. I watched him through all his struggles—I minis¬ tered to all his ailings—and I hailed with joy, the triumph of his native generosity. He gave her to the free action of her own will ;
will ; he enjoined nq promise ; he extorted no pledge of future favour; he- ■ ■" « Blessed be his deeds ! blessed be his memory !" ejaculated Huberts scarce con*· scious of what he uttered ; then* hesitating and blushing, " But I pray you, father, of the lady Isabel ? my hopes are anchored on her safety." " The lady Isabel," replied the confes¬ sor, " lives in the bosom of the church : she chose the fittest sanctuary for inno¬ cence ; and yielding to her brave conque^ ror, her gratitude and her praise, sawv tioned by the approval of her friend, the countess of Gloucester, and accompanied by her spiritual director, the monk Gil¬ bert, she sought security in her convent at Nuneaton." " At Nuneaton!" echoed Hubert. " Thanks ! thanks, dear father, for you have lightened my heart of a grievous load of care !" " I would ever be the minister of peace, and the harbinger of glad tidings," said ι 5 the
the confessor, meekly crossing his bosom. " And now, my son, what more wouldst thou crave, beyond rest, and the willing offices of Christian love ?" " I would tax patience yet a iittle fur¬ ther," rejoined Hubert. " I crave your pardon, holy sir, but I would fain know. whether, in this war of nature, the poor. misled De Maudit, e'er dared the just se¬ verity of his captive sister ?" ** The lady Isabel was safe in her con¬ vent at Nuneaton," answered the confessor. " ere sir William de Maudit quitted Ha¬ feld Castle." " God be praised Γ exclaimed Hubert : " such a meeting, had gendered heartbreak- ings, rather than satisfaction. But when De Maudit joined the followers of the earl of Leicester; when he heard of the sack ing of his hereditary home, of the capture of his sister—what thought he?—what said he?" " He mourned the fatal error of mad жеа!, the hasty misconception of an iniu- riatc
riate host," returned the monk. " Alas ! when retaliation lives on the swords of hostile party, we can but marvel, where it stops short of universal overthrow ! Yes, he mourned it as a son must mourn a blow so astounding; but still was his mourning tempered with gratitude t»> Heaven, for not one life was lost." " Mourned it," mused Hubert, " with a spirit, crushed and broken ; with a heart, bleeding with remorse and shame ; with a conscience, stricken beyond the reach of this world's sophistry :" but he gave not words to his musing, for observation sa¬ tisfied him, father Walter and himself, weighed not the actions of treason in the like balance. ·* Finite as wc are, hovv little can vve decipher the hidden workings of Omnipo¬ tent Wisdom !" pronounced the monk. " 'Twas the search for the brother of the lady Isabel, that snatched thee from death ; twas to succour, the perliaps wounded brother of the lady Isabel, that active ι (i friend-
friendship, instigated, and quickened the Christian office. I acted at theicommand of the countess of Gloucester ; and when I lighted oh the Wangled body df sir Wil¬ liam de Mandit ; when I strove to remove thee from thy grisly pillow—fb« 1 thou hadst locked him, as it were, in a last em¬ brace—I heard a sigh, and I felt the faint fluttet of life; and I bore thee ftom the bloody field, on the same bier with thy de^d friend, as wan, and almost, m mar¬ bled as himself. The issue of tbat day has been thy preservation: 'tie to the countess of Gloucester; or rather, through the medium ofthe countess of Gloucester, up to the lady Isabel herself, tbou mayest trace, through God's grace, the boon of life !" Huberfs heart wus too full for utter¬ ance ; he recalled that moment cf bitterest anguish—the last words, the last 100k, tire last smile Ы* Ms slaughtered friend—and ftitatity seemed to set in darker clouds, and fate itself to be clothed in nought save horror :
horror; again, in his " mind l s eye," did he see De Maudit pass from life to death ; did he see health, and strength, and yonth, fade like a flitting shadow : it was a dream of unvarnished truth ; a crying symbol of mortality ; and it despoiled this world of all its vivid flowers, and it hung it in all its original emptiness. " We must look to brighter, better sear- sons," pursued the confessor, pitying the agitation of the invalid ; " we must tn*ce mercy, not wrath, in the chastening of God's providence. The scourge, now hanging over onr wretched country, doubt¬ less, bears, unseen, a saving elause : 'tis, as wholesome correction, for wilful trespass ; the purging of the body, for the purifica¬ tion of the soul : every age, bears its revo¬ lutions, its trials, and its vices : conque¬ rors, and tyrants, strut their brief span, and sink, buried amid the ruins of their earth-erected glory. Faith tells us to trust in hope ; and experience convinces ш, that this
this our mortal pilgrimage, is made up of fitfulness and sorrow." " True, father," faltered Hubert, " my own short life assures me, sunshine and shower is the chequered destiny of man : but alas ! however affliction * yieldeth the peaceful fruit of righteousness/ like physic in our ailment, the draught savours of gall" " Yet does it bend to the footstool of grace," piously rejoined father Walter, " and divorcing from all of flesh, lead, through imperceptible gradations, to the contemplation of ourselves. Affliction, my son, stampeth upon the stricken and bleeding heart, the only true estimate of life ; for it points to eternity, as the goal, the haven, for all our hopes, and ail our wishes; it chastens and it curbs unruly passion ; it stays the helm of reason, and it steers, through all the shoals, and all the quicksands, lurking beneath the treacher¬ ous waves of human intercourse. The true Christian may mourn, but he cannot repine ;
repine ; for in the words of the holy book of Job, he will ever exclaim : s Happy is the man whom God correcteth ; he maketh sore, and bindeth up ; he woundeth, and his hands make whole." The hours of lassitude and debility 5 which inseparably tendeth the couch of sickness, was thus lightened by the con¬ verse and active sympathy of father Wal¬ ter; he ministered alike to the spiritual and bodily ailings of his patient : and gen¬ tleness too withheld not her boon of grace ; for the countess of Gloucester, in further¬ ance of her work of charity, oft, like a mi¬ nistering angel of love, visited, and sooth¬ ed his loneliness ! Hubert felt all his sor¬ rows hushed to rest in her presence ; for she spoke of Isabel with tenderness, of De Maudit with respect : she wept his early fall; she mourned the miseries of insatiate war; she represented the carl of Glouces¬ ter, not as stimulated by mad ambition and ravening thirst of power, but as an activé agent in the cause of justice, as zealously
zealously striving to elucidate the mystery still clouding the fete of the earl of Kent, Her voice faltered in pronouncing the name ofher fattier, and her blue eyes swam in tears, as she enumerated his patriotic virtues.—" And yet," she sobbed, " the re¬ turn for all his services, and all his devotvd zeal, has been endless persecution, and ut¬ ter ruin." Hubert thought of the hapless maniac confined in Hafeld Castle, and his sympathy, and his feelings, were inexpli¬ cable to himself ** Even now r ," pursued the countess, ** king Henry withholds all explanation ofthe fate of my unfortunate father. The earl, ray husband, solicits in vain : for though the battle of Lewes has curbed the sway of his despotic power, and ensured to England her rights and her liberties, he still refuses the information duty and nature crave after; he still, in well assumed ignorance, hides the key, leading to the cheerless dungeon of his once honoured justiciary." " Think
ťť Think you, lady," asked Hubert, " the king, lacketh inclination, or power ?" The countess started ; a nev/ fear grew in the auerv: the rose died on her fair cheek, and tears gemmed her sunny eyes. —'" Alas !" she faltered, ťť if my dear fa¬ ther be uo more of earth, why withhold the bed ofhis rest? Surely, such know¬ ledge woukl despoil party of its main cause of opposition ; for the wrongs ofthe earl of Kent, hath gathered a thousand swords to the standard of the earl of Lei¬ cester." " It is not for us to unreave the myste¬ ries of fate," said Hubert ; and he thought of the Templar, and he shuddered as he thought- " Lady, I have snatched at the keystone of my own destiny, and yet has it escaped my very grasp. I have seen the page open before me, and yet hath the clouds of accident interposed their vo¬ lumes of impenetrable darkness." " Yours has been a tangled maze, like unto my own," sighed the countess. " Aye,
* e Aye, lady," anxiously, ťí and the clew- thread is severed by the earl of Gloucester.'" The countess turned inquisitively to¬ wards him, yet 'twas lier eyes, rather than her lips, which urged for explanation. Hubert slightly touched upon the myste¬ ry of the copse-wood: he explained his obligations to the baron of Hansiape; he enlarged upon the virtues, the generosity. the known worth of the baron of Hans¬ iape: but when, on his return from Ke¬ nilworth, he reached the ruined monastery in which he had sought shelter ; when he spoke of his fate-fraught interview with the Knight-Templar, of the luckless in- trusión of the earl of Gloucester's follow¬ ers, his voice became painfully agitated. and his nerves, weakened by lassitude and long confinement, shook in palsied tremour. —" Lady," he faltered, ÍĹ in the capture oí that mysterious man, I have loftt the hope, which glimmering through years, buoyed mc with the lalse promise of parentage and of name/' ·· Not
" Not lost—-say not lost," exclaimed the countess, and then she sunk into deep and busy thought ; for her life was a series oí active service, and though her form was lair, and fragile as the lily, in the promo¬ tion of benevolence, she feared neither toil or hazard. She started—she looked up ; for his heavy, his laboured sigh, pierced from her ear to her soul : she read in his half averted face, such an expression of profound sadness, that catching the infec¬ tion, every feeling of her gentle nature became enwrapped.— u I will make your cause my own," she at length resumed : 44 as the valued friend of Isabel de Maudit, I will garner your claim with all my inte¬ rest. Doubt not my power," forcing an encouraging smile : " bear in mind, through all this scene of strife—and God wot, the world teems with nought else! Glouces¬ ter's sole sway, in heart and arms, is justice.' But alas ! though the :ť weeping blood oí woman's heart," melting at his mournful atory, espoused his interest, and furthered all
all his hopes, fate waged dire war with expectation ! The Knight-Templar, dar¬ ing the utmost malice of his captor, and brave in despite of chains and death, to prevent escape or rescue, had been trans¬ ferred to the keeping of the earl of Leiees* ter; and the earl of Leicester, secure in the fruition of all his ambitious projects, was now far distant, journeying through¬ out England, and forcing the captive king, to the perpetuity of his own disgrace! Spite of warring circumstances, of the heavy stress upon mind and spirits in the afflictions of his nearest and his best friends, youth, rallying, gradually shook off the lassitude of sickness, and the tints of health, re-dawning on the wan cheek of Hubert, illumined his sunken eyes, with something of their wonted fire ; yet did the dying, bleeding image of De Maudit, rise preeminent over every ill; the self- exile of the baron, the religious cell of Isa¬ bel, tlie demolition of the castle of Hans¬ iape, alternately, like spectre-shades, scared and
and saddened his fancy : but it was the last struggle of De Maudit —it was his stinging remorse—it was his dread of here¬ after shame, his pathetic appeal to be snatched from future opprobrium, to lie hid in dust, and be forgotten, which lived eternally on his memory, and jaundiced all his feelings. The first effort of returning strength led him to the earthy bed of De Maudit; and with throbbing pulses, and an aching heart, did he approach the unsodded mound cradling his rest. It was the hour of sunset ; and though the purple glory of the west, decked creation in reflected brightness; though brilliant and varied, were ťť Tlit· tints oí' tiie earth and tbt* hues ofthe sky," silence and gloom hung around, or rather, 'twas the gloom of his own mind, for aught whicli appertained not unto death, was dissonant to his feelings. He knelt upon tlie unmarked grave; he wept in the
the bitterness of his sorrow : again, did he dream over the past hours of mortal com¬ mune; and again, did reason and religion tell him, that oft are <» ---------------------Our picaku*.! wlľís, Made tlic whip- 'о ьс-шгес иэ " The lady Ingeirica— like unto the first Eve, marring the first paradise—had lured from the straight path of honour, had tangled, through the witchery of her po¬ tent beauty, and the mad fervour of De M audit's unbridled passions, into the per¬ plexities and mysteries of guilt and woe. She had cast around him, spells, which had dissolved all the bonds of youth and nature; she had cozened him with bright promises and dazzling hopes :—and when he sought the fulfilment of those bright promises, and those dazzling hopes, like the " false colours of the watery bow," they had faded, and plunged him into the blank of disappointment and despair ! Sh^ had been the eclipse to all his golden pros¬ pects—
pects—she had been the blighting mildew v/hich had settled upon his glory—she had been the pleasant vice, to lure him into evil: and 'twas her art, and 'twas her treachery, wdiich had shaped the whip to scourge him unto death ! "Alas! 'tis ever thus," mused Hubert, " when man yields to the incitements of his own fitful passions : step by step, he plunges deeper into the fearful vortex, till lost and overwhelmed—like the feeble bark, despoiled of her rudder, and tossed on the rough breakers of the tempest—he loses the stay of his own conduct, and be¬ comes the active and the willing agent of his own despair. Almighty Father ofthe universe ! grant me fortitude—grant me resolution, to breast the fearful torrent of temptation ! grant me grace, to see, and to shun, the thorns lurking within the rose of this world's pleasure! that when called hence—when laid in the narrow bed ť of our appointed rest'—my fame may be pure from taint, and my spirit, tried and
and chastened b)f the salutary scourge of thy mercy, be fitted to gather in eternity, the rich and promised harvest, vouchsafed to the ' just made perfect !"
CHAP-
CHAPTER VIII.
ï ştiind in tbc < lotul ut years. ťev\ are ib optimisa lo¬ uai d tbe písbt ; and when the ч ыоп comes, it4s but dita and daik, 0**man. The return of prince Edward, and his fol¬ lowers from the bloody track of their re¬ venge ;—-the astounding conviction of the overthrow of the royal party ;—the know¬ ledge of the king his father, and his un¬ cle's captivity in the priory of Lewes;—the general subjugation of all who had borne arms in their cause;—the fall of De Wil¬ ton, of the baron Fitz-Warren, of the thousands, who had striven unto death, in the cause of their lawful monarch ; toge¬ ther, with his own desperate resolve, to rally around him his scattered forces, and to try the issue of another battle, has been ably noted by the pen of the historian. vol. iv. к We
We trace also, the art and subtle policy of the earl of Leicester, in the quick fol¬ lowing treaty of peace, and the desperate fortune of the gallant prince Edward, in acceding to the hard and debasing condi¬ tions : and in further perusing the elabo¬ rate pages of that disastrous period, wc find the inward spring of the earl of Lei¬ cester's actions, gradually resolving itself, in towering ambition, and ardour for su¬ premacy:—we see the royal Henry, an automaton in his keeping, acting, moving, almost thinking, at his command—the king of the Romans, and prince Henry his son, prisoners in the Tower of Lon¬ don—prince Edward, consigned to close custody in Wallingford Castie—and the estates and possessions of all who had ad¬ hered to the desperate fortunes ofthe fallen monarch, yielded to plunder, and bestow¬ ed upon his relatives, and the creatures of his favour :—we see the king's writ, open¬ ing the prison-doors of all who were cap¬ tured at the siege of Northampton ; fur¬ nishing
nishing arms against himself, and strength¬ ening tbe giant power of his enemies :— we see Henry de Montford, the first born of the earl of Leicester, by the king's com¬ mission, made warden of the Cinque- Ports, and constable of Dover Castle, toge¬ ther with the chamberlainship of Sand¬ wich, during pleasure, committed to his keeping :—-we see England, fallen from its native height among nations, and enslaved by the wanton insolence of a foreign des¬ pot : for the earl of Leicester, in open vio¬ lation of every treaty, cast off all appear¬ ance of restraint, and becoming, in one, the sole master and tyrant ofthe kingdom ; oppressing the weak ; triumphing over the fallen; rapaciously engrossing to himself the ransom of the prisoners ; seizing the estates of the nobles captured in the bat¬ tle of Lewes, and treating the barons of his own party with haughty contempt» by sportively observing— their share qf the spoil was ample, in that he had saved them from the threatened attainders and for- K c 2 fèitures
feitures inseparable with defeat. But as in all and every stage of this fitful world, good may be elicited out of evil, the epoch of the House of Commons may be traced to the insidious usurpation of the aspiring Leicester: and spite of the convulsion*- and the tempests wiiich have rocked suc¬ ceeding ages, though planted by a hand so invidious, it has budded, and blossomed, 'and grown into strength ; and becoming a giant member of the constitution, a rock of adamant, damming up the surges of in¬ novation, it has snatched tlie nation alike* from aristocratica! and regal tyranny ! The disasters ofthat period are steeped in a die of inky blackness; for Leicester. defying even the thunders ofthe Vatican, wielded the sceptre of despotism, and shel¬ tered himself beneath the ponderous bul¬ warks ofhis own policy; yet did England writhe in her burning bonds, and frequent and heavy were her struggles, to clear the suffocating slough upon her freedom. Bui the limitation of our pages forbid our longer
longer lingering over the traditions of the fathers of the church, neither, must we unreave the feud, gendered in jealousy, and sowing dissension between the power¬ ful leaders, Leicester and Gloucester;— suffice it, that deep and deadly rancour divorced the interests of the late confede¬ rates ; and, that opposition to the huge and potent sway of the earl of Leicester, anchored the zeal, and the strength, and the interest of the earl of Gloucester, on the opposite calling :—and whilst the earl of Leicester, insolent in his uncontrollable power, was sedulously fanning the flame of his popularity, and safe hemming him¬ self in by the busy intrigues of his own policy, the earl of Gloucester, disgusted with his arbitrary conduct, hastily with¬ drew from Parliament, and retired to his estates on the borders of Wales. But we cannot close this slight sketch of the era in which we write, without further noting, that the voice of the people, callmg for the enlargement of prince Edward, к 3 who
who since the fatal battle of Lewes, had languished in close captivity, Leicester felt himself compelled to accede to the con¬ curring wishes of the kingdom : and first binding the prince, by stipulated and compulsatory oaths, he was, in Westmin¬ ster-hall, pronounced free by the barons. But though the bars of actual incarceration were thus withdrawn, the subtle feint be¬ trayed itself in the persevering policy of the earl of Leicester, for prince Edward changed but the colour of his bonds ; the sweets of liberty were unknown : a pri¬ soner at large, he was surrounded by the emissaries of his arch enemy, and left to the degrading consciousness, that whilst the traitorous faction reaped all the bene¬ fits of the treaty, neither himself^ or the king his father, obtained one single advan¬ tage. Shackled and enslaved, and drag¬ ged from county to county, and town to town, throughout the debased and fallen realm he w r as born to govern ; tightening, by forced acquiescence, the rivets of his own
own disgrace, the brave and gallant spirit of prince Edward, though compelled to bow to the tyrant, turned to the rallying gleam of future promise. The star arose, in the existing feud and dire animosity of Gloucester—it twinkled for a brief season —it faded, in short reconciliations, patched by the mediations of party—-it grew in brightness, when the earl of Gloucester, leaguing with the lords-marchers of Wales, threw off the specious guise of policy, and proclaimed himself an open enemy to the traitorous usurpation : and when at Here¬ ford, whither the earl of Leicester had re¬ moved with his royal prisoners, all of com¬ pact closed betwixt the rival leaders ; when the earl of Leicester, haughtily refused all demands of the earl of Gloucester; and the earl of Gloucester, with raging ire, breathed and bosomed revenge—every cloud scudded away, and the star, shone a sun, in gay and dazzling splendour !
к 4
CHAP-
CHAPTER IX The wi inkles in j-W brow, now ŕiiľd «ith 1Л<ия/, W r ere liken'd oft îo kingly bopulciires; Vor who lived kit.-i, but he con Id dig his grave ? And who durst smile, \vhen Leicester bout his hrou r Lo* now hts glory Mnear'd in dust and blood ! Jiis parks, his walks, ais шаиг>гь that he had, Ev'n now forsake him ; and, of ali his laudi. Is nothing ieft htm, but Λ*6 body's length. Shakľäpeahi Tke banquet v/as removed ; the wassail- cup began to circulate ; the sportive jest passed round, and the loud laugh, echoing the sportive jest, rang through the arched halls of Hereford Castle. It w r as a scene of festivity and mirth, and it accorded ill with the gloom of external circumstances ; for the fields of England were steeped in the crimson lhery of civil war, and her king wore the festering manacles of party- conquest.
conquest The threats and the hostile darings of the earl of Gloucester, excited the light banter of the lord Henry de Montford; he ridiculed the menaced evil, and upheld by the partizaus of his cause, poured upon the violated ear of prince Edward, the spirit-galling words of defi¬ ance and haughty security. The prince arose; he cast an eye of flame around, but he spoke not, for he felt that rage was im¬ potent: it was but the mockery of cour¬ tesy, yet did his train, or rather, his jailers, rise also; and as he moved towards an embrasure, formed by the windows in the massive walls, the sounds of minstrelsy, and a voice, in the court-yard below, ri¬ vetted his attention. He paused, and he listened : it was a light ballad of love and chivalry : the voice was clear and mellow, but it was broken by agitation, or by age. *' I wage," said De Montford, as the stanza closed, and the harmony died away, <e 'tis a time-worn mendicant, toiling out a largess of broken victuals." к 5 « Marry,"
«
Marry," observed the lord Robert de Ross, " it betokeneth other than the lack of victuals! I wage—*— " The voice again arose, and prince Ed¬ ward pressed nearer the casement. "- Kope ! поре, aiise; cheer thou the houi, And clwse the gloom of catt away ; Give back the heart its natu e plav, And on it gayest fancies shoVr "Pierce thou through darkest dieams ol v%oe. Gild thou the future with thy beam; And through the bnary pathway btn am, And tip the piesent in thy g!o-v. (i That capine solitude, ьо ιινη 7 The sport and ьсоы of ty ι mit pnde, May every cruel taui.t deilde, And look for aid on this side he.iv'n '" It ceased, and silence followed, till again, a light symphony sounded, and then the words: w My labours are ьоге, and m> wand'ungs .tie " uic, I labour and wander, though evil betide; I toil for the injured—I toil for the brave— A»d dare ought of peril o» this side tbe giave. 1 Iht
* ТЫ wiíie wofld, the false world, the world of deceit, Where the smile, tuid the look, and token, that greet; But play ou the lip, and hut live ín the eye, Nor spring from the heart, nor engender the siiţh. u But mine hc tlie mission, lo augur relief; To lighten the woe, aiul to lessen the grief; To cheei the dull heart, that droopeth iu sadness, And whisper the г.огоь of quick coming gladness !" 4S Beshrew me," exclaimed De Montford, *' but there is harmony in the varlet! What though we summon hither, and bid him pay in song the rate of hospitality ?" " Aye, to the hall !—to the hall !" said the lord Robert de Ross: and in a few minutes, a man, bending under the weight of years, and with a beard sweeping well¬ nigh to his girdle, stood in the midst ; his figure, shrouded in a russet gabardine; and like unto the bards of ancient story, bearing his harp, the sole founder of his fortune. It was a minstrel, or wandering troubadour, such as in the thirteenth cen- tury, commonly infested the halls and castles of the great ; and he stood, firm and undaunted, before the crowding no- K G bles,
bles. Song after song succeeded, and long after prince Edward had quitted the hall, did the tax on the minstrelsy of the stran¬ ger remain in full force : he chanted ballads of prowess and renown ; and he rang the changes, from St. George and the dragon, up to king Arthur, and the gallant knights ofhis round table : he sang until day faded in the west ; and then, banqueting on his hard-earned manchet, and slackening his thirst with sparkling ale, he wooed the pallet hospitality awarded. ît was a night of brightest moonshine; a night, " Such as the daj 'm when the ыт is hid." Prince Edward, listless and weary, dis¬ missing his train, and disgusted with the mere seeming of coţirtesy, had stretched himself upon his couch, and was fast losing all the care-fraught visions of his waking fancy, when a few low notes, sounding from the corridor, rallied him into being : he started, and he listened : it
it was the voice of the minstrel, but the accent was low and smothered, yet did he distinctly hear : " Star of England ! England's stay ! Shake oif the cloud which shrouds tliy mightiness. England's hope, away—away ! The ί uturt- break ь, and dawns in brightness !" The prince flung himself from the couch, and with one bound, threw open the door of the chamber. The minstrel entered, and first closing the door, and glancing carefully around, bent his knee in ho¬ mage ; then rising, and casting back his cloak, and tearing off his false beard, he stood, erect in strength, and glowing in the ruddy tints of health and youth ! It was the action of a moment ; swift, sound¬ less, as the touch of fairy-wand : and when the prince recognised Hubert—for Hubert it was, borne on the mission of duty and of interest, all of doubt yielded to security and confidence. The explanation was brief and inspiring : the friends, and liege subjects of the captive Henry, returning from
froto France, on the known rupture of the rival chiefs, had rallied round the standard ofthe earl of Gloucester: for the earl of Gloucester, grievously repentant, in having offended, and levied arms against the " Lord's anointed," and resolutely de¬ termined to wipe away the reproach, was the bulwark of their strength, and the adamantine hold of their reliance : and it was sir Koger Mortimer, and the baron of Hansiape, and the zealous nobles of their party, who looking to prince Ed¬ ward—as the elders looked to the star in the east— to bring back to the torn and districted bosom of England, the halcyon calm of prosperous tranquillity, had speed¬ ed him on the perilous mission. H I come, my prince," exclaimed Hu¬ bert, again bending his knee, " to swear, in the name of my firm and loyal associ¬ ates, fealty to the death ! to labour in the bleeding cause of oppressed majesty, and to offer our lives, an indemnity for our allegiance!" Prince Edward raised him —he
—he spoke not—he could not speak ; but his gratitude, his feelings, evinced them¬ selves in the warmth of his embrace. " I ^me to acquaint you," pursued Hubert, " that even here, we have an auxiliary, firm and faithful; that among the creatures of the tyrant Leicester, one honest heart stoops to the policy of dis¬ guise. Trust in the lord Robert de Clare, the earl of Gloucester's brother : with him, and through him, we plan, and with God's grace, I trust, shall speedily effect deliver¬ ance." " Oh for the moment !" exclaimed the gallant prince, his eyes flashing fire, his whole countenance irradiating the energy of his mind—" to wield again the sword, and hail the bliss of liberty ! to cast into the throat of Leicester, the heavy judg¬ ment, his treasons and his malice entail !" " It will come—it is well nigh at hand !" said Hubert. " Be patient, gracious sir, and rely on the efforts of your servants.*' IS Of my friends ! of my dear and valued friends !"
friends !" ardently pronounced the prince* " By the blessed Jesu, every single de¬ liverer, shall be to my soul, as a brother ! Let us hurl this Leicester, this hellhound, from his toppling station, and where be the limit to our gratitude !" The long night waned in confidential commune, in arrangements for the pre¬ sent, and plans for the future; yet with day's earliest dawn, did policy resume the guise and the muffle of age ; and Hu¬ bert, from the chamber of prince Edward, unmarked and unsuspected, glided back to the rough shelter of his own hard and unadorned pallet. The pen of the historian, commemorat¬ ing the incident, which severing the bonds of the pent-up lion, gave to England, freedom from her chains, proceed we then, to trace, in the next guise of our hero, the trim jerkin and tight hose of a groom ; for it was Hubert, who led to the lord Robert de Clare, the swift and beautiful horse, destined to bear so prominent a part
part in the glorious liberation. Prince Edward, pale with anxiety, mortification, and restlessness, needed not the plea of indisposition ; and his request for the pri¬ vilege of equestrian exercise, without ex¬ citing surprise, or awakening suspicion, was speedily accorded. Surrounded by a courtly retinue, and close hemmed in by the creatures of the earl of Leicester; the morning as bright, and the sun as gay, as their own costly housings and sumptuous attire, they emerged from the walls or Hereford Castle. Health to the sick, and light to the blind, were not more precious, than was the outward seeming of liberty to the harassed and tortured spirit of the royal captive ; yet more effectually to aid his purpose, and forward his design, did he descend to the light and playful ban¬ ter of cheerfulness : he spoke of hawking, of hunting, and of hounds; and quick clapping spurs to horse, he galloped o'er the velvet sward, and inhaled, in many a curvet and frolicsome bound, the balmy breeze
breeze of heaven. Successively breathing three of his own stud, he turned his eyes, as though inadvertently, upon a sumpter- horse, led by a groom of the lord Robert de Clare ; and admiring his pride, and his spirit, and the beauty of his paces, he sud¬ denly vaulted into the saddle, and ambling forward, in seeming playfulness, proposed a match, with the lords, Robert de Ross, and William de Vescy. The animal he bestrided, and the one provided by sir feoger Mortimer, was fleet as the wind : the prince knew its powers ; and when he had gained a head of his retinue and his guards, he turned with a beamy smile, and lifting high his plumed bonnet, and bowing in graceful courtesy, " My lords," he exclaimed, " we liave borne fellowship full long ; and now I bid you adieu ;" then slackening the reins upon his horse's neck, ·' b w ifter than arrow from the Tartar's b» w," he fled from their sight ! The appearance of a well-armed retinue, headed by sir Roger
Roger Mortimer, and tarrying to escort the royal fugitive to Wigmore Castle, was the signal for the termination of a long and venturous pursuit ; and De Ross and his associates, dreading the threatened ire of Leicester, returned discomfited and crest-fallen to Hereford. Quick and fete-fraught, are the succeed¬ ing incidents, swelling the pages of that eventful year. Hailed by his warm friends and zealous adherents, we behold the brave prince Edward, manfully breasting the ma¬ lice of Leicester, aimed through the medium of his puerile father : and though his strug¬ gles for liberty, were branded with the name of treason ;—though in the letters, or writs, enforced and modelled by the earl of Leicester, and executed by the king, he stood arraigned, a disturber of the peace, a transgressor, and a rebel to the true welfare of the nation ;—though the archbishop of Canterbury, and the bishop of London, and most of the clergy, in their several dioceses, were required to cxcom-
excommunicate him, by name, for his contumelious and graceless daring — he still adhered to the bosomed cause of free¬ dom; and swore, on the Evangelists, and relics ofthe saints, to die in tht st rurale, or to wrest devoted England, from the trammelling power of Leicester. The league was firm and resistless ; and quick, like the countless waves of ocean. was the simultaneous rush of the vast multitude, gathering around the royal ban¬ ner : the earls of Pembroke and Norfolk, landing İn South Wales, joined with a powerful force; and the lords-marchers, and warriors, from every quarter of the kingdom, poured in the utmost of their strength. John, baron Gifford, famous for his military prowess, bore in his train, so mighty a host of horse and foot, that he moved, the terror ofhis enemies, and the wonder ofhis friends; and when the well disciplined army marched to Worcester, the city surrendered without opposition. But though the baron of Hansiape, hand
hand and heart, embarked in the ar¬ duous struggle of party; though all his hopes, and all his aim, pointed to the res¬ titution of his lawful monarch, and the suppression of tyranny, iu the giant sway ofthe earl of Leicester; the pungent thorn of domestic ill, sorely rankled, and the midnight oil, was often wasted, in moody thought, and bitter wailing. His was a grief, deep and settled; a grief, admitting no ameliorating ra\, to cheer or solace; he could not glory in the virtues of his dead sun; neither could he listen the weight of his own woe, by boasting the deed-» of his lame : 'tis true, he would smile at the ofl-essaved consolation oí Hubert ; but his smile 1 , like the spring- shower on the flinty rock, reached not be¬ vond the surface ,—it wa.- the smile of grateful feeling, fading, and proclaiming utter barrenness ' vl Anu yet there is much to live for— much to love," urged Hubert: 4 ' at Nun¬ eaton,
eaton, within the religious walls of St. Mary, a saint prays for us." " Age and vouth," faltered the baron : " my blessed mother ! my darling Isabel f The one, by zeal and holiness, cleansed from the frailties of this workl of frailty : the other, like the half-fledged nestling, too young, too timid, too innocent, to have essayed the venturous flight of human folly !" " A being," sighed Hubert, tf made up of amiable, enviable contrariety: gentle, as the softest breeze of summer ; lovely, as morning dew in the maiden rose-bud ; rich, in all the bland and captivating graces of woman ; yet with a spirit, in de¬ fence of honour, firm and dauntless ; with a masculine courage, when .summoned into action! Ah, my lord 1 had you, like me, listened to the praises of the good old Geoffry, you too would declare, Isabel, a host of blessings in herself !" i€ And I do declare it—and I do feel it," fervently pronounced the baron. " Isa¬ bel
bel is a host of blessings in herself! And thou too, шу son, my dear son ! God be my^ witness"—and he clasped him in a w r arm embrace—" I feel the scourge, not fitted to the trespass! I am still rich, abundantly rich—I possess Isabel—and 1 possess thee !" Hubert's heart throbbed, fondly, joy« fully, to be coupled with Isabel, near, and dear, and necessary to the peace of his benefactor; to be with Isabel, the admit¬ ted solace to the loss of De Maudit, the earthly balm to tent the wound of parental grier* the existing panacea, to chase away the tear, and lure the calm of submission, was bliss, was recompense, to all and every trial! His cheek glowed; his eyes irra¬ diated the transport withm ; and when the baron, noting that glowing cheek, and those beaming eyes, feelingly observed ; ** I judged my last light queue! ied, my last hope blasted—I judged life, n scene of darkness, and the world desolation ; but now, a new light arises, a new hope beams Γ
beams!" the wild, the palpable agitation of Hubert, became inexplicable to him¬ self " 1 see it all—I read it all," pur¬ sued the baron, heedless of his emotion, "and I hail it, as a bright sunbeam on my waning life í Blessed be the storm, which drove nie for shelter to the copse-wood! blessed, thrice blessed, be my pilgrimage to Walsingham ! it began in contrition and sorrow, but it closed in the rich gar¬ ner of future promise ! Shame not, my >on : I have lived in the strict discipline of my feeling.**, but 1 have not outiived the remembrance oi' my davb of feeling. You lo\e our Isabel—not with the ealm *>till lo\e you bore her loi**t brother—but with the like wild and tumultuou** wishes which marked my pas&ion for her eibkied motlier. You would -select h"i\ as the partner of your weal and your woe; and wooinfi* her from the chill unsocial shade ofher con veut, shelter her from the rough btorms "fiate, in tlie warm iiaven of your own Ьонди. Answer me, Hubert ; have I not
1 not read your secret ?—have I not de¬ ciphered the hopes, which have long lived in your soul ?" Hubert sank at his feet.—" I have dared," he murmured : " yes, nameless, portionless, as I was, seeing—I have felt perfection : but never, never, my lord"— and he raised his eyes in the firm consci¬ ousness of honour—" have I sullied the ear of innocence, by craving ought of clandestine favour : nay, till my encoun¬ ter with the mysterious Templar—till I heard of an illustrious house, never did I ilare to analyze the wild flights of my own fancy ; but shrinking from the subtle snare, as the grave of principle, I wrestled with my own heart, and strove to banish the astounding conviction, even from rny- seir ** And William—our poor William ?" asked the baron. * ť Oh no Γ eagerly replied Hubert. " The palliatives of partial friendship, had been harder to stem, than my own tumultuous vol, iv. ĺ wishes
wishes. William judged me cold, dead to the force of passion ; for gratitude, my lord, was as a bar of adamant, to the dis¬ closure of a hope, injurious to honour, and to you." Again the feelings of the baron betray¬ ed themselves in the firm clasp ofhis em¬ brace; Ъг bent his head upon the shoul¬ der of Hubert; and he contrasted the con¬ duct of Hubert, with the conduct of De Maudit, until his face became deluged m tears.^—" The cup which irn Father hath given me, shall I not drink it," he falter¬ ed ; and then, struggling down his sobs. he looked up, and tried to smile. " Of the future, my Hubert—-alone of the fu¬ ture," he at length resumed. " Should God prosper our arms; should we live through the strife of war and tumult : should we see, the sun of prosperity shine bright upon the fields of England, then, then, my son—my dear son, the recom¬ pense of our labours, be the fruition of our hopes !" " Youi
" Your son ! your son !" ejaculated Hu¬ bert. " Virgin Mother !" and the w r ild tumult within rose almost to agony. " Isabel will give me a son, dear as her¬ self," rejoined the baron. " Marvel not, Hubert : your worth, your principles, your known integrity, be my surety for Isabel's peace. Should I fall by the sword — should the days of my pilgrimage, here on earth, be speedily accomplished, my death-pang will be lightened, in the bright dream of your future union ' Should it chance so—and life hangs on a verv hair- thread — as soon as may be, claim my child, my Isabel, at the hands of her gran¬ dam, at the hands of the piom* abbess of St. Mary : and bear with her, to the altar, niy approval, and my blessing 1 Say to father Gilbert : estimating, as Τ estimate, the rare virtues of your mind and heart, I yield up my treasure to your keeping, in the full and firm persuasion, that through all the vicissitudes of this dark and thorny pass to eternity, in joy and in grief, in L 2 prosperity
prosperity and in adversity, you will be to each other, a solace, and a host of strength !" Thus privileged, to love and to woo the gentle object of his long and secret devo¬ tion; to sue the return of an affection, constituting all of this worlďs good; to dwell on an occurrence, which the wildest flight of a wild and buoyant fancy once pictured hopeless ; Hubert, too happy for converse, sought the retirement of his own tent, to muse o'er the won¬ drous change in his destiny. Yet was his musing mixed with sadness:—and where is the musing, encompassing the past, which savours nof of sadness ? for alas í the human mind, is ever tenacious of ill, and one affliction rises paramount to a thousand blessings! The death of De Maudit, was the sable cloud, muffling the splendour of the future; and the gratula¬ tions, and brotherly participation of De Maudit, the sole lack to the glowing pic¬ ture of his sublunary paradise: but like unto
unto himself, the felicity of man is ever imperfect, else, would his hold be of 1 earth rather than heaven ! In nearing the point we wish, we must take a bird's-eye view, ofthe rapid changes, effected by the arms and the warlike ge¬ nius of prince Edward : we must simply note the capture of the city of Gloucester, and its strongly fortified castle, after a close siege of three weeks ; the reduction of many townsandfortressesin South Wales ; and the persevering ardour ofthe royalists, which combating every danger, and surmount¬ ing every difficulty, finally closed, in the overthrow ofthe rebel cause, and the death of their usurping leader. At the town of Kenilworth, in the defeat of Simon de Montford, the son of the earl of Leicester, and the slaughter and capture of his army, prince Edward obtained a mighty tri¬ umph ; and following up his conquests, and leaving his prisoners in close custody at Worcester, regardless of obstacle or fa¬ tigue, he marched throughout the night, L 3 and
and halted at daybreak near Evesham. Leicester's forces were encamped in the vale ; and the first intimation of an ene¬ my's approach, spoke in the steady and well disciplined advance of three distinct columns, headed by prince Edward, by the earl of Gloucester, and by sir Roger Mortimer. Dismay grew in the giant danger ; it evinced itself in the hasty pre¬ paration of Leicester and his associates, — " The Lord have mercy on our souls Γ he exclaimed, " for our bodies are the prince's." And we read further, that he forced the captive king Henry to don his armour, and to march against his owm son. That fate-fraught battle severed the chains of England ' Prince Edward, like the scathing firebrand of hate, was seen in every corner of the action ; his spirit hung upon the die, and he fought with that desperation, which speaks life a feather in the scale of victory ; he fought against oppression, against tyranny; he fought tor the rescue of his father, of his king* dom
dom; he fought, as the champion of a world, as though his nerves were braced with steel, and his breast invulnerable to the darts w hich levelled thousands. Long and deadly was the strife : blood streamed as water down the hills, staining the green¬ sward in one universal crimson : and throughout the long day, even until night mingled and confounded the combatants, did the battle rage ;—and many a heart ceased to beat, and many a head was lulled to quietude, which, with the dawn, had arisen vigorous and active. The heavens, as though imbibing the like mortal ire, raging almost to the anni¬ hilation of the human race, gathered in portentous blackness : the rain poured down in torrents : and vvhen the earl of Leicester received his death-wound ; when, bleeding, and wan» and stretched among the slain, without the aid of one friendly hand, without the balm of one solacing voice, he gasped out bis spirit, dinning peals of astounding thunder rocked the L 4 base
base of earth, and the blue and forked lightning, flitting, and playing, and gleam¬ ing on the broken and battered armour of the warriors, clinging to their sharp steels, and lingering on their burnished lances, looked, as troops of exulting demons, un¬ loosed by Ate (a f Suddenly, amid the din of sounds, a voice arose ;—that voice, like an arresting mandate from heaven, Stayed the death-dooming stroke, aimed by an upraised javelin ! It was a warrior, despoiled of every insignia of rank and station ; his crest battered ; his armour dimmed with blood; his sword-arm dis¬ abled, and writhing beneath the double pang of mind and body.»—" I am Henry of Winchester, your king !" The words were scarce uttered, when, with an electric bound, Hubert cut down the bold assailant, and rescued the wound¬ ed monarch : tlie next instant, saw prince Edward on his knee, craving a father's blessing; then, gathering new strength and new fire, and rich in the precious be¬ ii i son,
nison, he sprang up, and consigning his parent to the safe keeping of his gallant friends, plunged anew into the strife, eager, to snatch in victoiy, the coveted meed of UtaVIlItM İUUIV.1 . д.^^.т^* v T cia V/\^ıJt|lieöt more complete, or more desperately con¬ tested : the vale of Evesham, was the grave of thousands ; the battle of Eve¬ sham was the death-blow to usurpation : and when " the morning came with its beams;" when the sun, piercing through his shadowy mists, shone on the field of slaughter, Hubert, in the pale and ghastly corse of Henry de Älortford, stretched by the side of his dead father, read a humi¬ liating lesson, a lesson, to curb the tower¬ ing pride and dauntless daring of man f The husband—scarce one year back, the bridegroom of the treacherous Ingeirica; despoiled of all his ill-gotten honours ; ga¬ thered, as the common herd, to the one le* velling lot of earth ! Late, so prosperous, so despotic, so presumptuous ! And Ingel» rica — Ingeirica, with all her beauty, and L 5 all
all her subtle policy, confounded, over¬ whelmed in the universal ruin : the jewel¬ led bauble, the coveted crown, which oft, in imagination, had passed from father to son—had flittered on her own fair brow -—fading, as smoke ; vanishing, *' as the baseless fabric of a vision." " Holy Mary !" aspirated Hubert, " wa& it for this, she bartered honour and inte¬ grity?—was it for this, she sacrificed my friend ?" The anguish, the despair, the raging frenzy of De Maudit, flashed on memory: and with a bitter sigh, Hubert felt, in the breathless clav before him—in the deso- late berea\ ement of the youthful widow —that ever does, u „ -----------_— | ven-f '\i\tU- I Jibtice, i'ommund the tngredionrs ofthe poisus.ed cb.ıİM't- lo our own iip'> "
СНАГ-
CHAPTER Χ.
Had some рюа m»t;t; l of-Mİ to me the bo >k Ot Erovicience, and let me read my hfe, My heart had broke when í beheld tlie ъшп Of ills, which one by one I have endur'd. Hìmf The overthrow of that ingratitude and ambition which had so effectually sapped the power of the throne, in the death of the earl of Leicester, crushed not the dar¬ ing efforts of rebellion : like the fabled hydra, the monster possessed many heads ; and Simon de Montford, inheriting the haughty and daring disposition of the late earl his father, at the news of fhe defeat at Evesham, threw himself and his forces into his strong hold of Kenilworth Castle: where labouring diligently night and day to repair and stengthen its fortifications, and plundering in frequent sallies the ad¬ jacent country, and thereby laying in a L 6 store
store of provisions, sufficiently ample to înaintam a siege, he insolently defied at¬ tack, and resisted all overtures for submis¬ sion. We see the native clemency, and mild forbearance of king Henry, abused beyond endurance; his magisterial autho¬ rity resisted, and his just and long gather¬ ing indignation despised : patient beyond all precedent, we see him, striving to tem¬ porize with the barricaded foe; wooing by conciliation, and holding forth pardon, as the price of submission and fealty : but De Montford, and his rebellious abettors, spurn¬ ed the boon of grace; and wantonly dis¬ membering of his hand, the herald, dis* patched by king Henry to summon the sur¬ render of the castle, merned and bleeding. with no other answer, iney drove him fiercely back. Further delay savoured of weakness rather than mercv ; and incensed at the barbarous outrage—and f»$t by spe¬ cial writ, in every county and market-town throughout England* with horse and with arms, summoning all who owed him ser¬ vice—
vice—king Henry, and the gallant prince Edward, moved once more in the dread pomp of war. Again, did the baron of Hansiape, and the grateful Hubert, follow into the tented field: again, in all the zeal of loyalty, do we find them aiding 'm the deatlbdealing strife, and sacrificing all of domestic claim to the one common call of duty. Hubert, bearing in his heart, the image of her he loved, and smothering down the soft sigh, sacred to recollection and to hope:—for Isabel was still a so¬ journer in lier cloister sanctuary :~and be some short and selected passages iu her correspondence with her friend the countess of Gloucester, the epitome ofher thoughts and actions. " The battle of Lewes has passed," she wrote, " and England may mourn in sack¬ cloth and ashes : all her honour clouded : all her glory set : her king, a prisoner in the hands of his enemies ; his brave and loyal subjects, slaughtered or dispersed : doubtless 'tis the scourge best fashioned to the
the trespass ; for the judgment of Heaveh, like unto the mercy of Heaven, is ever infallible, Your messenger has wrought woe upon us all : you tell me, my dear father lived through the fight, and with many others, has escaped beyond the reach of Leicesters power:—and tliinking or me, as you think of me, I feei assured, that you will heap iavour upon your wounded prisoner. Poor Hubert. 1 fain would I anoint thy wounds with my tears ; or ra¬ ther, the wounds of thy heart; for like unto my own, tliy heart must be rent in twain í Yet, Margaret, can i not take comfort ; for nightly is my couch steeped in tears of agonized feeling ; tears, for the defalcation of my poor misguided brother, rather than for his fall : had he died in the legions of king Henry, I had mourned him with a holy sorrow :■—as it is, my sorrow- is dashed with gall ; and I kneel, and last. and pray for him, as 1 kneel, fast, and pray, for the castaway and reprobate. Virgin Mother î a De Maudit !—But i must not
<me
give speech to thought, lest pride bear the dominion, and my lament, savour of bleed¬ ing honour, rather than patient humility. Alas ! 1 must pray for a new spirit, ere 1 revise the past without sin. Poor—poor William ! God forgive him, and the baron de Hernigande too, and all, who stum¬ bling in their own darkness, are past pray¬ ing for themselves! The lady abiiess, and the good and pious sisters of St. Mary, all strive to sooth and solace; my revered grandam prays with me; and the holy Gil¬ bert counsels me : but still my heart is stubborn, and will not be comforted:— 'tis my father beyond sea^—.'tis my brother Jain—iis Hubert, suffering in distance, and England, trammelled in the chains of slavery, which turn the very voice ot comfort into шшш'епе."' The next extract, is after the unbridled insolence and despotic tyranny of the earl of Leicester, trampling down all the bounds of faith and honour, had divorced the earl of Gloucester from his party ; when cast- b*&
ing off the mask, he moved in all the pride of his own towering and destructive am¬ bition. " Dearest Margaret," wrote the anxious Isabels " I may now indeed embrace you with my whole heart ; embrace you, with¬ out one repining fæling, for your Glou¬ cester bears arms in the cause of king; Henry: he sees the monstrous evil lurk¬ ing beneath professed good ; and in aban¬ doning the standard of an invidious leader, secures to himself, befall what may, the sure recompense of an approving con¬ science ! The errors of blindness are to be lamented rather than condemned : and where man, awakening from that blindness, generously acknowledges, and openly re¬ nounces the evil, he becomes an ensample, worthv to imitate and to honour* Until now, I never regarded the earl of Glouces¬ ter, but with regret, at the inconsistency of his principles and his actions : now, that his principles and his actions bear concord, I regard him without sorrowing that he is the
the husband of your choice :—aye, and my mind and my hopes linger around the standard he has raised ; and I journey with him in all his enterprises, for my heart tells me, where loyalty rallies, there will my f*i4-)r\av nr\A TTtiLo-ff Ko -fruin«! I Т1*чти otvi İUM1V1 «Jt*V* Λ,Λ,Χ* KT%fA *. HSV· «.vnni&JV« . *JUVt luv we the creatures and the slaves of circum¬ stances! how, in a brief season, do we change ! Midnight was not darker than my mind and feelings : and now, has your messenger poured balm upon my spirit, and imparted the brightness of joy. Mar¬ garet, I will strive to be happy—-d will pray for the best—-I will picture tho best. God preserve you, and gild your future years in sunshine !" " Holy saints ! may I believe what I read? Is it, in truth, the well-know r n cha¬ racters of your pen? or, am I cozeiied, duped, by some strange and subtle falla* су ? Prince Edward escaped from Herer ford Castle ' prince Edward, piloted to free¬ dom, by the dear, dear companion of my happy infancy ! A thousand times, in a breath,
breath, do I ask myself if I wake—if I am in life—for the wondrous change baffles possibility. Bless thee! bless thee, Hu¬ bert! Thou hast laboured to indemnify the fatal lapse of our lost William ; and the ward ş the friend ofa De Maudit, will be renowned, as the champion of his prince ! My brain is dizzy ; my spuit, buoyant, al¬ most to frenzy : it is the glory, the pros¬ perity which breaks upon the fortunes of England : prince Edward will fight her battles! prince Edward will chase away the haze which mildews her fame ! And my f b ther too is returned from France ! and sir Roger Mortimer; and a whole phalanx of king Henry's liege friends! Ah ! surely Heaven smiles upon the good cause, and miracles may yet be wrought to rescue fallen royalty ! Your messengers, my Margaret, are become necessary to peace, us food to health—I look for them —I watch for them, daily, hourly, from sunrise until sunset; and then, 1 think, and say, as I lay my throbbing temples on
on my pillow, * Surely—-surely, he will come to-morrow/ Alas ! my impatience. *>avours little of the meekness, long suffer¬ ing, and yielding acquiescence, enjoined in the ritual of our faith: it baffles all the exordiums of my pious grandam. She, blessed soul ! a saint, lacking but the trans¬ lation to beatitude» chides and mourns my spiritual defection : she would fain divorce me, in thought and deed, from all the plea¬ sures and pains, and joys and perplexities of this mortal calling; she would anchor my hopes on eternity; she would teach me, to consider the space, betwixt now and eternity, as too short, for the only needful preparation of the sick and limed soul. God forgive me ! but spite of all the counsels of wisdom, my sick and limed soul, perversely hankers after earth and earthly ties; it flies back, to my dear fa¬ ther, to my dear Hubert: and in my dreams—and how can we help our dreams? —it steals away from Nuneaton, and ex¬ changes the scull and cross-bones, and all the
the relics and vestments of holiness, for the bright arms, and brighter deeds, of prince Edward and his gallant warriors. Ah, Margaret ! I have lived to envy even you; for you can tend the wounded; I can only think and pray for the champions of our cause : and at every office of devo¬ tion, at matins, lauds, vespers, and ejc- tums, I do kneel upoi ■ the marble step of the high altar, and I do offer up my fervent supplications to the throne of grace. 1 ' The next, and last fragment, evinces the gratitude of a warm and sensitive heart ; for Isabel, in the midst of all her joy, had tears, even for an enemy, when humbled and fallen. It was written, soon after the sceptre was wrested from the grasp of the earl of Leicester, when the battle of Eve¬ sham, had despoiled him of power ană of life; and it breathed transport in deliver¬ ance, but the transport was chastened with pity. " Dearest Margaret, did not experience speak you true, I should think you do but fable,
fable, so wild, so rapid, are the changes, in the strange romance ofthe last few weeks ! Again has the stress for victory been es¬ sayed ; and again are the arms of king Henry triumphant ! The silver horn of }our light-heeled messenger-—for I verily believe he was born to the spurs and the saddle — scarce died in echo, when he alighted at the gate. I heard him—I saw him— I bou ruled like a fawn through the pastures : y c t when I snatched your pack¬ et, every limb trembled ; and when I broke the seal, í burst into tears. Had you heard the triumphant Te Deum which rose from the organ-loft, you wou Id credit the sisters of St. Mary, with zeal, beyond the zeal of mere devotion. Ah ! your news, your as¬ tounding news, has electrified us all: it has shot like light through the whole com¬ munity : it has drawn tears from breath¬ ing statues, and quickened the sensibility of those, who believed their sensibility dead! I have lain prostrate before the altar—I have thanked God, that he has given
given us the victory, and that he has not bereaved us of our friends! Your Glou¬ cester lives ! and m v father lives ! and Hu- bert lives ! a"d we shall meet on this side the grave! Aye, my dear Margaret, and I have prayed God's blessing upon those who have fallen ; upon iriend, and upon tbe; upon Leicester, and upon his son : — and may the Virgin Mother, and the saints, and holy martyrs, pray for them also ; and mercifully expunging all their sins, fit them tor immortality, and tor glo¬ ry ! When I think of the brief season ot his powe., and the strides of his ambition -—and how can 1 think of ouţdit с1.ъс —1 would fain resolve it, in the known in- temperance, and mad daring of human passion. Alas İ often do we labour out our own miserv ; often do we crush our- selves, beneath the giant erections of our own folly ! Leicester lived a crying proof of ingratitude and presumption'—Leices¬ ter died a dire ensample oi the emptiness of earth-bom power. Peace be to his spirit ! when
when we hear of his arrogance and his tyranny, let us contrast them with his fall; and from the splendour ofhis almost retrai поиш. revert to th** narrow bed of earth, alike inhuming all of human pride and h π man corruption," But whilst the gentle Isabel, tarrying beneath the roof of holiness, was thus of¬ lering up her heartfelt prayers ibr those she loved ;—those she loved, were busied in the work of destruction and death. It was midsummer-eve, when king Hen¬ rv. and his gallant forces, closelv invested Kenilworth Castle; when the dreadful dm and havock of human invention spoke in thunder. All the engines, which inge- nuity could devise, and hate gather, pour¬ ed upon the close manned battlements: the air was still and balmy; and the skv. and the earth, teeming in their brightest ¿lories, contrasted the piercing and deaf¬ ening shouts of the combatants: missiles, thick as hailstones, fell around; late seem- ed to hang on every stroke of the tremen¬ dous
dons war-rammers; and the catapult, and the balista, ceased not to hurl their pon¬ derous stones. Yet did day after day arise and close without one practicable breach being efiected : in vain, the moving towers, plied with engines» and with hu¬ man sacrifices, poured forth their deadly batteries; in vain, with almost maddened fury, did the royal forces, led by the gal¬ lant prince Edward, and gathering hardi¬ hood in his ensample, strive to scale the walls : every effort closed in death ; for the tesieged, rallying to the like zeal, and spurred by the desperate alternative of conquest or bonds, beat back the ventu¬ rous assailants: molten lead» and sulphur, and pitch, and red-hot stones, poured from tho embrasures; and ghastly heaps of men and horses, and reeking fragments of desolat ion and ruin, thick scattered, lay below. But why linger o*er scenes, ap- palling to humanity ?—why pang the sen¬ sitive heart, with the horrid detail of strife and rancour? Thousands fell in the des¬ perate
jarate stress, and rivers of blood choked up tlie trenches : hut the castle of Kenil¬ worth opened not her portals, neither woukl the rebel garrison hear ought ot proffered mercy; they would yield fonone, save to the widowed countess of Leices¬ ter; at her hands had they received the custody of the castle, and into her hands alone would they relinquish the charge Vain and profittens was the pretext, for it >erved but the wanton waste oí human lives»; the countess oí Leicester, broken down in spirit and in pride, mourning the death oi' her husband and son, and over¬ whelmed in mortification utul dt ^pair, had. with lier d au gli ter к ı-k w, the i.iuy Ingel¬ rica, at the close of the battle *»! Kve>ham, passed into France, where, hiding their grieta and tlieir murmurs, witiiin the sanc¬ tuary of religion, in the service of God, tbey sought, througli the bin id bigotry of the age, an amelioration to the bitter scourge of festering remorse and seif accu¬ sation. vol. iv. m The
The long, long struggle of eighteen months, speaks the perseverance of the be- siegers and the (kring obduracy of the besieged : for though on midsummer eve, 1Щ the first blow was levelled at the mige walls aiid fortified ramparts of Kenil¬ worth Castle; it was upon SL Lucy's day, the thirteenth of Decem lier, 1260. that uom laik of supplies ami stress of famine, ¿ud chilling cold and bodily ailment, Henry de Hastings, the gi^eriior. imd his piciit and exhausted garrison, surrendered tu the victorious arms nf kmg Henry' But be the dictum de JĹcutiu;orth, pre* served in the Cottoniun hlmtrv, the rete- rente to the curious, for th* 4 Urm* and ar¬ ticles of capitulation : liflice it, that wan and meagre despair spoke in the bunken eye** and lank vi^iges of the soldiery : and when prince Edward, an J his warriors, marched in to hike possession, the horrid atench of putrefying carcases, arose almost to suflbcation. It wm days, ere the fresh and pure winds of heaven, scattered the noxious
noxious vapours, and longer still, ere the mutilated wrecks of war and violence were dislodged. Hubert, zealous in well-doing, voluntarily superintended the toil of the soldiery ; and often did the meek spirit of charity, lead him to the wan! of the sick and wounded. One aged solitary man, bleached with years of servitude, and stricken almost unto death, chained all his *vmpathy . he saw him helpless, bleeding, destitute, and he raised him from the earth, ¿ind he placed him on a couch, and l«t* poured, like unto the good Samaritan, ♦ ul and win«- into his wounds, But there w-a*» ã buried care*, a mining misery, a se- vrct inquietude, battling every effort to iesolve: t>lten did he trace, the flashing « ve-beattu wandering incptisitivcly around; otten did he note, the pallid lip, opening at tlie palsied «tart, then closing, with an inward shudder, as though to sear up the labouring communication; it seemed the sniggle of body and of spirit ; it seemed the mighty stress», 'twixt heavenly and M 2 earthly
earthly interest; and when Hubert ques¬ tioned, a groan was the sole response. It was the warden of the keep ; the tried and trusted servant of the late earl of Leices¬ ter ; the ready abettor, in all the intricate folds of his most subtle policy. " Lackest thou ought which human power can essay?" asked Hubert, reading death and horror in the grisly object be¬ fore him. The wretched man, half rais¬ ing himself, snatched at the hand of Hu¬ bert; he gazed at him for a moment, and a fearful convulsion blackened his features. " A father of the church," urged Hubert, alarmed and anxious, but the warden grasped his hand more firmly. ei Tarry yet a moment," he gasped out, " and then—then, not a father of the church, but thee." Hubert scarcely breath¬ ed—he pressed to the side of the couch- he bent his ear in deep attention. " List to me," pursued the dying man. " The light of this world is passing away ; my eyes grow dark ; but that darkness—that fearful
fearful darkness, teems with strange wild images. There is a pang, a load here"— and he pointed to his breast. " I have served my earthly, not my heavenly mas¬ ter; and my earthly master, now, is him¬ self earth ! List to me, kind stranger. I have served Simon de Montford, earl of Leicester; he who fell at Evesham—I have served him, at the dear rate of my own soul—I have yielded myself to his unjust policy—I have lent myself to his merciless dealings. List to me, and cre¬ dit me; and if the hour of expiation be not passed, save two fellow mortals from starvation." Hubert motioned to fly, but the warden held him back. " Time is precious," he continued, '* and must not be yielded to impulse. Already is Death creeping o'er my limbs—-I feel him well¬ nigh at my heart—I feel that the duties of this world are broken and gone ; that the imperative calls, ornature and of con¬ science, usurp their place. List to me, warrior, nor squander one single moment m 3 in
in unavailing search, lest, returning, тпу spent strength be gone, and the death of three be sealed in one." " Be brief then," implored Hubert, " nor, for your souľs eternal peace, tempt a possibility so awe-fraught. Mercy is held forth to repentant sin, arid grace vouchsafed in Rtonenient." The warden lay, silent and thoughtful ; no sign of life, save the quiver of his lip, and the occasional contraction of his brow : his seemed the struggle of shame and pe¬ nitence ; the one, shrinking at the oppro¬ brium of this world ; the other, appalled at the denounced doom, in that whieh b to come. Again, raising himself, and with convulsed catehings for breath and strength — i( In the keep," he pronounced ; ** in two separate dungeon«, immediately be¬ neath the state prison. Seek in one, the captive of w r ar; in the other, the victim of hellish policy." " But the entrance—the keys?" asked Hubert,
Hubert, eager to fly to the rescue of the unfortunate. " Here, under my pillow," faltered the dying man : " take them hence : they have been, as a pillow of lead, as a pillow of thorns to me. Go; bring me token of the life of the earl of Kent, that I may die with less than murder on my soul" " The earl of Kent !" ejaculated Hubert, but the almost mortal agony of the war¬ den, forbade all explanation. He waved him back.—" Not—not of me," he cried; '* think not of me: haste to the rescue of the injured, of the inno¬ cent : save the earl of Kent—save the vir¬ tuous Lawrence, that my guilt may be less damning." Hubert needed no second bidding ; snatching the keys, and consigning the wretched penitent to other keeping, he sought the baron of Hansiape ; and quick revealing the strange story, and wonder¬ ing·, and unable to unreave the compli¬ cated policy of the late potent plotter of m 4 treason
treason and rebellion—for how can honour, how can upright integrity, encompass the black designs of fraud and guilt? they to¬ gether sought the dark and dreary tower of the keep. Those who have groaned be¬ neath the misery of incarceration, need not the description of chains, and bars, and iron stancheons;— those who have ever breathed the balmy air of liberty, would but shudder, at the detailed horrors, of human invention, and human cruelty. The baron of Hansiape did shudder, and Hubert stepped fearfully back, when threading the damp cold passages, and ap¬ proaching the heavy grating, opening to the dungeons, beneath the state prison, an appalling groan sounded from within. The spirit then had not fled, and Hubert's for¬ titude rallied in the hope of timely suc¬ cour : he pressed forward ; he applied the key; and when the door grated on its hinges, another groan spoke the conscious¬ ness of the wretched inmate. Hu¬ bert snatched a torch from one of the men
men who aided in the labour of charity, and springing into the dungeon, waved it overhead. The broad blaze, piercing the remotest corners, fell on some scattered straw. Was it a bed?—was it a human form, stretched on the dark damp litter ? —and was it man, who had assigned to his fellow, a lot, so destitute, so wretched? " Holy God !" aspirated Hubert, and the next instant saw him at the side of the nearly unconscious prisoner, bending over him, and whispering comfort and succour. " We are come to rescue, to save," said Hubert; " to bring good tidings; to bear you from this den of misery and woe !" He ceased, but the prisoner spoke not, moved not; exhausted, listless, he lay, his eyes closed, and every power suspended ; nor until borne into the open air, till sti¬ mulated by a vivifying cordial, did ought of sound escape his lips. But even then, Hubert tarried not to listen to the over¬ flowings of his gratitude ; he remembered that the warden had named two prisoners ; m 5 the
the one of war, the other of policy ; and quick returning to the keep, he plunged again into the dark and murky passages, terminating in cells, as drear, and as com¬ fortless, as fancv ever coni ured. or miserv ever mourned. Ah ! what were his feel¬ ings, when in the object of his search, in the wan, and worn, and squallid inmate of another loathsome dungeon; in the meagre spent anatomy of ruthless famine, he recognised the Knight-Templar, the mysterious and acknowledged possessor of the master-key to his destiny ! Wild and complicated were his feelings; he could not question—he could not urge disclo¬ sure—for he saw the aged man, weakened almost to imbecility; his eyes, dim and sunk ; his features, worn to the bone : he stood erect, yet he tottered as be moved ; and when passing from the contrast of darkness into light, from a damp and fe¬ tid atmosphere into open and unimpeded air, the faintness of denth c ncceeded; a universal shudder crept o'er hk limbs; cold
cold damps gathered on his brow; and without a groan, without a struggle, he fell prostrate on the earth. It was long, ere care and interest lured back the nearly spent spirit; ere the heart regained its play, and the blood its circulation ; and it was longer still, ere power and memory dawned: he breathed, but he appeared lost to perception; he moved, but he could not speak; and stretched in uncom¬ plaining languor, he gradually sunk into deep and calm sleep. Through the long hours of night, watchful and anxious, with light and silent caution, Hubert ho¬ vered around the couch of the Templat ; listening to his still deep breathing, and marking the fluctuations of his care-worn countenance ; now, flushed with the hec¬ tic of fever; and now, tintless as the shrouded dead. His heart was full \ his imagination replete with a thousand phan¬ tasies ; again was the page of his destiny open ; and again, did fate threaten to rend it from his grasp : and when, for the first m 6 time,
time, the statue-like features relaxed from their rigidity; w r hen the eyes unclosed, and the lips parted in ã smile; when the pakied hand, feebly extended, greeted him with the eloquent pressure of recog¬ nition and gratitude, an indefinable sensa¬ tion quickened every pulise; a wild, an inexplicable pleasure, ran thrilling through his veins. " We meet again !" he exclaimed-—** we meet under happier auspices! God be praised, we meet on this side eternity !" " We meet, to part," faintly murmured the Templar, "for the thin spun thread ot life is nearly severed. Another day hati been too late ; another day had deepened the sin of the traitor Leicester ; but for your timely rescue, another day, and all the woes of my woe-fraught existence had ceased." " Another day," ejaculated Hubert, " and darkness and mystery then had slirouded all my prospects ; another day, and
and the chie to parentage and to honour had been lost." The Templar gazed steadfastly upon him ; he raised his hand to his forehead ; and as he lay in self-commune, a cloud of care and melancholy gathered on his brow : it seemed, as though ** the days of other years" lived on inemory ; as though the > voice, the look, the manner of Hubert, freshened remembrances which time had wellnigh obliterated : he breathed a heavy sigh, and struggling down the pang with¬ in, with a palsied shudder, pronounced ; ** 'Twas you, who talked of a storm—of a copse-wood—ofa cross by the way-side— ofa stranger nurse—of an unknown found¬ ling. "J 1 was you ------" " The same—the same," interrupted Hubert " I am that foundling : and you, the stranger nurse, who consigned me to the parental guardianship of the baron of Hansiape. Be brief, I supplicate : tell me further; tell me, by all our hopes, here and
and hereafter, what know you, of my fa¬ ther—of my mother ?" <ť Your mother," replied the Templar, " was of royal lineage : your father—*- Said I not, noble youth, to tell you of your father, would be to rouse an enemy, powerful as fate, relentless as death ? Said I not-----" He ceased, for the wild agitation of Hu¬ bert w r as almost suffocating ; his breath was laboured; his limbs trembled; his features were convulsed ; he cast himself on his knees at the side of thecouch, and he held thehand of the Templar with an iron pressure.— " Of my father—of my father ?" he gasped out, and then he bowed his ear to the very lip of the invalid, and he remained so still, and so passive, that the very throbbings of his pulses were almost audible. u Another season/* urged the Templar, doubtful for his safety ; " tarry, until rea¬ son, until religidti, bind-——" M Now—now, if you woald save my brain from maddening, I have prayed for
for this hour—I have pined for this hour" —and Hubert turned on him, an eye, so piteous, that all his hesitation vanished. " If there be gratitude in nature," so¬ lemnly observed the Templar ; " if there be ought of human feeling in the breast of kings; if the one link, harmonizing so¬ ciety, extends to a station, so elevated, so preeminent ; be the zealous services ofthe son, an indemnity for the supposed trans¬ gressions of tlie father. List to me"—«and he half-stretch ed himself from the couch, and bent his head on the shoulder of Hu¬ bert—" Henry, king of England, becomes your enemy, when he learns, that De Burgh, earl of Kent, was your father Γ The wild start, the conflicting feelings, raging in the breast, and crimsoning and bleaching successively the countenance of Hubert, baffles the force of language ! To be so honoured -to be so allied—and doubt and mystery, "like the morning cloud and the early dew," to fade away, and leave him enriched and noble, was as a fairy
a fairy tissue, a seductive bewilderment, a deceptive dream of joy and blessedness ! Was it reality?—was he indeed the son of the noble, the high born earl of Kent ? or was it all, a subtle phantasy, a mere chimera, which quickly dissipating, would leave him, as blank, and as rayless as be¬ fore ? Could he kneel at the feet of his persecuted father!—could he crave his blessing, even beneath the roof of Kenil¬ worth Í— 4 * God of Omnipotence !" he as¬ pirated, α gift me with grace, to estimate thy mercies; with moderation, with hu¬ mility, with meekness of heart, with low¬ liness of spirit, to bear, as I ought, this mighty influx of thy favour !" And then, in the impulse of nature and of duty, he would have hurried away ; he would have sought the chamber of the still enfeeblal charge of the baron of Hansiape, had not the Templar withheld him : but when the Templar heard, that a wall of stone alone separated him from the still living De Burgh, his emotion, like unto tbe emotion of
of Hubert, became terrifying ; he lay for many moments, motionless and wan, as¬ tounded, as by a sudden light, dazzling to KliîidrirHïç · í\r\Ä whpn thp rwiwpps of voir** returned, he raised himself from his pil¬ low, and casting his arms around the neck of Hubert, yielded to a burst of suffocating tears. Hubert wept with him : it was his mother, the princess Margaret, the liv¬ ing breathing statue he had seen at Ha¬ feld Castle, which dashed with bitterness, all his coming joy : her shriek, her voice, her look of desolation and anguish, falling as a mildew on his expectations : nor until he remembered, that good is often elicited out of seeming evil ; that virtue may strug¬ gle here below, and vice bear erect her shameless crest; that human existence is dappled with storm and sunshine; that man, " born to sorrow as the sparks fiy upwards,** is successively elevated and de¬ pressed, did gentleness and patience chas* ten his feelings : then, he recalled the pro¬ mises of grace; then, he bowed to divine wisdom,
wisdom, conscious» that his own dark and shallow judgment, was ill fitted to encom¬ pass the awful and mysterious dispensa¬ tions of overruling Providence ! Although gradually prepared and nerved in the foreknowledge of the lavish bounty of Heaven, the meeting of father and son was strikingly impressive. Weakened by endurance and long confinement, by men¬ tal trial and by bodily ill, the earl of Kent, feeble and emaciated, could scarce credit the mighty transition in his dark ami ttoübled destiny : he held, with a fervent dasp, the mn of his love ; he hung over him; he blessed him; he perused, with fond and aching interest, his speaking teatures ; he had no perception for ought beyond ! Attd Hubert too, with colour¬ less cheeks, and eyes deluged in tears, witli pulses wildly throbbing, and trans¬ ports, too keen, too exquisite for words, emiä but breathe the name of father·, and nimmt doubtful of reality, cling to him, fearful, lest the recovered blessing, should like
like very many of the bkssmgs of thfe world-vim«* from his grasp: and long was it, ere other than broken, snatched, and short sentences, evidenced the war within : and when the sob did die away, and when the conflict did yield to revi¬ ving fortitude ; wben, with gratitude ша with thankfulness, they sat, with bands clasped, and hearts open to each other, they had tears, and they had pity, and they had indignation, for every paat in¬ jury, and every crying wrong! But quick were they roused, to fresh conflicts and to fresh exertion : Rumour's hundred tongues, spread abroad the tale, and a gen¬ tle claimant, stirring anew the fearful throes of sensibility, chased the brief sea¬ son of quiescence* It was the counter of Gloucester, supported, almost borne in the arms of her husband; and from the arms of a husband, rudiant in smiles and in tears, passmg to the arms of father and brother ! Sacred be the meeting ! sacred the strug- IJl **L*fa3ŕ
gles erf omnipotent nature ! Be the veil, shrouding the impulsive workings of soul, unmoved : to paint reality, would be a fu¬ tile effort; to fall short of reality, a seem¬ ing lack of ability, which female pride dis¬ claims :—pass we then, to the season of calm tranquillity, when the heightened tints of enthusiasm fade to their native colours, and coed and dispassionate judgment, su¬ persedes the magic tissue of illusion. Long years of blank confinement present little variety in the detail : the earl of Kent, seated between his children, and surround¬ ed by his friends, impugned not the jus¬ tice of king Henry : he acquitted him of all malice ; represented him, as forgiving and merciful; and mourned him, as cne f duped and misled by subtle artifice. He passed lightly over the services of his early life ; over the decision and perseverance, which, on the death of king John, had es* tabikbed the then infinit Henry on the throne: he enumerated nought of the ¿ms of byalty and uith, which for years had
had stemmed the fluctuating torrents of caprice, ingratitude, and party-malice : he spoke of the earl of Chester, and of all wdio had persecuted him, with charity and with forbearance; he considered them, as passive agents in the great work of omnis¬ cient wisdom ; and he piously kissed the rod, as the acknowledged ehastener of his own proud spirit : he summed up all, in the mere vicissitudes of life; in the che¬ quered alternations of light and shade, in¬ variably dappling every man's pilgrimage. But alas! from the hour in which he had been dragged by De Cransctimb from his sanctuary at Merton, his tale was a tale of woe, replete with the corroding anguish of his own bruised and bleeding spirit; banished from wife, from home, from kin¬ dred, from all the heart best loves and va¬ lues ; consigned from prison to prison, in blank and hopeless solitude, he had known no change from persecution, no cessation from despair, "Cruel ! cruel !" sighed Hubert, t§ to doom the
the sensitive heart, to a torture, keener than death !" and as he spoke, he bowed his lips to the hand of his fether, and he shuddered at the conjured shriek of his frenzied mother* ** Policy, ray son," observed the earl, * r weighs not in the even balance of jus¬ tice, neither does it stickle at the instiga¬ tion of feeling : it frames laws of its own ; and to forward its subtle purpose, it tram¬ ples upon every bond of honour and hu- tnanitv." '· Surely," remarked the earl of Glouces¬ ter, ** policy had withdrawn the bolts of vour prison ; for the nation claimed you at the hands of king Henry, and the sword of rebellion flew from its scabbard to vin¬ dicate your causer " And think you;" аькеЦ lie Burgh, tl that ire, so stubborn, шпа so deadly* e'er harboured in tlie breast of our royal mas¬ ter? Oh no! learn to know and estimate him better : he may be swayed by passion, but never by malice; he may swerve* dnuugtå tbe imtigatiøii of otberj, but never
never through the dictates of his own hea^t. Read in my doom, the policy of De Montford earl of Leicester, and acquit, in one» the heart and the judgment of king Henry. 5 " " De Montford earl of Leicester !" burst alike from every tongue. " Aye. of De Montford earl of Leicester," resumed De Burgh. " He tempted me, by a wily snare, to escape from the castle ofthe Devizes :~he dispatched an emissary ofhis <iwu,to lure mewith the bribe of wife and children : Mid when desperate, and eager, and panting for liberty—and forgetful of the obedience I owed the mandate of my royal iiiaster, 1 did escape from the cas¬ tle ofthe Devizes—I was waylaid— ï was decoyed—1 wan dragged hither, in mid¬ night darkness, and consigned to the keep¬ ing of that accursed emissary« í saw ali my hopo nipped, mul all the golden dreams of my freedom blasted. Ah f sure¬ ly'—and he gazed alternately» upon the counter» of Gloucester, and upon Hubert — H the
—" the tax was heavier than the trespass : and yet 1 dragged it on my own head— 1 courted the weighty recognisance on my own witless disobedience. Had I tar¬ ried the known clemency of my king, he had withdraw n the scourge ofhis displea¬ sure ; he had warmed ше into peace and into favour: my wife-—my children-——' He ceased, or rather, emotion checked ar¬ ticulation ; tears streamed from his eye*, and sobs swelled his bosom: the cruel blank of tlie past rose to view*, and agita¬ tion grew to ag«-ny. Xot 'г word broke the stillness; it was det ρ and impressive. each alike execrated the treachery of Lei- ccfeter; but Leicester wa> in hi& grave, and no tongue ventured condemnation. 4 * Alack * and ьо many years the inmate of such a tell/ at length faltered the Tem¬ plar: ** bhut out from light and air; doom¬ ed to a living grave :—so many years—-— M ** Xot mì, my worthy Lawrence," inter¬ rupting him. ** Shut in a living grave, because shut out from those I loved: but until ν
until the siege qf Kenilworth, my suffer¬ ings were comparatively light. I had air, and I had ease—bodily ease : a down bed to rest upon, and luxuries to pamper ap¬ petite. I occupied the state prison ; and though watched and guarded with unre- laxing diligence, can fashion no complaint of personal ill. My life waned in endur¬ ance and sorrow, for the pangs of ine mory were pungent, and the morning conscious¬ ness of bonds, ever dissipated all the night visions of freedom. ЛЬ f " and he breath¬ ed a shudderiutf si^li, ** at liest mine is but «ι melancholy diary, doomed to all the tor¬ tures of conjecture» and craving in vain some intelligence ol my distant home; for (he warden, the trusted emissary of Lei¬ cester—he wbo had lured me in the toil, would uot, or could not, give me tidings. Once-—only once, he spoke of such deso¬ lation, such utter wretchedness, that my brain grew dizzy, and my life wellnigh became the forfeit For mouths, for years, í heard the shrieks of my frenzied wife— vol, ι v. к I sses№
I saw my children torn from her arms—I saw my castles yielded to pillage, my name proscribed—Holy Jesu ! and yet I lived— lived througli the storm ; lived the cap¬ tive of Leicester, the bleeding victim of my own credulity !" He ceased, for hc marked the wild start of Hubert ; he saw r his cheek fade to clay, and his lip quiver with internal anguish : the Templar too half rose from his seat, and then he sunk back, and buried his face in his spread hands. '* What have I to learn ?" asked the earl. " God be praised, I see both my children! but their mother—what, what of their mother?" and he fixed his eyes on the carl of Gloucester, with an expression of the deepest agony. ** The countess of Kent lives, my lord," said Gloucester ; and then he paused, for his weeping countess, stifling down her hysteric sobs, cast herself upon the neck of her father. " Lives—lives," she faltered oat, *' alike lost to pain and to pleasure." Piercing was the cry of the wretched De
De Burgh ; and long was it, ere the kind¬ ly efforts of his children, could rouse him from the contemplation of the piteous wreck immured within the walls of Ha¬ feld Castle : the tale of the warden then had been true: the royal Margaret, be¬ reaved of all earthly comfort, had mourn¬ ed her isolation even to madness. Hu¬ berťs thoughts fiew back to the hour, when piloted by De Maudit, he had seen his hapless mother on the step of the altar —marbled yet alive, so lost, so woe-be¬ gone, so unconscious of ought, save the rooted sorrow of her brain : her shriek rang a death-knell to his heart ; and his spirit sunk in those boding shrieks, for they stamped the dire conviction of her irremediable ailment :—and the Templar too writhed in the pang within ; for the distraught wits of the ill-starred countess, seemed to sharpen every pang, to lacerate every bleeding wound of memory. Alas ! he had been an unconscious abettor in the fatal work of her derangement :—in a mo- N 2 ment
ment of agony and trial, he had borne away her infant son ; and the loss of her son, and the darkening mystery clouding his fate, and the unbroken silence, upon all, in which her anxiety, her interest, and her tenderness, were most garnered, had aimed the death-blow to sanity, and muf¬ fled the once clear light of her reason, in clouds and gloom. But whilst, in the broken accents of strong emotion, the Templar chases away his blinding tears, and labours to explain his part in the mournful drama;—whilst knolling out the dire vicissitudes of his sad destiny, he rivets the ears, and chains the interest of his listening auditors :—be it my office, in furtherance of my story, to explain, in few words, the connexion, the casualties, and the incidents, which linked in one, the fortunes of sir Thomas Lawrence, with the fortunes, of his patron, the earl of Kent.
CHAP-
CHAPTER XI.
This is the state of man : to-day he puts forti» The tender leaves of hope, to-morrow blossoms, And bears his blubhing honours thick upon him: The third day contes ¡ι frost, a killing frost; ----------------------------------Nips his root, And then he falls ! Shakespeare. Prom the cradle, sir Thomas LawTence was the creature of impulse and enthu¬ siasm ; ardent, confiding, replete with all those great and generous attributes, form¬ ing in one, the bliss and the misery of life :—and the bliss of his life, lived in the vivid blossoms of love; and the misery of his life, in the dire blight which death un¬ timely scattered! It was in the heavy struggle, in which the king of Connaught became the captive of the victorious Eng¬ lish, that the rescue of life, forging the rivet of gratitude, bound him, spirit and N 3 body,
body, to the fortunes of De Burgh : and it was, whilst wounded and disabled, he lay in the convent of the Annunciation, that the young and gentle Eva, the des¬ tined spouse of heaven, shrouded in her novice veil, and sweet and lovely, " A» morning robes newly wash'd with dew," burst upon his sight! Long did he quaff the honeyed poison ; long did he yield to the deleterious trance of sense, to that fatal, that seductive trammel, which in the flitting span of a single instant, colours, full oft, the long, long years of future life. Sensitive and ardent, how could he misinterpret the dewy eye of favour ; so bright, so eloquent, so bashful, and so beamy ?—how could he resist, sighs, blushes, glances, which na¬ ture stamps imperative ? It was the sea¬ son of enthusiasm, the briefest, brightest season of his life; so short and perishable, that, as a flash of radiance, as a summer coruscation of the sky, it vanished, almost unseen ! The tie of the church, at first, an
an adamantean barrier, faded before the glow of youth's enthralment; and with all that despotism, which marks the hearťs first passion—with all that sophistry, which notes its giant encroachments, they dared, and they whispered love ! What were the persecutions, wdiat the denouncements of holiness, compared to the bleeding pangs entailed on absence?—what, the violation of the novice-vow, to the living death of blank estrangement ? Escape was tlie sole alternative ; and escape, was quickly plan¬ ned, and quickly executed :—they fled to the nearest port, and sailed for England ! But alas! fitful as the destiny of man,, did a calm and beamy sky, change into clouds and gloom ; did the scarcely fanning breeze, gather into gusts and tempests. The sun set beneath a lurid canopy : the gentle ripple of the waves, swelled into boiling billow r s : the winds rose in terrify¬ ing eddies, and the vessel, ere break of day, drifted, a dismasted wreck. It was through the horrors of that long night, N 4 that
that fear, and threatening destruction, stripped away all the roses of illusion; that Eva felt the vow she had pronounced upon the altar of her God, burn like fire on her brain : breathless and wan, she lay upon the bosom of her lover;—and though pillowed on that dear bosom-—though sheltered by those dear arms—oft, in the pauses of the storm, did she exclaim : " 'Tis the judgment on disobedience. Alas I alas ! vows to heaven* .savour not o f the vows of this world Γ The storm passed away; the rising sun looked gay and promising; the heavens wore again their garb of blue, and the treacherous waves, sportive and undula¬ ting» dazzled in geminy brightness : but cold, cold, as ice, lay the nu\ice\o\vat Eva*:» heart In \ain lovt- resumed his sophistry; in \ain, the wrapped and ar» dent Lawrence, laboured to assure and to strengthen ; she felt a numbing respumi* bility» an «fetotiiiding forcbodeiice, defying •dì Ы& eİİbrb; and tioi, when welcomed by
by warm and zealous friendship ; when, in the princely castle of Grosmont, the ho¬ noured guest of De Burgh, did her doubts, and her fearful prescience, vanish. She saw the preparations for her marriage with a palpitating heart ; with a feeling, flue» tuating 'twixt terror and transport: at day-dawn she arose, for sleep fled her pil¬ low; and she watched the dark vapours rolling along the sky—and she saw the sun struggle for preeminence—and she haw the sombre clouds, battle, and con¬ quer the struggles of the sun, until all of bosomed hope, set, like the sun, in gloom. Ah ! dire and fate-fraught were the vicis¬ situdes of that day ' The beauteous, sen- hithe, tender firide, garbed in modesty and native diffidence, ere night, was garbed in the nun t-clothcs ofthe grave! ït was no dream—it was no terrifying phantasy : the grateful happy Lawrence, held lier to his heart, hi life, his wedded, his acknowledged partner: he heard the feolemn injunction of the officiating priest ; s 5 —he
—he placed the magic badge upon her taper finger;—he saw her rise from the altar ; and as he gazed in all the ecstacy of passion, he saw her totter, and the next instant, like a broken lily, she lay dying in his arms. The last look of her eye was his—the last words ofher lips— '-' Vows to heaven, savour not qf the vous qf this world Γ It was the effort of waning strength—it was uttered in the death- pang» in the very pass of the spirit; anã it fell upon his soul, aiid upon his brain» iu characters, irremoveable and holy. For a season, frenzy and despair ensued ; mul all the efforts of friendship, antl ¿ill the arguments of religion, failed to sooth una to temporise: and when he did remeto recollection and to power, he revhed to л new being;—he became devout even to bigotry ; he lived at the foot of tiit* cros*, with the death*scene before his e\ ev— u ith the dying accents ι f Kva— *\ ith the dy¬ ing words øf Kva, eternally on memory, i%m to heaven, шхоиг mi of the г#ло -ι
of this world ! He had robbed heaven of a pure votary; and he felt, that heaven claimed at his hands, an expiatory sacri¬ fice: and the first determination of san ity, framed on the grave of her he loved, was to toil after that heaven, from which she now looked down, through the thorny bleeding track, of privation, and devo¬ tional endurance. In London, in the church of the Knights- Templars, he took the inaugurating vow, und divorcing himself írom the world, and dedicating his services to God, and depo¬ siting all his sublunary wealth on the altar of holiness, he became, in spirit and in form, a sworn soldier of the Temple : and in the church of the Temple, on the fast uf St. Dunstan, on the night ofthe sepul¬ ture of the protector of England—-as we have already explained—did he breathe into the ear ofthe baron of Hansiape, the words of the departed Eva ; words, called forth, by a vowtá pilgrimage to our Lady -Л Wtdbingham, pronounced ín the secu- N ii rity
rity of imagined solitude; words, so so¬ lemn, and so impressive, that they fell, like the bolt of fate, on the wrapped heart and fanatic mind of the mourner. Had the smile of royal favour, shone unclouded on the fortunes of the earl of Kent, sir Thomas Lawrence, a moody and a melan¬ choly man, dead to external things, and scarcely conscious of the lapse of time, whose «f —~~.—-——Wheel »louts* .»u, W на hk 'V t ¡I C.tiï tlí.ilž^t-* s г.. Mì. -л - had lived within the rules of his own or¬ der ; but the enthusiasm of his native cha¬ racter, dormant, not extinguished, revived to all its pristine vigour, when the royal mandate impelled the sacrilegious -seizure ofthe treasure, entrusted by De Burgh, to the keeping of the Knights-Templars, It was then, that glowing in zeal, he burst again into the world, armed in the sacred Ause of friendship, and prodigal of ser¬ vice, слеп unto death:-—not as the my* riad f backing in the sunshine, and scud* ding
ding before the shower: —net as the " friends of season, who follow fortune, and in the winter of their fate, forsake the place whose glories warmed them;" but faithful, adventurous, persevering, piercing within the very prison of the deposed fa¬ vourite, and setting life and liberty at ha¬ zard. We see him, the stay, the comfort, and the advocate, of the fallen and perse¬ cuted justiciary ; vindicating his cause in the hearing of majesty ; bearing, undaunt¬ ed, his wrongs to the foot of the throne, and staking honour on the probity of his intentions. But such was the spirit and rancour of party, such the weak indecision of king Henry's character, that every ef¬ fort failed: and when king Henry, the yielding tool of politic malice, lent the thunder of his power to the relentless ene¬ mies of the earl of Kent; when unfor¬ giving and vindictive, he offered three evils to the choice of the once honoured counsellor of his youth:-—to abjure the kingdom for ever ;—to be condemned to perpe*
perpetual imprisonment;—or publicly to declare himself a traitor : when the earl of Kent, bold in conscious rectitude, renoun¬ cing them all, sought sanctuary in the chapel at Merton ; when the popular cry, swelling into fury, called for vengeance on the innocent offspring of the persecuted noble—-the Templar Lawrence, toiling to avert the storm, and trembling fur their safety and their lives, hastened into Suf¬ folk» It was then, in a moment of dis¬ traction, when despair grew iu the cla¬ mour of party-tumult—Avhen the swell» and the din, of execrations and vioknee, sounded almost at the castle gates that the wretched countess goaded to frui/y, and scarcely eonscioiu» of the action, vicld¬ ed her first-born lo the care of Lawrenci, beseeching him, on htr knee*, îo íly with him Irom England, aud to cornigli him to the care and guardianship of her brother, the king of bvot*. And he did tl) ; and he did journey with die infant Hubert, pillowing him on his bosom» und bearing him
him on his faithful heart, until strength had nearly failed ; for the track was un¬ beaten, and he lost his way, amid bogs, and brakes, and morasses, thick dotting the dreary solitude. Once, had the day closed and risen, and the baby had tasted nought, save cold water and a dry man¬ chet ; yet he lay, in still uncomplaining conformity, as though patient under suf¬ fering, and conscious ofthe universal ruin of his house: and when the second day closed in portentous clouds; when the rain pattered, and the angry winds, rough as the r«»ugh pa *>ioíH of men, gathered into •4огш, the Templar, gazing on his infant charge, until almusi as wild as the frantic mother, from u hose arms lie received him, felt a new light to break upon his brain, and »и the brietne-s of thought, fashioned a new mode of procedure, lie would commit 1/un to the ket ping of some Chris¬ tian w a} farer; and for himself relieved frum the h» iplev» Under tbg upon lib movement·», lie would diape hi» courbe·— * not
not to the court of Scotland, as gaining, even in the best exertions of the royal Alexander, a feeble opponent to the power of the king of England—but to Rome, to the foot of the papal chair, to secure to his cause, the thunders ofthe Vatican, and to hurl on the head of ingratitude and injus¬ tice, the aw r ful ban of the church. With the scarce formed outline of conduct beck¬ oning onwards, and with all the sanguine hopes of his enthusiasm, ripening to frui* tion in the active interference of pope Gre¬ gory, the Templar, placing the little Hu¬ bert on the turf, scrawled on a leaf of hi> tablet the few hurried lines found by the baron of Hansiape ; and first securing it within the hood oi the embroidered man* tie» snatched up bis burden, and desperate and eager, moving on the wings of late, again pressed forwards. Gathering into jlsvuû and terror-striking violence, the very elements seemed to war u ith the houseless de&tîlute ьоп oi the persecuted De Burgh : the thunder, and the lightning, and the rain»
rain, drove to shelter: and Lawrence, anxious but for the safety of his helpless charge, darted into the same copse-wood, and stood beside the same rough-hewn cross, at the foot of which, the baron of Hansiape, poured forth his murmurs and his lamentations. The hour, the darkness, the loneliness of the spot, the deep intonations of thun¬ der, ami the alternate flashes of lightning, rending the ebon skies, and guiding to the perception of each other, impressed alike the belief of miraculous interposition ; and with that inconsistency which so frequent¬ ly attends impulse—for however the heart be the Miring of generous principles, it is delibera ion wrhich shapes to perfection our best actions—the son of the earl of Kent, wa* mysteriously consigned to the guar* diauslup of a stranger. Vet scarce had an hour waned in trackless wanderings, when the Templar reí ne n dieted that he had rdinquUhcd the heir of ids friend, ivithout one »ingle clue for his future re¬ covery ;
covery; and with a spirit sorely burdened, and a mind torn with countless agitation, he re-sought the copse-wood :—but he re- sought the copse-wood in vain : he saw the cross by the way-side ; he saw the spot upon wliich the pilgrim had knelt—but he saw neither pilgrim or child · The mo¬ ments given to incertitude, were agonizing and pungent: he pierced into the deepest ravines; he sifted the tangled поокь and woody knolls; forgetful of personal peril, he called aloud; but all his efforts w ere as nought ; his voice died in echo, and left him, as lone, and as solitary as before; and when whole days had intervened; when on shipboard, borne on the dancing wave, toiling for the preservation of the father, he ceased not to marvel at his own folly, and bitterly to mourn his renunciation of the son. In this world of chance and change, where is the surety to ripen to fruition, our best and wisest designs? In ali the pigmy strength of our own finite judg¬ ment,
ment, we plan, we arrange, we model things to perfection : but the breath of ca¬ sualty, in the brief span of a single mo¬ ment, crumbles our fairy fabrics, and levels all our boasted bulwarks to the dust ! The ship in which he had taken passage, bound to the port of Civita Vecchia, ere three days on her watery course, was boarded bv a Barbarv corsair ; and after the desperate stress of a few hours, cap¬ tured, and at length towed into Algiers. Sold into bondage, and driven into the in¬ terior of the country—-toiling amid troops of human beings, as forlorn and as wretched as himself, many years of slavery are sum¬ med up in a lew words: and when the Templar Law'rence—liberated by an act of grace, in having snatched from a wa¬ tery grave, the only son of the sanziac in whose service he had groaned forth the one half of bis existence—returned to his na¬ tive land ; when sick and sorrowing, he sojourned in и preceptory, or hospital of hii order, couid he have traced idi which had
had transpired during the drear years of his banishment from England, he would have traced, ruin and desolation, heaped, and heaping, on the hopes and prospects of his friend : he would have seen the fate of the earl of Kent still involved in mys¬ tery ;—the countess of Kent, in hopeless, rayless derangement, confined in Hafeld Castle;—the lovely Margaret, immured within tlie walls of St. Mary's convent at Nuneaton ;— and the youthful Hubert, he who in infancy he had unwittingly com¬ mitted to the care of a stranger, unsought and unknown. But as in all the events througli life, the sponge of time clean blots them from the minds of men, so the haze of revolving years, had blunted to general perception, the crying wrongs of the de» posed justiciar} : and the Templar, goad¬ ed to exertion by hints and half surmises, resolved, through the very heart of rebel¬ lton and raging anarchy, to seek the ear of king Henry himself, and crave at his hands, for light and explanation, This aim,
aim, and this sole propelling spur, made him once more a wayfarer ; and though the spirit sorely wrestled with the infir¬ mities of the flesh, it was the weariness of nature, and the sickness ofthe heart with¬ in, which drove him, at night-fall, to the rained monastery, in which Hubert, in his pa^s from Hafeld Castle to Hansiape, tarried, like himself tfie return of morn¬ ing. The stealing advance of the rebel forces, their sudden seizure in the moment pregnant with fate, the excited rage of the earl of Gloucester, and his summary vengeance, in condemning to chains, the bold and undaunted Templar, was bosom¬ ed» and brooded over, long after the Tem¬ plar had lost sight of the newly discovered object of his solicitude : and when trans- íêrred, for better security, to the custody of the earl id* Leicester; when at Kenil¬ worth Castle, unshaken and unyielding, he dared, even in the presence of that arch-leader, to garb treason and rébellion in the mkv die of their native blackness; when
when condemned for his hardihood, to the lowest dungeon of the keep—he bore into that dungeon, a heart and a conscience, void of offence, and daring all the malice of bis fortune : sinned against, rather than winning, he could still offer up his spirit in worship, and crave, at the altar of holi¬ ness, patience under endurance. Little now 7 remains to be explained. The warden died with the confession of the earl of Leicester's policy upon his Прь ; -—for it was policy, deep and subtle policy, which faJnoncd the actions of the earl of Leicester: firM, ht luring from the castle of Devizes; and then, in retaining within his own power, the person of the earl of Kent, blowing thereby the flames of hate» and forwarding his они imidioib purpose: for in keeping the once powerful favourite and minister of king Henry a close pri¬ soner within the castle of Kenilworth, hid from the eyes una knowledge of men» he poured oil and pitch upon the red-hot fire of party—the persecution* and imprison¬ ment
ment of the earl of Kent, being the one ostensible cause for rebellion and open re¬ volt: and when the angry barons, claimed at the hands ofthe royal Henry, the libe¬ ration ofthe fallen justiciary ; when they thundered vengeance upon his injustice, his ingratitude, and his cruelty, the sapient Leicester—as the wily serpent, toiling for the overthrow of mankind—hugged the secret dieper in his breast, and instigating, under the prostituted colouring of justice and of fa t dom, with his own hanf set fire to thv train, his own subtilty had planted. The annals of history, record no other rebellion, so extensive, and so widely dis¬ astrous, a^ the long and exterminating feud, belwkt our third Henry and his turbulent basom, passing so immediately, like a storm of nature, 'mto calm; neither, can the mild disposition of a sovereign, iw more thoroughly exemplified, than that the elus** of the stono, was neither mark¬ ed by bloud-stamed ^eufibkis or wide dis* benson.
herison. Save the family of De Montford earl of Leicester, no attainders were car¬ ried into force : and though a parliament, assembled at Winchester, attainted those who had borne arms against the king, we read, that " easy compositions were made for their lands; and that the heaviest sums, levied on the most obnoxious offenders, exceeded not five years' rent of tbeir es¬ tates." Mutual agitation, acknowledgments and regard, marked the meeting of king Henrv and the earl of Kent: but though fhe Milile of favour shadowed tiie «rant of jtârdon, the long-tried and worn spirit of ilie earh shrunk from the hribe wliich would have hired him back to the courtly circle;—alas! u ¡thin the prečinu* of the courtly circle, Ыь domestic ремсе had been wrecked; he had sunk the bleeding die¬ tim of party; and hk prayer» now on earth, was to paws the few remaining years of* hh allotted pilgrimage, uway from all thofee
those turmoils, intrigues, and petty strifes, which could disturb and mar the placidity of his chastened spirit; was to live in the arms of his children, and to die, with the mercies and promises of faith before his eyes. His partner, the hapless countess, destined, through life, to know no more the rav of reason, to feel no more the thrill of joy, in the bitterness of woe, uncon¬ scious oí* all around, dead to the presence of husband or of children, continued in Hafeld Castle, to wane away the blank of mere existence, in shrieks, in lamenta« tioìb, and in prayers; alternately arraign¬ ing the inj ustice of the king of England, f r sunk in lowly wretchedness, pillowing her »tricken head upon the highest step uf ihe aİLır, mechanically moving her lips m prayer, even when her despoiled intel¬ lect, knew nought of sense or sound. It was a eonteinplutiun, revolting to earth* born vanity; a contemplation, «»tinging to every better feeling of the *oui ; a con¬ templation, which, in each visit of her vol, j v. y mourning
mourning family, invariably impressed the humiliating lesson, that pride is not made Jor man.
CHAP-
CHAPTER XII.
€ί Shadowy and dim are the clouds of the past, W'hen joy sits on the beam of the present : As bummer storms, borne on the wings of wind, Yield to gayer rays and brighter Tories ! A thousand hearts felt to swell and throb in Hubert's bosom, when moving at the side of the baron of Hansiape, he first caught sight of the age-worn 4 towers of St. Mary's monastery, peering from amidst their forest-shelter! It was there, that Isabel had poured forth the offerings of an uncorrupt heart ; there, that she had bur¬ dened Heaven with prayers, for the safety of all who bore arms in the cause of king Henry. But it was not Isabel, prostrate on the step of the altar—it was Isabel, in all the light glee of the happy past, sport¬ ing in the woods and bowers of Hansiape, о 2! which
which swam in the trance of recollection —Isabel, beamy in youth and beauty, in genuous and endearing, fanning insensi¬ bly the breath of infant passion, and quick¬ ening into life, the glowing flames of tlu heart! He could not speak; he couhl scarce breathe, when they turned into tin track, leading direct to the convent-gah bis cheeks crimsoned, and every pulse throbbed. The baron too trembled with emotion; but his was the emotion of pam. ratlier than pleasure; for his mind encom¬ passed all that was dire and agomzin«». >ince last he had craved the blessing o t hr- .saintlv mother: the retro>pict of sv.ďs seemed as a vision ofthe night: tora mo¬ ment, it was the Hebe form oi Alice. dawning bright» as the iris-bow ín th* heavens, and then that brightness fiuled, and '♦et within her tomb. Tear* 1 courted each other down his furrowed cheeks and Mghis swelled to torture: øm* child, om only child, remained—William, a> hi·» Alice* was shrouded in dtfet-—and Wil- Udin*»
ham's fatal dereliction was forgotten.— ťí My father," faltered Hubert, pressing to his side, and sympathizing in all his feelings. The voice, the looks, the words, struck in the heart of the baron ; they fell as balm upon his bleeding wounds.— ťť My son!" he pronounced, and then he said no more, until within the court-yard of St Mary's. Powerfully affecting was the meeting of" parent and ehild í saered and sweet, the einoiion, khuliing in sight of each other! Isabel lay sobbing щит the bosom of her ¡ather; and vvhen л h e had power tbr words aid motion, still supported in his arms, J;e Mink with him at the feet of their muted mother. The voice which pro¬ nounced the coveted blessing, was broken; the hands, bid on their uncovered heads, uvid ima tremulous; for even the pious nun of St. Mary's, shook w»th cart h born feeling.— fci Father of angels and of men f " she said, struggling Ibr voice, and raising her eye:» to hcavee», " pour into the hearts, о 'Л aí
of these, thy children, the sanctifying spi¬ rit of thy grace, that through the world, in which they are destined to tread, they may pass, pure and unpolluted, till fitly fashioned in holiness, and perfected by trial, they may be summoned to thy wor¬ ship, above the skies !" The brief season passed at Nuneaton, was the era of blessedness and joy ! for there, did Hubert pour forth the tale of long-smothered love; and there, did he read in the trembling eye-beam which met his, all that proffered love most covets— approval and acceptance: there, tranced in Elysium, did he feel himself too blessed for earth ; for there, sanctioned by her fa¬ ther, and superior to all the narrow arts of coquetry, did Isabel, radiant in bashful tenderness, and yielding to all her native frankness, acknowledge the power he had long held over her feelings. " Not as a brother," she softly sighed ; " not with the love I bore our dear Wil¬ liam : ah, no !" and again her very temples blushed
blushed a rosy hue— w it was an opposite feeling; it was a strange wild mixture, of doubt and fear, and hope and agitation ; a combating, an overpowering emotion of heart, which told me, unblessed by your preference, my peace on earth had been wrecked." " Dearest Isabel !" and Hubert, with grateful transport, bowed his lips upon the passive hand he fondly clasped, " did such sympathy live in that gentle bosom ?—did such unguessed-at preference, harbour in that feeling heart ?" " In truth,' 1 murmured Isabel, and she half raised her beamy face frorn the shoul¬ der of her lover and she sweetly smiled through the raven ringlets which nearly shadowed it, " the hope of living and dy¬ ing in the home of my choice, in the che¬ rished circle, of friendship, and interest, and mutual conciliation, shaped all my repugnance, to the solitary cell, my fa¬ theťs fears allotted me. Alack, dear Hu¬ bert!" archly and innocently, " how could о 4 I be-
I become a nun, with all my affections wedded to earth ?" Hubert thought of that moment, when slowly pacing the terrace at Hatiìdape, bending with disease and mental misery, the anxieties of tlic father moulded a wish Midire; and the half sigh he breathed, and the passing cloud upon his brow, to- kered the mournful association, it wa« мюп alter IX» Maudit, rashly casting off the mask, had stood, with all his treasons eonii «*ľd, atid all im errors bfackcnui, in flit bold defence of hi* principles' **юп after the fatal tíir^\ hmi hurled hím int«» t)eb]>eratk»i»· mâ dt\orei4İ hini from the t ita *ƒ Ыч ymith—Isabel to*> recalled that шшш tit and hrr ptayfuhic^ yield«! to team™** ЛЬ*' ata^ s ' Jie Mibhťd t " but Ibr the Цш? of our dear William-— but IW the IUI1 of our demr Willum~we hâd ielt tappine*», liei« fattow ; u e liad kiioivit UL·^ wttbotit alloy. fÄJiiíciitmcfit hsd gilded tliť |W*tit, nua hope l^d b^kutted in the Itttiirc; but fur—' Nt>t
the faithful Geoffry, on the morn of the baron, and Isabel, and Hubert's intended departure from Hansiape; " if J should die, my honoured lord, ere the lavish waste of the spoiler be repaired, and the castle recover its greatness and its power, 1 would fain crave, one boon of grace, one gracious token of favour.** ·* Name it, my fritnd," sud tlie baron, earnestly ; u aiid may 1 leaven ·>ο deal with me, ач I hold the claim sacred '' k * Xo, not a ekim, my b»rd; ay not u ciaim : ratlier be if a grant» л largeos of in¬ dulgence, and overflowing reeom pense." *" Name it, my good Geof If) 4 " urged the lurou ; ** antl be İt» ач grint, or cluhn, alike holy;' Stf ** I u ould π >t where my heart ha» long rented," falteringly pronounced Geoffry— ** ¡u the chapel, niy honoured master-- он the vp-ot, where niglit and moniing» í offer up ту ыпй iu prii) t r ,-—uy t f it the feet ui щ U*-s-tcd la<ty, 1 would that íny poor fjtrri-âhabk cby tie ba ried. Not in pntk*— thtnk
tlűnk not in pride," hc pursued, for he saw the crimson of surprise flash o'er the wan cheek of the baron ; ** read it, as the proof of pure and faithful affection. In life I loved the sainted baroness ; and in death, as the oldest, and the humblest, and the truest of her followers, I would but moul¬ der at her ieet» in testimony ofher virtues and шу faith." ir It shall Ы so/ said the baron, after the pause of a moment, and lie extended his brød in conciliating eneouragcmi nt ** hnouid God mj will that I sun be the oldest of my laithful friends» as monrnei will I bear honourable witness to the long and tried servitude of the voluntary fol¬ lower of røy houbc. Well do I rcaiwalxt, you mam in the train of my lo&t Alice ; amt methinks» the angel spirit of my кы Alice would smile upon the token. lUn>i m peace, tben, honett Ck^flry ; yoar bune* »hall moulder in the ehepd of НлшЬре." The MnUet end tht^mtutauicmiøifrieiiiL· άύψ and of bve, gmtmg them in tbe per* ЪОП
son of the countess of Gloucester, save in the baron, soon chased away every rem¬ nant of gloom and care. Isabel, restored to the early companion of her days of infancy, lived with hope in her heart: attended by her lover; sought, accepted, courted, by the father, by the family of her lover ; bosoming no alloy to the full tide of bliss, save in the ofttimes obtruding remembrance of the buried William ; then would the sigh swell; then would the tear flow; then would she feel¬ ingly admit the imperfection of all sublu¬ nar}* joy ; then would she recall the oft» tittcrid words of the baron— happiness is uot qf earth. Alas ! she read it in the sor¬ rows ofhis early life—in the vicissitudes of the father of Hubert —in her own ex- {icriencc—in every page of nature—in every itage of man I She read it, in the регМтЫе germ, which springs and blos¬ soms ; bhe read it in each and every ves¬ tige of creation ; for perfection crowds upon promise, and decay triumphs over ul:
all : the bud blossoms, and then it spends itself; the fruit ripens, and then it withers! Man too, flourishes a brief season, and then he sets in death ! It was a reflection, little fashioned to bridal preparation, and Isabel quick exchanged it for brighter hopes. The next day was the fast of St. Dunstan —the next day was the destined grave of freedom ! Hubert named it the day of his happiness«—Isabel felt it the day of her happiness—-but her acknowledgment of happiness, spoke in a blush and a smile ! " The nineteenth of May—the fast of St. Dunstan/* sighed the baron, gazing al¬ ternately upon each. " It has been a fate- fraught anniversary in my life : may if, my children, prove a bliss-fraught anni¬ versary in thine!" ** Say rather, an anniversary, marked by a strange combination of events/ observed sir Thomas Lawrence ; ** an anniversary, my lord, stamped on memory ; sombred through the astounding die of mere casu* alty. L the appalling ghost of the pabt— the
the visionary Knight-Templar, knoUing out fate, predict it the future anniversary of promise : for in giving a father to Hu¬ bert, it gives a husband to Isabel !" " Henceforth, an anniversary, blessed and hallowed by us all !" exclaimed the earl of Kent; " an anniversary, my friend, to anchor our hopes, and wed them still to earth !" '* An anniversary," piously pronounced father Gilbert, ** rivetting the bonds of pure affection, registering the voluntary homage of devoted hearts ; an anniversary of acceptance and approval, sacred and holy, imá sanctified, and linking untn death f " *·' ľmvs tit /leaven, savour not of the vows <f this- world !" exclaimed the Tem¬ plar, İn the like deep and sepulchral tone, which had rang as a death-knell in the hour of lonely vigil The baron crossed his bosom—Isabel buried her face in her hands—Hubert looked fearlesUy up«— u Be it the immutable standard of my action V he
he firmly said ; ťť be it, through the years of my future life, the stay to keep my feet from stumbling ! Henceforth, be St. Dunstan my patron saint ; and the vow I breathe to-morrow, my ægis against all of error." u Amen !" aspirated the Templar. Isa¬ bel looked up : she spoke not ; but her lips parted in a beamy smile, for her heart echoed the sentiments of her lover.
NOTE.
