Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Margiana: or, Widdrington tower: a tale of the fifteenth century
y>i %a r a i.4 .y..f.
CHAP. L Tin ddvantugt't of a Lethargy, ii r \vas very fortunate for the two new- boarders that Sceur Clothilde was called away immediately after she had given "ihem this intelligence ; for had she observed how much it disconcerted them, and commu* nicated her remarks, suspicions might have been raised in the convent they would uot have found it easy to appease, since the abbess was prepared,to expect attempts for liberating the young English lady, who w»s spoken of by no other.name than Sceur voj , iv ii Marie,
Marie, which she had herself given the nuns to understand concealed her real ap¬ pellation. Bu! Lord Lothian being left alone with * Arlette, indulged himself in allowing free vent to his disappointment. He cursed himself for having en^ar.'d to reside in the monastery a week : for though he was. in fac*, free to quit it zt any time, he re¬ flected that, after capriciously leaving it, he never could unsuspected ly return, in case Margiana should be retaken by her uncle and brought back. Arlette regretted they had not enquired ofthe portresses in the first instance, whe¬ ther the reluctant captive was still in de¬ tention ; and her regret encreased every hour, while, to her great surprise, that of Sceur Genevieve seemed to diminish. In fact, the novelty of the scene around tdm,and the number of lovely young women, whose
whose charms shone brighter . for being contrasted with the gloomy walls that en¬ closed them, gave a turn to Lord Lothhufs thoughts which he dared not avow to his young companion, lest it might after¬ wards be repeated to her supposed lady ; and still less dared he, within Arlettc's knowledge, commit himself by any appa¬ rent impropriety of conduct. Ignorant, therefore, of the true cause of so sudden a change, well might. Arlette wonder at seeing Lord Lothian as com¬ posed, and to all appearance as happy, in the course of a few days, as if Margiana herself was still in the convent. Aud no doubt couid be entertained of her havin ,r realty been the,fugitive, the description of whose countenance, as well as that of her uncle, and tho calm philosophy with which she endured ..the mortification of her.con¬ finement, until she ingeniously seized the opportunity :of fxtajicating.Aeriself from lu cprre^ppivled-in: Wr-yj.^wtiCAilar, with the "5 ti y most
most striking features of her face and cha¬ racter, "How unlucky/'thought Arlette, "fo be only just three da)*s too fate! a little sooner, and we might all have gone dway together, for Margiana and I understand how to manage escapes." But, at the expiration of the week, she began, indeed, to think Lord Lothian un¬ accountable, when, instead of breaking from a retirement which he had no longer any visible inducement to prolong, he urged the probability of Margianas return, as a plea for continuing in it. tn fine, week after week passed away, and Sceur Genevieve became more natu¬ ralized as Sceur Arlette grew more weary, and more apprehensive of a discovery, which would in all likelihood prove fatal to her companion/ ahd of very serious consequences to herself as an accomplice She
Shewas again wishing a safe and speedy termination to this perilous adventure, when a total revulsion was given to her ideas one day, by Lord Lothian's suddenly rushing into her little cell, and rapturous¬ ly informing her Margiana had just been brought back, and left at the Convent by her uncle. " Let us not/* said he, " leave her a moment in ignorance that her friends are at hand ; but it will be tnore advisable that she shoukl see you first than L Come, therefore, let us meet her—I will keep be¬ hind you." Arlette, who had her own reasons for not feanng any discovery from Margiana's surprise at seeing her, and overjoyed at the news, sprung up with delight, iind for¬ got, in her haste to meet her cousin, all the gravity of deportment that became a boarder at the Ursulines,
s 3
She
She was all over nerve at the sight of a nymph-like figure, wrapt in a thin bhck veil, and conducted between two nuns at fhe further end of the long sallcvv. Half turning round, and catching hold of Lord Lothian's arm for support—*' Oh, should my Lady be angry/' cried she, <f at seeing us here 1" 4t Fonvard, forward/' said Lord I.othi.in. " I will meet the blame of that; but speak, or she will pass without noticing us, and they are probablv groins: to confine her. She may utter my name, if she hears my voice unprepared. Speak, I say, she is here V Arlette now trembling, and abashed at the consciousness of having done wrong, was rather pushed than persuaded on ; pnd, in a faltering' voice; as the young lady drew near, stepping before ber with clasp¬ ed hands, pressed against her bosom, faint¬ ly articulated — " Arlcttc ! Margiana !" Hut
, But the Lady Baussiere passed on. The young prisoner raised not her head, nor seemed even to hc:ir this address. She proceeded, as befoie, with the two nuns to the entrance of a cell, whence, after staying with her a few minutes, they with¬ drew, closing the door upon her. "This is better still ! ,J exclaimed Lord Lothian ; " I feared they would have lock- • ed her in, but now we may boldly ad¬ vance." They did advance, but neither of them very boldly ; for both,, though loth to own it } even to themselves, feared Margiana's correctness. At length, when the nuns were out of sight, they ventured to tap at her door. It was immediately opened bv the fair captive herself, who quietly asked them what they wanted ? (< Oh, my dear Lady !" said Arlette, in tears. b 4 " Ah \
"Ah! lovcl} Marginnn," cried Lord Lo¬ thian, i( am I at last so happy as to throw myself at vour feet?" " Merciful Hca\enl" exclaimed the J oung lady, starting back, " the \oicc, tiio face of Lord Lothian !" ff Ah ! let 'not her who prompted the offence inexorably blame it! Whose charms but those of Margiana could have led mc to practise such a deception ? Or what retirement so profound as to conceal her from my view? What can deccixc the vigilant eye of Love?" " Why a black veil and a dark cell, it ap¬ pears," replied the lady. " Are you not a. fine fellow, Lothian, to play such a prank as this? But you are about to re¬ ceive a very suitable reward for all the trouble you must have been at. Look here/' continued she, drawing allele her veil, " and tell me, am I not grown won¬ derfully like }our idol, Margiana?" Arlette, bitterly disappointed, fixed her eves
eyes on a face quite unknown to her; but Lord Lothian, with amaze as well as mor¬ tification, beheld his sister's lively friend, Clara Castles. She laughed at the sight of his woe-be^ gone countenance, and aiked what had infatuated him to suppose that Margiana had suddenly become a head shorter than usual ? " Never pretend to be really in love after this/' said she; <f a true lover's in¬ stinct would have precluded the mistake, e\en for a moment, and would have for¬ bidden your taking my little butterfly figure for the sublime and graceful maid, whom you must now prepare to mourn becomingly, for 1 have a tale to tell that it will require all your philosophy to hear i\ith fortitude/* <x Oh, Heavens!" cried Arlcttc. r ' No exclamations/* resumed Clara; "■ I am mute if either of you utter another: E 5 ACt
yet 1 am truly grieved at her untimely fate." < ( What fate ?"said Lord Lothian, alarm¬ ed at her senous tone. "Have you heard no rumour of it 7 -'" replied she. " Lady Margiana, after be¬ ing long- confined by her uncle Bertram at hjs gloomy castie in the north, had ju*t made her escape from it. when she wl^ seised, even before she hnd left the park, bv some ruffians, who, knowing her in- tent, from having overheard her reveal it some da^s before to a person in The bury- ing-p!aco, concluded her well provided with gold and jewel? for her flight, nnd forced her into a lonely wood on the banks of the river Coquet, where ——■" Arlette^ave a deep groan, and staggered. " They did not murder her?" cried Lord Lothian, f< Alas * your .sifter's steward, returning from Scotland, was a teirified witness of a deedof honor, that, being alone, he way un¬ able to pic\ent; and with extreme difHcutty escupe *!>
escaped, owing to the swiftness of his horse, from their attempts to destroy him a!so, lest his future evidence should betray their guilt. But, afterwards returning to the fatal spot, he secured the bloody scarf of th? haoles*? Maiiiiai»a ; I: aw i af ^ '>ur Sister's. The body had disappeared; they had pro¬ bably sunk it in tlic riser." L<jrd Lothian, strucv to the heart, co- \ei*ed bib Lice with both Iin haiuK, v.tieii a *!\ ftot.i Ciaru Cattle j rouzed him irom the *rid t '.''*c!u'e of \\\* grief. Aih*(tc had hu'uted, and was sinking to the floor They raided her, and in a short time she recovered to a ser.se of tiie most acute diMress. 4 i( Who is this pretty creature/' *aid ''!ara, ki whose anguijh is so h\ely and s-evuer ' (Lord Lothian acquainted her ) ,y A page—a boy!" cried Uie, ,f sarelv u ,> incr dible/'
p 6
VileTffi
Arlette now arose, and hastily acknmv- Ifedging the assistance $t\e had received, lagged to retire. She was half nifiTocated with her feelings, md wished tc weep alone. Lothian also soon withdrew. " I have much to say to you, Clara/' said he ; "but I ara too deeply overwhelmed at present, by the painful remembrance of her who is gone. Dear, lost creature, what a des¬ tiny has been her's V* " I am not surprised at your sorrow/' replied Clara ; " for I do believe, if yoti ever seriously loved any one, it was her. But you must compose yourself sufficiently for conversation against to-morrow, since I have as much to ask as you have, and a great deal fo tell you besides." Clara did Lord Lothian no more than justice in supposing his grief sincere. He cursed his precipitation a thousand times, and wished he had lingered in the neigh- 5 bourhood
over Margianas safety, which he fancied he might have ensured. Yet the anguish he suffered did not render him unmindful of his unhappy companion. He sought her out, but she refused all present con¬ solation ; and after many ineffectual en¬ deavours to soothe her into tranquillity, he left her to lament alone, wondering at and admiring so strong an attachment in a bov so von 114. The next morning, Lord Lothian wae early at the door of Clara's cell, to claim the promised conference; and she, with a levity he felt discordant to her feelings, rallied him on the depth of his sufferings, and the constancy oi 1 his affection. Then, changing the discourse, she asked him by what contrivance he had stolen into the convent ? He informed her of all thttt had happened ■to him since his leaving London* " And now/*
*SfiWh»ii.-
now/' said he, " tell me by what contri¬ vance you stole out of it ? for it seems you only escaped from the cage three days be¬ fore I came/' * f Oh/' she replied, " but I must take up my story from an earlier date, or you will not understand half the concerns that occupy me at this present juncture. In the first place, hold up your hands, and lift up your eves in aston.ahn.ent, when \ou hear that \o-ur M^ter and I have had i mortal quarrel; and next, gue^ what th..: quarrel' \*as ubout." "A lover, without question, There is nothing in the world worth quarrel!ing for but a lover or a lady/* * e Penetrating, judicious creature! and flattering tool you have divined the truth to a miracle. I will tell you how it came to pass.—.When you quitted London, 1 was staving with Lady Rothes, and vow mav re- member that William Scroope, about that time, gave some indications of wavering in his wonted allegiance to her rcsplendaut charms.
with vanity; and think I am a seif-decciver, when I : tell yott that he actually made a verv surprising' discovery shortly after. Would you believe it! he found out that \ wa i *. a good deal younger, and almost as handsome as Lady Hothes herself; and he liad no sooner ascertained the fact, than he whispered it iii my private ear. It was im¬ possible to be angry at him for the com¬ mit nic :.t ion ; and lean hardly tell you how ir happened, but I began to think it would almost Lc a good deed to save the poor fellow from marn iu^ a woman twenty years older than himself; so I did not quite forbid him ever naming the subject again. But, like a foolish man, and you men arc never wise at all times, not content with talking to me about it, he took it into his head to write forsooth a proposal; that we should run awn\ together; but, owing to sonie vile carelessness of his, fhe poor un¬ lucky htter never reached'mc; it fell into the hands of one of your sister's women-, who,
and, in the space of five minutes, a man was booted ap,d spurred, and dispatched to my uncle, then at Ldgehill, to come and fetch away his unhappy niece. The disappoint¬ ed fair one, in the mean time, vented her rage with all the violence, though not with all the dignity, of an injured princess, and raved about treachery and violated friend¬ ship, till I silenced her by saying, J really could not help peoples' observing I was younger than she was. Upon which she flung majestically out of one door, and I capered out of another, and we have never met since. My uncle arrived the next dav, packed me up on a hard-trotting horse, and scolded me ail the way into Warwick¬ shire. That, however, gave me little dis¬ turbance. I had contrived to leave a few lines with my lover, the expected effects of which allowed me no leisure to think of my uncle; for, supposing that Scroope jfright like to see me in the country as well as in London, and Edgehill being only an obscure
obscure place, it would have been ill-na¬ tured, you know, not to have given him directions how to find it by the nearest road. This precaution proved very lucky, fov ten days after he followed us; and one fmc moonlight night, I perceived him Miaichi ng about "under my window. Not being \evy fastidious on the subject of my wardrobe on particular occasions, I soon put up as much apparel as I thought would he useful to bring over to France, stole gently down an adorable pair of back stairs, and, Scroope having horses ready, was full twenty miles on the ropd to Do¬ ver before my honoured uncle awoke. " Loudly, na doubt, he stormed wheu he missed me, and swiftly he must have bidden, to overtake us; besides which, the spiteful winds favoured him ; so that he fairly reached Calais within the hour af¬ ter we left it, though we were far from suspecting him so near it was a felicity, however, wc were not kept much longer in doubt of; for, when wc were just ar¬ riving
riving within sight of Paris, indeed not above half a league from this horrible place, he came up witli us, and desiring the unfortunate partner of my flight to post immediately to a region it would not be proper'for me to name within this holy sanctuary, he told me he knew there was a convent of Ursulines close at hand, whi¬ ther I must prepare to go with all conveni¬ ent dispatch, and where he flattered him¬ self he should be able to secure me from ♦he trouble of taking any mor? sudden journies. " I had only just time to whisper poor Scroope, that ifl could recover my Hberty, he should hear of me at the apartments of Agnes Mon revet 1, one of Queen Isabella's young ladies, with whom I was very inti¬ mate when she resided in London; and there being no present remedy for this dis¬ aster, I quietly submitted to follow my uncle, though determined, if possible, to prove that he did flatter himself when he hoped he had* caged mc for life. Finding several
several persons, however, about the gates of the convent, I made no secret of my reluctance to view the inside of them, in the pleasing expectation that a little bustle might amount to a fray, and that fray ter¬ minate in my favour—in other words, that mv honoured uncle might be worsted. But I was no* so fortunate; the gates closed upon me, and had it not been that contriving schemes for my escape occu¬ pied my mind, I should have spent some of the mesi tedious days imaginable, I was lectured e ,v ery mo ,m ing by the abbess* and exhorted to repent the heinous sin I had committed, in preferring a handsome young man to a disagreeable old uncle; and after leaving thu refectory every evert¬ ing, w,s dozed into a lethargy by an ig¬ norant, corpulent-monk, who read to me out of the Lives of the Saints, till I made the delightful discovery that'he was Icthar- gie himself, or rather, I must own, I was indebted for this useful intelligence to a dcur, merry-hearted girl, the only sever¬ able
able creature here, one Sccur Clothilde. She toklntc, that if anybody read aloud to this reverend father above ten minutes tit once, the never-failing consequence was, his sinking into a profound sleep, a dis- order which, she said, had bee.* gaining upon him several yens. €{ I replied, I had a strong literary turn myself, loved reading aloud, and particu¬ larly enjoyed the sight of fat people re¬ posing. I therefore would not he back- ward ( in^ affording him any amusement of that nature, provided he would entrust me with the soothing ollice. Accordingly, the next day when he visited aie, and after a, short exhortation to renounce the vani¬ ties^ of the world, wus proceeding to open his great book, I gently reminded him that his last lecture had awakened a very' troublesome cough, and that therefore I would, if he pleased,, save him from the like inconvenience at present, by reading aloud the ins>U"uctive v page myself. " Luckily for me it had been raining. * and
snd he, having frequently to cross the courts, was provided with a long loose cloak and cowl, to defend him from the weather. These he had thrown off on en¬ tering my cell. In sanguine hopes, there¬ fore, I began my lecture, and scorning alike, pauses, emphasis, and variation of tone, read on with the most irresistible drowsiness of accent for full a' quarter of an hour, when with delight I beheld rny worthy confessor's eyes gradually close, and his mouth open. In five minutes more he was as secure as I could have wished him : however, I prosed on, employing my hands meanwhile in fastening round rny waist all the clothes I had brouglit frdm England, which proved no more than suf¬ ficient to encrease me to the size I wist'ed to attain. Throwing over these ftie. cloak and cowl so fortunately within my reach, I bade the dear old man #ood night, left him in possession of my bell/ and raisihg*my~ self to J the utmost sfretch'^f tijptdVnei^nt, delibe-
deliberately paced along the great gallery, where I was "so lucky as to meet no one except Sceur Clothilde, who was on the watch for me, and on whom I bestowed a parting nod, that spoke a world of thanks and adieus. At the door, as 1 past the in¬ ner portress, a \ioIent fit of coughing pre * vented me most seasonably from looking up at her, or her speaking to me, and the troublesome complaint seized me with re¬ doubled fury just as I reached the outer gates. The pious mother who guarded them, exclaimed hs I approached her— * Save you, father! you had better stay within this wet evening/ But my cough precluded all chance of returning her any answer, and the dusk infinitely befriended me. " I persevered in my drowsy pace till I reached the first angle of the wall, and then stepping briskly forward, with what sentiments of joy I leave you to imagine quilted the high road as "soon" ap possible -•■'*. . ;tnu
and striking across woods, fields, or rivu¬ lets, just ns It happened, kept in the direc¬ tion that 1 knew would bring me to Paris. " In fine, never was hazardous adven¬ ture more easily or more fortunately at- chie\ed. 1 met with no molestation till I put in for the night at a ^mall sequestered cabaret, where fatigue served me as a pre¬ tence for retiring immediately to rest, and from whence the next morning 1 proceed¬ ed to Paris. There pretending to be just arrived from Burgundy, and a perfect stranger, I easily obtained directions to the palace ; and 1 shall excite your sur¬ prise by telling \ou who I met ia the streets on my road thither—no other than Lord Delancey, brought to France by the same motive as yourself—a hope of find¬ ing the unfortunate Margiana. 1 instantly discovered myself to him, happy to meet with such protection tilj I agam saw Scroope, and implored him to direct, mejo some retreat, where I might be concealed from my uncle. He told rae fee could offer
offer one as safe as it was honourable, for that Lady Genevieve having come frou* ' England with bin in search of her sister, was under t'se actual patronage of Ciuer-u Isabella, and that I might reside with Lrr as long as I chose. i( To Lady Genevieve, therefore, he conducted mc. I met with the kindest re¬ ception from her, though her grief, like his, was unutterable, on hearing the fatal news I imparted to them ; and I have Lvca with her ever since, not daring, howe\er, to see much of Scroope, lest my uncK\ who was still in Paris, should trace me to my refuge. But all my caution could not finally avert this evil. Two days ago, ac¬ cident discovering to him where 1 was, he claimed me as his ward, upon which, Lord Delancey, having no authority to* detain. was forced"to give me up. The event * you'tnow,* lam a'prisoner once more; J foitt J as* Here are how four of lis irt cdnfe- 'defation, you andt your'page, Clothilde 'and niy self, t'do not despair - of "seeing ' ' the
the dear world again, in spite of my per¬ secuting uncle, and the vigilance with which 1 must now of course expect to be guarded." Lord Lothian, who at the mention of Margiana'cjname had relapsed into a gloomy reverie, hardly knew when Clara concluded her narrative, till the cessation of her voice restored his recollection. He then praised her spirit and ingenuity, which indeed had been exercised in a cause likely enough to excite the admiration of a man of his cha¬ racter, and gave her every assurance of assisting her second escape, and even of promoting her union with William Scroope. Clara then asked him a variety of questions relating to the supposed Man- nce 3 whom she strongly suspected to be really a woman; but finding Lord Lothian spoke of him with the most perfect sim¬ plicity, she forbore tirgirig the subject vet took an early opportunity of engaging iti conversation with Maurice himself. A vol. iv. r desire
desire to speak consolation to the affec¬ tionate page, after the shock he had re¬ ceived, furnished her with a sufficient ex¬ cuse ; and poor Arlette, happy at finding a friend in a countrywoman, and she also a friend of Lord Lothian's and of his sis¬ ter's, soon confided to her every secret of her heart. In return, Clara communicated to her the same account she had just given to Lord Lothian; and in conclusion, advised her to ask his leave for a day's absence from the convent, that she might spend it with Genevieve, whom she represented as extremely mi&erable, on account of the un¬ certainty she was under respecting Arlette, as well as on that of her sister's deplorable end. " But," continued Clara, " I must not conceal from you that your brother is so highly exasperated against you, that if he sees you, he will assuredly prevent your return hither. Resume, therefore, your page's disguise before you venture to make yourself known to Genevieve, who, I am well assured, wiE not betray you to Lord Qelancey.
Delancey. Indeed, his irritation U so ex¬ treme, that all the time I resided with her, she dreaded his meeting with you. Whilst you are unknown to him, you can free¬ ly exercise your own judgment, by re¬ turning or not, as you see fit; and the ©niy precautions you need use, are to in¬ troduce yourself at the palace as a page of Lord Lothian's, and to desire a private conference with Lady Genevieve; to fa¬ cilitate which, I will give you a few lines addressed to her own servant, a very intel¬ ligent French girl, and particularly at¬ tached to mc, as she was recommended to your cousin by my intimate friend, Agnes Monrevcil." Clara's arguments made a deep impres- fion on Arlette, who on various accounts- was anxious tq see Genevieve. She there¬ fore asked, and .easily obtained permission froni Lord Lo^ian, to go to Paris for a day, to waif upon the sister of her ia* mented lady, promising $he utawt discre- ... s P tior.
tion on the score of their abode ^with the Ursulines. Early the next morning she set out on a fnule for Paris, escorted by a lad, son to the gardener of the convent, who had or~ *ckrs from the nuns to see her safe to the gates ofthe city, whence, having dismissed him, she hastened to Lord Lothian's house, changed her dress, and proceeded as Mau¬ rice to the palace. Having received a di¬ rection to the quarter occupied by Queen Isabella, she enquired by name for the waiting-maid of the English Lady Gene¬ vieve; and the woman having read the note written to her by Clara, readily in¬ troduced the trembling page to her lady, liaving assured him she was quite alone. The meeting was a iveleome one on «fther side, for Oenevi*sv6 f&ftantly recol¬ lected the &tch~countei*ai&e of Arlette, and the tones of her Voice; the Northum* , brim accent -vf %ilch cotild iiot easily l&e . mistaken. i
mistaken. But her astonishment was al¬ most boundless when she understood how and with xvhom this thoughtless girl had quitted England. When she enquired where her residence had been since her ar¬ rival in France, Arlcttc readily replied,, at a convent some little distance from Paris; but nothing could induce her to mention what she knew of Lord Lothian. She said she had, on resuming a female dress, ©ob¬ tained immediate admittance into the clois- ter> where she lived more happily and with much more liberty than she had enjoyed at Widdrington Tower; and as to Lord Lothian, he had, she believed, a house somewhere in Paris. The artless Genevieve gave her implicit credit, and the subject was then exchanged for the mournful one that occupied their discourse the remainder of the day, and at intervals half drowned them in tearsi Ge¬ nevieve knew no further particulars thau those related by Clara; but she acquainted c 3 Arlette
Arlette that Lord Delancey so strongly dwelt on the improbability of Margiana's having been murdered as well as robbed, that his confidence had supported her's; " and he is at this very time/' said she, "ab¬ sent on a tour he resolved to make, in hopes of finding her in some of the pro¬ vincial convents; for at all those in Paris he has enquired strictly, but in vain/' Ge¬ nevieve informed Arlette that she accom¬ panied Lord Delancey to France entirely with the approbation of his father* whose grief and distress were extreme on find¬ ing Margiana had escaped from him as from an enemy; and that she herself had, at length thought it expedient to apprize him of her sisrer's projected scheme of taking fefuge with Queen Isabella, after Lord De¬ lancey and Harold Wallop had fruitlessly sought for her in England. " B}d the rumour ofthe murder then/' said Arlette, <( never reach you at Wid¬ drington Tower?'' u Never,
*< Never, which Delancey considers a:s a circumstance strongly confirming his hopes." Before the two cousins parted for the night, Genevieve was at some pains to pre¬ vail on Arlette to lay aside for ever her unbecoming disguise, and resolve to stay with her. But the dread of her brother's anger, if at his return he should discover who had heen her companion at the con¬ vent, enabled her firmly to resist all that Genevieve could plead; and she continued steady in her secret resolution to return to Lord Lothian the next morning. But the next morning a very different scene from what she had expected awafted her. An hour after day-break she was sent for into Gene vieveV, room, who appeared more dead than alive, not from illness hut from sorrow. Mute from excess of an- c 4t * guish #
guish, her waiting-woman spoke for her, and addressing Arlette as Lord Lothian's page, " Mylady/'saidshe, e( has just received a letter, which has almost broken her heart, and has determined her not to stay another hour in this city. She cannot wait Lord Delancey's return; and I, never having been out of Paris in my life, could be of no use to her on "her journey to England. She therefore entreats your assistance, as her countryman, to escort her thither." " Oh, Maurice I" said Genevieve, in a faint voice, " if you knew niy wretched¬ ness, you would not abandon me, I am ordered, cruelly ordered hence. Do hot, ah! do not desert your unhappy friend!'* She clasped her hands together, and there was so much agony in her looks, that Arlette's heart was melted into a forget¬ fulness of every selfish consideration. The presence of the maid forbade her falling on Genevieve's neck, but she instantly promised to do whatever was required of her.
her. A litter was then ordered, and the pretended page assisted in preparing for this precipitate journey. Genevieve, al¬ most lifeless, or alive only to weep, was incapable of any exertion but that of fre¬ quently reading a letter, which she drew from her bosom, and replaced there when she had finished it, with sobs that spoke her heart torn to pieces. She uttered not a word; and Arlette, forced to exert her¬ self, had no leisure to reflect on her own concerftss She took her plaea hf Gene¬ vieve's side when the litter was ready, vtnd they drove out of Paris on the road to¬ wards Amiens.
c5
CHAP.
' t CHAP. IL Peyseverancc worthy of a better Came* The wondering Arlette, during this melan* choly journey, made several attempts to learn the nature of a distress that seemed alike to have overpowered the mind and the frame of the wretched Genevieve, but in vain. If Arlette strove to soothe her, she melted into silent tears; and if she pressed her to reveal the cause of her grief, she would reply—" Oh, no ! such in¬ humanity ought not to be divulged—I will not so defame a fellow-creature^—the fatal secret shall die with me, and die promptly !" Sometimes
' Sometimes Arlette would urge the sur¬ prise her brother would feel at finding Genevieve had left Paris, on his return from the provinces; but the lovely mourner then dropping her head on the shoulder of her companion, would say—" Never, ne¬ ver may I behold him or human being more, excepting yourself, and one ether friend, to whom I am now hastening for a lust, though not a long, repose/' This friend was the wife of Lord Percy, to whose house in London, where Gene¬ vieve knew them both to be, she repaired on her arrival at that city, after a safe though a tedious journey, Lady Percy having heard of the dread¬ ful fate of Margiana, was not much asto¬ nished at the profound sorrow that seemed almost to have given the stroke of death to her sister, and received her with the tenderest kindness. They had a long pri¬ vate conference together, while Arlette c b wa©
was once more resuming the appearance of her sex and rank, but w T ith mortification perceiving that she herself was studiously excluded from her cousin's confidence. The two friends often sought to be alone, and in Arlette's presence only general con¬ versation past, in which Gene\ ieve hardly ever joined. The source of her tears, in¬ deed, after some time had elapsed, seemed exhausted; but though they had ceased to fall, unutterable woe had taken possession of her features; and hard must that heart have been, that felt not touchedby the ap¬ pearance of such patient grief in one so young and beautiful, Arlette was touched, but she was indig¬ nant too. She was even highly affronted, at being thought too giddy to share the secrets of one who knew not that she had reserved any of her own; and after awhile, the depositary of her complaints was Lady Rothes, to whom at first she felt attached, simply because she was Lord Lothian's sister, a.
sister, and afterwards because she was charmed and entertained by her sprightly manners. However, she had discretion enough to conceal from her the adven¬ tures in which she had borne an equal share with Lord Lothian ; and Lady Rothes remained in the belief that she had gone to France with her brother and her cousin. But Arlette's wonder, on the score of Genevieve's dejection, which was visible to. every one who saw her at all, she free¬ ly expressed. " It is occasioned by some¬ thing more than poor Margiana's death," said she, one day to Lady Rothes; " for she had not only recovered the first shock that event gave her, but even inclined to ad¬ mit my brother's opinion that the dread¬ ful report was not true in its fullest ex¬ tent. Besides, it was the receipt of a let¬ ter that threw her into such agonies of sorrow as you never witnessed—a letter which she has shewn to no one but Lady Percy.
Percy. What can this mystery be which is so inscrutable?'' ts And which you are so anxious to know T , and so angry at not knowing," said Lady Rothes, laughing. " Yet methinks 1 eouJd give a shrewd guess at the nature of it. Can anybody tell me where Jemmy is now?" " Who is Jemmy ?" ** Lothian. I heard he went to France, despairing and crazy after Margiana's death. Was he there when you came away ?" * " I rather think-—I believe he was," re¬ plied Arlette, stammering. " It was re¬ ported so." *' Oh, then some new love affair of his, to a certainty, has broken this gentle mourner's constant heart. Honest Jemmy never lets sorrow trouble him long, and I dare say he soon began to look about him amongst the sprightly damsels of France for relief to his woe. Why, my dear, you stare as if you had never heard of what
what every body has known these two years __that your cousin Genevieve has been dead and dying for my brother, ever since she became first acquainted with him." " I never heard of it in my whole life!" exclaimed Arlette, struck by the sudden ray of light that beamed at once full day upon her. " And is he in love with her too?" " Not in the least. Most men would have preferred her to her cold-hearted sis¬ ter; but there is no accounting for the taste of those monkies. My brother ne¬ ver could fancy Genevieve, though once he gave himself the amusement of flirting with her. Her beauty he calls statuary, and he says she has no more character than a white stock-dove, that has but one note to express all its humours. However, he admits the tame et ccetera of goodness, and mildness, and sweetness, and so forth. which, indeed, nobody can deny her." Arlette soon put an end to her visit, and
and came; away persuaded she at last pos¬ sessed the master-key of that secret which had so long distressed her friendship, and plagued her curiosity. Yet she was not by any means able to unravel the whole affair to her satisfaction ; for though she concluded Lord Lothian to be somehow connected with Genevieve's unhappiness, • she could not guess exactly how. She had, in the course of their journey to England, confessed her own partiality for him, there¬ fore she could not now be surprised at her cousin's reserve: but the letter was a perplexing circumstance, that she thought of, and tried again and again to under¬ stand, till her wits were almost bewildered. One opinion she decidedly adopted and maintained, with that pertinacity which was? a leading feature in her character-^naisi«" ly, that Genevieve had been so anxious tm bring her away from France, wholly to pre¬ clude a continuation cf her intrmaey with Lord Lothian, which might eventually lead hira. to a discovery of her real name,
and her partiality for him. This belief once taken up, she mistrusted all Gene¬ vieve's professions of friendship, and afraid of being duped by them out of her real happiness, she resolved to be cautiously on guard against her cousin for the fu¬ ture. Genevieve, absorbed by her own reflec- m tions, and communicative only to Lady Per* cy, had no suspicion of what was passing in her mind, and secluded herself as much as possible from every eye. As winter ap?- proached, she rarely leff the house; and when she did, it was only to take a melan¬ choly walk in the fields, or to see Lady Hot hes, at whose house her tears were ex*- cited anew, by the sight of the bloody scarf, which was her beloved sister's, and had been embroidered, she said, by her own hand in happier days. With extreme concern, Lord and Lady Percy saw her con¬ stitution was sinking under the indulgence she gave to her sorrow ; but evary attempt they
they made, either to draw her out into So¬ ciety, or to raise her into any thing re¬ sembling chearfulness, was evidently so irk¬ some to her, and even painful, though her manners were always gentle, and her gra¬ titude for their kindness nearly without li¬ mits, that thev desisted, even while Ladv Percy felt almost heart-broken at the symp¬ toms she exhibited of the insidious ap¬ proach of a decline. Arlette, but for the gay society of Lady Rothes, would have been immeasurably weary of an abode she declared was almost as dull as the black tower; forgetting that, until she had seen the world, she had ne¬ ver been at a loss for amusement, even in that scene of early confinement. She had long felt extremely anxious for some news of Lord Lothian, when Lord Percy, one day returning home to dine with his family, and finding her and his wife alone, informed them he had just been agreeably
agreeably surprised by unexpectedly meet¬ ing Lord Delancey in the street. " But vour brother," said h®, addressing himself to Arlette, " does not look the man he was. Harassed by a tedious and unavailing search through France, whence he arrived only last night, the conviction of that charming creature's death, whom he so faithfully loved, wili prove, I fear, too much for him. But we will not dwell upon the sub¬ ject. I would avoid it, as once I would have sought her. That wild boy, Lothian," conti¬ nued he, turning to Lady Percy, "is come back vith him from Paris, as I understood by the few hasty words we had time to exchange, and I suspect Delancey has been helping him out of some scrape; but he was shy of explaining, and the street where we met was no place to ask questions in. But he has promised to dine with ns to¬ morrow, I asked him to bring Lothian too, if they were together; but he, it seems, is at his own house v,ith Lady Rothes, and sets out to-morrow on a jour-
Bey to Edinburgh, at her request, on bu¬ siness relating to her son, the young Earl of Rothes, who, owing to some juvenile prank, has fallen into disgrace with the King of Scotland. I never told Lord De¬ lancey a word of yon, Ladv Arlette. i thought it would be such a chcarcr to his spirits to findf you - here safe with my wife and your cousin, that I had the discretion jn$f onee to --mention: L y*>ur name to him/* j J' A m®U .we incident!" said Lady Fejrcy. "Mad you in your whole life¬ time Harry, used your sword no oftener lhan your discretion^ you might have been accounted a merciful man, God wot! and a_great coward." " And the consequence will be/' re¬ turned he, " that when I grow an old man, and am past fighting, my discretion, from not having been worn out too early, will be in its full-.vigour and bloom of youth. There is a season for all things, Kate/* Arlette's thoughts were throwiKinto a tumult
tumult by this communication of Lord Percy'&. She was terrified at the idea of her brother being so near, and so soon expected under the same roof with herself. Recalling* to mind what Clara Castles had told her of his resentment, she appre¬ hended that, once in Delancey's power, she should be immediately sent back to her gloomy father at Widdrington Tower, and all chance of ever again seeing Lord Lo- thian, and all hope of future happiness and freedom 3 synonimous terms, in her opinion, would be lost for the remainder of her life. To stay, therefore, where she was, for a meeting with her brother, she shuddered only to think of; yet there was no alternative but either to do that, or to throw herself once more into Lord Lo¬ thian's protection. ^1 ihis dilemma, thj prejudices she had >tniteb^ctef^;|i(fer-^Ky>^ne-to consult for Genevieve she believed interested to keep hwfobm &W&MtU&ihl^*vento deliver .-•*-» , her
her again into the authority of her father; and she continued so thoughtful during the remainder of the day, that her appear¬ ance excited questions, and her reserve in answering them, curiosity. Even Gene¬ vieve, whom Arlette discovered in the evening to be informed of the return of the! two young noblemen, and whom she therefore observed with keen attention, asked her why she seemed grieved, rather than rejoiced, at her approaching meeting with a brother whom she professed to have always so tenderly loved ? " You know very well, cousin Gene¬ vieve," answered she, "he will be ques¬ tioning me how; I got over to France, and what I di# while I was,there, and J hate to be called to t an account I haVe been treated like a child long enough. Then he will give himself airs of being angry, &,. ;&nd documejat me as if I. was his w^j ?; and,;hfe has m -right fcfeit 1 tftei you Knf)W*,\ :; w -^ , -; : >;/- ,> jr?. : . i "y * ft
wi§m.m$®yi my mm
t Arlette, Advice* he may give you with propriety, because he is several years older than vou ; and even that he will be in- duced to bestow solely by his affection for you. Do you imagine he would con¬ cern himself about your proceedings, if he had no regard for you ? Besides, we must conceal from him that you quitted Eng¬ land with Lord Lothian, which may be easily done, *since Lord Lothian himself is not aware that he is acquainted with De¬ lancey's sister." Ci Then you would .advise me to stay here, and endure the first fire of my bro- ther's wrath, though I know him to be al¬ ready exasperated against me for leaving that hateful old dungeon in Northumber¬ land?" " Advise you to stay here !" repeated Genevieve, with a look of consternation which Arlette attributed to a very differ¬ ent feeling frora the real one that occa* sioned it. < f Here> my dear girl! What else
* i
else would you do but stay here? Whi¬ ther w T ould you go, unless to the very place you seem to speak of with so much horror ?" Sf You ask many questions, cousin Ge¬ nevieve, but you never answer any thing. For instance, now, I see you have been crying very lately; and what need have you tobe uneasy? You have no cause to fear meeting Delancey, as I have—and you are not attached to Lord Lotnian, as I am. Are you ?" Genevieve's colour rose, and she seemed at a loss what answer to return. " I will tell you what, cousin," conti-> nued Arlette, observing her, "you have taught tne to be as reserved as yourself; and since you communicate none of your sentiments to rae, I do not perceive why 1*should communicate mine to yon." " As you please/' said -Genevieve, mild¬ ly
lv, as Arlette left the room, tor reflect', irt* \he solitude of her own, ,ort her future' measures. She continued alone for the rest of tlr^ evening, pondering with somewhat more attention than she had ever before bestow¬ ed on any one subject, on what she could, ' what she ought, and what she dared not do. But the imagre of Genevieve attached to Lord Lothian, and treacherous to her¬ self, warped her judgment, or more pro¬ perly speaking, her imagination, and pre¬ vented any thing like prudence from min¬ gling with her meditations. In fine, her conclusion was, that death itself was almost preferable to being forced back, as she believed was her cousin's wish she might be, to a father who, always ty¬ rannical, would now, in all likelihood, be insufferably severe. Neither could shore- solve to meet those reproaches from a more respectable mother, whom she equal- "or. v-y p lv
ly loved and revered, that her conscience more thnn whispered her past conduct en¬ titled her to e?%pe- r t. Arlette's reasoning was thus conducted : <c If I see my brother, either his own precise notions, or his de¬ sire to punish fhe naughty girl, or, in fine, Genevieve's jealous instigations, will in¬ duce hiin tc take me down to Widdrin«;ton jail dircctlv, where I shall he lectured and locked up frora morning till night; ar.d my father, not beincj loth"! gie, like Clara's fat friar, there wiil be no more chance cf my escaping a second time, than of my walking" a qcartcr of a mile without ;»:y head. So that from this thraldom ro re¬ lease can be expected, ex.eept by submit- lin-r to one eaually severe, that of marry- ing- Harold Wallop. Now, Harold Wallop is very little better than a land monster; though I like him well enough for a friend, 1 should hate him worse than poison for a lo\ r; whereas Lord Lothian includes all I cv.-r did, or do, or ever shall admire. Why, then, how wicked it would be in me to
to think of marryinar anv body else ! and how easy, on the other hand, to join him again, and go with him directly to Bdin- burgh, where I shall be out of the way of them all! Ah ! but then, will not Gene¬ vieve suspect which road I liave taken, ?*n& send Deiancey scouring after me ? That would be very disagreeable, i must act by her as she has acted by rne, disguise the truth, and keep rny own councils. Fare¬ well, Arictte, then—and once more, wel¬ come I/aurk:e ! I hope that worthy youth v.ill forgive me, ii ever lie hears how free I make with his name." Arlette, now fixed io a point, and reso¬ lutely shutting 1 her eves against the wild-* next of her own conduct, began to pre¬ pare her measures. The first she took was writing the following letter to her cout>in :•—
" NoTwiTHSTANniKc what voui urge to me respecting my brother, I have neither resolution to meet his censures, nor fortitude to endure the probability of be¬ ing again confined in the Black Tower, However, you shall not a second time have anv room to reproach me with rndiscre- •tion, since f return to the convent of the Ursulines, where .Clara 'Castles must have thought me stranaclv capricious for leav- ine her so suddenly. Do not, I beseech you, my dear Genevieve, acquaint my bro¬ ther whither -I ,am going, He will.not be able to overtake me, for I shall not travel by the direct road ; neither tske shipping •at Dover; and the same dress that con¬ cealed me coming hither, will serve to dis- guise me back. * v Farewell, and do not betray tny se- _ <ii*iii'.i | iii3iiiifiip»" Arlette also wrote a few lines to Lady Percy conveying thanks to her and her Lord for their
their kindness, and confessing that particu¬ lar reasons made her afraid of seeing her brother. Satisfied with these precautions, which she thought admirably well con¬ trived, and sedulous to deceive herself, she arose very early the next morning; and equipped in her page's suit, walked unno¬ ticed out of the house, repairing with a light yet beating heart to Lord Lothian's well-known door, where a French servant, who had Lived with him at Paris, instantly recognised the trusly Maurice. " Oh, Claudien!" cried she,, "where is* my Lord ? I must speak with him this- moment/' (< My Lord," replied Claudien, '* is set- tin/; out immediately on a long journey, but he will rejoice to see le bon Sieur Maurice." " Take me to him where heis alone then, good Claudien; my business with him is particular." n 3 Lord-.
Lord Lothian appeared de lighted to *$ee the pretty page again ; and she was no poo ner private with him than, throwing herself at h'S feet, she earnestly besought Lir*i to admit the unhnppv Maurice iiifo h:s service, whose reward, for having, nr bev own desire, attended Ladv Genevieve rf to England, had been a disgraceful dismis¬ sion, and a charge ©f unpardonable neg'i- ■ftencc, in not having followed and pro-> fected her sister, when she so unfortunately nuit ted Widdrington Tower. " Lord De* 7. cy* lancev too," said she, " is $o-exasperated against "me from the same cause., that I daie not apply to him for my subsistence; and I am here, frier.die&s, destitute of md- Tsev. aiid'in danger of -starvinj?." (S Poor feliov/!" said Lord Lothian, *' it is cruel r.we foi* such a tender sptijr as t\,*'- "it. [\yyy siioukUt thou have nro- ley ted thv iadv ^ ''j'hrsc correct > ; ood peo* 'i.de.must nave verv savage hearts. Hut I yy\ ' iisr :-i-..-./ <• )-u'»' to ;-!d:nbur-«h, on a fa- un"; coLc-.rn of .some importance. Wilt
fflon go with me, Maurice, or stay here wifh my sister? I will gi\e thee a good wo~d to her." tf Oh. .vith yon wiih vou, mv Lord : I rzn wi'linilv g.^rvc -.o other/' ' •* Well then, Chiudien arul thou mt*«sr chrnge destinations, and both will be pVa* ed, for he wants to stay in London, a; d rny sister, thinking him a good ser¬ vant, wishes to keep him. Go, therefore, and tell him he mav remain where he is ; and be thou, Maurice, readv, for in ten. ' ' tr xniniues I must be gone/' Arlette, with equal joy and alacrity, ful¬ filled her commission. Lord Lothian wai punctual to the time he hnd annointed ; i it and she, having escaped being seen bv Lady Roth"'••, once more commenced a L'uirncv, without considering what she should do on reaching the end of it. Iier evasion was not discovered fill above t-.-c hours after it had taken place; and & 1 the
vcrlid of her be J, were carried to Ladv Percy and to Genevieve, as thev were sit- Mug together at breakfast. Each of them immediately imparted the contents of her ovvii to the other; and Lord Percy enter¬ ing soon after, Genevieve did not hesi taste to inform him of what had happened, and qnttefrt him to send some confidential ser¬ vant to pursue and guard Arlette till she .reached tlie convent of the Ursulines. But she expressed so much desire to complv in H A » v part with her request, and withhold all present knowledge ofthe event from Lcrd Delaneey,-that, as hisrsister had luckily .ne- yer been men tioned to him, the entire cir.- om>stance was past over in silence when¬ ever he was present; and he not only was spared the pain of knowing Arlette had avoided him, but he was even never in¬ formed she had been seen in France. Yet Geaevjeve only Waited the return pf Lord Percy's messenger to impart to him
him her safety, and the situation of the re¬ spectable retreat she had chosen. When that messenger, howeverj returned three weeks after with an accountnosuch perscrn had arrived at the monastery,. Genevieve Teh assured her cousin had gone to Scot¬ land with Lord Lothian, to whom she was probably married ; but her own afflictions; now by peculiar circumstances greatly ag¬ gravated, and the declining state of her health, at that time disabled' her from making any exertions even in her own be- h-A f. In the meantime, Ethelred had, in con¬ fidence, communicated to lienry Percy 2 the transactions that occurred in Franco- after the sudden departure of his cousin; Ohhis return to Paris from a fruitless; search through the provinces, he found a strong rumour prevailing in that-city, of a holy sanctuary profaned, and a pen¬ sioner of eighteen seduced by a young n5 man.
man of high rank, who had found means jtogain admission, and deceive the supe¬ riors for a length of time. The rcpoit .DC.ade little impression on the mind of a man ill at case; but the next day it en- gaged more of his attention, for he was informed the offender was an Enyiisluuaia. and that he war; tiirown into a prison, the door of which was surrounded dailv l-v yy\ enraged populace, prepared to tear L:e profaner? to pieces, whenever he should be led out, either for the purposes of execu- ticn or liberation. , Delnncey, though free from vice liim¬ self, .and hating it in another, \U Io\ed hjs,country, and k-h as if every Lriion wjls Ids friend. He was moved by the circum- rt stances of this case, even while to himself he owned no punishment could be too severe for the offence. I^ut, on the so- con .1 morning, a letter was brought iiim. whi<h liad been \eft at his hout;c by a per¬ son ui-.knov/n. It came from Ciara Castles,, and
sud was tc inform him that the unfortunate and guilty prisoner was no other than Lord Loihi:-,n, wliose life must prove the fort'c.: of Ids crime, unless so respectable a countryman as Lord Delancey, suffering mercy to overcome his strict love of jus¬ tice, deigned to solicit the court of France in his behalf. Lord Loil.ian was endeared to Ethelred by the affection he had borne his beloved JV'nrginna, lie was preparing to exert his ut;/:o:.i intiiiencc h\ his favour, when he was in adi nialjy joined by William Scroope, a \cHitli uf whom he had alwavs en- j tertained a good, opinion. Their efforts we:e m/ted, fur 5-croope was able to assist Lclancey by unJcrtaki;:^ inferior branches of the negotiation; and after the lapse of a week, Lord Lothian was set at librrtv — secretly, and at night. . Nor did fhe active benevolence of F.thcl ied stop here. He persuaded Lord Lothkui
to think of-making reparation to the young Clothilde, by marrying her as soon as she could be safely brought to England ; and was so much pleased with the behaviour of William Scroope throughout the whole of this delicate aflTair, that he presented him wifh as much property as removed the only objection old Castles had ever made to his union with his niece. Clara, not less rejoiced' than Lord Lo¬ thian by the change from hopeless impri¬ sonment' to freedom, quitted the convent withou? having any occasion to refer to a stratagem, and was honourably united to. her lover.
chap; 5
rTBiiwii am ff Wtll ilium "tr-lti -----------"T—*—Tmr^tT—" WT • , w i. ii.. w i ..... ..i- m -^ ai m j —>*^j— i>—
CHAP. III. The Life of a Libertine. Whiie the feelings of Lord Delancey re* warded him for the happiness he had con¬ ferred on so many persons, those of his sister were ih the same degree correcting her for the strange imprudences of her conduct. Her journey to Scotland, in the slender train of domestics that followed Lord Lothian, was concluded without acci¬ dent ; and most fortunate she esteemed lierself, when she had past the immediate neighbourhood of Widdrington Tower without seeing any ofher father's family. - ■ j ' * Lord"
Lord Lothian gave many a sigh io the memory of Margiana, as his eye w^.'.derec. over the spacious park aud sequestered burvinsc-place ; vet he er.tt-red into con* versation with Maurice, and aJ:ed him manv questions co:;;ern;n;*; the nresent Lo rd W i dd r i n l v * / : /s vy. o cl e o f I i T -: n <r, a nd particularly his siiu'v.-ar treatment of i A r* <*J
" Do vou see that lofty suuarc struc- ture, mv I *>ru/' said Maurice, "raising its four glootifV walls above the rest'of the building ? Ihat is called the Black Tower, aiid behind it is a garden, spreading to some extent over the top of a larse doy* tion of the castie. There, Ladv Arlette has chiefly, nay almost wholly lived foi: the last ten years. When a child, she had liberty enough; but as she became sen¬ sible of its value, she was deprived of the blessing." . " And how does she endure such barba? sous confine ment.?"
-•w
(< She -is a- ji^ht : hearted- y omig h&y, my Lord, and takes it more men ily than most would do, fov she is always full of pranks and pastimes. But, however, as you mus: suppose, sj5? docs not much rci'^h being so scrh *:d from the rc4 of tie >orld." ' k VA...- f a fi»olish girl sdie must be. then, not to. ;iin <\\\iyy and chopse for herself, since the '••■o; id lies. before her. Why does uot she rreep out of the window, ar.d slide dow;» IVem the battlements some dark 11 AU-; ! vvhu wouid protect her if she " Every man who had eyes, if she is as ha o duom'j ar; I havo been told she is. I wi*h she would (ly out of. her cage, and come to us for protection." '*' Are )ou sure you would afford it her, .ores ^ *. " Considcrincf thou hast been a courtly page, thou dost ask strange questions, gen¬ tle Mauric;e. ,Enquire of thine own heart whut
what-thou wouldst do-upon the like occa¬ sion, and then answer for me/* Arlette was half pleased* and half morti¬ fied by Lord. Lothian's reply; he was in¬ clined to befriend Lord Widdrington's im¬ prisoned daughter, but then he confound¬ ed her in flie general class of woman-kind. u Had he a-heart like mine," thought she, *' he wonld alreadv be able to distinguish. r/ o rae amidst a million, as I could distinguish him." It was lucky for Arlette that Lord Lo- thian, on his arrival at Edinburgh, was re¬ commended to lodge a't the house of a very respectable woman, a widow of one of the King's inferior officer?: She had a large family, and her husband had so well discharged the duties of his place, that, as a reward for; his services,, it had been con¬ tinued to his eldest son. The situation of her dwelling, therefore,-coatigaous to Ho- :, :•-. iyrood^
^ *
lyrood House, rendered it very convenient fur Lord Lothian, who<*e business laid en¬ tirely at the palace; and he vvas so assidti¬ ous in urging it, that no long time elapsed before his nephew, owing to his exertions, and proper submissions of hia own, was restored to the Scottish monarch's favour,. Arlette now felt more at ease than she had ever done since her leaving her father's castle., The plain sense and goodness of heart of the worthy widow soon won her esteem, and afterwards even her confi¬ dence ; and there were young women in the house, her daughters, nearly of Ar¬ iel te's own age, with whom she longed to enjoy that unreserved intimacy herdisguise forbade. i It was not, however, till she had been above a month at Edinburgh, that she bef gan seriously to think of disclosing hei> sclf to her new friends. The .-third daugh¬ ter, ,-Amabel »Stuart, was a beautiful girl, modest*
rpofVpf. soriThtlv. a«^tl in^f-nr^T^, f*r>v her, Arlette feltthr warme-'t ^ r 'ec*ion, and fc-r manv da* " wr.-> onlv w' t hhe;c? hv false s l mmo from «^1:r"»'i:i^ n rruirn rS !^^ ^pn« - * i ,• * i ',^j t * J i , r,' i .,.({* t * i ^f ? v ; t t, t > fit*. 1 i 1 * H * !, tJiou/rJi ':re' t(C*?rr»* iny,} cu na &tcount to rcve d hrr h'jch tirth to persons uncon- fiect**d with hcr ; and so much her inferi¬ ors in rank. But ihe conduct cf Lord Lothian by slow- degrees dissipated this false shame, and gave to poor Arlette a severe but salutary lesson. After the real nurno^e of his icur- nry v:as fulfilled, he <-hose to prolor.e his Ftnv in Fdinburjfh ; thi'* could not be won- ■drretl-at. T!<e court was constantly re- sldent at Holvrot.-d lioir-c : apd if it vield«« eel in snlenloi:;- t"; ihat ofKii:2 Ilenrv, it rather exceeded it in point of jjaietv. But simple gaiety had never been sufficient for Lord Lothian ; he soon distinguished him¬ self by a series of licentious adventures. whicli he was no longer yj anxious as be- * i'orv.
fore to conceal from Ma'nice, since ro doubts whatever now remained in his mind of Margiana's being r cally • cad. He w..:> rn-rly at his lodgings; and when he was if v-y, uruallv ir, such a .state as proved he was beginninir to add hr.birs of inebriation to his other vices. Arlette sickened'at the -sight, and heard instances of his profligacy from the elder Stuart, that filled her wifh co:;fu»:on and anguish. After repeated shocks of this nature, the deformity of his conduct was brought even more under - her own eve by Lord Lot 1 inn himself, who accidentally sec ins: th.e youn.r Amabel, srrnr/.ed not to insult her and her virtnovri ■4, v * * L'/< i%.v^ i.t t O n J L * Tie '■ v. *i"H to {i^dci'^tr'nd. :h'U either his beh-r.'•-• ;ir m^-t be corrected, r>r hi; '».b«i-!e c'^CTcd r and Arlette., sfrie'tdy Hi:;- e;'«:5red. more than half cured ofher chili- ith ration, and loth to cult a dwolliij;; w^-re Virtue* p^esidi-d, ta commit hcr^e'f siio.h'y
wholly to the discretion of one who was unable to govern even his own actions, in her distress, revealed every circumstance, except her name, to her young friend, with .leave to impart the. communication to her mother, whose experience -and ad¬ vice she found materially wanting to direct and extricate her from so embarrassing a situation. W : itb extreme surprise she learned that it had been long ago discovered she waa .supporting a fictitious character; but that Ihe widow had forborne to condemn her unheard, seeing the strict propriety of her conduct, and that Lord Lothian appeared actually to consider her in no otiier light than that of a page. Now, on being con- jsulred, the widow replied to Arlette with gentleness, yet in a tone of maternal ad¬ vice; and though she readily acquitted her even of. anv intentional deviation from fe- male honour, she made her completely ashamed of having so far neglected the iiituinve
special Providence, my dear child," said she, " must have watched over and pro¬ tected you in such perilous conjunctures as you have passed through, and to reside longer with Lord Lothian, now that his character is fullv developed to vou, would be to tempt that Providcnc-e, and even render yourself unworthy of its care/' " But what shall I do ?" said the weeping Arlette, encouraged by the mildness of this real friend. 4< It is true, if Lord Lothian, persevering in his present profligacy, obliges you to forbid him your house, I cannot endure the thoughts -of"leaving it, . and removing to some other, perhaps less decorous ; yet if I entirely quit his service, what will become of me in this foreijrir land, where I am a stranger, and destitute 0/ aevery resource V* The widow without -'hesi tat ion recom¬ mended her to 'return to her father; and' told her, that One? of her sons should atterrd .1. ..< ,.i to
. to restore her safely to hirn, if she would accept of his services; but even had Ar- lette been provided with sufficient resolu¬ tion for this measure, or been inclined to take ii, the extreme aversene:.:. she i'elt to have her name discic^ed would have de¬ terred her from all s-:ch thoughts. For herself, as has been seen, she had very Utile oride; but the idea of sullvin;-.r the honour of h.er faniin, brou-'ht wil'j it in- O si:]>portable mortification. Finding her unpersuadable on his head, her kind adxisor proposed another line, and recommended her to temporrx. "Since von have onlv Lord Lothian/' said she, " to look to for .support, you mmt, if possible, leave him ior the prc>- sent, without professing absolutely to quit his service. If you complained that the heat of this close city, .now, on the. af- proach of the wann season, aflec ted your health, do, you suppose he would refine you
you permission to retire into the coun
a*v '■
?>'
<c I have no re ::on to think he would," replied Arlctie; '• he has always behaved verv kiiKi'v to .ki- ; arivl with ali his faults, he is not iil-:.al-.;r..v.. But wliither couldi tjo} I have v.ot a Lieu!, out of vour fa- ni.'lv, in tiic wlude kingdom of Scotland." '*" Oh, mother:" interrupted Amabel, who felt wa: mlv iutertr.ted l>y the distress of Arlette, "v- h-tl a tlejira!>. ! <i p/rotcctiou would that of tiie woi ihv dame LL/zd.-e/ti be, wiso !od:!;e/i :'.t our house !a: t autumn with thy: iifflc bov v."ho to^-k the small- r.-.-.■>: ! And ■«*•; ..i x .e Kve:-; \\t the castle be- 1* nt.iu^ to Letd LoiiiianV, ncj>hew, l;c ce-;i 4 d rive Maurice- full authority to <ro thither to iier." " I allow von credit, Amabel, for rccol- lectin ,v that c-xcellciTt woman," returned the widow. f< She has the ohar i'o of Ladv Rothes's youngest son, a child about two . years old," pursued f.he, addrding Ai- Ivtie, i( and lives wi;a him at Rothes Castle, a few
a few*days journey northwards from hence. Some domestic business obliging her to come hither last vear, she would not lose sight of the infant entrusted to her care, and he unfortunately caught the small¬ pox, which delayed her return for some time, during which she lodged with me; and I never knew a woman of better prin¬ ciples, or stronger understanding. If you can obtain Lord Lothian's leave, on any pretence you think fit, to go to Rothes Cattle, my son David shall take care of you, and shew you the wav to it; and I will also give you a letter for dame Elizabeth, which, as she was kind enough to profess a good deal of friendship for me, will, I be¬ lieve, ensure you a favourable reception, provided I may recommend you to her care as a young woman." Arlette, delighted with this scheme, re¬ turned grateful thanks both to the sug- ffester ancl the promoter of it; and Lord Lothian, i$ho,with the levity natural to him, now
sow never thought af Maurice but when he was actually in sight, consented at th& first word to his removal to Rothes Castle, only calling him a puny little fellow for requiring country air. Furnishing herself, therefore, with some female apparel, which Lord Lothian's libe¬ rality enabled her fo purchase, Arlette wa3 soon prepared for her third journey ; and when her honest young guide was ready, and she set out with him, she could not help sa\ mg fo herself—"Well, I shall surely have seen enough of this world by- am! by. 1 have been af Paris, London, and Edinburgh, and am now going to the Korth Pole. Who wouid have thought of ail this when I roosted at Widdrington Tower?" She took a very affectionate leave of the- friendly Stuarts; and they sincerely re-' j;>icid vvhen, on-David's return, tliev learn ed she had arrived safely at Rothes Vim kv VOL. IV. V- and
and had been most kindly received there by Dame Elizabeth, Not long after her departure, the pro¬ ceedings of Lord Lothian became so ex¬ tremely flagrant, as to he no further sufler- able in anv house of honest repute; and were particulaily obnoxious in that of the widow Stuart, as her daughter Amabel stiil continued the object of his transient ad¬ miration. Furious was his wrath, on her insisting he should remove, and vehement¬ ly he at fust swore he should pay no atten- tion to the warning: but these ebullitions soon subsided ; and though he felt some regret at quitting the present idol of his profane worship, he reflected that he might find a pleasanter abode in any dwelling where the morals of the inhabitants were less strict; and in another fortnight, Ama¬ bel was as much forgotten as poor Clo¬ thilde, whose very existence, notwith¬ standing his promise so recently given to Lord Delancey, he now scarcely remem¬ bered
bered. He joined the gay and dissolute parties of the Prince of Scotland, and was anv thins: rather than a check on his ne- phew, the young Earl of Rothes. He loitered awav the summer in idle excur- sions into the country, with men as idle as himself; and lost, in the insidious ma- Ac of dissipation, not only the practice of arms, but even the noble ardour that becomes a warrior. He was Orlando in the. enchanted garden, and every bower presented him with an Alcena. The re¬ turn of winter found him weary of what is called pleasure, yet not satisfied; and he fancied that nothing but change of scene was necessary to convert his tedium into happiness. *'" Edinburgh is a very dull town," said he; '- 1 will go and try what sort of hunt¬ ing the country affords. It is very extra¬ ordinary that every place appears tedious, after I have been a little while in it—I wonder what it can.be owing to ! James/' e 2 he
fee added, to- his nephew* (C let its go %& Eothes Castle, and tr ike war upon th@ roebucks." •' Hot I trulyi" replied the young and hopeful Lord; u I am too well content with Edinburgh, to visit the Orcades, in- search of any better amusement than is to be found here. Rothes Castle! why I should as soon think of seeking pastime in Fingal's Cave. You may exist there a month without seeing any living creatures hut the eagles." " So much the better—-that will be va¬ riety ; and eagles are better company than tiresome men and women." The next morning Lord Lothian ordered his horses, and rode away to visit the eagles, Rothes Castle was a very strong and an¬ cient structure, at that time the boast of Scotland, for being, it was thought, utter¬ ly impregnable. Very different from Wid- drington
\?.st breadth of building to the eye, and covering a flat extent of ground, its bulk appeared scarcely proportionable to its height, which seemed to pierce the clouds as it stood frowning on the narrow summit of a lofty rock; up the craggy side of which only one winding path, almost im¬ possible to be discerned, from being half overgrown with briars, conducted the weary traveller or guesC The eaedes were, in- deed, screaming as thev sailed abo^e the aspiring turrets, and seemed, by their me¬ nacing tone, as if they were reproving Lord Lothian for disturbing their solemn repose. *' Well/* said he, as he gave his horse to &n attendant to lead up after him, " t lis is something new, at least. Scratching one's legs ro reach a nobleman's dwelling, a id the opportunity ot cultivating an ac* quaintance v>ith those crooked-bided gcn-»
try above, are luxuries not to be enjoyed everv day/ 3 After half an hour's tcdioin nsoer.t, he came witrrin sight of the great portal of the castlo; and at that instant the solemn procession ofa funeral was issuing from it with a corpse, which was going to bo de¬ posited in a small chapel that stood at the foot of the rock, almost concealed Ly thorns and brambles. * "This-is a lugubrious omen, indeed/' s.ud- Lord Lothian, as he made himself known to his nephew's domestics. <v ' "/ho:;i ?yc vou troittcc'to burv ?*' {i Bertha/' replied au aged man, * v old Bertha,, who has lived manv vcars in this castle; she liiiricd nw Ladv, vour sii ler, [ind came, from Ln^Iand with iier, wiitu she married my laic Lord. IJertha luust have been threescc^rc and fou^.-en.'"' " It was very wi&cly done vi her to die r then." 1 * «Ok
choice ; she came by her death in a very terrible way. I will tell vou the whole story. Four nights ago it-had rained, and then it had frozen------" " Prithee, old fellow, tell not thv dis- ^ r* n»al tales to me, but shew me where there is a good fire, and send me some supper ouicklv. Never attemnt a storv to a hun- gry man, unless thou art sure of being paid for it, especially concerning women of fourscore." "Oh, these voun<* one r ;! the«e vovnnr ones!" exclaimed the white-headed do¬ mestic, as he conducted Lord Lothian into the hall of the castle, " thev be so impa¬ tient, nothing czn he dorr? qui ;k enr* r 'gh for then. But T .\*haf, I wart-'int. vou have Lad a rou;>;h?sh ride, s.nd should have some¬ thing to eat after it; we will see, we vill see what we can ^ct for vou. Ir h a nitv t rt % ' Dame Klizubeth U -one down, with the funeral." " This is comfortable enough," said & £ Lord
Lord Lothian, as he sat over a chearful wood jbiaze, eating some game they had roasted for him ; " but it is very lonely. Have you jnobody in this castle, good father Abra¬ ham, that one could talk to for half an hour or so ?" ,. " God have mercv. vour Honour! there is your nephew, little Lord Hengist, if he was not a-bed, would talk fast enough to you ; his tongue is wagging from morn¬ ing to night." " Ileng-ist here ! I have never seen the rogue since he could crawl; net er mind h's being in bed, go and fetch him ; his compa jy will be better than none." The old man remonstrated—dame Ll'<- 2iLelh world he angry ; bu! Lord Lotlv i in/uted on being obeyed, and the bo\ w ii biought do*n, not in ill humour, as v.ot.il h:up be.-n the case with many children, but,-on the contrary, delighted at the pros¬ pect o^ eating a second supper with a fine *ian, who, he was told, was his uncle. He did
did iustice fo the character old Murray : had given of him as an orator, fpr his prate was diverting enough to Lord Lothian, and his spirits much too high to be kept within anv hot nds. He climbed upon all the furniture, laughing and shouting till ha was almost in convulsions, and then ran away with his uncle's vvhip and gloves, through doors and down passages, where he w$s soon out of si^ht. Presently, however, he rame scouring hack w»th a very busy, frightened face, roaring out—" Oh, uncle, come here—• make haste—here is something the matter very terrible—.come directly I" The child s .eyes stared like moons. Lord i J Lothian, taking up a li-^ht, fol.owed him to the extremity .of a long pa^i^e, that sloped, with a rapid des ent ; and towards .the end \A if, he heard the loud noise whicli had Iri.jhtcned the little bov. It was that of a dog, whining, barking, and * ■ r 5 fmioutdy
= fuVi : oiwlv scratching nt intervals, when ani- m ted by the sound of feet, on the inside cf a strong oaken door, thickly studded iwith broad-headed iron nails, and fastened with a pa->lock. Prompted part'*' by the 'Curiosity of idleness, and partly-»#y huma¬ nity towards" an animal that migfht be suf- fering. Lord lothian endeavoured to open the padlock ; but there was no key, and rather than wait for if,, he seized an iroti bar that happened to rest again't the wall, and wrenched the staple out of its receiver. Opening then the door, a miserable <\og s aj'p'irentlv almost starved, fell at his feet, a> if exhausted by its 'late efforts; and ttei/oint* forward, Lord Lothian found him- self in a small neat room, with a bed in ere corner, on which a person laid stretch¬ ed, whom at tint he believed to be a corpse. Parsing, however, to listen, he heard breath laboriously drawn, and ap¬ proached the bedside, where he beheld a piteous sucetacle. A tall,
either by sickness or famine to the bone, presented the image of death, though it still seemed to be just alive. Its eves were closed ; but Lord Lothian stooped down to examine the other fea¬ tures ; he ca t the light of his torch upon the wretched face, and started back in an agonv of horror, when he beheld the strangely altered, vet still lovely counte- nance of Manriaua.
rP *■» •"*
% 6 Ci!
4 iA J*
» ■*!■ < yMpM^^ n p iw j u Th w ur^frnT- T --------- '—'i' r y—r t
CHAP. IV. Chtarfuhicsz lr\ Captivity, At the glare of the torch, Margiana opened her eyes, but immediately closed them again, either from suffering by the light, or from insensibility, without any other movement. Lord Lothian, distracted by contending: emotions, now cursed the an- <y* * thors of her miser\\ and now asked what he could do for her relief, without having presence of mind sufficient for taAing any mea aires towards it. At length, recollec¬ ting that without immediate assistance she would probably not survive many mi- nutes,
bis sight, and supposing that the person who had the charge of his nephew mmt be # woman superior to the common servants of the castle, he bade the little boy, wha stood trembling beside him, frightened at the dismal object he sa^, run quickly and fetch Dame Elizabeth. He then, rais¬ ing Margiana's cold and wasted hand, re- juiced to find more pulse than he expect¬ ed, and again ihe opened her eyes at his action, and her lips moved, but they pro¬ nounced no articulate sound* In a few minutes Hengist returned, hold- in^ the hand of a woman of the most en- paging appearance, though she was n& longer young. She had been astonished by the child's story ; and now, .on Lor*] Lothian's asking the .meaning of what he beheld, solemnly assured him she had ner vtr before been in thaf room, and had al¬ ways biipposed it wan .used,as a cellar. " Bul
" But this unhappy lady/' said she, lay- ine her hand on Margiana's heart, "must have help without delay ; she appears to have been starved for want of food. I wiil go and prepare a cordial, and return this instant." + Fhe hastened away with all the alacrity of youth, and Lord Lotrran hnd very soon ihe satisfaction of seeing her come back with the proper restoratives, which, bav¬ ins! raised'Margiana, who had all her clothes on, she administered, while Lord Lothian supported her to sit up. Tlie charming sufferer, though unequal to any strong ex¬ ertion, was, however, able fo meet their endeavours, and ouened her lips to receive the offered food, though she had no sooner, swallowed it than her head., from weakness, sunk on Dame Elizabeth's shoulder, and she appeared for some moments to be ac¬ tually dead. " We shall lose her \ we shall lose her yet!"
tic. " No, my Lord, I am in hopes not; but she will require great care and atten- tion. A little more of the cordial was now given, and presently after some spoonfuls of strong broth, which seemed more than the other to revive the patient. " Re under no uneasiness, my Lord," said Dame Elizabeth, t{ I can almo-t dare to answer for her recovery now, since I believe she has suffered wholly f om ina- nition. But sitting up thus with her clothes on, is a fatigue *n her weak state. I am persuaded you will be considerate enough to retire; and if vou could refrain from seeint? her strain till to-morrow, it would be of material advantage to her, because after she has received a little more sup¬ port, ilccp will be her best friend," Dame
Strongly interested for her patient, that she doubted his acquiescence; but he readily promised any thing and every fhin<r fche re¬ quired for her benefit: and Margiana, af¬ ter being put to bed, and properly treated -for a few hours, was aide to look in the face of her benefactress, and reward her for what she had done by a grateful smile. Sleep then, as Dame Elizabeth had expect¬ ed,'brought its salutary aid to restore ex- •'hausted nature; and this excellent nurse sat bv the bedside till the bncak of day, when Lord Lothian's voice was heard gent¬ ly calling her from the passage. She went ,to him without awaking .her charge, and entreating she might not be disturbed, promised to let him know as soon as she awoke. Satisfied with this, and with as¬ surances she was doing well, he consented to be patient, and even, ?.t;her earnest re¬ quest, submitted.not to see .Margiana till thejalternoonj ujilessahe a$4ed for nim. In
In the meantime, the assistance, though late, that had been afforded, began to shew itself in the most favourable effects. After sleeping several hours, Margiana was able to spenk, and looking kindly nt Dame EH* 2abcth, the first words she uttered were— "God bless you!" which at intervals she often repeated. The clog that had shared her •sufTerinsis had partaken also of the seasonable relief administered to her, and at the sound of her voice raised himself from under the bed, and laying his fore ieet Lpon it, looked sagaciously in her face. "Poor fellow!" said Margiana, "thou ha t paid dear for thine attachment." He whined with joy at her notice, but Dame Elh&al eth would not suffer her to exhaust her biowly returning strong* h by talking, " To-morrow/*'
ftf To-morrow > deaf lady/' said she, " wc vill converse as much as you please, but do not exert vourself to-day/' "Onlv Ud\ mc, mv cood friend, shall I not he confined, and left to starve again ? 1 know I am in the nowrr of Lady Rothes. and the same reason may exist that in flu* enced he? formeilv." te De assured vou have nothing to fear. Lord Lothian is in fhe cnstle, and, I feel certain, will uot suffer you to be wron^- ed. I know nothing of the motives that can have induced Ln>*y Rothes to orartise such cruel inhumanity—indeed, I know not even who you arc , ?:ur Lord Lothian appears devoted to your service, and none here will dare to disobey hirn. I believe he will not be satisfied without seeing vou in the c*€ut\ i .e of ihis d-.y ; shall you object to ndmitumc him for a few minutes ?'* u Not if 1 have strength to rise/' replied Margiana; t( yet I had rather he would defer his visit till to-morrow—I shal' then have much to a^k concerning this blessed relief,
relief, and how mv wretched situation was discovered ; besides many dear though dis¬ tant concerns, which my head would be yet too confused io comprehend. But for the present, I confers fo^d and rest are wnat I most wish for/' Of the former, her careful mn'se would allow her only very slender proportions a: once. " I must not repine," said she, attempt¬ ing to smile; "on the contrary, I am thankful for what you give me, but indeed you miffht a;rant a little more than this." She was promised more the day follow¬ ing ; and by these prudent measures was so much recruited towards the evening, as to rise and sit up above two hours, during a few minutes of which Lord Lothian was admitted to enquire after her, with little Hengist, who had begged to see the p.>or dear lady again, as he called her. Marjriana
Margiana received her former lover wifh the frankness and friendship of a sister, for she had been given to understand by Bame E izabeth, that'he was the prinnpal instrument of her release. In a ranting, which he wns at'much pains to controul, and wh ch even forced tears of joy from his eyes, he knelt and kissed her hands, Vowing he would never leave her fill he saw her in some place she herself deemed secure; and would have entered on the de¬ tail of his search through France, but a sudden action she seemed unable to re¬ press prevented htm. Hengist held a piece of coarse bread, which he was just pre* pnriug to eat, when it caught her eye. 1..voluntarily stretching forth her hand to Sf'ze it—" Oh, my dear boy!" cried she, Tjur immediatelv, as if ashamed of her at- tempt, drew back. tc Do you want it ?" said the good-na¬ tured child, holdi ig it out. " Eat it, then; Hengist can get more.*' Marxians
tMargiana took it and kissed him. 94 Dear, dear creature !" exclaimed Lord Lothian, " have you been reduced to want a morsel of bread?" There was something in the tone of his voice as he said this, that a (Tec ted the little boy. He climbed upon Margiana's knees, and put his c^rnis round her neck; but his uncle would not suffer him long to fatigue her. Recollecting, however, the name he had pronounced, she asked if he was Lady Kcthes's son ?—and her ancient aflection for him redoubled oa being informed he was. She would have kept him with her, and even have asked some questions of Lord Lo'Lian, but Dame Elizabeth inter¬ posing, he was persuaded to retire for the present, on Margiana readily agreeing to indulge him with a longer conversation the ensuing morning; indeed, she tvas ex¬ tremely anxious to learn what had past ira her own family since the commencement of *^
of her tedious captivity, which she had en¬ dured a year and a half, and with impa¬ tience waited for the time when she booed i to receive some intelligence respecting her ■— A v. f sister and her estimable friends, Lortl De¬ lancey and Wallop. By very cautious degrees, her allowance of food beinff encreased, she almost hourly -recovered her strengtii. Her new friend. as attentive as judicious, ne\er left her 1 ut to see the little boy put to Led, entru.-.u. y\ his uncle with him in the day-time: end after a second night of quiet upose, Mu;- giana declared she felt compaiativcly iii health, " I hope you do," said the worthy Eh¬ zabeth ; " nevertheless you must not make very free with yourself as yet; your wast¬ ed, pallid cheeks, you cannot see, but look at these thin white hands, through which the daylight almost shines, and reflect how weak in fact must be one so reduced. Those
Those explanations, which it is so natural vou should wish to exchange with Lord Lothian, who seems to have been a former intima*e acquaintance, will be sufficient exertion for to-day/' * ** I ha\e known Lord Lothian from a bov, mv ffood mother," said Margiana, co- ^ J j <y " lourinir at the idea thnt she mi/nt think he bad spoken too fami'iar'v to her " Pardon me, my dear Ladv ; I meant not to penetrate into any thing vou choose to conceal, and stiU L^s to sir-nose wron^ where I J^ce none; I shall m.f evt \\ so Tar forget my station as to ask sow a smile question/' " Vou shall not need," answered »\Tar- 2»ana, kindly taking ht r hand. '* Under Pro\idence you ha\e sav*-d me from a mi¬ serable death, and I do not intend to hnve any reserves with you, Tiiere are \erv t very few occurrences in my life I need to conceal from any one; and for the short narrative I have to make to Lord Lothian, I shall *
Ishall not only desire, but enjoin you ta be present when he hears it." Elizabeth made suitable acknmvledg-* inents for this condescension, and scrupled mot to own she felt anxious to learn the name of the lady, who, by so singular a chance, had lived nineteen months under the same roof with herself without her knowledge. "There is something mysterious in my story, even to mwself," said Marsdana, *' which by your assistance I shall hope to unravel. But I will rise, that I may be ready to see Lord Lothian when lie conies." As she dressed without fatigue, she begged for the indulgence of receding her expected visitor in another room ; and change of air and scene afforded inex¬ pressible relief to one who had been so long
long confined to the same apartment, into which the light was only feebly admitted through one small iron-grated opening very near the top of it. The si<jht of the fields and the skv, as she xazed at them for a moment through. the wide door of ihe old hall, filled her with overwhelming sensations; and she knelt down ferventlv to return thanks for the restored blessings ofliberty and life. No sooner had Dame Elizabeth helped her to rise, which she was too weak to do without assistance, than Lord Lothian ap¬ peared more temperate in his expressions of pleasure than he had been the night be¬ fore, yet still unable to detach his eyes a inoment from her interesting countenance. He professed his fears lest the recital of what she had undergone might prove too fatiguing, and offered to restrain his anx¬ iety till some future time: but she told him she had in truth very little to say, as vol. iv, p her
her life had been nearlv a blank ever since she left England. Then, suppressing only all mention of Kendrew, which was, in¬ deed, immaterial to her story, she spoke ofthe festivity at Widdrington Tower, and the dancing in the evening, which having verv much heated the hall, she said she walked out for the refreshment of the air, and recounted her seizure in the grove that surrounded the burying place. '* It was in vain," continued she, " I en¬ deavoured to make myself heard. The man who held me, by cramming a part of the cloak he had wrapped me in over my mouth, rendered it impossible for me to utter anv sound but a low moaning, that at that late hour, and in the desolate coun¬ try across which they hurried me, for we past neither tree nor house that I could discern, was very unlikely to be distin¬ guished, though, indeed, so thick a sea fvg obscured the atmosphere that we might easily have passed many objects without my
my observing them. Thus we proceeded for a considerable time, advancing at such a swift rate, that even when the man, on coming to any difficult ground, for as to road 1 believe we followed none, was con¬ strained to loosen his hold of me, the bet¬ ter to guide his horse, I was under the in¬ stinctive necessity of holding by him, for I thought little short of death must be the consequence of a fall under such circum¬ stances. At length, both the horses being- blown, our pace was slackened, and for what a'-peared to be about two hours, wc went on at a fast trot, till we stopped at the door of a cottage, which, having lift¬ ed mc to the ground, they obliged me to enter. Here I hoped Ishould be able to make friends, who might enable me suc¬ cessfully to resist their further attempts; but, alas! they had too cautiously taken their-measures; for during the hour we staid there, not a living soul appeared but a deaf old woman and her grandson, a young boy, who assisted one, of my con- «■ •■ f 2 ductors
field me on his horse hardly for an instant
r
"" He being soon joined by the other, they took some refreshment, and pressed me to partake of it also, which in a slight degree I did, not knowing what fatigue I might liave to encounter, and believing that ari^ Appearance of sullenness migfrt induce #jem to treat me with severity. Chear- ful I could not pretend to appear, but re¬ signed I really was; yet neither my com¬ posure nor my entreaties could induce them to tell me by whom they were em¬ ployed, or whither they were carrying
" After they had 'sufficiently rested them¬ selves, they ordered the young lad to bring out the fresh horses; and when they bade me come to the door, I was surprised to find there three, on one of which was a woman's saddle. On this they mounted tne; but though I was permitted to hold the bridle, there was a long leading reiia attached
attached to the bit, that one of my compa¬ nions constantly held. But for this I cer¬ tainly should have attempted to escape, had we. gone through any town or village; however, those they contrived to avoid ; anc 1 by day-break I discovered we had as¬ cended one of the bleakest mountains I ever beheld. The rising ofthe sun enabled me to judge I was travelling northward^ ^nd also to view the faces of the two men ; but they were both utterly unknown to me; one of them spoke pure English-— the other very broad Scotch. " I was lost in conjee tures, yet could not believe them agents of my uncle, whom no motive, I thought, could pos¬ sibly influence to remove me from Wtd~ dnngton Tower, just before the time when I had reason to think he was persuaded I should yield to marry his son. " Our second halting-place was a shep~ herd's hut on a wild dreary moor, where the accent of an old man, the only person we saw, proclaimed him a native of Scot- f 3 land.
land. I had no doubt we had now ad-^ vanced some way into that country, Vknd, then for the first time admitted the idea that I might possibly have been seized by the order of Lady Hothes; though why, was a question I was unequal to answer, even to myself. Fatigue led me to throw myself on a straw bed that filled a corner of this hovel, the men choosing to take their breakfast on the ling before the door. The stillness of the place, added to my weariness, threw me into a profound sleep, from which I was awakened, much refresh¬ ed, by a call to rise and proceed. Our next stage was a very long one; it lasted till the heat of the noonday snh rendered riding intolerable—ancl the very horses were too faint to advance beyond the speed of a gentle trot. I never in my life beheld a more desolate country than every where met'the eye. Nothing was to be seen but black moorlands, and hills rising upon hills, sending forth no sound bnt the bleating of a few wretched-looking sheep,
sfieep, and now and then the lowing of a scanty herd of black cattle, guarded by a half-naked boy, basking on the long heath. Again I pressed my guides to tell me whir ther they were travelling; but they si¬ lenced me civilly enough, by saying I should be informed where I was, and of the cause of my detention, when I reached the end of my journey. " Our third resting-place was a cabin of somewhat better appearance than the last, inhabited by an herdsman and his wife; and I could not but admire the caution with which my companions had chosen their situations for reoose, when I observ- A * ed the man was lame, and quite as unable to assist me, had he been so disposed, as the poor old creature we had just quitted,, " Here, however, in an adjoining mud stable, was a relay of horses; and upon the-e we resumed our Journey about five o'clock in the afternoon, prosecuting it till an hour after sun-set, when we a^ain halted at a well-built stone house, but in- f 4 habited, t
habited, as far as I could observe, only by three women, who spoke in a language utterly unknown tc me, and which I took \ ' to be Erse. " The two men would have gone fur¬ ther that night, but they saw me so verv tnuch tired, and I so earnestly begged* them to let me rest till morning, that, af¬ ter consulting together a few minutes, they consented to oblige me. e< At four o'clock the next day we were again on horseback;—but why should I weary you and myself with a tedious re¬ petition of siuilar circumstances? In the same manner I have described, we journey¬ ed on, avoiding all towns and villages, tra- versing the wildest mountains, and fre¬ quently fording brooks, till the third night, when they told me I should now be allow¬ ed longer periods for repose, as we ap¬ proached the place of our destination. However,, our travelling ceased not until the close of two days, when I was asto¬ nished by the sight of this stupendous buildinsr,
a
«, building, from the foot of the rock, and by the information that here I was to be con¬ fined. "Dismounting, and obliging me to do the same, one bf the men took charge of the horses, while the other led me up the narrow path to the gate of the castle, where, on his. giving a shrill whistle, an aged woman appeared, whom he hailed by the name of Bertha, informn ;* her he had at length caught the bird they had so long held the cage ready for. / Ave,' said she, * so I heard frcm old Kinloch, who arrived here last night, after posting all your relays; I expected you before now/ < Why methinks/ replied the man, * we have done pretty well, considering this is but a slight young thing for travelling; and I must do her the iustice to sa\ she has behaved verv handsomely, and given us no more trouble than she could help/ ' That will be all the better for herself/ returned the woman. * Kinloch aud X f 5 have
have orders to treat her gently or not, just [ according as she takes on. But come in, Lady, pursued she ; you will not be sorry for a rest* and rest enough, you shall have^ I warrant you/ * e Wondering how all this vas to end, I followed her, and the man followed me, into that dungeon-reorn, which I have just now quitted for the first time since the well-remembered day I am speaking of * Now, Lady Margiana,' said my travel¬ ling companion, f please to give me your scarf, which I have need of for a particu¬ lar purpose, and I will fulfil my promise, by informing you that you are very deep in Scotland, at Rothes Castle, whither the lady of that name charged me to say she has been at the trouble of sending you, choosing rather that you shoukl be be¬ holden to her than to her brother, for avoiding the marriage intended to be forced upon you. She further bade me tell you, she laments, as much as you can do, that the encouragement you have given Lord Lothian
Lothian to hover in disguise abotit "Wid¬ drington Tower, must needs be brought to this sorry conclusion; but she hopes, as you are of a calm and philosophic turn, you will forgive her/ " With these words, he took my scarf from me, net offering any explanation why he did so; nor listening to my pro¬ testations of being innocent of the charge brought a/rainst me; and making me a re¬ spectful obeisance, with wishes for my health, Le retired. From that hour, I have never beheld him, though, Heaven knows, his image has been often enough present to my imagination. <j Cy? "The old woman then, in a very,civil manner, ?.sked me what I chose after mv ¥ journey, and on my requesting a little milk, readily went to fetch it, taking care, however, to secure the door. " Oh her return, she told me f might de¬ pend on every attention iu her power to shew me, and, liberty alone excepted, any indulgence I might wish for; but, to thk f G room/
room/ said she, € and this small court be¬ yond/ opening ** door into a little open space, enclosed by four high walls, 'you must submit to be confined. You will perceive that my Lady, who is very good, though she does not love to be thwarted, has been particular in her directions for promoting your comfort, since every thing you will Iind here hasbeen placed by her order— even the changes of apparel in yonder chest— the piece of working tapestry, in case yoo choosetoamuse yourself in that way,andthe books and writing materials on the table/ " Asking me then if I had any further commands for that night, and receiving my negative, she withdrew; and soon after, recommending myself to Heaven, I endea¬ voured to forget in sleep, which, indeed, proved a very ready visitor, my forlorn situation, and the still more distressing thoughts of the friends 1 had left behind j me, and my dear sister's anxiety. " The next morning Bertha brought my breakfast at an earlv hour; but having, as tj *■— she
she said, told me every thing it was netes-^ sary I should know the night before, she declined entering into any conversation, and retired almost immediately. " At noon, some plain wholesome food, sufficient for supper, as well as dinner, was set before me by an elderly man, whom I have since understood to be Kinloch ; af¬ ter which, I was no more disturbed till the next day, and that was begun, continued, and ended, as the former had been. All which has followed would be a void in narrative, though but for the tormenting idea of Genevieve's uneasiness, and the total deprivation of liberty, I could .have made myself contented enough. Needle¬ work was mv most constant source of amusement, and I was supplied with it as often as I chose by Bertha, whose civility was so great, as more than once to induce me to tempt her from her fidelity to Lady Rothes. But on this head I always found her inflexible. She frankly told me she was to be rewarded with an angel for every week
week that my confinement lasted; and when I promised her double the sum for her life, if she would release me, I disco¬ vered her to be, moreover, inviolably at¬ tached to her ladv, in whose favour she was most strongly prejudiced, and whose nurse, it seems, she had been. " On no other subject, however, did she give me the least cause to complain of her. On the contrary^ a few months ago, for I kept a calendar of my solitary life, when I was threatened with a feverish complaint, and suffered from a violent cough, she nursed me almost as kindly as vou your- self, my good Elizabeth, could have done ; and old Kinloch, who seems somewhat of a family surgeon, took the trouble of bleed¬ ing me. Another instance of Bertha's good nature, was her frequently bringing me the poor dog yen found wiih rne. We had taken an aflection for one anotiier, u r d she said he was a relief to mv solitude that she had not the heart fo deny me. A lamp too I was chearfully allowed during: the dark
dark evenings, and always a good fire in cold weather. I had suflicient change of occupations in reading, writing, working, and taking exercise in my little court¬ yard ; besides which, at my own request Bertha suflered me to keep my room clean and in order myself. This was a liuhr, dailv task, which contributed more, I be- lieve, than any other cause to maintain me in chearfulness and health: and thus, not very unhappily, 1 lived till about a week ago, when, not having for several days seen Kinloch, who, till then, had generally brought me my noon allowance, I asked, Bertha after hini> and was told he was gone upon an expedition that would probably detain him near a month from home. The dog, as he usually did when not driven back, had followed her into my room, and at mv request she left him with me all that day and night. The next morning, I saw nothing of her at the hour she had never. before failed to bnn«r me my breakfast, and 1 wondered at the omission in one so punctual.
punctual. Liberty, however, as I called the dog, was very good company, and I waited with patience, comforting myself that we should make a social meal together at dinner-time, when such long fasting would impart a double relish to our fare. But, al ^s 1 the hour of dinner also went bv without a sight of Bertha, and mv hun- grv companion laid watching the door, wifh a keenness of appetite in his looks tha! made me, I think, feel my own sufferings the more strongly. I varied my few amuse¬ ments to beguile the time, and watched the declining sun, feeling assured that be¬ fore night I should be visited ; vet, as if instinctively, husbanded the little fuel I still had left, fearful of being wholly with¬ out a lire in that damp region. ** Not to distress your feelings, my Lord, I will pass rapidly over fhis part of my Story. 1 " Night came, and the next morning dawned, and the nest noon beamed, with¬ out bringing me any relief, It is unplea¬ sant
sant to me, now, to recal .ny sensations, but I began to feel sick and light-headed, then faint, then feverish and restless. Poor Liberty's piteous gaze, as he laid his head on mv knee, and whined for food I had not to bestow, almost melted me into tears. Towards the second n^ght I became drowsy, and slept a good deal; but my slumbers were uneasv, and rny dreams frightful. Sometimes I fancied myself de¬ vouring raw flesh—at others, that heavy irons crushed by body to atoms, and I waked in the horrors of slight delirium. Then, methought the dog was tearing me to pieces to satisfy his hunger, and next, I was making a dreadful meal on him. These shocking fancies bewildered mv brain all night; and when the third day broke, and stiil no Bertha came, I feared my senses would fail me. I grew giddy, suf¬ fered much pain at intervals, and found my strength failing every hour. Some time about the middle of that night, I became insensible; all I recollect is, that Liberty cowled
" 1 should not be at all able to guess how long I laid thus, but for referring to my calendar, and comparing it nith Dame Elizabeth's date of the time when, she in¬ forms me, the noise made by the dog alarmed that dew little ^boy. After the third day, whicli, if ni* error has crept into my journal, was.a Tuesday, I was un¬ able to continue it, for, my fire having gone out, the effects of cold probably hastened those of hunger. It was on n Friday, it seems, you so providentally res¬ cued me, when perhaps I might still longer have lingered alive, though at intervals in¬ sensible, and apparently always so/* Lord Lothian, who, during Margiana's tale, had shewn the most violent alternate symptoms of rage and compassion, would now have broken ©ut into the wildest Imprecations against his sister, had he not been prevented, and entreated to forbear. « But/*
chanced such inhuman neglect of this love¬ ly creature ? What demon suggested the idea of starving her to death I" " They who could must have been de¬ mons indeed/* replied the worthy woman. "But all the evil arose from the single cir¬ cumstance of Lady Margiana's detention in the castle being known only to Kinloch* who is abt.cnt, and to Bertha, who is her¬ self dead. Last Sunday morning, the time when she first omitted her attendance, go¬ ing out very early, for some purpose, to the edge of the rock on the south side of the castle, where the ice was extremely slippery, from its havmg thawed much, and even rained, the day before, and fro¬ zen again at night, we suppose that her feet gave wav, and that she fell over the precipice. Old Murray heard her scream as well as I, and we hastened to h^r, find¬ ing her, indeed, a wretched spectacle The briars that grow wherever there **: a thin scattering of soil, had stopped her descent, but
jecting crag ofthe rock, against which she had so violently struck -h^r. head, that she r4 laid -quite senseless. Nor was this all the injury she had received, for one leg was broken> and her right,haml, that she had probably most exerted, to save herself, was . dislocated. She lingered^ in this deplora.- ble situation till Wednes#^, when she ex¬ pired, without having; e&er been able to Utter a word, though 'sometimes she mani- fested the strongest desire to speak. No doubt, amidst her own sufferings, her help¬ less captive must often have recurred to her thoughts. Blest be the protecting hand of Heaven, my Lord, that brought you to Rothes Castle the very day of her ■ -J M funeral ? At any other time I should have been with the child, and he might not have led you to make the important dis¬ covery you did." Lord Lothian's fury was now directed against the absent Kinloch, and he deviled 5 sucli
«uch strange punishments for him against his return, that Margiana inwardly resolved io get him away from the castle before he r £ame. To divert his thoughts for the present, she begged he would give her some intelli¬ gence of her sister and her other friends. Dame Elizabeth^ upon this, would have re¬ tired, but Margiana insisted on her staying, assuring her Lord Lothian could not in¬ form her of any thing she should wish to conceal from her. In her presence, there¬ fore, which was no restraint on^ the usual vivacity of his expressions, he related the visit he had received from her page, young Maurice, vvhen he himself was disguised as Henry Lonesborough, at Warkworth ; and then proceeded to the account of their journey together to France; not even omit¬ ting the stratagem they made use of to en¬ ter the convention believing her placed there by Lord Widdrington ; or suppress¬ ing any circumstance, except what imme¬ diately
^lately related to the young pensioner, Clothilde. He said enough, however, of the deception put upon the nuns, to shock the ears of his virtuous hearers ; which perceiving, he hastened to speak of his disappointment at the sight of Clara Cas« ties, and the misery he endured at the information she imparted of Margiana*s death, confirmed, in her opinion, by the bloody scarf, which it was now easy to perceive Lady Rothes's motive for securing —of Lady Genevieve's being in Paris with Lord Delancey, who was making a strict search for her, notwithstanding he had re¬ ceived the same fatal news—of Maurice's quitting the monastery, and returning to England with her sister, who became the guest of Lord and Lady Percy, while Mau- ricei choosing to exchange her service for his own, had followed him to Edinburgh; u from w he nee," said he, addressing Dame Elizabeth, :£ I understand he came here, not having his health in the town/' €e He did conie here, my Lord/' an¬ swered
*!ARGiANA,* swered she, "early last summer; but seem¬ ing much grieved for the loss of his lady* and not settling to this place, he stayed hut a verv short time, and went awav wifh the intent of going back to Widdrington Tower/' " He is the most affectionate, interest¬ ing youth I ever knew," said Lord Lo¬ thian. "His grateful remembrance of his be¬ loved mistress, his ingenuity and spright¬ liness, attached me to him most power¬ fully." . " Indeed !" cried Margiana, with a look of surprise. " I did not expect Maurice would ever have earned such high praise. He lived with me, it is true, several years, but I always looked upon him as the dullest lad I ever had in my service/* Dame Elizabeth smiled ; but her smile was not noticed, and Margiana desired Lord Lothian to proceed. iC 1 have nothing further to say," pur¬ sued
sued he, *' that is material. At Edinburgh 1 had the good fortune to accomplish the purpose that carried me thither, and after- Wards prolonged my stay, owing to having formed intimacies with several young men about the court. At length, growing weary of the town, and meeting with nothing that could interest me, since I believed you no longer in existence, I turned my thoughts towards hunting, and the amusements of the country ; and my nephew Rothes gave me such an account of this place, as raised my curiosity to come here. Thank Hea¬ ven, nothing intervened to repress it! Di\ine iustice seems to have ordained that he, for whose sake, on whose account, you was deprived of your liberty, should be made the agent to terminate your durance; and I am sure, neither the joy of Lady Ge¬ nevieve, nor of anv other friend yeu have, can exceed mine, at seeing you restored to the world, in some degree, by my means/* ** Excuse me, my Lord," said Dame Eli¬ zabeth,
^fabeth, when he ceased, <e but Lady Mar*. giana is looking extremely pale; she* has surlered fatigue enough at once, and ought now to have some repose." " Indeed, my good mother/' observed Margiana, with a smile, "if it was the same to yon, I had rather have something fo eat. I begin to fear my appetite will never think itself repaid for the late de¬ privations it has endured. But I will now return home," continued she, rising, "and bid you farewell, my Lord, for the pre¬ sent." tc Had you not better make choice of Some other room ?" said he. " The si<rht of that accursed place must give you the most mournful sensations." te No, indeed ! On the contrary, from being habituated to it, I should not like any other so well/* Lord Lothian offered her his arm, and attending her home, as she called it, took a more accurate survey than he had done v ol. iv. c before
"before of the plaGe she had inhabited **» Jong. Many instances of her ingenuity and patience in amusing herself were scat- tered in sight; but nothing so much en¬ gaged his attention as some verses he saw in her hand-writing on the wall. Observ- ing him prepared to.read them, she begged he would desist; " for," said she, €t to con¬ fess the truth, your sister Is not very re¬ spectfully mentioned in them." <( My sister !" he exclaimed, indignant¬ ly ; " I renounce her for her vile and sor- did interesfedncss. If ever these lines meet her eye, may she tremble with deeper ter¬ ror than shook the nerves of Belshazzar himself!" Margiana said no more, and he tenderly took his leave of her, after reading the verses, which, being modernized, were as follows:—
Tim
triowI ye blustering winds around me* Whistle thro* my iron grate, Storms nor grief shall e'er confound roe* Calmly I resign to fate* Whether breaking or declining, 4 Still the same is day to me, O'er my head bright sunbeam? shining Gild the prospects ofthe free ; Whilst within this gloomy prison* Emblem of eternal night, Never morn hRrh yet arisen, Never streamM his saffron light! Often, from the neighboring branches^ I discern the ihru&li's note; Near, more near the sound advances, Trembles now the warbler's throat* Ah ! 'tis gone I— a deadly stillness Checks at ence my list ning car 3 0*cr my limbs pervading chillness Proves me stiU a Captive here.
«»s
Vet '
Never shall Despair find test ; Kobler views my spirit firings Fofia a sunshine in my br£ast# Once the child of Fortune's bounties, Strange to me ^?ere want and woe j To a fair, abandoned Countess^ Row a victim i must bow« Welcome still what he advise^ Great Disposer of us all ! Up to Him my spirit rises, Never shall that spirit fell.
; V.
All Ahmad*. The tmremitting care of Dame Elizabeth, and Margiana's own excellent constitu¬ tion, now in a very short time removed alt the effects of her late sufferings, and she began to deliberate with herself to- what place it would be most advisable for ier to remove; since staying at Rothes Castle longer than was absolutely necessary to¬ wards her regaining strength enough to undertake a journey, was entirely out of the question, even had she not feared the consequences of Riufoch/s return whilst* g 3 Lord/
Lord Lothian remained there. But her apprehensions on that score precipitated her movements. At the expiration of ten days* Kinloch being now expected hpme within the week, and feeling herself equal to bear any mo¬ derate fatigue, she declared to Lord Lo¬ thian hef resolution of applying for a shel¬ ter to those who had so kindly afforded an asylum to her sister. He had acquainted her, that whilst he was at Edinburgh, it was reported Lord and Lady Percy were at Alnwick Castle with Lady Genevieve; and ■her impatience to see .that beloved sister again, made her not hesitate to venture herself so near her uncle, from whom she knew Henry Percv would protect her, in case any future attempts to infringe upon her liberty should render his aid neces¬ sary. She was also excited to this measure by the consideration of Kendrew, who pos¬ sibly
MABGIANA. MbTy might still be a concealed resident in Northumberland ; and, for the inform* ation he had promised her, and which she believed related to her father, her filial heart still panted with unabated fervour. Lord'Lothian, with passionate protesta¬ tions of undiminished love, renewed all the shining offers he had ever made her,. of laying his whole fortune at her feet, if slie would reward what he thought proper. to stile his undeviating constancy with hei* hand, and urged t her to take what would be, of all others, the most appropriate re* venge of Lady Rothes. But to this plea she only replied with a-smile, that she re¬ ferred her to the hand-wri ting on the-wall: and when he found that his vows and en¬ treaties made no impression, though she promised him her lasting friendship as ther least return he merited for the preserva¬ tion of her life, he desisted, onlv reso- kitcly declaring, that, wherever she went; g 4 . be
he would aecornpany her, till he saw liar safe with hex friends. She very much disliked the idea of tra¬ velling with only him and his own domes¬ tics ; and one day, consulting with Dame Elizabeth how that might be avoided, said —"she wished it were pebble to have so respectable a companion as herself." (r I wish to Heaven I eould go with you !" replied Elizabeth, in an earnest and ©ven a solemn tone; " hut, most unfortu^ nately for me, that is not possible. Yet I hope, nay, I believe, that at some future time, we shall meet again/* Then, after a pause, she observed, it was to be wished Lady A Tarsia na should have some attend- ant upon her journey, whom she might, were it only for the time being, call her own, and acquainted her that their old hutlcr, Murray, had a son, who, though lie occupied no higher a station than that of an inferior serving-man in the castle* was
wns steady, discreet, and resolute; and shd v. rertook to speak to him and his father on rhe subject, if Margiana Would cotide^- sceed to accept his sendees. Margiana answered, that far from think- ins: it a condescension, he should cali his attendance a favour conferred on her* self, which she should liberally reward. And without loss of time, Dame Elizabeth executed her commission ; and presently returned to sny, that old Murray and his son would think themselves honoured by her laying, any commands on either of them. This point-settled, Margiana became ex¬ tremely impatient to depart; and the wea¬ ther beincr clear and A'csty, every thin* %vas prepared for her setting out with Lord Lothian, and their slender escort, the next morning. However, when the hour of departure arrived, rejoiced though she was at the o if ihoi'.rhH
thoughts of escaping from Lady Rothes, and seeing her sister again, she yet felt a pang when she took leave of her maternal friend and the little boy, whom, consider^ ing him as her father's child, she loved as a brother. Her adieus were very hasty, for Margiana was not one to give way to fruitless sensibility; and upon most occa¬ sions, generally felt much more than she manifested. The same restraint seemed called in to aid Dame Elizabeth, yet she respectfully pressed Margiana's hand, and the tears sprung to her eyes as she bade God bless her. The attendants attempted to drive back the dog, as he followed her down the rock, but in vain ; though he disappeared for a time, she had no sooner reached the level ground than he was there; and then, by Lord Lothian's commands, they desisted. The journey proved much less fatiguing* to Margiana than herfellovv-traveTerhad ap¬ prehended ;
prehended; and she was extremely favoured by mild and temperate weather.. Pursuing also the. regular road,, made the ->vay con* siderably shorter than she had found it on, a former melancholy occasion: so that on the afternoon of the fourth day, she des¬ cried the extensive forests that surround-* ed Alnwick's lofty towers, gilded by the. rays of the setting sun. " Oh, my dearest Genevieve !" exclaim* ed Margiana, "I hope L shall find.these liere!" Her eyes sparkled with hope; but Lord Lothian, who knew himself no. favourite of Henry Percy*s, and looked for no in- vitation to prolong his stay, breathed only regret at the prospect »of being speedily parted from her* News verv different however, from what' either had expected, awaited them both on their reaching the gates of the eastle. g 6 The
• The dosaesfscs thnt appeared courteous^ ly invited them its, hnt acquainted them thai none of their principals were ther^*, or even in the country, ns My Lord of Northumberland," said the chief of them, ** with his gallant son, ??t out some days ago for Wales, at the head of his vassals; but we have since heard he has fallen too ill on the road to proceed, so that we may shortly expect him back. Lord Percy, no doubt, has gone forward. But we have received later news of an action that must have taken place before he could reach Wales/* ** How 1" cried Lord Lothian ; " is Glen- dower in arms again ?'* '* He has beeif in arms some time," re¬ plied the domestic. " I marvel you heard not of 'it/* *' And Lord Widdrington, Lord Delan¬ cey, and Harold Wallop/* interrupted Margiana, * s are they gone also into Wales?" €t Lord
said to be dying of a broken heart for the loss of his son and daughter." " Good Heavens ! What of them ?" " His daughter left him, Lady, many months ago, about the same time that his niece, Lady Margiana, was murdered in Coquet Wood, and she has* nfyer been heard of since/* " And did his son march with Lord Percy?" <( No, Lady," replied the man, with a look of surprise, " Lord Delancey and Harold Wallop fight on the King's side." <( And ou whose Lord Percy ?" said she, in a faltering voice. s< No more," interposed Lord Lothfan". " I have heard this change was foreseen in the house of Northumberland." " Wonderful 1" exclaimed Margiana. " Arlette fled! Lord Percy ! But what olf Lord Delancey ? Has any evil befallen him ?" *' Four days ago, Lady, there came ad- 3 vice
wee to Widdrington Tower, that beings inr action against Glendower, and parted from his friend, he was struck down bv a bat* tle-axe, and taken prisoner. However, if the enemy puts him not. to denth before our young Lord arrives, he will be certain of good treatment afterwards. Neverthe¬ less, they say his father takes on monrnr fully/' Margiana dropped her head, and might long have continued in. a sorrowful reve¬ rie, had not Lord Lothian awakened her to a sense of her situation* gt Had vou not better/' said he, " for the present accept the otferof staying here to-night ? You will then have time to de¬ liberate what measures t© pursue." Margiana, engrossed by thronging re- flections,hardly heard him, and again turrw ing. to. the domestic, asked him " if he knew whither Lady Genevieve Winburne was stiH with Lady- Percy ?!'■ " Lady
*'■ Lady Percy/* replied the man, u is ia Wales with her Lord; and on her go^ng thither, I believe the young lady you men¬ tion returned to her uncle at Widdrington I ower/ Margianamus^d. "What then/'thought she, ' w n°ed detain me here?'* The man went on.. ft You are welcome, > Lady,, to make this castle your abode for the 'present, and perhaps it would be most prudent so to do ; for parties, strongly ex¬ asperated against the King's friends, are traversing this country, and vou and vour * * *' ^ companions may chance to be ron»hlv treated, shouid you full in with thern, and they suspect you to be that way disposed/* Lord Lothian enquiring who was the leader of these parties, was informed the strongest of them was headed by Sir Hugh Mortimer and his nephew, the young Earl of March, who had already attacked some small fortresses that adhered to the Kino-. and were then rumoured to be within a day *s
it was not likely they would pass without insulting This intelligence, so far from deterring* Margiana, impelled' her to hasten thither without delay. * { I will join my uncle and my sister/* said she, addressing hen elf to Lord Lo¬ thian, " and we will encounter the same hazards, and share the same fate. Lord Widdrington, humiliated and in affliction, is 110 longer the man who persecuted rne, or an object.to be avoided; and the con¬ solation of beholding her sister alive, is iiot, at a period of anxiety like this, to be withheld from my tender-hearted Gene¬ vieve. Here then, my Lord, let- us part, if you choose to remain at Alnwick to¬ night/* ■i lord Lothian perceive 1 her too decided for dissuasion^ *:nd, iri fact, had no good reasons
M-AR&JANJU' reasons to oppose to her resolve;, but he said he would not be driven from her pre-? sence, until he saw her in security within the walls of Widdrington. Lord Delan^ cey's detention rendered it, in his opinion, a less formidable abode for her than .for- mexJy; wherefore, thanking the Earl of Northumberland's domestic for his offered hospitality, they turned their horses from the gate, and almost silently bent their way towards the banks, of the Coquet. Margiana was much too thoughtful fo$ conversation ; and Lord Lothian was que&« tioninir himself how he should act in this> crisis of public alfairs. It is true, he wa$ not a subject of Henry of Lancaster's, but he had enjoyed distinction at his- court* and had always resided under the protec-* tion of the English government. To a young man not deficient in nourage* deli¬ beration,on such a subject conld not las& long. Liis nearly extinguished martial spi¬ rit glowed anew. He reftected with con,-* £u;>io2f
sion on the indolent and scandalous man¬ ner in which lie had spent the greatest, and'all the latter part of his life; and in¬ ternally vowed,, as soon as he could witli propriety quit Margiana, to throw himself at the feet of King Henry, and there make a tender of his best services towards re* pelling his ungrateful foes. The travellers had proceeded above half way tt> Widdrington Tower before either of them spoke. At last, Lord Lothian in¬ terrupting Margiana's profound reverie, acquainted her with his intentions* She gave them the praise they deserved. "And to Heaven," she continued, '* Hen- Percy were as well disposed ! Twice> twice a rebel! Oh, Hotspur 1 how have yon stained your honour//' She lamented the regret Harold Wallop would fee! at meeting his friend as a foe in arms; and they conversed'on this subject; and on the perils that menaced Lord-De* tpcej in the power of his- enemies, till
MARGIANA*" *«3i* they entered the confines of the well^ known park. ' On approaching the castle, every thing* bespoke a state of preparation for defence* The drawbridge was up, the moat was full, and the court-yards were crowded witb armed men. All such of Lord Widdring¬ ton's vassals as had not followed his son? into Wales, had been summoned to pro¬ tect the walls, on the top of which nume¬ rous archers appeared, who, seeing this- small company advancing, gave notice of£ their approach to those below. * Scruton ascended to the battlements, and from thence discerning a female figure- in the group, ran hastily to acquaint his Lord, for he hoped Lady Arlette was re¬ turned. €e Beware of a stratagem/*said the alarm¬ ed and ever suspicious Bertram, - et That young traitor, March, or some of his myr~ - *midons
ose face you do not know. As for me, am sick in mind and body, and will see one vthom I can avoid.
<> ?»
Bertram forgot that he himself had been? a traitor to Richard the Second. ', Scruton, with a chosen few, ventured! forth to parley with the strangers, " Drop the port-cullis after us/* cried ie, " and watch if those men make signals* to any behind them/' Scruton was a coward from meanness and from constitution, and he fervently wished Lord Delancey, or Harold Wallop, had been at home in this time of peril and exert?on. He was accosted by Lord Lo-» thian, whose face he was unacquainted with,* but that young chief having just assumed a martial character, and thinking k right to wear.4 countenance corresponds
Sag with his ftew sentiments, met him with so awful an aspect, that Scruton, though scowling under his brows, was shrinking within himself, till he heard him pro¬ nounce the unexpected name of Mar¬ giana. t( Acquaint your Lord/* said he, <c his tiiece is here. " I am Lord Lothian, and grieve to hear his son's mischance/* Margiana now came forward, and Scru¬ ton recovered his presence of mind. "Oh, welcome sight!" he exclaimed. " How vou will be greeted here V He rj O would have assisted her off her horse, but she desired him to return and inform her tincle she was accompanied by the Earl of Lothian, who had been a means, in thfe hands of Providence, of rescuing her from captivity, and a dreadful death, and there¬ fore deserved such 'a reception as the "warmest hospitality wald^ifer. v Scruton
Scrufon dispatched one of his followers with this message, who presently returned, bearing? a cordial welcome to Mannana, and a courteous invitation to her deli¬ verer; but during his absence, she had dis¬ covered that the delight of seeing her sis- ter was not so near as she had hoped for. Lady Genevieve being still, as Scruton as¬ sured her, in Wates with Loj'd and Lady Percy. She was disappointed, yet reflected that since Lord Lothian was now at Wid- - drington, all was perhaps for the best; and she led the way into the gigantic hall,, and through it to the room where Bertram sat alone, in a state of despondence her re¬ storation was not of force to enliven. He seemed shrunk from his former-hulk and stature, little commanding as either of them had ever been. Yet, by a strange contradiction, now, in the days of his sor- row, he wore a haughtiness of demeanour, as remarkable as his former crouching sup¬ pleness had appeared in prosperity. How¬ ever,
MARGIANA. 14S «ver, he greeted Lord Lothian with civi¬ lity, and Margiana with a kindness even she believed unaffected. He entreated the former very courteously to make Wid* •drington Tower the place of his residence, until the present disturbances were ap¬ peased ; and, in fact, would not have been sorry to have had for his guest a young ■chief, whose activity, in case the castle * should be assaulted, might prove of advan¬ tage. But Lord Lothian, however strongly tempted to abide where Margiana was, had yet the firmness to persevere-in his first design of repairing to the King, and re¬ ceiving his orders from him, Bertram then, with a shew of more sa¬ tisfaction than surprise at finding it not .true, spoke to his niece of the report which he, in common with others, had be¬ lieved, of her death. Nevertheless, in this instance, as in most others, he was not sin¬ cere; for, in fact, he felt more surprise than satisfaction. Margiana dead, he had hoped
hoped Lord Delancey might in time form an attachment for some other lady; and therefore the opinion of her having been murdered, he had received with a very transitory concern; and the conviction of lier safety now T scarcely gave him an emo¬ tion of pleasure; though, understanding she had been forcibly carried into Scot¬ land, and detained there in the dungeon of d' castle, where, being forgotten, she must have perished, but for the timely appear¬ ance of Lord Lothian, he returned thanks to that nobleman, in such abundance, as at length forced upon Margiana the be* lief he was over-acting a part, and would, perhaps, have heen as well pleased, had she really suffered death. In the succinct relation she gave him of what she had endured, she forbore, from civility to Lord Lothian, all mention of Hothes Castle as the scene of her confine- ment, and professed to believe she had 'been seised by mistake/ instead of some i ■ ■ - other
yj'~ other person. She would then have changed the subject, and spoken of Lord Delancey ■ but Bertram, who unjustly supposed her rejoiced at what pained him, was silent and sullen at the mention of his son's name, and studiously avoided ail discourse respecting him, Lady Widdrington, and his daughter. Margiana, on enquiring af¬ ter the elder Wallop, found he had been dead above a year, The next morning, Lord Lothian, with a degree of resolution Manriana had be- lieved him hardly capable of, yet with evident reluctance, took his leave of her and lord Widdrington, and hastened with his siendcr train to London ; while the son of old Murray, who had been enjoined by Margiana not to expose the cruelty of his ladv, returned to Rothes Castie, with a re- ward much beyond his expectations. Margiana now found herself under no personal restraint whatever. Joyce, as if vol. iv. h humbled
humbled by the misfortunes of her Lord, was civil even to obsequiousness; and Scruton's vigilance, in giving all necessary orders, were in double request, owing to the infirm state of Bertram's health, which ivas considerably affected by the dejection that weighed down his spirits ; though an unaccountable species of false pride made him strive, in Margiana's presence, to force nature, and appear chearful. Had any one actually believed him in the spirits he often pretended to feel, tliey must have considered him an unnatural father and a disloyal subject. Bertram took indefati¬ gable pains to seem a worse man than he really was; but the mere force of habit impelled him to disguise the actual state of his mind, even when its emotions would have credited himself, if known. Margiana, free to converse with whom¬ ever she chose, and anxious to obtain, if possible, some information concerning Arlette, asked Joyce in what manner she had
had quitted Widdrington Tower ? But, not entirely crediting the woman's assurances that she was a stranger to the whole affair, she enquired of little Maud, if nothing had been heard of her young lady since her disappearance ? The affectionate girl replied, with tears, in the negative; but said she feared some wild scheme had been the occasion of it, as, the % r cry morning of her going away, young Maurice had acquainted her, and her only, in confi¬ dence, that he had missed a suit of his own apparel. The improbability of Arlette's having stooped to such a disguise, forced Mar¬ giana to reject the idea altogether; but Maud, while her respect precluded con¬ tention, seemed to adhere so steadily to her original opinion, that Margiana at length, fearing lest her page might have been bribed to connivance, sent for him to question him.
He replied to her interrogatories readi¬ ly, and without prevarication. " After the disturbance in the castle occasioned by your departure," said he, ** was somewhat subsided, I retired to my chamber, where 1 was surprised to find a lire burning in the chimney; and though it was almost extinguished, I observed- some fragments that had escaped the blaze. I did not pre¬ serve them, having no suspicion at the time of any thing extraordinary; but I took sufficient notice of them to be as¬ sured thev were part of a ladv's attire. * A ri However, it was no concern of mine, and so I held my peace; but when I heard the next mornin«r, that Ladv Arlette was not to be found, I discovered my own private thoughts to Maud, and she charged me never to mention them ; and I never have done so, Lady, to any but to yourself," " And have you on no occasion, Mau¬ rice, ever heard of Lady Arlette since ?" " Ko, never," replied the page. 4t Lord
* r Lord Lothian knew nothing concern¬ ing her?" i( 1 did not exchange a single word with Lord Lothian ali the time he staid here/* " I believe you. But do not feel ashamed, Maurice, of what does credit to yourself. I am no stranger to the pains vou took for mv sake. Lord Lothian ac- quainted me with every particular. While you was in France with him, had you no reasons to believe Lady Arlette was there also ? The same kind motive that induced my sister, might have induced her too." " In France!" said Maurice, staring around him. {i I never was in France in my life." It was now Margiana's turn to be sur¬ prised, and her reproaches to Maurice for his apparent duplicity brought ot? an ex¬ planation, that tilled her with the most alarming apprehensions for the safety of Arlette, By Lord Lothian, she had, in the simple tone of truth, been informed that n 3 Maurice
KHi MARGIAKA, Maurice hacl accompanied him to France; hacl there left him to attend her sister to England, and then returned to his service, and followed him to Edinburgh, whence he had gone to Rothes Castle. But when Maurice himself appealed to the testimony of every person residing at Widdrington Tower, to prove that he had never been absent from that place since she herself had left it, and protested that the last time he saw Ladv Genevieve was on the mor:-- ing she set out with Lord Delancey for Paris ; when ail tins was considered, and added to the circumstances of the stolen suit and burning apparel, a chain of pre¬ sumptive evidence was formed, that gave Manriana the moot extreme uneasiness. Her perplexity was so evident, that Mau¬ rice could not but observe it. t( Ah, mv Ladv/* cried he, " there is no end of wondering at all that happens keye. This is the place for unaccountable doings. Nothing goes strait forward in it, and one mub-r
■*' must not believe one's eyes nor ears. Would vou think that not a living sou! can tell where Lady Widdrington her::e!f U? Only it seems she knew what road iier daughter took, and so went after her, whiL v my Lord pretended all the while that she ,was at her devotions in her own closet, I'hey say something very strange, too. about a little room that once had a win¬ dow into the great court-yard/' ty* f (C Enough, iMaurice," said T/n^iana , *' tales \^ill never be v;aiitijfig where listen¬ er?; are to be found; but vou outfit m,t to indulge either your curiosity or your love of talking at my uncle's expence/' * She dismissed the page, and in the alarm she was under, would have been tempted to have broken through her reserve with a kinsman of any other character than that of Lord Widdrinfiton ; but, in addition to his usual want of ingenuousness, he was now so wholly retired within himself, and h 4 absorbed
absorbed ?-v bis own reiieciiou*;. r:C.iu* lously ?.voidiii;>; all nicutlju uf the com" icy: of has ov.ii fnmiK, that Mar/ana * : ' n:.:ihe? OT^jortunirv nor im/iirah^.n to en- deavour v at f:ai:iin'*' anv new li-*!.'.;, iVot-i *. ^ <y him, or to i-^uart ber own su-.,,ic i .':■-. Y; t she feared Arlette '-uvuld be for e\ er ]o":t.. She made no dot:l":f of h'jr havii.-* person¬ ated the pane, v/i;om Lord L'uhiau had so nt* 11 L --it; :. ! ■ L I, c:. i \ 1 ^ W . i\i i ;,t : -. i: V U *" *i; . t t . - . -,>•.*■ / > 4 , > ^ i i^io u.f s. i ^ I \ J *.***.-•'•'•- t Or t r> -; & f* jo * ■*■ i . . > r*t Wh.en Lord Widdrington did ocrn^lo^- allv enter into any discourse, he eoni.! {./ic * j * of nothing but the revolt of Gk-rr.b \.vr, and the defection of the house of I>rry. He fervently expressed h:s v/: : h thi* lienry otspur miglit with his life's: blood ry:y/ ths rfeit of his crime; and .secuie:!, by tl-.e ark, smothered fury of his look?, rather under the influence of a demons malice than a lay al subject's warrantable indigna¬ tion.
tion. Grief, instead of softening Bertram, only rendered his gloomy nature more un* tractable. *' Nothing can make this man amiable/* said Margiana to herself. " In prosperity he is mean, and alfects a dignity he can* not arrive at ; and affliction, far from hu¬ manizing, hardens him into sullenness and austerity." Once, she ventured to express a hope th it the arrival of Lord Percy in Wales would be a certain means of preserving Ethidred from insult and peril; but her uncle, scowling under his brows, gave her a lork so savage, she determined in fu¬ ture never to name his son. In the meantime, he was in hotirlv ex- pectaiion of the return of a messenger, whom he had sent to brins him intelli* gence from the sane of tumult, and in¬ wardly resolved that the very day that re- m 6 stored
stored Lord Delancey in safety toWiddring-* ton Tower, if, indeed, he was doomed ever to behold him in safety again, should see him solemnly betrothed to Margiana. Nothing more was heard of the party of rebels, commanded by Sir Hugh Mor¬ timer and his nephew; and it was even believed they had quitted the country, and repaired to Wales. However, till this desirable event was ascertained, all pre¬ cautionary preparations were continued, and Scruton displayed a diligence which, partly springing from his fears, was set down wholly to the account of his attach¬ ment to his lord. But the danger they both hoped gone by, was, in fact, only now approacliing them. Late one night. a scout, who had been sent out in that di¬ rection Sir Hugh Mortimer was supposed to have taken, returned, having ridden many miks at full speed, to outstrip the rebels, whom he declared to be within two hours march of Widdrington Tower. He described
'j'/ ' described their numbers as not consider¬ able enough to attack the castle with ad¬ vantage, provided those within did their duty. Bertram, therefore, who did not want courage, was not appalled at the peril that threatened him ; but all his boldness was necessary to counterbalance the now visible terrors cf Scruton. Incapable either of receiving; or transmitting directions, and still more so of exercising anv judg¬ ment of his own, he slunk from the pre¬ sence of his master, who, forced to ex¬ ertions beyond his strength, vainlv called for Scruton, and found himself, in the hour of greatest need, avoided, if not de¬ serted, by the man on whom he had placed his chief dependance. Yet when, at in¬ tervals, forced to appear, Scruton easily found means to excuse himself; he had been stationing the best bowmen where they were the most wanted to cover the weakest parts of the building, or he had been ordering up stones to the heights of the battlements, that they miidvt be in rea- 11 o' d/u'*;,
diness to hurl down on the heads of the as« saulters. Of whatever was done, not by the immediate command of Bertram him> self, Scruton claimed the merit, and Berr tram was too busily engaged to discover his duplicity. Margiana, apprised of what was so short¬ ly to happen, quietly retired with Maud fo her own apartment, but not to rest. She gave a charge to Maurice that he sliould come and acquaint them when the rebels approached, and then, without un¬ dressing, calmly laid down to await the event. A full hour sooner than was expected, the enemies were descried, by the light of a sinking moon, silently stealing towards the castle, which they had entertained hopes of surprising ; but they were quick¬ ly taught to prepare themselves for the stoutest resistance. They summoned Lord Widdrington either to deliver up his for¬ tress,
tress, or to join their cause, and march with them at the head -of his remaining forces into Wales, whither they were hast¬ ening to strengthen the army of Glen- do v/er. Bertram answered, that he should deli¬ ver uo Widdrington Tower onlv at the command of Henry of Lancaster, their so¬ vereign and his own ; and that he booed to spare them the trouble of so long a journey as they meditated, by affording them a lodging in the vaults of the castle, until the King should be pleased to order the heads of Lord March and his uncle to be carried upon poles to London. All parley now necessarily ceased. The young Earl was the first person to swim across the moat, followed by his shouting partizans ; and presently the strong walls of Widdrington were rudely invested on every side. "'Where is Scruton?" cried Bertram; * r tell him to defend the south aspect
aspect of the castle, fronting the park. I will myself take charge of all adjoining the great court. These massive buttresses are not to be shaken by a dotard and a boy, at the head of a handful of rebels." Bertram's confidence animated his men; and all such of the enemy as he engaged with met a prompt and a gallant opposer. Scruton he believed fuitiiling his duty on the station assigned him ; and every ap¬ pearance bespoke glory to the besieged, and shame to the insurgents. Maurice, who, ready at Lord Widdring¬ ton s side, was bold and active in bearing his orders, beyond the promise of such a youth, left him now and then for an in- stant, to inform Margiana of what was passing. " Have no fears for the result, Ladv," said he, " for one man of ours that fall:*, our arrows hit five of theirs. Securely posted
posted behind the loopholes, our archers take deliberate aim, whilst their force is spent at random. My Lord says this castle would withstand them for ever." As Maurice spoke, a tremendous noise was heard, that reverberated from side to side of the great court which her chamber overlooked. * r They are proceeding to ruder mea¬ sures now," said she, "than winging harm- r less arrows; they are endeavouring to force the walls. 1 ' 44 Oh," cried Maurice, whose naturally dull countenance was lightened up with the martial spirit so becoming to youth, " the walls are of a prodigious thickness; thev will never be able to make a breach through them." Here a second crash resounded, which almost shook that quarter of the stately fabric to its very foundation. " Go
" Go yoti then," replied Margiana, "and contribute your best endeavours to pre¬ vent them." Away flew Maurice, and presently after the noises were heard more distant. It seemed as if the enem ;, beaten off from the side against which they had directed their main attack, had now moved round to an opposite quarter, and loud shout¬ ings were frequently heard ; but whether proceeding from Lord Widdrington's men or the bevsiegers, it was impossible for Margiana to distinguish. As to Maud, she seemed to be terrified almost into a state of idiotcy. She clung £o Margiana, sometimes burying her face in her robe, and at others staring around her with a vacant eye, as if trying to re¬ collect where she was, and the cause of the commotion that prevailed. " Be not afraid, my good girl/' said Margiana,
Margiana, smiling at, though pitying her, t( Let this end as it mat, they wili not da nny harm to thee." After a considerable delay, Maurice came again, exclaiming — (f All is well* They were beginning to direct their whole J C* <yj strength agaiust the southern towers, and then my Lord changed posts with Scruton, and now he is .driving them off; and some of their, are killed with stones, and .some are drowned in the moat ,* and if Scruton does but keep up a good heart here to the north, before it is broad day they will have had enough of it/* " Pray Heaven thev mav !" cried Mar- giana. " It is dreadful work." " Oh, but Scruton is such a coward/' said Maurice, lowering his voice, as if he, tho glit there was a chance of being over¬ heard.. 4f When my Lord believed he was doing his best upon the south walls, he was sculkina; out of sight, and leaving the archers and slingers to direct one another. Hut
But nobody dares complain of him, for he would almost murder anv one that said a word against him to my Lord. However, the rebels were gaining such advantage from his remissness, that somebody at last ventured to run and tell my Lord they believed Scruton was killed, and feared they should be worsted; and my Lord just then having beaten his enemies out of the great court, hastened back with the man, and bade me find Scruton in case he was alive, and tell him to occupy the place he had himself just left. It was a long time before I could discover Scruton, and when I did, he was snug in the castle, where no arrow could come near him, and pre¬ tended he had lost his buckler, and was come in search of another But, how¬ ever," added Maurice, proudly, " ?, e was obliged to go, when I delivered to him my Lord's orders." ; <( Since my uncle entrusts you with them," said Mirgfana, " hasten back to him, lest he should have more to give, and be
be in want of you. Be active to render all the service in your power." " The next time I come, I hope it will be to tell you all is over/' cried Maurice, springing out ofthe chamber. " That lad ought always to be fighting, I think," said Margiana. iC I never saw him shew himself to so much advantage before." The tumult now ceased so considerably, thnt in hopes all danger was really past by, ancl anxious to learn a truth so desirable, Margiana, advising Maud not to quit her post of security, went through the armoury, and ascending towards the black tower, met some of her uncle's men hurrying down to assist in driving the enemy from the courts, or in pursuing them, if they fled; and in answer to her enquiries, they assured her that the rebels had received such a repulse, as would certainly deter them from renewing their attack. She would uot detain them at such a moment, by
by asking further questions, but sulTering them to pass on, ran lightly forward to the tower, from whence issuing out into what was called Arletfe'a girden, iaw had a partial view of the scene still passing below, A small number of the enemy seemed hastily retiring Irom tlie walls, as if anxi¬ ous to regain the open country; and Bcr- t ra m, w i J h a fe w fo J1 o w e rs, p v '■ ± ■: ;•< 1 11 • e:; \ a short way, leaving Scruton and the rest of his people to complete whnt liti.e still remained to be done. Fortunately, this fellow's cowardice ^s not contagious; the men under h" i wc e so aui.Jiated at finding victory wili/.- their grasp., th?,t. they drove back the greatest wei^'.it of their foes into the pr.rk from the foot of the south walls; and on seeing tho>e also fly, the shouts of the conquerors rent the ain Mai&iana, now satisfied that there was indeed
indeed nothing: more fo fear, returned to her apartment, where her hopes were pre¬ sently confirmed by Maurice, who came it in a transport of joy, to say that fhe rebel chiefs would soon be obliged fo make a precipitate retreat, for they were left with onlv half their number ; and those, if they awaited Lord Widdrington's return, wo"ld inevitably be cut to pieces. Iiis intelli¬ gence was repeated by several other do¬ mestics, who hastened to assure Margiana that the castle uas in safety; and the uni¬ versal acclamations that ensued left no room for any doubts. Soon after, some men running pa^t the armoury door, cried out— (< Lord Widdrington was returned, and thaf Sir Hugh Mortimer and Lord March won'd certainly be taken prison¬ ers/' Upon which Margiana bade Mau¬ rice again repair to her uncle, nor quit Lis side while it was possible for him to be of any use. He had not been gone many minutes, when
when she was surprised by a renewal of the same loud noise that had been heard before. It continued some time with in¬ termissions, and then a profound silence ensued, that induced her to believe the re¬ bels were all finally driven off. This stillness lasted so long, that she be¬ came impatient for further information, and was venturing below, hoping to hear this short siege had favourably terminated, when Maurice once more presented him- self before her, but with a countenance very unlike that he had formerly worn. He was breathless, pale, and trembling; and, clasping his hands together, when he saw her, he wildly exclaimed-—" Oh, my Lady, you will not believe what I have to fell you ! It is so strange, so incredible—• indeed, I can hardly believe it mvself." " Gracious Heaven 1 surely the fortune of the day has not changed ?" i( Oh, it is unaccountable 1 For my part, it has quite crazed me/' 4i You
" Y r ou will craze me too, Maurice, if you will not be more explicit. Pray speak out. My uncle is not killed ?" u Oh, no, Lady. But-r—" ec Proceed, Maurice; of what use is it thus to trifle with me ? If you are fright¬ ened, go away till you have recovered your¬ self, and then return." " I am not frightened, my Lady ; but who would not wonder ? Lord Widdring- ton jppSurrendered fhe castle !" '• Sflpndered it! To the enemies of ins king r " As b" surrendered it. He has ac- cepted, .errns, just when he has con¬ quered th***.." Maurice wrung his hands anew, and Margiana begged he would collect his ideas, and tell her quietly what he knew. "Aye, do be quiet," cried Maud, whose fears were now lost in cunosity; "com pose
168 MAKGIANA, pose yourself, and tell us all that has hap¬ pened, as clearly as you possibly can." Maurice, at this exhortation, exerted himself and addressing Margiana, gravely said— i{ My Lord drove some of the rebels a little while ago beyond the outer courts, but they then in their turn fell upon him, and so overpowered him, that he sought for safety by speedily coming back,^ How- ever, they proved as switt or ioomi he. and poured in with him to assist tgpe (Torts of Sir Hm v h, who had made a breach in the north wall. Lord Widdj '-n fought like a desperate man, but he '* 'sup¬ ported bv Scruton; and at lef^ tj ; se eing that both Sir Hugh and Lord i'%* ch had forced themselves through the breach, he fiung madlv after them, commanding me to call-Scruton -to him instantly. " I knew very well where to find Scru- ton. I had seen him lurking amongst the thickest of our own people, under pre¬ tence
tence of giving them directions; and when he returned with me, (surrounded at his earnest request by them), I beheld a"sight that filled me with consternation indeed ■ My Lord and Sir Hugh had hold of eaca other's hands, and I heard Sir Hugh cay — f Then you consent to join our just causer' and my Lord replied, ' \ do; and will march without delav. Order your followers hence, and mine shall have an immediate command for their depar¬ ture/ " In a moment the court was cleared ;#iy Lord conducted the rebellious chiefs into the great hall, where he is now entertain¬ ing them. Their forces, taking the west¬ ern road, have quitted the castle, and ours are directed to have their horses in rea¬ diness within two hours, to follow my, Lord into Wales. This is all I know, and I never was so amazed since 1 was born." * 01 - lv - i Margiana,
>iii" silent sttttfttfflfttnent*
fy
s a
■*
no time was allowed* her t& eMpre^ what ce was now seen ad-
vancing;
u l am bidden to teif you, Lady-Mar¬ giana/* s?id she, M that mry Lord, con¬ vinced of the justness of the cause Sir Ifogh Mortimer m engaged in, is pre¬ paring- to depart with him to join the Bar! Percy ; and it is his will that you should c^rrfp&ny him. He conimands, there- re, that you dispose vourself for setting without loss of time, as ne will ifiyselFP* said Margi- o suppress her emo- purpose? To what
ie going
'f FY*
dispose aria; endeavouring* tfert. " For* what
* r That is no oyce, coldly. *'
of mine/' replied fulfilled my com-
if
Could
* e ' Goteld > I- Jlpeak mth ymm -- Im^aiid, Joyce?" €t No, indeed; he has no leisure to be¬ stow upon any one, and I must begone mysel f. Maud, you come with m e; I have orders to give you. Yon, Maurice, may attend on your lady." s " Maurice," said Margiana, (i gc, ta, my uncle——Yet, hold ! Why," thought she;, (C need I send him? Why should I make a difficulty of doing what I cannot avoid, and wL-^t, after all, is desirable in itself? Is noJ my sister with Lady Percy in Giendowers camp ? and may we not from* thence still execute the) scheme she believes my death alone pre^ vented?" Margiana, prompt" to see what was §t«» ting to be done, was cool and resolute in: execution, when determined. Go, Mau¬ rice," said she, f< tell my Lord I will be ready at any hour he appoints; and do t - you
you be prepared also, since f am permitted to take you with me/' Maurice, awed by her deliberate tone into silent obedience, bowed and left her; and for a few minutes she could only ruminate in wonder on what she had heard. Soon, however, a second sum- «. - rnons was brought, and again by Joyce. Lord Widdrington, she was told, w r ould in half an hour be on horseback, and had determined not to leave the castle without her. <€ Then I will be ready in half an hour," replied she, chearfully. * r My uncle may rebel against his present sovereign, as he rebelled against his last; but he shall not, extending his principles, teach me, in this instance, to rebel against him." She assisted Joyce with good humour in forwarding the few preparations that were
were necessarv for herself; and within the time mentioned sat quietly down to await her uncle's orders for departure* They were brought by Maurice, who, having delivered them, ran down before her, to say she was ready. Lord Widdrington cast a significant look at Scruton. " Then/ 5 said he, " she re¬ turns Delanc#y's wife, and all is safe, pro¬ vided you only——" " Depend on me, my dearest Lord, my benefactor," cried the relieved coward, now no longer trembling for hi "fe, "all shall be done according to your wishes." Scruton was to remain at Widdrington Tower. Bertram, enfeebled bv sickness and fa- tigue, was assisted on his horse. Mau¬ rice held another for Margiana. She sa¬ luted her uncle before she was lifted on her saddle, and then followed him in si- i 3 lence
I ^M^rch, as if cer- evljram'js adherence, were already
fl
■* f
* .
■* . ^ CHAP. VL ■ : ^ Night's Lodgifhg. Mahgiana> in leaving Widdrington Tower, .felt that she bad but one subject of re¬ gret. Every future chance of seeing Ken- t drew was now probably for ever pre¬ cluded. Yet, anxiously as she must al¬ ways wish that she had received the com¬ munications he had promised her, she re¬ conciled herself to her departure, as he Jiad already cleared up the doubt most in¬ teresting to her, when he gav# her the melancholy assurance that her father was .really dead. Since he was indeed no more, i 4 inform-
information on any other subject could but be of secondary consideration; and she looked forward with exhilarated spirits, and the chearfulness of hope, to a joyful meeting with her-sister, from whom she flattered herself nothing in future would ever part her. Seriously also she turned her thoughts towards her former plan of seeking a re¬ fuge with Queen Isabella, and was the more intent upon it, because she had a strong suspicion Lord Widdrington hnd Been induced to ioin the rebel by bK ap- 'prehensions for his son's life, ami had pro- bably'stirjulated that Lord Delancey should be ^a e, ns a condition he insured on be- fore he would disgrace hia i.ame b\ a se¬ cond acr of treachery. Maririana's sa'acitv easily pointed out to her a part of tlie truth, but much of it stiU lav hid far beyond her knowledge. That her uncle had still the celebration of her
her marriage, in view, and at heart, she made no question; and satisfied with ihe means in her power of still avoiding it, she resolved, by no apparent want of sub- mission to alarm him, and by no negli- gence to lose any opportunity that cir¬ cumstances raiglft offer favourable to her design. She hnd very little conversation with her uncle as they travelled. He shunned all discourse, and even frequently returned her no answer, when she civilly expressed her fears that he was suffering more fa¬ tigue than he would long be able to cn~ dure. Yet this was a verv evident fact, His harrassed looks proclaimed him disor¬ dered both iu mind and body : and he was often obliged to linger behind his rnen^ the command of whom he resigned to fhe tAO malcontent chiefs, they having war'ed till he cnme. up with them on the evening f of their first day s march, 2 5 Oa
Op these occasions, Margiana, attended by Maurice, constantly remained with him; jbut jie appeared insensible of her attenr pops, and seemed fo forbear complaint^ ess froip patience in suffering than from;
■* rr «
His gloom was in no degree dissipated their near approach to the rebel army, though he was certain of there beholding Ids son again", the only being upon earth whom he really valued. But Margiana's .heart bfat lightly when she was assured of t>eing no farther than a day's journey from fhe station it was thought Lord Percy had chosen. Every moment that brought her Hearer t# Genevieve danced gaily on ; and though she did not impart her expccta- lions to her uncle, she felt a secret hope that the thoughtless Arlette, having re~ pented of her indiscretion, might have re¬ turned to the protection of Lord and Lady Percy, and be actually with them and her sister. Thk to Margiana was an additional
incen^ve to gladness. Jier chearful tem- per always tirrned to the brightest view of a -prosper, as naturally as the gay te¬ nants of the air fly from darkness to the, Jight.
* #
On the borders of Shropshire, they met witb some stragglers belonging to the Earl of Percy, who informed them that leader was then at Drayton, in his w v aj to meet the royal army, which was reported fo be advanced within a few miles of Shrews'no y ; and though the day was closing in when Lord Widdrington received these tidings, his anxiety to recover his son from fr\e hands of Glendower compelled him for- ward with the rest of his party ; so tnat they all arrived* at Drayton together, about two hours after sunsek Lord March arid his uncle had then much to do in dis- posing of their nien. Bertram, intent only on seeing the rebel chiefs, and procuring Eth ed's liberty, was too much engnged io think Ot Margiana.^ She was left there- • ■ 1 " 4tM 1 6 c fore
fore to procure herself a lodging for the night, as she could, attended only by her own page, and two of her uncle's domes¬ tics; and after hearing that Lady Percy was actually in this little town, she had no hesitation where to fix. But it required some caution not too suddenly to intro¬ duce, even to her, and still more to Ge¬ nevieve, a friend and a sister, who had been so long reputed dead. Most fearm£ a di^apoointment in her hope of seeing Genevieve, who, after' all, it was possible, might have been left in London, she asked, and easily obtained a direction to the house where Lord Percv's family had taken uo their abode. It was ui a field at the further end of the town, whither Margiana bent her way, ordering Maurice to precede her. On reaching the. door, he enquired of an old serving man, u if there was room there for any more lodgers ?" and was overheard, by a person within, who roughly cried out—" Prithet; begone*
begone, friend, for here is not a corner to spare/* - ■ * >„ (< I am sorry for that/* said Maurice, " since here is one in want of shelter, who> is not used to be denied/* " Then belike he will not take kindly to> it now/'' replied the voice. " However^ let him be never so much in want of a lodging, he cannot have one in this house, which is occupied by ladies, who shall nei¬ ther be crouded nor disturbed.** '* Ir is not a man who craves admittance/* said the persevering page; " it is a lady,.
a vounff and noble lady/' rt O J
if Mv service to her nobility,*' answered the person within "Acquaint her I will watt upon her this instant, and do my utmost fo> 'procure her suitable accommodatidnselse- where; but here, u the very devil himself insisted on a night's lodging, he should be refused/* " Oh, Heavens !*' said Margiana, "speaft- ing low, "that is*Harold Wallops v^icl. Draw
.good persoit, of all others, I most wish to see." Rfsiifiice now entered the house, and met him with whom he had spoken, but it wasby this time too dark to distinguish any Jfeatures. Assured, however, that he was addressing Harold Wallop, he now spoke with more boldness, s^nd urged that his lady, too weary-to-go {further, must needs lodge there, and there only. *' Thou art. a peevish little boy, I can fell thee that/' said .Harold, "and hast been spoiled, it .should seem, by thy la- Ay ** waiting-women. But where is she, that I may speaks with Jxer > Hray Heaven she prove to have more sense than thou iiasi!" Then perceiving Margiana, and ad- ^anqbig, xt Madam," pursued he, "par¬ don me for saying, no admission tun be granted to ai>¥ one here. This house is mUvjmdih fjully €i]$z$e& hy Lady
Percy and a friend of her'sj who is kdi^ posed; but I wdl return back with yo# into the town, #nd not leave you till yo«4 are provided with a convenient lodging/* Margiana, whose emotion made her.trem* ble from head to foot, could not immediate* ly command words to answer hirn, butslyg lingered as he would have led from the door. " This way, lady/' said he; « a little higher up there is a house, where, I be¬ lieve, you may be accommodated. But these are aukward times for Jadies to be travelling. When the world grows mad with fightings they are best under the tftieU ter of their owr roofs/* He npw laid .his hand tspon her horse's feridle, , ?' I had ra^he,r st^y Iseie/' said she* |>j|t
in a voice so tremulous, it was disguised from his knowledge. * * - He thought she was frightened, yet won* dered at her persisting. " How can you stay if there be no room?" he asked* half peevishly. " low lodge here," she returned; ff and If you would leave, room for me by re¬ moving for one night— '— '* " I lodge here ! What! do you take tne for a rebel ? No-—my quarters are afar off, amongst honest men, and true to their King. I have but come here to so- licit the exchange of two prisoners." " Lord Delancey one of them?" said Margiana. te This is 'a strange woman/' thought Wallop; u she will keep me here till morn¬ ing, jf I am not somewhat more abrupt *with r 'her. 'Come, lady/' continued he, " we have no time for idle talk; you are weary, and so am I. 1 pray you let us be
•KOing."
Ob
*' Oh, Harold!"' exclairrredt Margiana, u I cannot away from hence; Genevieve ia here/* .■' Struck bv the tone that now first awaken- cd his recollection, Wallop turned, hastily round, uttering an exclamation, but had not presence of mind to receive a trem¬ bling hand that was extended to hrn. lie looked up t but could not discern her countenance. *' Am I indeed so dead to your remem¬ brance ?" said she. " And is Margiana forgotten by all her former friends, as well as by Harold Wallop ?" t( Margiana 1 Impossible ! Oh, no, you cannot be her !—we cannot be so happy!" " Dear Harold," said she, " how is my sister ? Where is Arlette ? Do you not know my voice t" Convinced now of what he had been afraid of believing, lest it should not prove true*
utterance, ;he folded her to his bosom, as he lifted her from her horse; ind she was melted into tears by the lively and artless testimonies of his iriendlv affection. At length, reminding him of the presence of the attendants, she begged he would con¬ duct her into a room where she might be alone, ;till lie had'broken the discovery to f her -sister; " if, indeed/' said she, (% my beloved Genevieve is here/' ff She is here," cried Harold, te and what- -aver care we take, there is no doubt this surprise will kill her with joy. Bul come, come in to where there is a light, that I may see you. Heavenly Saviour! that I should ever behold your darling face again !"
On entering a low room, where a lamp was burning, his rapturescammenced anew, Margiana could not help smiling rough her tears at the fantastic phrases -lie madv*? use of to express them. But, dy- v " ' Ing
soon entreated him to go, aud with Lady Percy prepare her for the unexpected sight that awaited her. " Then I must see lady Percy by her¬ self, in the first instance/' cried he; f * for no sentence can I pronounce short of the plain matter of fact. Margiana is alive ! *• she may manage it as she pleases, but I am too exalted and too delighted for cir*- cumbendebusses. Go, some of you, and let Lady Percy know I want to speak with her this instant. 1 will ;keep out of your sister's way. I should telLher all in a mo¬ ment's time. Lady Percy '.dear Lady Per- xy 1 where are you ?"' Margiana, left alone, endeavoured to subdue her extreme agitation; but the sound of every advancing foot destroyed all her efforts. Presently; Lady Percy, incredulity and astonishment stamped on her features, entered the room.* " Caa
" Can what I have heard be possibly true?" said she; "-hasr not Wallop been dreaming?" " Oh, Lady Percy," cried Margiana, st kind friend of my dear sister, 1 know you will forgive my forcible intrusion. How, indeed, could I forbear it t knowing you both here ?" Lady Percy, tenderly embracing her, said every thing friendship and hospitality could dictate. * I, rejoice," said she, * c we have this fern porary shelter to afford you. Pray Heaven the joy prove not too much for ©ur lovely Genevieve;! Harold, after re¬ solving not to trust himself with her, for fear of being too abrupt, at last deter* mined no one should tell her but himself. Andfindeedt my own. agitation made me glad to devolve the task upon him. He is npw breaking the joyful news to her, and 1 have entreated him to be cautious. But hew
liovf happens it, dear Margiana, that wc see you here ? Your being alive is scarce- ly a greater surprise to me than your be¬ ing with what you, no doubt, cali the re¬ bel forces/' " And I shall probably encrease your astonishment/' replied Margiana, " when I inform you that Lord Widdrington has himself joined those forces. Your uncle and your brother, after being repulsed from Widdrington Tower, by some unac¬ countable means not in my power to ex- plain, determined him to forsake the cause he had tiii then adhered to. He has march¬ ed with them hither, and it was his will that I should accompany him/* : " Hark !" interrupted Lady Percy, "Ge¬ nevieve is coming; Harold has already told her," "Oh, dearest sister!" cried Margiana, unable longer to restrain her own feelings as she sprung to the door, and received Genevieve in her arms, who almost clung to her for support, as she sobbef out the name
attempting, my other word. "Well 1 /* cried Wallop, who had fol¬ lowed Genevieve into the room, " this is happiness. Now I know what it is. I never felt any thing like it in my life be¬ fore. What a delightful sensation ! Icould lay down and roll for joy. Bless, bless you both! Aye, that is right; cry, cry heartily ; it will do you more good than any thing else. I wish I had the same relief. 1 feel quite overloaded with happiness, I shall split, like a heavy-laden ship/' Indeed, Wallop was in such an extacy, that the sisters themselves recovered, in some degree, their tranquillity before he could be quieted* te Once, long ago; we saw him in- such a humour/* said; Genevieve, " th® night our poor father was expected in ; London, We scolded him for it thenj but now we may iadted sejoioe with bin* beyond all measure
the dead!" cried she, again embracing her, " where have you been since that fatal night you left us ? How did you escape from the ruffians who were supposed to have murdered you ?" " I did not escape from them, and they did not murder me/* replied Margiana) smiling, " They carried me into Scot¬ land. But I fear it is too long a story fo tell you to-night. It would keep Lady Fercy from her rest, and it is alreadv late." tr "I could-as easily fly as rest/'said Lady P. Genevieve and Wallop declared the same. " But/' observed the latter, '< ht us have some mercy on this dear creature herself vShe has probably had neither food nor sleep for many hours." Margiana protested she was no more inclined to sleeps than they were; upon which Lady Percy ordered some refresh¬ ments into the room, and good-naturedly said—" Wc must not, however, send you? , suppcrless
^pperless tombed, neither will we long de? tain you firom that conversation with your sister you mijst both so much wish fon TelLus nothing, therefore, till to-morrow, when, if .these martial spirits that accom¬ pany us will allow us leisure for the pur* pose, you shall become subject to our cu¬ riosity," " Not so, indeed," replied Margiana. < f - 1 will not claim such forbearance. What I have to teli may be related in such few words, that I will make ,no apology for in¬ truding them upon you to-night." " Eat something'first," said Lady Percy ; " for though I have no doubt you will prove yourself an heroine in what you have.undergone; yet you are not an he¬ roine of romance to live without food." u And see, dear sister," cried Genevieve, ff who is your serving-man upon the occa¬ sion. Harold Wallop is never gallant but when you, are. his object." And, in fact, he was quarrelling with all the domestics for
for presuming to wait upon Margiana, and protesting no human being but himself should bring her what she wanted. 1 * <c A plague upon ye all," cried he. iC Have J found the dearest friend I ever had in the world, after believing her dead for near two years, and shall I be hin- dered tendering my humble services to her, Lv a .set of officious knaves that never saw her before ? Begone, I say, or I will com¬ plain of ye to vour Lord, and he shall hot- sour ve with a vengeance." Margiana now enquired after Lord Per¬ cy, and was told he had gone out, on hear¬ ing of the arrival of his brother-in-law and Sir Hugh, to see them, and consult on their order of march ihe next morning. Recollecting also Arletie, she learned with extreme regret, that neither Ladv Percy nor her sister knew where she theu was; and ihe. presence of Wallop, restrained her from mentioning what she believed she v:"j assured of respecting her fovyy.yy .situ- U>'.. iv, k ' ations,
-had really been, might still be unknown to him. .. W r allop was not much surprised at hear¬ ing of Lord Widdrington's change. He supposed him f to have \>een actuated by motives thai solely concerned his son, and declared that Bertram never created asto¬ nishment in him, except when he acted right. Genevieve now in her turn asked sonie questions of Margiana, that led to a re¬ cital of her little story; and the effects it ■produced upon Harold, were at once co¬ mic and affecting. When he understood she had been confined at Rothes Castle, he muttered curses that were very often au¬ dible, and liberally bestowed them upon Lord Lothian as well as his sister, for hav¬ ing occasioned her sufferings, by lurk big so long in the neighbourhood of Wid¬ drington Tower. But when he heard of ffw>
the' danger Margiana had been in, owiug to - the absence of Kin!och, a'nd the sudden death of the old woman, he seemed al¬ most frantic ; and though he said less than before, walked up and down the room vith such violent strides, and his hands so firmlv clenched, that thev told him, in case Ja Iv Rof hes was suddenly to appear, they believed he would forget his manners to a lady. He became more reconciled to Lord I,oiliian as Margiana concluded her story, which cost the tender-hear?ed Genevieve many a fear; and as scon as it was ended, ladv Percy rising to retire, tokl the s*: ters she would conduct them both into the same room, as she supposed they would not choose to be \ytxxXcy\ that nii'-hr, * f i <( Alas, for parting!" cried Wallop; (i I must away to young Harry of Monmouth betimes to-morrow, and sec nb more of you till some bloody work has past, as it is likely we shall all meet dgain soon in a less iieaceabk way than we do ; at p'rest-iit. . k 2 Heaven
Heaven forbid I should be killed! I-shall fake special care of mvself, Margiana, that 1 may live to see you again." iC You came here to exchange some prisoners, I think," snid she, recalling to mind what he had told her at the door. '* Yes, and I am now returning a sue- cessful ncgociator, Delancey is with Glen¬ dower; and I have Lord Percy's order for his being exchanged agiinst two of the opposite party. I think they let us have him too cheap; they should have stipu¬ lated for half a dozen in return." Lady Percy called him a boaster; and, at lenrth, he rclucfantlv left them. " Now/' said she, to Margiana, " I will not intrude on you a moment longer. Genevieve has as great a surprise in store for you, as you have given us; and I claim great praise from her for having kent her council so well, and not forestalling the discovery she has to make to you." i f lady Percv then h&dc the sisters ijood niu'ht,
night, and left them to the indulgence of a satisfaction that each keenly felt, and one of them had not expected ever to en¬ joy again. They were no sooner private fhan Genevieve, folding Margiana in her arms, said—" Devoutly I thank God, mv dearest sister, for having thus restored you to me. Mav we never par* a^ain ! But I must not be alone with you a minute, without informing you of what Lady Percy just now al hided to/* " She has made me exoect to hear something very wonr- : v fu]/* said Mann- ana, with an earnest look. i( I hope the surprise will be of an agreeable nature," "" Sit down/' resumed Genevieve; <f I shall never be able tostand while I tell vou/* * Margiana began to feel alarmed. How¬ ever, she silently did as she was desired. Genevieve took hold of her hand, and pressed it in both her's; but her sister ob- sened that she trembled, and her appre¬ hensions encreased. K 3. (f Ih;
u wilfy-ou forgive me two offences I have committed against you ? Slight in them¬ selves, they become .serious ones between friends and sisters. When we were living together, my dear Margiana, and you had no reserv€s wiih me, I was constantly de¬ ceiving you, and made choice of another, instead pf yourself, for the partaker of my thoughts." " Both these offences, as you call them, dear Genevieve, have hmg been known, and long ago forgiven. When you pro¬ fessed your affections in your own power, how could I believe you sincere, every word and look bearing evidence to the contrary ? And how could I be so blind as not to discern, that to Catherine Morti¬ mer you confided what from me you con¬ cealed ?" ! " And yet you never reproached me for my'want of'confidence—you never suffered it to diminish your attachment to me. 0fo,.Margianp! how superior, through-
out our whole lives, has your character been to mine ? Well might you be ray father's favourite I" '* But what is this communication you have promised met 1 '*asked Margiana,though growing more asd more afraid of hearing it every moment, and expecting every coming word would be the name of Lo¬ thian. " You surely mean to tell me something I knew not before." " I do; but I must prepare you for it. When you went down to Edgehill with Lady Hothes, you may remember I attend¬ ed Queen Isabella, to Windsor; and there it was, dear sister, my heart became irre¬ vocably attached to one object, who ap¬ peared to me the most engaging of men." " Alas! I am convinced of it, my Ge- nev ieve V* <c The image of that beloved object I have ever since cherished in my bosom, vvith a constancy the most undeviating, the most tender, and, t«l! lately, the most hopeless. Long I felt, myself .slighted— x, 4. loife
long I believed myseif despised; yet my silent, unobtruding Jove was proof against every mortification, though, till I thought it returned, it. was never acknowledged." is And do vou now believe it returned?" j said Manriana, sighing at such a convic- tion of her sister's credulity. " Affer what I have rekled fhis very evening, can you believe it ? Ah, where, and how could he so impose upon you, my beloved girl ?" " At the altar, if he did impose on me," she replied, in a solemn tone; " for I am married, dearest sister, and but for the un¬ easiness this war creates, the happiest of human bcinjrs/' Cl Married 1" repeated Margiana. * f Y'es, to the best beloved, the most de¬ serving, to him 1 have so long and so faithfully preferred to every other- who left me, indeed; no eyes, no heart, for any but himself." " No eyes, indeed!*' involuntar'ly sigh¬ ed Margiana. " Oil! what a'desperate throw have you made for happiness ! But it
it.is past, ahd I will say no more. May he reform, and deserve you as well as he can ! The guardian now of my Genevieve's peace, Lord Lothian can be nothing less to mc than a brother." " Lord Lothian !" exclaimed Genevieve, indignantly, " Oh, how have you fallen into an error so insulting to me ? That strangers were imposed on by appearances, neither grieved nor surprised me; but how came you so far deceived, as to tiiink I could possibly love so poor, so unworthy a character as Lord Lothian, after knowing end appreciating the excellencies of Dc- lancev ?' Margiana clasped her hands together in the utmost amaze, but the flow of joy that rushed to her heart deprived her of utter¬ ance. <c Yes," resumed Genevieve, embracing her, " he for whom you have so long profecred a sister's love—-he, whom so of-' x 5 ten
ten ;with blushing checks I ha% r e heard yott wish might be your brother, is now in¬ deed^ my husband. While you unjustly accused me of an ill-placed partiality for a worthless libertine, my heart was en- slaved by the merits ofthe matchless Ethel- red. Lady Percy discovered my sentiments. in their infancy; but I dared not disclose them to you* leal your earnest wishes for my happiness, and your strong desire to avoid an union with him yourself, might have tempted you to have betrayed me to him. Yet let me yiot wrong at once his judgment and hk fidelity towards you. Till convinced beyond a doubt that you was no more, he regarded me as no othei- thun a sister." " Then blessed be the report of my deathi" exclaimed biargiana, " fpr a bless¬ ed effect it has pr fined, There is now no consideration ia this world, save the loss of those 1 love, that can weigh down iny.-lightened-.heart for an instant. You, jbappy.as. excellence can make you; De- 3 lancey
lancey my brother; Lord Widdrington sa¬ tisfied by an union that will induce him to let me live in peace ,v-what is thyi e, besides the common lot of humanity, that can ba¬ lance such a store of happiness ?" " I am sure mine is rendered nearly per¬ fect by hearing you talk thus/* said Gene¬ vieve. f * After the delight of seeing you alive, arid here, what was wanting, but vour approbation of rny conduct, and De¬ lancey's safety? Wallop has brought me tidings of the one, and you assure me of 1 the ofher. Ivlay the life of Ethelred be but spared in the approaching danger/and. Twill die content, befal what tnay." (< I trust it will be spared," returned Margiana. " Heaven forbid an union so ivell assorted, and so desirable, shotiM be so soon dissolved. I shall now meet 6e>-- lancey again, with a joy little Inferid'Ptb* your own, since there wanted biit this to-' endear-him- to me. But how happens it,' my sister/ that Lord Widdrington is'uttats'. k 6 quainted;
fe
quainted ..with your marriage?. .Surely no long time has elapsed since it took place." t ' f Yes, indeed, above half a vear," said Genevieve; (C but Delancey wished his fa- ther fo receive the first intimation of it from his own mouth; and when you hear the slorv I have to relate, you will find what a variety of accidents prevented their meeting." •' There h one other circumstance, my j love, I hope you will be able to explain to your own honour; and that is, tbe in¬ timacy that suddenly appearing between yourself and Lcrd Lothian, surprised ail the court, while it convinced every one there you were attached to each other; I should grieve,, indeed, did it appear you had encouraged the admiration Of one person, only io conceal your own senti¬ ments for another." " On that subject I have nothing to fear from your friendly censure, since I can
can explain my motives for that part of my behaviour to have been, if not strictly richt, at least well intentioncd ; and with that circumstance 1 shall be^in mv narra- tive, since it occurred first in the order of time. But my tale will prove a longer one than vour's, Martnano, and is, indeed, too tedious to begin now." l< Agreed then to defer.ii till the mornr iiig," said Margiana; '-'and let us now to bed, thankful for the felicity we enjoy." init in the morning they were awakened at early dawn by a summons to prepare for their departure. Lord Percy was al¬ ready gone with the strength of his forces^ and the young Earl of Marc a remained ber hind, with a small number of. choseia mejl, to protect his sister on the road, as she was determined to follow, aud continue near her husband during the time of action; These men might be wanted before the close of day, and, Lord March was imp a* tient to begone. Margiana and Gene- vieve.
vieve. therefore, thought only of not de¬ laying their friend, and were soon ready for their short expedition to Shrewsbury, where, it was believed, it would be ter¬ minated by their meeting with the royal army. This opinion was confirmed by various persons whom they met on the road : and on reaching the city, they found that the Prince of Wales, and his brother John of Lancaster, were, in fact, expected there that evening. But so many places of ac¬ commodation had been engaged for ihem and their followers, that Lord Percy's peo¬ ple had not been able to procure a lodg¬ ing for their Lady within the walls. Lord Mar<£ was therefore directed to a large and convenient farm-house, that afforded sufficient room for all the three ladies, about half a mile from the town; and there they esteemed themselves fortunate in the quietness of their situation, and in not being; divided from each other, The
The royal brothers arrived at Shrews- j bury even sooner than they had been look¬ ed for. The ncs.t morning Owen Glen¬ dower was expected up with Ins Welch- men, to ioin the forces commanded by Lord Percv; hut Delancey was known to r.' *■ be no lorWer with him, or a prisoner. The instant that restored him io his freedom, heari:if that the two eldest princes were themselves coming to terminate this un¬ happy contest, he liad flown to the stand¬ ard of his sovereign; so that Bertram* though he enioved the satisfaction of hear- in'- 1 * his son was at libertv. was denied that of seeing him, ar.d forced, reluctantly, to abide with a party whom, in his heart, he detested. But Sir Hugh Mortimer and his nephew had obtained a dominion over him, under which he trembled; and he crouched beneath tlieir controul, aware that no subtle arts could now advantage him. He cursed the hour that brought them to Widdrington Tower, and shunned alike Lord Percy and all. the, chiefs, of the rebellion.
rebellion. But they were under no ap¬ prehensions of his deserting them. Sir Hugh had given them the strongest assur¬ ances that he would answer for Lord Wid- slrington's fidelity with his own head.
CHAP,
in »n^ii.iHii n^wiinmil** "i 1 m»M~Tii rn— i CHAP. VIL A smothered Fiume. No sooner bad Genevieve, whose situation rendered travelling inconvenient, reco¬ vered from her fatigue, than slie became impatient to communicate the promised derail to her sister. *' I will not delay it longer than to-dav/' said she, the morning after their arrival at the farm-house, " for we know not what any hour may produce, at such a time as this. To-morrow an action may fake place, and we mav have to mourn our own, or our friend's calamities." . . . ■ (i Avert
* f Avert all dismal omens," replied Mar¬ giana. " Providenco will favour the just cause, and we, I hope, shall greet Delancey as a conqueror." Lady Percy, engrossed by terror for the safety of ber own nearest connexions, and readily imagining the sisters wished to be alone, for the free exchange of their senti¬ ment*, considerately left them the greatest part of ihe day ; and ali the others of their party were too busily engaged in pre¬ paring for the important event that was expected, to give them any interruption. * f I fear you will think I am going to be very prolix," said Genevieve, u when I begin my account of what I have to teli you at so early a period as that of my stay at Windsor; hut I am very anxious to clear <wyself in your opinion respecting Lord Lothian, by explaining the origin # and::.nature . of. my intimacy with him, which. indeed was so sudden, that it must n- ■-.. needs
needs have occasioned much conversation at court, and excited a thousand conjec¬ tures, not one of which had anv founda- tion in truth. The fact is, I was in pos¬ session of a secret that would have affect¬ ed his life, if known; and 1 am not cer¬ tain whether even to you, and at this dis- tance of time, I am perfectly justifiable ia revealing it. " You recollect, sister, the miserable end of Lord Latimer, who was found dead in a grove adjoining the castle, and, as it was supposed, dispatched by his own hand. But he had not been guilty of this iasfc rash action. He had fallen by the sword of Lord Lothian. " Owing to my inadvertence in lingers iiig behind Catherine Mortimer and Henry Percy, with whom I had been walking;, to look at Lord Latimer's play, I became the only witness of this dreadful scene. How the quarrel at first arose between these tw» - fiery spirits, I am ignorant;: ibr k seems* several barty-.words had pas* previously <bfc* twee**
tween them ; and some dispute arising on the subject of their game, the suppressed fury blazed forth anew. Latimer, having advanced an opinion which was contra¬ dicted by his opponent, brutally called him a presumptuous boy; and 1 mnst do Lord Lothian <ie justice to say, that he made very Jitt^ answer to this insult, fur¬ ther than observing to the oth^r, that he was intoxicated, and consequently not a fit subject to contend with. He even had the forbearance, mistrusting, as he after¬ wards said, the abruptness of his own tem¬ per, to think of leaving the place, and had actually reached the end ofthe walk nearest the castle, when Lord Latimer followed hinv with abusive language. Upon hear¬ ing it, he stopped. I, who was near him, g the best of my way from so disa- eeable a scene, urged him to come away ' me, and he was preparing to acqui¬ esce, when the other uttered some expres¬ sions extremely insulting to Lady Rothes, and told iiordLothian he had,better be- gone*
o-one, and watch ©ver the actions of his sister, to prevent her, if possible, from in¬ curring further 'in famv than she had alrea- dv done. <{ Incensed by this gross affront beyond all moderation, Lord Lothian instantly drew his sword, and deaf to mv entreaties, and every argument I couid urge, violent- ri O tJ ly attacked the insulrcr, yet not witiiout iii ving him time to defend himself. f> I was so confounded and terrified at the sight of thdr mutual fury, that I had not presence of mind sufficient to act as I immediately ought to have done ; and when at last it did occur to me to call for assist¬ ance to part them, it was too late. Intoxi- cation and excess of rage laid the unhaopy Lord Latimer open to every pass of his enemy; but a singular circumstance gave that turn to the event that it afterwards took. Lord Lothian's sword, by some accident, sprung out of his hand—the other, seeing his disadvantage, was basely rushing upon him, which Lothian per¬ ceiving,
reiving, was so exasperated, that he- <md ■ ■denlv wrung Lord Latimer's weapon frotu him, and plunged it through his heart. He had staggered back a few paces into tlu* grove, while receiving the wound, and then fell dead in an instant. " I know not what 1 said or did, but I believe I fainted However, I recollect perfectly that Lord Lothian, all his pas¬ sion subdued, and even trembling himself with horror, supported me, entreating I would command myself. I asked if Lord Latimer was killed? ' Too certainly/ said he, ' and I must die for it. I am no fa¬ vourite with the Kins;, bv whom he was beloved, and I know he will revenge his ■ death. But a man cannot live always, and j it is as easy to die by the axe as by a j fever. Be composed, therefore, dear Lady ? Poor Latimer is no^reat loss to the world, and I shall be still less so/ V He made thus light of the affair, as he subsequently assured me, because he saw Iwas so frightened as scarcely to fcetain
my senses. However, 1 drew near *o the bodv, ho;>inK something mitrht vet be done to restore it to life. But a moment's view of it destroyed all such expecta* tion. f Crme away/ said Lord Lothian ; * this is a shocking sight for your gentle nature. Sutler me to see you safe to your'apart¬ ment, before I surrender myself to expiate rny offence; and tell your beloved sister, Ladv Genevieve, when vou see her r^ain, that my last breath was spent in calling down a blessing upon her/ " I looked at him as he spoke, and my heart melted with pity at the contrition of his countenance, the tear that sprung to his eye, and his tender mention of you. I recollected how long he had loved you, how young he was, and how rash from education as well as nature. Pe was also a near kinsman of our dear mother's. A vriah arose, in my heart to save him, if it were possible. * Alas,* said 1, ' your gujlt was -not pre me-
premeditated. In such a case, might noi the existence ofa fellow-creature be pre¬ served without offending Heaver. ? If mv bearing: no evidence anainst vou, mv Lord. can avail, you are safe. Let us withdraw from this fatal place/ " lie hung down his head, and folded his arms in silence; hm he suffered mc to draw him away. After ail vancing a few steps, I struck my foot agninst the handle of his sword, which he had lost, and took it up. 'This U your's/ said I ; ' it Hew out of your hand. It cannot, any more than I, prove a witness against you. All will ap¬ pear the effect of the wretched man's own rashness/ " I was amazed afterwards, on recollect¬ ing I had been cool enough to talk thus; but I believe the despair in which I saw Lord Lothian recalled my seette.ed senses, while his sorrow and repentance touched mv heart. lie took his sword from me, and mechanically sheathed it, without seem- ing to know what he did. At length,, I got
^ot him into the castle, where, fortu- nately, almost every body being gone t.o f rest, we met no one in our way to his apartment, which I knew to be within three doors of mine. There leaving him, —'■ Fareweil, mv Lord/ said I, ' To-mor- row, if questioned, .1 shall aver that we rrliiincd to the castle together, leaving Lord Latimer in the s»rove. If you would jr>l therefore bring disgrace on Margiana's iii-.tcr, and your own kinswoman, say no- Uyv.il to criminate vourscOf/ *• lie re turned me no r.iiswcr, and I re¬ tired to my own rooi'-i, to pass the night in a state of agitation that 1 leave you, my ilear Margiae s a, to conceive, li h unne- ce'isa:', to /well on the issue of this ad- ventuie, jinee it is already lujown to you. Lord Lothian was too fo:nl of life to slight fhe oiiorecl means of preserving it; and however he might be suspected of the guilt of Lord Latimer's death, nothing, except through my testimony, couid be proved against hini,. Hence arose, in his ™<. * v - >- breast
btreast that regard for me which he afrer« Wards took every -opportunity of display¬ ing. Yet at no time did he profess it to* be tinctured with the slightest portion of love; though as he is of the number of those! who, from the natural levity of their deportment, have only one way of shew¬ ing their friendship for women, namely, by extravagant praise, and attentions ge¬ nerally thought flattering, it is no wonder his was mistaken for a tenderer passion. ** In the meantime, the admiration he was supposed to feel for me, I was sud¬ denly and unconsciously made sensible of for another. Prepared as I was, by the en¬ comiums 1 had heard from you, to behold Ffhelred with partial eyes, my heart, I ac¬ knowledge, was more t^an half subdued the very first time we met. It was in the presence of Queen Isabella, who, for his uncle's sake at first, and afterwards for his own, frequently admitted him into het apartments—and the gracefulness of his carriage, the sweetness of his countenance, and
aW;the^-gefetleness of his matinei^j made iwe consider every other young man I had- hitherto seen as decidedly his inferior. t{ His near affinity obtained him a prompt Introduction, to 'rae; and when I disco¬ vered that his conversation was as pleasing as his external appearance, I concluded it was impossible you should again reject him, in case he renewed his offers to you, and endeavoured to check the partiality I found stealing fast upon my heart, or at lea^t to confine it within such limits as be¬ came a sister. f< Unluckily for me, my new frjeml, Lord Lothian, though unconscious-of the evil, gave it strength. Whenever he saw Ethelred speaking-to me, he would ad\ ance the moment the other retired, and beseech me, in his fantastic -way, to put all the rmgie of beauty in requisition to enslave his heart; 'for then/ said he, e he will fdrbear to attack my goddess, Margiana, rfrtdjie a ikL' you will make the handsomest -pair h\ England, 4 i2 "Alas!
-Ala§ -haw? sessedof-th© pow-ar, would^J-.!»&£$,-j^rac~ tiscd his '-advice ! bur .whea .ErfieJijed .fol- lowed you to Edgehill, I gave upthe qause as lost, as did Lord Lothian ako;, and th® similarity of our sufferings, though knowz> ©niy to myself, m&d& me sympathise with him. : " Judging of your sentiments, de^r sis¬ ter, by my owtn, I thought that Bthelrcd, now ati inmate iij the same house with yourself, could not fail af creating-an in- terest in his favour. I resolved, therefore, when he should return, to a\oid him, since I felt it was not in my power-to see him with-indifference; and considered it would be an injury both to you and myself, .to ' <rf » f encourage a preference for one who \srts likely to obtain your hand. " Judxe of my sensations, of mv asto- <yj- v * n ish ment, when I heard from Harold Wal¬ lop, on his return with Ethelred to Lon¬ don, that you had a^aiu, and finally-re- fused him. i cannot describe tho contra¬ riety
1 was anjrrv with Vou. I thought yon the most" unaccountable of human beings; then fancied mvself secure of succeeding vou in his' affections; and then,"hearinu from fhc'sarrie quarter of his strong attachment to 'you, and his determination to marry th? other woman, gave myself up t> a fund melancholy; that proved upon mv spirit?, a fleeted 'rnv looks', and drew upon mc the notice of the censorious; who all pro- nou'need me 'dying'fbr the love of Lord Lothian, ' ! ff Indeed, it was, no wonder this became th.e universal'butt nion. 1 had been so lonjr and' so much 'teazed abotit Idm, that I could not help bhrdunw whenever he at)- pr Cached 'me, nnd almost whenever his ninVe was mentioned ; for if generalK' hap- '•^ned, upon either of these occasions, ****** - * that every e^e present'was fu'riied towards rnre. ...... rr/ Cath^ririe Mortimer vat? t*\e ohiyp^r-* son who detected : rh'e real tratL. We fad ^ 3 become
^ ; -* MARgSAHA,
become extremely intimate; yerl*was far from intending to confide my sentiments to her, when she one day archly said'to me—' What is the reason, my dear• Gene- Vieve, you suffer yourself to be so v wor¬ ried about Lord Lothian, when, lam veny certain, you do not care two straws for im'?* h* , .
;:vi Wis h/ re , : „rnedL,^other.pe< i pie Woukl have sense e.nough to, make the same discovery ; but till they do, I, know- not how to prevent their worrying me/ L 'Perhaps/ retorted Catherine, 'you are •not very, anxious to hinder them. .No dbubt you like better they should run on a wrong scerjt, than hit ; npqn the right < -a y f •: ■ ,; ,-" . ■■ ■ one. . , . * *'1 cannot gqess what you mean by a right scent,' answered I, a good deal con- fused. '..'<., \ : . " '." "• * ' Canapt you, indeed ? Poor, denr Ge^ i^evieve S How innoceht she' looks! apd yet, ifl %yas only to name. Harold £ Wal- or his friend^ Ethelred , Winbtfrne> I
am not clear which, I warrant she would blush like a young criminal, just disco¬ vered committing his first offence/ " Though bitterly distressed, I made an¬ swer, that the one being a near kinsman, and the other a most worthy character, it m was not likely I should hear either of their names with regret. But she did not suffer me to escape so easily. * You are not/ said she, * so able a cheat as you suppose. The verv first time I saw vou and vour cousin together, the st^te of vour heart was out of all question with me. Why, I could have told by the very tip of your nose that you liked him. And why should you be ashamed to own it? Does not an affection so placed us much credit your judgment, as a partiality thrown away on Lord Lothian would have disgraced it? I, for my part, honour your choice, and will venture any wager, hearing what I do, of your sister's persevering character, and constitutional indifference, that Ethelred will be your's at last/ , l4 ' kt In
* * " In fine, dear sister, overpowered by her observations, and perhaps soothed b} her prophecy, I confessed to Catherine Mortimer a truth, which till now has ne¬ ver been acknowledged to any other. Ye't fev.rfyA of havi'; ; ^ \i discovered by more that, her, I took uo pains to conir.idict the t;eneral error, r\^t»{ ir. mv answers to vovr Irtlejs froi:\ i *--?*_> c:*iH, when I .■{»«■■ lliilllit .1 t .' v hi K r t t , v * i i. : .. i J ^ v *• I ikv % * * ■ i ? *Lmi + . ,^ ! \ 'm^r-'-lWi Hiniv } f|^^" *- {*'< *if-r. sevciaiH^ wcr.t'd coutiuer vour stritir:?: coh'iic^;. J tlr:r*;l \vM coon mv who!** he P't " i. r to xi-'A, hs i was or.ee \ crv neard'/n y •'"-■■ Tnetlint^h af?^r vour .vturn, ^\aen I slioi ; 1 undoubtc'.liv have wore*. Ivl, had\o-i ? tii chcclr.l *v:e. c ,J '."'C verv ii.-'-t ♦Iiivj I s.:w Lord Lothian-— —' said 1, you prevent- cd mv cor,clu«linir words. I was about to add, I deryhed --im. Do vou not remem- ber, Margiana, giving me the bracelet, wrought with Lthclred's hair ? Ah ! could you but have rcr.d my heart, as you pre- sented me the precious gift!
** M *kP> - Wfls^rable- period that ensued, every-#ti^p/C^nsideration ; was- lo&t in sor¬ row for our mutual misfortune, in the un- timdvr fate of o,ur* beloved father. -■ Qur removal to tha^ seat of gloomy. ; graqdeur ia Nonh.umlierJanrt» ? was ill calculated, to enliven the ^qr^ra.scasatiojUi. tfta^we/gjjj ed down n»y h.rart;. and^ the.fatal clause, ia my father's..\vili, ^hile to you it was dis^ tresting,, jj^r-^ftmiejat. once of every iiope. Unable ojrhtr to qve.rcorpe my predilecfr tion, i^Jo b^av <up ; agfti^t the c.hjlli^g;ii>- fluence qf tu^airj I resigned myself tq whui Ithouvtn i\\i uu-fortunate'and iuevit^ able dei»tii>y, and piij^y .in your sight en** dva»au red; to a^su ;n o the appearancf; of anv animation,- . . .. , ..■ " Alice a. ioGuj, and dreary iutq'val of de.q>*>ndcnc£, ) a word ypu once, dropped restored me to life. You told me you thought-it \v> -sible, not ondy to. avoid a nsavria^e with Ethelred, but' ihe cloister; ako; audi blessed-vou, in .my heart*-as th& ben<?^» angel; l)pi*o Uu ,'j>^e^ve,rfi?e- fromj l o wretch-
t . i
fr
! t '
■ :, MitiVet' : w.t- part;bf ,my stofy wifh" pM^ymi^v^tkB iMj&t entirely iinacqttai f f I will not pretehd fojdescribe my grief and Co Sterna tiori, when, on the night of your disappearanee/ yod did not return from' 'the - : ll wry i rig-placei' 1 •";! / da red' ridt im* mediately; acknowledge I knew/,'whithei you was gone, tor fear'of your* being sur-r prised With- Kendrew, or bringingulanger tipon the poor'old man> l5ut when I heard tmi jqm rtetv'as well 'as every other, had heen searched" to no purpose, 1 became almost |i!/ifd with conjectures .and terror. Yet,, aB^r alf, 1 could bnly ; suppose^that, ^^ing t^'some ^afi^e, impossible for me to.dvvine, but sufficiently forcible tb war** tkiiii ne° measure,' v FfaHe;e/.^ arid 1 ^ ^ri
:'f^
> i it r
S^TKe'*iiiW :! rf
i r one over under Kendrew's
* ■ '*-!
s,'.]"in ; a m
ette, s^> strangely % ; the same -time, more pro-
I endea
I endeavoured, after awhile, to tranquillize myself as well as I was able, in the hope you would shortly transmit to me some intelligence. But when week after week sped away without bringing me this con¬ solation ; and the most diligent search that Ethelred and Wallop could male, was pro¬ ductive of nothing but disappointment, I could no longer refrain from communi¬ cating the design you had formerly enter¬ tained of accepting the long offered pro¬ tection of the late Queen. You will rea¬ dily believe the disclosure at once deter¬ mined Ethelred to seek for you at Paris; and pitying the extreme dejection, to which he beheld me a prey, he asked and obtained his father's leave for me to ac¬ company him. " Prudery herself could not have ob¬ jected against travelling, on such an er¬ rand, with so near a kinsman ; and, I fear, had it even been objectionable, the ex¬ treme pleasure with which I received the proposal, and thought of a journey in, l 0 Ethelred's.
eyer, a^t my ovyn request^, I was attended 1^4 a female servant, a middle-aged wo- n^an,* yery unfortunately for the poor- creature, herself, for she took a fever, and ,a * 4 ■ /■ - y . - * die4 within a week, after our arrival, in prance. "Our finding, that yon had not been heard of there, was a severe, shock both to Ethels re4 aj)d, myself. His affection for you seemed, so sincere, and his, grief was., sp manly, that I admired him as something more, amiable, than hu inanity, an, cl thought I could- haye diejl the-next, hour confetU- fdly^ to hase been so beloved by ,him my¬ self. Tie spent much of his tim,e with.me, when not engaged in making, enepiiries, concerning you; and- his. society, was a delightful poison, with the force oj* which I, was not, even \ef, fully acquainted. " For so;ne days-. I suffered an attack of the same complaint, that, had carried, off tny servant; and during.thaf period, how soothing,
They were a duty from a brother, he said; bait, alas! I, could nQt receive th^m with the tranquil gratitude of a sisteiv The, kindness of the Queen, also entitled her. to my warmest acknowledgments; bujt, lin^ certain of your fate, my dear Margiana* raid still,' in general, despairing of Ethel¬ red's love, it is. needless to say, I was vei*y far from being happy. " You. ajre^dy know in wha^ manner CJura Castlpvjsought and obtained conceal¬ ment with us. from, her uncle, and of the, dreadful news she brought us, which npw ? appears to h^ve. been a fabrication of tha-$ vile woman, Lady Rothes, news, that.^ think, would have killejd-. me, had not D^r lancey persisted tq. deny, them all credit* lie argued that it was hardly, po^stbje such a murder could be committed in the im?* mediate neighbourhood of» W.iddrinaton Tower, without its being by some cifcuqi-r &Jan ce bet ra > ed. ' E i i h e r t rac es of b i oqd^* sa 4 id.hej ' would-ha^v^ heeib founds or th^ 5 river
-%K*
9 -i *%%%** ^ ff $ " s *
fitrer Would wave yielded up Its * ■ Would'then mga m&' to hope; and there was a Charming magic in his voice, wh»ch, when I listened to it,- banished uneasiness, and every feeling hut those of tenderness
"Clara, in her wild and rattling way, frequently rallied me upon our good in¬ telligence, arid told me that though it should appear you was gone for ever, Ethelred still need not look beyond his own family tor'a wife. Bot I too little sympathized with Clara's character, and too strongly suspected her of partiality for Ethelred herself, not to guard my se¬ cret with the utmost care from her. How¬ ever, I was once thrown oflf my caution be¬ fore her; and she had the eyes of a hawk, ihat no circumstance, however trivial, could
"After she had been with us some days, >e place of her retirement was acciden- Hy discovered by her lover, William robpej, for 5 I* am tery confident she did
*.?
complained that her behaviour towards him was changed, and it was, indeed, easy to observe that it became more cool every day, yet encouraged by Delancey, he paid tis frequent visits, and soon appeared ta feel for him a friendship that recommend¬ ed him to me. (< One morning, coming into the apart¬ ment where Clara and I were alone, he abruptly expressed his fears concerning Lord Delancey's health. 'He harrasses him* self too much/ said he. ' The personal fa* tigue and anxiety of mind he undergoes are too much for human strength, and % strongly apprehend he has caught this fe¬ ver which has prevailed so much of late* f brought him yesterday, very reluctanilvj to own, that he has lost hia appetite and rest/ , " As Scroope said this, Clara turned her eyes upon me with a searching look, that tmfortunately covered my conscious fa^$ with blushes. However,, I, replied, m cala.lv
^1 n>}y. a$$ was f abS ^ tha t : l ^fopgd Scroope w$id4<P r $v4; n>is^ak@n; and no- mote was sg^d, on, the subjec^. Qlara^ soon after left therpouv an4 ne P ut an. end r to his visit; hnt scarcely was he gone, when Ethelred entered, and, as, if suffering from the heat, for, the day. was.remarkably wann, he threw himself on a seat without speaking. He bad ridden that morning, to a convent on tbe skirts of tho forest of Fontainbleau, aXk§>. U,was easy, to perceive, with his usual ill, -sjucttess-. 11m eyes were bent on; the ground, and tho recent observations of Scroope Jnduced- me, to False, mine to his coun tenance. The sight of it struck a tender*sorrpw, tp my. he^rt. He.was pale, thinner I;fancied than ever;., ancl:the mourn* fyl cast of his features called forth my foolish and ready tea^s i« a. monient. We had sat thus some minutes, when, suddenly. looking up, he^aw.-me before I had* time to withdraw my attention. Iu great sur¬ prise he gazed at. me, and though it, might iV>t be difiipuit fos .hun, to accotaut for, tuy
>-cars, there is no doubt he wondered at mv change of colour, for 1 was sensible J \.A that my face was instantlv crimsoned over, and that verv consciousness redoubled my *■ confusion. He arose, came to ir.e, nnd, inkins: my hand, kindly sa!d— s My dear Genevieve, do not «*ive wav to this/ Alas! thought T, I have si ven v/av too long to -yy> c * * ^-^ make resistance ie-v/. P»ut I could not speak. I found my hand trembled, and would have withdrawn it, when, before I was aware of his intention, he bent down his head and kissed me. ' Pardon me/ cried he, seeing me start wirh confusion and surprise, f how could 1 see a tear stand¬ ing on a sister's cheek, p.nd not endeavour by .some means to disperse it?" " Had the matter rested here, all had hcen well, and I, for that time at least, had been safe ; but, just as he concluded these words, still holding my hand, Clara re¬ turned, and her emotion was nothing in¬ ferior to mine when she beheld us, ' I beg pardon, 1 said she,' significantly, "and imuicdi"
immediately, retiring, closed the door after her. ' What does the foolish girl mean P exclaimed Delancey ; but I, breaking from hiin, ran after her, and desired her to re¬ turn. I thought she gave me a spiteful look, and a sneer I am certain there was upon her face. However, she suffered me to lead her back, though she did not re¬ strain herself from saving— 4 Believe me, I should not have intruded upon you, if I had known you had been so pleasantly en¬ gaged * I was prevented making any re¬ ply, by having reached the room-door; and the natural and composed behaviour of Lord Delancey, who seemed as if he had already fe gotten the transaction, must, I think, have rendered me the only object of her suspicions, which another unlucky circumstance tended to confirm. " Finding myself extremely inconveni¬ enced by the loss of my woman-servant, I had, ever since her death, been enquiring for another to succeed her ; and two days after this scene took place, Clara named a young
young person fo me, on the recommenda¬ tion of a friend of her's, Agnes de Monre- veil, whom you must remember to have tt seen at our court. As she had a very good character, and I was pleased with her ap¬ pearance, I readily engaged her; and the evening after she came, intending to place under her care a few jewels I had brought with me from England, I went into a little closet where thev were, to fetch them to j her, leaving her with Clara in my bed- Toom, into which this closet opened. The trinkets happened to be dispersed in vari¬ ous drawers, and I was sone minutes en¬ gaged in collecting them, when Clara, either impelled by idle curiosity, or from thinking I staid long, followed me, and reached the closet door just as I, not hav¬ ing heard her advance, was pressing to my lips the beloved bracelet you had given .me. "On looking up I met her eyes, and my countenance no doubt again betrayed me; for with adected gaiety she exclaimed, ,i » * 4wAv
€ Ue is a hnerv mortal, fa*r Genevieve, * r « whose h;';ir von can so honour! What Would the dc-^r - in^man say if lie saw you ? But I protest/ continued she, imnerti- nentfy drnwin--* nearer, ' 1 believe it has bf'on^ed to the dear kinsman himself. I a;n pic.;!ii>'i::uslv mistaken if that is not the very bracelet your infi exf ble sister was ob!i«r o d, bv parental authority, to accent at £dp;ch:lL after borrowintj it as'3 pattern to work another bv/ " I was so vexed at her recollection of it. and hurt bv her want of delicacy, ihh\ rf - I made no et!;er answer than'shewing her the fel?ow te> it f hoping she would stip-i- Y;o:;c the yvzi she lied seen was vours. But Clara w.ia io<; cuniiiniy'to be deceived, and too malicious to suffer me to think she was: for. t^kin-» up the second one, 4 Ave/ said she, * this is your sister's hair. ' It ii rather lighter ti an Lord Pelancev's; Ire*- member her weaving it perfectly/ Then, with pretended unconcern, humming a song, she turned from mc, oddly flourish- to*
wig het hand, as though she had said, 'yes, I see plainlv how it is now ;' and left me covered with shame, and most painfully eiiibar rassed. "But an alarm of a more serious nature soon engros.ed all my attention, .and ren¬ dered me not only headless of Clara C\is~. ties, but almost huiiifeijnt to what she thought. Lord Delancey, on his return home that evening, discovered manifest tokebs of indispf'siliop ; and the next dav it. was beyond di-jpiue that Scroope had judged righf Iv, whc.n he believed him at¬ tacked by the prevailing" fc*er. \U 'pro¬ gress became very rapid, and for three days he was counted to his bed in some danger. When he was sutueicmly reco¬ vered to sit up again, Clara and I -occa¬ sionally bore hini company; and the-at* tuitions of Scroope were really those of a friend, thougli Clara now blighted Jtim in so marked a manner, that he could derive very.Jktre satisfaction from his visits; and, io--mc;:#t least, her partiality for Ethel ied became
became more visible every hour. A two¬ fold cause rendered tne civil to this ill* used young man. I felt obliged to him for his kindness to Delancey, and I pitied bim for being subject to such capricious treatment. But I was quickly made to re¬ pent my compassion, and taught to know how rarely young men will, not miscon¬ strue any attentions they receive. , .** No sooner was Ethelred's health tole¬ rably re-established, than he resolved on that scheme, which you know he after¬ wards put in practice, of extending. his enquiries to the. provincial convents of France ; and speaking of his intention one day before William Scroope/ I happened to say, l wished his hearing of you might occasion him speedily to return; not only that ;otsr dreadful suspense on your ac¬ count might be terminated, but also that we might be enabled to quit France, of •which I was heartily tired, and convinced that the climate did* not agree'with 'me, • *' If .you 1 think it really--affects -youi • health
MARC? AN A. 239 health, my dear Genevieve/ said Ethelred, tenderly,' I should grieve you delayed leav¬ ing it until my ieturn. ! am sure if you feel a wish to revisit England now, I will most willingly accompany you thitlier, and' come back to prosecute my search after¬ wards/ * Or you, Scroope,' interrupted Clara, officiously, ' would no doubt be delighted to render any service to Lady Genevieve, since Lord Delancey's time is of value/ " No man thus called upon could avoid saying something very civil; but, whether it was the consequence of my being vexed at Clara's forwardness or hot, I cannot say, methought Scroope made a speech some¬ what more civil; net to say particular, than the occasion required. " In fact, as 1 have since learned, he was r irritated at Clara's behaviour, and hoped to awaken her former regard for him, by affecting peculiar attention to me. Had I been aware of his motive, I should have wished success to his scheme with all my heart;
hear£<;> but .'ignorant of that r it was no wonder I, felt offended by his subsequent conduct. Totally regardless of Clara, for the remainder of the time she continued with us, he directed his words and looks to me, in such a manner as niade rne re¬ pent having ever noticed him as more than a mere, distant acquaintance; and when apparently insensible to the change in ray -demeanour, that seemed necessary to re¬ press him,, he .wrote to me, a few days be¬ fore Lord Delancey's intended journey, what" I thought a very presumptuous let¬ ter, entreating he might have the pleasure of accelerating his own departure, and es¬ corting dear Lady Genevieve to England. i judged it high time to £jivc him such a rebuke, as might effectually prevent his troubling me for the future. In very few words, therefore, I answered him; and they were to this eiiect:—
} i -
?4
l AU
€ I am reduced to the ne¬ cessity of abruptly informing you, that I. should be extremely sorry either to acce¬ lerate or to delay your departure from this country, or indeed to give you any trou¬ ble beyond this letter. Your time is vour own, and I feel neither a right nor a wish to engross any portion of it, as I hope, whenever I return to England, to travel under the protection of one in whom 1 can with more pleasure as well as more propriety confide/ *' This note I gave to tny new Trench servant, with a charge that she sliould de¬ liver it to William Scroope the next time he came to our lodgings, when, as you may be weil assured, I took especial care to avoid him. And the concern thus ended, Heaven knows, I thought no more about him, except to conclude that Clara had been actuated by verv rational motives to rt « discard so fickle a lover from her favour, vol, iv, m Alas?
t Alas! how, ignorantly were my judgments formed ! I soon after,pitied Clara Castles, with as little discrimination as I had blamed poor Scroope. , " The morning previous to that on which Ethelred was to quit Paris, I arose, in no great spirits, though he had the day before exerted himself to the utmost to animate me with the hope of his bringing back the wished-for tidings of your safety. We met alone, at breakfast; and he, observing I had been weeping, tenderly chid me for indulging a dejection, 'which,'said he, ' I have a happy presentiment I shall be able to dissipate on my return/ i God grant it V replied I, f for dispirit¬ ed as I am, I am weak enough to suffer every trifle to overpower me. I look for¬ ward to the time of your absence as to a dreary period, that withholds from me all friendly intercourse, since I must own that Clara, though lively and sensible enough in her way, is not the kind of person I A'ould ever confidentially converse with/ " Instead
fr Instead of immediatelv answering me, Lord Delancey, with an heightened com¬ plexion, threw down his eyes. Then rais¬ ing them to my face with an inquisitive expression, he rested them intently there for a moment, and suffered them again to fall. I fancied he looked confused, and feared I had said something wrong, yet not knowing what, awaited his speaking in silence. At length, in an altered voice, he said—' Fear not, you will no more be troubled with Clara/ " I now imagined he blamed me for speaking of her with too little considera¬ tion, and hastily replied— ' Do not sup¬ pose I dislike Clara. On the contrary, I think she has many pleasing qualities/ + ' Then/ interrupted he, smiling, £ I must caution you not to lament her too much, for she is, by this time, very near the con¬ vent she so ingeniously contrived to escape fro m. * * Good Heavens!* I exclaimed, greatly M 2 surprised,
#r uncle discovered her to be wi us/ answered Ethelred, still looking down on thp breakfast-table, and colouring vio¬ lently ; / and you are aware we possessed no authority to detain a ward from her guardian, when he chose to demand her/ "His manner indicated a mystery that surprised me. * Poor creature'/ cried f, * from the bottom of my heart I pity her. What a punishment must such seclusion be to one of her sprightly disposition !' * It must, indeed/ replied Ethelred, thoughtfully. ' But as her spirits were often rather oppressive to you than enter- tainipg, I am in hopes you will not feel her departure any considerable loss. At- tachqd as you are to the Queen, you can never want society, when you choose tu ,swi& hi .the private circle she draws around
,T ?Cu< C
j. ., not i t »
fhe r ate of poor Clara, and forgot ?*U the vexation she had given me, when I thought of the vain regrets and the penance she was then enduring. "The next morning proved a severe frinl fo my own very small share of foifi- tude Efhelred was prepared to depart; and after a conversation, friendly on his side, and hardly supported on mine, where¬ in professing the character ofa brother, he gj^e me much good and fraternal advice, he in a solemn tone prayed God to bless me, and to vouchsafe to us both a happier meeting, wheri you, he hoped, would be restored to our arms. Melted by the ten¬ derness of his expressions, and grieved at the recollection that, absent at once froin him and you, I was going to be bereft of all I held dear, the tears gushed abundant¬ ly from my eyes, and scarcely knowing what 1 did, I pressed his hand to my bosom as I sobbed 'out- 1 -'' Dear; dear Ethelred ! farewell '/ He looked surprised, but with- M 3 out
£ut saving any thins:, hrstilv* saluted me arfd went away, leaving me in a state of affliction that convinced me too surely all iny future happiness was entirely depend¬ ant on himself. Then it was I became sen¬ sible of the wisdom of that maxim bv which you from your earliest youth had heen scll-jruided-—that a woman on^ht ne- ver to put her affections out of her own power, unless she is certain of their being returned, as well as properly placed. " I now come to a part of my narrative, which will give you as much surprise as at the time it gave me, unless. 'vhich is not improbable, you. have had any suspicions of a singular fact excited bv the account you would receive from Lord Lothian of liis journey to Paris. Did he tell you that he travelled thither in company with your page, with Maurice ?" " Yes, dear sister," replied Margiana■; " and if my conjectures are right, you will feel a'second time surprised; when I inform, you that Lord Lothian (admitting his evi¬ dence
' f deuce to be creditableLstill continues, in the belief that it was Maurice whom he travelled with." <c That is very extraordinary indeed/ 5 said Genevieve. iC Bnt you would naturally be led *o suspect the truth, if, on your return to Widdrington Tower, you found Maurice had never been from thence/' (< I was so," answered Margiana. " And his information confirmed me in an opi¬ nion, which all I had heard from Lord Lo¬ thian had not even raised ; for he fold me he missed a suit of his own clothes at the time Arlette disappeared ; arid had found part of a lady's apparel burning in the chimney of his room. Astonished as I was at such inconsiderate wildness, you probablv, when you first learned it, would be yet more so, since you was ignorant of the circumstance that first introduced Lord Lothian to the notice of our mad cousin J . *■ I was ignorant of it till I saw Arlette at Paris," said Genevieve ; "but, though n.o,t wholly ingenuous, she did not ccmceal M 4 from
from, me that part of her story. However, to proceed in order, I must acquaint you, that very soon after Ethelred had left me, my French nu/sd, with a most demure countenance, brought me word, a page belonging to a young Scottish nobleman, named Lord Lothian, particularly begged to see me. As no reason existed why I should refuse this request, I Ordered her to introduce him, and at the very first glance was struck with his strange re- semblance to Arlette's remarkable cast of features. " I leave you to judge of my surprise, when, on our being left alone, she disco¬ vered herself to me, and related how, un¬ der the name and garb of Maurice, she had desperately imposed herself on Lord Lothian as your page, and had encouraged him tp pursue you, as she imagined, to France,. "I asked her how she became acquaint¬ ed with Lord Lothian, and how she had learned his being at Warkworth?—a cir¬ cumstance
stance I had been profoundly Ignorant df myself. Upon which she entertained me with the narrative of the curious nocturnal scene she had treated you with, when you so imprudently, I must say, opened her cage door. 1 could hardly credit my own senses; and, to confess the truth, more than once, as she talked, suspected her of being a little flighty. Obstinate she proved herself beyond all doubt, for by no argu¬ ments, no entreaties, could I prevail on her to promise me she would lay aside her disgraceful metamorphoses. On another point also, though 1 knew it not at the time, she was equally resolute in wrong; for, in reply to my enquiries concerning Lord Lothia&'s. actual place of residence, she denied all positive knowledge of it, and persisted in only laying she believed he had a house in Paris* >whereas, as I have since learned, both from Lord Percy and my husband, he was scandalously disgrac¬ ing his nrtion and his name, by an in fa- mous ab®de in the very same convent m5 where
where Arlette had learned from Clara Cas¬ tles where to find me. She persevered too in a strange notion, which at that time 1 could not by any means account for her having taken up. She fancied her brother deeply exasperated against her, and de¬ clared she would not for the world have him* discover where she was. I was at much pains to remove this error; but her mind had been poisoned, fov the furtherance of a treacherous project, and it was not in the power of any thing I could say to furnish an antidote. <f Prepare vourself now, my dear sister, to bestow, all your compassion upon your Genevieve. While 1 was indulging the sa¬ tisfaction that the safetv and the society cf Arlette naturally imparted to me, a blow, the most severe, and of all others the least expected, was suspended over my head. J cannot even now, happy as I am, look back upon the despair it inflicted, whin out shuddering, and wondering how I sur¬ vived it. 1 was preparing to rise the next morning*
morning, and repeat.my endeavours to ob¬ tain some influence over the misguided Arlette, when my maid, hastily entering my chamber, delivered to me a letter which she said had been, till within an hour be¬ fore, forgotten bv a servant of Lord De- lancev's, who, on account of some bu- siness, had been ordered to wait in Pans three days after his Lord's departure, be¬ fore he set forward to rejoin him at Or¬ leans, lie had beeii directed, she said, to irive it to me as soon as Lord Delancey left the liouse ; but it had unfortunately es¬ caped h«s recollection until ihe moment of hisqmt'ing it himself. Head it, my dearest Margiana, and though vou know not what it h to lo.o, vou cannot but ima. f riue my r* *ta* J sufferings on the perusal " Margiana took the letter from her sister, and with astonishment ran over the follow¬ ing lines, which she observed were written in Lord Delancey's hand.
m6 lt T
4?
ir may s
ser it can be painful to hear it. sen she forgets the retiring modesty o ?er sex, to display unsolicited love, she ts the respect that before was her due. ''itb such respect I alwavs wished to have treated vou. You are not satisfied with ir, and therefore it is withdrawn, and you must quit a house wheie vou are so im- properly an inmate. Retire, to where your i a * example cannot be contagious, to that so¬ litude and concealment which may give you leisure to reflect, that when a lady obtrudes her affection in a quarter from hence none has ever been oftered to her, ie excites a sentiment more unlike
love than even hatred itself—contempt. " For your sake, as well as my own, I hope we shall never meet again; yet
it
>r$4
t * i C
i ' -.>
$t
" Some imposition must have heen prac¬ tised here, mv dear Gene\ieve/' said Mar- mr eiana, examining the hand-writing of this cruel letter. *' It is impossible Ethelred could have penned such words as these— so unmerited, so insulting!" " I thought so at first," replied Gene¬ vieve, " until 1 saw the superscription to myself, and compared the fatal lines with oiher pierces of his writing I happened fo be possessed of. But when, after all, the dreadful conxiction of their being genuine was forced uoon me. can van wonder that 1 felt nearlv annihilated ? 'Wus it fo thi* rt end/ cried I, half drowned in tears, ' \ on professed kindness and a friendship fur me, inhuman Ethelred?—cold and proud in- sulter! I may have been imprudent in suffering vou to discover mv sentiments; hut were ihey so manifested as to entitle tne to a punishment like this? .Alaft.I wretched girl, what hasi thou now to do, but to obey his cruel order? Turned thus out of duon*, quit this wretched house,
m®vi * make certain ! * "Vainly I invoked wounded pride to support ray spirits and niy sinking* frame, apd strove to scorn an affronter so base and unmanly. When I recalled the hours we had past together, my heartfelt broke and bleeding. I determined, while yet able to make the exertion, before wholly overcome by*my misery, to be gone; for I<shrunk from the idea of his supposing I lingered in hopes of hearing from him again ; and, therefore, ordering my maid to prepare instantly for my return to Eng¬ land, I bade her send to me the supposed page. I must do Arlette the justice to say, that when she beheld my distress, though ignorant of its cause, and found the Frenchwoman unwilling to leave France, she without hesitation agreed to accom¬ pany me, and afibrd what little comfort. was in her power. €t Very/little^, indeed, it was I could re* ceive. i My senses continued sunk in grief during
durkig the wholes of our melancholy joilr*? Hey; and I arrived more dead than alive in London, where the friendly Catherine^ on learning the nature of my sufferings, received and soothed me wifh a> tenderness lean never forget/' Genevieve's narrative was here inter-* rupted, by the entrance of the very friend whose kind offices were so gratefully re¬ membered. Lady Percy came, in much agitation, to acquaint the sisters that sho had just been informed by her brother, an action would inevitably take place the following day, terms of accommodation having been offered by the two princes, and promises of pardon to. the revolters^ which they had refused. " Every thing," said she, " is now pre¬ paring for a general engagement; and happy are they who have sufficient occa-* pation to preserve them from reflecting. ■. s .• v ..: I have
.Henry ;, ment of oar arrival here, and probably shall not until all is over '* "Tiif all is over, therefore/' said Margi- ona, tc you shall not foe left to yourself And let us not repine that this regretted contest will'now be so soon at an end. How dismal would it have been, to have had our present anxiety protracted to any length ®f time ! And who can tell but that, before to-morrow hight, we may be so happy as to have peace re*- stored; and Lord Percy, Lord March, De- lancev, and Harold Walloo, all safe ? While we petition Heaven in their be¬ lt df, let us add one prayer more: may ti/.; be the last mad rebellion we ever be¬ hold r Ladv Percy fervently cried amen ! and accented the offered kindness of the sis- ters to pass the rest of the day in their society, when Margiana's even spirits. proved
proved an infinite support to/both her anxious companions, # At nighr, when she retired with Gene¬ vieve to their own apartment, the latter resumed her recital in these terms.
t>WAJr#
#■
w
as
CHAP. VIII. An unjml Ac^imilotu 94 Could any circumstance have added ta my affliction, during that unhappy period of;my life immediately, following my re¬ turn to England, it would have been in^ creased by the behaviour of Arlette, who, soon capriciously withdrawing her confi» dence from me, seemed to view me with dislike, and listen to whatever 1 said with distrust fknow not from whom, unless from Lady Rothes, she adopted the gene¬ ral notion of my attachment to Lord Lo- thian, her Own partiality for wham she had ^ '.:-...'. uud if*,*
undisguisedly confessed to me; but I af¬ terwards discovered that her conduct to¬ wards me had been the consequence of that mistake: some expressions she herself let fall during the last conversation we ever had together convinced me of this; and during her short residence in London, she frequented Lady Rothes much more t intimately than any other person. " I was little disposed, however, to la¬ ment any trivial evil. The report of your death was corroborated tb me in so many different ways, that 1 could no longer de¬ ceive myself into a doubt concerning it; tmd the horrid certainty, together with that of being scorned by the cruel Ethel¬ red. bowed me down beneath a weight of woe, compared with which, what I had be¬ fore endured in my father's house, or at Widdrington Tower, was peace and com* fort. So far from endeavouring to bear up against if, I welcomed the symptoms of a failing constitution giving way to a bro¬ ken heart, and besought Lady Percy to spare
5 s* arc her consolations, wh^i sh* 3 soughf [ to persuade me either tha* I had been de¬ ceived by a forgery, or that the man who j could so barbarously, so unprovokedly in- suit me } ws unworthy of my remem- \ brance The first suggestion I could not i admit of. I was too well acquainted with j Lord Delanrey's hand-writing even fo hope \ f the fatal letter was an impos't'on ; and j various after-refiections strengthened my painful belief of its having been actually penned by himself. " With shame and anguish I recalled to mind every little testimony I had ever given him of niy regard ; and yet so inno¬ cent, so remote from being bold were they, that I can truly aver, the strongest was that conveyed by my action when I lasf took leave of him. More than once his eyes had been scarchingly fixed on my face, more than once they had expressed surprise; but how far removed was I at the time from apprehending he suspected me of an unbecoming wish ! "Thus
** Thus mournfully passed the time, till be and Lord Lothian returned together from France. The first intimation of this event was given me by my cautious friend, who, equally with myself, feared my meeting Lord Delancey unprepared, though she would not suffer me to indulge my own wish of wholly avoiding him. ' 1 have no patience/ said she, * to hear you talk of banishing yourself from our domestic circle, because an infatuated young man has chosen to give way to fas¬ tidious pride or unaccountable caprice. It would be humouring him too much, and submitting to his unjustifiable treatment, as if you had deserved it. No/ pursued she, indignantly, ' conscious of not hav¬ ing done any thing the most severe moni¬ tor could censure you for, meet him with a serenity of innocence that may press remorse upon his heart, and mortify the vanity that alone could suggest to him you honoured him with your love/ * f These high-sounding words buoyed up
up my spirits for a time, and even inspired me with courage to determine thati would not abandon my usual place at table, when, two days after his arrival in London, Ethel¬ red dined at Lord Percy's. et But I ought in this place to mention, that Arlette, whether influenced by a dread of seeing her brother, whom she believed incensed by her flight, or by the uncon¬ troulable desire of bein if with Lord Lo- thian again, (in order to join whom, as we had heard he was £oin£ immediately into Scotland, she knew there was no time to he lost), whether with either or both of these considerations operating on her mind, I am ignorant; but certain it 1*5, that, after a short and extraordinary con¬ versation with me, wherein she took no pains to conceal that she thought me her rival, she actually resumed her disguise, j which I had persuaded her to lay aside, l and quitted the house the next morning, before any one in it was stirring, except¬ ing herself. She left a letter of thanks to f 1. j
■ t Lady Percy, and to me a. short farewell note, written solely for the purpose of misleading my suspicions, and preventing my sending her brother in pursuit of her, for she knew not that between him and myself any shyness whatever subsisted. f< Little aware of tiie art fid ness latent in Arlette's character, 1 implicitly believed, as she v-ished me to Jo, that she deMimed returning to the et;nvs:nt she had left near Pans; and communicitih:** her note to Lord Percy, though, at her very earnest request, I begged he wouid withhold the knowledge of it from her brother, that kind friend ^ent after her a guard, to pro¬ tect her thither, But to you, who would hear Lord Lothian's account of the page's return to him, I need not say, poor Arlette was nowhere to be found by Lord Percy's messe nsrer." " But where can the unhappy girl be at present ?" interrupted Margiana. t( Lord Lothian acquainted me, that Maurice, whom
whom he did not seem to suspect any other than he appeared, after attending him to Edinburgh, begged to retire from thence into the country, when the return of hot weather in that close city affected his health. Arlette went to Rothes Castle; but Dame Elizabeth, the excellent woman I mentioned to you as presiding there, said positively that the page only staid a short time, and then set forward with intent to return to Widdrington Tower. Yet there I found she had never been heard of." *' I make no question," a*eplied Gene¬ vieve, t( that she has again thrown herself in the way of Lord Lothian. If he takes any part in ihis present quarrel, and comes hither to join either the royal or the rebel forces, you will find we shall gain some intelligence concerning her." " I wish we may," answered Margiana, u though we may regret its reaching us thrpugh such a channel. But proceed with your story, my dear sister. I am impa¬ tient
?tient to hear how yow ^d Bthelred met, and how your misunderstandings were re¬ moved/' ■ .-/ --/.,' " It was a long time," resumed Gene¬ vieve, " before they wcw?> even in any de¬ gree, cleared up; and our first meeting was as that of two strangers. On his en¬ tering Lord Percy's house, he shewed no surprise at seeing me, for he had Been made acquainted with my residence there; and he bowed to me with a frozen air of respect, that both angered and afflicted me. After that first moment our eyes ne ver again met during the whole course of the day; but, as there were other guests present, and I was very little in the habit of discoursing with any one, the strange distance in our behaviour towards each other did not draw observation-^no, not even from Lord Percy; who* M t might believe my friend's assurances, was not a*j- prized of the real state of mv hesrrt; j •' j " But I fear it was not long^onreatcd from him. Lord Delancey's visits were
^ometlgtyGB. paid."i^ilien no other company was by, and then* the coldness of his de~ portment towards me became too remark¬ able to escape the notice #f the most su* perficial observer^ Lord Percy, I believe, soon suspected my dejection to proceed fron\inor.e causes than your reported death, andjshewed a friendly anxiety to learn the * f 'y' ' ^ / '■ truth* f Have you and yotjr kinsman had a quarrel i'said he to me one day. ' You do not converse like two persons who travelled to France together, and abided there with little other.society thari^ that of each other for several weeks. You never address yourself to him, your eyes are ^always averted from his face, and he rarely speaks to you but when civility absolutely obliges him to it/ " Distressed as I was by these, observa- tions, I thought it was most advisable, since I could not deny the justice of them, to confess a part of the truth. 1: therefore told Lord Percy, with sincerity enough* 4 Heaven
Ijkavea knows* that I had unfortunately given offence to Lord Delancey; but, by what means, fpras -as ignorant as himself. He kindly o$eifd to require an, explana¬ tion for me; but Iso earnestly supplicated him to forbear, that he dropped the design, acknowledging that nothing in general could be more ill-judged, or less service¬ able, than interference in any differences between near relations. e I have no doubt,' said he, * sweet-tem¬ pered and well-disposed as you both are, that you will soon come to a right under¬ standing. 1 will leave the matter, there- fore, to yourselves, taking no further part in. it than giving you as many opportuni¬ ties, as possible, of effecting, a reconcili¬ ation/ v <e With this view he was constantly press¬ ing Deiancey to come to his house, and it - was a subject of surprise io me that the other gave frequent way to his solicita¬ tions. Scarcely a day ever past that we N 2 did
MARGIANA, )■ • r did not see him; and I was foolish enough to be pleased with his presence, though he* maintained the same reserfei with which/ \ At"- -„. %ve had first met, and though 1 ! was obliged to hide my anxiety for an explanation he seemed so entirely disinclined to give. " Yet?there were moments when I could almost fancy he felt sorry for what had past. Occasionally I observed his eyes fixed mournfully upon me; and he wore an air of repressed melancholy, that affect¬ ed nie more than I even dared own to myself. My heart is more formed for pity 2nd love, than resentment. The appear¬ ance of sorrow in him added bitterness to my own grief; yet what, thought I, are his sufferings.to mine? He has not been unjustly reproached and insulted; he ne¬ ver fixed his affections on one who repaid him With cruelty and contempt. * What have I to do with compassion for a man who could drive me from my only asylum in a foreign land, and scorn me for an innocent
Innocent love, which, however he had dis¬ covered it, I had never obtruded upon hint. <f Harrassed hy these reflections, by my grief for your doss, which I could now no longer question, and by my uneasiness on account of Arletfe, I found my health gra¬ dually declining as the winter advanced, i felt, however, no inclination to utter a com¬ plaint, or to excite any alarm., My only hope was to preserve from general obser¬ vation that secret anguish which was bend¬ ing me to the grave; my only ambition was to be regretted, when no more, by hini-who had broken my heart. " Some weeks before Christmas, I was left alone with my friend, to enjoy, unre- y strained, the mournful privilege of tears. .u JSer situation did not permit her to ac- company Lord Percy, when, with Ethel¬ red; he tbok leave of us, to pay a visit to his father, and attend to his concerns at Alnwick, proposing, however, only a very short absence. nS «For
"For several days preceding their depar¬ ture, Delancey forbore coming tothe house. 1 was therefore spared the confusion I might have felt at parting from him ; t but what a pang the reflection gave, that he had pro¬ bably avoided me, for fear I should express a wish Of returning with/him to Widdring- ton Tower! I blushed with shame at being thought so mean spirited, and tried, ah, how vainly 1 to hate the cold and disdain¬ ful character that, supposing «me attached to him, could thus behave* With what patience did the g-en*4e i Lady Percy, e*n- Xleatfoftfkigio 'tfsm& mem fity ovm esteem, loothe my *afli0tk>n, mid «tri«% to dissi- pate tbe mortifying images 1 conjured up to torment myself I With what^friendly regret did she lament to find albher efforts
, * Lord Percy, when he took Jeave of tw, had not intended being fr^m Loiidon langer than six weeks; but some differ¬ ences that broke out with the bordering Scots detained him in Northumberland till <; ■ March,
MARGIANA. 271 Marrrj. He then returned alone, and 1 was pleased rather than alarmed by the surprise he signified at the sight of me, after so short am absence as three months, I over¬ heard him tell his wife the alteration was beyond belief, excepting to those who be¬ held it; and that Something must speedily be done, either by change of air or other¬ wise, or I should be inevitably lost. " Lady Percy's confinement, however, which commenced within two days after, effectually, and as it proved fortunately, prevented our removal from London; and her recovery being slow* ami for a long while doubtful, his attention* was too much engaged by her danger to be thrown away on one Whom it could not, at that timej have benefited. *' The joy her recovery gave me was the first, pleasurable sensation I had felt for many months; and it was quickly suc*- ceeded by another, scarcely inferior. This was the unexpected appearance ef the worthy Wallop, wbo had refused .Lord a 4 Percy's
Percy's invitation to bear him company r front/, the north, because Ethelred was at that time detained at Widdrington Tower, by a wo'ind he had recently received from a Scot, during that disturbance! have just mentioned. No sooner, however, was he able tc travel, than Walfop readily agreed to revisit London with his friend, on whom particular calls imposed it as a duty, to be then ai hand, to receive the orders of the *M- 3k ft J i ^jfc » ^ " These tumults, which have since actii" aiiy broken Torth, began then to be ap¬ prehended ; ^and Henry wished to have ail .those nobles/Jfe^cojald the most assuredly confide in near the court, that they might ..fee unreadiness to raise men, in case of ne- • cessity. The expected pressure of the Tonics, therefore, confined Ethelred much about the King; and Lord Percy was equal¬ ly , i assiduous to obtain the li^rty of th*-. .ypung .Earl of March, whom the friends of the,sovereign judged it expedient to hold in qaotivjty t ,ashe had been, ever since his , , ,, '.>.-> , ; father's
father's death, in Ireland, esteemed the pre¬ sumptive heir to the crown. But Wallop, of less tio?ninal rank, though of abilities and courage equally acknowledged, had more time to bestow on private friendship, and therefore w.e saw much of him." ?• But how, clear sister/' interrupted Mar- r.iana, '•' did he meet vou at first ? If Lord Percv. who had left vou sn lately before, was struck with your altered appearance, I am persuaded it would not make less im¬ pression on the kind-hearted Wallop." " Nor did it/' replied Genevieve. e: I was passing over a scene 1 thought imma¬ terial, forgetting how interested you al¬ ways are for the, honour and humanity of your favourite Harold. But^ to make you amends, let me hasten to acknowledge that to him, under Heaven, I chiefly owe my present fortunate lot. " He and Ethelred visited Lady Percy so .immediately after their arrival, that I be¬ lieve, next to the house that was my fa- therX> and which was now Delancey's "• M
tered. Fortunately, as I thought it, I was in mv own chamber when they came, so that I was prepared for the sight of them by my friend herself, who, now sufficiently recovered to leave her room, came to ap¬ prise me of their visit. She hurried me down with her most impatiently, for lei¬ sure, she said, would only more and more disqualify me for the meeting ; and she hoped every thing from the impetuous friendship of Wallop, who, when he saw ihose he loved unhappy, was of a temper fo brave the fury of warring elements for their relief. " Overpowered, rather than convinced, for I had long been dead to every hope, I suffered her to lead me as she pleased, and felt almost careless what evil betided me next. "Only Lord Percy was with the two friends on our reaching the hall; but they were deeply engaged in conversation, and I felt extremely unwilling that our en* * trance
trance shoidd interrupt them, in the belief thev 'nad not observed us. . I therefore has¬ tily retreated, and d cw Lad ; .' Percy back with me into the next apartment; but we had no sooner opened the door of it, than Wallop overtook us and catching hold of mv hand—' For the love of her who is gone/ cried he, i suifer me to behold the sister who was so dear to that first of wo¬ men, the blessed Margiana !' " He paused, as if silenced by his own emotions. I could no longer make an ef¬ fort to fly from him ; but I was as mute as himself, from an overflow of pleasure, at the sight of so tried a friend—a strange, an unwonted sensation. " Then it was that, casting his eyes on my face, he noticed the change it had un¬ dergone ; and starting back, exclaimed aloud—* Heavenly God ! is this Lady Ge¬ nevieve P < * " He was overheard by Lord Percy and Ethelred, who were following him; and the sight and approach of the httet encreasiug n 0 t|\e
. the agitation I had already undergone, proved too much for what may be called rather my mental folly than personal weak¬ ness. I couldj)ot become paler than 1 was before, but I felt mvself jjrowinjr faint, and Lady Percy afforded me timely sup¬ port. 'What is here to dor' cried Wallop. 1 Is if the loss of her sister has reduced fhis sweet creature to a disembodied spi¬ rit ? Why, what hands are these?' pursued he, lifting up, mine, as they hung blood¬ less by my side. f Fie upon }e all: she has been finely taken care of. Think you she can live a week at this rate V 4 Look to your friend, Harold/ said Lady Fercy, half angry at him, yet unable to restrain her fears, r It was he who took Genevieve from Widdrington. Let him render up an account of his trust/ '< Recovering myself,' I assured Wallop I. % was very well, and gently.pressed his hand, jn confirmation of wnat I said. He bent dovm his head, as if to kiss mine; but I be- lieve
lieve it was rather to conceal his emotion. Doubtless you was in his thoughts and the sight of my emaciated figure might brint* vou r:cre tenderlv than usual to his rerolleciion. When he quitted me, Eihel- red advanced, and for a moment J fancied he was g'jing to oficr me his he*ul ; hut he iiijmcdiatciv retreated, and felt into cii>- course with Ladv Pcrev, who hear*! him r m with impaiience, and ans-vered him hardly with temper, for, as she afrerwards assured me, she felt provoked, and even distrusted, at the odd and persevering distance he maintained towards me, in / 'fiance ofthe most common dictates of humanity. " Wallop, I saw, marked hitn with ztten- t'on, and looked frequently from one of us to the other ; but he also wrapoed him¬ self up in silent reserve, and scarce spoke to any one till after dinner, when, rising to go out with Lord Percy, he asked me, in a low voice, if he might see me alone the following day? I hesitated, and co¬ loured, for I imagined he wished to talk to me
rne concerninsr Etlv:i.ed. However, hr ivould no! h i uu' n-'-- : !'.itt« 5 Be h -aa ii mav/ • u 1 tie. 1 *., i'- c-.-.- ' ; and if you have the hta:t tn refuse a hush- ful old friend, who ris uo: <•>•, en y<.u vo fonsr, whv. so ira*< ; i /u* \»rt-.r, ?h;st i^ a!! I ^',a!I ?c)/ '• When he was cc<m% I r.ccuainfcd I.a/.v Prrcv v/.th his ivquchi, and she etureated mc bv «!! pienns to ^ra T U it. ' fnto what- ever ce!:cern Harold Wallop i.^ udmitted/ raid sLe, ' '>oue benefit ensuer.. He has Lren sifted bv the faiiies to dispense bless- irsirsand kind off.ces, aa\ through his means I for etc] vo ir peace w:U be restored, atid PcIanccVs vanity humbled, You shall be locked up with him, and ! will not suffer you to be released under two hours/ ■" Though much less sanguine than my friend, vou will readily suppose 1 hailed her omens, and followed her advice. Wal¬ lop was early with me the next morning, and seemed so unaffectedly interested for my welfare, that it was at first with some difficulty
di^uilty ! resttjined myself from opening v.'-y v hole henrt to hirn without restriction* L ii when 1 *. allod toitiinc! Ids extreme in~ ♦imarv with Ethelred, and that whatever I rJid io the one, it would appear I wished repcried to the ether, I checked myself, a/raid ie..t tuner should suppose I sued for pity and reconciliation, when, in fact, resentment was the only sentiment 1 ought to harbour. " Yet, prone to justify Delancey where it was possible he conld be justified, I ad¬ mitted his presmt beha\ lour was in some degree warranted, when Wallop informed me what he grounded it upon. ' The instant we were alone yesterday/ said he, ' I asked him what was become of that cordial and fraternal friendship yott had always expressed for each other, and with which you had quitted England toge¬ ther? And, taking the privilege of inti¬ macy, I must make free to acknowledge to you, I was not only surprised but grieved at his answer.' ' Pray
' Pray repeat it/ said I, calmly. 'He has aectMv.med me to mortification; and any additional insult he mav (hink proper to oircct against me, I hope I shall be able to endure, with as liltle complaint as I have borne the last. What is trie offence Lord Delancey charges me with r' 4 One I iri:st, ; you will be able to dis¬ prove, dearestJLady—-that of putting your¬ self under the protection of a person in the service of Lord Lothian, and leav¬ ing France solely accompanied by him.; though you must have been aware of the scandalous life his principal at that very period was leading—a life which, to use Delancey's strong expression*, was more lhan sufficient to shock and revolt any wo¬ man of even ordinary delicacy. Since it was impossible to suppose such an accusa¬ tion well founded, Lfcjared him to prove it, and he readily gave me a promise that his belief sheuld be regulated bv vour own f is rJ J J bare assertion—your avowal, or denial of • - ■ ' I the fact. To receive either of these, he has
^it
? w '.CV
^gl
has accompanied me hither; and Lie ft him below, where he bade me tell vou he is willing to en ser into any explanation yog require, whenever you choose to" honour him, by commanding his presence/ - * Oh, I require no explanation; I wish not to see him. After a formidable pre¬ paration like this, I a>z</f/"aotsee him. But through your mouth I will tell him, he has .wronged my innocence, wounded my feel¬ ings, anddestroyed my peaceof mind. When, -unjustly, he cast aspersions upon me, he himself became guilty of cruelty toward| -one who was defenceless, but for his pro¬ tection. Yet I forgive him/ continued I, shedding a torrent of tears, * and have only to hope he will one day become sensible of his injustice.' f Oh, Ladv Genevieve! these mistakes shall be cleared up^ and without delay. Two persons must not be suffered to re¬ main Unhappy, for want of exchanging a few words. I will call Delancey this in¬ stant. , > i .* . " Wallop
•m
*&.
yu
4f
,s ^
*W
^^
:£*
%2fM
ithheld him. 'No, Harold,* said -I, 'it oes not become me thus to trouble your friend. ^1 have no claim upon his time, jior wdtrld his coming hither now answer ihe purpose ymi expect. My happiness he cannot restore, for it is not in my power to remote the grounds of his con- tempt. I haveno doubts for him to clear, and I am unable to resolve his. The mis¬ take, therefore, for he does labour under a mistake, must needs for the present re¬ gain as it is/ s *Tt shall riot, if I live/ exclaimed Wal* lop, impetuously breaking from rne. * Shall I see a difference subsisting between two friends, who are both rendered wretched by it, and not overturn every obstacle that apposes my reconciling them ? Stay but till'1 come back, I entreat you/ And away he speeded, leaving me in a panic'of dis- tress at the recollection that I cdmd not, without betraying Arlette, and the whole V'- * of
enlpate^myself. >v # ** Dreading the sight of Ethelred under, ^ such circumstances, I was hastemng away to avoid himi^ut such had heen gallop's activity, that I met them both as I wa«l leaving the room, and then, confused by fhe impossibility of escape, I stood mo¬ tionless and silent. Delancey bowed, *and in slight agitation said something about receiving my commands; but Wallop spoke more directly to the point. * Lady Genevieve/ said he, * declares you have wronged her, Ethelred. I felt certain of that befiote; but she forgives you, and wishes you to be convmced of yonr injustice/ ' As soon as it is Lady Getievieve's plea¬ sure/ replied Ethelred, 4? grave!y> ' to ac^ Kg-naint me how I have wronged her, I will acknowledge my offence, and solicit her pardon. I will even prove myself as prompt as ever to take an interest in her concerns; for when she had recourse to
'-..-> the proteq^on of a man doubtless more •a valued thant^mvself, I did nof thiiik I was y? • *■ • ■.. '"V> pAempted from the duty of offering mine againi |§ ever she chose to reclaim it/ .{..%■ " At 'these words, so poignant and so ncool, iny teafs flowed afresh. '■ I had not recourse to the protection you reproach me with, my Lord, until I v/as forced upon the measure ; and I am now cruelly a suf¬ ferer, from being unable to explain all the particulars of the case. But wlien timej . as it will d6, brings the innocence of my intentions to light, you may perhaps, with regret, remember, that you treated me with indignity! did not deserve.' tf But why,' interrupted Wallop, 'can¬ not the matter be now so far explained, as to terminate this disagreement which af- ilicts each of you ? Excuse me, who have no right to interfere, for entreating, Lady Genevieve, that you will, in some degree, convince Lord Delancey he has been im¬ posed upon/ * Heaven is my witness V exclaimed •♦jfoEthelred,
Ethelred, with warmth, ' the keenest re¬ proaches Lady Genevieve could make, Would be welcome to me, if they proved" I had been in an error. She should in- r^i\mr c 1 stantly see a penitent at her feet, designed to submit to any punishment she deemed sufficient to atone for his fault/ ' God bless you, sweet Lady!' cried Ha¬ rold, f explain the mystery that obscures this transaction.' " Thev were now both silent, as if wait- ing for my speaking, while I clasped my hands, and inwardly groaned at the mar¬ tyrdom I endured for Arlette's folly. ' Shall I reject my former belief/ said Ethelred, c af last ? If you say you did not quit Paris the very day after a page of Lord Lothian's waited on you for the first time at your apartments, and with that very page, and no other companion, I will implicitly credit you/ 'Credit me then/ I replied, < when I assure you the whole was an unfortunate: illusion/ ' , - ; 4 Then
myv absence with a servant of Lord Lp^ thian's ?•' * He might possibly then bein Lord Lo¬ thian's service/ answered I, my cheeks burning w^h blushes; ' but he was, in fact, a youth who had been my sister's page„ and whom you may both remember by the name of Maurice/ * Maurice!' they exclaimed, with one ; voice. ' Maurice ! whom we left last week at Widdrington Tower, and who has never been absent from thence any time during these last three years V i-' "I was confounded by this turn, which my distress had .prevented my recollecting was so probable; and sitting down, half distracted, f You suspect me/ cried I, 'you accuse me of imprudence and falsehood, and -will not take my word. I have no¬ thing more, therefore, to say. I refer yo% to JU»rd Lothian himself, who will tell you the, same that 1 have done/ * No doubt of that/ said Wallop. 'But thin
thk is ihe strangest story I ever heard/ He sighed aloud, while his friend, after a-pause, during which his piercing eye shot through me, said* with a composure I thought frightful— ' I was. not aware, Lady Gene¬ vieve, when I liberated Lord Lothian froni a disgraceful confinement, how material a service I was rendering you ; for how could I suspect there existed so active an agen£ to maintain a communication between you ? However, you ave the undoubted mistress of your own actions, nor shall I ever presume to call in question the pro¬ priety of any of them. Nevertheless, when¬ ever Lord Lothian is so fortunaXc.as to call you his, I shall perceive only one subject of rejoicing; and that will proceed from a consideration whence it is strange that joy should flow—the feeling heart ofthe sen¬ sible and affectionate Margiana will not be ^ffiicted by your union. I have now only to apologize for having troubled you wi$h interrogations I had no right to make,, and to assure you they have occasioned you the
th& last uneasiness you shall ever receive from me/ "He laid hold of Wallop's arm as he ended these words, and would have drawn him away; the other, on his side, endea¬ vouring to detain him ; but I v\*as too much overpowered not to wish them both gone, and therefore waived my hand for them to depart. Wallop then made no further re¬ sistance, and they withdrew, impressed no doubt with the conviction of my being a weak, infatuated creature, now so enslaved by an unworthy passion, as to be lost to all sense of dignity and honour. . tf They were no sooner out of sight than I would have given the world to re¬ cal them. Yet what had I in my power to say, that could have availed me, without be¬ traying Arlette ? I submitted, therefore, to an irremediable evil; and once more yielding an unresisting victim to un merits ed misfortune, gave myself up as for ever iunk in Ethelred's, and even in Harold's esteem. Indeed, when I afterwards learned ^ • fronu
&om Henry Percy that the internet of the former had released Lord Lothian from an imprisonment which he had incurred by a scandalous offence, I could not wonder at the contempt my supposed attachment excited. That incorrigible libertine, even in the very pursuit of virtue, a slave to vice, distuned as a woman, had introduced himself into the convent where hf had rea¬ son to suppose you had taken refuge, and there had seduced a yountr pensioner of honourable connexions. No doubt Ar¬ lette had been his companion and assistant in his dangerous enterprise of gaining ad¬ mission ; yet that young dissembler, when she joined me in Paris, disclaimed all know¬ ledge of his actual residence. <( I found myself entangled in a dis¬ graceful web, without being able to blame any ill-intentioned fabricator of it, and without possessing any means of defence, unless I assumed the odious character of an informer, and threw upon Arlette the weight that was too heavy for myself to V0L « iv- o support.
support. But I was now accustomed to sorrow, and quietly sunk under its influ¬ ence. Indeed, had I been disposed to at¬ tempt my own vindication, no opportu¬ nity was afforded me by Ethelred, for he now very rarely frequented the house; and though Wallop often came, he never so¬ licited a second conversation with me. "Thus, bereft of the esteem of those I most valued, I again avoided society in general, ami considered myself, but for Lord and Lady Percv, as an isolated beini;, deprived of all my nearest connexions by death—overlooked by my uncle as a crea¬ ture of no significance—unknown to Lady Kachel—suspected, or rather forgotten, by Arlette, who had unconsciously destroyed mv neace ahd fame—and contemned by the possessor of my heart. Retrospection was painful, and what had I to look for¬ ward to in this world that did not encrease my depression ? I had already trespassed too long on the hospitable kindness of the friends I was with; the idea of living at Widdring-
MAKCIANA. . Widdrington alone with my gloomy uncle was insupportable ; and I began once more to turn my thoughts towards Queen Isa¬ bella, when the continued agitation of spirits, and uneasiness I bad undergone, threw me into a low fever, which deter¬ mined Lady Percy to remove me from London without delay. Her Lord had be¬ fore intended taking a house at Windsor, for a summer residence for his family, and the danger they both suppo»ed me in made him hasten the execution of his de¬ sign. In less than a week we were settled in a delightful situation on the borders of the forest; and deeply touched by the in¬ terest they took in my welfare, I assured them I found the utmost relief from the change, and the purity of the air; though in fact, I felt thai within,, which I was well convinced would baffle all their kindness, and defy every external remedy." " Ifl considered only myself,"said Mar¬ giana, here interrupting her sister, " so much am I interested in your story, I 5 should
should stifTer you to finish it without re¬ minding you how late it is, and that you ivill be exhausted for want of sleep-. But I ought not to be so selfish. Defer the re¬ mainder, therefore, until morning, my dear Genevieve. We shall probably have time for it before we can receive any intelli¬ gence from the scene of action, and when that does arrive, I have good hopes we shall not hear any thing distressing/' Genevieve was not sorry to profit by this considerate proposal. She therefore took her sister's advice, and sought repose. But before they joined Lady Percy the next day, she thus proceeded, SN.D OF VOL. IV,
_ ..... _ ii_uwiiii i iMli ■■ Hi ■ i ii iranw In i ------------------ ISn^r5arling f and Co* Leadenhali-StWK.
