Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Margiana: or, Widdrington tower: a tale of the fifteenth century
M <A M G IJL Jf*4* CHAP. L Mutual Forgiveness, VV E had not been long at Windsor, y.hen the court ateo removed thither; and Lord Percy renewed his solicitations—I had almost said his importunities, to procure the liberty of the Earl of March. Many ot his filends tried to persuade him it would not be sui prising if his anxiety proved fatal to that nobleman's life, by rendering him more than ever an object-of the King's jealousy and fear; but the more pains they took $© turn his thoughts from this favourite vou v n poin*\
to insist upon it; while other'subiccts of difference, of inferior momerit, Exasper¬ ated him, and embittered the mind of'the King, " Some "Scottish prisoners he had taken, when last in the north, were claimed by the latter; and Lord Percy, concluding his right over them was ex¬ clusive, refused to give them up. Every interview that took place, every message that was exchanged between them, pro¬ duced only more glowing irritation and deeper reseotment; and Hotspur's temper became at length so uncontroulable, that Lady Percy, in serious alarm, had re¬ course to tbe mediation of more temperate spirits. t( Aware of the influence that Helancey and Harold WaHop possessed over the mind of her husband,she secretly sent a messenger to London, where they still were, to entreat they would aot only come to Windsor, but evea Ukv up their residence in her house
<]kaw&~<*' serving my emotion when she aequa,rvl me with what &he had done, f that m^w good consequences than one will be the result. Harry's wratii, I flatter m\self, may be prevented in future from boiling o\ev in the outrageous manner it does at present; and the tedious shyness between you and Lord Delancey, which is too evidently un¬ dermining your existence, may, by some lucky chance, during the intima. y of a daily intercourse, be terminated/ t( I replied, that however anxious I might be for such an event, I miht exact from her a renewal of her promise that she would not inform Delancey who the person really was that accompanied me from France; for to you, Margiana, I will own, I indulged a latent hope, that when, in the course of time, he discovered the truth, he would, while he repented his injustice, gne me credit for the faith I had inviolably pre¬ served Cowards his sister. A disclosure from Lady Percy would, have been considered as '", " 4 b 5 springing
- . springing from me; and'when I thotiglit of his insulting letter, I feTt'tdo* proud either to make or suffer her to' make any advances/* ** Ah, my dearestt3enevieve," interposed Margiana, " how happened tt, all this while, you never reflected, that while Ethelred was indulging an unaccountable caprice, aiid "you was supinely giving way to your own grief, pool" Arlette was, In fact, even a great¬ er sufferer than yourself? How could you feel a friendship for her, and yet think yourself bound to observe an injunction, which consideration for her own future welfare should have made you wholly dis¬ regard ? M *' I now know that I acted wrong," re- pliedtjenevieve; " and I expected the ob¬ servation from you. I can only urge in my own defence, that I, at that time, made no question Lord Lothian and Arlette were married in Scotland; and When afterwards the truth was discovered, and Wallop posted down to Edinburgh/ Delancey'beirig ill, he received
received'from Lord Lothian the most so-^ lemn assurances that he knew nothing of Lady Arlette. He. then, without betraying her disguise, inquired where was the young page who had quitted my service for his? and being directed to Rothes Castle, has¬ tened thither; but was told by an old man, of respectable appearance, that Maurice, had returned to Widdrbgton'fower, There, indeed, he found the real Maurice; but alt his endeavours to obtain intelligence of Arlette were entirely unsuccessful. On bis, rejoining us, he and Delancoy> concerned at my distress,, forbore to reproach me for' my too long continued reserve ; K and strove- to comfort themselves and me with the reflection, ;that Ar;!ette'$ imprudence was unknown eyen to Lprd Lothian himself. However, I am sensible my conduct ex¬ hibited" the utmost want of judgment, andtlbave never ceased to lament it sin.ee,* , ., : f But to, return:—My friend blamed me % what she called my false delicacy; yet. - b 3 stil
still relied wiih confidence on thh ^Ood offices of Wallop, which he would have frequent opportunities of exerting, when he became an inmate in the htnise; and, fbr these reasons, as well as on account of her husband, she felt and expressed the liveliest satisfaction when, on the second day after the departure of her messenger, her two welcome guests arrived. Lord Percy was agreeably surprised by their ap* pearattce, which he believed occasioned solely by their own desire to see him ; and they took care not to inform him they had been sent for as moderators, a bare suspicion; of which would have enraged him past holding; though he could not, as the event has fatally prosed, have been more deaf to their arguments, or more averse to pacifi¬ cation. " I was unexpectedly gratified at finding Ethelred's behaviour towards myself now somewhat less distant than before. It seem¬ ed as if time had softened his prejudices against me, and even his resentment^at my apparent
apparent falsehood, so awfully expressed when we parted after our last conversation- As to Wallop, he was the same kind friend as ever; and he had not been many hours at Windsor before he testified his anxiety that Ethelred and I should mutually forget every cause of complaint against each other. He took ro pains to disguise his apprehen¬ sions on ths score of my health ; and even in Deiancey's countenance I often traced ^ commiseration that appeared to me incom¬ patible with the cruelty of his foregone behaviour. But all this pity was barren of effect. They both still believed I had been guilty of an.attempt to deceive them, and. that I continued infatuated by my partiality fbr Lord Lothian. Forgiveness, and even compassion, they accorded to my youth and inexperience; but it was chance alone that cleared me from the imputation of the worst of these offences. " You will smile when you hear what a ludicrous circumstance led to that dis¬ covery L ought to have made long before, a 4 and
and dispatched Wallop on a journey into Scotland. * f Delancey had for several days been in¬ disposed, by the re-opening of the wound he had so recently received, and had been tormented with so violent a headache, that Lady Percy strictly forbade her eldest boy, and a cousin of his, who was his playmate, from diverting themselves with any noisy game in his hearing. They were very obedient to this order whenever they were in the room with us, till one evening, when, as they were sitting together in a corner, a most hot dispute arose between them, which they carried on so vehemently, that at length their mutual contradictions were bawled out in unintelligible tones of pas¬ sion. Loud v\erc their defiances, and furious their enures, tiii young Percy, like a genuine Hotspur, knocked his antagonist down. His father and Wallop now in-* tcrfered. Tlie former made him beg his couwi/s pardon, and the latter inquired what were the grounds of their quarrel? They
They said it was about a story their nurse had told them the dav before. ( What story was that, Harry >' said Ethelred, taking littkr pcrcv on his knee. * Why, cousir./ replied the child, ' it' w^as about a cat that w**s turned into a - woman, and then changed herself into a cat back again/ * It is very early for such little- pugs as you to fight for a woman/ said Ethelred,, laughing. c Pray, hew did you contrive to differ about her?* * Why, because I said it was a true storys;- and William said it was* not/ * Then I am afraid, Harry, ifyou had the' best of the battle, you bad the worst of the argument. What made you funcy puch a diverting little story as that could? be true ?* * I think it was still, coiu.in Delancey, for^ ill you can say/ ' Then 1 suppose you would knock met down too, if you could;.for I do assure you, cox, it is not." * : ' But
< '* Bttt how do you know it is not ?* said the little boy. * Because it is impossible/ " ^Ahd why is it impossible ?' : c How much faster/ observed Ethelred. ' children can ask questions than men or wo¬ men can answer them ! However/ pursued he, ' try to change yourself into a squirrel, Harry, and see if son can do it. If vou cm, I will believe your story is a true one/ ' Oh, but/ replied the child, ' that is quite different. Big people can do any¬ thing/ * To take vou in vonr own wav, Harry, how do yon know they can ?' * Oh, because I have seen them/ * Indeed! Now \ on grow worth listening to! Come, !rt us hear what s-.ir^rMiitr things yd have si en, What changes do you know of?* * Why # J know of a caterpillar <'hat was changed into a butterfly/ . < But a caterpillar is not one cf the big people, is he, Harry ?' ' -•- 'No!
« No \ but I have seen a boy changed in¬ to a girl/ * Iii ess my heart! where ?* f Whv, here. Lady Gene\ ieve's page was turned into a wcman just after she came tp us/ ' How?* exclaimed Delancey. ' Lad\ Genevieve's page I' cried Wallop. ' What is the meaning of this?* f Oh/ said I, * Harry has no meaning. How should he ?* f Forbear, dear creature," interrupted Lady Lercy. ' The hand of Providence i$ here. It renders this child an instrument to clear your fame from censure, and unveil the truth/ * Be it manifested to us all then/ said Harold, r and you are the oracle we look to* Explain, dear lady, and pity our impatience to know that Geneueve, like her sister, is incapable of error. What of thi;> page turn¬ ed woman ?* ' Simply that the page mas a woman/ replied Lady Percy- ' 'xhe nest.time you »6 blame
l^kme innocent people, I hope you will be better informed/ " The two friends looked at Lord Percy. * Why, my good fellows/ said he, * I be¬ lieve you should'have known all this before; hut, to own the truth, my head has been very full of other matters, and I am afraid I forgot it. However, the fact is a fact of the first certainty, that little Maurice was assuredly no other than Ladv Arlette/ i{ Astonishment took possession of the features of Ethelred, £ My sister / cried he, setting down the child. f Oh whv. Lady Genevieve, was! not told of this before ? What could induce you to commit n;rh injustice against yourself and ntr, wliile you prolonged my painful anxietv 3 Lut whither did she go when she <jui{;ed \o^r protection ? J Cf I hung my hc^d at this inquin . v> difficult to reply to; and the change in Wallop's countenance encreased mv per¬ plexity, by convincing me of what I had he- lore only suspected, that he was attached to my
my cousin. Pressed, however, to answer, I told Lord Delancey that his sister, wishing to be with you, and believing you gone to France, had, in the disguise of your page, and under the protection of Lord Lothian, who was concealed on your account at Warkworth, pursued you thither, as she s-jpposed ; but failing to meet with you irt *'t« convent of the Ursulines, had resorted to me, whose abode in Paris she had learned from (Mara (Viles. ' And with me/ con- t:;:iR\! I, ' she was contented to remain, alter resuming her own character, till she heard of ) our return to London, when a dread of vour resentment, instilled into her i\)\o.d by Clara's insinuations; forced her once more away. She left a letter to in¬ form me she was going back to the Ursulines; but a proper person dispatched to overtake her, by Lord Percy, found her not either there or on the road thither/ ' And have you no suspicion,' cried . Wallop, impatiently, f which road she took? At home we know she- is not. Good Heavens!
Heav^us! what hazards mu^ she not have rtin. so lovely, so unprotected !* * But she had again assumed her disguise/ replied I; ' and perhaps returned to Lord Lothian, as a certain means.of immediately quitting London, and removing to a dis¬ tance from her brother; for Lord Lothian was at that time on the point of setting out for Edinburgh, on business relating to his nephew. When there, no doubt she would leave him, and most likely fix on some pro¬ per plate of residence/ ' Most likely !* repeated Wallop, feeling the same surprise you have just now ex¬ pressed. * Oh, Lady Genevieve, where were yowr prudence and your friendship for her, when you did not instantly acquaint Delancey with all you knew concerning her?' * No more of this/ cried Ethelred. r It may not yet be too late. She must, how- ever» be sought after without any further waste of time. I may be some miles on my ^ny this very night/ " Here
** l!ere Wallop vehemently'faler)>b%e&, £ » protesting he would himself go, instead of 5 his friend, whosestill unclosed wound woiild render such a hasty journey extremely ha-* zardous; and Delancey, well knowing his sister's interests might safely be entrusted to Harold, and urgently pressed both by Lord and Lady Percy to commit the afi%ir to him, without needlessly endangering his own safety, yielded at length to stay be¬ hind. " Harold's preparations, you will sup¬ pose, were as rapid as anxiety and love could tr.ake them. Within the hour he set out for Edinburgh ; and I have already told vou the luckless result of his journey. He was above a fortnight absent; and great was our perplexity, on his return, to find the fair fugitive had not been heard of; a per¬ plexity only equalled by that surprise we all felt at hearing she had so long and so completely deceived Lord Lothian.- Our general conclusion was, that shehad ; retired into some monastery, as a place of res- • * 3 pectable
captivity than the recesses of the Black- Tower. ** In the meantime, Delaneev's wound- assuming a more favourable appearance, his health improved, and Wallop had the satis¬ faction of finding him considerably better- than when he went away; but this was the only alteration to be discerned in Delancey* Though he never mentioned your name, it* was easily perceived you was never absent* from his thoughts; and towards myself his general behaviour was still reserved and- distant Civil, and even gentle; in his de¬ portment when we met, he yet seemed ton regard me as no nearer to him than a com* mon and casual acquaintance, and hardly ever addressed himself to me upon any, occasion. Lady Percy, who had believed the principal subject of di&erence was done- away when the mystery attending the paga wa's disclosed, became more than ever ex-? asperated against him, and frequently urged me to drive from my thoughts * a& insolent young >
deserved hot the worth he despised. « But, could I have attended to this ad¬ vice, it would have been overbalanced by Wallop, who ceased not to lament our tmi* tual estrangement; which he protested to me he was certain was the ^catise of-ex-^ treme regret to his friend. He entered into this subject with peculiar seriousness one evening, as we were walking together in the forest; and pressed me to acquaint him if I had any other cause of resentment against Ethelred than bis late mistrust of the honour of my word ? ^ " He looked at me, as he asked this ques-* tion, with a penetrating glance, that brought the faded colour into my cheeks! * None/ I replied, < that I shall complaiii of; none that I think worth troubling yott about/ ' s Ah. Lady Genevieve/ cried he, * f fear ^•l greatly fear------But I have no right to teize you with my conjectures; and my apprehensions would,only ofiend you/i *'.? f Ah
' Ah no, Wallop, AH pride is dead in me now. There was a time, but it has long been over, when I was sensible of reproach and insult. At present, you would find it difficult indeed to pain me/ ' Reproach and insult! Who coiild offer either to you ?* ' Not you, Wallop. Say on, therefore; I am ready to hear any thing you have to observe. What is it you conjecture ? What k it you apprehend ?' r Will you not blame me, as officious and presuming, if I say, I fear your heart is so far entangled as to be utterly irrecoverable? And yet, my lovely friend, at xhe risk of actually giving you that paia )ou say you can no longer feel, I am impelled to %dd, that if you was aware of the pursuits in which the most dissipated of mankind is siow so deeply engaged as to be wholly engrossed by them, your delicacy, as well as your tenderness, would be too much shocked to bestow—yes, I am persuaded* qveir agaio to bestow^ a thought of affec- f\l, „, tioa
tion Upon him. I speak the simple truth ; though, of all, or even half, the truth, it would be difficult to convey to you an idea. But every mouth at Edinburgh exclaims against the licentiousness that every day furnishes instances of. Virtuous daughters seduced, nay even the peace of married men disturbed, are mournful and revolting proofs of a disposition at once abandoned and incorrigible. How soon have the Ursulines, the wretched Clothilde, to whom reparation has been promised, and the severe punishment in¬ curred, and so narrowly escaped from, in France, how soon have they all been for¬ gotten 1 Dear, dear Lady, turn yctir eyes inwards on yourself, consider your own worth, so infinitely above what be can ever merit, and recal your strayed affections. The satisfaction I should feci is no object to dwell on, though it would be that of the sincerest of your friends; but U you have any of that regard left you once pro ^ ssed' for Delancey, surely the pleasure yo& rv -"* would
would impart to him might prove an in¬ centive/ * You are speaking of Lord Lothian/ re¬ plied I, determined at length to vindicate my own heart, though I discovered not all its emotions. * Any disgraceful information respecting him can excite in me no sur* prise* What other line of conduct could be expected from a man who has nc\er shewn better propensities?* . * None, surely/ returned Harold, in a. tone of surprise. * But, from Lady Gene¬ vieve, contempt alone, it might be pre¬ sumed, would be the portion of such a character,* f And so it is. Even while I pity Lord Lothian, as one designed by Nature for less ignoble purposes, I despise him as the slave of vicious and unbridled passion/ * Ah, why then, for one so lost, should you. abandon yourself to solitude and me-- la^choly ? Whydo you not root him frorn^ ypuv heart, and forget the worthless being- ypu •cant&ot esteem ?' r # f The
* The plant that never struck a fibre into the soil, what hand can unroot ? It h time io undecei^^ vou, Harold. You, in com- men with many others, have long cherished a mistake, the most degrading to me. You believed me early and easily attracted by the frivolous qualities of Lord Lothian, and still insult my judgment by suspecting me of attachment towards him. Tn return for that friendship you profess for me, and which 1 have no reason to doubt, you shall be the first person I undeceive upon this point. Hear me, therefore, once for all, and with the purest sincerity, declare, that for Lord Lothian I never felt an emotion of tenderness in my life ! I-rorn an acci¬ dental circumstance, which I am not free to re\eal, but which was wholly unconnected with a thought of love, our acquaintance h>i>t arose; and since then I have invariably reprobated his conduct, and considered his character with the same condemnation ss yourself. You look incredulous; per-. haps
haps you do not believe me; but why, were it false, need I make this assertion?' * And why, if it be true, Lady Genevieve, have you concealed the truth so long?* * To the person principally concerned it has always been known. Lord Lothian, from the first hour we met, has never believed himself the object of my par¬ tiality. Lady Percy, the friend of my heart, never thought me so lost as to loye him/ , * Is it possible that you serioiHy say this?* interrupted Wallop. * I can hardly persuade myself that I am awake. Rut why did you not long ago place the same confidence ia Delancey with which you now honour me? Why do you cruelly leave him in an error, which his friendship for you renders pain¬ ful ?' * Ah, Wallop, if you speak sincerely to me, you know but little of your friend. I fear he has been far from sharing your mistake. He chose.a higher ground tp mortify
mortify and affront me from; and now Tares little whether Lord Lothian be in my thoughts or no/ * I know not what you mean by higher ground; but of this I am certain, you ma¬ terially wrong him. Only your beloved sister was dearer to his heart than your.el I'; and now she is gone, no other possesses in an equal degree the power of afflicting him. He is of a temper too manly, perhaps too proud, to complain even to me; bttt I know he suffers severely from your Leha- viour to him/ * From my behaviour! Good Heavens, how otherwise than reservedly can I behave to one who affects to treat me as a stranger? Would to God I had always observed the same distance 1 I might then have been spared the indignity he thought proper to overwhelm me with/ * Indignity, Lady Genevieve ! Indignity from Ethelred you nor any one ever re¬ ceived. I challenge the whole wofld to bring forward
forward a proof of unmerited insult from him/ * Yet what ; alas, had I done to merit it? A sister might have conducted herself, might have conversed with, might almost have thought of him as I did. No, Harold, Delancey was cruel and unjust; and is now probably, as you observe, too proud to con¬ fess that his conscience reproaches him for What is past/ < Why should it reproach him ? What c/heuce has he committed, unless anxiety for your welfare be a crime ? When yoa abruptlv quitted hit? protection, to throw yourself ostensibly on that of Lord Lothian, for whom he had no reason to doubt your previous regard, what man, more especially what kinsman, would not have felt the in¬ dignity offered to him as he did ? And yet you can talk of being treated with contempt* a-nd insult* Excuse my warmth, Lady Genevieve, but such accusations no one should urge without proof; and proof you have
^irme'f ''Mb¥ilieMamfe : tSatattefic^ to you dri account of the page, then ap¬ parently iii Lord Lothian's service, you are cleared, and, I grieve to add, at Arlette*s expence f but wny your resentment should outlive tlie error you took ao pains to re¬ move, TicnoW not/ ( '* I think hot of that error/ replied f, 4 and with readiness 6wn I was wrong iii not discovering it sooner, put surely ydu are unacqtiainte.d. with some particulars of Lord Delancey's con^upt. Had I, without provocation, quitted Paris, instead of await¬ ing his return, not even he should ha^e been more prompt to censure me than myself. But driven as I was with heaped opprobrium from him—Qh, spare me the, mortifying subject'. Though it is ever present to my thoughts, I cannot bear to tajjc of it/ * What opprobrium ?' CK|ed Harold 'What is this fancied insult you dwell,on. so in- tensely \ U is n ot in. Ethelred's nature to wound the feelings of any one, of a. lady more especially/ ' vou v a c * And
c And yet, was it likely such a letter as he wrote to me should not wound mine severely ?' s What letter? When?' * Then I was right, when I supposed you unacquainted with it. Now learn, that this most faultless Ethelred, this kind cousin, this anxious friend, so solicitous for my wxlfare, so tender of m) feelings, when he quitted Paris, had the cruelty to leave behind him a letter for me, wherein he reproached me for the testimonies of my innocent affection for himself, and bade me avoid and never see him more. Ah/ pursued I, crying bitterly, ' too well he \x\evf Lord Lothian was nothing to me. But a word, a look, would have sufficed to have driven me away. There was no need of such harsh-* ness and contempt/ " Wallop interrupted me with impa¬ tience. f There must be some accursed mis¬ take in this/said he. 'No human being shall persuade me Delancey could write a letter of the Und* fcuch indelicacy and arrogance are
rapine/ ' I will leave it to your own senses to persuade you/ replied I, drying my tears. c I have the letter here, though not about me at"this moment, and you shall see it/ e Agreed, Lady Genevieve ! And if I can prove it a forgery, remember, every subject of difference between you and Delancey is done away/ " I shook my head in silence ; and during the rest of our walk, Wallop fully employed himself in .breathing imprecations against the wretch, whoever he might be, that had fabricated such a misunderstanding between us, " The instant we returned to the house, he urged me to shew him this fatal letter without delay ; and I was persuaded the sight of it would convince him, as it had clone m\se!f; tut, on the i<n\t:\\yy, he strenuously insisted it \va: a foi^ejy. Com¬ paring it with some of Ethclvrd's writing which happened to lie in his way, he
pointed out to me. several differences: a£ character, obvious enough; yet still, desir¬ ous as I was of removing from my mind the heavy load that had so long oppressed it, J could not think they substantiated the fact he would establish. He was exasperated at my adherence to my former opinion,. And passionately vowed he would not restore the letter, nor suffer me to leayehim, till hehad shewn it to Ethelred, and had thoroughly / convinced me how much 1 had wronged him. ' Go/ said he, calling a servant* ' go and tell Lord Delancey I would speak with him immediately/ * Oh no, no/ I cried, struggling in an ag^ny of distress to get from him, * not for the whole world! I would not be con¬ fronted with him on such a subject, to save my exigence. Inhuman friend ! would you have him repeat to my face the affronts he has penned ?* 9 He never penned them!' exclaimed Wallop. * Unless you forced the letter yourself, you have nothing to fear. If he wrote
■forote a line of that infernal scroll, I will consent to lose my life the next moment. Be calm ; you may as well, for I shall not let you go. This vile quarrel has been drawn out to too great a length already, and an¬ other hour shall not pass without every cause of it being removed. Fear me not; I wilL&y nothftig that can wound you. I will be as careful as if you was my sister/ " The entrance of Lord Delancey pre¬ vented His saying more to me; yet he still held my arm. * My dearlithelred/ said he, ' you know how long I have grieved at the shyness sub¬ sisting between you and your cousin. It is one of the first wishes of my heart to see it terminated; and, to that end, I have been endeavouring to obtain some lights as to its cause. A letter, I find, has given great and just offence. Now, I am extremely anxious to prove that letter the work of some con¬ cealed enemy, and I hope you will be able to assist me in the attempt/ ' A letter was indeed written,' replied c 3 Ethelred;
Ethelred; * but say not it offended. There was no right to take offence. The same cfhciousnes's that occasioned it, deserved it also/ i Hew ** cried Wallop, * Do you own it ?' * Indeed I do; though at the same time I nniht acknowledge Lady Genevieve was the very last person from whom 1 should have expected it/ 'GraciousHeaven!* interrupted I, roused into exertion by this strangely repeated charge—* of what officiousness had I been guilty ? When you was ill, indeed, I thought z sister's care became me; but surely, other¬ wise ------' ' You mistake me/ said Ethelred, inter¬ rupting me in his turn. ' The officiou^ness was mine. The cold, the insulting letter you s,ent me, way the punishment it justly merited/' * j)_ n your blunders!' cried Wallop. ' I say what letter ? Lady Genevieve wrote none to you/ <1 thought
**! thought you mentioned it just bow, as the origin of all this concern/ replied Ethelred, coolly. * jj ere arc cross-purposes, with a ven- geance! But why, when we can come to the jioint at once, should we stand Winking at it from a distance ? Let us understand each other fairly,—!Ic-jpe/ proceeded Wallop, producing it as he spoke, ( here is the letter to wh'ch I alluded. Did you, Lord Delancey, write this sublime composi¬ tion t* " Ethelred took it, cast his eye over, and then returned it, with an unchanged coun¬ tenance ' I did/ answered he, ' but now came you by it?' < You did!' exclaimed Wallop; 'and can acknowledge it with an unblushing fore¬ head ! Oh, for shame, for shame ! Was this a letter to write to a woman ?* * Yes, if that woman deserved it. You force from me expressions it h extremely irksome to make use of; but if the for¬ wardness of her behaviour was such as c 4 yielded
f > i K i - yielded to no gentler means pf repression; if, notwithstanding the constant coldness she met with, she persisted to obtrude her tin- welcome partiality upon trie,and in defiance of the coittempf, nay even the aversion, I look no pains to conceal- -----' * Look, look to Lady Genevieve V cried Wallop; for my heart at these words seemed dying within me, and I was sinking to the ground, f ' Inhuman monster! what mad¬ ness possesses you thus to accuse a woman whose modesty was never yet excelled ? Bear up, sweet Lady ! let me lead you to your chamber. This is the last time you shall be insulted by him. Forgive me for having now occasioned you this distress.' e Gene\ieve/ said Delancey, endeavour¬ ing to take my hand, ' this is very unac¬ countable. Why should you interest your¬ self so deeply in an affair I hoped had ne\er come to your knowledge ? Why should \ ou grieve ------ ' 9 Then there is some mistake after all!' interrupted Wallop, impetuously, * Did you
Genevieve ?* * To Lady Gfr>evievet Heaven forbid! I wrote it to i. lara Castles, after I had in¬ formed her uncle where fhe was, and had recommended him to place her again in tbe con vent, finding how ex tremely improper so unprincipled and intriguing a young woman was to be the companion of my cousin after I had left Paris/ * Thank God !' cried Wallop.. 'Hearthis, Ladv Genevieve, and extend vour hand to the man whom we have both of us injured by our suspicions.' ff I was so delighted, so overpowered 1 with joyful sensations, that I had not pre¬ sence of mind enough to utter a sentence,, and could only once or twice exclaim, * Oh, Delancey!* as! sat down breathless on a seat that Wallop drew beside me. Ethelred, pressing my hand to his lips, ssked by what machination a paper ad¬ dressed to Clara had fallen into my p'osses- sion, as if intended for me ? And on my c5- at
at length informing him that it had been cielivered to mc by the French servant whom a friend of Clara's had recommended to my service, he observed the imposition had been but too easy for one of her plotting genius. * But to what end/ said he, ' could Clara have wished to create estrangement between us?' ( The end is obvious enough/ replied Harold. 'Enraged at finding you would not love herself, she was resohed, if pos- fcibJe, to pic>ent your loving any other; and knowing Margiana to be dead, s>hc na- tmally concluded her sister the moit likely to,succeed her in your ailcc'lions/ * Mv dearest cousin/ &aid Ethelred, ten- dcrlv cmbrac : pg me, ' thisexj lauation can¬ not give mere pleasure to you than it does iori*i.elf. I ha\e been most sensibly af- Uctcd by the alteration in your behaviour SoVtauU mc, and rejoice to find it so ac¬ counted for. You would not have been the modestly dignified character I always thought you, had you resented siah an of- Race
fence in anyslighterdegree; andyourletter, which stung mc to the heart, was nothing more than what such a puppy as you be¬ lieved me to be deserved.' * I wrote vou no letter, mv Lord, If yourecehed one from me, some second imposition must have been practised.* * Surely not, my dear Genevieve. It was in your handwriting, and was what I should richly have merited, had I addressed the ether to you.'' * And when did you receive it," my Lord v ' Your French maid delivered it to me when I returned to Paris from theProvinces^ and, to my extreme astonishment, found ■jou gone/ ' And can T see the letter? It must be a sp'irloi:^ one for I never wrote you a line. Can vou shew it to mc?' ' No ,* but I can repeat it. I believe I re- cdKct e\erv word/ * Repeat it then/ said Wallop. ( I W£s informed you had written it on? c ft. the-
the looming of your departure, which took place immediately after you bad beeii waited upon by a page belonging to lord Lothian* It ran thus:
* I am forced to inform yon I should be sorry either tp delay or to hasten your departure from this country, ©r indeed to give you any trouble beyond this letter. Your time is your own, aad I have no right or desire to engross any part of it, as I hope, when f return to England, to travel under the protection of one whom I can with more pleasure, as well as more propriety, confide in/
* Alas/ cried J* * what wickedness has been put in practice to ruin me in ycur opinion ! I addressed the fines you have repeated to William Scroope, in «cmse- <juenc£
MARGIAKA* quence of an offer he made me, perhaps. well meant, but of a boldness that I thought required some check. He wrote me a pro¬ posal of accompanying me to England, fa case I wished to leave France without waiting: for your return ; and this answer I ordered the same perfidious woman to remit to him the next time he visited at the house. You now perceive I was far from alluding to Lord Lothian in that letter. Good God t what contempt should I not justly have in¬ curred, could I have made use of such ex* prcssions to you ! Well might you deprive me of a friendship I appeared sa incapable of appreciating!' " Ethelred was preparing to make some reply, when Harold prevented him, by say* ing, * I perceive Lady Geneueve is not ta be trusted to be her own adyocate. She stops after a simple explanation of this fact, without vindicating herself from the dis¬ grace attributed to her, of having made an unworthy choice. Till within this hour, as- you did, I believed her affections had always bcea
been bestowed on Lord Lothian; but she has just now condescended to undeceive me in that particular. And why/ pursued He, turning to me, * should Ethelred be denied the pleasure which «one so sincerely your friend must receive from the communica¬ tion ?* < Indeed/ said I, e Lord Lothian neither K nor ever was, more tome than an object of the most perfect indifference. I never heardanintimation to the contrary,without feeling ashamed of being so ill thought of; and to partiality, I doubt not, has often been attributed the very confurion that arcse from so opposite a motive/ f I am extremely happy to hear }Oxi say* tlris/ replied Lord Delancey, * and I gi\e vour Assurance the most implicit credit. In fact, I must do my own penetration the justice to observe, that I had long sus¬ pected the world wronged you by the sup¬ position, till this treacherous tontrhance at-Paris overturned'all my endeavours to believe you indifferent to the libertine.*
Of Clara, my opinion was never very fa¬ vourable; but I was far fromthinking her capable of such wicked perfidy as this. No wonder, therefore, I implicitly submitted to the deception; and believing myself hated, and Lothian beloved, determined never to importune you more. Even the regret I felt on my return to London, at the sight of your altered looks, was half- stifled by the consideration that you suffered for him, and mourned the baseness of his recent conduct in the monastery. But suffer me to. ask, how happened you, my dear Genevieve, to receive a person nomi¬ nally in his service, and so abruptly to quit the protection of the Queen V * I consented to see the page, whom my ' vile sen ant represented as very desirous of speaking to me, because I had really no grounds for denying his request. His sup¬ posed master had always behaved with the . utmost propriety to me; and 1 am sure iie\erf<lt any partiality for trie, but what simply arose from being dear'JVlargieui&V; sktcr*.
sion fbr her, ? had never heard a word x>? love from his lips; and therefore a refusal to he*r any message he sent would have been unwarranted ill manners. With res¬ pect to my sudden journey, my Lord, you have ©nly to rail to mind some sentences in that cruel Tetter, which was brought to me the worniug after your sister's appear¬ ance. I can repeat them, Heaven knows, without referring t© the writing.—Fo» mmt qvit a Jwtmvchete you are so impro¬ perly an inmate. Fetire U where you? example cannot be contagious. For your sake* m well as imj own, I hope we shall never meet again. Your hand was so art¬ fully mutated* en Hie back of the letter, I bad na idea of: any deception; and you cannot.be surpri&ed if my first and only thought was instantly t© obey the peremp¬ tory mandate/ * Ht>«t ably the baggage contrived tr> yeusenge herself of your coldness !* cried- W«ltop» * "Stou- «e what love -wi&de, and bow 5
now dangerous it is to offend a lady wjfio, is infected with it/ ' It has done, in this case/ answered Ethelred, ' all that hatred could have ef¬ fected. However, Clara was much be- holden to chance and my sister's grange folly, for the accomplishment ,of her scheme ' o " I told Ethelrf d she was Iess„indebted to chance respecting Arlette than he iniagined; and, if possible, raised his indignation, by acquainting him pf ner so artfully sending his sister to me in the quality of Lord Lothian's page, and prepossessing her with the fear of his anger, that, by avoiding him f all chance might be precluded of a discovery of the deception. * What a world of ingenious trick/ ex¬ claimed Harold, * has exercised her fertile genius, to make you two hate one another ! Ko doubt she must have been afraid of your both admitting a very different sen* timent/ ' Would to Heaven/ said Dejancey, * her fears
fears were well founded respecting us both! 1 * ' " I coloured, from the consciousness that Clara had indeed su pedcd me upon very sure grounds, and from the emotion that Ethelred's words excited in my bosom, I ^dundmy'rorifusioh was so apparent, that I hastily quitted the two frends, to impart my felicity to Ia^yPercy, whose joy at finding Lord Delancey blameless, and our quarrerat { an end, proved her to be indeed the warm-hearted friend I always had reason to esteem her. " Our next general meeting was a renewal of congratulations, oddly intermixed with the wrathful phrases and curious epithets sported by the worthy Harold, wbo declared, that, next to the revival of his beloved friend, meaning you, sister, and the reco¬ very of Arlette, nothing could have given him such true pleasure as the reconcilia¬ tion hat had just taken place, arid the ex¬ posure of the young Jezebel, as he called Clara Castles. * I fear'
'f fear poor Scroope/ said he, * will soort discover he has drawn a sorry lot; for she little deserved that Ethelred should enable her to marrv the honest lad/ " His friend declared he rejoiced that transaction was concluded before the recent discovery had ,be^n made, confessing he should scarcely afterwards have been ca¬ pable of the efTort. And then it was I learned that the generous Ethelred had re¬ moved from Scroope that poverty which had been his only crime in the eyes of Clara's uncle. I leave you to judge whether it did not raise him in my opinion; or* rather, to speak wholly without reserve, whether he became not now nearer to me than ever. u Perhaps he grew sensible of this. Per¬ haps what I had undergone on his account touched him with pity, or my faded form created an interest in his brcasi, which all I had ever been praised for of beauty had' failed to excite. The most probable con¬ jecture is, that being quite bereft of alt hope
hqperof,your existence, «ndindifTerertt to fhe .whole world beside, he turned his thoughts on me, who had been the nearest and dearest to \ou. I am unable to say by w^ich, or if by any, of these mothes he was influenced; but he now took every opportunity of bestowing upon me all those nameless attentions which me usually,meant as precursors of an avowal #f loye, " The restored tranquillity of my mtrtd had its due effect on my hitherto fluctuating health; and, but for the recollection of your supposed dreadful fate, I might say more of happiness was crowded into the ensuing sis weeks, than I had ever known during the whole of my preceding life. Had my heart n&t been before Delancey's, it would now have heen assuredly won by the ipanly tenderness he shewed, and the pre*- ference he protested no other, after your Ipss, could have excited. " Very soon after the double deception cyf |he letters was revealed, he spoke to Lady Percy
Percy to engage her interest with mein his behalf; which she frankly, too frankly, told him she believettwas* unnecessary. * If your own merit/ said she, * has not already se-' cured you an interest In Genevieve's bosom, it must iwerfs be as insensible as was tha"r ; of her sister; and surely such indifference cannot have pervaded two of the same)* house;* u Upon this hedeclared himsvif to hte; but I am inclined to think he was' too well aware of my sentiments to need Such encouragement; and only spoketoLady Percy from delicacy, that he might appear to have doubts of obtaining my favour. I endeavoured to answer him without nic¬ tation, and candidly said, that if my uccTe shewed no averseness to the union, he was the person whom I should prefer to all others for the companion of my fi.ture life- He immediately took active'measures for obtaining a dispensation for our mar¬ riage from the bfat^; and talked of a> ' journey to Widdrington Tov^erj to apprise his
bis falser of all that had passed, and procure i|is consent., But Wallop, whose joy ren¬ dered him almost a lunatic, and Lady Percy, whose fears qn my account, of any reverse, made her anxious for aH the precipitation possible, overruled my endeavours, lo pro- = mote this latter measure; and each of them so strenuously represented the hazard of re¬ opening Delanccy's wound, the certainty of Lord Widdringiou's approbation, and how much more advisable it would be'for us to conclude the affair at ,once, ! and then ^o down together, finally to settle in the norlh, that Ethelred suffered himself to be persuaded by their arguments. But I could not reconcile myself to the impropriety of marrying him -without even his father's knowledge; and therefore he took the op¬ portunity of writing to him by a messenger who Was going down to Alnwick Castle, to acquaint him that, at length, his long fa¬ vourite wish of a nearer connexion with one of his nieces Was likely to be fulfilled, by my consent to bestow on.him my hand.: * <( i wished
" I wished to await the return of this messenger, whose absence was not expected to outlast fourteen days; but I was so pressingly urged not to delay much beyond that time, in case he.should be detained, , that on the twentieth following his depar¬ ture, he not having since been heard-of, I was united to the most beloved and most amiable of human bepgs; a fortnight after which, we learned that the poor fellov/ who s had been, .charged with , the dispatch to Lord Widdrington,. having fallen in with a party of hot-headed Y^orkshiremen/ w : ho reproached him with the iluctuating prin¬ ciples of his masters, the Lprds of the house of Percy, a quarrel had ensued, wherein he had been s-hun ; i=o that the news of our marriage had not yet reached Northumber¬ land ; and I urged Delancey that we might, without delay, prepare to carry the intelli¬ gence of it ourselves. He was equally de¬ sirous of paying this mark of respect to his father, and assured me no consideration should withhold him after he had executed some
MARGIANA.' some orders of the King, which must of necessity take him into Herefordshire. * f But this journey, short as it was,' proved a'very unfortunate one; for the exertion of travelling on horseback produced the effect that had been so long apprehended: and his wound, after he had rode about forty miles on his return, became so troublesome as to hinder his proceeding. A groom of Lord Percy's, who had attended him, came forward to bring us this infor¬ mation, lest his delay might create more uneasiness than the' occasion really called for. However, my fears were too much awakened not to hasten to him at Pains- wick, where he bad halted/and where, accompanied by a surgeon of eminence from London, I found 'him "seriously ill, |§?rom a cause that had not been suspected before. The wound, which was in his shoufiler, had been prevented from heal¬ ing kindly, owing to a loose splinter of bone which ought, in the frst instance, to have been extracted, and which the surgeon
surgeon who went with ine now very skil¬ fully removed. But the fever, in the mean time, had coi^idcrnbly -aincd ground, and it was several weeks befoie he was permitted to resume his journey. "When he did resume if, we returned <o London, not only to avoid th^ inconve¬ nience of the cross-roads to Koithumber- land, but also that we nvght have the com¬ pany of our kind friends, who had delayed their own removal thither purposely to travel with us. But no sooner had we reached the metropolis than new troubles once more raised a bar to our leaving it. " Owen Glendower's preparations be¬ came publicly spoke11 of; and it was the wiih of the King, since Lord Widdrington vas in readiness on bis own domains to call forth his vassals in case of need, that De¬ lancey and Harold Wallop should continue »earhimsolf,knowinghow entirelv he could dene'id on ih*~ ccL'riiy of th. Ir motion 4 , M.d Me h'delii) oi thei- atia/! ment. t«nt, v *t f 5>om<*
" ^ome time after, Lord Percy* to avoid snvohirteg his friends, set out to join hia father, without acquainting them eitherwitb liis journey or its intent; and the next re¬ port we heard was, that the Earl of Nor¬ thumberland and he had openly-erected the standard of rebellion. " The distress of my amiable friend, upoa this occasion, ^as so extreme, that funding her determined to join her husband, in case he should actually repair to Wales, it be* came my earnest wish not to leave her; by gratifying which I could also continue near Delancey, who, should the revolt become more serious, was to meet a powerful body of his father's %assals In the county of Derby, and proceed at their head to the fatal scene of action. He entirely approved my adherence to Lady Percy; and I need fiot tell you the event. He set forward from London, cruelly pained by the defec¬ tion of his ambitious friend, but confident of the success of the royal party. I have never
jiever beheld him since. Heaven grant us all a joyful meeting when this eventful day is past! though I confess I anticipate, w?th a pleasure not wholly unmixed with un¬ easiness, the astonishment and the sort of sensation he will feel at the unexpected sight of you/'
os cr
CHAP. IL
Vaulting Jnhition that overleaps itself. 1 Mabgiaka tenderly embraced her sister at the conclusion of her narrative, and said every thing in her power to re-assure her on the score of her husband's fixed affec¬ tions, without advancing a single argument that was not founded on the surest grounds —her own knowledge of his high sense of duty and moral rectitude, and the f charms of % Onevieve herself, who was, if possible, more delicately beautiful than ever. Margiana's modest opinion of her own attractions made her suppose^ very easy for
fof a Idver to forget her; and while she always remembered that Genevieve was more critieally handsome than herself, she never recollected the peculiar advantages she possessed, of a different and a superior nature; namely, an easy yet diffident grace, that communicated charms to every action; a mingled expression of sense and sweetm^lx*aming throu^Arge dark eyes, over the most intelligent countenance irj the world; a forn\ less fragile and more finely proportioned than her sister's; and a dign fied innate affability of manner, that spoke her mindful of the ease and happiness of all around her, while she seemed utterly regardless of herself. Those who knew her intimately added to the account of these external attractions, an understanding of the first order, as much cultivated as the confined knowledge of the period she lived in allowed it to be; and a temper so cheer¬ ful as to defy all personal vexation. In a friend's cause, Margiana could be irritated, but not ia her own. Her unaffected for- - . ■ d3 titude
Heaven beheld her, has been seen; and she was as steady in th& performance of what she knew to be right, as quick in discrimi¬ nating the fit and unfit, at the first view of amy difficult situation. Genevieve, who was of a much more common ehar&g#r, looked up to her with a deference thet Margiana never would re* «eive m her due, and which often pained %er; and the fond wife of Delancey thought, $vith an indescribable emotion, of his pro* $>ably approaching meeting with the woman to whom he had been so strongly and so long attached, and of hev own conscious inferiority in those points to which she be¬ lieved he affixed the highest value. Nor was this her most serious cause of apprehension. &hQtifd that meeting never take place! should the last day of Ethelred % existence, as well as that of so many other brave mesr, he arrived i**rBjit Geneiieve rejected
heart Lady Percy, though equally a prey to the most tormenting apprehensions, yet strove to command herself, and to meet her friends with an appearance of serenity very foreiga to her heart Her Lord, after having witk difficulty feeea pemiacted %% repose for a fewhours, had takefcn a hastf-but affectionate Jeave of her, and had repaired to join the other leaders of his party, for the purposk ©£ making every proper arrangement for the important day that was now arrived; a 4ay that was either to overwhelm the noble house of Percy in ruin, or to lift it to a rank second only to royalty, by placing the young Eatl of March upon the throne; a day that was to confirm or to terminate the sovereignty of Henry Bolingbroke. Hotspur, ardent for war, and rash to the very last moments ol his existence, had j) 4 disdained
disdained the counsels of the'moref a'ged and temperate of his partisans, who advised him to wait for the arrival of Glendower and his forces, who* might hourly be ex¬ pected, before he hazarded an engagement, Their absence, and the illness of his father, were disadvantages which, while he admit*- fed their force, were without power toxuvb his headstrong valour; and he determined to give battle to the royal army, though it ^ad been strengthened the day beforeby #he King, at the head of a formidable body of men. All hopes of an accommodation had vanished og the return of Lord Percy's uncle, the Eaxfof Worcester, from the camp :of the sovereign, whose gracious promise to redress the grievances he had been sent to complain of, and to grant the malcontents -a general pardon, provided they wotdd lay down their arms, had been concealed by that perfidious traitor. Hotspur, enraged at the haughty answer he had been led to believe the King had returned by his uncle, •boiled with fmpatience for the onset; and . . ' . .* his
his impetuosity was encreased by the fiery spirit of his friend in arms, the gallant Douglas. Even the most moderate now ac-. knowledged with a sigh that only bloodshed could terminate the quarrel. *• Commanded by the King himseTf, who was agisted by the two eldest Princes, whom he had joined the preceding day, the royal army, without any further attempt at con¬ ciliation, was suffered io advance to a large plain, not more than half a mile distant from? the house where Lady Percy was. The rebels awaited them in good order, and with determined hearts, save only the Earl of Widdrington, whose spirit shrunk within him, and whose arm was unnerved. His son and Harold Wallop were amongst the opposing numbers, and marched near to the Prince of Wales* Neither of them had been able to send more than a short and hasty message to their lovely-anxious friends; though Delancey »5 had
Md aheady been made acquainted by Harold of his owa joyful surprise at finding Margiams alive. His delight from this source, joined to his consternation at the trnexpected and «naccountab!e defection of his father, and his dread of lifting his arm against a parent's life; filled the soul of Ethelred with such ia conflict of emotions, as might have deprived many men of the presence of mind necessary on such an occasion; hut he struggle4 to subdue his feelings, or at least to direct their energy solely to the momentous business of the day. " We will keep near to each other, md to the Princes/' said he, S( that we may be at hand to give assistance if needed, either mutmlly or to them. If we fall in the performance of our duty, we shall leave a good name behind us. ff we survive the bloody work of this day, there will be time enough to think and talk of tho l e we love* My most anxious \^i&hes, next to the desire of victory,, are, that we may see my fa their %hting oa our side before the battle is over> 5
dver, and that Henry Percy iftay be laken by some Bobte hand, unhurt by your's or ttiine.^ lord Deianeey*s messenger fottnd Mar¬ giana, Genevieve* m& Jikdy Percy, already apprised that an immediate action was in¬ evitable ; and it required all the fortitudes of the former to controfet her bwn strong fcgitatibil, while she endeavoured to com- fitfse that of het friends. Lady Percys tremblingly alive for the safety of her hus¬ band and her brother, had ordered various menials to station themselves in different quarters of the field of action, that they might bring her instant intelligence of ever) turn in the fortune of the day; and while She and Lady Genevieie counted the moments in anxious suspense, the attenti *e and useful kindness of Margiana strove itw - Sensibly to draW them into a converse, icm^- <alcuLicd to engage their minds r ^ in-" fcre^t their curiosity. She led t n iew , mw speak of Alnwick Castle and W' ^rin^p a
Tower;'and then-fell into'a narrative of those circumstances which/ occurring to herself at the latter place, ha~d, at the time they happened, appeared to her unaccount¬ able. She uelated the alarm occasioned to her by the first mysterious appearance of the cloaked figure issuing from behind the arras of her gloomy chamber, the terror which induced her .to fly h}to the great ball for shelter, and the ineffectual search made bv her uncle and.Scruton; the singular address which she found.inclosed in the book of Italian tales, and her irresolution * whether or not to attend to the request of ,the unknown lo meet him in the vaults of the castle* Here Margiana paused, for she saw the attention of her sister was arrested. " Well," said Genevieve, " and is it pos¬ sible you had resolution to go?" " Something more than curiosity," re¬ plied Margiana, " proved a strong incen¬ tive;
five; yet the'apprehension of some snare, and an unaccountable dread of Scruton, deterred me,'till the return .of Lord Delan¬ cey and Harold Wallop from London." She then recounted their fruitless night-watches, and in particular that wherein she herself had accompanied them, when the cloak had been found. Even Lady Percy became in¬ terested in her story. She passed rapidly forward, and spoke of the second invitation, many months after, to the burying-place ; and her auditors were agreeably surprised to find that Kendrew was the man wh&m she had wished, yet feared to meet. " I little thought," observed Genevieve, " that our old servant had been so long hovering near us; yet 1 am persuaded he is the person whom once I met iin the passage leading to the armoury. I hap- > pencd to be alone, and was moving slowly forward, with a lamp in my hand, when a figure, such as you describe, cautiously ad¬ vanced. I saw him not, however, till he was very near me. He then held up his i . band
hand as if fo stop me, hut without gpeaklfig; tmd immediately raised my arm which bore the light, till its rays beamed on my face. But he instantly suffered it to drop, and With a heavy sigh turned from me, and in> stantly disappeared. *' Another time I was yCt more afarmed. Joyce w&s \Vlfh me. My fright proceeded from a difrerent person. At the top of a pair of backstairs we heard a lumbering roisC, as of people ascending, bearing a weighty load. Joyce herself seemed ig¬ norant Of the cause, and listened with surprise and attention. At length, three Servants of the castle appeared, tearing- &tnengsf them a heavy man, who groaned as if he had been severely hurt. One of the domestics, perceiving Joyce, called to her, and begged her attention for Father 6eoifry, Who 1 had been almost murdered. On her approaching him, 1 followed; Lut while she was answering the man, the frier, observing me, clenched his Cms, and speak¬ ing through kfe shut teeth, prayed a i uise
from Heaven upon all our race. I was inexpressibly shocked and terrified; and esteemed such a denunciation, from a per¬ son whom I had always considered as a holy character, as ah evil of very serious import. He was proceeding to imprecate the villain! who had reduced him to his state of suffer¬ ing, when Joyce, suddenly turning round, and catching his broken sentence, impe¬ tuously struck her hard up6n his mouth, to check his unguarded expressions. She then laid hold of my arm, and hurried me away." " And was that all yon ever knew of particular concerning Father Ceoffry ?" asked Margiana, interested now in her turn by this mention of the friar. "Had you ever reason to suspect any mystery relating to him ?" said Genevieve, eluding, as Margiana fancied, her question. The latter hesitated. She <$d not like to reveal what she had seen above the hrowr* tapestry chamber, nor of the iron cage, nor the contents of the paper she had found there,
there. Diverting, 'therefore, the discourse^ *— {( I heard a dreadful rtoise," replied she, " one night, asof a person knocked down, near the armoury door, and severely wound¬ ed." But here she stopt,- afraid of saying too much* " There have been unaccountable stories respectingWiddrington Tower, and particu¬ larly concerning Lady Rachel," observed Lady Percy; s < and Wallop, I know, has strange surmises. But you are not like the vulgar, ready to give credit to any marvel¬ lous tale. The mo^t surprising circum¬ stance of all, seems to me to be Lord Wid- drington's recent change, for whic h neither my Lord nor Wallop can possibly assign any reason." < " I am inclined to believe your brother is acquainted with the true one/' said Mar¬ giana ; " and powerful it must needs be, since he appeared to rely, all the way as wc journeyed from Northumberland, on pos¬ sessing unbounded influence o\er the future conduct of my uncle/*, ** Gracious
* Gracious Heaven !" interrupted Gene* vieve, shuddering, " should the father and son meet in arms, without recognising each other! Should either fall by the other's sword, and my unhappy Ethelred or Lord Widdrington—Alan, either way the horrid thought »» torture," " Fear not, dearest sister/ 1 cried Mar¬ giana; " is not Wallop there ? And where be is, does not good inevitably ensue, as Lady Percy once before assured you ? Will he not, think you, be mindful to pre¬ vent ------" At that moment, one of the servants who had been posted to bring information from the field, presented himself before his Lady. " I bring you good tidings/'he exclaimed, without waiting to be questioned. "Though the King's horsemen have,gained a slight advantage over ours, his foot are nearly cut to pieces. My Lord calls aloud for the
the Prince of Wales in e^ety quarter; but the Prince will be a bold man if he dares to foce him. My Lo-d and theEa 1 of Douglas breathe slaughter and vengeance; and the young Lord MarcU. has fought nobly/* lie was proceeding, when another mes¬ senger arrived. He was an old man, grown |$iey in the service of the Percy family. All vere attentive on his entrance, and the first comer observed a profound silence. He was ordered to sit down, for he appeared spent and breathless; but his smile forbade all apprehensions. When he was sufficiently recovered fo speak, " The Earl of Widdrington and his son have met/' said he. Genevieve clasped her hands together, and Margianagsaed at him wk&keen atten¬ tion.
u Father
" of M did they Know each other in time?' 1 " Your uncle did not It now his son till $11 was over/' replied the old man* Genevieve covered her face, shrieking* and Margiftftft'ttink dow» upon a seat. « Till bis Hfe was in safety/' pursued the old man, " he was ignorant to whom he owed it." tf What was over, then? v said Lady Percy, impatiently, " The danger, Lady." M Fie, good old Reginald! how could you thus alarm Lady Delancey? Then Lord Widdrington md h> son are both safe?" . * " Both, -ub«r>; But the Earl is taken prisoner, and safely they will keep him, no doubt." Genevieve, now relieved from her ter¬ rors, asked how the affair had passed; and what
what were'the circumstances "to which the old man had'ttlhided ? " Why, Lady;" replied he, " saving your presence, and with reverence be it spoken, $y Lord your dncledtd not seem over^fond of being in th&thiditst of the fight j for he kept aloof, and was shy; and his shyness was noticed. However, our brave Lord said nothing to him, t for the sake of his son, I guess. But Sir Hugh Mortimer, as 1 heard, $ent a nuessage to$iimi* fo^i^ok to himself, and lay about him a little more cordially, or he might chance rohtepent it, since both LorcbMarch and himself kept a strict watch over him. So witlvthat, ft seems the old Earl grew more brisk-;' but still belike was afraid of meeting his son. However, he met with a worse than him/for fie tt^-Jwith Prince Joint ©f % Lancaster,: i$hp knew him, and mauled him handsomely, and would have taken him alive, but he refused to give up his sword,,-and. though kei was? wounded, fough t. on ;. so thaitthe yoking Prince, Qnd-* ino"
itig all would not do, but that he fatfst i>e forced to aim at his life, raised his arm to? cut hint down, which he might have done at one stroke; when just at that very point of time steps in a young warrior, who re¬ ceived the blow on his shield, and besought him to spare the Earl of Widdrington. He afterwards disco^ered himself to be Lord Delancey ; and then hisfathei was so much affected that he surrendered himself a pri¬ soner to the Prince, and was carried away to the Prince's tent, where his &on gave orders to have his wound immediately dreiAcd, and then returned to the field, where he and Harold Wallop, God wot! make as sore destruction on their side as our gallant young Lord and Earl Douglas do on ours. Marry! the King's forces turn pale when they hear the cry of Espeiance ! and see the flash o( Harry Hot¬ spur's sword," " Thank Heaven for this good news!" said Genevieve, ' f and grant we hear none worse to-day/' Lady
tfee rfety of their miele, Wihose captivity ft'tey c#u!d not lament and on the honour w\mh hh so* lad acquired by protecting him; but neidter Margiana nor Genevieve berseif perceived any thing more in hisao* lion than a simple performance of hk du$$. The succeeding* reports brought by Lady Percy's messengers continued to be for some time equally favourable with the former. She received repeated assurances that her Lord was unhurt,and thatthe advan¬ tage was rather on the rebel than the royal side; thoughGenevieve also had the delight to hear that Ethelred still fought without a wound. But, towards the afternoon, old Reginald, whose anxiety had again carried him to the bloody scene, returned with a face of more apprehension thaa he had shewn before. In feet, the impetuous valour of the King's horse, commanded by the Puince of Wales,
Wallop beside him, bore down all opposi* tion. The former of these young heroes bad as eagerly sought to oppose his arm against that of Henry Percy as he bad hint* self been sought hy him ; and twice they had met, hnt as often been parted hy the mul¬ titude, that bore rherr* fonvard m different directions. Owing to the same irresistible rushing of nnmbers, Lord Delancey had been separated from his friend; and while he still conti¬ nued near the Prince of Wales, Wallop had* been forced by the pressure of some of his own party to a spot where report led him to believe Owen Glendower was" approach¬ ing with his Welehmen. To find atid sub*- due/tfm, therefore, became now the object of Harold's ardent hopes; forfois heart re¬ volted against the idea of raising hissworcl against the Earl of Percy; md on his and Glendower's .ife he was aware the success of the rebels whoKy depended. Several he took
chief,' wh%se exist¬ ence^ were forfeited to his'mistake; but still the real Glendower was far ftom him, and unhurt. Harold called him by name; but his voice vainly sounded. i 1 Meantime, Hotspur, who in one quarter saw his troops giving way before a throng of horsemen, flew like lightning to their assistance, and gave proofs .of the most mad and desperate courage. As he cried Esperance! and rushed onwards, his fol¬ lowers seemed to catch the blaze of fury that warmed'hiffi ;, and certain at length that he beheld the Prince of Wales in the person of t]ie opposing leader, he called on him with a triumphant shout, as if he had aheady obtained a victory over him. He was heard by Henry Mpnmouth, and hailed with a cry as triumphant as his own. That moment they met; and " Welcome, welcome, Harry!" w$$ the greeting that broke from either chief.
Delancey
dearest of his friends; and turning away With horror, his conscience not daring to offer any defence, he left him to the royal arm, while he lifted his own against two other foes, one of whom he knew to be Douglas. Tlie (f tug of war" ensued singly between them for several minutes ; nor, till the Scot gave way, did his companion ap¬ proach to defend him. When he did, his voice proclaimed the Earl cf March; but he was instantly met, and challenged by a chief, who suddenly advancing to Ethelrcd's side, followed by an aged warrior, whose jrrev hairs w T ere discernible beneath his helmet, bade him be of good cheer; for two friends were at hand, who would risk their lives for the cause he was engaged in. tc The best cause here/' cried the old warrior, " is a bad one; but ,if yon be Lord Delancey,, I will die ere I see you hurt." vol, v-, tj While
While this was passing, the Prince of Wales and Lord Percy, still fighting with the furv of men who contended for a kingdom, had insensibly moved onwards to a trifling distance ; but Delancey, watchftri over the Prince's life, invited Douglas to follow. Before, however, either of them could reach the enraged combatants, the gallant but Hl-advised Hotspur had expiated the offence of his rashness and revolt. The star of Henry Monmouth prevailed, and his sword reached the heart of this noble rebel, who died tortured rather by the pang which the recollection of his ruined party in¬ flicted, than by the personal anguish he endured. His fall was seen by many, and his arm our and the motto on his shield made him known to all. The news, so fatal to one party, so encouraging to the other, flew f*ift as wind throughout the field; but to the ears of Wallop it was followed up by intelligence of a more afflicting nature. ° After
After this important event, the adherents of the King, flushed with the liveliest hopes, esteemed the victory their own, and pressed upon their dispirited foes, who, too certain of the death of their beloved leader, gave way on every side. In a short time the rout became complete; and Wallop was astonished to see the vassals of Northum¬ berland and Worcester flying in all direc¬ tions. He would have pursued them ; but was compelled to attend to his own safety, a^ul turn to Sir Hugh Mortimer, who had the temerity to fall upon him; while Lord March endeavoured to rally the fugitives, cheering them by hia voice, exhorting and threatening them by turns. But terror has no ears, ai.d they continued to fly, though to a fatal end, since they were cut to pieces almost to a single man. The aged Sir Hugh, beneath the power¬ ful arm he had to contend with, would probably soon have shared the same fate, lad not the generous Wallop, pitying his
grey hairs, rather wished to make him his prisoner than his victim. As he was dis¬ arming him, a chief, whom he knew to oe Sir Walter Blunt, drew near, and exultingly exclaimed," All is won! all is o\ er, Wallop! The Prince of Wales hath slain Henry Percy, awd We have ordy to lament your gallant friend, Lord Widdrington's j=o*i who was killed close to him by the Fori of Douglas. I saw him receive the mortal wound, and fall. But you may do a humane deed, by hastening to yonder grange, where orr soldiers be!ie\e Lord Percy's wife and ser¬ vants are. The insolence of victory will destroy them all, if they be not powerfully protected. I am obliged to return to the King, but I will take charge of your pri¬ soner, while you run to &ave them/* " Slain b} Douglas!" cried Wallop. " By the great Ruler of the World, Douglas shalt fall by no other hand than mine!" At that moment, a young warrior. ru<-h* &og by, heard the last words of Wallop.— " Douglas
<f prisoner of Wales/' said he. " I would he had re¬ ceived hisHighness's sword in his heart be¬ fore now, for he has just slain the noblest youth that graced the field—the gallant Lord Delancey." HauJd stood suspended. He wished to save Lady Percy and her fair friends from the fury of his own party, and also to know whether timely assistance might not yet rescue his beloved Ethelred frcm the grave;. " Who art thou ?" said he to the young maifc who spoke last. The stranger raised his beaver, and disco¬ vered the features of William Scroope. " Good youth," cried Wallop, " thou knewest aud didst love Delancey. Hasten to him, bear him to his tent, and tender him thine aid, if he be not really dead. My duty forces me at present another way; but js,3. I will
2 will soon return and assist thee, if our cares can avail him." Scroope, eager to execute his direction?, trrned from him almost without reply; and Wallop, with a half-broken heart, hastily pursued his way to the farm-house, Near to which he was joined by an esquire of the Earl of March, who, having heard of the danger that menaced his sister, had sent to give her notice of it, and to charge her to make her escape. This man, as well as Wallop, had taken a nearer road than the horsemen of the King could pursue; but they were pouring for¬ wards with such fury, and were so near at hand, that Wallop despaired of being able to restrain them. His fears were not con¬ fined to the danger of Lady Percy alone. In the destructive tunvilt now threatening to prevail, it was not likely that friends should be distinguished from foes; and his personal
shuddered at the prospect of those perils that environed Margiana and her sister. Hastily, therefore, ordering the esquire to prepare three horses,with all speed, he re¬ solved to fly with his friends and Lady Percy until he could leave them in a place of safety, from whence he might return to attend to the farther duties required of him; and then entering the house, with none of the exulting sensations of a victor, he for¬ tunately saw Margiana alone. She, having perceived numbers of rebels flying across the fields, had supposed the contest near a- termination, and watched, in eager hope of some one who might bring news of the King's success, and the, safety of her friends. " Oh, Wallop !" said she, rejoicing to see him, " do you not bear us good tidings?" r * Yes, dear.Margiana! excellent tidings for us, but dismal for poor Lady Percy* Hotspur is killed; the rebels are utterly e 4 defeated ;
defeated; and their conquerors in a feW" minutes will be here, intent on plunder and destruction. Yon must be gone without delay; for, flushed as they are with victory, it will not be porsible for me, n\or would it even be so for the Tvlnce of Wales himself, were he here, to govern their unbridled humours. Call your sister and Lady Percy* Horses are in readiness, tind I will see you to a place of security.** ** But why, Wallop, does your voice falter? why do you speak in such an ac¬ cent of woe ? why is your look so heart¬ broken ? More, I fear, are slain than Hot¬ spur. Some one perhaps, as dear to us as he to Lady Percy. You do not answer me, Harold. Yet speak, I pray you. Is Delan¬ cey safe ? '* Margiana laid her hand on his arm as she spoke, and gazed with an inquiring eye. He could not bear its meaning, but turned from her with a heavy sigh, that by its chilling sound too plainly expressed the truth.
ttuth. She understood dim, and pressing her arms in silence across her breast, her head sunk upon them. He bent over her for an instant; .but.it was only for an in*. slant. « " Indeed you must be gone/* said he; " there is no time.to lose. Call Lady Percy; call your sister; prepareyourself." *" My sister J ah, God protect my poor sifter !"■ " God's will be done !" cried Wallop, in a stifled, yet a firmer tone than before. " And'enable, us/* said Margiana, i( to submit-to this dreadful stroke as we ought! We will be ready for you this instant." She then abruptly left him ; and resolving not to think of what she had heard, or rather of what-she had surmised, she went to seek the unfortunate Genevieve and her friend; and found them together. But the latter was already apprised of the death of her v. 5 husband,
husband, and was deaf to every repre&ema^ tion of her own danger. . t( Percy is no more," said she; " and I will abide here to share tlie- fate that has- been inflicted upon him." In vain the sisters besought her to partnke ibeir flight No consideration could induce her even to quit the house she was. in, sa\e> rhedreadof insult from a licentious soldiery; and not force itself, she declared,, should tear her to any distance from the spot where Hotspur lay. Committing her, therefore, at the earnest request of Wallop, who now appeared, to the care of her own domestic.^ who might, after the tumult was subsided, acquaintLord March where they hadconcealed her, should he himself escape, Margiana prevailed on Genevieve to atiend to her own safety; and Wallop hurried both the sisters out of the back door, and through the farm-yard, the issue
issue from which was concealed by a thicket of trees from the road whereby if was likely the victorious forces would approach. Here they found the horses ready that Wallop had ordered ; but they had the satisfaction/ before they lost sight of the grange, to see the unhappy Lady Percy carried off by her brother's followers and her own servants, in a direction that led to a small village, situated about, a mile from the town of Shrewsbury*
as & CHAP,
CHAP. Iff. A House on Fiye* The sun had been set near an hour, and the sky was fast obscuring with heavy clouds^ that hastened the approach of a long No¬ vember night, when the fair fugitives quit¬ ted the house where, in so short a time, they had suffered so much anxietv. Margiana and Wallop, pierced with affliction at De- lancey's death, and the thoughts of the wee to be endured by the wretched Genevieve, Kide silently on, till her questions forced. them to speak, even while she encreased their inability to utter a sentence with com¬ posure, "Whither
ff Whither are we to go, Harold ? s * de-* manded she. " Do not let us remove too far, or we shall be out of the reach of further information, and lose the chance of soon seeing Delancey, Tell me, for I know you would not be sundered, and tell me truly, is he unwounded ? is he in no way hurt?" " I am unable to answer yon/* replied Wallop, tK for wc were separated ; but he was well and unhurt when I saw him last; Mv search for Owen Glendower led me into a different part of the field, and prevented my afterwards rejoining him." (f And did you meet with Glendower V* : (i No; ami T think some of his own spirits must have conveyed him away, or else the report spread of his arrival was a false one, for in no shape could I discover him." * l " But where," said Margiana, repeating Genevieve's question, on account of whose situation she feared the inconvenience, if not danger, of this removal—" where, and 0 to
to whonvare you conducting us ? I hope you do not mean we should proceed ^ixr, for it will soon be night, and these lowering clouds threaten immediate rain." f< There is an honest yeoman," replied Harold, " one Thomas Parlington, who,. with his wife and two daughters, lives in an old decayed hall house, on the skirts of a village not more than seven miles from Shrewsbury. His three sons have this day fought valiantly in our army, and he him¬ self is warmly attached to the King. His wife, too, is a worthy woman. With these good people, therefore, you will be per¬ fectly safe, and 1 hope not uneasily situ¬ ated, tHl I can return to you, and receive your further orders whither next to attend you/' " And 1 hope you will then be ac¬ companied by Delancey/' observed Ge¬ nevieve. " I.hope so too/* returned Wallop, in a faintvoiee,but determined, at whatcyer cost, to preserve the fatal secret, until she, whose foriora
forlorn situation moved his manly heart to pity, should be in a place of shelter, where the soothing attentions of her sister might, if any thing could, enable her. to*bear the cruel shock she must receive. He had no reason to flatter himself with any doubts of the truth of what he had heard. Reported by Sir Walter Blunt,.an eye-witness, it had been confirmed by William Scroope, who knewDelancey well; and the faithful Harold now, for the second time in his life, knew what sorrow was. The feelings of Margiana were as acute as his own, from a double cause—her past friendship for him who was gone, and her tender affection for her sister. She con¬ sidered-it would be most advisable, if in¬ deed it was practicable, to keep her in ignorance of what had happened, till they could reach Widdrington Tower, now their only home; and, for this reason, Margiana felt anxious to hasten thither as expedi¬ tiously as circumstances would allow. A litter,
litter; she hoped, or some other easy conr- vevance, v \<hi 1 c \ mtured at the village to which they weie ^oiitg ; Lut wnen there, she would endeavour to obtain a few mo¬ ments ol pihate conversation wah Wallop, and consult with him on what couid be done. He had confirmed old Reginald's report of their uncle's having been taken prisoner, and consequently they were free to direct their measures without the appre¬ hensions of any confront. If the mental sufferings of Genevieve were less painful than those of her com¬ panions, she was nevertheless not without her share of grief She loved Lady Percy dearly ; and the image of her tears and despair haunted her imagination, while she spoke of them in such tender terms as made Margiana weep at the reflection how soon that anguish she lamented for another would become her own. ■ The roads had been rendered so bad by autumnal
aatumnal rains, and by the various march* 3n«s of the royal and the rebel armies, that the progress of the travellers was necessarily verv slow ; and Wallop believed they were still above three miles from the place of their destination, when the evening shut completed in, and a thick small rain began to descend, which was presently driven against their left side, by the springing up of the south wind. They were unprovided with any change of raiment, for Margiana, besides having had no leisure for prepara¬ tion, had depended on Wallop's returning to the camp and sending Maurice to them. They urged their horses to what speed the roughness of the way permitted ; but they were at the entrance of a dreary moor, that offered no shelter of any kind, and that stretched, as Wallop informed them, to the very house whither they were repairing. Margiana's anxiety for her sister encreas¬ ed so much, that she fretted inwardlv, and with some difficulty forbore to expre 1 . her impatience;
impatience; while Wallop, absorbed by his own melancholy reflections, neither recol¬ lected that it was dark, nor that his com¬ panions would probably soon be wet through. When Margiana spoke her ap* prehensions that their quickened pace might be unpleasant to Genevieve, the latter quietly replied, " How little worthy our notice are such slight sufferings as these, dear sister \ Let us, while we mourn pur poor friend's heavy affliction, be thank* ful, whether we meet with shelter this night or not, for our own milder fate/* A deep sigh was the only reply Margiana could make; and they all proceeded for another half hour almost without speaking, when Margiana, awaking from a. profound reverie, observed they had quitted the beaten road; for though she could not discern what ground they were upon, she distinguished by her horse's pace, that he was walking over frequent hillocks and tufts of long rushy grass. Afraid of morasses> which thet black
black swampy appearance of the moor, on their first approaching it, rendered not un¬ likely to be found there, she called to Wal¬ lop, and asked him if he was sure of being in the right direction? He started at the sound of her voice, but replied, " Yes ! why do you doubt it?" * l Because wc have strayed from the tract/' said she, " and because, however you may be acquainted with this road in the daytime, you cannotperceive any object whereby to guide you at present." " Pardon me. The last faint traces of light are still discernible in the north-west, which is the due point we have to make for; and I keep my eye on that quarter." "But had we not better recover the roadf We may here chance to meet with marshy ground, and advance too far before we are a-ware of it." " You need not have any fears of that mature," answered Harold. " This heath is t every
every where sound ground; and I pur¬ posely led you from the high way as soon as I could, lest we should haopeu to be overtaken by the forces of either party, whose society you would probably be glad to dispense with. From the top of the last hill we passed, I thought I pen eived a body of men pursuing the same road we were in. But do not alarm yourselves. They will not readily find us here; and we can easily elude them, as we shall hear the trampling of their horses' feet, should they approach us. Besides, we must now be within two miles of the place 2 hope to conduct you to/' Airain the wanderers sunk into silence; and thoughts of Lelancey again drove from the remembrance of two of them every idea unconnected with himself. Those glim¬ mering remains of light which had hitherto directed Wallop, now totally faded away, and the rain fell thicker than before. Had Genevieve been atieisure to think of herse 1 f, her
Ler timid nature would have shrunk af¬ frighted ; but grief for her unhappy friend, andsoliciiude for her beloved husband, fully engaged all her faculties; and no sound but the bleating of a few solitary moor sheep, otiered any disturbance to her meditation, till, after another long pause, Margiana exclaimed, " I see a light before w. Can ir. Wallop, be the village you are in qucbt of?" " It is more likely to be a light in old Pailington's he use," replied he, looking at if, " for it is half a mile on this side of the villaire, which consists entirely of cottages, ai.d their inhabitants are probaLlv all at resf by this time. But we will now bear a little to the left, and then we shall regain the road/* He pressed his horse forward, and beg¬ ged the sisters would keep near him. They were a little fearful of falling in with the men he had spoken of; but they would not teize him with objections; and a few minutes
minutes more brought them near the light, which, oh approaching it, they discovered to be a large fire, kept under by the dampness of the air, but apparently shel¬ tered from the rain by something which overhung it, and smouldering amid ashes, that sent forth a strong smell of burning wood. " What means this?" cried Wallop. " Pray Heaven the rebels have not been at work ! This uncouth object before us, partiv surrounding a blazing heap, seems; to be the remains of a house destroyed by fire." '< Were it one of the cottages of the vil¬ lage/' said Margiana, " probably it would not be the onlv sufferer." (( Any place that offers rest and shelter," observed Genevieve, " ts welcome at such a tiire as this. Pray> let us make towards it, and dry ourselves, for the present. Per¬ haps before long the rain may abate."
Wallop
Wallop agreed to her request; but no sooner had they reached the smoking ruin than he exclaimed, " Alas ! then it is as I suspected ! This indeed was poor Parting¬ ton's house. Here is the old avenue of trees, and here the garden wall and heavy iron gate. God grant he may not have suf¬ fered in his family as well as in his pos¬ sessions !" Abe e three-fourths of this devoted man¬ sion had fallen in, a sacrifice to the flames; and the remainder seemed only to have escaped the ruinous communication, owing to the preceding rain, which, however, had not extinguished the fire, that in one corner was feeding on a huc;e pile of rubbish, because it was screened from the shower by a half-consumed projection of the roof, ■supported by its adherence to that part of the building that had not caught the •b!aze. u This certainly has been the work of some
some former day/' said Margiana. rt if il" walls that are destroyed were as solid a-J those which are standing appear to be, by the red glare cast upon them, some hours must have been required to consume them/* ** We must consider this devastation," said Wallop, < c as denoting the road by which some of the rebels came to join us, previous to this day's action. Poor Par¬ lington was known to be a steady adherent of the King's; and he has suffered for his lovaitv-happy if be himself and his wife and children have escaped the conflagra¬ tion. But the rain seems coming on more heavily than ever. Do you chuse to dis¬ regard it, and ride forward to the village, or will you take shelter here under what is left of roof?" Poor Genevieve, who was both fatigued and afraid of going further, lest they should encounter any riotous persons, begged to alight where she was; and Wallop> fastening his
his horse to a tree, stepped forward to see what accommodation the place could be made to afford. He perceived that the hall/ and a room beyond it, visible through an open door-way, Upon which the red light olearned, were still undemolished j and, without examining further, he hastily re¬ turned, and assisted his fair charges to alight. Securing their horses near bis own, he went with the two sisters into the hall, and then, for the first time, took notice that a fire was burning in the chimney of the inner room, and that a tall figure in ar¬ mour was standing over it, Margiana and Genevieve hesitated whether Jhey should proceed; but Wallop, desiring them not to be alarmed, courteously addressed the stranger, and begged he would allow two ladies to partake the refuge this ruined spot presented. " Willingly," replied the man. tx I am vol. v. v myself
myself in pursuit of a lady, to offer her my assistance, hearing she fled this way. But I now fear I have outrode her. She was accompanied by a brave young soldier, named Harold Wallop. Can you tell me whether he be gone by ?" " He is not," returned Harold. <f Who, I pray, is the lady you are in quest of?" " A matchless one!" the stranger answer¬ ed—" no offence to the fair dames who accompany you. It is Lady Margiana Win¬ burne whom I seek. She was forced by her uncle to attend him to the scene of carnage we have just left. Thank Heaven she is yet alive ! I have loved her from her infancy, and served her noble parents till they died/* ^ Oh, Kendrew!" exclaimed Margiana, springing forward—" Kendrew, dear old man \ It can be no other than yoi; 1" The stranger started, threw off his helmet on the ground, and eagerly strained his eyes to behold the loved object befoie him. When he distinguished her features, he flung himself
himself at her feet, and clasped Ins txgcd arms around her knees. <s Welcome, wel¬ come be this day," cried he, u and blessed for evermore. Henceforward, either you drive me from you, or wc never part again/* "Never!" emphatically repeated Mar¬ xians, raising the good old man with kind¬ ness, and pressing one of his hands between her's. (< We will never, Kendrew, part again. But see, here is my sister. It is long indeed since last you beheld her. Little did either cf us hope to find you here." Kendrew paid bis cordial respects to Genevieve, and testified his happiness at seeing both his young ladies safe; but it was easy to perceive Margiana had all his affection. He seemed unable to detach his eves from her face, and made the fire blaze, for the pleasure of more clearly behold¬ ing her. Then, preparing to indulge the garrulity of age, he was beginning to talk of past scenes, when Wallop, glad of having it so soon in his power to leave his fair friends r *2 under
under proper protection,, interrupted him, resolved to hasten back to the place where now all his thoughts were centered. But be was not more prompt to form this design than Margiana to propose it. " Your duty, W T aIlop," said she, " recals you to your sovereign and to the camp. Delay not here with us, since we are now secure with Kendrew, on whom we can rely with con¬ fidence not inferior to what we. place in vourself. Go therefore; but let us hear of or see you soon again, and we will await you either in this place or in the village." She dared not, in her sister's hearing, trust her voice to name Delancey ; but Harold well knew on what account she was solicitous he should leave them. Recommending them both, therefore, to the care of Kendrew, he bade them farewell till the next day, when be promised to see them again,' and then went out, followed by the old man, who was officious to un¬ fasten his horse for him, and to shelter those cf
of his young ladies in an out-house for the night. Margiana, under pretence of send-* inw some order to Maurice, which she had before forgotten, followed Wallop to the outside of the building, where they could not be overheard. " Before you leave us," said she, " re¬ lieve, i beseech you, as well as you are able, the dreadful suspense in which I must other¬ wise pass this night. Is our dear Delancey really slain ? Was you near him at the horrid moment ?" AVallop told her what he had heard; and when she found he was not strictly certain; of the fact, she lamented so much of his time had been devoted to herself and her sister, that might have been employed more usefully for his friend, who perhaps was no more than wounded. " Begone, worthy Harold," she cried, fC begone, without delay. Do not even to- f n h morrow-
morrow quit my brother, if your presence is serviceable to him, but send Maurice to us with information by the first dawn of looming ". * I will/' he replied, " if there be a chance of Ethelred's life. If, on the con* trary, all is really over, I will return to you myself, and not leave you till you are safe at Widdrington Tower. In the meantime, be cautious not to awaken your sister's suspicions." He then mounted his horse, and departed, whilst Margiana, instead of immediately returning to the room she had quitted, con~ tinned standing, wrapt in thought, wishing, yet fearing, to admit the hope that Wallop's communication had raised. She had be¬ fore, from his silent gesture, so entirely supposed he had himself seen Delancey dead, that the recent discovery of her mis¬ take amounted, in her sanguine imagina¬ tion, to a warrantable ground for indulging fairer prospects; and she leaned against a broken
broken fragment of what once had been the great door-way into the hall, uncon¬ scious of the rain that the varying blast sometimes drove partially against her, of the crackling heap of ruins, now nearly ex¬ tinguished by the wetness of the night, and even of the return of Kendrew, who, not having observed her, as she stood half con¬ cealed by the wall, had gone back to her shter. She concluded him still busied with the horses, and the solitude of a few minutes was indulgence to her, while under circum¬ stances that rendered Genevieve's society of all others the most irksome. " She will talk of Delancey/' thought Margiana, (C when I return; and on such a subject, so dear, and so naturally occur¬ ring to us both, what can I say? Oh! graciousGod/ 1 pursued she, ina!ow,solemn tone, and lifting up her hands to Heaven, " grant us, if it be thy pleasure, but a safe f 4 return^
return, with my dear sister's husband, to the once dreaded towers of Widdrington, and all the thanks that human hearts can offer for thy divine mercy------" She was interrupted here by a dismal cry, that issued from the inner room. Without a moment's reflection, she rushed across the hall, and entered it, where a heart-breaking sight filled her with horror and amazement, Her sister was stretched like a corpse upon the flags, and Kendrew, in the extremest perturnation, was endeavouring to raise her. "Oh Heavens!" cried Margiana, " my Genevieve, what means this?" " The Almighty only knows," exclaimed Kendrew, trembling. " I know not. I meant not to shock or offend. I said but that your fears of a forced marriage might now cease, for that your uncle Bertram's son was this day slain by the Earl of Douglas, and Lady Genevieve sent forth that dread-
ful shriek you heard, and dropt down, as you s^e, upon the floor/' << Alas, alas! what have you told her! But it was innocently done. You knew not Lord Delancey was her husband. Help me to raise her, good Kendrew. Beloved uster, look up. Your Ethelred is but' wounded/* Poor Kendrew, distracted at what he heard, and at the mischief he had caused, now endeavoured to assist Margiana, now , struck his hands against his bosom, and now proposed running to the village for help.- Margiana, having raised her sister's head, supported it on her own shoulder, and directed Kendrew to fetch some water. It wrs a good while before he returned with it; and Genevieve, in the mean time, had opened her eyes, but they were fixed and grazed, beholding without distinguishing objects. She was perfectly motionless, and appeared to be equally insensible. In vain Margiana's soothing voice spoke the ten* y 5 devest
derest things, and assured her Lord Delan~ cey was only hurt, not killed. She gave no visible sign of understanding her; ancl Margiana was beginning to fear her senses were entirely fled, when*she motioned with her hands, as if she wished to move. She was assisted to rise, but groaned as though subdued by pain, either bodily or mental, and shook with sueh violence as to be un¬ able to stand. Kendrew joined some seats together, and they laid her upon them ; but the exertion had overpowered her, for, with a deep sigh, she relapsed into insensi¬ bility, and continued an alarming while in that state. When she ut length recovered, her intellects seemed in some degree re¬ stored, for, at times, she faintly uttered,, " Oh, dearest sister !" and when Margiana assured her of Delancey's life, expressed her incredulity by heavy sighs. Thankful, however, at seeing her self- possession even thus far regained, Margiana began to indulge hopes that, with respect to her
her at least, aH might yet be well; when? wiih terror she beheld her breaking out into a cold, deathlike perspiration, and heard her complain of being very ill. Frightened beyond measure at the consequences that in her situation might possibly ensue from* the shock she had received, she now en¬ treated Kendrew would lose no time in hastening to the village, and bringing from thence some women, who might assist in case Genevieve became worse; and the good old man, as terrified as-herself, went away, praying for his young lady's life, and imprecating mischief on himself for having reduced her to this deplorable state. The scene that er.sued was the severest' trial Margiana's fortitude had ever endured. Genevieve sunk from one fainting fit fo another, and no means of relief, save water. only, were at hand for her sisler to bestow. Scarcely dared she admit a.trembling hope, when the sufferer opened her eyes; and *' ti when
10$ MARGIANA. when she closed them, all was again despair Genevieve sometimes seemed desirous of speaking, yet incapable of articulating more than a few r imperfect words. Once with difficulty she said, " Oh, sister, if I die, fail not——** but she could not proceed. Half the world Margiana would have given for a reviving cordial; but no cordial had she to impart, except the assurances she re¬ peated in vain of Lord Delaneev's safety, Genevieve either did not comprehend or would not believe her; and thus wore away a heavy hour, be fere two respectable looking country women appeared, brought by Kendrew from the village, They had the good sense, on hearing the circumstance that occasioned their being disturbed, to bring with them some proper restoratives;, and the aid of tlicse afforded a temporary relief to the sufferings of the invalid, and a suspen/icn of the fears of Margiana. But the relief and the suspen¬ sion were of very short continuance. To- wards
'wards morning, Genevieve was seized with convulsions. Again, one frightful fit suc¬ ceeded to another, and there was no longer any doubt of what the event must prove. At four o'clock, premature birth was given to a dead infant, and Genevieve, for iwo hours after, seemed as dead herself. Margiana, clinging to hope, indulged an expectation she would recover; but the women, less prejudiced by the force of their own wishes, and more experienced, gazed for some time in mournful silence, and then openly avowed their fears, which every moment and every indication strengthened. Yet, just before the break of day, the hapless wife of Delancey seemed to enjoy renovated force, and the entire restoration of her faculties. She even recovered her articulation ; but she made use of it only to exhort her sister to repel the delusions of hope.— (( Deceive not yourself, my beloved Margiana," said she. i{ The mortal stroke 3 is
is given ; nor can the whole world prevent me now from following to the tomb the dearest of human beings. Let the same grave, I entreat you, hold us both—if his precious remains are rescued from the faial field of blood." " Talk not thus, my Genevieve. I do not believe he is dead. Report only—Wal¬ lop told you the truth. He was well when he last saw him/' "Be it so ! In that case, be you his comforter. Fail not to make him all the arnerds a sister can, for the loss of one who would have died a thousand times to save him. Farewell! I am growing very faint again. Sister! friend of my heart! bless vou ! Oh, my God !——" She endeavoured to bend forward, as if to meet the being whose sacred name she invoked; but the paleness and the dews of death overspread her. beauteous counte¬ nance as she stretched forth her feeble arms to embrace Margiana. The kind-hearted villagers
villagers wetfed her lips with the cordial; but they had soon occasion to apply it with more effect to those of her sister. Genevieve breathed her last as her cheek met that of Margiana; and, as though there had been a contagion in death, the latter sunk down on the expiring corpse, equally bereft, for a time, of life and motion, * Harold Wallop, giving way to the impa¬ tience that distracted him, had urged his horse to its utmost speed on his way back to the camp, where he immediately directed Ms course to Lord Delaneev's tent. There he found William Scroope and several do¬ mestics attending on a wounded warrior, who lay apparently asleep; but, by the light of a torch that was burning near, Wallop discovered other features than those of Delancey. Scroope, at the sight of him, arose, with a silent gesture of. joy, and suddenly taking him by the arm, led him to the outside of the tent. " Fonrive
"Forgive me/* said he, " the alarm f occasioned you, and rejoice with me it was a false one. But many as well as I were deceived. Lord Lothian, who arrived here late last night, was mistaken for your pallant friend at the moment he was struck down by the Earl of Douglas. Lord De¬ lancey is we!], and at present with the King, suing for his unworihy father's life. He ordered his servants to bring Lord Lo'hian here, in gratitude for that nobleman's hav— iiw rushed forwards to assist him ; and I have seen his wounds dressed, and have attended near him ever since, at Lord Delaneev's request.**' " The Lord reward you for your good news!" cried Wallop. i( I only wish I had known all this a little sooner. I should not then have given pain to the worthiest heart in the world. But it will only, be a few hours of suspense, which succeeding happi¬ ness will overbalance." He cheerfully embraced Scroope, and hastened.
hastened to the royal tent. In" his way thither, he met Delancey returning from it. Their meeting was a joyful one to both. Harold was delighted to find his friend had not even received any hurt, ex¬ cept a slight one in his hand ; and Ethelred, who had vainly sought for his wife and Margiana at the house they had lately oc¬ cupied with Lady Percy, but which he found plundered, and almost destroyed, was happy to hear they had been removed to a place of safety. When he learned, however, that Margiana believed him slain, he lamented his inability to hasten to them without waiting for the return of day; but, till he had secured the safety of his father, he could not bear to think of quitting the camp; and Lord Widdrington, besides being a prisoner to the King, who had just refused binding himself to Ethelred by any promise to grant his life, was also dangerously wounded, H<5
He was now, therefore, on his way to the tent of Prince John, where his father lay. Wallop accompanied him, and they found the wretched Bertram enduring with forti¬ tude, yet in sullen and obstinate silence, the anguish of a deep wound in his side, which had brought on a considerable degree of fever. Yet the surgeon who attended him gave it as his opinion that he would recover; and the night was spent in the performance of filial duties, which seemed at length to make some impression on the mind of the unhappy man. As soon as Ethelred could persuade him¬ self that his father was easier, and not in immediate danger, he committed him to the care of his friend; and, taking a direction to the ruined house where Margiana and Genevieve had been left, he rode ibither* his heart beating high with the hope of soon folding to his bosom the two persons most dear to him in the world* He
He found the spot without any difficulty. The destruction it had sustained was a suffi¬ cient indication to point it out. lie ap¬ proached the old avenue and garden wall by which Wallop had recognised it the night before, just as the sun was beaming his first faint rays across the dismal moor. He alighted, and fastening his horse, entered the outward hall. He had been told of the inner room, but all was so still, he doubted its late inhabitants had retired to the village " beyond. However, he proceeded; and the * noise he made occasioned no disturbance. On reaching the door, he observed a groupe of persons within, who appeared unconscious of his approach. He stopped, and, chilled with a presentiment of evil, surveyed the objects before him. Stretched on the seats that had been joined together to receive her, he beheld the body of his wife. Margiana was on the ground* her head laid down upon the corse, and both her arms thrown across it, while Kendrew stood in mute despair, and the two women* ia
in respectful silence, were quietly perform¬ ing: some office for the dead. Kendrew was the only person who saw Lord Delancey, till Margiana, on hearing his exclamation, raised her eyes. Ethelred believed his wife was asleep, or had fainted. Margiana dropt her head again, unable to undeceive him; but Kendrew broke to him th© fatal truth. The two women and Kendrew retiring, Ethelred knelt down beside Margiana, and they remained alone with the body upwards - ©f two hours. * & * * * # In the. course of the morning Kendrew* was dispatched back to the camp, where he acquainted Wallop with what had passed, and recommended Lord Widdrington to his farther care. He returned accompanied by Maurice and Lord Delancey's servants, and a proper conveyance followed him for bearing.
"bearing the remains of Genevieve to Wid¬ drington Tower. The mournful procession was attended by Ethelred and Margiana, who strove to support each other in their grief. Thev travelled very slowly, and were se« veral days on the road. On their arrival at the castle, Kendrew adresscd Lord Delancey in these terms: " Mv Lord, I am the old man who, when you was hard pressed by the Earls of Douglas and March, rushed between you and danger, at the moment Lord Lothian fell. If I was of service to vou on that day, I beseech you to erant me the boon I crave.—Give imme- diate orders that Scruton and his wife be laid in irons, in the strongest dungeon of the castle. I will be answerable for the justice of the command." " What is their crime ?" said Delancey, <f I will not convey it in words, my Lord. I will shew it to you as soon as you are at leisure.
leisure. You cannot attend lo the subject at present; but, in the meantime, secure that man and woman. If you neglect doing so, they, having seen me with you, will fly the castle before morning." Lord Delancey, having mused a few mo¬ ments, complied in part with Kendrew's request. He gave directions that Scruton and Joyce should be confined ; but forbade that they should be laid in irons, or other- wise ill treated.
CHAP,
CHAP. IV. A secret Chamber, The obsequies of Genevieve could not be said to renew the affliction of Margiana. Her grief was as profound as the occasion of it was just, and as her regard foi the deceased had been sincere ; and *t was ren¬ dered still more acute by the dismal cir¬ cumstances attending it. The image of a beloved and amiable sister, expiring from the shock received from a mistaken report, in a situation so forlorn, so nearly desolate, and from a cause so peculiarly to be la¬ mented, was e\er present to Margiana's imagination. Yet her affliction, as in the case
ease of her father's death, partook of iL~ peneral ^ood sense and regulation of he* character. She neither ostentatiously d: : - pbyed nor sullenly confined it to her own bosom. She rather shunned than sought conversation, even with Delancey ; yet she refused not to confer with him on necessary subjects. She received his soothing atten¬ tions naturally as proceeding from a bro¬ ther ; and when the faithful Kendrew urged her not needlessly to indulge her grief, but to look forward to brighter days, now that the tyranny of her uncle—he spoke, he said, on sure grounds—was for ever over- past, she attempted to reward his kindness and anxiety by a smile, which though at first assumed, soon became the result of at pious and cheerful hope, so constant¬ ly the inmate of her own innocent heart. The regret of Lord Delancey, though he would not have been willing to own it, even to himself, was probably much less severe that of Margiana. He had loved Genevieve,
Genevieve, it is true, when at length really convinced that her sister was no more ; but bis love was the offspring of compassion ; for, had he not believed her attached to him with a tenderness that was preying on her fragile constitution, she would never, with all her beautv, have become his wife, M.vrffiana was the onlv woman to whom he had been trulv devoted ; and when he sup- posed her lost, a painful void was left in his heart, Genevieve's habitual melancholy engaged his pity ; while the supposed cause of it, a partiality for Lord Lothian* excited his contempt. During his residence with her at Paris, some particularities in her behaviour towards himself, though un¬ intended on her part, led him to suspect ho had been mistaken ; but the contrivances of Clu.u Castles quelled an idea that uo young man, who speaks thi* truth, will deny to be flattering, lie then dro\c her from his rememhn.rue, as one not worthy of a place in it; yet \\\e sight of her faded form md profound dejection when again he met vol. v. c; her
,.-■■' • . ber at Lord Percy's, insensibly softened his severity, though he despised the woman who could grieve for an object so worth¬ less ; for he long supposed Lord Lothian's excesses to be the ground of Genevie\e's melancholy- Harold Wallop was the person who re* moved this error. Partly from conjectur¬ ing the truth himself, and partly from ex¬ tracting confessions from Lady Percy, which she had not intended to make, till, drawn on by his artful, but well-meant, observa¬ tions and questions, she knew not how either to proceed or retract, he in time became nearly certain of that secret Genevieve had so carefully and painfully preserved. So that her declaration of indifference for Lord Lothian was far from giving him so much surprise as he pretended to feel. It may be supposed his conjectures were not long withheld from his Triend : and thus Lord Delancey** affections were secur-
ed on the side of gratitude and commisera¬ tion, less than from genuine original, pre¬ dilection. After he was married, Gene¬ vieve's sweetness of manners, and his own rectitude, continued his attachment; yet, beneath the inmost folds of his heart, the image of Margiana still predominated ; and when he was first apprised of her being yet alive, a-sentiment undefinable almost to himself struck cold to his feelings, and made him recollect, with a sigh, that he was en¬ gaged for life. Yet the goodness and tenderness of his disposition made him now a sincere mour¬ ner. Could a wish have recalled the hapless wife whose love for him had destroyed her, ha would have thought himself a savage not to have breathed it; and he severely blamed his own heart, when, oppressed by mournful images, and especially when rendering the last solemn duties to the departed, he some¬ times caught himself involuntarily exclaim- - o 2 im?
MARGIANA. frig-—" Thank Heaven, however, Margiana lives! * The orders of Lord Delancey, suggested by Kendrew, had been given only just in time. Scruton, on perceiving the old man in the train of his young Lord, had suddenly re- treated into the castle, and, with his wife, bad attempted .^mediate evasion. Ken¬ drew, however, had powerful reasons to excite him to prompt execution. The man and woman were secured ; but, as had been directed, without insult, or any other op¬ pression thati simple confinement in one of the dungeons. Till the funeral was over, their xtames were never mentioned, or, perhaps, they themselves even thought of. Kendrew bore too heartfelt a respect for the family of his formerly beloved Lady, whom in youth he had accompanied from her peaceful retreat in Scotland, and continued faithfully to serve while
while she lived, not to refrain even from the subjert nearest to his heart, so long as any dutv remained unpaid to the early-fated Genevieve, But this mournful ceremony past, he became anxious to unburthen jii& loaded mind to Lord Delancev, whose na- ture, so unlike that Of his father, claimed hio iSi^cm, and engaged all of his affectionr that belonged not to Margiana. Ethelred, on his desiring a conference, recollected Scruton and his confinement, which a flairs of nearer concern had driven from his memory. He sent for Kendrew, and asked' him of what nature was the infor¬ mation he wished to impart ? " Of an important nature, my Lord; but there is only one room in the <--:!e wherein 2 can communicate it." *' What room is that, good Kendrew ?" u A secret chamber, my Lord. We must repair to it alone, and at night, unless you would chuse to have more exposed to the g 3 domestics
pedieiit for them to know. H would be wellalso if Lady Margiana herself were not yet made acquainted with what I have io
3$
" You raise mv curiosity, Kendrew. But what do you accuse Scruton anu his " I will 'shew you, my Lord, whenever you chuse. Is it your pleasure to go with me this night to the chamber I speak cfr ' tltbefred consented, and named an hour for meeting Kendrew in the great hall, when every other person in the castle should be
'K7l>*
"At that hour," said the old man, M will be in waiting, and will be provided with every thing necessary for the under¬ taking."
It
v,s^sw^^
1ST
It hnd been one of Lotd Delancey's first concerns, on arriving atWiddringtonlojer, : to inquire after his mother, whose objec¬ tions againstseeinghim.heconcluded.could now no longer exist.. But from the same womw-servant through whose means ,he ; had once or twice before exchanged com- miinication with her, he learnec that Lady Widdrington had, some time ago, privately, quitted the cartte. and was gone no one • knew whither, without evena single attend-, ant. Of his sister also nothing had been. heard; and Ethelred's perplexity was un- ; mitigated, excepting by a hope, and that a very faint one, that these two dear relations might be together. • In fact, it seemed not very improbable that Arlette might know the place of her mother's retirement, and have gone to her, af.er she left the protection of Lord and I ad" Percy. Her brother, meanwhile, con¬ soled himself with the .reflection, that as £ oon as the recent circumstances which had c 4, befallen
befallen their family became generally known, Lady Widdrington would either by letter, or by her actual return home, remove the anxiety she must suppose him to be labouring under. •*■ •*- * * & # At the appointed time, Lord Delancry quitted his "apartment, whither he had re¬ tired as usual, to avoid exciting any ob¬ servation ; though he knew not why all this mystery needed to be practised; and de¬ scending into the hall, found Kendrew ex¬ pecting him, furnisiied with a lamp, and bearing on his shoulder a pickaxe and a mattock. Ethelred was surprised; but he .forbore asking any questions, and only told the old man he was readv to follow him. Kendrew returned no answer. He appeared to be in considerable emotion ; and, with¬ out uttering a word, led to those steps under thfc fireat staircase which conducted to the castle vaults, He went down; and Lord Delancey wondering in what all this would terminate, followed him.
MAKGIANA. 1 %9 t They traversed in silence all those gloomy aisles where Ethelred and his friend had fruitlessly spent so many hours. At the remote end of the furthest of these,Kendrew began to re-ascend another flight, commu¬ nicating with the back part of the castle; but-when he had mounted about half-way, he stopped on a broad landing, and, selling down his lamp, said they need go no fur.her. " Why," asked Lord Delancey, (t have you brought me all the length of the vaults, to reach this spot ? Could we not have come down these stairs, instead of those under the great hall?" " Not without passing through the ser¬ vants' apartments, my Lord. And even noWj distant as we are, I fear awaking them." 4C And what must we do here," said Ethelred, u if we are not to ascend nearer to them ? I see no door through which wc can advance on either side." " We must make ourselves a passage," replied the old man. <e Will you be pleased* my Lord, to assist me ?"
< On the left of the landing, there were some stones in tbe.wall more roughly dress- ed than the Others. The joints between them wero large, and they seemed put to¬ gether in an unworkmanlike manner. Ken¬ drew, taking his pickaxe, begai* to loosen them from each other; but his hand& trem- bled,and he appeared so much discomposed, that Ethelred took the tool from him, and, observing his injunctions to make as little noise as possible, with more able hands soon removed a large stone; after which it became an easy task to render the opening as wide as they chose. W T hen it was sufficiently capacious to ad- mit'them, the old man desired Lord Delan¬ cey would pass through. He did so; and Kendrew followed with the lamp. Lord Delancey now found himself in a small square chamber, in which there was neither door, nor window,nor chimney, nor furniture, of any kind. The floor consisted of large flags, and it was vaulted overhead; but
but there was no other substance whereon to rest the eye, save four bare walls. Kendrew held the lamp aloft; then he lowered it to the ground. lie seemed confounded and astonished, and indistinct¬ ly muttered a curse. Ethelred began to fancy his imagination was disturbed; and, almost smiling at his own credulity, asked Uni for what they came there ? Kendrew hung his head in silence; bCt jit_was the silence of reflection.. After a- while, raisin ff his eves, with a mortified look —" I fear, my Lord," said he, " I have no- ilv.ng more to shew vou." 4i Nothing more ! my worthy old friend. I profess you have not shewn me anything as yet. But why has this chamber been walled up in such a manner as to leave no place of entrance ?" Instead of answering, Kendrew stamped with his foot, and listened to the sound his action produced. He then shifted his place, c 6 stamped
.stamped upon another flag, and listened again. He proceeded to a third, and did the like. One moment, Ethelred appre¬ hended him to be in his dotage; and the next, fancied some serious mystery gave rise to this strange behaviour. However, he attended patiently, and without inter¬ rupting him, to the gestures of the old man, who went on, separately trying every different flag, to discover whether it re¬ turned an echo unlike the lest. At length, he stamped on one that seemed less firm beneath his feet than the others. He changed colour, tried it again, and found that at one end it gave way, as if the soil was loose below it. An exclamation burst from him, and he went to seize the mattock, which he had left on the landing of the stairs without. He brought it back, and, without much difficulty, raised the flag, Lord Delancey assisting him to remove it. Nothing appeared under it but common loose earth. Some of this he scraped aside wjfh his hands; and in a few minutes Ethelred,,
Ethelred, who held the lamp so as to throw a light on what he was doing, perceived that he had reached a substance which did nol give way to his efforts. " Here, here !" cried Kendrew. « Lower your lamp, my Lord. Look here !" Delancey looked. He saw a dark coarse cloth. " Lift up that cloth," said tfic old man. Delancey complied, ami beheld under¬ neath it the remains of the feet of a corpse, decayed as though they had long been dead. " Good Cod!" he exclaimed, u what means this?" Kendrew had resumed his tool, and was now working at the next flag, which lay in " a direction to cover the upper part of the body.
body, supposing it entire. He loosened, but was not able to raise it. Ethelred, shuddering, and dreading to hear the truth, assisted him. Below the thin surface of soil the coarse cloth again appeared. u Remove it, my Lord/' said Kendrew, in a Solemn tone. " I cannot/' On lifting it up, Ethelred perceived the other extremity of the figure, wrapped in what seemed once to have been a costly mantle, and the head was covered with a velvet cap, near to whichKendrew, kneeling down, held the lamp close to it, and directed Lord Delaneev's attention to a large letter worked in gold, on the front of it. " See you that letter, my Lord ?" said .U vt It was a W. The embroidery had been wrought by Margiana; and Delancey had often seen his uncle wear the cap. He clasped his hands together, and his figure - * • stiffened
stiffened into horror, like one of the fabled beholders of Medusa. " Llere—here/' cried Kendrew, with mournful vehemence, €( He the remains of the once gallant Karl of Widdrington, foully murdered by the hand of Scruton. In this chamber saw I mv noble master treacher- ©usly slain, by the wicked agent of------" He stopt. Lord Delancey groaned, and covered his face with both his hands. A deep silence for some minutes ensued. Kendrew*s nature melted when he perceived that Lord Delancey wept. " Thus it is/' said the old servant. (C The hearts of good men are grieved for the vices of the wicked; but you, my Lord, are blame¬ less. Such a son, and such a wife as your excellent mother, may obtain forgiveness at the throne of mercy for the guilty hus¬ band and father. Why should you remain longer here, to witness this cruel spectacle? You 5
MAK01ANA. You have seen enough for conviction ; and when vou think fit to hear the sad tale I *have to tell, I will be ready to (5bcy your •call. ,Let us now for the present cover up .from sight these dear remains." Sobbing, he took another view of all that was left of his beloved master; and then replaced the cloth, and strewed the soil as before. But it was some time ere he could make Ethelred comprehend that he wished to move the flag-stones back to their places. At length, they left this dismal place, and returned aloiiE the vaults to the great half, where Kendrew felt unwilling to leave his young Lord in the affliction that pressed upon him. The latter guessed his thoughts^ and would not drive him away. *' Sleep is not for me this night/' said he. s< Relate vour dreadful story now." (i Not now, my good Lord. You are loo much shocked already." i( Think
* f Thihkyou the shock can be encreased, ©Id man ? After knowing the deadly fact itself, can any circumstances aggravate my sorrow ? No ; since the thoughts of every other subject arc excluded, let me now listen to this,and learn atonceall itshorrid particu¬ lars. Sit down—Omit nothing, yet be brief. When came my dear uncle to this fatal place ?" " After the battle at Cirencester, my Lord, when the rebel nobles were surprised in their camp, and defeated, my beloved master declared to me his resolution of taking refuge in his own castle, with his brother; the rather, as there had lately be¬ fore been a difference between them, and he wished to prove that he, on his part, had forgotten it. So, alas! he thought had your father too ; for he received him kindly, entreated him to keep close within the walls, lest he should be seized by Henry's partisans; and undertook to go to court, and implore his pardon of the King him¬ self, while he maintained the place of his retreat
^ retreat a profound secret. He went, but soon returned with the unwelcome news, that his Highness was inflexible." ** Mv father surely went not to London ?" interrupted Lord Delancey, •' I know not for certain. He said he did, and brought back this fabricated answer. The malcontents were then gathering round Raby, hoping to make successful head sUjainat the Lancastrian forces, and frequent and urgent were the solicitations my Lord received to join them. Methought your father secretly favoured these. I am sure he facilitated their reaching his brother. However, the Earl was unmoved by them ; for he considered this second undertaking as hopeless; aud it be^an to repent him that he had offended the King. Yet, by his brother's entreaties, he was persuaded to stay here, and deterred frcm going in person to implore the royal mercy. He was loaded with caresses, and ' elieved himself secure from every danger. But your noble mother, my
.
mv-Lord, judged differently of this trea¬ cherous calm. She loved your father really with a sister's love, and often urged him to throw himself on the clemency of his so¬ vereign. Had he fortunately been induced' to follow this advice, she was of opinion his actions would have been restricted, had his determination become known. Her suc¬ ceeding conduct proved this. ^ « She sent for me one day into this hail, when your father was absent, and, putting a key into my hands—'"Kendrew/ said she], * you are a faithful servant, attached to your Lord, and may be trusted. Should it happen that he ever is debarred from leav¬ ing this castle, vou shall be furnished with the means of liberating him. Freserve this key, which opens the side-entrance of the building facing the stables. Reveal to no person my part in this concern. I rely on your discretion.' '* Lady Rachel said no more; but I had heard enough to make me comprehend my Lord was in the hands of an enemy, I would
would fain-have told him all my thought^ but Lady Rachel's is Junction forbade my nan.ing her, and his anger rose whenever I expressed asi.-.picion of t> egood faith of his brother. lie would bid me keep mv cold* blooded car tion within my own bosom, and said his father's son could never betray the man who trtv-tcd in him. " Then it was, my Lord, that you ob¬ tained my master's pardon from the King; hi\t he never knew you did so On the con» frary, your kind and dutiful conduct preci¬ pitated his fate. * f Late one evening I was with him in the lower court of the castle, when wc saw Scruton, who had been sent on domestic business to a neighbouring village, ride fu¬ riously over the drawbridge, throw himself off his horse with the utmost precipitation, and repair to his master, with whom he re¬ mained some time in private. The fell resolution was then, perhaps, suddenly taken. You was within a short distance of Widdrington Tower, with a pardon for your uncle;
The cruel deceivers came to us. Bertram. Winburne smiled on his brother, and cour¬ teously warned him in from the night-air. The narrow door, for there was then a door, stood open into the fatal chamber we have lately left. An opposite one, on the broad landing of the stairs, was also un* closed. Bertram took his brother's arm, and led him info this chamber. It was nearly dark. They entered into conversation. I was behind them, with Scruton, when your father suddenly grasped me by the throat, while Scruton, drawing a dagger from be¬ neath his vest, plunged it to the hilt in your uncle's side. I believe it pierced his heart, He groaned and fell. At that in¬ stant, Ladv Widdrington, descending the stone-steps, reached the door fronting us ; and her husband, leaving me to Scruton, * flew to secure her from causing any alarm. The villain seized me; but I had now re- ' covered my presence of mind, and struggled with him. He would have stabbed me; but the
■j the dagger was still in my master's side, and he could not with one hand draw it forth. 1 collected all my force to give him such a blow as brought him to the ground; and fled, anxious to preserve my life, for the : purposes of justice, not revenge. " To Lady Rachel's providential inter¬ vention, ho "'doubt, I owed my escape. Bertram dared not leave her at liberty. Scruton was stunned with his fall; and the time it required to secure her within a re¬ mote chamber enabled me to quit the con- lines of the castle. I concealed myself within the woods all that night, aad several ,* succeeding days, and then, burying my cloak and upper garments, offered myself as a peasant to work at hard labour for an honest farmer. I was unsuspected, employ¬ ed, and entertained; and thereby continued so near Widdrington Tower as to hear of every material transaction there. Vassals love to talk of their lords; and the yeoman whom I served spoke of what every person in the vicinity had been made to believe ; namely,
I ' namely, Lord Widdrington's second act of rebellion against his liege lord, in joining . the insurgents near Raby, even at the time :. when his nephew was bringing to him full forgiveness for his former offences. Also, of Scruton's being dispatched in pursuit of *. him, and afterwards of his vain attempt to bring him back, and the fabricated story of his being slain in battle. "I heard all this, and vowed-—forgive me, my Lord—the deadliest hatred against the perpetrators of all this guilt. Yet my heart melted when I heard of the excess of your affliction. I resolved to observe the utmost caution, and not to endanger one of the only two witnesses of this horrid deed by a single rash step. Lady Rachel, we heard, had voluntarily confined herself in performance of a vow ; and you was said to have gone tq London to bring back your cousins, now their uncle's wards. » * . t " I wondered how the corpse had been disposed of; and one evening, returning from the village of Warkworth, in my peasant's
" peasant's garb, with a load of timber, hear^ ing that Scruton was from home, I made *'soirie pretence for passing through the 'courts'of the castle, and saw the entrance into the bloody chamber had been walled 11 p# I remembered some mason's work had been in hand at the fatal period; and the building-stones that were strewed around offered a ready means of concealment, less liable than interment to detection, 1 speak upon a certaintv ; the bodv was not buried then." " How know you that ?" asked Lord Delancev. " Confine vour narrative at present to what concerns that alone. How obtained you further information relating to it?" (C Through the young Earl of March and Sir Hugh Mortimer, my Lord, several years after. Much of matter, interesting to you and Lady Margiana, fell out in the interval ; but I will now, in observance of vour com- mands, speak only of the subject we arc upon. (( You
rt You know, that on the late breaking out of Glendower's rebellion, the tw& chiefs it have mentioned came into the north to concert their measures with your kinsmen of the house of Percy; and so many dss- affected men flocked to their standard* that they-, were enabled to defy and plunder many strong places. It was thought likely they would attack this fortress; and I hoped the hour was come for the exposure of the secret crime I had witnessed-.: I was rather prompted to the acceleration of'this, than deterred from it, by the unexpected return of m v belovedyoun^ Lady,which aid not oc- casion in mc the same surprise itdid in many others,' as I have since heard, for the report of her death,- so carefully spread by Lady Rothes/to further her own interested views, never reached me, ; " Lady Margiana's re-appearance re¬ doubled my anxiety to do justice^to her fa¬ ther's memory, and mm ish his murderer. I threw off ray disguise^ audiwent to join the forces o f the t wo Itadars on their approaching ,\ql; v, a Widdrinuton
WiaiWngtoh Tower. Though I hated the cause they were engaged in, I did my best to .serve.■them ; but your father and his mm* the base Scruton excepted, made so gallant a resistance, that 1 feared the fortune ©f the day was turning against us. Under this apprehension, I bethought myself of an effectual mtfans of securing not only the victory, tout'peculiarly the point I wished for. " Forcing tr»V way 1, P to ^ r ^ U K^> * told him I knew of a weak place on the northern side of the building, and advised him to direct all his force against the spot at which I let fly my arrow. With those words, Itoerft my bow, and hh the very place, which had been built up weaker than the rest of the wall. To engage him to follow my counsel, I assured him, could he penetrate info the chamber within, he might make his own conditions with the Earl ot AViddriivgt©*!. " The earnestness of my looks and lan¬ guage persuaded the ckief; ^r^ to speak more
tnore properly, the justice of Providence prevailed. The ill*constructed wall was beaten inwards. Sir Hugh and his nephew rushed on. I followed them, and belield the same object you have lately seen, but without even the poor appearance of sc- pulfuro. f Thh.' cried I, ( is the body of the late Lord Widdrington, mv noble mas¬ ter ! falsely reported to have died in re¬ bellion, but, in fact, slain here, by hir, bro¬ ther s on! or/ ik As I spoke, your father, pale and pr^p- insr, anpearcd before us. lie hr.d h^ard mv words. He knew me. *ind concluded him^cif undoiu*. Yet he bi^.^ed for r.ierc , \ z:\~nl to v » be screened from shame. ' Turn then/ wud Sir Hii^h, ' to forward ihc interests of the Earl of rerev. Join your forces to oil'.;, ai;d h.ic with ns to Wales. If thou re fust sf, or failest in ?hc:-.c particulars, exposure and destruction he upon thee S' il My Lord, you know the rest. Your father's acquiescence was implicit. In a few n •- hours
hours he was on h*s march for Lord Percv'rf camp; and, leaving Scruton behind, to preserve the secret chamber still a mystery, he took Lady Margiana with him t to pre¬ vent, no doubt, her suspicions being awa¬ kened bv any rumours that misjht obtain, and probably anxious to complete her marriage with you before they reached her ears. <f This is all I have to sav on the subject of my late Lord; but, as I remained lone convened in the neighbourhood of \h.$ castle, and, bv means of the key which hr.d been given me, had constantly free, though private, access into it. lam in possession of many other unknown particulars, which I shall be glad to re\eal jointly to you and Lady Margiana, whenever you are disposed to permit me.*' " Some other time, good Kendrew/' said Lord Delancey, without raising his head, for he had long been listening to him with his face concealed by his cloak—" some other time. I have heard enough for to-night. Retire
Retire to your rest, my friend, if rest you can obtain, and leave me now." " But will you, my Lord, endeavour tc? rest?" " Fear me not, good old man. I will see thee again in the morning." " But suffer me, kind master, ere I go> to light you to your chamber, t promise I will leave you there." Lord Delancey was in too much anguish of mind to contend. He arose and went to his apartment, where Kendrew quitted him, and where he spent the remainder of the heavy hours in prayer, to deprecate Divine vengeance, till he met Margiana,. the next morning, at breakfast in the great hall. At this, as well as at every other meal* the old servant persisted to attend on them ; and.it grieved, him to behold t'se haggard altered looks of Lord Delancey. So re- Of markable was the change that had taken ii % place.
place since the preceding day, that Mar¬ giana noticed it, and inquired if he was not well P " You. appear/* said she, u as though you had not slept; as: though some additional uneasiness cf mind——'* He turned from her inquiring eye, and strove to suppress the sighs that filled his aching heart. t( Hope for hetttt days, Ethelred/* con¬ tinued she, kindly. u You have losf, it is true, a faithful and a tender friend; but ■vou have many Ici't ; and it will go hard but that the good services you have ren* dered to the Kins; will insure vour father's pardon/' lie shuddered at hearing his father named; and wished to lead her thoughts to some other subject, " You
- You forget," he observed, " the pain¬ ful suspense I am held in respecting my MO ,her and Arle.te. Where, all th.s wh.le can the,j be wandering ? What may not they together is but very slender; and .f they are »ot. how can we account for the absence of the unhappy girl whoha.no other giude than her own imperfect judgment? .. You need not, my Lord, be under any uneasiness respecting your mother," said- Mendrew. , ■ « Why not, my good friend ?" asfced Wargiana; for Ethelred was inattentive, and had not heard him. ,« Becat:se," replied the old man, that excellent Lady is safe, and employed as she has always been through life, usefully and worthily." » How !" cried Lord Delancey, starting from his reverie—" of whom- are you speaking?" " Of Lady Widdrington, my Lord;-— a woman, whose virtues might suffice h4 ta
MARGIANA.' to bring down blessings on a whole family of sinners." "• Good Heavens f do you know any thing concerning her ?" " A great deal, my Lord. I had once the happiness of rendering her a materia] ser* vice-; after which I spent many days in.at- tendingher, and was proud of receiving her commands." ;■■■.{ i : €( You astonish me, Kendrew. A&d*do you know where she now isj?'* : » s( Aye, my Lord; she is at Rothes Castljl, in Scotland, where she has long .resided, under the obscure name of Dame Elizabeth guarding from a threatened danger young Hengist, the infant son of my late dear Lord by Lady Rothes." *"' Oh, the blessed saints!" exclaimed Margiana. " Said you Dame Elizabeth-? Was she I knew there, and loved so well, your mother, Lord Delancey ?" Ethelred, admitting the first pleasurable emotion that had warmed his heart for many a day,
. dav. demanded an explanation. The me¬ lancholy circumstances that had attended- his meeting wi.hMargiana had, e^ver s.nce preventcdhisaskinganavrativ.ofwhathad befallen her during her long abode in Scot¬ land. He had only generally learned sh* had been confined by order of Lady Rothes, fromHarold Wallop.who had referred h.m to herself for particulars; nnd now, ath.sre- nuest.she briefly related to him the narrat.ve cT her seizure, captivity, and liberat.on; dwelling more minutely on that part of her. story. that respected Lady Widdrington... When she had concluded-," How like my mother V cried Delancey; " fearless of danger, when a duty was to be performed !" "^But why—why," asked Margiana, he¬ sitating, " was her protection, or any pro¬ tection, necessary for little Hengist e" Ethelred arose, and walked from the table. "Your uncle Bertram believed himle- H 5 ruiraaU,"
git'iraafe,'* replied Kendrew, lowering his voice. '* Lady Bothes has taken great pains ■to have him esteemed so." Margiana returned no answer. She felt for the feelings of Delancey, attributing them to the implied reflection on his father, and not to his own fears of being super¬ seded by the child. To soothe those feel¬ ings, she said, " Oh, my Lord, why should not your mother now be restored to you, and to her home ? Ought she not ? Ye?, surely, she ought to be invited back." S( Let me *ro for her, my eood young Lord," cried Kendrew. " A meeting be¬ tween you will rejoice the hearts of you both ; and I know the .situation of the place, and the nearest road to it, better than any ■r Of your servants here." i( I will go myself," returned Ethelred. e< It is my duty; ^nd you shall stay here "with Lady Margiana." This determination was highly approved a of
of by her, and Kendrew submitted to it. But, owing to the absence of Lord Wid¬ drington, so many affairs of consequence * claimed his son's immediate and peculiar attention, that he found to his great regret, it would not be possible for him to gratify his own wishes in this particular. He there¬ fore, with reluctance, was forced to suffer Kendrew, and a suitable number of attend¬ ants, to set out for Rothes CasfJe on the following morning; though, calculating the number of days it was likely they.would be on the road, he resolved nothing should prevent his meeting his mother at Edin¬ burgh, and there putting: himself at the liead of her escort, from thence to W&* drington To wen
n G CHAP.
An old Servant It was fortunate for Lord Delancey that he bad indispensable avocations to engross nearly all his time, and very much of his attention. A profound melancholy might Otherwise have seized upon his heart, which bad received the severest wound from the certainty of his father's guilt. Several cir¬ cumstances that had occurred during his stay at home, when he brought down the royal pardon for his uncle, had created in his mind a fear, that every thing had not been done which might and ought to have been at least attempted to prevent his de¬ parting
parting a second time from his duty; and he believed Scruton capable enough of concealing the King's clemency, and re¬ presenting him as inflexible, when it was supposed he was. pursuing "the noble rebel to Rabv ; if, indeed, he had his master's orders to authorise his villainy. But wickedness such as Kthelred had been informed of, he had not imagined it in the heart of man to conceive. Undeceived in this particu¬ lar, and finding the perpetrator of it his own father's agent, horror and agony had little of power that Lord Delancey did not (eel. Scruton, who was still in confinement, underwent no uncertainty respecting its cause, lie had seen Kendrew, and knew he was imprisoned by the directions of his young master; yet hope did not forsake him, for he depended on the return of his Lord to restore him to liberty.' He knew not that Bertram was a still more wretched captive than himself; for Scruton and Joyce . were
Were so justlv hated by every domestic in the castle, that none went to relieve the gloom of their dungeon, save the man ap¬ pointed to carry their ftfod, and he re¬ solutely refused to answer any of their inquiries. Ethelred, though resolved to be just* was vet slow to : nflict a uwrtnl punishment on one, who, villain as he was, had acted undei his father's directions. Besides, he knew not but that other discoveries might be in Scruton's power to make. The nature of Jovce's guilt he had yet to learn, for Ken¬ drew had appeared to implicate her as well as her husband. He determined, therefore, to wait until a second conference with Kendrew, and his mother** atdvice, might strengthen his own Judgment, and prevent his acting with a precipitation it was possible to repent or. But the agitated state of his mind, and the acuteness of his feelings, stamped a de¬ jection
jection on his face that excited all the sym¬ pathy of Margiana. Herself still deeply deploring Genevieve's death, she attributed his broken spirits to the same cause that nfiected her own ; and felt that she had never valued Ethelred so highly before. Iiis love failed to impress her, while she had believed herself the object of it; biit now that she thought him mourning the loss of her sister, she both cherished and commi¬ serated him with all that mingled tenderness, vet strength of reirard, of which women alone perhaps are capable. The many concerns that pressed upon him prevented their frequently meeting, e?.cci)tino;-at the hours of refreshment. At these times, exerting herself to overcome her own recollections, she endeavoured to appear cheerful, and to excite cheerfulness in him, by promoting only subjects of hope ancl satisfaction. This she considered as a dutv. She would talk of his mother's re- turn; and, reminding him of Arlette's pro¬ vidential
vidential retreat from Edinburgh to Rothes Castle, would dwell on the probability of her having ever since continued privately there, under Lady Widdrington's protec¬ tion ; though the latter might think it pru*» dent to conceal the circumstance during her acquaintance with Margiana, on account of Lord Lothian's being also at the castle at the same time. All this Delancey admitted ; and he loved the kind friend <*nd sister who was so soli* citous to promote his peace of mind. But one frightful ima:re idled his heart, and closed it against the approach of every Change of place affords a temporary relief to the wretched. He was «lad when the appointed time arri ed for his setting ©ut to join his mother, and Margiana saw him depart, with hopes ot a nappier meet¬ ing. She herself looked foiward with real pleasure to the return of Lady Widdrington, including
including, as she was willing to believe,.that of Arlette; and only the tears she continued to shed, as a tribute to the memory of Genevieve, interrupted the course of that tranquillity which, both from constitution and principle, had ever, till now, been the inmate of her busoni. Some doubts, however, relating to her father, and others raised by the mysterious paper that mentioned Father Geoffry, still clouded her mind; but she resolved to clear them, by taking the first opportunity of an interview with Kendrew, whose knowledge of all the perplexing trans* actions of the castle she believed almost unbounded. During Lord Delancey's absence, she re¬ ceived no news, but that her uncle had been conveyed a close prisoner to London, in the train of the victorious army, and that he w r as strictly confined in the Tower, th& King not having, yet determined his. future fate*
fate. Her generous nature led her to wish he might be forgiven ; and she reflected with pleasure that Wallop was near the per-. son of the offended monarch, and that he would be as strenuous for what could im¬ part happiness to his friend, as that friend could be himself, A day sooner than she had expected the return of the travellers, she received the welcome news of their approach, accompa¬ nied by an additional subject of rejoicing. Maurice came running to her, his eyes sparkling with pleasure, and acquainted her their young Lord had hmt forward one of his followers to inform her his mother was within a mile of the castle, and also Lady Arlette and the young Hengist, whom Lady Widdrington would not trust from under her own protection. Margiana felt more of joy than surprise. Anxious to shew all the respect in her power to the sister-in-law of her father, to the mother of Lord Delancey, and to one whom, for her own intrinsic worth-
worth, he loved so well, she ordered all the household to attend her, to meet and wel¬ come their excellent Lady home ; and mim- berf, both within and without the castle, were almost instantly assembled. With de¬ light in all their faces, they followed her to the confines f>f the park, where they were soon descried by the travellers; and the impatient Arlette, with some of her natural impetuosity, though that was now consi¬ derably softened down by the precepts and example of her admirable tutoress, sprung forward at the sight of Margiana. Their meeting was an affectionate and a happy one; but Margiana felt most of joy when she bent her knee to Lady Wid¬ drington, and found herself pressed to her maternal bosom. " Said I not," cried that Lady, tenderly embracing her," said I not, dear ard virtuous Margiana, we should meet again ? You littl©
little thought it would be so soon, or that it would be here/' . " To find you anywhere/* replied Mar¬ giana, sf would be happiness to me ; but to discover such kindness and excellence in so near and dear a connexion, gives indeed an overflow of pleasure." Ethelred now came forward, and pointed out to Margiana her little favourite, asleep in the arms of the servant before whom he sat on horseback. " This is too much of delight," said she, " for one day !" " Let us not complain of it," said Lady Widdrington, smiling, " were it twice as much. But you, niece, do the honours of Widdrington Tower. We follow your lead, and are ready to advance to the castle in your train." " I, with the rest of its inmates, am too fortunate at being in your's," replied Mar¬ giana, motioning for Lady Widdrington to advance, while Arlette, springing from her norsCju
fcorse, said she would walk home with her cousin. " Ah! mad girl," cried Margiana, as they proceeded, " what a special Providence has watched over your safety, to place you, when you had the least right to expect so great a blessing', under the protection of such a mother !" " Aye; was it not lucky ?" said Arlette. " I have been in Heaven ever since 1 No confinement, no ill-humour, to fret me; but good instruction, so pleasantly given, that it made me ieel heartily ashamed of what I had done, though so few people knew of it. For, after all, what do you think, coz, Lord Lothian proved not worth a farthing. A wild, bad, scapegrace ! Oh, you knew him the best, i will trust to your opinion another time. Wallop is a sad fright, to be sure; but he would out¬ weigh a thousand such for goodness/* i - ( , Margiana was glad to find Arlette had ac¬ quired a right way of thinking, without losing
losing her vivacity, of which latter she gave many proofs before they reached *he castle. Lady Widdrington possessed very great fortitude ; and she required it all to conceal the emotion with which, after so long an absence, she re-entered those gates she had quitted under the most dreadful impres¬ sions. Much conversation had passed be¬ tween herself and-Ethelred on the subject of those horrid events that had driven her from her home; and both had concluded not to torture Margiana, and disgrace him they were bound to revere, by an unlimited revelation of his guilt. They agreed she should be suffered to suppose that her uncle, convinced of Hengists legitimacy, had formed a nefarious design of stealing hira from his mother, and of either secret¬ ing him a* home, or sending him beyond the seas; and they determined to place the detention Lady Widdrington had un- fagopc wholly to the account of her de¬ clared
clared purpose of warning L?.dy Rothes of her infant's danger; as her evasion was actually made with that intent. On the subject of the murder, they resolved to observe the most profound silence. Margiana's present opinion of the manner of her father's death had al¬ ready sufficiently pained her; and even Kendrew, though he had once been so anxious to inform her of the worst, now acquiesced in this prudent plan, and con¬ fessed no good purpose whatever could be answered by awakening and redoubling her anguish by a recital of the dreadful truth. When, therefore, the openness of Mar¬ giana's heart induced her to reveal every action and thought of her life to the amiable woman whom she held deserving of her utmost confidence, the ©ther wis prepared to return her communication, by a guarded narrative, sufficient to clear up her doubts, without too keenly afiecting her sensibility. They
They had leisure and solitude for ti»eo£ exchanges o[ the heart, for Lord Delancey no sooner saw his mother and sister safe at Widdrington Tower than he hastened to London, to join his solicitations to those of Harold Wallop for his father's life. His recent acquaintance with the crime he had committed rendered him more anxious on this head than ever; for Delancey, with¬ out os:entation, was a Christian in the most charitable sense of the word; and he shuddered at the idea of bis parent's being precipitated into eternity, with such a load of guilt unreported of, unatoned for. His mother and Margiana could not but approve of the -pi bus motive that led him from them, though both felt his absence to be a loss, especially the former, whose love for him was proportioned to his merits, aiid who: had already so long mourned :he de¬ privation of hi3*oci«tyj • : • '■ Lady
Lady Widdrington acquainted Margiana, that the particulars of her own escape were so connected with the history of Kendrew's concealment, that it would be advisable he should preface her narration with the ac¬ count he had longagb ir tended giving in the burying-place, when vhe success of Lady rto^hes's scheme prevented the appointed meeting there. The old man was accord-" ingly summoned ; and being previously in¬ structed what to communicate and what to conceal, he gave his beloved young lady the following recital; Ladv Widdrington chusing to withdraw, until he had conclud¬ ed it. i. {( When I had the misfortune," said he, " to lose mv dear master, instead of giving: myself up-to a despair, that could bo of no service to the living or the dead, I deter- mined either to sell my life very dearly to the enemy, or if possible to save it, that I might still be of use to my Lord's children. The unhappy contest over, I disguised my- vol. v, i self
self as a peasant, and came to fix in this neighbourhood, finding that you and Lady Genevieve, as your uncle's wards, were to be brought hither. This I thought strange, knowing the high opinion my Lord had always entertained of his eldest daughter's prudence, so capable' of directing her own and her sister's actions; and could not but suspect some foul play, respecting the will said to be written and left here by him. I had never heard of his making any will; and my doubts confirmed me' in my design of continuing near this place, to render you all the service in my power. (i But as your uncle, if conscious of any deception, would surely not have suffered me to approach you, I carefully maintained iny disguise, and had the good fortune to be entertained as a labouring servant by one John Kottage, a vassal of my Lord's, one of whose daughters-was just gone to live as an inferior servant in the castle. This was a lucky circumstance for me; for she frequently walked over to see her parents;
parents; and from her talk to them, which they often repeated as we all sat together at meat, I gathered many particulars of use for me to know, while I ran no hazard of being discovered by her, because I left the castle just before she went to live there. By these means I learned your arrival, and the strict conditions of your dear father's will., which Scruton had mentioned, and which were much spoken of amongst the domestics. 1 was "^nvinced the whole was a forgery, being mo*ally certain my Lord had made no will at all; for he had often said to me, that, in case of the worst, mean- ing his being slain, his personal property would of course devolve to his children; and that your own discretion was the best guard to which he could commit either yourself or his vounsrest daughter. *So I remained close in mv concealment, and lent an attentive ear to all I could le:im relating to your situation ; till, chancing to hear from Nottage's girl what apartment yon i 2 slept
mce of a spring-trap in his chamber, to prevent your ever leaving your own room at nio-ht without his knowledge, I thought I would venture ,to make use of a key I had of the side entrance, near the stables, to let myself into the castle, and endeavour to speak to you, for I wished to communicate to you my suspicions of the forgery. •« I should not have feared revealing my¬ self to Lady Rachel, knowing her character to be so worthy; but we were told she had made a vow io confine herself for a whole year, as an expiation of her brother's dying in rebellion; and though 1 doubted the truth of that story also, her seclusion, whatever was its cause, effectually hindered me from making myself known to her." **. Why, Kendrew, did you doubt the truth of that story?" said Margiana. <e I thought it unlikely a woman of such enlightened good sense should condemn herself to be useless to her family for so
long
long a time. And it was improbable too that she should have contracted so very strong a liking for my Lord, though he tva$ her brother, during the little while he spent with her, for he was scarcely three weeks at Widdrington Tower, and they had hardly ever met before. " So, as I was saying, I had no chance of applying to her; and as I always lay in an outhouse, I could go abroad any night without being missed, if I only took care to be in arain before morning. Accordingly, I wrapt myself in a long cloak, and carry¬ ing a lanthorn underneath it, I introduced myself into the castle; but not daring to ap¬ proach your chamber through the armoury, for fear of the spring-trap, I softly made my way into the room that I knew lay on the other side of yours, and which I recol¬ lected was in one part divided from it by a thin wooden partition. With a sharp knife, 1 cut out of this a large panuel; and, luckily for me, the night being stormy, the noise I made was not loud enough to dis- i 3 turb
turb you. The loose arras hangings con- cealed from your room what I was doing; but I had no sooner worked myself a pas¬ sage, tifan the want of oil in my lanthorn warned me to be gone. Replacing, there¬ fore, the panne!, I hurried back the way I came, and a few nights after repeated my attempt, having provided myself with a few lines in writing, to leave for you, in case I was prevented by any accident from coming to the speech of you. ec I found the panne! just as I had left it, ?ind, passing through the opening, and hearing all war, still, 1 lifted up the hang¬ ings, so as to have a free view into your apartment; but I discovered you had not yet come to it for the night. I waited, therefore, in mv place of concealment, and very soon had the satisfaction of hearing vcu enter; but that accursed woman Joyce %r' was with you, as I saw from under a corner of the arras." « Whv do vou call her by such a name, Kendrew ? What has she done ?'* « She
tc She has aided and abetted your uncle, dear Lady, in a^ 1 his schemes; and she know"—here Kendrew checked himself— l( as much as her husband did, of his forged will, and his design against little Hengist. * c I kept close, till I thought she was gone to rest; for I was not sure but she might be in the habit of returning to take away your lamp. So I waited, and saw you reach down a book; and after vou had read a wliile, hearing no noise in the castle, I believed I might step forward, making myself sure you would know me at the first word I spoke. But, no doubt, you fancied me that villain Scruton, coming to murder —no, not to murder, but to frighten you ; for you fled away like a lapwing, and I heard you run through the armoury, ancl along the passage; whereupon I made no question but your uncle, who was probably gone to his chamber, would be alarmed, and would instantly hasten to your room with some cf his people. So, as no time was to be lost, I thrust the paper I had i 4 brou sh i
brought into the leaves of your book ; but fearing your uncle mighU.ook into it, I put it by upon the shelves, and made the best of mv way out of the castle, not without hopes you would see what i had written, and would come down into the vaults. " But after being there several nights, for I dared not alarm you by returning a second time to your apartment, I began to fear you had never §een enough of my hand-writing to recollect it again, and that you apprehended some snare from your Uncle or Scruton. " 1 was never disturbed during my sub¬ terranean watches, but once, when I heard some heavy steps advancing so suddenly, that I was fain to leave my cloak behind me, and escape. But the greatest danger I ever was in of being discovered, was one nioht when I had come to the castle rather too soon, and, lurking in one of the pas¬ sages, in hopes of seeing you, I perceived a young lady coming towards me, whom I took for your very self; but I was disap¬ pointed.,
pointed. It was not vo»>. I believed it was yov.r sister; but I was afraid of trusting any bodv else." '■ It was my dear sister," said Margiana* "■ She mentioned the circumstance to me long after ; but had she tjone so at the time, neither of us then would have suspected Tou." Kendrew bowed, but returned no answer to this observation. *' Soon after/* he continued, " I had the. great pleasure of being serviceable to Lady Widdrington ; but the whole of that ccmcf-ii she herself will chuse to relate to *, on. i will therefore proceed to sav, that after a?j- sisting her to escape from her confinement. 1 was honoured by the permission of at- ending her to London, from whep.ee-' I hoped very soon to re f 'irn ; but I wns there unluckily reeognred by some J a^eas*riar.s. who swore to me as a person who hud Ih\::i i 5 very
very active in tire cause of King Richard, and I was consequently thrown into prison. However, after I had been detained there several months, the keeper of it, fortunately for me, died, and a countryman of my own succeeded to his office. " It was not difficult for me to prevail upon this man to connive at my escape; and I no sooner regained my liberty than I posted back hither, hoping to be more suc¬ cessful in my fixture attempts to speak with you. I became still more sanguine, when * Lord Widdrington set out for Wales. How¬ ever, I gave up the idea of meeting you in ihc-vaults, having so often watched for you there in vain ;■ but, hearing you frequently walked to the burying-place, I resolved to hazard a letter, inviting you to meet me there. 1 dared not name myself, as I was sure that Scruton, knowing what intelli¬ gence 1 had it ifi my power to give you, would raise all the vassals of his Lord to hunt me down, should it be suspected I was in
in the country. Yet I ventured to mention a childish ballad, that I thought would re¬ mind vou of me. iC This letter I carried one evening to your chamber, when all the family were engaged at supper; but to prevent its com- inp under the observation of ycur spies, I concealed it in the same book I had made use of before, which I drew out of its place, to fix your attention. i( The meeting that followed, some time after, I need not recal to \ our remembrance, It will ahvays be in mine. I had never been happy before, since my dear master died. But I paid heavily for my pleasure, when I found myself disappointed in my hope of secingvou again; and, after a night spent in restless anxiety, heard the report that you had sccretlv fled from the castle. It was conjectured you was gone to London ; and thither i went in pursuit of you ; and after a considerable time spent in fruitless inquiries, I returned here, supposing that this would probably be the first place where i 6 yoa
vou would be heard of. For, notwith- standing what was held out, I could not believe, after the few wonis I had ex¬ changed with you" in the burying-place, that you had voluntarily gone away with¬ out me. " But all my hopes died away by de¬ crees; and I then became careless of my life. Indeed I thought there was nothing worth living for, since I could no longer be serviceable to you ; and perhaps too desperately threw myself into the service of Lord March and Sir Hugh Mortimer, out of auxiousness to oppose your uncle in any wav I could. The news of your unex- * peeled return made me persevere for your relief; and when the rebels had succeeded in forcing the castle, and marched towards Lord Percy's camp, 1 followed in their train, still keeping an obseivant eye upon your UBcle, though, ns you always rode near him, I forbore to appreach you ; but re¬ solved, in case he persisted to enforce your marriage with his son against your
will, to give you all the information in my power. " At the time vou* separated from him, and retired to Ladv Perry, I was so much employed by Sir Hugh Mortimer, that I never had an opportunity of speaking with you; but you was first in mv thoughts when the action was over ; and when, upon inquiry, I found which road yon had taken with Harold Wallop, I pursued you ; but a slight hurt i had received from a spear-head proving verv troublesome, I made for the fji>t lijiht I saw to apply a bandage to it, and was just about to remount my horse, and proceed to inquire further at the village beyond the ruined house, when I beheld vour precious (ace ! You must have quitted the high road, for 1 certainly had passed you. " Such have f;een poor old Kendrew's adventures, my dear young Lady, since you lost the best father, and 1 the best master, that ever lived. But now, 1 trust, I-am laid up
up in a resting-place for the remainder of my life. " You will observe, I have omitted in my story all that concerns Lady Widdrington. She knows exactly how it fell in my way to assist her, and what I was lucky enough to do will come properly into the account she wishes to give you herself of what has befallen her."
CHAR
frWPW^^^^^*!WU*n*MOlMki4iak^M»*W
CHAP. \L Innocence protected hy Virtue* Margiava had a pleasure in expressing to her faithful old servant all the gratitude she felt for the anxiety and trouble he had undergone for her sako; and she as¬ sured him his desire of spending the rest of his days in her sevice could not be stronger than her own to retain him with her. She asked him some further questions respect¬ ing the menaces her uncle had thrown out against the infant son of Lady Rothes, and understood that, though not publicly made, they had once, in an unguarded moment,. beea
been inadvertently dropped in the hearing of Lady Widdrington. The fact, which Kendrew had been can- tioncd not to rcvial, was, that Bertram, fi-rious and desp.. i-ale, at the moment of bein^" detected by his* wife in the bloody chamber,hail braved her powerof becoming a witness against him. by threats of the most cruel confinement, ar.d impious oaths, that the child whom Lady Kothes professed to have been born in lawful wedlock should not long survive its hated father. Instead of mentioning these particulars, Kendrew onlv observed, th:.t Lady Widdrington, with so much horror, reprobated all idea of any •attempt against the b, y, that her husband, well acquainted with >r courage and re¬ solution in a rii/e.t r. /, , had confined, and even inhumanly treated her, to prevent her inteiferencc. Margiana then recollected the remote apartment, the iron cage, and the torn paper.
paper. But it was strange, she thought, if the hand-writing was really Lady Wid¬ drington's, that it had not been recognised by Harold Wallop. This, with some other doubts, still perplexed her; but she looked to her aunt's narrative for a dispersion of them all, and soon claimed the promised communication. " After what you have heard from Ken- drew./' said Lady Widdrington, " much does not remain for me to tell vou ; but as it is chiefly in his favour, I had rather be the relater of it myself, than leave if to him, who would dwell very modestly on his own merits. Nothing I shall ever be able to do for the worthy creature can repay the obligation I lie under to him. I grieve, that while doing justice to his kindness, I must bring the heavy charge of cruelty against another, whom I fain would once have honoured; but all that 1 sav must be confined within your own bojorn. 4* I will
" 1 will not dwell upon the circumstances that made my Lord think it necessary to deprive me of my liberty. You have been already sufficiently apprised of them by Kendrew, whom I desired to relieve me from that part of the task. It is enough for me to observe, that I was immediately forced into a distant chamber at the top of the castle; and, to give a colour of pro¬ bability to the tale that I find was spread of my having made.a vow of seclusion, I was committed to the keeping of the priest. Father Geoffry, who was the only person had access to me, your uncle alone
" By each of these I was constantly soli¬ cited to bind myself by oath never to take any measures for thwarting my Lord's de¬ signs against his infant nephew, and never to discover any thing I knew in his own disfavour.- This concession was proposed as the price of my freedom ; but I preferred captivity, though it was embittered to me ' ' bv
by various mod* i of punishment inflicted by the priest, at the command, however, I fear, of his Lord. if My knowledge of both their characters allowed me little room to hope; and I could not expect an interference in my favour from any one but my son, who, I conclud¬ ed, would be with the most assiduous care deceived. The place of my confinement was so distant from every inhabited room of the castle, save that occupied by Father Geoffry himself, that it was very rarely any mortal sound reached my ear. But, one gloomy evening, I heard a person coughing violent¬ ly in the chamber beneath mine, wherein my unfortunate and lamented brother had formerly slept, Though without expecta¬ tion of relief, a natural instinct prompted me to give warning that a wretched being was above ; and I threw down a heavy stone bottle, the onlv article of furniture in the apartment, excepting my straw bed. But nothing ensued; and I concluded that I must shortly perish, owing to the sufferings I was
I was made to endure, and the very scanty supply of food I received. I fear, my dear Margiana, 1 was a less patient prisoner than yourself. I more than once endeavoured to awaken pity and remorse in my husband's bosom; for the priest furnished me with the means of writing to him; but compas¬ sion dwelt not in his nature, and the season for remorse was not arrived. " At lengthy my deliverer appeared ; and I must now explain to you how Kendrew became possessed of the means of setting me free. 1 he better to guard against a discovery of the truth, Lord Widdrington, it seems, obliged mv own woman to join in the deception he was practising. He pro¬ bably thought it would not be belies ed that I should seclude myself, without a female attendant. He forced her, under pain of the severest punishment, to confirm the ac¬ count he chose to give of me She accord¬ ingly represented me as confining myself in a chamber verv distant from the one that really was my prison; and, as I have since heard,
heard, was induced, by her fears of torture, even to delude my son, by giving him various answers to letters he had wrote, as if returned by mc. This she could easily do, for she had lived with me from a child, and as I had myself taught her to write:, her hand bore the strongest resemblance to mine. However, she did not prove so faithful a confidant to mv Lord but that she intimated to a servant girl under her that Father Geoffry was in fact less my confes¬ sor and comforter than my gaoler, for that I was a captive in a remote chamber, of which he kept the key. The girl, though sworn to secrecy, could not contain what she knew. She was the' daughter of that John Nottage for whom vour old servant worked ; and probably the next time she visited her parents, she dropt more than hints of what had been revealed to her. " Thus Kendrew became informed of my real situation ; and the feelings it excited in his heart did not spend themselves in un¬ availing compassion. He resolved to act vigorously
vioorously in my behalf; and knowing that old Geoffry went often to Warkworth to confess his penitents, and sometimes re¬ turned home late at night, he one evening lav in wait for him, and, observing him crossing a large field alone, he. went up \o him, and told him he was come for the key of that chamber where I was con¬ fined. " Geoffry, of course, denying it was in his possession, the sturdy old warrior knock¬ ed him down, and, searching his garments, took it from him ; but did not quit the spot till he had effectually taken care he should not rise without assistance, or be able to reach the castle before I was set at liberty. He confessed to me, that he beat and bruis¬ ed him without mercy or remorse. But the oTtilt of this, if guilt there was, his next kind action fully expiated. "Leaving his groaning victim, he has¬ tened on to the Tower; and by the time he arrived there, the night had become nearly dark enough for his purpose. However, he
he concealed himself till it was likely my Lord and all the domestics were gone to rest. He then, by means of his own key, entered the building, and, being well acquainted with the interior of it, and having gathered from Nottage's daughter the situation of my prison room, he readily made his way to it; for he never risked any of his nocturnal visits without previously providing himself with the means of obtaining a light,, in case, he said, any event should fall out to favour your escaping from your uncle. " I was waked by the noise, unwonted at such an hour, of my door being cautiously opened. But a very different voice from that of either of my oppressors immediately relieved my apprehensions of a sudden death. Calling me by my name, Kendrew declared a friend was come to relieve me ; and on my answering, he urged me to rise with all haste and be gone, for that he was ready to see me safe to any part of the world I chose to repair to. He then told me
sie who he was: and I felt my deliverance certain at the sound of his name. "Praising God for a blessing so unlocked for, I did as he desired mc ; and as I always slept in a part of my clothes, for fear of surprisals, I was soon ready. lonce thought of leaving a few lines for my Lord; and actually wrote them, but afterwards, reflec¬ ting they could answer no good purpose, I destroved the paper. (£ As we were leaving that dismal room, I asked Kendrew if my nieces were at the castle, and how they were treated ? ' 111 enough!' was his reply. I then inquired where they slept ? and understanding from him that Genevieve's chamber lay through that occupied by Scruton and Joyce, but that you was the principal object of your uncle's suspicions tyranny, I conceived a sudden wish to make you the partner of my flight. u As we reached the end of the passage that leads to the armoury, Kendrew stop*
i>iii2f, to shelter his lioht from a gust of wind that blew up from the great staircase, I stepped forward, directing him to wait for me an instant; and not being aware of the invention of the loose flag acting upon i machine in mv Lord's room, thought only of calling vou, and urging you to be crone with us. Lest you should condemn mv imprudence as greater than it really was, 1 must observe to you, that my Lord had changed hh apartment, probnblv to be Dear vou ; for be had never before slept in that quarter of the castle. Hut, alas! mv rashness had nearly cost my com nan ion his life, and ruined myself. At the n msc made bv the spring, my husband rushes from his chamber, and Kendrew advancing at the same moment with his lamp, he saw and recognised us both, lie was armed with a dagger, and putting me aside with ooe hand, he aimed with the other a mortal blow «t Kendrew. But Kendrew was not to be so easily overcome. He parried the stroke, aud a struggle ensued, which ended in my vor., v, k Lord's
Lord's being stretched across the passage. Apprehending, however, that he was only stunned, and might soon rise and create an alarm, Kendrew almost forced me away, and hurried me out of the castle, and across the park, into the woods, which, under favour of the night, we reached in safety. Here, assuring: me he would return for you as soon as I was out of Bertram's reach, he suffered me to proceed more deliberately, till he drew near Nottage's house, where, awaking the man and his wife, he charged me to fear nothing, for they would befriend us. I found them indeed not merely willing, but even anxious, to serve he; and, by Kendrew's advice, I dressed t/.yself in a complete suit of the honest won an's clothes, while her husband assisted the * hi man in preparing a light covered cart, and two horses, to take us some miles on the Carlisle road; and Nottage himself made ready to go with us, and bring the horses 4i Every thing was so promptly done, that
Inst in less than half an hour F was lifted into the cart, and left the worthy woman deliehtcd at having rendered a service, as she said, to her oppressed Lady ; and cer¬ tain that she as well as her husband wouldi for their own sakes, observe the strictest ki^U* v ^ v * <c \V reached a small town, fifteen miles on the western road, before daybreak ; and as I was taken for a countrywoman, I attract¬ ed no observation. We here parted from the friendly Kottage, and, procuring some 'stronger horses, proceeded a little r iher, but more rapidly, in the same dirtvuon* when we turned aside into the south road, which, niter several doys journey, brought us in safety to London. " There, mv first care was to send Ken* drew to Lady Kothes, to acquaint her with the danger that menaced her little boy: and she, well recollecting the confidential servant of her departed friend, paid ready attention to his caution. She determined K 2 to
to send the intended innocent victim to Pcothes Castle, in Scotland; but seeming averse to go thither herself, Kendrew, by my direction/informed herhe could recommend a kinswoman of his own, to whose care Hengist might be safely confided. Upoa this, she sent for me, and, not to detain you longer than is necessary, a day was ap¬ pointed for my setting out with the child, escorted by Kendrew, who was very desir¬ ous of returning, to be near you, after he had seen me safe at my new place of des¬ tination. " But, in the meantime, he was unfortu¬ nately seen by ard known to some fiery pagans of ,he King. «ho «nen,be«d bow active he had been in the service of the late insurgent nobles; and by them he was thrown into confinement. Lady Rothes, therefore, who knew me by no other name than that of Dame Elizabeth, appointed ber own steward to supply Kendrew's place; and I arrived securely with my young
young charge in that distant region, which you also was so soon after compelled to* visit. *' Here I led a safe, a peaceful, and not unpleasant life; attached to the infant, whom I loved not only as my brother's child, but as a helpless being whom I had proved the instrument of Providence to preserve. I endeavoured to do my duty inr cherishing his health, and promoting his improvement, and received a delight from the performance of it. But how was I re¬ warded for all, when, beneath the name and disguise of a page, I beheld my dear wild Arlette, escaped from her father's unnatural. 1 I bondage ! The sight of her gave me so much happiness, Iwas not able to quarrel with the means that procured it to me, though I easily made her ashamed of her strange deviation from that propriety of conduct which is or ought to be the pride of woman as well as man. Luekilv for her; Lord Lothian had himself destroyed the im¬ pression he i.ad so suddenly made on hei? k. 3, childish*
wbich she h&d lived, he had-pr©bably never attracted* her notice ; and her natural notions of ^rectitude and delicacy :made her view him with dislike and disgust, on a further knowledge of his character. I had there¬ fore no lurking partiality to contend with; and Arlette, enjoying all reasonable liberty, and suffering no other restrictions than what she herself admitted to he just, soon became* in my partial estimation, all a mother could desire. S€ I was convinced of the permanency of her reformation, by the care with which she avoided Lord Lothian, when he visited Rothes Castle, some months after, and her averseness that even you should be informed of her past indiscretion; for I did not con¬ ceal from her the captivity and the suffer¬ ings you had endured. By her own desire, therefore, during the time of your con- valescence, I sent her to visit a respect* able neighbour. She said she feared you more than any .one, because you had no weaknesses
^weaknesses 4>f your own, to render you indulgent to those of others, and was with¬ out the natural partiality that made me
<' I did not combat her shyness, by re¬ presenting that you would certainly learn the whole of her former conduct from your sister; for I did not wish her to overcome the shame she felt too quickly. And I could not but fear her being recognised by Lord Lothian in her own character, as the supposed youth who had attended him so= long. " I am sincere when Tsay, that the friend¬ ship I formed for you during the short interval we spent together, was such as made me very sensible of your departure. I wished I could have returned with you; and my heart panted to be once more folded in the arms of my beloved son. But having gathered from you the unchanged situation. of affairs at this place, I resolved, to sup- s press my anxiety, and wait for a more fa¬ vourable season. k. 4. .'* Xhe
" The patience that Providence endowed me with, it has also been pleased to reward, 1 had not much longer to wait. Kendrew, a second time to me the messenger of good, brought me word that my dear Ethelred .--..; treated my return. And though I was ?eked to find my husband had become a : ie! to the sovereign he had formerly as- :: !ed to ra»se to that dignity, I felt, and siill /f, hopes that he will be pardoned. De- iancey is highly and deservedly valued by the King, and for his sake, offences may perchance be overlooked, that, but for him, nild not be forgiven." Margiana, after expressing to Lady Wid» .'rington the admiration she thought due to licv fortitude and perseverance, and her sense of the obligation under which she had laid her infant brother, related to her the : jnversation she had held with Joyce in the rown tapestry chamber, when she heard die noise overhead that had thrown that wicked woman into momentary confusion* Shej
IF^e then mentioned the subsequent anxiety th-t led her to explore the chamber above., Bt i when she would have spoken of the* iron cage, her voice faltered;, and Lady Widdrington, observing it, turned pale.. " I see, Margiana," said she, (e you have?" combined circumstances that have informed* you further than, for your uncle's credit's sake, eoukl have been wished; But Father GeeffVy, who always was the inflictor of what I suffered, is no doubt entitled to- much of the blame. He it was who locked me, for five and sometimes for seven hours; every other day, in that dreadful cage you must have seen." (C And beneath which," said Margiana, (c I found this torn fragment, that I have eyer since preserved, hoping the mystery attending it-might- be one day explained. From the sad tale you have told, I should have supposed it written by you, had not the hand been unknown to Harold Wallop/* k3: ■ Lad*.
Lady Widdrington looked at it.--*" This indeed is part of what I wrote/* said she; " and I cannot wonder he did not recollect the hand to be mine; yet I took no pains to disguise it/' " Why then, my dear aunt------" Mar¬ giana stopt, hut her eyes continued the question she would have asked. 4< Sometimes, I am apt to think Father Geoffry exceeded the authority vested in. him. Mo*e than once, to break, he said, the stubborn spirit that rose against a hus** band's will, not satisfied with the punish¬ ment of the cage, he inflicted another much more acute. He applied a small iron in¬ strument, called a thumb-screw, to each of my fingers in turn; and after awhile they became so crippled, that it was with much difliculty I made any use of them at all. If you have a curiosity to know the whole of my address to my Lord, I can gratify it; for, after I had effected my escape, I found I had unknowingly slipt the other fragment at I had written into my sleeve, in- 3 stead
stead of having thrown them both down; and I have kept it ever since, as a memorial of my sufferings and deliverance. Lady Widdrington rose, and, opening a small cabinet in the room where they were sifting, gave the relic to Margiana, who, joining it to her own, read as follows:
ft You inflict tortures in • vain. I will be resolute, and not all that: you and the infernal Geoffry can devise shall ever force me to bind myself by the oath you require. Whatever human nature can endure, I will bear; but know, I fly to preserve the innocent Hengist the instant I regain my liberty; and, far from the reach of your cruelty, shall live in peace, while maddening remorse wrings your guilty bo-* som/' mm. t^Jqgjffljgnp«niTii."- k a « Alas !**'
" Alas!° cried Margiana; u alas, for the wickedness of man ! And what, dear Lady, is become of this vile ©eofTry ? I have never either seen or heard of him since we returned from Shrewsbury/' *' lam told/* replied Lady Widdrington, €i he quitted not only this castle, but even the country, as soon as he discovered that Delancey was likely to become the master here, in consequence of his father's being a prisoner. Scruton and his wife, who were also in the guilty secret, would no doubt have done the same, had they not been in good time securedl They now lie at the mercy of my son; and if mercy he can shew them, consistently with justice, I make no question but he will." While these conversations were passing at Widdrington Tower, Lord Delancey, burying the secret of his father's blackest guilt deeply in his own bosom, even from Harold Wallop, was anxiously engaged in imploring the King to pardon the less criminal
criminal act of rebellion, which he repre¬ sented the Earl to have been forced into by Sir Hugh Mortimer and his nephew. Those two leaders Henry had forgiven, re¬ mitting, as he termed it, all further punish¬ ment, since each had virtually lost his head when Harry Percy died ; and, upon these grounds, Ethelred hoped his father also might escape an ignominious death. But he found the King strongly, and, in his opinion, unaccountably prejudiced. Henry bade him be told, for he would not suffer him to address himself upon the occasion, that he positively refused to bind himself by any promise; and that only Ethelred's steady loyalty, and the services he had ren¬ dered him throughout the whole of the late rebellion, had hitherto preserved his father from the scaffold. (i It is in our own breast," pursued the sovereign, " to punish or to pardon, as we see fit; and as we have our reasons for ex¬ tending a hand of mercy to Lord March and
and old Mortimer, so we may have causey unknown to any I ut pirr&elves, for judging Bertram of Widdrington undeserving of • the like lenity. Yet, for the love we bear Delancev, we will take time for further con- sideration, before he be condemned," With this answer, as it was all he could obtain, though the Prince of Wales him¬ self condescended to plead for him, Lord Delancey %vas forced to be content; and he was spared the pain the sight of his wretched parent would have given him, ■by a strict order, which the Warden of the Tower punctually obeyed, not to admit any person whatever to see the miserable Bertram. Another concern, during Ethe]red*s stay in London, engaged some part of his at¬ tention. Lady Rothes talked publicly, and in very high terms, of the usurpation of his father and himself, in assuming titles, and appropriating lands, to which they had no pretensions y
pretensions; since the late Earl of Wid¬ drington, besides his two daughters, had left to inherit his.honours and wealth, a son,bom of a marriage which took place between him and herself, at Edgehill, the summer before he died. Many persons were convinced, by her lofty tone and solemn asseverations; and the tale was beginning to obtain such extensive credit, that Ethelred felt it to be a duty owing either to young Llengist, or to his father and himself, to demand such proofs as were in her power to bring for¬ ward. But as a personal interview with Lady Rothes, on business of such a nature, would have been a very unpleasant task to him, his friend Harold readily undertook it for a/ him; and, upon soliciting a conference with the Lady, was immediately admitted. The society of neither of these, however, being highly valued by the other, his visit was a very short one. He told her he came at tlie request of Lord Delancey, or Ethelred Winburne,
Winburne, whichever he mi«;ht be, to re-» ceive from her own mouth an assurance of her being, or not being, the widov/ of his late uncle. " If he be dead." replied she, " lam hi& widow ; if he be living, I am his wife." " You was really, then, married to> him?" f( If the man who married us was really 3. priest." t{ Pardon me, Lady Rothes. I would not be rude, and rude it is to doubt a Lady's" word. I entreat vou, therefore, to remove my doubts, by producing your proofs. Where, I pray you, was the ceremony per*» formed ? and who was the priest that mar¬ ried you ?•" " The ceremony was performed in the chapel in old Castlcs's house, and the priest was Daniel Lazinby, of Edgehill." f{ And is he living there now ?" " No; he is dead. You must make what advantage you can of that,"
" And was there no other witness of your marriage?" <{ Yes; Clara Castles." *' Clara, now the wife of Wiliianr Scroope ? And where, I pray you, Lady, is she ?" " Be that your affair to find out, Wal¬ lop ; it will be a little amusement for you. But if you can contrive to let her know your friend is in London, married as she is, I should not question her coming hither very readily. And when you can address your inquiries to her, prithee let me hear no more of them, for, in good sooth, they are marvellously tiresome," Wallop, on leaving this flighty wcman, made it his business to discover where Scroope and his wife actually were; and hearing they resided at Edgehill, with her uncle, he went thither without loss of time; and, as Lord Delancey's friend, met with a very courteous reception, Pa
On his acquainting Clara with the nature of his errand, she smiled, and said, <e Yoit come too late, brave Harold. I am engaged on the other side/* " I hope you are engaged on the side of truth/' vsaid he; " and truth is all I want to hear. Ifyou really witnessed the marriage ceremony between the, late Earl of Wid¬ drington and the Countess of Rothes, there is no reason why you should not make oath of the same/ 8 *< Ave ! but the worthy Lady you men¬ tion would persuade me to make oath of it, whether I did or not. The fact is, Wallop, about an hour before you arrived, there came here a trusty servant of Lady Rothes's, her steward, whom your favourite Margiana can testify upon occasion to have been a \ery useful agent, and an agreeable fellow traveller over the Highlands. All that story is pretty public now. This man came with the most brilliant offers of his Lady's in¬ terest, and her brother's also, with the King, ha *
possession of certain estates that belonged to his late kinsman, Lord Latimer, in con¬ sideration of my rendering her the slight service of perjuring myself, and deposing that I was present at her marriage with the deceased Earl of Widdrington ; at the same time that I was entreated to forget the for¬ mer difference that subsisted between us. '* But having already, I am ashamed to say, occasioned too much uneasiness to your excellent friend, which I hope, as he has himself felt the force of love, he has already pardoned me for; besides lying under signal obligations to him, both in my own person and in that of my husband; God forbid f should do him any further injury, even putting all fear of incurring guilt out of the question. I protest to you, Lady Rothes was not, 'to my knowledge, married to Lord Widdrington ; and I am decidedly of opi¬ nion she never was. After hearing from her steward a pompous display of her proffered services, I bade him return, and-1^11 .his Lady from me, she had better become an honest
honest woman, as I had done; since, at he£* years, she could not reasonably expect to live a great while longer. But that, if she was anxious to establish the fact of a marriage having been celebrated in our little chapel, 1 could be of infinite use to her, having actually witnessed one there, no longer ago thstn last week. Step this way," pursued Clara, laying hold of Wallop's arm, " and I will shew you an object that, ifyou be an admirer of beauty, and a lover of justice^ cannot fail to give you pleasure/ 1 She led him out, under the little rustic porch that sheltered the front door; from whence, looking towards the bottom of the garden, he beheld a very lovely young wo¬ man sitting on a bench, at work, by the side of the brook. u I am sure," resumed Clara, u that, for Lady Rothes's sake, you will be agreeably surprised when I inform you that fair re¬ cluse is no other than the young pensioner Clothilde^
^lothilde, whom you have no doubt heard Delancey speak of. *' As soon as Lord Lothian could be safely tnoved, after receiving what was long be¬ lieved to be his death's wound, he was, by my husband's care brought here, where Clothilde had already been sometime before him. Our joint care and good nursing soon re-established his health; and on Tuesday last, the pretty foreigner became Countess of Lothian. I charged the honest steward tc report this agreeable news, with¬ out fail, to his Lady; though it is possible she may already have received it from her brother himself, who yesterdav morning left us for a few davs, and will probably visit his sister before his return." All Wallop's former dislike of Clara va nished at this testimony of her present good disposition, and he expressed his unquali¬ fied approbation, with assurances of Lord Dclancey's future friendship, and his own pleasure,
pleasure, at the just mortification LadjJ- Rothes would receive. The high spirits he was in made his com* pany so pleasant, that he was much pressed to prolong his stay, both by Clara herself and William Scroope, as well as her uncle. But he was too impatient to see his friend again, to comply with their request. He made the best of his way, therefore, back to London, and, by his information, fully satis¬ fied Lord Delancey that he had nothing to apprehend on the score of Lady Rothes, Soon after, Ethelred, finding that his fur¬ ther residence in London could be of no avail to his father, and that a variety of domestic concerns required his presence at Widdrington Tower; gave way to the earnest wishes of his heart, to return to the beloved society of his mother and Margiana. He was very desirous that Wallop should ac- cottpany him* and Wallop was equally anxious
jftnxious to go; but the King, at that time, iad need of him, though he promised him ,an early leave of absence. Lord Delancey, accordingly, set out alone, in the hope their separation would be but short; and was received with rapture bv his mother, and a consciousness of joy bv Margiana, that spread confusion over her fine face. This was observed by Lady Widdrington, and impressed her with ideas, which her niece's silence, seeming, as it did, to proceed from a fear of saying too much, strongly served to confirm.
CHAP.
MARGIAHA*'
H*^, (I, J. - Ill»-Il .11II [■^■■l* III* III! 'll'l '"" -W^.*** ■■*■!» *
CHAP. VII. The Sting of Death is Sim The propensities of the human, heart are most clearly seen in the quiet circle of domestic duties. The character then wears no holvday garb; and those truths arc brought to light which sometimes, in con* cerns of moment, are concealed. Lady Widdrington's partiality for her young and amiable companions rendered her ex¬ tremely attentive to whatever might deve- lope their sentiments; and less penetration than she possessed would have sufficed to convince her, that of all the three, Arlette alone was really happy. That
of bis i MhevMmmtimy>m&' milt, could' not ;fbrprlse bar; bdt Xacly W!ddri^gt©tt : fencied she could discern tMs -wt^ not the ©isly-subject of afBietidn that preyed upon his spirits, &tsd 'undermined bis peace. She thmight she beheld in him traces of the deep roots .of am unsubdued passion, which still stubbornly held their ground, and were twisted, round the fibres of bis passion 'had .yielded; fa 11 Jr. ^ ^ '' the introduction of a forejgp sentitnenl; but it had yielded only while its. own be* loved object was supposed to be be^was •-n^w^^tofed fO--hisls6oiety affection |-»^but hm8 restored ? bad been hiu wife» and Mmg iana, thougli ndship, was stil dead to bMTr|ove* '-■* '-i ■ ■ -^-,
' %
*<
Virtyo behalf,
J*tt»«K£
i *
v^v^
SKa'
>hi&v * ? v
d^cjnsracy of
^ ,•■
9
^
w
I»
always
always places bounds to her grief. The tarnished lustre of the name of Widdrington it belongs -to you to restore. You have ©ever,sullied it; and though your father has proved himself unworthy of his line, your mother, 1 presume to say, never brought disgrace on his or on her own. Be happy, my dearest Ethelred, in an honest consciousness of your own worth, in the unlimited love of that parent you can look up to without a blush, and in the affection of two sisters, whose tenderness can only be equalled by the warm friendship of our fa¬ vourite Wallop." " Best of mothers!" cried Delancey, " I am sensible of the blessingsyou have named. I am resigned—I hope I am—to the will of Heaven ; but henceforward, if 1 would have happiness, I must adopt your's, and that of mv other friends, and call it mine; for it if can never more be inborn with me/* " And why never, Delancey ? Must a virtuous child be for ever unhappy, because be has a guilty parent ? The remembrance of
• MARGIANA,' *#*' ^ of his crime, since it is unknown to others, will expire with us." " Itjwill so. But there ?wfl^ be another source of regret. You may unconsciously have touched upon it, even when enumer¬ ating my causes of content. But no more of this. Let us, my dearest mother, do what is right, and receive resignedly what God is pleased 40 send us." After thrs conversation, while Delancey's heart was bleeding, he affected-a calm, and even a chearful exterior, in his mother's presence; but the secret dejection he la¬ boured under was seen by Margiana, and penetrated her with a sentiment to which she had hitherto been a stranger. That she herself in any degree occasioned it, was the idea of all others most remote from her mind ; and she cherished the interest Ethel- red now created in her bosom, because she believed It unconnected with and remote from the nature of love. She felt an in- 1 2 sidious
odious delight Irs assisting: &dy Widdring- m to soothe, and the gay Arlette to en- Jfiven, his hours of retirement spe^|dn the 4ni«J s t pf his family, end fancied, coujd she
hing but the return of Wailop would be wanting to re-establish the peaceful content
Sometimes, when expressing her desire to see Harold again, she was interrupted hf Lady Widdrington, who told her that only her hand could reward the many excellen¬ cies of that worthy young maB. I; But Mar¬ giana, with all her friendship for him, shrinking from the idea, would reply, "Oh, no ! Can he e^st, on whom thai hand can be bestowed which once tos withheld from
9$
*i&s
At length, the man so deservedly valued was seen approaching the castle. Ethelred, who was on boisehack in the pa$kj galloped forward
V
forward to tse^ him; but his ardour re¬ ceived a sudden, check, on observing the countenance of his friend. w Dismount, Delancey," said Harold. " Order one of your people to take our horses, and let us walk* 1 have much to say to you." " Say it quickly then, dear Harold! Your looks speak melancholy things. What of my father?" K *' Oh, Ethelred J cm he be the fathe" jf a son like you ? 1 shall strike.a dagger to your heart, I know, when I tell you his guilt is divulged/' "His-guilt, Wallop? You mean-—yoa mean his rebellion?" " No, no I I mean your uncle." Delancey stopt, turned from him, and groaned tin bitterness of anguish. His frjend was silent for some minutes, and then saiB-4" I see yotf know it all. I combat hot your grief; il* is just and natural; yet let not shame fender it galling
to vour soul. The crime is known only to the King and myself, besides the two persons who revealed it to him; and for your's and your mother's sake, we have bound ourselves by oath to secrecy. Nor can your father ever agonize either, of you' more, 4 My dear Delancey-—he is dead V* The pious son fell on Harold's shoulder, and wept. The conversation that followed was in¬ coherent, and feebly supported by Wallop, who was scarcely interrupted by his friend. u Particulars," he said, " he would not give, till he was more composed to hear them. And from your mother," pursued he, (< un* less she already knows the worst, they ought to be concealed. To you, therefore, when we can be alone, I will be more explicit. In the meantime, let not her or Margiana, conjecture more from your appearance than the sorrow naturally felt at the loss of a parent." While
While they were yet speaking, Wallop saw Ladv Widdrington, Margiana, and Ar- lette, advancing to meet and welcome him, Ethelred started at the sight.— <c Go to them, Harold," said he. " I will be with vou asrain after awhile." And then, has- ten ing from his friend, he plugged into the woods, where he remained long alone. From what he bad heard, he apprehended that his father had died beneath the stroke of the executioner; and attributed to Wal¬ lop's tenderness for his feelings, his not having made a direct mention of the man¬ ner of his death. He fervently prayed that it might expiate the guilty past; and at length'became sufficiently master of him- self to return to the castle, with the ex- /- f. pression of horror his features had lately jworn composed to that of decent sorrow. Wallop, in the meanwhile, had account¬ ed for his absence, fey gently breaking to Lady Widdrington, in the presence of her daughter and niece, a part of what had l 4 passed
passed between them. He acquainted them thaPBertram was no more; but suffered them to suppose he had died a natural death in the Tower, reserving a complete explanation until he should be private with Delancey. The news was immediately made known iKj^oughout the castle, where respect for theirLadlesandtheirbeloved young Lord, rather than any reference Jbr the memory of the departed, .produced a shew of grief in the domestici. But Lady Widdrington*s affliction'4typs»more than shew. Her husband had probably been called to his Creator in an unrepentant state, and she dreaded to hear the particulars of his last hours. Arlette might fee said to be shocked at Ihesuddenneas of the eveflfc - rather than ".grieved; for, ever since her brother's re* turn, the King's pardon had bee^expected; md' Margiana, who had the least cause for regret, turned her wide attention to assist Wallop, in speaking cdfisolatioe to the mo- But
But he had not yet acquainted either of them with the * worst. At night, when' Margiana and Arlette retired, Delanoey* - assuring him that concealment from Lady Widdrington was unnecessarv, conducted him to her apartment; and there-Wallop fully informed her and his friend* of the> whole dreadful concern, :, From his recital it appeared, that while the King wavered with respect to pardon¬ ing or punishing Lord Widdrington, ,the^ two chiefs to whom that nobleman's guilt was known conceived it their duty to ter¬ minate his irresolution, by apprising him of the horrid spectacle they had seen, when by force of arms they had broke into the secret chamber, and beheld his brother's unburied remains. *' The King listened to them," continued Harold, " with much stronger symptoms ©f indignation than surprise; ao4 as soon as> they quitted his presensde, he sen* forme; and knowing the intimacy I wa$ i. 5 honoured
honoured with by this fomily, questioned me upon the subject. ■ *' I had no occasion to pretend ignorance. Mis Highness was so convinced of mine being real, that he believed, and still be¬ lieves, Loifd Delancey himself unacquainted with the fafal truth. e Be it vour task/ said he, ( Wallop, te* break it to him. It is the office of a friend, 2nd you will perform it gently ; for it is right he should know all." The King then/* pursued Harold, " explained a circumstance to me, which, soon after it happened, gave me much uneasiness, and excited in my mind many and strange conjectures. During that troubled interval that followed the de¬ feat of the rebels at Cirencester, when you, Ethelred, was absent from London, your cousins saw at court, apparently descending from a private conference with the King, a stranger, whose peculiar manner of noticing them greatly attracted their attention. Lady Margiana has told me, that she and her sister. fancied
AUG I AN A. £27 fancied themselves purposely brought for¬ ward by Henry to his view, with marks of approbation ; but though they were both named to the stranger, they were suffered to remain ignorant who he was. Never, either before or after that day, did they be¬ hold him during their residence in London; but Lady Margiana's description of his per¬ son and deportment led me to conjecture who he might be. " On my arrival at this place with your cousins, immediately after their father's death, my suspicions were proved to be well founded. They discovered the mysterious stranger to be their uncle; yet he took no notice of ever having previously seen them. And the subject of his visit at court continued a profound secret, till Henry him¬ self, recalling h to his mind on this occa¬ sion, revealed it to me. ,( The late Lord Widdrington had taken refuse here at the time it was paid. And, I f;neve to sav, hh brother made the sacred name of loyalty a pretence for his attempt t. 6 at
at furthering the worst designs; for they 4id.not then ^proceed beyond an attempt. /' ^faking a merit with his Prince of be¬ traying the place of his brother's conceal- menti he averred, that all natural affections gave way to the duty he held owing to the anointed sovereign of the land. But the noble-minded Henry, detesting his base¬ ness, received his pretended homage with undisguised contempt; and, far from jus¬ tifying his hopes, and gratifying his wicked ambition, even then gave indications of a disposition to forgive the offender. Would to Heaven he had, at that time, before further eyil had occurred ! but it is too late for wishes now. Lord Bertram returned; and you, -Ethelred, fatally followed with your uncle's pardon, which too surely pre¬ cipitated the event, " The circumstances of vour arrival and reception here, which you related to me soon afterwards, impressed me very deeply, though I was far enough, God knows! from mmnkmg the. truth. I believed oiiJy, that :♦ - your
your tincle had been held in ignorance of the King's clement intentions, and had beeri suffered, if not induced, to run headlongto his ruin." " Is this all, Harold ?" said Delancey, mournfully. * { If it is not, be speedy; for you break my mother's heart/* • I will pause here, then," replied Wallop. " The rest another time." " No, no/' said Lady Widdrington, half drowned in tears. "Goon, I pray you. Let us not hear a tale like this at twice. I expect something dreadful. The King, con¬ vinced of Bertram's guilt, gave orders—. what were his orders ?" " Then I must, I will be brief, and not torture you with suspense. The Warden of the Tower, on the following dav, received a command to bid the Earl prepare for death, unless he could clear himself of the hateful &eed imputed to him by Sirllugh Mortimer and Lord March. The same night he was found dead; the sinews cut of his wrists, knees,,-and ancles. The Juiife-allowed hiiti to
■*"' to eat with had been applied to this terribfe purpose." ladv Widdrington, as she sat, uttering an inarticulate sound, stretched out one trembling hand to her son, as she covered her pale visage with the other. Ethelred took it, pressed her head against his filial bosom, and mingled his tears with her's. Wallop, :hinking it right to leave them together, retired, his own manly heart wrung to the quick by the sense of their just and deep affliction. For several succeeding days, Lady Wid¬ drington denied herself the soothing society of her children and her friends, and eon- fined herself wholly to her own apartment. A neighbouring priest, of a character very • different from that of Father Geoffry, as¬ sisted her supplications to the throne of mercy for the repose of Bertram's guilty soul; and masses were said, by her desire,
In the chapels of Widdrington and Wark- worth. Margiana and Arlette respected the'mo- tives of her privacy too much, to wish to interrupt it. They frequently joined their de\oiious to those of Lord Delancey; and ignorant as they were of the most afflicting circumstances of what had passed, they ad¬ mired that goodness of heart which his pro¬ found sorrow for the less of such a parent tcstiiied; a* sorrow which, though Arlette could not participate n it, placed him in the most amiable point of view to her as well as Marxians. " Wonder not at my affliction," said he to them. " My father was always a kind and partial parent to me; though to my sister his prejudices forbade him to be equally indulgent. His errors were those of ambition ; and for whom is a father am¬ bitious but for his children ?'* Wallop,
Wallop, not seeing Scruton, inquired of Ethelred what wa's become of him ; and was glad to find he had been secured. " My melancholy mission is not yet completed/* said he, *' for I have an order to delher to you concerning him. Your unhappy fa¬ ther, before he destroyed himself, wrote an accusation-against that man, which was found after his death; and, agreeably to the request contained therein, it was laid before the sovereign. It was conceived in these few words:
* Let the King be informed> that a villain resides at Widdrington Tower, named Scruton, whose execution is an act ©f justice due to the law/ *'. The King asked me if I knew the mat* ? but I could say nothing as to his guilt. The order
order I bring is, that his former life be in¬ quired into, amUhat he suffer punishment, in case he be f^^ed criminal. Do you believe him to have been concerned in the great offence we all deplore r Lord$>eIancey, instead of lowering his friend, called for Kendrew, and (Mring him to repeat to Wallop the particulars he bad related to himself, he withdrew. ensued was, that Wallop and the old servant went down together to the dungeon, where they found>Scnfton and his wife. Stubborn in guilt, they were both sullenly silent to Wallop's interrogations; till Joyce broke forth into loud revilings against the un« gratefur family that rewarded their long and faithful servicej with ignominy and ip- prisonmcnt, ■ i Scruton, less bold than her, said, yet yudely said k, that he had, never commit¬ ted
ted any offence, save by command of hh
<*&*
k, m e
"But for what am I thus punished?" cried the woman, clamorous on account of her own sufferings, though she seemed feebly afflicted by those of her husband— <e What have I done to be confined and treated like a malefactor ? If that wretch took a bribe to do evil, must I be put to shame for hjs wickedness?" ^ Why," said Wallop, " if you thought it wickedness, did you conceal it, and assist him in its execution ? Though you armed him not with the dagger, did,you not give your aid lo hide its murderous effects? new you not he had slain the brother of Lord ? Knew you not your excellent Lady was privately suffering captivity and tortures, because she had declared her reso- utioii to protect his orphan son ? But why jshould breath be wasted thus ! Our busi¬ ness, Scruton, is with you. Let repentance and confession, ere they be too late, atone for
for the crime you have committed* Your Lord is not here, to protect you; and the priest, lessan,pffender than yourself,is fled/' To this Scruton returned no answer, for some time; but, at length, he again dis- % claimed all blame, and averred that he con¬ sidered himself an innocent m*ft, since it had not belonged to him either to dispute the will of his master, or to reveal his secrets. When, however, he was informed that master was gone to render up an ac¬ count of all his actions, good and evil, to his Creator, and that he had died by his own hand, and when he was shewn by Wallop the writing he had left behind, to implicate his wretched agent, the expression of his features changed from sullenness to fury and despair. With shocking vehemence he uttered imprecations, that Wallop was obliged to use the sternest voice of autho¬ rity to silence ; and the miserable man, then suddenly admitting a h6f>e that, by humility, he might deprecate; the punishment he de- \ * served,
served, begged he might be allowed to relate all he knew.
'e was suffered to proceed; but he had no- thingtosayjhatcoulc! extenuate hisownsfuilf, 'and little that could add tothat of Bertram. Hedeclared, that Lord Widdrington had been? doomed to destruction, even at the time of the difference between the brothers at Flint -astle, when the faftafcblow was received. ich never after was forgivm. Bertram bad hoped that the King's resentment would' have spared to his own hand the eifusion^ef blood, innocent as to himself; but Henry *$ apprehended clemency, and LordWiddring- ton's determination ho| to engage further in the rebellion, had^msheathed the private dagger against his life, His nephew's sud¬ den arrival had'urged the readiest means of concealing his murder. To remove the corpse from the chamber where it lay, was 1 hazardous, and^subject to detection; to inhiirae it benea&h the pavement, was also iuseoure> for its;dec|y ought have betrayed
■**'
the fatal secret, and there was not time to bury it deep. It was determined, therefore, to wall up the two narrow entrances; afid Jovce had assisted her husband hi the task during the night, which was prot^a^ed to Lord Delancey by a sleeping draught in¬ fused i|tto his drink at supper.
f„*3fc ">'■
But the escape of Kendrew held Bertrani and his vile agents in painful and continual alarm. Ethelred, bv his father's means, was long kept away from Widdrington Tower, lest he should meet with him, or discover the mystery of his mother'* confinement; and Margiana and her sister had been strictly watched, from the same dread, - When the former was alarmed by the appearance of a stranger in her apart¬ ment, Bertram fancied it not Kendrew, because he did not suppose him possessed of a means of entering the castle, but Lady Widdrington herself, escaped, owing tov the negligence o£ Geoffry, f*ir a time from
■ .*• 2$S MARGIANA. her chamber; though the servile priest de¬ nied, and truly, the possibility of the fact. Wherefore, Margiana was more strictly confined at nights, but less so after her aunt had actually fled. For Bertram, who feared, while.he was compelled to admire, the cha¬ racter of his niece, wished to keep on the best terms with her in his power. He wan anxious to hasten her marriage with his son, that if ever she became ap¬ prised of the manner of her father's death, she might be too closely allied to the family. of his murderer to 'reveal the guilty story to the world. From a similar cause, Scruton declared, his Lord had resolved to bestow his daughter on Harold Wallop, whose pene¬ tration he dreaded. The will, by Bertram's directions, Scruton himself had forged, being the abler penman of the two. Such was the .substance of this man's communication, which Wallop afterwards repeated to his friend. The worthy priest was
was directed to use his exhortations to awaken the sinner to repentance, and time was allowed *br the purpose ; but>Scruton was radically mean and ill-disposed; and having lived a violator of the laws of God and man, he died the death of a coward. His ignominious end was so private, as to be known only to the few acquainted with his crime; and his wife, though she admitted the justice of his execution, thought her own punishment too severe, in being con¬ fined within the walls of a religious house for the remainder of her days,
CHAP
m i i ijim»j M. . n'i ii i p^<p^*^iw»*M«w
CHAP. VIIL A good Mother may he trusted. Another ceremony yet remained to be per¬ formed, to satisfy the pious feelings of Lord Delancey; Lut this, though of a nature very different from the last, it was also necessary should be concealed from the world. The bones of hh lamented uncle were lying irreverently covered with unhallowed soil, instead of being gathered to those of his forefathers; and the nephew, who, with even filial affection, mourned his fate, was anxious to render to them the proper honours of sepulture. This
This could not be done without admit¬ ting another person to participate in that dreadful secret which loaded his heart; but, averse though he might be to have the knowledge of it extended, true religion in his bosom easily overcame the feelings of false shame. At his next confession, Ethelred revealed the whole of the dismal tale to good Father Francis, the successor of Geoffry, who had before been ignorant of the name of Scru¬ ton *s unfortunate victim; and a nioht was appointed for removing the precious re¬ mains of William Earl of Widdrington to their last and suitable home, the tomb of his ancestors. The faithful hands of Ken¬ drew,. whose attachment so long survived his Lord, prepared the " narrow house/* and himself Lord Delancey, and Harold Wallop, with the priest, were all the at¬ tendants. No funereal pomp was there; but the sincerity of the hearts of the mourn¬ ers supplied the place of ceremonial. Not
043 -HI even a single torch was hazarded, to create wonder or suspicion. The modest rays of the moon lighted the devout a^stants across the park; and the deep shadow of the ivied arches pointed out the spot or their destination. The stillness of the lonely ■building, interrupted only by the saving of the loftv branches that surrounded ,t, G dded to the solemnity of the scene ; and, calming the human mind to repose, .n- epircd perhaps as true a sentiment of .eli¬ sion as ever was awakened by the pealing ^ „„..,i rimir These were want- organ or the vocal tuoir. n»- inB 4o celebrate the present rites; but the pravers poured forth, as the remains of Lord Widdrington were lowered into the earth, were fervent, and the tears of three of hi, most faithful friends wetted h.s grave. This last duty paid to his beloved uncle. Lord Delancey felt more at rest, and urged his mother to forego the solitude of her .partment. and restore herself to the society Jf those who loved her. She gelded to
:md aflection subsisting between fne per¬ sons couid alone have injured happiness, it must now have been found at Widdrington Tower. The most truly contented person there was good old Kendrew. He rejoiced that all. which human hands could do had been per¬ formed in honour of his master's memory, and he blessed God for having permitted him to survive all his sufferings and station him for life in the sen ice of Marxians whom he almost adored, and near the ner- ."ons of Lady Widdrington and her :,on r whom he equally respected and loved. Yet he could like, he said, that some decree of punishment should fall on Lady Kothcs for her baseness towards Mnrgir.na, in min¬ ing her to be watched and seized, .-s s,to;i us it was Known that Lord Lothian hn.er,./ near her in disguise; and he fron^. ?rit u- urged the justice cf J:»yiu^ the w.'-.ok- * that Lady's proceedings before the Kini;.
ft, But Margiana oa this subject was un¬ persuadable. " Not a &tef, worthy Ken¬ drew," said she, '* will I take against the woman whom my father loved, and the mother of that dear infant now gambolling before us, Had I stood m any danger of becoming Lord Lothian*s wife, the measures bis sister thought proper to take to prevent it would have been actually sen'ices done to me; and was it not likely for her to suppose that the ufieasy confinement I suf¬ fered here, and which, no doubt, wasknowrt to her, might induce me to listen to his offers of liberty and love? But, granting she really injured me, by making me her prisoner for so many months, as indeed I was apt enough to think the case at the time, 1 will take a nobler revenge than lodging a complaint against her with the King. I will love and protect her boy, as if he was my own, so long as she will per¬ mit him to remain here with us/' ■Kendrew would shake his head at this,
and say it was fine talking; but that Lady Rothes, to feel hurt hy her generosity, ought to have such a soul and such a spirit as her own, instead of the very reverse, of both. But nevertheless, though he was, he hoped,agoodChristian,he could not forbear a belief that Providence would ordain some retribution to overtake her before she died. Ko! lon<r after* intelligence was received of this uiice gay votary of courtly dissipa¬ tion, which Kendrew knew not at first whether or not to consider as a fulfilment of his wishes. Lord Delancey had been several days absent upon business, near the borders of Scotland, where he had seen the young Earl of Rothes; and from him he had learned, that the Countess his mother was married again, with an additional cir¬ cumstance which did not much surprise him, that the person on whom she had be¬ stowed herself was an obscure man, far from young, and of very inferior birth. Lord Rothes, who had never been much beholden
to maternal cares,unless havingbeen spoiled when he was a boy could be esteemed an obligation, appeared to think and speak of this event as a concern of very little mo¬ ment, otherwise than as the meanness of the connexion cast a shade over the dignity of his house. But Lord Delancey thought him too light a character to feel much re¬ gret even from that consideration, On his return to Widdrington Tower, he recollected the circumstance, and men¬ tioned it, observing to Margiana, that her earnest wish never to be parted from little Hengist would probably be gratified, since other cares, and perhaps a younger family, might now be expected to claim Lady Rothes's future attention. Hearing that her husband had been ac¬ customed to move in an inferior walk of life, Margiana expressed her surprise that a woman who had been the object of her father's love could so far descend beneath ber
her former views and actual condition; but Lady Widdrington asked her wherein she thought Lady Rothes had been inconsis¬ tent? Wallop inquired of Ethelred if he had? heard the name of the person she had mar¬ ried? "Her son did tell it me," replied^;: u but I believe I have forgotten it." Then endeavouring to recal it to his recollection, ** I am not certain/' he added, " but I thinle it was Chaston.'* Margiana repeated the name, and after¬ wards seemed to be searching her own me¬ mory. She continued to muse so long,, that Ethelred asked her what engaged her thoughts? "Nothing of moment," answered she* "T was only fancying I had at some time: heard tnat name before." -
" Try if you can remember when" said Lady W T iddrington, i( and what you heard concerning it/* " I think it was my dear mother who once spoke it in my hearing. Relating the par¬ ticulars of her cousin's marriage with the late Lord Rothes, if I do not mistake, she mentioned a youth of the name of Chaston, as one of her own two attendants who accompanied her when she quitted her father's house, and went to reside in Scot¬ land/' " I feel assured you are right/' said Lady Widdrington ; " and if she behaves better to her second than she did to her first hus¬ band, who shall blame her choice ?" Old Kendrew was less charitably disposed. Oi: being told the news, he declared he had hop^s the time was now approaching when the bud woman who had seduced his dear Lord, :;nd persecuted his daughter, would be made to repent of all her misdeeds.— ««. Mav the man she has chosen/' cried he, *' prove a tyrant, and lock her up in a cold cellar
cellar for a year and a half, as she locked up my precious young Lady ! She might have been satisfied with the mischief she had done the family before/* " Do you profess Christianity, and yet talk thus?" said Lady Widdrington, smiling. *' You ought to forget injuries/' " And so I would have forgotten this, and forgiven it too, Lady, had it been done to myself." ****** The many serious concerns which of late had engaged Wallop's time and thoughts, and so strongly proved his friendship-, and all the kind affections of his heart, had not weakened in his bosom the force of a softer sensation. Arlette was still very dear to him; and the great improvements which had taken place in her mind during the last two years even encreased his tenderness and esteem-, while those of her person called forth additional admiration. But his pas¬ sion for her, bearing the genuine character of real love, rendered him chietly solicitous m 5 for
for the happiness of its object, and ex¬ tremely apprehensive that her sentiments for him could never be made to partake of any other nature thanffhat of sisterly re¬ gard. He recalled to mind, with infinite ~ regret, the silent averseness she had shewn towards him, when her father had spoken of him to her as the man he intended for her future companion through life; and the recollection made him forbear either to address herself, or seek to interest her mother or Delancev in his favour, now that the parent was no more who would have enforced recommendation bv authority. Wallop's timidity, however, and diffidence of his own.merits, led him into a mistake, the reverse of what a confident man would have been liable to; for. he now appeared to the maturer judgment of Arlette very different from the Wallop sjie had.under- valu edbe fore. She. behe)d him as he rea 1 ly was; and, with her consitutioual frankness of-heart., strove not to disguise her amend- 3 ed
ed opinion of him. But this very circum«»- stance, which with many young men would have operate to inspire hope, produced; the directly contra» effect upon, Wallop. " I see plainly," he would say to Ethelred* " that no tirri%> no change, nor anything in mv power to do, can ever make me find favour in your sister's eyes. She prof- ses- her good opinion of me so unreservedly, she treats me so exactly as she would do w T ere I her brother, or even her little Maud, that I despair of her ever enduring me as a lover; and I cannot bear the thoughts of her being influenced to do what is dis¬ agreeable to her, either by your kind par¬ tiality for me, or the persuasions, of Lady Widdrington." "Nay, then/' said Delancey once, in- answer to an observation of this nature, " if you are ra haughty and independent as to disdain our assistance, I am sure you must have more confidence of succeeding with¬ out it than you are willing to own. And m G m eh inks,
methinks your complaints are grounded on so very weak a foundation, that you must utter them rather for the pleasure of seeing me smile at them as fijjjplous, than from any serious apprehensions you entertain. My sister, forsooth ! has a good opinion of yon, and treats you with fJl^iliaritv, and undisguised regard ! Truly, you are much to be pitied, and have a most dismal subject of lamentation 1 I warrant, if she shunned and appeared to dislike you, you would be full of hope V* ki Laugh as you please, Ethelred ; but I can tell you, were I a good-looking fellow as you ^re, and any lady particularly avoided me, I should be apt to fancy myself a favourite with her; but what chance have I, with this hideous rough figure, ever to be suffered by a handsome girl to make love to her ? I heard Lady Arlette, a little while ago, say to her cousin, purposely loud enough for me to hear her, £ What a pity it is poor Wallop cannot put his head where his heart is, and so hide it from us, while he presented
us with a sight of the other, which, I dare s;v , ij {in* sij>\<tiier of the two ! If he could b ; f contrive to lock ?. little like other people, one might endure to listen tahim; but if I am listen ng ever so linah, the moment I louk at him, 1 feel c'j pr-.-od to scream and fix-.' This, vou will aii ,w, is fine encouragement * Was 1 to talk to her of love, it is likely she v.ould never she me an opportunits of scaling her away a second time." " Indeed, Wallop, I tl-ought you had more sense ! If Arlette wi.-hes \ our looks improved, is it, not a sign she feels inte¬ rested for you ? U'ltil you have sp.oken to her, what more would ;ou hav*?" " It is an easy thing to argue in other people's cases, De^ncey. But pray, iet me ask you, if, at the time you would have given your ears to have been hcio\ed by jVTargiana, you did not feel the most hope¬ less of success when she profevsed a quiet, sedate, insipid friendship for you ? I re¬ member a case in point, bhe once said some™
MARGIANA* something to me in commendation of your- open, cheerful aspect; aud the peaceable, indifferent tone in-which she delivered her observation, was the first thing that con¬ vinced me she never could bring herself to* love you. But how now, Delancey ? What means that alteration fn-your looks? What- have I said to affect vou ?" ''Nothing worth noticing,"replied Ethel-* red. 4 Let tis change the subject.'* (S Ah, mv friejrid, is it even so ? Are you fated to be thus constant, even after hope is dead ? Then I pity you indeed !" re No, Harold, do not pity ; reproach and blame me. Tell me I am-ungrateful to the memory of'Genevieve, and impious in still loving her sister—now, alas, ??/?/ sister too! Yet, when vou have done all this, I shall continue the same unhappy man you now behold me ; for I can never, never cease to think of Margiana with a fondness that makes me wretched. When I reflect on the possibility of her marrying another, my heart dies within me,, add, in despite-of every
eVery argument I can use with myself against my own feelings, I could welcome exile or death to avoid the torture of be¬ holding it. But why do I say thus much, even to you ? The subject has hurried me away. Forget every word I have utter¬ ed, my dear Wallop; forget, if possible, my folly, though I myself feel it to be incurable, and submit to it as a man yields to a disease that he is aware must shorten his life, and can only terminate with it." Wallop was grieved, but knew not what to reply. He wished his friend could be insensibly led to form some other attach- ment; and to Lady Widdrington, to-whose address and abilities he thought everv rhino* possible, he ventured to hint his anxiety. She immediately understood from what source it proceeded.— " I have indeed no doubt," said she, " that Margiana is still the only object of Ethelred's affections; and, in
in try opinion, there is little probability of his ever becoming indifferent towards her; unless, indeed, he could be induced to love some other lady. 1 am season¬ ably furnished with the means of trying whether this can be done, which I have not yet communicated to him. To-morrow morning I will make use of it, and you shall witness the effect. It will perhaps enable me to guess at the state of more minds thaa one." At breakfast, the following day, Wallop was prepared to see Lady Widdrington prove her experiment. She began by di¬ recting the subject of discourse towards her kindred at Alnwick Castle; and said, she rejoiced at the extreme good understand¬ ing- that subsisted between the Earl of 'Northumberland and his daughter-in-law, I.adv Percy, since it contributed to the com- fort of each, and did equal credit to both. " The affliction/* continued she, « that lady Percy has undergone for the death of 4 her
her gallant husband, has endeared her to the Earl, who loves her as his own .child ; and he has lately given me a convincing proof of his solicitude for her future hap¬ piness. I have not yet informed you, my dear Ethelred, that his messenger who was here last week brought a letter for me, containing a proposal, which I am desired, af some fit opportunity, to lay before you. It is a flattering one for you, and I ant persuaded you will be inclined to give it all the attention it deserves." Lady Wid¬ drington drew out the letter, and continued — <e Mv Lord of Northumberland wishes that, at a due season, a treaty of marriage may be set on foot between you and Lady Percy; and, no doubt, all here must concur with me in desiring to promote so honour¬ able an alliance. But read the Earl's letter yourself." Lord Delancey sat at the upper part of the table, on the side opposite to his mo¬ ther, and Margiana occupied the end be¬ tween
tween them. It was therefore natural that Lady Widdrington should give her the letter to pass it to her son. She did so, and raised" her eyes to Margiana's countenance. It was paler than usual, and she avoided look¬ ing up. Lady Widdrington observed the motion of her hand as she delivered the paper to Delancey. It trembled, and Mar¬ giana seemed conscious of the tremour, by instantly resting it on the table. Ethelred read the letter to himself, but he did not chuse trusting his voice to make any ob¬ servations upon it while Margiana was pre¬ sent. He feared betraying to her his con- tinued love, and dreaded her contempt should she suspect it. He passed the letter in silence to Wallop, who, being asked his sentiments by Lady Widdrington, made an¬ swer, that such a connexion could only be thought of as desirable. Arlette said the sarruv Margiana spoke not a word, but took an early opportunity of quitting the hall; and, as soon as she was gone, Lady Widdrington asked her son what answer he¬ ad vised.
advised her to return to her kinsman ? "A grateful one, dear mother," replied Ethelred, abruptly, " for the honour he esteems me worthy of; but an absolute refusal let it be, for I would not marry Lady Percy to be made king of England. Sister, will you walk? I want to shew you some¬ thing in the park/' He went out with Arlette, and his mother and Harold were left alone. "I expected this," said Lady Widdrington. " How determined he is !" " And I fear will continue so," replied Walloo. " An attachment like his is inter- jl woven with his frame, and has become a part of him." " Is that the only remark you have to make, Harold ? Did no circumstance res¬ pecting any other person at all engage your attention ?" f€ Yes; what I never thought to have be¬ held in this world—an emotion in Lady Margiana.
Margiana. Surely she cannot be so unfor¬ tunate as now to have lost her insensibility, when love can be of no avail ?" f< I would not wager much to the con¬ trary," said Lady Widdrington, rising; " but I will go to her, and ask her opinion of this offered alliance. I have great hopes all will end favourably yet." Lady Widdrington found Margiana in her chamber, busily employed at work; and she spoke in so cheerful a tone, that had not her maternal friend seen as well as heard her, she might have supposed her mind at ease. But it was plainly to be perceived she had been in tears, and that she endeavoured to conceal her eyes from notice. There needed no more to convince Lady Widdrington of the state of her heart. She forbore, therefore, to distress her by any particular conversation; and soon after, leaving:
leaving her alone, she returned to the hall, where she was presently joined by her son and daughter. The latter, too lively to be long inactive, left them in a short time ; and Lady Wid¬ drington interrupted the former as he was introducing indifferent subjects of dis¬ course.—" Tell me, my dear Delancey/ 4 said she, " since you wish me to put a negative so decided on Lord Northumber¬ land's proposal, by what motive am I to conclude you actuated ? Have you re¬ solved never to marry a second time, or are you so versatile as to be already again at- tached r" " At present," replied Lord Delancey, " I have indeed no thoughts of marrying again." " Am I then to suppose the other?" " If you think me versatile, ifyou think me prone to indulge every new fancy—" f Should I be less mistaken if I thought you
you indulging an old one, Ethelred ? You do not answer me. You used not to be thus reserved with your best friend. W r hat can I infer from the change, but that you harbour some thoughts of a nature that renders them painful to divulge?" (( Surely," replied he, " it does not foi- low, because I am averse to form a con¬ nexion with Lady Percy, that I wish for one with any other." " It does not. Yet tell me, if you could now have any hopes of obtaining Margiana, would you not still persevere in your en¬ deavours to win her hand ?" « My dearest mother, I know you are my best friend, and I will not have any reserves with you. I bad rather die for Margiana, than live with any other woman. But of what avail is such discourse as this ? I am bow her brother; aud before I was so, she repeatedly rejected me." «* Could you at this time offer to her, I am of opinion she would not refuse you again." " I ought
MARGIAKA.* *' I ought not to wish it so She would. in that ease, be as unhappy as myself." " You need not be unhappy, Delancey. You have only to exert yourself." " And think you I have not exerted all that is left me of reason, and tried to argue myself out of a passion I would fain conceal from all the world ?" And ail without effect?" said Lady Wid*
"/
drington.
Ethelred began to suspect his mother ridiculed him, and was silent. <e Good sense," pursued she, <f will gene¬ rally work wonders in cases of this nature*; but since it is of no avail in vours, I know but of one other way which 1 can safely recommend to you, and I will now point it out. In former days you were accus¬ tomed to follow my advice, and to declare you never repented doing so. I otfer it to you once more, and thus; Go into Scotland,
to Rothes Castle. Obtain admission there, on any pretence you please. The old ser¬ vants are hospitable, and will make yon welcome. Ask leave to be left alone to your devotions in the oriel chamber; and when there, remove a large crucifix, which stands at the upper end of it, on what appears a heavy block of wood. But this seeniing block is hollow, and by a slight exertion you mav lift off the top of it. It contains what will remove the im~ happiness you complain of. Bring away with you whatever you find there, and re¬ place the top of the block and the crucifix as you found them. This is all the advice I have to give you, Reflect on it to-day, and to-morrow pursue it, or not, as you chuse. Only remember this,-—a good mo- ther may be trusted." Lady Widdrington now left her son, and avoided being alone with him the remain¬ der of the day. He related what she had said
said to Harold Wallop, who urged him, by all means, to proceed as directed. And by the next morning's dawn, he set forward on an adventure, which, had it been sug¬ gested by any other person than his mo¬ ther, he-would have called -idle and -ro¬ mantic.
vct« v*
M
ia A ,-
CHAP. IX.
An Oriel Chamber.
Margiana's mortification was deep, and her reflections very severe, when she reviewed ber own feelings. A treacherous passion had crept into her heart before she was even aware of its approach; and with equal re¬ gret and surprise shediscovered the iiragc of Delancey there, not simply as thatofa fnend, but engrossing her thoughts, and soften¬ ing them to a sentiment strange and new. Margiana, however, was not of a temper quietly to submit to the rule of that power he had hitherto held in subjection, Lxert-
£
:u«' her usual strength of mind, she deter- mined that absence should wither what she was av>jre contention could not overcome; and revoking sever./, plans for her future destination, she at length lixed on o*>e, which oftcner than once before she had looked forward to with satisfaction. Notwithstanding the pain it gSve her to think of quitting her dearest connexions, she hesitated not to endure it, when con¬ vinced of iis necessity towards her peace; and two davs after the departure of Lord Delancev, deaf to the insidious pleadings ■of her own heart, she communicated to Ladv Widdrington her lesolution of <;-oiiiff to reside for a while with her former be¬ loved mistress, Isabella of France. iC Had not vou, my tier aunt." said she, " been happy in the intercourse of your own an/able children, j;o consideration, I think, could have l:d my wishes to any place of abode remote from your's: hut wince their merits and society !ea\e vou n - no thin a'
nothing In this world to desire, I feel im¬ pelled to testify my remembrance of my late royal patroness, and my gratitude for all her past kindness, in the only wav that is allowed une. Permit me, therefore, to leave you,* and if I might so far trespass on your goodness as to beg that-Hcngist may be trusted to mc,-—in case you could spare him——" " I could spare him much more easily thaiv.vof/, Margiana; and, to say the truth, I could not very ^e\\ spare either of vou. Neither do I think the scheme you mention is for vour own advantage. A person should be influenced by very strong reasons in¬ deed, before they desert their own nearest and natural friends; for to whom, after all, hut to them, do any of us look up for com¬ fort and assistance, when either is wanted ? If you have no stronger one to urge than a desire of proving that you preserve a tender recollection of Queen Isabella, you are better where you are, than you can possibly be any where else. But perhaps you have . ...-,.. *•. other
mother, and be not afraid of naming them to me." " I should not be afraid," replied Mar¬ giana, i( of placing any confidence in you,. that could either gratify you to receive, or be of any avail to myself to impart; but—" She hesitated, the words died on her lip:, and she cast down her eyes in silence. " But," said Lady Widdrington, with a smile, and continuing her sentence, " there may be secrets of the heart, which you can¬ not bear to reveal, even to the mother of Delancey." Margiana coloured a crimson hue. " Forgive me, dearest creature ! I see your difficulties, t honour your motives, and am sensible of all your worth; but something you must do, in return for the love I bear you. Lay aside your project of leaving us, for one month only; and then, if you still wish lo bereave us of one of our best blessings, you shall not.be- opposed." n & Margiana*
Margiat^a, confounded, yet melted, by such tenderness, submitted, though she could not help thinking that her aunt, if indeed she read the actual state of her heart* was deserved by her usual prudence and •delicacy. Ethelred, in the meantime, journeyed rapidly through the -southern counties of jScxriland; and, towards the approach of a stormy evening,finding himself, on inquiry, at the distance of about eleven miles from Rothes Castle, he purposely proceeded, that he might be furnished, by the surrounding darkness, with a plausible excuse for solicit- in^ shelter there. He wished even for rain ; but no rain fell. However, the wind was tempestuous, and the night was beginning to be obscure, when he reached the foot of the rock, and ascended the narrow path-way, forcing himself and his horse through the tangled briars. Old Murray, who appeared at the gate at his call, hearing he was a stranger who had lost his way, courteously entreated
entreated him to abide in the castle for that night; and, as ifafraid of a refusal, took his horse, and led it away, while he* ordered another servant to conduct the traveller into the hall. There, soon after joining Lord Delancey, he begged him to consider* himself at home, and would suffer no other attendant to bring in his supper, or serve him; assuring him, all the time, he had so won his heart, by his cheerful affability,* hart he should have his choice of all she sleeping- rooms in tlie castle. " I am on a a©rt of pilgrimage," said Ethelred, " which obliges me nightly to private devotion. If, there¬ fore, you have an oriel chamber here, and. could lodge me near------" " You shall sleep in the very next apart¬ ment," interrupted the old man. " A door opens between them, and no- mortal shall disturb you." These promises were performed. Ethel¬ red was no soone/ left alone, than a power** ful sentiment of curiosity l$d him into this k 4 orieL
where fie saw the lanre
^w H
' rrucifix Lady Widdrington had mentione With a »raver to Heat en. th®t beneath 1
he might reslly find a termination of his ■anxiety, yet wondering how Margiana could ■be connected with anything there, he lifted it from the clumsy pedestal whereon it Tested, ^nd then, with some difficulty, re¬ moved the top of the latter. With a beat¬ ing heart he examined the contents, and saw an ©Id oaken box, so large as almost to fill the hollow space within the block. He took it out, and, opening it, found a parcel wrapt up in black cloth. This he secured ; zmd having restored everv thing else to its proper order, he hastened back to his own * hamber; but there, to his extreme disap¬ pointment, he discovered the parcel was sealed up, and the impression he knew to be that of his mother's seal. Great as was his impatience to know the nature of what he held, he recollected that he had only been enjoined to bring a**ay what
what he found beneath the crucifix ; and would not destroy what he considered a; sacred thing, but resolved to restrain him¬ self till his return home. His emotion^ howevrr, effectually prevented his sleeping; and he was ready to depart at a very early hour the following morning, when he took a friendly leave of the kind old servant, and slew, in imagination, to the gates ox Wid¬¬ drington Tower. His horse so well seconded his wishes, that his return was even more swift than the b< I'innins of his iournev had been; and Ladv Widdrington so much compassionated iiis eagerness, that, on his arrival, hardly allowintr hh friends time to bid him w>el— come, she took him into her closet, where, breaking tlie seal of the parcel, she disco* vered to him a Lrgc assortment of papers. " These," said she, ir are for your perusal; and I can readily conceive the joy with which they will be read, i will leave you n 5 here.
here with thera, detaining you only while I relate how they came into my possession. gs ' During the early period of my resi¬ dence at Rothes Castle, the principal female servant there was an aged woman, named Bertha, who had been nurse to Lady Alicia, mid came with her into Scotland on her marriage. This woman met with an acci¬ dent, that occasioned her instant death, as you have already learned from Margiana'^ story. But one particular circumstance con¬ nected with that accident, I now mention * 4 for the first time. " Just before she lost her life, she had apparently been employed in sorting these letters, then the contents of the oaken box; for on going into her chamber afterwards, I observed it open on her table, with the papers scattered around; and some expres¬ sions written on one of them, that caught my eye as I was about to lock them up, forcibly arrested my attention, and 1 read them all. " When
f& When I returned hither, .1 .-i«ei|ld;..eot •' trust myself with then>i lest thei^possessjott might tempt me to shew proofs of a fact I: then saw no use ia< revealing;. yet,in order to secure them, so as that their situation should be known only to myselt and yet that they might be accessible to any mes¬ senger, in case circumstances required their removal, I concealed them, leaving the cumbrous box unlocked, and using no other precaution than scaling them up. « This is all I have to premise. When you have read and perfectly understood; them, come to me. You will find me in my : chamber." Lady Widdrington left her son with these words, and, closing the door upon him, sent for Kendrew. When he came, she told him she had some questions of moment to ask him; and had a conference with the old man, which, after it had lasted some tim was interrupted.by Lord Delancey's eati-"■ice, holding the papers in his hand. n-6 HeA. v
?*
Widdritrgtosij takiag his haiid,. (t 2 satisfied T. -Have L deceived you*?/' excited; a*- false hope ? Or are -you free as-formerly to,address Margiana y sense*are so confounded/* r
99
££
il change
witl> ; circumstancesi
s?
€£.
fence
-" said-Lady-Widdringtofl, Arlette, and Wallop, mystery shall be explained resence of them all; and trust, no more.of these dark
&
13
t CX liS'
)X
'■ im media
J
e.
an new, ai th them, having astonished them >yful wildness of his looks and 'soon as they appeared, Lady giana on a
beside ber* related to her the journey Lord Delancey had taken by her advice, its pnr« pose, and thelustory of the oaken box and its contents. ** 1 must now," continued she, " explain my motive for sending him thus far, for letters long ago addressed to Lady Kothcs. It was, my dear Margiana; an in* ward conviction that his continued attach* Bient to you, and a rising affection in your breast for him, were likely to embitter your future lives, since you were of opinion an obstacle existed of force to prevent your union. I knew no such obstacle-did exist; and I refer you to those papers for a-con¬ firmation of what I say. You will examine their contents at your leisure'; but, at pre¬ sent, as your anxiety and wonder must .-be considerably raised, I will-relieve-them--by a brief txecount of the most extraordinary deception that perhaps ever was-carried on for so many years." Seeing Margiana was very much agitated —->" I will not," pursued she* '" teaze you by any further.preface, but-begin at .once wl
what shall be a summary of the informa¬ tion Ethelred has just obtained from those letters, ft When Lady Rothes first came to reside in Scotland as a bride, she was attended by two domestics;* who had been particularly in her own service; Bertha, formerly her nurse, and Her page, Chaston, whom Ken¬ drew savs he well remembers a handsome mi youth, nearly of her own age. The present or Lord Rothes was born about a year subse¬ quent to her marriage; after which event, his father, the Jate Earl, was sent by the King of Scotland into Holland, to negociate some affairs of consequence with the mi¬ nsters of the Spanish monarch. But these affairs were drawn out to such a length, that his absence lasted thirteen months rand,. during that interval, all the circumstances were comprised that you are now, thus late, to learn. Lord Rothes had not left his Lady many weeks before she wrote a pressing invitation to your father, Margiana, to- make a journey into Scotland, to see her; and*
and she sent it by this very Chaston. Un¬ fortunately for himself, Lord Widdrington went, He resided a long while, in the qua-- litv of a kinsman, at and near Rothes Castle;. and that attachment which had begun be¬ tween them with honourable views, soon< degenerated into a guilty connexion. Lady Rothes presently declared- to your father, that the consequences were such as must; expose her, if known, to a separation from her husband, who had been so long absent; and in her distress how to conceal her offence, and yet secure her infant from neglect, she,, with the concurrence of her lover, adopted a most extraordinary resolu¬ tion. She wrote an imploring letter to your excellent mother, whose mildness of temper and goodness of heart she thus dared to abuse; and, with well-affected penitence, confessed that one criminal moment had rendered her wretched for life. She owned her love for Lord Widdrington had over¬ come, for an instant, her sense of duty; yet pleaded not that love in extenuation of 3 her
her fault. She supplicated your mother's pardon, and besought her, as she would imitate that Power who delights to forgive repentant sinners, to receive the hapless innocent, and dispose of it in England, where Lord Rothes might never learn ife existence; This well-acted humility and contrition produced the effect that hael been hoped for. Lord Widdrington, on his return to the country-house, where your mother then resided, found her as much disposed to lament as to blame her cousin-, and notonly willing but eSVen anxious that the child should be sent.—' Yet, God for*- feid/ said she, * that an infant, the offspring of my Widdrington, should be consigned to strangers. Its being your's, my dear Lord, is sufficient to make me consider it mine. Let it come, therefore, and it shall be reared as the younger sister of Margiana/ To Kendrew alone this angel-woman con*- Tided the secret; The rest of her household were deceived. In due time, Chaston and Bertha privately, and at night, brought the Child a
child; and it grew up as her own, bearing the name of Genevieve. Thus far Kendrew was acquainted, and has deposed towards the truth of this story; but a second part remained behind, which it was the conse¬ quence of Bertha's sudden fate to reveal, by exposing to my view a series of letters ad¬ dressed to Lady Rothes by Chaston. * ( From them it appears, that not long after her marriage, this abandoned woman conceived a passion for her handsome page. He was not backward to return it, and neither was of a temper long to deny in¬ dulgence to their love. It was an alarm occasioned by this base intimacy that in¬ duced Lady Rothes to invite her former admirer into Scotland. Chaston was poor and dependant, and she was swayed alike by the fear of detection and expence. She de¬ termined to insure to her child a nobler lot than bv birth it was entitled to; and Lord Widdrington, when he consented to put his admirable wife's affection so strangely to the proof, little imagined he was himself dc-
ceived. Thus, Chaston, not he, was the real father of the infant; the date of whose birth- he was made to believe seven weeks later than it really was. He died, as he had lived, in ignorance of this fact; and Kendrew him- .self has just declared to me, that till now, though he knew your reputed sister was not the daughter of Lady W T iddrington, he did suppose her to be raally your father's. child. " Long after the return of Earl Rothes from Holland, Chaston, it appears, became the tutor of his young Lord, whom m due time he attended to Edinburgh; and. then that correspondence was begun, and carried on, through Bertha's means, be¬ tween him and his worthless Lady; but for which this infamous deception might, perhaps, never have been discovered. The letters now before us often revert to its rise, and the whole of its progress—and, further, my beloved Margiana, they remove that bar which I hope and believe has for same 4«ae been the only obstacle -remain-
ing to prevent my son's unicm with the sole possessor of his heart. You are not his sister by marriage. You are free to re¬ ceive his hand; and if his merits have at length created an interest in your affec¬ tions, I have such an opinion of your good sense, as bids me hope you will not perse¬ vere in rejecting it." Margiana was held silent many minutes, by a variety of contending emotions, some distressing and others soothing to her feel¬ ings—tender admiration of the conduct of her mother, who, she made no doubt, had consented to the deception, in hopes of recovering and securing her husband's love,; shame, at that of her father ; detestation of Lady Rothes's guilt; and joy at iinding her own partiality for Delancey consistent with the purest innocence. She now recalled to mind several of her mother's expressions, when lying on her death-bed; in parti¬ cular, the advice so strongly conveyed to Genevieve, to cultivate Lady Rothes's af¬ fection ;
feetion ; and the horror manifested by the latter at Edgehill, on the first suggestion of an attachment between her daughter and Lord Lothian, the present discovery fully accounted for. Wallop and Arlette, in the meantime, were examining the letters so fortunately brought to light; and Ethelred, with a timid hope he feared too promptly to indulge^ awaited Margiana's speaking, while his anxiety marked every feature. Lady Widdrington again took his hand* and leading him to her niece—" He has endured much of late," said she, " and you will not further punish him with suspense, unless you experience any yourself. If, on the contrary, you mean to reward his long and faithful attachment, give him your hand now, and suffer us all to witness the action, as a token of your consent." Margiana extended her h'atid; and De* lancev;
lanccy knelt at her feet, while he pressed it to his bosom. " My dear Arlette/' continued Lady Wid¬ drington, te your happiness is rto less an object of tender concern to me than your brother s, and the present moment gives me an opportunity of expressing my solicitude for it. I shall think it for ever secured in this world, ifyou acquiesce in a scheme that was once before proposed to you by your father,—I mean your union with one of the worthiest characters in existence, the friendly and deserving Harold Wallop/* " I am so delighted at Ethelred's felici¬ ty," replied Arlette, crying for joy, t€ that I can refuse no compliance with any wish of your's, my dear mother ! And besides, now 1 am grown older and wiser than I was, I do not mind Wallop's not being handsome half so much as I used to do/* It is needles to expatiate on the happiness ♦of Delancey and his friend. * The*e^cellent Lady
Lady Widdrington and the overjoyed Ken¬ drew shared it all; and their marriages proved as fortunate in the event as they were bright in prospect. The prejudices and the indifference of Margiana were com¬ pletely overcome; and after she had been long a wife, while Lady Rothes was wither¬ ing under the united evils of penury and a mean husband's moroseness, she often said in wonder to her mother-in-law and Arlette, « Whv was I so long afraid of trusting my happiness to your Ethelred, since he has every virtue of which human nature is ca¬ pable, and hardly a fault to place in balance
against them?"
FJKIS.
