THE UNIVERSITY 



OF ILLINOIS 



LIBRARY 



1829 



,s. 




The person charging this material is re- 
sponsible for its return on or before the 
Latest Date stamped below. 

Theft, mutilation, and underlining of books 
are reasons for disciplinary action and may 
result in dismissal from the University. 
University of Illinois Library 



SFP-5 



9S8 



L161— O-1096 




SALATHIEL. 

A STORY OF 

THE PAST, THE PRESENT, AND 

THE FUTURE. 

IN THREE VOLUMES. 
VOL. II. 

NEW EDITION. 



LONDON : 

HENRY COLBURN, NEW BURLINGTON STREET. 

1829. 



PRINTED BY A. J, TALPY, RED LION COURT, FLEJCT STREET. 






\^ 



V 



SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER I. 



The remainder of this memorable day lingered on 
with a tardiness beyond description. The future 
pressed on my mind with an intolerable weight. 
The criminal who counts the watches of the night 
before his execution, has but a faint image of that 
fierce and yet pining anxiety, that loathing of all 
things unconnected with the one mighty event, yet 
that dread of suffering it to dwell upon the mind ; 
the mixture of hopelessness and hope, the sickly 
panting of the heart, the tenfold and morbid ner- 
vousness of every nerve in his frame ; which make 

VOL. II. A 



316335 



^ SALATHIEL. 

up the suspense of the conspirator in even the 
noblest cause. 

When the hour of banquet came, I sat down in 
the midst of magnificence, as was the custom of 
my rank ; the table was filled with guests ; all 
around me was gaiety and pomp, high-born men, 
handsome women, richly attired attendants ; plate, 
the work of Tyrian and Greek artists, in its mas- 
sive beauty ; walls covered with tissues ; music fil- 
ling the air cooled by fountains of perfumed waters. 
I felt as little of them, as if I were in the wilder- 
ness. The richest wines, the most delicate fruits, 
palled on my taste. A heaviness, an almost 
Lethean oblivion of all before my eyes, closed up 
every feeling ; if I had one wish, it was that for 
the next forty-eight hours oblivion might amount 
to insensibility ! At my wife and daughters I ven- 
tured but one glance. I thought that I had never 
before seen them look so fitted to adorn their rank, 
to be the models of grace, loveliness, and honour 
to society ; and the thought smote my heart in the 
midst of my contemplation ! — how soon all this 
may be changed ! Will another sun-set find those 
lovely and beloved beings here ? May they not be 
fugitives and beggars through the land, or, worse 
a thousand times, be in the power of the Roman I 
And this is my doing. Here sit I, in the midst of 



SALATHIEL. 3 

this innocent and happy circle, drawing ruin upon 
their heads, and writing with a cloudy hand the 
sentence of subversion upon these joyous walls. 
Here sit I, like the tempter in paradise — to in- 
volve in my own destruction all that is pure and 
peaceful, and confiding- and happy ! With what 
terror would they look upon me, if they could 
at this instant see the evils that I am sum- 
moning round them ! — if they could read but my 
bosom 

My eyes sought Constantius ; he had just re- 
turned from his preparations, and came in glowing 
with the enthusiasm of the soldier. He sat down 
beside Salome, and his cheek gradually turned of 
the hue of death. He sat, like myself, absorbed 
in frequent reverie ; and to the playful solicitations 
of Salome, that he would indulge in the table after 
his fatigue, he gave forced smiles and broken 
answers. The future was plainly busy with, us 
both ; with all that the heart of man could love 
beside him, he felt the pang of contrast ; and, 
when on accidentally lifting his eyes they met 
mine, the single conscious look interchanged told 
the bitter perturbation that preyed on both in the 
hearts' core. 

I soon rose ; and, on pretence of having letters 
to despatch to our friends in Rome, retired to my 



4 SALATHIEL, 

chamber. There lay the chart still on the table, 
marked by the pencil lines of the route to Masada. 
Heavens ! with what breathlessness I traced every 
point and bearing of it ! How eagerly I pursued 
the mountain paths in which the movement might 
be concealed ; how anxiously I marked the spaces 
of open country in which it must be exposed to 
the Roman eye! But the chart itself! There, 
within a space over which I could stretch my arm, 
was my world ! In that little boundary was I to 
struggle against the supremacy that covered the 
earth ! Those fairy hills, those scarcely visible 
rivers, those remote cities, dots of human habita- 
tion, were to be henceforth the places of siege and 
battle, memorable for the destruction of human 
life; engrossing every energy of the mind and 
frame of myself and my countrymen ; and big with 
the fates of generations on generations ! 

It was dusk ; and I was still devouring with my 
eyes this chart of prophecy, when Constantius 
entered. " I have come," said he gravely, " to 
bid you farewell for the night. In two days I 
hope we shall all meet again." 

** No, my brave son," t interrupted. " We do 
not leave each other to-night." 

He looked surprised. " I must be gone this 
instant. Eleazar has done his part with the ac- 



SALATHIEL. 5 

tivity of his honest and manly mind. Two miles 
off, in the valley under the date-grove, I have left 
five hundred of the finest fellows that ever sat a 
charger. In half an hour Sirius rises ; then we 
go, and then let the governor of Masada look to 
it. Farewell, and wish me good fortune." 

*' May every angel that protects the righteous 
cause, hover above your head!" I exclaimed; 
"but, no farewell; for we go together." 

** Do you doubt my conduct of the enterprise ? " 
pronounced he strongly. ** 'Tis true I have been 
in the Roman service; but that service I hated 
from the bottom of my soul. I was a Greek ; and 
bound to Rome no longer than she could hold me 
in her chain. If I could have had men to follow 
me, I should have done in Cyprus what I now do 
in Judea. The countryman of Leonidas, Cimou, 
and Timoleon, was not born to hug his slavery. I 
am now a son of Judea ; to her my affections have 
been transplanted, and to her, if she does not re- 
ject me, shall my means and my life be given !" 

He relaxed the belt from his waist, and flung it 
with his scymitar on the ground. I lifted it, and 
gave it again to his hand. 

" No, Constantius," I replied. ** I honour your 
zeal, and would confide in you, if the world hung 
upon the balance. But I cannot bear the thought 



6 SALATHIEL. 

of lingering here, while you are in the field. The 
misery of suspense is intolerable. My mind, 
within those few hours, has been on the rack. I 
must take the chances with you." 

" It is utterly impossible," was his firm answer. 
*' Your absence would excite instant suspicion. 
The Roman spies are everywhere. The natural 
result follows, that our march would be intercepted ; 
and I am not sure, but that even now we may be 
too late. That inconceivable sagacity by which 
the Romans seem to be masters of every man's 
secret, has been already at work ; troops were 
seen on the route to Masada this very day. Our 
horses may get before them ; but if the garrison 
be reinforced, the expedition is undone. But a 
still more immediate result would be the destruc- 
tion of all here. Let it be known that the prince 
of Naphtali has left his palace, and the dozen 
squadrons of Thracian horse which I saw within 
those four days at Tiberias, will be riding through 
your domains before the next sun- set." 

This reflection checked me. " Well then," said 
I, ** go ; and the protection of Him whose pillar 
of cloud led his people through the sea and through 
the desert, be your shelter and your light in the 
day of peril ! " 

I pressed his hand; he turned to depart, but 



SALATHIEL. 7 

came back ; and, after a slight hesitation, said — 
** If Salome had once offended her noble father by 
her flight, the ofifence was mine. — Forgive her; 
for her heart is still the heart of your child. She 
loves you. If I fall, let the memory of our dis- 
obedience lie in my grave !" — His voice stopped, 
and mine could not break the silence. 

*' Let what will come," resumed he with an 
effort, *' tell Salome that the last word on my 
lips was her beloved name !" He left the chamber, 
and I felt as if a portion of my being had gone 
forth from me. 

This day was one of the many festivals of our 
country, and my halls echoed with sounds of en- 
joyment. The immense gardens glittered with 
illumination in all the graceful devices, of which 
our people were such masters ; and when I looked 
out for the path of Constantius, I was absolutely 
pained by the sight of so much fantastic pleasure, 
while my hero was pursuing his way through dark- 
ness and solitude. 

At length the festival was over. The lights 
twinkled thinner among the arbours, the sounds of 
glad voices sank, and I saw from my casement the 
evidences of departure in the trains of torches 
that moved up the surrounding hills. The sight 
of a starlight sky has always been to me among 



8 SALATHIEL. 

the softest and surest healers of the heart ; and I 
gazed upon that mighty scene which throws all 
Jiuman cares into such littleness, until my compo- 
sure returned. 

The last of the guests had left the palace before 
I ventured to descend. The vases of perfumes 
still breathed in the hall of the evening banquet ; 
the alabaster lamps were still burning ; but, ex- 
cepting the attendants who waited on my steps at 
a distance, and whose fixed figures might have 
been taken for statues, there was not a living 
being near me of the laughing and joyous crowd 
that had so lately glittered, danced, sported, and 
smiled, within those sumptuous walls. Yet, what 
was this but a picture of the common rotation of 
life ? Or, by a yet more immediate moral, what 
was it but a picture of the desertion that might be 
coming upon me and mine ? 

I sat down to extinguish my sullen philosophy 
in wine. But no draught that ever passed the lips 
could extinguish the low fever that brooded on my 
spirit. I dreaded that the presence of my family 
might force out my heavy secret, and lingered, 
with my eyes gazing without sight, on the costly 
covering of the board. 

A sound of music from an inner hall, to which 
Miriam and her daughters had retired, aroused me. 



SALATHIEL. 9 

I stood at the door, gazing on the group within. 
The music was a hymn, with which they closed the 
customary devotions of the day. But there was 
something in its sound to me that I had never felt 
before. At the moment when those sweet voices 
were pouring out the gratitude of hearts as inno- 
cent and glowing as the hearts of angels, a scene 
of horror might be acting. The husband of Sa- 
lome might be struggling under the Roman swords ; 
he might be lying a corpse under the feet of the 
cavalry, that before morn might bring the news of 
his destruction in the flames that startled us from 
our sleep, and the swords that pierced our bosoms. 
And what beings were those thus appointed for 
the sacrifice ? The lapse of even a few years had 
perfected the natural beauty of my daughters. 
Salome's sparkling eye was more brilliant; her 
graceful form was moulded into more easy ele- 
gance ; and her laughing lip was wreathed with a 
more playful smile. Never did I see a creature 
of deeper witchery. My Esther, my noble and 
dear Esther, who was, perhaps, the dearer to me 
from her inheriting a tinge of my melancholy, yet 
a melancholy exalted by genius and ardour of soul 
into a charm, was this night the leader of the song 
of holiness. Her large uplifted eye glowed v/ith 
the brightness of one of the stars on which it was 



10 SALATHIEL. 

fixed. Her hands fell on the harp in almost the 
attitude of prayer; and the expression of her lofty 
and intellectual countenance, crimsoned with the 
theme, told of a communion with thoughts and 
beings above mortality. The hymn was done ; the 
voices had ceased ; yet the inspiration still burned 
in her soul ; her hands still shook from the chords 
harmonies, sweet, but of the wildest and boldest 
brilliancy ; bursts and flights of sound, like the 
rushing of the distant waterfall at night, or the 
solemn echoes and mighty complainings of the 
forest in the first swell of the storm. Miriam and 
Salome sat beholding her in silent admiration and 
love. 

The magnificent dress of the Jewish female 
could not heighten the power of such beauty. But 
it filled up the picture. The jewelled tiaras, the 
embroidered shawls, the high- wrought and massive 
armlets, the silken robes and sashes fringed with 
pearl and diamond, the profusion of dazzling orna- 
ment that makes the Oriental costume to this day, 
were the true habits of the forms that then sat 
unconscious of the delighted yet anxious eye that 
drank in the joy of their presence. I saw before 
me the pomp of princedoms, investing forms worthy 
of thrones. 

My entrance broke off* the harper*s spell, and I 



SALATHIEL. 11 

found it a hard task to answer the fond inquiries 
and touching congratulations that flowed upon me. 
But the hour waned, and I was again left alone for 
the few minutes which it was my custom to give 
to meditation before I retired to rest. I threw 
open the low door that opened into a garden thick 
with the Persian rose, and filling the air with cool 
fragrance. At my first glance upwards I saw 
Sirius — he was on the verge of the horizon ! The 
thoughts of the day again gathered over my soul. 
I idly combined the fate of Constantius with the 
decline of the star that he had taken for his signal. 
My senses lost their truth, or contributed to de- 
ceive me. I fancied that I heard sounds of con- 
flict ; the echo of horses' feet rang in my ears. A 
meteor that slowly sailed across the sky, struck me 
as a supernatural summons. My brain, fearfully 
excitable since my great misfortune, at length 
kindled up such strong realities, that I found my- 
self on the point of betraying the burden of my 
spirit by some palpable disclosure. 

Twice had I reached the door of Miriam's 
chamber, to tell her my whole perplexity. But I 
heard the voices of her attendants within, and 
again shrank from the tale. I ranged the long 
galleries, perplexed with capricious and strange 
torments of the imagination. 



12 SALATHIEL. 

" If he should fall," said I, " how shall I atone 
for the cruelty of sending him upon a service of 
such hopeless hazard — a few peasants with naked 
breasts against Roman battlements ! What soldier 
would not ridicule my folly in hoping success? 
What man would not charge me with scorn of the 
life of my kindred? The blood of my tribe will be 
upon my head for ever. The base will take ad- 
vantage of their fate to degrade my name with the 
nation. The brave will disdain him who sent 
others to the peril which he dared not share. 
There sinks the prince of Naphtali ! In the grave 
of my gallant son and his companions is buried my 
dream of martial honour ; the sword that strikes 
him, cuts to the ground my lost ambition of deli- 
vering my country. 

The advice of Constantius returned to my mind, 
but, like the meeting of two tides, it was only to 
increase the tumult within. I felt the floor shake 
under my hurried tread. I smote my forehead — it 
was covered with drops of agony. The voices 
within my wife's chamber had ceased. But was I 
to rouse her from her sleep, perhaps the last quiet 
sleep that she was ever to take, only to hear in- 
telligence that must make her miserable ? 

This reflection let in upon me a new flood of 
anxieties. ** If misfortune should come, with what 



SALATHIEL. 13 

face shall I ever be able to look upon my family, 
upon the daughter that I have widowed, upon the 
wife, upon the child, whose sorrow, even whose 
silence will torture me ? And how long must 1 
keep my secret? For four days! while I am 
scarcely able to bear its suspense for an hour." 

I leaned my throbbing forehead upon one of the 
marble tables, as if to imbibe coolness from the 
stone. I felt a light hand upon mine. Miriam 
stood beside me. ** Salathiel!" pronounced she 
in an unshaken voice, " there is something pain- 
ful on your mind. Whether it be only a duty on 
your part to disclose it to me, I shall not say ; 
but if you think me fit to share your happier 
hours, must I have the humiliation of feeling that 
I am to be excluded from your confidence in the 
day when those hours may be darkened ?" 

I was silent, for to speak was beyond my strength, 
but I pressed her delicate fingers to my bosom. 

** Misfortune, my dear husband," resumed she, 
" is trivial, but when it reaches the mind. Oh, 
rather let me encounter it in the bitterest priva- 
tions of poverty and exile; rather let me be a 
nameless outcast to the latest year I have to live, 
than feel the bitterness of being forgotten by the 
heart to which, come life or death, mine is bound 
for ever and ever.*' 



14 SALATHIEL. 

I glanced up at her. Tears dropped on her 
cheeks ; but her voice was firm. ** I have ob- 
served you," said she, " in deep agitation during 
the day; but I forebore to press you for the cause. 
I have listened now, till long past midnight, to the 
sound of your feet, to the sound of groans and 
pangs wrung from your bosom ; nay, to exclama- 
tions and broken sentences, which have let me 
most involuntarily into the knowledge that this 
disturbance arises from the state of our country. 
I know your noble nature, Salathiel ; and I say to 
you, in this solemn and sacred hour of danger, 
follow the guidance of that noble nature." 

I cast my arms about her neck, and imprinted a 
kiss as true as ever came from human love upon 
her lips. She had taken a weight from my soul. 
T detailed the whole design to her. She listened 
with many a change from red to pale, and many a 
tremor of the white hand that lay in mine. When 
I ceased, the woman in her broke forth in tears 
and sighs. ** Yet," said she, " you must go. 
Perish the thought, that for the selfish desire of 
looking even upon you in safety here, I should 
hazard the dearer honour of my lord. It is right 
that Judea should make the attempt to shake off 
her tyranny. It is wise to lose not a moment, 
when the attempt is fully resolved on. You must 



SALATHIEL. 15 

be the leader, and you must purchase that incom- 
parable distinction by showing* that you possess 
the qualities of a leader. The people can never 
be deceived in their own cause. Kings and courts 
may be deluded into the choice of incapacity ; but 
the man whom a people will follow from their 
firesides to the field, must bear the palpable stamp 
of wisdom, energy, and valour." 

" Admirable being !" I exclaimed, *' worthy to 
be honoured while Israel has a name. Then, I 
have your consent to follow Constantius. By speed 
I may reach him before he can have arrived at 
the object of the enterprise. Farewell, my best 
beloved — farewell!" She fell into my arms in a 
passion of tears. 

She at length recovered, and said, ** This is 
weakness, the mere weakness of surprise. Yes ; 
go. Prince of Naphtali. No man must take the 
glory from you. Constantius is a hero ; but you 
must be a king, and more than a king; not the 
struggler for the baubles of royalty, but for the 
giories of the rescuer of the people of God. The 
first blow of the war must not be given by another, 
dear as he is. The first triumph, the whole tri- 
umph, must be my lord's." She knelt down, and 
poured out her soul to Heaven in eloquent suppli- 
cation for my safety. I listened in homage. 



16 SALATHIEL. 

" Now go," sighed she, " and remember, in the 
day of battle, who will then be in prayer for you. 
Court no unnecessary peril; for if you perish, 
which of us would desire to live !" She again sank 
upon her knees; and I in reverent silence de- 
scended from the gallery. 



SALATHIEL. 17 



CHAPTER II. 

My preparations were quickly made. I di- 
vested myself of my robes, led out my favourite 
barbj flung an alhaik over my shoulders, and by 
the help of my Arab turban might have passed for 
a courier or a plunderer in any comer of Syria. 
This was done unseen of any eye ; for the crowd 
of attendants that thronged the palace in the day, 
were now stretched through the courts, or on the 
terraces, fast asleep, under the doubled influence 
of a day of feasting, and a night of tepid summer 
air. 

I rode without stopping, till the sun began to 
throw up his yellow rays through the vapours of 
the lake of Tiberias. To ascertain alike the pro- 
gress of Constantius, and the chances of meeting 



18 SALATHIEL. 

with some of those Roman squadrons which were 
perpetually moving- between the fortresses, 1 struck 
off the road into a forest, tied my barb to a tree, 
and set forth to reconnoitre. 

Travelling on foot was the common mode of a 
country which, like Judea, was but little fitted for 
the breed of horses ; and I found no want of com- 
panions. Pedlars, peasants, disbanded soldiers, 
and probably thieves, diversified my knowledge of 
mankind within a few miles. I escaped under the 
sneer of the soldier, and the compassion of the 
peasant. The first glance at my wardrobe satisfied 
the robber that I was not worth the exercise of 
his profession, or perhaps that I was a brother of 
the trade. But I found none of the repulsiveness 
that makes the intercourse of higher life so un- 
productive. Confidence was on every tongue. 
All the secrets of their families were at my dis- 
posal ; and I discovered, even m the sandy roads 
of Palestine, that to be a judicious listener is 
one of the first talents for popularity all over the 
world. 

But, of my peculiar objects I could learn no- 
thing, though every man whom I met had some 
story of the Romans. I ascertained to my sur- 
prise, that the intelligence which Septimius brought 
from the very penetralia of the imperial cabinet, was 



SALATHIEL. 19 

known to the multitude. Every voice of the po- 
pulace was full of a tale, which probably was 
reckoned among the profoundest secrets of the 
state. I have made the same observation in later 
teras, and found even in the most formal mysteries 
of the most frowning governments, the rumour of 
the streets outrun the cabinets. So it must be, 
while diplomatists have tongues, and while women 
and domestics have curiosity. 

But if I were to rely on the accuracy of those 
willing politicians, the cause of independence was 
without hope. Human nature loves to make itself 
important; and the narrator of the marvellous is 
always great, according to the distention of his 
news. Those who had seen a cohort, invariably 
magnified it into a legion: a troop of cavalry 
covered half a province ; and the detachments 
marching from Asia Minor and Egypt for our 
invasion, were reckoned by the very largest nume- 
ration within the teller's capacity. 

As I was sitting by a rivulet, moistening some 
of the common bread of the country, which 1 had 
brought to aid my disguise, I entered into con- 
versation with one of those unhoused exiles of 
society, whom at the first glance we discern to be 
nature's commoners, indebted to no man for food, 
raiment, or habitation, the native dweller on the 



20 SALATHIEL. 

road. He had some of the habitual jest of those 
who have no care, and congratulated me on the 
size of my table, the meadow ; and the unadulte- 
rated purity of my potation, the brook. He in- 
formed me that he came direct from the Nile, 
where he had seen the son of Vespasian at the 
head of a hundred thousand men. A Syrian 
soldier, returning to Damascus, who joined 
our meal, felt indignant at the discredit thus 
thrown on a general, under whom he had received 
three pike wounds, and leave to beg his way home. 
He swore by Ashtaroth, that the force under Titus 
was at least twice the number. A third wanderer, 
a Roman veteran, of whom the remainder was 
covered over with glorious patches, arrived just 
in time to relieve his general from the disgrace of 
so limited a command, and another hundred thou- 
sand was instantly put under his orders; sanc- 
tioned by asseverations in the name of Jupiter 
Capitolinus, and as many others of the calendar 
as the patriot could pronounce. This rapid re- 
cruiting threw the former authorities into the 
back-ground ; and the old legionary was, for the 
rest of the meal, the undisputed leader of the con- 
versation. 

*' To suppose," said the veteran, " that those 
circumcised dogs can stand against a regular-bred 



SALATHIEL. 21 

Roman general, is sacrilege. Half his army, or a 
tenth of his army, would walk through the land, 
north and south, east and west, as easily as I could 
walk through this brook." 

** No doubt of it," said the Syrian, ** if they 
had some of our cavalry for flanking and forag- 
ing." 

" Aye, for any thing but fighting, comrade," 
said the Roman with a laugh. 

" No ; you leave out another capital quality," 
observed the beggar : " for none can deny, that 
whoever may be first in the advance, the Syrians 
will be first in the retreat. There are two ma- 
noeuvres to make a complete soldier — how to get 
into the battle, and how to get out of it. Now, 
the Syrians manage the latter in the most un- 
doubted perfection." 

'* Silence, villain," exclaimed the Syrian, *' or 
you have robbed your last hen-roost." 

" He says nothing but the truth for all that," 
interrupted the veteran. " But neither of us 
taxed your cavalry with cowardice. No ; it was 
pure virtue. They had too much modesty to take 
the way into the field before other troops ; and too 
much humanity not to teach them how to sleep 
without broken bones." 



22 SALATHIEL. 

The beggar, delighted at the prospect of a quar- 
rel, gave the assent, that more embroils the fray. 

*' Mark Antony did not say so," murmured the 
indignant Syrian. 

*' Mark Antony!" cried the Roman, starting 
upon his single leg ; *' glory to his name ! but what 
could a fellow like you know about Mark Antony ?" 

" I only served with him," drily replied the 
Syrian. 

'* Then here's my hand for you," exclaimed the 
brave old man : ** we are comrades. I would love 
even a dog that had seen the face of Mark An- 
tony. He was the first man that I ever carried 
buckler under. Aye, there was a soldier for you ; 
such men are not made in this puling age. He 
could fight from morn till night, and carouse from 
night till morn, and never lose his seat on his 
charger in the field for the day after. I have seen 
him run half naked through the snows in Armenia, 
and walk in armour in the hottest day of Egypt. 
He loved the soldier, and the soldier loved him. 
So, comrade, here's to the health of Mark Antony. 
Ah, we shall never see such men again." 

He drew out a flask of ration wine, closely akin 
to vinegar, of which he hospitably gave us each a 
cup; and after pouring a libation to his hero's 



SALATHIEL. 23 

memory, whom he evidently placed among his 
^ods, swallowed the draught, in which we devout- 
ly followed his example. 

" Yet," said the beggar, " if Antony were a 
great man, he has left little men enough behind 
him. There's, for instance, the present gay pro- 
curator ; six months in the gout, the other six 
months drunk, or if sober, only thinking where he 
can rob next. This will bring the government into 
trouble before long, or I'm much mistaken. For 
my part, I pledge myself, if he should take any 
part of my property " 

** Why, if he did," said the Syrian, " I give 

him credit for magic. He would find a crop of 
wheat in the sand, or coin money of the air. 
Where is your property ?" 

** Comrade," said the veteran, laughing, "recol- 
lect ; if the saying be true, that people are least to 
be judged of by the outside, the rags of our jovial 
friend must hide many a shekel ; and, as to where 
his property lies, he has a wide estate who has the 
world for his portion ; and property enough, who 
thinks all his own that he can lay his fingers on." 

The laugh was now loud against the beggar. 
He however bore all like one accustomed to the 
buffets of fortune; and, joining in it, said, 
" Whatever may be my talents in that way, there 



24 SALATHIEL. 

is no great chance of showing" them in this com- 
pany ; but if you should be present at the sack 
of Masada, and I should meet you on your way 
back " 

*' Masada!" exclaimed I instinctively. 

** Yes, I left the town three days ago. On 
that very morning an order arrived to prepare for 
the coming of the great and good Florus ; whoj 
in his wisdom, feeling the want of gold, has de- 
termined to fill up the hollows of the military chest 
and his own purse, by stripping the armoury of 
every thing that can sell for money. My intelli- 
gence is from the best authority. The governor's 
principal bath-slave told it to one of the damsels of 
the steward's department, with whom the Ethiopian 
is mortally in love ; and the damsel, in a moment 
of tenderness, told it to me. In fact, to let you 
into my secret, I am now looking out for Florus, 
in whose train 1 intend to make my way back into 
this gold mine." 

*' The villain !" cried the veteran, " disturb the 
arms of the dead ! Why, they say that it has the 
very corslet and buckler that Mark Antony wore 
when he marched against the Idumeans." 

*' I fear more the disturbance of the arms of 
the living," said the Syrian. " The Jews will 
take it for granted that the Romans are giving 



SALATHIEL. 2^ 

up the business in despair; and if I'm a true man, 
there will be blood before I get home." 

" No fear of that, fellow soldier," said the vete- 
ran, gaily ; " you have kept your two legs, and 
when they have so long carried you out of harm's 
way, it would be the worst treatment possible to 
leave you in it at last. But there is something in 
what you say. I had a dream last night. I 
thought that I saw the country in a blaze, and 
when I started from my sleep, my ears were filled 
with a sound like the trampling of ten thousand 
cavalry." 

I drew my breath quick ; and, to conceal my 
emotion, gathered up the fragments of our meal. 
On completing my work, I found the beggar's eye 
fixed on me : — he smiled. 

" I too had a dream last night," said he, " and 
of much the same kind. I thought that I saw a 
cloud of cavalry riding as fast as horse could lay 
boof to ground ; I never saw a more dashing set, 
since my first campaign upon the highways of this 
wicked world. I'll be sworn that, whatever their 
errand may be, such riders will not come back 
without it. Their horses' heads were turned to- 
wards Masada, and I am now between two minds 
whether I may not mention my dream to the pro- 
curator himself." 

VOL. II. B 



26 SALATHIEL. 

I found his keen eye turned on me again. 
'' Absurd!" said I. *' He would recommend you 
only to his lictor." 

" I rather think he would recommend me to his 
treasurer, for I never had a dream that seemed so 
like a fact. I should not be surprised to find that 
I had been sleeping with my eyes open." 

His look convinced me that I was known. I 
touched his hand, while the soldiers were busy 
packing up their cups, and showed him gold. He 
smiled carelessly. I laid my hand on my poniard ; 
he but smiled again. 

" The sun is burning out," said he, " and I can 
stand talking here no longer. Farewell, brave 
soldiers, and safe home to you ! Farewell, Arab, 
and safe home to those that you are looking after !" 
He stalked away, and as he passed me, said in a 
low voice, *' Glory to Naphtali!" 

After exchanging good wishes with the old men, 
I followed him ; he led the way towards the wood 
at a pace which kept me at a distance. When I 
reached the shade, he stopped, and prostrated 
himself before me. 

" Will my lord," said he, " forgive the presump- 
tion of his servant? This day, when I first met 
you, your disguise deceived me. I bear intelli- 
gence from your friends." I caught the fragment 



SALATHIEL. 27 

of papyrus from him, and read : — '* All's well. 
We have hitherto met with nothing to oppose us. 
To-morrow night we shall be on the ground. If 
no addition be made to the force within, the sur- 
prise will be complete. Our cause itself is victory. 
Health to all we love !" 

" Your mission is now done," said I. " Go on 
to Naphtali, and you shall be rewarded as your 
activity has deserved." 

" No," replied he, with the easy air of a licensed 
humorist, " I have but two things to think of in 
this world— my time and my money ; of one of 
them I have infinitely more than I well know how 
to spend ; and of the other infinitely less. I ex- 
pected to have killed a few days in going up to 
Naphtali. But that hope has been cut off by my 
finding you half way. I will now try Florus, and 
get rid of a day or two with that most worthy of 
men." 

" That I forbid," interrupted I. 

" Not, if you will trust one whom your noble son 
has trusted. I am not altogether without some 
dislike to the Romans myself, nor something be- 
tween contempt and hatred for Gessius Florus.'» 
His countenance darkened at the name. " I tell 
you," pronounced he bitterly, ** that fellow ji pam- 
pered carcass this day contains as black a mass of 



28 SALATHIEL. 

villany as stains the earth. 1 have an old account 
to settle with him." 

His voice quivered. ** I was once no rambler, 
no outcast of the land. I lived on the side of 
Hermon, lovely Hermon! I was affianced to a 
maiden of my kindred, as sweet a flower as ever 
blushed with love and joy. Our bridal day was 
fixed. I went to Csesarea-Philippi to purchase 
some marriage presents. When I returned, I 
found nothing but women weeping, and men furious 
with impotent rage. My bride was gone. A 
Roman troop had surrounded her father's house in 
the night, and torn her away. Wild, distracted, 
nay, I believe raving mad, I searched the land. I 
kept life in me only that I might recover or re- 
venge her. 1 abandoned property, friends, all! I 
at length made the discovery." 

To hide his perturbation, he turned away. 
*' Powers of justice and vengeance !** he murmured 
in a shuddering tone, " are there no thunders for 
such things ? She had been seen by that hoary 
profligate. She was carried off* by him. She 
spurned his insults. He ordered her to be chained, 
to be starved, to be lashed !" 

Tears burst from his eyes. — " She still spurned 
him. She implored to die. She called upon my 
name in her misery. — Wretch that I was, what 



SALATHIEL. 29 

could I, a worm, do under the heel of the tyrant i 
— But I saw her at last : — I made my way into the 
dungeon. There sat she, pale as the stone to 
which she was chained ; a silent, sightless, blood- 
less, mindless skeleton. I called to her : she 
knew nothing. I pressed my lips to hers : she 
never felt them. I bathed her cold hands in my 
tears — I fell at her feet — I prayed to her but to 
pronounce one word ; to g"ive some sign of remem- 
brance ; to look on me. She sat like a statue ; 
her reason was gone, gone for ever !" 

He flung himself upon the ground, and writhed 
and groaned before me. To turn him from a sub- 
ject of such sorrow, I asked what he meant to do 
by his intercourse with Floras. 

** To do ? — not to stab him in his bed ; not to 
poison him in his banquet ; not to smite him with 
that speedy death, which would be mercy ; — no, 
but to force him into ruin step by step ; to gather 
shame, remorse, and anguish round him, cloud on 
cloud ; to mix evil in his cup with such exquisite 
slowness, that he shall taste every drop ; to strike 
him only so far, that he may feel the pang without 
being stunned; to mingle so much of hope in his 
undoing, that he may never enjoy the vigour of 
despair ; to sink him into his own Tartarus inch by 



30 SALATHIEL. 

inch, till every fibre has its particular agony." He 
yelled, suddenly rose from the ground, and rushed 
forward and threaded the thickets with swiftness 
that made pursuit in vain. 



SALATHIEL. 31 



CHAPTER III. 



The violence of the beggar's anguish, and the 
strong" probabilities of his story engrossed me so 
much, that I at first regretted the extraordinary 
flight, which put it out of my power to off*er him 
any assistance. I returned with a feeling of dis- 
appointment to the spot where I had left my horse, 
and was riding towards the higher country to avoid 
the enemy's straggling parties, when I heard a loud 
outcry. On a crag so distant, that I thought 
human speed could scarcely have reached it in the 
time, I saw this strange being making all kinds of 
signals, sometimes pointing to me, then to some 
object below him ; and uttering a cry which might 
easily be mistaken for the howl of a wild beast. 

I reined up ; it was impossible for me to ascer- 



32 SALATHIEL. 

tain whether he were warning me of the neigh- 
bourhood of danger, or apprising others of my 
approach ; or even, from the nature of his cries, 
preparing me for an assault by a troop of pan- 
thers. Great stakes make man suspicious; and 
the Prince of Naphtali, speeding to the capture of 
the principal place of arms of the legions, might be 
an object well worth a little treachery. I rapidly 
forgot the beggar's sorrows in the consideration of 
his habits ; decided that his harangue was a piece 
of professional dexterity, probably played off every 
week of his life ; and that, if I would not be in 
Roman hands before night, I must ride in the 
precisely opposite direction to that which his sig- 
nals so laboriously recommended. 

Nothing grows with more vigour than the doubt 
of human honesty. I satisfied myself in a few 
moments that I was a dupe; dashed through 
thicket, over rock, forded torrent, and, from the 
top of an acclivity at which even my high-mettled 
steed had looked with repugnance, saw, with the 
triumph of him who deceives the deceiver, the 
increased violence of the impostor's attitudes. He 
leaped from crag to crag with the activity of a 
goat; and when he could do nothing else, gave 
the last evidence of Oriental vexation, by tearing 
his robes. I waved my hand to him in contemp- 



SALATHIEL. 33 

tuous farewell ; and dismounting, for the side of 
the hill was almost precipitous, led my panting 
Arab through beds of myrtle, and every lovely 
and sweet-smelling bloom, to the edge of a valley, 
that seemed made to shut out every disturbance of 
man. 

A circle of low hills, covered to the crown with 
foliage, surrounded a deep space of velvet turf, 
kept green as the emerald by the flow of rivulets, 
and the moisture of a pellucid lake in the centre, 
tinged with every colour of the heavens. The 
beauty of this sylvan spot was enhanced by the 
luxuriant. profusion of almond, orange, and other 
trees, that in every stage of production, from the 
bud to the fruit, covered the little knolls below, 
and formed a broad belt round the lake. 

Parched as I was by the intolerable heat, this 
secluded haunt of the very spirit of freshness looked 
doubly lovely. My eyes, half blinded by the glare 
of the sands, and even my mind exhausted by the 
perplexities of the day, found delicious relaxation 
in the verdure and dewy breath of the silent valley. 
My barb, with the quick sense of animals accus- 
tomed to the travel of the wilderness, showed her 
delight by playful boundings, the prouder arching 
of her neck, and the brighter glancing of her 
bright eye. 



34 SALATHIEL. 

" Here," thought I, as I led her slowly towards 
the steep descent, " would be the very spot for 
the innocence that had not tried the world, or the 
philosophy that had tried it, and found all vanity. 
Who could dream that, within the borders of this 
distracted land, in the very hearing, almost within 
the very sight of the last miseries that man can 
inflict on man, there was a retreat, which the foot 
of man perhaps never yet defiled ; and in which 
the calamities that afflict society might be as little 
felt as if it were among the stars ! " 

A violent plunge of the barb put an end to my 
speculation. She exhibited the wildest signs of 
terror, snorted, and strove to break from me; then 
lixing her glance keenly on the thickets below, 
shook in every limb. Yet, the scene was tran- 
quillity itself; the chameleon lay basking in the 
sun, and the only sound was that of the wild 
doves murmuring under the broad leaves of the 
palm-trees. 

But my mare still resisted every effbrt to lead 
her downwards ; her ears were fluttering con- 
vulsively; her ej'es were starting from their sockets. 
I grew peevish at the animal's unusual obstinacy, 
and was about to let her suffer thirst for the day, 
when my senses were paralyzed by a tremendous 
roar. A lion stood on the summit which I had 



SALATHIEL. 35 

but just quitted. He was not a dozen yards above 
my head, and his first sprinp^ must have carried 
me to the bottom of the precipice. The barb 
burst away at once. I drew the only weapon I 
had, a dagger, — and, hopeless as escape was, 
grasping the tangled weeds to sustain my footing, 
awaited the plunge. But the lordly savage pro- 
bably disdained so ignoble a prey, and continued 
on the summit, lashing his sides with his tail, and 
tearing up the ground. He at length stopped 
suddenly, listened, as to some approaching foot, 
and then, with a hideous yell, sprang over me, and 
was in the thicket below at a single bound. 

The whole thicket was instantly alive ; the 
shade which I had fixed on for the seat of un- 
earthly tranquillity, was an old liaunt of lions; and 
the mighty herd were now roused from their noon- 
day slumbers. Nothing could be grander or more 
terrible than this disturbed majesty of the forest 
kings. In every variety of savage passion, from 
terror to fury, they plunged, and tore, and yelled; 
dashed through the lake, burst through the thicket, 
rushed up the hills, or stood baying and roaring 
in defiance against the coming invader; the num- 
bers were immense, for the rareness of shade and 
water had gathered them from every quarter of 
the desert. 



36 SALATHIEL. 

While I stood clinging to my perilous hold, aiid 
fearful of attracting their gaze by the slightest 
movement, the source of the commotion appeared, 
in the shape of a Roman soldier issuing, spear in 
hand, through a ravine at the further side of the 
valley. He was palpably unconscious of the for- 
midable place into which he was entering ; and 
the gallant clamour of voices through the hills, 
showed that he was followed by others as bold and 
unconscious of their danger as himself. 

But his career soon closed ; his horse's feet had 
scarcely touched the turf, when a lion was fixed 
with fangs and claws on the creature's loins. The 
rider uttered a cry of horror, and for the instant, 
sat helplessly gazing at the open jaws behind him. 
I saw the lion gathering up his flanks for a second 
bound ; but the soldier, a figure of gigantic strength, 
grasping the nostrils of the monster with one hand, 
and, with the other shortening his spear, drove 
the steel at one resistless thrust into the lion's 
forehead. Horse, lion, and rider fell, and con- 
tinued struggling together. 

In the next moment, a mass of cavalry came 
thundering down the ravine. They had broken 
off from their march, through the accident of rous- 
ing a straggling lion, and followed him in the giddy 
ardour of the chase. But the sight now before 



SALATHIEL. 37 

them was enough to appal the boldest intrepidity. 
The valley was filled with the vast herd ; retreat 
was impossible, for the troopers came still pouring 
in by the only pass, and, from the sudden descent 
of the glen, horse and man were rolled head fore- 
most among the lions ; neither man nor monster 
could retreat. The conflict was horrible ; the 
heavy spears of the legionaries plunged through 
bone and brain ; the lions, made more furious by 
wounds, sprang upon the powerful horses and tore 
them to the ground, or flew at the troopers' throats, 
and crushed and dragged away cuirass and buckler. 
The valley was a struggling heap of human and 
savage battle ; man, lion, and charger, writhing 
and rolling in agonies, till their forms were undis- 
tinguishable. The groans and cries of the legion- 
aries, the screams of the mangled horses, and the 
roars and bowlings of the lions bleeding with 
sword and spear, tearing the dead, darting up the 
sides of the hills in terror, and rushing down again 
with the fresh thirst of gore, baffled all conception 
of fury and horror. 

But man was the conqueror at last ; the sa- 
vages, scared by the spear, and thinned in their 
numbers, made a rush in one body towards the 
ravine, overthrew every thing in their way, and 



38 SALATHIEL. 

burst from the valley, awaking the desert for many 
a league with their roar. 

The troopers, bitterly repenting their rash ex- 
ploit, gathered up the remnants of their dead on 
litters of boughs, and, leaving many a gallant steed 
to feast the vultures, slowly retired from the place 
of carnage. 

The spot to which I clung, made ascent or 
descent equally difficult ; and during this extraor- 
dinary contest I continued imbedded in the foliage, 
and glad to escape the eye of man and brute alike. 
But the troop were gone ; beneath me lay nothing 
but a scene of blood, and I began to wind my way 
to the summit. A menace from below stopped me. 
A solitary horseman had galloped back to give a 
last look to this valley of death ; he saw me climb- 
ing the hill, saw that I was not a Roman, and, in 
the irritation of the hour, made no scruple of sacri- 
ficing a native to the manes of his comrades. The 
spear followed his words, and ploughed the ground 
at my side. His outcry brought back a dozen of 
his squadron; 1 found myself about to be assailed 
by a general discharge ; escape on foot was impos- 
sible ; and I had no resource but to descend and 
give myself up to the soldiery. 

It was to warn me of this hazard that the signals 



SALATHIEL. 39 

of my strange companion were made. He saw the 
advance of the Roman column along the plain. 
My suspicions of his honesty drove me directly 
into their road, and the chance of turning down 
the valley scarcely retarded the capture. On my 
first emerging from the hills I must have been 
taken. However, my captors were in unusual ill- 
temper. As an Arab, too poor to be worth plun- 
dering or being made prisoner, I should have met 
only a sneer or an execration, and been turned 
loose ; but ihe late disaster made the turban and 
alhaik odious, and I was treated with the wrath 
due to a fellow-conspirator of the lions. 

To my request, that I should be suffered to de- 
part in peace on my business, the most prompt 
denial was given; the story that I told to account 
for my travel in the track of the column, was 
treated with the simplest scorn ; I was pronounced 
a spy, and fairly told that my head v/as my own 
only till I gave the procurator whatever informa- 
tion it contained. 

Yet T found one friend in this evil state of my 
expedition. My barb, which I had given up for 
lost in the desert, or torn by the wild beasts, ap- 
peared on the heights overhanging our march, and 
by snuffing the wind, and bounding backwards and 
forwards through the thickets, attracted general 



40 SALATHIEL. 

attention. I claimed her, and the idea that the 
way-sore and rough-clothed prisoner could be the 
master of so noble an animal, raised scorn to its 
most peremptory pitch. In turn I demanded per- 
mission to prove my right ; and called the barb. 
The creature heard the voice with the most obvious 
delight, bounded towards me, rubbed her head to 
my feet, and by every movement of dumb joy 
showed that she had found her master. 

But my requests for dismissal were idle ; I 
talked to the winds ; the rear squadrons of the 
column were in sight ; there was no time to be 
lost. I was suffered to mount the barb, but her 
bridle was thrown across the neck of one of the 
trooper's horses, and I was marched along to death, 
or a tedious captivity. 

My blood boiled, when I thought of what was 
to be done before the dawn. ** What would be 
expected from me by my people, and how lame, 
and impotent must my excuse fall on the public 
ear; how miserable a proof had I given of the 
vigilance and vigour that were to claim the com- 
mand of armies !" I gnashed my teeth, and writh- 
ed in every nerve. My agitation at length caught 
the eye of a corpulent old captain, whose good- 
humoured visage was coloured by the deepest in- 
fusion of the grape. His strong Thracian charger 



SALATHIEL. 41 

was a moveable magazine of the choicest Falernian ; 
out of every crevice of his packsaddle and accou- 
trements peeped the head of a flask ; and to judge 
by his frequent recourse to his stores, no man was 
less inclined to carry his baggage for nothing. Po- 
pularity too attended upon the captain, and a group 
of young patricians attached to the Procurator's 
court were content to abate of their rank, and ride 
along with the old soldier, in consideration of his 
better knowledge of the grand military science of 
providing for the road. 

In the midst of some camp story, which the 
majority received with peals of applause, the cap- 
tain glanced upon me ; and, asking, " whether I 
was not ill," held out his flask. I took it, and 
never did I taste draught so delicious. Thirst and 
hunger are the true secrets of luxury. I absolutely 
felt new life rushing into me with the wine. 
• " There," said the old man, *' see how the 
fellow's eye sparkles. Falernian is the doctor, 
after all. I have had no other these forty years. 
For hard knocks, hard watches, and hard weather, 
there is nothing like the true juice of the vine. 
Try it again, Arab." I declined the offer in civil 
terms. 

" There," said he, " it has made the man elo- 
quent. By Hercules, it would put a tongue into 



42 SALATHIEL. 

the dumb animals. I warrant it would make that 
mare speak. And now that I look at her, she is 
as prettily made a creature as I have seen in 
Syria ; her nose would fit in a drinking-cup. 
What is her price, at a word?" 

I answered him, that "she was not to be sold." 

" Well, well, say no more about it," replied the 
jovial old man. ** I know you Arabs make as 
much of a mare as of a child, and I never meddle 
in family affairs." 

A haughty-looking tribune, covered with em- 
broidery, and the other coxcombry of the court 
soldier, spurred his foaming charger between us, 
and uttered with a sneer, — " What, captain, by 
Venus and all the Graces, giving this beggar a 
lecture in philosophy, or a lesson in politeness ? If 
you will not have the mare, I will. Dismount, 
slave !" 

The officers gathered to the front, to see the 
progress of the affair. I sat silent. 

''Slave! do you hear? Dismount! You will 
lose nothing, for you will steal another in the first 
field you come to." 

" I know but one race of robbers in Judea," 
replied I. 

The old captain reined up beside me, and said, 
in a whisper — '' Friend, let him have the mare. 



SALATHIEL. 43 

He is rich, and will pay you handsomely; and 
powerful besides, for he is the nephew of the 
procurator. It will not be wise in you to put him 
in a passion." 

" That fellow shall never have her, though he 
were to coin these sands into gold," replied I. 

" Do you mean to call us robbers?" said the 
tribune, with a lowering eye. 

'* Do you mean to stop me on the highway, and 
take my property from me, and expect that I shall 
call you anything else ?" was the answer. 

** Sententious rogues, those Arabs ! Every soul 
of them has a point or a proverb on his tongue ;" 
murmured the captain to the group of young men, 
who were evidently amused by .seeing their unpo- 
pular companion entangled with me. 

" Slave!" said the tribune fiercely, '* w^e must 
have no more of this. You have been found 
lurking about the camp. Will you be hanged for 
a spy ?" 

*' A spy !" said I, and the insult probably 
coloured my cheek. " No ; a spy has no business 
among the Romans." 

" So," observed the captain, " the Arab seems 
to think that our proceedings are in general pretty 
palpable. Slay, strip, and burn." He turned to 
the patrician tribune. — ** The fellow is not worth 



44 SALATHIEL. 

our trouble. Shall I let him go about his busi- 
ness?" 

'* Sir," said the tribune, angrily, " it is your 
business to command your troop, and be silent." 
The old man bit his lip, and fell back to the line 
of his men. My taunter reined up beside me 
again. " Do you know, robber, that I can order 
you to be speared on the spot for your lies ?" 

" No ; for I have told you nothing but the 
truth of both of us. Such an order too would 
only prove that men will often bid others do, what 
they dare not touch with a finger of their own." 

The officers, offended at the treatment of their 
old favourite, burst into a laugh. The coxcomb 
grew doubly indignant. 

*' Strip the hound," exclaimed he to the sol- 
diers: " it is money that makes him insolent." 

*' Nature has done it at least for one of us, 
without the expense of a mite;" replied I, calmly. 

" Off with his turban! Those fellows carry 
coin in every fold of it." 

The officers looked at each other in surprise; 
the captain hardly suppressed a contemptuous ex- 
ecration between his lips. The very troopers he- 
sitated. 

'* Soldiers !" said I, in the same unaltered tone, 
" I have no gold in my turban. An Arab is sel- 



SALATHIEL. 45 

dom one of those — the outside of whose head is 
better worth than the in." 

The perfumed and curled locks of the tribune, 
surmounted by a helmet, sculptured and plumed 
in the most extravagant style, caught every eye; 
and the shaft, slight as it was, went home. 

" I'll pluck the robber off his horse by the 
beard ;" exclaimed the tribune., spurring his horse 
upon me, and advancing his hand. 

I threw open my robe, grasped my dagger, and 
sternly pronounced — ** There is an oath in our 
line, that the man who touches the beard of an 
Arab, dies." He was not prepared for the action ; 
hesitated, and finally wheeled from me. The old 
captain burst out into an involuntary huzza ! 

** Take the beggar to the camp ;" said the tri- 
bune, as he rode away. *' I hate all scoundrels ;" 
and he glanced round the spectators. 

'• Then," exclaimed I, after him, as a parting 
blow, ** you have at least one virtue, for you can 
never be charged with self-love." 

This woman-war made me popular on the spot. 
The tribune had no sooner turned his horse's head, 
than the officers clustered together in laughter. 
Even the iron visages of the troopers relaxed into 
grim smiles. The old jocular captain was the only 
one still grave. 



46 SALATHIEL. 

" There rides not this day under the canopy of 
Heaven," murmured he, " a greater puppy than 
Caius Sempronius Catulus, tribune of the thir- 
teenth legion, by his mother's morals, and the 
Emperor's taste. Why did not the coxcomb stay 
at home, and show off his trappings among the 
supper-eaters of the Palatine 1 He might have pow- 
dered his ringlets with gold-dust, washed his lily 
hands in rose-water, and perfumed his Indian 
handkerchief with myrrh, as well there as here ; 
for he does nothing else. Except," and he 
clenched the heavy hilt of his falchion, *' insult 
men, who have seen more battles than he has seen 
years ; who know better service than figuring in 
ball-rooms, or bowing in courts ; and the least 
drop of whose blood is worth all that will ever run 
in his effeminate veins. But I have not done with 
him yet. As for you, friend," said he, '* I am 
sorry to stop you on your way. But as this affair 
will be magnified by that fool's tongue, you must 
be brought to the procurator. However, the 
camp is only a few miles off; you will be asked a 
few questions, and then left to follow your will." 
He little dreamed how I recoiled from that inter- 
view. 

To shorten the time of my delay, the good- 
natured old man ordered the squadron to mend 



SALATHIEL. 47 

their pace ; and in half an hour we saw the noon- 
encampment of my sworn enemy, lifting its white 
tops and scarlet flags among the umbrage of a 
forest, deep in the valley at our feet. 



48 SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER IV. 

The squadron drew up at the entrance of the 
procurator's tent ; and, with a crowd of alarmed 
peasants captured in the course of the day, I was 
delivered over to be questioned by this man of 
terror. The few minutes which passed before I 
was called to take my turn, were singularly pain- 
ful. This was not fear ; for the instant sentence 
of the axe would have been almost a relief from 
the hopeless and fretful thwartings sown so thickly 
ih my path. But to have embarked in a noble 
enterprise, and to perish, without use; to have 
arrived almost within sight of the point of my 
desires, and then, without striking a blow, to be 
given up to shame, stung me like a serpent. 

My heart sprang to my Jips, when I heard 



SALATHIEL. 49 

myself called to the presence of Florus. He was 
lying" upon a couch, with his never-failing cup 
before him, and turning over some papers, with a 
shaking hand. Care or conscience had made 
ravages in him, since I saw him last. He was 
still the same figure of excess ; but his cheek was 
hollow : the few locks on his head had grown a 
more snowy white ; and the little, pampered hand 
was thin and yellow as the claw of the vulture that 
he so much resembled in his soul. 

With his head scarcely lifted from the table, 
and with eyes that seemed more shut than open, 
he asked, " whence I had come, and whither I 
was going?" My voice, notwithstanding the 
attempt to disguise it, struck his acute ear. His 
native keenness was awake at once. He darted a 
fiery glance at me, and, striking his hand on the 
table, exclaimed — " By Hercules, it is the Jew !'' 
My altered costume again perplexed him. " Yet," 
said he in soliloquy, " that fellow went to Nero, 
and must have been executed. Ho ! send in the 
tribune who took him." Catulus entered ; and his 
account of me was, luckily, contemptuous in the 
extreme. I was " a notorious robber, who had 
stolen a handsome horse, perfectly worthy of the 
stud of the procurator." I panted with the hope 
of escape, and was gradually moving to the door. 
VOL. II. c 



50 SALATHIEL. 

*' Stand, slave!" cried Florus : *' I have my 
doubts of you still ; and as the public safety admits 
of no mistake, I have no alternative. Tribune ! 
order in the lictors. He must be scourged to 
confession." The lictors were summoned ; and I 
was to be torn by Roman torturers. 

A tumult arose outside, and a man rushed in 
with the lictors, exclaiming, " Justice, most mighty 
Florus ! By the majesty of Rome, and the mag- 
nanimity of the most illustrious of governors, I 
call for justice against my plunderer, my undoer, 
the robber of the son of £1 Hakim of his most 
precious treasure." 

Florus recognised the clamourer as an old 
acquaintance, and desired him to state his com- 
plaint, and with as much brevity as possible. 

" Last night," said the man, " I was the happy 
possessor of a mare, fleet as the ostrich, and 
shapely as the face of beauty. I had intended her 
as a present for the most illustrious of procurators, 
the great Florus, whom the gods long preserve ! 
In the hour of my rest, the spoiler came, noiseless 
as the fall of the turtle's feather, but cruel as the 
viper's tooth. When I arose, the mare was gone. 
I was in distraction. I tore my beard ; I beat 
my head upon the ground ; I cursed the robber 
wherever he went, to the sun-rising or the sun- 



SALATHIEL. 51 

setting, to the mountains or the valleys. But 
fortune sits on the banner of my lord the procura- 
tor ; and I came for hope to his conquering feet. 
In passing through the camp, what did I see but 
my treasure — the delight of my eyes, the drier up 
of my tears! I have come to claim justice, and 
the restoration of my mare, that I may have the 
happiness to present her to the most renowned of 
mankind." 

I had been occupied with the thought, whether 
I should burst through the lictors, or rush on the 
procurator. But the length and loudness of this 
outcry engrossed every one. The orator was my 
friend, the beggar. He pointed fiercely to me. 
If looks could kill, he would not have survived the 
look that I gave the traitor in return. 

'* There," said Florus, " is your plunderer. 
Sabat, have you ever seen him before ?" 

The beggar strode insolently towards me. '' Seen 
him before! aye, a hundred times. What! Ben 
Ammon, the most notorious thief from the Nile 
to the Jordan. My lord, every child knows him. 
Hah, by the gods of my fathers, by my mother's 
bosom, by shaft and by shield, he has stolen more 
horses within the last twenty years, than would 
remount all the cavalry from Beersheba to Da- 



52 SALATHIEL. 

mascus ! It was but last night that I was lead- 
ing my mare, the gem of my eyes, my pearl — ^' 

I now began to perceive the value of my elo- 
quent friend's interposition. 

*' An Arab horse-thief? — that alters the case," 
said the procurator. " Ho ! did you not say that 
the mare was intended for me? Lictor, go and 
bring this wonder to the door." 

The voluble son of El Hakim followed the 
lictor.; and returned, crying out more furiously 
than before against me. His " pearl, the delight 
of his eyes, was spoiled — was utter unmanage- 
able. I had put some of my villainous enchant^ 
ments upon her ; for which I was notorious." 

The procurator's curiosity was excited : he rose, 
and went to take a view of the enchanted animal. 
I followed ; and certainly nothing could be more 
singular than the restiveness which the son of El 
Hakim contrived to make her exhibit. She 
plunged — she bounded ; bit, reared, and flung out 
in all directions. Every attempt to lead or mount 
her was foiled in the most complete yet most 
ludicrous manner. The young cavalry officers 
came from all sides, and could not be restrained 
from boisterous laughter, even by the presence of 
the procurator. Florus himself, at last, became 



SALATHIEL. ^ 

among the loudest. Even I, accustomed as I was 
to daring horsemanship, was surprised at the ec- 
centric agility of this unlucky rider. He was 
alternately on the animal's back and under her 
feet ; he sprang upon her from behind ; he sprang 
over her head ; he stood upon the saddle ; but all 
in vain : he had scarcely touched her, when she 
threw him up in the air again, amid the perpetual 
roar of the soldiery. 

At length, with a look of dire disappointment, 
he gave up the task ; and, scarcely able to drag 
his limbs along, prostrated himself before Florus, 
praying that he would order the Arab thief to 
unsay the spells that had turned " the gentlest 
mare in the world into a wild beast." The consent 
was given with a haughty nod ; and I advanced to 
play my part in a performance, of whose objects I 
had not a conception. The orator delivered the 
barb to me with a look so expressive of cunning, 
sport, and triumph, that, perplexed as 1 was, I 
could not avoid a smile. My experiment was 
rapidly made. The mare knew me, and was 
tractable at once. This only confirmed the charge 
of my necromancy. But tlie son of El Hakim 
professed himself altogether dissatisfied with so 
expeditious a process, and demanded that I should 
go through the regular steps of the art. In the 



54 SALATHIEL. 

midst of the fiercest reprobation of my unhallowed 
dealings, a whisper from him put me in possession 
of his mind. 

I now went through the process used by the 
travelling jugglers ; and if the deepest attention 
of an audience could reward my talents, mine re- 
ceived unexampled reward. My gazings on the 
sky, whisperings in the barb's ear, grotesque figures 
traced on the sand, wild gestures and mysterious 
jargon, thoroughly absorbed the intellects of the 
honest legionaries. If I had been content with 
fame, I might have spread my reputation through 
the Roman camps, as a conjuror of the first mag* 
nitude. 

I was, however, beginning to be weary of my 
exhibition, and longed for the signal ; when Sabat 
approached, and loudly testifying that I had clearly 
performed my task, threw the bridle over the 
animal's head, and whispered, '* Now !" 

My heart panted ; my hand was on the mane : 
I glanced round to see that all was safe before I 
gave the spring— when Florus screamed out, " The 
Jew ! by Tartarus, it is the Jew himself. Drag 
down the circumcised dog." With cavalry on 
every side of me, forcible escape was out of the 
question. 

** Undone, undone!" were the words of my wild 



SALATHIEL. 5^ 

friend as he passed me. And when I saw him 
once more in the most earnest conversation with 
Florus, I concluded that the discovery was com- 
plete. 'I was in utter despair. I stood sullenly 
waiting for the worst, and gave an internal curse 
to the more than malevolence of fortune. 

The conversation continued so long, that the 
impatience of those round me began to break out. 

'' On what possible subject can the procurator 
suffer that mad fellow to have so long an au- 
dience?" said a young patrician. 

*' On every possible subject, I should conceive, 
from the length of the discussion," was the reply. 

" Florus knows his man," said a third; '* that 
mad fellow is a regular spy, and receives more of 
the Emperor's coin in a month, than we do in a 
year." 

The tribune now broke into the circle, and, with 
a look of supreme scorn, affectedly exclaimed, 
*' Come, knight of the desert, sovereign of the 
sands, let us have a specimen of your calling. 
Stand back, officers ; this egg of Ishmael is to quit 
plunder so soon, that he would probably like to 
die as he lived — in the exercise of his trade. Here, 
slave, show us the most approved method of get- 
ting possession of another man's horse." 

I stood in indignant silence. The tribune threat- 



66 SALATHIEL. 

ened. A thought struck me : I bowed to the com- 
mand, let the barb loose, and proceeded according 
to my theory of horse-stealing. 

I approached noiselessly, gesticulated, made 
mystic movements, and gibbered witchcraft as be- 
fore. The animal, with natural docility, suffered 
my experiments. I continued urging her towards 
the thinner side of the circle. *' Now, noble Ro- 
mans," said I, *' look carefully to the next spell, 
for it is the triumph of the art." 

Curiosity was in every countenance. I made a 
genuflexion to the four points of the compass, de- 
voted a gesture of peculiar solemnity to the pro- 
curator's tent, and while all eyes were drawn in 
that direction, sprang on the barb's back, and was 
gone like an arrow. 

I heard a clamour of surprise, mingled with 
outrageous laughter, and, looking round, saw the 
whole crowd of the loose riders of the encampment 
in full pursuit up the hill. Florus was at his tent 
door, pointing towards me with furious gestures. 
The trumpets were calling, the cavalry mounting : 
I had roused the whole activity of the little army. 

The slope of the valley was long and steep ; and 
the heavy horsemanship of the legionaries, who 
were perhaps not very anxious for my capture, 
soon threw them out. A little knot of the more 



SALATHIEL. 57 

zealous alone kept up a pursuit, from which I had 
no fears. An abrupt rock in the middle of the 
ascent at length hid them from me. To gain a 
last view of the camp, I doubled round the rock, 
and saw, a few yards below me, the tribune, with 
his horse completely blown. I owed him a debt, 
partly on my own account, and partly on that of the 
old captain, which I had determined to discharge at 
the earliest possible time. I darted upon him. 
He was all astonishment : a single buffet from my 
naked hand knocked the helpless taunter off his 
charger. " Tribune," cried I, as he lay upon the 
ground, " you have had one specimen of my art 
to-day, now you shall have another. Learn in fu- 
ture to respect an Arab." T caught his horse's 
bridle, gave the animal a lash, and v/e bounded 
away together. The scene was visible to the whole 
camp ; the troopers, who had reined up on the 
declivity, gave a roar of merriment, and I heard 
the old corpulent captain's laugh above it all. 



58 SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER V. 

1 HAD escaped ; but the delay was ruinous. 
The sun sank when I reached the brow of the moun- 
tain, and Masada lay many a weary mile for- 
ward. I cast off the tribune's horse, thus giving 
his insolent master evidence that I did not under- 
stand the main point of my trade, and stood pon- 
dering to what point of the mighty ridge that rose 
blue along the horizon, 1 should turn ; when, in 
the plunge of the horse, as he felt himself at liberty, 
his saddle came to the ground. The possibility of 
its containing reports of the state of the enemy led 
me to examine its pockets ; they were stuffed with 
letters worthy of the highest circles of Italian high 
life ; the ill-spelled registers of vapidity at a loss 
how to lose its time ; of libertinism sick of induU 



SALATHIEL. 59 

gence ; and of pecuniary embarrassment driven to 
the most hopeless and whimsical resources. 

A glance at a few of these epistles was enough, 
and I scattered into the air the reputations of half 
the high-born maids and matrons of Rome. But, 
as I was turning away with an instinctive exclama- 
tion of scorn at this compendium of patrician life, 
my eye was caught by a letter addressed to the 
governor of Masada. In opening it, I committed 
no violation of diplomacy ; for it held no secret, 
other than an angry remission of his allegiance by 
some wearied fair one, who announced her intended 
marriage with the tribune. 

My revenge was thus to go further than my in- 
tent ; for I deprived him of the personal triumph 
of delivering this calamitous despatch to his rival. 
Yet, on second thoughts, conceiving that some 
cipher might lurk under its absurdity, I secured 
the paper, and giving the rein, left the whole 
secret correspondence of debt, libel, and love, to 
the delight of mankind. 

I flew along ; my indefatigable barb, as if she 
felt her master's anxieties, put forth double speed. 
But I had yet a fearful length to traverse. The 
night fell thick and rude ; but I had no time to 
think of rest or shelter. I pushed on. The wind 
rose, and wrapt me in whirls of sand. I heard the 



60 SALATHIEL. 

roar of waters. The ground became fractured, 
and full of the loose fragments that fall from rocky 
hills. I discovered only that I was at the foot of 
the ridge, and had lost my way. In this embar- 
rassment I trusted to the sagacity of my steed. 
But thirst led her directly to the bed of one of the 
mountain torrents, and the phosphoric gleam of the 
waters alone saved us both from a plunge over 
a precipice deep enough to extinguish every ap- 
petite and ambition in the round of this bustling 
world. 

To find a passage or an escape, I alighted. The 
torrent bellowed before me. A wall of rock rose 
on the opposite side. After long climbings and 
descents, I found that I had descended too deep 
to return. Oh, how I longed for trace of man, for 
the feeblest light that ever twinkled from cottage 
window ! I felt the plague of helplessness. To at- 
tempt the waters was impossible. To linger where 
I stood till dawn, was misery. 

" What would be going on in the mean while ? 
Perhaps, at the very time while I was standing in 
wretched doubt, imprisoned among those pestilent 
cliffs, shivering with the spray and the storm, and 
yet more chilled with bitter incertitude, the deed 
was doing ! Constantius was with ineffectual gal- 
lantry assaulting the fortress ; my brave kinsmen 



SALATHIEL. 61 

"Were pouring out their lives under the Roman 
spears ; and I was not there 1 " 

A fitful sound came mingling with the roar of the 
cataract ; it swelled, and vanished away, like the 
rushings of the gale. A trumpet rang, but so 
feebly, that nothing but the keenness of an ear 
straining to catch the slightest sound, could have 
distinguished it. I heard remote shouts ; they 
deepened ; the echo of trumpets followed. ** The 
assault has begun ! The work of glory and of 
death was doing. Every instant cost a life. The 
hail-stones that bruised me were not thicker than 
the arrows that were then smiting down my 
people. Yet there was I, held like a wolf in the 
pitfall !" 

Even where the combat was being fought, 
bafiled my conception. It might be in the clouds, 
or uiider ground, on the opposite side of the black 
ridge before me, or many a league beyond the 
reach of my exhausted limbs, and drooping steed ; 
all was darkness to the eye and the mind. 

A light flashed down a ravine, leading into the 
heart of the mountains : another and another rose. 
Masada stood upon the mountain's brow ! 

T plunged into the torrent — was beaten down 
by the billows — was swept along through narrow 
necks of rock, and, half suffocated, was hurled up 



6i SALATHIEL. 

again, to find myself on the opposite shore. Wet 
and weary, I less climbed than tore my way up- 
wards. But the torrent had borne me far below 
the ravine. Before me was a gigantic rampart of 
rock. But the time was flying. I sprang with 
fierce agility from fissure to fissure. I dragged 
myself up the face of the precipice by the tufted 
weeds and chance brushwood. I swung from 
point to point by the few projecting branches, that 
yet broke away almost in my grasp ; until, with 
my hands excoriated, my limbs stiff" and bleeding, 
and my head reeling, I reached the pinnacle. 

Was I under the dominion of a spell ? was the 
power of some fiend raised to mock me ? All was 
darkness as far as the eye could pierce : the hea- 
viest veil of midnight hung upon the earth. There 
was utter silence. Not the slightest breath 
touched upon the ear. 

For a while the thought of some strange illu- 
sion was paramount ; then came the frightful idea 
that the illusion was in myself; that in the effort 
to gain the ascent, I had strained eye and ear, 
until I €Ould neither hear nor see ; that I was still 
within sight and sound of battle, but insensible to 
the impressions of the external world for ever. 
Immortality under this exclusion ! A deathless- 
ness of the deaf and blind ! The thought struck me 



SALATHIRL. 63 

with a force inconceivable by all minds but one 
sentenced like mine ! 

I cried aloud. A flood of joy rushed into my 
heart when I heard my voice answered ; though it 
was but by the neigh of my barb below, which 
probably felt itself as ill-placed as its master. I 
now used my ear as the guide, and cautiously 
descending the further side of the ridge, was soon 
on comparatively level ground, the remnant of a 
forest. My foot struck against a human body ; I 
spoke ; the answer was a groan, and an entreaty 
that I should bear a small packet, which was put 
into my hands with a feeble pressure, to ** the 
prince of Naphtali !" In alarm and astonishment, 
I raised the sufferer from the thorns in which he 
could scarcely breathe ; gave him some water from 
my flask, and after many an eff'ort, in which I 
thought that life would depart every moment, he 
told me that " he was the unfortunate leader of 
the assault of Masada." Constantius lay in my 
arms! 

** Where I am," said he, " how I came here, 
or any thing, but that we are undone, I cannot 
conceive. My last recollection was that of fixing 
a ladder to the inner rampart. We had made our 
way good so far without much loss. The garrison 
was weakened by detachments sent out to plunder 



64 , SALATHIEL. 

for the arrival of the procurator. I attacked at 
midnight. To surprise a Roman fortress was, I 
well knew, next to impossible ; and no man ever 
found a Roman garrison without bravery. But 
our bold fellows did wonders. Every thing was 
driven from the first rampart; we made more 
prisoners than we knew what to do with ; and in 
the midst of all kinds of resistance, we laid the 
ladders to the second wall. But the garrison were 
still too strong for us. Our easy conquest of the 
first line might have been a snare, for the battle- 
ments before us exhibited an overwhelming force. 
We fought on ; but the ladders were broken with 
showers of stones from the engines. The business 
looked desperate ; but I had made up my mind 
not to go back after having once got in ; and, rally- 
ing the men, carried a ladder through a storm of 
lances and arrows to the foot of the main tower. 
1 was bravely followed, and we were within grasp 
of the battlement, when I saw a cohort rush out 
from a sally-port below. This was fatal ; the foot 
of the rampart was cleared at once ; the ladders 
were flung down ; and, I suppose, it is owing to 
the ill-judged fidelity of some of my followers, that 
I am unfortunate enough to find myself here and 
alive." 

During the endless hours of this miserable night, 



SALATHIEL. B5 

I laboured, with scarcely a hope, to keep life in 
my heroic son. My coming had saved him. The 
exposure and his wounds must have destroyed him 
before morning. We consulted sadly on our next 
course. I suggested the possibility of gaining the 
fortress by a renewal of the attack, while the 
garrison were unprepared, or perhaps indulging 
themselves in carousal or sleep after their success. 
The necessity of some attempt was strongly in my 
mind, and I expressed my determination to run 
the hazard, if I could find where the remnant of 
our troops had taken refuge. But this was the 
first difficulty. Signals of any kind must rouse 
the vigilance of the Romans. The fortress was 
above our heads ; and to collect the men during 
the night was impossible. 

While I watched the restless tossings of Con- 
stantius, a light stole along the ground at a dis- 
tance. My first idea was, that a Roman patrol 
was coming, to extinguish our last remains of hope. 
But the light was soon perceived to be in the hand 
of some one cautious of discovery. To keep its 
bearer at a distance, I followed the track, and 
grasped him. 

*' I surrender," said the captive, perfectly at his 
ease ; " long life to the Emperor !" He lifted 
the lamp to my face, and burst into laughter. 



66 SALATHIEL. 

" May I have a Roman falchion through me," 
said he, " but I think we were born under the 
same planet. By all the food that has entered 
my lips this day, I took your Highness for a thief ; 
and pardon the word, for a Roman one. I have 
been running after you the whole day and night." 
He continued to talk and writhe with a kind of 
mad merriment. I could not obtain an answer to 
my questions, of what led him there— how he could 
guide us out of the forest — or what news he brought 
from the procurator. He less walked than danced 
before me through the thickets, as our scene with 
Florus recurred to his fantastic mind. 

" Never was trick so capital as your escape," 
exclaimed he ; ** I would have given an eye, or 
an arm, things rather an impediment to a beggar, 
I allow ; but it would have been worth a kingdom 
to see, as I saw, the faces of the whole camp, 
procurator, officers, troopers, and all, down to the 
horse-boys, on your slipping through their fingers 
in such first-rate style. I have done clever things 
in my time. But never, no never, shall I equal 
that way of making five thousand men at once look 
like five thousand fools. I own I thought that you 
would do something brilliant ; and it was for that 
purpose that I tried to draw off" the eye of that 
scoundrel Florus, for, sot as he is, there are not 



SALATHIEL. 67 

ten in Palestine keener in all points where roguery- 
is concerned. I caught hold of his robe, told him 
a ready lie of the largest size about a discovery of 
money in Jerusalem ; and while he was nibbling 
at the bait, I heard the uproar. You were off ; 
I could not help laughing in his illustrious face. 
He kicked me from him, and foaming with rage, 
ordered every man and horse out after your High- 
ness. But I saw at a glance, that you had the 
game in your own hands. You skimmed away 
like a bird ; an eagle could not have got up that 
long hill in finer condition. Away you went, 
bounding from steep to steep like a stone from a 
sling ; you cut the air like a shaft. I have seen 
many a mare in my time ; but as for the equal of 
yours, — why, a pair of wings would be of no use 
to her. She is a paragon, a bird of paradise, an 
ostrich on four legs, a " 

I checked his volubility, and led him to the 
rough bed-side of Constantius. I could not have 
found a better auxiliary. He knew every appli- 
cation used by the medicine of the time ; and, to 
give him credit on his own showing, all diseases 
found in him an enemy worth all the doctors of 
Asia. 

** He had travelled for his knowledge ; he had 
fought with death from the Nile to the Ganges, 



68 SALATHIEL. 

and could swear that the sharks and crocodiles 
owed him a grudge throughout the world. He 
had cured rajahs and satraps, till he made him- 
self unpopular in every court where xnen looked 
to vacancies ; had kept rich old men out of their 
graves, until there was a general conspiracy of 
heirs to drive him out of the country ; and had 
poured life into so many dying husbands, that the 
women made a universal combination against his 
own." 

This flow of panegyric, however, did not im- 
pede his present services. He applied his herbs 
and bandages with professional dexterity, and 
kindling a fire, prepared some food which went 
further to cheer the patient than even his medi- 
cine. He still talked away, like one to whom 
Vv'ords were a necessary escape for his surcharge 
of animal spirits. ** He knew every thing in 
physic. He had studied in Egypt, and could 
compound the true essential extract of mummy 
with any man that wore a beard, from the Cata- 
racts to the bottom of the Delta. He once walked 
to the mountains of the moon, to learn the secret 
of powdered chrysolite. On the Himmaleh he 
picked up his know ledge of the bezoar ; and a 
year's march through sands and snows rewarded 
him at once with a bag of the ginseng, most mar- 



SALATHIEL. W 

vellous of roots, and the sight of the wall of 
China, most endless of walls." 

How he stooped to veil this accumulation of 
knowledge in rags, he did not condescend to ex- 
plain. But his skill, so far, was certainly admi- 
rable, and my brave Constantius recovered with a 
suddenness that surprised me. With his strength, 
his hopes returned. 

** Oh," exclaimed he, awaking from a refreshing 
sleep, " that I were once again at the foot of the 
rampart, with the ladder in my hand !" 

" By my father's beard," replied the leech, 
*' you are much better where you are: for, ob- 
serve, though I can go further than any doctor 
between the four rivers, yet I never professed to 
cure the dead. Take Masada by scale! Ha, ha! 
take the clouds by scale ! You would have found 
three walls within the one to which they decoyed 
you. Herod was the prince of builders, and 
could have built out everything, but the champion 
that carries no arms but a scythe, and cares as 
little for King Herod, as for Sabat the beggar." 

"Then you know Masada?" interrupted I 
eagerly. 

*' Know it, yes ; every loophole, window, door, 
aye — and stocks, from one end of it to the other." 

But my escape from the camp was so congenial 



70 SALATHIEL. 

to his ideas of pleasantry, that it mingled with all 
his topics. War and politics went for nothing, 
compared with the adroitness of eluding Roman 
activity. "By Jove!" said he, "when I played 
my tricks with that pearl of pearls, that supreme 
of horseflesh, your barb, I was clumsy ; I played 
the clown, you beat me hollow ; it was matchless ; 
it was my purse in prospect of your generosity to 
its emptiness this night ;" he made a profound 
obeisance, — "to see those panting fellows climbing 
up the hill after you, nearly killed me." 
" But the fortress." 

" Why, as to the fortress, the notion of attacking 
it was madness. I had my doubts of your inten- 
tion ; and broke loose from the camp to give you 
the benefit of my advice. — But the tribune ! Ha, 
ha! never was coxcomb so rightly served. You 
won the heart of the whole legion by the single 
blow that saved him the trouble of sitting his 
horse. The troopers could not keep their saddles 
for laughing ; and as for the old fat captain, I was 
only afraid that he would roar himself out of the 
world. I confess, I owed my escape partly to 
him, and his last words were, * Rascal, if you 
ever fall in with the Arab, whom I suspect to be 
as pleasant a rogue as yourself, tell him that 1 
wish I had a dozen such in my squadron.' " 



SALATHIEL. 71 

*' But is there any possibility of knowing the 
present state of the garrison I " 

•' Aye, there is the misfortune. Yesterday 
I could have got in, and got out again, like a wild 
cat. But after this night's visit, it is not too much 
to suppose, that they may be a little more select in 
their hospitality. The governor had a slight cor- 
respondence of his own to carry on ; a trifle in the 
way of trade ; I had the honour to be smuggler 
extraordinary to his Mightiness ; and, as in state 
secrets every thing ought to be kept from the 
vulgar, my path in and out was by a portcullis, far 
enough from gates and sentinels ; through which 
portcullis I should have shown you the way, if 
the attack had waited for me a few hours longer. 
That chance is of course cut off now. But see, 
yonder comes the morning." 

" Then we must move, or have the garrison on 
us." 

" I forbid that manoeuvre," interrupted the fel- 
low with easy audacity. 

Constantius and I, in equal surprise, bade him 
be silent. Yet the quietness with which he took 
the rebuke propitiated me, and I asked his reason. 

" Nothing more than, that, if you stir, you are 
ruined. The hare is safest near the kennel. The 
outlaw sleeps sounder in the magistrate's house. 



75 SALATHIEL. 

than he ever slept in his den. I once escaped 
hanging, by coolly walking into a jail. There 
stands Masada !" and he pointed to what looked 
to me a heap of black clouds gathered on the 
mountain's brow above. 

" Not a soul that you have left alive there, will 
dream of your being within a stone's throw. The 
copse is thick enough to hide a man from every 
thing, but a creditor, an evil conscience, or a 
wife ; stir out of it, and they are on your heels. 
And I dislike them so heartily, that I hope never 
to have the honour of their attendance. But you 
are not mad enough to think of trying them 
again V 

" Mad, fellow !" I exclaimed ; " you forget in 
whose presence you are." He continued making 
some new arrangement of the bandages on his 
patient's wounds ; and, without taking the slightest 
notice of my displeasure, cheered his work with a 
song. 

" Mad or wise," said I in soliloquy, '' I shall lie 
in the ditch of that fortress, or in its citadel, 
before next sun-rise." 

*' You may lie in both," said the beggar, pur- 
suing his occupation and his song. " Mad! why 
not ; all the world are in the same way. The 
Emperor is mad enough to stay where men have 



SALATHIEL. 73 

hands and knives. His people are mad enough 
to let their throats be cut by him. Florus i^ mad 
enough to sleep another night in Palestine. You 
are mad enough to attack his garrison ; and I — am 
mad enough to go along with you." 

" You are a singular being. But will you 
hazard y6ur neck for nothing ?" 

*' Custom makes every thing easy," observed 
he, spanning his muscular neck with his hand. " I 
have been so many years within sight of the cord, 
and all such expeditious modes of paying the only 
debt I ever intend to pay, and that only because 
it is the last, that I care as little about the ven- 
ture, as any broken gambler about his last coin. 
The tables are ready, dice in hand, the stakes 
down ; and before the next sun peeps in upon our 
play, we three shall have our fortunes made, or 
shall lie without caring a straw for the spite of 
fortune. My plan is this : — I must get into the 
town ; you must gather your troop without noise, 
and be ready for my signal, a light from one of the 
towers. A false attack must be made on the 
gates, a true attack must be made by the port- 
cullis, which, if it be not stopped up, I will unlock ; 
and never trust me, if your Highness does not eat 
your next supper off the governor's plate. There's 
a plan for you. I should have been a general, 

VOL. II. D 



74 SALATHIEL. 

But merit, — aye, there's the rub, — merit is like 
the camel's lading — it stops him at the gate, while 
the empty slip in. It is putting wings upon one's 
shoulders, when the race is to be run upon the 
arround. Too much brain in a man is like too 
much bend in a bow ; the bow either breaks, or 
sends the arrow a mile beyond the mark. Genius, 
my prince, is — " 

I interrupted the general in his progress into the 
philosopher, and demanded whether the renewed 
vigilance of the fortress would not require some 
additional expedient for his entry. He struck his 
forehead; the thought came, as the flint gives 
its spark, and he produced a highly ornamented 
tablet. " This," said he, *' I ought to employ in 
your service ; for if you had not knocked down 
the tribune, I could never have picked it up. In 
making my run over the mountain, I struck upon 
his correspondence. Oh ! the curse of curiosity ! 
if I had not stopped to delight myself with the 
whole scandal of Rome, I should have been here 
in time. But I lingered, lost an hour in laughing, 
and when I set out in the dusk, lost my way for 
the first time in my life. Before setting off, how- 
ever, I wrote a letter ridiculing Florus in all 
points, burlesqueing the people about him, scoffing 
at every body in the most heroic style ; and having 



SALATHIEL. 75 

subscribed the name of the unlucky tribune, ad- 
dressed it to one of the most notorious personages 
in all Italy ; and placed it where it is sure to be 
seen, and as sure to be carried to the most noble 
of procurators. Now, could I not begin a corre- 
spondence with the governor, and act the courier 
myself? Yet, to hit upon the subject — " He paused. 

The letter that I had found, occurred to me. 
I showed it to our adroit friend. He was inecsta- 
cies. He kissed it over and over, and played 
some of those antics which had already made me 
half doubt his sanity. He flung down the tablet. 
'* Go," said he ; ** fiction is a fine thing in its way. 
But give me fact, when I want to entrap a great 
man. He is so little used to truth, that the least 
atom of it is a spell ; the fresh bait will carry the 
largest hook. Aye, this is the letter for us ; it has 
the sincerity of the sex, when they are determined 
to jilt a man ; its abuse will cover me from top to 
toe with the cloak of a true ambassador." 

" But the unpopularity of your credentials," 
said I, laughingly. 

** Let the potentate by whom they are sent, set- 
tle that affair with the potentate by whom they are 
received," replied he. 

** You will be hanged." 

'* I shall first get in." 



76 SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER VI. 

The day passed anxiously, for every sound of 
the huge fortress was heard in the thicket. The 
creaking of machines, brought up to the walls 
against future assault ; the rattling of hammers ; 
the rolling of waggons loaded with materials for 
the repair of the night's damage ; the calls of trum- 
pet and clarion, and the march of patroles, rang 
perpetually in our ears. The depth of the copse, 
and its nearness to the ramparts, justified the beg- 
gar's generalship, and the son of El Hakim proved 
himself a master of the art of castrametation. 
Nothing could exceed his alertness in threading 
the mazes of this dwarf forest, where a wolf could 
scarcely have made progress ; and where a lynx 
would have required all his eyes. 



SALATHIEL. 77 

On my asking how he contrived to find his way 
through this labyrinth, he told me, that '' tor 
making one's way in woods and elsewhere, there 
was nothing like a familiarity with smuggling, and 
the state. 

" The man," continued he, " who has driven a 
trade in every thing from pearls to pistachios with- 
out leave of the customs, cannot be much puzzled 
by thickets ; and the man who has contrived to 
climb into confidence at court, must have had a 
talent for keeping his feet in the most slippery 
spots, or he never could have mounted the back- 
stairs ! " 

He collected the troop, of whom I was rejoiced 
to believe that but few had fallen, though nearly 
one half were made prisoners ; they were eager to 
attempt the rampart again, all boldly attributing 
their failure to accident, and all thirsting alike for 
the rescue of their comrades, and for revenge. 
The letter was given to our emissary, and I 
ascended the loftiest of the mountain pinnacles, to 
examine for myself the nature of the ground. 

From my height the view was complete; the 
whole interior of the fortress lay open ; and in the 
same glance, I saw the grace and regal grandeur 
of design, which Greek taste could stamp even 
upon the strength of military architecture, and 



78 SALATHIEL. 

the utter hopelessness of any direct assault upon 
Masada, by less than an army. 

Who but he that has actually been in the same 
situation, can conceive the feelings with which I 
gazed ! Below me, was the spot in which a few 
hours must see me conqueror or nothing! On 
that battlement I might, before another morn, be 
stretched in blood ! on that tower I might be fixed 
a horrid spectacle! Nature is irresistible, and 
her workings overpowered the old belief, that a 
mysterious sentence was to give me a miserable 
perpetuity of life. The thought has always ter- 
ribly returned ; but the moment of energy has al- 
ways extinguished it ; the hurrying and swelling 
current of my heart rolled over it, as the summer 
torrent rushes over the tomb on its brink. The 
melancholy memorial was there, sure to re-appear 
with the first subsiding ; but, lost while the flood 
of feeling whirled along. 

Every group of soldiery that slept, or sang, or 
gamed, or gazed, along the ramparts under the 
bright and quiet day which followed so fearful a 
night ; every archer pacing on his tower ; every 
solitary wanderer in the streets ; every change of 
the guard ; every entering courier ; was visible to 
me, and all were objects of keen interest. At 
length, my courier came. I saw his approach 



SALATHIEL. 79 

from a pass of the mountains at the remotest point 
from our cover, his well- contrived exhaustion, the 
ostentatious dust upon his tattered habiliments, 
and the fearless impudence with which he beg-uiled 
the sulky guard at the gate, and stalked before the 
centurion by whom he was brought to the Go- 
vernor. 

With what eyes of impatience 1 now watched 
the sun ! I wished for the power of extinguish- 
ing day from the heavens. As the hour of fate 
approached, the fever of the mind grew. To 
defer the attack beyond the night, was to abandon 
it; for by morn the troops under Florus must reach 
Masada. Yet a strange sensation, a chillness of 
heart sometimes came on me, in which my hands 
were as feeble as an infant's. I felt like one be- 
fore a tribunal, awaiting the word that must decide 
his destiny. Nothing tries the soul more deeply 
than this concentration of its fortunes into a few 
moments. The man sees himself standing on the 
edge of a precipice, down which there is no second 
step. But the thought of returning errandless 
and humiliated, and this too, from my first enter- 
prise, was intense bitterness. I made my de- 
cision. From that instant I breathed freely, my 
strength returned, hope glowed in my bosom ; 
and, clinging to the granite spire of the mountain. 



80 SALATHIEL. 

1 looked down upon the haughty stronghold, like 
its evil genius descending from the clouds. 

The sun touched the western ridge. A horse- 
man came at full stretch across the plain at its 
foot, and entered the fortress. He evidently 
brought news of importance, for the troops were 
hurried under arms, flags hoisted on the ramparts, 
and the walls lined with archers. All was military 
bustle. 

My first conception was, that my emissary had 
betrayed us, and that we were about to be at- 
tacked. I plunged from the pinnacle, and was 
following the windings of the goat-track to our 
lair, when I saw the rising of a cloud of dust in the 
distance. It moved with great rapidity, and soon 
developed its contents. Intelligence of the assault 
had reached Florus. His sagacity saw what 
perils turned on the loss of the fortress ; he shook 
off his indolence, and came without delay to its 
succour. Banners, helmets, and scarlet cloaks, 
poured across the plain. A torrent of brass, burn- 
ing and flashing in the sun-beam, continued to roll 
down the defile ; and before the evening star glit- 
tered, the whole cavalry of the fifteenth legion 
was trampling over the drawbridge of Masada. 

Here was the death-blow. My enterprise was 
henceforth tenfold more hopeless; but with me 



SALATHIEL. 81 

the time for prudence was past. If the reinforce- 
ment had arrived but an hour before, I should 
probably have given up the attempt in despair. 
But my mind was fixed ; I had made an internal 
vow ; and if the whole host of Rome were crowded 
within the walls beneath, I should have hazarded 
the assault. 

I descended, found my troop collected, and, to 
my alarm and vexation, Constantius, enfeebled 
as he was, obstinately determined to assault the 
rampart again. With the noble daring of his 
enthusiastic heart he told me, that unless I suf- 
fered him to attempt the retrieval of his defeat, 
he felt it impossible to survive. 

** Shame and grief," said he, '' are as deadly 
as the sword ; and never will I return to the face 
of her whom I love, nor of the family whom I 
honour, unless I can return with the conscious- 
ness of having at least deserved to be success- 
ful." 

Against this I reasoned, but reasoned in vain. 
We finally divided our followers. I gave him the 
attack of the rampart, which was to be the place 
of his triumph or his grave ; flung myself into his 
embrace, and listened to his parting steps with a 
heart throbbing at every tread, I then moved 



82 SALATHIEL. 

round the foot of the mountain towards the secret 
passage. 

The night fell dark as we could wish. I waited 
impatiently for the signal, a light from the walls. 
Yet, no signal twinkled from wall or tower, and I 
began to distrust again ; but while I lingered, a 
shout told me that Constantius was already en- 
gaged. ** Let what will come, " exclaimed I, 
" onward !" 

We scrambled up the face of the rock, and at 
length found the entrance of the subterranean. 
It was so narrow, that even in the day-time it 
must have been nearly invisible from below. A 
low iron door a few yards within the fissure was 
the first obstacle. To beat it down might alarm 
the garrison. The passage allowed but of our 
advance one by one. I led the way, hatchet in 
hand. A few blows given with as little noise as 
possible, broke the stones round the lock. The 
door gave way, and we all crept in. In this man- 
ner we wound along for a distance, which I began 
to think endless. The passage was singularly 
toilsome. We ascended considerable heights, we 
descended steep paths, in which it was with the 
utmost difficulty that we could keep our feet ; we 
heard the rush of waters through the darkness ; 



SALATHIEL. 



83 



blasts of bitter wind swept against us ; the thick 
and heavy air that closed round us after them, 
almost impeded our breathing ; and from time to 
time the vapour of sulphur gave the fearful im- 
pression that we had lost our way, and were actu- 
ally engulfed in the bowels of a burning mine. 

The heart of my hunters was bold, and they 
still held on ; but the mere fatigue of struggling 
through this poisoned atmosphere, was fast ex- 
hausting their courage. I cheered them with 
what topics I could, but never was my imagination 
more barren. I heard, at every step I took, fewer 
feet following me. The close and pestilential air 
was beginning to act even upon myself; but the 
great stake was playing above, and onward I must 
go. I dared not speak louder than in a whisper ; 
soon no whisper responded to mine. I tottered on, 
till, overpowered by the feeling that our sacrifice 
was in vain, a sensation like that of a sickly propen- 
sity to sleep bound up my faculties ; and, whether 
I slept or fainted, I for a time lost all recollection. 

A roar, like thunder, overhead, roused me. A 
sight the most superb burst on my awaking eyes ; 
a roof of gold, arched so high, that even its splen- 
dour was partially dimmed ; walls of diamond, 
pillared with a thousand columns of every precious 
gem ; whole shafts of emerald ; pavilions of jasper 



64 SALATHIEL. 

and beryl ; couches wrought with pearl and silver ; 
a floor, as far as the glance could pierce, studded 
with amethyst and ruby ; treasures, to which the 
accumulated spoils of the Greek or the Persian 
were nothing ; the finest devices of the most ex- 
quisite art, mingled with the most colossal forms 
which wealth could wear ; opulence in its massive 
and negligent grandeur; opulence in its delicate 
and almost spiritualized beauty, were before me. 
A slender flame burning at the foot of an idol, 
lighted Up this stupendous temple. 

I was alone ; but the orifice by which I had 
entered was visible ; the light shot far down into 
it, and I soon collected the greater number of my 
troop. All were equally wrapt in wonder, and the 
superstitious feelings which the presence of the 
Roman and Syrian idolaters had partially gene- 
rated even in the Jewish mind, began to startle 
those brave men. 

'* We had, perhaps, come into forbidden ground ; 
the gods of the earth, whether gods or demons, 
were powerful ; and we stood in the violated cen- 
tre of the mountain." 

For the first time, I found the failure of my in- 
fluence. A few adhered to me, but the majority 
calmly declared that, however fearless of man, 
they dared go no further. I threw myself on the 



SALATHIEL. 85 

ground before the entrance of the cavern, and de- 
sired them to consummate their crime by trampling 
on their prince and leader. But they were deter- 
mined to retire. I taunted them, I adjured them, 
I poured out the most vehement reproaches. They 
stepped over me as I lay at the mouth of the fis- 
sure ; and at length one and all left me to cry out 
in my dazzling solitude, against the treachery of 
human faith, and the emptiness of human wishes. 

The roar again rolled above ; I heard distant 
shouts and trumpets. In the sudden and despe- 
rate consciousness that all was now to be gained 
or lost, I rushed after the fugitives, to force them 
back. I plunged into the darkness, and grasped 
the first figure that I could overtake. My hand 
fell on the iron cuirass of a Roman ! my blood ran 
chill. ** We were betrayed ; decoyed into the 
bowels of the mountain to be massacred." 

The figure started from me. I gave a blind 
blow of the axe, and heard it crush through his 
helmet. The man fell at my feet. I wildly de- 
manded, •* How he came there, and how we might 
make our way into the light ?" 

" You are undone," said he faintly. " Your spy 
was seized by the Procurator. Your attack was 
known, and the door of the subterranean left un- 



86 SALATHIEL. 

guarded, to entrap you. This passage was the 
entrance to a former mine ; and in the mine is your 
grave." The voice sank, he groaned, and was 
no more. 

His words were soon confirmed by the hurried 
return of my men. They had found the passage 
obstructed by a portcullis, dropt since their en- 
trance. Torches were seen through the fissures 
above, and the sound of arms rattled round us. 
The ambush was complete. " Now," said I, " we 
have but one thing for it ; — the sword, first for our 
enemy, last for ourselves. If we must die, let us 
not die by Roman halters." 

One and all, we rushed back into the mine. 
But we had now no leisure to look upon the beau- 
ty of those spars and crystals, which under the 
light of the altar glittered and blushed with such 
gem-like radiance. From that altar rose a fierce 
and broad pyramid of fire ; piles of fagots, con- 
tinually poured from a grating above, fed the 
blaze to intolerable fierceness. Smoke filled the 
mine. To escape was beyond hope. The single 
orifice had been already tried. Around us was 
a solid wall as old as the world. It was already 
heating with the blaze ; our feet shrank from the 
floor. The flame, shooting in a thousand spires, 



SALATHIEL. 87 

coiled and sprang against the roof, the walls, and 
the ground. To remain where we were, was to 
be a cinder. The catastrophe was inevitable ! 

In the madness of pain, I made a furious bound 
into the column of fire. All followed, for death 
was certain, and the sooner it came the better. 
With unspeakable feelings I saw, at the back of 
the mound of stone on which the fagots burned, 
an opening, hitherto concealed by the huge figure 
of the idol. We crowded into it ; here we were 
at least out of reach of the flame. But what was 
our chance, but that of a more lingering death ? 
We hurried in ; a portcullis stood across the pas- 
sage! What was to be our fate, but famine? We 
must perish in a lingering misery — of all miseries 
the most appalling ; and with the bitter aggrava- 
tion of perishing unknown, worthless, useless, stig- 
matised for slaves or dastards ! What man of 
Israel would ever hear of our deaths ? What 
chronicler of Rome would deign to vindicate our 
absence from the combat ? 

We were within hearing of that combat. The 
assault thundered more wildly than ever over our 
heads ; the alternate shout of Jew and Roman 
descended to us. But where were we ? caged, 
dungeoned, doomed ! If the earth laid her trea- 
sures at my feet that night, I would have given 



88 SALATHIEL. 

them for one hour of freedom, one saving, hallowed 
effort. Oh ! for one struggle beside my warriors, 
to redeem my name, and avenge my country ! The 
contrast subdued me utterly. I sank into a corner, 
and wept like a child. 

The roar of battle grew feeble. " Was all 
lost I Constantius slain ? for with life he would 
not yield. Was the whole hope of Judea crushed 
at a blow ?" I cried aloud to my followers to 
force the portcullis. They dragged and tore at 
the bars. But it was of a solid strength, that not 
ten times ours could master. 

In the midst of our hopeless labours, the sound 
of heavy blows above caught my ear, and frag- 
ments of rock fell in; the blows were continued. 
Was this but a new expedient to crush or suffo- 
cate us ? 

A crevice showed the light of a torch over- 
head. I grasped the axe to strike a last blow at 
the gate, and die. — 1 heard a voice pronounce my 
name ! Another blow opened the roof. A face 
bent down, and a loud laugh proclaimed my crazy 
friend. **Ha!" said he, " are you there at last? 
You have had a hard night's work of it. But, 
come up ; I have an incomparable joke to tell you 
about the tribune and the procurator. Come up, 
my prince, and see the world." 



SALATHIEL. 89 

I had no time to rebuke his jocularity. I 
climbed up the side of the passage, and found 
myself still in a dungeon. To my look of disap- 
pointment, he gave no other answer than a laugh ; 
and unscrewing a bar from the loop-hole above his 
head, " It is my custom," said he, " to make 
myself at my ease wherever I go ; and as prisons 
fall to a man's lot, like other things, I like to 
be able to leave my mansion whenever T am tired 
of it." 

'* Forward then," said T, impatiently. 

" Backward," said the beggar, with the most 
unruffled coolness. " That loop-hole is for me 
alone. I may be under the governor's care again, 
and I have showed it to you now, merely as a 
curiosity. Drink, my brave fellows," said he, 
turning to the troop below, and giving them a 
skin of wine. " Soldiers must have their com- 
forts, my gallant prince, as well as beggars. If 
that villain Procurator had not come by express, 
(for no man alive is quicker to catch an idea, 
where he is likely to lose or gain,) you should 
have been by this time sleeping in the governor's 
bed, and the governor, probably, supping with 
me. But all is fortune, good and bad, in this 
world. The Procurator, putting your escape and 
mine together, began to think that his presence 



90 SALATHIEL. 

might be useful here ; and the laziest rogue in 
Palestine came with a speed that might have 
done honour to the quickest, who stands before 
you in my person. I had gone on swimmingly 
with the governor on the strength of your love- 
letter, angry as it made him. But the first sight 
of Florus put an end to my chance of opening the 
gates for your triumphal entry. I was tied, neck 
and heels, and flung here, to be gibbeted to- 
morrow morning. But that morning has not 
come yet." 

He paced the cell uneasily. At length he 
sprang up, and looking from the loop-hole, whis- 
pered " Now !" — A low, creaking sound of ma- 
chinery followed. ** Down into the cavern," said 
he, " that accursed cohort has moved at last. 
Away, my prince, and seek your fortune." 

I exhibited some reluctance to be engulfed 
again. But his countenance assumed a sudden 
sternness. His only word was " Down !" As we 
were parting, he solemnly pronounced, — ** May 
whatever power befriends the righteous cause, 
and blasts the man of infamy and blood, send the 
lightnings before you !" A tear stood in his up- 
lifted eye. His worn countenance flushed, as he 
spoke the words. He seized a spear from a corner, 
and plunged after me into the cavern. 



SALATHIEL. 91 

The portcullis no longer obstructed us ; the 
passage opened at the foot of the rampart. My 
heart bounded ; I could have rushed upon an 
army. The same eagerness was in us all. But 
the hand of our guide was on my shoulder. 
" Your attack," said he, " can be nothing, unless 
it be a surprise. Move along unseen, if possible, 
till you come to the flank of the first tower. There 
wait for my signal !" I demanded its nature. 
But he was gone. 

The sound of the assault swelled again, though 
it was palpably receding. 1 climbed the rampart 
alone. The torches on a distant battlement showed 
me the Romans in force, and evidently making way. 
I could restrain myself no longer. My troop too 
murmured at their inaction. I gave the word — 
led them on — concealed by the shadow of the co- 
lossal wall, saw the Romans crowding on the bat- 
tlements above — fell upon the guard at the gate, 
and cast it open ! 

Constantius was the first that saw me. He sprang 
forward, with a cry of exultation. The Romans on 
the battlement felt themselves cut off, were struck 
with panic, and threw down their arms ; but we 
had more important objects, and rushed back to the 
citadel. Our work was not yet done ; we were en- 
tangled in the streets, and lost time. The garrison 



92 SALATHIEL. 

was strong, and fought like men who had no re- 
source but in the sword. We were pressed on all 
sides ; an arrow lodged in my shoulder, and I could 
wield the axe no more. In a few discharges, every 
man round me was bruised or bleeding. I saw a 
Roman column hurrying along the rampart, whose 
charge must finish the battle at once. But in the 
instant of despair, a blaze sprang up in rear of the 
enemy. Another and another followed. The go- 
vernor's palace was on fire ! The sight broke the 
Roman courage. Cries of treachery rang through 
the ranks ; they turned, flung away spear and 
shield, and I was master of the strongest fortress 
in Palestine ! 



SALATHIEL. J>3 



CHAFIER VII. 



Resistance was at an end, and we had now 
nothing to do, but to prevent the conflagration 
from snatching the prize out of our hands. The 
flames rose menacingly from the roof of the pa- 
lace ; and another hour might see the famous 
arsenal beyond tlie power of man. Leaving to 
Constantius the care of securing the prisoners, I 
entered the palace, followed by a detachment. In 
the bustle, I had missed my deliverer ; but scarcely 
could think about him, or any thing else, while 
the enemy were showering lances and shafts as 
thick as snow upon us. But now, some fears of 
his extravagance recurred to me, and T ordered 
strict search to be made for him. 

The fire had seized on but a wing of the palace, 



94 SALATHIEL. 

and was speedily extinguished. I was ascending 
the stair, when a figure bounded full against me 
from a side-door. It was the beggar. His voice, 
however, was my only means of recognition, for 
his outward man had undergone a total change. 
He wore a rich cuirass and helmet, a Greek fal- 
chion glittered in his embroidered belt, a tissued 
mantle hung over his shoulder, and a spear pon- 
derous, but inlaid and polished with the nicest art, 
was brandished in his hand. " What," said he, 
" is all over ? May all the fogs of earth and skies 
cloud me, but 1 was born under the most malig- 
nant planet that ever did mischief; I left you only 
to do some business of my own, I failed there. My 
next business was to join and help you to give a 
lesson to those Roman hounds ; or, if they were to 
give the lesson to us, take chance along with you, 
and exhibit as a soldier. T made bold to borrow 
the governor's arms, as you see ; but I am always 
unlucky." 

" If it was you who set this roof on fire, your 
torch was worth an army." 

** Aye, I never saw fire fail ; no man is ashamed 
of running away from a blaze ; and I thought that 
the Romans were tired enough, to be glad of the 
excuse. But I had a point besides to carry. 
Florus is somewhere under these ceilings. I de- 



SALATIUEL. W 

termined to burn him out, and pay home my long 
arrear, as he attempted to make his escape. But 
you have just extinguished the cleverest earthly 
contrivance for the discovery of rascal governors ; 
and I must break an oath I made long ago against 
his ever dying in his bed." 

" Florus here! then we must have him without 
delay. But, who comes ?" 

At the word I seized a slave of the palace, in 
ihe attempt to escape. He begged hard for life, 
and promised to conduct us where the I'rocurator 
was concealed. We hurried on through a succes- 
sion of winding passages ; a strong door stopped 
us: "There," said the slave. 

** By the beard of my fathers, the wolf shall not 
be long in his den," cried the son of El Hakim. 
" Procurator, your last crime is committed." 

He threw himself against the door with pro- 
digious force ; the bars burst away, and before us 
lay the terror of Judea ! 

He was to be a terror no more. A cup, the 
inseparable amethystine cup, stood on the table 
beside his couch. He lay writhing with pain. 
His countenance wore the ghastliest hue of death. 
I bade him surrender. He smiled, took the cup 
in his trembling hand, and eagerly swallowed the 
remaining drops in its bottom. 



96 SALATHIEL. 

**What? poison!" exclaimed my companion, 
" Has the villain escaped me ! Here is my planet 
again ; never was man so unlucky. But, he is not 
dead yet." 

He drew his falchion, and lifted it up with the 
look of one about to offer a solemn sacrifice. I 
seized his arm. " He is dying," said I ; " he is 
beyond earthly vengeance." The wretched crimi- 
nal before us was nearly insensible to his brief 
preservation. The poison, acting upon a frame 
already broken with public and private anxieties, 
was making quick work ; and the glazed eye, the 
fallen countenance, and the collapsed limb, showed 
that his last hour was come. 

*' And this is the thing," soliloquized the son of 
El Hakim, *' that men feared ! In this senseless 
flesh was the power to make the free tremble 
for their freedom, and the slave curse the hour 
that he was born. This mass of mortality could 
stand between me and happiness — could make me 
a beggar, a wanderer, miserable, mad ! " He 
caught up the hand that hung nerveless from the 
couch. " Accursed hand !" exclaimed he, " what 
torrents of blood have owed their flowing to thee ! 
A word written by these fingers cost a thousand 
lives. And, oh ! Heaven ! in this cruel grasp 
was the key to thy dungeon, my Mary ; that dun- 



SALATHIEL. 97 

geon of more than the body, the hideous prison- 
house that extinguished thy mind !" He let fall 
the hand, and wept bitterly. 

To my utter surprise, the Procurator started 
upon his feet, and, with the look that had so often 
made the heart quake, haughtily demanded who 
we were, and how we dared to interrupt his pri- 
vacy. I felt as if a spirit had started up before 
me from the shroud. But this extraordinary re- 
vival was merely the last effort of a fierce mind. 
He tottered, and was falling, when my companion 
darted forward, grasped him by the bosom with 
one hand, and waving the falchion above him with 
the other — '* He hears! he sees!" exclaimed he 
exultingly. " Who are we ? Who am I ? Look 
upon me, Gessius Florus, before the sight leaves 
your eyes for ever. See Sabat the Ishmaelite ! — 
the despised, the insulted, the trampled, the 
undone ! But never did you prosper from the hour 
of my ruin. I was your spy, but it was only to 
bring you into a snare ; I fed your pride, but it 
was only that it might turn the hearts of all men 
against you ; I stimulated your avarice, only that 
wealth might make your nights sleepless, and your 
days, days of fear ; I stirred your wrath into rage ; 
I set your prudence asleep ; I inflamed your am- 
bition into frenzy ! This night I led your con- 
VOL. II. E 



98 SA LATHI EL. 

querors upon you. But I had made all sure. 
The vengeance was at hand. In another week, 
Gessius Florus, if you had escaped this sword, you 
would have been seized by order of the Emperor ; 
stripped of your wealth, your honours, your ac- 
cursed power, and your wretched life. The com- 
mand for your blood is this night crossing the 
Mediterranean !" 

The dying man struggled to get free, wrenched 
himself by a violent effort from the strong grasp, 
that at once held and sustained him, and fell. — 
He was dead ! 

The son of El Hakim stood gazing on the body 
in silence ; when the glitter of a ring on the hand, 
as it lay spread on the floor, struck his eye. He 
seized it with an outcry : the man was wholly 
changed ; his frowning visage flashed with joy. I 
in vain demanded the cause. He pressed the 
signet to his lips. ''Farewell, farewell!" he ex- 
claimed. 

*' Will you not wait for your share of the spoil, 
your ample and deserved reward V 

" Farewell !" he repeated, and burst from the 
chamber. 

This memorable night made changes in more 
than the Ishmaelite. Constantius was, at last, in 
his element. I had hitherto seen him disguised 



SALATHIEL. 99 

by circumstances : the fugitive from his country, 
the lover under the embarrassments of forbidden 
passion, the ill-starred soldier. His native vigour 
of soul was under a perpetual cloud. But now 
the cloud broke away ; and victory, the conscious- 
ness of having nobly retrieved his check, and the 
still prouder consciousness of the career that this 
triumph laid open before him, brought the cha- 
racter of his mind into full light. He was now 
the lofty enthusiast that nature made him. He 
breathed generous ambition: his step was the step 
of command ; and when he rushed to my embrace 
with almost the eagerness of a boy, and a voice 
stifled with emotion, I saw in him the romance, 
the soaring spirit, and the passionate love of glory, 
that moulded the Greek hero. 

He had done his duty nobly. All were in ad- 
miration of his assault. The Romans had been 
fully prepared. He scaled the rampart, and scaled 
it almost singly in their teeth. His men followed 
gallantly. He pressed on: the second rampart 
was stormed. I found him at the foot of the third, 
checked by its impregnable mass alone, but defying 
the whole garrison to drive him back. When I 
afterwards saw the strength of those bulwarks, I 
felt that, with such a leader, at the head of troops 



100 SALATHIEf.. 

animated by his own spirit, there was nothing ex- 
travagant in the boldest hope of war. 

This was an eventful night ; and there was still 
much to be done before we slept. I threw over 
my tattered garments one of the many mantles 
that lay loose round the chamber, flung another 
on the body of the Procurator, and sallied forth to 
give the final orders of the night. The prisoners 
had been already secured, and I found the great 
hall of the palace crowded with their officers. The 
interview was whimsical : for a while I escaped 
recognition ; the gashed faces and torn raiment of 
my hunters, which bore the marks of our dreary 
march through the subterranean ; the rough heads 
and hands stained with the fight, a startling con- 
trast to the perfect equipment of the Roman under 
all circumstances, gave them the look of the wild- 
est of the robber tribes. My disguise was in the 
contrary way, yet complete. The cloak was acci- 
dentally one of the most showy in the Procurator's 
wardrobe. 1 found myself enveloped in. furs and 
tissues; and their Arab acquaintance was forgot- 
ten, in what seemed to them the legitimate mo- 
narch of the mountains. 

I was received by the circle of officers with the 
deference which, let the captor be who he may, 



SALATHIEL. 101 

marks the distinction between him and his prisoner; 
yet with the decent dignity of the brave. There 
was but one exception, which I might have guess- 
ed — the tribune. He was all humiliation, stooped 
to make some abject request about his baubles, 
and was probably on the point of apologizing for 
his ever having taken up the trade of war ; when I 
turned on my heel, and shook hands with my old 
friend the Captain. He looked in evident per- 
plexity. At last, through even the grim evidences 
of the night's work on my countenance, and the 
problem of my pompous mantle, his brightening 
eye began to recognize me; and he burst out with, 
" The Arab, by Jupiter!" But when I asked him, 
" what had become of his baggage," I touched a 
tender string ; and, with a countenance as cast 
down as if he had sustained an irreparable cala- 
mity, he told me that his whole travelling cellar 
was in the hands of my men ; and it was bis full 
belief that he was at that moment not worth a 
tlask in the wide world. 

The tribune turned away in conscious disgrace ; 
and I sent him to a dungeon, to meditate till morn 
on the awkwardness of insolence to strangers. 
With the others I sat down to such entertainment 
as a sacked fortress could supply; but which hun- 
ger, thirst, and fatigue, rendered worth all the 



102 SALATHIEL. 

banquets of the idle. The old captain cheered his 
soul, and grew rhetorical. " Wine," said he, 
flask in hand, " does wonders. It is the true 
leveller, for it leaves no troublesome inequality of 
conditions. It is the true sponge, that pays all 
debts at sight, for it makes us forget the existence 
of a creditor. It is the true friend, that sticks 
by a man to the last drop ; the faithful mistress, 
that jilts no man; and the most charming of 
wives, whose tongue no husband hears, whose com- 
pany is equally delightful at all hours, and who 
is as bewitching this day as she was this day fifty 
years ago." 

The panegyric was popular. The governor's 
cellar flowed. The Italian connoisseurship in 
vintages was displayed in the most profound style; 
and long before we parted, the great ** sponge" 
which wipes away debt, had wiped away every re- 
collection of defeat. The idea of their being 
prisoners never clouded a sunbeam that came from 
the bottle. The letters scattered from the tri- 
bune's saddle were an unfailing topic. The legion 
picked them up on the march ; they had the 
piquancy of scandal of their particular friends ; 
and the addition made to their intelligence by my 
wild associate, was unanimously declared the most 
dexterous piece of frolic, the most pleasant venom. 



SALATHIEU 103 

and the most venomous pleasantry, that ever 
emanated from the wit of man. 

But my task was not yet done. I left those gay 
soldiers to their wine, and with Constantius and 
some torch- bearers, hastened to the Armoury of 
Herod — the forbidden ground; the treasure-house 
of war; and, if old rumour were to be believed, 
the place of many a mysterious celebration, un- 
lawful to be seen by human eyes. 

The building was in the centre of the citadel, 
and was of the stateliest architecture. The mas- 
sive doors were thrown open. At the first step 1 
shrank from the blaze of steel and gold that shot 
back against the torches. The walls of this gi- 
gantic hall were covered with arms and armour of 
every nation — cuirasses, Persian, Roman, and 
Greek ; the plate-mail of the Gaul ; the Indian 
chain-armour ; innumerable head-pieces, from the 
steel cap of the Scythian, to the plumed and triple- 
crested helmet of the Greek, the richest combina- 
tion of strength and beauty ever borne by soldier- 
ship ; shields of every shape and sculpture ; the 
Greek orb ; the Persian rhomb ; the Cimmerian 
crescent; — all arms, the ponderous spear of the 
phalanx ; the Thracian pike ; the German war- 
hatchet ; the Italian javelin ; the bow, from the 
Nubian, twice the height of man, to the small 



104 SALATHIEL. 

half circle of the Assyrian cavalry; swords, the 
broad-bladed and fearful falchion of the Roman, 
every thrust of which let out a life; the huge 
two-handed sword of the Baltic tribes ; the 
Syrian scymitar ; the Persian acinaces ; the deep- 
hilted knife of the Indian islander; the Arab 
poniard ; the serrated blade of the African ; all 
were there, in their richest models — the collection 
of Herod's life. War had raised him to a rank 
which allowed the indulgence of his most lavish 
tastes of good and ill ; the sword was his true 
sceptre ; and never king bore the sign of his so- 
vereignty more royally emblazoned. 

After long admiration of this display of the 
wealth dearest to the soldier, I was retiring, when 
a slave approached, and prostrating himself, told 
me that a hall remained, still more singular, " the 
hall in which the Great Herod received his death- 
warning." I gazed round the armoury; there 
was no door but the one by which we had en- 
tered , 

*' Not here," said the Ethiopian ; " yet it is 
beside us. The foot of a Roman has never en- 
tered it. The secret remained with me alone. 
Does my lord command that it shall be revealed ?" 

The order was given. The slave took down one 
of the coats of mail, pushed back a valve, and we 



SALATHIEL. 105 

entered a winding stair which led us downwards 
for some minutes. The narrow passage and heavy 
air reminded me of the subterranean. Our torches 
burned dimly, and the visages of my attendants 
showed how little their gallantry was to be relied 
on ; if we were to be brought into contact with 
magicians and ghosts. 

"Here," said the Ethiopian, ** it was the cus- 
tom of the great king, in his declining years, when 
his heart was broken by the loss of the most be- 
loved of wives, and maddened by the conspiracies 
of the princes his sons, to come and consult others 
than the God of Jerusalem. Here the Chaldee 
men of wisdom came to raise the spirits of the de- 
parted, and show the fates of his kingdom. We 
are now in the bowels of the mountain." 

He loosed a chain, which disappeared into the 
ground with a hollow noise. A huge mass of rock 
slowly rolled back, and showed a depth of darkness 
through which our twinkling torches scarcely made 
way. 

'* Stop," said the slave, " I should have first 
lighted the shrine." He left us, and we shortly 
saw a blaze of many colours on a tripod in the 
centre. As the blaze strengthened, a scene of won- 
der awoke before the eye. A host of armed men 



106 SALATHIEL. 

grew upon the darkness. The immense vault was 
peopled with groups of warriors, all the great mi- 
litary leaders of the world, in their native arms, and 
surrounded by a cluster of their captains ; the dis- 
turbers of the earth, from Sesostris down to Caesar 
and Antony, brandishing the lance, or reining the 
charger, each in his known attitude of command. 
There rushed Cyrus in the scythed chariot, sur- 
rounded by his horsemen, barded from head to 
heel. There Alexander, with the banner of Mace- 
don waving above his head, and armed as when he 
leaped into the Granicus. There Hannibal, upon 
the elephant that he rode at Cannae. There 
Caesar, with the head of Pompey at his feet. 
Those, and a long succession of the masters of vic- 
tory, each in the moment of supreme fortune, made 
the vault a representative palace of human glory. 
But the view from the entrance told but half the 
tale. It was when I advanced and lifted the torch 
to the countenance of the first group, that the 
moral was visible. All the visages were those of 
skeletons. The costly armour was upon bones. 
The spears and sceptres were brandished by the 
thin fingers of the grave. The vault was the 
representative sepulchre of human vanity. 

This was one of the fantastic fits of a mind 



SALATHIEL. 107 

which felt too late the emptiness of earthly honours. 
Half pagan, the powerful intellect of the man gave 
way to the sullen superstitions of the murderer. 
Egypt was still the mystic tyrant of Palestine; and 
Herod, in his despair, sank into the slave of a cre- 
dulity at once weak and terrible. 

In the last hours of a long and deeply varied 
life, exhausted more by misery of soul than disease ; 
when medicine was hopeless, and he had returned 
from trying the famous springs of Callirhoe in vain, 
the king ordered himself to be brought into this 
vault, and left alone. He remained in it for some 
hours. The attendants were at length roused by 
hideous wailings; they broke open the entrance, 
and found him in a paroxysm of terror. The vault 
was filled with the strong odours of some magical 
preparations still burning on the tripod. The 
sound of departing feet was heard, but Herod sat 
alone. In accents of the wildest woe, he declared 
that he had seen the statues filled with sudden 
life, and charging him with the death of his wife 
and children. 

He left Masada instantly, pronouncing a curse 
upon the hour in which he first listened to the arts 
of Egypt. He was carried to Jericho, and there 
laid on a bed from which he never rose. Alter- 
nate bursts of blasphemy and remorse made his 



'^,. 108 SALATHIEL. 

parting moments frightful. But tyranny was in 
his last thought ; and he died holding in his hand 
the order for the massacre of every leading man in 
JTudea. 



SALATHIEL. 109 



CHAPTER VIII. 



The first decided blow of the war was giveu. 
I had incurred the full wrath of Rome ; the trench 
between nie and forgiveness was impassable ; and 
I felt a stern delight in the conviction that hope 
of truce or pardon was at an end : the seizure of 
Masada was a defiance of the whole power of the 
empire. 

But it had the higher importance of a triumph 
at the beginning of a war, the moment when even 
the counigeous are perplexed by doubt, and the 
timid watch their opportunity to raise the cry of 
ill fortune. It showed the facility of conquest, 
where men are determined to run the full risk of 
good or evil ; it shook the military credit of the 
enemy, by the proof that they could be over- 



110 . SALATHIEL. 

matched in activity, spirit, and conduct. The cap- 
ture of a Roman fortress by assault was a thing 
almost unheard of. But the consummate value 
of the enterprise was in its declaration to those 
who would fight ; that they had leaders, able and 
willing to take the last chance with them for the 
freedom of their country. 

When day broke, and the strength of this cele- 
brated fortress was fairly visible, I could scarcely 
believe that our success was altogether the work 
of man. The genius of ancient fortification pro- 
duced nothing more remarkable than Masada. It 
stood on the summit of a height, so steep that the 
sun never reached the bottom of the surrounding 
defiles. Its outer wall was a mile round, with 
thirty-eight towers, each eighty feet high. Im- 
mense marble cisterns ; granaries, like palaces, 
capable of holding provisions for years ; exhaust- 
less arms and military engines, in buildings of the 
finest Greek art ; and defences of the most costly 
skill, at every commanding point of the interior ; 
showed the kingly magnificence and warlike care 
of the most brilliant, daring, and successful mo- 
narch of Judea, since Solomon. 

By the first sun-beam, a new wonder struck the 
multitude, whom the tumult of the night had 
gathered on the neighbouring hills. I ordered the 



SALATHIEL. Ill 

great standard of Naphtali to be hoisted on the 
citadel. It was raised in the midst of shouts and 
hymns ; and the huge scarlet folds spread out, ma- 
jestically displaying the emblem of our tribe, the 
Silver Stag, before the morn. Shouts echoed 
and re-echoed round the horizon. The hill tops, 
covered as far as the eye could reach, did homage 
to the banner of Jewish deliverance ; and, in- 
spired by the sight, every man of their thousands 
took sword and spear, and made ready for battle. 

My first care was to relieve the mind of my fa- 
mily ; and Constantius, with triumph in every 
feature, and love and honour glowing in his heart, 
was made the bearer of the glad tidings. 

The duties of command devolved rapidly on me. 
An army to be raised— a plan of operations to be 
determined on — the chieftains of the country to 
be combined — and the profligate feuds of Jeru- 
salem to be extinguished ; were difficulties that 
lay before my first step. It is in preliminaries like 
those, that the burning spirit of a man, full of the 
manliest resolutions, and caring no more for per- 
sonal safety than he cares for the weed under his 
feet, is fated to feel the true troubles of high en- 
terprise. 

I soon experienced the wretchedness of having 
to contend with the indolent, the artful, and the 



112 SALATHIEL. 

base. My mind, eager to follow up the first suc- 
cess, was entangled in tedious and intricate nego- 
ciation with men whom no sense of right or wrong 
could stimulate to integrity. Rival interests to be 
conciliated — gross corruptions to be crushed — 
paltry passions to be stigmatised — family hatreds 
to be reconciled — childish antipathies — grasping 
avarice — giddy ambition — savage cruelty, to be 
rectified, propitiated, or punished ; were among 
my tasks, before I could plant a foot in the field. 
If those are the fruits that grow round even the 
righteous cause, what must be the rank crop of 
conspiracy ! 

But, one point I speedily settled. The first as- 
semblage of the chieftains satisfied me of the ab- 
surdity of councils of war. Every man had his 
plan ; and every plan contemplated some per- 
sonal object. I saw that to discuss them would be 
useless and endless. I had already begun to learn 
the diplomatic art of taking my own way, with the 
most unruffled aspect. T begged of the proposers 
to reduce their views to writing ; received their 
papers with perfect civility ; took them to my ca- 
binet, and gave their brilliancy to add to the blaze 
of my fire. High station is soon compelled to 
dissemble. A month before, I should have spoken 
out my mind, and treated the plans and the pro- 



SALATHIEL, 113 

posers alike with scorn. But a month before, I 
was neither general nor statesman. Freed from 
the encumbrance of many councillors, I decided 
on a rapid march to Jerusalem ; — there was power 
and glory in the word : by this measure I should 
be master of all that final victory could give, the 
popular mind, the national resources, and the 
highest prize of tlie most successful war. 

Those thoughts banished rest from my pillow. 
I passed day and night in a perpetual, feverish, 
exaltation of mind ; yet, if I were to compute my 
few periods of happiness, among them would be 
the week when I could neither eat, drink, nor 
sleep, from the mere overflowing of my warlike 
reveries at Masada. 

We may well forgive the splenetic apathy and 
sullen scorn of life that beset the holder of power, 
when time or chance leaves his grasp empty. The 
mighty monarch ; the general, on whose sword 
hung the balance of empires ; the statesman, on 
whose council rose or sank the welfare of millions ; 
fallen into inaction, sunk into the feeble and un- 
exciting employments of common life, their genius 
and their fame a burden and a reproach, the 
source of a restless and indignant contrast be- 
tween what they were and what they are ; how 
feeble an emblem of such minds is the lion fanged, 



114 SALATHIEL. 

or the eagle chained to a log ! We may pass by 
even the fooleries which so often make the world 
stare at the latter years of famous men. When 
they can no longer soar to their natural height, all 
beneath is equal to them ; our petty wisdom is not 
worth their trouble. They scorn the little opi- 
nions of common-place mankind, and follow their 
own tastes — contemptuously trifle, and proudly 
play the fool. 

Before the week was out, I was at the head of 
a hundred thousand men ; I was the champion of 
a great country ; the leader of the most formidable 
insurrection that ever contended with Rome in the 
East, the general of an army whose fidelity and 
spirit were not to be surpassed on earth. Could 
ambition ask more ! There was even more, though 
too seldom to be asked by human ambition. My 
nation was sacred ; a cause above human nature 
was to be fought for ; in that cause I might, at 
once, redeem my own name from obscurity, and be 
the instrument of exalting the name, authority, 
and religion of a people, the regal people of the 
Sovereign of all ! 

Constantius returned. It was in vain that I had 
directed my family to take refuge in the mountain 
country of Naphtali. My authority was for once 
disputed at home. Strong affection mastered fear, 



SALATHIEL. 115 

and, swift as love could speed, I saw them enter- 
ing the gates of Masada. 

Such meetings can come but once in a life. 
I was surrounded by innocent fondness, beauty 
most admirable, and faith that no misfortunes 
could shake ; and I was surrounded by them in an 
hour when prosperity seemed labouring to lavish 
on me all the wishes of man. I felt too, by 
the glance with which Miriam looked upon her 
"hero," that I had earned a higher title to the 
world's respect. Had she found me in chains, she 
would have shared them without a murmur. But 
her lofty heart rejoiced to find her husband thus 
vindicating his claims to the homage of mankind. 

Yet to those matchless enjoyments I gave up 
but one day. By the next dawn, the trumpet 
sounded for the march. I knew the importance of 
following up the first blow in all wars ; its indis- 
pensable importance in a war of insurrection. To 
meet the disciplined troops of Rome in pitched 
battles would be madness. The true manoeuvre 
was, to distract their attention by variety of onset, 
cut off* their communications, keep their camps in 
perpetual alarm, and make our activity, numbers, 
and knowledge of the country, the substitutes for 
equipment, experience, and the science of the sol- 
dier. 



11^ SALATHIEL. 

In summoning those brave men, I adhered to 
the regulations of the law of our prophet ; a law 
whose humanity and regard for natural feelings 
distinguished it in the most striking manner from 
the stern violences of the pagan levy. No man 
was required to take up arms, who had built 
a house, and had not dedicated it ; no man who had 
planted a vineyard or olive ground, and had not 
yet reaped the produce ; no man who had be- 
trothed a wife, -and had not yet taken her home ; 
and, no man during the first year of his marriage. 

My prisoners were my last embarrassment. To 
leave them to the chance of popular mercy, or to 
leave them immured in the fortress, would be 
cruelty. To let them loose would be, of course, to 
give so many soldiers to the enemy. I adopted the 
simpler expedient of marching them to Berytus, 
seizing a detachment of the Roman provision 
ships, and embarking the whole for Italy. 

To my old friend the captain, whose cheerful- 
ness could be abated only by a failure of the vin- 
tage, I offered a tranquil settlement among our 
hills. The etiquette of soldiership was formidably 
tasked by my ofter, for the veteran was thoroughly 
weary of his thankless service. He hesitated, 
swore that I deserved to be a Roman, and even 
a captain of horse ; but finished by saying that, 



SALATHIEL. 117 

bad a trade as the army was, he was too old to 
learn a better. I gave him and some others their 
unconditional liberty ; and he parted from the 
Jewish rebel with more obvious regret, than per- 
haps he ever dreamed himself capable of feeling 
for any thing but his horse and his bottle. 

Eleazar took the charge of my family, and the 
command of Masada. The sun burst out with 
cheerful omen on the troops, as I wound down the 
steep road, named the Serpent, from its extreme 
obliquity. The sight before me was of a nature to 
exhilarate the heaviest heart; an immense host 
making the air ring with acclamations at the 
coming of their chieftain. The mental perspective 
of public honours and national service was still 
more exalting. Yet I felt a boding depression, as 
if within those walls had begun and ended my 
prosperity. 

On the first ridge which crossed our march, I 
instinctively stopped to give a farewell look. The 
breeze had sunk, and the scarlet banner shook out 
its folds to the sun no more ; a cloud hung on the 
mountain peak, and covered the fortress with 
gloom. I turned away. The omen was true ! 

But sickly thoughts were forgotten, when we 
were once fairly on the march. Who that has 
ever moved with an army, has not known its ready 



118 SALATHIEL. 

cure for heaviness of heart .' The sound of the 
moving multitude, their broad mirth, the mere 
trampling of their feet, the picturesque lights that 
fall upon the columns as they pass over the in- 
equalities of the ground, keep the eye and the 
mind singularly alive. 

Our men felt the whole delight of the scene, 
and gambolled like deer, or horses let loose into 
pasture. But, to the military habits of Con- 
stantius, this rude vigour was the highest vexation. 
He galloped from flank to flank with hopeless 
diligence, found that his arrangements only per- 
plexed our bold peasantry the more, and at length 
fairly relinquished the idea of gaining any degree 
of credit by the brilliancy of their discipline. But 
I, no more a tactician than themselves, was con- 
tent with seeing in them the material of the true 
soldier. The spear was carried rudely, but the hand 
that carried it was strong ; the march was ir- 
regular, but the step was firm ; if there was song, 
and mirth, and clamour, they were the cheerful 
voices of the brave ; and I could read in the 
countenances of ranks, which no skill could keep 
in order, the hardihood and generous devotedness 
that, in wars like ours, have so often baffled the 
proud, and left of the mighty but clay. 

During the day we saw no enemy, and drove 



SALATHIEL. 119 

along- with the unembarrassed step of men going 
up to one of the festivals. The march was hot ; 
the zeal of our young soldiers made it rapid ; and 
we continued it long after the usual hour of re- 
pose. But then sleep took its thorough revenge. It 
was fortunate for our fame that the enemy were 
not nigh ; for sleep fastened irresistibly and at 
once upon the whole multitude. Sentinels were 
planted in vain ; the spears fell from their hands, 
and the watchers were tranquilly laid side by side 
with the slumbering. Outposts and the usual 
precautionary arrangements were equally useless. 
Sleep was our master. Constantius exerted his 
vigilance with fruitless activity ; and, before an 
hour passed, he and I were probably the sole 
sentinels of the grand army of Judea. 

*' What can be done with such sluggards ?" 
said he, indignantly pointing to the heaps that, 
wrapped in their cloaks, covered the fields far 
round, and in the moonlight looked more like 
surges tipped with foam than human beings. 

"What can be done? — wonders." 

'* Will they ever be able to manoeuvre in the 
face of the legions ?" 

" Never." 

" Will they ever be able to move like regular 
troops ?" 



120 SALATHIEL. 

** Never." 

" Will they ever be able to keep their eyes open 
after sunset ?" 

•* Never, after such a march as we have given 
them to-day." 

**What then, under heaven, will they be good 
for?" 

*• To beat the Romans out of Palestine !" 



SALATHIEL. 121 



CHAPTER IX. 

Before the sun was up, my peasants were on 
the march again. From the annual journeys of 
the tribes to the great city, no country was ever 
known so well to its whole population as Palestine. 
Every hill, forest, and mountain stream, was 
now saluted with a shout of old recognition. Dis- 
cipline was forgotten, as we approached those spots 
of memory ; and the troops rambled loosely over 
the ground on which in gentler times they had 
rested in the midst of their caravans. Constantiiis 
had many an irritation to encounter ; but I com- 
bated his wrath, and pledged myself, that when 
the occasion arrived, my countrymen would show 
the native vigour of the soil. 

" Let my peasants take their way," said I. ** If 
VOL. II. F 



122 SALATHIEL. 

they will not make an army, let them make a 
mob ; let them come into the field with the bold 
propensities and generous passions of their nature, 
unchecked by the trammels of regular warfare ; 
let them feel themselves men and not machines, 
and I pledge myself for their victory." 

*' They will soon have the opportunity : look 
yonder." He pointed to a low range of misty 
hills some miles onward. 

** Are we to fight the clouds? for I can see 
nothing else." 

" Our troops, I think, would be exactly the 
proper antagonists. But there is one cloud upon 
those hills, that something more than the wind 
must drive away." 

The sun threw a passing gleam upon the heights, 
and it was returned by the sparkling of spears. 
The enemy was before us. Constantius galloped 
with some of our hunters to the front, to observe 
their position. The trumpets sounded, and my 
countrymen justified all that I had said, by the 
enthusiasm that lighted up every countenance at 
the hope of coming into contact with the op- 
pressor. 

We advanced ; shouts rang from tribe to tribe ; 
we quickened our pace; at length the whole 
multitude ran. At the foot of the height every 



SALATHIEL. IfS 

man pushed forward without waiting for his fellow ; 
it was a complete confusion. The chief force 
against us was cavalry, and I saw them preparing 
to charge. We must suffer prodigiously, let the 
day end how it would. The whole campaign 
might hang on the first repulse. I stood in agony. 
I saw the squadrons level their lances. I saw the 
centurions dash out in front. All was ready for 
the fatal charge. To my astonishment, the whole 
of the cavalry wheeled round and disappeared. 

The panic was like miracle— equally rapid and 
unaccountable, I rode to the top of the hill, and 
discovered the secret. Constantius, observing the 
enemy's attention taken up with my advance, had 
made his way round the heights. His trumpet 
gave the first notice of the manoeuvre. Their rear 
was threatened, and the cavalry fled, leaving a 
cohort in our hands. 

The first success in war is as full of consequences 
as the first repulse. The flight and capture of any 
fragment of the legions was magnified into a sign 
of perpetual triumph. But never was successful 
soldier honoured with a more clamorous triumph 
than Constantius. Nature speaks out among her 
untutored sons. Envy has nothing to do in such 
fields as ours. He was applauded to the skies. 

" Well," said I, as I pressed the gallant hand 



124 SALATHIEL. 

that had planted the first laurel on our brows; 
" you see that, if ploughmen and shepherds make 
rude soldiers, they make capital judges of soldier- 
ship. You might have conquered a kingdom 
without receiving half this panegyric in Rome." 

" The service is but begun, and we shaH have 
another lesson to get or give before to-morrow. 
Those fellows are grateful, I allow," said he, with 
a smile, *' but you must allow that, for what has 
been done, we have to thank the discipline that 
brought us in the Roman rear." 

'* Yes, and the discipline that made them so 
much alarmed about their rear, as to run away ; 
when they might have charged and beaten us." 

This little affair put us all in spirits, and the 
songs and cheerful clamours burst out with renewed 
animation. But the symptoms of the enemy soon 
became thicker. We found the ruined cottage, 
the torn-up garden, the burnt orchard ; those 
habitual evidences of the camp. As we advanced, 
the tracks of waggons and of the huge wheels of 
the military engines were fresh in the grass, and 
from time to time some skeleton of a beast of bur- 
den, or some half-covered wreck of man, showed 
that desolation had walked there ; the cavalry soon 
showed themselves on the heights in larger bodies ; 
but all was forgotten in the sight that at length 



SALArHIEL. 125 

rose npon the horizon ; we beheld, bathed in the 
richest glow of a summer's eve, the summits of the 
mountains round Jerusalem, and glorious above 
them, like another sun, the golden beauty of the 
Temple of temples. 

What Jew ever saw that sight but with homage 
of heart ? Fine fancies may declaim of the rapture 
of returning to one's country after long years. 
Rapture ! to find ourselves in a land of strangers, 
ourselves forgotten, our early scenes so changed, 
that we can scarcely retrace them, filled up with 
new faces, or with the old so worn by time and 
care, that we read in them nothing but the empti- 
ness of human hope ; the whole world new, frivolous, 
and contemptuous of our feelings. Where is the 
mother, the sister, the woman of our heart ? we 
find their only memorials among the dead, and 
bitterly feel that our true country is the tomb. 

But the return to Zion was not of the things of 
thia world. The Jew saw before him the city of 
prophecy and power. Mortal thoughts, individual 
sorrows, the melancholy experiences of human 
life, had no place among the mighty hopes that 
gathered over it, like angels' wings. Restoration, 
boundless empire, imperishable glory, were the 
writing upon its bulw^arks. It stood before him 
the Universal City, whose gates were to be open 



126 SALATHIEL. 

for the reverence of all time ; the symbol to the 
earth of the returning presence of the Great King ;' 
the promise to the Jew of an empire, triumphant 
over the casualties of nations, the crimes of man, 
and the all-grasping avarice of the grave. 

The multitude prostrated themselves ; then 
rising, broke forth into the glorious hymn sung 
by the tribes on their journeys to the Temple. 

** Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised 
in the city of our God, the mountain of his holi- 
ness. 

" Beautiful, the joy of the earth is Mount Zion^ 
the city of the Great King ! 

" God is known in her palaces for a refuge. 

" We have thought of thy loving-kindness, 
O God, in the midst of thy temple. 

** Walk about Zion, tell the towers thereof. 
Mark ye her bulwarks, consider her palaces. For 
her God is our God, for ever and ever; he will 
be our guide in death ; his praise is to the ends 
of the earth. Glory to the King of Zion." 

The harmony of the adoring myriads rose sweet 
and solemn upon the air ; the sky was a canopy of 
sapphire ; the breeze rich with the evening flowers ; 
Jerusalem before me ! I felt as if the covering of 
my mortal nature were about to be cast away, and 
my spirit to go forth, divested of its grosser in- 



SALATHIEL. 127 

cumbrauces, on a bright and boundless career of 
fortune. 

But recollections never to be subdued, saddened 
my memory of the Temple ; and when the first 
influence of the worship passed, I turned from the 
sight of what was to me the eternal monument of 
the heaviest crime and calamity of man. I gave 
one parting glance, as day died upon the spires. 
To my surprise, they were darkened by more than 
twilight ; I glanced again, smoke rolled cloud on 
cloud over Mount Moriah ; flame, and the distant 
roar of battle startled us. *' Had the enemy anti- 
cipated our march, and was Jerusalem about to be 
stormed before our eyes?" 

We were not long left to conjecture. Crowds 
of frightened women and children were seen flying 
across the country. The roar swelled again ; we 
answered it by cries of indignation, and rushed 
onward. Unable to ascertain the point of attack, 
I halted the multitude at the entrance of one of 
the roads ascending to the Great gate of the Upper 
city, and galloped forward with a few of my 
people. 

A horseman rushed from the gate with a heed- 
less rapidity, which must have flung him into the 
midst of us, or sent him over the precipice. His 
voice alone enabled me to recognise in this furious 



128 SALATHIEL. 

rider my kinsman Jubal. But ncTcr had a few 
months so altered a human being. Instead of the 
bold and martial figure of the chieftain, 1 saw an 
emaciated and exhausted man, apparently in the 
last stage of life or sorrow ; the florid cheek was 
of the colour of clay; the flashing glance was 
sunken ; the loud and cheerful voice was sepul- 
chral. I welcomed him with the natural regard 
of our relationship : but his perturbation was fear- 
ful ; he trembled, grew fiery red, and could return 
my greeting only with a feeble tongue and a wild 
eye. 

But this was no time for private feelings. I 
inquired the state of things in Jerusalem. Here 
his embarrassment was thrown aside, and the 
natural energy of the man found room. *' Jeru- 
salem has three curses at this hour," said he, 
fiercely, " the priests, the people, and the Romans ; 
and the last is the lightest of the three : — the 
priests bloated with indulgence, and mad with 
love of the world ; the people pampered with 
faction, and mad with bigotry ; and the Romans 
availing themselves of the madness of each, to 
crush all." 

''But has the assault been actually made? or 
is there force enough within to repel it?" inter- 
rupted I. 



SALATHIEL. 129 

" The assault has been made, and the enemy 
have driven every thing before them, so far as 
has been their pleasure. Why they have not 
pushed on is inconceivable ; for our regular 
troops are good for nothing. I have been sent 
out to raise the villages ; but my labour will be 
useless, for, see, the eagles are already on the 
wall." 

I looked ; on the northern quarter of the battle- 
ments I saw, through smoke and flame, the 
accursed standard. Below, rose immense bursts 
of conflagration ; the whole of the New City, the 
Bezetha, was on fire. 

My plan was instantly formed. I divided my 
force into two bodies; gave one to Constantius, 
with orders to enter the city, and beat the Romans 
from the walls; and with the other, threaded the 
ravines towards their position on the hills. I had 
to make a long circuit. The Roman camp was 
pitched on the ridge of Mount Scopas, seven 
furlongs from the city. Guided by Jubal, I 
gained its rear. My troops, stimulated by the 
sight of the fugitive people, required all my 
efl'orts to keep them from rushing on the detach- 
ments that we saw successively hurrying to rein- 
force the assault. 

Night fell ; but the signal for mv attack, a 



130 SALATHIEL. 

fixed number of torches on the tower of the 
Temple, did not appear. The troops, ambushed 
in the olive-groves skirting the ridge, had hitherto 
escaped discovery. At length they grew furious, 
and bore me along with them. As we burst up 
the rugged sides of the hill, like a huge surge 
before the tempest, I cast a despairing glance 
towards the City : the torches at that moment 
rose. Hope lived again. I pointed them out to 
the troops : the sight added wings to their speed ; 
and, before the enemy could recover from their 
astonishment, we were in the centre of the camp. 

Nothing could be more complete than our suc- 
cess. The legionaries, sure of the morning's 
march into Jerusalem, and the plunder of the 
Temple, were caught leaning in crowds over the 
ramparts, unarmed, and making absolute holiday. 
Caius Cestius, their insolent general, was carousing 
in his tent after the fatigues of the evening. The 
tribunes followed his example; the soldiery saw 
tiothing to require their superior abstemiousness ; 
and the wine was flowing freely in healths to the 
next day's rapine, when our roar opened their 
eyes* To resist was out of the question. Fifty 
thousand spearmen, as daring as ever lifted wea- 
pon, and inflamed with the feelings of their ha- 
rassed country, were in their midst, and they ran 



S A LATHI EL. 131 

in all directions. I pressed on to the general's 
tent ; but the prize had escaped : he was gone on 
the first alarm. My followers indignantly set it 
on fire : the blaze spread, and the flame of the 
Roman camp rolled up, like the flame of a sacrifice 
to the god of battles. 

The seizure of the position was the ruin of the 
detachments abandoned between the hill and the 
city. At the sight of the flames, the gates were 
flung open ; and Constantius drove the assailants 
from point to point, until our shouts told him that 
we were marching upon their rear. The shock 
then was final. The cohorts, dispirited and sur- 
prised, broke like water ; and scarcely a man of 
them lived to boast of having insulted the walls of 
Jerusalem. 

Day arose ; and the Temple met the rising 
beam, unstained by the smoke of an enemy's fire. 
The wreck of the legions lay upon the declivities, 
like the fragments of a fleet on the shore. But 
this sight, painful even to an enemy, was soon 
forgotten in the concourse of the rescued citizens, 
the exultation of the troops, and the still more 
seducing vanities that filled the heart of their 
chieftain. 

Towards noon, a long train of the principal 
people, headed by the priests and elders, was 



132 SALATHTEL. 

seen issuing from the gates to congratulate me. 
Music and triumphant shouts announced their 
approach through the valley. My heart bounded 
with the feelings of a conqueror. The whole long 
vista of national honours ; the popular praise, the 
personal dignity, the power of trampling upon the 
malignant, the clearance of my character, the 
right to take the future lead on all occasions of 
public service and princely renown ; opened before 
my dazzled eye. 

I was standing alone upon the brow of the pro- 
montory. As far as the eye could reach, all was 
in motion, and all was directed to me : the homage 
of soldiery, priests, and people, centred in my 
single being. I involuntarily uttered aloud — '* At 
last I shall enter Jerusalem in triumph." I heard 
a voice at my side — " Never shall you enter Je- 
rusalem but in sorrow !" 

An indescribable pang accompanied the words. 
There was not a living soul near me to have ut- 
tered them. The troops were standing at a distance 
below, and in perfect silence. The words were 
spoken close to my ear But I fatally knew the 
voice, and conjecture was at an end. 

My limbs felt powerless, as if I had been struck 
by lightning. I called Jubal up the peak to assist 
me. But the blow that smote my frame seemed to 



SALATHTEL. 133 

have smote his mind. His look had grown tenfold 
more haggard in this single night. His e3^es rolled 
wildly ; his speech was a collection of unmeaning 
sounds, or the language of a fierce disturbance of 
thought, altogether unintelligible. A lunatic stood 
before me. 

Was this to be the foretaste of my own in- 
flictions ? I shuddered as the past horrors rose upon 
my memory. Or was I to see my kindred, friends, 
family, put under the yoke of bodily and mental 
misery, as a menace of the punishment that was to 
cut asunder my connexion with human nature? 



134 SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER X. 



In pain and terror I drew my unfortunate 
kinsman from the gaze of the troops; and en- 
treated him to tell me, by what melancholy chance 
his feelings had been thus disturbed. He looked at 
me with a fierce glance, and half unsheathed his 
dagger. But I was not to be repelled, and still 
laboured to soothe him. He hurriedly grasped the 
weapon, flung it down the steep, and sinking at 
my feet, burst into tears. 

An uproar in the valley roused me from the con- 
templation of this wreck of youth and hope. The 
enemy, though defeated, had suffered little com- 
parative loss. The pride of the legions could not 
brook the idea of defeat, by what they deemed the 
rabble of the city and the fields. Cestius, under 



SALATHIEL. J35 

cover of the broken coinitry on our flanks, had 
rallied the fugitives of the camp ; and now, be- 
tween me and the city, were rapidly advancing in 
columns, forty thousand men. 

The manoeuvre was bold. It might either cut 
us off from Jerusalem, and force us to fight at a 
ruinous disadvantage, or leave the city totally ex- 
posed. But, like all daring games, it was peri- 
lous ; and I was determined to make the haughty 
Roman feel that he had an antagonist who would 
not leave the game at his discretion. 

From the pinnacle on which I stood, the whole 
champaign lay beneath me. Nothing could be 
lovelier. The grandest combinations of art and 
nature were before the eye — Jerusalem on her 
hills, a city of palaces, and in that hour displaying 
her full pomp ; her towers streaming with banners ; 
her battlements crowded with troops ; her priest- 
hood and citizens in their festal habits, pouring 
from the colossal gates, and covering the plain 
with processions ; that plain itself, coloured and 
teeming with the richest produce of the earth ; 
groves of the olive ; declivities, purple with *he 
vine, or yellow with corn, gleaming in the sun, 
sheets of vegetable gold, richer than ever was dug 
from Indian mine. 

I gazed, with an eye enraptured by the scene of 



136 SALATHIEL. 

beauty ; but the signals of my advanced parties 
along the heights soon told me that the enemy 
were in movement. 

My plan was already adopted. On the right 
spread the plain ; on the left lay the broken and 
hilly country, through which the enemy were 
moving by the three principal ravines. I felt 
that, if they could unite and form, success, with 
our undisciplined levies, was desperate. The only 
hope was, of beating the columns separately, as 
they emerged into the plain. The moment of 
action was rapidly arriving. Cavalry had begun 
to scatter over the ground, and ride down upon 
the processions ; which, startled at the sight, were 
instantly scattered, and flying townrds Jerusalem. 

'' The day of congratulations is clearly over," 
said Jubal, pointing in scorn to the dispersed citi- 
zens. '* To-day, at least, you will not receive the 
homage of those hypocrites of the Sanhedrim." 

*' Nor, perhaps, to-morrow, fellow-soldier; for 
we must first see of what materials those columns 
are made. If we beat them, we shall save the 
elders the trouble of crossing the plain, and re- 
ceive our honours within the walls." 

'* In Jerusalem !" exclaimed he, wildly. " No; 
never ! You have dangers to encounter within 
those walls that no art of man could withstand ,* 



SALATHIEL. 137 

dangers keener than the dagger, more deadly than 
the aspic, more resistless than the force of armies ! 
Enter Jerusalem, and you are undone." 

I looked upon him with astonishment. But 
there was in his eye a sad humility, a strangely 
imploring glance, that formed the most singular 
contrast to the wildness of his words. " Be 
warned!" sa'd he, pressing close, as if he dreaded 
that his secret should be overheard. " I have seen 
horrid things, I have heard horrid things, since I 
last entered the city. Beware of the leaders of 
Jerusalem! I tell you that they have fearful 
power, that their hate is inexorable, and that you 
are its great victim !" 

" This is altogether beyond my conception : how 
have I offended?" 

"I know not; but mysterious things are 
whispered. You are charged with unutterable 
acts. Your sudden abandonment of the priest- 
hood ; sights seen in your deserted chambers, 
which not even the most daring would venture to 
inhabit; your escape from dangers, that must 
have extinguished any other human being, have 
bred fatal rumours. It has been said that you 
worshipped in the bowels of the mountain of 
Masada, where the magic fire burns eternally be- 
fore the form of the Evil One; that you even 



138 SALATHIEL. 

conquered the fortress, impregnable as it was to 
man, by a horrid compact ; and that the raising 
of your standard was the declared sign of that 
compact, dreadfully to be repaid by you and 
yours !" 

" Monstrous and incredible calumny ! Where 
was their evidence ? My actions were before the 
face of the world. — Hypocrites and villains !" 

" If your virtues were written in a sun-beam, 
envy would darken, malice pervert, and hatred 
destroy," exclaimed my kinsman, with the bold 
countenance and manly feeling of his better days. 
" They have in their secret councils stained you 
with a fate more gloomy than I can comprehend 
that you are sentenced to even here the mi- 
sery reserved for the guilty beyond the grave." 

I felt as if he had stricken a lance through my 
heart. Mortal sickness seized on every vein. My 
blood was ice. Fiery sparkles shot before my 
eyes. '' There," thought I, *' is the first infliction 
of the sentence that is to separate, to smite, to 
pursue me, to the last hour of time !" 

I instinctively put my hand to my brow, to feel 
if the mark of Cain were not already there. I 
gave one hurried glance at Heaven, as if to see 
the form of the destroying angel stooping over me. 

But the consciousness that I was in the presence 



SALATHTEL. 139 

of the multitude, compelled me to master my 
feelings. I assumed a desperate firmness, and 
commanded Jubal to be ready with his proofs of 
those calumnies, against the time when I should 
confound my accusers. But I spoke to the winds. 
I need have dreaded no observer in him. The in- 
terval of reason was gone. He burst out into the 
fiercest horrors. 

" They pursue me !" exclaimed he ; " they come 
by thousands, with the poniard and the poison ! 
They cry for blood ! they would drive me to a 
crime black as their own ! " 

He flung himself at my feet; and clasping them, 
prevented every effort to save him from this de- 
gradation. He buried his face in my robe ; and 
casting up a scared look from time to time, as if 
he shrank from some object of terror, apostrophised 
his vision. 

"Fearful being," he cried, "spare me! turn 
away those searching eyes! I have sworn to do the 
deed, and it shall be done, I have sworn it against 
faith and honour, against the ties of nature, against 
the laws of Heaven ; but it shall be done. Now, 
begone ! See !" He cowered, pointing to a cloud 
that floated across the sun; " see! he spreads his 
wings, he hovers over me ; the thunders are 
flaming in his hands. Begone, Spirit of power and 



140 SALATHTEL. 

evil ! It shall be done ! Look, where he vanishes 
into the heights of his kingdom ! the prince ot" the 
power of the air." 

The cloud which fed the fancy of ni}^ unfor- 
tunate kinsman dissolved, and with it his fear of 
the tempter. But he lay exhausted at my feet, — 
his eyes closed, his limbs shuddering, — the emblem 
of weakness and despair. I tried to rouse him by 
that topic which would once have shot new life 
into his heroic heart. 

" Rise, Jubal; and see the enemy, whom we 
have so long thirsted to meet. This battle must 
not be fought without you. To-day, neither magic 
nor chance shall be imputed to the conqueror, if I 
shall conquer. Jerusalem sees the battle ; and 
before the face of my country I will show the 
faculties that make the leader, or will leave the 
last drop of my blood upon those fields." 

The warrior kindled within him. He sprang 
from the ground, and shot down an eagle glance 
at the enemy, who had made rapid progress, and 
were beginning to show the heads of their columns 
in the plain. He was unarmed. I gave him my 
sword ; and the proud humility with which he put 
it to his lips, was a pledge to me that it would be 
honoured in his hands. 

" Glorious thing!" he exclaimed, as he flashed 



SALATHIEL. 141 

it before the sun, " that raises man at once to the 
height of human honours, or sends him where no 
care can disturb his rest ; thou art the true 
sceptre that guards and graces empire ; the true 
talisman, more powerful than all the arts of 
the enchanter ! What, like thee, can lift up the 
lowly, enrich the destitute, restore the undone? 
What talent, consummate knowledge, gift of 
nature, nay, what smile of fortune can, like thee, 
in one hour lid the obscure stand forth the idol of 
a people, or the wonder of a world ? Now, for 
glory !" he shouted to the listening circle of the 
troops, who answered him with shouts. — *' Now, 
for glory !" they cried, and poured after him down 
the side of the mountain. 

The three gorges of the valleys through which 
the enemy moved, opened into the plain at wide 
intervals from each other. I delayed our march 
until the moment at which the nearest column 
should show its head. I saw that the eagerness of 
Cestius to reach the open ground was already 
hurrying his columns ; and that, from the compa- 
rative facilities of the ravine immediately under 
my position, the nearest column must arrive un- 
supported. 

The moment came. The helmets and spears 
were already pouring from the pass, when a gesture 



142 SA LATHI EL. 

of my hand let loose the whole human torrent upon 
them. Our advantage of the ground, our num- 
bers, and impetuosity, decided the fate of this 
division at once. The legionaries were not merely 
repulsed, they were absolutely trampled down ; 
they lay as if a mighty wall, or a fragment of the 
mountain, had fallen upon them. 

The two remaining columns were still to be 
fought. Their solid front, the compact and broad 
mass of iron that rushed down the ravines, seemed 
irresistible ; and when I cast a glance on the irre- 
gular and waving lines behind me, I felt the whole 
peril of the day. Yet I feared idly. The enemy 
charged, and forced their way into the very centre 
of the multitude, like two vast wedges crushing all 
before them. But though they could repel, they 
could not conquer. The spirit of the Jew fighting 
before Jerusalem was more than heroism. To ex- 
tinguish a Roman, though at the instant loss of 
life ; to disable a single spear, though by receiving 
it in his bosom ; to encumber with his corpse the 
steps of the adversary, was reward enough for the 
man of Israel. 

I saw crowds of those bold peasants fling them- 
selves on the ground, to creep in between the feet 
of the legionaries, and die stabbing them ; others 
casting away the lance to seize the Roman buck- 



SALATHIEL. 143 

lers, and encumber them with the strong grasp of 
death : crowds mounted the rising grounds, and 
leaped down on the spears. 

The enemy, overborne with the weight of the 
multitude, at length found it impossible to move 
further; yet their solid strength was not to be 
broken. Wherever we turned, there was the 
same wall of shields, the same thick fence of le- 
velled lances. We might as well have assaulted a 
rock. Our arrows rebounded from their impene- 
trable armour; the stones that poured on them 
from innumerable slings, rolled off like the hail 
of a summer shower from a roof. But, to have 
stopped the columns, and prevented their junc- 
tion, was itself a triumph. I felt that thus we had 
scarcely to do more than fix them where they 
stood, and leave the intense heat of the day, 
thirst, and weariness, to fight our battle. But my 
troops were not to be restrained. They still rolled 
in furious heaps against the living fortification. 
Every broken lance in that impenetrable barrier, 
every pierced helmet was a trophy ; the fall of a 
single legionary groused a shout of exultation, and 
was the signal for a new charge. 

But the battle was no longer to be left to our 
unassisted efforts. The troops in Jerusalem moved 
down, with Constantius at their head. In the 



144 SALATHIEL. 

perpetual roar of the conflict, their shouts escaped 
my ear ; and my first intelligence of their advance 
was from Jubal, who had well redeemed his pledge 
during the day. Hurrying with him to one of 
the eminences that overlooked the field, I saw 
with pride and delight the standard of Naphtali 
spreading its red folds at the head of the advanc- 
ing multitude. " Who commands them?" asked 
Jubal eagerly. 

** Who should command them, with that banner 
at their head," replied I, '* but my son, my brave 
Constantius ?" 

He heard no more ; but, bending his turban to 
the saddle bow, struck the spur into his horse, 
and, with a cry of madness, plunged into the centre 
of the nearest column. The stroke came upon it 
like a thunderbolt ; the phalanx wavered for the 
first time ; a space was broken into its ranks. The 
chasm was filled up by a charge of my hunters. 
To save or die with Jubal, was the impulse ! That 
charge was never recovered ; the column loosened, 
the multitude pressed in upon it, and Constantius 
arrived only in time to see th^ remnant of the 
proud Roman army flying to the disastrous shelter 
of the ravine. 

The day was won — I was a conqueror! The 
nvincible legions were invincible no more. I had 



SALATHIEL. 145 

conquered under the gaze of Jerusalem ! Where 
was the enmity that would dare to murmur against 
me now ? What calumny would not be crushed 
by the force of national gratitude? A flood of 
absorbing sensations filled my soul. No eloquence 
of man could express the glowing and superb 
consciousness that swelled my heart, in the moment 
when I saw the Romans shake, and heard the 
shouts of my army proclaiming me victor ! 

After that day, I can forgive the boldest ex- 
travagance of the boldest passion for war. That 
passion is not crlielty, nor the thirst of possession, 
nor the longing for supremacy ; but something 
made up of them all, and yet superior to all — the 
essential spirit of the stirring motives of the 
human mind — the fever of the gamester, kindled 

by the loftiest objects, and ennobled by them a 

game where the stake is an endless inheritance of 
renown, a sudden lifting of the man into the rank 
of those on whose names time can make no im- 
pression ; who, let their place on earth be what it 
may, are at the head of mankind. Immortals, 
without undergoing the penalty of the grave ! 



VOL. 1] 



146 SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER XT. 

I DETERMINED to give the enemy no respite^ 
and ordered the ravines to be attacked by fresh 
troops. While they were advancing, I galloped 
in search of Jubal over the ground of the last 
charge. He was not to be seen among the living 
or the dead. 

The look of the field, when the first glow of 
battle passed, was enough to shake a sterner spirit 
than mine. Our advance to the gorges of the 
mountain had left the plain naked. The sea of 
turbans and lances was gone rolling, like the swell 
of an angry ocean, against the foot of the hills. 
All before us was the precipitous rock, or the 
rocky pass, thronged with helmets and spears. 
But all behind was death, or misery worse than 



SALATHIEL. 14^ 

death ; hundreds and thousands groaning in agony, 
crying out for water to cool their burning lips, im- 
ploring the sword to put them out of pain. The 
legionaries lay in their ranks, as they had fought ; 
solid piles of men, horses, and arms, the true 
monuments of soldiership. The veterans of Rome 
had gallantly sustained the honours of her name. 

I turned from this sight towards the rescued 
city. The sun was resting on its towers; the 
smokes of the evening sacrifice were ascending in 
slow wreaths from the altar of the sanctuary. The 
trumpets and voices of the minstrels poured a rich 
stream of harmony on the cool air. The recol- 
lection of gentler times came upon my heart. 
Through what scenes of anxious feeling had I not 
passed, since those gates closed upon me ! 

The contrast between the holy calm of my early 
days, and the fierce struggles of my doomed exis- 
tence, pressed with bitter force. My spirit shook. 
The warrior enthusiasm was chilled. The sounds 
of triumph rang hollow in my ear ; and those who 
had at that hour looked upon the man of victory, 
the champion of Israel, would have seen but a 
helpless wretch, hiding his face from human view; 
and wishing that he could exchange fates with the 
mangled shapes beside him. 

The trampling of horses roused me from this 



148 SALATHIEL. 

unwarlike weakness. Constantius came glowing 
to communicate the intelligence that the last of 
the enemy had been driven in, and that his fresh 
troops only awaited my orders to force the passes. 
I mounted, heard the shoutsof the brave pursuers, 
and was again the soldier. 

But the iron front of the enemy resisted our 
boldest attempts to force the ravines. The hills 
were not to be turned ; and we were compelled, 
after innumerable efforts, to wait for the move- 
ment of the Romans from a spot which thirst and 
hunger must soon make untenable. This day 
stripped them of their baggage, beasts of burden, 
and military engines. Night fell too speedily — to 
us a reluctant relaxation, to them a temporary 
shelter from inevitable ruin. 

At dawn, the pursuit began again. We found 
the passes open, and the enemy struggling to es- 
cape out of those fatal defiles. The day was worn 
away in perpetual attempts to break the ranks of 
the legionaries. The Jew, light, agile, and with 
nothing to carry but his spear, was a tremendous 
antagonist to the Roman, perplexed among rocks 
and torrents, famishing, and encumbered with an 
oppressive weight of armour. The losses of this 
day were dreadful. Our darts commanded their 
march from the heights ; every stone did execu- 



SALATHIEL. 149 

tion among ranks whose helmets and shields were 
now shattered by the perpetual discharge. Still 
they toiled on unbroken. W^e saw their long line 
struggling with patient discipline through the rug- 
ged depth below ; and in the face of our attacks 
they made way, till night covered them. 

I spent that night on horseback. Fatigue was 
never felt in the strong excitement of the time. 
I saw multitudes sink at my horse's feet in sleep 
as insensible as the rock on which they lay. Sleep 
never touched my eyelids. I galloped from post 
to post, brought up reinforcements to my wearied 
ranks, and longed for morn. 

It came at last. The enemy had reached the 
head of the defiles, but a force was poured upon 
them that nothing could resist. Their remaining 
cavalry were driven from the sides of the precipice 
into the depths ; the few light troops that scaled 
the higher grounds were swept away. I looked 
upon their whole army as in my hands, and was 
riding forward with Constantius and my chief 
officers to receive their surrender, when they 
were saved by one of those instances of devoted- 
ness that distinguished the Roman character. 

Wearied of perpetual pursuit and evasion, I 
was rejoiced to see, at last, symptoms of a deter- 
mination to wait for us, and try the chance of 



150 SALATHIEL. 

battle. An abrupt ridge of rock, surmounted 
with a lofty cone, was the enemy's position, long 
after famous in Jewish annals. A line of spears- 
men were drawn up on the ridge ; and the broken 
summit of the cone, a space of a few hundred 
yards, was occupied by a cohort. Some of the 
Italian dexterity was employed to give the idea 
that Cestius had taken his stand upon this central 
spot ; an eagle and a concourse of officers were 
exhibited ; and upon this spot I directed the prin- 
cipal attack to be made. 

But the cool bravery of its defenders was not 
to be shaken. After a long waste of time in 
efforts to scale the rock ; indignant at seeing vic- 
tory retarded by such an obstacle, I left the busi- 
ness to the slingers and archers, and ordered a 
perpetual discharge to be kept up on the cohort. 
This was decisive. Every stone and arrow told 
upon the little force crowded together on the 
naked height. Shield and helmet sank one by 
one under the mere weight of missiles. Their 
circle rapidly diminished, and, refusing surrender, 
they perished to a man. 

When we took possession, the enemy were gone. 
The resistance of the cohort had given them time 
to escape; and Cestius sheltered his degraded 
laurels behind the ramparts of Bethhoron, by the 
sacrifice of four hundred heroes. 



SALATHIEL. 151 

This battle, which commenced on the eighth 
day of the month Marchesvan, had no equal in 
the war. The loss to the Romans was unparal- 
leled since the defeat of Crassus. Two legions 
were destroyed ; six thousand bodies were left on 
the field. The whole preparation for the siege of 
Jerusalem fell into our hands. Then was the hour 
to have struck the final blow for freedom. Then 
was given that chance of restoration, that respite, 
which Providence gives to every nation and every 
man. But our crimes, our wild feuds, the bigoted 
fury and polluted license of our factions, rose up 
as a cloud between us and the light ; we were 
made to be ruined. 

But those were not my reflections when I saw 
the gates of Bethhoron closing on the fugitives : 
I vowed never to rest, until I brought prisoners to 
Jerusalem, the last of the sacrilegious army that 
had dared to assault the Temple. 

The walls of Bethhoron, manned only with the 
wTeck of the troops that we had routed from ail 
their positions, could off'er no impediment to hands 
and hearts like ours. 1 ordered an immediate as- 
sault. The resistance was desperate, for beyond 
this city there was no place of refuge nearer than 
Antipatris. We were twice repulsed. I headed 
the third attack myself. The dead filled up the 



152 SALATHIEL. 

ditch, and I had already arrived at the foot of the 
rampart, with the scaling ladder in my hand, when 
I heard Jubal's voice behind me. He was leaping 
and dancing in the attitudes of utter madness. But 
there was no time to be lost. I rushed upon the 
battlements, tore a standard from its bearer, and 
Avaved it over my head with a shout of victory. 
The plain, the hills, the valleys, covered with the 
host rushing to the assault, echoed the cry ; I was 
at the summit of fortune ! 

In the next moment I felt a sudden shock. 
Darkness covered my eyes, and I plunged head- 
long. 

I awoke in a dungeon. 



SALATHIEL. 153 



CHAPTER XII. 

In that dungeon I lay two years. How I lived, 
how I bore to retain existence, I can now have no 
conception. I was for the greater part of the time 
in a kind of childishness. I was not mad, nor alto- 
gether insensible of things about me, nor even 
without the occasional inclination for the common 
objects and propensities of our being. I used to 
look for the glimmer of day-light, that was suffered 
to enter my cell. The reflection of the moon in a 
pool, of which, by climbing to the loop-hole, I 
could gain a glimpse, was waited for with some 
feeble feeling of pleasure. But my animal appe 
tites were more fully alive than ever. An hour's 
delay of the miserable provision that was thrown 
through my bars, made me wretched. I devoured 



354 SALATHIEL. 

it like a wild beast, and then longed through the 
dreary hours for its coming- again. 

I made no attempt to escape. I dragged ray- 
self once to the entrance of the dungeon, found it 
secured by an iron door, and never tried it again. 
If every bar had been open, I scarcely know 
whether T should have attempted to pass it. Even 
in my more reasoning hours, I felt no desire to 
move ; Destiny was upon me. My doom was 
marked in characters which nothing but blindness 
could fail to read ; and to struggle with fate, what 
was it but to prepare for new misfortune ! 

The memory of my wife and children sometimes 
broke through the icy apathy with which I la- 
boured to incrust my mind. Tears flowed, nature 
stung my heart ; I groaned, and made the vault 
ring with the cries of the exile from earth and hea- 
ven. But this passed away, and I was again the 
self-divorced man, without a tie to bind him to 
transitory things. 

I heard the thunder and the winds ; the light- 
nings sometimes startled me from my savage sleep. 
But what were they to me ! I was dreadfully se- 
cure from the fiercest rage of nature. There were 
nights when I conceived that I could distinguish 
the roarings of the ocean, and, shuddering, seemed 
to hear the cries of drowning men. But those too 



SALATHIEL. 155 

passed away. I swept remembrance from my mind, 
and felt a sort of vague enjoyment in the effort 
to defy the last power of evil. Cold, heat, hun- 
ger, waking, sleep, were the calendar of my year, 
the only points in which I was sensible of exist- 
ence ; I felt myself like some of those torpid ani- 
mals which, buried in stones from the creation, 
live on until the creation shall be no more. 

But this stern heaviness was only for the waking 
hour. Night had its old implacable dominion 
over me; full of vivid misery, crowded with the 
bitter sweet of memory, I wandered free among 
those in whose faces and forms my spirit found 
matchless loveliness ; then the cruel caprice of 
fancy would sting me ; in the very concord of en- 
chanting sounds, there would come a funereal voice. 
In the circle of the happy, I was appalled by some 
hideous visage uttering words of mystery. A spec- 
tral form would hang upon my steps, and tell me 
that I was undone. 

From one of those miserable slumbers I was 
roused by a voice pronouncing my name. I at 
first confounded it with the wanderings of sleep. 
But a chilling touch upon my forehead com- 
pletely aroused me. It was night, yet my eyes, 
accustomed to the darkness, gradually discovered 
the first intruder who ever stood within my living 



156 SALATHIEL. 

grave; nothing human could look more like the 
dead. A breathing skeleton stood before me. The 
skin clung to his bones ; misery was in every fea- 
ture ; the voice was scarcely above a whisper. 

" Rise," said this wretched being, " prince of 
Naphtali, you are free ; follow me." 

Strange thoughts were in the words. Was this 
indeed the universal summonc^r ? the being whom 
the prosperous dread, but the wretched love 1 Had 
the King of terrors stood before me, I could not 
have gazed on him with more wonder. " Rise," said 
the voice impatiently ; "we have but an hour till 
day-break, and you must escape now, or never." 
The sound of freedom scattered my apathy. The 
world opened upon my heart; country, friends, 
children, were in the word ; and I started up with 
the feeling of one to whom life is given on the 
scaffold. 

My guide hurried forward through the winding 
way to the door. He stopped : I heard him utter 
a groan, strike fiercely against the bars, and fall. 
I found him lying at the threshold without speech 
or motion ; carried him back ; and, by the help of 
the cruse of water left to moisten my solitary meal, 
restored him to his senses. 

" The wind," said he, '* must have closed the 
door, and we are destined to die together. So be it; 



SALATHIEL. 157 

with neither of us can the struggle be long — Fare- 
well !" He flung himself upon his face in a corner, 
and seemed to sleep. A noise of some heavy in- 
strument roused us both. He listened, and said, 
" There is hope still. The slave who let me in, 
is forcing the door."' We rushed to assist him ; 
and tugged and tore at the massive stones in which 
the hinges were fixed ; but found our utmost 
strength ineffectual as an infant's. The slave now 
cried out that he must give up the attempt ; that 
day was breaking, and the guard were at hand. 
We implored him to try once more. By a violent 
effort he drove his crow-bar through one of the 
pannels ; the gleam of light gave us courage ; and 
with our united strength we heaved at the joints, 
which were evidently loosening. 

In the midst of our work, the slave fled; and I 
heard a plunge into the pool beneath. ** He has 
perished," said my companion. '* The door is on 
the face of a precipice. He has fallen in the at- 
tempt to escape, and we are now finally undone."' 

The guard, disturbed by the noise, arrived ; and 
in the depths of our cell we heard the day spent in 
making the impassable barrier firmer than ever. 

For some hours my companion lay in that state 
of exhaustion which I could not distinguish from 
uneasy slumber, and which I attributed to the 



15S SALATHIEL. 

fatigue of our mutual labours. But his groans 
became so deep, that I ventured to rouse him, and 
even to cheer him with the chances of escape. 

*' I have not slept," said he ; "I shall never 
sleep again, until the grave gives me that slum- 
ber in which the wretched can alone find rest. 
Escape ! No — for months, for years, I have had 
but one object. I have traversed mountain and 
sea for it ; I have given to it day and night, all the 
wealth that I possessed in the world ; I could give 
no more, but my life ; and that too I was to give. 
I stood within sight of this object. Its attain- 
ment would have comforted my dying hour. But it 
is snatched from me in the very malice of fortune ; 
and now the sooner I perish, the better." He 
writhed with mental pain. 

** But what cause can you have for being here? 
You are no prisoner. You have not fought our 
tyrants. Who are you?" 

** One whom you can never know. A being 
born to honour and happiness ; but who perverted 
them by pride and revenge, and whose last mise- 
rable hope is, that he may die unknown, and 
without the curses that fall on the traitor and the 
murderer." 

I knew the speaker, in those words of woe. I 
cried out, " Jubal, my friend, my kinsman, my 



SALATHIEL. 159 

hero ; is it you then who have risked your life to 
save me ?" I threw myself beside him. He crept 
from me. I caught his meagre hand. I forced 
food into his lips ; in the deepest grief at his ob- 
vious suffering, I adjured him to live and hope. 

He started away wildly. ** Touch me not. 
Prince of Naphtali, I am unfit to live. I — I have 
been your ruin; and yet, he who knows the heart, 
knows that I alone am not to blame. I was a 
dupe, a slave to furious passions, the victim of 
evil councillors, the prey of disease of mind. What 
I did was done in malice, but it was done in mad- 
ness too. On my crimes may Heaven have 
mercy ! for they are beyond the forgiveness of 
man." 

By the feeble light, which showed scarcely 
more than the wretchedness of my dungeon, I 
made some little preparation for the refreshment of 
this feverish and famished being. His story agi- 
tated him ; and, strongly awakened as my curiosity 
was, I forbore all question. But it lay a burden 
on his mind, and I suffered him to make his con- 
fession. 

" I loved Salome," said he ; ** but I was so 
secure of acceptance, according to the custom of 
our tribe, that I never conceived the possibility of 
an obstacle to our marriage. My love and my 



160 SALATHIEL. 

pride were equally hurt by her rejection. The 
return of Salome from Rome, and the new dis- 
tinctions of her husband, your gratitude, and the 
popular applause, made my envy bitterness. To 
change the scene, I went to Jerusalem. I there 
found the spirit of malice active. Your learning 
and talents had made you obnoxious long before ; 
your new opulence and rank turned dislike into 
hatred. Onias, whose dagger you turned from the 
bosom of the noble Eleazar, remembered his dis- 
grace. He headed the conspiracy against you; 
and nothing but your heroism, and the daring 
vigour with which you stirred up the nation, could 
have saved you long since from the last extremities 
of faction and revenge. My unhappy state of 
mind threw me into his hands. I was inflamed 
against you by perpetual calumnies. My feelings, 
morbid with fancied wrongs, hurried me into vio- 
lences of language and wild resolutions, that now 
strike me with wonder. It was even proposed 
that I should accuse you before the Sanhedrim of 
dealing with the powers of darkness. Proofs were 
offered, which my bewildered and broken reason 
could scarcely resist. I was assailed with subtle 
argument ; the latent superstitions of my nature 
were stimulated by sights and scenes of strange 
import, horrid and mysterious displays, which im- 



SALATHIEL. 161 

plicate the leaders of Jerusalem deeply in the 
charges laid by our law upon the idolaters. Spirits, 
or the semblances of spirits, were raised before my 
eyes ; voices were heard in the depths and in the 
air, denouncing you, even you, as the enemy of 
Judea and of man. 1 was commanded, in the 
midst of thunders, real or feigned, to destroy you." 

Here his voice sank, his frame quivered ; and 
wrapping his head in his cloak, he remained long 
silent. To relieve him from this painful narrative, 
I asked for intelligence of my family and of the 
country, 

" Of your family I can tell you nothing," said 
he, mournfully ; ** I shrank from the very mention 
of their name. During these two years, 1 had but 
one pursuit, the discovery of your prison. I re- 
fused to hear, to think of other things. I felt that 
I was dying, and I dreaded to appear before the 
great tribunal with the groans from your dungeon 
rising up to stifle my prayers." 

** But is our country still torn by the Roman 
wolves ?" 

'' Its destruction forced itself on my eyes. The 
whole land is in tumult. Blood and horror are 
under every roof from Lebanon to Idumea. The 
Roman sword is out, and it falls with cruel havoc ; 
but the Jewish dagger pays it home, and the le- 



162 SALATHIEL. 

gions quail before the naked valour of the peasan- 
try. But what are valour or patriotism to us now ? 
We are in our grave 1" 

The thought of my family exposed to the 
miseries of a ferocious war, only kindled my eager- 
ness to escape from this den of oblivion. I rose : it 
was evening ; and the melancholy moon threw the 
old feeble gleam on the water, which had so long 
been to me the only mirror of her countenance. I 
observed the light darkened by a figure stealing 
along the edge of the pool. It approached, and 
the words were whispered: *'It is impossible to 
break open the door from without, as the guard 
are on the watch ; but try whether it cannot be 
opened from within." A crow-bar was pushed into 
the loop-hole ; its bearer, the slave, who had 
escaped by swimming, jumped down and was 
gone. 

I left Jubal where he lay, lingered at the door 
till all external sounds ceased, and then made my 
desperate attempt. I was wasted by confinement ; 
but the mind is force. I laboured with furious 
effort at the mass of bolt and bar, and at length 
felt it begin to give way. I saw a star, the first 
for two long years, twinkling through the fracture. 
A quarter of an hour's labour more unfixed the 
huge hinge, and I felt the night air cool and fra- 



SALATHIEL. 163 

grant on my cheek. I now grasped the last bar, 
and was in the act of forcing it from the wall, 
when the thought of Jubal struck me. There was 
a struggle of a moment in my mind. To linger 
now might be to give the guard time to intercept 
me. I was ravening for liberty. It was to me 
now, what water in the desert is to the dying cara- 
van. It was the sole assuaging of a frantic thirst, 
of a fiery and consuming fever of the soul. If 
every grain of dust under my feet were diamonds, 
I would have given them to feel myself treading 
the dewy grass that lay waving on the hill-side 
before me. 

A tall shadow passed along, and compelled me 
to pause. It was that of a mountain shepherd, 
spear in hand, guarding his flock from the depre- 
dations of the wolves. He stopped at a short 
distance from the dungeon, and, gazing on the 
moon, broke out with a rude, but not unsweet 
voice into song. The melody was wild, a lamen- 
tation over the fallen glories of Judea ; '' whose 
sun was set, and whose remaining light, sad and 
holy as the beauty of the moon, must soon decay." 
The word freedom mingled in the strain, and every 
note of that solemn strain vibrated to my heart. 
The shepherd passed along. 

I tore down the bar, and gazed upon the glorious 



164 SALATHIKL. 

face of heaven. My feet were upon the free 
ground. I returned hastily to the eel!, and told 
Jubal the glad tidings ; but he heard me not. To 
abandon him there was to give him up to inevitable 
death, either by the rage of the guard, or by the 
less merciful infliction of famine. I carried him 
on my shoulders to the entrance. 

A roar of wrath, mixed with ridicule, broke on 
me, as I touched the threshold. The guard stood 
drawn up in front of the dilapidated door ; and the 
sight of the prisoner entrapped in the very crisis 
of escape, was the true food for ruffian mirth. 
Staggering under my burden, I yet burst forward; 
but I was received in a circle of levelled spears. 
Resistance was desperate ; yet, even when sunk 
upon the ground under my burden, I attempted 
to resist, or gather their points in my bosom and 
perish. But my feeble efforts only raised new 
scofling. I was unworthy of Roman steel; and 
the guard, after amusing themselves with my im- 
potent rage, dragged me within the passage, placed 
Jubal, who neither spoke nor moved, beside me, 
blocked up the door, and wished me '* better 
success the next time." 

I spent the remainder of that night in fierce 
agitation. The apathy, the protecting scorn of 
external things that I had nurtured, as other men 



SALATHIEL. 165 

would nurture happiness, was gone. The glimpse 
of the sky haunted me ; u hundred times in the 
course of the night I thought that I was treading 
on the grass ; that I felt its refreshing moisture ; 
that the air was breathing balm on my cheek; 
th^t the shepherd's song was still echoing in my 
ears, and that I saw him pointing to a new way 
of escape from my inextricable dungeon. In one 
of my ramblings I fell over Jubal. Exasperated 
at the stern reality round me, I flung the crow-bar 
from my hand. A sound followed, like the fall of 
large stones into water. The sound continued. 
Still stranger echoes followed, which my bewildered 
fancy turned into all similitudes of earth and 
ocean ; the march of troops, the distant roar of 
thunder, the dashing of billows, the clamour of 
battle, the boisterous mirth of Bacchanalians ; the 
groaning and heaving of masts and rigging tossed 
by storm. 

The dungeon v/as dark as death, and T felt my 
way towards the sound. To my surprise, the 
accidental blow of the bar had loosened a part of 
the wall ; and made an orifice large enough to 
admit the human body. The pale light of morning 
showed a cavern beyond, narrow and rugged ; but 
into which I was resolved to penetrate. It branched 
into a ^ ariety of passages, some of them fit for 



166 SALATHIEL. 

nothing but the fox's burrow. Two were wider. 
I returned to the lair of my unhappy companion, 
and prevailed on him to follow, only by the decla- 
ration, that if he refused, I must perish by his 
side. My scanty provisions were gathered up. I 
led the way ; and, determined never to return to 
the place of my misery, we set forward, to tempt 
in utter darkness the last chances of famine — pil- 
grims of the tomb. 

We wandered through a fearful labyrinth for a 
period which utterly exhausted us. Of night or 
day we had no knowledge ; but hunger keenly told 
us that it was long. I was sinking ; when a low 
groan struck my ear. I listened pantingly : it 
came again. Tt was evidently from some object 
close beside me. I put forth my hand, and pulled 
away a projecting stone : a flash of light illumined 
the passage. Another step would have plunged 
us into a pool a thousand feet below. 



SA LATHI EL. 167 



CHAPTER XIII. 

The cavern thus opened to us was large, and 
seemed to be the magazine of some place of trade. 
It was crowded with chests and bales heaped to- 
gether in disorder. But life and liberty were be- 
fore us. I cheered Jubal, till his scattered senses 
returned, and he clasped my feet in humiliation 
and gratitude. 

We were like men created anew. Sudden 
strength nerved our limbs : we forced our way 
through piles that but an hour before would have 
been mountains to our despairing strength. After 
long labour we worked our passage to a door. It 
opened into another cavern, palpably the dwelling 
of some master of extraordinary opulence. Rich 
tissues were hung on the walls ; the ceiling was a 



168 SALATHIEL. 

Tjrian canopy ; precious vases stood od tables of 
citron and ivory. A large lyre superbly orna- 
mented hung in an opening of the rock, and gave 
its melancholy music to the wind. But no human 
being was to be seen. Was this one of the true 
wonders that men classed among the fictions of 
Greece and Asia? The Nereids with their queen 
could not have sought a more secluded palace. 
Still onward were heard the sounds of ocean. We 
followed them, and saw one of those scenes of 
grandeur which nature creates, as if to show the 
littleness of man. 

An arch three times the height of the loftiest 
temple, and ribbed with marble, rose broadly over 
our heads. Innumerable shafts of the purest 
alabaster, rounded with the perfection of sculpture, 
rose in groups and clusters to the solemn roof: 
wild flowers and climbing plants of every scent 
and hue gathered round the capitals, and hung the 
gigantic sides of the hall with a lovelier decora- 
tion than ever was wrought in loom. The awful 
beauty of this ocean-temple bowed the heart in 
instinctive homage. I felt the sacredness of 
nature. 

But this grandeur was alone worthy of the 
spectacle to which it opened. The whole mag- 
nificence of the Mediterranean spread before our 



SALATHIEL. 169 

eyes, smooth as polished silver, and now reflecting 
the glories of the west. The sun lay on the 
horizon in the midst of crimson clouds, like a 
monarch on the funeral pile, sinking in conflagra- 
tion that lighted earth and ocean. 

But at this noble portal we had reached our 
limit. The sides of the cavern projected so far 
into the waters as to make a small anchorage. 
Access or escape by land was palpably impossible. 
Yet here at least we were masters. No claimant 
presented himself to dispute our title. The pro- 
visions of our unknown host were ample, and, to 
our eager tastes, dangerous from their luxury. 
The evening that we passed over our repast at the 
entrance of the cave, exhilarated with the first 
sensation of liberty, and enjoying every aspect and 
voice of the lovely scene with the keenness of the 
most unhoped-for novelty, was a full recompense 
for the toils and terrors of the labyrinth. 

All before us was peace. — The surge that died 
at our feet murmured peace ; the wheeling sea- 
birds, as their long trains steered homeward, 
pouring out from time to time a clangor of wild 
sounds that descended to us in harmony ; the little 
white-sailed vessels, that skimmed along the dis- 
tant waters like flies ; the breeze waving the ivy 
VOL. II. H 



170 SALATIIIEL. 

and arbutus that festooned our banquet-hall ; alike 
spoke to the heart the language of peace. 

*' If," said I, " my death-bed were left to my 
own choice, on the verge of this cavern would I 
wish to take my last farewell." 

" To the dying all places must be indifferent," 
replied my companion : ** when Death is at hand, 
his shadow fills the mind. What matters it to the 
exile, who in a few moments must leave his 
country for ever, on what spot of its shore his last 
step is planted ? Perhaps the lovelier that spot, 
the more painful the parting. If I must have my 
choice, let me die in the dungeon, or in battle ; in 
the chain that makes me hate the earth, or in the 
struggle that makes it be forgotten." 

" Yet, even for battle, if we would acquit our- 
selves as becomes men, is not some previous rest 
almost essential ? and for the sterner conflict with 
that mighty enemy, before whom cur strength is 
vapour, is it not well to prepare with the whole 
means of mental fortitude 1 I would not perish in 
the irritation of the dungeon ; in the blind fury of 
man against man ; nor in the hot and giddy whirl 
of human cares. Let me lay my sinking frame 
where nothing shall intrude upon the nobler busi- 
ness of the mind. But these are melancholy 



SALATHIEL. 171 

thoughts. Come, Jubal, fill to the speedy deli- 
verauce of our country." 

" Here, then, to her speedy deliverance, and 
the glory of those who fight her battles I " The cup 
was filled to the brim ; but just as the wine touched 
his lips, he flung it away. " No," exclaimed he, 
in bitterness of soul, *' it is not for such as I to 
join in the aspirations of the patriot and the 
soldier. Prince of Naphtali, your generous na- 
ture has forgiven me ; but there is an accuser 
here," and he struck his withered hand wildly 
upon his bosom, *' that can never be silenced. 
Under the delusions, the infernal delusions of your 
enemies, I followed you through a long period of 
your career unseen. Every act, almost every 
thought, was made known to me ; for you were 
surrounded by the agents of your enemies. I was 
urged by the belief that you were utterly accursed 
by our law, and that to drive the dagger to your 
heart was to redeem our cause. But the act was 
against my nature ; and in the struggle my reason 
failed. When I stood before you on the morning 
of the great battle, you saw me in one of those 
fits of frenzy that always followed a new command 
to murder. The misery of seeing Salome's hus- 
band once more triumphant finally plunged me 



172 SALATHIEL. 

into the Roman ranks to seek for death. I es- 
caped, followed the army, and reached Bethhoron 
in the midst of the assault. Still frantic, I thought 
that in you I saw my rival victorious, and sprang 
upon the wall. It was this hand, this parricidal 
hand, that struck the blow — ." He covered his 
face, and sighed convulsively. 

The mystery of my captivity was now cleared 
up, and feeling only pity and forgiveness for the 
ruin that remorse had made, I succeeded at last 
in restoring him to some degree of calmness. I 
even ventured to cheer him with the hope of better 
days, when in the palace of my fathers I should 
acknowledge my deliverer. With a pressure of 
the hand, and a melancholy smile, " I know," 
said he, " that I have not long to live. But if 
any prayer of mine is to be answered by the Power 
that I have so deeply offended, it would be to die 
in some act of service to my prince and generous 
benefactor. But hark!" 

A groan was uttered close to the spot where we 
sat. I perceived for the first time an opening 
behind some furniture ; entered, and saw lying on 
a bed a man apparently in the last stage of ex- 
haustion. He exclaimed, " Three days of misery, 
— three days left alone, to die; — without food, 



SALATHIEL. 173 

without help, abandoned by all. But I have de- 
served it. Traitor and villain as I am, I have 
deserved a thousand deaths ! " 

I looked upon this as but the raving of . pain, 
and brought him some wine. He swallowed it 
with fierce avidity; but, even while I held the 
cup to his lips, he sank back with a cry of horror. 
** Aye," cried he, " I knew that I could not es- 
cape you ; you are come at last. Spirit, leave me 
to die. Or if," said he, half rising, and looking 
in my face with a steady yet dim glare, '* you can 
tell the secrets of the grave, tell me what is my 
fate. I adjure you, fearful being, by the God of 
Israel ; by the gods of the Pagan ; or if you ac- 
knowledge any god beyond the last hour of mise- 
rable man, tell me what I am to be." 

I continued silent, and struck with the agony of 
his features. Jubal entered, and the looks of the 
dying man were turned on him. 

'* More of them!" he exclaimed, " more tor- 
mentors! more terrible witnesses of the tortures 
of a wretch whom earth casts out ! What, I de- 
mand of you, is the fate of those who live as 
I have lived ? — the betrayer, the plunderer, the man 
of blood I But you will give me no answer. The 
time for your power is not come." He lay for a 



174 SALATHIEL. 

short period in mental sufferings ; then, starting- 
up on his feet by an extraordinary effort of nature, 
and with furious execrations at the tardiness of 
death, he tore off the bandage which covered a 
wound on his forehead. The blood streamed down, 
and made him a ghastly spectacle. " Aye," cried 
he, as he looked upon his stained hands, " this is 
the true colour ; the traitor's blood should cover 
the traitor's hands. Years of crime, this is your 
reward. The betrayal of my noble master to 
death, the ruin of his house, the destruction of his 
name ; these were the right beginning to the life 
of the robber." 

A peal of thunder rolled over our heads, and 
the gush of the rising waves roared through the 
cavern. 

" Aye, there is your army," he cried, " coming 
in the storm. I have seen your angry visages at 
night in the burning village ; I have seen you in 
the shipwreck ; I have seen you in the howling 
wilderness ; but now I see you in shapes more 
terrible than all." 

The wind bursting through the long vaults, 
forced open the door. *' Welcome, welcome to 
your prey," he yelled, and drawing a knife from 
his sash, darted it into his bosom. The act was so 



SALATHIEL. 175 

instantaneous, that to arrest the blow was impos- 
sible. He fell, and died with a brief, fierce 
struggle. 

" Horrible end," murmured Jubal, gazing on 
the stiffened form ; — " here is theory answered at 
once ; happier for that wretch to have perished in 
the hottest strife of man or nature, trampled in 
the charge, or plunged into the billows ! But, 
save me from the misery of lonely death !" 

" Yet it was our presence that made him feel. 
He was guilty of some crime, perhaps of many, 
that the sight of us strangely awoke to torment 
his dying hour. He gazed upon me with evident 
alarm, and, not improbably, my withered face, and 
those rags of my dungeon, startled him into re- 
collections too strong for his decayed reason." 

*' Have you ever seen him before ?" 

" Never." I gave a reluctant look to the hide- 
ous distortion of a countenance still full of the 
final agony. 

** Now, to think of ourselves. We shall have 
soon our own experiment fairly tried. A few 
days must exhaust our provisions. The surges 
roll on the one hand, on the other we have the 
rock. But we shall die at least in pomp. No 
king of Asia will lie in a nobler vault, nor even 
have sincerer rejoicings at his end; the crows 



176 SALATHIEL, 

and vultures are no hypocrites," said Jubal, with 
a melancholy smile. 

The dead man's turban had fallen off in his last 
violence, and I perceived the corner of a letter in 
its folds. Its intelligence startled me. It was 
from the commandant of the Roman fleet on the 
coast, mentioning that a squadron was in readiness 
to " attack the pirates in their cavern." 

A heavy sound, as if something of immense 
weight had rushed into the entrance of the arch, 
and then the echo of many voices, stopped our 
conversation. 

" The Romans have come," said I, " and you 
will be now indulged with your wish : our lives 
are forfeited ; for never will I go back to the 
dungeon." 

** I hear no sound but that of laughter," said 
Jubal, listening ; '* those invaders are the merriest 
of cut-throats. But, before we give ourselves 
actually into their hands, let us see of what they 
are made." 

We left the chamber, and returned to the recess 
from which we had originally emerged. Its posi- 
tion commanded a view of the chief avenues and 
chambers of the cavern ; and while I was busy 
below in securing the door, Jubal mounted the 
wall, and reconnoitred the enemy through a 



SALATHIEL. 177 

fissure. " Those are no Romans," whispered he, 
" but a set of the most jovial fellows that ever 
robbed on the seas. They have clearly been 
driven in by the storm, and are now preparing to 
feast. Their voyage has been lucky, if I am to 
judge by the bales that they are hauling in ; and if 
wine can do it, they will be in an hour or two 
drunk to the last man." 

** Then we can take advantage of their sleep, let 
loose one of their boats, and away." 

I mounted, to see this pirate festivity In the 
various vistas of the huge cavern, groups of bold- 
faced and athletic men were gathered, all busy 
with the bustle of the time : some piling fires 
against the walls, and preparing provisions : some 
stripping o(T their wet garments, and bringing 
others out of heaps of every kind and colour, from 
recesses in the rock : some furbishing their arms, 
and wiping the spray from rusty helmets and 
corselets. The hollow vaults rang with songs, 
boisterous laughter, the rattling of armour, and 
the creaking and rolling of chests of plunder. 
The dashing of the sea under the gale filled up 
this animated dissonance ; and at intervals the 
thunder bursting directly above our heads, over- 
powered all, and silenced all. 



178 SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

The chamber, whose costly equipment first told 
us of the opulence of its masters, was set apart 
for the chief rovers, who were soon seated at a 
large table in its centre, covered with luxury. 
Flagons of wine were brought from cellars known 
only to the initiated ; fruits piled in silver baskets 
blushed along the board ; plate of the richest 
workmanship, the plunder of palaces and temples, 
glittered in every form ; tripods loaded with aro- 
matic wood threw a blaze up to the marble roof; 
and from the central arch hung a superb Greek 
lamp, shooting out light from a hundred mouths 
of serpents twined in all possible ways. The party 
before me were about thirty ; as fierce looking 
figures as ever toiled through tempest : some 



SALATHIEL. 179 

splendidly attired, some in the rough costume of 
the deck ; but all jovial, and determined to make 
the most of their time. Other men had paid for the 
banquet ; and there was probably not a vase on their 
table that was not the purchase of personal hazard. 
They sat, conquerors, in the midst of their own 
trophies ; and not the most self-indulgent son of 
opulence could have more luxuriated in his wealth, 
nor the most exquisite student of epicurism have 
discussed his luxuries with more finished and fas- 
tidious science. Lounging on couches covered with 
embroidered draperies, too costly for all but princes, 
they lectured the cooks without mercy : the ve- 
nison, pheasants, sturgeon, and a multitude of other 
dishes, were in succession pronounced utterly un- 
fit to be touched ; and the wine w as tasted, and 
dismissed with the scorn of palates refined to the 
highest point of delicacy. Yet the sea air was 
not to be trifled with ; and a succession of courses 
appeared, and were despatched with a diligence 
that prohibited all language, beyond the pithy 
phrases of delight or disappointment. 

The wine at length set the conversation flowing ; 
and, from the merits of the various vintages, the 
speakers diverged into the general subjects of 
politics and their profession; on the former of 
which they visited all parties with tolerably equal 



180 SALATHIEL. 

ridicule ; and, on the latter, declared unanimously 
that the only cause worthy of a man of sense was 
the cause for which they were assembled round that 
table. The next stage was the more hazardous 
one of personal jocularity ; yet even this was got 
over, with but a few murmurs from the parties 
suffering. Songs and toasts to themselves, their 
loves, matron and maid, within the shores of the 
Mediterranean ; and their enterprises in all time 
to come, relieved the drier topics ; and all was 
good fellowship, until one unlucky goblet of spoiled 
wine soured the table. 

" So, this you call Chian," exclaimed a broad- 
built figure, whose yellow hair and blue eyes 
showed him a son of the north ; * ' may I be poisoned," 
and he made a hideous grimace, " if more detest- 
able vinegar ever was brewed ; let me but meet 
the merchant, and I shall teach him a lesson that 
he will remember, when next he thinks of mur- 
dering men at their meals. Here, baboon, take it; 
it is fit only for such as you." He flung the gob> 
let point-blank at the head of a negro, who es- 
caped it only by bounding to one side with the 
agility of the ape, that he much resembled. 

*' Bad news, Vladomir, for our winter's stock, 
for half of it is Chian," said a dark-featured and 
brilliant-eyed Arab, who sat at the head of the table. 



SALATHIEL. 181 

'' Ho ! Syphax, fill round from that flagon, and let 
us hold a council of war upon the delinquent 
wine." 

The slave dexterously changed the wine ; it was 
poured round, pronounced first-rate, and the Ger- 
man was laughed at remorselessly. 

** I suppose I am not to believe my own senses," 
remonstrated Vladomir. 

*' Oh ! by all means, as long as you keep them," 
said one, laughing. 

•' Will you tell me that I don't know the dif- 
ference between wine and that poison." 

" Neither you nor any man, friend Vladomir, 
can know much upon the subject after his second 
dozen of goblets ;" sneered another at the German's 
national propensity. 

" You do him injustice," said a subtle- visaged 
Chiote at the opposite side of the table. " He is 
as much in his senses this moment as ever he was. 
There are brains of that happy constitution, which 
defies alike reason and wine." 

" Well, I shall say no more," murmured the 
German sullenly, '* than, confound the spot on 
which that wine grew, wherever it lies ; the hung- 
riest vineyard on the Rhine would be ashamed to 
show its equal. By Woden, the very taste will go 
with me to my grave." 



182 SALATHIEL. 

" Perhaps it may," said the Chiote, irritated for 
the honour of his country, and significantly touch- 
ing his dagger. ** But were you ever in the 
island?" 

'' No ; nor ever shall, with my own consent, if 
that flagon be from it," growled the German, with 
his broad eye glaring on his adversary. " I have 
seen enough of its produce, alive and dead to- 
night." 

The wind roared without, and a tremendous 
thunder-peal checked the angry dialogue. There 
was a general pause. 

" Come, comrades, no quarreling," cried the 
Arab. " Heavens, how the storm comes on ! No- 
thing can ride out to-night. Here's the captain's 
health, and safe home to him." The cups were 
filled ; but the disputants were not to be so easily 
reconciled. 

" Ho ! Memnon," cried the master of the table 
to a sallow Egyptian richly clothed, and whose 
scymitar and dagger sparkled with jewels. He 
was engaged in close council with the rover at his 
side. *' Lay by business now ; you don't like the 
wine, or the toast?" 

The Egyptian startled from his conference, pro- 
fessed his perfect admiration of both, and sipping, 
returned to his whisper. 



SALATHIEL. 183 

" Memnon won't drink, for fear of letting out 
his secrets; for instance, where he found that 
scymitar, or what has become of the owner," said 
a young and handsome Idumean, with a smile. 

" I should like to know by what authority you 
ask me questions on the subject. If it had been 
in your hands, I should have never thought any 
necessary," retorted the scowling Egyptian. 

'' Aye, of course not, Memnon : my way is well 
known. — Fight rather than steal ; plunder rather 
than cheat ; and, after the affair is over, account 
to captain and crew, rather than glitter in their 
property," was the Idumean's answer, with a glow 
of indignation reddening his striking features. 

" By the bye," said the Arab, in whose eye the 
gems flashed temptingly, '• I think that Memnon 
is always under a lucky star. We come home in 
rags, but he regularly returns the better for his 
trip : why, Ptolemy himself has not a more ex- 
quisite tailor. All depends, however, upon a man's 
knowledge of navigation in this world." 

*' And friend Memnon knows every point of it, 
but plain sailing," said the contemptuous Idumean. 

The Egyptian's sallow skin grew livid. '' I may 
be coward, or liar, or pilferer, or what you will," 
exclaimed he ; " but if I were the whole three, I 



184 SALATHIEL. 

could stand no chance of being distinguished in 
the present company." 

'* Insult to the whole profession," exclaimed the 
Arab. " And now I insist, in the general name, 
on your giving a plain account of the proceeds of 
your last cruise. You can be at no loss for it." 

*^ No ; for he has it by his side, and in the most 
brilliant arithmetic," said Hanno, a satirical- vi- 
saged son of Carthage. 

" I must hear no more on the subject," bitterly 
pronounced the Egyptian. ** Those diamonds 
belong to neither captain nor crew. 1 purchased 
them fairly ; and the seller was, I will undertake 
to say, the better off of the two." 

"Yes; I will undertake to say," laughed the 
Idumean, " that you left him the happiest dog in 
existence. It is care that makes us all miserable; 
and the less we have to care for, the luckier we 
are. I have not a doubt you left the fellow at the 
summit of earthly rapture !" 

*' Aye!" added the Arab, '* without a sorrow 
or a shekel in the world." 

Boisterous mirth followed the Egyptian, as he 
started from his couch, and left the hall ; casting- 
fierce looks in his retreat, like Parthian arrows, on 
the carousal. 



SALATHIEL. 185 

The German had, in the mean time, fallen back 
in a doze ; from which he was disturbed by the 
slave's refilling his goblet. 

" Aye, that tastes like wine," said he, glancing 
at the Greek, who had by no means forgotten the 
controversy. 

*' Taste what it may, it is the very same wine 
that you railed at half an hour ago," returned the 
Chiote : " the truth is, my good Vladomir, that 
the wine of Greece is like its language ; both are 
exquisite and unrivalled to those who understand 
them. But Nature wisely adapts tastes to men, 
and men to tastes. I am not at all surprised that 
north of the Danube they prefer beer." 

The German had nothing to give back for the 
taunt, but the frown that gathered on his black 
brow. 

The Chiote pursued his triumph ; and with 
a languid, lover-like gaze on the wine, which 
sparkled in purple radiance to the brim of its 
enamelled cup, he apostrophised the produce of 
his fine country. '* Delicious grape !— essence of 
the sun-shine and of the dew ! — what vales but the 
vales of Chios could have produced thee? What 
tint of heaven is brighter than thy hue? what 
fragrance of earth richer than thy perfume ?" 



186 SALATHIEL. 

He lightly sipped a few drops from the edge, 
like a libation to the deity of taste. 

*' Exquisite draught!" breathed he; "une- 
qualled but by the rosy lip and melting sigh of 
beauty ! Well spoke the proverb — * Chios, whose 
wines steal every head ; and whose women, every 
heart; " 

"You forget the rest," gladly interrupted the 
German : — " And whose men steal every thing." 
A general laugh followed the retort, such as it was. 

" Scythian !" said the Greek, across the table, 
in a voice made low by rage, and preparing to 
strike. 

"Liar!" roared the German, sweeping a blow 
of his falchion, which the Chiote escaped only by 
flinging himself on the ground. The blow fell on 
the table, where it caused wide devastation. All 
now started up ; swords were out on every side ; 
and nothing but forcing the antagonists to their 
cells, prevented the last perils of a difference of 
palate. 

The storm bellowed deeper and deeper. 

" Here's to the luck that sent us back before 
this Northwester thought of stirring abroad," said 
the Arab. " I wish our noble captain were among 
us now. Where was he last seen ?" 



SALATHIEL. 187 

*' Steering westward, off and on Rhodes, look- 
ing out for the galley that carried the Procurator's 
plate. But this wind must send him in before 
morning," was the answer of Hanno. 

'' Or send him to the bottom, where many as 
bold a fellow has gone before him," whispered a 
tall haggard-looking Italian to the answerer. 

" That would be good news, for one of us at 
least," said Hanno. " You would have no reck- 
oning to settle. Your crew made a handsome 
affair of that Alexandrian prize. And the cap- 
tain might be looking for returns, friend Ter- 
tuUus." 

** Then let him look to himself. His time may 
be nearer than he thinks. His haughtiness, and 
trampling upon men as good as himself, may pro- 
voke justice before long," growled the Italian, 
indignant at some late discipline. 

" Justice ! — is the man mad? The very sound 
is high treason in our gallant company. Why, 
comrade, if justice ever ventured here, where 
would some of us have been these last six 
months ?" 

The sound caught the general ear ; the allu- 
sion was understood, and the Italian was dis- 
pleased. 

" I hate to be remarkable,'* said he : *' with the 



188 SALATHIEL. 

honest, it may be proper to be honest ; but beside 
you, my facetious Hanno, a man should cultivate 
a little of the opposite school, in mere compliment 
to his friend. You had no scruples, when you 
hanged the merchant the other day." 

A murmur arose in the hall. 

*' Comrades," said Hanno, with the air of an 
orator ; *' hear me too on that subject : three 
words will settle the question to men of sense. 
The merchant was a regular trader. Will any 
man who knows the world, and has brains an atom 
clearer than those with which Heaven in its mercy 
has gifted my virtuous friend, believe that I, a 
regular liver by the merchant, would extinguish 
that by which I live ? Sensible physicians never 
kill a patient while he can pay; sensible kings 
never exterminate a province when it can pro- 
duce any thing in the shape of a tax ; sensible 
women never pray for the extinction of the male 
sex until they despair of getting husbands ; sen- 
sible husbands never wish their wives out of the 
world while they can get any thing by their 
living; so, sensible men of our profession will 
never put a merchant under water, until they 
can make nothing by his remaining above 
it. I have, for instance, raised contributions 
on that same trader every summer these five 



SALATHIEL. 189 

years ; and, by the blessing of fortune, hope 
to have the same thing to say for five times as 
many years to come. No ; I would not see 
any man touch a hair of his head. In six months 
he will have a cargo again, and I shall meet him 
with as much pleasure as ever." The Cartha- 
ginian was highly applauded. 

". Malek, you dont drink ;" cried the Arab to a 
gigantic Ethiopian towards the end of the table. 
*• Here, I pledge you in the very wine that was 
marked for the emperor's cellar." 

Malek tasted it, and sent back a cup in return. 

** The Emperor's wine may be good enough for 
him," was the message; " but this cup contains 
the wine marked for the Emperor's butler." 

The verdict was fully in favour of the Ethio- 
pian. 

'• In all matters of this kind," said Malek, with 
an air of supreme taste, " I look first to the stores 
of the regular professors — the science of life is in 
the masters of the kitchen and the cellar. Your 
Emperors and Procurators, of course, must be 
content with what they can get. But the man 
who wishes to have the first-rate dinner, should 
be on good terms with the cook and the butler. 
I caught this sample on my last voyage after the 



190 SALATHIEL. 

imperial fleet. Nero never had such wine on his 
table." 

He indulged himself in a long draught of this 
exclusive luxury ; and sank on his couch, with his 
hand clasping the superbly-embossed flagon, a part 
of his prize. 

*' The black churl," said a little shrivelled Sy- 
rian, "never shares; he keeps his wine as he 
keeps his money." 

** Aye, he keeps every thing but his character," 
whispered Hanno. 

** There you wrong him," observed the Syrian ; 
" no man keeps his character more steadily. By 
Beelzebub! it is like his skin; neither will be 
blacker the longest day he has to live." 
■ A roar of laughter rose round the hall. 

'• Black or not black," exclaimed the Ethio- 
pian, with a sullen grin, that showed his teeth like 
the fangs of a wild beast, *' my blood's as red as 
yours." 

"Possibly," retorted the little Syrian; "but, 
as I must take your word on the subject till I shall 
have seen a drop of it spilt in fair fight, 1 only 
hope I may live and be happy till then ; and I 
cannot put up a better prayer for a merry old age." 

" There is no chance of your ever seeing it," 



SALATHIEL. 191 

growled the Ethiopian ; " you love the baggage 
and the hold too well to leave them to accident^ 
be the fight fair or foul." 

The laugh was easily raised, and it was turned 
against the Syrian, who started up, and declaimed 
with a fury of gesture that made the ridicule still 
louder. 

" I appeal to all," cried the fiery orator. " I 
appeal to every man of honour among us, whether 
by night or day, on land or water, I have ever 
been backward ?" 

" Never at an escape," interrupted the Ethio- 
pian. 

'* Whether I have ever broken faith with the 
band?" 

•* Likely enough : where nobody trusts, we may 
defy treason." 

" Whether my character and services are not 
known and valued by our captain?" still louder 
exclaimed the irritated Syrian. 

** Aye, just as little as they deserve." 

*' Silence, brute," screamed the diminutive ad- 
versary, casting his keen eyes, that doubly blazed 
with rage, on the Ethiopian, who still lay em- 
bracing the flagon at his ease. " With heroes of 
your complexion I disdain all contest. If I must 



192 SALATHIEL. 

fight, it shall be with human beings, not with 
savages — with men, not monsters." 

The Ethiopian's black cheek absolutely grew 
red : this taunt was the sting. At one prodigious 
bound he sprang across the table, and darted upon 
the Syrian's throat with the roar and the fury of a 
tiger. 

All was instant confusion : lamps, flagons, fruits, 
were trampled on ; the table was overthrown ; 
swords and poniards flashed in all hands. The 
little Syrian yelled, strangling in the grasp of the 
black giant ; and it was with the utmost difficulty 
that he could be rescued. The Arab, a fine ath- 
letic fellow, achieved this object, and bade him 
run for his life ; — a command with which he com- 
plied unhesitatingly, followed by a cheer from 
Hanno, who swore that if all trades failed, he 
would make his fortune by his heels at the Olympic 
games." 

Our share of the scene was come. The fugi- 
tive, naturally bold enough, but startled by the 
savage ferocity of his antagonist, made his way 
towards our place of refuge. The black got loose, 
and pursued. I disdained to be dragged forth as 
a lurking culprit ; and flinging open the door, stood 
before the crowd. 



SALATHIEL. 193 

The effect was marvellous. The tumult was 
hushed at once. Terror seized upon their boldest. 
Our haggard forms, seen by that half intoxication 
which bewilders the brain before it enfeebles the 
senses, were completely fitted to startle the super- 
stition that lurks in the bosom of every son of the 
sea ; and for the moment they evidently took us 
for something better or worse than man. 



VOL. II. 



194 SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER XV. 



But the delusion was short-lived ; my voice 
broke the spell ; and perhaps the consciousness of 
their idle alarm increased* their rage. " Spies" 
was then the outcry ; and this dreaded sound 
brought from their beds and tables the whole 
band. It was in vain that I attempted to speak ; 
the mob have no ears, whether in cities or caves ; 
and we were dragged forward to undergo our ex- 
amination. Yet what was to be done in the midst 
of a host of tongues, all questioning, accusing, and 
swearing together ? 

Some were ready to take every star of heaven 
to witness that we were a pair of Paphlagonian 
pilots, and the identical ones hired to run two of 
their ships aground, by which the best expedition 



SALATHIEL. 195 

of the year was undoDe. Others knew us to have 
been in the regular pay of the Procurator, and the 
means of betraying their last captain to the axe. 
But the majority honoured us with the character 
of simple thieves, who had taken advantage of 
their absence, and been driven to hide among the 
baggage. 

The question next arose ; '* how we could have 
got in ?" and for the first time the carousers 
thought of their centinel. I told them what I had 
seen. They poured into his chamber, and their 
suspicions were fixed in inexorable reality — " We 
had murdered him." The speediest death for us 
was now the only consideration. Every man had 
his proposal ; and never were more curious varie- 
ties of escape from this evil world offered to two 
wretches already weary of it ; but the Arab's voice 
carried the point. '* He disliked seeing men tossed 
into the fire ; ropes were too useful, and the sword 
was too honourable, to be employed on rogues. 
But, as by water we came, by water we should 
go." The sentence was received with a shout ; 
and amidst laughter, furious cries, and threats of 
vengeance, we were dragged to the mouth of the 
cave. 

The sternest suicide must die in his own way, 
or. he will shrink. I was reckless of life ; but I 



196 SALATHIEL. 

had not prepared myself for this midnight divorce 
from the world. The tempest was appalling. The 
waves burst into the anchorage in huge heaps, 
dashing sheets of foam up to its roof. The wind 
volleyed in gusts that took the strongest off their 
feet ; the galleys were tossed, as if they were so 
many weeds on the surface of the water. Lamps 
and torches were useless ; and the only light was 
from the funereal gleam of the billows, and the 
sheets of sulphurous fire that fell upon the turbu- 
lence of ocean beyond. Even the hardy forms 
round me were disheartened ; and I took advan- 
tage of a furious gust that swung us all aside, to 
struggle from their grasp, and seizing a pike, fight 
for my life. Jubal seconded me with the boldness 
that no decay could exhaust; and setting our 
backs to the rock, we for a while baffled our exe- 
cutioners. But this could not last against such 
numbers as poured to their assistance. Our pikes 
were broken; we were hemmed in, and finally 
dragged again to the mouth of the cavern, that, 
with its foam and the howl of the tumbling billows, 
looked like the jaws of some huge monster ready 
for its prey. 

Enfeebled, bruised, and overpowered, T was on 
the point of denying my murderers their last indul- 
gence, and plunging headlong, when a trumpet 



SALATHIEL. 197 

sounded. The pirates loosed their hold ; and in 
a few minutes a large galley with all her oars 
broken, and every sail torn to fragments, shot by 
the mouth of the cavern. A joyous cry of " The 
captain ! the captain !" echoed through the vaults. 
The galley, disabled by the storm, tacked several 
times before she could make the entrance ; but at 
length, by a masterly manoeuvre, she was brought 
round, and darted right in on the top of a moun- 
tainous billow. Before the galley touched the 
ground, the captain had leaped into the arms of 
the band, who received him with, shouts. His 
quick eye fell upon us at once, and he demanded 
fiercely, " what we were ?" " Spies and thieves," 
was the general reply. ** Spies !" he repeated ; 
looking contemptuously on our habiliments. " Im- 
possible. — Thieves, very likely, and very beggarly 
ones. — Yet, do you think that such wretches would 
dare to come, of themselves, within our claws V* 

I denied both imputations alike. He seemed 
struck with my words, and said to the crowd, 
" Folly! Take them away, if it does not require 
too much courage to touch them ; and let them be 
washed and fed, for the honour of hospitality and 
their own faces. The two poor devils have doubt- 
less been driven in by the rough night ; and it is 
rough enough to make a man wish to be any where 



198 SALATHIEL. 

but abroad. Here, change my clothes, and order 
supper." 

** We cannot be too cautious. They may still 
be spies," said the Egyptian, who had just arrived 
from his slumbers. 

I attempted to explain how we came. 

** Of course — of course," said the captain, pull- 
ing off his dripping garments, and flinging his 
cloak to one, his cuirass to another, and his cap to 
a third. " Your rags would vouch for you in any 
port on earth. Or, if you carry on the trade of 
treachery, you are very ill paid. Why, Memnon, 
look at these fellows ; would you give a shekel for 
their souls and bodies ? Not a mite. When I look 
for spies, I expect to find them among the pros- 
perous. The rogues who deal in secret 'intelli- 
gence, take too good care of themselves. Embroi- 
dered cloaks and jewel-hilted scymitars are a safer 
sign than naked skins at any time. However, if 
you turn out to be spies, eat, drink, and sleep your 
best to-night, for you shall be hanged to-morrow." 

He hurried onwards, and we followed, still in 
durance. The banquet was reinstated ; and the 
principal personages of the band gathered round 
to hear the adventures of the voyage. 

*' All has been ill luck," said he, tossing ofi^ a 
bumper. ** The old procurator's spirit was, I 



SALATHIEL. 19^ 

think, abroad ; either to take care of his plate, or 
to torment mankind, according to his custom. We 
were within a boat's length of the prize, when the 
wind came right in our teeth. Every thing that 
could, ran for the harbour : some went on the 
rocks — some straight to the bottom ; and that we 
might not follow their example, I put the good 
ship before the wind, and never was better pleased 
than to find myself at home. Thus you see, com- 
rades, that my history is brief; but then it has an 
advantage that history sometimes denies itself — 
every syllable of it is true." 

As the light of the lamps fell on him, it struck 
me that his face was familiar to my recollection. 
He was young, but the habits of his life had given 
him a premature manhood ; his eye flashed and 
sparkled with Greek brilliancy, but his cheek, 
after the first flush of the banquet, was pale ; and 
the thinness of a physiognomy naturally masculine 
and noble, showed that either care or hardship had 
lain heavily upon his days. 

He had scarcely set down to the table, when, 
his glance turning where we stood guarded, he 
ordered us to be brought before him. 

" I think," said he, ** you came here but a day 
or two ago. Did you find no difficulty with our 
sentinels ?" 



200 SALATHIEL. 

" Ha!" exclaimed the Arab, " how could I have 
forgotten that ? I left Titus, or by whatever of his 
hundred names he chose to be called, on guard, at 
his own request, the day I steered for the Nile. 
He was sick, or pretended to be so ; and, as I 
gave myself but a couple of days for the voyage, I 
expected to be back in time to save him from the 
horrors of his own company. But the wind said 
otherwise — the two days were ten; and on my 
return, we found the wretched fellow a corpse, — 
whether from being taken ill, and unable to help 
himself, or from the assistance of those worthy 
persons here, whom we discovered in attendance." 

" On that subject I have no doubt whatever,*' 
interposed the Egyptian: "those villains mur- 
dered him.'' 

" It is possible," mused the captain. " But I 
cannot foresee what they were to get by it— a 
question that you at least will acknowledge to be 
of considerable importance," said he, with a care- 
less smile at the Egyptian, whose avarice was 
proverbial. 

The object of the satire was stung ; and to get 
rid of the dangerous topic, he aftected wrath, and 
said impetuously, " Let it be so ; let our blood 
go for nothing. Let treachery thrive. Let our 
throats be at the mercy of every wandering ruffian ; 



SALATHIEL. 201 

and let us have the consolation that our labours 
and our sacrifices will be honoured with a sneer." 
He turned to the crowd waiting round us. " Brave 
comrades !" exclaimed he, *' henceforth under- 
'stand that you are at every dagger's mercy ; that, 
if you are left behind, you may be assassinated 
with impunity : as, if you are taken out upon our 
foolish expeditions, your lives may be flung away 
upon the whims and follies of would-be heroes." 

The crowd, fickle, and inflamed by wine, gave a 
huzza for the *' sailor's friend." The Egyptian 
encouraged, and having a long load of gall upon 
his memory, made the desperate venture of at 
once disowning the authority of the captain, and 
ordering in his own name that we should be de- 
livered over to execution. 

The captain listened, without a word ; but his 
hand was on his scymitar, and his cheek burned, 
as he fixed his eyes on the livid accuser. The 
crowd pressed closer upon us ; and I saw the 
dagger pointed at my breast — when I recollected 
the letter. I gave it to the captain, who read it in 
silence; and then, with the utmost composure, 
desired it to be handed over to the Egyptian. 

** Comrades," said he, "I have to apologize for 
breach of the confidence that should always sub- 
sist between men of honour. I have here acci- 



202 SALATHIEL. 

dentally read a letter which the cipher shows to 
have been intended for our trusty friend Memnon ; 
but, since the subject is no longer confined to him- 
self, he will doubtless feel no objection to indulging 
us all with the correspondence." 

The band thronged round the table ; expecta- 
tion sat on every face ; and its various expression 
in the crowded circle of those strong physiogno- 
mies — the keen, the wondering, the angry, the 
contemptuous, the convinced, the triumphant — 
would have made an incomparable study for a 
painter. The Egyptian took the letter with a 
trembling hand, and read the fatal words. 

*' The fleet will be off the northern promontory 
by midnight. You will light a signal, and be 
ready to conduct the troops into the cavern." 

The reader let the fatal despatch fall from his 
hands. An outcry of wrath rose on all sides ; and 
the traitor was on the point of being sacrificed, 
when the young Idumean generously started 
forward. 

" It is known, I believe, to every man here^" 
said he, " that I dislike and distrust Memnon as 
much as any being on earth. I knew him to be 
base and cruel, and therefore hated him. I have 
long suspected him of being connected with trans- 
actions that nothing but the madness of avarice 



SALATHIEL. 203 

could venture upon, and nothing but death atone. 
But he must not perish without trial. Till inquiry 
is made, the man who strikes him must strike 
through me." He placed himself before the cul- 
prit; who, now taking courage, long and dexterous- 
ly insisted that the letter was a forgery, invented 
by " assassins and those who employed assassins." 

The tide of popular wisdom is easily turned. 
Opinion was now raging against me, and the 
Egyptian stood a fair chance of seeing his reputa- 
tion cleared in my blood. 

" Come," said the captain, rising, '* as we are 
not likely to gain much information from the living, 
let us see whether the dead can give us any : lead 
on, prisoners." 

I led the way to the recess. The dead man lay 
untouched ; but, in the interval, the features had 
returned, as is often the case in death, to the ex- 
pression of former years. I uttered an exclama- 
tion ; he was the domestic that had betrayed me to 
the Procurator. 

" Conscience !" cried the Egyptian. 

" Conscience !" echoed the crowd. 

The captain turned to me. " Did either you or 
your companion commit this murder ? I will have 
no long stories. They will not go down with me. 
The fellow was a villain ; and if he had lived till 



204 SALATHIEL. 

my return, he should have fed the crows within 
the next twelve hours. One word — yes or no." 

I answered firmly. 

" I believe you," said the captain. He took 
the hand of the corpse, and called to the Egyp- 
tian. " Take this hand, and swear that you know 
nothing of the treason. But, ha ! what have we 
here ?" As he lifted the arm, the sleeve of the 
tunic gave way, and a slip of papyrus fell on the 
bed. He caught it up, and exclaiming, ** What j 
to-night? pernicious villain!" — turned to the as- 
tonished band. 

" Comrades, there is the blackest treachery 
among us. "We are sold — sold by that accursed 
Egyptian. Strip the slave, and fling him into the 
dungeon until I return ; no — he shall come with 
us, in chains. Call up the band. Every galley 
must be put to sea instantly, if we would not be 
burned in our beds." 

The trumpets sounded through the cavern ; and 
rapid preparations were made for obeying this un- 
expected command. The fires blazed again ; arms 
and armour rang ; men were mustered ; and the 
galleys swung out from their moorings in the midst 
of tumult and volleys of execrations against the 
treachery that " could not wait for daylight and 
.fair weather." 



SALATHIEL. - 205 

** And now," said the captain, " while our lads 
are getting ready, I think that it is time for me to 
sup. Sit down, and let us hear over our wine 
what story the prisoners have to tell.'* 

I briefly stated our escape from the dungeon. 

** It may be a lie ; yet the thing hangs not 
badly together. Your wardrobe speaks prodi- 
giously in favour of your veracity. Ho ! Ben 
Ali, see that the avenue into the warehouse is 
stopped up. We must have no visits from the 
garrison of the tower. And now, hear my story 
of the night: — As I was lying off and on, waiting 
to catch that cursed galley, a correspondent on 
shore let me partly into the secret of that Egyptian 
dog's dealings. Rich as the knave was, — and how 
he came by his money Tartarus only knows, — 
Roman gold had charms for him still. In fact, he 
had been carrying on a very handsome trade in 
information during the last six months ; which 
may best account for the escape of two fleets from 
Byzantium, and not less for the present safety of 
the procurator's plate ; which, however, I hope, 
by the blessing of Neptune, to see, before another 
week, shining upon this table. Your discovery 
was of infinite use. That an attack upon us was 
intended, I was aware; but the how and when 
were the difiiculty. The time of the attack was 



206 SALATHIEL. 

announced in the papyrus ; and but for the sto^m, 
we should probably be now doing other things than 
supping." 

*' The sea is going down already, and the wind 
has changed," said the Arab. *' We can haul off 
the shore without loss of time." 

" Then, the sooner the better. We must seal 
up the Romans in their port ; or if they venture 
out on such a night, give them sound reason for 
wishing that they had stayed at home. Their 
galleys, if good for nothing else, will do to burn." 

This bold determination was received with a 
general cheer : the leaders rose, and drank to the 
glory of their expedition ; and all rushed towards 
the galleys, which, crowded with men, lay tossing 
at the edge of the arch. 

I followed, and demanded what was to be our 
fate. ** Here we will not stay : put us to death 
at once rather than leave us to perish here." 

** Well then, what will you have?" 

'* Any thing but this desperate abandonment. 
Let us take the chances of your voyage, and be 
set on shore at the first place you touch." 

** And sell our secret to the best bidder? No. 
But I have no time to make terms with you now. 
One word for all : ragged as you both are, you are 
strong ; and your faces would do no great discredit 



SALATHIEL. 207 

to our profession. You probably think this no 
very striking compliment," said he, laughing. 
** However, I have taken a whim to have you with 
us, and offer you promotion. Will you take ser- 
vice with the noble company of the Free-trade?" 

Jubal was rashly indignant; 1 checked him, 
and merely answered, that I had purposes of ex- 
treme exigency which prevented my accepting his 
offer. 

'* Ha! morality," exclaimed he ; " you will not 
be seen with rogues like us?" He laughed aloud. 
«< Why, man, if you will not live, eat, drink, travel, 
and die, with rogues, where upon earth can you 
expect to live or die ? The difference between us 
and the world is, that we do the thing without the 
additional vice of hypocrisy." 

The leaders, who waited round us, felt for the 
honour of their calling ; and, but for their awe of 
the captain, we stood but slight chance of living 
even to hear the question settled. 

" A pike might let a little light into their un- 
derstandings," said one. 

*' If they would not follow on the deck, they 
should swim at the stern," said another. 

" The hermits should be sent back to their dun- 
geon to study philosophy," said a third. 

The boat was run up on the sand. " Get in. 



208 SALATHIEL. 

said the captain. '* I have taken it into my head 
to convince you by fact, of the honour, dignity, 
and primitiveness of our profession ; which is, in 
the first place, the oldest, for it was the original 
employment of human hands. In the next place, 
the most universal ; for it is the principle of all 
trades, pursuits, and professions, from the emperor 
on his throne, down through the doctor, the 
lawyer, and the merchant, to the very sediment of 
society." 

A loud " bravo " echoed through the cavern. 

** Are you not convinced yet?" said the captain. 
** The Free- trade is the very essence of the vir- 
tues ; all the teachers of your philosophy are 
dumb to it. For example ; I meet a merchant- 
man loaded with goods — for what is the cargo 
meant? To purchase slaves; to tear fathers from 
their families — husbands from their wives ; to 
burn villages ; and bribe savages to murder each 
other. — I strip the hold : the slave-market is at an 
end : and no one suffers, but a fellow who ought to 
have been hanged long ago." 

The captain's doctrine was more popular than 
ever. 

" I meet a rich old rogue," continued he, ** on 
his voyage between the islands. What is he going 
to do? To marry some pretty creature who has 



SALATHIEL. 209 

a young lover, perhaps a dozen. The marriage 
would break her heart ; and raise a little rebellion 
in the island. — We capture the old Cupid, strip 
him of his coin, and he is a Cupid no more ; 
fathers and mothers abhor him at once ; the young 
lover has his bride ; and the old one his lesson. 
The one gets his love, and the other his experi- 
ence ; and both have to thank the gallant crew 
of the Scorpion ; which Heaven long keep above 
water." 

A joyous huzza, and the waving of caps and 
swords, hailed the captain's display. " The Free- 
trade for ever !" was shouted in all directions. 

" I see, comrades," said the captain, ** that 
though truth is persuasive, your huzza is not for 
me, but for fact. — We find a young rake ranging 
the world with more money than brains, sowing 
sedition among the fair rivals for the honour of 
sharing his purse ; running away with daughters ; 
gambling greater fools than himself out of their 
fortunes ; in short, playing the profligate in all 
shapes. — He drops into our hands, and we strip 
him to the last penny. What is the consequence ? 
we make him virtuous on the spot. The profligate 
becomes a model of penitence ; the root of all his 
ills has been unearthed ; the prodigal is saving ; 
the bacchanal temperate ; the seducer lives in the 



210 SALATHIEL, 

innocence of a babe; the gambler never touches 
a die. We have broken the main-spring of his 
vices — money; disarmed the soft deceiver of his 
spell — money ; checked the infection of the gam- 
bler's example, by cutting off the source of the 
disease — money ; or, if nothing can teach him 
common sense, our dungeon will at least keep him 
out of harm's way. 

*' And now, my heroes of salt-water, noble 
brothers of the Nereids, sons of the star-light, 
here I make libation to our next merry meeting." 
He poured a part of his cup into the wave, and 
drank to the general health, with the remainder. 

" Happiness to all! let our work to-night be 
what it will, I know, my lads, that it will be hand- 
somely done. The enemy may call us names ; but 
you will answer them by solid proofs, that, what- 
ever we may be, we are neither slaves nor das- 
tards. If I catch the insolent commander of the 
Roman fleet, I will teach him a lesson in morals 
that he never knew before. He shall flog, fleece, 
and torture, no more. I will turn the hard-hearted 
tyrant into tenderness from top to toe. His treat- 
ment of the crew of the Hyaena was infamous ; 
and by Jupiter, what I owe him shall be discharged 
in full. Now, on board, my heroes, and may 
Neptune take care of you !" 



SALATHIEL. 211 

The trumpets flourished ; the people cheered ; 
the boats pushed off; the galleys hoisted every 
sail ; and in a moment we found ourselves rushing* 
through the water, under the wildest canopy of 
heaven . 



212 SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

We stretched out far to sea, for the double 
purpose of falling by surprise upon the Roman 
squadron, and avoiding the shoals. The wind 
lulled at intervals so much, that we had recourse 
to our oars ; it would then burst down with a vio- 
lence that all but hurled us out of the water. I 
now saw more of the captain, and was witness of 
the extraordinary energy, activity, and skill, of 
this singular young man. Never was there a 
more expert seaman. For every change of sea 
or wind, he had a new expedient ; and when the 
hearts of the stoutest sank, he took the helm into 
his hands, and carried us through the chaos of 
water, foam, whirlwind, and lightning, with the 



SALATHIEL. 218 

vigour and daring of one bom to sport with the 
storm. 

As I "was gazing over the vessel's side, on the 
phosphoric gleams that danced along the ridges of 
the billows, he came up to me. 

** I am sorry," said he, ** that we have been 
compelled to give you so rough a specimen of our 
hospitality; and this is not altogether a summer 
sea; but you saw how the matter stood. The 
enemy would have been upon us ; and the whole 
advantage of our staying at home would be, to 
have our throats cut in company." 

Odd and rambling as his style was, there was 
something in his manner and voice that had struck 
me before, even in the boisterousness of the con- 
vivial crowd. But now, in the solitary ocean, 
there was a melancholy sweetness in his tones 
that made me start with sad recollection. Yet, 
when by the lightning I attempted to discover in 
his features any clue to memory, and saw but the 
tall figure wrapped in the sailor's cloak, the hair 
streaming over his face in the spray, and every 
line of his powerful physiognomy at its full stretch 
in the agitation of the time, the thought vanished 
again. 

*' I hinted," said he, after an interval of silence, 
" at your taking chance with us. If you will, you 



214 SALATHIEL. 

may. But the hint was thrown out merely to 
draw off the fellows about rae ; and you are at full 
liberty to forget it." 

" It is impossible to join you," was my an- 
swer ; *' my life is due to my country." 

" Oh ! for that matter, so is mine, and due a 
long time ago: my only wonder is, how I have 
evaded payment till now. But I am a man of few 
words. I have taken a sort of liking to you, and 
should wish to have a few such at hand. The 
world calls me villain, and the majority of course 
carries the question. For its opinion, I do not 
care a cup of water : a bubble of this foam would 
weigh as heavy with me, as the rambling, giddy, 
vulgar judgment of a world in which the first of 
talents is scoundrelism. I never knew a man fail, 
who brought to market prostitution of mind enough 
to make him a tool ; vice enough to despise every 
thing but gain ; and cunning enough to keep him- 
self out of the hands of the magistrate, till opu- 
lence enabled him to corrupt the law, or authority 
to defy it. But let this pass. The point between 
us is, will you take service?" 

'' No! — I feel the strongest gratitude for the 
manliness and generosity of your protection. You 
saved our lives ; and our only hope of revisiting 
Judea in freedom is through you. But, young 



SALATHIEL. 2l5 

man, I have a great cause in hand. I have risked 
every thing for it. Family, wealth, rank, life, are 
my stake ; and I look upon every hour given to 
other things as so far a fraud upon my country." 

I heard him sigh. There was silence on both 
sides for a while, and he paced the deck ; then 
suddenly returning, laid his hand on my shoulder. 
" I am convinced of your honour," said he, " and 
far be it from me to betray a man who has indeed 
a purpose worthy of manhood, into our broken and 
unhappy — aye, let the word come out, infamous 
career. But you tell me that I have been of some 
use to you ; I now demand the return. You have 
refused to take service with me. — Let me take 
service with you !" 

I stared at him. He smiled sadly, and said, 
" You will not associate with one stained like me. 
Aye, for the robber there is no repentance. Yet 
why shall the world," and his voice was full of 
anguish, " why shall the ungenerous and misjudg- 
ing world be suffered to expel and keep for ever 
at a distance those whom it has first betrayed ?" 
His emotion got the better of him, and his voice 
sank. He again approached me. ** I am weary 
of this kind of life. Not that I have reason to 
complain of the men about me, nor that I dislike 
the roaming and chances of the sea ; but, that I 



216 SALATHIEL. 

feel the desire to be something better — to redeem 
myself out of the number of the dishonoured ; to 
do something which, whether I live or die, will 
satisfy me that I was not meant to be — the outcast 
that I am." 

" Then join us, if you will," said I. ** Our 
cause demands the bold ; and the noblest spirit 
that ever dwelt in man, would find its finest field 
in the deliverance of our land of holiness and 
glory. But, can you leave all that you have round 
you here ?" 

" Not without a struggle. I have an infinite 
delight in this wild kind of existence. I love the 
strong excitement of hazard ; I love the perpetual 
bustle of our career ; I love even the capricious- 
ness of wind and wave. I have wealth in return 
for its perils ; and no man knows what enjoyment 
is, but he who knows it through the fatigue of a 
sailor's life. All the banquets of epicurism are not 
half so delicious, as even the simplest meal, to his 
hunger ; nor the softest bed of luxury half so 
refreshing as the bare deck to his weariness. But 
I must break up those habits ; and, whether beggar 
and slave, or soldier and obtaining the distinction 
of a soldier's success, I am determined on trying 
my chance among mankind." 

A sheet of lightning covered the whole horizon 



SALATHIEL. 217 

with blue flame ; and a huge ball of fire springing 
from the cloud, after a long flight over the waters, 
split upon the shore. 

The keenness of the sailor's eye saw what had 
escaped mine. " This was a lucky sea-light for 
us," said he. " The Romans are lying under 
yonder promontory ; driven to take shelter by the 
gale, of course: — but for that fire ball, they would 
have escaped me." 

All hands were summoned upon deck ; signals 
made to the other galleys ; the little fleet brought 
into close order ; pikes, torches, and combustibles 
of all kinds gathered upon the poop ; the sails 
furled ; and with muffled oars we glided down 
upon the enemy. 

The Reman squadron, with that precaution 
which was the essential principle of their matchless 
discipline, were drawn up in order of battle; 
though they could have had no expectation of 
being attacked on such a night. But the roar of 
the wind buried every other sound, and we stole 
round the promontory unheard. 

The short period of this silent navigation was 
one of the keenest anxiet}^ All but those neces- 
sary for the working of the vessel were lying on 
their faces ; we feared lest the very drawing of 
our breath might give the alarm ; not a limb was 

VOL. II. K 



218 SALATHIEL. 

moved, and, like a galley of the dead, we floated 
on, filled with destruction. We were yet at some 
distance from the twinkling lights that showed the 
prefect's trireme ; when, on glancing round, I 
perceived a dark object on the water, and pointed 
it out to the captain. He looked, but looked in 
vain. 

" Some lurking spy," said he, " that was born 
to pay for his knowledge." With a sailor's promp- 
titude, he caught up a lamp, and swung it over- 
board. It fell beside the object, a small boat as 
black as the waves themselves. 

" Now for the sentinel," were his words, as he 
plunged into the sea. The act was rapid as 
thought. I heard a struggle, a groan, and the 
boat floated empty beside me on the next billow. 

But there was no time for search. We were 
within an oar's length of the anchorage. To com- 
municate the loss of their captain, (and what 
could human struggle do among the mountain 
waves of that sea ?) might be to dispirit the crew, 
and ruin the enterprise. I took the command 
upon myself, and gave the word to fall on. 

A storm of fire, as strange to the enemy as if it 
had risen from the bottom of the sea, was instantly 
poured on the advanced ships. The surprise was 
total. The crews, exhausted by the night, were 



SALATHIEL. 219 

chiefly asleep. The troops on board were helpless, 
on decks covered with the spray, and among 
shrouds and sails falling down in burning frag- 
ments on their heads. Our shouts gave them the 
idea of being attacked by overwhelming numbers: 
and, after a short dispute, we cleared the whole 
outer line of every sailor and soldier. The whole 
was soon a pile of flame, a sea volcano that lighted 
sky, sea, and shore. 

Yet only half our work was done. The enemy 
were now fully awake, and no man could despise 
Roman preparation. I ordered a fire-galley to be 
run in between the leading ships ; but she was 
caught half way by a chain, and turned round, 
scattering flame among ourselves. The boats were 
then lowered, and our most desperate fellows sent 
to cut out, or board. But the crowded decks 
drove them back, and the Roman pike was an 
over-match for our short falchions. For a while 
we were forced to content ourselves with the 
distant exchange of lances and arrows. The aff*air 
became critical. The enemy were still three times 
our force ; they were unmooring ; and our only 
chance of destroying them was at anchor. I called 
the crew forward, and proposed that we should 
run the galley close on the prefect's ship, set them 
both on fire, and, in the confusion, carry the re- 



220 SALATHIEL. 

mainiDg vessels. But sailors, if as bold, are as 
capricious as their element. Our partial repulse 
had already disheartened them. I was met by 
murmurs and clamours for the captain. The cla- 
mours rose into open charges that I had, to get 
the command, thrown him overboard. 

I was alone. Jubal, worn out with fatigue and 
illness, was lying at my feet, more requiring de- 
fence than able to afford it. The crowd were 
growing furious against the stranger. I felt that 
all depended on the moment, and leaped from the 
poop into the midst of the mutineers. 

*' Fools," I exclaimed, "what could I get by 
making away with year captain ? I have no wish 
for your command. I have no want of your help. 
I disdain you : — bold as lions, over the table ; tame 
as sheep, on the deck ; I leave you to be butchered 
by the Romans. Let the brave follow me, if such 
there be among you." 

A shallop that had returned with the defeated 
boarders lay by the galley's side. I seized a torch. 
Eight or ten, roused by my taunts, followed me 
into the boat. We pulled right for the Roman 
centre. Every man biid a torch in one hand, and 
an oar in the other. We shot along the waters, a 
flying mass of flame ; and while both fleets were 
e-azins: on us in astonishment, rushed under the 



SALATHIEL. 2^ 

poop of the commander's trireme. The fire soon 
rolled up her tarry sides, and ran along the 
cordage. But the defence was desperate, and 
lances rained upon us. Half of us were disabled 
in the first discharge ; the shallop was battered 
with huge stones ; and 1 felt that she was sinking. 

*' One trial more, brave comrades, one glorious 
attempt more 1 The boat must go down ; and 
unless we would go along with it, we must board." 

I leaped forward, and clung to the chains. My 
example was followed. The boat went down ; and 
this sight, which was just discoverable by the livid 
flame of the vessel, raised a roar of triumph 
among the enemy. But to climb up the tall sides 
of the trireme was beyond our skill, and we re- 
mained dashed by the heavy waves as she rose and 
fell. Our only alternatives now were to be piked, 
drowned, or burned. The flame was already 
rapidly advancing. Showers of sparkles fell upon 
our heads ; the clamps and iron-work were grow- 
ing hot to the touch ; the smoke was rolling over 
us in suffbcating volumes. I was giving up all 
for lost; when a mountainous billow swept the 
vessel's stern round, and I saw a blaze burst out 
from the shore. The Roman tents were on flame ! 

Consternation seized the crews thus attacked 
on all sides ; and uncertain of the number of the 



222 SALATHIEL. 

assailants, they began to desert the ships, and, by 
l>oats or swimming, make for various points of the 
land. The sight re-animated me. I climbed up 
the side of the trireme, torch in hand, and with my 
haggard countenance, made still wilder by the wild 
work of the night, looked a formidable apparition 
to men already harassed out of all courage. They 
plunged overboard, and I was monarch of the 
finest war-galley on the coast of Syria. 

But my kingdom was without subjects. None 
of my own crew had followed me. I saw the 
pirate vessels bearing down to complete the de- 
struction of the fleet ; and hailed them, but they 
all swept far wide of the trireme. The fire had 
taken too fast hold of her to make approach safe. 
I now began to feel my situation. The first triumph 
was past, and I found myself deserted. The deed 
of devastation was in the mean while rapidly going 
on. I saw the Roman ships successively boarded, 
almost without resistance, and in a blaze. The 
conflagration rose in sheets and spires to the hea- 
vens, and coloured the waters to an immeasurable 
extent with the deepest dye of gore. 

I heard the victorious shouts, and mine rose 
spontaneously along with them. In every vessel 
burned, in every torch flung, I rejoiced in a new 
blow to the tyrants of Judea. But my thoughts 



SALATHIEL. 223 

were soon fearfully brought home. The fire 
reached the cables ; the trireme, plunging and 
tossing like a living creature in its last agony, 
burst away from her anchors : the wind was off 
the shore ; a gust, strong as the blow of a batter- 
ing ram, struck her ; and, on the back of a huge 
refluent wave, she shot out to sea, a flying pyra- 
mid of fire. 



224 SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

Never was man more indifferent to the result 
than the solitary voyager of the burning trireme. 
What had life for me ? I looked at pain with 
instinctive dread ; but the waves offered a ready 
refuge from the more hideous suffering, and a single 
plunge in the whirling foam at my side would be 
the complete and instant cure of all the pangs that 
besiege the flesh. I gazed round me. The ele- 
ment of fire reigned supreme. The shore — moun- 
tain, vale, and sand — was bright as day, from the 
blaze of the tents, and floating fragments of the 
galleys. The heavens were an arch of angry 
splendour — every stooping cloud swept along, 
reddened with the various dyes of the conflagra- 
tion below. The sea was a rolling abyss of the 



SALATHIEL. 22^ 

fiercest colour of slaughter. The blazing vessels, 
loosened from the shore, rushed madly before the 
storm, sheet and shroud shaking' loose abroad, like 
vast wings of flame. 

At length all disappeared. The shore faded far 
into a dim line of light ; the galleys sank or were 
consumed ; the sea grew dark again ; the light- 
nings were the only blaze of heaven. But the 
trireme, strongly built, and of immense size, still 
fed the flame, and still shot on through the tem- 
pest, that fell on her more furiously as she lost the 
cover of the land. The waves rose to a height 
that often baffled the wind, and left me floating in 
a strange calm between two black walls of water, 
reaching to the clouds, and on whose smooth sides 
the image of the burning vessel was reflected as 
strongly as in a mirror. But the ascent to the 
summit of those fearful barriers again let in the 
storm in its rage. The tops of the billows were 
whirled off* in sheets of foam ; the wind tore mast 
and sail away ; and the vessel was dashed forward 
like a stone discharged from an engine. I stood 
on the poop, which the spray and the wind kept 
clear of flame, and contemplated, with some feel- 
ing of the fierce grandeur of the spectacle, the fire 
rolling over the forward part of the vessel in a 
thousand shapes and folds. 



226 SALATHIEL. 

While I was thus careering along, like the 
genius of fire upon his throne, I caught a glimpse 
of sails scattering in every direction before me— I 
had rushed into the middle of one of those small 
trading fleets that coasted annually between the 
Euxine and the Nile. They flew as if pursued by 
a fiend. But the same wind that bore them, bore 
me ; and their screams, as the trireme bounded 
from billow to billow on their track, were audible 
even through the roarings of the storm. 

They gradually succeeded in spreading them- 
selves so far, that the contact with the flame must 
be partial. But, on one, the largest and most 
crowded, the trireme bore inevitably down. The 
hunted ship tried every mode of escape in vain ; it 
manoeuvred with extraordinary skill ; but the pur- 
suer, lightened of every burthen, rushed on like 
a messenger of vengeance. 

I could distinctly see the confusion and misery 
of the crowd that covered the deck ; men and 
women kneeling, weeping, dying ; or, in the fierce 
riot of despair, struggling for some wretched spoil, 
or equally wretched indulgence, that a few mo- 
ments more must tear from all alike. But among 
the fearful mingling of sounds, one voice I heard 
that struck to my soul. It alone roused me from 
my stern scorn of human suffering. I no longer 



SALATHIEL. 227 

looked upon those beings as upon insects that must 
be crushed in the revolution of the great wheel of 
fate. The heart, the living human heart, palpi- 
tated within me. I rushed to the side of the 
trireme, and with voice and hand made signals to 
the crew to take me on board. 

But at my call a cry of agony echoed through 
the vessel. All fled to its further part, but a few, 
who, unable to move, were seen dropt on their 
knees, and in the attitudes of preternatural fear, 
imploring every power of heaven. Shocked by the 
consciousness that, even in the hour when mutual 
hazard softens the heart of man, T was an object of 
horror, I shrank back. I heard the voice once 
more ; and once more resolved to make an effort 
for life ; flung a burning fragment over the side, 
to help me through the waves. 

But the time was past. The fragment had 
scarcely touched the foam, when a sheet of light- 
ning wrapped sea and sky ; the flying vessel was 
gone. My eye looked but upon the wilderness of 
waters. The flash was fatal to both. It had 
struck the hold of the trireme, in which was stowed 
a large freightage of the bitumen and nitre of the 
desert. A column of flame,, white as silver, rose 
straight and steadily up to the clouds ; and the 
huge ship, disparting timber by timber, reeled, 



228 SALATHIEL. 

heaved, and plunged headlong into the bosom of 
the ocean. 

I rose to the surface from a prodigious depth. I 
was nearly breathless. My limbs were wasted with 
famine and fatigue ; but the tossing of the surges 
sustained and swept me on. The chill at last be- 
numbed me, and my limbs were heavy as iron ; 
when a broken mast rolling by, entangled me in its 
cordage. It drove towards a point of land round 
which the current swept. Strongly netted in the 
wreck, I was dragged along, sometimes above the 
water, sometimes below. But a violent shock 
released me, and with a new terror of the death 
that I had so long resisted, I felt myself go down. 
I was ingulfed in the whirlpool ! 

Every sensation was horridly vivid. I had the 
full consciousness of life, and of the unfathomable 
depth into which I was descending. I heard the 
roar and rushing of the waters round me ; the 
holding of my breath was torture ; I strained, 
struggled, tossed out my arms, grasped madly 
around, as if to catch something that might retard 
my hideous descent. My eyes were open. I 
never was less stunned by shock or fear. The 
solid darkness, the suffocation, the furious whirl 
of the eddy that spun me round its huge circle 
like an atom of sand, every sense of drowning. 



SALATHIEL. 229 

passed through my shattered frame with an indi- 
vidual and successive pang". 

I at last touched something, whether living or 
dead, fish or stone, I know not ; but the impulse 
changed my direction, and I was darted up to the 
surface. 

The storm had gone with the rapidity of the 
south. The stars burned brightly blue above my 
head. The pleasant breath of groves and flowery 
perfumes came on the waters, A distant sound 
of sweet voices lingered on the air. Like one 
roused from a frightful dream, I could scarcely 
believe that this was reality. But the rolling 
waters behind gave me sudden evidence. A bil- 
low, the last messenger of the storm, burst Into 
the little bay, filled it to the brim with foam, and 
tossed me far forward. It rolled back, dragging 
with it the sedge and pebbles of the beach, with 
an enormous noise. T grasped the trunk of an 
olive, rough and firm as the rock itself. The 
retiring wave left me ; I felt my way some paces 
among the trees ; cast myself down, and, worn 
out with fatigue, had scarcely touched the earth, 
when I fell into that profound sleep which is the 
twin brother of death. 

I awoke in the decline of the day, as I could 
perceive by the yellow and orange hues that 



230 SALATHIEL. 

coloured the thick branches above me. I was 
lying in a delicious recess, crowded with fruit- 
trees ; my bed was the turf, but it was soft as 
down ; a solitary nightingale above my head was 
sending forth snatches of that melody which night 
prolongs into the very voice of sweetness and sor- 
row; and a balmy air from the wild thyme and 
blossoms of the rose breathed soothingly even to 
the mind. 

I had been thrown on one of the little isles that 
lie off Anthaedon, a portion of the Philistine terri- 
tory, before it was won by our hero Maccabaeus. 
The commerce which once filled the arm of the 
sea near Gaza, perished in the change of masters ; 
and silence and seclusion reigned in a spot for- 
merly echoing with the tumult of merchant and 
mariner. The little isle, the favourite retreat of 
the opulent Greek and Syrian traders in the over- 
powering heats of summer, and cultivated with 
the lavish expenditure of commercial taste, now 
gave no proof of its ever having felt the foot of 
man, but in the spontaneous pouring out of 
flowers, once brought from every region of the 
East and West, and the exquisite fruits that still 
enriched its slopes and dells. 

In all things else, nature had resumed her 
rights ; the pavilions, the temples of Parian and 



SALATHIEL. 231 

Numidian stone, were in ruins, and buried under 
a carpet of roses and myrtles. The statues left 
but here and there a remnant of themselves, a 
sublime relic wreathed over in fantastic spirals by 
the clematis and other climbing plants. The 
sculptured fountain let its waters loose over the 
ground ; and the guardian genius that hung in 
marble beauty over the spring, had long since 
resigned his charge, and lay mutilated and dis- 
coloured with the air and the dew. But the 
spring still gushed, bounding bright between the 
gray fissures of the cliff, and marking its course 
through the plain by the richer mazes of green. 

To me, who was as weary of existence as ever 
was galley-slave, this spot of quiet loveliness had 
a tenfold power. My mind, like my body, longed 
for rest. 

Through life I had walked in a thorny path. I 
had winged a tempestuous atmosphere. Useless 
hazards, wild projects, bitter sufferings, were my 
portion. My affections, those feelings in which 
alone I could be said to live, had been made inlets 
of pain. The love which nature and justice won 
from me to my family, was perpetually thwarted 
by a chain of circumstances that made me a 
wretched, helpless, and solitary man. What then 
could I do better than abandon the idle hope of 



232 SALATHIEL. 

finding happiness among mankind, break off the 
trial which must be prolonged only to my evil, 
and elude the fate that destined me to be an exile 
in the world I Yes ! I would no longer be a man 
of suffering in the presence of its happiness ; a 
wretch stripped of an actual purpose or a solid 
hope in the midst of its activity and triumph ; the 
abhorred example of a career miserable with de- 
feated pursuit, and tantalized with expectations, 
vain as the bubble on the stream ! 

In this stern resolve, gathering a courage from 
despair, — as the criminal standing on the scaffold 
scoffs at the world that rejects him, — I determined 
to exclude recollection. The spot round me was 
to fill up the whole measure of my thoughts. Wife, 
children, friend, country, to me must exist no 
more. I imaged them in the tomb ; I talked with 
them as shadows, as the graceful and lovely ex- 
istences of ages past ; but laboured to divest 
them of the individual features that cling to the 
soul. 

Lest this mystic repose should be disturbed by 
any of the sights of living man, I withdrew deeper 
into the shades which first sheltered me. It was 
enough for me that there was a canopy of leaves 
above to shield my limbs from the casual visita* 
tions of a sky whose sapphire looked scarcely 



SALATHIEL. 233 

capable of a stain, and that the turf was soft 
for my couch. Fruits, sufficient to tempt the 
most luxurious taste, were falling round ; and the 
waters of the bright rivulet scooped in the rind 
of citron and orange, were a draught that the 
epicure might envy. I was utterly ignorant on 
what shore of the Mediterranean I was thrown, 
further than that the sun rose behind my bower, 
and threw his western lustre on the waveless ex- 
panse of sea that spread before it to the round 
horizon. 



234 SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 



But no man can be a philosopher against na- 
ture. With my strength the desire of exertion 
returned. My most voluptuous rest became 
irksome. Memory would not be restrained ; the 
floodgates of thought opened once more ; and to 
resist the passion for the world, I was driven to 
the drudgery of the hands. I gathered wood for 
the winter's fuel, in the midst of days when the 
Sim poured fire from the heavens ; I attempted to 
build a hut, beside grottos that a hermit would 
love; I trained trees, and cultivated flowers, 
where the soil threw out all that was rich in both 
with exhaustless prodigality. 

But no expedient would appease the passion for 
the absorbing business of the world. My bower 



SALATHIEL. 235 

lost its enchantment ; the delight of lying on beds 
of violet, and, with my eyes fixed on the heavens, 
wandering away on the wings of fantastic illusion, 
palled upon me ; the colours of the vision grew 
dim. I no more imaged shapes of beauty winging 
their way through the celestial azure ; I heard no 
harmonies of spirits on the midnight winds ; I fol- 
lowed no longer the sun, rushing on his golden 
chariot-wheels to lands unstained by human step ; 
or plunged with him into the depths, and ranged 
the secret wonders of ocean. 

Labour, in its turn, grew irksome. I reproached 
myself for the vulgar existence which occupied 
only the inferior portion of my nature ; living only 
for food, sleep, and shelter, what was I better than 
the seals that basked on the shore at my feet? 
Night, too, — that mysterious rest, interposed for 
purposes of such varied beneficence — to cool the 
brain fevered by the bustle of the day — to soften 
mutual hostility by a pause to which all alike must 
yield — to remind our forgetful nature, by a per- 
petual semblance, of the time when all things must 
pass away, and be silent, and change — to sit in 
judgment on our hearts, and, by a decision which 
no hypocrisy can disguise, anticipate the punish- 
ment of the villain, as it gives the man of virtue 



236 SALATHIEL. 

the foretaste of his reward, — night began to exert 
its old influence over me ; and, with the strongest 
determination to think no more of what had been, 
I closed my eyes but to let in the past. I might 
have said, that my true sleep was during the la- 
bours of the day ; and my waking, when I lay, with 
my senses sealed, upon my bed of leaves. 

It is impossible to shut up the mind ; and I at 
last abandoned the struggle. The spell of indo- 
lence once broken, I became as restless as an eagle 
in a cage. My first object was to discover on what 
corner of the land I was thrown. Nothing could 
be briefer than the circuit of my island, and no- 
thing less explanatory. It was one of those little 
alluvial spots that grow round the first rock that 
catches the vegetation swept down by rivers. 
Ages had gone by, while reed was bound to reed, 
and one bed of clay laid upon another. The ocean 
had thrown up its pebbles on the shore ; the wind 
had sown tree and herb on the naked sides of the 
tall rock ; the tree had drawn the cloud, and from 
its roots let loose the spring. Cities and empires 
perished while this little island was forming into 
loveliness. Thus nature perpetually builds, while 
decay does it work with the pomps of man. 

From the shore I saw but a long line of yellow 



SALATHIEL. 237 

sand across a broad belt of blue waters. No sight 
on earth could less attract the eye, or be less indi- 
cative of man and the delights of civilised life. 

Yet, within that sandy barrier, what wild and 
wondrous acts were doing and to be done ! My 
mind, with a wing that no sorrow or bondage 
could tame, passed over the desert, and saw the 
battle, the siege, the bloody sedition, the long and 
heart-broken banishment, the fierce conflict of pas- 
sions irres trainable as the tempest, the melancholy 
ruin of my country by a judgment powerful as fate, 
and dreary and returnless as the grave. 

But the waters between me and that shore 
were an obstacle that no vigour of imagination 
could overcome. I was too feeble to attempt the 
passage by swimming. The opposite coast ap- 
peared to be uninhabited, and the few fishing- 
boats that passed lazily along this lifeless coast, 
evidently shunned the island, as I conceived, from 
some hidden shoal. I felt myself a prisoner, and 
the thought irritated me. That ancient disturb- 
ance of my mind, which rendered it so keenly ex- 
citable, was born again ; I felt its coming, and 
knew that my only resource was to escape from 
this circumscribing paradise, that was become 
my dungeon. Day after day I paced the shore, 



238 SALATHTEL. 

awaking the echoes with my useless shouts, as each 
distant sail glided along close to the sandy line 
that was to me the unattainable path of happiness. 
I made signals from the hill ; but I might as 
well have summoned the vultures to stop, as they 
flew screaming above my head to feed on the relics 
of the Syrian caravans. 

What trifles can sometimes stand between man 
and enjoyment ! Wisdom would have thanked 
Heaven for the hope of escaping the miseries of 
life in the little enchanted round, guarded by that 
entrenchment of waters, filled with every produc- 
tion that could delight the sense, and giving to 
the spirit weary of all that the world could offer, 
the gentle retirement in which it could gather its 
remaining strength, and make its peace with 
Heaven. 

I was lying, during a fiery noon, on the edge of 
the island, looking towards the opposite coast, the 
only object on which I could now bear to look ; 
when in the stillness of the hour I heard a strange 
mingling of distant sounds ; yet so totally indis- 
tinct, that after long listening I could conjecture 
it to be nothing but the ripple of the water. 

It died away. But it haunted me ; I heard it 
in fancy. It followed me in the twilight, when 



SALATHIEL. 239 

earth and heaven were soft and silent as an infant's 
sleep — when the very spirit of tranquillity seemed 
to be folding his dewy wings over the world. 

Wearied more with thought than with the daily 
toil that I imposed on myself for its cure, I had 
lain down on my bed of turf under the shelter of 
those thick-woven boughs that scarcely let in the 
glimpses of the moon. The memory of all whom 
later chances brought in my path, passed before 
me ; — the fate of my gallant kinsmen in Masada ; 
of the wily Ishmaelite ; of the pirate captain ; of 
that unhappy crew whose danger was my involun- 
tary deed ; of my family, scattered upon the face 
of the world. Arcturus, bending towards the 
horizon, told me that it was midnight ; when my 
reverie was broken by the same sounds that had 
disturbed my day. 

But they now came full and distinct. I heard 
the crashing of heavy axles along the road, the 
measured tramp of cavalry, the calls of the clarion 
and trumpet. They seemed beside me. I started 
from my bed ; but all around was still. I gazed 
across the waters. They were lying, like another 
sky, reflecting star for star with the blue immen- 
sity above ; but on them was no living thing. 
I had heard of phantom armies traversing the 



240 SALATHIEL. 

air; but the sky was serene as crystal. I climbed 
the hill, upon whose summit I recollected to have 
seen the ruins of an altar ; gathered the weeds, 
and lighted a beacon. The flame threw a wide 
and ruddy reflection on the waters and the sky. 
I vyatched by it till morn. But the sound had 
died as rapidly as it came ; and when with the 
first pearly tinge of the east the coast shaped 
itself beneath my eye, I saw with bitter disappoint- 
ment but the same solitary sand. 

The idea of another day of suspense was in- 
tolerable. I returned to my place of refuge, gave 
it that glance of mingled feeling, without which 
perhaps no man leaves the shelter which he is 
never to see again ; collected a few fruits for my 
sustenance if I should reach the shore of Pales- 
tine, and, with a resolution to perish, if it so 
pleased Providence, but not to return, plunged 
into the sea. 

The channel was even broader than I had cal- 
culated by the eye. My limbs were still en- 
feebled ; but my determination was strength. I 
was swept by the current far from the opposite 
curve of the shore, yet its force spared mine ; and 
at length I felt the ground imder my feet. I was 
overjoyed; though never was scene less fitted for 



SALATHIEL. 241 

joy. To the utmost verge of the view, spread the 
desert; a sullen herbless waste, glowing like a 
sheet of brass in the almost vertical sun. 

But I was on land. I had accomplished my 
purpose. Hope, the power of exertion, the 
chances of the glorious future, were before me. I 
was no longer a prisoner w ithin the borders of a 
spot, which for the objects of manly life might as 
well have been my grave. 

I journeyed on in the direction of Masada; there 
at least I should be no fugitive. Yet, what fear- 
ful reverses, in this time of confusion, might not 
have occurred even there ? what certainty could I 
have of being spared the bitterest losses, when 
sorrow and slaughter reigned through the land ? 
Was I to be protected from the storm that fell 
with such promiscuous fury upon all ? I too, the 
marked, the victim, the example to mankind ! — I 
looked wistfully back to the isle, that isle of 
oblivion ! 

While I was pacing the shore, that actually 
scorched my feet, I heard a cry of alarm, and saw 
on a low range of sand-hills, at some distance, a 
figure making violent gestures. Friend or enemy, 
at least here was man ; and I did not deeply care 
for the consequences even of meeting man in his 
worst shape. My life was not worth the taking. 

VOL. II. L 



242 SALATHIEL. 

Hunger and thirst might be more formidable 
enemies in the end ; and I advanced towards the 
half-naked savage, who, however, ran down from 
the hill, crying out louder than ever. I dragged 
my weary limbs after him, and reached the edge 
of a little dell, in which stood a circle of tents. 

I had fallen among the robbers of the desert ; 
but there was evident confusion in this fragment 
of a tribe. The camels were in the act of being 
loaded ; men and women were gathering their 
household utensils v/ith the haste of terror ; and 
dogs, sheep, camels, and children, set up their 
voices in a general clamour. 

Dreading that I might lose my only chance of 
refreshment and guidance, I cried out with all my 
might, and ran down towards them ; but the sight 
of me raised an universal scream ; and every 
living thing took flight, the warriors of the colony 
gallantly leading the way with a speed that soon 
left the pedestrians far in the rear. But their 
invader conquered only for food. I entered the 
first of the deserted tents, and indulged myself 
with a full feast of bread, dry and rough as the 
sand on which it was baked, and of water only 
less bitter than that through which I had swum. 
But all luxury is relative. To me they were 
both delicious, and I thanked at once the good 



SALATHIEL. 243 

fortune which had provided so prodigally for those 
withered monarchs of the sands, and had invested 
me with the salutary terror that gave the fruits of 
triumph without the toil. 

At the close of my feast I uttered a few custo- 
mary words of thanksgiving-. A cry of joy rang in 
my ears ; I looked round ; saw, to my surprise, a 
bale of carpets walk forward from a corner of the 
tent, and heard a Jewish tongue, imploring for 
life and freedom. I rapidly developed the speaker; 
and from this repulsive coverture came forth one 
of the loveliest young females that I had ever 
seen. Her story was soon told. She was the 
grand-daughter of Ananus, the late high-p-riest, 
one of the most distinguished of his nation for 
every lofty quality ; but he had fallen on evil days. 
His resistance to faction sharpened the dagger 
against him, and he perished in one of the merci- 
less feuds of the city. His only descendant was 
sent to claim the protection of her relatives in the 
south of Judea. But her escort was dispersed by 
an attack of the Arabs, and in the division of the 
spoil, the Sheik of this little encampment obtained 
her as his share. 

The robber-merchant, was on his way to Cesarea 
to sell his prize to the Roman governor, when my 
arrival put his army to the rout. To my inquiry 



244 ■ SALATHIEL. 

into the cause of this singular success, the fair girl 
answered, that the Arabs had taken me for a 
supernatural visitant, " probably come to claim 
some account of their proceedings in the late 
expedition." They had been first startled by the 
blaze in the island, which, from a wild tradition, 
was supposed to be the dwelling of forbidden 
beings. The passage of the channel was seen, 
and increased the wonder ; my daring to appear 
alone among men whom mankind shunned, com- 
pleted the belief of my more than mortal prowess ; 
and the Arabs' courage abandoned a contest, in 
which " the least that could happen to them was 
to be swept into the ocean, or tost piecemeal upon 
the winds." 

To prevent the effects of their returning intre- 
pidity, no time was to be lost in our escape. But 
the sun, which would have scorched anything but 
a lizard or a Bedoween to death, kept us pri- 
soners until evening. We were actively employed 
in the mean while. The plunder of the horde 
was examined with the curiosity that makes one 
of the indefeasible qualities of the fair in all 
climates ; and the young Jewess had not been an 
inmate of the tent, nor possessed the brightest 
eyes among the daught rs of women, for nothing. 

With an air between play and revenge, she 



SALATHIEL. 245 

hunted out every recess in which even the art of 
Arab thievery could dispose of its produce ; and at 
length rooted up from a hole in the very darkest 
corner of the tent, that precious deposit for which 
the Sheik would have sacrificed all mankind, and 
even the last hair of his beard— a bag of shekels. 
She danced with exultation, as she poured its 
shining contents on the ground before me. 

*' If ever Arab regretted his capture," said she, 
*'this most unlucky of Sheiks shall have cause. 
But I shall teach him at least one virtue — repent- 
ance to the last hour of his life. I think that I 
see him at this moment frightened into a philo- 
sopher, and wishing from the bottom of his soul 
that he had, for once, resisted the temptations of 
his trade." 

"But what will you do with the money, my 
pretty teacher of virtue to Arabs?" 

*' Give it to my preserver," said she, advancing, 
with a look suddenly changed from sportiveness to 
blushing timidity ; *' give it to him who was sent 
by Providence to rescue a daughter of Israel from 
the hands of Pagans." 

In the emotion of gratitude to me there was 
mingled a loftier feeling, never so lovely as in 
youth and woman ; she threw up a single glance 



246 SALATHIELc 

to heaven, and a tear of piety and gratitude filled 
her sparkling eye. 

*' But, temptress and teacher at once, by what 
right am I to seize on the Sheik's treasury ? May 
it not diminish my supernatural dignity with the 
tribe, to be known as a plunderer ?" 

" Ha !" said she, with a rosy smile ; '* who is 
to betray you but your accomplice? Besides, 
money is reputation and innocence, wisdom and 
virtue, all over the world. Be rich, and mankind 
are too rational to inquire how you became the 
happy possessor of that which mankind worship in 
their soul. But listen, and let us state the case 
fairly." 

Touching with the tip of one slender finger my 
arm as it lay folded over my bosom, she waved the 
other hand in attitudes of untaught persuasion. 

'* Is it not true," pleaded the pretty creature, 
" that next to a crime of our own, is the being a 
party to the crime of others? Now, for what con- 
ceivable purpose could the Arab have collected 
this money ? Not for food or clothing ; for he can 
eat thistles with his own mule, and nature has 
furnished him with clothing as she has furnished 
the bear. The alhaik is only an encumbrance to 
his impenetrable skin. What then can he do 



SALATHIEL. 247 

with money but mischief, fit out new expedi- 
tions, and capture other fair maidens, who cannot 
hope to find spirits good or bad for their pro- 
tectors ? If we leave him the means of evil, what 
is it but doing the evil ourselves I So," concluded 
this resistless pleader, carefully gathering up the 
spoil, and putting it into my hand, " I have gained 
my cause, and have now only to thank my most 
impartial judge for his patient hearing." 

There is a spell in woman. No man, not utterly 
degraded, can listen without delight to the accents 
of the guileless heart. Beauty, too, has a natural 
power over the mind ; and it is right that this 
should be. All that overcomes selfishness, the 
besetting sin of the world, is an instrument of 
good. Beauty is but melody of a higher kind ; and 
both alike soften the troubled and hard nature of 
man. Even if we looked on lovely woman but as 
on a rose, an exquisite production of the summer 
hours of life, it would be idle to deny her influence 
in making even those summer hours sweeter. 

But, as the companion of the mind, as the very 
model of a friendship that no chance can shake, as 
the pleasant sharer of the heart of heart, the being 
to whom man returns after the tumult of the day, 
like the worshipper to a secret shrine, to revive 
his nobler tastes and virtues at a source pure from 



248 SALATHIEL. 

the evil of the external world, and glowing with a 
perpetual light of sanctity and love ; where shall 
we find her equal ? or what must be our feeling 
towards the mighty Disposer of earth and all that 
it inhabit, but of admiration and gratitude to that 
disposal which thus combines our highest happi- 
ness with our purest virtue ! 



SA LATHI EL. 249 



CHAPTER XIX. 



The evening came at last; the burning calm 
was followed by a breeze breathing of life ; and on 
the sky sailed, as if it were wafted by that gentle 
breeze, the evening star. The lifeless silence of 
the desert began to be broken by a variety of 
sounds, Yvild and sad enough in themselves, but 
softening by distance, and not ill suited to that 
declining hour which is so natural an emblem of 
the decline of life. The moaning of the shepherd's 
horn ; the low of the folding herds ; the long, deep 
cry of the camel ; even the scream of the vulture 
wheeling home from the corpse left by some recent 
wreck on the shore; and the howl of the jackall 
venturing out on the edge of dusk, came with no 
unpleasing melancholy upon the wind. 



250 SALATHIEL. 

We stood gazing- impatiently from the tent-door 
at the west, that still glowed like a furnace of 
molten gold. 

*' Will that sun never go down ?'* said I. '* We 
must wait his leisure ; and he seems determined 
to tantalize us." 

" Yes ; like a rich old man determined to try 
the patience of his heirs ; and more tenacious of 
his wealth, the more his powers of enjoyment de- 
cay." 

•' Philosophy from those young lips ! Yet, the 
desert is the place for a philosopher." 

'* That I deny," said my sportive companion. 
" Philosophy is good for nothing, where it has 
nothing to ridicule, and where it will be neither 
fed nor flattered. Its true place is the world ; as 
much as the true place of yonder falcon is where- 
ever it can find any thing to pounce upon. Here 
your philosopher must labour for himself, and 
laugh at himself; an indulgence in which he is 
the most temperate of men. In short, he is fit 
only for the idle, gay, ridiculous, and timid world. 
The desert is the soil for a much nobler plant. If 
you would train a poet into flower, set him here." 

** Or a plunderer." 

" No doubt. — They are sometimes much the 



SALATHIEL. 251 

" But the desert produces nothing — but Arabs." 

" There are some minds even among Arabs : 
and some of their rhapsodies are beauty itself. 
The very master of this tent, who fought and 
killed, I dare not say how many, to secure so pre- 
cious a prize as myself; and who, after all his 
heroism, would have sold me into slavery for life, 
spent half his evenings sitting at this door, chant- 
ing to every star of heaven, and rhyming, with 
tears in his eyes, to all kinds of tender remem- 
brances." 

'* But he was a genius, a heaven-born accident ; 
and his merit was the more in being a genius in 
the midst of such a scene." 

'* No — every thing round us this hour is poetry. 
The silence — those broken sounds that make the 
silence more striking as they decay — those fiery 
continents of cloud, the empire of that greatest 
of sheiks the sun, lord of the red desert of the air 
— the immeasurable desert below ! Vastness, ob- 
scurity, and terror, the three spirits that work the 
profoundest wonders of the poet, are here in their 
native region. And now," she said, with a look 
that showed there were other spells than poetry to 
be found in the desert, " to release you, I know 
by signs infallible that the sun is setting." 

I could not avoid laughing at the mimic wisdom 



•2.5'2 SALATHIEL. 

with which she announced her discorery ; and 
asked whence she had acquired the faculty of 
solving such rare problems. 

" Oh, by my incomparable knowledge of the 
stars." She pointed to the eastern sky, on which 
thev began to cluster in showers of diamond. ** I 
have to thank the desert for it ; and," she added 
with a slight submission of voice, " for every 
thing. — I am a daughter of the desert ; the first 
siffht that I saw was a camel ; my early, my only 
accomplishments were, to ride, sing Bedoween 
sonars, tell Bedoween stories, and tame a young 
panther. But my history draws to a close. While 
I was supreme in the graces of a savage ; had 
learned to sit a dromedary, throw the lance, make 
alhaiks, and gallop for a week together ; love, re- 
sistless love, came in my way. The son of the 
sheik, heir to a hundred quarrels, and ten thousand 
sheep, goats, and horses, claimed me as his natu- 
ral prey. I shrank from a husband, even more 
accomplished than myself; and was meditating 
how to make my escape, whether into the wilder- 
ness, or into the bottom of the sea, when a sum- 
mons came, which, or the money that came with 
it, the sheik found irresistible. And now, my his- 
tory is at an end." 

" And so/' said I, to provoke her to the rest of 



T«i^ 



—if 






OS tf 



I.»^lF, 



Tkr 



254 SALATHIEL. 

A faint echo of horns and voices roused me. 

" Look to the hills," I exclaimed, as I saw a 
long black line creeping, like a march of ants, 
down the side of a distant range of sand. 

" Those are our Arabs," said she, without a 
change of countenance. ** They are, of course, 
coming to see what the angel or demon who 
visited them to-day has left in witness of his for- 
midable presence. But, from what I overheard 
of their terrors, no Arab will venture near 
the tents till night ; night, the general veil of 
the iniquities of this pleasant and very wicked 
world." 

" Yet how shall we traverse the sands on 
foot?" 

" Forbid it, the spirit of romance. I must see 
whether the gallantry of the sheik has not provided 
against that misfortune." She flew into the tent, 
and, drawing back a curtain, showed me two mares 
of the most famous breed of Arabia. 

" Here are the Koshlani," said she, with playful 
malice dancing in her eyes. *' I saw them brought 
in in triumph last night, stolen from the pastures 
of Achmet ben Ali himself, first horse-stealer and 
prince of the Bedoweens, who is doubtless by this 
time half dead of grief at the loss of the two gems 
of his stud. I heard the achievement told with 



SALATHIEL. 255 

great rejoicings ; and a very curious specimen of 
dexterity it was. Come forth," said she, leading 
out two beautiful animals, white as milk. '* Come 
forth, you two lovely orphans of the true breed of 
Solomon ; — princesses with pedigrees that put 
kings to shame, unless they can go back two 
thousand years; birds of the Bedoween, with 
wings to your feet, stars for eyes, and ten times 
the sense of your masters in your little tossing 
heads." 

She sprang upon her courser, and winded it with 
the delight of practised skill. The Arabs were 
now but a few miles off, and in full gallop towards 
us. I urged her to ride away at once ; but she 
continued curvetting and manoeuvring her spirited 
steed, that, enjoying the free air of the desert 
after having been shut up so long, threw up its 
red nostrils in the Nvind, and bounded like a 
stag. 

" A moment yet," said she. " I have not quite 
done with the Arab. It is certainly bad treatment 
for his hospitality, to have plundered him of his 
dinner, his money, and his horses." 

** And of his captive ; a loss beyond all repara- 
tion." 

*' I perfectly believe so," was the laughing 



256 SALATHIEL. 

answer; '* but I have been thinking of making 
him a reparation, which any Arab on earth would 
think worth even my charms. I have been con- 
triving how to make his fortune." 

" By returning his shekels ! " 

" Not a grain of them shall he ever see. No ; 
be shall not have the sorrow to think that he en- 
tertained only a princess and a philosopher. As a 
spirit you came, and as a spirit you shall depart ; 
and he shall have the honour of telling the tale. 
The national stories of such matters are worn out ; 
he shall have a new one of his own ; and every 
emir in the kingdoms of Ishmael, through the 
fiery sands of Ichama; the riverless mountains of 
Nayd ; Hejoz, the country of flies and fools ; and 
Yemen, the land of locusts, lawyers, and mer- 
chants, will rejoice to have him at his meal. The 
man's fortune is made ; for there is no access to 
the heart, like that of being necessary to the din- 
ners and dulness of the mighty." 

** Or, on the strength of the wonder," said I, 
*' he may make wonders of his own ; turn char- 
latan of the first magnitude ; profess to cure the 
incurable, and get solid gold for empty pretension ; 
sell health to the epicure, gaiety to the old, and 
charms to the repulsive ; defy the course of na- 



SALATHIEL. 857 

ture, and live like a prince upon the exhaustless 
revenue of human absurdity." 

A cloud of smoke wreathed up from the sheik's 
tent ; fire followed, and even while we looked on, 
the wind, carrying the burning fragments, set the 
whole camp in a blaze. The Arabs gave a shriek, 
and fled back, scattering with gestures and cries 
of terror through the sands. 

" There — there," said my companion, clapping 
her delicate white palms in exultation : " let them 
beware of making women captives in future. In 
my final visit to the tent, I put a firebrand into the 
very bundle of carpets in which I played the part 
of slave." 

** Not to be your representative, I presume." 

" Yes, with only the distinction, that in time I 
should have been much the more perilous of the 
two. If that unlucky sheik had dared to keep me 
a week longer in his detestable tent, I should have 
raised a rebellion in the tribe, dethroned him, and 
turned princess on my own account. As to burn- 
ing him out, there was no remedy. But for those 
flames, the tribe would have been upon our road. 
But for those flames, we might even have been 
mistaken for mere mortals : and your spirits 
always vanish, as we do, in fire and smoke. How 
nobly those tents blaze ! Now, forward ! " 



258 SALATHIEL. 

She gave the reins to her barb, flung a triumph- 
ant gesture towards the burning camp, and, under 
cover of a huge sheet of fiery vapour, we darted 
into the wilderness. 



SALATHIEL. 25^ 



CHAPTER XX. 



I DIRECTED our flight towards Masada. The 
stars were brilliant guides ; and the coolness of the 
Arabian night, which forms so singular a contrast 
to the overpowering ardours of the day, relieved 
us from the chief obstacle of desert travel. At 
day-break we reached a tract near the sea-shore, 
whose broken and burnt-up ground showed that 
there had lately encamped the army, the sound of 
whose march filled my reveries in the island. 

It was evening when I caught the glimpse of 
the distant mountain of the fortress. My heart 
bounded fearfully at the sight. An impression of 
evil was upon me. Yet I must go on, or die. 

" There," said I, *' you see my home, and yours, 
while you desire it. You will find friends, de- 



260 SALATHIEL. 

lighted to receive you, and a protection that 
neither Roman nor Arab can violate. Heaven 
grant that ail may be as when I left Masada!" 

The fair girl gratefully thanked me. 

" I have been long," said she, " unused to 
kindness ; and its voice overpowers me. But, if 
the duty, the gratitude, the faithful devotedness of 
the orphan to her generous preserver, can deserve 
protection, I shall yet have some claim. Suffer 
me to be your daughter." 

She bowed her head before me with filial re- 
verence ; I took the outstretched hand, that 
quivered in mine, and pressed it to my lips. The 
sacred compact was ratified in the sight of Heaven. 
More formal treaties have been made, but few 
sincerer. 

We rapidly advanced to the foot of the ridge 
that, now defining and extending, showed its well- 
known features in their rugged grandeur. But, 
to come in sight of the fortress, I had still one of 
the huge buttresses of the mountain to round. 
My companion, with the quick sympathy that makes 
one of the finest charms of woman, already shared 
in my ominous fears, and rode by my side without 
a word. My eyes were fixed on the ground. — I 
was roused by a clash of warlike music. The 
suspense was terribly at an end. 



SALATHIEL. 261 

The spears of a legion were moving in a glit- 
tering line down the further declivity. Squadrons 
of horse in marching order were drawn up on the 
plain. The baggage of a little army lay under the 
eye, waiting for the escort of the troops now de- 
scending from the fortress. The story of my ruin 
was told in that single glance. All was lost. 

The walls of the citadel, breached in every di- 
rection, gave signs of a long siege. The White 
Stag of Naphtali no longer lifted its head in pride 
on the battlements ; dismantling and desolation 
were there. But what horrors must have been 
wrought before the Romans could shake the 
strength of those walls ! In what grave was I to 
look for my noble brother and my kinsmen ? Last 
and most fearful, what had been the fate of Miriam 
and my children ! 

Conscious that to stay was to give myself and 
my trembling companion to the cruel mercy of 
Rome, I yet was unable to leave the spot. I 
hovered round it as the spirit might hover round 
the tomb. Maddening with bitter yearnings of 
heart, that intense eagerness to know the worst, 
which is next to despair, I spurred up the steep 
by an obscure path that led me to a postern. 

There was no sound within. 

I dashed through the streets. Not a living 



262 SALATHIEL. 

being was to be seen ; piles of fire-wood lighted 
under the principal buildings and at the gates, 
showed that the fortress was destined to immediate 
overthrow. War had done its worst. The broad 
sanguine plashes on the pavements showed that 
the battle had been fought long and desperately 
within the walls. The famous armoury was a heap 
of ashes. Ditches dug across the streets, and 
strewed with broken weapons, and the white rem- 
nants of what once was man ; walls raised within 
walls, and now broken down ; stately houses loop- 
holed and turned into little fortresses ; fragments 
of noble architecture blocking up the breaches ; 
graves dug in every spot where the spade could 
open a few feet of ground ; fragments of superb 
furniture lying half-burnt, where the defenders 
had been forced out by conflagration ; gave sad 
evidence of the struggle of brave men against over- 
powering numbers. 

But where were they, who had made the prize 
so dear to the conquerors? Was I treading on 
the clay that once breathed patriotism and love ? 
Did the wreck on which I leaned, as I gazed round 
this mighty mausoleum, cover the earthly tene- 
ment of my kinsmen, and still dearer, the last of 
my name ? Was I treading on the grave of those 
gentle and lovely natures, for whose happiness I 



SALATHIEL. 263 

would rejoicingly have laid down the sceptre of 
the world? 

In my agitation I spoke aloud. My voice rang 
through the solitude round me, and returned on 
the ear with a startling distinctness. Living 
sounds suddenly mingled with the echo. A low 
groan came from the pile of ruins beside me. I 
listened, as one might listen for an answer from 
the sepulchre. The voice was heard again. A 
few stones from the shattered wall gave way, and 
I saw thrust out the withered, bony hand of a 
human being. I tore down the remaining impe- 
diments, and saw, pale, emaciated, and at the 
point of death by famine, my friend, my fellow- 
soldier, my fellow-sufferer, Jubal ! 

Joy is sometimes as dangerous as sorrow. He 
gave a glance of recognition, struggled forward, 
and, uttering a wild cry, fell senseless into my 
arms. On his recovering, before I could ask him 
the question nearest to my heart, it was answered. 
"They are safe, all safe," said he. "On the 
landing of fresh troops from Italy, the first efforts 
of the legions were directed against this fortress. 
The pirates, in return for the victory to which you 
led them, had set me at liberty. I made my way 
through the enemy's posts ; Eleazar, ever generous 
and noble, received me, after all my wanderings. 



264 SALATHIEL. 

with the heart of a father ; and we determined on 
defending this glorious trophy of your heroism to 
the last man. But, with the wisdom that never 
failed him, he knew what must be the result, and 
at the very commencement of the siege sent away 
your family to Alexandria, where they might be 
secure of protection from our kindred." 

**And they went by sea?" I asked shudder- 
ingly, while the whole terrible truth dawned upon 
my mind. 

** It was the only course. The country was 
filled with the enemy." 

" Then they are lost ! Wretched father, now no 
father ! — man marked by destiny ! — the blow has 
fallen at last. They perished — I saw them perish. 
Their dying shrieks rang in these ears. I was 
their destroyer. From first to last I have been 
their undoing !" 

Jubal looked on me with astonishment. My 
adopted daughter, without any idle attempt at 
consolation, only bathed my hand in her tears. 

"There must be some misconception here," said 
Jubal. " Before we left that accursed dungeon, 
they had embarked with a crowd of females from 
the surrounding country in one of the annual fleets 
for Egypt. Before we sailed from the pirate's 
cavern^ they were probably safe in Alexandria." 



SALATHIEL. 265 

" No ! I saw them perish. I heard their dying 
cry. I drove them, involuntarily but surely drove 
them, to destruction," was the only voice that my 
withering lips could utter. I remembered the 
horrors of the storm ; the desperate efforts of the 
merchant galley to escape ; its fatal disappearance. 
Faintly, and with many a reviving agony, I gave 
the melancholy reasons for my belief. My audi- 
tors listened with fear and trembling. 

'' There is now no use in sorrow," said Jubal 
sternly, " and as little in struggle. I too have 
lived till the light that lightened my dreary hours 
is extinguished. I have known the extremities of 
passion. If suffering could have atoned for my 
offences, I have suffered. A thousand years of ex- 
istence could not teach me more. Here let us 
die." He unsheathed his poniard. 

*' Here let us die!" I exclaimed with him, and 
my poniard glittered in my hand. 

My young companion, in the anxiety of the 
moment, forgetting the presence of a stranger, 
flung back the veil which had hitherto covered her 
face and figure, and clasping my half-raised arm, 
said in a tone, so low, yet penetrating, that it 
seemed the whispers of my own conscience — 

" Has death no fears V She fixed her eyes on 
me, and waited breathless for the answer. 

VOL. II. M 



266 SALATHIEL. 

** Daughter of beauty," said Jubal, as a smile of 
admiration played on his sad features, '* thoughts 
like ours are not for the lovely and the young. 
May the Heaven that has stamped that counte- 
nance be your protection through many a year ! 
But to the weary rest is happiness, not terror. 
Prince of Naphtali, this fair maiden's presence for- 
bids darker thoughts ; we must speed her on her 
way to security, before we can think of ourselves 
and our misfortunes." 

" The daughter of Ananus," said she, in a tone 
of heroic pride, ** has no fears. The boldest war- 
rior of Israel never died more boldly than that vene- 
rable parent. Within his sacred robes there was 
the heart of a soldier, a patriot, and a king. Let 
me die for a cause like his ; at the foot of the altar 
let my blood be poured out for my country ; let 
this feeble form sink in the ruins of the Temple ; 
and death will be of all welcome things the most 
welcome. But I would not die for a fantasy, for 
idleness, for nothing. Put up those weapons, war- 
riors, and let us go forth and see whether great 
things are not yet to be done." 

She significantly pointed towards Jerusalem. 

"It is too late," said Jubal, glancing with a 
sigh at his own wasted form. 

" What?" said the heroine; " is it too late to 



SALATHIEL. 267 

be virtuous, but not too late to be guilty ? too late 
to resist the enemies of our country, but not too 
late to make ourselves worthless to her holy cause I 
If Heaven demands an account of every wasted 
talent and mispent hour, what fearful account will 
be theirs who make all talents and all hours useless 
at a blow ?" 

" Maiden, you have not known what it is to lose 
every thing that made earth a place of hope," said 
I, gazing with wonder and pity on the fine enthu- 
siasm that the world is so fatally empowered to 
destroy. ** May not the tired traveller hasten to 
the end of his journey without a crime ?" 

** May not the slave," said Jubal, *' weary of 
his chain, escape unchidden from his captivity?" 

" And may not the soldier quit his post, when 
caprice disgusts him with his duty ?" was the 
maiden's answer, with a lofty look. ** Or may 
not the child break loose from the place of in- 
struction, and plead his disgust at discipline? As 
well may man, placed here for the service of the 
highest and most benevolent of beings, plead his 
own narrow and ignorant will against the supreme 
command ; daringly charge Heaven with the in- 
justice of setting him a task above his strength, 
and madly insult its power under the hollow pre- 
text of relying on its compassion. — This wisdom 



268 SALATHIEL. 

is not my own. It was the last gift of an illus- 
trious parent, when, in my agony at the sight 
of his mortal wounds, I longed to follow him. 
*' Live," said he, ** while you can live with virtue. 
The God who has placed us on earth, best knows 
when and how to recall us. If self-destruction 
were no crime in one instance, it would be no 
crime to universal mankind ; the whole frame of so- 
ciety would be overthrown by a permission to evade 
its duties on the easy penalty of dying. Our ob- 
ligations to country, family, man, and Heaven, 
would be perpetually flung off, if they were to be 
held at the caprice of human insensibility." 

Jubal looked intently on the young oracle ; and, 
bending with oriental deference, was yet uncon- 
vinced. *• Man was not made to endure, when 
endurance is useless. Is there to be no end to 
the mind's anxiety but the tardy decay of the 
frame l Is there no time for the return of the 
exile ? or, what is this very feeling of despair but 
a voice within — an unwritten command to die !" 

Naomi turned to me, with a look imploring my 
aid. But I was broken down with the tidings 
that had just reached me. Jubal wrapped his 
cloak round him, and was striding into the shadow 
of the ruin. Naomi, terrified at the idea of death, 
seized the corner of his mantle. " Will you 



SALATHIEL. 269 

shrink from the evils of life," she adjured, ** and 
yet have the dreadful courage to defy the wrath of 
Heaven? Shall worms like us, shall creatures 
covered with weaknesses and sins, whose only hope 
must be in mercy, commit a crime that by its very 
nature disclaims supplication, and makes repent- 
ance impossible ?" 

With the energy of fear, she threw back the 
folds of the cloak, and arrested the hand, with the 
dagger already unsheathed in it. She led back 
the reluctant, yet unresisting step of the suicide, 
and said, in a voice still trembling : ** Prince of 
Naphtali, save your brother!" I held out my 
arms to Jubal ; the sternness of his soul was past, 
and he fell upon my neck. Naomi stood, exult- 
ing in her triumph, with the countenance that an 
angel might wear at the return of a sinner. 

*' Prince of Naphtali," said she, " if those who 
were dear to you have perished, which Heaven 
avert ! you may have been thus but the more 
marked out for the instrument of solemn uses to 
Israel. The virtues that might have languished 
in the happiness of home, may be summoned into 
vigour for mankind. Warrior," and she turned 
her glowing smile on Jubal, " this is not the time 
for valour and experience to shrink from the side 
of our country. Faction may be repelled by pa- 



270 SALATHIEL. 

triotism ; violence put down by wisdora ; the pow- 
ers of the people roused by the example of a hero ; 
even the last spark of life may be made splendid 
by mingling with the last glories of the chosen 
people of God." 

Jubal's wasted cheek reddened with the theme ; 
but his emotion was too deep for language. He led 
the way ; we passed in silence through the silent 
streets ; and, without seeing the face of a human 
being, reached the dismantled gates of Masada, 



SALATHIEL. 271 



CHAPTER XXI. 

JuBAL guided us down the declivities among 
ramparts and trenches ; and after long windings, 
where every step reminded us of havoc, brought 
us to a little hamlet in the recesses of the valley, 
so secluded, that it seemed never to have heard 
the sound of war. 

The thunder of the falling masses of fortification 
as the fire reached their props, awoke me soon 
after midnight ; and I arose and tasted the deli- 
cious air that makes the summer night of Asia the 
time of refreshing alike to the frame and to the 
mind. I found Jubal already abroad, and gazing 
on the summit of the mountain, where the sullen 
glare of the sky, and the crash of buildings, showed 



272 SALATHIEL. 

that the work of devastation was rapidly going 
on. 

He gave me some of the details of the siege. 
The Romans had found the fortress so hazardous 
to the advance of their reinforcements, that its 
possession was essential to the conquest of Judea. 
Cestius, my old antagonist, solicited the command, 
to wipe off his disgrace ; and the whole force of 
the legions was brought up. But the generalship 
of Eleazar, and the intrepidity of the garrison 
baffled every assault, with tremendous loss to the 
enemy. The siege was next turned into a block- 
ade. Famine and disease were more formidable 
than the sword ; and the brave defenders were 
reduced to a number scarcely able to man the 
walls. 

" We now," said Jubal, " fought the battle of 
despair : we saw the enemy's camp crowded every 
day with fresh troops, and the provisions of the 
whole country brought among them in lavish pro- 
fusion, while we had not a morsel to eat, while our 
fountains ran dry, and our few troops were harassed 
with mortal fatigue. Yet no man thought of sur- 
render. Eleazar's courage,— a courage sustained 
by higher thoughts than those of the soldier, the 
fortitude of piety and prayer, — inspired us all ; 



SALATHIEL. 273 

and we went to our melancholy duties with the 
calmness of those to whom the grave was inevit- 
able. 

** At last, when our reduced numbers gave the 
enemy a hope of overpowering the defence, we 
were attacked by their whole force. But, if they 
expected to conquer us at their ease, never were 
men more deceived. When the walls gave way 
before their machines, they were fought from 
street to street, from house to house, from cham- 
ber to chamber. Eleazar, active as wise, was 
everywhere ; we fought in ruins — in fire. Multi- 
tudes of the enemy perished ; and more deaths w ere 
given by the knife than the spear ; for our arms 
were long since exhausted. The last effort was made 
on the spot were you found me. When every de- 
fence was mastered by the perpetual supply of fresh 
troops, Eleazar, passing through the subterranean 
to attack the Roman rear, left me in command of 
the few that survived. We intrenched ourselves 
in the armoury. For three days we fought, with- 
out tasting food, without an hour's sleep, without 
laying the weapons out of our hands. At length 
the final assault was given. In the midst of it we 
heard shouts which told us that our friends had 
made the concerted attack ; but we were too few 
and feeble to second it. The shouts died awav — 



274 SALATHIEL. 

we were overpowered ; and my first sensation of 
returning life was the combined agony of famine, 
wounds, and suffocation, under the ruins that I 
then thought my living grave." 

" By dawn," said I, "we must set out for 
Jerusalem." 

" It has been closely invested for the last three 
months ; and famine and faction are doing their 
worst within the walls. Titus is without, at the 
head of a hundred thousand of the legionaries and 
allies. To enter will be next to impossible ; and 
when once entered, what will be before you but 
the madness of civil discord, and finally, death by 
the hands of an enemy utterly infuriated against 
our nation ?" 

" To Jerusalem, at all risks ; my fate is mingled 
with that of the last stronghold of our fallen peo- 
ple. What matters it to one whose roots of hap- 
piness are cut up like mine, in what spot he strug- 
gles with man and fortune ? As a son of Judea my 
powers are due to her cause, and every drop of 
my blood shed for any other would be treason to 
the memory of my fathers. The dawn finds me 
on my way to Jerusalem." 

** It is spoken like a prince of Naphtali; but 
I must not follow you. The course of glory is cut 
off for me; unless something may still be done 



SALATHIEL. 275 

by collecting the fugitives of the tribes, and ha- 
rassing the Roman communications. But Jeru- 
salem, though every stone of her walls is precious 
to my soul, must not receive my guilty steps. I 
have horrid recollections of things seen and dome 
there. My mind is still too full of the impulses 
that drove it to frenzy. Onias, that wily hypo- 
crite, will be there to fill me with visions of terror. 
There too are — others." He was silent; but 
suddenly resuming his firmness, " I have no hos- 
tility to Constantius ; T even honour and esteem 
him ; but my spirit is still too feverish to bear his 
presence. I must live and die far from all that 
I have ever known." 

He hid his face in his mantle ; but the agitation 
of his form showed more than clamorous grief. 
He walked forth into the darkness. I was igno- 
rant of his purpose, and lingered long for his 
return. But I saw him no more. 

Disturbed and pained by his loss, I had scarcely 
thrown myself on the cottage floor, my only bed, 
when I was roused by the cries of the village. A 
detachment of Roman cavalry marching for Jeru- 
salem had entered, and was taking up its quar- 
ters for the night. The peasantry could make 
no resistance, and attempted none. I had only 



270 SALATHIEL. 

time to call to my adopted daughter to rise, 
when our hut was occupied, and we were made 
prisoners. 

This was an unexpected blow ; yet it was one 
to which, on second thoughts, I was reconciled. 
In the disturbed state of the country, travelling 
was totally insecure; and even to obtain a con- 
veyance of any kind was a matter of extreme 
difficulty. The roving plunderers that hovered 
in the train of the camp were, of all plunderers, 
the most merciless. By falling into the hands 
of the legionaries, we were at least sure of an 
escort; I might obtain some useful information 
of their affairs, and, once in sight of the city, 
might escape from the Roman lines with more 
ease as a prisoner, than I could pass them as an 
enemy. 

The cavalry moved at day-break; and before 
night we saw in the horizon the hills that surround 
Jerusalem. But we had full evidence of our 
approach to the centre of struggle, by the devas- 
tation that follows the track of the best disciplined 
army ; — groves and orchards cut down ; corn-fields 
trampled ; cottages burnt ; gardens and homesteads 
ravaged. Further on, we traversed the encamp- 
ments of the auxiliaries, barbarians of every colour 



SALATHIEL. 277 

and language within the limits of the mightiest of 
empires. 

To the soldier of civilised nations war is a new 
state of existence. To the soldier of barbarism 
war is but a more active species of his daily life. 
It requires no divorce from his old habits, and 
even encourages his old objects, cares, and plea- 
sures. We found the Arab, the German, the 
Scythian, and the Ethiop, hunting, carousing, 
trafficking, and quarrelling, as if they had never 
stirred from their native regions. The hordes 
brought with them their families, their cattle, and 
their trade. In the rear of every auxiliary camp 
was a regular mart, crowded with all kinds of 
dealers. Through the fields the barbarians were 
following the sports of home. Trains of falconers 
were flying their birds at the wild pigeon and 
heron. Half-naked horsemen were running races, 
without saddle or rein, on horses wild and swift 
as the antelope. Groups were lying under the 
palm-groves asleep, with their spears fixed at their 
heads; others were seen busy decorating them- 
selves for battle ; crowds were dancing, gaming, 
and drinking. 

As we advanced, we could hear the variety of 
clamours and echoes that belong to barbarian war 



2?8 SALATHIEL. 

— the braying" of savage horns, the roars of mirth, 
rage, and feasting ; the shouts of clans moving up 
to reinforce the besiegers ; the screams and la- 
mentations of the innumerable women as the wains 
and litters brought back the wounded ; the barba- 
rian bowlings over the hasty grave of some chief- 
tain ; the ferocious revelry of the discoverers of 
plunder, and the inextinguishable sorrows of the 
captives. 

We passed through some miles of this bois- 
terous and bustling scene, in which even a Roman 
escort was scarcely a sufficient security. The 
barbarians thronged round us, brandished their 
spears over our heads, rode their horses full gallop 
against us, and exhausted the whole language of 
scorn, ridicule, and wrath, upon our helpless con- 
dition. 

But the clamour gradually died away, and we 
entered upon another region, totally denuded of 
life and of the means of life ; a zone of silence and 
solitude interposed between the dangerous riot of 
barbarism, and the severe regularity of the legions. 
Far within this circle we reached the Roman 
camp ; the world of disciplined war. 

The setting sun threw his flame on the long 
vistas of shield and helmet drawn out, according 



SA LATHI EL. 279 

to custom, for the hour of exercise before nightfall. 
The tribunes were on horseback in front of the 
cohorts, putting them through that boundless 
variety of admirable movements, in which no 
soldiery were so dexterous as those of Rome. But 
all was done with characteristic silence. No sound 
was heard but the measured tramp of the ma- 
noeuvre, and the voice of the tribune. The sight 
was at once absorbing to the eye of one, like 
me, an enthusiast in soldiership, and appalling 
to the lover of his country. Before me was 
the great machine, the resistless, living energy, 
that had levelled the strength of the most re- 
nowned kingdoms. With the feeling of a man 
who sees the tempest at hand, in the immedi- 
ate terror of the bolt, I could yet gaze with won- 
der and admiration at the grandeur of the thunder- 
cloud. 

Before me was at once the perfection of power, 
and the perfection of discipline. Here were no 
rambling crowds of retainers, no hurrying of troops 
startled by sudden attack, no military clamours. 
All was calm, regular, and grand. In a country, 
the seat of the most furious war ever waged, I 
might have thought that I saw but a summer camp 
in an Italian plain. 

As the night fell, the legions saluted the parting 



280 SALATHIEL. 

sun with homage, according to a custom which 
they had learned in their eastern campaigns. 
Sounds, less of war than of worship, arose ; flutes 
breathed in low and dulcet harmonies from the 
lines ; and this iron soldiery, bound on the business 
of extermination, moved to their tents in the midst 
of strains made to wrap the heart in softness and 
solemnity. 

I awoke at sun-rise. But was I in a land of 
enchantment? I looked for the immense camp: 
— it had vanished. A few soldiers collecting the 
prisoners sleeping about the field were all that 
remained of an army. Our guard explained the 
wonder. An attack on the trenches, in which the 
besiegers had been driven in with serious loss, had 
determined Titus to bring up his whole force. 
The troops moved with that habitual silence 
which eluded almost the waking ear. They 
were now beyond the hills, and the hour was 
come at which the prisoners were ordered to follow 
them. 

But where was the daughter of Ananus ? I had 
placed her in a tent with some captive females of 
our nation. The tent was struck, and its inmates 
were gone. On the spot where it stood, a flock of 
sheep were already grazing, with a Roman soldier 
leaning drowsily on his spear for their shepherd. 



SALATHIEL. 281 

To what alarms might not this fair girl be 
exposed ? Dubious and distressed, I followed the 
guard in the hope of discovering the fate of an 
innocent and lovely child, who seemed, like my- 
self, marked for misfortune. 

In this march we went almost the whole circuit 
of the hills surrounding Jerusalem ; and I thus had 
for three days the opportunity that I longed for, of 
seeing the nature of the force with which we were 
to contend. The troops were admirably armed. 
There was nothing for superfluity ; yet those who 
conceived the system, knew the value of show ; and 
the equipments of the officers were superb. The 
helmets, cuirasses, and swords, were frequently 
inlaid with the precious metals ; and the superior 
officers rode richly caparisoned chargers, purchased 
at an enormous price from the finest studs of 
Europe and Asia. The common soldier was proud 
of the brightness of his shield and helmet : on 
duty both were covered ; but on their festivals, 
the most cheering moment was when the order 
was given to uncase their arms. Then, nothing 
could be more beautiful than the aspect of the 
legion. 

One striking source of its pomp was the multitude 
of banners. Every emblem that mythology could 



282 SALATHIEL. 

feign, every animal, every memorial connected 
with the history of soldiership and Rome, glit- 
tered above the forest of spears ; gilded serpents, 
•wolves, lions, gods, genii, stars, diadems, impe- 
rial busts, and the eagle paramount over all, 
were mingled with vanes of purple and embroidery. 
The most showy pageant of civil life was dull and 
colourless to the crowded magnificence of the 
Koman line. 

Their system of manoeuvre gave this magnifi- 
cence its full development. With the modern 
armies the principle is the avoidance of fire. With 
the ancient armies the principle was the concentra- 
tion of force. All was done by impulse. The 
figure by which the greatest weight could be driven 
against the enemy's ranks, was the secret of vic- 
tory. The subtlety of Italian imagination en- 
lightened by Greek science, and fertilised by the 
experience of universal war, was occupied in the 
discovery ; and the field exercise of the legions 
displayed every form into which troops could be 
thrown. 

The Romans always sought to fight pitched 
battles. They left the minor services to their 
allies; and haughtily reserved themselves for the 
master-strokes by which empires are lost or won. 



SALATHIEL. 283 

The humbler hostilities, the obscure skirmishings 
and surprises, they disdained; observing that, 
while " to steal upon men was the work of a thief, 
and to butcher them was the habit of a barbarian, 
to fight them was the act of a soldier." 



2&i: SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER XXII. 

At the close of a weary day we reached our 
final station, upon the hill Scopas, seven furlongs 
from Jerusalem. Bitter memory was busy with 
me there. From the spot on which I flung myself 
in heaviness of heart, huddled among a crowd of 
miserable captives, and wishing only that the 
evening gathering over me might be my last, I 
had once looked upon the army of the oppressors 
marching into my toils, and exulted in the secure 
glories of myself and my country. 

But the prospect now beneath the eye showed 
only the fiery track of invasion. The pastoral 
beauty of the plain was utterly gone. The innu- 
merable garden-houses and summer-dwellings of 
the Jewish nobles, gleaming in every variety of 



SALATHIEL. 285 

graceful architecture, among vineyards and depths 
of aromatic foliage, were levelled to the ground ; 
and the gardens turned into a sandy waste, cut up 
by trenches and military works in every direction. 
In the midst rose the great Roman rampart, which 
Titus, in despair of conquering the city by the 
sword, drew round it to extinguish its last hope of 
provisions or reinforcements ; a hideous boundary, 
within which all was to be the sepulchre. 

I saw Jerusalem only in her expiring struggle. 
Others have given the history of that most memo- 
rable siege. My knowledge was limited to the 
last hideous days of an existence long declining, 
and finally extinguished in horrors beyond the 
imagination of man. 

I knew her follies, her ingratitude, her crimes ; 
but the love of the city of David was deep in my 
soul ; her lofty privileges, the proud memory of 
those who had made her courts glorious, the sage, 
the soldier, and the prophet, lights of the world 
to which the boasted illumination of the heathen 
was darkness, filled my spirit with an immortal 
homage. I loved her then — I love her still. 

To mingle my blood with that of my perishing 
country was the first wish of my heart. But I 
was under the rigour of the confinement inflicted 
on the Jewish prisoners. My rank was known; 



286 SALATHIEL. 

and while it produced offers of new distinction 
from my captors, it increased their vigilance. To 
every temptation I gave the same denial, and 
occupied my hours in devices for escape. In the 
meanwhile, I saw with terror that the wall of 
circumvallation was closing ; and that a short 
period must place an impassable barrier between 
me and the city. 

After a day of anxious gazing on the progress 
of this wall of destiny, I was aroused at midnight 
by the roaring of one of those tempests which 
sometimes break in so fiercely upon an eastern 
summer. The lightning struck the old tower in 
which I was confined, and I found myself riding 
on a pile of ruins. Escape, in the midst of a 
Roman camp, seemed as remote as ever. But 
the storm which shook solid walls, made its way 
at will among tents, and the whole encampment 
was broken up. A column of infantry passed 
where I was extricating myself from the ruins. 
They were going to reinforce the troops in the 
trenches against the chance of an attack during 
the tempest. I followed them. The night was 
terrible. The lightning that blazed with frightful 
vividness, and then left the sky to tenfold obscu- 
rity, led us through the lines. The column was 
too late, and it found the besieged already mounted 



SALATHIEL. 287 

upon the wall of circumvallation, and flinging it 
down in huge fragments. The assault and de- 
fence were alike desperate. The night grew 
pitchy dark, and the only evidence that men were 
round me, was the clang of arms. 

A sudden flash showed me that I had reached 
the foot of the rampart. The besieged, carried 
away by their native impetuosity, poured down in 
crowds. Their leader, cheering them on, was 
struck by a lance, and fell. The sight rallied the 
enemy. I felt that now or never was the moment 
for my escape. I rushed in front, and called out 
my name. At the voice the wounded leader 
uttered a cry which I well knew. I caught him 
from the ground. A gigantic centurion darted 
forward, and grasped my robe. Embarrassed 
with my burden, I was on the point of being 
dragged back ; the centurion's sword glittered 
over my head. With my only weapon, a stone, I 
struck him a furious blow on the forehead. The 
sword fell from his grasp ; I seized it, and keep- 
ing the rest at bay, and in the midst of shouts 
from my countrymen, leaped the trench, with 
the nobler trophy in my arms. I had rescued 
Constantius ! 

Jerusalem was now verging on the last horrors. 
I could scarcely find my way through her ruins. 



288 SALATHIEL. 

The noble buildings were destroyed by conflagra- 
tion, or the assaults of the various factions. The 
monuments of our kings and tribes were lying in 
mutilation at my feet. Every man of former 
eminence was gone. Massacre and exile were 
the masters of the higher ranks; and even the 
accidental distinctions into which the humbler in 
birth or opulence were thrown by the few past 
years, involved a fearful purchase of public ha- 
zard. Like men in an earthquake, the elevation 
of each was only a sign to him of the working of 
an irresistible principle of ruin. But the most 
formidable characteristic was the change wrought 
upon the popular mind. 

A single revolution may be a source of public 
good ; but a succession of great political changes 
is fatal alike to public and private virtue. The 
sense of honour dies, in the fierce pressures of 
personal struggle. Humanity dies, in the sight 
of hourly violences. Conscience dies, in the con- 
flict where personal safety is so often endangered, 
that its preservation at length usurps the entire 
mind. Religion dies, where the religious man is 
so often the victim of the unprincipled. Violence 
and vice are soon found to be the natural instru- 
ments of triumph in a war of the passions ; and 
the more relentless atrocity carries the day, until 



SALA.THIEL. 289 

selfishness, the mother of treachery, rapine, and 
carnage, is the paramount principle. Then the 
nation perishes, or is sent forth in madness and 
misery, an object of terror and infection, to propa- 
gate evil through the world. 

The very features of the popular physiognomy 
were changed. The natural vividness of the 
countenance was there, but hardened and clouded 
by habitual ferocity. I was surrounded by a mul- 
titude, in each of whom I was compelled to see 
the assassin. The keen eye scowled with cruelty ; 
the cheek wore the alternate flush and paleness of 
desperate thoughts. The hurried gatherings — 
the quick quarrel — the loud blasphemy, told me 
the infuriate temper that had fallen, for the last 
curse, on Jerusalem. Scarcely a man passed me 
of whom I could not have said, *' There goes one 
from a murder, or to a murder." 

But more open evidences startled me, accus- 
tomed as I was to scenes of military violence. I 
saw men stabbed in familiar greetings in the 
streets; mansions set on fire and burned in the 
face of day, with their inmates screaming for help 
and yet unhelped ; hundreds slain in rabble 
tumults, of which no one knew the origin. The 
streets were covered with the wrecks of pillage, 
sumptuous furniture plundered from the mansions 
VOL. II. N 



290 SALATHIEL. 

of the great, and plundered for the mere love of 
ruin; mingled with the more hideous wrecks of 
man — unburied bodies, and skeletons, left to 
whiten in the blast, or to be torn by the dogs. 

Three factions divided Jerusalem, even while 
the Roman battering-rams were shaking her co- 
lossal towers. Three armies fought night and 
day within the city, carrying on the operations of 
war with more than civil fury. Streets under- 
mined, houses battered down, granaries burned, 
wells poisoned, the perpetual shower of death 
from the roofs, made the external hostility tri- 
vial ; and the Romans required only patience to 
have been bloodless masters of a city, which yet 
they would have found only a tomb of its people. 

I wandered, an utter stranger, through Jeru- 
salem. All the familiar faces were gone. At an 
early period of the war many of the higher ranks, 
foreseeing the event, had left the city ; at a later, 
my victory over Cestius, by driving back the 
enemy, gave a free passage to a crowd of others. 
It was at that time remarked that the chief fugi- 
tives v/ere Christians ; and a singular prophecy of 
their Master was declared to be the warning of 
their esciipe. It is certain that, of his followers, 
including many even of our priests and learned 
men, scarcely one remained. They declared that 



SALATHIEL. 201 

the evil menaced by the Divine Wisdom through 
Moses — (may he rest in glory !) was come ; that 
the death of their Master was the consummating 
crime ; and that, in the Romans, the predicted 
nation of destroyers, the people " of a strange 
speech," flying on '* eagle wings from the ends of 
the earth," was already commissioned against a 
land stained with the blood of the Messiah. 

Fatally was the word of the great prophet of 
Israel accomplished ; fearfully fell the sword to 
smite away root and branch ; solemnly, and by a 
hand which scorned the strength of man, was the 
deluge of ruin let loose against the throne of 
David. And still, through almost two thousand 
years, the flood of desolation is at the full ; no 
mountain- top is seen rising; no spot is left clear 
for the sole of the Jewish foot ; no dove returns 
with the olive. 

Eternal King, shall this be for ever ? Wilt thou 
utterly reject the children of him whom thy right 
hand brought from the land of the idolater ? Wilt 
thou for ever hide thy might from the tribes whom 
thy servant Moses led through the burning wilder- 
ness ? Wilt thou not bring back the broken king- 
dom of thy servant Israel? Still we wander in 
darkness, the tenants of a prison whose walls we 
feel at every step : the scoff" of the idolater ; the 



292 SALATHIEL. 

captive of the infidel ; have we not abided witb- 
out king or priest, or ephod or teraphim, many 
days; and when are those days to be at an 
end ? 

Yet, is not the deluge at last about to subside ? 
Is not the trumpet at the lip to summon thy 
chosen ? Are not the broken tribes now awaiting 
thy command to come from the desert — from the 
sea — from the dungeon — from the mine — like the 
light from darkness ? I gaze upon the stars, and 
think, countless and glorious as they are, such 
shall yet be thy multitude and thy splendour, 
people of the undone ! The promise of the King 
of Kings is fulfilling; and even now, to my 
withered eyes, to my struggling prayer, to the 
deeper agonies of a supplication that no tongue 
can utter, there is a vision and an answer. — On 
my knees worn by the flint, I hear the midnight 
voice ; and, weeping, wait for the day that will 
come, though heaven and earth shall pass away. 



8ALATHIEL. *i9S 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

My first object was, to ascertain the fate ot 
my family. From Constantius I could learn 
nothing- ; for the severity of his wound had re- 
duced him to such a state, that he recognised no 
one. I sat by him day after day, watching- with 
bitter solicitude for the return of his senses. He 
raved continually of his wife, and every other 
name that I loved. The effecting eloquence of 
his appeals sometimes plunged me into the deepest 
depression ; sometimes drove me out to seek re- 
lief from them even in the horrors of the streets. 
I was the most solitary of men. In those melan- 
choly wanderings, none spoke to me ; I spoke to 
none. The kinsmen whom I had left under the 
command of my brave son, were slain or dis- 



2^4 SALATHIFJy. 

persed ; and, on the night when I saw him bat- 
tling with his native ardour, the men whom he led 
to the fodft of the rampart were an accidental 
band, excited by his brilliant intrepidity to choose 
him at the instant for their captain. In sorrow, 
indeed, had I entered Jerusalem. 

The devastation of the city was enormous dur- 
ing its tumults. The great factions were reduced 
to two ; but in the struggle, a large portion of the 
Temple was burned. The stately chambers of the 
priests were dust and embers. The cloisters which 
encircled the sanctuary were beaten down, or left 
naked to the visitation of the seasons, which now, 
as by the peculiar wrath of Heaven, had assumed 
a fierce and ominous inclemency. Tremendous 
bursts of tempest shook the city ; and the popular 
mind was kept in perpetual alarm at the accidents 
which followed those storms. Fires were con- 
stantly caused by the lightning ; deluges of rain 
flooded the streets, and, falling on the shattered 
roofs, increased the misery of their famishing in- 
habitants: the keenest severity of winter in the 
midst of spring, added to the sufferings of a peo- 
ple doubly unprovided to encounter it, by its un- 
expectedness, and by their necessary exposure on 
the battlements and in the field. 

Within the walls, all bore the look of a grave, 



SALATHIEL. 295 

and even that grave shaken by some convulsion of 
nature. From the battlements, the sight was 
despair. The Roman camps covered" the hills, 
and we could see the soldiery sharpening the very 
lances that were to drink our blood. The tires 
of their night-watches lighted up the horizon 
round. 

At every fire we could see our future slayers. 
We heard the sound of their trumpets, and their 
shouts ; as the sheep in the fold might hear the 
roaring of the lion and the tiger ready to leap their 
feeble boundary. 

Yet the valour of the people was never wearied 
out. The wall, whose circle was to shut us up 
from the help of man or the hope of escape, was 
the grand object of attack and defence; and, 
though thousands covered the ground at its foot 
with their corpses, the Jew was still ready to rush 
on the Roman spear. This valour was sponta- 
neous, for subordination had long been at an end. 
The names of John of Giscala and Simon, influen- 
tial as they were in the earlier periods of the war, 
had lost their force in the civil fury and desperate 
pressures of the siege. No leaders were acknow- 
ledged, but hatred of the enemy, iron fortitude, 
and a determination not to survive the fall of Je- 
rusalem. 



296 SALATHIEL. 

In this furious warfare, I took my share with 
the rest ; handled the spear, and fought and 
watched, without thinking of any distinction of 
rank. My military experience, and the personal 
strength which enabled me to render prominent 
services in those desultory attacks, often excited 
our warriors to offer me command ; but ambition 
was dead within me. 

I was one day sitting beside the bed of Con- 
stantius, and bitterly absorbed in gazing on what 
I thought the progress of death ; when I heard an 
universal outcry, more melancholy than human 
voices seemed made to utter. My first thought 
was that the enemy had forced the gates. I took 
down my sword, and gloomily prepared to go out, 
and die. I found the streets filled with crowds 
hurrying forward without apparent direction, but 
all exhibiting a sorrow amounting to agony ; 
wringing their hands, beating their bosoms, tear- 
ing their hair, and casting dust and ashes on their 
heads. A large body of the priesthood came 
rushing from the Temple with loud lamentations. 
The Daily Sacrifice had ceased! The perpe- 
tual offering, which twice a day burned in testi- 
monial of the sins and the expiation of Israel, the 
peculiar homage of the nation to Heaven, was no 
more ! The siege had extinguished the resources 



SALATHIEL. 297 

of the Temple ; the victims could no longer be 
supplied ; and the people must perish without the 
power of atonement. This was the final cutting 
off — the declaration of the sentence — the seal 
of the great condemnation. — Jerusalem was un- 
done ! 

Overpowered by this fatal sign, I was sadly re- 
turning to my worse than solitary chamber ; for 
there lay, speechless and powerless, the noblest 
creature that breathed in Jerusalem — yet a source 
of perpetual anxiety to me from his utter helpless- 
nesc, and the deep affection which I bore him ; 
when I was driven aside by a new torrent of the 
people, exclaiming — " The prophet ! the prophet ! 
woe to the city of David !" 

They rushed on in haggard multitudes ; and in 
the midst of them came a mad fellow, bounding 
and gesticulating with indescribable wildness. His 
constant exclamation was — " Woe ! — woe ! — woe !" 
expressed in a tone that searched the very heart. 
He stopped from time to time, and flung out some 
denunciation against the popular crimes, then 
recommenced his cry of *' Woe !" and bounded 
forward again. 

He at length came opposite to where I stood ; 
and his features struck me as resembling some that 



^8 SALATHIEL. 

I had seen before. But they were full of a strange 
impulse — the grandeur of inspiration, mingled 
with the animal fierceness of frenzy. The eye 
shot fire under the sharp and hollow brows ; 
the nostrils contracted and opened like those 
of an angry steed ; and every muscle of a sin- 
gularly elastic frame was quivering and exposed 
from the effects alike of mental violence and 
famine. 

" Ho ! Prince of Naphtali ! we meet at last !" 
was his exclamation. His countenance fell; and a 
tear gushed from lids that looked incapable of 
human weakness. " I found her, my beauty, my 
bride ! She was in the dungeon. The seal-ring 
that I tore from that villain's finger was worth a 
mine of gold, for it opened the gates of her prison. 
Come forth, girl !" With these words, he caught 
by the hand, and led to me a pale creature, with 
the traces of loveliness, but evidently in the last 
stage of mortal decay. She stood silent as a 
statue. In compassion I took her hand, while 
the multitude gathered round us in curiosity. I 
now remembered Sabat the Ishmaelite, and his 
story. 

** She is mad," said Sabat, shaking his head 
mournfully, and gazing on the fading form at his 



SALATHIEL. 299 

side. " Worlds would not restore her senses. 
But there is a time for all things." He sighed, 
and cast his full eye on heaven. " I watched her 
day and night," he went on, " till I grew mad 
loo. But the world will have an end, and then all 
will be well. Come, wife, we must be going. To- 
night there are strange things within the walls, 
and without the walls. There will be feasting 
and mourning ; there will be blood and tears : 
then comes the famine — then comes the fire — then 
the sword ; and then all is quiet again, and for 
ever! But Heaven is mighty. To-night there 
will be wonders ; watch well your walls, people 
of the ruined city! To-night there will be signs; 
let no man sleep, but those that sleep in the grave. 
Prince of Naphtali ! have you too sworn, as I have, 
to die?" He lifted his meagre hand. ** Come, 
ye thunders ! come, ye fires ! vengeance cries 
from the sanctuary. Listen, undone people ! 
listen, nation of sorrow ! to the trumpets of the 
ministers of wrath. Woe ! — woe ! — woe !" 

Pronouncing those words with a voice of the 
most sonorous, yet melancholy power, he threw 
himself into a succession of strange and fearful 
gestures ; then beckoning to the female, who sub- 
missively followed his steps, plunged away among 



300 SALATHIEL. 

the multitude. I heard the howl of '* Woe ! — woe! 
woe !" long echoed through the windings of the 
ruined streets ; and thought that I heard the voice 
of the angel of desolation. 



END OF VOL. II. 



LONDON: 

PRINTED BY A. J. VALPY, RED LION COUIlT, FLEET SlREfT. 



Q 



