Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Don Raphael: a romance
DON KAPHAEL.
CHAPTER I. Away ! Dare nőt to julHFy thy erimc, That, thtt »lone can aggravate its horror, Add mfolencc to infolence* Tfumpson^ X HE ftreets of Madrid had long been cleared from paffengers. All the city was enfhrouded in flumbers and darknefs, and the old clock of the cathedral had chimed with füllen paufes the hour of midnight; when Don Lorenzo de Ferrara was walk*, îng alone,, wrapped in gloomy thoughts, and in as littìe hafte as if it had been noon day, The\fubje& of km thoughts was con- **Mfijt* I* $ cealed
s
cealed in hk hreaft; but had any fpeciator witneffed hk actions, thev muft have be- lieved that hk .mind was touched with diftraòtion, and that grief or paftion had completely overpowered hk underftand- ¿ng He wandered through feveral ftreets, his arms folded acrofs, and hk eves bent on the ground; now and then he extended his hands, as if imploring the aid of hea¬ ven, or invoking thenanie^of hk miftrefs, while the diforderof hk pace betrayed the detraction of *hk foul- г Не was oppofite the front of a magnificent pile of build · ing, when hk attention was fuddenly ar¬ refted at the .fight of a fiender ladder of rope, which was faftened to a balcony above, and defcended into the ftreet. He looked round him, to difcover if any-perfon were nigh, but the ftreets were filent and dark—»-he > liitened to .catch any found, but none came near, and r he ftood wondering at the fingularity «of the prepa¬ ration. It was not long before he con¬ cluded
3
eluded that it mì 2 t he robbers, who af thk moment were rifling the houfe, and if fo, he mould em the hazard of be¬ ing murdered hy them in their retreat, or of fuflering under the futpkion of befng an accomplice, mould the guana of the night come round. № had particular reafons to avoid fo unpleafant a fufpicion, which under fuch cìrrumflances would be more eafily entertained than refuted; and he moved fome paces diftant before he reflecied, that probably hk feet had been direeed thither for the prefervation of the family, whom he now propofed to alarm. A flight confuflon which reached hk ears on the flillnefs of night confirmed hk fufpicions, and called for his aflitlance. He forgot hk own individual danger, and immediately afcended the ladder. He paufed when he gained the balcony, hut every thing round him was again filent, and he flood irrefolute whether to proceed or retreat, when the low found of ap- в s . proaehtiig
4 ţroaching and hafty footftepe arrefted hto attention. Ile hud hts hand upon hb fword, that he saugte eot bc taken at ad- \^ntage in the dark. Some perfoQ haâily approached, by whofe quick ftep and low breathing he judged to he a female; and now an adven¬ ture of a very different nature feemed to prefent itfelf He moved a little forward, .to he møre certain, and the bdy catching his motion, threw herfelf fuddenly into his arms, leaning upon Jus ftoulder, her fpirits in extreme agitation. " О heavens/' (aid fhe, " are you at length .come ? I,haye beep on the verge of de¬ tection. I am,not now free from danger/* ." Eear nothing/* replied Lorenzo in a low yöice, «'J.will protect you." " Let us fly inflantly," replied the tody, giving .him her hand, .*' pr it will be too latø. I ihould die yvith fhame at my fi- -the^Şsfeet, were he thus-to.detéctíme/* Lorenzo t could make no reply to;theţe fcords, ţfut gently drawiţîg her forward, he
5
led her to the defcent, wondering în hk own mind at lhe Angularity of the miftake, which af firft had amuféd him, but which on fécond reflection threatened to involve Шт in cirrtimftancei* the moft unpleafing, ami which he had neither leifure nor incli¬ nation to purfue. Yet to defert the bdy ta focà m moment, and under fuch a mif¬ take, he conceived would be both cruef and unmanly. Her drefs, her manner, and her aht, as well as he could diftinguifli through the obfcurity; befpokeher of rank, and* the touch of her hand informed him fhe was not mean. He looked down to fee if any perfon was beneath in the ftreet, more af¬ tonifhed than ever that" the favoured lover did not appear, as from the words of the lady it was evident fhe had expected an* other. He aftifted her to defcend,' preferving mutual filence, and was' preparirig to. fol¬ low, when a loud voice arrefted his fteps, and he perceived behind him a man with a' is dnrtfh
β
dnîwn fword in one hand, and a taper in the other ; hk drek at the fame time hi the tit- moft d l lorder. 1 le ran forward, threatening \ engeance by his кюЬ and words, uttering the epithets of robber and auaflln at €tery Пер, and calling on Űte lady by the name of Agnes, who being in die ftrect, cfcaped bis fight. Lorenzo Ciw the neceffity of preparing for his defence, which he had fcarce tim« to do, before he was furtoufly attacked by* the itrangcr, who aimed at his life, with a violence that deprived himfelf of leaion. Lorenzo felt the aukwartlness of his fitu¬ ation. Had he been willing, explanation under his circumfiances could not have a\ailed; yet he found reluctance to fight a man who had not injured him, and who poffibly was defending his family from dif- honour. Immediate danger rendered it imponible to remain merely on the defen- five, and having been long inured to peril and danger, he turned afide the mr.d attack of his adverfary, and in a moment ran hint through the arm, " I
r
** fam murdered/* exclaimed Ar ш- fortunate тли *íth * groan, m he fett Пров the balcony. ** I ngraieful daugh¬ ter! do I die for mr kìudmeu toyou?** lorenzo wimed to remam, that he might yield every affiftance is hk power, bat the confufed found of various voices within the palace warned him to fly» and reheveď him from the apprehenfion that the wounded mau would be left without at¬ tention. Three fteps brought him to the ground, not a little chagrined at this fatal event, and angry at the imprudence which had involved him in circumftances of fo much emharrafsment. The lady remained trem¬ bling in the ftreet—fhe caught the arm of Lorenzo, to prevent herfelf falling, and he could diftinguifh by the univerfal fhudder which agitated her frame, the extreme «uf¬ order of her mind, though her tongue de¬ nied giving utterance to her feelings. Lorenzo was aware of the neceffity of Jight, though irrefolute in the plan he в 4 ihould
8
Ihotild adopt. île had no arrangernents ready for the purpofe, and the particulars of his own affairs confined him to the nar- xowefc circle of aciion. Τσ carry an un- known lady to his own refidence would involve'him ín innumerable difficulties, yet he faw no other way to diféntaňgle himfelf with honour, from an adventure he had been led into by fate or curiofity. The feet oíľ tlie lady moved fwiftly for¬ ward, urged by fear, while her arm leaned upon Lorenzen SbeTpokë not, but the tears followed down her cheeks, and fre- quenf and deep fighs fimggled for utter¬ ance. Jiorenzo'wàs töomucb confufed to rnterrupt this iileike, fill arriving at the end of a long ilreet, he fuddenly paufed^ anii ioquired where .the Iadv intended going. " Цо1у Virgin ľ' exclaimed fhe, {peak¬ ing through her tears, ** is that a que/Hon to be aiked at this moment ? Have I facri- ficed my fame, my peace, for this ?· Would to htaven I had j>erîfhed bý my ;faţhert fword^.
9
fword, rather than have been thus ftabbed to the heart by an indifference which can only arife from contempt." Lorenzo in vain attempted to form an apology he could not utter, for the cool- nefs of his behaviour, under thofe circum¬ ftances the lady imagined him, admitted ло apology ; and was indeed the extreme of cruelty. He paufed, with intention to declare the miftake that had arifen, when the foundof fteps behind, obliged them to move forward, fearful of further mifchief. He led his unknown charge, through va¬ rious ftreets where filence and darknefs the moft profound refided : the agitation of the lady every moment increafed, and the confuflon of Lorenzo did noi fubflde. Ir¬ refolute oil what mode of action he fhould adopt, they arrived at the door of a mean- looking ¿welling, from whofe forbidding afpect the lady fbrunk with affright, when Lorenzo knocked af the door. " Is thi&a placc^—!" Caid fhe, in a voice fcarce audible^ from a tumult of contend- UJ ing
IO ing paflfoit* : fkc wottid faıvç tûa 1йюгг # гшг grief pre\cnttd her indignation fro» breaking Ibfth, and Ι,οτηι^ο perfeciïy un· dertlood the meaning her qucflrøm røiplied. lie w» going to fepiy. when the door was opened by a wfctrbcd looking old barnán. with а glimmering taper in her hand, fcarce fen ing to atari: the outlines of a figure, which fscknefk and age had nearly deitrovecL İoıenzo ad\anrcd io enter» but Lady Agnes fhrunk back with evident aiìHght. «* Barbarian t M cried fhe with extreme agitation, " do you already treal me thus. Would to heaven I had died, ere this night had taught me the treachery and ingrati* tude of man« But I am not yet your't; nor will I ever." " The chevalier is a noble gentleman,** cried the old woman, ** and incapable of either ingratitude or treachery. I have known him thefe three days, and I nave bleffed the hour ever fmce that he firft darkened my door." y Woman/'
и
- Woman," faid the weeptug fnflêrer, ** k h not from you that 1 aft; information ; the appearance of this place is mote than fëiüriest. Bet he к ikretved if he thtsk», weak aud foohfh as I hav« ačfced, that I will rommit myfeif further into hk power— he m i flakes me, aad alaa I have nùfbkcn myfeif** *· Lady," replied Lorenzo, во longer fpeaking in an under voice, * * I am net the man you expected. Л miftake— rt He was proceeding, hut die bdy no longer heard htm. The firft found of hk voice was more than fufficient to explain tø her the unwelcome truth; and flunk¬ ing from the various diftrefs that involved her, the funk fenfelefs, and would have fallen to the ground, had not Lorenzo pre¬ ferved her. He fupported her into the houfe, and the old woman having fecured the door,, proceeded before him with the lamp into a large apartment, which feemed once to have been elegantly furniihed, hut now wore the appearance of extreme poverty. The
If
The ©M woman pbeed the Ьивр про» a table, while fhe hafteaed to procure fome remedy for the fenfelef» ftranger. Lorenzo gently fopported her to a fopfca, removing her veil, to give her air, and perhaps to fatisfy hk curiofity. Me beheld a coun¬ tenance which, though, pale, was yet ex¬ tremely lovely., and marked with an air of nobility and good fenfe. He was wholly a ftranger in Madrid, and could not there* fore know, from the fituation of her father's * palace, to Whom it belonged, nor had he learns more of the name of the lady, than that of Agnes, from the .words of her un¬ fortunate father. Hewas gazing upon her features, having reached the lamp to ex¬ amine them minutely, when dame Alice returned with a powerful ¿umulan t. "Holy Saint Nicholas/ 1 exclaimed ihe„ croffing herfelf, "what domy eyes beholds CaVáMer h Have you-murdered the lady £** " Murdered the lady ! mygood woman *" re^ekteä-X^óŕenao; «no; fhe is not yet recoveredfrom thefwopn, youhaveavery Ih^t memory/; . V &Ц
IS
** Ah, CavaSer;** faåå Ése, pmmímg wfth 1er hand, "if my memory s had, my eyes ate yet good. I am fise i did not erpeti merder would have bee» c ommit ted mide« my roof, and I take al the hietaa Emus and holy martyre to witnefs, that I neither approved nor confcntttd fo fo barbarous a deed.'* Lorenzo, while dame Alice was thus he- moaning herfelf, examined into the caufe of her grief. He perceived feverai drops of blood upon the garment of the lady, which railed hk alarm, that fhe had, unfeen by him, wounded herfelf, when fhe fell af the door ; and he was considering if he ought not to call in furgical affiftance, when the old woman's exclamations pointed out to him the <bloód upon his own cloak, which communicatees 'to the ladies drefs. Relieved from "thk alarm, he left the lady ,to the care and attention of dame Alice, whofeíckmoüráhe feotìnedi by aifurances that itwa$:a rival^he badflightly wounded.
14 Ше retired to b ν afide hk cloak, and Го reflect coolly upon the means of extricating himfelf from thk unpleafant a flair. Great and potent reafons already required hk utmoft caution and fecrefy. Hk life, per¬ haps, depended upon the obfcurity of hk retreat; for he had little doubt but the wound he had inflt&ed would prove fatal. Judging from appearances the perfon whom he had been engaged with, muft he of fu¬ perior rank. He had unintentionally run away with a lady, who woukl, moft pro¬ bably, difcover his afylum, if permitted to leave the houfe. She had, indeed, no place to retire to, unlefs it were a convent ; for after fuch an adventure with an ob* fcure ftranger, the door of her lover anď of her father would be alike clofed upon ■л her. Wo appear himfelf publicly in her fervice was impoflible, and to entruft any commiffion to dame Alice was, ^ at beft, extremely hazardous, and he had little doubt hut the lady would inf ì ft upon her liberty, when fhe fhould have recovered her reafon. Ia
in Madrid! there wat« but one man whom he could rslf hk friends aed to that friend he had been a ftranirer, ñmce a verv earîv period of voo th, when thcv had been fcfl.îw ftudents at the eoflege of Toledo, A fworn iriendmip at that period hsd fubfiftcd between them, feut federal Tears, and varrøes adveatares, hau con- tinned to divide them ; and Lorenzo knew not, if that attachment which had engaged the young Aranda tohinv had fu rv ived the accidents of time, and the prosperous for¬ tunes which had enfia ted him in the honors and riches of hk anceftors. He had hitherto remained unknown, trom a fear of difcover¬ îng hk abode, hut he now propofed to feck the palace of the Count, as foon as it was day, that he might learn how much he had to depend upon friendfliip, and if poffible, tranfmit to him the proteciion of the lady. He threw afide his military drefs, which was ftained With blood, and taking from a fmall parcel thfe garb of a i Benedictina .Monk, which he' had worn oh other occa¬ fions,
Iff
fions, he took every precaution îigainft detection. He returned to the room where he had left Lady Agnes, and found that though flie had repeatedly recovered, yet lhe no fooner opened her eyes upon the dreary defoiation of the apartment, whofe wretchednefs appeared more mtferable by the gummer of one only lamp; than fhe again clofed them, as if flie fought to fink from a confeioufnefs of her cruel fituation. He recommended the old houfekeeper to ufe her with attention and kindnefs, and if poffiblc,to attempt to tranquillize her fears ; then entering his own folitary chamber, he threw himfelf into a crazy chair, in hopes of Anding in a few minutes oblivion, a relief from reflection. He found it impoffible to reft. Indis¬ tinct and frightful images flitted through his imagination, when he clofed his eyes, and Harting up he refolved to go (though it was fcarce pafl midnight) to the palace of Count Aranda, which he knew was not ík from the couvent of St Francis; Wrap¬ ping
17 ping his religious habit around him, and drawing the cowl over his head, he ven¬ tured through the obfcure ftreets, where no perfon wa& ftirring. He had already paffed feveral narrow winding ftreets> and fearing that he had gone wrong, he paufed to look round, in hopes of feeing fome perfon of whom he might inquire. He had not flood many minutes, before fome one approached him, running in hafte, who no fooner came near errough to diílinguiíb his habit, than catching him by the arm, " My good Fa¬ ther," faid he, <( this is moil fortunate : I was this moment running to the convent of St. Francis to fetch a Confeifor, but you will fave me the trouble of difturbing their repofe." " I am on bufinefs," replied Lorenzo; a There are many others difengaged ; y v u will do well to apply to them ; they are now at prayer.** íť You mufl not.deny me ;" faid the fer· vunt, " my miftrefs isat the point of death. She
ш S&e mav not evän live till we ratt return ;. and poor woman r me leems very unfit to die." "What w tíie m:iíter with her?** f-id Lorenzo. « Marier enough, f dare fay '' replied mm fervaoi, " At time» me is raving as if me were míase ; and then fhe weeps^ and moans as if Qm baa feme very terrible crime upon her confidence.—But holy Either; the time waftes, and fee will he a corp» before the dawn of mom ing." " How know you that?" faid Lorenzo; '? if fhe can rave a» you fay, fhe is not før near to death." " She is worn oor with watching," faid the fervant, impatiently, « It is a deed of eharky, Father ; you may fave her foul, for it is evident fome enormous crime lay^ heavy upon it." " Has fhe madeyou her confeifor, then ?" faid Lorenzo, merely to gain time to think how he might extricate himfelf from thi& tm fore fee n adventure. m 'W fS I have
19 f * Γ have been her fervant for years," anfwered the mm, " ami #c has always feeën fïtbjeci to very great inconfîftencıes, alwavs wiming to change her fituation, and feklom fleepİng a week in the fame apartment; and Лея at times btery, me Kas been for whole botns plunged into the deepen melancholy, never ånfWering a queftion, or regarding whether wè were in her prefence, or out of it. But how, poor fedy, ft wilr foon be over wfth her, ami yon will never hear from her own mouth what preys upon her fotil, if you do not move a little faften" Lorenzo flood ïrrefolute. To repulfe or to comply alike expofed him to the danger of detection, and* fie knew the ex- tent of the confequences that would enfue. He was about to urge the importance of ä prior engagement, when a fecund fervant came haftily iip. "Is my lady dead?", cried Jie firftl " No," anfwered the other, " but you will very likely ftay here till flie is, for ftie is
fø к in a great hurry to leave the world,, an# ïer chief cry к for a cotifefibr." ** You have not now liberty to refufe, Fatter," faié the ßrft^ preffing Lorenzo by tike arm. " Move on, if you pleafe, a Kttîc more willingly: confider, that by walking a few yards, you may fave a foul." Lorenzo perceived how vain it was to remonftrate, anďwifhing himfelf well over thk unpleafant accident, he accompanied. the fervants, who did not conceal their fuf¬ picions that lome very important crime hung; upon the mind of their lady, and diftracied the moments which ought to have beert fpent in tranquillity and prayer. Lorenzo caft a flight glance from hk ¿owl at thé building where they flopped! It was large, but no way peculiar in its. ftruőlure; and the door being opened, mey entered, and paffed altogether towards the chamber of the fick lady. They pro¬ ceeded to-the fécond ftory, through feveral elegant ,apartmeiits>. till their ears were aflaiied by lamentations and groans, which. Lorenzo
fl
Lorenzo at firft conceived to pro c e e d front the dying perfon, hut was.foon convinced that it was-thus the fervants endeavoured to exprefs their forrow .round the bed of their miftrefs, where there did not appear one perfon, who claimed the character of a friend or relation ; and it was eafy to per* ceive that this fhew of grief proceeded not from the heart, and could only increafe the pangs of mifery. "Here is the holy FatherConfefTor/' faid the fervaqt in a whining tone, as he conducted Lorenzo to the bed-fide ; " has my Lady any other requeft?" A voice enfeebled by fu fiering, and weak from in¬ ternal decay, defired that,the good Father would advance, and offer up to heaven, prayers for a contrite fpirit, which was convinced of the vanity .of life, and the .dreadful nature of fin. Lorenzo drew near the hed of mifery and forrow. "Thé glimmering lights in the chamber fhone upon the eager faces of the group, who could fcarce fupprefs the curiofity
22 enrìofìty which itniggled to break through lhe affefted lamentations of grief. Before him lay the àyìng lady, already pale with ги· íhadings of death, and groaning in* wardfy from the fuffcrings both of body and mind She raí fed her languid and hollow eyes upon Lorenzo. They were marţed with •an expreffion of fuch extreme meaning, that his whole frame was agitated as he gazed upon them. The ftrong expreffion of contagious grief feemed to rife in his bo fom, and deftroy his power of utter¬ ance, and he was obliged to turn back his cowl, that he,might breathe with greater freedom. " Eternal mercy ! " murmured the pe¬ nitent, whilft every limb feemed to be agi¬ tated with conviüfivc motion, " whom do I behold? whom have you brought?" Jbormzo feared that he was detected- he fhuddered at the confequences ; and drawing his cowl haftily over his face, " The lady," faid he, in a low and fearful voice,
23 n*oiee, " h delirious. I cannot be of fcr* vie c í híí bv mv univers." lie moved round to withdraw, but the words of the lady arrctled his fteps. " Go not," faid flie. " let him not qint me till I am certified of the truth." ** Dear Ladv/* faid one of the female a í tendants, " it h only the holy friar who came here at your requeft, and waits to take your confeffion, and adminifter the comforts of abfolufion/* " Ah," faid the latlv in a hollow voice, ί; what is abfohitioti, when crime is no longer a matter of will ? Can it give poarc to the mind diftracted by paffion, and even yet a prey to guilt? Can the being who has been guilty of-—" The domefti es looked at each other, ami at Lorenzo, but the words of the lady funk into filence. She feemed to fluí nk from reflection, and clofingher eyes^fhe uttered a deep and mournful groan, at the fame time firetching out her limfcs, as if in the agony of inftant diifolution, *
24
'"ît is all over !" faid the domenica with a cry ; (C my lady is dead." A profound iilence, for fome minutes, -clofed the lips of the moft clamourous, who were fhocked ata fcenefo repugnan t to all nature. Lorenzo felt a fecret horror creep цроп his nerves, as he contemplated the fubject before him. €( Unhappy woman ;" faid he to himfelf; " what was the crime which fo preyed upon thy fpirits, that it deprived thee of hop:* ? Alas î that' the paffions of our nature , ihould be the tyrants of our reafon, and fo far our conquerors, that reafon only be¬ comes a medium of gratification; and hurried as we are from paiBon to paffion, we never paufe to* reflect, till reflection has no power-4o relieve/* All prefent hung down their heads in filence ; a few fhed tears ; and Lorenzo was going to offer the prayer appointed for the foul of the lately departed, when the hitherto infenfìble lady, with a figh that feemed drawn from the inmofl recefs of
23
-of her hreaft, again opened her eyes, and -turned them upon Lorenzo "Yourarc ftill here;" faid ftie f;iimly ; "d am going very fait. Lillen to my cc n- feftion ; and О tell me if there be any ïhopc." Lorenzo took a feat near the bed. lie would have ordered the fervants to depart but the reflection of his own fituation, and the character he had to perform, caufed ¡him to-trembïe. He was<well verf cd in the formula? of the church, but he knew not the nature of the confeftkm he was to receive, nor the confequences in which it <mÍ£ht involve hira. The fervants gathered с" 1 О »clofer round the bed, in eager expec 'talion, but -the lady paufing, motioned them to retire. "Let-rue be alone," faicl ihe, "let no oue beprgfefttbut this holy Father." AJl-the fpečiators reluctantly and linger¬ ingly withdrew ; but their obedience car¬ ried them no further than the coridor, where they endeavoured to gather what vol. i. с might
'might bc laid by their lady : but the fone of her voice wak fo low, and her fpeech fo much interrupted, that fcarce a word could be heard, accompanied by fighs and tears. An hour was already pàft, and their im¬ patience became extreme. They liften ed with gainful; attention, but their fancy de¬ ceived r Äeiťeárs, '' for all was filent as the grave. Hiey continued to wait fome time longer, -but the profoundeft ftillnefs re¬ mained; and curiofity became mingled with wi>näéťíaiä s âpprehcmioti. Tlie ÄöafekeifjierWås theflrftwho broke through the iwfuLfiletíce, which had tied up their wo'roVby obferving Ihe extreme fingularity of the event, and the uncommon length 'of the ctíhféftíön. u Were it the tranfaarouà of ШШ^Шё," faid fhe, * ť thať my Ladýlfabeílu^^s jrøuringinto the ear of thè ^Father ConfefTor, it would »ottake'l(rø|c#-#ie:^lt faw a perfon fo exhaufted, arid fö éviåetstly at tfa point of death, can be able Yulafa fűcb a nar¬ rative, к beyoıid vieM, Itadw nut what to
#S7 .tø Chilik ; bring your ear io the key-hole, for my part, I cannot hear the lina Heft whifper.—-purely no accident has feip- pened." . ■ The fervanţs were very willing to be ¿alarmed. Judging, with probability, that no common caufe could have produced fo long and fo oninterrırpted a ftjllnefs, and no ionger attending to гефее!, they «solved to fatisfy themfelves in the reafon of fuch filence. « The houfekeeper yen|üüred flowly to -open the door, but fhe ftarted back in hafty affright, her pale countenance ex- -preffing the horror which thook her frame. It was fome moments before fhe could fpeak, iupportedby two, of the women fer¬ vants: All prefent caught the alarm, look¬ ing round with fear, not knowing- what to believe, till their repeated interroga¬ tions drew from the houfekeeper, that fhe had no fooner opened fhe door, than ihe fixed her eyes upon a figure, all drefled in white, which fat upon the bed, while the с % Confeifor
ff s Confeifor remained in hk chair, with hk *yesclofèâas>ifdéad. , A ftory fo iricredible, was differently received, according to the difpofition Of the hearer: All the fen^auts gathered in a group, and after.» much debate, it; was agreed that thêhoMeftifhòhld enter the ■room^and^ifJthe houfekeeper had not bwhd^^ved by her fancy, and the gloom «that reigned in the chamber. il * ; Ohé%f ? rae ,J mò!íl courageous entered the lápartmèM, ditetitìed the dyi%^tapëré Mmİf glimmered iri the focketsj' kaïâ thé frîèncè of deátli j reığtıed aroundtliem. They advanced With flirihk- ing Caution towaids" the bed, where the lady : lay motionlefs. Lorenzo was re¿· clining with hk head againftthe back of the eUtãrisà' rf afleep or dead, for bé moveďnot at their entrance, nor at fhe confuflon >df fo many murmuring voices, for the fervants had folbwed clofe after each other, fearing to ftraggle from the group. f - < - r ' The
The ftory of the houfekeeper now re¬ ceived credit, though they could not per¬ ceive the, phantom in .white«:.-. and they gazed round¡them wjth pale cheeks «and ap^ prehenfive fitncies^ The lady was evidently dead : Iter face;şmd, tţe^^aq^ş-Wieţe alr s e^dy bedewed w¡th, ^е,фпдту п со|4ь4ащр of death, ajad;i)^pft.hay^ ( ^i(e^% time loft to the wor%;, ííí;th , )t ' Vi ιπ,Ι:9Η--:·, ,. * I»o^enz,q feemed^ to ;}ще partaken iti herk^t^Aß^ gm tp fill every bqfçm r ; Qn t e, of them ventured to take his .hand^ »an^. the diffe¬ rence, of, the 4 tQuch l convinced, him, that life had not yet ceafed ţp^ move in his certainly yet ative, Jbuj c (u^ .¡ри^е^Ц.ех· fe-emejy ίοψ, and I haye, n%do|ţţţ, but the %ιΐΓς wlii^h, dame, .Jac|nj^|¿faw,,, has ter?· rifled ¿he *noor Moni , iu.tQ .cony ulftons« Help me then to ç z onye| 4 Şıp r iut9 the next room." CS Some
30' Some of f hem hcfiťated; but the women urging them to exert themfelves, they complied. The motion, and perhaps the change of air, fpeedily roufed the dormant powers of his frame, and it was not long before he opened his eyes, which fixing upon the unknown perfons round him, he iîö Röner gained the power of fpeech, than he ordered one of them inflantly to fetcli a publie notary, that фе cónfefllon of the lady might be taken down before wit- ííeffes. " It is not of any ufe, Father;" faid oné- of them. "It is of infinite importances I cortimand ycm inflantly to obey me," faid Lorenzo paffionately ; t( a momenta delay may indeed render your going at all, ufelefs." M I would go, moil willingly," replied theftewafd, "but—" "But—but what r fay, what?" cried Lorenzo. " The lady h dead/* replied the fteward in a low voice. "Dead!" repeated Lorenzo to himfelf, in thè greateft agitation. " Dead at fuch a
31 a moment.—Then I have no longer bufi¬ nefs here." " What was it, holy Father ? " faid the fteward, refpectfully, when he faw Lorenzo rifing to depart., The latter frowned, with¬ out replying, and moved towards the door.i (( het us intreat," cried feveral, " that you will not leave us in fuch a perplexity. How could the confeffion of my lady agitate you fo much, unlefs.indeed you faw—" 1* Yes," replied Lorenzo, with a, for- bidding look; " I both faw and heard; but confeffion к not a trifle to be. played with. Let me pafs ;—-hear you not the bell ringing to morning prayers ? Do your duty to your miftrefs; and if you know any of her relations, let them be inflantly fent for : I may then find it neceflary to appear. Remember my injunctions, and keep yoiir foulyin peace," Morning had dawned upon the fpires of Madrid, whea Lorenzo quitted the houfe. He drew his cowl over his face to prevent being obferved, and deeply mufing on the с 4 recent
m recent adventure, he moved flowly througb the iireets. ·-.·*·. " How wonderfully ftrartge/' iakl he to himfelf, w 'hàvé been 'thè events of thk night ! as though førtune hád combined to^ bring the 4 vaŕloiís divèrgeùctóòf fate to a* poMt/aiidi*involve 'me either in ¡greater pfer^èxitiesí* or fexmcàte пге ( wholly from thofe mit ñb^ifnit'mf ť ' YetTïtrely this к. nót ##¥!ШкЪ ЩШ 'preféht flate of г '' f -ι * my affairs., I have been, perhaps; ^lilty of М1гНеЬ 0 ¥паЧег11п ! JWYftýwif ha yöung* kdy,%0¥*^ her lover/ I hkv^heard ä } cônfèfíion which it vvas ofihe й1тОЛ а 1ароГгапсе I ftiould* hear, -IftUr wHicKïÏare'hóf reveal, though it оГ^Ь^^ШриШпШ to%ankind. lam« по^^ЩЪраГа !^rmfut- ¡ rVieftflmip to thë ? tèÛ r a teli inďecid 5 tbverë/vvhen my very name mav no''longer Hè remembered, bv the Count Aranda." In the midft of there reflections Lorenzo 'paffed the convent of St. Francis. He in¬ quired of an old devotee,, who was haften-
33 ihg to early prayers, and mumbling oyer her beads as fhe walked, which was the palace of Count Aranda. " Biefs your Hoţinefs," anfwered fhe, " İt is a comfortable fight to fee vour reverence abroad fo early about vyorks of piety. The Count has very mucb r ocçafiqn for a confeb for, for. my part I hurried away, to prayers as foon I could ; it was Øiockin^ ţo hear him, and I .-am going : .ţo n purify my, mind at the (brine of Şt Francis," , 4 " Good woman/! faid Lorenzo, 'f of what; are you fpeaking. Jş. tte Çoun t unwell ? Ч " Yeş truly, is he, ", fí|iď fhe, railing her voice. " He is flarkma<3t. Holy Father/* "Heaven preferve ; { us/' fa,id Lorenzo, in a; low voice,—r" Aye- foifay/,* ; cried the old lady, 'í may itkeep us all in our right mind. It is an avy ful j udgmcnt, but i f thefe grandees, and Counts, and Marquises, and Dukes, had no more upon their confciences than ua poor folk, they would not be fo apt to lofe their underílandingsľ' с 5 f 'Where
34 "Where does the palace ftand?" de¬ manded Lorenzo abrubtlv. " Is it poflible you don't know the G)unťspäláce ( ?" cried the old lady, lifting tij > her haiub and eyes. " Mercy on me, not know where the Count Aranda lives î í ťhought all the world had known him/* "I have no time to wafte," cried Lo¬ renzo, impatiently. " Well, well/' raid the Old lady, "if you don't really know the palace, the more's the pity. Look down to the bottom of that Itreet, there you feç a large marble build¬ ing; that is the place. You need not tell his Excellency, Father, that I faid he was mad." Lorenzo immediately hæftened away and left the old lady in the midit of a fentence, fearing fome new interruption, if he re¬ mained in the open ftreet. He lamented the unforefeen calamity of his friend, which muft neceffarily deftroy all the hopes he had formed, and deprive him at once of that counfel and fupport he fo much needed. He
35 He arrived in a few inimités at the gate of the palace, anddefired the porter to'in¬ troduce him to the Count. " He cannot be feen," replied the fcrvant. <( Is his maladv fo violent ? Does he not retain the power of diftinguifliing per- fons?" "Of doing what ?" faid the fervant, opening his eyes, with a broad flare. "Ï fay," faid Lorenzo, "is his rea fon. quite gone ? Is he pontively delirious ?" The fervant, without replying, broke into a violent fit of laughing, which called a fevcrc frown lipon the brow of Lorenzo, who had not any inclination to mirth; and the fervant recollecting that he owed more reverence to the habit of the inquirer, re- pliedina feribile voide :—"You have been deceived, Father;Tome 1 perfon has' fent you hither to pray for my mafter, I fuppofe; but he was never in a w r orfe humour for fuch an exercife, than j u ft now. He has been fwearing and ftorming at evçry thing about Ыда/ this three hours, and I would с β not
зб not engage that even your habit would protect you from affront/*' " I will hazard it," replied Lorenzo, "F mufl fee him, fori'have bufinefs of conle- quence" The fervant no longer hefitated, but led the way up ttairs, and through feveral rooms, to the dòòr of the'Cburiťs chamber, where he ftopjjedľ fí " Yôti Will éxcufe my entering to innm^èëyoti, Father,"Taid he, " I might be made to pay for the intru- fiotf/' - î,; )rn v '" r ·" , ·'<·- ' ■·;' Lorenzo tàpptabt Ш door^ but received ; no anfwer, and venturing to open k> he· faw the Count fittiUg With his back towards him. * '- /"' ; ; * - :> Every thtrigi round nim lay in diibrder: a brace of pifióla >Щ Ьроп Ше fabter a fword unfhcathed urjòn the toor ; the drefs of the Count vite equally deranged & his hat lay before him, with the feather broken^ and his cloak was torn from his moulders. " Surely" thought Lorenzo, " what the Did lady faid was the truth, here are incon¬ trovertible
37 tro vertible figns of infanity. Tlie fervant had a mind to play upon me." The Count hearing jhe fervant fhut the door, roufed from his reverie, and ftarting from his feat, turned round with a look of anger and per¬ turbation ¡ " Did noti command- -" cried he; but the moment he beheld the figure of Lorenzo,. in hk benedictine robes> his voice fell, and he gazed upon him fome moments, as if to read his menage. - ,, ,. s Lorenzo ftood confounded and filent,- not being able to determine; whether or no the Count was actually mad, while the lat¬ ter fat down, fixing' hk eyes ftedfaftly upon him with a mixture of apparent fear.. "What would you ?" faid he at length, pale and fa ulte ri ng> (< What к it you want ?" " lam come/' replied Lorenzo, ina voice agimtiid by the fingularity of fuch a recep¬ tion. tc I am come to inforni you of mat* ters of importance." " "Have my prayers. and щу wiflies then Jbeen heard? "faid the Count in a my fteriqus manner»
Я8 *■ r manner. " Holy Stranger, permit me to inquire, from what celeftial fphere you have defcended, and what is the purport of your imperial miffion." " He is undoubtedly diftracted," thought Lorenzo, " he raves, and will not perhaps know me if X flioukl difclofe myfeif; yet it is neceflary that I (hould try him." " Count Aranda," faid he, folemnly, "you had once & friend, named, Lorenzo de Ferara^ who was your companion when you fludied at Toledo, Bo you remember ? " "- 1 remember him well," replied the Count, with a figh, " but it is fome years fmce I have ever heard of him ; no doubt ir he is dead." "Behold him here," faid Lorenzo, throw¬ ing back bis cloak and cowl, and firetching out his hand. > * The Count fhuddered, and fhrunk back. " Do you di íUa i n my acquaintance?" faid Lorenzo, his eye fparkling with indigna¬ tion ? " Are you too proud to acknow · ledge me?"
3.9 " О, no, no," cried the Count, " I fee clearly mý dear friend no longer lives, but I was ignorant that permiffion was ever given to a being that had once been hu¬ man, to allume again that form, imagin- mg ----- " You are diftracied," interrupted Lo- renzo, abruptly. " Is your imagination be¬ wildered, or do you leek beneath this affec¬ tation to conceal your ingratitude ? Have you forgot that I preferved you from drowning, at the hazard of my own life ? Did we*not fwear a friendihip, that neither accident nor fortune was to interrupt or deftroy ? But when I come to you in dif- trefs—when I claim your affiftance, you meanly fhrink from the tafic, and affect to believe me not what I am. Count, I defpife fuch conduci." " You wrong me ! " replied the Count, itili gazing at him with fear; "are you really and pcfjtively Lorenzo deFerara; and have you never been dead ?" « What aMurdity ! " faid Lorenzo ; tc how if
40 if I had been dead, could I have been here,? The dead never leave the grave to wander on it's furface." e ' That I deny/' faid the Marquis for lemnly; " they may wander, though in unfeen forms; the doctrine of celeitial in¬ fluences teaches us that there are various modes of fpiritual existence;, and that at times, and to the greatly favoured, thefe. forms have been commanded to appear and have intercourfeJ" " G 004 heavens!" faid Lorenzo, " now have you become fo credulous ? But beA lieve me, I am ppfitively the individual Lorenzo you, knew at Toledo." " But you were then a civilian," re¬ turned the Count: " I heard afterwaixîs that you had entered the army ; what thea. is the meaning of this habit?" " It-is the difguife of neceffity," replied- Lorenzo,, hoping that the Count was гет turning to reálon. " I am flill a foldier of fortune—I may fay, of ruined fortune., Many unparalleled events have forced nie
4t ťo Madrid. I came to repofe in your con¬ fidence, tó require your advice and affift¬ ance : but tell me firit, if you are fatisfied* lam no impoftor." u Your voice and your perfon declare you to be Lorenzo," laid the Count; " You will rőrffivé'tné if Γ haVe acted· towards you wiÄ'mconíľftéhcér È am at pr¿fent íàbòWring under a misfortune which ? derari jfés* íny iinaerMndirig, ánd? almoft drives me tó actual madnefs." « But -ЩШ^оШе ^ou'cb-uİd'tmâçııe» mé ^^a fupernaturaf1bÎémg i ^? ^ Îaiiliorënzb/ : ťf Who or Whatever I did believe y oit, " anfwered the Count folemhlý, " iet us wave for tKé prefent. I am ready to liften now tó' your affairs, and to hear im what way you require my lervices. 4 ' * ï 'it'll ' " That is much too long a detail for this» hour," replied Lorenzo: "theadventures; of this night are of themfelves fufficient. If fc fcarcely, perhaps, to be believed^ that* fince the clock ftruck twelve, İ have killed a nobleman, run away with a lady, and—" Lorenzo*
42 Lorenzo was proceeding, but the fudden emotion of the Count ftartled him. His countenance changed ; and rifing in fiuy, he fnafched his fword from the floor, cry¬ ing aloud, " It is you then, who have deftroyed my happincfs—who have fe- duced the affections of Lady Agness-and murdered the Duke of Aragon, her father* Monfter,fly! or I fhall not. refpect the oath of our friendihip." , '"Howirafh are. you," replied Lorenzo calmly. * ť I was toldî that you were mad H and I have now too much proof." " Would it not urge any man to mad- nefs? to outrageous madnefs," exclaimed; the Count vehemently* fe to have all his hopes blafted.in a night? to find his mif¬ trefs gone before the moment of affigna* tion— to find her father bathed in blood— to find that his rival was once his friend? О God! tis too much for my foul to bear." (< Suffer me to explain the truth to you," cried Lorenzo, chagrined at thk haftinefs, of temper. " You
43 t( You can h o t explain any thing í" paf fionatcly cried the Count : " is not Laciy Agnes now in your hands?" "She is, but----" "But what?" cried the Count, advancing. " Fly ! fly ! my rage will overcome me." " Hear me, hear me!" repeated Lo-* fenzo; "How could Ί know**that Lady Agnes was- any thing to you ? 1 never beheld her till this night:" · *' Nevferî" interrupted the Count, be- ginning to cool; " how then*—how к it poffible fhe ihould truft herfelf with you, if you were a ftranger r She did not ufe tó be fo forward : but I am not fo eafily ďtfped"-- you have betrayed me." "Ifyou would liftén," faid Lorenzo, " I might explain ; but while you thus play the child, I will be filent." " You have a defire to torture my foul," cried the Count, walking about in great agitation. " If you knew how nearly all my hopes of future happi n e ík and prefent peace are concerned In thk unfortunate affair;
44 afíhir ; eveiV though you were my rivaţ y où 'woiilďpitý me." ' e Now, my dear friend/* replied Lo¬ renzo, " you fpeak with reafon : attend, I beg you,, without interruption, to the ac¬ cidents of this eventfu 1 n ight : you will thëti ^èrxèivé, ^ that however ftrange my running away with your miftrefs will ap~ pear, ;Щ "Tr?îk för ffiiört öf what I-have feen alia heard, ih %f 'yiaý ΐά your palace." Loŕ^bthenretítéď the accident which neceffity ■ fte f was: tinder of 'Wounding the Ifcke^fuV^rmipriže. at the behaviour of tlie Jàdy~4ihd ) the fituation in which he had left her.. He vvas : then proceeding to. inform the Count of the migular. confeffion he had witneffed, but the Count had not power to reftrain his impatience. Starting up, he begged Lorenzo in¬ flantly to lead him to Lady Agnes. " Ex¬ cufe me, my dear friend," faid he ; " but eonfider what muft be the terrore of a lady in her fituation !—What muft fhe have
'have felt on difcoverinar fo ftranre a mif- ■take !—What muft flie have thought of my coolncfs ; and can I ever expect her for- . givenefs? Surely I muft have beende- tained by powers the moft extraordinary : no human means could have, Jo confufed my fenfes, and held me from my a ment"
íOV íí'f
Lorenzo reinembered tbc behavÍour^oX * ŕ 4 ï . „ i ' í » .ŕ ■ ƒ_ , i \ ' " , í ' r J ¿ - - ' ■é ' 4. ΐ the Count at hk nrflL, en tran се;" г.. andı hk furprize was ponyeţţi^^^to^jcprjojSţyj, ţto learn thç purports^pf wopJs^ber^^thjWhicli: feemed concealejd 4 a;^(ticaimeaning.; ? .... " 1 have no time at this moment," an^ fwered the Coupt, " to enter on a fubject ^of fuch infinite importance: at prefçnt tet us haften to Lady Agnes.
», ■■t )
'·,< ^'Ut
CIÎAP.
46
CHAP. И.
HE day had long dawned upon the labours of Madrid, when the Count land Lorenzo haftened to the fecluded lodgings ofthelafteTi "You have a very ungular choice/* faid Aranda; "what could induce you to 4ive in this vile fituation, furrounded with poverty and dirt? You muft have very powerful realbns for dwelling in the moft unpleafant part of Madrid. "*;■■ -· " I have fo, indeed ;" re^plied Lorenzo. 4 ' The fame reafons have metamorphofed my military drefs into the robes of a Monk, and'the unfortunate accident of thk night will oblige me to continue this difguife." * The
47 The Count remained filent; and it was not long before they arrived at the houfe of dame Alice. On their entrance, the old lady fa I u ted them with a con f ufion of exclamations, j from which they could only guefs that fome frefh accident had happened, and which their fears immediately applied to Jady Agnes. ..,.". "Hówis the lady now ? Is flie recovered ? Lead us to her chamber:" cried the Count und Lorenzo at once. " Alas is me !" returned dame Alice, lifting up her eyes and crofting herfelf; * v but it is utterly impoffible Cavaliers. What a wicked world do we live in ! Satan himfelf, is furely tbrdke Ioofe;, r «trBut it is no matter: ь the fairer the appearance, the more deceitful theheart." Γ " What aré you muttering; В" demanded the Count impatiently; f *the lady well?" « She is by this, l høp^," replied fhe. €< But fuch doings never took place under * my roof before—Heaven and the bleffed ■ faints
46 faints protect us!—If I had but fuf- .pečted —" " Sufpecìcd what? fay what!" de- inanded Lorenzo. f c You need not be in, a .paífión ;" replised -dameAlice, " î forgive you : but Lmuftbe fo ,plain as to tell, y ou, that my houfe, though <тоёап and humble, ilialjjiev^er bea Iheker for fuch proceedings; and had ■-I'^knowjq, no щопеу ,nor fair ipeephes neitlier, ft>ould -ever haye te^npted me ţo take you in." ".Sit down, my, gqo4 ^-P^^n," foid the Count. "-Calm ypurifelf a Jittie, япД then ' μ. S ι s x ' ' * "f- * W^ 1 Л У ■■. ry- ·= Jf ŕ т ' quickly tell uş what you mean." "Myrmeaning does.not t require expia- лай on, I think. The Cavalier knows it full well. Heaycn alone, ţhougţb knows were it will all end.^—The lady İsJuUVof threats, and no perfuafion can pacify her. ľ , '51 will undertake to make your peace/* .faid the Counts ' ť only ilïçw me to hor apartment Неде, is a trifle for the. in- xonvenience you bavefuffered," - ' ' > < - ''l* ff Ah,
t{ Ah, your Excellenza," replied ïhe, wiping her eyes : tf you are too generous. It is not for that I complain. It js that fo fweet a young lady ihould have been fo deceived ; lmt,;thanks to the blefled faints, íhé is fáfe enough by this." The Count was alarmed at this in telli- gence-T-defiring her to inform him where Lady Agnes was. *' That I cannot do ;" fáid fhe. "Ae .foon as fhe was fufficiently recovered to fpeak, (he enquired who the Cavalier was that had conveyed her to my houfe, which I told her, unthinking of harm, arid that he was gone out. This news feemed to recover her at once, for Harting up, ih e told me fhe had been bafely deceived into the belief that Lorenzo was another perfon, and offering me a ring, flie bèf ought me to forward her efcape from a wreťch who had, doubtlefs, firft deftroyed her lover, and had after- wards murdered her father. I could not pretend to detain her, you know, Cavalier, and as I refufed taking any bribe, fixe hinted x VOL. I. D tO
ŐO to me at parting, that fhe fhould bury herfelf for the reft of her life, in fome provincial convent, where not even her relations fhould ever difcover her." The Count was confounded at thk inti¬ mation. All hk eager hopes of foothing her under her unfortunate fituation were overthrown, and he muft continue (at leaft for atime) to remain in her eyes, the moft defpicable of men. While the Count remained in this re· verie, Lorenzo reflected that lady Agnes might not even yet have quitted the houfe ; but concealing his fufpicion, and making a fign to thé Count to detain the old lady, he proceeded to examine thé different apart¬ ments. Це paffed through feveral, and into that where hady Agnes had refted, but without the fmalleft trace that could confirm hk ftďpicions. He palled forward to hk own chamber, from which he took a few things he wifhed to depofit in the care of the Count, and was returning, when be fancied that
that a voice came from fome diftant ap¬ partient. The houfe was large and defolate. He knew of no other lodger than himfelf, and believing that now he had difcovered the retreat of the lady, he proceeded haftily up the ftairs, and advanced towards the room from whence the voice feemed to proceed. "O tremendous juftice," faid a folemn voice, " how canft thou be reconciled to ¡nfatiate vengeance. Is it not better that ten thoufand die, than that I fhould fu fler Γ Lorenzo fhuddered at the words. The voice was dreadfully familiar to hk ear İ <f О heavens," thought he, " have I been fo near deftruction, and at reft. How hm thk terrible man difcovered my retreat f " " Am I wrong/' faid the fame voke, (in foliloquy) "Can human nature give up her paffions to cool argument ? No ; gwe me but revenge, and I fhall die with fatk* faftion," Lorenzo, pale and trembling, turned away with cautious ftep. « Äh/ f faid he DŽ fø
52
to himfelf, " It is he, it is Don Raphael, and Madrid cannot hide me from his eye." It was with fome difficulty he returned to the Count, for he expected every moment to be overtaken, and the flighteft echo of his fteps ftartled him with apprehenfion. 4 The bleffed Virgin keep us! " ejaculated dame Alice, " what has the Cavalier feen ; I hope it was not the ghoft of the lady's fa¬ ther; if fo, I am undone forever." "What is it that has affrighted you thus? M faid the Count, looking at him in aftonifliment. " Have you indeed been witnefs to any fupernatural appearance? You are extremely pale." Lorenzo endeavoured to fmile at their fufpicious. " Would to heaven/' faid he, " that it had been a fpirit. How long have you had other guefts than myfeif in your houfe, dame Alice ?" " Since laft night ;" replied fhe, " but you need not have been terrified at him, if that s all you have feen. I muft confefs his looks are not the moft winning; but for him to turn a foldier pale ! " " He
55
" He mufl be very terrible/' faid the Count, fmiling. " It İs well you have no occaiion to know him," faid Lorenzo, myfterioullv. " I would not for the value of all Madrid, Леер under the fame roof with him." (< Marry ! that as yon lifcc," faid dame Alice, with a fmile of contempt. K( I dare fay he has not killed a Nobleman, and run away with a Lady; for my part I like a rough outfide if it "conceals a found heart; fo you will do well, Cavalier, to look for ano¬ ther lodging/* " It may be as well," faid Count Aranda, " to take the good woman at her word, the doors of my palace will be always open to you, and my fervants ihall come for your baggage/' "I have very little of that," replied Lo¬ renzo, t( a foldier of fortune mull have few incumbrances; but my dear Count, let us hailen from this place ; at another op¬ portunity I will give you my reafons; the found of my voice may betray me/* n$ The
54 fhe Count made another effort to gain from dame Alice, what me might know further of Lady Agnes, hut without effect, as ihe was really ignorant of the motions of that bdy. He returned without more delay, with Lorenzo to his palace, frèni whence he difpatched two of his moft trufty fervants, the one to make minuté enquiry at every convent after Lady Agnes/and thé fecund to learn the health of the Duke; feif in the bufinefs, ft might leid to un¬ pleafant confequences, aud perhaps defeat &e very purpofe of hk inquiry, fmce, no doubt, hk perfon would Ъе partidularly de- fcribed, if lhe refolved to avoid hıra. " Af er appointing a fuit of roomt to fl» ufe of Imemo, the Count defired that he would retire to laké fome Urde reft, and meet tóm in Ш afternoon, ' when thW might - renew that mutual cAnftèencé they had early exchanged, 'm the college of To- 1 1®ш, 'Ш/ш wluch had been long mterru|Mêel hf the ncceft*ry abfence öf Loretíiŕo,
ss upon the duties of his fituation ; and a fe¬ ries of adventures, which followed clofe «pon each other. Lorenzo, when he retired, had fufficient matter to exercife reflection, but wearied nature required repofe, and it was not till fome time after noorj that he awoke, and haftened to meet his friend. _ . . i} He found him fitting alone in a profound fit of muftng, and foon learnt that his mef- fengers had returned with unpleafant tiding. Lady Agnes not being to be found, and the Puke of Aragon> life in the tttmou danger; while at the fame time part of the truth had become the public difcourfe of Madrid, and the utmou vigi- lance was exerted to difcover the affaffin. ^ m ^m^tm^ Wï tøf* \)f í«a«H* woiiWfttraai clue to the houfe of dame Alice, where for.the filence of the latter; even the pa¬ lace of tip Count be confidered as a very retreat
S6
4t
lam almoft driven to defpair ;" faid he, the more I endeavour to fly my fate» the greater ait the difficulties into which I am plunged. Madrid I confidered a. a fecu« afylum from an enemy as inveterate as death; hut I find htm lodging beneath the very fame roof, and if I knew where to flyv Madrid would not hold me three hours/' *■ Hf "I lament with you/'returned the Count, *' this unfortunate accident ; hut while the Duke lives* there it every reafon to hope ; and you will he fale i» my palace. You could not be morefecure and lefs known, ifyouwereunder royal protection/' At mis moment a fervant еШмярещ' an« prefented a folded paper to Lorenzo, who inquired ifit was for him. " Yes, Senor/* replied the fervant; "the perfo© who brought it, defired me I» Шт it Into y our own hand»/* Шт Count and Loresxxo looked al each other* шш tbo låtter tuiron|f to Шш fttwxitt uho brouffht the bükt, * f flc
57 (e tie was dreffed in the habit of a monk," replied the fervant, " of nearly the fame' order as yourfelf,—He would not wait a moment." " What myftery !" faid Lorenzo as the fervant withdrew. "Are all my motions watched.—But who can thk be V* He tore open the paper,-and read (Imply:«-* Lorenzo de Жегата, h requested èy a friend te come this night, at the tame hour, to the same place where he heard m extraordinary confession. . "The morjt I endeavour to free myfeif from thk maze,"faid Lorenzo, "the more am I perplexed and bewildered*'* ■ "What was the confeifion that you heard?" inquired the Count. " My curi-" ofity к roufed: hut you are weal with want of refrefhment, and before I can re¬ queft you to gratify me, I w ifi order a repül into my ftudy, where we mail be toem from interruption—at kaft from any w§#efe OOtHMW4tvMna# p&. JLorenso
5Q Lorenzo ímiled, for he had more than once obferved a peculiar bias to fuperili- tion in his friend; and he remembered even while they were at college, thé Count had made the ftudy of the occult fcienccs, bisamuWnt. During their repaft, they fuggefted va- riety of plans to difcover the retreat of lady Agnes, and foften the refentment flie had bat too muchreafon to entertain. *' When î«Hfeéii" faid hë, w upon the de-^ licacy of her mind, and the many objections I had to combat before I could Induce her to ñy with me, I almoft bfe tbe hope that flie will be ever reconciled tè mf eàeufes/* « But if йш fiiic^dy hurts уои,**тер1Ы Lorano, * no doubt but 0tìs will* forghre/ What crime» except ineonfhmcy, will not a lover forgi ve ? And if you had pomer tø perfuade her to quit her father's houfe, there can be but little doubt but you may apwB-pwpvail*** - **By the manner in which fm fymk" replied the Çmrnt, «I pwdv* thai you ' - cMs
ô9 daß lady Agnes with thofe women, who are ever ready to fly in the face of their fathers' commands, and are happy to have an excufe to give a wide latitude to their actions ; buí I affure you, you are ex- tremely wrong. It was with the confent of her father himfelf, that I paid my ad- dreffes fo her, and our courtfhip had gone fofar, that the day of our union had been named. The marriage fettlements had been hinted at, and it would fcarcely have been fuppofed that any accident, mort of death, could have interrupted our felicity. But thé Duke, without deigning to give me any reafons for hk caprice, firft became cool towards me, and alter feveral flagrant affronts, forbid me h к houfe; declaring, that though hk daughter was an only child, before he would beftow her upon me, he would conflue her in a convent for life* It was in vain ï fought for an explanation; amfi little doubt, but fome private enemy hat fecretly traduced me, for 'the Duke Ы а шап who knows the world too well, to »β aa
60 acì in thk manner without believing that he has a fufficient reafon/* " But then he к guilty of very great in* juftice/* replied Lorenzo, " in liftening to tales he will not hear refuted. I think that hk daughter к perfectly excufable.— There would be nothing to regret, if all who acted thus had the ume motives ; but blind and mifguided paffion к too gene¬ rally predominant." Lorenzo, while he fpoke thus, repeat¬ edly fighed, and the Count making no reply, he funk into â fit of mufing, which was interrupted by the fervant'« entering to dear the table. *' Jago," faid the Count, "bring fome wine, fome fruit, and forne fweetmeats; and then, remember I am at homo to no one ; not even little Mahmut, unlela he brings me news from the Duke." fhe ferrant bowed and retired* " Åi little Mahmut, as you eau him," laid Lo- i*n*o,"©neofyourdomclUc*?'' Г Hoj
ni " No ;** replied Aranda, u he is the moft Angular little mortal on the face of the earth; his qualifications are altogether fupernatural ; and I may truly fay, he is highly favoured of heaven ; but I mufl not awaken your curiofity too ftrongly for the prefent. If we fhould have hereafter, any moments of leifure, 1 will introduce him to you ; hut now let me beg of you to make ще acquainted with your various fortunes ; and how a man who preferves a regard to morality, can have raifed to himfelf fo unrelenting a foe/' His friend remained filent, revolving in his mind the cruelty of his fate« until the fervant had made his arrangements, when the Count repeating his charge of denial, and having faftened the door to prevent any interruption, he began. The Adventures qf ^mze de ferata* It ¡s, ! believe, more than five year» fince j • I left you at your fludies in Toledo, more ferious avocations forcing me Into the world. í it- i
m world. You remember, that from my carOeft infancy, I had been brought up within the walls of a convent, at a little diftance from that city ; that my parents, my guardian, or my patron, were alike unknown to me ; and that whether I was rí- the child of chance or of indigence I had only a few circumftances to guefs. In that early fančbnry of my youth I was taught to believe myfeif deftined for facred ordination. I was initiated into the ritual and formulae of our church ; and never having experienced the carcflcs of parental affection, or the pleafures of free exiftence, ! felt no repugnance to the rou¬ tine of tuonante di ft ipline, believing that ihe whole human fpecies were employed in fimilar fervices. It was Muts that the years of my youth glided hy % I was happy, becaufe I knew of no more extended a circle of exjflenec, and I was without a wifh to difcover the origin from which I fprang, or tlie hamt that fuppUed a yearly ftipend for my ШяТШ&ШшШ. fin Ш&Щ^Шщр Wf 4pF*W
6S ön the day that I entered my fifteenth year^ihe Superior received a note from the hand óf a ftranger, which created in him much furprize, and he hefitated to obey its réquèft. " This note," faid he to the ftranger, " requires me to deliver to you our little brother Lorenzo ; but we al¬ ready confider him an inmate in onr houfe/* " I prefume not to dictate," faid the ftranger, " but I would fuggeft, that as his hoard has been regularly difburfed, you cannot have a claim to detain him." "That is moft true," replied the Supe¬ rior; ** I hope I am to deliver him to better fortune/* The ftranger bowed, but made no reply; and I was immediately fent for, and delivered into hié hands. This perfon was of a taciturne difpo- fition; and I remember that he heard all the trifling remaría I made, and tik won* iksr I ежртейГеЙ at the new feenes which opened at once bifore my eyes, with the moft perfect indifference. Iwai
64 I was introduced by him to the college where the ftudy of jurifprudence k prač¬ tifed, for t had no occafion to fpend my «me in learning languages, the monks having fpared no pains in my inflruction. The flranger then took hk leave, without the fmalleft token of fatisfaction or regret, only recommending diligence. It was then I took upon me thofe fludies which might one day raife me to the tri* bunal of j ufi ice ; and ii wat then, my dear Aranda, I became acquainted with you« It was then you condoled with me, as my ideas enlarged, on the obfcurity of my birth, and tihe uncertainty of my fortunes. Boring three years my Шагу wat puno* tuaily paid by fome perfon unknown, but my utmoft vigilance could never detect the hand; and as my private Hipead was by no mean* illiberal, I remember you ufed to confole me with the inference, that my friends could not be of low rank pr (munt.
65 f As my intercourfe with the world he- came more general, it was with forrow I looked upon the precarioufnefs of my fituation. The idea of being overwhelmed in poverty at the caprice of a perfon whom I knew not, was to me dreadful ; and the more fo, as I had never known the dis¬ tinction of poor and rich, or witneffed the miferies fuffered hy the former. To preferve myfeif from thk terrible fituation, which arofe to my mind in cafe of abandonment I applied almoft day andi night to my ftudies. fhe pleafures en« joyed hy other young men in my йш* ι afton, were profcribed hy me ; and I muft acknowledge, my raonaftic habits had ori¬ ginally fitted me for this drudgery of learning, and taken from me much of the levity and piety of youth. I have fometimes wondered that a young mau, with fo ufuent a fpirit as the Count Amuda, could find pleafure in the fociety of a perfon who had no refouree» of enter¬ tainment. lour
65 Your company, I believe, was abfolutely neceflary to prevent my finking into me** lancholy; and indeed it was almoft the only rebxation I allowed myfeif through the day. Many were the fchemes I projected to difcover the fource of my fupplies, hut all were equally fruitlefs; and I have no doubt that even the Superiors of the col¬ lege were equally ignorant of my real The ftudy of jurifprudence was in itfelf unintereftsng, but not fo in ita powert and ЧйЧрЩт^ЧГЧЯ чР1ЧР we4hŕ4H^^ Ш ЧяИРчРчЛ ЩЩ ЩяЯЩгШШ *Щ ^'Щ0ЩЩ^ШЩрФщфЩ^Щ^4ЩЩтЩ^т that I might do much to foften the feveri- ties of mankind, and redrefs many of thofe grievances which daily cried aloud for amelioration, I found much fatisfaction in planning fchemes which were indeed never to cxifh The fancy that I might one day prefide over the bâr oî juftice, excited to me a ftrong ardour for knowledge, independent of other motivesi and having pafled through
67 through the courfe of ftudy neceffary for common and civil cafes, I was entering ■i Ì 1 upon the abftrufe fpeculations of the laws of nations, when my purfutts were totally changed ; and from the rights, were di¬ rected to the wrongs of mankind. Whoever it was that had power over my fate, their intentions feemed to have no liability. The Superior of the college received a note, which requefted my dif- mhTal from the eftabliíhment, and a little packet, which contained a fubordinate commiffion In the army« anda fmall fum of money to equip me formy new capacity, It is likely I fhould not have pofitively fubmittcd to this arbitrary deflination, without any reafon or excufe, had it not to. Ibr perori»: кг.к.Ы talk to re-arrange my plans, and from fo clofe an application to ftudv, from the re- treats of a college, and the сеШ of $ dotier, to enter at ¿nee upon the buftle of mili¬ tary life, and all the exertions of painful Warfare« I had
63 1 had juft entered my nineteenth year when I became a foldier ; and as the army к a fcene of fplendor and parade, my youthful mind eafily imbibed all the max- ims of gallantry and honour which are the ftamina of a foldier s charaeler, h was with confiderable regret I left Toledo, which to me had been a fécond retreat, and where I had found a companion and a hiend : hut the hurry of my employ did not leave me much time to think« The deference I every where received reconciled me to the chatige of fttuations, and the mies of veteran heroes fired my imagination with an ardent defire after fimilar exploits. Our regiment was marched through va¬ rious provinces, for near a twelvemonth, in Khirh time I &w gmt part of Spain, and the manners of its inhabitants ; but I de* fired nothing more than a war, when I might hare an opportunity of fignalking my refolution, and fomething to repeat as well as røy companions. The
69 The reftleflhefs of ambition and the dif- content of the people are generally fer¬ menting frefh troubles, and fome fymp- toms of war appearing on the fide of Portugal, feveral bodies of troops were concentrated toward the frontiers of that kingdom. It was propofed that an extenfive en¬ campment fhould be formed along the borders of the Breganza Domain ; but as no pofitive act of hoftility had been com¬ mitted, it had been det med beft not to provoke war by an open difplay of power ; and our troops were difperfed to the cities of Leon and Oviedo. It was my lot to be ftationcd in the city of Leon, on the beautiful river Elza, at the foot of the mountains of Aituria, fo re¬ markable for the variety of foliage which in fome places clothes the fummits of the higheít h ilk A icldicr s life is extremely pleafant, when quartered in a large town ; he re¬ ceives the homage of all ranks, and the par-
70 particular regards of the ladies ; he к decorated in the moft elegant manner, and hk uniform к calculated to difpláy the human figure in the utmoft perfection; hk exercifes give a play of health to hk "* * * 't,. countenance ; and kindling at the parade of public exhibition, he feels anď afmoft believes himfelf fuperior to the reft of mankind. No wonder then, that my ideas mould undergo a freíh revolution, and ; frefli views open before me. The confined fphere ot L umble independence was enlarged; and I reflected on die means of procuring a fplendid eftabltfhment. Many were the opportunities I had of offering myfeif to fome lady of fortune, but my ambition looked forward to rank and dignity. I confidered it a folly for a foldier of fortune to encumber himfelf with a wife, unlefs (he could raife him both to affluence and rank, and by loolmg too high, I found that my rain fchemes were always abortivo; but
but my heart was untouched, and my va- nity was too high to fuffer much. Ambition, I might fay, was my darling miftrefs. She was my theme by day, and my dream by night ; and ïë inflated were my ideas, that I fancied myfeif little fhort of the heroes of antiquity, though I had never, .even in flngle combat, yét feen the face of an enemy. This enthufiafm was pro¬ moted by my ftudies and ray exercifes. Thè arts of war, the lives of heroes, and the fictitious adventures of romance, oblitera- ted the fpirit of* LegiflatiOn and the Pan¬ dits. I arofe every day with the fun, and plunged into the river. I joined every party that was formed to chafe the wolves amongft the mountains! I clambered the fteepeft rocks, and endeavoured to imitate ' the goat in leaping from rock to rock. Thus I hardened my conftitution, and fighed for the moment of actual fervice, when I imagined my fingle prowefs wpuld fuifice to hew down whole ranks of the enemy,
n -if enemy, and to decide the fortune of the day. '.-.··., ì .. : м- Enthufiafm is ever the fame in its na« ture, though leading tp different ends ; and though İt k a fpecies of infanity, yet no man к more perfectly happy than he who is moft fubject to its fway. Of. ţhk, nature is love. At that time I had never been touched by its influence, and perhaps my fuflerings were the more fevere from its having heen delayed till my reafon was matured into fettled habit. It was in one of our adventures on the mountains, that we were led a confiderable way, in purfuit of a wolf, whofe fierce appearance and uncommon Иге, excited determination to extirpate him : but the labour and difficulty of following him through a country fo rugged, tired put my companions, one after the other, and even the dogs feemed willing to abandon the chafe.
Deter
* **А«5^^ *i 4шмщ
^Determined not tô yield to trifling obr' jßaelesj I continued to clamber from one elevation tö the next, and only conquered One thicket to engage with another. My faithful dog kept true to the fcent ; and after rambling I know not whither, I found myfeif aloné' on the abrupt heights of the mountains. ' Iihouted aloud to my companions, but the »fournis only vibrated from rock to rock, returning upon me in riumberlefs echoes : and I repeated the experiment feverâl times, charmed with the efteči;. The peculiar wiIdnefs of my elevated fituation obliterated all ideas of thè chafe, and I flood for főmé time, ad¬ miring the beauties of nature around mé. After fome time, I advanced to the elevated bro\V of the mountain, which feemed tó promile an extenfive view, as it overlooked a considerable valley, and com- manded the many windings of ä long chain of bills. It wiis about fun-fet when I gained this fituation, and looked down With delight into vol.1. в the
74 ihe vale heneath, which was entirely co- leered with foreft trees, of variegated foliage, upon whofe tops the fun feemed tó repofe with lingering delight. The irregular hiljs j which encircled this place, rofe as an amphitheatrøe around ; in fome parts covered with almoft impene¬ trable woods, in others barren. The fun Ilion e red upon the tops of the hills, and the clouds caught the fervid tinge which gave all nature a glow, and filled me with an enthufiaftic rapture. I fat down upon the fhort mofs of the mountain, to contemplate at leifure, the fublime fcenery around me. The peaceful tranquillity of the valley, fhadowed by almoft impenetrable foliage : thè dreary and chaotic barrennefs of the diftant moun* tains, ihaded with blacknefs: the flow fmkmg of the fun, whofe orb feemed to ìncreafe in magnitude as it verged to the edge of the horizon : and the deep filence which forerun the night, entranced me upon the fpot. The
75 The íhoitts of men, the founds of cattle* and the voices of birds, were equally ba* nimed from this folitary fpot; und I in¬ dulged in a dream, which carried me away from fociety, and planted me amidft em - bowering fhades, and verdant greens. I forgot my companions. I forgot the ne¬ ceffity of my return to Leon. -I forgot all things but the pleating profpects around me, till the fhades of the gigantic moun¬ tains began to overfpread the valley, and the blue mifts to gather upon the hills. My faithful dog broke the chain of my enchantment, ihewing by his impatience, that he knew our timé was wafteing; but when I began to reflect upon returning, I found it utterly impoffible, in the dark, and without a guide, to retread rocks and fteeps, where there was ho path, and where a falfe ftep would have been irrecoverable. I alfo found, on defcending from the flights of fancy, that I was both weary tind hungry, without having power to procure refreihment, and with the profpect before e 2 me
76 me of remaining all night upon the hfli#^ When I arofe, I found íny limbs fliflened with fitting, after fo much exercife, and I moved flowly to a little thicket, where I purpofed to await the morning; but in fear that fome noxious reptile might have made it a retreat, I moved oh to a frag¬ ment of rock, which lay upon the furface, as if thrown from á greater height. I fat down, refolved to bear with pa- I tience, and as ; became a foldier, what was without remedy ; and I pleafed myfeif with reflecting that this was the firft acci- dent I had experienced which I could con- irrue «into ah adventure. The darknefs of night moved fail over the face of the'earth, and the diftİnction of objects »y/as obliterated. The cool winds flitted by me, as I fat upon the rock, like whîfpèrs in the air, and my dog frequently ftarted up his ears, as if alarmed by fome diftant found. My fituation became extremely cool, and the dews of the hills gathered upon me
77 me with an unpleafant chillnefs. I arofé to warm myfeif by motion, and my dog ftarted up, no doubt joyous at the hope that he fhould not remain in that fituation all night. He ran about me with pleafure, and I felt at that moment what a miferable being is man, without a friend or com¬ panion to lhare in the reflections, the. pleafures, and the pains, his flying and rapid mind is perpetually fuggefting. Thefe thoughts naturally led on to a. train of reflections upon my own folitary fituation in life, and without regarding my fteps, I continued to follow my faithfuL attendant, till I found he had difcovered - - t. a path that feemed to wind towards the. valley. Though precipitous and dangerous, I determined to purfue it;, and had ad- vaneed a confiderable way, fometimes. intercepted by the bufhes which choaked the path, when the dog on a fudden flop¬ ped and began to bark. e s I looked
7й 1 looked forward, in the wav he feemed to direct, and was not a little furprized at feeing a light move beneath me, near the furface of the ground, along the fkirts of the foreft. It was too dark for me to dif* tingili fli by whom the light was carried, bur conceiving it could be only fome peafant who refided in this fecluded retreat, and who might now be returning to his cottage from his daily labour ; I determined to claim a iheker beneath his roof for the night. I had fome difficulty to filence the cla¬ mour of my dog, who feemed to Dirink back, as if unwilling to follow me ; but his fajthfulnefs overcame his fear, and we de« fcended flowly together. By the time I gained the level ground, at the expence of two or three falls, the light was loft in the windings of the foreft. It was too dark to judge for myfeif, and I left it to the fa- gacity of my dog to ftrike out fome path, which I followed without hefitation, every inftant in danger of being knocked down by the hanging branches. It
79 It was fome time before I again caught the light, which the barking of my dog firft pointed out, and I was not a little fur¬ prized at the cowardice he difplayed in creeping clofe by my fide. I advanced with as much fwiftnefs as the thtckncf« of the trees would permit, fometimes gain¬ ing upon the light,, which feveral time* crofted the path, and fometimes bring к altogether. For more than a mile, according to my judgment, I continued to follow thk %ht> without being able to diftinguifh by whom it was carried. I increafed mv fpeed, re¬ ceiving feveral fevere blow» from the im¬ pending boughs ; but when I fancied mv¬ felf within a few paces, on a fudden it appeared at a diftance, like a faint flar. My furprize began to be roufed. The filence and caution of my dog* who crept fo clofe to my feet that I was in danger of treading upon him, did not decreafe my fufpicions ; and remembering the talc* I had heard of fpirits that wandered hy * 4 night,
80
night, ant! of meteors glancing along the path of the traveller, I began to hefitafe whether I ftiould proceed. I was almoft afhamed of betraying thefe fymptoms of fear to myfeif, and refolved .after a moment's hefitation to follow *t all »events. Poffibly, thought I, this is the adventure my fortune has referred for me as a trial of my courage, and worthinefs of her favours ; fhall I then be wanting to fécond her intentions í Not however to venture forward rafhly, I prepared my fword for any attack that might be made on my perfon, and calling upon the fpirits of departed heroes, I ad¬ vanced with a quick motion ; my fword held out before me to feparate the branche». I now evidently gained upon the light, and fancied I could perceive the outlines of a human figure, envelloped in brack: but whether really dreffed in that сокшг, or only receiving it from the iliade of night, I cotirdnot diftinguifh. I now ven¬ tured
81
tured tocall aloud to the perfon to fíay ; and my dog, encouraged by my voice,, began to bark, but with evident fear. The light flopped for a moment, but was inflantly extinguifhed, and I remained in total and impenetrable darknefs. I flood flill to liflen if any one moved towards me, and bent my ear to catch the founds that might run along the ground, for I was not without fufpicion that he might have been a robber, who, on hear ing my voice, had extinguifhed the light s the better to fall on me by furprize, but all remained profoundly and-terribly filent. I looked round, but it was impoffible to diftinguifh a yard before me. I looked up, but a dark canopy of foliage concealed even, the fparkle of a flar. The wind was hufhed, and fo great was the filence, that a leaf might almofl have been heard to fall. Some bird of the night fíew by me, and the fudden found in the air, ftartled me with fear. What a moment was this to. give the wing to fancy, for fuperflitious^-fears ε 5 began
ш
began to creep over me in fpite of reafon t rememlKTcd feveral ftrange florim 1 had heard at \jmm f of thefe very mountains· and partirukrfy of a defobtc building w hirh, fot ought 1 knew, might tie fitœfc d ìli ıhtı valley* That are lunts when the moft ¿bin»! of Èmmm affame the fare of tmih # aud fuch ш ume ш the prêtent. ШИ ОСЩНШТщ III my ОП whether I (ЬоиИ «шш Ш% advmsce, or
ч
1
#
vaudP f trtîfiınjç I» pfsiııt oui t
#
*
^ #
fïiblbf^i ш 1 tma
divided
fêr, wlien tfa diftant tours of fomt perfori finging, caught my ear r the filence of the foreft permitting me diftinčtly to hear tfa air of an old popular ballad. Encouraged by tfa affurance of fome near abode, I advanced with increafing fpiritv; and after winding through fe vera! intricate path· amongft the buffai, I dif¬ covered a cottage of moft mtferable afpect. Through a chini In urn broken mutter*, fhone a ray of fight, and having waited till tfa v oiro ceafed, I ventured to tap gently it tfa door« Every found feemed to fa hurørd, a« if in akrmattfaonufbialcifoirirftÄn«* of atı intruder in fo fecluded a fi fua ñon I waited fome time, bot receí* ing tm we$y* 1 ventured to tıp »pin with htäåew поз fr The light wa* taken away· må 1 tipeêted ♦very moment fornt «mt would арршг, but m thk I mm difappointed. My dog teftified fai impatience by fail¬ ing, and after waiting feme time, I con- tlmkd It could fa ouly fttr which pre¬ vented
İl fented any me appearing ; nor could I wonder Ihat they fhould he thus cauliom, when I confidered that whatever might ha the cogency, no help ws* near: and though roitagen mighf not have much to tempi fheivirk* of rapine, yet fbi little wat to them ofihcutmoft value; ncrdidlknow ^ hom they might bvc to dread ю fo fuf- ttóôt» a wikL i ve tugiif ww jpet üftf.— »it wat w» ipHNtwimf lo шмшш rør fo many houn ai midi pii ufi momitiţr, Ш tke damp and opee aiMttd I refolved not to he fo eafdy di'fiiiilfdi. iijiffflffffi iuffi l lriigitt å 1 İMİ in fear* 1 determined ,ШЬЖЪШ АшШ. ■шШЛЫЕЁЫ^ШЯ} МеШИШЛ jf ii ¡Μι ■TBii^aMMÉÌÉ^ 8 JMftHJW ищци 'Йл.Ш'.шшмЛ-ШЫШ Ш^ШШШя1 - ] яШкШШ тяШЬшяИ^^шЕя >Ша 'ШЁШешЛЩяШ ЛШ ШяШШ -ÆEEwL· ¿сттЬЛ. Лтф О* kcf-bol», «ко I т. шла теща 1 w»te ïfdL *#' Ш ¿terfeli -Ш ЁШШШ^шШё&я* ^ ^^Üa^o^rfMK Ш $% Шшш)1тжшЁтштшш1тШ ЫЛтЁтЛ^тЕутфттт Шаш$т
ш " From whence come you ?" demanded a rough voice, ditTerent Irom the íiríŕ, which 1 fad judged to fa a woman's. * From Leo»;* жерШей t « 1 wason a hunting party, and fare toi my way/' "Are you »lone the» Ψ * demanded the fame voice; « are your companions «car ?" ** Ко Γ »»fwered I # # *tfay art many тШш behind, if they are not, as к moft probble, by thk tíme, fafe at Ltott. If©» will nor repent giring me melier/* ♦* Tfat к mort than I know /' laid m% m ш low grambtkg voice, while 1 fa&rd him unbar the door, which fa gradually opened, a* if to convince himfelf tfat I An old woman, wloft finturti wert roughened with ihe weather ami tfa tempeñ of mmy ш yem fald ft fmall Imp» by whkh I ttøimguimed tfa muf· ter of the cottage Ut was dreffed I» tfacoarff habis of m woodman. Ilia am* tun· «fif extremely dark· тле Ш eye moved with qtikkitef» and r^pdity Ш
feemed confidmbly younger than hm oompiuf on, and with the moll forbidding air, invited me into his dwelling. I lat down, with fonte doubts of what company 1 had accident!) flumbkd upon, but at there ms now no remedy, I took mm not m betmy any fear. The old bdy pbr*d ihe bmp upon the tibie, while the man шап §rai mm in fecu re the door, as if tie apprehended Mi little rttadcJ would he totoed, placing bmrû fta\e» of wood littlnå it. ^ Tť jfttitMl Ата ШЫ№Ё "Ш^ШжМа ja mf ~UŠ% Wèsp шшшшшфегешл&шШ щ frietwL у f*>d I, you make allfure/' M Th» b not a mmU m ü\t Ы %rith our щшмш щшш§ wesmøu he» -' Ymtmďmaémr* соытистИ *· Mm muh d* fhtf nrahí r, ' í*íd he «ус10Ш1вг*«г)'О11 *тМ Ы%е Итешчщ A*> fbr iui thrle wüfÉL ht fLdiai Iki* kiöl% аша tihi Ашг. тйтя ш й1икг с
upon my figurei шпа I thought he frowned at perceiving my arme. " Sylvia," faid he as he fat down, " yoti have heen finging here till yott have let the- fîre out : bring anottier log—the Cavalier looks cold" He then liftetted as if he ex-* peued to hear fome perfon coming; fitting on hk three-legged fiool in fuch variety of poftum, that t faw he waa not tatfcflcd wifh my prefence. I muft own my opinio» of my hoft began* to he not the moft favourable; but fup- pofiftg Wm to have evil bıtetıiîon», 1 flat- Шее myfeif that I had f «flit tent ftill to repel any attack he could make upon mm акте; aml I determined, if any о the f came m the cottage, to <ptit it al all 1шшк< 1 caft a glance rouud thk little dwelling, hut fhediin tomp only düpbytd the hum* Ы? ami вешними pofMkift» of ш collage,, with fume implement· for cutting wood» I faw no preparations for fuppet; amt ihe ftsrtiuf-fc oi tkt ma», with the SyhiMtle %tne of the woman, mem not «alctåitfd m
89
io inette freedom. 1 almoft repented hav¬ ing accepted fuch unwelcome melter: hut m mm î muft make the heft ufe of my had fortune, I defired to know if I could not have fomethiiig to eat, the chafe having left me tery hungry. ** I dont know/' replied he dryly. ** Soldier* don't generally carry much coto about f hem: wc have no luxuries/* #< I toll be contented with what <at»fie* ymi/' replied I, without uotking his icmai»» * 4 We Copped an hour ago," replied hew ** We hsve miihiu^ but шШЬЩек bread, шеф ш шш№ тшшь* Ьшшш ш ш$1у ЕШ ätenčw «ш1 â Aitt# Ъш íbiitb* аишишаше" ibi* ■^r»ŕ· '#^ w , ^™ч'- ""» TBţw -чк l ^ff ıj|i y iyili . тг-ъ /rv w ' TT ff #J ■ч'дя/'-'Чг чр^т-^ Iŕ'ÍW 'Й^^^^У^Ч^г'Р^^Ив -^j^^i^pi^^ vırt t-b**! <odagje with a wei giare* I prt« w cd ltot шу hoi ef e4 me шШ m üm%mhm% imt, v rn·· е1Ш«Ш1 from the 4А!*ше ofı 14ШЯв<ов py y^ yţy llí* dbik
m ieutrnm were glazed with the glare of fhe fire, and hk afpel I feemed favage m ex¬ treme. ** Surely," thowghf I, " thk mm cannot be what he feems : here к nothing of the feren i ty of a cottage life marked upon hk face; every trait of paftion amt a bad heart k ímpreff ed upon hk furrowed features/* A piece of wood fell from the ire upon the hearth—he ftooped to take it up, and fome weapon (which fa concealed in a moment) half difclofcd itfelf, in hk breaft. He turned hk eye» troon mt, ernå perceiv¬ ing tfat 1 fact mine пжее про« hh», fa eaffett aloud with fome confuflon, " %l- f ш, Sy hk. make a little hafte— can't vou ШтЛ éLm flini» I. li %** ЯШМ Мят- ЩЩШш f 1 fatgfad aloud af the name of iv-trJtv for fitre never was mme mate appíícd? fat my fai feemed offended г» my free¬ dom, mifbkmg ummßm, ** Hit «ей. Omfart uld fa, ** for thofe m high fírrtimffonce* m laugh ai fN^fffty, ffa time fai fafls»*»*ifaf к— f теза.
90 1 гами thai I im fclf wat опте a foldier, mììé if iìtefft hud recendi İti reward» I ili auki тл have heen hurte d İn thi» mıırtrhed pitee* But m оЫ UAúícr m like an old #p»rfficnt # ufelcf« when worn ottf ľ* ** Yom widely mîftake me/* гер1Ы î. ** fl gl nm forme to laugh at poverty ; for nø man out he well poorer fhan myfeif. litt hcM c#»e* SyUb; tad I (h»U not to%y the fupper «у сшпрашош will ha%« hyhh ph€t4 fomeıery 1ш1 bread before ше 9 «öd a âau ©f wioe. 4 Сошг, €* váibrr/ faid 1Ьг # **youinuÄ »ol tvp^l p^fof ^ icfriicdif ι ** het I «шМ «ritfe^pf p^%t ЩУ |ШШ|ей1 te WWL· Jbci Ш dffül" fit ÊÊÈaÈÊÊfr 'mMÛ'MÊfàïJmi- ШаЯЬЁШ шШШШ">ЕЬ vsEÆWE ΕΆ ~ÊW&£& дздлймВ ЩтШяШт Ч$Ф ЩЩмфШфжЩеь ШщШШ Щр^шЩ* ЩШЩг 'Рщ-^И ч! 'ЩрЩ Щ W' у%РР ЯР- meiMRju м ¿inf üwihcf hw% $»ţi%ii* It, hcfiw to §^w htf # Gmlicf s %««ι «ril
91 welt you found out thk place. Bui yott meet any one abroad in thk wiîdernef* r" * # Ko/* reph'cd I, ·· whom fhould í meet?" ** Nay, J know not/* replied he mth «pfirhneik '* Do ethm dwell here befide your" " ft к reported fo/* anfwered he, glancing a look at dame Sylvia, who hever ven* lured a Angle word. "Did yon never hear of any murders or robberies in thef* mountain*?** ** NV>/' anfwrfed I carele% ; ** mmm in partknbr, Um but lately come to leon, and it wa»'by mere accident 1 ^h^iiftf«4 th» románik *nd fethided valley Yon Item fhut out from all the worM try fhe motintaim th$t (nrnmnâ yem, I fuppofe % en tew tmeum mew emm tìm wmê m iyb »atı jabalí ja Mim il ă*i mm mW^wmæWmw The fr«* ihat do come, sure епоифГ герщШа he drily« ** åme шт alt ttot emm rntınîerevf At» P icmieAëd I» eynf my ff e щтя Ыт, i thtmght
m tbMtøtø he арре»гЫ qeiie eotîftifW« må шуМрМат fwir aroufed more ftrongly ifan before Ile av erted hk rye f mm me ţ uwà nirrin* tite Ute, wplícd, ·* 1 htw»w »ot : i fat* U%H hrw mmy уешш Uè ештф, 1 am Лай of »oîhiııg for my inti; bit 9АЬм her# (Лаф ^även lnow« Oie fas мтЫш$ io lofe) k almoÄ temi M тл of her ΐιϊϋΓ ШштШ^щ^т^йЬжЪтеэтшаШяа **%%Ш U 'к атиюШарт. ту good щтиаРШ! **Ve· s^» sbafasi of t«hfeei%llwfrf w ^Ko» CmsSctr erki fee* I» a tmu* ulig %mm^ m If I fai штШт§ worfo m toi Л sfarti «c*f hmaåL Шт™* т *· lif «fal Г nini «I fai. »« ■» » w ptilmi mm, Фт Ыре4Ы Шщт m mttü ашт ЩШ шт tßm ·· ·»· *** <ш tri 9««w € е *%Лйг, Лш «Műi ·«·» brin«* i» I рЛя* 3 as·* «Я fa»t> liv tfai щт^йМфУт^Ла Cmšle mSm %***%* ifa fMiİ K «¿Μ. «»» İ*»^ «H»· «^
93 a «hain «ailing from his wairt along the JÉVtfilÏNI íl llıl'lMİÎı ii Τ *Ф gpromia« I now recoîMlett the figure which 1 hadi indìffinai) feen carrying the light through the foreft, which I had followed through fo many windings and lofi iff fo fitigular a manner, the Wood rufhed to my face at the remembran« Cv ami 1 inquired ШЫ hadi been out that night. "Wat 1 out ľ* repeated Ле* roughly, «Where? what do you mean» Cavalier? Bo j ou think that I—" He rfrí.*tkéltt§» fisddetity, thai he mm bfttat iiif mm*e than li«" jıîudf mly might ι and faffing upon me «иг el Mi wa%nant and cxpfrlRv e glinr^t, he did« ftitlifv« thai he no t r mm f mm hemt after n ^ h {-Γι II * Ihm U тип tøve kern fome- #f your ntighb*Mf»/ f f¿*íil L M pffisf ovr г thø гшШтп Ы kd be tisy ti, I foli и* rti щ %bi, raifM % бшиг peffirn i е^«У »of «trinaie fwŕ a C4>ftfkler4bk dífbmr ŕ ## lto% %'#ι^ιιιΓ # ewe $vbkir ***r»§f m Uu^ïlghi * Ш it kumam thctwmàî Ш k «w« füiftlf ? did tţ— "
94 rf Píliaw !" cried the man ; (i what non - fenfe next, will you dream about? What was the perfon like, who earned this fame light, Cavalier ? " (i He was in my eyes fo wrapped İn black, that—" ** In black! fay you ?" cried he impa¬ tiently. tc Arc you fu re he was in black ? Did you fee his face ?" * "'No!" replied I, aftonifhed at the change his countenance expreffed, after but a moment before chiding his com¬ panion for her credulity, " What if I had feen his face ! " " Oh, nothing;" replied he. * f Ifyou had feen his face, you would never have wifhed to have feen it again." **"ls he a murderer, ora robber?" faid I, fixing my eyes upon him ; "are his fea¬ tures fo terrible?" (ť I know not what he is," anfwered he, paufing a moment as if to liften; thea proceeding : " í can only tell you that no man in thefe parts dare look upon him. He
95 •He is never feen in day-light; and ii m but at times he appears. No man knows whence he comes, or where he goes. Nor dare any man meet him to inquire: though it is believed he dw r ells in the ruins of au old caftle at no great diftance." "That is a very uncomfortable abode/' faid 1, watching his countenance ; c< per¬ haps if I had followed him, he would have given me fhelter. I have heard many ftrange talcs of his pranks, but I did not believe them : however yon have raifed my curiofity." " It was beft for vou," faid he, with a faint fmile, that you did not follow him : " flou ter men than you have attempted it ý and paid very dearly for their hardihood. Many an one has he led to the edge of a precipice, down which they have been dafhed in pieces, others he has led into quagmires: but I know not that he does anv mifchief to thofe who take no notice of him ; and that is the reafon I do not permit Sylvia to mention him." I knfvsj
96 î knew not what to infer from fo extra- vacant a tale. I was aware how credulous country people were ; delighting in the marvellous, and believing the greateft abfurditics. But I had been witnefs in part to the truth of this talc, and the fear my dög had tefti/icd, induced me to think that there might be more reafon to believe, than generally happens. I wifhed to in¬ quire farther concerning this marvellous ilory, and why the fpečtre had been named the old man of>the caftle ; but Filelfo (lb was my hoft. named )relapfed into his furly difpofition, and re fu fed tö anfwer. We remained fome time mutually filent, each wrapped in their own reflections. Mine were divided between what I had jutt heaixl, and the fingular difpofition of Filelfo, who feemed un eafy at my com¬ pany, and not to be conciliated by any advances of friendfhip« Our filence had continued forne time, interrupted only by a fpark now and then flying from the embers, which were dying upon
9Т upon the hearth. The lamp fhed fo low a gleam, that I began to apprehend wc fhould foon be involved in total darknek. Filelfo ftarted up at once, with fo bri ík a motion, that he alarmed me. " Dame Sy 1- \ia," cried he, " do you not fee the fire is dying out? What preparations have vou made for the Cavalier?'* tc I have made none/* replied fhe, asin truth file might, for fhe had never left the room, except to 'provide the fupper. " You will have forry entertainment/' faid he, finding over the floor : '* our cot¬ tage cannot boaft any bed but flraw—per¬ haps you cannot fleep in that way ?— When I was a foldier, I have often been glad of a hard ftone to lay under my head/' I anfwered that I had no deiign to fleep, zmd with truth; for never did 1 meet lefs invitation. " But we who labour hard in the day, require fleep," faid he; " and I fuppofe you do not wifh to keep us both up to bear you company" vol. i. г *< Certainlv
** Certainly not,*' anfwered î ; ** permit me to fit here ; put a little more wood to the fire» and you may go to reft. I fhall pay you with pleafure. 0 " You forget that you are a ftranger to us," replied he bluntly. " I don't fufpecì you of any wrong, Cavalier;» but you know—" He pet ceive d mv ancer was- rifinir at hk infolent tnfhimitlous, aBd 'he aflumed ай ak of ò^knce, as much ,aa to lay, шеяшвя, ι« too naiv· %ŕcia fnatrhed Irø rheJaflro. and her tal! ftfciiitiüÉ—^Mfji flİMvEia^lha ШшаЬшш'*" mit 4εη&μκ«1ια «aa^É^n^b кшъ%^№4ъ
**Союе, Cavalier,** İM fhe, " 'rk ai- ТгЧиИмЬр щЯИРЖ НИР ww ШЩЩЙ ШщёЯЩгЩщг « Чщг p|tVf# ч» 1 Oaeff#V|ŕl^4W ЧЩ#· *Щ#*чР
I hejß&MMwl for a moment; but îmıeed there was no choice, and her words feemed » 'Ч^ nighi," f,H ï to FiHfo а, I Ыт. ^åfe, wj% $mà night t^*" re turned
s© returned he in a Curly voiced throwing himfelf down upon a bench, with fo much noife, that he ftiook the walk of his totter¬ ing dwelling. I followed Sylvia into a little dirty kind of lumber room, in which flood a ladder« leading through a trap door into a loft, where fowls were roofting, and forne bun- <U« of ftraw and (ire-wood were piled ш. for winter flore. 4 ** There," faid íhc, ťí take the lamp— you muft do as well as you can % but don't forget to draw, up the ladder after you." I returned her th^nka for the caution, which feemed to hint to me even more ihan my fupicions dared to acknowledge. I did not fail to obey her injun8ion ; and ш the trap-door waaloofe^I placed it down ma . «onfid«*!« wolgh« of wood upon Щ 9щЩ0 ЩЬЩфЩаРш w щШЩ$ЩяяЩщ щкщщга*шШЩф вЧ(Р"чРИИр г W w Щ иУ щ ' щЩШЩ Щ0Щ^щгщЩ0^тШЩ Filelfo and Sylvia, but wm not able to un- 4İerftand the fubjecì, though my fears naturally led me to fuppofe that it related to myfeif. r e After
İTO After fome time a total filence prevailed, and I then ventured to examine a little the fituation in which I was placed. The lamp every moment threatened to expire, and it was with caution A proceeded to fearch through the gloomy 'lort. ■ A teng cheft, half concealed beneath fome loofe ftraw, attracted my attention. With the utmoft care i removed the ftraw, and lifted up the lid, with a defrgn to exa- mine the contents, a curiofity that was perhaps unjuftifiablc, but hy the wretched fituation in which î was placed. * It was impoffible to fee the contents of this cheli, -which 'flood at fome diftance from the lamp ; and I feared to move the fight, left the flame mould espire. I ventured to put my hand In to examine, thinking that it wat perhaps éoni for the fowls ; hut f was ftruck vtkh frefh fears on finding that I had difcovered the ftock of a firelock. Ha! thought!, thk к doubtlefs a repository for arms, and this man к a apbbcr, What if ids comrades fhould re¬ turn,
ιαι rum, while I am cooped in this loft, entirely at their mercy ! I felt fome little confidence in the com¬ pany of my dog, who had fallen; afleep amongft the ftraw, and I knew would roufe me at the firft alarm, if I mould happen to flumber. I placed my piftols in order, and grafp- ing my fword, lay down upon the flooring ; hut if I clofed my eyes, I opened them again, fancying that I heard a ruftiing near me :— thus for fome time, fear and an in- clination to fleep by turns Ыа the maftery. The more I reflected on the danger of my fituation* the ţnore fufpicion I felt for what the cheft might contain ; and being at length overcome by %* .charm of fleep, i "í* r- I '' I dreamt that this cheft waV not only a re- pofitory of varions weapons, but for thofe travellers who had been murdered by the terrible Filelfo. The figure of this favage looking man feemed again to come before me; he feemed to ileal along the loft with the dead body of a man upon hk fhoulders ; ? rs he
ÍÔ2 he drew near thè cheft, and railing the cover, carefully depofited his* burthen within; while he was doing which, he- feèmèd to my imagination to tiirn^ his eye* upon me as I flepit, with a look of threaten* 'ing mâlîce. Dame Sylvia appeared to follow with a light, and a bafon of water With which fhe ftooped repeatedly, to wafh out ftams of blood upon the floor. Filelfo had ho fooner made an end of his errand, than I thought he advanced towards me with a dagger Which he pulled from his bofom. 1 attempted içi raife my fword, but in vain—4 feemed chained down upon «the floors—and raifing his dagger, 1 felt the >eold fteel gradually thrüft through my breaft. I awoke with a violent ftrugglc, and In an agony of horror. I trembled vio- tently, and cold drops of fweat hung upon upon me, while for a few 'momente I be* lieved the vifion a reality. In the utmoft agitation I looked round/ almoft expecting to fee repeated the dreadful fubject of my dream- The lamp ftitt
103 burnt, though feebly, and filence reigned around. I arofe, ^determined.; tó fatisfy myfeif as to, tlie contents oí, this сЦеп, which had fo much alarmed me, and gently moving the lamp, I proceeded Ц raife the lid, every inftant liftening to catch the minuteft noife. , ; ; i I held the lamp down, ţo look into the chelit í and. at ;thàt .moment I heard the found of a bugle horn. ,( , Now am I loft ľ' ejaculated h "thefe are his comrades re- turned/' Xhelidof Ле, cheii flipped from my hand and clofed,' the wind extinguiih- ing the lamp, and leaving me in total and horrid darknefs. My feelings at that moment were truly wretched, and I flood itili in filent agony, expecting fome dreadful cataftrophe im¬ mediately to enfue.. Again the bugle horn founded, and after the paufe of a few.moT ments, it founded a third time clofe to the cottage. \ F* ч Iliit-
riiftened, and could diftinguifli the faf- 1 * f , tenings of the door below, taken away ; ahd^ä mixture of low Voices enfue ; but I could no t gather a fittgle difti net word, nor dm-ft I move from the fpot where I flood. This converfation was held ' in the dark> for any light,vyould have expofed them through the chinks of (he floor;* and I could not but admire their ; extreme cau* tion; They bad not talked long before they both qui raid the cottage together, for I had heard only one voice befide that of Filelfo. I liftened "»r'i long time, expecting their return, but in vain ; and by my cal¬ culation ft was about two ofcloek in the morning. Γ ventured to take a more eafy pofition, and fteep being now completely baniflied from my eyes, I became more reconciled to my fituation. Doubtlefs, thought l, Filelfo confidered a foldier beneath lus notice; and to fay the truth, he would bave>
105 liave had a very paltry booty, not wortk the trouble of winning. Moft likely he is gone out at this early hour with his com¬ rade, on fome party of depredation. It was morning before Iclofed my eyes, the day ihining through feveral chinks of the roof; through which at the fame time paffed thè frefh breezes that moved over the foreft. I flept for about two hours, when I was awakened by the crowing of the cock which roofted on a beam over my head; and finding myfeif extremely revived by the flight fleep I had taken, I arofe, and pre¬ pared the ladder to defcend ; but catling my eye towards the chefl, my former defire to examine its contents arofe, and I ftep¬ ped towards it. My hand was upon the lid, when fancying I heard a noife behind me. I looked round, and faw the head of dame Sylvia through the trap door, fhe having mounted the ladder I had juft let down, to fetch fome wood for the fire. y $ I was
í Об 1 was extremely confufed at this âetec-* fion, though fhe took no notice that fhe had feen me, only inquiring if I had flept, and if I had any appetite for my breakfaft. * Fileno has been out/ 1 faid fhe, " la¬ bouring iii the woods fince day-break." " I inquired how foon fhe expected hk return, determining to be at fome diftance' from his dwelling by that time : nor did í defire to learn the nature of his labour. Dame Sylvia haftened to prepare me fome cakes, inquiring if I had heard any noife in the night« t was at a lofs how to anfwer this quef- tion} but confidéting that from her T could not poffibly have any thing to fear, " Pray," faid I, " was there any danger, that you cautioned me to draw up the ladder ?" "lik impoffible to he too fecure/' re* plied fhe, rather confufed. €t Then there was danger," cried I. u I comprehend your meaning—Filelfo к —" «' Hufh, Cavalier," faid ¿e, alarmed and * running
running to the window, to fee if he wa$ coming; tben finding all fafe> fhe turned towards me. " 1 guefs," faid fhe, H your fufpiciom, but they are wrong; my mafter 1 believe, js hitherto honeft, but tempta¬ tion to a man:, whofe extravagance has brought him to the extreme of poverty, is oftentimes refi í He fs.". "Who was it theu/* faid I* "that founded the bugle horn in the dead hour of night, ifit was not a comrade?" « Ah !" replied flţe folemnly* " I fear U was a comrade, but much more to he dreaded than the partnerihip of robhem/* "You become myfierioijs/' faid I; " pray explain/* Again fhe looked to the door; hut no .fign of »Filelfo appearing, fhe turned to¬ wards me, faying» " Yon may perhaps think what I am going to tell you* t%e idle whims of an old woman ; but for all that, it to but too true.—You heard the bugle horn ?" "I did/* " You remember what you was told of the wandering fpirit of tne
103
the Old Han of the caftle ?" " Yes, what has that to do with the founding of the bugle horn?" " Too much. Filelfo had no inclination to explain to you any thing concerning that infernal being: But that you have heard is afluredly true ; and I fear me that he has feduced my mafter into his fervice, and purchafed his foul for the paltry goods of this world." "I biow not," faid I, M whether I fhould not laugh at you. Can there be any temptation in this cottage, or any luxury in the homely fare you are now preparing ? A man muft be a fool indeed to fell hk foul fora moreel of bread." " Ah, Cavalier," replied fhe folemnly, and fighing, "you are deceived. But I hope you will not expofe me to Filelfo. I am certain that he would murder me, if he knew that 1 mentioned what he endear vours to conceal even from me. But I have heard one or two of their midnight converfations ; though, in general, they retire into the woods. It к not many weeks
109
weeks fince I heard this prowling fpirit uir to my mafter, Serve me,Fikfjh,wiih diligence, and I will repay you beyond your utmost wish ; by the centre of this rolling earth I swear, 1 1 if you deceive me, you had better have been Angelo Gomez. fi And pray who is Angelo Gomez >" faid I. tc What !" faid fhe, " did you never hear the ftory of Angelo Gomez ? It was toM in verfe by fome famous poet ; but the fhort of it is, that this Angelo Gomez was a cottager in thk very foreft, and for fome reafon or other, entered bond with the old man of the caftle, who was then alive, and a very famous magician. It was about two hundred years ago; but as I was faying, Angelo Gomez: entered into a ieague to f-?rve him : fomehow difpleafing him, he one night had him carried through the air, cottage and all, and placed on the higheft point of the mountain, where it was impoflible for any man to climb, and where the cottage ftands to thk day ; and they
110 they do fay, that the fkeleton of poor Gomez, who was ftarved to death, is now to be feen there." "That is very likely, indeed;" faid I. " If no one can clamber up to the cottage, how can they fee the fkeleton of Angelo Gomez ? " {< I dont know how," faid fhe, " I only know that it is all true, for 1 have feen the cottage many a time myfeif." "I would advife you, my good woman," faid J, (f not tö let tfhefe things difturb your reft. Depend upon it, Filelfo knows better than enter into an engagement with any fuch perfon as you imagine." Dame Sylvia was angry at my difbelief. "-Î would tell you of á thoufand malicious actions," faid fhe, "committed by this fpirit, which no prieft dare .undertake to lay. This very forejft к deferted by all the peafants, on account that they could not Jive átquiet. And Giles, who was the laft that braved it, died on a fuddeni nobody knows how, aboui two years agone : about which
Ill which time it firft was that Filelfo fell into the fnare. Ever fmce that time, he has been talking of retrieving his fortune, and once more figuring in the world : and he does not live, as you may fuppofe, by what you fee here ; for I affure you he brings home, at times, all kinds of dainties, fweet- meats, and preferves, and fowls, and fruit, and wine. But I never will tafte with him, as for certain they are provided by Satan." I fmiled at this woman's fimplicity; though I perceived there was certainly fome myftery in her flbry, and I was pre¬ paring to touch upon the contents of the cheft, as Filelfo entered the path before the cottage, bending beneath a large bundle of faggots. " Hufh !" cried dame Sylvia, in a fright : " Here he comes ; remember tò be filent oň what Ì have told you." I made a motion that fhe might depend upon my honour ; and turning towards the door, I endeavoured to read the character of this lingular'man. I fan-
m I fancied that I could perceive in hk countenance, indignation at the meannefs of his employ. He feemed to fpurn the ground, rather than walk upon it ; and leverai execrations fell from his lips, as he came near. He threw down his burden > with a frown; " See," faid he to me, " how I am obliged to labour, while thoufands riot in fuperfluity, and deftroy what they cannot confume. I may toil for two days to earn a dollar, while the idle will throw away fifty in a night, at forae entertain- ment they deteft. But d — n me if I be longer a drudge 'm this world for nothing ; or lay thefe grey hairs on a dunghill." " Have you forgot," faid I, aftonifhed at his behaviour. " Have you forgot that the rich are not always happy ? What have you here in this fequeftered retreat to dif¬ turb your tranquillity? The man with ten thoufand ducats a year, cannot eat more than you." " Tis very fine talking," cried he pee- viflily, fť IIe can always eat if he chufes, which
113 which I cannot. If poverty is fuch a charming thing, why don't thofe who praife it fo much, fhewus a little practice ? But they know better; andi know better : and may I die at an Auto da Fe, if I fuffer ŕt long.—Dame Sylvia, where is my break¬ faft ?" I wondered at the ftrong inclination of this man to make himfelf miferable. The morofenefs of hk temper was not to be foften ed by civility, and I was under thè neceffity of fitting down ro breakfaft, and helping myfeif without ceremony, or of going without. He eyed me in füllen filence, and we had nearly finiflied our repaft of hot cakes and coffee, before he again addrefled me. ' f You foldiers," faid he, " in thefe times, lead very fine lives ; live on the beft of the land, and do nothing ;—'twas other- wife in my days ; but every thing is getting worfe." te Very likely/* replied I coolly. " How manv leagues is it from hen? e to Leon ?" " The
114 " The road you fay you came," anfwered he, " is about fix. But there is another,. through a narrow defile, not eafy to fincţ, that is only three. It begins at the bottom of the valley, and winds round the foot of the mountains, on the other fide of this foreft." As it was neceflary I fhould return to Leon with as much fpeed as poffible, and asit was indeed equally difficult for me to retrace a rout I had fcarce noticed, I ven- tured to requeft Filelfo to be my guide to die path he mentioned, for which I oftered him a liberal reward. After fome grum¬ bling he reluctantly complied ; and having made a fmall· prefent to dame Sylvia, for the poor entertainment I had received, we fet out. I looked round at the door, at this wretched fabric, which appeared fo nearly falling, that I could not bat acknowledge in my own mind, it was no place to be defired, even by thofe who affect rapture at feclu- iion and repofe. A fine
ш A fiate refrefliing air played amongft the trees of the foreft, fcented with variety of aromatic exhalations, from the wild fhrubš which grew in prof ufion. The- path was overfpread with fhort grafs, and bordered with variety of wild flowers ; in fome places fpreading upon irregular banks of mofs ; in others tufted beneath the venerable branches of the hardy oak, or the wide- fpreading cork, 4 * In fome places the foreft was fo thick, that the fun with difficulty penetrated through the foliage ; in others it was open, inclofing a fmall plat of meadow, enamelled with wild flowers, and enlivened with the hum of bees, eager in collecting a thou¬ fand fweets. I had leifure to examine the fcenery around me, for my guide was too much engaged with his own refilions to inter¬ rupt the filence. And when I began to examine his drefs as he walked a few paces before me, marked the caution of his fteps, and caught a glimpfe of his dark and un- bending
116 bending features, I could not avoid think¬ ing that I beheld a robber, ileal ing through the covert« to fall upon the haplefs to- veiler. We continued to wind through feveral involutions of the path, which bent down to the banks of the ftream, whofe murmur^ ing waters traced their way over broken fragmenft of rocK, or jbft themfelves in unfearchable chafms. Sweet-fcented and evergreen fhrubs hung over the banks, and a deep grove of bending willows, formed an inimitable fhade, where Contemplation mig« t delight to linger; invited by the congeniality of the twilight grove, and the pleafant mur- mur of the ftream. The cooing of the dove was heard from the fecret retreats of the foreft, and the nightingale mingled its melody with the foft tones of the Unnet. I remarked feveral clufters of rofe trees and myrtles, and in fome places the delicate jeifamine, encircled and entwined round the
117 the olive and'the mulberry.* I wondered thatthefe trees fhould be promifcuouily mingled with thofe of the foreft, as if planted by the hand ofman, to give variety and entertainment to this felect fituation. I had no doubt but this had once been the retreat of Tome Grandee, and poffibly had been thus embellifhed by the owner of the caftle of St. Helma, when that building was in its glory. Thefe reflections reminded me that I oughtnot to quhthe foreft without viewing fo celebrated a ruin, concerning which fo many tales of wonder were circulated, and which 1 myfeif had been half inclined to believe. I inquired of Filelfo where the caftle flood. " It once flood upon the ground," re- replied he, quickening his pace. "But where do the remains now ftand ; it is not certainly all level with the ground ?" " Perhaps not," faid he, fullenly. " I give myfeif no trouble about it ;—It lays fomewhere to the left, deeper into the foreft."
IIB 14 I ihould very much like to fee it," faid I, <c I have a great tafte for the reliques of ancient grandeur. I love to explore the mouldering walls which have formerly vibrated to the voices of men, and the founds of hilarity." "And other founds too, mayhap," mut¬ tered he. " Yes," continued I, " the founds of grief and lamentation, perhaps of war, and perhaps of murder." "I know nothing about it;" faid he, ·" let us walk a little, fafter, or we fhall not get to the plain by noon," " You feem very referved," faid I, '" about this caftle : have you any reafon to be fo careful of mentioning it ? You are not fo fuperflitious as dame Sylvia." " Superftitious;" repeated he, two or three times, with a contemptuous fmile. " No, no, Cavalier, I am not very fuper- fiitioiis. It requires no fuperftition to avoid the caftle of St. Helma. If you knew—" Here
119 Here he fuddenly paufed, with a look that feemed to reproach himfelf with faying too much. " If I knew what ?" demanded Î. "Ts there any danger in exploring this caftle?" " 'Tis what I would not undertake," re¬ turned he. <( There is danger enough, if it was only from the tottering towers which rattle in the wind. Never a tempeft hap¬ pens, but part of it comes to the ground." " What then will become of the old man ? M faid I fmiling. "He will have no place to fhelter him from the rain/' ' Filelfo did not conceal his difpleafure at thefe words. ** If he never forfakes thk foreft, till that happens/* faid he, €t he is fafe enough for a century at leaft. There are yet two of the towers and one fide per¬ fect. The eaftern tower, where the old magician ufed to ftudy, was fplit by a thunder bolt from the top to the bottom ; and he was burnt to afhes as he was form¬ ing fome terrible fpell. The country peo¬ ple believe that the chafm was formed by the
Î20 the devil, as he flew away with him that night, which was near an hundred years ago. It may be two for any thing I know ; but ever fince that time, nobody has dared to live in the caftle, and very few to go near it" " Did you never venture to walk over it?" faid I. " I walk over it !" replied he, " No, no, I know a little better. There have been one or two perfons fince I lived in thk foreft who had more courage than wifdom : but they had leifure to repent." "How fo ?" '" Bow fo! Why fhe one of them never came back to this hour: and the other, after going over fome of the rooms, fat himfelf down in a chair : for not a thing had been moved. He had not, however, fat long, before the ghoft of the old magician, in a black gown, with a beard down to his knees, a lamp in one hand, and a chain round hk body, juft as he wan¬ ders through the foreft at night, came into the room, and fixed his eyes upon him with
иг \çitb a tremendous feov/n, and a Took that 1 penetrated through his foul. The fpeetre' then'laid his icy hand upon the ftranger, who: had no power to refift, and after leading him. through feveral chambers, where he was; almoft frightened to death by different dieluilons, .he was conducted into the vaults of the caftle, and led along ai damp paflage, paved with human bones, and walled with fkulls. In this place the apparition vaniflied^ and it was many hours before the ftranger found his way from that loatmbme fituation:; where he was nearly fuffoJcated with various fmells, and half poifoned with filth. When he at kift groped, his way to day-light, he found himfell; at the mouth of a broken fhm-e, wnich had formerly, been the; drain* to the caftie. Since that time, which is fifteen years agov no perfon has- been fufficiently hardy to venture into the caftie." I thankediFiWfoibr г his-namtive/whieh, hpwêMér* ftrange,^ carried:w4th it an air of truth : but L dåd not: find Iefs ; inclination ^ VOL. I. G tO
122 ι . tp vilit the caftle; on the contrary, my curiofity was more ftrongly excited to be vyitnefs of the exiftence of fo :fìngular a . fact. I could not draw from Filelfo any further particulars : he even told me that he repented having faid any thing:to deter me from examining the caftle, fince I had fo much defire to be -running into.danger. We left the courfe of the ftream, and foon quitted the valley for a more open, though not lefs romantic country. The road lay between feveral îhills, which formed as it were ithe firft fteps of the mountains of Afturia ; and we foon per¬ ceived the fpires of Leon beneath us. Here .my guide propofed to return, pointing.out .to me the road ; and after recompen îmg him for his trouble, I very willingly -difpenfed with hk company : for I could not di veft myfeif of fufpicion, not¬ withftanding his behaviour towards me: and had I dared, I fhould have inquired of him the contents of that cheft, which had fo much engaged any attention. I pro-
123 '1 proceeded forward alone, charmed with the extenfive profpect I enjoyed, and tracing the river, in its various windings, acrofs an almoft bôundlefs plain, decorated with cultivation, and adorned, at intervals, with little villages, embofomed in planta¬ tions of orange and olive trees. The heat of the fun rcmirtåed me that noon was advancing, and I quickened my fteps, not knowing what conjectures might be formed on my abfence ; efpecially as it was every day expected we fhould be called hito actual fervice. Nothing would have been a feverer dif¬ grace to me, than inch an event during my abfence; every t*fficer having received •orders to hold himfelf in momentary readi¬ nefs. The ardor of the chafe, and the fubfequent events, had entirely baniflied my engagements from my mind> and the fpires of Leon alone, recalled to me the urgency of my prefence. I haftened forward, calling but a hafty glance upon objects and views, which I о я propofed
124 : .Λ- I 'proppfeä again ţo vi fi t on the firíl оррог- tynity. When I aţrived at Leon, I hauened inftantly to the gmvã щот, where I learnt ! with íatisfaflion .tJuHt-nø. freíh command ! had been receiyed í and being unwilling to make a.^onfíd^nt of any of the yoitng and giddy officers» my companionsj I con¬ tented myfdf with gating, that being benighted ош a part of the nionnţajns, whe^e, I i was \тщац% øf the .way, I had ; fgu nd; Iheker i n/ th^ «cptóage of apeafenţ, Ϊ oerenied f tø щуШГ exploring, the, 'laby- rinths of the valley, and, ще ruim of* St. \ Helma, which I confide^ed as v a treafure I for future entertainment!: and I took, no f mall pleafure^ in reflecting that ţ would ! d¿íeover the myftery which envellpped thofe mouldering ^а1Ц and undeceive the ; world with pegasto the ilory of the.Oîţl Man of the ÇaíUe, by ^hiçh^ дапе the ..·. fpečbs. was weii known-^LecMi. ;
CHAP.
i>*. tJ^
CHAP. IH.
W HEN Γ returned tö my lodging, Г found upon the table, a letter inclofing a ticket and invitation to a mafked ball, to- be given by the Marquis of Fienza, I was furprized, not knowing from whom this favour Was feht, nor did my rank in the army entitle me to the circle of fociety Mito Which I fhould be introduced : how- ever, after forne hefitation, I decided to accept the invitation. Is it jioffible, thought I, that my unknown relation, or guardián, has intention, under iíiyipnŕ of the general difguife, to difcourfe with me ? But then, what drefs ihall I \ - - \ * adopt, by which they may difcover me ? It was fome time before I could pleafe myfeif in this point, for my finances did notpermit me to give way to my fancy, and í determined at length, to appear in thé g з habit
Ш6 habit of a ftudent, which would be per¬ fectly in character, and by making ufe of the clothes I had worn at Toledo, thofe who ţmew me, could not miftake, while I mould be paffed over by ftrangers. Thk point being arranged, I indulged in various conjectures,.on.the refult, flatter¬ ing myfeif that it might perhaps be a parent, who could no longer forego the fatisfac¬ tion òf beholding their offspring ; and fo perfectly did I reconcile my felf to. the idea that it was afluredly my unknown protecr tor, that I formed various plans in my mind to compel them to a difcovery. My hopes increafed as the day of the bail drew near ; and never having mingled, in feenes of pleafure, I haftened. with a light hearts to thk feftival of mirth and fancy ; where all the people of diftİnction in and near Leqn were affembled, and many of my fuperior offtçeïs mingled in tl\e group. At that time, mafquerades were the moft fafhionablç araufements of Spain, and par¬ ticularly φ
lî>7 ficufàrîy promoted by the ladies, who were allowed freedoms at them, their ufual habits forbid. ñ vaft number of both fexes were affetn- bled, of manners as various as the different characters affumed ; and I was perfectly charmed with the gay variety. Duennas were there dreffed üke giddy youth—and youth affumed the decrepitude of age. Rakes appeared under the habits of monks—and monks in the drefs of ofßcers. Every one feemed to have chofen a character oppofite to the one they per¬ formed in real life; but perhaps that which they would have chofen,. had they had the liberty of choice. The commander of the regiment to which I belonged, was there as a confeifor, and I myfeif, as I nave faid, as a ftudent Several mafks attempted' converfation with me, but their queftions and replies were fo perfectly abfurd, and fo much out of character, that the firft novelty wearing away, I began to confider this amufement g i as
mn
as an infîpid method of trifling away fitne, when a nun tapped ше upon the arm, an4 inquired how long I had left college, and if I could inftruct a fintple novice in the vows fhe was about to take. " It is not for me," anfwered I, " to take upon myfeif fo important an оШое ; I would rather refer you to the cat« of yon¬ der father, whom you fee counting his beads, with his eyes fixed upon the ground/' « Truly/' faid me, u I expeaed a little more gallantry from a ftudent, than to be referred to an old conleffor. Will the feverity of your telies pemût you to dance with me ?" ** I am afliamed to acknowledge," re¬ plied I, (< that my exercifes have never allowed me timefor thataccomplilhment." " Let us, then/* faid fhe, laughing, " take a feat, and obferve the humours of tbe crowd." She caft her eyes round, and perceiving a vacancy, upon a form placed at the end of the grand hall, fhe conducted me
129 me thither, repelling with no little wit, the farcafms that were caft upon her for the freedom flie was taking with a col¬ legian. We entered into converfation oh the various characters which paffed before us, and by degrees fhe contrived to introduce a more tender fubject. She inquired par¬ ticularly If my heart had ever been at¬ tached to any particular lady, and when t replied In the negative, her voice affumed a tone of peculiar tendèrnefs. " It is of no ufe, Cavalier/' faid ftie, « to pretend longer that I do not know you ; the name of Lorenzo has long been dear to my heart ; but your confiant referve' has hitherto prevented yoûr difcoverîng the efteem I kave för you. Tell me then, if your heart be fufceptible of tendernefs, how far I may expect a return ?" íť íííadam !*^ replied I, ftruck with her euprèfìions, " how fhall I return you thanks for the obfîğaüon&you lay upon me?
g 5
But
ш
But you fay yon know me ! пщ" I inquire how you received that knowledge ?" t( Do you think," fakl flic, briikiy, r " f. did not caufe your motions to be watched;, and knew well the habit you would come in r" ,( You miihke my meaning/* returned I, ever keeping in view the fubject mofe upon my mind, and looking forward to a vciy different explanation, 4 * î have a, wifh to know how· you difcovered who I am, and what are the particulars you know concerning my birth ?" " That к the moft curious queftion/* returned flie, laughing, " that ever man in your fituation made, to a lady in mine. What fingularity attends your birth ? Are n&t you a gentleman and an officer ? and what further do I wifh to know, that you might defire to conceal ?" " Then you are ignorant/* replied Ï, difappointed. *' You did not fend for me here to explain ; and 1 am—*"
£ \Vhai î
ÎAÎ
rí Whäi ! г ' demanded ihe with стр1п{ : < and fome indignation. 4 ' Gráciou« he¿- ven; what are you talking ohouc* I fear wc do nul undcrftand each other *" It was clear, indeed, that ье did not ; imi recollecting that 1 hãé already com¬ mitted my fri f too ùv to % Uranger, Ì .ď- fisrøed.as welf as ï could, an ш of gallan¬ try, and began to enter into that ìYn ofots». round of compliments which is expected in aflemhltes of pro mì feu о us comp.mv ТЫ anger of my nun be^an io ι lear away, and her wit to fparkle, when fhe found I dki not behave to her with indif¬ ference* 1 intreated her many times to favour me with a glance at her feature« conjecturing, from the grace of her pcrfun, and the vivacity of her converfation, that her beauty was without a rival ; by í thk favour flie abfolutely denied me. When tired with -fluiag. we arofe and mingled in the crowd. I obferved that our Heps were frequently crofled by ά talî figure, habited as a confeffur, who endea¬ voured
ι m vonred to engage my firav поисс, Uy !ш remarks» but ftie treated him with Ictere repartee, and avoided his peculiar Atten¬ tions. ** Yo« little think,, Loiriuo," faid the, *' who this formidable гал al of vour4 Is: No lefs a perfon, I allure you, than your commander, Count Pandoif b. Do yon think vou arc known by him t " I replied that I believed nor, and inquired if flie were certain of the perfon: for I knew fo little of Ле world, timt 1 could lease« think a man of hi» ycaa» would at¬ tempt to gain theRflfe&kms of any hay. We left the hall whm the dance« again began, and fought ionic refvefhmenl in an elefant apartment, lighted in a fuperb manner, and åifpfeying every luxury the feafon could produce. Wc took lome htå fherëet and Italia» ■ preferves; but røy nun was A> levere, that knowing ftie muft of neeeiltry unmaik in il»e refeftory, fhe contrived to draw over ^•feee a Akk bkek veil, whkfe elMkisHy - pre*
LIS vented my obfcning her countenance; nor could mv intreattc*. miniîlcd with *dl the compliments mv fancy could fusţirefi, prevail upon her to be lets fevere, Wc <lilVourfed on a thoufand fubjrch f u as aftonilln^l со tind mv uuknovsu com- pattion perfect mi fire fs -oí many things beyond the fphere of a lady s ed »cu t on ; mul î wasa* much charmet! v ¡fb the mati' ner of her cxprefHon, as with the words me uttered. There was fomething pecu¬ liarly fafcinating in the tones of her voice» and Itaving prevailed on her to fing, the company, as well as myfeif» were enchanted wah her voice, and pleafed with the tittle ballad the had chofen. But while f ht enjoying thi* fatb.-faclinn, -¿nd a particular flow of fpirits infpired bv the caie tv around me, 1 remarked that the confeifor kept his Itition bitlini view, and'fomethimr * like jealoufy arofe in my heart. When my companion had finrfhed her baffad, ï conducted' her from the crowds which had gathered in a circle, fixed hy the melody of "her voice r and mingfiug " *iih
İM with tlie company walking, wc were infen- íibly led into the gardens, which, to my furprize, were illuminated, and gay with variety of maiks. After forne intreaty On my part, and much hefitation on that of the lady, I pre¬ vailed upon her to inform me that her name was Ippolita ; but her family and the place of her refidence, flie concealed. We rambled through the flowery mazes. of thofe extenfive gardens, charmed with, the fragrance of the air, perfumed with the coftiy drugs of the eaft. The delicate green of the foliage, as the· feathered leaves trembled oil the gentle breath of the. night, amongft a thoufand lig)its, charmed the eye, and induced the mind to wander into the fairy regions of fictitious felicity. Ippolita teftified her pleafure by the. fofteft expreffions; my heart yielding to her charms, and forming a ftrong inclina¬ tion towards the tender paffion. But when î was forgetting myfeif in the pleating,. dream,
Í35 dream, the figure of Count Pandolfa crofted me at every turning of the walk. I was chagrined at this circumftance, on feveral accounts, for while I confidered him as my rival, I had to fear his refent¬ ment in. the line of my duty ; for being much beneath him in command, it was* unpleafant and unfafe to have fuch a man foran enemy. I believed myfeif unknown to him, and L refolved, at all hazards, not to betray myfeif. Ippolita perceived me thoughtful, and requefted to know whafc difturbed me. I difguifed my real uneafi- nefs beneath a compliment,, profeffing to, regret, and. which indeed was true, my ignorance of where 1 fhould have the plea-- fure of feeing her. again... At thefe words flie broke into a laugh,, whifpering to me,. "My dear Lorenzo, leave that to my care. 1 have received fo, much pleafure in your company this night, that you may depend on, my feeking out fome expedient for our future meeting. But I fufpečt you do not deal candidly with me
iaß Ш е«.^уоп ate chagrined at the particularii f of this oíd Count, who is my utmoit aver- lion. Would you believe it —this man, who to-night has drei fed bimfelf in the habit of a Confeifor, not only hâs a private amour with a woman of this city, but maktìs. honourable preţeniîons to me ? Thank heaven, I am my ¿nvn miftrefe^—1 have re- fufed Mm with contempt. My füttüfíe vi independent, though not to aflfluencč : an¿ Without my heart Ï will never beflow my hutía.'* Thefe^ felitímeiíts infpired m« mth in* érfeafed eñeem— my røinå affîımed tratí- qûiliity— and we fatmtered tilt we wêrö both willing to ßt døwn at thè tabled which were fpread in the орен ärr, with elegant cold collations, and attended hy a band, of mufle, concealed ш a grove of omttge treat ■ *Ше freedom éf 1ррйШ imitée nie ťa fay ийпу tMng^ mý dMíáeíífcê aftd ígno 4 - ráncé àFÛiè'-îék would -oAérwifer iáVe 'pté* every
137 iívery object within its view, naturally in¬ clined ţo love and tendernefs. Though I .had not feen the face of this fafcinating lady, her exterior did not per¬ mit me. to doubt of her beauty ; and t ventured to proiefs fm her a paffion, whkh flie declined with that pointed delicacy which rather invites than forbids. I Ughed ont an earneft requeft that >flüë would acquaint méwith her refidence, and: решк of Щ *i$№ '-■ mid though flie would » not grant either, me proraifed thtt it·· mould not he lang beforeïhe^ird from her again. ....·.·.* With Ш& promife I was obliged-to fee faúsneâ, and 4he company beginning to feparate, I was under the neceffity of liftV étiing to her wequéft that I would'leave her, me declaring that my prefummg to follo# her, would be to lofe her for ever.- When I had bade her adieu, I haftened ' home, to mufe upon every'fyliable which had fallen from het lips; and to picture tú myfeif what fort· of features'-were likely té belong
ш belong to fö elegant a form. So mudr was my mind engaged> that I endeavoured ih vain« to clofe ray eyes ; and it was not till morning that I fell afleep; when I did not awake till late m the day, and fome time after the hour of attending the parade. >, · - ■ ■; · Γ was not a little angry with: myfeif for this neglect of 'duty-, which I feared Count Fandolfo would not fail to feize as a pro« per opportunity of punifhingmy prefump· tion, iiv defaming' from him a lady ho feerøed fo defi røns of gaining. Nor was í deceived, for he not only reprehended me in fevere tenns, but threatened* to lay me under arreft, if I was ever guilty .o! flmilar negligence» My aquation did not permit» of reply, and* when f reflected* on the dîfgrace İ had in¬ curred, I was ready not only to execrate the, mafquerade, but the lady who had drawn me there, almoft determining to re-* utfe any future invitation ; but if you have ever bççn touched by the fkfcinating man¬ ners
13Ş u^s ofthat infııîuating féx, you will readily imagine that thofe refoiutions were only ¡ adhered to, till the opportunity arofe for [ breaking them» · Mmy dá^s did not paåi away befóte I received a note, left by a fervant in my abfence, req^efting me to be on the public walk ithat evening at a particular hour, and to accompany the ρ f on who would there fpeak to me; '· - \ I was in raptures at this- notice, and the time feemed an age, till the moraen ťar- rived formy haAening to the walks¿ I was there confiderably before the time ap* pointed, my impatience leading me. to ima?» gine that I was deceived, and that Donna t Ippolita had only intended to trifle with 1 me, that the might eo]fcertain herfelf with the preftmiptb m of my vanity. I walked to цпй Що with hafty fteps, now repeating her name in tender wijfies, and then acouftng her of unkindneis.; My im¬ patience and diforderly paces- attached up-* mi me фе eyes of the company, and I еп-< devoured
deavöred*€o be cömpöfed, hu tmy vexalèm increafed as the fhades of evening began to difperfe the people, without winging me the wiflied-fbr meffenger. · ; that k čbuldrioťhe'the
írástea 4 mê, rather hoping that ' ît might b#*e trick of my feMövv4>ffit I tit» fpof t v^thtny cri but then I recollected, that I had not con*»
t
ír.
'' fi
№ hat deceived mê/* faid ï tòmy* wlM ! 'break fïoiri her for èvér> агнШ
Ifi
ps me tmy ğîvfe préfet m Pkndolfo> and İ fo, Йе U
om^tt t % regard/·
røy
tıons
as Lorenzo de aerara, î' replied niativeY then taking ine familiarly : v My Lady/' fald hè," fe now
* * * *" , **«
or you at no grea'
wi
It was by this entirely duík^ and I com- immediately' with the requeft of the fable ambaffador of love. He led me through feveral private ftreets, till we came fuddenly to the front of a very fine houfe, which by its appearances; was elegant enough for fome Marquis or Grandee, at leaft fo it appeared to my eyes; and fcarce believing my good fortune, I followed in fijence through feveral elegant apartments, шпД I came to one that was more neat than large, and furnifhed in a ftyle of the utmoft tafte. Щедапсе an4neat&efs were confpicuous in every article; wax. tapers, on filver ftaiids, burnt in the, midft of ; a clufter of flowers,,atidjprefenteitpniy· viewm ob* ject, wbkh nţpre, attraSedi плу aţitmion. tljau . tbeHdecomtions ofi the. apajrimentï I beheld a beautiful female, fitting »щот a^ı^ftş; fopha, dreffed 'm the, m^â .en¬ chanting manner. Цег- щщфещоп , m of íbe.. : fmçft plive, % w^ch the, fofţ apd gnilhiQg ^laiiqe^ ja^h^ 4 ditìyey^)fo;m^Ìi improved,
lia improved/that î was riveted to the fpot r without the power of advancing. I feared that fome miftake had been made, and í was going to apologize for my intrufion* when fmiling at my emharraffment, and holding out to me one of the moft delicate hands in Spain, her voice in a moment informed me it was indeed Ippolita. " How are you, my dear Lorenzo ?" faid fhe ; " have you not thought it an age fince we laft parted?" Then turning toihe fervant, fhe ordered him to prepare a treat flie purpofed to give me. * I fat down befide her, and my diffidence by degrees fubfidmg, our converfation became at once tender and lively. A little repaft was ferved Up, over which we fat talking tili the clock ftruck twelve. I knew not how to tear myfeif away> though at the fame time I was under the neceffity of going. Donna Ippolita quickly penetrated my thoughts. " 'Lo* renzo," faid fhe, < f I am forry you are ttot perfectly free with me :*—You wifh to go : why
14S •why do you not fay fo ? there is n® fatis¬ fačlion in conftraint, and I defire, if y®n regard my efteem, you will in future leave , me, when you know it to be neceflary. On the evening after to-morrow ï will fee you again." So faying, fhe arofe, and gave me * her hand, which I ventured, for the ñrñ time, to prefs to my lips ; then calling to her fervant, Muzio, fhe bade me adieu, with a mixture of dignity and tendernefs which perfectly charmed me, and funk deep into mv heart. I returned home, more than ever charmed with this lady, whofe behaviour had been more referved this evening, than at the roafcpierade ; and her good fenfe fhone more powerful than her wit. î began fe- rioufly to entertain thoughts of marriage; for though fhe was fome years older than myfeif, I reflecied that fortune had thrown in my way, an opportunity which might never again occur, of rendering myfeif independent of my unknown friends, and of the work'. Icon-
144 Ï confidered, that whatever raighť be fflf h\rlh, I ihould not difgrace myfeif by art alliance with a woman of fo much beauty and good fenfe as Ippolita ; and î dreamed nil night of equipages and palaces, digni- íiities and honours. I counted the next day, the hours and the minutes that were to lead me again to this charming creature, who abforbedi ali my thoughts. ï declined a party upon the mountains, for the pleafure of repeating, at leifure, the name of Ippolita; and thè romantic valley, with the ruins of St, Helma, which I nadpur-pofed to explore, no longer engaged any portion of my attention.. The hours crept round;, and I was again happy mth« company andr converfation of this fafemat ing creature. Eiäaer by ac¬ cident, ой rather by афщъ U\e hinted to me that* her fortume was coniiderable and indepe^ideiit: that though íhehada/faÄer who hejd her, in fome coniroul, yet- flie w^ş ihemiikehuflm dŞ$®fp; to- for- time
İ45 time having been left her by her hufband, who had been nearly eighteen months dead. Thefe hints flattered my moft fanguine expectations, but I was embarraíľcd and afliamed to mention my own obfcurity of birth, and confequent poverty ; fo much fo indeed that I neglected many favourable opportunities, on this and leverai fubfc quent vif its, of preffing my fuit with that ardour I defired, dreading nothing more than ihe queftion which ihould touch on my fortune, confidcring that it would in¬ flan try deftroy all my high-raifed expecr tat i ons. I obferved that Count Fandolfo had always latterly regarded mc with a look of marked difpleafure, frequently fending mc on trifling parties into the country, to pro¬ tect flores, and provide ammunition ; but as it was not in my power to retalíate, í was obliged to be paffivc under his dif¬ pleafure. vtø. ι. re The
The day when I received my quarterly as a foldier, and the penfion of my .unknown friend came round, it was with fatisfačlion I went to the office, in the hope that I mould be very fhortly above receiving what had the appearance of cha¬ rity ; but I was not a little confounded at receiving only the common pay of my
" How is this ?" faid I to the payanafter; " you muft certainly mi flake ! " He aflured me that he did not; that he had received no fupply from the ufual channel, nor fo much as a note of expia-
I could make no reply for vexation, and my indignation would have been too hard for my resolution, had I known on whom
I haftened in the great eft confuflon to my lodging, reflecting that I was become a beggar indeed. I threw myfeif upon a chair to revolve every circumftance of my fate :—Either I had been deferted as I had often-
m oftentimes foreboded—either the party who overlooked me was dead—-or Count Pandolfo had fome fecret influence over my fate, and knew the fource from whence I had been ftipplied, which his reprefen talions had flopped. in either cafe I had no роШЫе means of redrefs. My pride would not permit me to feek an explanation of the Count; and my determination to thwart his pro¬ jects became f о much the ftronger, as the neceffity of my eflablimment became greater. 1 imputed his enmity to his jea¬ loufy, and I felt a fecret fatisfaction in tri¬ umphing over a man who took thofe finif- ter means of depriving his rival of power I refolved to explain my fituation to Ippolita at our next interview, and either prevail with her to promife a fpeedy union, or enter fome other regiment; no¬ thing being more unpleafant than for a fubordinate officer to be at variance with his commander, who, if he be inclined, can render his very exiftence a burthen. к £ Filled
148 Filled with thcfe fentiments, 1 íiew tø Donna Ippolita as foon as it was dark. She received me with her uftml (miles and aflii- bility, and after fome little preface, I entered upon the fubject of my birth and fituation. She checked me with vivacity, declaring that this harangue was fupcrfluous, as flie had made particular inquiry into every thing relating to mc ; and though î was fo unhappy as not to be acquainted with my parents, flic confidered that circumftance more as a claim upon her gcnerofiiv, than a fubject for reproach. * 4 Will vou never learn to know mc, my dear Lorenzo ?" faid flie, prefenting me a glafs of wine. " Muft 1 repeat to you that I am (at leaft fo I flatter myfeif ) fu¬ perior to the vulgar prejudices of illiberal people? Of what value is wealth, if it does not allow us to do what we have a mind, provided there be no criminality at¬ tached to the action ?" " Charming:
МП f * Charming Ippolita î" replied í. " You have indeed more than once convinced me that Spain cannot produce another fo ami¬ able, and fo worthy to be loved. In more than one inftance your good fenfe has pe¬ netrated to my thoughts, and outftripped their utterance. At this moment you can¬ not but perceive all I would exprefs, and even more than I have language to fay." " You are Angularly gallant to-night, Cavalier," faid fhe, with a glance that filled my foul with hope ; " are you as fincere as polite ?" I now bade adieu to timidity, giving ut¬ terance to all my wiflies. I befought her to make me happy, by the promife of her hand, and after a thoufand fcruples, and namclefs expreffions, which give fo much point to trifles on thefe occafions, fhe con- fented with a charming grace to comply with my requeft. While wc fat involved in thofe explana¬ tions which follow a mutual avowal of paf¬ fion, I heard a fort of buflling noife upon л s the
150
the flaire, and the voice of Muzio repeat¬ ing—" I affure you, Senor, my Lady is not at home." Ippolita became inflantly pale. " Hea¬ vens !" cried 1, " you are ill. Who is it dare thus to intrude ?" " I am loft !" cried fhe, with a faint cry ; " it is my father, and lam undone/* ťi if it is only your father, why this alarm?" faid I. "He muil foon know of our affection, and why not at this moment r'* tr Not for a world!" cried me, in ex« rremeagitation. "Ah, Lorenzo, you do not know his rafhnefs, and his intolerable pride. If you love me, do not wait. Go info that clofet—you will find a private ftair-cafe that will lead you out. Good heavens, how unfortunate í Fly, deai Lorenzo, fly !" I was beyond meafure aftonifhed at an agitation which I thought needleís, if her forlune was fo independent as í was taught to beliebe ; but the bullie on the flairs every
ш
every moment advancing, I retired to pre¬ vent her from fainting, which her varying complexion ftrongly indicated. í did not, however, hailen down the back flairs, waiting to difcovcr if her father was knpwn to me, for th® voice of the perfon difputing with Muzio I certainly had fome-* where heard before. But what horror and difappojntrøent thrilled through my foul, when I plainly diftingwihed the loud voice of Count Fandolfo, " So Madam!" cried he, " you are not at home!----Wine too!-—Pray who was, your companion ? I'll find him out !" " Hear mc," cried Ippolita, in a voice of aflumed fondnefs, and even fhedding tears. ** Hear me, dear General; your anger frightens me to death. ît was a miftake of Muzio s. Then lowering her voice, " It was a mi tlake that arofe from my regard for you. That impertinent and mad- beaded boy Lorenao, fent me a uote thai he would viiit me ; and Muzio having my orders to deny mc, extended them to you. и a As
í 52 As to the wine, there has been nobody here : the firft glafs was dirty, and I took a fécond. But fee, my dear Count, how apt paffion is to build upon trifles without meaning." He fat down, apparently fatkfied with thefe excufes. " I hope,*' faid he, " I may truft in your honour. After the fecrets I have repofed in your confidence, even your own delicacy muft prevent your hav¬ ing any conneciion with him. He has no property that might fli mulate your inte- reft; and pardon me, that is the only excufe for treachery I allow in ladies of your quality." * " I have given you my word, my dear Count ! " replied flie, " and do you think I would flight you for a boy ?—Think better of yourfelf, í befeech you." '* I thought I heard a noife in the clofet," faid the Count, (C It is only the cat, I fuppofe, but I will fee," faid fhe, rifing herfelf, and advancing towards the door where I flood, and which was fo con¬ trived,
153 triyed that it opened upon a private flight of ftairs, which, no doubt, had al¬ fi fted others before me. My curiofity and indignation had kept an equal pace, and it was only from the moft powerful reafons, I refrained burfting into the chamber, and wreaking the firft workings of my rage upon the perfidious woman ; but a moment's reflection ferved to fhew me the danger I had efcaped, and to rejoice that I had detected the fyren, who was luring me to deftru6tion. On hearing her rife, I haftily withdrew, taking no caution that I might not be heard, for I thought that knowledge muft fill hex with confuflon. I flipped down the flairs, and met Muzio coming up. I made a fign to him to be filent, which he perfečily underftood, and grinning at me with his large white teeth, he conducted me fafe into the ftreet. . I uttered a fhort ejaculation of thanks for my fortunate efcape, it feeming to me like a dream that I had juft awoke from, и 4 and
and î wondered at the powerful fpcll that' had bound up my fenfes. I who had but an hour before believed that the ardor of my love would never be íhaken, and con¬ fidered that no earthly object fo defirable as the hand of thk ladv, now found that I defpifed her from my foul, and my refent¬ ment almoft led me to hatred!. î formed many fchemes of revenge as î walked haftily to my lodging; for the words of Count Pandolfo were fo flighting to my feîf-îove, that I defired much to teach him, that I was not altogether the boy he thought me. As İ became calmer, I faw that the heft revenge I could take was to remain wholly indifferent, leaving Ippolita to form her own conjetures, and no doubt fhe would expecl that ï fhould either continue en tangled in her toik, or fly out. into fome violent mark of anger, which would ex- "pofe my own weaknefs. Total indiffe¬ rence wouM wound her to the heart, as 4ht cotdd fcarce think it poffible, I could fo
ш * fo foon break from the chains, fhe believed fhe had riveted upon me. What a fex к thk ! thought 1 ; with the fembiance and fmiles of angels, they lure us to admire, while malice lodges deep within their hearts, and vanity, coquetry, and deceit, guide all their motions. Thank heaven î have efcaped with fo little mif- chief from one of the moft perfidious and moft alluring. Never again will I liften to the fong of the Siren .«»«'Never again approach the fmiling fhores, where love feems to beckon to the gardens of delight, but which are encompaffed by the quick* funds of deceit, and the vprtex of a pbren- zicd imagination. I had fufficient food for refteétion, to prevent fleep intruding upon ще. Some¬ times I rejoiced at my efcape : fometimes I bellowed upon her epithets of vexation ; and £отейщев I regretted that the vïüom I had indulged for fo many days, had thus, at laft,. i?aniih@d ini© empty air. Then again, wheji I turned my thoughts upon h $ my
ш my own circumftances, I beheld mvfelf almoft a beggar, and an o u tea ft from the fociety in which I lived. I had no man near me to whom I could apply for direction or advice. No relation on the furface of the earth whom I could claim or acknowledge. I had been more than once deceived in the flight friendfhips I had formed in the array, and my mind looked forward with very dark broodings upon the future. I began to think man a very different being from what I had imagined when I knew nothing beyond the walk of the con¬ vent, or had only acquaintance with the youth of the college, moft of whom were untainted by the vices of the world,, and were as fanguine in their expectations as myfeif. Once more I determined to make the ftudy of war my only purfuit, that I might thereby banifh from my mind thofe in¬ truding and unwelcome reflections, which only conducted to melancholy and defpair: and
157 and I even formed a diftant intention of banifliing myfeif from Spain, as an adven-. turer in the new world. I kept my refolution never again to vifit Ippolita, who attempted, by feveral infinuating letters and meflages, to per- fuade me to an interview, accufing me of injuftice and barbarity, in not fo much as hearing the excufes fhe had to make : but I was too well aware of the power of her eyes and her eloquence, to truft to my reafon in counteracting them, efpecially when the paffions of youth were in rebel¬ lion againft me. I could not but perceive the increafing coidnefs of Count Pandolfo, which ren¬ dered my fituation peculiarly irkfome. More than once I had ferious thoughts of abandoning the army, and retiring to the bofom of filence and repofe. I looked back with regret to the hours of my youth, when no thought for to-morrow deftroyed the pleafures of to-day; and reflecting upon the folly of human pur¬ fuits,
158 fuits, fhe tranquillity of msnaftíc retîfc* ment appeared with innumerable charms. * f But," faid I, * ( has man no other duties than thofe of self? Was he born to fpeiid hk days in indolence ; to be unproductive on the face of the earth ì Did the gptst Creator of the human race fay to man, be unfruitful ? DM the teacher of реже bid hk difeipks immure themfelves in cells, and mock the purpofes of nature Ì Ко!-— The vow of momftic celibacy m then a vow of negative murder. It is a compact to dimtnifh the fpecies. It к blafphemy againft the eternity of heaven." Thefe and fimilar reflections created in me an abhorence of monkifh inftitutions, and though I might be faid, as a foldier, not to be allowed to ртошшпсе againft others for diminifhing mankind; yet there was a ftrong apology for my profef» fion, 'm the unruly and ungovernable paf¬ fions of men, which are perpetually fer¬ menting difcord, and ¡require the йтщ шт of coabmed power, to prevent a few malignant
í 59 ^alignant and turbulent fpifif* from wholly røottng up fociety, and depopula¬ ting ihc earth, ît ¡s, however, to Ise hoped that mankind will one day univerfally lee lhe happineff of peace; and then, and not ttil then, the profeffton of a fohl ier will become both impious andufclelV The rumour became every day Wronger» that Portugal was training up force« in fecrei, and Гоше cabai forming againft the Queen Hegent. Our troops were under eon liant training, and fevcrat detachment» were appointee to ftaMons on the moun¬ tains, to be геИу to pour down upon the province of Gaťtcia. One evening I wis furpmed by a hur- Tvtng meffage from Count Pandolfo» who ddired ïntbntîy tø fee me upon a Ini fi пей of importance. It was in *шп ίο attempt judging of Inch a mandate, though I had little doubt but it related to Donna Ippo¬ lita, and I armed myfeif with patience., to hear any thing he might chufe to fay on the ftibjcčt He
I6ö
He received me with cool politenefs, and feveral profefïïons of friendfliip, fome little time fince I might have believed fincere. "Cavalier Lorenzo," faid he, prefenting me with a patent, " I have the honour to declare to you, that you are appointed to a fuperior command. You are made Captain over a regiment. To-morrow I am going to march through the province of Aituria, to concentrate the army of Oviedo. The Duke D'Almaine will fucceed me in this city, and you are appointed to command a detachment which will fecure an eíľential pafs upon the fork of the moun¬ tains, where there is now a fmall garrifon you will have to relieve. Fort Dajos will be made a depot for ammunition, on ac¬ count of its fituation. It is a nation of much importance, and your fidelity and courage is depended on." You may fuppofe I liitened with atten¬ tion to this harangue, for fome time, doubt-
İĞİ
doubting whether he was ferious ; but the cominiflion which I read, and the affability of his manner, convinced me of the truth. I returned him thanks for his good «pinion. My refentment was already vanifhed, for I looked upon the affair of Donna Ippolita as the greateft abfurdity on my part, and fuch as merited from him the treatment I had received. I knew not to whom to impute this fudden fmile of fortune. My ftation at an ifolated fort, I could readily guefs, was the management of the Count, which would prevent my viftting Ippolita in his abfence ; but my commiffion I con¬ fidered as the laft fervice of my unknown guardian. I returned the Count my acknowledge¬ ments, inquiring more particularly into the nature of the fervices expected from me : and learning the troops would be in mo¬ tion early the very next morning, being to march at an hour's warning, I retired to make fomc little arrangements, the time fcarcely allowed. My
My heart fluttered at the approach^ of active duty, and my promotion made me look upon myfeif with more refpect, feel¬ ing that confidence, and natural pride, which gives a pleafurabk ftimulus to ©xertion. I threw myfeif down upon the bed for about three hours : rifm g as foon as the dawn of day fhed a grey light upo© the horizon. The drums beat to arms m feveral parts of the city, and the foldiers began to afferable from their quarters. The inhabitants arofe to witnefs our de*· parture, and every fenfation thafc can thrill the heart's exp? ¿station, with hope шпа fear> with joy and forrow, was experienced by all and each of the multitude* i placed myfeif at the heaå of my men* who had been apprized of my promotion nearly as foon as myfeif, and tefıi&çd their fatisfaction by their cheerfulnefs in obey-« ing my commands.* Count Pandolfo led the van with a long line of troops, and a grand military band, which enlivened the pro*
1β3 procefTion and animated every heart The colours flreamed upon the wind ; the horfes pranced as if joyful at again entering the field ; and the foldiers marched forward with animation. My troops, who were to leave the main body at the foot of the mountains, taking a more fouthern direction, formed the rear, and ï was not a little proud at behold¬ ing myfeif fo confpicuous in the midit oí glitter and parade : and while I looked around me at the fpečiators, I fancied the fmiles of the ladies, chiefly direéted on mvfeli and not a few bonored me with wifhes of fuccefs. ï itiifed my eyes towards a window where many kdies and gentlemen were Handing on the balcony, and amongft them Ippolita was not a little confpicuous. She coloured with refentment and anger, bridling her head, and biting her lips with vexation, as I had the vanitv to believe : and in order to mortify her, ï took not the imallefl no¬ tice of her endeavours to atfraamy regard; bowing
1G4
bowing to a lady in an oppofite window, whom I had never feen before, but who returned my falute with fatisfaction ; throwing me/ at the fame time, fome flowers fhe took from her bofom, and which I placed in ray hat, beneath a fine waving plume of feathers, with an air of no Tittle gallantry. This little incident gave me a frefh flow of fpirits ; the proceffion appearing in my eyes more to refemble the air of a triumph, than that of an army going to war : one half of which, at lealtà were certainly going 4o be ilaughtered. I took leave of Count Pandolfo at the foot of the hiik, our routs and deflination here dividing. The roads were good, though narrow and of laborious afcent, having been once Roman military ways. In fome places they had been hewn out of the living rock ; in others they were raifed upon terraces of large flones, at the ex- pence of prodigious labour : fometimes they paffed over the Леер fummit of a hill*
1С5
hill, and then again overtopped the hang¬ ing precipices. We foon found ourfelves winding amongft mountains, formed of hills heaped together without regularity, and rifmg to the clouds—their dark heads being fre¬ quently lofi to our fight; and then again emerging to view, as the clouds broke and paffed over them. The trampling of fo many feet in mea- fared time, founded hollow and fearful over the rocks; and when the clarions and trumpets founded at intervals, the vibrating tones fled from mountain to mountain, till they feemed loft for ever in filence; but in a few féconds another chain of hills took up the charge, and fancy might have believed that every hollow contained a troop, and every mountain an army ready prepared for the battle. This deception %vas wonderfully increafed by the extenfive line of the troops, along the narrow winding xoad, which from ele¬ vated itations, could be only partially feen. Some
Ì66 Some appeared fcattered over the moun*· tains behind. Some creeping along the fteep fide of the htl!.—?A file of baggage waggons appeared aloft in the clouds, while others were loft in the vallies. At the feet of the mountains and in the crevices of tne røcKS, fpread forefts of chefnut and pane, while the high heads of the hills, expofed to all the fury of the feafons, were 'm general barren, and black with rugged rocks, or thinly clothed with fhort grafs and mofs, amongft which flocks of fheep were lei furely browfing. I frequently flopped to gaze behind me on the magnificence of the fcenery ; the little hills around reminding me of that charming valley I had fo fully intended to explore. I knew by the fituation, that it could not be more than three leagues dif» tant from fort Dajos, which I was going to command ; but thofe three bagnes were over the moft barren part of the moun» tains« One universal confufton of rocks, piled in £U£Uef® variety intervened; inter-
luterfected by deep natural ravines, and dangerous from accumulations of ftagnant water, over which time had fpread a thin and deceitful furface. At noon we halted in the line of march, and provifions being diüributed through the ranks, the men formed themfelves into little companies on thè road. Some fhe!« Véveå themfelves in groups under the cool fhade of the hanging rocks. Others ftrayed down to the vallies, where the winding ftream gently murmured, and the frefh verdure fpread itfelf for their repofe; while the veterans, ufed to the toils and fatigues of war, fat down upon the open grounds, balking in the burning beams of the fun, and mingling fongs with their f canty repair. İ arnuféd myfeif with contemplating this living picture of humaan Ufe, reread feefbr© me. The bold fcetiery which every group exhibited was ftrikingly great, nor could ï forbear, when I confidered the dark fea¬ tures moil of them prèfessifêd, their uni¬ form
168 form and martial drefs, and their arms fcattered befide them, glittering in the fun, or piled againft the rocks, comparing them to fo many hords of banditti enjoying their fpoil, or waiting to furprize frefh plunder. Theboafting voices of fome who were exaggerating their own actions, to raife themfelves into heroes, in the eyes of thofe who were new to the army ; the loud laughter of others, and the longs of many, by degrees funk into filence ; moft of them being inclined to fleep, while the more watchful refrained from tlifturbing their companions, fitting in filent contem¬ plation on the family and friends they had left, and the pleafures of their native home. A few indeed, whofe vifages were fur¬ rowed with traits of cruelty, were planning fchemes of depredation, when the horrid trump of war ihould be the fignal of liberating them to prey upon mankind : and when I reflected that the peaceful ham¬ lets, the abodes of innocence and love, would firft fall a prey to the ravages of con-
169 contending power ; I fighed at the pro- feflion I belonged to, and was grieved at the crimes of man. The time allowed for repofe, very foon expired. The ihrill trumpet founded the fignal for marching, and the blaft was re¬ turned in harfh echoes, flying in every di- rcciion around us. In a moment, as if ri fing from the grave, all ftarted into mo¬ tion. Thofe on the brink of the ftream haftened to the dufty road, the hollows beneath the rocks poured forth their numbers, and ftragglers from the foreft, panting for breath, clambered the fteeps, and formed into the line. The fame energy and fatisfaction did not now urge them to the march, as when frefh in the cool of the morning, and in¬ fpired by the mufic of martial inftruments. It was but at intervals that the trumpet founded in thé front, and was anfwered in the rear, and repeated by the echoes. Toil and wearinefs appeared in moft of their features, and thofe who had preffed vor,, i. ¡ ίο
170 to be foremoft in the morning, now lin« gered in the rear. The clouds of duft raifed by the tramp¬ ling of their feet, thickened their refpi- ration, and fullied the brightnefs of their drefs. They ло longer fhone with the fplendor of a parade, but they took a much more interefting appearance, and feemed indeed, warriors of the mountains. We had long fince left behind us all figns of human habitation, travelling over a mafs of mountains, where fcarce the tot¬ tering fabric of a Ihepherd's hut was to be feen in the interval of half a league : and it was not eafy to fuppofe that any objecl on thefe barren heights, could poffibly at^ traci: the ambition of man. Yet their commanding fituation on the frontiers of an hoftile country, and the impregnable nature of the fortrefs, perched upon the point of a rock, and afcended by narrow ftairs, rendered it a place of extreme ftrength, and a key to three provinces, as it ftood in the fork of a long chain of moun¬ tains,
Ui tains, one tide of which flretchcd away to the northern ocean, and the other bor¬ dered Galicia. The night came on extremely dark, but without rain, long before we reached the place of ourdeftination : and torches being lighted to guide the troops over the dan¬ gerous roads, the fpeclacle aflumed a face of dreadful grandeur, the numbers of the men being multiplied into an army of infinite magnitude. In every direction lights íhone and dis¬ appeared, while the dark outlines of the mountains were vifible only in blacknefs, intermixing and forming one mafs with the clouds. The voices of the men calling to each other, paíľed upon the wind, and were faintly repeated by the echoes. The clafli of arms frequently was heard along the winding of the road, and die trumpet fcreamed in the air. On a fudden the tremendous noife of a cannon thundered over our heads, rolling from mountain to mountain in repeated ι 2 vibrations,
172 я ibrations, fhaking the rocks with the con- cufìion, and threatening to overwhelm us in the ruins. For a moment I was aftonifhed at the ftupendous effect, which rolled over us equal to the pealing thunder of the clouds ; and 1 could diftinguifli the earth to tťemble under my feet. This piece was fired from the fort, which was perched above our heads ; and from which the line of our march had for fome time been diftinčtly obferved, though the grey ftone οΐ the fortifications, and the obfcurity of the night, hid it from our view. W r e nov. perceived lights upon the battlements, and foon diftinctlv heard the voices of people as they paffed along the ramparts. We had not expected fo foon to reach the place of our deftinatioa, none but our guides having been the way before, fo that the cannon burli upon us in furprize, and fpread an alarm that the enemy were near ; but when the truth was difcovered, the troops
troops quickened their fteps, and we foon heard the drum beating to arms in the garrifon, that we might receive the ho¬ nours of war. I delivered my credentials at the gate to the officer on duty, who received me with politenefs, and we flood converting to¬ gether, while the troops and the baggage filed into the æra of the fort. The mufic of the garrifon ftruck up, and was anfwered by that of the newly arrived troops, whit 1 h at firft founded at a diftance, but as it drew nearer, rufhed upon the filence of night with a fublime effect. It was long before the whole had entered the gates and were diftribured to their quarters, and not tilľthcn would I retire with Don Ferren to filare a little entertainment his attention had provided. I felt rather embarraffed in the prefence of a man whom I was about to fuperfede in command, and it was only his politencis which encouraged my confidence ; but as foon as he had read a private letter I de- i £ livered
m Π \ ered from Count Pandolfo, he took n\e by the hand, faying with a fmile : ( ' My dear Lorenzo, you ought to con¬ gratulate me, if it were not that you are obliged to take my fituation. I am about fo exchange the irkfomenefs of garrifon duty, for aclive fervice. The day following to-morrow, my regiment will refign this place to vou. I am commanded to Oviedo." I made a fuitable reply to this fpeech, &nå we fat down to fupper with fatisfaction. Don Ferren gave me feveral genera! m·^ Amotions, which his knowledge of the fituation enabled him to do ; and it was not until far in the night that we retired to reft. The following day was fpent in the ne¬ ceifary arrangements for an exchange of poflèlfìon ; and the day after, Don Ferren took his leave of me, nor did ï omit any ceremony οι military etiquette. CHAP.
75
CHAP. IV,
X HE fort of Dajos fia η ds perched upon the point of a mountain, and is afcended by a very narrow pafs, hewn out of the rock. It confifts of a large quadrangular tower, and a range of huts for foldiers ţ beneath which is an extenfive excavation, for the keeping of flores.. It is encom¬ pafíed by a rampart and parapet, covered by two battions, and a battery mounting eight field pieces, which entirely com¬ manded the afcent for a confiderable dif¬ tance, and rendered the fort impregnable to any force which might be brought againft it. The tower being built of the fame dark none which forms the mountains, the eve i t of
i Го aí a itrangcr cannot diftingııifh it. at a tii f- tance, from tbc many piles of broken rock the lem pelts have at diffère n t times íhaken Irom their foundations, and feattcred over the mountains in varietv of fanciful forms. The novelty of my fituation was hď- |icient amufement to me for fome time, and the vali profpecì which the elevation prcfentcd around me, was a charm t<» counteract the routine of dutv. The painted, hmdfcape that fpread before me in the province of Galicia, formed a fine contrail with the awful grandeur of the mountains. Thcfe were dark and Acrile, iblcmnly fea t ed in eternal gloom; while the vallies finiled in the gayen colours of cultivation. Λ perpetual filence, like a calm on the ocean, or when the winds are hufhed in the deferí, reigned around us, and knew no interruption, but the wind:;, the thunder, and the rain. Except, indeed, the birds of the heathy wildernefs, as they pafíed, fcreamingby in fearch of prey. If
J/ 1 ¡t was feklom a courier arrived with di í patches, and we feemed as if baniflied from focietv and condemned to a fiate of 4İ inaction not a little irkfome. Our com¬ pany did not confift of more than three hundred men, the reft having accompanied Don Ferren to Oviedo : and I found f о much fri voli tv in the manners of the oífi- cers, that 1 was pleafed when I could retire from their fociety without îhc imputation of pride. f wifhed to be able to ramble over the mountains, but my duty forbade this in¬ dulgence, as I feared being negligent on my poft, or abfent from the fort in cafe oí alarm ; it being impoflible to know at what hour, or in what place, the fmothcred flame would burit forth. For a month I endured this confinement, at the end of which a courier arrived from Oviedo, with news that every thins: had taken a tranquil appearance on the fide of Portugal, and the Duke of Briganza was preparing to vifit Madrid; where, no ι 5 doubt,
178 doubt, his detention would have prevented the revolution which has fince taken place. Being now more at liberty, I made a few arrangements, in cafe of any alarm taking place during my occafional rambles, ordering a fignal gun to be fired, which could be heard with eafe at more than a leagues diftance, in every direction on the mountains. As foon as the guard was changed, and the orders of the day de¬ livered, I feldom miffed fome little excur- fion, but thefe were lengthened infenflbly Another mountain appeared which I had never afcended, another valley lay beneath, which I had never explored, and thus it was frequently evening by the time I re¬ turned to Dajos. This part of that extenfive chain called the mountains of Afturia, is as 1 have faid, extremely barren, being expofed to the winds and ftorms, which blow from the northern ocean; but towards the fouth, they are covered with extenfive forefts, prefenting to the eye that richnefs of ve¬ getation,
ш getation, which is at once pleating and grand ; and we are fometimes loft in aftonifliment at beholding large maíľes οΐ foren trees, hanging as it were in the air, or fufpended from the crevices of the rocks. Thefe diftant objects frequently brought to my mind the valley of St. Helma ; its pleafant fhades ; the clear murmur of its ftream ; and the myfterious caftle, that was mouldering to the ground. How different, thought I, to ramble amidft the fhades of the fpreading beech, the chefnut, and the feather-leafed afh : to liften to the drowfy babbling of the brook, and enjoy the in¬ dolence of luxurious repofe.«—Here, if I ramble, it is over fteeps and precipices, where I am for ever in danger of breaking my neck ; and my toil is rewarded, only by viewing a new fuccefllon of tremen¬ dous ilerility. Yet in this flerility there was a charm extremely pleafant and in¬ viting to melancholy reflection, for when I wandered over the fpreading heath, and heard
180 heard the wind figh amongft the tall mois; it feemed like the founds, of mourning fpirits to the imagination ; and the fudden guit which paffed away and was heard no more, filled me with fuperflitious fear. One evening I had ftruck into another direction, at a confiderable diftance from the fort, and being fatigued with clamber¬ ing, I fat down upon a fragment of rock, green with m ofs, and overlooking an ex¬ tenfive fweep, along the tides of feveral mountains. I watched the gradual ap¬ proach of twilight, when the fun no longer tinged with purple the grey rocks, or the lofty clouds. Objects took upon them the fame dun fhade, and the form of the hills was only vifible in broken out¬ lines. The cool winds crept by me, and every bird of the waftc was flill. My thoughts took the fad fhading of the night, and an unufual and unaccountable opprefíion of fpirits hung upon me. The molt gloomy mufings crowded upon me, and no longer dwelling
131 dwelling on my own individual fortune, 1 reflected on the Itate of man, and his íeis than momentary exiftence. Like the gufl of wind upon the mountain, he is here, and he ispaíľed away for ever. But where, whither does he go ? Is he like a beam of light, penetrating for ever through infinite fpace? but what mind can even contem¬ plate for a minute the nature of infinite continuance ? it flarts back with horror ! for reflection becomes pofitive madnefs. Λ blaft of wind blew by me cold and cheerlefs ; the tall mofs flower waved its head, and the darknefs of night hung »pon the dells beneath me. I ftarted as the winds paffed over me at intervals. I fancied that articulate founds moved upon the breeze. I raifed mv head to liften, and heard a cry which I could not under ftand. Surely, thought I, the fpirits of night are wandering over the defoiation of na¬ ture, for no human beino- can be roamina at this hour, far from habitation or fhelter. Asai η
ш Again my nerves were thrilled with the cry, which grew ftronger upon the air. My fenfes became alarmed, for it was a cry of fuch diftrefs, that thought heard.no words, mv foul felt fhocked within me. I arofe and ftood looking towards the winding dale. In a moment after, I per¬ ceived an obfcure form moving with unde- feribable quicknefs towards me. The outline was human, but I could diftinguifh neither feature nor action, yet it moved with the fwiftnefs of wind, uttering re¬ peatedly, this tremendous cry ; / am judged wiih а terrible judgment ! I caught thefe words as the phantom paffed by along the furface of the wafte, with glan¬ cing velocity. I trembled—-I looked round, but the form was gone. î had fcarce fufficient ftrength to feat myfeif; my nerves had ion their tone, and the cold breezes of the night alone, preferved me from finking. What k' this, thought I, which has juft paffed before me ? Is it die fpirit of fome wretched
Î83 wretched mortal, or a roaming demon of the air ? Whence came it, and whither is it gone ? Can thk be the fpirit that wan¬ ders through the valley of St. Helma, or broods over the ruins of its caftle ? If fo, fearful and terrible indeed arc the judg¬ ments of the Almighty. Sorcery muft be a crime of the deepeft dye. This explanation of an unfathomable myftery, in fome degree tranquilized my mind. I arofe and fought my way over the tracklefs mofles of the mountain. Fancy at times chained me to the earths when the founding wind feemed to bring again to my ears the fearful cry of woe, but it paffed away, and again funk into filence. It was with difficulty and labour I found my way back to the fort, guided by a glim¬ mering light from the watch tower. The people at Dajos teftified their furprize at my pale and frighted looks, which I im* puted to the danger and fatigue of tracing through deep mofs, which in fome places con
184 concealed holes, where the water ftagnated and became extremely dangerous. hi truth, I had no inclination to relate the circumftances of what I had heard and feen, at the certainty of being diíbcíieved ; nor could Í, on mature reflection, avoid think¬ ing myfeif that I might have been deceived by the vapours which roll over the hills, and the peculiar train of melancholy re¬ flections, which then had poffeffion of my mind. But again I remembered the night when I firft difcovered the valley of St. Helma. It was certain that I had then followed an obfcure figure which eluded me. The ftories of Filelfo and Sylvia could not have been for the pnrpofe of deceiving me ; and there was in their man¬ ner, fomething more than in thofe who only relate from report the tales of fiction and of horror. There are many things which we are perpetually refolving to perform, but which every trifling incident ferves to w CJ poftpone: for where there is fome trouble,
185 trouble, we are willing to think that to¬ morrow mav perhaps ferve better than to-day. Of thefe was my projected viiit to the valley, and it is probable, my refo¬ lution would never have been fufíkieníly roufed, but for an incident which filled my foul with aftonifliment, and kindled within me all thofe remains of fuperftition, which my monkifh education had caufed me to imbibe, but which my later ftudies had enabled me in fome degree to fmother. I now felt an invincible and perpetual impulfe to undertake this adventure ; but the length of the way to the valley, and the time it would neceffarily require, de¬ layed me yet fome time longer. I ap¬ pointed a temporary command during my abfence, which I did not intend fliould exceed two days, and felecting-an old fol¬ dier, named Gafton, who was well ac¬ quainted with the Aflurias, 1 ordered him to provide arms and proviflons for our jour¬ ney, giving out that I meant to explore the defiles of the mountains, the better í*» faci-
186 facilitate any operations which might hereafter be neceflary, when there might be no time for fuch undertakings. Gafton had all things in readinefs, early in the morning, and well pleafed at my preference of him, boafted not a little of his knowledge, declaring that he was ac¬ quainted with almofl every ftone that ky upon the hilk, and knew every creviceand every bog that we had to avoid : for he would undertake to lead me, by ways that only fhepherds and their flocks could know. Hk boafting would have lead me to doubt hk abilities, had I not known that his ®arly days were paffed attending fheep upon thefe very hilk ; and having break· failed, w© fet out from Dajos. The fun fhone bright, and the light clouds difperťed from tlie fummit of the Ы1Ы :. we foon left the fort behind us, lightly treading over the dark brown fward which was decked with innumerable flow¬ ers, of fuch diminutive fize, that they ap¬ peared
18? pcaretl üke fpangles fcatícrcd ίώοηΐ. The morning air infpirtd m with vigor, and frefh youth ftrengthened the nerves of Gafton, of the fight of fo many well-known objects, which recalled to hh memory the years that had paffed away, linee he ftrayed carelefs as the docks he attended ; and ï was perfectly interefted in his favour, when I perceived a tear to ileal down hb check* which he ftrove to hide» It was not fot mc to interrupt his reflec¬ tions-*-! had enough of my own: bul in fpite of thefe, the country we now entered upon, aroufed rae to obfervation. We feemed furrounded by ahfolute barrennefs, and proceeded with difficulty over moun¬ tains which appeared as vaft accumulations of fand, of rocks, and of rubbifh; m if fome mighty city had once fpread "m buildings, lis domes, and its fpires, over this place, but which a tre menebus earth¬ quake hadreverfed, oran univerfal con'!,:- gratiou reduced into rntns and alhes. Nor didit require much from fancy, actually to pr.iat
138
point out rocks of various forms v\ hielt flood detached, and reared themfelves above furrounding fragments, like fhat- tcred fpires, or broken columns. The reflection and refraction of the fun in fuc- ceedtng ages had calcined the rocks into duft, and the intcnfity of his rays almoft fubdued our ftrength. Gafton toiled for¬ ward with perf e verin g labour, and I was not willing to be outdone by a man three times my age. By noon he conducted me to a fpotth^t repaid all the difficulty of attainment. It was a fmall plat of green fward, which* fvvcllcd from ihe regular flope of fhe body of the mountain, and was covered with a lively verdure, which was preferved by a fmall fpring that trickled down the rocks behind, and fhaded in part by a thorn, whofe roots grew into the chinks of the rocks. We fat down upon this airy fituation, Gafton producing the contents of his wal¬ let, which furnifhed no flight repaft. The prof-
1-39
profpect that wc enjoyed gave fpirit to out' entertainment. To the right flretchcd the frowning andcloud-capt mountains wc had paffed; and to t lie left arofe, in apparent endiefs fucceflion, others not lefs lofty and irregular, but which were clothed with waving trees in all the various íhadings of autumn. The barren valley beneath us was encompafíed by hills fplit with deep failures, and feveral trickling ft reams, which took the appearance of inching filver, í raced their mazy courfe down intricate and narrow channels in the rocks. The plains were wholly fhut from our view. We beheld only the great and the fublime, and the mind partook of the ima¬ gery it furveyed. When we had fin i Died our repaft, I inquired of Gallon if he knew the valley of St. Helma ? "Know it !" replied he; i( yes, yes, I know it well: it lies beneath yonder blue mountain with the two peaks; that little ftream you Ice there, gufhing down the rocks
190 rocks from the fpring of St. Maria, winds away till it comes to that valley ; it is then much larger, and before it gets to the fea, it is deep enough to carry ftiips." " Is it long," faid I, " fince yon dwelt upon thefe hills ? I undcrftand you were born amongft them." " Your Honor is right/* replied Gallon. " It is now manv a vear fince I was amongft them : I have not thriven like the fpring oí Saint Maria ; for 1 return drv, and poor, and exhauited. There is little plea¬ fure to the man who returns ίο the place of his youth poor as the day he departed. lie may tell them the adventures he has feen, and they will not believe him." " But you have relations—they will always liften to you with pleafure.** " No, your Honor," anfwered he, (bak¬ ing his grey head; " I have neither friends nor relations : they are long fmce dead. My parents were buried before I was the height of an arcabuz. An old fhepherd took pity on me # and took me to keep fhecp
191 fheep on thefe hills : and when he died, I was feized with a fpirit of roaming ; for í had no one that cared for me, fo I went to the wars, and am now grown grey in the fervice." He repeated his fhort but forrowful ftory with a look full of meaning ,* and when I faw his white locks waving in the wind, I faid to myfeif, " This man has done his duty : he ought now to retire to eafe and quiet ; but alas, he is, like myfeif, forlorn on ihe ftormv waf te of life," " Well, mv brave comrade/' faid I, f< 'tis a folly for foldiers to repine : if we are beaten to-day, to-morrow we may conquer: the chances of war are ever turning round. If it is fo many years fmce you left thefe mountains, you perhaps have forgot the old Caftle that Hands in the valley of St. Helma." " That I filali never do/* returned he. ** Thirty years ago, and more, I have heard the good old Gonzalez tell fuch ftories abou t
192 about it, that I filali remember them to my dying-day." " And what were thefe?" faid I. " Has the caftle been fo long in ruins?" " Many a year before that I believe," if report fay true, " î remember when all the furrounding walls were full of gaps and cracks ; one of the towers in my day was quite even with the ground> and a great part of the wall ; but the moft curious is the tower called the Deviľs Tower, it fplit exactly in half. I remember old Gonzalez telling us that he had heard his father fay, that it happened when he was a boy, on a very windy iiornry night. There lived at that time an old man, who fpent his time in ftudy, and the country people would have it, that he was a magician, and knew more than themfelves, and lived in a lonely out- landiih manner. Some faid he was melan- lancholy, and fome faid he was mad. He however; was the owner of the caftle, and nobody knew his heirs. He ufed to be drcíľed in fo whimfical a manner, with a a long
193
Ions: beard down to his knees, that it was enough to give credit to all that was faid of him. It was never, I believe, known what became of him ; fome laid he was car¬ ried away in a whirlwind, others whifpered that he muft have been murdered, though nobody knew by whom, becaufe his ghoft always walked with a lamp, and had a large chain round its waift." " I did not expect," faid I, r ' that you who have feen the world, and who doubt this old man's being a magician, would have given credit to the reft of this ftorv. Did you ever fee any appearance of this fpeőlre or any other ?" " Never, myfeif ; but old Gonzalez fince told me, that upon the mountains one night, when he was lying upon the heath watching for a wolf that had been feveral times looking for fome mutton, he heard all at once a ftrange cry, as of fome perfon indiftrefs: he raifed himfelf to look round, and fome figure flitted along the brow of the hill, but what, he could not diftinčtly VOT т к fee,
194 fee, and iţ ftruck him, from the ftrange fear he felt, that it muft be the ghoft of the Old Man of the Caftle." . This incident fo itrongly accorded ivith the ftrange and fhocking phantom I had myielf feen, that I was fome time filent, rer flecting upon a phenomenon, which ap¬ peared fo fupernatural, that I had hefitated in believing .my own fenfes. I could no Jonger doubt, after fuch con¬ firmation, though there was fome variation in the tales of Gafton and Filelfo, the latter perhaps adding circumftances more confo- nant to his own nature. Gafton, when no longer invited to talk, reclined himfelf to fleep, and left me to my οιγη reftečtkms.. 1 began ¡to feel fome- thing of repugnance tomy intended expe¬ dition, the deferted ruins 4)f the Caftle of St. Helma becoming a more formidable object than i «had hitherto thought them. I had made preparations, with intent to * pafs a night in fome one of the chambers which might yet remain fo entire as to af¬ ford
1.95 ford me fhelter, but when I thought that perhaps the fame phantom which had paffed me oli the hills might become my vifitor, I Was much inclined to return to Dajos; then again I confidered my own folly, and refolyed at all hazards to proceed, that I might affure myfeif of the truth, and know what confidence was to be placed in popular narrations. I awoke Gallon, who flept lightly, ftart¬ ing up at the firft call, for he had been inured to camps. We took leave of this pleafant fpot, continuing our way by a winding defcent into a hollow, which again led us to another afcent, keeping along the fide of the mountains, till we overlooked the valley of St. Helma, as from the top of an amphitheatre of hills. The profpect was different from the line of view in which I had firft beheld it, but not lefs enchanting. Gafton pointed out to me, at a diftance, the two remaining towers of the Caftle, little more than via¬ ble from the elevation, above the tall K Ä trees
196 trees that furrourided it. It was fituatcd nearly in the centre of the valley, upon a -fmall elevation, and before the invention of cannon, might have frowned' defiance to any hoftility. I wondered that I.had not difcovered it on my firft vifit to this place, but the indif- tinčt form it affumed, almoft concealed as it was by the furrounding trees, prevented a ftranger from diftinguifliing it from the broken outlines of towers and battlements, which the mountains prefented wherever they were bare of foliage. We defcended. into the valley, winding amongft thickets of myrtle and rofemary. The lofty beech, the elm, and the chefnut ¿fpread an almoft impenetrable gloom through the foreft. The mild tints of the evening began to tinge the iky with a deeper glow, empurpling the rocks on the tops and fides of the furrounding moun¬ tains, and when his broad orb hung up< л the hills, the country appeared lighted up lu universal blaze. ; The
197 The few paths that wound through the mazes of the foreft, were, fince the days of Gafton, ovèrfpread with grafs, and he could only guide me by the known fituation of the Caftle. A thoufand little infects bufily attended our fteps, dancing about us, and their humming was uninterrupted by a ze- phir, or the trembling of a leaf. As we ad- vaneed deeper into the foreft, the beauty of the fcenery increafed> and it feemed as if art had been employed to mingle trees of light and deep-coloured foliage, agreeably to amufe the eye. Jeftamines and woodbines in abundance clung to the fupporting branches of the ¡ ftrong giants of the grove, hanging over our heads in feftoons of delicate flowers, while beneath our feet, the fhort grafs was fcattered over with violets. I was charmed with the beauty of the groves, and Gafton obferved, that in his time he did not remember that he had ever feen thefe flowers growing wild. " Doubt¬ lefs," faid he, " becaufe at that time the к 3 foreft
198 foreft'was inhabited by near a dozen fami lies, and now it is become a defert, without a foul to invite a Angle traveller to his hearth." " The re verfe is then not for the better," faid I. " To man, fociety has more charms than all the wildernefs can afford; but where is the reward of his labours, if he re¬ turns from foreign countries to his native foil, and finds it abandoned of its people, without one to be told of his return." Gafton hung down his head and was filent. We moved flowly forward, engaged with our own reflections, till the gentle mur¬ murs of a ftream caught my ear, and at¬ tracted my attention. A path feemed to incline towards the brook ftriking into a tall grove of evergreens and fweet-fcented fhrubs, overhung with lofty cyprefs, and a few wild citrons. The melodious voice of the nightingale warbled unfeen amongft the foliage, and wé advanced, forgetting that we were pof¬ fibly
199 fîbly leaving the Caftle, whofe towers were not to be diftinguiflied in the deep bofom of the foreft. As I advanced, amore at- tractive found than even the ftrains of the nightingale reached my ear : it was the fweet and plaintive founds of a female voice, unaccompanied by any infiniment, and I immediately fancied it to proceed from fome fhepherdefs fitting on a bank of flowers, with her fheep on one fide, and a ftream on the other. Charmed with the idea of fo arcadean a fcene, I moved cautioufly onward, till opening upon a little grove, I perceived at a few paces diftant, fitting beneath a little natural arbour, upon a bank of mofe, the elegant figure of a lady, half dreffed, as if flie had been bathing in the liquid pool, her hair falling in natural ringlets, concealed her bofom, her face was averted, and fhe feemed bufled in adjufting her drefs, while fhe amufed herfelf finging ; and amongft fe¬ veral little airs that fhe fang, the following was all that I remember : к 4 AIR.
200 AIR. Violets and Б lue- bells grow in the groves ; Rofcs unfold their fweet fcents to the ix\r m But if they grow, where no mortal e'er roves > What is the value 3 which none can fhare ? Virgins, like rofes, blooming and gay, Soft as the Violets delicate flow'r, Hid in the Valley, for ever may ftay, For who caa perceive or feel their pow'r ? While I flood liftening with attention to the fweet nielodv of her voice, I had leifure to examine the fingularity of her drefs ; it was neither Spanifh, Morefco, nor Religi¬ ous, but a curious mixture of each, formed in fo fanciful a manner, that while it won¬ derfully difplayed all the perfections of the form, it gave rife to the idea, that the fair wearer was a little deranged in her mind ; but when fhe turned her face towards me, thefe fufpicious vanifhed all at once, leav¬ ing behind them pleafure and furprize. I beheld a countenance, lovely with vouth and beautv,and fuffufed with the moft delicate blu ih. Her eyes beamed with intel- li gence,
201 licence, but the moment fhe glanced them upon me, her features expreffed terror and confufion. She fnatched a looÏe robe and veil which lay upon the bank, and ftart¬ ing up, flie ftood for a moment in the atti¬ tude of flight, gazing upon me with a look of furprize, while her delicate mouth was half inclined to fmile. I ftood ftill, in the moil pleaflng confu¬ flon, when throwing into her features a thoufand uniting graces, with fome little air of coquetry, flie ftarted away with the fpeed of a fawn ; I flew after her, befeech- ing her to ftay, but her nimble feet almoft outftripped the wind; and her veft hanging part over her fhoulder and her ann fhe feemed like the figure of Diana in the woods. I conjured her to wait but a moment, that I might aik her a queftion of infinite importance. I made ufe of the moll ten¬ der expreffions, but all in vain, for the cruel tormenter, when fhe had gained a confider¬ able diftance upon me, turned round her к 5 head
202 head with an arch fmile, and then again darted away. I knew not what to think of this beha¬ viour, which fhe repeated feveral times, and I began to fufpecì that her flight was intended only to invite purfuit, and the remembrance of the artful Donna Ippolita, almoft determined me to give upthe chafe;, but when fhe again turned her face, there appeared fo much of youthful innocence in every feature, that I found it impoffible to defift. The elegance and eafe of every motion while flie flew along, fcarce touching the «rafs, brought to my mind the fabulous ilories I had read of Sylvan Nymphs, pur- fued by the deities of the foreft. She turned round an abrubt angle of the thicket. and again for a moment flie paufed to gaze at me, but was as quickly loft to my view. The underwood and fhrubs were here fo extremely thick, and fo regular, that it had every appearance of having been planted by art, and I expected to find within its fhades
203 fhades fome little cottage, which, like Filelfo's, might give fhelter to fome re- clufe from the world. I feared in the mazy labyrinth to lofe the track, and was quickly round the fame an¬ gle, but it was only time enough to catch a glimpfe at her form, as ihe paffed through a little door in a high ftone wall, and cio ling it with quicknefs, was loft to my purfuit. 1 was confounded at this incident, and looking up through the thick boughs of the trees, perceived that 1 was on the out¬ fide of the wall which encircled the ruins of the caftle of St. Helma, whofe an tique turrets and battlements appeared to hang far above my head. The coppice was ίο luxuriantly verdant, and fo entangled, that it was not eafy to deviate from the regular track; and the· fhrubs mingled with briars, grew fo clofe to the wall, that the eye could not from this fpot learn the extent. • I flood mufing upon the ftrange flight of this nymph, who had taken an afylum within
204 within a ruin of which I had heard fo many Angular reports, till Gafton ihould over¬ take me ; for I could by no means recon¬ cile the idea, that it was poffible for a female of her appearance to refide in fo defolate a place; and with very little affiftance from fancy, I fhould have be¬ lieved what I had feen, to be one of thofe illufionsl had been taught to expect. He foon came in fight, and feemed fomewhat difappointed when he faw me Handing alone, my arms folded, and my eyes raifed towards the towers where the ivy entwined, and the long-ftalked mofs waved its head to the airs of the evening. " Ah, your Honor !" faid Gafton, "there they are, juft as they ftood thirty years ago, and as they may ftand thirty more. 1 warrant they would not have run away. You had better firft have caught the young lady—thirty years will make fome little odds in her." " 1 thank you for your obfervations," replied I, roufed from the reverie into which
£05 which I was finking ; " they are perfectly true ; but do you think me fo ungallant a foldier, my boy, as to give up a lady on any occafion ? The truth is, ihe disap¬ peared through that door." " Through that ! " cried Gallon with a look of furprize. "Why that leads into the little yard behind the caftle, where fometimes the carelefs bovs ufed to ileal away to play, becaufe they knew nobody would look for them there : but the gate was down at that time. The old wall too has been repaired, for it was then full of breaches. I know not what to think of all this.—Surely it could not be done without hands." " That I think is very clear; but if we cannot find entrance in one place, wc may in another. The evening will foon clofe upon us, and I wiih firft to make choice of an apartment." " St. Chriftopher be your guide," replied he, ihaking his head; " if your Honor means to pafs the night in that caftle, you will
2ö6 will find fifty gaps in the wall, that wilf admit a troop of horfe. I am only forry that you have brought poor old Gafton all the way from Dajos to ftand centry outfide thefe walls, while you are rambling over them, òr, perhaps, fighting with fome fpečtre. For my part I have no curiofity to traverfe rooms, mildewed and hung with cobwebs, and the wind whittling at every window. It would be much better to be in an old wine cellar, for there we fhould have all thefe, andfomething to chear us." " But the lady, Gafton.—You would not want any other to chear you." "There are times and feafons, your Honor, for all things; my time is paft; yoiir's is paffing ; but I doubt whether you pafs any of it in company of that lady, as you call her, this night." <f None but the brave deferve the fair," faid I ; "and furely after coming all the way from fort Dajos, we will never go back to fay we arrived at the walls of the caftle and feared to enter: for my part, I will not retreat
207 retreat till I fee fome more formidable' opponent than the ihadow of a woman. 4 ' Gallon made no reply—leading the way till we came oppofite one corner of the wall. " Faith and truth, your Honor," faid he, paufing and refting on his fword. " Here ufed to be a large opening,but it is mended up like the door.—I doubt whether we find any entrance at all. It ftrikes me that the fhepherds or fome of the woodmen have built up the wall, to prevent ftrangers from fuflering for their curiofity." I thought this not unlikely, and we con¬ tinued to follow what had once been the path, but was now overfpread with the branches of creeping fhrubs. No chafm in the wall appeared, and I began to have fome apprehenfions, not lefs alarming than thofe arifing from fupernatural canfes. I compared the manners of Filelfo, with the f ecuri ty of this place, fo well adapted to banditti. All my fufpicions of his cha¬ racter and defigns, recurred frefh to my memory,
208 memory, and I began to apprehend that the caftle of St. Helma was indeed haunted, but with fpirits more terrible to man, than all that roam invifible through the earth or the air. Gafton conducted me carefully round the wall towards the principal gates. i( There, at leaft/'faid he, " you will find room enough to enter. One of the old maffy gates had been (in my youth) fo long on the ground, that the grafs was more than half grown over it : the other fwung by one hinge, and, no doubt, has long fince dropt to pieces/' <f I wonder/' faid I, <( Gafton, that you never ventured into the caftle/' " Why, your Honor," replied he, " I muft own I never did. I have been within this outer wall, and walked over the yards and gardens, and what they call the inner court. They were all covered with long grafs and weeds, and the garden was over¬ grown with thiftles and nettles—the fhrubs and flowers grew wild : it was a defolate fight
209 fiffht to fee : and then the ruinated towers and tottering-walls, that feemed as if they were going to fall upon you. I remem¬ ber we boys ufed fometimes to pelt the windows, but there was no occafion for that to make it look difmal. I could almoft fancy that I hear fomebody groaning at this moment, within that dark looking tower." {( You will put us both in the vapours," faid I. (t The evening comes on a-pace, for we have loft the fun behind the moun¬ tains." Having forced our way among the entangled boughs, which in fome places were almoft impenetrable, we reached what had been the grand entrance, but we found the wall made good, apparently newer than the reft. Here we paufed to reflect on this unex¬ pected difappointment, and Gafton with no little fatisfaction took hold of it to re- requeft again that I would at leaft defer tili morning, my refolution of exploring the
210 the building, which it was-not poffible now to fee, even if we were within the walls. I could not but admit the juftnefs of his reafons, but at the fame time I wiihed earneftly to fatisfy my curiofity, which the fingular incident of the lady not a little increafed. I therefore propofed that after we had entirely gone round the building, if I faw no opening by which we could eafily enter, I would poftpone it till the morning, intending then to fcale the walk. The increafing darknefs, which the thick foliage augmented, obliged us to quicken our fteps, and we foon reached the fouthern fide facing the ruined part of the caftle : the winding of the river here running over a bed of broken rocks, prevented our pro¬ ceeding, the wall continuing down to the edge of the water, and being now fatkfied our attempts further would be ufelefs for that night, I propofed in my own mind to endeavour to gain the cottage of Filelfo, which though a wretched place, was pre¬ ferable to remaining in the heavy dews which
211 which dropped from the trees. I had цМ<> not forgot the cheft which I had feen in the loft, and whofe contents appeared to me very fufpicious. In about a hundred yards, we entered a naiTow path, on one fide of which ran a flopingbank, not a little convenient for the purpofe of refting, and Gafton very quickly remembered, that we had been travellins; fince noon, without halting, and now ftood in need of refreihment. I could not refufe his requeft; and the more fo as I found myfeif inclined to par¬ take of our flores, and we fat down upon the bank fpread with mofs and wild ftraw- berries. "This is admirably romantic," faid I, " Have you any tafte for the fublime ? " " I do not know that I ever tailed it in my life/' replied he. " I like a good piece of mutton and a glafs of Madeira, much better than moft of the made di flics ferved up at the tables of Grandees." (C You
212 " You miftake me, friend," faid I, laugh in"·. " I mean have you anvrelifh for the charms of fuch a place as this, where a dull and impenetrable obfcurity creeps among the trees, where the path is fcarce vifible, and may lead to the edge of a precipice, where, if it was light, we might perhaps fee a turret of the caftle crowned with wild flowers, and where we are every moment, for what we can tell, expofed to the attacks of robbers." "Heaven forbid!" cried Gafton. "I never had a tafte for any fuch a fituation r though in the courfe of my profeffion, no man can fay I was ever a coward, and per¬ haps fome mothers and widows may have wept for the ftrength of my arm.—Hufh ! your Honor ; did not you hear a foot fall ?" " No," anfwered I, in a low voice. " Don't let your apprehenfions furprize you." Gafton made no reply ; but bending hk car to the path, he Hilened for half a - minute.
213 minute. " Somebody is coming this way/' faid he. f( There is only one, fo if it ihould prove a robber, Ave need only ftand upon our guard." He then refuraed his feat, placing his fword ready befide him. I was not under any apprehenfion at this intelligence, for we were well armed. It was not many minutes before I found that he had guefled well, plainly diftinguifliing fteps, w T hich in the filence of this foreft, founded to a con- fiderable diftance. It was not long before I perceived a man approaching, though the furrounding iliades did not permit me to diftinguifli his features clearly. He was tall, and as he came nearer, I fuppofed him to be a wood¬ man by hisdrefs, and an axe he carried over his moulder. • He quickly perceived us and immedi¬ ately turned round to retreat. " What, my old friend, Filelfo," cried I, " have you forgot your gueft ? We want your aflift- ance
214 ance to another night s lodging. How is dame Sylvia?" At thefe words he turned round, and came cautioufly up to us. I then perceived it was not Filelfo, but a ftranger. " Cavalier/' faid he, « did you inquire for Filelfo ? are you acquainted with him ?" ·' Periečtly well," replied I; "he was once my hoft, and we ate now going to look out for his cottage." " It к fome diftance hence," anfwered he, " but ifyou often vifit him, you doubt- lek know where it ftands. I wifh vou fafe there." At thefe words, he was retiring, but I called to him to ftay. " Sit down, friend, and tafle our wine," faid I. <( You will be fo good as direct us to his cottage, or per¬ haps give us fhelter in your own." " Ye my f tic powers," faid he, folemnly looking up, " what cottage have I ?" Then turning to us : " Strangers, I will direct you, if you chufe, to hk cottage.—By what means did vou lofe vour wav ?" w ·* * " To
215 ,ŕ To fay truth» I am unacquainted with the vallev. This к the fécond time of mv viikingit.'* ** You have bufinefs of fome importance here, no doubt," faid he, eying me as I could perceive through the duíky light. " I have bufinefs, but it is only the bufi¬ nefs of curiofity and doubt ; I came pur¬ pofely to explore the Caftle of St. Helma, 1 hear forne verv* ftrange reports concern¬ ing it, and I have come hither to be fatk- fied." ** And you hav'e chofen Filelfo for vour * ti guide ------ . " u No, no," cried I, ' ( I fhall not be able to prevail on Filelfo, to fuch an under¬ taking, he would have frightened me from it, if I would have attended to fome horri¬ ble ftory lie was full of, concerning the Old Man of the Caftle, who, he laid, haunted tlie ruins, and roamed through the foreft. But I am not to be frightened by fuch idle tales.*' " Filelfo
216 fí Filelfo told you truth/* faid he, in a fo¬ lemn tone of voice. " Ko man that ever entered thofe defolate walk returned to lay he had feen the Old .Man of the Caftle.** " Do vou live in this foreft/* faid L ** 1 am not defirous of troubling Filelfo, for you doubtlefs know he is not very hofpi- table." " He had his realms/' replied the ftranger. " I cannot offer yon flWhcr, for before the day breaks 1 have many leagues to go," "Leagues/*repeated 1 in fiirprUc, •■are you going to walk all night c\ er ihcfe wilds and forells." " Not to-night, but many nights; yet before 1 go my deftinetl journey, let me caution you not to approach the Caftle of St. Helma," I was inflamed by the myftery of thefe fpeeches. " Your advice," faid I, " Ы too late, and your words only excite in me a firmer refolution. If it coll me mv life, î fwear by all the Saints I am refolved to venture." He
ile railed hk hand for a moment to In« forehead. ·· Raftı mortal/' faid he, 4i you are ignorant of the danger you tempt. Your oath has hound you ; you are en¬ gaged to advance. Thk m not the path to Ihe Caftle, thk will lead you to the river." ** You know the» which it к ! ** cried К cajţcrlv, '* Point me to it» and 1 vviti give you any reward you require."— ** To-morrow/* faid he» with a groan. ** we will talk ofthat. What к your name Y* t replied, thai my name was Loren/ о de 1 erattı* that I was commander of Fort Dajos, and if in hk travels he ever came there, 1 fhouhft make him welcome. " I accept tke înv'ilation, * laid he ; ** let its be gone ; the night advances rapidly» - and before morning 1 muft he at Rome." He turned round ahrnhtly » beginning to walk forward. Gafton had fcarce time to put the remains of our repaft into hk wal¬ let and run after us, for imperceptibly thk ftranger walked at an amazing pace, which required fome exertion to follow. It was 1 n 0 \v
218 now fo dark that objects were become of one fhade. The ftranger moved rapidly on, and Gafton, panting for breath, took hold of my arm, whifpering at the fame time, , 'F'or heaven's fake, your Honor, did he not fay he was going to Rome ? dont fol¬ low him any more; either he is mad, or this ia the verv —·*—" Gafton was immediately filenced by our guide turning round. t( As the hour draws near to midnight," faid he, "when the three-quarter chime is founded by the Caftle dial at Madrid, you will perceive a . glimmering blue flame creep along the bat¬ tlements of the remaining towers ; at that time all the gates and doors of the Caftle are open ; you may then, and then only find entrance, but I warn you to fhun the danger you provoke: When the clock ftrikes twelve, remember me ! " " And how do you know all thk ?" de¬ manded I. " To-nìorrow," faid he, folemnly, « To¬ morrow you will not afk me that queftion. Look
219 Look round, there is your path to the left. Λ Gafton, as well as myfeif, turned our heads at this intimation; but when we again looked round, our infhiictor w r as gone, and we ftood aghaft in mutual and filent afto¬ nifliment "Did I not warn your Honor/' faid Gafton, in a tremulous voice; " I thought there was fomething ftrange about him.** Here he paufed and hefitated, at the fame time looking round him, though no objeél could be diftinčtly feen. "I fay, I flioukl not wonder if this were the very fpirit which wanders about, and takes up his abode in this fepulchral Caftle." " It is not impoffible," replied I ; rr hk difappearing in this manner, was fomething inexplicable." " Ýes, your Honor; and then did not you remark in what a ftrange voice he fome¬ times fpoke, and when he talked of travel¬ ling to Rome in a few hours, and of wan¬ dering leagues in a night over thefe wilds, ь 2 where
220 •where no living foul durft venture ; and of hearing in the mountains of Afturia the Ca¬ thedral clock of Madrid ? f ľm furçit made my blood run chill, though I know not why." ' * '■ .-·:;-■ '■.··,- " Wile, well, my friend," faid I, laying my hand on his moulder to encourage him. ' tf You muft perceive that' fome very im¬ portant myftery is concealed beneath thefe circumftances, and that myftery Л have fworn to know/notwithftanding his denun¬ ciations. I grant it is poffible; him we have now feen may be тетеЛЦГз fpirit of the Old Man of the Caftle.; but then who was the Lady. Did you ever hear of one Caftle being haunted by two fpirits at a time ?" . Gafton lau ffhed at the idea* but made ufe , of all his rhetoric to-prevent my going for- ..ward. ,Being however, determined . that nothing, fhort s of impaffable force fliould preven 1. 1 me/ I ilr uclc ľ down the, path, cau- ţjoufty tracing my way ? i ãu4 was reluc¬ tantly
221 tantly followed by Gafton ; who, though I did not put him upon his duty, confidered himfelf bound by the laws of honour to accompany me.
x 5 CHAR
QO& -». v-V
CHAP. V.
Τ· HE path perpetually wound in dînèrent intricate directions,, as if contrived to« miflead the judgment, and I was in doubt whether we were not leaving the Caftle al¬ together; when we came at once upon a poftern gate, which on trial, I found ftrongly barred ; and had it been day, tlie walls were too high to be Icalcd without a ladder. Gafton fat down upon the grafs. " This. Is a ftrange bufinefs I have been thinking," faid he. tf If I might take the liberty, I mould fay, that 1 .do think it is not our place to pry into myfteries that do not concern us. It is for Priefts to combat diofts, and for Soldiers to vyar with men." £i · lb
0t4 "It is not my intention to deprive you of your own difcretion," faid L " I took you only to guide me over the mountains, and lam fatisfied w;ih your fervices. I do not defire you to accompany me beyond this fpot, where you may reft yourfelf from the fatigues of the day." "What," cried he, " while you are ex¬ ploring the Caftle alone, and perhaps breaking your neck down fome flattered ftair-cafe in the dark ; it would be a very pretty tale to return with to Dajos. No, fince nothing can change your mind, I will not üt idly here. Old as I am, and a little worfe for wear, I remember the time when I fhould have been as refolute as yourfelf : I have but a few years, to live at any rate, and I may as well end my days in this caf¬ tle as any where elfe. Ah î your Цопог, There ! there !■—Do you fee the flame r" " Yes, Gafton," replied I, "I do; it moves flowly along the turret It is a faint and fickîy flame, like the ignited vapours of ĺ 4 night,
224 n i dit, òr üke the flame I once followed in this very foreft." - « You did follow then," faid Gafton, * e and where did it go ?" * ( I know not—It was either extinguifh¬ ed or vanifhed, for I loft it when I thought I was juft upon it.'* i( Ah Г Mafter," faid Gafton, with a ftifled figh : fC But no'matter, let us go." At thefe words we arofe. , We ftood gazi rig upon the light, which/moved flowly along the moulding of gothic fretwork, which jetted a little beyond the walls, running round the building, about 'a* yard below the battlements,' and much too ilar- row för any human being to ftand upon. " Mercy upon us;" faid Gafton, ina whif¬ per ; (t Do you not feel an odd fenfation creep over you. Ha î there,—the light ftands tìill." In à: few moments the'¿fate flew open with a harfli found, and a fecret fliiidder ran through my frame. ŕ I advanced, followed by Gafton, into the court-yard, which was covered with thiftles and
225 and matted grafs. It was too dark, particularly to diftinguifh the ravages of time upon the building, though we could perceive through the windows in front, the oppofite iky, the roof in that part having wholly fallen in. At this hour of the night I had no inclina¬ tion to trace the outlines of the Caftle, which was a large hollow fquare, with an¬ gular towers ; one half of the building was fallen into ruins, and the principal gate was choaked up by a large heap of ftones. I muft confefs, that I feemed as if under a momentary refpite at this repulfe. The fingularity of the mov pig flame,. and the fudden opening of the outer gate had in fpired me with awe and пд little appre¬ henfion, iţ being impoftţble ionger to with¬ hold belief from the tales L had fo repeat¬ edly heard. ; "Wewiijvwaitin thisyard till morning," 1Щ I. ".It is fomething to, make an en- trance; I |?egin» to ťhim\, that i f we were to enter fuch a mouldering fabric as this L ã ■■ < without ,. ч. ■ \ ' 'i J * %
225* without light, tve might fall through forne- fracture in the flooring." ťf I do not think we ihall want light, your Honor," replied Gafton 3 coming, clofe to me. ts If I miftake nót, the flame has quitted tlie battlements, and now burns. at the bottom of the fouth tower." I looked where he pointed, and perceiv¬ ed that the light filóne from a little door at the foot of the tower> and; looking up, the battlements were left in cloudy darknefs. " Let us accept this fignal," cried I, ad¬ vancing; " ? Tis now too late to retreat." Gafton made no reply, and keeping clofe behind me, we advanced to the door· whence the light had mone, but it was now advanced partly up the winding ftairs of this tower, and while we Could not fee the body of the flame, its rays in the turn¬ ing of the fteps caft a gloomy light, which fuffered us to difcern the way, moving for- ward when we advanced!, and flopping when we paufed to liften ; and could T have diftihguifhed fteps, I mould have been cer¬ tain
tain fome perfon preceded us. Unwilling to be feen, we followed the uncertain light to the firft landing, where an antique lamp burnt upon the ground. Here we paufed to look round us in doubt. A dreadful filence reigned through the building, and the furrounding gloom fpread its fadnefs over our fpirits. We looked at each, .other in filence, but Gafton did not make any motion to retreat, and I would notnow fhew, by о ut ward fear, that I repented my rafhnefs. I railed the lamp ftom the ground, and following a narrow paffkge which branched bo the rights between two walls, after two or three turnings, we reached a door» which anfwered the information we had received, that all the doors in the caftle, at this folemn hour, would be open. "But, your Honor," faidrGafton, " he did not tell us wheat they would fhut ;. tis tento one but we ihall be caught, though all appears fo inviting at urcfent/' г 'J Peace,
Í2B " Peace, Gafton," faid I, iC let us not alarm any flumbering fpirit." " Do fpirits fleep, then ?" returned Gallon, in a low voice, as we paffed into a chamber, furrounded bv ftone walls, and of confiderable extent. " I know not, in¬ deed," faid I, " whether they fleep or no, but I mean fpirits that yet inhabit earthly bodies. It is not clear to me that thofe who haunt this calile are immaterial." I raifed the lamp to throw light upon the furrounding obfcurity, and at that moment the door we had juft entered, jarred to, with a violence that fhook the whole fabric, echoing for feveral moments along the chambers, in fearful founds. -I fhuddered at this ftrange incident, and Gafton uttered a deep groan, unable other- wife to exprefs his fears. Convinced that no human power, unaided by fupernatural agency, could have effected this, I ftood confounded, till the echoes died away, and all again fettled; into the deepeft ftillnefs. ' No *
229 No footftep was diftinguifliable, except our own, as we cautioufly advanced to¬ wards an oppofite door which ftood open, inviting our entrance. A flight of lhirs, defcending to the ground-floor of the body of the caftle, prefented themfelves, and we began to defcend, paufing about half way, in expectation that the door аЬоле us would be clofed behind us, but we were deceived ; and having reached the ground-floor, we proceeded along a paf¬ fage, which our lamp but faintly ferved to illumine, its rays not penetrating to the further end. " I thought I heard a groan," faid I, to Gafton : fi heard you any-found ?"· " No," replied he, liftening. "How many houri» does it want yet till morning ? Ha î Maf tro, what is that ?" fi Where/' faid i x turning round quickly. "Oit is nothing but your fhadow," faid he, f I mjftook it againft the wall forfome- thing elfe, every part of this .folitary, place chills nie with apprehenfion/' * I was 1 r '
230 Γ was not without partaking in thefe fears,. but it was now impoffible to return if 1 would. What I moft dreaded-was the. ex¬ tinction of our light, being almoft per- fuaded that it burnt by magic power, and would fail us when it had ferved to con- duct us to fome dangerous place. Another door flood open before us, and proceeding flowly on, we entered a room, where were fbme remains of furniture of ancient form, damp with mildew, and, dropping in pieces with age. " Let us now try an experiment, my friend," faid I, " help mê to move this old. piece of lumber, which I fuppofe has been. a fopha, into the door-way, we will fee if~ invifible hands will remove it, or if it wilL not prevent this door clofing upon us." " Aye, your Honor/' faid Gafton, " that: is well thought on ; fet the lamp on the ground, if you pleafe, or it will be too much for our ftrength. The people of old times ufedto love furniture that might ftand as long as the ftone walk of their dwelling.". I
23 t; Γ placed the lamf> upon the ground, and? with fome difficulty we removed this old. piece of lumber, and placed it againft the door. " That is what I calbfecuring a retreat," cried Gafton, exulting. "The old Duke of Caftile ufed to fay, a good retreat was often of more moment than a partial vic¬ tory. I with we could make his words true in the prefent inftance." " Never fear;" replied I. tc If the old Duke never advanced he could neverr retreat. We will try his maxim when we can go no further. I begin to like the· adventure." " That is more than I can fay /' replied he fhrugging up his fhoulders ; and could I at that folemn moment have fmiled at any thing, it would have been at his grotefque- appearance, by the light which, faintly burnt upon the floor. I ftooped to teke up the lamp, which by theweaknefe of its flamei created in me no fmall fear that ii was expiring. The folemn found
232 found of a bell ftriking at tedious intervals, broke upon the filence ; every tone vibra¬ ting through my nerves; and when it ftruck the twelfth time,the lamp glimmered, flaflied up for a moment, and died away ! I fhuddered at this accident, and remem¬ bered that the ftranger had bade me think of him when I heard the laft hour of night. Strange and myfterious being,, thought I, what can this portend. What prodigy next am I to witnefs? Poor Gafton begaii to repeat his prayers with as much fervor as if he had been at the point of death. " Heaven haye mercy on us t Gracious and ever-loving Saints, and bleffed Martyrs," cried he, hk teeth ftriking each other with fear, " protect us this once—but this once—from the Old Man of the Caftle, and if I ever come again within his territories—-" "What nonfeiife ave you uttering ?" cried I. " Did not I,chufe you out of a •whole ,girøft>n ; for your courage ?—Do youIftand muttering jii that manner when
233 vou are to charge the enemy ?—Do not you perceive the reflection of fome light at the farther end of the room ?" st I fliould not wonder," replied he, " if it was the very lamp your Honor was juft now carrying, which has made a march in the dark, and now is ready trimmed and lighted, to lead us into a more difmal iitii- tion, if that can be found." I fmiled at this remark, moving towards the light, till I difcovered that it entered from an inner chamber, the door of which, like all we had hitherto paffed, remained open ; though this was but partly fo, I pu flied it back, and we entered a chamber, the fight of which caufed us to paufe in new aftonifliment. It was wainfeoted round with plain wood, painted black : the roof and the floor were of the fame colour :—four ta¬ pers, of black wax, in black candlefticks, burnt upon a fmall fquare table, in the centre of this room, upon which was placed fome dry fruit and wine, This.
534 This was a reception* we had had nc^ reafon to expect from the invifible owner of the Caftle, and we moved towards the table, without thinking to take the lame precaution with this door as we had done with the outer one, and it was inflantly jarred too, and bolted-on the out/ide with a violent noife. All our apprehenfions were increafed at this new circumftance, which convinced us beyond doubt, that whoever it was that overlooked us, all our fteps had been ob¬ ferved, andnow we.-were entirely cut off from the hope of retreat, there being not the fmalleft appearance of a door in the black wainfcot around us. "Holy Saints!" exclaimed Gafton, tf what is the matter with your Honor,—- are you ill *·" " That is a ftrange queftion," replied I, not well pleafed that he fhould then notice thepalenefs of my countenance: but look¬ ing at him with fome little difpleafure, I was ftartlcd to perceive that his face was changed
2:)5 ' changed into a livid colour, and that his lips were faded like thofe of a corpfe. fi Good God, Gafton," cried I, i( what is the matter ? you are extremely ill." (C I know not," faid he, gazing round him with a ftare of horror ; " the lights burn blue ! Your Honor is certainly at the point of death, or fome fpeli has. fallen upon you." <c Tis ftrange," cried I. '■' You appear to me as if you were dying, and your colour is already faded, and poffibly I ap¬ pear the fame to you,—Yet I do not feel myfeif any way affected. It muft be fome charm that acts upon us, and has perplexed our fight. Sit down, my friend, and if I thought we might eat without danger,. here is a little repaft ready fet out for us." et Not for the world—not for the world : I would not touch a moreel," cried he. t( Depend on it,, 'tis fet there for no good. This chamber looks as if dreffed for a amerai, and moft likely thefe provinoli» are intended to deftroy us." This-.
236 This conci ufion appeared but too pro¬ bable; and I glanced my eye over the chamber, which was mournful in extreme. Two chairs flood on each fide of the table, made of black wood, and of a lingular form : all that wé looked upon was black. From the roof hung a large iron chain, reaching within two ïeet of the table ; and when I remembered what Filelfo had told me,—Doubtlefs, thought I, this chamber is the place where the Old Man performed his incantations; and what we now behold are poffibly the remaining effects of his diabolical art. When I glanced my eye upon the terrific countenance of Gafton, who needed nothing to have heightened the fear that Was painted upon his face, a fudden ficknefs feized me, and I could fcarcely ftand. I motioned to Gafton to fit down in one of the chairs, whilft I did thé fame in another. He obeved me in filence, for we were mutually incapable of fpeech. We were fcarcelv lea ted, when I obferved the chain
237 •chain which hung over the table to be powerfully agitated; and I attempted to ftart up, but found that I was fixed in my feat by fome fecret fprings which clafped over me. Gafton uttered a loud feream of horror, when he found himfelf confined in the fame manner; and-clofing his eyes, lay as if already dead. The clanking of chains founded from beneath the floor; and I was fpeechlefs vvith horror, when I perceived him gradu¬ ally fink from my fight, and a trap door in a few moments clofe up the chafm. The four tapers died out one after the other, and I found myfeif left in impene¬ trable darknefs. My agitation was extreme and dreadful, when I found all my efforts in vain to ex¬ tricate myfeif from the fatal chair in which Ί fat..·, . ■ ,,-.,,ν ν -.; . My thoughts were too confounded to admit of arrangement ; and the predomi¬ nant fenfation, I remember, at. that fatal ■ ., - ■ ,. hour
238 J hour was, that I fhould be difpatched by fome fecret ftab in the dark. The rattling of chains by degrees fub* fided into filence. I execrated my own folly in exploring myfteries which did not belong to me ; and when I recollected the devices which owners of ancient cafties had to gratify their malice upon an enemy, and the tales I had heard, independent of fupernatural power, I began to apprehend that I fhould thus remain, till famine termi¬ nated my exiftence. My fpirits frequently flamed into impo¬ tent efforts of rage, and I fhook the infer¬ nal machine which clafped me round with iron bars ; but it was beyond the power of man to break them afunder : nor could I move my arms, either to defend myfeľf in cafe of attack, orto terminate my exift¬ ence, when defpair fhould render lire infuďerablc. This frenzy was fuddenly checked by the found of the door, [ which had been f о firmly bolted, opening and fhutting re¬ peatedly
£39 peatedly with violence; and raifing my eyes, I beheld in the oppofite wall the word Lorenzo m letters of fire. I clofed them at this horrid fight, and expected that death was ftealing into my veins, from the icy chillnefs which fpread through them. In a few moments all was again filent —I opened my eyes, and the inscription was van ifhed. Whoever, thought I, after this fhall dif- believe the powers of enchantment, ought for one minute to experience my fituation. But where will this terminate, and who fhall nee me from this miferable confine¬ ment ? The room was impenetrably dark, nor was the univerfal ftillnefs interrupted by the flighteft found. One o'clock was tolled heavily by the caftle bell; and while the found ftill vibrated, the door entering the room where I was confined, opened fud¬ denly, and a faint light ftreamed into the apartment. I turned
240 ' I turned my eyes towards it in fearful expectation of fome new phenomenon, and beheld the Jfigure of an old man ad- vancing : his white beard reached nearly to his knees, and his countenance was moil íliocking to look upon, and fuch as it is impoffible for mortal to poflefs. He was tall, and moved forward with an air, ferious and majeftic : his robes were black, and trailed upon the ground: on his head he wore a black tiera: round his waift was a flrong chain, part of which reached to the floor. In his left hand he carried a lamp whofe flame burnt blue ; and in his right a black wand, which he waved in myfleri- ous circles in the air as he approached. AH my fenfcs were wound up to the moil acute agony of expectation. I dared not move my eyes from his perfon, and yet I feared to gaze at him, Thijs, thought I, is the Old Man, the magician of the caille of St. Helma. ; Is it his wandering fpirit, or the man himfelf who has dis¬ covered the means of prolonging human ìik ? While
241 While I made thefe reflections, he ad¬ vanced towards the table, where I was feated, with his wand pointing to the chain which hung down from the roof, and then , at that round his body, by which I judged that he had been faftened in that manner, till he had found means to break away. He preffed hk foot firmly upon a plank of the .floor, and inflantly I perceived the chain agitated, as it had been before; the fprings recoiled, and I ftarted up at liberty. I made a fign of thanks for this favour, . and without the fmalleft motion of a fea¬ ture, he pronounced in a hollow voice the word obey. He waved hk wand in the air, and without moving a ftep, pointed me to a plank in the floor, where I perceived an iron ring, which he motioned me to raife. I looked down with horror upon * the dark aby is that prefented itfelf beneath this trap-door, and in which poor Gafton, had been plunged. I recoiled from it with evident figns of fear. t VOL.!. lê This
242 'This ungular being took no notice of my difmay, moving forward to the opening, down which he immediately ftepped, bid¬ ding mefttifow. Implicit obedience bent my limbs to comply. I ftepped down upon a narrow ladder, but my foot flipping, I was at once precipitated to the bottom. My fenfes, î believe, failed me for a moment, and I found níyfelf ftruggling to rifé, in the arms of my terrible condučior. I fhuddered, when I perceived that his arms were around me ; thé lámp flill burned at a little diftance, Where it had fallen, by my tumbling upon my conduőtör who lay beneath me ; but I ihould have permitted him to rife, had I hot been convinced by the warmth of his body that my fenfes had been impofed upon. I ftártèd up, entangling him in his chain and ŕóbH volang ïAitemtly to difpatcb him if heaÄedbüror rfeßÄed. "Raih mortal·" éried he, *ceafe this violence, allow me to rife." : ^Not
24â " Not "till you fwear/* replied I. £t thai ^ou will conduct me and my companion fafe from thk place, and explain to me the ^iluflons to which we have been victims. If you attempt any outrage, I will immedi- j|ely plunge my fword into your heart." "Your companion," replied he, * ť is al¬ ready fafe from the walk: ifyou will follow me through thefe fubterraneous paffages, which he has gone before, I will lead you immediately where he is waiting for you, by my command." " No," replied I, u I have already paid for exploring this building; you muft lead me through the upper rooms. You muft comply with my requeft." He made a motion with hk hand as he arofe. I was again fhocked with hk livid afpect, and almoft doubted my fenfes. I took the lamp, and faultered out my com- maud for him to lead the way ; but if he had refilled, I doubt whether i ihould have had power tp ufe violence. m 5 He
244 He proceeded before me into the bbi к chamber the door of which he locked he- hind us, taking away the key ; he led the way into a fmall .room very poorly fur- nifhed, on the firft floor of the Caille. Here he flopped, and turning round, ha unfaftened a maik which he wore, and which had fo much terrified me ; and I be¬ held the features of the woodman I had feen the preceding evening, through the gloom of twilight. " You are a bold man, Cavalier Lo¬ renzo," Taid he, " 1 bid you welcome to my*CaflIe. Good God, ά your name Lo- renao ?" I was very much furprifed at this quel- tton, -which he made with a urange altera¬ tion of voice and feature. He turned away to conceal his confuflon, lighting a lamp which ftood by, and extinguifhing the one he had held, whofe flame burnt bine, and call fo falfe a tint upon objects ; again he turned round, and overcoming hb confu- fion : (t What I mean," faid he, « is, if you are
245 are a man of honor» 1 may dependen your keeping my fecret/* ♦* ï know not," replied I, " whetheľho* nor does uot urge me to the contrary. It muft he a fecret of more than common import, that ran teach you to practice fo many and fo ftrange deceptions. It mufl he a fecret of lingular myftery that can re¬ tain you in thk folitary fituation» where you live in «Ш1Ы, cogent, .ж« if you would have claim upon my honor, it will he hy rcpofing in my confidence/* 1 mufl acknowledge that 1 was charmed wifh his figure ; though youth was no longer written upon hb brow. He was a mnn about forty-five, of an animated af- pect, mingled with much dignity ; hk eye commanded refpect, and over his features, the paillons which animated hk foul, play¬ ed as images in a mirror. Hk fmile pof- feíľed faci nation, and hk frown infpired fe¬ cret terror. He was in appearance a man fuperior to common men, and I was irre- и s ftftiblv
246 fi fii bl ν ÍnQ)ired with the wifh to gain hi* confidence, and en fu re hfs friendihip. 4 Senor," faid I, '* though I have not much experience in mankind, I have bceli taught that it is not from exteriors we are to judge. My wifh, my defire at this mo¬ ment, would be to promife you unlimited fecrecy. But have not my fenfes been deceived, and my reafon deprived of its. powers? Have I not witneffed events this night, fuperior to common caufes?" " If the explanation of thefe things you have feen," faid he, fitting down, and point¬ ing me to a feat, " will fatisfy you, nothing is more eafy. I am a man, Lorenzo, who have feen many misfortunes; the gay world has loft its charm for me; I have fled from friends, whom felf-mterèft only drew round me ;. from love* the moft baneful of deceits ; from courts, poífeíQng no fin- ceri ty; and from mankind, who prey upon each other." I fighed as he fummed.up this fad cata-, logue, and raifing my eyes, I read in his, the emotions of hjş heart
247 " This Caftk/' faid he, (( concealed in the dark bofom of a foreft, and that foreft buried amidit an amphitheatre of hills, ever capped with clouds, was once the abode of my anceftors, and feemed the only place ca¬ pable of affording to mc the obfcurity I had chofen. Some tales which you heard, were a better defence againft intrufion, than a wall with battlements, and a garrifon with troops. To thefe reports I gaveaddition, with wider circulation; and this foreft, which twenty years fince, at my firft fettling, con¬ tained about a dozen cottages, was quickly deferted of its people. One peafant alone remained, whom I retained in my fervice till his death. It was abfolutely neceffary fome one fhould know my fituation that 1 might provide for a thoufand wants I had imbibed, and having by accident met the woodman, Filelfo, who had fought fhelter in an obfcure and tumbling hovel; I en¬ gaged him by confiderable prefents. though I have little defire to repofe much ia his confidence," w 4 « You
248 " You fay weft/' fáid I, interrupting him, f * that man is not to be trufted ; depe ná on it Senor, you will one day find him a vil¬ lain/' He fmiled at the warmth ofmy expref¬ fion, then again his features took the» ufual ftamp of ferioufnefg, and he went on, " f believe that he is without principle, but he knows, and he trembles at my power ; he knows that I can punifli him dreadfully. Yes, terrible would be hk doom." As he pronounced thefe word& in a raifed voice, I felt a fecrèt horror creep over me, and I feared to inquire into the nature of this punifhment. "He affumed hk ufual tonei " Lo¬ renzo," faid he, u you will perceive how eafy it was for me to deceive you and your companion, when your minds were fo well prepared by precedi ng events. I followed you in the dark, in thk difguife, fo that had you feen me, I fliould have paflèd for a fpectre. I clofed the doors behind you, that
249 that you might be under the neceffity of entering that black and fearful chamber, where many curious and barbarous engines of torture remain, fmce the time of igno¬ rance and barbarity. Your furprize at the fight of your companion's livid complexion was natural; a chymical compofition in the tapers, threw out a falfe light. A much lefs degree of deception has fufficiently de¬ terred feveral wandering r perfons, whom chance or curiofity have led to thk build¬ ing; but my meeting you on the pre¬ ceding evening, and the courage you ex¬ preffed, notwithftanding the myftery of my words, caufed me ţo believe, that it was not' a trifle that would deter your refearches. I aik you to tell me, and to tell me upon honor, if you have no other view than to examine the truth or falfity of report, or to trace over the antiquities of this vaft and ancient pile^f Heñxeá his penetrating eye upon me, while I prepared to reply, m 5 *f f fienor,"
ir 15ënbr/ r faidî; "the Candor with which' you have explained to mèi: what-my reafòib would long have vainly fearched into, claims from nie ah open reply. I wilfown that the flories told me by Fiíélfőp with in- tentiöri tó alarm me, only excited mý cu¬ riofity. The flránge founds I heard of the bugle-horn' át midnights at his" cottage, and having myfeif followed ä light, which; difáppeáŕed when I thought myfeif clofe iipori ity roufed níý refolution to know the truth. ť * It was ■!,"■ replied he, f< ťhat you fol¬ lowed. 'It- к tüy etìftom víherí' Г vifít Fi- Mrd; tò fó^d^lörh,;whíc^ was in dänjgér of difcoyë^jtte^wduld àíífwè^ The rrtáfk í Wear Wheh Г viflťhím^ к this, which. you wilbown k ? füfficiénr nöt/only ; to fright dámé ЗуШ!^ Vagant defčriptioň. of any ^ШеШбтйуЬу ^fcidéñlr/ber#i^á^^.ri' *¿ b?,·.·: "H ' ť I am fatkfiéar replied ŕ-Jk * I Will never more give credence to tales of appa¬ ritions,
ririons> and ftories of fpectres. I have no doubt but they might all be explained upon inquiry, into much more familiar circumftances than thofe you have juft repeated;" « , t 'f I know not that," anfwered he.' "There muft be föme foundation for the univerfal belief of mankind; there muft even be fome reafon for the very character you have feen me affume. Men are rarely fo in ven tive as to build a ftory at once.- -Give them but a .fingle fact, and that they may fwell into a volume/' At thefe words he arofe abruptly, and remarking the hour, inquired whether I would take fuch fhelter as the caftlé af¬ forded för the remainder of the night, or. join my companion in the foreft." To he thus difmifted, was far from my intention. I Wifhed much fór a mòre ;.·■ in¬ timate acquaintance with a man, Whofe mode of life was fo eccentric, and whole manners were fo totally different from the the reft of mankind, «The
■m **■ j* tç The light of the morning," faid I, " is beginning to mingle with the light of your lamp, and-in lefs. than an hour the tops of the hilk will be tinged with the beams of the fun. Gafton will wait for me, and I would willingly remain fome moments longer in your company. You haye given me fufficient reafon tö pro¬ mife you fecrefy, and I give you my word of honour." "' Lorenzo/* laid he, m a firm and Heady voice, " your courage has gained my re¬ fpect, and your words command my efteem; I could eafily confide in your promife, and I doubt not it would bind you. In¬ deed, the ordy ill confequence I have to fear is the intrufion of many;--perfons who now believe me dead. I' came hither to live for myfeif, and no longer to be the İlave of impertinence and folly. My mode of life knot a crime, that I fhould fea ľ the bw ; and my power in the world would protect me from injury. But Ъ wifh not to be under the neceffity of exerting that power,
power, and repulfinğ the intrufion of thofie I am determined not to fee. You may think, perhaps, that my head is fomewhat deranged ; I know not but it is, and this fol i t ude beft befits the temper of my mind. Will you oblige me ? Will you take a fo¬ lemn oath, not even to mention to your attendant, the difcovery you have made." " You conftrain me," replied l y " to any thing you demand ; but if I fwear, I expect to be more than half a confident—I ex,- pect—" " What ! " cried he changing counte¬ nance. " What do you expect ?" , I remarked the fudden alteration of his manner, and though my thoughts ran forward to inquiry after the beautiful girl I had feen the preceding evening, and traced to thefe walls, I refrained, .from a fort of referve on my part, which feemed to whifper the impropriety of the queftion; and replying, I informed him, that I ex¬ pected he wpuld indulge me with a view of
of the interior cf the caftle, and inform me'by what name I fhould addrefs him. "The name by which I am known," replied he, "is Don Raphael. If you follow me, I will lead you to the apart¬ ments I : inhabit, but to conduct you over the building is not in my power. Many of the flairs and paffages were broke into by the fall of great part of the edifice— thefe are now blocked up : fome cham¬ bers like that in which you have this night witneffed a fpecimen of cruel ingenui ty* and fome fuits of,rooms, for particular reafons I have walled up, and indeed were they open to infpection, one" chamber is fo fimilar to another, that curiofity would foon be fatiated. Tollow me,, if you pleafe." We paffed through feveral narrow paf- fages> leeuréd byíkong doors, of which he had the keys; and coming to a winding itone ftair-cafe, we äfčended, t and entered on a fuit of rooms, furnifhed in a ñylé of elegance-
tòô elegance more fuited to the former fpfen— dor of the caftle than its prefent fituation. Don Raphael bade me remark as we paffed, that he Was, in no danger of fudden furprize, it being no eafy matter to force f о many ftrong doors, of black oak, even, by any one who was familial* with the mazy windings of the paffages, into which the grey light of day fhed its rays through the narrow loop-holes ; and the lamp began to diminifh in luftre. The third room we entered, was fitted: up ! for a private chapel. Upon a finali altar, of curious workmanfliiip, flood a filver crucifix, of no little value.;—A cryftal kmp burnt 1 on each fide. A Window of ftainëd glafs, threw a deep and melancholy gloom upon the objeéìs, infpiring ferious refltécrion. kŕ This/' faid Don Raphael; paufing, '*k the place where I pafs part of my time; ïhavehere, áš yöu fée, objecìs. that re- mind me what I am; Gra that organ, í can^ perform anthems, andföothemy mind with the
tÒ6 the hopes of a better and more fublime exiftence. Here, Lorenzo, I claim your promife. Swear to me by your refpect for that fign, that my fecret fhall not pafs - from your lips; fwear that you will not mention to any one living the fecret of my retreat." " By all the hopes I poffefs," replied I, " I fwear, that I will preferve your fecret, unlefs you yourfelf ihall caufe me to divulge it." " That is fufficient," anfwered he, pro¬ ceeding to an oppoßte door, which led us into a library of fome extent. " Yo« fee here," faid he, " that I am not without at¬ tending to the cultivation of my mind; believe me, I have much more entertainr ment in converting with thefe filent friends, than I fhould have with the living authors and actors. I learn wiCdpm from their maxims and actions, but had I known the individuals, I fhould doubtlefs have found the jnoft pious tinged with hypocrify ; and the moft heroic, exactly like the men oí the
257 fhe prefent generation. Here, I may fay, I feel myfejf rife above my fpecies ; for it is my opinion, that no man is fuperior to bis fellows but in two points of view. The political economy of nations* requires that there fhould be fubordination of ranks, but though neceffary, it к abfolutely fictitious : it к like the money of a country, of not the fmalleft intrinflc value, but of the greateft for political reafons. The only dignity ofman, is the fuperiority of hk knowledge; his*mind becomes elevated; he perceives things with truth, and then only has he a claim to be called a rational being;" te I muft admire," replied I, " thefe fen¬ timents you exprefs ; they give me con¬ fidence in myfeif, and ftimulate me to learning. I confefs that I envy the choice you have made, but every man has not that power of feleétion. You have here all the charms of folitude, without the feverity of monaftic feclufion, or a binding vow
,258 vow you would often, have defired to dif- folve." " Exactly fo," replied he ; " I have en¬ deavouredtOiCombine all that к pleating of abfolute folitude, I am. not incommo- ded here with the petty politics of a con¬ vent: my -'hours are not facrificed to an uninftructive,-formula. I have a large garden, in which I can ramble àt leifure ; the cultivation of which к a labour necef¬ fary to health ; and if its boundaries are too fmall, I can wander abroad in the foreft, fecure within the magic circle Г have drawn round me." He fmiled as he fpoke, and moving forward, we entered anotherroom, adapted to more domeftic purpofes, and fitted up hi a ftyle of fimplicity and neatnefs* " This," faid he, "is my fitting room. I command an extenfive horizon from thefe windows : almoft the only ones that are not enfhrouded by the lofty trees, or circumfcribed by the towering hills. You may fee over a long chain of vallies, formed v
959 formed^ by the prominent angles of moun- tains-~and the mind is induced to wander far beyond the eye. You muft require refreihment, Lorenzo ; pray be feated on that fppha ; you will not find it a decep¬ tion." I fat down at his defire; his Words had the power of a charm over me, and every object Γ beheld, feemed almoft like illu- fion, when I remembered the external defoiation of the building ; and had not the firft circumftances of our mvfterious m entrance been fo fully explained; Γ fhoulď have been inclined to fufpect Don Raphael of powers rather fuperior to common life. He fat down near me, after placing upon a fmall table, fome wine, and cakes, when obferving that the day had broken, and the clear light fliot frøm the hills, he extin- guifhed the lamp, and preffed mè to join him in a repaft, of-which I had. fome, need to reflore my fpirits. (i I would offer you coffee," faid he,with a fmile, t{ if 1 had power to call up fome- invifible
260 invifible dwarf to make it, but that not being the cafe, I hope you will excufe me*" " I fhould like it as well," replied Î, " from the hands of a fair nymph ; cannot you, Don Raphael, call upon fuch an one to attend us ŕ" ; Whether it was the expreffion of my looks, or the purport of the words, I had uttered taking him by furprize, I know not, but the blood rufhed into his face ; his eyes fparkled with inexpreifible fierce- nefs, and ftarting up, he looked round him, as for fome weapon of vengeance. I repented the expreffion ; but it was •too late. " Rafh man," cried he, looking earneftly at me> "who are you ? are you a traitor in difguife?—But remember your oath; for by the living Creator of Exiftence, if you betray me, even in the confidence I have repofed, or by any accidental dif- covery you have made, 1 will inflict upon' yqu an unutterable vengeance—a ven¬ geance
tei geance at which even fiends fliall fhudder, I command you to tell me what you have learnť! what ft is you mean !" However I was ftruck with aftonifliment at hk words and manners, his laft expref¬ fions roufed my indignation. " Don Raphael," replied I, cooly, " I am little ac¬ quainted with you, and it feems you are equally ignorant of me, or you would know that I defpife threats, and am not to be commanded by an equal. You have given way to an abfurd burft of paffion.— You have inadvertantly informed me of what I only fufpečted; and" continued I, in a tone of irony, "I do not wonder you have fo elegant a tafte in retirement, when it extends even to the choice of a com¬ panion." A palenefs almoft equal to that of death, overfpread his countenance ; his limbs trembled ; his lips quivered ; and unable to exprefs the excefs of paffion and agi¬ tation, he fat down, fixing his eyes upon me with a look which almoft amounted to frenzy. Нй
tììs emotion excited my pity and regret. í knew not why, but I was angry with my^ f elf, for Thus playing/upon; his feelings ; though I was aftonifhed, and more than ever interefted in a man, who was fo to¬ tally different from all with whom I had ever yet converfed, and excited at once, both efteem and fear. " Lorenzo," faid he, after a long and folemn paufe, " Γ know not by what means you have come at my moft facred fecret— -& fecret which not even Filelfo could betray, for he has never, to my knowledge, feen or heard of my daughter Cornelia. But remember now, what I am going to fay ; and remember, as you would avoid the threats I have power to fulfil·*-- I have fworn on the facred altar, and by Omnipotence itfelf, that while I live, Cor¬ nelia fhall not leave me; No ; by the eternity of heaven, though he were a prince of the blood*—though he were the mo* narch of Spain himfelf, who fhould fue at my feet for her, I would refufe, and fpurn í at
2Ô3 - at his öfter. Ko ; fooner than part with Cornelia, I would plunge my poignard in her bofom—-I would tear her piecemeal, and fcätter her limbs in fhe air." " Is this paffion, or is it madnefs, Don Raphael!" cried I, not a little ftartled at his vehemence. " You muft allow that fuch an oath and fuch refoiutions are ex¬ tremely unnatural." " I am not to be bound by the laws of nature, nor bv the laws of man," cried he. " If I allowed myfeif amenable to human inftitutions, do you think I WOuld feclude myfeif thus totally from fociety ?" " But, Senor," replied I, " you do not, I hope, place yourfelf beyond the reach of the law? Your being thus fußered to live here in tranquillity, arifes from the laws having full forcé; arid thofe laws which watch round your repofe, and ren¬ der your perfon facred, you cannot abro¬ gate or interrupt, however fuperior ; your rank, or prejudiced your opinion." " You
26á \ s « You are a tolerable civilian, ** replied he with more temperance. " I acknow¬ ledge what you fay, in its utmoft latitude ; nor do I mean, to imply that I do not bow with reverence to the government of the land : but I would enforce my intention by faying, that when a man has overleaped hk love of life in purfuit of a favourite object, the law becomes a very trifling bar¬ rier in his way. Sooner than part with Cornelia, my life and her's fhall both be¬ come a facrifice ; then where is the law ?— Now do you comprehend ? " " Clearly," cried I, " It is impoflible to miftake, nor can I wonder that you have fo great a defire to retain as your companion, a young lady of fo much elegance; fhe muft render your hours lefs tedious, and folitude lefs irkfome. She muft ~ -----" " Let us wave the difcourfe, Cavalier," interrupted he, fomewhat impatiently ; "it к a fubject I do not love.to difcufs; only be fo obliging as tell me briefly how you difcovered my daughter." 1 in·
265 I informed him of the chance which led me to her the preceding evening. lie was difturbed at my narration ; and the praifes Ibeftowed upon her beauty called up va¬ rious emotions in his countenance. " It is enough ;'* faid he. " How long will you remain at the Fort of Dajos, and to what part of Spain do you expect to march ? " I replied, « that it was extremely uncer¬ tain ; but that while I remained at the Fort, I ilio uld be pleafed if he would honor me with a viiit, and happy, in another oppor¬ tunity to wait upon him at this Caille/' He feemed embarraffed and undecided in his anfwer, preffing me to partake of the wine and cakes, and it was eafy for me -to perceive that he was difturbed at my prefence, which I imputed to jealoufy of his daughter. I wifhed to relieve him by my abfence, but notwithftanding his aid terity and forbidding coolnefs, I fourni , charm in his converfation and fomciinu;;
266 to me altogether new in his expreffions, which riveted me to his company. I arofe feveral times to make obferva¬ tions on the beauty of the opening morn¬ ing, the grandeur of the expanding fun over the blue mifts of the mountains, ¿and the dark waving woods. " Methinks, Don Raphael," faid I, after a few minutes mutual filence, " that vou are a happy man in your choice of life. You feem to me to want but one thing to render your fituation perfect." "And what is that?" faid he, with a fcrutinizing look. "It is a friend," replied I. "How¬ ever valuable may be the company and K. converfation of your daughter Cornelia, flill there muft be a great diftance be¬ tween a father and his daughter. There muft be a thoufand fubjecìs upon which you cannot converfe. You muft forbear all abftrufe and fpeculative reafoning." " And much better it is to forbear than indulge," anfwered he. if Too much fpe- culation
2ϋΐ culation only bewilders the mind : amidit. infinity of hypothefes, truth becomes un- diftinguifliable." * ** I am of a different opinion," rejoined I, for the fake of converfation* and to lengthen my ftay. " Truth can only be found by being fought, I acknowledge that in the company of a virtuous and ac- compliftied female, converfation may be pleafant, and the hours agreeably amufed; but to be on a perfect footing of equality, that female ought to be a wife." " You know not, perhaps," replied he in a tone of tendernefs, 4ť what it is to be a parent!—what it is to rear up a plant, ingrafting upon the flexile foul your opi¬ nions and ideas—to watch the dawn in s beauty of opening youth, and the "expand- in g flowers of underftanding and grace : nor can you conceive the mighty value o f fuch a plant—a value equal to my exiftence: nor fliall any man enjoy the fruits of my cultivation, which he cannot know how to value, and might quickly defpife. Chance n ? has
268 has informed vou that I poflefs this trea·* ш a fure, and I have informed vou that no ' φ power but death fliall fnatch her from mc. If, therefore, you will forgive my plain- nefs, and confer on me a favour, which I will find means to acknowledge in a man¬ ner you think not of; you will abide by the oath of fecrecy you have taken, and fuffer me to remain in that folitude, which for important reafons 1 have chofen." " You requeft of me/' replied I. "what is indeed more difficult for mc to comply with, for while you defire ray abfence» your words fafcinate my fteps, and if 1 am denied your friendfliip» I feel that I fhall fuffer infinite regret; for, permit meto fay* that befides yourfelf, I never met with more than one perfon, who appeared to me worthy the confidence of. fincere friendfliip." My words created in him much confu¬ fion ; the blood flowed to his cheeks, and again receded ; he opened his mouth to lpeak, but his words died away unuttered, and
269 and he murmured to himfelf, ť# No, it к impoflible." We fat fome time mutually emhamtífcd. when I was thrown into greater confufton hy hearing a light ftep, moving toward* the door, and a fweet voice fing mg, as the perfon advanced, of which I only caught thefe lines : Youth t$ a Urum tìm fmoutMv» glides, Bright as the liquid fouotaim How, Through ρ t calm t meads, ils c hry fiai îia^s, Sparkle sml thine, tmi gaily go. Hon Itaphael ftarted up in the utmoft confufion, and glancing a look of inexpli¬ cable meaning at me, he darted to the door, but was not fwift enough to prevent Cor¬ nelia opening İt firft, and throwing herfelf i л to h к arms. " My dear father," faid fhe, " you arc early ; I did not expect you had fo foon arifen. I was going to play the morning hymn in the chapel: will you accompany me?" « I am engaged, Cornelia," replied he, kifliiig her; " if you will go into the gar- κ s den
1>?0 den, and gather fome flowers for the win¬ dow, I will attend you prefently." " I will go directly," anfwered flie, taking his hand, and fmiling with moft bewitching grace. " But I have had a very pleafant dream to-night, and if you will liften a moment, I will tell it you." Don Raphael turned his head towards me, and I could eafily conceive his vexa¬ tion ; but I was rivetted to the feat where I fat, and had no power to fpeak or retreat, fo much was I engaged with the beauty and expreffions of this charming creature. Her eyes followed the motion of Don Ra¬ phael ; flie ftarted, and blufhed deeply when flie beheld me, and the electricity of her glance thrilled over my nerves, pro¬ ducing a flmilar fenfation. " Do I ftill dream," faid flie, in a mur¬ mured whifper. " This is the very refem- blance of the figure I faw in my fleep. Is it real, father?" Don Raphael bit his lip ; he fmiled, he frowned, he knew not what to reply. " This, Cornelia," faid he, " is— a man /"
2/1 Cornelia averted her eyes, and was going to fly, but fuddenly flopping, " I fhould have told you laft night, father, had you returned fooner," faid fhe, " that I faw fuch an one as this in the foreft : I ran from it, but it fmiled fo, that I had almoft a mind to have flayed and fpoken to it. 'Tis not fo much different from you and me, father, as I had imagined. I ftiould like to know if it can fpeak as we do. I thought that it did, yefterday." "Nonfenfe; no, 'tis dumb----'tis de- ftruction. Go, get to your own room, Cornelia," cried Don Raphael in the ut¬ moft agitation. "But ifit will not hurt you," faid fhe, lingeringly, (t it may not be fo venomous." "Diffraction !" cried he. "Torture!— О infufferable !—Begone, Cornelia—I command you to begone." Cornelia, affrighted, inflantly obeyed ; and Don Raphael paced the room, his hands clenched to his forehead. I was too much engaged with my own thoughts, and n 4 the
272 the Angular feene I had witneffed, to in- terrüpî him ; nor indeed was I capable of putting any queftion at that moment. Don Jlaphael continued to traverfe the room, muttering fentenccs to himfelf. " Folly !—Fool that I am !—But I ought to have expecied—" With many other un¬ connected phrafes he continued to amufe himfelf, till a fmall clock in the room ftruck feven. It was then he feemed to recover hk fcattered thoughts, and turning fuddenly round to me, ( for I had not removed from the fopha, where I fat revolving over the means of being better acquainted with the charming Cornelia,) "Cavalier Lorenzo," faid he, " you offered me yoiir friend¬ fliip; but if you would not be my moil fatal enemy, you will never again vifit the caftle of St. Helma. You have made yourfelf mafter of a fecret which I would have guarded with my life. You have feen my daughter Cornelia : fhe is as innocent as a child of nature, and I repent
273 repent me that I have kept her fo pro¬ foundly ignorant. Till this morning flie- hás been taught to fear the name ofman. I have painted him to her in all the colour¬ ings of deformity.—I have taught her to dread him as the mortal enemy of inno¬ cence and virtue : but I fear I have only performed half my talk, and undone by too much referve, what all my caution fought to build up. Will you lay me under an eternal obligation ? Will you allow me to fee you depart in peace ? " His words made a deep impreffion .upon me.—I arofe ; " Don Raphael," replied I, " your commands muft be obeyed. Is it poffible that lovely creature never faw any man before, except yourfelf ?" "Never;" replied he, "never within her recollection. She is now only fixteen. Filelfo never comes to the čaftle, hor dare he intrude within a certain diftance :—the confequence to him would be death." N5 " Death!"
2U <( Death !" repeated I, endeavouring ťo penetrate the thoughts of this, uncommon mortal. " Yes," laid he fternly, " death." " Your reafons," faid I, " ought to be powerful, for your orders are rigorous; but I go, Don Itaphael, and you may de¬ pend on my filence." " And your oath," returned he, expref- fively. " Had you experienced the per¬ fidy of friendfliip and of love, as 1 have, you would not condemn my actions. But heaven be praifed, I am now fo much mafter of my own pride, that the opinions of others have long been indifferent to me. Ybur companion has moft probably departed for Dajos. If you are unacquainted with the way, I will give you directions to the cottage of Filelfo, who fliall attend you." I returned him thanks for his politenefs, but knowing that Gafton would not venture to return, within any reafonable time, without me, I declined the offer ; and after a few ceremonies of par ting, Don Raphael con-
275 conducted me to the gate, where he di¬ rected me to the place he had left the old foldier. " Adieu, Lorenzo," faid he; remember your honour and your oath," I waved my hand, and bowing, entered the labyrinthian path, in fearch of my faithful companion.
CHAP.
276
CHAP. VI.
Ал about an hundred paces diftant, I found Gafton fitting under a tree, with his back againft the trunk, and his fword with the point thruft into the ground, befide him. His eyes were clofed, and he feemed to enjoy a profound fleep, but the found of my fteps ftartled him, and he leaped up in a fright ; but when he faw who İt was, he fat down again, and began to groan, as if he fuffered under mortal pain. " Àh, your Honor, can I believe my eyes ?—Can I believe that I fee yourfelf come back again, to look for the poor old Gafton ?" " Chear up, my boy," cried I, " and tell me how you got out of the dungeon you fell into." i' Dun·
277 fť Dungeon," repeated he, groaning ; f< No, no, your Honor, it was the bottom- lefs pit ; I thought I never fhould have ceafed going down. I am fure it is deeper than any gold or filver mine in Mexico ; and then it went with fuch rapidity, that it firft took away my breath, and then my fenfes." "That was bad indeed :—Well, but you got fafe out at laft." " Ah, your Honor ; no, I believe I am going to die here, on this very fpot ; and if you will juft have the.goodnefs to let me be buried under this great tree, I will thank your Honor as long as I live." " Pfhaw, nonfenfe !" cried I, ** have you got nothing to eat ?" (e О no, nothing at all, your Honor, that is the worft of it. If we had any thing to eat, we might talk over thefe things af our eafe ; but I fee nothing but a few wild berries, and I fhall die here." « You will firft, I hope," faid I, fitting down befide him, " tell me how you ef¬ caped
278 caped—ifyou had ftayed till day-light, you might have let yourfelf out." t( If I had ftayed an hour longer, I be¬ lieve I fliould never have come out at all. I was more dead that alive, when I re¬ covered mvfelf, at the bottom of that bottomlefs pit ; for there was the great Bel¬ zebub, in the drefs of a conjurer, ftanding over me with a torch of burning fulphur. He roared out to me in a voice as big as thunder, to get up and follow him : 1 did fo, your Honor, for I was very glad to find that I could move at all. But there he led me over heaps of carcafes that were quite putrid, and no doubt thought I, they have been unfortunate travellers like us. Well, your Honor, I believe 1 was knee deep in filth, as I followed, or rather waded through corruption ; but what hurt ine moft, was to hear the piteous groans of thofe dead bodies, as I trod upon them.—Oh, it made my heart die within me. Wc had not walked above four or five leagues of difmal way, before wc came into a large hall that was big enough to
279 to hold St. Peter's at Rome. The walls were black like thofe of the room we were fo finely caught in, and at the diftance of every yard, was a niche, fuch as I have fceu ftatucs ftanding in, but inftead of ftatues, every one had a red hot fkeleton, to the amount of about three hundred, and moft horrible it was to behold them : but I was near dying in reality, when I faw one place empty, and my own name written over it in blood." tf That was moft terrible, indeed," cried I, laughing. (< How was it poffible you could furvive fo tremendous an adventure?' 1 i( Your Honor, then, does not believe what I am relating ? " " Not quite all, indeed, Gafton," replied I. "1 muft have more faith than an old devotee, if I did. But pray how got you out ofthat hazardous fituation?" " 1 was call," faid he, with a very ferious countenance, "into a deep trance, and when I recovered, I found myfeif lying on
280 on my face, beneath this very tree, and here I fhall die." There was fomething fo doleful in hk tone, that however I might be inclined to laugh at his credulity, I could not but commiferate his diftrefs, for certainly his fears had filled his imagination with thefe frightful chimeras, and almoft unhinged his underftanding. I would have endea¬ voured to undeceive him, but my oath to Don Raphael intervened, and I contented myfeif with foothing hk mind, and combat¬ ing his terrors. I had brought with me the wallet he had left behind him, with the fragments of our llores, and having per- fuaded him to eat, his fpirits gradually returned, and his ailments vanifhed. After refting fome time, Gafton fo far recovered as to confent to fet out on our return, and I cautioned him to avoid making himfelf the jeft of his comrades at the fort, who, whatever truth there might be in his tale, would certainly condemn him as crazy, We
£81 We arofe anď traced our way through this filent foreft, guiding our fteps by the peaks of the mountains, for there w T as no chance of meeting any human being who might direéì us. Gafton was filent, for he was in faci much indifpofed by hk fright, and I had fufficient employment for my reflections in the eccentrical charaeler of Don Raphael, and the fweet fimplicity of his daughter Cornelia. We began to afcend the mountains, but the fublime profpecìs that flretchcd around and beneath us, did not once invite us to paufe that we might regard them, fo great is the difference when the mind and the body are weary. We made a very fcanty repaft about noon, on the remains of our proviflons, and by night fall, reached the fort of Dajos, fatigued and difpirited. A courier had arrived about an hour before with dif- patches, which were thought to be impor¬ tant, and a council was at that moment debating on the propriety of opening them, and of fending fome røeflenger after те л
OQOr me, though they kne\v not exactly the route 1 had taken. Weary as 1 was, I immediately retired to read over the difpatches, which came fronr öviedo, and bade me prepare to repel any attack on the part of Portugal, as they had certain intelligence that a fudden irruption was on the moment of breaking out, and that I muft hold myfeif in readinefs to depart at a minute's notice, with half the garrifon, to any part my fervices might be required. There feemed to me fomething more than I could penetrate in thefe advices, which, in faci, told me no more than we already knew; and I even fufpečted that hoflilities were abfolutely begun. ï gave orders for doubling the guard, and that the flricteil difcipline and vigilance muft be obferved. Having taken thefe precautions, I fat down in my own apartment to reft myfcIÇ with more liberty, while my fupper was preparing ; and the image of Cornelia prefented itfelf to my mind with all the fmiling
283 fmiling foftnefs that had fo deeply im- preffed itfelf upon mc. I had not entirely made an end of my fupper before another meffenger arrived at the fort. He fpoke with a wonderful de¬ gree of myftery, and every thing was in confuflon and alarm. "All Spain," faid he to the men, " is in arms. The Court is going to leave Madrid. Nobody knows what has happened : but whatever it be, every thing к going to be turned upfide down." My apartment was befet with officers, who crowded round me, eagerly demand¬ ing the news, and they were not a little chagrined, when they found me equally ignorant of the foundation of this fel¬ low's reports. I told them that my inftruciions were to leave the fort in the hands of Don Miguel de Varro, and twenty men, and to march within three hours for Leon, where further advice would be re¬ ceived, as to the nature of the fervice we were to be employed on.
284 -φ The bufile and con fu fion this informa¬ tion created, required my prefence and exertions ; and it was with difficulty I could f natch half an hour's fleep upon the floor. It was in vain to conjecture to what part of Spain we were deftined, or whether we ihould not even be ordered on foreign fervice ; for it was eafy to fuppofe that fome more d i flan t object than Por¬ tugal was in view, or fo important a fitu¬ ation would not have been left expofed m without fufficient men to defend it It was now, for the firft time, I regretted thofe engagements which would tear me away from an obje6t that fo lately was become dear to me, and the more I refolved to forget, feemed the deeper engraved on my memory. It was, however, extremely unbecoming the character of a foldier, to fuffer the foftnefs of love to fubdue my refolution in moments like thefe; and roufing myfeif, as well from the fupinenefs of flumber as love, I packed up my own baggage, and made every arrangement for our
285 •our march, which I ordered to commence at two o'clock in the morning : fo preca¬ rious is the life of a foldier,. that he cannot fay in the morning where he fhall fleep at night. At the time appointed we began to tra- verfe thofe fteeps and defiles, whofe varied profpečt had fo delighted me on my jour¬ ney to Dajos. I now paffed along them an unconcerned traveller, having in my own mind fufficient employment for reflection. Our march was extremely fatiguing, the fun being high and fultry, and the duft of the road blowing over us in drifts. We reached Leon late in the afternoon, where arrange¬ ments had been made for our recep¬ tion, and large bodies of troops were collected, though ignorant of their def- tination. I waited upon the Duke of Cadile for further inftroctions ; he informed me that the whole province of Catalonia had broken into fudden and violent rebellion. Orders had been tranfmitted from the Court of Madrid,
286 Madrid, to collect and turn upon them the whole power of Spain, that their intentions might be crufhed before the contagion fhould be caught by other provinces ; or the infldious and ufual policy of France lead her to fend fupplies to difaflečtion, or reinforcements to difappointed ambition : it being well known that the popular fury had been blown into flame, bv men whofe views had been difappointed in the Cabi¬ net, and who, to revenge themfelves for fuppofed neglect, played upon the paffions of the people, who certainly fullered under the preffure of many evils. Such indeed is, and always has been the cafe, under the moft wife and prudent governments ; for if it be difficult for the mafter of a family to have his orders re¬ flected, and his commands obeyed, how much more difficult is it for the govern¬ ment of any country to find upright fer¬ vants, who will not abufe their truft, and make a rod of their power. Can
287 'Can then a pretext ever be wanting for the ambitious, the turbulent, the licentious, and the disappointed, to play upon the people, and make them the wretched vic¬ tims of their intrigues and defigns ? The collection of troops required time, and I rejoiced to learn that fome days would be abfolutely neceifary for the march of thofe at the diftant frontier towns, which had been ftationcd to overlook Portugal. I was now again in the city, where I had fo nearly fallen a victim to the deceit of Donna Ippolita, and when I remembered all the allurements flie had difplayed, and the blandifhments fhe had pračtifed, even the innocence of Cornelia could not efcape my fufpicion, though it was impoffible for more than a tranfient thought to glance upon fuch an idea. " If," thought I, " there ever exiited a female, whofe heart was without guile, it is this beautiful creature. Brought up at a diftance from intercourfe with the reft of her f ex, whofe example might have conta¬ minated
288 minated the native luftre of her foul, and taught her the arts of vanity and pride, it is impoffible but all die graces of feminine perfection muft endow her mind ; and her perfon, my eyes can witnefs, is without equal." It is aftonifliing how the mind of a lover amufes itfelf with reveries, perpetually painting images of impoffible perfection and fchemes of impoffible attainment. In thefe reveries I found fufficient amufement for every waking hour, and propofed to myfeif variety of plans, once more to gain a fight of Cornelia, whom I confidered held in a fpecious confinement by Don Raphael, who facrificed her happi- nefs to his own convenience. How flatter¬ ing to my love of romance, were lhe fchemes I propofed to myfeif of refcuing her from his power; but then I remembered with grief that I could not afford her fhelter, being myfeif without a home, or any permanent eftabliíhment. Ah,
289 Ah, thought I, would it were poffi¬ ble f β far to gain upon this proud and myf¬ terious mortal, as to win his efteem. I have no tye that fliould prevent my re- nouncing the world, and becoming a part¬ ner in his folitude ; he may then accom¬ modate his unnatural oath. We will live and die together. My mind entered into every previous arrangement, and furmounted every bar¬ rier, till I almoft believed mvfelf an mhabi- tant of the Caftle of St. Helma ; but from this reverie the roll of the drum fuddenly aroufed me, and other duties than thofe of love and romantici ty called me to action. There is no remark тэге juft, than that indolence and folitude are the great fof- terers of love, by permitting the mind to follow, and to indulge without interrup¬ tion, every fcheme of felicity it can fuggeft. But among the active purfuits of life, the charm vaniflies, and we behold things in their proper fhades and colours. vol. i. о So
290 So it was, that my fcheme appeared ri¬ diculous, when I was attentive to the du¬ ties of my ftation ; but no fooner was I alone, than all the fafcinating charms of love and folitude rufhed upon me fo pow¬ erfully, that I was more than once on the point of ftarting up and flying to the valley. For two days I balanced between duty and inclination, but the more I hefitated, the lefs was I capable of determination : while the hours ftill continued their pro- grefs, and I heard with regret that the third day was fixed for our departure, and it was but too probable that I might never vifit Leon again. " This reflection at once prompted me to ačiion. It was impoffible I could think of leaving Cornelia without fo much as an adieu, or the flighteft hint of the affection fhe had infpired, for I believed that it was impoffible but one day or other fhe would give her heart and her perfon to fome one, in defiance of the oath of her father, and I fliould
2.91 fhould then have my own folly to condemn, for having fuhmitted in filence. I haftened to the Duke of Caftile, for Count Pandolfo was not yet arrived, though hourly expected, and hk conjunction would determine the march of the troops. It was with extreme difficulty that I obtained permiffion of abfence till the following morning, and that as a favour I was to pre- fervc fecret, or half the officers in the city would have petitioned a fimilar indulgence. It was noon when I departed from Leon; the diftance exceeded fix leagues of very rough road ; but what will not man under¬ take when hk pallions lead the way ? Having provided my fet' with a mule, I haftened from the city, taking the obfcure road which Filelfo had firft pointed out to me, and it was not till I began to enter amongft the mountains, that I felt the abfurdity of my project. How unlikely was it that I fliould find admiffion to the caftle, and how much more unlikely that I fliould find an opportunity о £ of
292 of fpeaking to Cornelia, who would doubt Iefs be more feverely guarded than before, and poffibly not permitted beyond the walls of the calile. To look once more upon thofe walls, feemed to me no finali gratification, and though I fmiled at my folly, I had no, energy to repel its imp ul fes. I even fan¬ cied that I breathed with more fatisfačlion as Γ came within the circle where the lovely Cornelia moved. Certainly, thought I, it cannot be love that thus attracts me ; for what have I feen of Donna Cornelia, but a momentary glance, except, indeed, on the evening that I firft beheld her, when her flight discovered her perfon in a thoufand graceful attitudes : but how abfurd to fall in love from fuch a caufe ; yet I have been told the god of Love fhould be encompafíed by a thoufand abfurditics. How diffimilar are the fenti- ments I feel for this lady, and thole I ex¬ perienced for Donna Ippolita ; tis certain that if I now love, I never, loved before. With
293 With reflections like thefe, I beguiled the lensrth of the wav, and bein«: mounted on a lure-footed mule, I entered the foreft fome time before funfet. The narrownefs and intricacy of the path now impeded my way, and I purpofed in my own mind to fallen the mule in fome copfe, and proceed on foot, but a fudden turn of the path led me before I was aware, to the brink of the ftream, and the hanging rocks around recalled to my recollection, that I was within a few paces of the fpot where I had firft beheld Cor¬ nelia. This little accident was a charm to my mind. I difmounted and moved flowly forward, enraptured with the deep filence which prevailed, and the enchanting foli- tude of the fpot, interrupted only by the gurgling of the little ftream, as it flowed through the rounded channels of the rock into a limpid pool, where it formed a tranfparent bath, overfheltered by clifls, о 3 covered
294 covered with wild flowers, and concealed by an interwoven thicket. at I faftened the mule to the trunk of a palm tree, and fat down on the bank where Cornelia had fat ; the birds fang in the grove, and the declining fun tinged all na¬ ture with a deep and beautiful glow. I was perfectly enraptured, and my eye wan¬ dered over this ]ittle place with i n fa t i able delight. The fhort grafs in feveral places was bent down with the impreffion of foot* fteps, and I pleafed myfeif with believing they were traces of Cornelia. Several little pieces of filk were fcattered upon the ground, and while I arofe to gather them, with more pleafure than if they had been the relics of a faint, I made no doubt but this felečt fpot was a favourite place with Cornelia; and that flie fometimes came hither to work, thefe little fragments fuf* ftciently teftified. How long time had elapied fince fhe had been i» this place,! hád no means to de¬ termine,
295 termine, and I regretted that my appear¬ ance in the foreft might have deprived her of thk liberty ; and fo far from remember¬ ing me with pleafure, fhe would only think of me as the caufe of her ftricter confinement. While thefe reflections engaged me, I ftooped to pick up fom e thi n g that glittered amongft the grafs, and to my furprize found it to be a portrait, not of Cornelia, but of a man, the expreffion of whofe features ar¬ refted my attention. He feemed to be about the age of twenty, and the fire of fuperiority animated his features. An engaging fweetnefs of ex¬ preffion played over hk face, while hk elevated forehead and commanding eye befpoke nohlenefs of birth, and nobility of foul. It was impoffible that having once feen Don Raphael, I fhould be a moment in fixing upon the original of this portrait, though time, with the pencil of paffion, had deeply traced hk fingers over the brow of youth. о 4 The
296 The habit was militair, and I felt no little fatisfaction from the reflection that Don Raphael had once borne arms like myfeif, and therefore muft pay the tribute of refpect to the name of foldier. I rejoiced in this fortunate difcovery, though I knew at the fame time what uneafinefs fuch a lofs would create to Cornelia. I reflected, that if no better fcheme arofe, I had an excellent excufe for admiffion to the Caftle, under pretence of reflori n g the piaure, and I determined immediately to haften to the Caftle gate ; but while I was every moment on the point of going, î ftill lingered without any motive for flay¬ ing, but to imagine in idea, the pleafure of again feeing fo innocenta girl; andi fat down to picture to myfeif the furprize I fhould occafion her. You will fay that my imagination had run away with my reafon ; than which, there is nothing more true, for reafon has nothing in common with love. I indulged
£9Г I indulged in thefe thoughts, which the enchanting mildnefs of the evening, and the filence of the place, encouraged ; and leaning my head back againft a tree, I was unconfcioufly finking into flumber with the picture in my hand, when I fuddenly found my fingers preffed by thofe of ano¬ ther, who endeavoured to take the picture from me, and raifing my eyes, I beheld with a ftart of aitonifhment and pleafure, the lovely Cornelia bending over me, en¬ deavouring to recover the portrait, with trembling impatience* She ftepped fuddenly back on my waking. No fign of confcious impropriety was upon her features, but with the mott enchanting voice, ihe defired "I would give to her the piéìure fhe had loft." " Sweet maid," faid I, riling up, and taking her hand with one of mine, holding at the fame time, the picture at fome diftance before her with the other ; " it was my intention to reflore it to you, but I cannot part from it without fome reward." о 5 « 1 do
Я93 u I do not underftand you/' replied the, "you know the picture is mine, what re¬ ward then can you afk for returning what you cannot keep ? I beg you to return it to me directly, for if my father finds that I have fpoken to you, he will be very an¬ gry, and I expect him every moment back to the Caftle." " Then he has forbid me fpeaking to you," faid I, " and why has he done fo ?" "Becaufehe fays you area man," anfwer¬ ed fhe, with a tender bluffi, " and he told me all men are felfifh, and wifh nothing more than to deftroy us." " But, my angel," replied I, in a voice of as much foftnefs as I could affume, " is not Don Raphael alfo a man like myfeif ? Do you think he would injure you ?" " I know not," anfwered fhe, fomewhat confufed, "he looks upon me fometimes fo· terrible, that I almoft fear he is going to eat me up, efpecially fince I have aiked him fo many queflions about you : Whe¬ ther you lived in the woods, or fed fheep on
299 on the mountains, and if there were many fuch as you, in what he calls the world ? " I was perfectly aftonifhed at fo much fimplicity, accompanied with pure and perfect innocence. " Cornelia," replied I, "Don Raphael has done well to inform you that man is a being to be feared ; he is fierce in his paffions, and deceitful in the means of gratifying them." "And are you one of thefe," cried fhe, endeavouring to free her hand, " give me the pictured—" " Moft certainly," replied I, " for I have no right to detain it ; but you muft remain with me a few moments, that I may tell you fifty things of that world you have never yet feen, and which Don Raphael conceals from you with the jealoufy of a mifer. He has not perhaps told you, that thoufands of human beings like you and I, and himfelf, refide in immenfe buildings called cities; that we have variety of am u fe¬ rn ents, of entertainments, of employments and purfuits ; he has painted to you per о 6 haps
300 haps only the troubles, vexations, and са-» lam iti es attached to the world, while he concealed from vou all its charms." "He has told me very little," replied fhe, " but I have a great defire to know more, and if I did not expect my father would quickly Teturn, I fhould liften with pleafure to what you could tell me ; hut indeed, Lorenzo, I muft go." ** Will vou remember me," faid L with a deep figh, " when I am far away, or has vour father all your affection ? " " Do you think," faid fhe, turning her eyes upon me, with a look which pene¬ trated me to the foul ; " Do you think then I fhall forget you ? But why are you going away ? Are thefe woods fo very un¬ pleafant, or is it, that in them you have no place to fleep ?" *· Ah, Cornelia," replied I, fighing, u though I could dwell beneath the branches of thefe trees, and feed with plea¬ fure on the fruits that grow wild on the boughs; yet lam under an imperious, ne¬ ceffity
SOI ceffity to go away, far away.—I know not myfeif how far, and perhaps I fhall never fee you more." I know not whether it were the tones of my voice, or.the fympathy we had inftinc- tively imbibed that touched her, and melt¬ ed her into tears—tears,which as they flowed, delighted me with the certainty, that if I loved, Γ did not love alone. I gave loofe to all the raptures of a lover's expref¬ fion ; I clafped the blufhing maid to m ν bofom, and offered up to heaven and to her the moft folemn vows, that fhe alone ftiould be the miftrefs of my affections; that for her alone would I wifh to live, and that fhe fhould be the fecret centre, round which all my actions fhould move." " But my father—;" murmured Cornelia, and this fhort fentence led forward to the moft unpleafant reflections. We flood leaning on each other in filence : not a leaf in the foreft feemed to move, and* the laft rays of the fun fcarce tipped the up- moit fummit of the hilk, while deep twi¬ light
SÖ2 light hung upon the groves. What were the feelings of that moment, when the ne¬ ceffity of parting, without a poffibility oi* even requefting a future meeting, ftruck me with anguifh, and deprived me of fpeech ! This uncertainty was interøtpted by the fudden report of a piftol ; and I ftarted round, in expectation that Don Raphael was about to revenge himfelf The tur¬ tle dove does not tremble half fo much at the fhot of the fportfman, as did Cornelia at the found of the piftol. "It comes," faid fhe, " from the way of the Caftle ; my fatherľis returned ; it is a fignal that I am miffed ; fly I befeech you, for he has vowed the moft dreadful ven¬ geance upon you and upon me, if he ever difcovers that we have met without his knowledge." " But whence," cried I in hafte, "whence fuch injuftice ? What caufe of offence ?" "I know not," interrupted fhe, break¬ ing from me ; " but he is very ftrange in his
303 his fpeeches of late ; hé will not believe that I was ignorant of your being before in the foreft, and I fhould not have been here this evening, but that I found the key of the little gate by accident ; I had no intention of flaying longer, than juft to take a furvey of my favourite little fpot, fhe only place where I feel myfeif per¬ fectly free—-adieu, Lorenzo, adieu, adieu," cried fhe, as fhe darted from me through the labyrinthian path. Unable to reftrain my fteps, I purfued her, again to have the fatisfaction of a look or a parting glance ; her feet were more accuftomed than mine to evade the briars that crept over the path, and fhe fled from me with as much earneftnefs as if fhe had feared my defigns. The clafh of weapons engaged my at¬ tention and riveted my fteps ; I turned towards the place whence he founds pro¬ ceeded, and could faintly diftinguifh at a diftance between the boles of the frees, through
304 through the gloom which gathered fail, two perlons contending for victory. I paufed for a moment, hefitating whe¬ ther I ought to interfere; but fancying that Γ co :ld diftinguifli the figure of Filelfo, as one of the combatants, I fufpecled that fome traveller was the vicìim of his out¬ rage ; and being well armed, I rufhed im¬ mediately forward to interfere. As I drew near, I was aftonifhed to per¬ ceive that it was no other than Filelfo and Don Raphael himfelf, engaged in ferious and fatal combat ; they feemed to have no other weapons than poignards, with which they fought furiouily, and with determina¬ tion that one or both ihould periül. They were too much engaged with themfelves to perceive my approach, and I was within a few paces, when the foot of Don Raphael linking againil a root, he fell, and Filelfo darted upon him like a beali of prey upon his violini. " Is this thy vaunted power?" faid he, furÍQUÜy: and raifmg his weapon already fiaincd
305 ftained with blood, " This fhall liberate mv engagements, this fhall render me again free." His arm was defcending with rapidity, when I ftruck him a fide blow with my fword, which made him flagger, and drop the weapon from his hand, the blood ruftiing from the wound he had received. " Rife, Don Raphael," faid I, " Provi¬ dence has brought me to your relief, but whence comes it, that the dagger of the fervant is raifed againft his mafter?" "Secure the villain," faid Don Ra* phael, attempting to rife; " he is a mont¬ ier of ingratitude. More than once has his life been a forfeit to the law, and I have not only fpared, but concealed him ; but now juftice and my own fafety demand him from my protection, and he ihall die." *' That is more than you dare," mut¬ tered Filelfo, fullenly, « But for this III— flared (tripling, and I had now done the deed.
306 deed. But mark me, I may chance to come acrofs thee, youth." " Regard him not," faid Don Raphael, feizing him by the arm, for he could make no refiftanee. " He is both a robber and a murderer : afli ft me to convey him to the caille, till I can deliver him to the officers of juftice." " Thou lieft," cried Filelfo, with a fmile of malice : " 'tis not thy intention ; 'tis not in thy-daring. I would unmaik thee. I would drag thee from thefe grim woods, and from the caftk of St. Helma, Re¬ member Alencaftro ! " I could perceive through the dim twi¬ light, that Don Raphael was extremely agitated; and the myftery of Filelfo's words conveyed a meaning which made me fhud- der, and led forward to thoughts I dared not to follow. I remained inactive, my foul fecretly fhocked as I looked from one to the other, and I could not poffibly de¬ termine which was molt criminal. X Don.
307 Don Raphael faw my doubts and hefi¬ tation. " Weak boy," exclaimed he, " you wear a foldi er 's coat, but you poffefs a woman's heart. See you not that I am bleeding from feveral wounds, or I would drag this wretch by the hair to my caftle, if no other means appeared ?" " Thy power is not equal to thy will, good mafter," faid Filelfo, tauntingly. * c You had better contrive to get yourfelf thither," " I am a fool/* faid Don Raphael, ftifling . his refentment, " to regard the words of a man infignificant and impotent as thou. Cavalier Lorenzo, you have this evening rendered me an important fervice, which I am forry to have received from your hand. Fate has fo ordained, and if you have a defire to finifh the obligation, you will affift me to confine this murderer. Yes, I repeat it, he is both a murderer and an outlaw. If you refufe me, I fhall reward the fervice I have already received, but you will have no further claim." « I defy
308 <f 1 defy you both," cried Filelfo, break¬ ing from the weak grafp of Don Raphael: "I will go myfeif to Leon, and bring back with me the power to examine everv recels X «r in the caftle—it will then be feen—" As he fpoke he leaped into the thicket, notwithftanding hk arm continued to bleed, and that he had before received feveral wounds. The fuddennefs of hk flight deprived me of reflection, while it conveyed to mc an inftant idea of hk guilt, and feizing one of my piftols, I fired after him into the thicket; the bullet rattled amongft the branches, without further effect. " He has efcaped," faid Don Raphael. " My wounds will not permit me to purfue him, and you muft be better acquainted with the receffes of thk foreft. than I fancy you are, or it would be a dangerous at¬ tempt in you to follow him." ' f Will you fuller him to go to Leon and betray you, then ?" faid I. "No;"
309 . * { No ;" replied Don Raphael, fmiling, *·* his words were only intended to deceive vou ; he dare not." * f But they finely had meaning?" faid I. "■ They had," replied he, emphatically. ft What do you fuppofe they imply ?" This queftion filenced me a few moments, for I dared not to fay what I thought they implied, and I merely anfwered that I knew not. " Nor I cither," faid he, cool!v. " You had better re-charge your piftol, and be on your guard as you return. Filelfo has malice, and fufficient ftrength yet left to fire a piftol. We muft not remain in thk place. Had he not taken nie by furprize when we were converfing as in friendfliip, I fliould have fealed his doom. iVs it was, he has no reafon to boaft his activity." Don Itaphael took two or three fteps along the path, but found himfelf too weak with lofs of blood, to walk without affiftance, and hk wounds continued to bleed. te Lorenzo,"
310 <f Lorenzo," faid he, in a mournful voice, " you fee how reluctant I am to be obliged to you, but you know my reafons, and you know the oath you have taken," I waved my hand as he fpoke, and moved on to fupport him. " I perceive," faid I, " that you are faint and weak. I hope your wounds are not dangerous." "No, I think not," anfwered ho, " a certain imbecility has feizedmy nerves;— I muft fhake it off. It arifes as much from my having taken a long ramble this day over the barren mountains, without any refrefliment lince the morning, as from my wounds." We began to proceed flowly towards the caftle of St. Helma. " Cavalier Lorenzo," faid Don Raphael, as he leaned upon my arm, " I thought by this time you had been many leagues dif¬ tant from this valley. I am acquainted with the troubles that have rifen in Catalo¬ nia. I confefs that were it not for one con-
311 <ronfideration, which indeed is paramount to all others, 1 fhould regret that our ac¬ quaintance is fo tranfcient ; for, notwith¬ ftanding my uneafinefs at your prefence, I feel a fatisfaction that I cannot account for, in your company. Tell me, who are your relations, and what are your connec¬ tions in life. I am not without fome knowledge of the inhabitants of the world, and if I can return you any fervice ofthat nature, vou have onlv to mention your wifhes." I was afliamed to declare that I was even ignorant of my birth, and in my confuflon could make no immediate reply. " Perhaps," faid he, " you are too proud to receive obligation ; perhaps you do not require it ; at leaft, do me the favour to receive this ring—it is a trifle which I would have you accept in token of friend¬ ihip." " The intention," anfwered I, " obliges me to accept the gift ; I fhall wear it at once with pride and with pleafure." He bowed,
312 bowed, and we fhortly after arrived at the caftle. He waited a moment at the gate, as if he expected I would have bade him adieu, but that was very far from my intention ; and having faftened the gate, we proceeded in filence through the garden, and by a poftern into the caftle. It was dark, and the remembrance of what I had expe¬ rienced on my firft vifit to this dreary pile of building, caufed me to fhrink back. " Be not afraid," faid Don Raphael, itili leaning upon me. " This caftle is cer¬ tainly awful, and the mind, unaccnftomed to its gloom, may fancy fhadows of viiion- ary beings in its dark receffes. Its walls have ere now echoed the groans of defpair, and rung with the cries of murder ; but it is tobe remembered,the perpetrator and fuf- ferer have long ere this refted in peace." " Can, then, the mind of a murderer ever be at reft ?" faid I, and paufed. " That is a lingular queftion," replied he, " and does not relate to what I was faying.
313 faying. I think the mind even of a mur¬ derer might become callous. There may be certain flarts of ungovernable terror; certain traits of a fecret, deep and dreadful; that will betray him to himfelf, if not to others, and when unengaged by bufinefs, and retired into the filence of midnight, he muft endure the agonies of the con¬ demned, and feel that fling which he cannot draw forth." " You have painted his feelings," faid I, " with a mailer's hand. It requires obfer¬ vation to know thk." " It requires more !" cried he, in a tone of voice that made me ftart. " Thk is no fubject to difcourfe upon in thk place. Yoiir fuperftition and your fears would awaken :—you would fancy groans in the murmurs of the wind, and fpirits in the tall trees that wave againft the windows." "I am not apt," faid I, " to gi\e at¬ tention to light fancies. I even queftion whether thè fpirits of the dead can break through the confines of invifible exiftence, vol. ι. ρ and
314 and become embodied to our fenfes. Once indeed, have I feen and heard, what would give contradiction to reafon, and reafon to credulity." <( What did you fee ?" faid Don Raphael paufing in the dark ; and not a found was heard to move through the caftle. " It was near midnight," replied I ; te it was on the fide of one of thofe dark moun¬ tains, where the wind moves unchecked, that I was fitting, ferious and fad—" Don Raphael fighed; and while I paufed, the deep found of diftant mufic ftole upon us. " It is Cornelia that plays, faid Don Raphael : " flie is performing a ferious fervice of my own compofition/' " The ftrain," faid I, « is Melancholy itfelf—it is more adapted to defpair than piety—it is fuch as a mind might fancy, which had loft all taite for exiftence/' " It was in fuch a difpofition that I com- pofed it, fhortly after a misfortune had befallen me, which occafioned my difguft for life. 1 am no profound mufician, but I have
f315 Л have had fufficient leifure to amufe mvfelf with that fublimeft of human in- ventions. " " Let us approach and liften," faid I. " Mufic charms me to rapture." " I am fo much exhaufted," anfwered Don Raphael, " that I ftiould rather proceed to my own room. I find myfeif fainter every moment." I was under the neceffity of fubmitting to his wifhes, and we foon entered the fame range of apartments where he had formerlv conducted me. A lamp was burning upon his table : wine and feveral articles of refreihment were placed upon a little fideboard : and not only neatnefs, but elegance and pro fu fion appeared. Could any traveller by chance have gained admifflon into thefe retired apart¬ ments of this decaying fabric, nothing fhort of enchantment could have appeared capable of thus providing. Thefe inhabited chambers were too ftrongly fecured, and diftina from thofe purpofely fuiilred to p 2 decav,
316 decay, for any one to attempt entering by force. Nor fhould I have a fécond time vifited the caftle, if accident had not de¬ tected to me the fecrets it contained. Don Raphael fat down upon a fopha. I fupplied him with fome refrefhments, and having ftripped off' hk upper gannents, I examined the wounds he had received, which proved to be little more than fcratches with the point of a dagger on his breaft and arm. At his direction I opened a cabinet con¬ taining elixirs of various qualities, and pharmacal preparations, with fome of which having drefled hk wounds, he pro- feffed himfelf confiderablv eafier, and invited me to partake the contents of hk fideboard. *" — " It appears to me, Cavalier Lorenzo," faid he, " a little lingular, that you fliould fo opportunelv come to mv relief. I thought the fervice you are ordered on, more preffing than to admit your abfence : and why fhould you come to this foreft ?" « ť Senor,"
317 " Senor," anfwered I, " your fufpicioñs are perhaps in part true. I confefs that I knew not how to tear myfeif away from this part of Spain, without once more vifit- ing this romantic valley, which fpreads out fo many allurements, that I may fay the fummit of my wiflies would be ţo imitate the mode of life you have chofen. The world in my eyes does not appear to offer any confideration that I fhould regret its lofs ; and I muft acknowledge, I look with no fmall envy on the tranquillity of your fituation. The cares of fubfiftence, of ap¬ pearance, and of etiquette, do not compel you to act againft your inclination and wiflies—you may wander abroad in the foreft, contemplating the beauties of na¬ ture—you may traverfe the mountains, and meditate on the fublimity and filence of rugged uncultivation—you may return hither, and enjoy the charms of a well regulated gaixlen, or the delicacies of human art—you have books and mufic to lead you into the regions of fancy and of ρ 3 found—
313 found—you have a fweet companion to entertain you—and you want only a friend who filali àt once be able to fhare in vour reflections, and to preclude the neceffity õf trufting to the attention of a mercenary agent, whofe avarice may be tempted to deftroy the hand that feeds him." Don Raphael had continued filent during this long fpeech, poffibly as much from furprize, as hefitation at the anfwer he fliould return: he feemed to behold me with an earn eft gaze of wonder, and when J ceafed to fpeak, he replied. " Lorenzo, you have more than once hinted to me, the fentiments you have now fo fully expreffed. Your mind is roman¬ tic—you are young—and that mode of Ufe which appears fo very different to any you have hitherto enjoyed, tempts you to fup¬ pofe that there happinefs is to be found, becaufe it has not fallen to your lot. But you would quickly look in vain for the Very buftle you now feck to avoid. The groves that charm you to-day, would to morrow become faded in your eye."
319 " Not fo," cried I haftily. " 1 have been familiar with the fecluded cloifters of monkifh retirement—I have paffed days in meditation within the gloomy confines of a narrow cell, and nights in watching at the dreary fhrine of fome departed faint." " You feek to impofe on me," faid he with fome feverity. " I am not fufficiently ignorant to believe an incongruity. The times of holy warfare are long pail : monks do not now exchange the cowl for the helmet. You feek to difguife your real motives—my daughter-*—" He paufed; for no doubt my confcioiif- nefs of the truth of this accufation was vifible. He frowned, and remained for fome time in filence, his eyes fteadtly fixed upon my fece, while »balhed I could only look upon the ground, ihrinking from the fcrutiny of his regard. After a deep figh, he leaned back upon the feat. " You have mentioned to me," faid he, " that your name is Lorenzo de Ferrara, I have gathered from your fre- ρ 4 quent
320 quent hefitatioňs that fome unpleafant cir¬ cumftance clouds your birth or your for- time. The tone of your voice, the general outline of your countenance, calls back to my memory perlons and times, long va¬ il ifhed from the face of exiftence. Have I any claim upon your confidence ; and may I, without wounding your delicacy, inquire into the minuter circumftances of your fituation in life ?" " You may command my u t moil confi¬ dence." faid I, 'f Very few words will ac¬ quaint you with all that I know of myfelfc and you will then no longer wonder at the apathy with which I regard the world." He liitened with the profoundeft atten¬ tion while I fpoke ; he caufed me to repeat to him every trifle I could recollect, con¬ cerning the means by which I had received fúpplies; difappointment fat upon his features ; and when I had brought down my narrative to the conclufton of my ad¬ ventures with Donna Ippolita, he clofed his eyes and remained for more than half an hour
321 hour in the deepeft reflection, without making the fmalleft comment upon what he had heard. This fingularity of behaviour was not a little painful to me, but I faw too many flights of this ftrange mortal to be very much furprized; though my fears and hopes, as to the impreffion I made upon him, were not a little fluctuating, during this long fufpenfe. At length he opened his eyes, as if juft awaking from a dream, and looking on a watch that lay before him. " It is near two o'clock," faid he, "It is the folemn hour of night, and human nature demands re¬ pofe« To-morrow you will begin your journey towards Catalonia ; you have need of reft/* " When the mind is powerfully en¬ gaged," anfwered I, " the body can dif- penfe with fleep; in two hours I muft depart for Leon. You have, however, much caufe to retire; if you will grant me ρ 5 permiffion
322 permiffion, I will lay down upon that couch till the mills of night begin to depart." " Be it fo," faid he; « 1 feel myfeif both languid and weak, I will lay down for two hours, and will be with you by the time you intend to fet out." " You are very ill, Don Raphael," cried I, obferving an increafing palenefs over¬ fpread his face. " I fear you have fome fecret hurt." « I fhall be better, I truft, after a little refl," anfwered he; " thk к a return of an old difeafe, which к more óf the mind than the body." So faying, he faintly fmiled, and attempted to rife, but found his flrength fo much exhaufted, that he was obliged to accept my affiftance» A little door which he unlocked, opened Upon a winding paffage, which conducted us to a'fuit of rooms very neatly fur* nifhed, and ftrongly faftened by bolts to prevent any fudden furprize from the hardyhood of a ftranger. Every door-way had two ftrong folding doors of black oak, and
323 and the entrance into the third room was fo narrow, that but one perfon could pafs at a time. In thk chamber, lighted by a narrow loop-hole by day, Don Raphael flept. The lamp which I had brought at hk defire, I placed upon a little ebony table, and after leading him to the bed, I fat down on a chair befide him. He was too unwell to defire converfation, and I had fufficient leifure to examine thk Ungular chr.mber, where jealoufy might have repofed her choicefl treafure, or ty¬ ranny flumbered fecure. The outer-door which clofed upon the narrow entrance, was ftrongly plated with iron, and the inner was conftruőled of iron bars, in the manner of the gratings in the parlour of a convent, through which it was eafy to deftroy any perfon, before he could poffibly ftir from hk pofition, fu pp ofin g he could have over> come the barrier of the outer door. Several brace of piftols hung near the hed, moft probably loaded. In one cor- P6 ncr
324
ner lay feveral pieces of ancient weapons of war, and an antique battle-axe was fuf pended from an hook, a dagger of peculiar form hung near the bed-poft, and twenty men would have found arms fufficient to equip them, It was evident that many of thefe wea¬ pons had hung for years in their prefent fituation, and from the brightnefs of feve¬ ral, it was alfo apparent that Don Raphael kept fufficient in readinefs for ufe. But when I reflected on the folitude of lik fitu¬ ation, and the refources of concealment this very building would afford in cafe of outrages, could I wonder at fo much fufpi¬ cious precaution ; yet, thought I, is it poffi¬ ble he к fo careful of his own prefervation, and permit his daughter to remain expofed in the more open parts of the building ; her of whom he feems more jealous, than a mifer over his feci ci flores. I caft my eyes round the gloomy apart¬ ment, and perceived a narrow door oppo¬ fite the one by which we had entered. I made
325 I made no doubt but it led to fomc chambers beyond, and it was more than probable they were appropriated to Cor¬ nelia. Whether thefe chambers belong to Cor¬ nelia or not, thought I, I fhould much like to fee what was contained behind fo much precaution. What is it prevents my fa¬ tisfy ing the curiofity I feel ? Good man¬ ners, and the danger of detection forbid me; but certainly I have received no friendihip or civility from Don Raphael that fhould bind me ; on the contrar v, everv obligation is on hk fide, \et he treats me with the moft diftant civilitv. The more I debated in my own mind the propriety of fuch an action, the lefs capable I found myfeif to withftand the temptation, and ï liitened a long time to be affured that Don Raphael was afleep, every moment on the point of rifing to fatisfy myfeif, yet ftill fixed to my chair, from a fear that too fudden a motion might aro ufe his half fleepy fenfes. The
326 The moft profound filence reigned within this vaft and decaying pile of building, even the midnight breeze was ex- eluded the retirement of this chamber, and the little flame of the lamp burnt with¬ out a waver. It was with difficulty I could diftingııifh the breathing of Don Raphael, and I made no doubt the cordial he had taken, acted as an opiate. My thoughts fluctuated in fufpenfe ; I was within the walls of the caftle of St. Helma ; nay, within the very chamber of the powerful mafteroftismyfteries, and if this opportunity departed unimproved, a flmilar was never likely to occur ; yet I feared to grafp the moments as they flew, and hefitation and fufpenfe chained me to the place. A faint and hollow tone founded fo- lemnly from a diftance. I flartedand liitened, and found it was three o'clock; only one hour now remained before the morning would again break through the dárkneís of night, when other cares, and other
327 other engagements would call me into action. I felt as if I had been waiting for fome fignal. The minutes admitted no longer delay ; I ventured in a low voice to pro¬ nounce the name of Don Raphael, but I received no anfwer ; 1 repeated it in a louder voice, without receiving any reply. I liitened, and could perceive that he breathed ; I cautioufly arofe, bringing the lamp, ihaded with my hand, towards the bed, when I ftood a few moments contem¬ plating his features, which were pale, though ferene. How imbecile and weak a creature is man, thought I, when any derangement takes place in his fragile frame. This being, who lays here extended before me, pof- lefles powers and energies of the moil vio¬ lent nature when roufed ; he is mafter of all the accomplifhments of a nobleman ; his -manners and his modes of action are wonderful ; eccentricity is in all hk w >rds and purfuits. But what is he now ? when that
sos fîıat ípark of etherial and heavenly fíame is dormant. Now he lies before me an inert mafs of matter, and no more exalted than the mean eft peafant in all Spain. Could that moniler Filelio now ileal in¬ to this chamber, could he Üke me, ft and thus befóte hk fleepmg enemy; then, Don Raphael would fleep no more ! The idea alone made rae fiiudder. I piclured to myfeif the horrid image of Fi- leifo in mv íituation ; I thought I could mark the fmile of malignant triumph, which would diííort his í trong traced fea¬ tures. Ì turned mv head round with a doubting mind, ieit fome leeret palìàge~ mìffht even then have allowed him admit- fion. Ail was dark around me as I ihaded the lamp, leit its rays might awaken Don Ra¬ phael. I alinoti believed that Ï heard the low breathing of a perfon who feared to betray his approach. I Mened with ear- neft attention, not daring to make the İmaîleîİ motion. I became certain that fome
338 fome other perfon moved near me. I heard a bolt gradually and cautioufly with¬ drawn . I fhuddered with the firft emotions of dread, but refolution came to my aid ; and fnatching at the dagger which hung at the head of the bed, I turned quickly round to await the event, fecretly pleafed tha* Don Raphael woidd a fécond time owe his life to my protection. Thefe thoughts va¬ nifhed ina moment, when I beheld the door open, and Cornelia herfelf in a night-drefs with a lamp in her hand, enter the room, END OF VOL. I.
Printtd by R % ЕхШ } 87, Gh&ì Perikndstreet ;
