Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Theodore Cyphon: or, the benevolent Jew: a novel
THEODORE CYPHON.
CHAPTER I.
" No nus induens in tentatioiieiu " X HE rain continued, though with abated violence, till morning, which no sooner dawned upon the open country, than my spirits began to revive, and my indifference to give place to exertions of safety. I feared venturing into any house, and casting my eyes over the country, I perceived, down the stream, a thicket, which spread among a confusion of rocks and precipices, and "promised to vol. ii. · a » screen
screen me from tlie malevolence of' pur¬ suit. I hastened from the dangerous situa¬ tion in which I had passed so lnimy hours of suspense, continuing my n-ay to the thicket, every moment turning to see if I was observed. With all the ti¬ midity of a robber, I sought some ob¬ scure corner of concealment, first break¬ ing off a branch of a crab tree for my defence, and a quantity ol' its fruit for food. Beneath α hanging rock, which pro¬ jected in a sloping direction, sufficient to turn off the rain, and wholly concealed by brambles and thorn trees, I sat doivn to my breakfast, no longer wondering that man had ever tasted acorns with pleasure, when I experienced the gout liberty atid hungerigave'my acid repast. I stretched out my limbs otii the turf • r„ . < lu ι ι· with
With satisfaction, though benumbed b) damp and cold I felt -ι glow of delight, in tin, consciousness that no bolts and wells prevented my ranging, whilst in fact I was as much α prisoner as before —" Now, cried I, " t) rant, the struggle foi poiver is at an end ' Have not I tn umphed ovei all your schemes a I forgot Eliza, in fancying the con sternation of my keepers, and sunk asleep amidst cheering reflections When I awoke, the sun had chased away the clouds, a delightful fteshness filkd the an, a profusion of sweets were borne up on tbe bieeze, and I tasted m puuty the delights of nature I ventured to spread my clothes to the sun, I basked beneath its rays, transporting my imagination to the Attic shores, where the heroes of mankind spent their tune m rurahty I lamented the deviation we had made from simplicity, ttt the sttme time that I acknowledged I -would not willingly в 2 return
retiini to the ignorance of the first ages. I durst not venture from my shtlter, though pressed by hunger, whilst the light was sufficient to betray me; but when night again leturned, I aiose to depart. The old gentleman I have men¬ tioned, as related to my mother, Ined at the distance of foi ty miles, ¡md my fa¬ ther having had an antipathy towards him ever after his mairiagc, I looked on his house as the most eligible sanctuary, for I perceived that men will often¬ times bestow a favour to chagiiu an enemy, where chanty might have sued in vain. I picked iny steps »vith caution in the dark, often entangling apiong the briars, till at length I foupd, myself so involved in a labyrinth of precipices and quarries, as to have little chance of discovering the road. In this perplexity I stood for some
some time, »vhen I was startled by the barking of и dog at a little distance. The recollection that I probably had little to fear, prevented my flight. The chance I had of meeting with а guide to conduct me from the wood, invigorated my courage, already high, from the ne¬ cessity I had of food. In this disposi¬ tion I advanced, and turning the corner of a rock, saw the rays of a fire shine from behind some bushes. 1 ventured further, and perceived a dog standing by, and some utensils scattered loosely on the ground. As I could see without being seen, I ventured silently and slowly, till I could perceive the figure of a de- crepid old man, who rested himself upon а bundle of rushes, every now and then adding α fresh twig to the fire, while he feasted on some broken bread and meat. My courage was wholly revived ; I ad¬ vanced up to him without hesitation, sifting down by the fire. в 3 " Father,"
" Pather," said I, " I have löst my way , Ι am hungr) , and, if yon please, will share your supper ' '1 his was the true laconic style, and with the word of welcome, he held out to me part of his pi ovisions, and a draught Írom а bottle of ile " At tins time of life," said I, " your lourneyingb should have ceased, and those limbs, little oble to endure the fa¬ tigues of travelling, have been provided for beneath the shelter of hospitality " " And dost think then,' said he, " thit foi your boasted though miserable secuuty, I would exchange the fresh helds, and the freedom of rambling, to pine undei the frowns of a greedy over¬ seer' No, never whilst these gums con mumble α crust of bread, or this hand lift from the brook a delicious drought of Adam's ale "
I admired
I admitid the indignation with which he spoke, and recollecting the vile prac tites of our village tyrants, I could not condemn lus spirit «if independence and to amuse the timt, made some trifling inquiries into his adventures My questions, pci Imps above the com mon ideas he was used to meet, excited his attention He gared upon me some time with a penetrative keenness, which filled me with uneasiness, then taking from his pocket a printed handbill he give it me to read It wis an accurate description of my self, containing every particular of my dress stating that I had escaped from a private madhouse and lest my appear ance ot sanity might speak in my favour, it stated, that at times I bad consider able lucid inteivals, which gave place to acts of the greatest outrage concluding with a hundred pounds reward to any n 4 one
one who would bring me to squire Cy¬ phon, or give information of my route, so as to be a means of my recovery. I was struck dumb with astonishment, to find that even the bosom of the rocks could not conceal me ; and shocked to meet ι repetition of that anger which had burnt for more than sixteen months, and during that time had inflicted tor¬ ture on its victim without satiety.— " Well, father," said I, throwing the pa¬ per into the fire, " do you intend to have the hundred pounds, by conducting me back to a prison I abhor—to a dungeon worse than the workhouse you detest, and in »vhose place you prefer the pre¬ carious existence of chance ?" " Dost think that I will'" said he; " what care I for the ' ŕiundred pounds ; a man cannot want what he never pos¬ sessed." ' "I would reward'you," returned I, " but I have been robjied of every far¬ thing;
thing ; 1 have not sixpence to procure а morsel of bread." " As to that" said he, " courage, my lad ; thou shalt not want. I will to-mor¬ row go to the village, and bring us suf¬ ficient, and when thee be'st rich, thee shalt repay me." I admired those honest sentiments, dictated from the heart of hospitality, and thanking him for so unexpected α kindness, laid down on α corner of his blanket, exulting that men were yet to be found, who could rise above meanness and treachery, though tempted by offers far above their station.—" Here," thought 1, " is a man, destitute almost of the ne¬ cessaries of life, yet will not grasp the means of comparative affluence, when he must pluck it with the rank weed of treachery ; how happy then would man¬ kind be, were they equally poor, with¬ out a knowledge of the fascination of pomp and splendour 1 " в S We
We arose in the mormng, fresh as the beasts »vho bro»» se the herbs, and by the sidi of a silver stream feasted on the remnants of ch-irity.distnbutingapoition to the faithful dog I agreed to remam on the spot till his return from the vil l ige, from »vlience I expected ne»vs that might infintile« my lutine ronduit I spent the tune of his absence in walking imongst the bushes, and gathering the wild fiuit, sometimes stopping to listen if he was returning, nnd agam feanng, from the length of his absence, lie had designs of betrayuig me I had wan¬ dered some hundred yards from om rttreat mto я deep kind of glen, so full of bramble bushes that it was difficult to poss, when I heard tbe voices ot se» e ral men at α little distance I instantly douched (as -ι hare when «be catches the voice ot the huntei in the swelling bi ee/e), endeavouring to distinguish their discourse
' Are
" Are you sure it bes he?' snid one " it will be a fine haul, my old dnd, if we take him " Oh, he's as umple as α child, replied the man ot genuini, hospit αϊ ι γυ ' " he has no suspicion m the world, and »ve shall bt sure of the money Γοι ctrtiin I should not have betrayed him, but you kno»v ι hundred pounds is a hundred pounds, and not every day to be lighted on I »vas greatly shocked at this baseness, I began to abhoi my felloiv-creatures, und almost it-solved to march boldly up and punish his treachery а moment brought »vith it an excuse '1 he tempta¬ tion was irresistible, and poverty, whilst it has before its eyes the splendoui ot riches, easily believes in them charm« they do not possess I waited till they had passed, and till I supposed they had given up the search ae useless, one of them having returned through the hoi. lo»v where I lay, without uiscovenng me в 6 " What,"
" What," cried I to myself, " what have I done, that I should thus fear the day, like a man guilty of a crime? Am not I in Britain, where justice is su¬ preme? why then remain longer the sub¬ ject of fear to every wind that blo»vs?" I started up, and taking my crab-stick in my hand, marched forward with the fixed purpose of opposing violence to violence. 1 passed behind the village, and entered upon the public road. Every eye that met me, I fancied gazed upon me with curiosity, implying doubt and hesitation. I brandished my stick over my shoulder, and assuming a look of fierceness, continued my pace, every moment increasing my confidence, as no one ventured to touch me, probably owing to my reported madness ; for in a country place every whisper is circulated with speed, accumulating wonder as it passes: thus I Was Considered stronger than any five men, as able to leâpfrom the
the top of a house unhurti to break and bend iron bars the thickness of a kitchen range, and that with a kick of my foot 1 could splinter a church door. Thiel had learnt from the old beggar, ond therefore could easily accountfor the fear I perceived in several people who passed me; but I, who knew the weak¬ ness of my strength, dreaded lest they should unite, and overpower me by numbers, in hopes of the reward. My haughty and undaunted carriage was, however, more in my favour than I could have supposed, as it supported the tale ; and those who met and kneiv me, I afterwards learnt, declared that the froth run out of my mouth, that my eyes rolled, and that I grinned in a frightful manner. • Amused in part by the follies of men, and encouraged ,by my success, 1 ven¬ tured* to enter ¡the next village, w}u,eh being
being tbe post town, contained an mn of some note I walked into the yard, the people giving me the way, and see ing a postchaise ready to depart, I as¬ sumed a tone of authority, and opening the door, bado the postilion drive to Helton Hall, the residence of my uncle lhe landlord gave him a wink, find wluspeied something, I doubted not was an order to dnve me to my fathers This vt is in fact the case, he striking ofl from the village in the contrary road to what I wished I looked out of the window to see if we weie followed, and not perceiving any one, I exerted my voice to stop him, tlirea amng if he did not instantly tuin to the road I had ordered, 1 would tear hitri and his horses into a million of pieces The poor fel. lo»v trembled at my voice and gestuie, no doubt »vishmg as soon as possible to dischaige his fare, he clapped spurs to bis horses, and without waiting to change, urged forward to Helton Hall It was the
the dusk of the evening when we stop¬ ped the porter opened the door, shut¬ ting it -igám m a hurry, the moment he saw me, s»veRring he should not admit a madman to murder them " You see, síid I, turning to the postilion " I cannot pay you at present but call to moi row, and I will make you amends " Thank your honoui, replied he, bowing to the ground, and no doubt re¬ joicing he was so cheaply rid of the mad- m-iii, mounted, and drove off at full speed, eveiy now and then looking be hind him I was exti emely puzzled at this treat ment of my uncle, which I doubted not arose mei ely from his believing the re¬ port in common with others, and sat down on the steps, expecting some one would bring me а furthei message In less than five minutes my cousin Edward came up with his gun, haviug been shooting he stilted at my presence, and
and stopped without resolution to ad¬ vance. I held out my hand to him.—" Ned," said I, " surely you do not credit all this farce of my insanity, one of the most abominable schemes ever set on foot to harass the weak. I wish to Speak to my uricle; what I have to say, will convinee you both that I retain my senses, though that I do so, after so much suffering, is the wonder." He paused a moment ; and not per¬ ceiving any signs of distraction, con¬ sented to lead me to his father. The old gentleman could scarcely credit the story I told him, so inconsistent did it appear with the character of a father, and so contrary to the boasted genero¬ sity of Theodoric. But the affair of Simpson, which he now heard for the fit-st time, confirmed his belief, and en¬ sured his protection I could
I could gain no intelligence of Mr. Hanson ; and now being free from that perpetual alarm, which had called up every effort to repel approaching evil, all my tenderness for Eliza again rushed upon me. I sighed once more to behold her, to repeat to her my thoughts, and to interchange those sentiments of soft¬ ness I had so long been deprived of. I could not for а moment suppose myself less dear to her than before ; and I pro¬ posed, when I should have reduced my affairs to α train, to renew those claims she could not deny me. It was necessary to act with caution, as I well knew the power my father possessed, unu doubted not but the keeper was equal to any action, however criminal, which might tend to his own security. The plan I had proposed of living on myj little estate, must рготе abortive, it ,bejng ( folly to throw myself in their way, and dangerous even to trust
trust myself within the orbit of their rofluewca. It was, however, necessary that I should go to arrange my schemes, and to make every inquiry concerning Mr. Hanson. I had also a strong desire to visit that cottage, where my soul had first tasted the delight of love, and from whence had originated every subsequent distress. I longed to retrace the steps of Eliza, to юзе my thoughts in those flights of imagination that constitute the heaven of love, and entrances the mind in visions of fiction. I proposed to my uncle Thompson, that he should purchase my little do¬ main ; and that his son, his steward, and two of his servants, should accompany me to view it, in the course of a fe»v days. This was agreeable tó his wishes, the estate having belonged to his side ol the family, and we arranged our planá accordingly. We provided ourselves with arms, in case of attempted violence, and
and in the dusk of the evening arrived at the village; the innkeeper paying me his compliments on my restoration to health. After supper, aecompanied by my cousin, I ventured towards Mr. Hanson's; but words cannot convey to you the damp which sunk upon my spi¬ rits at the sight prepared for me. In place of the neat cottage I expected—in place of the well-ordered garden, where virtue had once been busy, I beheld no¬ thing but а waste ; every vestige of α dwelling was removed, the palings, of the garden torn up, and the little plat trod under foot by every passenger. A heavy sigh escaped from the bot¬ tom of my heart. I cast myself down upon the ground in an agony of despair. —" Oh," cried I, " this is the bitterness of vengeance; this is the lust of de¬ struction ! Oh, Eliza, Eliza 1 veliere art thou ?" My cousin Edward was affected to tears I had made him the confident of
of my engagements; and though he condemned the greať inequality of m'y choice, and thought, like the generality of Altri, that such an one might serve by v>ay 'Of amusement, to a persort of my expectations, yet this unparalleled aet Of vindictive barbarity called up every feeling of' human hature to op¬ pose it, rendering justifiable any op¬ position to so high an extended prero¬ gative'. ' There" Is in oUr nature a passion of resistance, which hurries us even con¬ trary to Our reasoh and interests. We are to be led, and won upon -, but till every spark of spirit is extinct, »Ve can¬ not he driven. Did 'parents consider this, when they would control the in¬ clinations of children with an imperious will, 'much evil' would'' bé avoided. Every'lnjUry I received Servad drllý fo widen' a-' breach; 1 át '«fit-»made' ny" ári overbearing cotemahd. 1 ''Though åiifleW ing
ing as I did, I yet retained so much re¬ spect for the man whom I had once con¬ sidered as a father, that I forbore pub¬ lishing to the world the treatment I had received ; but this last wound sunk deep on my soul ; it was a stroke I hod not been prepared for, and was one of those trifles on which hangs much of our hap¬ piness. I became ashamed of indulging so much weakness at the destruction of a cottage; yet though I had often seen the action before—often seen the poor peasant, »vith his weeping wife, and baiefoot children, driven out into the wilderness, I had not felt it myself, I had not experienced the horrid barb«. rity. On this Spot of earth, despoiled for my sake, 1 1 had intended to begin my researches j but now I had no point, to proceed from, and returned, overwhelm¬ ed
ed in grief, with my cousin to the inn. I endeavoured to draw some informa¬ tion from our host; but he knew no¬ thing more than that the Hansons had disappeared suddenly, no one knew how ; that all his goods had been sold for rent in arrear; and that his son had been taken from college, and sent as chaplain on board a man of war, to a five j eais' station in the East Indies. Thus all traoes appeared lost, the ale¬ house .being the usual centre of news ; hut lest some private circumstance might romain with the villagers, I hastened to an elderly woman, who had been α slight acquaintance, and whose head contained a chronicle of anecdotes, and all the little tales which circulate in the country. She could scarcely believe at first that I was recovered; but when I inquired after the Hansons, he.- counte¬ nance assumed tam air of heaviness. »
" I guess,
" I guess, master Theodore," said she, shaking her head, " »ve poor folks bave no right to speak, or I should not think all fair as it ought to be. I 'nope you did not ruin that pretty Eliza, as »vas said." " By »vhom ?" cried I. " Who «Jare asperse the character of ethereal vir¬ tue ?" " I cannot say," answered slie, " b) »»bom it »vas said; but sure enough I heard it ; though, says I, at the time, I don't believe it ; for master Cyphon is not like many of your rich folks, who think that a poor maiden is honoured if he condescands to ruin her. No, said I, lie had other kind of sentiments, and to le sure the whole must be false." " Well, but my grod mother," said I, " let us leave these idle tales, and tell me if you know« any thing where this family may be «found i I-believe'I may be the cause of their ejectment, end I would ì
would endeavour torepair tlie- loss they have suffered J-"» " I guess your motive, said she, sMHing " Love, they say, »#r» travel m the »r I know a young man like you, doet) not «pend so much öf htotııne in the company «f girls for conversation, but, As I said beflwe, we poor people m«yvtjhmk whotvw* dare not et«yyinoir ts ltvsto every, one"! weuid.tuö what I know «xftirf и т.* h, n "And me," «aid W' yotf-tnake suffi- «iieutly p«y dot 1Ш knowledgo, -ţmy keep me no longer in suspense.'' " 1 will tell you then, said she, low emig Iter voice· 'f it is whispered that your father ha» ruined 'poor'. Ηίββοη, and taken away hie ohfrMoteri=so4liat be is in the greatest ^istraesi^uta fipfofie to Liverpool, wh*re.l«s4»ift!toitt-<!»Mgh- ters support theWi8eW*e-byi'wSIMng-and takingiiŕi phrin WWfc^iW^h^y^HhlHt not for ibe world »*yf yoı»*·* »c«ŕ4iä*, J ^ t», t y. * ч>л* ι .* 4 Äj^ŕ
tisiftraapalahisilittle hotel would-then be tar«* from rae." I etìnrd/onb/ leun in addition, that one of my uncle's meitvtmts ι bad .given her this information, under a promise of secrecy, having been employed by his master to carry a letter. To have found them at «11 gave me too much satisfac¬ tion to be cheeked by any attending circumstances of distress; and I could scarcely restrain the impatience which would have hurried me the same night towards Liverpool. It was no sooner known through the village that I was amongst them, and in my proper aenaea, than they would have testified their joy by a bonfire, had not my deaire, of escaping observation forced me to,r««tein then»; though I felt on tliu,t)uwai«w<th«t satisfaction a just ma- giatnrt» « tuler muat feel »t public ap¬ plause. It was a surety that now my • ♦di^ii. с person
person was safe but I had too much suspicion of the influence a hundred pounds might have on individuals and the secret machmations of my father, to- trust myself out alone f t (
» Ù
I It 1 (I ta
1 U λ Ι к н 1 « Ι f ni ч» ifi 1 it It i «I f чМ I . fl Ι Η »γη Τ f ι ». i fiŕwtti ш ei о i t л f J f idi bedára« / t Jftf » in (til» i 9i3ili rtgi/O'h , I » CHAP
CHAPTER II.
J( w«s a tice, which, woigli'd m iieav'n, shalf morr i.ft.l HiHti tenfoU virtues in the other »cale
The next doy I ventured through tbc country to my little estate, and ha» ing adjusted the terms with my cousin, I set out in the highest impatience for Liverpool, delighting myself by the way with the unexpected pleasure I should diffuse, and the change I had poner to make in their affairs. I proposed to se¬ clude myself and them in the wildş of Wales, breathing the air which had nourished the sons of independence-, but though there is scarcely a more refined *''''/- c â pleasure
pleasure than this anticipation of fancy, few would take delight in its recapitula¬ tion ; I therefore hastened to Liverpool, where I instantly began my inquiries. The poverty of the Hansons had shrouded them from notice, and the ob¬ scurity with which they lived, concealed them from common observation I in¬ quired at thepost-hóuše, but to them the name was unknown, and chance alene remained to conduct me. I wait- eij »Vith ímpatience tül the Sunday, when I hastened fruiti one church to •another, in hopes of discovering some öf the girls in the assembly; but wftb- imt effect The next day I ranged dyer the mil¬ liners' shops, having 'tecollecitìd that 'they teok m plain wqrlt; otit: the^ejieral 'answer was a negation, 'With' smiţes-arid ^'ignlflwfrtqntistioiis. Thlisdefeated, (aWiaddep^'by wsr,|mtìp(Ì»>(% j ti<vn|t-
dered ahplifţ the. toiţn, visiting evpi-y courted.,turning, in¡hppes,of seeing or beting seen by ( them» till I had slmost persuaded- myself they ooflld not, be in the place, and, as a last effort, WAStgoblg to advertise for them, when I one morn¬ ing perceived а servapţ of Theodoric's walking down a crosAAtreet I followed st а cautious, distance, not doubtingi tpiwhpni his errajud was di¬ rected, though,I coiitd,not conceive the intention, unless it related to myself. He entered а house, which on the out¬ side appeared trainable, and wlţichi I had/'nc-lişd, in my rambles as, fiit f^'the rendezvous.of thieves. It had noj'oııtıîr doţir., and woe, in fact, little superku; to apİleofrubbiş]ı, I ţaekf my stotion in en obscure cor- iieftflCJf, fishing to Ц observad 0J5 him, arţd.'eţ' Щ' «I»? timf wishing; to see if any iofftbe, 'Harisjirts врре^пеД·' I ŕe- 1 ' ut с 3 rnained
mBlired near half an hour in this sus pense I theri saw him standing m the entry, With а person weeping, and seem ingly supplicating, whom I judged to be Af№ Hanrson 1 tfelt an impulsive motion to fly, to ltiWove those feorsMto gaze on my be¬ loved t lii á, 'bat I had sufficient discre tion' tciireïtrain mV impetuosity till his deptøifr*, ■Wtíieb hb did With the air of л man intrusted with concerns of tm porfance Thòligh now «o ììear the object of my déShréVI feared to present myself before her' I seemed to enjoy the pleasure of expectation, and' to delay the reality indeed I wanted courage to present my self to those who had suffered so much fòr toyiÈflte, а«а ( 1 aimosi déttfeted the recejftitSn fMBöulfeV ^ffleet T Ventured Intótté-jSayafeVP^yeaihetitaee romvd, àli^IsteríèiífiP-possible to*tMŕ«e«.e wf iltain their
their 'Wftll known voices. I. advanced slowly up the half-broken stairs,, and raising up my eyes, saw a female pass along'the landingfrom «me itoomAo an¬ other; her handkerchief was.ath*r eyes, and concealed her face; but her form, her motion, Was that .of Eliga, 1 trem¬ bled, andstoodetiUforaimtwtxeitt,·, Hum, reeolleeting ЙМ* tiri» tmght ho,ftbe; ; best opportunity, of .presenjtíngimyaelf^o the family ,\b endeavoured ta:be,collecto). ι ..... .. L vi -'f" I tapped at the door, which, гЛЦ -s. Hanson opened with a scream of terror, and my natne was repeated by the girls, with exclamations of surprise and joy. All my inquiries were,directed for Eliza. 1 burned «4th «resisti Ые- impatience to see hen, I scarcely, remember·the.pir- «umatancesi.ofi our· iWeeting;, but she wiepiv<etitlifori,soí(4ettime í clasped her in.*ny,«rois, wiţhoirtiiBflwif tft.a^tţcu- Ывт Mjjfjoy|was,tofl(gr«it,tp f a4niitof ťKolwuatior»^. lţf(,waf< r at r sileM;,k(pd of •,<-ilt ' C i rapture,
rapture, which spent itself in jtgrH.aud ended in team. When I could take notice· of any thing about me, I was shocked at the appearance of misery, and substitute« of poverty. The pride of my sitters elect returning, they blushedj endeavoured to eoneeal many little thing« custom had ndt yel'ftmilifsrirfed. Poor-Hanson-wee in the «fhamber I·' had observad MirA enter. His grief at the destruction of his family, the fate impending over his dtmgbt«!«, sunk down the spirit» of the viHÎuoua.roaHı; even conseiousinnooence wail inadequate to hi» support—his health daily! deolined» hit· spirit was broken, and the fire of bw'eyes. now-no lohgw flashed with animation, •turning with languidi dejection'Orl those· hupless females, whom· he foarecVto leave, yet had not power t» take fromt a world where rttein fesAutj» waa- their bane, inhere · tlielp^piaJmcatiotts were· miy -i», ..len« citements
ciţemeiţt« tQi dasţţuqţioii, apdf where- the delicute feeling« of ţue lower ranks, of life; a«f matto' »f jesti and ridicule to those, whose; «inly, νμΐαφίβ distinction is possession., of wealth. He wis, sitting in, a, chfliri when Ien- tered., ond, would baye arisen to.receive ine, liad his, strength,, ptMsmit&di. „but, uiiabje, he, held· out lii« htjud, and.faint¬ ly smiüng«, expressed. hia f satÌBfiiet»p ut seeing me. Indigttatáon swelled, my heart at, the author of these sufferings, and í «egretted, the.tie of,eonsanguJBÍty. I endeavour^ to rouse his drooping spiritSi and eheev him with sun.eliiniiig prospects,. I-reminded him, of his шч>, mjee, th»*»- after a years pimbaţion, Ufi WPeVladKaneftmy 8 W* wÜUnis daugli- teft^awUItliiid befo>»v,hjB» the aeheme of calm i^Weieep t Д , had ¡projected, ι , ■ ,, i,C '.hf u, -," '[,... i -Ч ASiv^a^-eloBňKj^aídihiv " \ vtdll t^r,yw,.iţheedf)rer)i««ynfi«fş 1 .andt my , ·,(» ,,. с 5 wishes,
»vWfèüj 'with 'that sincerity becoming в irfan'^bclul'fto leave the' cohfu-Son l «tf life I 'kno»v Well that this partiality Ш rhy •daoghtei' arises from the maimer of your education; for, though the heir of great riches, you have seen little of life 'I'ftitr'HltiH,' ih giving my «onsent, tnárthi»"tirhe "Will come »vhen' you will ìepent 'ťhis 1 'apposition' to your'father, anil regret 'having·taken a wife« whose êridcrAthirinlVtlrpoverty aııdıbeaı«y.· , " Permit me," cried I, m α tone' of itilpíťtienbe; "'M pifť you right, and shew ytíi^Hiliť'my ρΓΟίβιβηοε· arises not from the'vaitt' J inotîvë you 'suppose.· I <con- fess 11 ! ktthiire' the 1 tieautlml »person of EliSîVı.^bııt h«W miftiy more are there е(\Ы,' if J hdf sufjef-Iori I equally <*m- deíhh'WPweätóieé«!· oC-jUdgnient whieh la^es'fťserf I« romäntieity, i».4*erl*hed only by ^Wffiimi'iWBd^eretllnlallfday of love in a cottage; but in what cot¬ tage Shall be found a'igitl'witiiitlte real ««sbM-t^anör^efl Мй£*'Ф*Ж1 '- ŕ almost
sdmoaaıaaidıi in what palace?. /Xliqugb, obliged.dike the,Roman danţse^, to,)a- bour at the spinniiigrwheel, she lias had youniţirecepts to,iııptructh,et.În all the valuable knowledge, nliecpmipg a woman'; .and though she ^ .wants,, 'tis true» the superficial *ccqmpli(SJimeiits,o/( music tandı dwoingi. th^e» dft inecessa;:};, she wayiteasilytaefiiuiííhitoSeí^heo, ,ţ|ie moat^refinecV, nealpnùjg, / can , /jqly, ad¬ vance .fttbat,«rtetiis ,poornrrW4, ^ lt W,f)fií rich."llt .1 I f, „ , (( „,>| filone^, replied/ Mr. tøanson^w^a calm smile, " is, 1 know, a «ielu,d«ng .co¬ pimi; and 1. acknowledge»,,though I would tsvei appearances, I should i>ot,J?e sorry to see ,myr,<Jaughter BSţabljşhe(l with fOtimHch secMflly,;, yet,,my chorac- terttw atftlatgymao of »timt ţarrn, offaith, soiifteMiBiperioa.tpifiyrø. other» .цагиси- iwlyifoshidefmyuacjtiqg.^hoţtţ your fy- ther'fct^wbatipii." , , ( , iH,<'4Í№dieani}S0ju¿'tj}r»t1«í I„i"|afliţrall I *»veisufl«Băl h^vfrj^swefey^appeal ^«mi* с 6 to
t»**»», whërr you α» i^mfideritttiuAaatt. peal-Woaltì-b· to aak α psiiscftptis»» li there wo tírommt whta« tins tiftiahalL oea»««?-tJ*a'-elMMwetanoe suflfaaent to ifoiwlW.lteobligBtWi? 1 ' : " Yes," he replied, " waibtUI jam urn- of age, you may then dispose of yourself, in tltenf«lli«m*(t«kea jwaroeytebon. dorr, *irf* ! tante thai ahm-me of «anetyt Yon WiU then se* 'thmg»in another lrglrt,<iatirj GtMke β* these, nouons íyosi/ have imbibed, whieh indeed befit the «haructerera man, butnot а mau of the »vorld ot fashion." t " ÄeWiember," and Iv « the ill come» queueës of yoa» first pwhttatiowţ tìiinfc to what y mı expose your daughters, by leétvmg them, Ш ease *f year death, »vitrtdulv offe in Whom «heyoan trasttAr 17«Tt¥ét*iirntre>te»1frelflh*ri#v«rtl;you, ι un № TfetA tl«'i«to4İm*renOiı «ŕ » f*»v inonth«» t m i»ť 'Щ «ti.» ■»¡УШЧЙив* he^««l«iT«W#oje«!keti-e).í. plıe*j'»-I ^(«»vtfftc^rttkíiiandi.-aheutjiíi-·,. -- severe,
sevewit naua* rbe» dona-, neiüitíi indeed will the. lew eonatdfer you a« kgn%.mejy ried within that periods . ., ,, , " The law," cried I, " allows nothing tot the feelings· of а.ттсг»ч& makea no detinotion *f peiraonst" . . , This- waa «w fiist camrewatia«,, and the model of several MbaequMttibut λ> found- hitt Ев-мПеявгвга* to. hti аЬажеа«; and plfjaaedfinajqihappy in,the,, »te»,, conree li enjoyed wilh Eliaa, ,ah*,time waa; fee fro» heavy on -my hamtei,, J. never ventured ftem thit retreat, its obn. seurJty aechtdoig me fiJatn dangtriiand I began to flatter «ayself the-atjger of my. fattier hadi(evat)ot«tau\i > oj!ithat he.was willing to ihe а pussita afectate*! «rf »yi aetiaBsaiii.iIniithiA *oweVer,,,I ,wıası,ınia- i^dMn;'li«,w*s|»rii<i^y:»>qi*irbte^ nry.«axiartantatairabfittn«itde^nia>g tt» pro-. ceed to open violence, he sent я løtfcfito Miv Шпарц îC^rataring..· the mot*, -im. pti%»;!«4rom»wa»)'in»tanvly,to ılunsts» ΊΊ -ij'h me,
ntèV^Wnahudder at the punishment he »viWpréparhìg to inflict on those who disobeyed his injunctions. ι н . filili'-. í , f ι , >■ »"<· AnfjtWill -youjV cried I, "bend¡your neck to the yoke?-. Will you. volini- tarily become the slave of despotism like tMe'pH'eivè-'lWJyei» daughter« t end smile at his menaces." :'n'14ieodme/t replied ihey searcely able ttt>«peakv «'you nsloimpossibUities. lio νβ»Ι irotfperoeiiie tkot he ds .acquainted with (röhr being.here ?> You are not yet oŕíhgff;· •уоихяппоь procure a. licence, wanting hist appuobation ;. to go to Scot¬ land'is impossible t «nd though Iiiioiv heartily consent to yetir union. I see not how it etui'be·effected."·, . , . ,„ , " Am I then," cried I, " so miserable л being, that the moment I am «vithin grasptoffelicity, l-am'tobeiumedariviay to'r.'distanoe.? Mm tlnevwii tonbe cheøtt ed %i<*lie.:.phantoniS),«f «upeej^ncfl^ Whetí<í.my- deta friendn«iîyi iprecaçKWïV .414 my
my father, r prevents you from »Making us both happy » » iWhat ineonjtenienoe can ensue ? The wrongs we have ell suffered call for measures of energy, and Heaven must sanction the union it appointe, by ι binding our desires, by bringing us together, though the powers of man were, exerted ΛΟι oppose US" rtt. π ' fl t .n He shook· his heedM this· train et rea¬ soning, a tear started from his eye.rimd m alleno? he' rested· his ahead upon the table This was the moment off. doubt and deliberation.' π I flew to where Eliza was, and taking her handı I pressed ibito my lips with wildness— ft Come,' ? cried I, " we are instantly to be married ; we must now, if ever, .offerì tip out» vow« ef unity." 'D. j >!·> II. 1 .|. || Crimeon tglowed ton the»t;heekfbo£ Elisa ; she half rose, but sinking down with'surprise'inidieonfusipiiiiifound it dirrreUlttobretithei'A glass oft water к»· < ι covered
c«V«í*i.hev and she assumed sui muoh reatlutioBi »uta mqiiire why.I was, m tUihaate?! п. ι "iBeeauie,"' eried. I, « 1 cannot live wkhowt-you-j-brcause tkey wouldl tear ш asunder. Cumethen, my £lia% my love, yeu» ftithec wajfrs for you." Ά My fatlmií'í-'/tpeatedsb*, whilst she tremblingly arose, and holding by the armor hertmotiMr, wetpetfurneiito his room.' .".. ι.. . ι " ЪЫщч Щ dean sir» " eried 1, " here a»· yourt chihlreni! can you refuse our mpiastr 4 €an you pronounce the sen¬ tence oť sur panting for ever ?" '' No^saidJlie, deeply sighing, " I can¬ not, retiree me, Bather «f Mercies, if I am wrong, and pity the-weakness of a parent, who would shelter from the storms of life one of those little ones thou haai given Him ¡n· trust 1 " .11. It .J ,.,.,. ... II. - „l' ' ! 'Ilne tm-butetrøi ot'ptótoni whiohlhad <тгЫ/Ш>ЪЫ тувеЩ -'iwbeidej* «H-ttás í' ' solemn
solem« retjuesţ,. I túrnod rflund»to.dry, up she tear» thati J^pd/tomitheiiryjea of EUaa,,and to es,tab)U*|her fwfidence, which was jiartly restoivď by the ι pre¬ sence of her father, and the soothing ex¬ pression», of hçr mother. With difficulty and many pausest Mr- Hanson read) »ver, thei ceramony,. bia wife's, ling sepiring as 'the pledge Oft я>у faith ; and thus the letter, mtended. to part us fbr ever, had bean the, maana qf a precipitate union; but alni' few were the expressions, ofı aetisfaetfon which could attend a marriage ao stranga.and so sudden, that whilst 1 pressed a kiss on the lip« of Щ/Щ. I had difficulty) to believe, sjw wm indepd ГОу wife. ι I w*qte пехф day, an aocountj qf this event tn mvfioouajn,, desiring h«),would meetmeatşnappoiprişd place, and no company «a to Wales. Д hoqgk vjjijily d«lining,,,J had .fome hopes tiiq.airof .ţi» . the
tHö'möuntaiiís, and the calm I expeled vľe shOttld enjoy, would restore МпНаП- sOKI'and'rënder his company а delightful addition tofttirement. >» ι tm ,11 , ι, , As my Uncle Theodoric hod never op- peared openly against me, nay, had twice sent the Hansons а small present, I con- clťirledfhfe'ríiljíht only be distant on*my MKefS ftmuittl'· I therefore Wrote him WOrd W my mawioge, with thanks for his kindness'during чиу youth; thus publishing myselfHvhat policy sbould HävetflUght nie to Conceal »ill Mmd been of »frge. ' ' Tltê'promised vengeance of my father had not begun to act. I puzzled myself to conceive how he could any way affect me 1 'I' Believed It might be merely a vahntj'to try theioxtent íoŕhia -aut hority, and Mjfthat ground even"*éntl»red w ρΊίΜΙβ wlt#.Hli4a. r n ut ,h ·■ i· ., b "« < ^<i ч t -.По ¡i uf«,. t -, 'm' Щ
My cousin arrived aa we had appoint¬ ed ; he bud even taken so much interest in my service, aa to inquire out a spot suited to my taste and finances; and wafted by this sudden gale of good for¬ tune, we took possession of our little do¬ main. My eoufiin remained with us a month, and as all -waa peace and tranquillity during his stay, I looked on him 'as α protecting angel, and would bave retain¬ ed him longer, had not a little incident prevented my «desiring it. We were walking out together one morning, when he informed me that he must depart the day after to-morrow ; and on my 'in¬ quiring why, he replied—" I am charm¬ ed tvith your example*, but pride will not permit- ine to^follow it. ' I ato half in 'love with 8&рМв;> and were she my equal,-would rejoice to make heťmy wife; and as it 4 delicacy and 'hbnbbr forbid me to think of her in any other way." ι ' ·' And
'|fA»4 *b«s ŕ " said I,,'' to n fidlţ prWe yø», «wovddi aaorifice your judgment. Haye you,not sufficient to be free ip your ptjejes-rrrto place it where yo» will ? or, ist ttw, possession of wealth only to make ι«» slaves to the opinions of others, and to give up every taste of our own ' This is the peculiar curse attached to royalty, that they are shut out, from all the aßeotjpn& of friendship, sincerity, and^OW, 1 " ' '» The worldi my dear cousin," said he-i " we must 'though I own the folly) swim down with the, tide, oţ be liable tp the,ridieu)e of our, friends; and truly, I could illibear ta lieari iti whispered when I entered a ball-roon), ' Ь that her? Hflmjsh ( She's, tolerable, ithqugh, cqn- sidering tbe.education, she musti have hodí-m' po jţoi) know, Mr·. I'm, told she's a jiooFicţergymanîstdanghţer, with, outt a, sixpence,, and of ¡Hieb, чя# virtue, that, pofflr,<?oi|ydon «ft» oWiged W hoW toHymen," » " b " t к ·· Well,"
" Well," ettid I, " Ishall not be tempt¬ ed into ball-rooms ; and were I, I should impute the whispers of defamation, 'to malicious revenge, or the spiteful insi¬ nuations of an unsuccessful candidate." " Be it so," said he; " but I mtwi fly where I cannot conquer; and will give five hundred pounds to the man she shall choose as a husband." ' I was astonished at this heroic pitch Of generosity, which 1 admired, but could not have Imitated, and this differ¬ ence (for I was willing to flatter my selt- esteem) arose from the nature and the length of the connexion, as well'as the variety of our tempers. He had not, like me; been years the companion Of his choice-, his acquaintance was but of а month, and therefore it was compara¬ tively 'easy to nip passion in the bud. I parted from mm »*ith regret lobn- sidered myself now as securely Settled, and
and 'took pleasure in 'planning, with Eliïa, several little improvements; jok¬ ing with her on the addition we should receive from the increase of our family, and representing, that time might tven reconcile my father to a marriage, against »vhieh pride alone could object Thus »ve began to settle into the routine of a domestic life, when we were surprised by α visit from my uncle Theodorlc. He expressed his sat'wfhction at the spot I bad chosen, and after a gentle remon¬ strance at the degradation I had been guilty of, acknowledged that Eliza was some excuse ; and that it should be his endeavour to bring my father to terms. ' My heart overflowed »vith gratitude at so unexpected a kindness ; and if I entertained no very sanguine hopes from bis interposition, I expected at lesui an assurance of tranquillity. The charming Eliza gave delight to the hours v «nid, sunk in the lap of repose and indulgence, I foresaw
Itlbresew not the hideous ruin,pţepşre|a for me—I saw not the dreadful cfiaem which was to break beneath my feet, and entomb ıhı its cavities every particle of remammg bliss. > , , ,, : il perceived (for laye is, çagU}teyed) timt in.· the smilesiandi иш esses of Jßhza, theneţ-was ян «ir,«if ,soiKow„,that iifuher gayest inotnants she .»Vfould vniiuse, ац«1 sigh,« lihad more HhMiıOnceı caught № weeping iııJıer cliamber, whiph shejjn- putedf.toi her fears on account of lisi fiı- tlier.AMut usihev ftrtliei; might be W'd to growl better, if «nyt clwnge was yisMe, I wasi ill satisfied,, Tonnen ting .myself with α thousand conjectuies, my final eoiiclusion was, that soinetlmig in my bfíhaviour disgusted hpr, thpugh her de- licttey.»,rentmined ,her, «¡omplaiiUsa and grieved aj hen want.qf cpnfidejiee, which ^«wídihavje ,led,her,te,iuubqsoi» all her nn»ţiftejf3,to,fWe,,and|repi()se^n шуДсу^ ^ft^|dj»Uj>ti M c-x ^darm, lt I,peij(ţjqţ»ed,roy n ·ιι-1 I suspicions
sHtpleieiie to Mr. : Hansan, 'desifing his '«ävioe. *' Æheedorei" said he, "Lamebbut to cut you to the heart. My daughter, unable longer to be silent, has besought me to enfold to you tlie cause Of: her grlefv as rnore capable of supporting the ■detail. Youmtist prepare to bear j with ciunmetsi, aprogressiwioflvilhmy, »uohas fortitude alone oval enable you. to eoin- b«t and defeat. You are not ignorant of the grovelling, base disposition > of your untole: you remember his ι unjust treatment of the Simpsons ; yeu will nob wonder then if he has takeni a fancy 'fortEliza, orlffieuses violence to obtain his desires." I wis stíiíek du«bi at'this opening; thei blood fete«Wk»iiry flhwk^iaml wr 1rps'fjr»iv«red in reply, 1Щ*ф»Ыож Mete'ia violent, 4l»t l-ftmidtkidlffiiUit Wbretrthe, **dg«lfi«sjs«wi*»k«itiies-fbr . ; ■ ••hr.
air. . Mr, Hanson was alarmed; he en¬ treated me to be calm, that he might continue what he had to say ; to which I,listened with silenti though eSqtnsite torture. " ¡ " You are already aware of the visits made us by Theodorien servants, under the specious pretence of bringing us a trifling supply, unknown· to your fa¬ ther, but in reality with terms of the most scandalous nature to Eliza. He endeavoured to move her by the consi¬ deration of her family ; he proposed as part of the wages of prostitution, that I should be reestablished, and my de- elining year« protected ; that her sisters should be portioned to deserving men, and hţr brother sent for from India, and settled-jn>a good curacy ι but these she bad resolution to Withstand. But when jthe opiWraet of certain ruin was present- ed-*-w,heri *he appeared then the cause oíottť«*leetnictienji*er.'heaiť bediime _ ' (VOL. ii. D sick,
sick ; and she has confessed her mind wavered, no personal injury appearing equa' to what we must suffer for her sake ι for she was reody to apply to her¬ self the admirable song of Robin Gray : Mj mutier didna spenk, But bite tnukeil m *п;1«0А «Ul mj ti«Mt was tilit to bunk " It was at this time you returned to us, and overbalanced ; her projected sa¬ crifice. She concealed from you, and from us, tire vile offers she had received, and fancying they would never be agnin repeated, assumed her usual tranquillity. The visit of your uncle renewed her distress; and though-she, by every stra¬ tagem, endeavoured to avoid meeting with hiin alone, he has found opportu¬ nity again to urge his offeis by promi¬ ses ; and threatening, ho has denounced (in case of her résistance) «ii mt, and on you, •everlasting vetigeance. "Ήίβ words were, that the angen of squibeCyphon, compared to hie, should'be ássthè 'blow¬ ing
ing of the south wind to the irresistible fuiyi of the north. He has even ven¬ tured to attempt violence. Unable lon¬ ger to suffer in silence, from fear ot' »vhat consequences may follow, she has besought me to desire you would for¬ bid his presence, and endeavour to pro¬ vide against his threats " I had some difficulty to withhold my¬ self from instantly flying to wreak my vengeance upon him, but policy sug¬ gested the necessity of dissimulation I flew, to Eliza, to sooth her with my caresses, to quiet her fears, and to assure her, he might indeed threaten, but he bad not the power to perform. The task of'appearing with iny usual tranquillity before Theodoric, was too difficult-for performance! Passion dyed my »cheeks in'scarlet the moment he approabhed: I trembled with rage, and was, rbliged to torn from hint to subdue .' i D 2 my
my anger He saw instantly the change in my behaviour; and not doubting my knowledge of his perfidy, smothered his resentment, but informed me, that he had received intelligence, requiring bis return that evening. I made no at¬ tempt to prevent him ; I could not even conceal my satisfaction, flattering myself that his absence would restore us tran¬ quillity, and that I had nothing imme¬ diately to fear fiom his enmity. In fact, I »vas at a loss to discover from what quarter, and in what form, his threats were to commence their action. X was unconscious of a positive bieach of thç,la»ys of my country, I possessed in Britain a freehold estate; I owed no man a, shilling, and confid¬ ing in my own, innocence, could, not possibly guess that persécution hovered over ui. ,
CHAP-
CHAPTER III.
On the second day after his departure, Mr. Hanson being something better, and pleased with the cheerfulness in our faces, removed from his room to'partake a trifling feast we hád provided, and to enjoy the little sallies of youthful sport, when our entertainment was destroyed by the entrance of Ыо Officers of jus¬ tice, with á warrant to apprehend Mr. Hanson for felony, ' "For felony 1 " cried I, starting up,- whilst the'»Vomen trembled and turned pale.—"You mistake, my good f sirs* Mr, Hanson never was guilty of an ille-
41 That," rephed they, " ıs not our business, for the gentleman's sake I hope so, but he will do better to prove it on his trial than here —Are you ready to go, sir?" turning to BIr Hanson In the moment of persecution, though oppressed by the weakness of disease, that excellent man was firm and col lected he arose, and giving his hand to the officer, declared it was perfectly right, lie knew for what he had to suf¬ fer, but he did not repent " I conjure you not to grieve," said he to us— " your distress afflicts me infinitely more than this mandate of justice " " And what," demanded I, " is the опте you are charged with ' ' " It is," answered the officer, " the act of marrying clandestinely two per¬ sons under age " " It is me then," cried I, " who have ruined you. It is I, who from motives ot self-interest, have brought you to dis¬ honour, and perhaps to public shame,— But,
But, sir," said I, scarce knowing what 1 said, "cannotyou, cannot you accept mei who am in tact the only guilty person, in place of this gentleman, who is to» fast declining to suffer tong the punish¬ ment you would inflict ?" I was called to my recollection by the complaints of Mis. Hanson ; her daugh¬ ters hung round theirfather in teais, »ml offered up to Heaven the most earnest jprayere. " And can you," said I, * tear from the bosom of hie family, а man who. morally, has been guilty of no crime ' Are your hearts so savage, as to lead a man in his situation to α prison, where privation of air will anticipate his sen¬ tence ?" " All this is nothing to the purpose," replied one, " our duty must be done- come, sir, wetmuatinotstandtuponicere- mony." ю İ Thus,
Thus, in one moment, were We dashed from pur elevation to the ground, andthe cup of bitterness held up totour lips. I knew perfectly well to whom thi« »troke Was to be imputed, but that I might not, by attending my duty, leave· behind me my wife exposed to outrage, I гчсотра- nied Mr. Hanson, with my family, to the town where the county gaol was. I paid а visit to my uncle Thompson, to secure his interest ; but had it been of avail, he »vas too ill to take any active part, and his son was engaged attend¬ ing by his bed. I now reproached myself fort ι my ill- judged impatience, ¡лш! felt although I had been the,sole cause of this calamity, a calamity not a little augmented ,by the grief, which inoeasantly preyad.'upon Eliza, and imbitţered eyery JhowJ The health of Mr. Hanson now doily; and visibly declined, and though, fei»;. trial !.. WaS
waa to come on in lesa than a month, I had doubts of hie living to see it over ; but whilst 1' was preparing to support his counsel with what little argument I was mnèter of, I was Myself Dearly ovei- whelmed in another process, of a nature which touched me in the nearest rela¬ tion, and like the goad of a driver, urged me (already irritated) nearly tó madness This was no other than a suit, instituted on the part of my father, to annul my marriage as Void. Thus hampered in the toils of a villain, I would gladly have found shelter in the untrod desert. I detested the proceed¬ ings of mén, who, undercòlour of justice and law, could trample on the sacred ties of union, and for a mere point of forma¬ lity, adjudge a punishment greater than was annexed to a rupture of the public peace, or an outrage against society. The detestable Theodoric, now. he had D 5 pushed
pushed ua be fancied into a strait with¬ out escape, bad the effrontery to, make overtures to Eliza ; and to shade ,his pro¬ ceedings, advanced, that as she ivas not iny wife, she was at that moment living with me in » state of licentiousness, and therefore her qcceptunce of himself wa« cţiily a change of,masters, so much in¬ deed for the better, that »vhilst I should heap upon her and her relations nothing bu,t, miseries, .he vyould even now stretch out his arm to save them, and place tliein in wealth and happiness. I was astonished at an impudence so glaring, and sighed fox some opportunity of returning vengeance on ,hi» head. Meantime the trial ofMr. Hanson emut¬ on, and turned upon two questions, their being no, witness, who ítouldj-legally be forced to give eyjdeqce.. , ¡- „ Theqiieitions were, Дгсуоч,тагг)«1? W,ho, ,mw¡ed „you. J r ,Bj(„a «Qgu^ocpi- deiit
dent our case came on the next, and Mr. Hanson being found guilty, was remanded back till sentence could be pronounced. I had difficulty to retain calmness sufficient to recollect my de¬ fence; having determined to plead my¬ self, conscious that mueh depended ли touching those passions a'disinterested perann "could not easily trffecti " The case was proved töthétoisfiictibn of the'judges, that being not dtily under age, and with the absolute disáent df tüy father, but even without banns, and in a private fchamber, the rflarriagO ceremony had been performed, it was to all intelits and purposes void. I arose, and at t«r Ob¬ taining leave, entered Oh the defensive III , I . in« ""M"the 'first plece,""said'l, "you have this instant 'tølronodricéd a man guilty, for the very act you are now ' '¿bMg'W pXVVe Wás of Ше"е1гМ, for '«^'»«»'mAieiírbr^arri^dt' rtìar- " ,ι D 6 ned
(ied. .ilf Ms. Hanson, ia .guilty of felony fioíA-hiiviug ţmanied цв, the» I air« ran»· riedr>a>Bİ)heıBi>sıera the penalty ţi Sfiit am not .mameeViaUbaly .yoil cahnetiitrara* port u man fourteen yeais^ for the, mere act;of,icradiag.ovfir:the.itoarriage cere« mony, wlijch α layman,might hove done as well, andito itbeiaelfieame purpose Thus the one proposition ,is'a negation of the other. But, my lords, you have condemned Mr.Hanson forJiavingiroar- ried us in apriveto-charober.,.Do you thirds the meanness of ttbe >phwe is л difference;«! the sight,of Godi'— ¡But I askfjyotir pardon fon .mentioning oue who.liadsoilittle,to. do, ini,titÌ8icaee, I wiH^Eocried tostate in alewfiţl wjay-r you Md« thajt tbe vow*,»ve have, made, the ceremony we have used, is not bind¬ ing according to.laWr» buHl-esk, dO you not-allow tteiűf^fWt'itoihe ant binding, as almost; to «intuii t s to,jmiiwagejlaud еуев .ţ« deu^Uttţ.a proea» sftaliţoekty, when, а mob sirapljlisay«·»» i^vwtiMKi I will
J!»na'6wawrjri*/at»,.rmd she, Without re¬ plying tin the aflìrtnatith,! barely does not oppose it iby word or deed? - Here then," I criad I, 'Vis aftartorju4İjr-*.iı«,oııe point the toere presumption is held good, in the other, the most solemn engage« menta done away. My lords, I am ex¬ tremely sorry-farther ltd! trespass, and I hope what I.nowadvance шву be con. sidered of serious importance, and which otherwise will convert into a jest those laws» which but fortheiminton»Of power and ehicsilery. Would *ender twelve mil¬ lions ef people ,bleseed.i It will, be- ,ad- vanced, that, as a minor, {«wld not cnm tract,mni,errgagementH4ny minority is no»v expired, soi trifling was, (the 4iffer. enee. ,oİ}ııt J..«sk,;doesn0t tbe la w allow «,minor ¡t«c«elirat!tiioi\.!riecesearieeK A wife then ie ne^feneoeesMiyHnbutfaj^nv {tank« <(I ivcSlld aofte« the. tormi of re- prise«*>rrr« companion it hen is-, and, thus, itt sfím ,the liMRitit üoniWlíded mto' « eajsetion"of prostitution.·.. How many .«- V of
of our nobles and gentlemen, whose mo¬ rals are naturally good, and who would have married but for this restriction, which would throw nature into fetters, keep mistresses in private? How ma¬ ny. ----- "' I was here called to order, and desired to' plead to the question, and not to points of law. " I háve done then," said I ; " 1 know it is an ungrateful subject; but this 1 would inquire, if my divorce is to be a thoroet mensat" " No," replied the judge, "that would be supposing the marriage to have ac¬ tually taken place 1 , but here there is a nullity ab initio, and you are each al¬ lowed to contract elsewhere.'" "'' *' Then, my lord," said I, " ťhis' ís surely inconsistent. 'You ¡mnul !j my marriage toiaáyü-Vbm'oi^, ШШЪ. beŕty to contract it again to-morrow-, and
ond I pledge myself before this honour¬ able court—before all those who are here assembled, that I will have no other wife than this Eliza Hanson, which public promise I ìiold tantamount to un engagement on parchment. And now, my lords, and you, gentlemen of the jury, I will trespass yet a momci.t, in order to hold up to, your detestatiti", fie man who, in fact, is the instigator of these rigorous proceedings ; and tliough infamy will brund bis name, I fear it will not correct his vitiated habits." " Hold !" cried the judge, " we must not allow defamation in open court, and aa this process is instituted, on the part of your relations, surely you »vould not, through them, wound yourself; 1 ' I bowed, and remained.silent, satisfied by, the countenances of, my father and uncle, ti)at I yet held,,!!! илу hand a rxiwin-,,to inflyt, pupislimsiif, bjt diaco¬ ni m in, -j. ; '> , , , vering
vering to the world the depth of their injustice. Being discharged from the court, and divorced from Eliza, I would have pro¬ ceeded instantly toiprocurea licence, had I not been withheld by my concern for Mr. Hanson. His wife and daughters were weeping 1 beside him, and my en¬ trance seemed tò angıîıerıt their distress. Ii pressed my beloved EJira to my bo. som in one corner of'the dungeon; we wept at our misfortunes, endeavouring to< give comfort to each other; but our father and friend, in the last stage of a dedine, 'confined by heavy irons, on а bed of straw, was а picture too shocking to be dwelt 'om; whilst his wife and daughters wept beside him, and not a little augmented his sufferings by their complaints. In this distress (for α sum of money) ' we
we were allowed to pass, the night togo.· ther, compared with which, iny former imprisonments .when 'condemned to brood alone on my sufferings, was .plea· sure itself; So false is that maxim which fancieá а division of distress, by sharing it with those we love. No sleep cldsed my eyes, no dreams of delicious fallacy. deluded me a moment from the scenes before me; all was one dark prospectw-i and the misery was augmented by re¬ membering that a father's hand .was exalted to destroy when it should have saved; and if, through the heat of youth, I had been led astray, he should have attempted gently to reclaim) but now every new ι infliction raised up the bit¬ terness' of hatred; I abhorred the very presentation of his image, and impre¬ cated on the head of Theodtric ineffeo tual curses. In this temper of mind, the morning dawned upon ihe. through the gratings. of
of the cell My companions enjoyed a disturbed kind of slumber I hung over Khza with that kind of sensation- а motliei must feel for the child of her love, and whose existence she knows to be marked with fatality I traced with fondness every moulding of featurt, every grace that had charmed my youth. and depicted those smiles which bad once dimpltd round her mouth At niy approach a tear fell upon her cheek, I stooped to imprint upon her forehead а kiss, and sighed as over а treasure about to be torn from me Moved by the impression of some dream, she stretched out her arms, and clasped me to her, murmuring, ш а half-broken voice—" No, my husband, they shall not tear me from you ' 'I his little incident touched too deeply on my feelings to be borne, I started up-1 folded my hands—" It is too much—
much—too much for nature to suffer ' cried I " Oh God, give my soul re¬ venge—let retribution no longer be de¬ layed' Sly friends awoke at this exclamation, which I was ashamed to own and after inquiring the health of Mr Hanson, 1 went out to enjoy the air—to reflett on the steps I should take Weaned and disgusted with what I had suffered in England, and seeing no end to the vm diction of my father, or the nefarious practices of my uncle, I adopted the design of attending Mr Hanson to America, and settling in some impe¬ netrable forest, »«here the hiboui of our hands might supply our exigencies, and the surplus provide against the in¬ trusions ot weather, and perhaps m time afford us some of those superfluities, which are like fruita on the road across α parched land
I began
I began to calculate · our experioee, and the probability of success in such on undertaking, until I hod finally es¬ tablished our residence. I pleased my self with the patriarchal prospect till I had lost myself in the wilderness, and was brought back' to а remembrance of the ills that overwhelmed mc in tor¬ rents, by a tap on the shoulder, and the magic words of— f Sır, you are the king's prisoner." " I may as well," said I, carelessly, "be the king's prisoner as not; but I should be glad to know how I have of¬ fended him whom I never saw." ■ < " Here is a writ," said the felloiv, " at the suit of Theodoric Cyphon, alias lord I)——, for board, lodging, and educa¬ tion, to the amount of two thousand pounds in sterling currency." ι I was struck dumb at this demand; and not having any one to give boil, nor choosing to be taken to а bailiffs, was conveyed
conveyed to the debtor's side of the pri¬ son. I was so accustomed to unforeseen accidents, that I cannot say, after the first surprise, I experienced any new de¬ jection ; for being pressed down to the lowest, and blunted to trifles, one grand consideration alone engaged my atten¬ tion. The shock was, however, too much for Mr. Hanson; it in one moment dashed to the ground all his hopes of his daughter's security. He saw that even our marriage was dissolved, and that power could trample on eveiy obli¬ gation, moral and human. It was with difficulty I obtained per¬ mission to visit him.—" Theodore," said ¡ip, " and you, my, children, I am con¬ scious that now my exertions are over— that „this world will npt long contain α Spul that bath suffered the inflistions of malignity. I have striven to suffer with L patience—
patience — to trust in Heaven for sup port and if I sink beneath the trial, the weakness of humanity must plead for pardon One thing—but one thing—1 would impress upon you all it is the only legacy I can bequeath you—and that is, deviate not from the line of moral recti tude, and then, though trodden under toot by power, you will imvardly find yourselves fai, very far, above your op pressors—you will possess that innate assurance which will open before you tl e gates of α smiling eternity, where the evei lasting principle of life shall dis pense to you an equivalent reward A smile played round the mouth of the dying man a momentary fire flash ed in his eyes Thus stretched on the straw, in the bottom of a dungeon, with no object of pleasure to exente his regret, he breathed out his soul with a gentle sigh, and a calmness the wicked can ne¬ ver inherit ^ Blunted
Blunted as I was, and deadened to the keen arrows of misery, I felt that yet I might be sensibly toucb»d—that the fancied callosity of my htart was vulnerable I turned round my eyes in а sort of stupor—I beheld Mrs Hanson sinking down in α fainting bt—I sow grief in the faces of the girls so dread¬ fully fixed, that no tear started in their eye—I beheld the onte lovely face of Eliza the image of death 1 closed my eyes on the dreadful presentation, and found pleasure in believing myself near¬ ly choking, and that I should soon be released A little cold water, dashed in my face by the gaolei, however, recovered me, though nmy brain whirled with the shock, iwhiclt had endangered rationality My formér spirit, in some degree, began to returrt! Opposition roused the sink¬ ing particles of fire, and brought my de. termination to α tone of action. I re¬ lt t Λ membered
membered' how much ι resolution had aided my escape,from the mad-house, and X drew some comfort by reflecting, that in the evolutions Of the wheel of life, my turn of elevation muet cornii >' i> I t ι ι Thus once more master of my reason, I wrote to my cousin to sell the estate, а»|а|«1яюму,яппииу,,1о,*11е ¿mount re¬ quired; in the mean time, endeavouring to cheer the spirits of Eliza, . ■-'Itjww itniiige,,tliat[ane. accident suc- 'ßeeding to another, constantly-delayed the time I had appointed to procure n licence: and, as if fate had interposed, new,, w hen I.agftin, turned, iny ithoughts ito itbtfiiwţiimrtMrhi Haramia» taken 'isliofaifever, anánot bei»ig(fw;niitte4,tP remain in tbe prison, her.dJlMghtefö at¬ tended ber in β private lodging. > .1 ' - un t Л/, к, ■*,*■* '**> ' .1 ι. ;- "w . «, .- üi « >ws«. ten , , - ι . iOja.nl η. , ·υβη««»> ^ *âr ле u , „ CHAP-
CHAPTER IV
' Oh t!»t my soul had wing d from «arttı its flight Fre d««ds litte these h .d burst upon my sight t 1 ui.LiEVEi) that my enemies would content themselves with standing aloof to behold my sufferings, without invent¬ ing new modes of torment, thus 1 more readily trusted Eliza from my sight, and waited with greater patience the exertions of my cousin, who, notwithstanding the recent death of his father, busied himselt to serve me The fever of Mrs Hanson daily m creased, and settling*on her spirits elud ed every effort of art Thus in less than vol il E a month
η month she was laid beside her husband, adding one more to the long Ust Of vic¬ tims who have fallen before the arm of despotism. My cousin, conscious of what I must suffer, hastened to visit us, in¬ forming me of the many delays-he met «vith in raising the money, which· lie im¬ puted tO some insidious practice of my lelations. He touched on the'nullity ot liiyrnerritige, and finding Istili con¬ sidered Eliza as my »vif'e. Advised me, the instant I regained my liberty, to fly to Scotland, and no<ohgé!<'åliew· the nc- rfdenHlr Of fortulle or dWigW'nPmireVr»- leftco to divide us ■ "' ' ■> " II' . .-. . l , I thanked him'for this hint, reproach¬ ing myself for not having ere'tM» »döpt- ed it. ι I'instrncted WiW Ιο·-Ί»ι*ο*ν«Γν thing ready for our flight âïopWWte'as possible. But, alas ' who can defy with imptinitty the threatsdf poivwëftd riches ? Who-can fly from the'mswuteei» *ríöf »Woith ? My unde; By means Of-A spy, ' whom
»ylioni h* had proeured amongst the mi¬ serable wretches that pined out their ex¬ istence in durance, traversed our »hole designi and perftctiy understood the method we had laid down Perhaps to facilitate our de»ti uctton, he consented, »vith apparent clemency, to sign a gene¬ ial release, on payment of two-thirds of the two thousand pounds, my cousin generously advancing α moiety till my affairs could be arranged. Towards the dusk of the evening, as u e had concerted, he came to declare me 11 ее, to open the gates ot iny prison, and lead me to my expecting bride He in¬ formed me that he had given Eliza and her sisters notice to be ready for us, and that a chaise was in waiting, to prevent u minuteis delay, We.Walked·hastily,to,tlieir lodging, whivh-Waawl^tAvoi street» distance, and ,,uufi ni rjeíi.j ran nou ,
ran up stairs without warning, in the delightful expectation of finding them impatient to attend us. I fancied to my- «clf a repetition of those blushes that had formerly adorned Eliza, when first she promised to be mine, when first I receiv¬ ed her trembling hand from her sainted lather. But this was α dream of gaudy foundation, and vanished as the shadoivs of faiicy, A scream of surprise broke fi om Sophia and her sister at our entrance, each tvgerly demanding what bad bap- flenéd'to bceifsion our so sudden return I fl " Return!" said I ; " we tire but this moment come from the prison. But »»heie is Eliza?" " Oh, I'know not," eried Sophia ; " oh my ' Sister ' what will'become of us! She is already gone—and yon not to have seen her ·" "' When ? where-?"' ciied I in distrac¬ tion. 'Oh horrör r what is it that· has ' '' 'happened '
happened ? Where ? with whom «.111 she be gone?" I was too much agitated to attend to their answer ; but my cousin drew from them, that а mau, in α dark coat, had de¬ livered a message as from us, «lesinny Eliza »vould, for particular reasons, hasten alone, and immediately, to such an inn, our former rendezvous being inconve¬ nient,; convinced by this, latter circum¬ stance, and the token of a ring (that I now, for the first time, discovered, had been stolen), that we were in waiting, she had not hesitated accompanying the man. This was the sum of an information which fixed me in Д momentary trance , a cold chill gradually ran through my frame, and large drops of sweat gathered on my brow. 1 Edward was alarjmed at the change of, my features, and catclppg me by, the arm, shouted, as to wake me e 3 from
from deep, mă eitdeHVoUred 1 te hispiré me with the ardour of pursuit. 1 start¬ ed at thé summons and kissing both my sisters, with a niöiimful tone Of Voice bade'them adieu, as though my soul had been sensible of the long ftrevMll it was t»Tting, ! 'nnd of the dreadful sufferings be¬ fore it 'My cousin took on himself the task of incjuiry, my' mind Whirling in'wild confusion,' aiid'-mý whole 'înteţit 'being ori ptìrsirìrYbut Whom, or viWre to .pur¬ sue, was not éasyfo aieotJveri'wëglithier- ed, indeed,'that к postfcharíè and four had, about halfan hour before, drove* Off -with a person such as we described, to¬ gether with к tingl* man, On thè road to London, but fu'rtlier Hief knew'nbV. Horses Were quréWy'rrrb*Ìi^àtìd>not a mdrritmtMost iri'hasrefiing aft» 'Tilfem, but? tJwirig· to tifï-'darkiTees W'tiiê'tiight, ПО trfices còàld bè' diedre« beýbnďtílfe 1,1 ll eighth
«ehth twlestqua-t" (Cousin," sauj I,, m ayowe agitated by deşpoţr, " f¡o me, rn}- serabb; m ţ am, life ıs become ац insup¬ portable burden, and as I cannot even accept of your goodness farther, I will search by myself into the den, of this monster—-I will either find ЕДга or pe¬ rish " It waa,wv vem İ№ rdţaopted.jtO; dis¬ suade me, by representations of, danger, I was armed with pistola and despair, and putting лрцг« to my horse, г«х1е off m tbe dark , The generous,young imp followed ihr some way, b,ut aş I could not allow hmţjtp fptangle»Jnmşe^f p^y oauss,,í tıjtrııed ,down ^crpsSfroad, jpd Ы him,iít}ifthftdark, Му Ьр те цпас- сивЦш«^)^8^тшз^>хегС1«да, and not inspired with the rage of his master, he тШЩЯч aţţ^^aşjvxith du^ilfx "Rade to advance ţ tøfl also entangh$ my¬ self in roads.that jl was a stranger to, ^^frnSpIrøtetofqf Iffili^mgthat ltde» E * Ï traversed
I traversed them more than once. Im¬ patience augmented my distresses, till having jaded the poor animal to its last exertion, it fell beneath me, and my foot catching iii the stirrup, was so pressed, that I found it impossible to rise I stretched out my hand to reach one of the pistols, with design to finish on the spot the misery of my situation; but the fair form of my beloved wife present¬ ed itself, and the picture which I had in our momentary prosperity procured, seemed to heat in unison with my heart I cherished this phantasm of a sick ima¬ gination—I shrunk from my purpose; and the last advice of Mr. Hanson recur¬ ring to reflection, I lifted up mine eyes towards the dark concave of heaven -, but I wanted courage to address a petition to a Protector whom I k fancied had de¬ serted me, I 1 V 1*1, In ,this ; situation I remained several j hours,
hours, during which I suffered the most excruciating tortures of mind on the fate of Sliza. I knew that from herself I had nothing to fear ; I knew that open vio¬ lence With her would not prevail ; but I knew also, that Theodoric was guilty ol actions even demons themselves would blush to own -, yet I trusted that the dig¬ nity of virtue would awe him 'into re¬ spect, and at least, for ä time, bar against outrage, In this situation I was discovered by а peasant going to work in the morning; and having released ine from thé horse, which was actually dead, he conducted me to his cottage, standing by the road¬ side at thé distance of a hundred yards. His wife undertook my «ire-, and the part bemg considerably swelled, 'made ready a fomentation of warm Vinegar she procured at a distant alehouse. To me the pains of the body were only second- ^¿nsideratiofis! IdiscbveVeď'.ín many
clrcumİMiirorf atiestes, Ш tbìè ťot táger was пМаШЧо к Amllţ/'m^ir VTl lage, nnďfA'feVe^edpAteeseflHilr^rrr ficient sagacity, might uneiisliëeretlly gather itíforuiaí«tín4»Jàt*w<«ild hold rVtítn my ремопЙ inquirí« HaVirfg'giVènfclh. ínatídrJMdnVtb {(Л ceed,' he seťottt Whitsť I bated riiyself wrìtino Ì6 my cduínri, tiduri ať WSty period I laid dovtøi my pen to gif* way to the bitterness of reflection Åt night my emüsary returned lie fiHfl' ttlade eVerý Щ&у without eifcfct, -hlfvlng learned merely, thattfty Tatli«* w« ¿«me totrèland, and that TW^orteltatî kit been on rna еШЧе Шее mý trial From tWs î gathered' rJheií· aWS{ftcltJiib of tny revenge aha 1 «egaW^rmoet to doubt tfiat ¡t vrts my litri* Ш flanSrft- pamiedEIiirf. I ordered 1 poetirfgiWlrllb befíXwIinthéphnr^raUowna, o№rmğ aréwaWtrj Щ mfotm»«bWH l' scoti ' ° ^ found
foundjl must J^av^lyi^mvidfinto fifty divisions, If J attended, to the^_ nij- merouspretensiqnsof infiirrnaţîţii. , , My^tíoUsin came ţp vjgfy^ nie „iß the cottage; and if a tiţind rgit*te^ aş inine could receive any comfort, it was ш the kindaess flfJ»i,i аЦепйо1). 11; Ш had.se¬ cured tilijSpjftlfe. a placeiM вф^/тШ u school, and %\щ younger ^ojace aş lady's maid, ip Ь>^<^, г ж^ ( 8Цца1^П8аеу woiild^e W %»a^ay, t prot^ite^¿ antice jtromiţcd) ju екегу future „0D^rtuiji f ţy, to befriend, theta, He ttţojf lea,ye of nie, his own affairs r^o^iring^^jŞtţe^ţlon , and being i»nfiried by rny leg, I was ne¬ cessitated to sit inactiye, a pţey to every melancholy suggestion ; surely no time of ray liffi„waş sov dreadfully tedious, W44fifjnom|nţ p^lşd tne, to exertion, anıl evjşRjţ «rømen); Ψ*? W Á 4 P*F ful inactíqn„j„ ť| ь , !( s ^, ч , ,fUW · It nn tut 1,{l tu ii. f >t"Th4fcc*fteefrfflffi« ιΦΫ,ΡΜ w,Hh Мят»1 E б out
out, tidings of Eliza. - 1 8pmetímee. in¬ dulged the suggestion that she had been assassinated, or transported to some other country. This was the more feasible, the marriage we had α second time pro¬ jected not basing taken plage-, thus I should -be at liberty to contract again, und I lioubted na,t, when they should have, as they fancied, sufficiently .hum¬ bled me. this, would be the proposal ; but I determined to bar against.a moment¬ ary weakness, and raising my thoughts and my eyes towards heaven, I solemnly vowed, throughout the duration, of' my earthly existence, never to marry any, unjess it were Eliza, without certain and tineontrovertible proof of.her decease. ,(, ,1 ι ,'. On the sixteenth day, one of my cousin's servanta brought,we,a lette,rrfdi- rected to.Jiis Iwueo,,, Iiasţgptl^kjBe*- the direction, tq bg EMs, ...Ijspened it with a r ,tbousf#4 fpfebo^irjgs οίο^Η, , andtreedjtfit ШЬй end„W(tJB %»τΐ»»^Βτιΐ
tio« of'6 man in the last effort» of de¬ spair " - '
" Once; dear Theodore, my heart fondly called you'rdrne','once'it heat wltìi tumultuous'delights tHe tender natne of husbaríď, but it-was рлевбшр- tiotl to think, that happiness eoul* re¬ side Where inequality Of staliodwas so greatly ttnptbportionedi'tnd My ínind misgave me, e Ven whilst it listened with a woman's credulity to your pictures of felicity, and was content to sacrifice Its prudence to give 'pleasure to the» only man who had fever-caused» it'to vibrate with delight fit 1» Jt fit If *tB#hb lottgeri^ve« 4b> the'eye Of laK'^rOpJKaiflŕe.iaré yod mine.' My lieart'bérltfrto parting at-this saatfarewell Theodore, -yisar 'ber? hatee' nbw- thrills thrtìiighJ tìtf *в«Ы№ horror .lyèti the '"* name
«'an* of arian who will for«rer be*ejk>v- ed is constantly rising to my lipe, *nd departa with a sigh on the winds. I know that your love ia equal to mine. I know that I am about to wound your peace fer trMsv.aiiti I feel a> secret shud¬ der! at what you will Buffer at this mo- xotart Ы№еяаог*Ц:,1 aro now-#0 More the Hiiaaithet fyou IbVtdrrtlnW ihe mast wi-efcbed .amoegatiWOrtten.uaud »про longer boast that purity, »vliicfeivaa.ţhe «tdy >4irtibn I inherited from'myLgao- -tHer-uJtlwonly, ebarm .«hat could link youtome. · ι iiu» ι U ' in ''5 , « Oh,Theodore ! my eyes refuse to be moistened by » tear t my aet row i» toot¬ ed in the secrets of my heart; and de¬ filed, aa I am, by a man, whose-name I «niiotìproni^ncewitlfVWtiishbiWerice^ ltaaltefitimyla»tareqi«eb tba*iyaWiwiţl enttriohlliieai'tliűUghiyqUDujitMan^^ «Mimexion »viAEiiz» had. штаШ· Andyetrt»«*«* ,Vteoitoeìvinh«| »де«!}! I write '
I «niţel Tire world iato «faè a-bonwi wilderness. I Am blasted tk myyouth ; and ihe lightning of power ima fidlen: on me -with destruction ; the veıyıîight of day ia loathsome in rnyieyeSÄUnworthy of you, my exirtence is hateful, t .tv , " Forgive the complaints that break from mtim tliebitWtoeeaOf anguiihi and attend to the' circurtutariea». ot'.myid·- itmotìon. You mint knew liotv İ was deceived into the anarei of iyour irao- rnoua «iole/ who aösmptediietíttoefiir one word of cdmfort, or indeed to let me hear the sound of his defeated voice, till we «topped «taloné house, thé situation of Which I tm ignorant of. f .t ^ II . ) " Νι*'ίβτυ«τΛ -appeared »to .attend ш, and himself Untied the bandage that confined mei вп*ру ¡fe»tfe»«afetìie<en- teY>the-)H»we> JtW*»hiafe»^fend)en- tRMié^Mtøitabt teeolbiBİtfeotıemosrs.e <sirs>№t«tei^t)il)iit«^n«ri(>r>U«tit dead ««tw i at
ot once. He bade me fear nothing ; and smiling maliciously—' What,' said he, ' do you think I would honour you so far? ÎÎO, poor wretch' this is to be your prison for life ; and my degenerate nephew shall be obliged to marry ac¬ cording to his rank.' " 1 was comforted by this speech, which I hoped might be true, as it took from me immediate apprehension ; and as he behaved with α pompous kind of civility, I the readier accepted some re¬ freshment, which I much stood in need of. On a sudden I found my head giddy, an irresistible stupor came over me; and when I awoke in the morning, I found the cruel wretch beside me, and that I was no longer worthy; of your name. " I have written thus, far with..calm¬ ness. I am distracted, Tbefjdpre--.I,can¬ not· write my feelings., Oh t£od' why waa I born to be the victim of lust—the instrument
instrument of incest and violence · In vain I look back for comfort—I see only a long catalogue of sufferings; and'as since conscious of passion, I hove tasted little but disappointment, I am willing to hasten from the burden of mySelf. But, oh Theodore' my senses swim, when they look up to the summit of that happiness they had once dared to attempt, and from which they are fallen for ever. " All my pride, my self-consequence is done away ; and those attainments I gloried in, as fitting me for your compa¬ nion, now oiily sharpen the sense of my debasement. Young, just stepping into life, with you my partner in domesti¬ city, how am I fallen, and my hopes buried for ever in the dust ' My years, if years are yet appointed me, must be consumed in signs and tears. A mo¬ ther's pleasures will not warm my nffec- 'tiôns * for, öh Theodore ' thou wilt not ι Ji„ ι by
by me be a father, and to the crimes ol your uncle is to be added the prema¬ ture destruction of your son. " Clouds, impregnate with blackness, hang over me. Time itself cannot popr a balm into my soul—oblivion cannot cover my dishonour, uniting şt опое adultery aud incest Oh Theodc-re ι I linger in iny last adieu; fain would I embrace the object of my affections, but it is a woman's weakness, and the only «hade of comfort that now,glances on що is, that my remembrance wül ever dwell with yon—that you will weep for røe —that you Wilt sigh the, natne of JJjfoa, and perhaps I may inhale the breeze burdened with, so soft an ff impres- eion." ι '' H · ' My eyes closed at this drendfufperiod. My soul had drank thrdeep cup, eï wo to ňie dreg·, 'aria stupefneüofl. whirled through
through every pulsation. Every .object was wiped at once Írom my remem¬ brance. I ceased to be conscious of my existence. The noble faculties of man »vere bewildered, and the immortal spi¬ rit knew not itself In a word, mad- ness fired my brain—I can no longer write at the fearful reflection, and pause to over эте returning tentations.
During this period, when all things were Veiled from my knowledge; «hen the 'actione of «hui tio longer disturbed me, and I enjoyed the delirium of riot¬ ous phantasms, my cousin took charge of me himself, to prevent my again fall¬ ing into the hands ot barbarians. Whether I tasted happiness during thè euep*hikm>of what we termiiensón, I cannwtell: The whole laaa s matant dream; «rheŕeno bue image returns with con-
connexion. I remember that my lead¬ ing idea was Eliza ; that I indulged day and night in caressing her picture ; and that I fancied I Was going to be married to her who was already and for ever torn from me. It was many months before this storm began to subside í andeven now I am at times thrown from the equipoise of judg¬ ment, and that by a trifle, which to the eye if indifference would appear of' no importance; from thence you may ac¬ count tor some traces of inconsistency, and perceive sOme clouds remaining, which, like those after the body of the storm is gone by, scatter α partial shower. When recovered to a consdonsness of self, I found in my manners ah univer¬ sal mutation. The pleasure I had tasted in fields and grovts Was ntf-more; the «horma of liberty and sentiment were fled;
■fled, the whole world seemed an uni¬ versal blank, interspersed indeed with chasms, but not one object to give me pleasure The finest days, when the sun shone with cheerful brilliance, I would spend m some dark room, brooding in melancholy silence, and »vhen the hea vens scattered vengeante on the earth, then I delighted to behold their rage, and ran out to partake in tht storm—to enjoy the uproar of natine My tousm endeavoured to touch me »»ith harmonv, but it was long ere I took delight in any other sounds than the rolling of a drum, or the deep bass ot un organ, these, by the sublimity of their tones, never failed to charm me, and for whole days 1 delighted to run over the keys of the organ u ithout un¬ derstanding a note No kind ot literature hod povyer to engage
engage me, I saw <nothing in, history but a list of murders and, iiigMtitude; in ι fiction, evif, with virtue suffering, and rewarded only by ait improbable stretch of the author'a invention ; and in biography, good qualities tortured to angelic perfection, with vices varnished over aa human failings, or thrown alto¬ gether into the shade. I concluded from tlie whole, that in every position of Ufe, much evil was certain, and any good precarious. Poetry was only tbe flights of imagi¬ nation, erected on impossible existences. By it. the country, where labour is tlie order of ι the day, was converted, into enchanted groves, and peaceful meadow·. I saw not the rustic smile of coûtent, as he basked in the lap of ease or beneath his laden bows. I saw indeed, much misery and the tears of sorrow, I saw not the ( simple ,plţaty, smilit an, the I,- ., ι, , , , ι if« •n..fwr 1 r , r>·
nut-brown board; but I saw scarcity and α Wretched pittance, the repast of poverty; Thus my eye tumed with melancholy on the dark portrait of human existence, tnd my understanding was ¿harmed only by the reflections of the wisest of kings: for he spent his days without war: he saw that in much labour there is little profit; and that ambition was vanity and vexation of spirit. Tbe letter of Eliza gave a constant keenness to my feelings, and seemed tp inspire me with the spirit of revenge ; but on whom was this to be taken, and »»■hot vengeance could I make to jus¬ tice? The bonds of affinity were bro¬ ken ; the law did not furnish me suffi¬ cient satisfaction; it could not restore Mt. Hansoin to life ; it could not restore rife back''Eliza without spot; it could nöt restore my son to existence; it could not
not give me back the years of suffering I had undergone It was a weak and puny instrument, in comparison to m) »» rongs It was in my case a nullity of existence, and like a man who dwells on some great design, some vast accom plithment, I bin ied m) self in dark cor ners, to turn in my mind the revenge I ••hould take
CHAP
CHAPTER V
------------------------ A m un Impulsi, et Liecft mug к que cuj d e duct Byll d mj ubo of enger pass ü irve " Death alone could satisfy the injury I had received, and that because it was the highesthmit of my potency—' Yes said I to myself, " y ou may boast of your absolute will, but you cannot, like me, inflict d« ith my hands hold over your heads the sword of destruction I can at pleasure divide the breath of existence, oud from this hour I hold at will the tenure of your life There was one argument which over¬ vol, ιί p came
came my difficulties as to the legality of the action ; for I was willing to re¬ concile my proceedings by argument.— " The law," said I, " defines a man and his wife as one; the law allows the wo¬ man a right to deal death to a man who offers her violence; the injury is the same tome as to her; I therefore, as part of my wife, hove a right to take up that authority." In this syllogism, which set out on а wrong hypothesis, I forgot that the law had divided us, and that it only allows this act of resiatance In the moments of violence. I knew that by this action I should become obnoxious to life, but I wished to die; the hand of the execu¬ tioner had no terrors for me ; dungeons, chains, and a scaffold, are only to be feared by the mäh who iS conscious of guilt. I knew the pride of my father would be shaken, I knew he would curse the hour when he had stimulated me
me to retaliation, when he should find the name of Cyphon in the registers of tlie condemned, and see the hopes of his house expiring on а gibbet. But my feelings delighted now in inflicting punishment; I was pleased with the vexation I should create him, and night and day turned in every possible point of view the project I had formed. It was now that I again took delight in reading, as it strengthened my reso¬ lution, and placed the action as patriotic and praiseworthy. I considered him as a tyrant, a second Scylla, who in the wantonness of his might, played with the passions and feelings of men, and I gloried in my purpose of stretching him equal with his fellow sod. A little inci¬ dent that happened at this time hastened my resolution. A poor man whose head was covered with grey hairs, and whose countenance F г testified
testified to lus labour, with a vi ïfe suf¬ fering under the palsy and a broken constitution, had, for want of an esta¬ blished meansof subsistence, sold mat«lies round the country for some years But now, like the race-hoise, their course »vas run, and not being able to reach any other pnnsh, crawled to the over¬ seers of the one where my uncle ι esilici!, craving permission to breathe their last sigh beneath the sheltci of the wittched workhouse These humane gentlemen could say nothing to tbe petition, v. ithout the concui rence of Theodonc, as their coffins would have cost three or four shillings He was sent to, but as they did not belong to the parish, the overseers were desired to give them a passage to the next, that in its turn might pass them to the next, and so on, till they could claim a settlement, and thus might they have run the gauntlet of a nation famed
famed for benevolence; but it happened one of the wheelbarrows, containing the man, was overturned, and his arm fractured in the fall, which loaded the parish with his burden ; but his wife was laid on the high road of the next, and shortly breathed out her existence, with no charitable Samaritan to administer oil and wine, after her escape from the thieves. " And shall this pass?" cried I, when I heard it ; " shall the British nation be stigmatized by a proceeding like this ? No; I will wipe out the stain, and re¬ store her to pristine lustre." " And how?" said my cousin, grave¬ ly, who did not comprehend my design. "Howl" returned I; "by bringing to justice those who abuse her, and en¬ wrap villany in the mantle of law." " Take care, I beg," said he; " once already you have suffered from great- F 3 ness:
neas: beware, lest it again пае up and crush you." Aa I wanted no confident, I 'forbore to tell him, that α man resolved to die laughs at earthly power; and I retired to turn over my dark intentions. I wrote down imy will, which I left be¬ hind me, sealed, making every disposi¬ tion so hazardous an enterprise could re¬ quire. My little fortune I divided be¬ tween the three daughters of Hanson, appointing ithat the portion of Eliza was to remain seven years untoudhed, tin case that period should elapse without ther discovery. I left 'behind me а letter of thanks, containing a hint that II intend¬ ed leaving England, and thus at once put it out of the power -of my enemies to hurt me. I left his house in -the night, and pur¬ suing the plan I had laid down, hastened to
to Livteipool, from thence embarking for Ireland, tin order to sink every trace. I landed there in а different name, chang¬ ing my deportment and attire. I stu¬ died а strange accent, and returned to England through Northumberland. The dress i now aesumed was that of a beg¬ gar, concealing the youth of my features beneath a wig and long beard -, a basket, with a few ballads and some ginger¬ bread, í erved me to bend over, support¬ ed .by ia crutch; and thus I ventured through the villages, to the 'centre of my uncle's domain. I could sufficiently confide in my dis¬ guise, having passed unnoticed through our village, and even gathered some anecdotes relative to myself. I learned also, that лпу flight was Iknown, that some supposed I had destroyed myself, and lastly, that Theodoric was returned to bia castle, iwhich I .easily imputed to his belief of ithe latter report. F i A tear
A tear fell from my eyes as I passed the ground where Hanson's cottage had once stood, and bent my steps towards my father's house, wliich I »vished to see. I also had some desire to behold himself, to contemplate those savage fea¬ tures, which could, unmoved, doom а son to misery, I learnt from the servants, that he was gone to visit at a gentleman's seat, and having promised the girls husbands and wealth, and handsome lasses to the men, I was treated in the kitchen with a tankard of ale and sixpence, as а re¬ ward for my chiromantie skill. I had nearly, however, overacted my part, by mentioning some things they were sure the old, man must have told me. I had even temerity to forewarn them, that some great person would soon die in the country ; thus afterwards it was circulated, that Satan had appear¬ ed
ed in the squires kitchen—that strange lights had been seen walking from the Hall to the churchyard—that the can dies that night burnt blue—and most women had dreamed something extra¬ ordinary One circumstance I had learnt gave me considerable uneasiness, which was a custom Theodonc had of being guarded by two servants when he went out, and his castle »/as constantly watched by two sentinels —" This, thought 1, " af¬ ter all, is some satisfaction, the tyrant trembles in his retreat, and his cnines are his punishment This panic was also shared by my fa ther, who, like Oliver Cromwell, never lay twice together in the same room, would depart without warning, on a visit to some other country seat, went always armed, and if the bushes on the F S road
road side were agitated by the wind, he would start and turn pale. Thus I had the satisfaction of inspir¬ ing them with terror, though the diffi¬ culty of admission was thereby linoreas- ed I advanced in my disguise to the house, and assuming my function of prying into futurity, soon was encircled by the servants, who listened, with gap- ing credulity, to Toy skill. It was dark before I had finished my oracular fore¬ bodings, having purposely spun them into length; and seeing they had no suspicion of my person, I asked them boldly to admit me into some of the out-houses, the night being too cold to sleep in a hedge. After some difficulty, it was agreed I should sleep in the sta¬ ble -, and, as no opportunity arose to ad¬ vance my grand design, I accepted the offer, that 11 might at leisure make far¬ ther observations. Tht
The night was extremely dark, and covering myself with some hay, I lay wholly concealed in one of the stalls. In about an hour, I heard the door «pen, and the hostler, who had been absent, entered with a lantern, which he set down, seating himself on a corn- chest. After scratching his head, and looking round, as if considering some¬ thing he liad to perform, he examined his watoli, and speaking to himself— " I'll be domed," said he, " if it yean't ten o'clock, aa I mun be with Bell in an our, an got all these here horses to foder. Dang her—I wish the parlour window may be fast; ise more fit for bed than courting—yaw !" This was one of those fortunate chan¬ ces that often favour the bold; but now the difficulty of escaping unseen by this inamorato, was no little concern; for¬ tune, or rather justice, stood my friend, and at the same, time suggested to me a f 6 scheme
scheme of no little importance. The corn happening to run short, the hostler was obliged to fetch more from tbe granary, which time I employed in es¬ caping from the stable, taking with me one of the livery coats, which hung up¬ on a pin. My beggar's disguise I threw down the drawwell, and knowing the way perfectly in the dark, was not long gain¬ ing the parlour window. It was un¬ fastened, and without noise <my adven¬ tures at tbe madhouse having taught me precaution in those expeditions) I slipped in, and found myself in the par¬ lour. I stopped a moment to consider the vast j design I hod in hand, t strength¬ ened my resolution by recapitulating the wrongs I had suffered, the destruc¬ tion of my friends, my wife, and «my son ;· and no longer, hesitating, I pro¬ nounced
nounced with Casar — "The die is catti' and feeling all my courage arise, I hast¬ ened up the main staircase. A light which crossed from one room fo the other startled me, lest I should be frus¬ trated, and seeing that all was not yet quiet, I passed into the rooms on the first floor. The doors being open, I re¬ tired to the innermost, from whose win¬ dow I had often gazed with pleasure at the spire of the little church, where then Mr. Hanson officiated ; but now it was concealed in impenetrable darkness. Lest I might be discovered by the entrance of some of the servants, I laid down beneath а dining-table, where I remained listening to every sound till twelve o'clock was struck by the hall clock. Without shoes, and without a coat, I left the room, and hastening up stairs to my uncle's chamber, perceived, before it was too late to retreat, a lamp hung above the door, and a man asleep before
bafore it. Once, and but once, the thought arose to dispatch him ; hut, are· 'coiling at lbe inhumanity, I retuined, and, by a private staircase, entered ano¬ ther auit of rooms that happened to he open, and from them I got into the li¬ brary, adjoining to which waa hie cham¬ ber. A light gleamed thiough the Jkey- hole. I advanced with ihe step pf tbe •midnight robber, ararcely venturing to breathe, and looking through, saw him sitting beside a fire, reading some let- ters. My blood arose to fermentation; I instantly opened the door, and .stood before him with a dagger in my hand. He .trembled at my figure, perhaps .thinking it my unembodied form ; Jnit, re«wUeetingtóm»elfT-'' What/' cried lie, i" T-heodore! how have you enteied? »whatia your purpose ?" " Can my purpose be doubted,", cried il, »<moiï»ter«f inhumanity? This night Heaven
Heaven has doomed the limits of your existence—«this night thy soul, dyed in human gore, loaded with purple crimes, •must cease to riot herein safety. But whereas Eliza? Answer this, or you are instantly dead !" He arose at my threatening posture, and, probably thinking his guard had betrayed him, seized a pistol which lay upon the chimney—"'Theodore," cried lie aloud, end stepping'back, "tremble at your rashness! begone instantly, Or you will not have the liberty. Eliza is not in my knowledge. Do you go?" " No, my lord," cried I ·, " I am «ome with determination to pour curses upon your head— Л am come to execute -jus¬ tice. Inhuman wretch! infamous, de¬ testable coward ! ' youi have contaminated •my existence—you'iWe murdered my son—you have committed incest with my wife—you have transported young Hanson—.you lia ve dug the-grave of his parents—
parents—you have outraged humanity ; and for these crimes thou shalt die !" At this moment I heard a voice at the door-, I believed his guard was alarmed, and advanced hastily upon him —he fired, but missed me, and I in¬ stantly stubbed him to the heart. He reeled, and fell over the chair, pronounc¬ ing faintly — " You have killed me, Theodore! you have murdered your uncle!" An indescribable horror vibrated through every corner of my frame. The blood of my uncle dyed my clothes, end marked my face. I started with dread at my figure in a large glass which stood opposite, and nothing presented to my ideas but murder. The dagger, yet reeking in his blood, I held in my hand ; I lifted it up, to give myself the last dis¬ missal before the servant should enter, the
the door being fastened on the inside; but my eye glancing on tbe papers, per¬ ceived a letter written by Eliza, and scarcely conscious of what I did, I snatched it up, and fled down the back stairs. I seemed bewildered in some fearful dream ; I was too confused to connect my thoughts, and my presence of mind was directed solely to flying to a distance from so horrid а ecene —a scene which seemed to pursue—to haunt me; for of self-preservation I had little regard. Murder! murder! sounded in my ears, and I repeated, with horror, as I fled— " I am a murderer !" In that elevation of soul, when man is raised above himself by the agitations iď passion, I continued in α direct line over hedges and ditches, swimming two ri¬ vers in the apace of twenty miles. I then, for the firat time, sat down to rest, endea-
endeavouring to still «he tumult which whirled in «wild uproar through my brain. I had lost my dagger I knew not 'how, but my letter was safe in my bosom ; and aa morning began to dawn, I concealed myself in a thicket. I reflected «whether «it was not most prudent at once ito quit England, for 'I felta kind of pride in eluding the in¬ quiries «I knew my father would make. í ¡knew that so long as I eluded his knowledge, he would suffer equal alarm, and expect the hand of assassination in every shade. Beside this, I hod another motive to live, «which was the hope of once more seeing Eliza; for as she had suffered contrary to her will, I conceiv¬ ed it injustice to forsake her unsought, and noweagerly desired α re-union. My mind having, in accomplishing the revenge which hod solely engaged it, .lost one object of its pursuit, now «re¬ turned
turned to шаге tender «flections. The letter I had hastily taken up waa some¬ thing üke mine, filled with reproaches to .himself, but without a single line to conduct to 'her concealment. Formerly, when flying from the mad¬ house, I enjoyed a conscious interior peace of mind, but ¡this was now de¬ stroyed. Timidity made me "flutter at the falling of a leat, and when fatigue pressed down my eyelids, tremendous images flitted before me; the ¡figure of Theodoric weltering in his .blood never a moment left my .eyes, and I repented that I hod taken from Heaven the taak of vengeance. There is surely no crime named a* mongst men equal to murder; it ie.de¬ priving a man of existence, vHho has •equal right with ourselves to live-, it ia extinguishing that iport of ethereal being, which no remorse or suffering con
can ever illuminate. It was long before my mind, by every argument of reason and sophistry, could be tuned to com¬ posure, and never again will it enjoy that tranquillity it possessed whilst no doubt of its innocence arose. I now experienced the verity of Mr. Hanson's counsel, and wept in tears of wormwood and gall the fatal influence I had yielded to passion, which sweeps like a deluge every thing before it. I passed the rest of the day, without tasting food, in the thicket, nor durst I venture out till night, though benumb¬ ed and stiff with continuing so many hours in my wet clothes, without changing posture, aud after so hard an exercise. I then ventured out, and stripping off my waistcoat, which was stained with blood, I concealed it in a bush, and cutting myself a stick for defence, set out again on а painful march. The
The country I entered on was wild and dreary, with ver) little sign of cul¬ tivation, and I wandered long and pain¬ fully, in hopes of meeting some hut where I might procure refreshment, being exceedingly faint, and almost will¬ ing to lay down, regardless of the event Still, however, I had resolution to pro¬ ceed, and towards midnight came up to a cottage on the road sule I knocked at the door, after some time а man ap peared at the upper wmdoiv, and de¬ manded what I wanted at that hour?— ' Tnend," said I, " I am a pooi man »vho have been robbed and stripped , I ■im dying with hungei, and beg you »vill admit me, or at least give me some¬ thing to eat" " If you a'been robbed," said he, " youi anot pay for what yea, and I a nothing to give, for a be but a day labourer ' " Softly,' said I, " though it is true I have been robbed, yet I have reserved m a private pocket a few shillings, and
and you shall not lose by your hospita hty These words touched the humanity of the cottager I was let into his mi¬ serable shelter, which admitted the wind in several directions. A few fagots were kindled into a blaze, and whilst ma wife was making ready some oat¬ meal porridge, I bargained for an old waggoners frock, the only article of dress he could spare from his person, together with a pair of wooden shoes, my feet being lacerated with walking barefoot. He expressed some surpnse that my shoes were taken, and for a moment I could not thmk of an answer, as to have imputed it to the value cf the buckles would ill have agreed with the poverty of my appearance, but placing it to their intention of preventing my pur suit, I came clear from that difficulty Thus
Thus equipped and refreshed, I again set out; but as the morning began to draw nigh, I struck away from the road, to seek some shelter from the day. I passed along a path that lined the banks of a river, and was entertained by tbe sporting of the fish, and charmed by a landscape truly romantic, which the ra¬ diant streakings of the reflecting beams of the sun gilded and adorned. Having gone as I judged about three miles, I came to the ruins of a castle, whose shattered walla seemed to bow obedience to the winds, and were^rown- ed with ivy and moss. The moat was only sufficient to supply a stream for brooklime and watercresses, and in some places was filled wholly up by fragments of the wall. I passed over, entering the square, formerly the abode of grandeur, but now tlie poor had found shelter in its ruins; thus those who had reared
reared it, now when in decay, once more regained possession. The present resident was an old wo¬ man, whom yeais had bowed down to the earth, and though once she might have caused sighs in the bosom of youth, her countenance now retained none of those graces; she was, in fact, " the sad historian of the pensive plain," and lived here in a dwelling reared from the rubbish, and roofed with rushes ; a little oat cake, a small portion of skimmed milk', and the cresses that grew in the moat, continued her existence, and un¬ possessed of earthly wealth, she lived unenvied, but not unknown. Such was the figure I beheld on en¬ tering the open square, and recollecting the man of independence, who had pre¬ ferred α crust of bread and open air, to hospitality and a workhouse, I was about ι Ur
about to fly as from α serpent, but her keen eye had perceived me, and she de¬ manded my business. " My business," said I, " is to ask some refreshment, and directions on my way, from which I suppose I have con¬ siderably strayed." " If so," said she, " you are welcome to such as I have, and if you are hun¬ gry, it will go down—for hunger, young man, is the best of sauces ; follow me, and take care of your head as you come in." I was pleased with the freedom of her manner, and sat down familiarly in the only room she had; α skillet of milk was placed on the fire, and an oaten cake on the top of а three legged stool ; she sat down on a sofa of turf, entreating me to eat, with a smile of welcome which displaced the wrinkles of age—and here let me do justice to my countrywomen, vol. и. о for
for m all my distresses and wanderings them I have eVer found possessing com passion, generosity, and pity With them the impulse of kindness precedes consi deration, and the hand is held out to relieve ere the tongue inquires into the esse
CHAP-
CHAPTER VI.
-Then
Attinti in night, around lier hend wero miste, And ш one hand stie held a death's head , T'other did clink a massive chain, enltnk'd With daggers " As was natural, our discourse turned on the remains of the building around us, but no knight of legendary lore was straying from hia paternal domain ; the case simply was, that Oliver Cromwell had, in his usurpation, battered it down, and the present lord preferred an elegant villa to old walls, seldom coming to visit his tenants. My feet, which had beenivery mueh tom in my journey, now refnsed their office, when I would if i-J о 2 have
have departed; and considering the pri¬ vacy of the spot, and its distance-from the line of pursuit, I agreed to remain till better able to travel. My hostess would have gone to the village to procure me something better than her common fare, but this I would not allow, as I was accustomed to the meanest accommodations, and moreover feared she might raise suspicion by so unusual α provision. I perceived that the sighs which es¬ caped me excited her attention, though she forbore to inquire, endeavouring to divert my melancholy by many rural stories of ghosts and love affairs. I was pleased with this attention, because it was the genuine offspring of goodness, as my mean frock could give her no ideas of my birth or superiority, ι In the afternoon, I lay down in one comer, to repose, and seeing me asleep, she went out
out that I might be alone, walking along the path by the river. Two men who happened to be com¬ ing that way, saluted her with the usual inquiry of wbat news, and to her an¬ swer of ignorance, told her that lord D ------ had been murdered, and two thousand pounds' reward offered by squire Cyphon for the murderer, whom it was supposed was his own son. " What !" demanded the old woman, "sure he would not hang his Own son?" ·* That I dare say he'd not stick at," said the man, " or his own father, if he could get sixpence by it; besides, mo¬ ther, you know when the son is out of the way, he comes in for the title and estate." "Alackaday!" said she; "these be times, when the father will hang the son, and the nephew murder the uncle; • oS but
hut tell me, how waa it—ia the Son a wild youth?" " Not that I know, but they eay he went mad for love, and that he broke out of confinement and killed his uncle, because he would not let him marry whom he liked." " That is a pity," said she ; " I would not be α lady, if I might not have the man I liked, for all the king of France's dominions." " Well said, my lass," replied one of them, laughing ; " цол, I suppose, it'Theo- do»e Cyphon was to come ip your way, you would not give him up for the two thousand pounds' reward." " Not ¿ troth," said she; " I should go mad myself with two thousand pounds, gemini, ţ should be hanging myself; and besides I should always see his ghost." " Ha, ha' give me the money, and I wanapt his ghost won't frighten me" Thus
Thup ended, their conversation, and fortunately she was too muoh engaged with thoBtoryshe had heard, to meption my being with her. I was yet asleep when she returned, and my waggoner's frock being open at the breast, and no waistcoat on, the picture of Eliza had slipped from my shirt, hanging down by the rţband, A picture so valuable filled her with surprise, and the whiteness of my bosom, so different from what my ha bit suggested, excited her suspicions; she compared the story she had just heard with the visible distress which had marked my behaviour.—" Theo¬ dore.," said she, " why do you tsleep so long?" I wakened with surprise at the sound of my name, and in my first confusion, demanded^-" who colled me ?" but re¬ covering, and thinking I had been dream- o i ing.
ing, we looked at each other with mu¬ tual embarrassment. < " Young man," said she, "you need not be alarmed—I shall not betray you, though two thousand pounds are offered for you. I will never sell the life of my fellow-creature ; but as you have stained your hands in blood, you must not re¬ main with me ; you may be sure I shall say nothing of your having been here¬ out how could you be guilty of so base α crime ?" " To you, my good mother," I replied, " I will open myself, since I perceive that murder can never be concealed-, and aa I am weary of a life subject to perpe¬ tual apprehension and unending perse¬ cution, the two thousand pounds shalt be yours ; I surrender myself your pri¬ soner, and thus I shall repay your hos¬ pitality." " Par be it from tne," said she, "todo this. I have seen fourscore years and upwards;
THEODORE CYPHON. upwards ; I have seen the lands change their people ; but in all that time I have never seen happiness ; and now, after so many years accustomed hardship, and the moat scanty living, it would be no pleasure to feed on luxury ; and though I abhor thy crime, I will not bring thee to death." ■* Woman," cried I, rising up, and taking her in my arms, " may He who delighteth in mercy deal it to thee! To give me up for the solitary consideration of reward, would be unworthy thy sex, unworthy of thy virtues; but justice perhaps demands me at your hand, for by death can the crime of death alone be atoned." " But," said she, " I am informed you were mad?" " No," cried I; " I have been insane; I have been lost in a happy delirium ; but this action was calm premeditation, adopted on the most acute reasoning; and though I am now sorry, it is not β 5 that
that I think mypelf wrong, but that I stooped to revenge, and atayed the arni of Omnipotence," I then related to her the outlines of my sufferings, and tasted, in the tears she shed, the pleasure of sympathy, She now freely offered me her cottage, qs- suring me of its security, apt) that 1 might remain with her, without fear or suspicion. On the evening of the fourth day of my abode with this hospitable matron, I went down to the moat to gather şomu cresses, without perceiving a man who was fishing in the river; I stopped, and sauntered about, viewing the place, re¬ curring to the times when its grandeur was at the height, and its proud Jiattle- mcnts bade defiapce to the weather. I considered the revolutions а man of spi¬ rit oud genius might create in the world. J wished for Immortality and invisibility ; "and
" and then," said I to myself, " I would so change the face of this earth, that one large family should inhabit it ; war should cease, and ambitious men shine in virtue and those enterprises of discovery and commerce that are attended by danger and toil." I was so rapt and lost in the various ramifications of so immense а design, that I returned carelessly to our but, without perceiving I »vas observed. It seems my waggoner's frock had betray¬ ed me, the labourer of whom I bought it having circulated the circumstance, with lamentations that his evil genius prevented his detaining me, as it »vould have made α man of him for life. As the fame of my valour and despe¬ ration had spread with exagge.-»tion to this part of the country, the man »vho had observed me durst not venture alone to attempt any thing; but watching me G 6 into
into the old woman'a hut, hastened to procure assteice. It was a clear night, and my hostess on some occasion happening to go to the door, after Our supper, perceived three men advancing across the moat with precaution, and looking round, as if fearful of being betrayed. With a presence of mind which pre¬ served me, she ran in—" Theodore," said she, " you must instantly fly ; take that old soldier's coat under your arm, and haste for your life f* I started up in too much haste to em¬ brace my kind protectress, and another minute had been too late. The clearness of thè night, which had hitherto contri¬ buted to my preservation, now was a- gainst mc, as it enabled my pursuers to distinguish my flight. After passing the moat, 'ľ'éntered on the path, fbHowing ' the
thé course of the river, and could plainly hear the sound of their feet behind, every moment gaining upon me. There was no choice of roads, and the only alter¬ native was to leap into the river ; but even this I feared to adopt, as most pro. bably they could swim as well as my¬ self, and my wet clothes would, when on the other side, retard my speed. In this exigency I recollected the ex¬ pedient of Caius Marius, the Roman consul, when pursued by his enemies, the place being something parallel, which was probably what had struck me. I slipped as silently as possible through the rushes, descended the bank, sitting down in the water, amongst the sedges and rushes, reserving only so much opening as was sufficient to hear and ob¬ serve. My pursuers were quickly on the spot where I had slipped them, and "' coming
coming tø a stand (for, they had kept me iu sight), beg» 1 ) tq beat the bushes, one of the moat courageous venturing to de¬ scend tO the ¡edge of the river. As I scarcely breathed, and the, sedges rustled with the wind, he could make no dis¬ covery; ep4 perhaps fearful of my start¬ ing upon him unawares, he hastened up to his comrades, declaring I must be gone further, and had dodged them by diving. It was agreed therefore to proceed- No sooner were they beyopd hearing, than I released myself from my dis¬ agreeable situation, and taking «iff 1 my frock, sent it down the stream, that they nţight suppose me drowned. .This was soorcely performed before I heard them rgturiiiiig, swearing I most be someways hereabouts, and'that they would watch till morning. lake a hunted rat, I again plunged into the water, for near tw6 jipurs continuing emerged up to the > - ' chin,
ch|p, and unde* -the pairţfiu pecessiţy of remaining inactive, though bepumbed with cold, as tbe least agitation of the water might have betrayed me. Their resolutjon of waiting till morn¬ ing began tq fail as their ¡lopeş of the two thousand pounds became less ; and repeating to each, other some of the vyon- tlerfnl stpries tbey bad heard of my ac- tiops, agreed that I must deal with the devil, and bad vanished on the spot Amongst other things that Iţad confirm¬ ed this sagacious conclusion, was the cir¬ cumstances in circulation of my uncle's murder. It was known that he bad a guard at his door, that t»yo sentinels, night and day, watched tlie house ; yet, notwithstanding all this vigilance, I had found my way into an jnner chamber, leaving behind me a pah* of shoes and a 'coat in the dining-room. This coat, which was known to have hujig up in the stables, the hostler aiyore -vvas taken off
off the pin by an invisible hand, whilst he veas cleaning the horses, and that, run- Ding out in a fright, he saw a blue flame come from one of the windows, and heard groans in the bottom of the well, where was found the clothes of the for¬ tune-teller in propria persona. At this description, repeated by one of the countrymen, they were filled with apprehension ; and the circumstances of my sinking before their eyes raised their fear to so great a height, that rising up, and looking round with careful precau¬ tion, they went off at full speed, and cir¬ culated round the country, that if I did not deal with the devil, I could certainly become invisible whenever I pleased. Though rejoicing at so narrow an es¬ cape, which I owed to the credulity of mankind, I durst not venture buck to tbe old woman ; and dripping with wet, and trembling -with cold, I continued to follow
follow the path, carrying the soldier's coat'under my arm. My'body woe in¬ ured to suffering, and hardened against external concussions, or Vicissitudes such as I endured would have destroyed me; but I now took pleasure in keeping α whole county on the stretch, and elud¬ ing the vigilance of all whom two thou¬ sand pounds could excite-, at the same time I knew the terror which would dwell in the bosom Of my father, and though surrounded by friends, inflict Upon him a feat equal to what I suffered. A hollow in the bank of the river sup* plied me next day with retreat, and be¬ ili; far from any house, afforded both comfort ahd security.' Ere the day broke full upon me.'I had formed a kind of breastwork with bushes beneath the overhanging earth; behind which I could observe all that passed, without being myselfopefitodetection. Thedejithof the dub of water before me prevented ' " the
th·,approach of idle boys ;, апД thus, I passed д wJioIerdşy w¡t)iout tastbig fopd. At eight I again ventured out, and in search t*fi,aaroe,wţld 'n" 4 » exerţiaed.my- self 8uf38cienUy to restore α due circula¬ tion of b|ood; hut of those, owing to tbe earliness of autumn,, I could not col. leet nny quantity, and hunger called aloud ion relief. The riyer again, held put to, me means, of, preservation ; and now, of necessity, I practised β mode Of fishing I baddeani- ed as а youthful sport. I descended to where th* stream was $ent, though not deep, «nd raising the edges pf the flat atones, and, (¡hose which stood hollow, bj groping supplied myselft y«itli several finfe trouta, iCheţe, necessity pbjiged me to eat raw, and; assuredly custom alone renden eppkery indispensable, for in Sieges and famines what loathsome sub¬ stitutes org ţot de,vqured »vith ¿oíí /
Not
Not being npwiin danger of aetual fa¬ mine, I retired again to my (enclosure, where the day was spent in contempla¬ tion, and ga zing ou the sleepy stream. A twig, α leaf, waa a matter, of amuse¬ ment, and when a bubble rose to the top, I marked the effects of its explosion. A week was passed m this manner; but considering that now the heaţ of pursuit must bq over, and being satiated with inactivity, I determined to venture out at all hazards, and continue to be guided by the course qÇthe river. After having passed near five miles, as I judged, I entered a, field of turnips, which to me had al| the charma oí an orchard, laden, with the most delicious frint. I şat down te enjoy my good fortţme,, and found my spirits and ardour arise, whilst my past endurance, like the toils pf the campaigner, were forgot in the fleeting possession of the instant.
Having
Having provided »little ífóŕ the com- iflg day, l'art tbrWard with Spirita, in- tending to cross 'the country, and escape to Holland, as I perceived the impossi¬ bility of finding rest in England, fand my soul eagerly ddsired to hear tidings of'Eliza—for I proposlk no longer to exist, than while satisfied she yet breath¬ ed in the same sphere f of being The path, after aorte miles, Opened upon α road Striking off, as I believed, iii the direction I'intended to pursue. ' I had -not proceeded far before I came to an hedge alb'hou'sè. Whose open door and cheerful fire invited thè weary tra¬ veller to refresh. I considered that I was effectually disguised, and being wholly а stranger, could not raise suspi¬ cion, should my etory bekno*vn; where¬ fore, trusting to chance, I yielded to the temptation òf a relief I sú tauch re¬ quired.
Isat
I «at down in one corner by the fire, and assuming the Caledonian accent in my demands, passed as a common stran¬ ger. I soon learnt there had been oj fan¬ at a neighbouring town, which occasion¬ ed their being open at this hour, I had not sat long, before three persons alight¬ ed from horseback, and sat down at the same table, on the opposite side. The news of the day, and the,price of cattle being adjusted, one of them inquired if the famous madman, Theodore Cyphon, had yet been seen since he was said to have vanished by the side of ------river, just at JDeadman's Plunge. I trembled at my own name, sitting silent that my confusion might pass un¬ observed. Every one was ignorant of what was, become of me, and laughing, ridiculed the opinion of those who had followed me, whom they supposed had invented the tale, in excuse for their own miscarriage or cowardice.—" For," ,-,;- said
sold the lost speaker, " I'll maintain, that for a KVe man to eiftfc into the earth, and yet live, ia impossible; and as for this here Theodore Cyphon, I knows him as Well as I knows my own father. He's a's much flesh una blood as any Of he ; and otíry let hie get along. side him." I admired (the effrontery of this con¬ clusion ; and but for my dread of detec¬ tion,) should have enjoyed their conjec¬ tures, each allowing if I vras not invisi¬ ble, I was invincible: but а piece of in¬ formation I learnt, threw me into one of those disorders of mind to you the subject of so well-founded α suspicion. One of ihem, Who Was a grazier, had that afternoon been at the village near the 'abode df the old Woman who had so kindly given trie Shelter. He -there learnt, that as I Was supposed to 'be leagued with the devil, and 'had vanish¬ ed in smoke, she, of course, being old Wd.
and poor, Was thkenfbra witch by the courltry people, 'who aröae, 'One and aH, to exhibit their zeal in'purifying the country from so impious in inhabitant. 'She WaS dragged troni her miserable. abode, and tliough her aged eyes Were dimly turned to Heaven for mercy, they hurried her to the river, that she might undergo the aqueous ordeal. She did not swim, as was expected, wanting the gift of supernatural talents, but to their surprise sunk to the bottom, expiring through fright, age, and suffocation, be¬ fore she could be taken out. The villa¬ gers retired, convinced she was not a witch, and ended their day's exploit with burying herat the parish expence, to the honour of our enlightened under¬ standings, and theglory ofthè eighteenth century,'so famed by the heroes of the mouth*. · .«;.·;.:, . .1 . . .:. .- - .At
At this narrative my countenance changed, the mug of ale dropped upon the floor, and every eye was turned to¬ wards me. An elderly' countryman, who was eating bis bread and cheese, fixed his attention on me with a look of sud¬ den recollection, and turning to the man who had pretended to my acquaintance, demanded what sort of person I was, observing, he was either out in his guess, or the soldier was Theodore himself. This was no sooner suggested, than my size and figure struck them, and each-starting up, declared I must be the man. ' The eminence of the danger aroused rae/rom my lethargy. I arose, and in an elevated voice—" Yes," cried I, " I am Theodore. I am the man who snaps iron bars like straws, who can vanish when I please, and traverse on the wings of the wind. Stand off then, make way, or
or α legion of demons shall instantly whirl destruction around and about ye!" An address so uncommon, an action and manner so strange, had the intended effect; and as if impelled by invisible im¬ pulse, they slunk back, not offering to stop my progress to the door ; nor did the hostess venture to demand payment for my supper. I hastened forward with speed, fear¬ ing, when their panic should have tub- sided, the temptation of two thousand pounds would conquer their supersti¬ tion ; nor was I wrong in this sugges¬ tion, as, from first laughing at each other's trepidation, they proceeded to vaunts of their valour, and at once agreed to pur¬ sue me and divide the spoil An alarming discovery I had made considerably abated, my spirits, as I learnbfrom.a milestone that I had taken iovoL. ii. h a cir-
a circoitous ramble, being little more than twenty miles troni my father's; but at the same time recollecting that, if within the influence of his power I had eluded his researches, how mnch more might I reckon on security when I attained a distance where his name should be unknown ! I looked behind ine, aud saw my pur¬ suers advancing ; and before me saw a common, where no shelter offered, and Where my only chance of safety was speed ur superior resistance. My reso¬ lution was eqnal to any form of danger nay, I felt a pleasure in appearing some¬ thing superior, and trusted not a little to my personal prowess, if so urged {by ■aen trembling with superstition) that its exertion Should be indispensable. It was one of those cloudy nights, when objects are indistinctly seen, and nametimfea Inai in absolute darkness; yet ,., on
on the extent of a wild I could expect little- from circumstances so favourable·. My pursuers, elated with still holding me in view, exerted their speed in pro¬ portion as their hopes increased, and being nearly spent with running, I halted a moment to reflect. I perceived, through the gloom, at a distance on the right, a gibbet, with a man hanging in chains; I exerted my speed, and the darkness then favouring me, climbed up, and clinging round the dead body, was suspended in the air. The countrymen, almost at tlie same instant, came up, stopping with renewed terror at having lost me ; for owing to the glimmering light, and the confusion they were under, I had appeared to va¬ njah, Érőm the moment I was ascending the gibbet, my body not being seen. They were no longer ashamed of ex- ffctssirig their terror and astonishment -, ι h 8 one
one of them falling on his knees, with ejaculations to Heaven for mercy on all his past sins and offences. The others stood trembling, afraid to turn their backs, and dreading to stay ; no doubt heartily repenting their folly in expect¬ ing to take me, and vowing to amend their lives if suffered to escape alive. Whilst they were thus wondering, and their teeth chattering with fear, а breeze of wind rushed across the com¬ mon, and pressing on the gibbet, the rusty iron gave a harsh creak, at which they set up a cry of dismay, and would have fled, but their pious companion was fallen on his face. My situation was far from pleasant; but my mind was unloaded by false superstition, and having brought it to act with calmness on most occasions, I perceived that, by a proper use of this accident, I might so impress terror on the country, that I should be almost able to march through it
it with impunity in the face of day They had, therefore, no sooner raised their companion on his feet, than I ut¬ tered α deep groan, and swinging the hooping, created a noise grating and so¬ lemn It was not possible human na¬ ture could endure more self preserva¬ tion became the only impulse of action The man, as if struck with some elastic machine, darted forward, crying out he vi as dead, and as I now raised my voice with a howl, none tarried to look behind, and happy was he who did not find him self last
η 3 CHAP-
CHAPTER VII.
FiľESto by their folly from so imtnhieht i dahger, I descended from my disagree¬ able situation, my flesh shrinking as it weris ¡from Its loathsome company, and I underwent a momentary pain at remem¬ bering that my actions had merited, nay, that I was actually flying from а similar suspension. I proceeded on my way over tbe common, pitying in my mind the weakness of men, when their senses are enslaved by ignorance and superstition, and turning in the versa¬ tility of thought to those itinerate dic¬ tators who pretend to disseminate know¬ ledge, but who bind ignorance in fetters of tenfold durance, enchaining every no¬ ble
Ые faoülty of teaaon i» the dungeons of doubt, mystery, and inexplicable per¬ plexity.—" Oh," said I, m the enthu¬ siasm of thought, " oh that some dis¬ interested men would form themselves into a society for the propagation of true knowledge—who would teach the multi¬ tude their height in the scale of exist¬ ence, and convince them that actions alone «an please α benevolent Creator— who would teach them not to dread Death «is a conductor to eternal misery, if ithey cannot swallow incongruities, end Who would teach them that the balm of credulity is not sufficient to cover the most abandoned actions '" Confident I should have little tø fear at« greater .distant» from home, I press¬ ed forward the remainder of the night, during the day laying concealed in a thicket. On the second day I conti. nued (o walk forward, as I considered the danger now nearly qver, and being Η 4 weak
weak for want of refreshment, I ven¬ tured into a town through which the road lay. The only shop open at so early an hour, was а little chandleťs, who dealt in almost every article of country con¬ sumption, as well as second-hand clothes. Having purchased some provisions of the man, I ventured to inform him I was just arrived from a campaign in the East Indies, and was going to see my friends; that I was ashamed of my scar¬ let coat, and would, if I could get it cheap, purchase another. Whilst I was fitting myself, and ex¬ amining some other articles of dress, my eyes were struck with horror, and my blood recoiled back to its source, at a dirty half sheet of paper pasted against the wall, witll MURDER at the top in large characters, and beneath— An ac¬ count of a most wicked, notorious, bar¬ barous.
barons, and inhuman murder, commit¬ ted on the body of the late lord Л -----, by his own nephew, Theodore Cyphon, for the purpose of gaining possession of his estate. — Tbu have Ukevjise an ac¬ count of the marvelbus appearances that have haunted the house, together with a relation of several supernatural prodigies performed by the said Tlieo- dore Cyphon. " Pray, my good friend," said I to the shopkeeper, without the least move¬ ment of feature, " do you know this Theodore Cyphon ?" " No," he replied, " only as the re¬ port goes. I take it he's something of your size (measuring me with his eye), and they say deals with Old Nick-, for he slips out of all places of confinement ; and though two thousand pounds be of¬ fered, nobody can take him for all that" " Then how can he escape from con¬ finement ?" said I. H S « Why,
" Why, he was eeiíed at first by tht hostler, »Vho sawhitúcömebut, all streânl- itíg with blood, and was committed to gaol; hut he reaped from the top' one stormy night, And hás nsVer boen taktih since." Bèirig equipped in my new diigulse, I thanked hiin for his InfoMıatrOtt; und wrapping my old clothes in a btihdte, I marched forward, entertained by the Veracity of report. I SooWleft the 1 town á considerable way behind »e; î tt№n disencumbered myself, by committing my bundle to the first stream I crossed , and fm ving 'advanced near ten miles on thè ŕbnd·, and pateed safely Uy many passengerst I > withdrew into a grave, that I might not tempt fortune. Toward« evening lagnili VBftttttfeáWi, -tmi! had «he temerity to 'enter* а large town -, mit' I quickly repented lily folly. The first object which gaeed Ш tn the face
bee waa my detested name, beneath the capital reward of two thousand pounds ; my person was minutely described, and I shuddered as I read, lest any by¬ stander should draw the parallel. I fan- tied every one watched me as I passed— I believed, if I saw two persons whisper, it concerned myself. In this agitation, large drops of sweat gathered on my face—all my resolution and spirit seemed absorbed in infatuated weakness. My joy was inexpressible when free from this danger—a danger which I re¬ solved no more unnecessarily to incur. I waa ehagrined and surprised that my father sbould have pursued his desire of taking me ao far; well knowing, that however he might delight to torment, he would not wish to expose me to pub¬ lic justice—a step that would shock his >,pride, and stigmatize hia name. It would be tedious to enumerate tbe η 6 various
various disguises I assumed, the many narrow escapes I had from the hounds of justice, who had now scented the re¬ ward, and were eager for blood. The whole kingdom resounded my name, and I was often astonished that escape was at all possible. It was in one of my concealments I had the happiness of rescuing your daughter, and repelling machinations si¬ milar to those which have for ever de¬ stroyed me. Tired at length with being hunted from mankind, despairing of again finding Eliza, whose image was the constant companion of my miseries, and the dumb partner of my woes, I turned my thoughts towards the Arab of the desert, who obeys the impulse of nature and passion. My life was, in my own eyes, of trifling consideration, yet I was unwilling to suffer for an action I held meritorious ; and
and viewing with melancholy the ob¬ jects and ideas that constantly crowded upon me, I beheld, with equal abhor¬ rence, the ways and customs of nations, and the whole system of human exist¬ ence. I proceeded to London, with re¬ solution to fly to where the sword was law, and inclination the rule of right. Withheld by your generosity and no¬ bility of sentiment, my heart rejoiced in having found a man ; but circumstances unhappily crowded again on my way¬ ward fortune, and whispered that there was no rest for the head of a murderer but the damp lap ornature, and that I must begin again to traverse the maze of concealment, and adopt the inheritance of misery."
" Aloe !" cried Eve, laying the manu¬ script upon the table, and wiping away the
th« teats that followed each other down her lovely cheeks, " how has my foolish passion brought new evil on the object •of its existence ! Yet why should he fiy us ? Surely he could not suppose we would have betrayed him with a kiss Of peace; for justice could not demand the sacrifice." " Nay, my daughter," said Shechem, *' he certainly did not wrong us by such a supposition, or he would not now have placed in us this confidence. Besides, in my opinion, his crime, though dreadful, Was abstractedly meritorious, inasmuch as it destroyed from the surface of the groaning earth, a Wretch who converted its goods into the means of ¿vil ; but, physically and morally considered, he was most assuredly wrong, because in¬ fringing on the right of his neighbour to live, and because, if privale justice were alloived, no man, howeyer virtuous, how¬ ever praiseworthy, would escape the ca¬ lumny of every individual; life would be
be held'on α preearlou« tenure, Mid the whole world would become u íUughrer- hoiiee, Until the race of man was utterly extinguished. It is better, therefore, that partiţii evils, though enormous, be permMtd (if the law provides no re¬ medy), than that general evil should re¬ sult." " I am unequal," replied Eve, " to follow the miirtts of metaphysical discus¬ sion ; but etuuiot we tliink of some ex¬ pedient to recall the wanderer, who from this hour shall be to me no more then a tender friend ? Yes, I admire his firm¬ ness—I partake in hia passiohfbr the itn- fortunate Eliza I and emulating, as ,1 will aspire tO do, hie rectitude of ¡prin¬ ciple, I will rise above the weakness Of love, Bince it is now unjustifiable.'' -Sheehem rejoiced ut this unexpected elevation of mind; and more than ever astortishedat theeoeetitrioitiesaml ıt«wıge fortune <of lite friend, who was а victim to
to vindictive passion, he readily agreed on establishing an inquiry, tending to discover where Theodore had again launched into obscurity : but here nn ob¬ vious difficulty presented ; for how could any inquisition take place, without ex¬ posing the unhappy circumstances he la¬ boured under? thus, in place of friend¬ ship, he should become his persecutor, since to detect him in his haunts was to deliver him to the magistrate. Thus perplexed, the benevolent de¬ scendant of Abraham found his inten¬ tions defeated, and the son of his affec¬ tions lost to bis bounty. The character of squire Cyphon appeared to him more blood-thirsty, more inhuman, than that of the prowling tiger in the desert of Lybia, or the lion of the Thebian wilder¬ ness. Not contented with reducing him from the shadow of comfort—with hurl¬ ing on him immensity of destruction— of destroying tbe source of every tender sensation,
sensation, and every connexion which gives value to the existence of socialised man—he now hunted him like a beast of prey, and panted for the blood of his only son-, and for what? From whence originated this ? From an accidental blow, given in the resistance of wanton power ; for refusing to abandon at com¬ mand the control of his will, and not bowing down to lick the dust from the feet of epitomized tyranny. If his knowledge of Theodore was lost in darkness, the traces he'had left be¬ hind held out some glimmerings, by which hope might be induced to follow. Whilst he weighed in his mind the plan he should adopt, and sighed at the inef- ficacy of till human institutions to repel the encroachments of injustice and op¬ pression, his daughter retired with the paper to her chamber, where she wept at the fate of the Hansons, sighed at the destruction of the Simpsons, and prayed to
to ,the Ged of Abraham, Isaac, andja- aob, 1er the «fety xsf Theedone. Her beasted firmness паи shaken, at в view of the «angers (wUcb euoompassed кип, like the Unes of α besieged pity 5 ,*ud her soul was dismayed at the idea that Theo¬ dore—tit« man whose action« were the dictate» of justice—who bad rescued her from violation, und Whose »image M first created in her heart the tremulation of love—would perhaps expire ,qn в gib¬ bet—be cut down like a flower in the bloom pf youth. A thousand impossible expedients crowded ргл lier mipd, One while fihe proposed ,to seek ,hhn ín disguise· to watah^wd hover round hiin ataiguardjan angel; another ,tim.e to ¡brave the anger, of hie father,:and extprt. а pardon. But these 1 she was ,çon«cio,us veere 1 alike 'm- practicable, heingsolely thesportingsipf imagination.
Though
Though so great ber teelingBj ehe pol· aeaaed the spirit of α noble mind; ond though she had doated on Theodore with all the fondness of juvenile passion, those sentiments were tranafonned, «11 the drosa of weakness waa aubatracted, and the pure ore of ardent friendship alone remained. Though the judge bad not considered hia engagements saored, to her they appeared inviolable, and equal to the most solemn form. The same evening Sheclrera wrote,to Edward in terma of ambiguity—«that be¬ ing interested in the fate «f Eliaa, «nd in fact guardian to some property fallen to her, he wished .for information Of her then situation, and likewise that of her sisters -, proposing also, that if business or pleasure led'him to'town, that he bad matters of moment to communicate, re¬ lative to Theodore. More he would hot hazard to the conveyance of the pott, aa he doubted ndt but sqUire Cyphon would, like
Itke his brother despots, keep his emis¬ saries in pay where intelligence was likely to be gathered. ' Some days after this, the lawyer whom Shechem had often occasion to employ in his business, called upon him to con¬ sider the progress Of α suit in Chancery, which had been depending for many years, and seemed likely tò remaln in statu quo, which inclined the Jew, who loved not to throw good money after bad, to suffer the affair to die; de¬ claring he believed the office took its name, not from the common chances of law, but from the chance of the cli¬ ents living to see the termination of the suit. ' The lawyer, who had before this wit¬ nessed the singular modes of thinking and acting peculiar to the Jew, proposed a question he said had been referred to his decision, yiz. the legal heir of an es¬ tate
tate being missing, сап the next in right proceed to possession ? " My good friend," replied Shechem, " there is great ambiguity attached to the term milting, on the circumstances of which hang the definition." " Can then," said the lawyer, " the se¬ cond in heirship obtain possession, the premier being insane?" " Assuredly," replied Shechem, " pro¬ vided provision is made in case the in¬ sane recover his senses." " Well," replied the lawyer, " this is not altogether the statement, but now I will give you a brief of the case. The true heir of the estate, in order to obtain possession, having made away with the incumbent, is obliged to abscond, and has hitherto eluded the vigilance of law. He lies at the same time under imputa¬ tion of derangement, so that if not exe¬ cuted for the murder, he will he held in durance. The question is, whether in the
tke mean time tbe next heir can obtain possession ?" M hold not," said Shechem, whilst reikctioni that rose in hia mind flushed to his cheeks ; " dost thou not know, that, till condemned by the law, every man is presumed innocent, and therefore hia estate cannot devolve to another till he hath actually suffered the sentence ? But in the mean time, I apprehend guardiana sbould be appointed, like re¬ gents in a kingdom whose prince ia a minor. But I think, if thy ease is sin¬ gular, the hoste of thy employer ia equally so; and I have а shrewd suspicion he is within my knowledge." " Y«hi lieve exactly met my ideas," re¬ plied the lawyer ; " and the notoriety of the transaetton I hat«, glanced at may heh) you to information."' ' " And If I judge right," said Shechem, " m fiSHtgon eqtiimCyphon, it is tekim an eternal and everlasting disgrâce. Not content
oentent with offering two thosnand pounds' reward to bring his son to the executioner, he is too impatient to wait the death of that son, to defe« hie posses¬ sion of an estate which, but for the crime of that son, would never have devolved to him." As Shechem had nothing to commu¬ nicate, and could gain no further intelli¬ gence, he was contented to turn the dis¬ course, in bis own mind more than ever execrating so vile a depravity, so eager a thirst after riche» and the bauble of a name. It Is no wonder, thought he, the World has been deluged in blood, and the human race dragged to slaughter for the glory of fame, when a village Nero can play his pranks of domination, and scourge with a laah whom he pleases. No letter had yet arrived from Ed¬ ward, and Shechem began to doubt whether his affection had not been lost in
in the common odium attached to the crime of his cousin. But from these sus¬ picions а few days relieved him, by bringing Edward himself to the Mi¬ llones. His inquiries after the exiles hed been fruitless. At the receipt of the letter his impatience did not allow any delay, and he came forward in the eager ex¬ pectation of embracing his cousin ; he was therefore much disappointed to find that he again was lost, and that а barren narrative alone remained behind. Of the fate of Eliza he was equally ignorant, no one having appeared to claim the portion he had advertised in her name; and considering her inability to provide för her own maintenance by labour, he could only conclude that death had finally closed upon her suffer. ings.
As
As to squire Cyphon, his life was a circle of terror, and a succession of alarm. His timidity was notorious, and his cru¬ elty more insufferable than ever; for, not tasting any comfort himself, he •could not endure in his sight any one whose countenance wore a smile, and contrived, by moroseness, to involve every face in eternal gloom. No pre¬ caution the vigilance of suspicion could suggest, was unemployed, to guard against assassination or surprise. His windows were barred with iron, his own «uit of apartments were only to be en¬ tered by a narrow door, and to prevent poison, he made his servant taste every dish and every bottle that was brought him. His sleep was broken and inter¬ rupted ; frequently he would rise in the night, and examine his pistols. He re¬ frained from all intercourse with his neighbours, living a voluntary prisoner to the wantonness of his power, and the consciousness of his deserts. voi. π. ι " And
" And such," said Shechem, " are the enjoyments of tyrants; for knowing themselves а burden on the earth, they fancy every weapon of death endowed with latent powers, and turning against them. But do you really think him so depraved as to see his son publicly exe¬ cuted?" " As to that," said Edward, " prob¬ ably he may, if he considers it necessary to his own safety; yet I cannot say, as it would wound his pride, and brand him With infamy ; for, amidst all this, he is tremblingly alive to fame, and af¬ fects to lament thé insanity of his son aa the stimulus of bis outrage of lord D——, and as thfr motive for his own precaution. Tbe large reward, I be¬ lieve, is solely to get 'him in his power, and. Ho doubt; he aims at confining him fet mV 'Eye was disappointed that no tidings transpired, tacitly reproaching Theodore ť' ι with
with want Of friendship, in obstinately persisting in* α silence he must know would inflict pain on his friends. Yet to this allegation of ingratitude the ex¬ cuse was ready; how could she know his situation—the difficulties in which he might be involved? and she doily dreaded to hear of his being discovered by the ministers of justice, or the candi¬ dates for reward. Finding, that though his journey had indeed assured him of the existence of Theodore, it could give him no clue to the inexplicable labyrinth he had again entered, Edward took leave of the bene¬ volent Israelite and his tender daughter, returning to prosecute plans of improve¬ ment, and to pass his life in irresolute indolence. Not finding, in the meri¬ dian of his own quality, one female whom his heart could approve, he hesitated to adopt her, whose sole disqualification was α want of what himself abundantly 1 8 possessed;
possessed; so ridiculous are the ideas often allowed to influence the actions of those who are otherwise wise.
CHAP-
CHAPTER VIII
Λ httle Incident that would embellish a great History Some months passed away without bringing any account of Theodore, and Eve hod, with difficulty, overcome the painful thought of never agam behold¬ ing the friend of her heart Shechem had made every possible inquiry per¬ mitted by discretion, but all his circum¬ locutory interrogations tended alike to the point of ignorance, and he could not but admire, amidst his regret, a vigi¬ lance that so effectually eluded the in¬ quisition of justice, the hopes of two ι 3 thousand
thousand pounds, and the researches of friendship. He had examined the captains con¬ cerned in the Levant trade, not know¬ ing but he might have executed his for¬ mer intention ofl wandering with the wild Arab, yet no traces could be found. It was in the cabin of one of those ves¬ sels, 'he observed a>yoitng man, With a complexion darkened by the sun—fea¬ tures that were natives of England, but possessing^ thei solemnity ahd command¬ ing grandeur,of. the East; and be,was more particularly engaged by a general likeness he fancied he could trace to Eliza Hanson. He could· nob «iippose it herself, the featuKa being· masculine, yet theicast of countenance -engaged ıhımı andı he en¬ tered into- a conversation,- during which be discovered -that he -was just come iram Alexandriai " I have,"
" I have," said hfe, after disiiourse had introduced familiarity, " a diamond of some ¿mount I would willingly part with ; -and if you favour me 'With your address, I will take your opinion." With this Shechem readily complied, and, under pretext of business, pressed him not to delay, but, if convenient, to come the same evening. Without being able to account for the sudden partiality he felt for one so totally a stranger, Any other than as he came from the city where much of his life had been spent, he waited with im¬ patience for the hour appointed; and when the stranger arrived, dispensed with his general rule, by conducting him into his library. The diamond was produced, and fif¬ teen hundred pieces agreed on ás the price; but when the stranger signed his 1 4 name
name to the receipt, Shethem could not refrain expressions of surprise at the sig¬ nature of Jason Hanson —"Pardon me," said he, " thou art certainly related to the Hansons of -----, and it was the affinity of thy countenance first excited my desire of speaking to thee, may I then inquire how near thou art of kin' 1 lie young man gazed on the wither¬ ed form of Bensadi, he reflected a mo¬ ment, and, no doubt, considering that no dangei could arise from a solution of the question, owned himself the son of the poor curate, and inquired impa* tiently if he could give him any infor- mation ? " Alas, my son ' ' said Shechem, whilst he wiped а tear from his eye, and falter¬ ed m Ins accent, " I understood thou »ert sent to Bombay—then how earnest thou to Alexandria ? " That, ' snid Hanson, " my present impatience will not allow me to relate, but
but I beg, if you ore informed, keep me no longer in ignorance of what so nearly concerns me, for, from the infamous practices under which I myself have suffered, I have the most fearful fore¬ bodings that I am not the only victim." " A storm," said Shechem, " cannot well fall on one, without spreading to another; and seldom can vengeance be executed, without involving every con¬ nexion with the patient. I have indeed to wound thee to the heart—to unfold to thee inflictions of a villany disgracing to the name of man -, but my age and my infirmities forbid me to undertake the task in my own person. Here is a paper, written by thy juvenile and suf¬ fering friend, Theodore, in which thou wilt see that virtue in this »vorld is not an insurance of prosperity." He left Hanson to read the destruc¬ tion of his family, retiring to the com¬ pany of his daughter, who charmed his ι 5 tumul-
tumultuous thought« .into',calmness by the influence of magic sound, л Revenge, grief, distraction, and the mostjpßignantuseneations, swelled, and toi4,„by,<turns, the, bowm oí Hanson, but when hecatne tq the faUVof the ty¬ rant, «he cried out—" God-like' Theo¬ dore,! noble, bigh-souled friend' this is well—this ia right!" A stream of tears gushed from, his eyes, in some degree aUaying.the burn¬ ing heat bi»aver.£gii^ipn l CH!at«di and he continued to follpw'rheodpretthrough hia flight and obseunty. r Ţhe conclu¬ sion, which involved ι him m ,darkness, awakened ias remembrance of where he then was, and, having ealhídjBensadi, eagerly inquired if he knew where bis friend was concealed, or where he might embrace Ma sister. Г , Im . > ',. Of these Shechem knew fld more than himself,
himeelf,; »lating, till;«lipper wds m- nounced by .his, daughter, the severul expedienta he had unsuccessfully tried. Foťiany other company. Hanson »vould have been totally unfit; but the cordini kindness of the Jew, and tht} f»fftieS»<Qf his daughter, were some consolation to a disappointed mind; for, having hoped to place hja parents and sisters in afflu¬ ence, the blow he had received by this knowledge» of their ruin, for a while seemed to stun him. with itt force. E It Nothbeijig) under ah engagement, of returning to the vesseli he accepted.! ¡for that night, anı apartment at Bensadi'e, and turned in his mind the scheméîof retribution he should adopt, considering, in th* ardöutfoff youth, he. hod at right to rotaliote,· and eddingj у/Ш he.thad perfoftaUjr.eufftred to the injuries of bis relations, he knew no boumjs to stay the rage of his vengeance. He con- ceiyed.it the part of wisdom not to leave j 1 6 any
any thing to chance, and before he com¬ menced hostilities on the enemy, policy dictated the necessity of preventing re¬ prisals by leaving opportunity-, he there¬ fore first determined to discover Eliza, and place his sisters beyond the reach of common misfortune. On the morrow, Shechem accompa¬ nied his new friend to arrange some matters of business with the Levant trader; and as Hanson was wholly ig¬ norant of the town, consequently liable to impositions, he desired Shechem to admit into his house two trunks, con¬ taining, as he hinted, articles of consider¬ able amount. An increase of fortune like this ap¬ peared almost miraculous in the eyes of the Jew, and, more than once, he ex¬ pressed his curiosity and surprise, that, in the space of so short α time, he could have amassed so much, especially since he
he had not been in any of those offices where opportunities are fiirnished of plundering the Indian, and extorting, with demoniac rapacity, the labour of his hands. " So fin- from that," replied Hanson, " my rank is no more than an East India soldier; thus, you see, I myself am а slave broke from his bonds. But I will reserve my adventures, that your daugh¬ ter may hear them ; for, you know, the soldier's vanity is great in relating his toils, and the traveller delights to re¬ count to the fair the dangers he has sur¬ mounted, that sex being peculiar in their love of bravery and commiseration of distress." With this promise Shechem was sa¬ tisfied, and having, at his return, pro¬ vided him with an apartment, and se¬ cured the trunks, they sat down toge¬ ther, and Eve signifying her desire to know
know all th»t related to a family abe loved, for the sake of Eliza, he began.
" It is justly said, that the pleasure of deaeriMngiQqr difficulties after they are passtdit compensates, in a degree, their sufferance;.and I 410 longer wonder »t the dangers braved by heroes, when I taste'the·,satisfaction of again passing over them ia safety, • ''¡Youilcnow the' ю w station in which the evolution», of fortuné had placed, our family μ and that by<the bounty of that infamous miscreant,, Theodoria, I was for a time placed at college. It ia as¬ suredly (taken in a moral light), as muchvaidebt ita satisfy expectations we voluntarilyi otitei «as ,any other ob^ga- tion·'proceeding from rverbal-aasertkin; and heivtho gives β youth ,rtaaoiţ,,to believe he Will provide ior biaestabliah- -1 ment.
ment, is absolutely bound to ,do ,so. With lb«, propositipn im my, vift»/, it was no small check to my aspiring hopes, to find in place of being raised -to.a situation of emolument, that tbe extent of my patronage was to reach merely to a chaplaincy aboard a, man of war, and I lamented the insanity of my friend,, to whose absence I imputed the change in his uncle. " Little at that time did I conceivetlte possibility of,his being the subject of such malignant persecution; .little didjl conceive him struggling with all tfce hardship of, imprisonment, or I wpjüd have sacrificed· .life and fortune fpţihjs relief, though a nation had arisen,to oppose. " By the jÇomparjşon ,of tinae<)I, r* r- ceive that the instant- of my departure waa {the signal pf destruction to my family,- and that the day which launched me
me on the surface of the mighty deep, was to overwhelm the innocent in bound¬ less misery ; but of this I was ignorant. —With all my fancied sense, I possessed no more prescience than the sheep be¬ neath the hand of the butcher. I pro¬ ceeded on the voyage with the lofty hopes of an adventurer, but scarce had we lost the last glimpse of the shores of Britain, than the farce of my chaplaincy was explained, and my real destination laid open; being, that I was sold into the Company's service, and thus sent to be a minion of oppression, and the in¬ strument of enslaving those who had more right to that territory than our¬ selves, except, indeed, the weighty con¬ sideration of a heavier artillery. " In the first transports of my indigna¬ tion (for my temper is not to be trod upon), I ran to the side of the ship, and should have plunged for ever from 'a world of so much treachery, had not one
one of the seamen caught me by the coat. I was ordered beneath deck, and pinioned to the boards by heavy irons, in a little chamber where the air scarcely penetrated, and the stench of bilge water was almost equal to suffocation. In this miserable situation I was not alone— α situation in which we tasted the treat¬ ment of those black and copper-coloured beasts, that are brought from the coasts of Africa, to plant our sugar canes, to turn our mills, and make fortunes for the most imperious of Adam's descend¬ ants. " The room in which we were pinioned was six feet by five, where three of us were stowed to supply the Eastern markets. The one was a young gen¬ tleman who was an orphan, and left to the care of an uncle. The other a youth, who coming to town, ignorant of tbe practices which are either con¬ nived at by the magistrates to the blast¬ ing
ing of' the Engliah character, or elude the vigHancòof the police to their ever¬ lasting disgrace. '' This youth was traversing the streets out of curiosity, when he was accosted by a well-dressed man, and asked if he wanted employ -, void of suspicion, he answered in the affirmative. ' Well, юу lad,' said the gentleman ' а friend Of mine who ia a merchant will employ you ; take this paper, and tell him Mr. Nox sends his compliments.' ft The youth did as directed, with many expressions of thanks, and hastened to the house of the merchant, who lived on the banks of the Thames. He was shewn into a parlour, received a glass of wine, was desired to sit down, fell asleep and when he awoke, found him¬ self handcuffed and in the dark, .Being robust, he attempted to escape, but in vain;
vain; and in the dead hour of midnight was conveyed down the river and pi¬ nioned in the hold. ' And such,' cried I, ' is the boasted generosity of Britons, such the Usage of Christians! and is it possible a free na¬ tion can suffer contractors for men Γ Why have I not power to purge, to exterminate those leeches who suck tbe blood of society ? But, alas ! I am only an East India soldier, going to add my weight to the scale of that universal op¬ pression, which spreads'from tho black son of At'ric's burning sands, to thè vizier, who, glittering in gilded trap¬ pings, bows his neck to the bowstring of eastern omnipotence.' " The soul which enjoys no internal source of consolation, will in circum¬ stances such as mine were then, sink into despondency ; but my mind being stored with the< instructions of « father, and
and the learning of ages, I never, in any of my accidental distresses, gave way to useless repining, but sought into my¬ self some means of obviation. I knew, to oppose power by force, was like bat¬ tering at a wall with sand; but I knew also, that to countermine it by what is called cunning, was like wearing away the foundations, where every particle of sand detached was advancive progres¬ sion. f' Being myself a minister of religion, my thoughts often adverted to its in¬ fluence on mankind, and I saw that, throughout the varied globe, one uni¬ versal principle was the groundwork of every establishment, namely, supersti¬ tion. I saw that men were more guided by their terrors than a rectitude of prin¬ ciple; end that in the eye of Him who permits this diversity of form, the most bigotted devotees of any sect, whether Bramin, Mahometan, Christian, or Jew, could
could not stand candidates for his favour, wanting the qualification of moral vir¬ tue; but possessing that, the habit of their nation, the contradiction of their supersti tion,and inflections of form, must, as the dust on the beam, preponderate alike. " I pass over the intolerable hardships of a situation like ours ; the dreadful endurance of a burning zone, where the air inhaled was impregnate with fire, and all the stench of а ship, with the comforts of rotten provisions and stink¬ ing water. I conduct you at once to our landing at Bombay, where I and many more were enrolled in the Com¬ pany's service, and sent up the country to quell an insurrection, the copper-co¬ loured sons of the earth being tired with the rapacity of the white, and the tor¬ tures these inflicted in extorting taxes, the right of collecting which was unde¬ niably
niably established by the edicts of the cannon " After suffering every hardship, thirst, the weight of arms, and dust, (raised by our company and the winds) could inflict, we came in sight of a village, where the enemy were strongly intrenched. It was determined by those acquainted witll the feelings of human nature, to impress a full *ense of our superiority on the various tribes, by holding out exemplary punishment. " The drums and trumpets sounded to the charge, as the shades of night served to raise the terror of uncertainty. Tbe cannon from an oblique battery began to roar, and flashes of sulphurous fire gleamed »through the thickened air. The vo«*«f humenity was ^stinguish- ed in thfiiţriflcjple of eelf-prejwrtratipn; the «oul» gejaded to madness, eurrøundi < ed
ed by murder, arose above itself, and triumphed in blood and slaughter. " A body of infantry advanced, under cover of a heavy cannonade, to storm the lines, which was quickly effected, the bodies of our companions (many only slightly wounded) serving to mount the parapet. Without regard we trampled the dying to pieces ; and in the torrent of entrance where a breach was formed, many were smashed or torn asunder. Our bayonets were fixed, and served in place of pikes, with which we charged the .enemy drawn up in dose compact on the banquette; and whilst tbe blood streamed from our wounds we threw ourselves upon their weapons, «tabbing them in the face, and carrying ell before us with irresistible fury. Some hund¬ reds of our men perished by being Una¬ ble to keep their feet amidst the promis¬ cuous confusion of mangled, carcases, and the glutinous mixture of blood and flesh,
flesh, and mud, so that falling down, they were either smothered or trod to pieces. No quarter was given. Man, woman, «nd child, were hewn down With the sword and the axe, or knocked on the head like brutes. Fire, the most dreadful of elements, spread devastation amidst the houses, where those '»vho feared the brutality of the soldiers were burnt to death. • ?! Close to the spot where I stood, α young woman, wholly naked, with two babes in her arms, rushed from a sink¬ ing house ; frenzy rolled in her eye, her hair streamed upon the wind, and screaming a language we knew not, 'be¬ sought our mercy. A tall Irishman, whose eyes flashed the fury ofthe damn¬ ed, seized her children by'the htiir, and dashed their brains out upon the gratinai' He waa going to plunge his bay'enetiinto the breast of the mother, when a ball stţwokfheaito'the ¿roati6,f>ÈitVé»iMrSa í»t.i * Л1 Ы*
her brains in my face: at the -saine moment, a black, naked and stream¬ ing with blood, rushed from а heap of ruins, and with his axe split the white savage from the head half down the back. " Hell itself is repose, peace, and plea¬ sure, to the scene I then saw—a scene which turned the blood in my veies, and rendered my life detestably loath¬ some. No sound met the quivering ear, save piercing shrieks, groans, shouts, oaths, and the roaring of cannon. The haggard eye trembled at the falling houses» ι the blazing fir«, anı) the suffer¬ ing people, who fell beneath a promis¬ cuous butebery. Virgins were hastily ravished, aud then murdered without pity. Children were thrown into the, flatnett the young andthe old univer- saJly,periihed, < K.I í » I' « Whilst the fury of the storm bad vox,, il к lasted,
leaded, I, as a part of the machine called an army, had acted in concord; but now I stood still, petrified with horror, at the comer of α street, the smoking ruins burning about me. Personal danger had no time to occur.. My soul was shocked, my whole frame was convulsed, arid I called aloud for the fury of Heaven to'sinbafronce the conquerors and the •conquered, into the bowels of the earth, that if possible such a scene of carnage «tight be wiped from the annals of hu¬ manity. 'But when I considered this waa only a freak, a petty transaction in a village, a trifle not worth mention, when compared to the battles and storms Which crowd on the pages of history, and swell the pomp of glory and ambi¬ tion, I raised the point of my sword to niy bosom, nnd should have bade adieu, without regret, ■ toi the enlightened, the polished, 'the civilized,, the wrJhderfiil taena lof f earth, had mot a blow behind jUtlledmyitonses¿ntoiitupor, apd^loeed »far - my
my eyes on the grand display of human magnificence. n " I was awakened from my trance by a stab in the breast ; and opening my eye« perceived a black (with a visage slashed into the form of a demon) standing over me, and ready to repeat his stroke with the only arm be hod remaining. I was not 'born to passive obedience;· a burning splinter lay close beside me, «arid grasping it more through instinct than reflection, I gave him a blow that dashed him into the flames. ι " I started up, and looked round ine with a'vacant horror not tobe described, at 'the objects Which encompassed me, andcllilled by the silence which univer¬ sally reigned; except interrupted by the «rash of a tumbling beam, or tbe crack- lingof the flamee. This stillness was as awful as'the preceding tumult hed been thsirrehdousV'· In every dirmrtitmKthe "" к 2 sated
sated eye turned to find repose, objects of rapine and barbarity met. The mu¬ tilated carcasses of Indians and Euro¬ peans blended promiscuously in gore, which stagnated here and there in bol· ţo»vs. In one place ait old шал and woman were transfixed to the earth with the same pike,. In Another a woman ţîaa hanging to а post, with two ehil* феп tied to her feet. There was yet nó other light than that of the flames; f(nd being without a, companion, I sat down on а dead body, to reason on the track I should pursuet To remain with the army I shuddered at, as my assist¬ ance! must then be given to injustice and. oppression. I ltad.no hopes of being free when, the term of five years, was expired, as I had before me examples of the, deceits practised on those who wished to return. The value of my existence was not worth the Chance of α die, but ţhaţ chance I resolved to throw, rather than submit any longer to slavery,
" Whilst I thus sat and refleeteel, t perceived indistinctly through thegloçm, the figure of a man gliding along; he was naked, and held a large knife in nia hand, whilst from his neck hung a bag, into which, from time to time, he put something. He came nearer, and by the light of the embers I could discern him cut off the head of a mail; and it then struck me he was one of those vul¬ tures that hover over a field of slaughter to strip the dead ; and not knowing but I might stand the chance oţ a visit, pre¬ pared to meet him, by unsheathing my stiletto. " My motioh had attracted his eye, and ι the, instantly advanced with large strides towards me. I started up,, atad brandished my weapon. Probably being too intent on His prey, he took no heed to hia feet, and stumbling oyer a carcase, he fell prone befoie me. Iq an instant I stabbed him through tne íhroaí/an'd к 3 finding
finding he was done for, by hie drop¬ ping the knife, I turned him over to examine the contents of his bag. I tore it from his neck, and taking it up to a blaze of fire, opened the mouth ; but I cannot express to you the shock I un¬ derwent at discovering pieces of ears and fingers, which this miscreant had cut or torn from the bodies, for the sake of the golden ornaments. I threw the infa¬ mous plunder into the flames, with the shudder of α man who has unawares grasped a serpent. I resolved instantly to desert, and fly from the very face of man. " I quitted the reeking village, where so much had been done to convince the wretched Hindoos of the justice, huma¬ nity, and bravery of the British nation. As I feared our army would shortly re¬ turn from the pursuit, I hastened as fast as my wounds would permit, in a direc¬ tion as opposite as I could judge from ,the rilute of their march. " The
" The pale flashing meteors, which, bke the aurora borealis, scintillate ip the fiery atmosphere of the east, served to guide me through а country without а leading rood -, and before day I had made up to a forest of banyan, plantain, and other trees peculiar to the climate. Under these I sat down to rest till the morning, my wounds bemg painful, and my strength declining.
J, CHÄV-
CHAPTER IX. The Retaliation of an Hindoo. " When the sun again rose upon the highest branches of the forest, I endea¬ voured to penetrate the depths of the shade ; but, owing to loss of blood, and the languor ever succeeding extraor¬ dinary exertion, I was more than once on the point of fainting. Nature had, however, provided bountifully for the wants and necessities of man, the most delicious fruits hanging in abundance. I sat down to feast on oranges and pomegranates, and found a delightful freshness spread through my frame. Tbe fragrance of the shrubs, which bloomed,
bloomed, where in cold climates only brambles will vegetate, was borne on the faint breeze, fanning the senses. The fecundity of nature contributed equally to luxury and delight. I thought my¬ self on the borders of Paradise ; and had not the recent scene of carnage opposed as a drawback, I should have pronounc¬ ed, that even oh our earth there were spots exempted from evil. " In the midst of this enthusiasm, I observed the bushes to shake, the high grass to tremble, and a large snake, near¬ ly six yat-ds long, curled before mo. I wos fixed to the spot with fear—all my paradisul images faded in an instant, though I should have remembered that this animal was no stranger in the gar¬ den of Eden. " There was something peculiarly dreadful in ť » motion of this monster; it seemed tt glide imperceptibly along к 5 in
in silent majesty. The birds, who were rejoicing on the branches, now dropped ttiêir note, or faintly chirped as they en¬ deavoured to fly; and the monkeys· and sqnirrels, with wild chotterings, fled to eoncenl themselves beneath tbe foliage. Its fiery eye did not perceive me, or, perceiving, bowed obedience to man, and left me in an universal tremble; no token, you will say, of courage, or my eminent superiority as lord of the creation. " All tbe charms of the grove bad now lost their beauty—I cast my eye round with caution, and dared scarcely advance, lest I should stir up an enemy. As I penetrated deeper into the wood, I seemed to enter a region of enchant¬ ment, where a hundred noises assailed me on every side, none of which had ever before vibrated on my ear. Troops of monkeys bounded through the trees, with a hideous chattering, perhaps at this
this visit from a tame relation. Various unknown birds flew about, bedecked with α plumage glittering as the rain¬ bow, or charmed the ear with sounds of melody. Snakes were become fami¬ liar to me; some lay folded and basking at the roots of trees, others wound round the branches, and some, of glossy and burnished appearance, suspended them¬ selves from the twigs in the air, tnd seemed to wanton on the breeze. " But of this latter, there was only, at long spaces, а faint breath. A burning heat, with а damp vapour, was alone sensibly felt, and these intermixing with the powerful perfumes, excited an al¬ most irresistible inclination to sleep. The luscious fruits, which hung in full perfection, allayed the thirst excited by the heat, and guiding myself as near as possible by the sun, I sustained my spi¬ rits, in certain confidence of success.
к 6 "On
" On a sudden I heard the Voice of a man, to me far more terrible than ser¬ pents or tigers. I slunk trembling into a brake, waiting tO hear If I could dis¬ tinguish any particular that might warn me to escape, or assure me Of safety. For a time I could hear nothing of the enemy I feared, and for whom t was wholly unprovided, having with me no missile weapon of any description. " I soon after heard the barking of a dog, and the laüghtor of children. Thus encouiaged, I ventured to look out. «nd saw a naked savage, dancing on α little spot of ground, with two children, of a deep Capper colour. I arose, with in¬ tention to trust to his meriy ; ' for man,' said I to myeelÇ ' is tho same, Whether black, bro»Vii,ör »vilitekbe still h»s pas¬ sions; the only danger to be,feared isin opposing those passions ; tieside ν hospi¬ tality is the first law of nature, and, at all hatards, death is only death, and few are
are the things in this world for which а wise man would desire to live.' " I have often had occasion to ob¬ serve, that the way to preserve life is not to be over fearful of losing it i being prepared fbr'the worst, every alternative is for the better, and we undertake dan¬ gers prudence would tremble at. " Thus fortified by reason, I ventured to advance-, but the Hindoo had no sooner α glimpse of my colour, than, as if в Hon had rushed down his path, he uttered a howl, and catching his chil¬ dren ih his arms, began to fly. I called after him aloud. He looked round at the tone of distress; I lifted up my hands—I pointed to my wounds ; thougli this appeal should have excited his joy, seeing they· were rocbived in butchering his countrymen ; bul: his heart was not made of European materials, and seeing that I was unprovided with firearms, he
he tumed round and held out his hand in token of peace. " I addressed him in the several lan¬ guages I was master of, but he was ig¬ norant of all except the Hindoo, and а little bad Arabic, serving merely to con¬ vey a general meaning, accompanied by signs. This was, however, sufficient for the purpose of benevolence ; and seeing my exhausted situation, he conducted me into a deep hollow, where, amidst almost impervious shades, the modest mansion rose. This palace was an erection of sods, strengthened by branchée of trees, »vhieh growing, became a little shelter. A small aperture served for door and win¬ dow, an Indian mat for carpet and bed. Milk, melons, and cocoa nuts, were set before me, by the female companion of his solitude, and knoiving that he who would ingratiate himself with the mo¬ ther must notice her offspring, I was particular
particular in my caresses of these dingy children of heat. " A condescension so unusual from a white gained upon them both, and all that the cottage afforded was at my command.—' You are separate here, my friend,' said I, ' from the rest of your nation—do you hold no commerce with them ?' ' Yes,' he replied, ' I hold the com¬ merce of friendship—I feed the wanderer, when he strays from the desert, without asking his cast —I am content with my companion ; we live on the productions of nature, and can man desire more?' ' Yes,' said I, ' you live ignorant of a thousand luxuries; you know not the voluptuousness of poignant sauces.' ' Brama,' said he, ' allows us not to destroy the life of any animal, and we are sufficiently provided with vegetables and fruit«.' ' Supposing it,' replied I, ' you know nothing
nothing of the divine art of navigation which opens one country to another, and supplies the inhabitants of the frigid zone with the luxuriances of the tem¬ perate and torrid.' ' Happy would it have been,' said he, ' if I had not known, nor ever heard of this divine art, for I see nothing result from it but murder and oppression If we built large ships like yourselves, and could traverse the vast ocean, would your people give us settlements in their country, and allow us to make contribu¬ tions?' ' No,' said I, ' that would be contrary to the la»vs of nature and the rights of possession.' ' Then,' retorted he, sharply, ' you act contrary to the laws of nature and the rights of possession. You are at great pains to brave storms rind distresses, that you may extort from us our property, and convert us into slaves, to cultivate your rice, your poppies, arid your cot¬ tons.
tons. We would willingly have traded with you—we would have given you our cottons, our gold, our diamonds, and our ivory.' ' But,' said I, ' you would not have given us them for nothing, and the needy adventurers who come over here have not principle sufficient to wait the profits of a fair barter.' ' By that,* said he, ' I suppose, ånd from their actions, I judge, they are the vagabonds of your nation that come amongst us. I had heard of tliar oru- etties, and not being willing to lofefe the liberty of commanding my own actions (for I did not see how their being white gaVe them authority to force me to la¬ bour), I forsook the pleasure of living with my relations, and with my compa¬ nion buried myself in the woods.' " SUch Were the sentiments of the simple Hindoo. I own I blushed for my c¿üritrymen ; and the only excuse I could
could make was, that they were a com¬ pany of hungry merchants.—' Of what avail,' thought I, ' is our boasted learn¬ ing and knowledge? For what are all our researches, but to deal out slavery and death to those less learned than our¬ selves? Wonderful improvements, ui- deed !' " Before my Indian friend, I found myself considerably sunk in value, and had I then а companion like myself, I sİKtuld have renounced society, and taken up my abode »vith monkeys and serpents. Beneath the covert of the Woods, I remained till my wounds were perfectly whole, experiencing the efficacy of cleanliness and nature, to restore the accidental damages of our fragile ma¬ chine. " Perhaps I should have formed a fa¬ mily alliance with the worshippers of Brama, and learnt to reverence the Pa¬ goda
goda of Seringham, 'had not mý appre¬ hensions of the fute of my family sup¬ ported the fading desire of returning to England. I therefore first proposed a trial at escape, and, should that be im¬ possible, to sit down in peace beneath the banyan's shade, rather than again expose myself at an English settlement, " I set out in the design of traversing the immense wood, which had from the first harmony of chaos spread forth ¡ts branches, and I shed tears at parting with the man of nature, and his family ; I left them sporting with their children on a little green, and had the satisfaction to hear their repeated good wishes, in that accent of heartfelt affection which more than words is convictive of the es¬ teem we possess. " Those who have never experienced, can little conceive the terrors of an east¬ ern forest,'far overbalancing the beauties of
of the flowers and the richness of the fruits. In the day, the silent serpent winds through the grass, or darts from the trees, whilst the air is hot almost to suffocation. In the night, echo thunders with roarings, the meteors gleam through the air, and the under growl of lions and tigers fix dismay in the stoutest heart, and carry terror to every other animal of the woods. " My Only resource at night was to climb the trees, in defiance of serpents and noxious insects; the goat was by night ind day α perpetual torment, often nearly stimulating me to madness, by the irritation they created in the skin. "On the second day of my painful jour¬ ney, I discovered the remains of an ani¬ mal, I judged to be α buffalo from the largeness of the remaining bones, though tbey were broken and Scattered -about, I had fortunately only heard the roarings" of
of the lion and the bowlings of the tiger, but I every moment expected to see them start from the gloom, and seize on me as their victim. Indeed I often met with their footsteps ; and in one place, from the devastation of the trees and the torn up ground, I concluded there had been a combat with α rhinoceros or ele¬ phant. " No human being, nor the traces of their feet, met my eye throughout the remainder of the solitary march ; and whilst I beheld so immense а track a- dorned with all the glories of luxuriant vegetation, I cursed in my heait that ambition with which a name, or a paltry track of ground, is suflicient reason to annihilate a million of human beings. " On the eighth day of my journey, my eyes were blessed with the prospect of the mighty deep. I stood for α time to gaze on it with ecstacy, and felt a rapture arising
arising i(i my mind at the recollection of parents and friends ; but this was quickly damped by not being able to descry either, town or habitation. I sat down, gazing round with irresolution of pur¬ pose,,, for being ignorant of the latitude of Surat, tţear whieh I supposed myself, nor having any instrument to take an observation, I might wander without ever approaching nearer, or perhaps throwpig myself in the »» ay of the army. Yet tq sit down without nn effort, and spend the rest of my life without pur¬ pose or benefit, »vas contrary to my na¬ ture, «nd I resolved at least to make а trial at escape, by following in a north¬ ward direction along the banks of the ocean. " For some days I continued this plan, but the wood, the only to,uţce of myex- istencţ;, cuiling in а barren flat, necessi¬ tated me to return, changing my inten¬ tion into waiting the fortune of chance, , , ¡I which
which 'might conduct some vessel On shore, or within sight of signals. " In the life I seemed doomed to lead, there was little of variety -, the neit tree providing me subsistence, my whole range of amusement consisted in exa¬ mining α thousand plants and flowers unknown in Europe. I now experienced the »vant of society; the hours passed a»vay, it is true, but in their duration I was α prey to lassitude, and sighed for some object of action. " The equinox I kne»v must come up¬ on mc, but hoping as I did to leave the place, I wanted resolution to proVide for it, and should doubtless have »raited its fury, but for the restless spirit which im¬ pelled mc to action. In obedience to this impulse, I begun to erect α hut, with nó other tool tllán'á pocket-knife, and tbiirìd no small pleasure in observing its idMcemcnt. ' ' '" · " * " Round
" Round the apqt I had planned for my little habitation, I drew a line of chevaux de frise, formed of pointed stakes, so closely and «xsmpactly placed, that no animal of common, ще could have made an entrance. Thus I began to have a regular appearance. One day walking along the shores I hod the curioaity to pick up several shells that lay scattered abouti they contained pearl« of no little Value» «M as I never, .despaired of some day escaping, I ponceeled many of the finest in my clothes. '" I hod now been more than six weeks on the shore, weeks which to me had pos- sessedithe duration of months, and for aught· I could' perceive, I might here spend the remnant efi my ¡days, no ves¬ tige of mari, being near, or, in fact, any object that could assure mc the earth contained any hum»n ¡bemg besidei my¬ self. <'. ι, c"s · л„ <t liet Un I 'f.! l' (iţi 1 "'il .tii 't "Ohe
.," Ofte >0f thase ι tretnieedouS, «tonu» ivhiukr- threat en destrmotiaerito isinkieg »atUnttbielesediAii .the iet»enii«gpt*f- α VrsiHíAiťttl инул" Rain -ami -hiu ¿tesasnd.· «Λ' not in itorreirts^ but (in ι shetojier as, lifi ¡tlie [burating icloudscf-parted: <ae enee (»mtU -their «ontente.,·,; ïbei tirane der soettied t« shake Ithe» hm-«os;>it»íd vibrated through the« forest, without a moment's intermission, whilst the liglitnÍHgíof',iv»nOue .«obilrs flaahed and |Щ|тиж1,1Ье gloom, which ensUrended the earth with tenfold, darkness. ,Ήιβ heavens themselves appeared ito open, and the-last bour «ť resuscitation tl» »be ceanetııonâ -trenHriing, Jíntnre taboutt to hear her doom. - Tlreigitmtesťstormsef Eiirppet'wbe« compacad «lithfthem,' ere asa^ehilti's iflrework tootheibuiistingci' ЩНиип, li í ■ .·ι in I iii» ¡flslf ι 111 j'P itn .-. Ы - i, mli " T»e«%,,!Viţh««e ıpmudı beads Auhtd and raked the bosom of the clouds, were Shivered into atoms ; the whole forest •stMv- п. L bent
bent and waved like a field of corn. The sea'arose above ita shores in contending confusion, and its surges dashed with а sound awftilly sublime, when intermixed with thê'jar of elements. The roaring of the lions and the howling of other beasts were sunk in the storm, and seem¬ ed rather the impulsions of fear than the ferocity of courage. " Beneath the banyan tree, I was safe from thé lightning, and though drenched with ι oih, tíoritemplated with reverende the grandeur of the hurricane in the ele¬ vation of its fury ; thence, by а natural transition, raising my blind With wonder to the power of that Being, who could set the universe at war, hurl infinity of worlds against each 'other id confusion, and convert the harmony of the circling spheres into uproar, destroying all that breathes the breath of existence.' ' ' " For three days the storiti cfmtinUBd, " almost
almost without interruption ; it, then, sub¬ sided, and I ventured towards the short'. Every step presented before me devasta¬ tion, and I found my hut, wherein I had trusted, as able to resist solstitial fury, scattered, without a vestige remaining. I raised my eyes towards the ocean, and beheld, with pleasure unspeakable, a ves¬ sel nearing the land, apparently under circumstances of distress. I retired to where I might see without being ob¬ served, waiting impatiently till she brought to, and sent a boat ashore. " Their habits convinced me they were Dutch, and now being no longer in fear, I advanced, accosting them in French— two of them happened to be well ac¬ quainted with that language. " I informed them I had been ship¬ wrecked in а voyage to Mocka, hod taken the dress of а common soldier wl)0,„W|as dtowne4,on rl ţhe. I sh.ore, l and ,,ι, L 2 had
trad remained ön th« -spot near three year«. ' ' t ΙΊ ' ' ',' They agreed to take me onboard, at the sailè tirne letting me imdtf istand they were bound from Surnt to Mocka for gum», f»'d that the storm had, driven them into 'this bay, which was that of Ambaya,, ι "After loading the boat with fruits, we , went on boaro], and having repeated the same story to the captain, he offered ,to land me safe at Mocka. I knew too well the character of the Bataviana, end indeed of mankind in general, to open to him the^secret of my wealth/as I doubt¬ ed hat he would; »sacrifice his humanity >to avarice, and ,рг4ЬаЫу land me in a desert to perish. ■ " I had.oonueivqd the design of sail¬ ing up ihe Bed Sea, traversing the„'fi»- 'moua Thebaic desert, «nd dbivn.tfie Nile ι to
to Aífixandriat As røy BattviWpr* ceedçd no higher tbRP Mockş, «nattere. were'DP yessela then in harhpur, X was oteügAred tp wait, end proyids myself lodging with an old Arab, whose 1 raps'- city belied the character of Aiabian hos¬ pitality. I parted with several of my pearls to provido myself an Arabian dress, find njany other neeessjiţies requur* ed. ifi n voytnvø! e^ue«5rţţejiigeroii$ a.nd tedtøtls,.iB, Wçiçli níorS «¡и tiv hO eppré 1 · liended frçmtl № inbftbiţ*Jtf! ón shoH. thtw'tlfcWeifla^Msea.'iirillfesqubR beto oţ rørtjl,' tóm. *b<èé со1риг; 1 ргсМ- blytlie»ea,í¿(r*'lt«iia,uie. ' i i " After α considerabili present to the shaik for Ills' protection, I was allowed tö remem at l,i,bPfty, «mt bgføg considered (Й Worth pWtHWlai; IWţlPe, from my ap- prfreili p#fci;^. "în 'one of the cp|nmo;i ЧЫЖ ШЪ№ ojo ťhje tfed'Şea, a#er dlÄJPiJe|«li#ref^»^a^e*r iW<tø pí-oteotjon fif щу o\d llflst—for aH who L 3 would
woidd make a passage through this in¬ hospitable region must nominate some Arab as ghasir or protector, without which, in case of shipwreck, they would probably suffer murder as well as rob¬ bery. " The usual vicissitudes of weather at¬ tended our course, and when near shore, our senses were delighted with the spices wafted from Arabia Felix ; but however I might be tempted to land, the bar¬ barity of the inhabitants prevented me. The only place we touched at to procure some refreshment, was Gidda, where we took up two Mahometan pilgrims, who had been at Mecca. " In the following night, a smart gale of wind sprang up from the shore, which sent our pilots to prayep, instead of using thejr exertions, an^ the etan being obscured b,y ploiţţjs, I feared beingdriven on the Abyssinian coast; and ignorant as
as I was of navigation, I endeavoured to steer through the storm, and to inspire the sailors with some other spirit than superstition. " For two days we continued to drive, every hour expecting our creaking vessel would deliver us to the waves. We then came within sight of a shore, the captain asserted he knew to be а well- known point within а few leagues of Suez, and therefore stood directly in; but the surges, which broke over the beds of coral, soon convinced him of his mistake; a heavy squall at the same time fixed the forecastle immoveably firm, whilst the stem was exposed to the beat¬ ing of the waves. " In vain the Mahometana called on their prophet for safety, they were obliged to commit themselves to the waves, few reaching the shore. To me, who was ex¬ pert at swimming, arid collected in my L * senses,
εβηβββ,,.ίι» aotaiiiraent'of land .was tan eaa^mat№nţ, but when there, 1 knew not what Heeepticrrt I might experiencevand fixing in my belt a brace of pistols and an Arabian dagger, I cast myself on the wavesr shortly gaining the> land, where not ai singletniee of vegetation was. per¬ ceivable, ι I ι '»Iť wns'ieiriijrtifl the«loniiuj;,.wlten the> aiuti» exoeeding keen« .and I found those who 'hadi escaped cioucliiag to the samdı kmeıMing thevtn-eeh of the »fesseli Brodi . Weleac «egret we. weie ■ quickly called to aotiots, by the. .appearance·,,of' eeweral .Arabaatisv aaned. witht. sptara ; and not kiKurmg wliether they came as enemies or friends, were obliged to pre- pare to receive them as either. " The. Antoría* iiwttiy- carry; >vjth tliero some destructive ..weapon., «nd therefore we foiuid ourselves very well armed with, (pistols/ ¡αφ. ,daggera, Our little
Httle company, which hsdtrembled -be¬ fore at the blowing of the winde, drew itself tip with admirable resolution, agair-st a danger fir more dreadful. This was merely the result of habit, for in those desert wilds, where man· is hunted by man, life is held on the te¬ nure of α moment. i> '' Seeing our resolution, and probably supposing persomi in our<ircumstance.s could not have much plunder, they halted at a httle distançai surveying us with attention. I considered, that'when resolution wavers, α trifle will occasion it to preponderate, and that much may be trusted to the generosity of man ; I therefore threw down my arms, and ad¬ vanced, with one hand stretched out, the other touching my forehead, pro¬ nouncing at the same time, aloud·— * Salam altcum.' " A venerable Arab, with a spear in í 5 his
his hand, and double armed, advanced to meet me, with the salute of 'Altcum salam,' an assurance that peace was be¬ tween us, and that I might claim the rights of hospitality.—' And you are also bound,' said I, ' to protect these my companions through the desert; will you swear that no harm shall come up¬ on them ?' ■ As to that,' said he, ' my profession is war, and those who ore with us must partake in its chances. I am going to teturn through the wilderness of Thebes into Lower Egypt, and if your route be that way, you must partake the hazards of warfare.' " This was not the route of the sail¬ ors, and as they feared to trust an Arab of the desert, they agreed rather to en¬ dure the chances of famine ; nor could I persuade any but one Turk to trust himself with the robbers. ι « The
" The behaviour of the seamen irri¬ tated the chief of the band, and I had some difficulty in persuading him to suffer their obstinacy to be its own re¬ ward; but no entreaties could prevail with him to spare the wreck, which was by this time divided, and great part washed ashore. All that was portable his followers laded upon camels ; and by the time the sun cast no shadow on the plains, we were ready to march over α track of rocky and uneven ground.
1 6 CHAP-
V CHAP'fER Χ.
!н"лга «е'ЬМячкс^Нлл «IHiAtt to Ιιι,οκ,ιι Wfctoh рИАНЦйотв bksl-aiA.ttlmujtalci tefin ; ]IefírJA»»l«tefM<l'tfflttlesäFro*«re>w!iHl, , And tiılfıt «nrf| ıırAly vtlitfa tor ţtorliow) arvıııul.
О cense my fenre ' nil fi nunc ns I go, »» ben tbnugUt crentes unnutiıber'd scenes of и ο, Wlint if the hon in Ins mge I inlet— Oft ш the (Just I view his printed feet Coluvs " I considered myself as now launch¬ ing out into а new sphere of existence, being thrown amongst the truly savage sons of men, with whom no law, save force, was acknowledged—I considered that I should now see him, when every passion
passion had away, and his desires only repressed by gratification. " During our painful march, which by no means excited pleasurable ideas of what was to be endured in traversing the burning sands, I had occasion to ob¬ serve the firmness of their courage, and the undaunted air, so strongly delineated on their features, the consequences of an independent life.. Towards evening we turned round a sharp projection of rocks, and found ourselves in a regular camp, where we were received with congratu¬ lations, and the faith, which was never known to be violated by а robber, pledged to us. I endeavoured to attach myself to the chief,- by opening to him ideaa he was utterly ignorant of; and, happily for me, he was a roan of curi¬ osity, and uHccrmmon liberality of sen¬ timent. " A young camel waa killed, a» a kind
kind of feast, before we began our march. and brandy was given round in plenty, as we sat upon the sands. The meat was seasoned with spices to a degree of excoriation ; and when I considered the vast quantity of pepper and brandy they consumed, with the fiery atmosphere they inhaled, I could not wonder at the heat of their temper, or that their na¬ tural passions partook of madness. In fact, the animal spirits, in those climates, are in constant fermentation, unknown in the temperate air of Europe; and though we do not call them children of the sun, they merit the name of chil¬ dren of fire. " In the morning our tents were struck, and, together »ith the baggage, and a large .pro vision of, water in skins, mounted «ibthe »patient catnel. The whole band, to tbe sound юг songs, be¬ gan to movefbrward, and no care seem¬ ed to cloud« them fromt the p-it, or what might
might be yet to come. Mirth and jests were bandied from one to another, and an unacquainted spectator would hardly have supposed so careless a troop was about to traverse a burning desert, and give themselves up to all the inconve¬ niences and dangers attending so dismal а march. " For many leagues our way wound amongst mountains of garnet, vast co¬ lumns of which were shattered in va¬ rious forms, and scattered over the val¬ lies, appearing like the ruins of some magnificent city. Amongst these we halted at night ; and our scouts bringing word that they had discovered traces of camel's feet, lately formed, being)those of a wandering band more numerous than themselves, it was agreed to re¬ main here for some days, till they should have passed beyond danger of our over¬ taking them; those robbers always avoiding any. troops, on the same expe¬ dition,
diMörı, if· superior in numbers. Their sagacity in discovering the numberj'Bhd time they have been on the spot, is only equalled by thè American Indians, who ■itili trace an enemy through valleys, itaA over mountains, by his scent, or the рЧ-ейиге On the' sward " The tents' were accordingly pitched, and, as а mark of favour, iny station was appointed neaf that of the captain. The "mountains which the Cushites first in¬ habited after the flood, lay on our right hand ; being fearful of another deluge, if they ventured to build in the plain, they exeavated thé mountains like'the cells of a honeycomb, in which a whole nation resided. " My ctirfofrity to see scv wonderful а moiraméht of nrttiquity' Ш ine tri pre¬ vail on thé sliáik, or daptain, : to accom¬ pany me; with'thirty *jf hrsméfo, to view sb extraordinary a téŕfiŕrmáhce, *hich remains
remains a testimony of юте great revo lution in nature. " A lew miserable, wretches, win liye on plunder, and the flesh of'camels, mţ and dried, m· tlie sun, at, thin day, exist in those subterranean chambers, тору of which are both curiously carved, and spacious enough to coiiüim.a.whole vil. lage. Having satisfied ourselves, going from one chamber to.anothai^weimouiit- ed our eutiiels, and descended into j» deep valley,/ surrounded hy ¡тщета rooks of gamet, of various cofcure, Щ* ing as lens im collecting tbe ray« of. tte sun, rendering respiration, scareely.pas. tibie, thougli а gentle.eurirept of.uir.iraj drawn along the centre of the valky- , V VJTebadinOrtiadvanoedrlW'«· »he"»«»* «¡ţ the Aıohşı die>iijgţţisluţd th© top'lt' 1 tpnt, wijtli|[tu streamer ifiyíng* behind a pţle 9f,roçks. Before we could deter* вдще oi^tj^nffcessary mensures, several , men
men appeared, armed, filing out to meet us. " In а moment the robbers were pre¬ pared, seeing we must engage; light¬ ning appeared to flash from their eyes, their nostrils were inflated, their whole visage became a tempest of fury, and they ran to the attack. " The enemy were drawn out in greater number, but we had the superi¬ ority in arms; and, by a judicious ma¬ noeuvre, the captain shewed himself not unskilled m command. The irregularity of the scattered rocks affording places of concealment for an army, he detached ten of his men, commanding them to remain unobserved, till, by a feigned flight, he should have drawn the enemy beyond suecour from their camp, they were then to take them in flank, and give no quarter.
I kept
" I kept mV etation beside Ab Ulíher, the captain, resolving to exert myself to the utmost ; for now it was not an af¬ fair of injustice, but tyrant against ty¬ rant; and my only chance of retaining the affections of my protectors, was by a display of courage equal to their own. " Ab Ulmer knew the advantage of riding up to the charge. Our pistols were discharged in each other's faces, our spears were hurled in the air, and our sabres drawn in an instant. On our part, though we maintained the battle with vigour, we gradually retreated to beyond the ambuscade, which, at the signal, rushed out, and took them be¬ hind-, at the same time we uttered α tremendous shout, and, re-nerving our arma, redoubled Our exertions. The enemy continued firm and undismayed, fighting with the obstinacy of tigers, which disdain to yield whilst breath re¬ mains
mams in them, though bleeding under a thbutìatid wound«. < 1 " Notwithstanding this resistance, we began to press upon them, when, in our turn, we began to fear, near twenty nftirW advancing fl-om the camp at full speed'—' Fly, Hanson,' cried Ab Ul- me¥; 'také two with you, turn yonder j4rèJéefton, andi 'attempt to burn their camp; 1 '«* wè .shall be lost! >' »It t, ' · w '·1' hastened' Without bsing а шо. ШШу and; notwithstanding the burn. Ing'teat, aitd violent thirst, occasirjned bft cliVudá' Of dust aad the exertion of fijgntifiij, rjogethee with thepainful irri- tfltioti' of tlit dust' rltnltlihg in r^ur wounds, I irged forward, with the two ЙМЬ»,' WhosryicoUntenanoès were staifitìd Vtftïi blood, arid liad the типу of bounds aeVorfrilIgtiiéíriirey. '"" "· "» '' «U j t I 11 TUJI./t iL'U fl·!'"*'""' .Il "Oh 'tfltf We entered the camp, it being left under
under the «ire· bf only three men »Ш Wo boys, wlipiguarded the pass. Tirø of the men were instantly cut to.pieceB» and a fiie burning on the ground, for the purpose of roasting fopd, the/tents were instantly in а Ыаис. , t¡ " The cries of vynmen were heard from one of the largest, already on fire. I hastened in to iescue them; but nay e)-es were shocked with a sight more dieadful than imagination can conceive. Two young females, beautiful as the virgins of Georgia, Were weltering on the gi'ound, whilst streams of blood poured from the wounds they had given themselves. An elderly woman, of most magnificent mien, lay stretched beeide them, to alt appearance dead. One of the Arabs, perceiving she yet had life» placed one foot on her bosom, and raised Ids cimeter to eut off her head, bnt •catdiing hia arm, I turned aeide the blow. He instantly endeavoured to turn the
the weapon upon me, but avoiding the stroke, I plunged my sabre through his throat, and brought him down with а groan. " The lady, who was pompously ar¬ rayed in fine muslin and jewels, I drag¬ ged out of the tent -, but before I could return to save her daughters, the whole was an entire blaze of fire, and they were smothered in the flames. The whole camp »vos now kindled, and it was with difficulty we could carry to a distance some of the valuable baggage, in which we were helped by the Arab and the two boys. " Meanwhile, those engaged in the battle, seeing their tents burning, and not knowing tbe numbers who were thus employed, flagged all at once, suffering themselves to be out down almost with¬ out resistance, which they were to a man. >' , t, , ι "The
" The shoot of victory ! victory ! as¬ sailed our ears; but we had little to boost, only twelve remaining on' our side, and these badly wounded, the cap¬ tain especially, who had then the head of a epear sticking in his arm. Water was the general cry ; for beneath α ver¬ tical sun, water is more inestimable than v» ine. A new cry now arose ; and in α tumultuous manner they demanded my life, for having killed one of their com¬ panions. I instantly saw the' greatness of the danger I was exposed to, and swearing by Mahomet I would chine the first who raised his hand against nie, I waved my sabre, «lyed with gore, and rushed through them to Ab Ulmer. — ' Did not you promise,' cried I, · on your oath, that none of your people should offer me violence in the desert ? Did you not swear, ' ' May God do so to me', and more also, if I or mine touch α hair of thy head in injury ?' ' Truly I did," said he ; * and I here " l again
again repeat that promise to thee; for *he Victory df this day is thine.' • He has shun an Arab,' cried they, ' <u.d we demand blood for blood.' ' I háve,' tried I, ' miscreants-, I am ready to repeat it. Who ore you, that think to bravado? That man was slain in my own defence. I swear by the tombs of your fathers, that he raised his sword again« me ; aad I swear also, I Will not die tamely Uke а camel, but with the fury of a lica,' 'Bravo,my friend !' ciied theshaik, ad· vatxeing to embrace s-*r' there shall not anjtair of thine heed be touched, whilst Ab Щнег -ímtii power to poise а lanee.' A blobd-thtrsty fellow, of masculine make, advanced before his fellows.— ' tøaaterV eried he, 'the man thou host »bin was tay -friend. I demand justice, according to our law. I dare titeé to the combat ; сега»: on,, ond the field be the victor's.' ıh Hi ι Though those о«еа>1е,ме detantta at ι » ne
the broadsword, they have no know¬ ledge of fencing, or the cool art of de¬ fence, in which I knew myself practised. I therefore stepped up to him—' And now,' cried I, ' see what this knave can perform ; he cai. ¡ot so much as hit me, with all his vaunts.' " He bore down upon me with fury ; by the weight of his blows often nearly striking down my guard, but my sword, being well tempered, stood the shock; and having exercised himself out of breath, I began to advance in iny turn, and taking him over the sword-arm, made myself master of his weapon, to the astonishment of the Arabs, who now allowed I was a brave fellow, and volun¬ tarily took an oath to bury every animo¬ sity. " ' ' '' Having thus settled this disagree¬ able affair, and stanched our wounds) thepliinderbi^ciim«·the ntíxt object of "Voi. π. m attention.
attention. It waa exceedingly rich, con¬ sisting of many shawls, which singly were< valued at four hundred sequins, with bars and ingots of gold. As the chief commanded that a portion, should be set aside for me, and I perceived it was not agreeable to the company, who considered me as an interloper, and had underheath threatened destruction to the lady I had rescued, I thought it wisest to avoid further altercation, and at the. same time do an office of humanity. " I waited, however, till my division was set apart, then desiring they would attend, I began—' You say well that I am a stranger amongst you -, and to shew you .that a stranger can possess more spirit than you who traverse the desert, 1 now stand up amongst you. I am a man, whose country is the world, and whose friends are all who wear the image of man; as such, you cannot condemn my clemency in preserving this unfortu- . , -i u nate
nate woman, who I shall claim as mine ; and those paltry goods you have set aside as my share of the prize, I intend to divide, not partially between you who hove fought, but between the whole community, as а testimony of friend¬ ship.' " This disinterestedness conciliated the most refractory, and the lady was willingly delivered to my care. She was overwhelmed with sorrow, preserving an uninterrupted silence during the course of our march to the camp. I learned from one of the boys we had taken, that she was the wife of the chief, and that those two young women, who had pe¬ rished rather than suffer tbe violation of the conquerors, were her daughters. They also informed me she was not an Arab, having been taken prisoner in α little caravan in Lower Egypt. " As this was α matter of trifling im- M 8 portance,
portance, I tumed my attention to com¬ fort her, but could only draw from her expressions of gratitude at my kindness, and a bequest, made with peculiar so¬ lemnity.—' I feel,' said she, ' that the fountain of my life begins to fail, and that my days are numbered. They have long been written in characters of sor¬ row, and joy has been a stranger to my heart ; but this last shock, which hath destroyed me in so cruel a manner, in bereaving t me of my children, hath brought niy terrene existence to a nar¬ row span. I am no Arab, but a descend¬ ant of Abraham. I possess yet some degree of wealth, and some trinkets of no value, but as pledges of the dearest and tenderest affection ; all these I de¬ liver tg r y°4 I a11 * юг ™У ω ^ β neverpart willingly from the bracelets and necklace ypu will £ηή in this casket,' , !. in ii.« «' At these, words şbe/leljvered ¡nto my bapdşj^caşkejţ of сцгкидв pastern wtirk .im-t id manahip.
manship; and lying down upon the couch, desired I Would suffer her to re¬ main a short time alone. I went out at the door of my tent, unable to reply, and sat down upon the ground. It was midnight, and the stars glittered with peculiar brightness. I gazed round On the stillness of nature, and sighed at the sorrow constantly the companion of man. The sons of rapine were at rest—not a breath floated on the atmosphere—and I gave loose to that melancholy dejection of spirits which regards existence with indifference, ' Why,' thought I, ' do I toil for a phantom? why cross deserts and seas, to find out relations, who perhaps are enclosed in the depths of the grave' Of wnat consequence is life to me, who have no purpose of enjoyment, and whose spul is sickened at the universal Tilly of man ? Why not take flight from life, and either sink into eternal non- M 3 entity,
entity, or arise tO 'etherial and purified being? This dross Which I hoM in my hands has perhaps been death to many, has beer) procured by the panting miner, who breathe« α hundred fathom deep in tbe earth, and drudges through a miser¬ able life. 'Båt, elas!· were I ¡to enume¬ rate the list of affinitive corses it has produced,- íimuBtiidenúl the/history of man,·-<3wtheh,i crMhlj forgetting my sitoatkn^iiiiJegone, pestofsòdiety, and leave n« 1 to het-bs and babbbngi streams !' ) ι lall'ini, ' It f l! ι it of) " In «ompBance with this «airy of imagination I dashed the casket to the ground, arid fer sonietime satiheWflder- edin reflettisb.<<The)tendeTİı«c«i1e4ıtiıMı of relatİOTiship eg^ii^'eirmé· betor*· tne, arid' irírsòn»! "suffering 8Urtk"hwby. I took up the4si]>ket i ^ttdle<>nceallng1t be¬ neath my drees, loeJíM-ittlindy tiver the -vast «nd miméasurrAteTproíifcelT -»»here lib' susteifance'that ı»üld' support the life of· any- thing breathing Wot «v'be ,л)1'( í- found,
'foundo Yet in this almost ¡ boundless tnok, where α million bad room to pass, a hundred people oould neţ meet rwith- otit cutting each other in piecesrrfør the honour of human nature—»strong exhi¬ bition of our superior sense above -¡the brutt» andi beasts ofitbe earth. ,· ' t iftti »ntmitfi t \' ' .tt ». ι " I passeil several! houri e,i»p«ieW;to tbe damp» ß£ reghån and iSuppOsiiigthc lady by.this timeapleep, I entered Boftly. She lay, upoivlthe eouclii the lamp burn¬ ed beside her, and on the ground stood a small phial empty. I began,to'fear «he had put an. end to her, sorøvfftyrwul ^vawijeg, listenedin wip (» hSBEohgr bwöiifcritoojíthei; haml» ¡^nwiffM; J. saJndijWnj.feKidA^iier^wiitJfc,», ¡ljorior (onlpfftofbeJdte ^W^BOtihjdefsJraţ^fee vM^ihl^jífcíhJriJes^rtof^aljVBl^ l«wrt7*a,||ft,pj¥«ieíM.Í ,í 4pol(cr<a$t$te 04fsM^B»4bhl№ß iBfUiejtjÖjdiof its efiî- «й«да Sm %ftìmej#hgting önérte, ейя- ( ι · t.| м 4 sistency
sistency of following her ; before I could come to any resolutiqn I fell asleep, end fancied myself in England, where I en¬ joyed, as№ our cottage fire, those social sports my sisters and Theodore used to partake. " I was awakened by the Arabs com¬ ing to strike my tent, the order being given to march ; and no one troubling Himseiŕ to inquire into the death of the stranger, а haşty grave was dug in the sands, ,at my entreaty, where she was in¬ terred.' '" This day's march was extremely painful to all who were »vounded.; hut as our provision pf, rice was lovy, there was necessity for our not delaying by the Way, r We usually rested,an Ьдаг in the heat of the, day, tq «Ьц^,с«#е, wliich the Arabians do without, either milk or sugar. foi f.0.1 ΟΙΙΛ6. İO IMf< НкЧ Ä ' , « " The •il И
" Thé human species, in this part of the world, may be said to be placed in a hotbed, the females attaining maturity so early, that they supply the harama at twelve and thirteen, When they aré in full bloom, becoming old, with every mark of decayed nature, at little more than twenty. Beneath some palm trees, which grew out of ihe roms near Syene, I perceived а young Arabian woman giv¬ ing suck to an infant, I presented ber some apice, and inquiring her age, found she was a few months turned of eleven " On the evening of this ţ day we pitched our tenta beneath a grove of doom trees, which aflbrded an agreeable freshness, though their fruit wis not va¬ luable , we had, however, 'dàíes and wille, With cakes'of rice, few nations out of Europe making* regular repasta of 'meat 1 · S ' f1 ' ' " The vast ocean of sand now lay be- ' u MS fore
fore us. The robbers took particular care to furnish α stock of water ; a sup¬ ply of cakes was baked, ground into po»yder, and packed up in bags. This powder was afterwards mixed »vith brandy, water, and spice, being the only food, besides coffee, on which we, sub¬ siste«!, ¡This method of preparing it be¬ forehand was, for the convenience of carriage, and the impossibility of procur¬ ing fire, where neither shrub por blade of grass could vegetate, . . " Our cattle, on the morning of our departure, took more than their usual time, to, drink, as if conscious they had to,undergo a long fast; andati»! Arabs themselves .appeared melancholy» ,mov- 'mg apQftt in silence. .Icoukl not but remark the contrast .off^heb^biihaYKnir novato the mirth and jopty o|pur first removaL which could oidy be ascribed to the shortness of the trip and paucity 9t4»Pgeţ· o'» · > . ,, , "Tlie
" ' The slightest: 'Wind' ä ogitated »the sand, already 'calcined to pówdef by'the acticirt of heat.' Thé tfampUng ofťbfar camels involved us in clouds, sorWétitrits nearly sUspenditfg the powerè of r^ä^iüa- tion. The eye sought iri vahi fdťreííef from thé ünlversab^İare, ahď'ISo sfttla- tion con be thought on more'dnpleasatit; the tongue cleaved tö thè'robFöf 'Hie mùuth with thirst.' ahďwe'vŕeréSieceasi- tated, from time to time, to*'fake''a mouthful of water, retaining it unsiviil- lowed, to allay the burning flame. " On the second day I experienced 1 that deception of sight remarked by travellers, and whièh I conceive arises from the rare¬ faction of air and the action of so Vast a body of liglit 'on the opti* nér4e-i4ňy companions, Glieli at the distaficrJ'of a hundred yards, 'appearing ' increased to ' the height of a tower, aÄh&ť ditmek 'énkfgéa'tiVi the tøimenSibitø 'Ot âti ele¬ phant. The eye which for d ·ΑπιΒ con- M 6 templates
teraplates-the «un, tums away, filled with flying clouds and globules of light; so here, surrounded by no object but ex¬ tended-sterility and a cloudless sky, on the' extent of horizon the sight por¬ trayed castles, houses, and mountains, that, like an ignis fatuus, were chased in vein. » " On theevening of the twentieth day, whilst »the sun was yet high in the heavens, we were astonished with a •prodigy inconceivably grand, and such as not even the robbers had before wit¬ nessed. - A keen wind sprang iup, and blowing from, north to south, carried columns «f sund «between us'and, the sun, which being tinged with its rays, and in some placee, as it were, transpa- ' rent, took the exact reeernblance of an immense wall of èie floating through the air.- 'The interstices through which 'ţhe ви» shone, 'added tot the awfoloiag- Шаи»ее-"«г ťh* J»eeee,< the n*n». <ap- .·'· peering
peering to burst and sparkle from piles of red-hot sand. " Tbe Arabians prostrated themselves with trembling, whilst I stood lost in the sublime object, which continued to pass before us, and which, had ι iti Ap¬ proached, would in a moment have bu¬ ried us in its bosom. The soul was lost in the consciousness of its own insigni¬ ficance, and in solemn silence beheld the temblé beauty and raajesty-of the phe¬ nomenon. Some particles of'»and caiut' near us, and I could distinguish that the whole body was not of partial thiekness, but was hurled in confusion, or rather spread between us and the aun like a mist. ι ι ■ ŕ " The.regular appearance wa« quickly »changed by the increase of th« ,Vftad, - which raising the sand in chaotic oon- 'iusicm, took the form of mouataifls, and «very figure fancy could trace, appear¬ ing
ing like -a vast country of fire, or the regions of Pandemonium. 'MCne impression so sublime a scene made im my mind has never been effa- oed.'lufd more strongly impressed upon «ι№ the certainty of on infinite Creator, than all the declamations of priests and philosophers. '' '"•When this astonishing and stupen¬ dous phenomenon had passed, the tents were taken from the camels, it bemg agreed'to go no farther that night, super¬ stition having, as it Were, fixed the Arabs to the spot. But when we came to'Examine our- water, α more serious and just alarm took place. By some accident the vessels had leaked nearly half their contents, sol that we -must either strike -eastward' deeper into the desert, to some wells' within reach 1 , whilst our stock held out, or continue in long marches,
marches, at half allowance, to some wells we should find in a valley, ρ ţ » " Most-were for the first proposal, as no situation is more dreadful .ibaSHtbe want of water in a country ofjlaøe., but AV Ulmer represented so strikingly tbe hardships of »going' deepe» intőbbe desert, the delay it would occesţonjirind that the supply we could then carry from tliose,distant springs would,"barely equal the march before ue, that, it,was agreed to advance early in the :iflorciug, to lay by in the excessive heat, ,αηΑ tra¬ vel through the night, i ι ι ŕ " According to this plan we continued several days, during which the vjolent fatigue,1 sufferedthreiv me ijitQ.afever, adding, if possible, to an, insatiate -and tormenting draught. My whale, body seemed, parched,,and to ba,ve r k}st its radical moisture; the ak^.UteraUy peeled ,,-►,. off
off my face and hands. Thus, blinded with dust, I continued to ride forward in α state of torture. The poor Turk, who, ·ββ well as myself, suŕľered under so unusual α situation, applied himself to opium and brandy, which threw him into а temporary stupor ; but acting as a violent stimulant, he became raving mad, and after several attempts to de¬ stroy himself, being only prevented by confining his hands, he died the second day, a deplorable object of pity. " On the following day, we beheld a spectacle that could give no sensations of pleasure to persons in our situation, but sunk our hopes considerably ; it was tbe 'skeletons of several men and camels, who 'had fidlen down in this inhospita¬ ble waste; beside them lay several heavy articles of baggage the wind had not yet acattered ; but even thé rapacity of the robbers was gone, their spirits drooping dike the herbs of the field When deprived of
of moisture. Besides, not knowing how soon we ourselves might be under tlie same circumstances, it was useless to add to the burdens of the panting camels. " It is the little accidents of life that particularly touch us, and under strik¬ ing circumstances. Thus the bones of a few miserable travellers, in the barren »vilderness, excited compassion and dis¬ may iu the bosoms of men, whose trade was murder, and whose subsistence was plunder. W e proceeded slowly forward during tbe rest of that and the following day; but the succeeding, which saw our water drained to the last drop, impressed upon us the deepest melancholy. To augment our distress, the camels began to flag; two of those that carried .bales actually sunk down and expired. " We proceeded t'oiward.in the deepest .silence, and to ease the camels, »vere ob¬ liged to dismount, and traverse aands which
which scorched the foot, and burnt the sandals from the feet. Some began to talk of laying down and dying; and seeing that now was the time to rise above human suffering, 1 exerted my¬ self, though labouring under accumula¬ ted diseases, encouraging them to pro¬ ceed. The Arabs knew we were within half a day's march of the wells, but at the rate we went, we might as well have been distant a week; nor could arguments be urged to the enmele, one eftef lanotber laying down, witll their burdens, and the masters sat down be¬ ndi them. " A general halt was now called, and subordination having ceased, I demand¬ ed to be heard.—' What,' cried I, ' men of Arabia, is this the spirit so much boasted of in the four quarten of the world? this your endurance af hardship, that you will sit down on theiurrids, and die of; thirst vrith your lirmtk before'you, ι when
when the fountains of life invite you to drink ? For my part, though I value life as little as any of you, I will noťdíe with¬ out a struggle. Come on then, you who have spirit, let us drive forward and pro¬ cure water, or drop down in the attempt.' " Haifa dozen were roused from their lethargy-, we took each one of the youngest and most able camels, and ad¬ vanced forward, leaving all our baggage behind. After three hours riding, a per¬ ceptible freshness was distinguishable in the air', the camels snuffed at the gale, advancing on a half trot, so great Is their sagacity, that they will discover water at the distance of several leagues, « " In 'two hours more, the eye oould distinguish no object of satisfaction; but we shortly after came up to a vale, sank from thè fevei of the surface« and con¬ cealed -till we were close upon it. It did not perhaps possess the beauties of . Tempe,
Tempe, but for fragrance no spot in the universe could excel. Wild thyme, frankincense, and rosemary, covered the whole place, interspersed with odorife¬ rous shrubs ; but these were not the first objects of our attention, each hastening to the wells, from whence a transpa¬ rent stream overflowed, winding its course beneath α grove of date and palm trees. " It was necessary to restrain our ar¬ dour, by first washing ourselves, and re¬ taining for a time a quantity of water in the mouth, before we ventured to drink. Our camels kneeled down to the springs, as if to return thanks for their deliver¬ ance ; but whilst we refreshed ourselves, we did not forget those who were pant¬ ing in the desert. " We were received on our return as the messengers of life, and on some who were far gone, we were obliged to sprinkle
sprinkle the water α little at a time, by which means, and the freshness thus created in the air, only one remained unrecoverable, and was left in the de¬ sert. " By the light of the stars we conti¬ nued our way to the vale where the tents were pitched, and mirth once more abounded ; for like the sailor whose life is bandied on the points of uncertainty, those robbers enjoyed existence as it passed, the hardships escaped serving to give zest to the present safety : besides we were now over the most dismal part of the desert, and the ìecollection of their wives and children could not but be pleasing. " I also reflected, that the chief obsta¬ cles to my return were surmounted, and partook in the general satisfaction. Af¬ ter remaining in this valley some days, we again set forward, arriving, after a long
long aeries of difficulties, at a large en· campment, from whence could be seen one of the famous pyramids. " My journey not being undertaken from motives of curiosity, I scarcely no¬ ticed them ; but, being furnished with a guide« I took leave of the robbers, who generally insisted, that, as the lady was my prize, and I had behaved in а «vay they termed gallant, all the jewels on her dress should remain to me. Thus I was advanced to fortune beyond my ex¬ pectation, and enabled to keep untouch¬ ed the casket, which I have never yet had an opportunity to open, being in¬ volved in all the bustle of travelling, and exposed to the observation of stran¬ gers." " I thank thee, my friend," said She¬ chem -, " but if thou wilt indulge us a little further, the obligation will be com¬ plete. There are some circumstances re¬ lating
lating to the lady you mentioned, I would fain be resolved in, and particu¬ larly her bequest of the casket." ι " I understand," said Hanson ; " there are no two persons on earth whom I would wish more to oblige." He glanced a look of expression at Kve, »vho had attended to all his dan¬ gers, and whose cheek flushed at some of his heroic descriptions, Then rising, he hastened to bring the precious donation. The first object wua a pair of brace¬ lets, set with brilliants, and containing two miniature pictures, in the Arme¬ nian dress, both young, nnd with that expressive vivacity so characteristic of the East.—" I am satisfied," said She¬ chem ; " this was the present I gave my wife on the day of our espousals ; I fear¬ ed she hadi been murdered by those rob¬ bers who tore her from my arms, and stabbed her in my sight Take away, my
my friend, relics I cannot behold with pleasure—this world is the dominion of evil; but now I am satisfied, since I know her fate, though it was terrible." Age had, in Shechem, reduced the fine edge of feeling, or rather, enabled him to conceal his griefs from common observation. His sorrow was of that secret nature which is felt, but not shewn; and having indulged thought for a time, he dried up the tears of his daughter, leaving Hanson to entertain her, whilst he went on some business into the city.
END OF VOL. II.
PiirrttdbyJ.Darling, Lcadenhsli'Street, Londen.
