Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Theodore Cyphon: or, the benevolent Jew: a novel
THEODORE CYPHON.
CHAPTER I
Ц« tient Jen, J« M ее oeijh «ян leiunejlj, «кред Wl ats uver onl; troubles f Ilts to keep П4Х1ЛТ İT was one dark winter mght, when the wind howled along the streets of London, beating the descending rain m oblique vollies against the sides of the houses, that a short decrepid figure of a roan, bowed down by years, hobbled, by the help of his stick, under a gateway, in Whitechapel, to shelter himself from the torrent at that instant falling The mght *" в 3 was
WR» purücularly dark, the streets nearly forsaken, and the distant voice of the Watchman, calling past twelve o'clock, Was the only sound that brake iq upon tlie storm. He was congratulating himself on his good fortune in finding shelter from its violence, when three men came up with a similar intention ; and it being dark, and the first personage a little figure, they believed themselves unobserved; lamenting their ill luck, not having met with any success in their profession. '' I wish," cried one, with an oath, " we had a little shy blue to warm us in this d ----- dhole. Not a single «eb this whole çitvçhey" " No, by George," returned another, " we've had rum luck. I ¡belieytes Ч" 8 hy w 00 ' 1 do— ţ piust e'«i) post it again Jike a geminan: apd take t me heue, I knpws,.eliob, andyop, Dick, ebe>no flineb- ers;
ек; and if I splU, 'broil ihy'sotll'on'a .gridiron." " Mum with your jabber," cried Bob, spying the aforraaid little figuie. " Whtit have we here? (seizing him by the col¬ lar.) Come, friend, no resistance—let us divide stock." ' " I'm a poor wretch," replied the fi¬ gure. " I deals in no stocks. For tile mercys of Heavens, spare the wretched and miserables !" " You old rogUe, what, you don't think I knows ye I This is the go ' here, Dick, its Shechem, the old Jew thief, is robs every body. Come, Moses, out with the ready." Shechem, who did not love forcible detainers, began to make resistance, call¬ ing aloud for the guardians of the'bight ; but these gentlemen, perhaps fearing the storti«, or deafened by its-noise, did not make their ajjapeaiiMioe,} »and poor She¬ chem «must have delivered his éneum- B 4 brances,
brandes, bad not hiv «criei reached tlıe ею of a young man, who stood up under »otte pent-houses, and no sooner distin¬ guished the supplication of distress, than he hastened to relieve it. He was not indeed armed with the tremendous club of Leo, but he held in bis hand a twig of an English crab-tree, with which one of the robbers, who ad¬ vanced with a threat, was brought to the «ground; and though it was very dark, the voice -of the Jew was sufficient« to lead him to the right point " Cease," cried he, with a tone of au¬ thority, "cowards, begone-, how dare ye.attack tbt helpless and feeble,-unless your-souls,are.as base as your profes¬ sioni? t i i' " He's a Jew/', cried one-, " be'« 'β sneaking hound ofa Jew, or, d'ye see, I shpuld, have scorned to t«oucbhím.'?i j t<i?tAnd>'whe«eiV .replied the,»stranger, « (n»i(J " is
" ie ifté'distincrion? "Io noteS-Jewa maw?i'.Shame <on youi «tekertip -.your oompanion, and'begone, or you shallifind «some-other employment." »ι , tr Whether it was the specimen they had already seen of the strangeris dexte¬ rity ; iwbether tbey feared tbe approach of the protectors of property; ot that cou«- rege in a right cause carries with it some¬ thing terrific to tbe guilty; or it might be all those reasons combined; but cer. tain it is, those heroes of dark alleys re¬ treated, muttering imprecation», and vow¬ ing some day yet to go partners with Shechem. "Give me leave, sir," said ithe young man, " to inquire if you have received hurt from this violence, and if I can, be of any farther assistance?" « -■ , The Jew was some time in replying,· for he was not ready with ptrnfossions of ι в В thanks
thanks and eternal gratiUde, whiih tame good Chrifctians can proffar oto every юс- caSion. At length, laying bis hand «pon the stranger's arm, in a voice Which Ãut- tered, it might be from the late shock he had »eceived—·« I know not," sitid he, " to whom I owe this interpositan«, for at times angele have visited men : for¬ give an old man, who cannot «speel to thee his thanks, aud perhaps thanks atom а Jew would be httie acceptable. Fer- adventure thou moyest «tand in need of a friend, then make thyself known to "Sheehem Bensadi, ofthe Minories." He then attempted to walk, the rain being abated to a small drizzle, butfound the support of his stick inadequate, hav¬ ing slightly sprained his «ancle, and was therefore necessitated to accept the prof¬ fered'arm Of thé stranger.— " One o'clock 1 " repeated the Jew, after the watchman, who had now found his way jjato the street« " It is a late hour; I hope I do »at detain thee ftom thy friend«?,
friendSj who may be atíŕmed lit thy ab¬ sence?" " No," replied the stranger, with a pe¬ culiarity of accent. " Peradventure thou art master of thy time; but for thy sake, I hope it is not customary with thee tb be ih tbe streets when the sons of discretion are at rest." '' I am, indeed," retuined the ytxatVi, " master of my time; sind mý being in the streets is occasioned by My not hav¬ ing any place to repose in." ■ '< Who then are thy relations? Who then arc thy friends?" inquired the Jew. « Hast them disobliged the» 'by some youthful folly? if so, ahd thou hast con¬ fident in a son of Abraham, permit tme to intercede for thfee." î ' ' A deep sigh and silence was thé («ply. The young man appeared not'solfeitbus tU btodên ànóthír With his misfortunes; it may W trota h Supposition, that in'the calltsuii heart'of à Jew he Should not «rid f в 6 »а'ййп-
a wmftfrter.,' By this time they werebe- ftre the doer of a large house, on whieh was written Shechfm Bensadi. A few st«t*ps led up to it»—" I think/' said the Jew, advancing, " thou hintedst at having no friends ; amongst Christians, I believe this will be thy chief.'! <> ^ ι Whilst he sejd this, he. had put fato the'hands of the stranger a purse of no «mall value. For a moment the young man Was silent; he poised the purse m his hand, uttering in an under» voice— " This from a Jew '" then, as if recollect¬ ing himself, he .held it f«om him, desir¬ ing thtt he might not be pnsied-to ac- ЩЬ « reward, for« what bé hadiltaeJin éémpliance with hie own fkjngs; and that, «enshtént with justice, he «ould not 'rt№ive¡tny'«other acknowledgment than hlsttankii > >«<. Ji tn I ui r » Thi» from -a ClirUtiapj «hough»; the J»W.—"ifiutnly "maid He, .'.'ľtboui «rfe,a •on'of tbe lineage.of bmdieıanaıy «ill .ни « < <· и ji > ι 'know
know not which of his descendant« would remse a gift. Thou mayert indtìedftic рООГ." ' J ' ·< " I confess that I sm so," answered the stranger. " I am not ashamed to ac¬ knowledge that my portion of human goods amounts to no more than what I carry about me, and that were It con¬ sistent with my situation, I should Hét beobove accepting a reward for manual services, though 1 cannot for the mele exercise of moral precepts " »i A few drops of rain prevented the »e- ply Shechem wa» reflecting to give; and though bid doors were not open to every one, he invited him to enter, and wait »t least till the morning. They were let in with caution by an old woman, With a rushlight in a lantern, to present «the •Wimtaspuffirg it'out, or «the weite of greair oem the icurrentief air.-. Th -Же - bolts.ia «pring,lockyand m large ehainyie- «euMd the door behind them. Th« young man
-uan-irøiléd) and followed without hesi¬ tation, ihto a side chamber, where were a few old-fashioned chairs, an oak table, with somé shelves containing books and pepets. «'Bring, 1 ' said the Jew, " some Water, tbat we may wash, and then let us have somé of thy kneaden cakes to supper, for verily I «have tasted nothing since morn¬ ing, saVe a glass of Wine at Reheboam's. Bring also a little vinegar, tbat I may allay the pain in my foot." Whilst Rebekah was preparing the repast, Shechem inquired the name of his guest. " Theodore?" w And thy eimame?" He «hesitated, and then replied, whilst a deepcriolBon flushed his Cheeki -ч" I hav* informed you, sir, that my name is Theodore; I am, «ifortienately, so situat¬ ed, that my lifo might be endangered by saying
saying more, and I hepe that will be ex¬ cuse sufficient." ",.!.' Shechem «returned no answer. Doubt and suspicion would have inspired him with unfavourable ideas; but surely'he who could voluntarily refuse л purse, could not be under fisar of the law. Yet he had said his portion was about, lıinp. He might be a clerk who had robbed his master; though that suspicion could not well rest on «ne who offered to »accept personal labour. There might also be many reasons, consistent with innocence, where »concealment was, necessary; and perhaps his action, tone cf' vaiçe,*ed phy¬ siognomy, might be much in his favour. Whilst Shechem pondetedithese things hi, hit mind, and eyed With deep atten¬ tion, the features of Theodocc from be¬ neath,,his lowering, eyebrows, НеЬекЛ hadteprepated tike unleavened cakes, and l't 4, v. by
byher cntrthce interwpted'tbe silence which had taken place. "<·Ί thittk," said Shecbetn, whilst he divided with him a cake, " thou saldst a place bf pecuniary profit might be of service; if to, and thou canst procure a character of fidelity, I will endeavour to recommend thee." "Pardon me," said Theodore; "I said, indeed, thatl should be glad to re¬ ceive a reward for manual services ; but such is my fate, such the calamities I suffer under, that it is impossible I can appear in public ; nor is there but one in the range Of human nature that will call me friend." What crime ' Shechem was going to say ; hut checking himself, he went on. —" After my observations of this night, I cannot allow myself to think thou hast brought upon thyself this sentence of banishment by misdeeds. But tbat a young
young man of thy appearance should want a friend in a land so famed 'fbr be¬ nevolence, is equally strange with thy mysterious manner. Thou canst Mot be ignorant that mistrust will not» admit thee> an inmate in any bouse—that thy secrecy will bar thee from the meanest employ; how then wilt thou procure means of subsistence?" · < " I have felt," replied Theodore,' with a sigh, " the want of' confidence irt my fellow men, who from being imposed on by designers, hive lost the power 41Г dis¬ tinguishing truth. I have-felt in· β coun¬ try where ostentatious charity gilds th«; insides pf our churches, and erect« mag¬ nificent buildings, that from th« forlorn wanderer, even justice is «withheld, end I fly from a land of .Christian«, tcvvan- dsr .with the Arab ofthe desert«!'+ , «if«' j , -,, ». «»,,(,[ inSiirpuS«« eyifently,*jTci!easfld •oil.tha features «?ţ(the Jevr,i „tøe aimost-appre¬ hended that the keepers of Bedlam had been
been remiss, for who in his right mind would talk pf wandering with the robber of the desert? «Yet ithe evident connex¬ ion -and discernment of the yomjg man, baffled every conjecture: and knowing that to humour insanity was the best me¬ thod of treatment, should such be the present case, he desired to know in what way he had provided for his journey. " I have .informed you," he replied, " that I am condemned to mope about at night ij came this evening to town, witheintentionof taking the »first ship I eould find.¡for either Hollandot France. I have a trifle todefray my expenees to Alexandria. I ¡understand Arabie, and shall associate with those who practise justice unitnpelled by law." " Thfekest thou," said ShBchem, with a smile, " that this phantom of thy sick brain Will lead,to reality? thinkest thou to «find jultice amongst tbe Arabs? Be- , hew me,, fiches and power ate theuni- ' versal
versafrules of righi, and thou wiltt Mtt find in any epot where thet potseseion of either is valuable, »that any other motite, say« interest, is the leading principle." " I believe," iretumod Theodore, " that what you observe is true, and that you should observe it, I the more wonder, because those of your nation are gene¬ rally allowed to have few ideas beyond the value of moveables, and the accumu¬ lation of riches." " I do not .deny ithe latter part of thy sentence," said Shechem, " because We perceive that riches are the only eUťe en¬ gine of human power, as the mèdium 'of action, anditbe command tof foreign la¬ bour. By riches, though outcasts and the scoff of Dations, .we oftenegovem the actions of kings, , We deal ini a commo¬ dity which ensures us existence, wher¬ ever society is formed on commercial principles; and whilst our outward ap¬ pearance, Is mean and despicable, We pass without exciting this envy «rf the people
Ш iné a thou,Yrøpj.fø,*jiave objection (й^п||егЦке en enjplpy, which should rtotriiy jhee ţuijde·· ineceiwty «of going atifeau ? it is not i-Mflrrøop to meet with young men ¡»hp und«?rţtand,Ar»bie,"> t '■"To nie," said Tbţodore, 'f it is im¬ material where I spend the rest of my Um. A dungeon or a palace—an en¬ closure, or an extended plain, are alike Liberty has lost its power of charming, and, my eye tijrnij from the actions of men mth disgust "i < >. "^traçiipî^jWjpndisrfuny stiange ι iare thy sentiments ' I ewjoujd attach etheeito myself," cried r Şff <ţhe?m, «holding out his hand; " son of Adam, where wast thou horn, what hast thou suffered, thu» early tţi lose a relish ifor existence?" A tear started in the eye of Theodore, he «natie an effort, and overcame his re¬ flections, desiring to know how he could render-himself of service. " I have
■ " I have many éÖttespondents, I am almost «overpowered'with'business, and have for some time sought 'fo' fina a young man Whom I could trust in my house, as here I transact rivy more valu¬ able concern's. 'But I find 'none who' have talents suited to my turn of conver¬ sation. They are all given up to vanity, and gad more after pleasure than profit. Thou desirest concealment—with me thou art safe ; no one ever visits beyond this chamber, and my only servant is Re¬ bekah. Thy wages shall be according to merit ; and I hope I shall be able to bind thee to me as a friend." " I, on my part," said Theodore, " have but one point to stipulate, because though poor, Wages are no considération: and this is it—I have eonosaled mý name and my connexions, nnd on the day curiosi¬ ty leads you to urge rhe for farther dis¬ covery, that day I fly beyond the power of recall." There
There was a something in the elevation of feature, in the energy of voice with which this interdiction was pronounced, that inspired ite hearer, with awe. Ima¬ gination oould not fix; and the only mo¬ ment which hppeared ldft bim to inquire, he feared to employ, lést he should in¬ cur the penalty denounced. Bound down by terms so embarras- .■*T*e «bu consented totlie proposal i 'atid thuV áť three bttock iiiithé ^¿пййУ,"» JeWereoeireä iritbhis house,ntid retained (Й a StmaWt, a man lie bpduie^eir before ШП, under circtiihstances that ihight have'" warrantee' any suspicion, merely because hie had the appèaraiice Of sinbe- rlty'atfd Merit.' Where is the' Christian who would»have done this?
■ » ire CHAP-
U ŕ .7/)l,lťl ι uk t 1 f mf /r ι tufi CHAPTER H , , ,
" Oo than and do so likewise ' <Ί Rebekah, at her master's bidding, сод» ducted Theodore by a back' staircase; 1» a little room pn the second floor, which sh.» told him was appointed for his use, at,the same time cautioning bim never to let cunosity lead him tu the other side of the house; for there Bensadi de¬ posited his treasure and permitted no one to go ť Theodore thanked her for the caution, and taking the rush, prepared to undress, but tbe singular appearance of the room first eţcited his attention. The bed was of
o£ ţhe ^aj^sest materials, and covered with a horse nig—in oije corner stood a box, by the carvings, made in the reign <}f »ЕЦй^феф; the hd wfls festened on by two »trups of an old shoe, serving as hinges, and to use a,poetical phrase, was fylltfemfltmtps. The ceiling was darkened and adomed by several flourishes of smoke, and the jyajps^ot,appeared nevejr,to, have ibeen jwi«j^4. Tujo drawings with,ink were retened «даг the chimney with wafer —the one, the figure of a conjurerjma circle, round whom danced three imps, lňeded with tag», pf .money, and flutter¬ ing 4ijj,,tiieirebands pieces of paper, »on whicjlviqipwld.Jbeídiíceriied tbe war«j*, jMrt oiij". The other was the view,of .8 pn¬ son, with a man's face at the grating. e Ι Л 'u Л.«. 1 " If I am to reason from analogy," ť ought Theodore, " my predecessor h td i^#Ji*&rrøHjtoemwt,i«dsure<^i*»,!i ¡¡, .this
this chamber is not very much io" be pre¬ ferred to actual durance." ' ' To him, however, every placé of se¬ crecy was alike, nor was he startled »t observing the windows grated, attribut¬ ing it to a precaution of mirerly jealousy. He sat down on the side of the bed, fbr sometime forgetting where'he wrórthen taking from his bosom a small picture, tied with black silk, he pressed'itto his lips, dropped upon it a tear, whilst the single articulation of Eliza! escaped him. As perhaps the'reader begins to lake some slight interest in «tiie actions of a youth not known to them «even by name, and may have fancied him possessing an elegance of figure, let us leave him to dream of Eliza, to " КйпсЪ M stireejüws limt elude tlıe touch," whieW we picture to eutselve« a young X№. ι. с man
тад.яииМу reecliiiig tbe middle, size, dressed something above ithe country fa«, eliitppji and yet beneath the town, His eyetjtför the ladies will no doubt inquire theiei,e»low),were neither blue noe dark» , but,(petweenibotti; afaiut tinge ofi »redi was, just peijcoivtthle in »the higher part. of his cheek.,, Though egood-natured, in-i, tensity of reflection, and some melancho¬ ly cmnimstancee, had given his eyebrows an habituel ňxmn; arid bis eye,'without ι possessing t huti keen penetration wliich eonfiiijes, yet ata glance seemed to taken. in every surrounding object. ι i .m Bus faje was.wť the-index of his taidd j ,ι t eommnnice tion 'with men hadgiveri hiih¡ « asubtiHyofftiature.'andmaııy struggleeiKi had muée Mie sa nutster of his passions;'." tliattaihuhdred oniotiobe might diilraot!.,! his ■ mind, .without one·· infleetiooriofii" nııısdle,, witjvîii that, ¡«flection might ietid;it; to fliantìy»nt«evgil> »i'ľllii» jvvae^,(hni+eY«l,iíf wliţnihe was liable tâ observation ; but
when alorie, when no human oye'beliélď ' him, he eould weep at a trifhvithd ¡ţiv«iuJ way tb every Softness of humanity'. 1 1Ш 1 " as actions are »the best criterion eféllaí' ' racterje'and, no character can be properly'' 1 » defined 1 tjll ,lt »ceases to opemttii lét' the'«' rcaderwait till he has seen him in action,' < before he'Vênttires on conclusions.'»i > '« I , . .'.Ill, >-ll.' Theodore, refreshed by the-fclumbeM 1 " oť tbeníght, arose early, and'Wohld'hàVè "' descended from his chamber,' hut^he',-! found the door fastened on the outside, < and for a moiiirattisuspicioft'crotiscei'llls mind, wliich was not lessened by observ¬ ing «that'hie .window ewnmúiikAte<i»only· withia baok yard, cxmnuanding'iio othei" l>i'o«pi№tithatj»a,poft ef. tlie.'»Towetr,.,the > topsiiof .the, shipping, »and the« distali t"·'- hilb^-i^ilmd^adyitutmediinihisithfnst*,^ thé .metan* of 'escapo, andľprejected'ihis "» jilarsi'iwWu'hiseSUSpitóoii-wttó reHwod^by" RqlKjmhtfoppUjg ««tiWe dow«t«â"í«ll- < ' iuti , «ьи Ί..ι>, ilo »J l(li..l ¿пи jılingıı» л ji( ir
ing'líiinfhe might cöme'tbtreakfiist β» satin ás he-òhoee. ■ ' n c ι« ι ' He'tiiiieended with her into thé Kit- ÄllfeH," 1 whicli exhibited an appèstamle nearly as desolate as hii chamber. ' Ben- sadi 'received him with a «nüè, dnd of¬ fered hini part of the scanty'Hieal befi*e hnn, observing, " that nature required wsiy'little¡for sustenance, and that vitiht- ed tastes alone relished luxurious enter¬ tainments." > Theodore assented to the remarks with¬ out scruple partaking of What was offer·« ed.'ithough in his mind he thought, ""'tho right ustíof riches was nob merelj» ЮрЫ sess theme· whilst' our enjoymentls Weľé· only -,ich as poverty tnighťprooure; but this ι was not itile- first installeret' incon¬ sistency he had sesen in this worldŕq ' ■ ,», . .Π J«4 After breakfast, Slirebeto ¡conducted- ' him
him to tho,countingihouse, ,a,ipprø|two yards and a half square, adjoining to ithe audience-chamber. A double desk was placed at the opposite wall, with! ■*· ДЬоо1 од »eachf sida« leaving exactly room, for the, ¡writer to place himsdf, whilst .the shelves of paper whioh.hung over Iiis head, prevented any other ,than «a con-, tracted position. A lump of lead, with « hole bored in the centre by a.hot'pokei', was the inkstand, and a square, »lip ot' inch deal the ruler. i« ( , " Thou seest how I am obligeai to save," said Shechem ; " not β breatli ought tOebe wasted« The person who was here befqre thee was idle, and used to wear away three pens in the day, which was nine hundred and thirtytnine ,in the yøaiy,iai»ounting, to near ten shillings for pelisi" l'Ile t / ι , " Perhaps," said Theodore, " his writ- ihgi wis (equal to'tli«* loss!-' -IMd'htyfive long with you ?" CS «No;
w t 't Not-only t nine-mbHttıs; he tan a- liliway with'a noteert' twø hundred pounds vtundiwaeitikteit up^-^^hnt let US'preceed «btw butiness.,» Thou"Ufiderstandest Ara¬ bic. Here are some letters to Smyrna, I And'this is á letter to Moceo, 'pertaining na «argo 'ofi «oflfee;i copy these »àlito the •'lêtterubook, ahd mind thou"writest it '»i«niall v »and'leave'no spaces." ' ι -"Theodore set about his 'task without inquiring further about the ' runaway, concluding, from the perplexity visible in thc'fentures of Shechem, tha^he had 'been brought to punishment, π His'task was finished by noon, and Shechem be¬ ing out, he sat down with 'Rebekah to -"a'diliner of' eggs' and' potatoes.' 'As if "withbuť 1 design,'»he '-observed,' ths« the '«drawings « in ¡ i'his -room, thoiigh· 'rlide, must have been designed by scme'per- son bf gonius,-Who was wiffing to ex¬ press bis contempt of riches. » Ί . "And yet," replied lälebékebe/'" the .« j ι young
young man who drew them -was not so out of conceit with ncltesj ioť ihe «wmld not have been so ungrateful to ouiimas- tcr, ivho took him from a very,'mean employ i'' " ' ч<1 't Ingratitude," said Theodora, a » <l 1 condemn, because gratitude is a species of coin in the power of tho poorest, to return for a benefit, and ,the'»ot»doing so is gieater d shonesty than non-pay¬ ment of a debt, the latter not béihg al¬ ways in our power " ι '· That is exactly master's way ol (¡peaking, and had he not been better than most Jews, Jos would have hanged for it"' "'For what?" . ι "' Why*-but if master .should, know I hddiyou, he I would certainly be very 'angry, for he cannot bear to ljuar.ofıimy kindness he nas done." ,, ι ,, "'f Yet," thought Theodore, "this man is a Jew." ι,ι ι u\ ,ι,, Rebékah)icdntinued.-J-" Well," as I ί с 4 don't
don't believe you will tell it again, you must» know, 'this Jos« then ran away with a note, ubá was taken lip, but that I > don't know rightly about Well, master was sent foi to swe.ir to the note, Which he was obhged to do, and bound over to prosecute, 1 think they call it, though, firom what I could learn, it meliti!*; thtit, when one has suffered a ftatid.-'they are to pay the justice to punish the thief." Theodore shrugged up his shoulders and was silent.—" Well, as I was going tó i ay, as the day of tiial came near hand, master used always to be in a moping kind ol' humour, tould nevtei rest in a place, but Hdgettèd fremi óľie room to another, said little to any body, and wótild ¡nt doWn m thii Very fetched,' and groan so you èannot tlıiirkî— "Hear sir,' said I, one day, 1 ' wliat cííttVthe mattéi·!"—' I mulat Wm¿ $ό%'4№ hb, ' Ι milit hang' 4bè u pooi·' fcll'ow 1 '«' hvo huhdrCd'-poündfc 'Rehékah/tifoii Know¬ est
est I would not molest» the, life ι of any thing breathing the breath of life a »ne¬ vertheless, his crime merito punishment. Yet tţie law provides not one propor¬ tionatet tlıe life of man is surely тяге valuable than gold, and hia existence than silver; very few are, fche Kjjtmt· that can warrant putting a,feUow r pţ*sa- ture to death.'—* But, sir,' s»ţd»I, i'„ţpq property was yours; it is you ,w,ho,are to prosecute or let it alone, as you think best, since they have called on your help to punish α man who has broken the law. If you do not, you will oply lose the two hundred pounds, and as you say, tliat is ntţt equal to killing a man,'i—' That is lost at any tate,' says he, \ and if I do uot prosecute him» for T ty pqunds ¡tœd upwards must go .after itdbecaujjé publje justice muştbesup- portedliy privapţ, property:,yet that, ¿s notthpiottjecti he will iţhen,he left; to prey on the .wojíd.ewilíiont^^ní iPU- c 5 mshment;
4M8hm«if j hie rained >cbaraít»r will pre- •*entt«hlmv'if life'woiildi from'honeutietn- ploy, his ^escape will embolden faiai' to commit rnoreiflagrant outrage, artd I see -nri'way of savingchim buťby pHJtunng him-a'place abroad, and ι some 'йну, he -"taeyireWtrnit.'—Well, would^yièu thihk rt,!iafteribmelittle pondering,'he «htip- > >ped the prosecution, and stint him to'An »agerttjítt Lisbon, vvlictre he rrowibeheves '«áth prndenoe" ¡ к > ■ *' Meréy, »thou divine, thawdieaveii- born maid ''' qaculnted 'i'heoTİotle, ıhı a kind of transport, but recollecting hirti- *e\f— " ThaťwaBtheitnieiepiritibŕ mer- try/' «vid-he; « it is not «Ufficienti We hft the blind from tbe ditch, unleasuwe put thènv'in the road te avoid'it init'n- tiiiier hut'«bat'tbe roan -who лпвнюй- iine'him»etf taíhe hombiest ieot>d«ntho can dettend to cdemteteetlıeâiaııtttisı of a pen andiastjuaroiiiæh ofpajmijthfnild laţ, eţapabl«! oie»» jgtaid, «îsubhımraıı e D l átfőtt
effiirt of tenövolenée, ia,indeedia1mťist above credibility .-—yet this man, is a Jew '" The last sentence was >not uttered aloud. A train of reflections followed, iri' which he endeavoured to develop the character of the Jew ι he compared him, in his own mind, with those who publish their good deeds on the house¬ top ; but as doubtless the reader is mak¬ bg something like the same reflections, let ¡them not be interrupted. From this little anecdote he had ga¬ thered the reason of his being locked into bis chamber ; and was teady to al¬ low,, that prevention is better than re¬ medy. The afternoon was without em¬ ploy, as Shechem did not return; and •Kèbekah being busy brightening up« het apartment* the'chamber of' audience »and the counting-illume we№ theioniy places open to Theodore. с 6 This
This «ontänement of range brought to his mind the caution ho had received not to visit any other part of the house; and lie could not but smile at the strange inconsistency of the charge, when only one female was left to guard those trea¬ sures'he was thus taught had existence, and «were thus exposed to a man who was yet'a stranger. In the midst of his reflections, he was thrown into confusion by a loud rap at the door, to whicli he durst not reply, and, recollecting the place where he then was (i was the room appropriated to vjsi- tors Al he hyrried down stairs, desiring Re- bekjth vvould see who was there. '■ Anďwhy," said she, " could you not let in' ýó'ur master ?" ' »J il.lJ ce » » 1.' lťvíaiBfiinlple-qiiestíon, but one Theo. dtri-e СОЙМ hot well answer,' any Other than- by «lightly saying he had agreed never to open the door. - ' ¡"V л· - » 'Tis
"'Tis as nţiustcr saye.ïe «ЛигЫпРке, with eomethingi of acrimonyijtilnitweKVe the daughters ot' Jerusalem posscsstmore than dove-like qualities ; " prid« uidipor, veity nre constant companions." ι , ниш «Ί t 'l 't, Theodore felt the. reproof, but remain»»; cd silent, only laying his litwd upon hit, bosom with a sigh, when she, was fţouy,, Shechem desired his attendance in the parlour. ' " Thou hast had a slight reproof froni Rebekah," said he, " owing to my for¬ getfulness ; but that is ended ; and now I have to demand thy ttltentíòn on a little affair of business. A tradesman, in a large way of tj-ade, has, by thp ex¬ travagance of his wife, so embarrassed his circumstances, that his creditors threaten to distress him.,.. He hasupplied to, his iriends, ¡who, refuse to assist hm whilst, his wife Uves with'him. ( ,TI'Qlb ^¡»ищ* young, might thinkl>eB,pretl.y'¡ he \ощь »e her
Hi* to hisOwn hurt t they hhve two che¬ rub children, who in the end will suffei. Now, thou, seest, though I condemn the folly of the father for not acting ай he ought, in restraining the expensive -vani¬ ties of his wife, I should wish not to 111- *volVe tHeir children in ruin ; and I Would ask if ïhou thmkest it Will nbtfce thrmv- 1 iúg money away to relieve him in his jtresent difficulties'" Shechem remained silent, expecting a reply, which Theodore was foo much as¬ tonished to make. He gazed upon 13en- sadi, whilst his mind hesitated iñ believ¬ ing if Indeed any man coiild act up to sentiments like these Shechem, 1 Who knew riot the tnie'irio- tiVeè of" his silence, went on"-!" Ь per¬ ceive, that as thou attunacquaihfetMwith this family; thou canst riot tèBwhétber his' wifeîs sincere ih her profes-siens'oŕ re¬ turn; thou hast nòt heard her-c'ondemii the
thethoüghttess- giddiness- which 'léd 'Hér to sigh for finery." , 11 H ' " Nb, no '" őried Théodore, " fa» ôtber thoughts occupied my attention 'This person, whoever she is, must see the ru in¬ cus effetto of 'her Vanity Thé feelings Ofa rhother must have wrung hér to the soul ; and I doubt not but she will refbrth The husband may in time repay' n kind¬ ness, which is more valuable «thah- Wile you to restore him to secure indepen¬ dence, as it may confirm the resolutions of his wife; «by her future economy'she may compensate for »every thing post, theii- family may bless 'you to their littest bieath ; and;— япс1-~Л erannot indeed trace the prospect any farther.'·' « " I believe," replied Shechem, " I have a cold in mine eyes, < Tho».•hast con¬ vinced me tlíatin cioing'& benefit t» those babes, I shall not have to blame myself as hazarding beyond prudence, and thou shaltiCWry the rehefto their ürílier.'.' «u Theodore startet! up; but a moment m' served
sfirKeA to!fiheck,hİS4|î4qvır^" I cap-wt-," said he(," these walls cjrpumsgrihe. νκ. ţ.rrţuste fqvfigp.the, pjejisure of admii'is- teijng coijjfort." , , i, Shechem in his turn looked surprised, he had laid ojj the table a noto uf five hundred pounds, lie had offered it to Theodore unrestricted ; and had his de¬ sire of concealmeut arisen, from a breach of honesty, here was a temptation he could' not have withstood ; something more mysterious must then relate to him, something o«.* high importance, vyhvoli cquld prevent so great an advocate for charity from carrying so ample a r/elitff, as must raise the receivers beyond their hopos, »and give α pleasure indescribable to.tlje donw»; but what this was he was forbid to inquire, and no conjçctyııe could develop. , ,, Whilst those opposite reflections filled their minds, and their eyes mutually fixed
fixed on the note which lay on the table, a chariot rolled tó tile dőoíy ahd'tr visitor of consideration waä announced, by 'a rapping which Started Theodore,' tutd was liurrjmg Iiim down stairs to the kitchen, had not Shechem stopped him, by pointing to the counting-house,'at the same time securing the note in his pocketbook. Rebekah ushered н gay figure into the room, by the name ot' lord Pindarn. He threw himself into a chair; and whilst he employed his hands picking his teeth and adjusting his frill—" Well, my old dad," said he, "you know how the world mils when you see me at the Minories. But,' 'pon my Soul, you ought not to stow is thts room with all .those blaék chronicles ; 'tis as if one entered A ilaugli- tef-hotase ¡ bonds, mortgages, 'deben¬ tures, &c. «fee. to no small tune, I'll be sworn. Oh, but ay, how's cash ?" ■"'Nowetb »fe'haa, Iitell théc,'4epl*ed ' ' ' ' She-
Sheriitìm·, «verily I thinks it is gone to Wthe'RedlSea; nothing but paper stirring —no guineas to be seen." "I thought so, damme' Well, this is a paper world. Let's see—I want a neut little sum; all fltmitci, if'yeiwill That, by the bye, was a blessed inven¬ tion ; for absolutely a hundred ' guineas would tear a hole in one's pocket, nuless we threw them like silver into the coat, but that would make such a confouhded jingle, the boys would run out to If ok for a dog and a canister " " A hundred guineos, didst say ?" cried Shechem. " I cannot raise fiftieä*«-'tis not to be had." " Ha, hu, ha ' that's comical, 'pon my soul, one of' the best bulls irt England ' Pive hundred won't do, I tell yè. Let's see. Sukey wants'those diamond brace¬ lets. Oh, you old rogue, if you had'but a peep ntSuke, your withered heart would gallop like a race-horse—you'd' down 1 With the needy I'll tell you a secret; she's
she's all my utiin, 1 just come fram my grounds j and, betwéen-ourselvesMheold manor produces'nothing good 'but girls and'partiidges. Cbme, don't look sulky -, I'll wipe out scores when old squaretoes pops it. Come, now, just a ndat little round thousand, and then I'm off" '' Mercy, mercy ' Vat, yon kill me at Once ι A thousands ' 'tis not m the uni- verseJ Where dost think an old miser¬ ables hke me should have a thousands?" " Now do," cneu lord Pihdarn, " 1 beg you will make haste. The money must be had, that's ροζ, cost whafit'will, and if you won't, old Zinacrib'Will' for sixty per cent." « Sixty per cents, sayest thdii ? that is something; but I only take de 'law¬ ful interests.' Well—give thy bonds for five hundred, and I'll see if I «in ttettow ibnr for thee. Moneys are scarce ; -must give «a large premiums or go without it " " Bravo ι bravissimo i" crieflfthe «oble " Well
'»,Well said, old iLuicifer ι you'll fry in thei next iworld—«think ye shan't?'' " No,my lord; 'such as you, who take care to stand candidates for 'places below, will vote mc not guilty." " A\, ay, when I'm in Satan's privy- council, I'll remember my old fH«end m the Minories. Hut'tis past five o'clock— we.dnie at seven. Come, Where's the pen end ink? let's have the'nine hun¬ dred down." ι ' "That will.no do; ifit must be so large a sums, I-shall'be ruined; I shbll be forced» to fly to Palestines, Vell —two hundred premiums, and to-morrow I will send the monies«" . ,\ , л " To-night!« jq an hour; Suke'irillbt have the,bracelets)" ■ » .»' ui /'i0b, J edo recollect. 1 Oh, mybaďme- moriesl'.'.critKİ Sliechem ; "1 have »just "re¬ ceived 'tlie veryisumSi Write.you« the bonds, whilst I fetch them." Sheuhem ¡¡hortly returned with notes to the amount . * Ibi'
of eightihuiidredtepoutids, forwhich'-he received a bond,for a thousand j anďin (ive minutes after his thoughtless guest rolled away from the door. It is impossible to describe the asto¬ nishment of Theodore during this trans¬ action. The benevolent Jew was be¬ come an extortioner, in tho strictest sense of the word. The man who had so short* ly before offered five hundred pounds to a tradesman sinking in credit, without interest, and almost without ' security, had exacted a bond of a thousand on a debt of eight hundred pounds. Strange —incomprehensibly strange ! How was il possible to reconcile appearances so in¬ compatible ! The mind of Theodore was incompetent; and he had somedifficulty to overcome¡ marks ofi astonishment, ■ be¬ fore he. attended the summons Of She- cheui. , -in He was, however, prevented the trouble
trouble of'opening· the· diicoiirse, by the < latteh« wjhoi.wasilookiny »on ,the«bondi—» · " My bmij"i s»itl hev <f little thought he^ ' hud any one to overhear his»folliesi;»Uut whatithinkest thou on this matter?" " II think,'! mid Theodore,· »oppiiiţţi tii eoıısid er whether, he shooltl decbm the >i whole af.liistlloiightB, '''I ¡think'thnt-U- ,ι ι 1 know notiWhaHo think of uman» Who"' canidXtorttseexot-bitanbapreUiiunijBnd ' lavish, ab «the, samoitimoasiiiii to Inore · tha» twice thè amount." u u n ei ι ''Tlwui hast well'said. From ithe' , ovtT-fuliiGss,of»the rich; I take awrty to ι give to him who hath needui Every ftir-" t thing I extort »fpoim, the'profligate, «¡S''a farthing leásni» the isum, whieh w«8'fto i' destroy «ithe iunocentj »to dppress the'" needy, to be?squisn«dcred,«on iiixuriOi'« '' and banefulipcofus^n, or lost.tjiehaiţiDTS '■-■ and viiluina., laitin the seat» of distri¬ butive juetiue-»——«" ' ııı' 'a Jffl 1lt)l' III „ιι ,Ι ι ι ι Mil lllt..l it.l, Ш was^(«iJg,i^^btMi,the bebtødaiy » ílllllJUU of
of Theodore,broke.off theı diiieonrseehe had entered on, end »fixed bim'in.speeob. ι«»ί less reflection. It ι is triiez not a word ti·'. eapodjliiinii butitheiinstant idea comayUn cd in these, worib.tcok himiby.surprise,! ; anıl threw, libi eû'ılıis; usila! guard. He clcnoliedi his hands together' ihe started. up from, hia »seat with ian agony of feaui ■ turei Imhicb must .have claimed pity from, I inseufiibility«, he.ivalkeil twice across tlio;., room, then sat down, calm in appearance. ач if nothing had happened.—" I ask yourt ipardon," said he, > '' fbr ι allowing those «tarte of madness to overcome »mc.» > I wiili endeavour at,bettor." " e /> 'tWe^illiturntoibusinessithen^said ι Slidáiem; whOwaeiwfflingtoalloVi mad- «ι nefiS'îto liav*ibeoii the active principle, tliought iv 'appeared ι a > .matjlnese fraught ι with «ţicaliing. -.«» I Mi el ι» 1 1111(1 Inn -ιιΐ,ώ ir, r' « Ir «ι í in The rest of the day was-employed« in» « meiÎantile affairs, and adjusting in order a VttetifrieUtif bf>nde%:.lx)ntni(*sj'«Sio. to Ui ю amount
amount which could not but excite ad¬ miration in one unacquainted with forms of business One article in particular, was the curious practice of negotiating bills drawn by a certain bank in the north, which bringt take» np by She¬ chem, tbe same sanı, with commission and interest, was again drawn for on the bank¿ m A tho« the bill circulated,, w lu İs t Shechemwas ia fact the chief ƒr;« of the house. ' bi..this.employ the mind of Theodore seemejd- to take rest, as not allowtd to brood over those ualauiities under whieh it suffered. Ear 1каг ».month the usual routine, of business, with now and then an a&òfjkipdiiess intervening, fflle4,u-p the .^¡щ^люг. j ban .any »eireumslapee taken p^şec; lliat might clear up the darto- n«?ss wbiţel) r hupg upon the fortunt* of ХЪерфоредоа attimea created fanaesirf atxapgfëfigWfi ^,ţ>e,iiaaeii)atioe oť.Ube Je«. i »iii.'»i.!«i> „-t <¡ CHAP-
CHAPTEÄ III. a THEODORE had been adjusting «tr ítc- «dunt of gunpowder ánd bullets,"pnvaté- ly sold in Canada to some Indian chiefs, and lamenting the savage state of our nattire'; 'the horrors of war, and the at¬ tending train of human calamity, till his erc-rind Overflowed'with pity at our delu¬ sions, «nil with »grief" that those delusions nHskt) töntinue tiltnum iVhblongêr man Softaied irttò that defigirtfdl'state of feeling When overy'trffle'Vibntts. tin the beart, bé retired eaAy from bis Éúgú Ve- paít'to llİBsilent'chımıber-^plsai-by-nb weampüaleulatedtöexcite НМЬе^^аа. whicli lbmettılMs'6Wl-uae ЪН-тМШ- der feelings. ' " 4<чМ. i. d He
He had pressed the portrait to his bo¬ som—he had pronounced the soft name of Eliza—he had permitted a tear to fall, when he was suddenly surprised by the sound of music, w hich warbled at a dis¬ tance, in notes of such melodious wild¬ ness, that he fancied they excelled in composition every thing he hnd heard. There are tiiijbs when the slightest' im¬ pression isfelt, I have said ; such at this instant was the situation of Theodore, addihfr, no dqubt, mueli to the merit of' the performance. Could it be Shechem who played thus ? for no one else had ho «ver seen, except H«?bekah, and hei· lic could not suppose it to be. The clear¬ ness with which he ctlught every note, persuaded hiot it must be some [raison iii the house; and'charmed by the no- velty, -is well as - curiosity, he silently opened the door, advancing with caution in Uie dark. » », ,. I ,11 il- ι · He had already proceeded beyond the • f ' « bar-
barriers of proscription, when reflection whispered that he. might be trespasewg on the rights of his master.ı and hé ne mained on the spot attentive only to the sound. > He fanciod he could pewjiixe an accompanying voice; he ventured a tew paces to be satisfied; but then what were the words—what words tcoujd« be adapted to music so wild, yet so spit '' and thus he continued toadvaiujctjll-lp found himself opposite a door, which re¬ mained ajai, and distinctly heard the dos ing stanza. 1 he wand rers of Israel, through nnlions dispers d, hhnll unieni dwell lei Mifuy, again rest in peace, And the harp, that so plaintive our sorrows rchears'd, Shall thrill with new pleasures, as pleasures increase The sweet spicy shrubs, that wave over the lulle, Untouch'd by the simoom, eternally bjoiv, ePrankincenie and myrrh from their bosom distilli, Ahd lovd shall attend ot. dur path as we go " I i ι " Oh, my daughter 1 " said a voice Theodor« »knew itaqhft SMfsbem's, ," ne ч, D 2 vei
ver shall ivo see that land flowing with milk and honey I We are appointed to the nations as a sure token of Omnipo¬ tence, for though one of the least amongst nations, and from tune lmmcmotial des pised, we arc e\en at this time a sepaiate people, whilst the Bab) loniiius, v« ho «ed our fathers captive—the llomans, who lazed to the ground the temple of our glory, are swallowed up of time, and known only bj recotd' " And do j on thmk, ' said a voico, m softer tone, " th.it we should be more happy at Jtiusalem—lor wc should not thei с bc exempt ftom sorrow'" "Alas, my daughter 1 ' retuined She¬ chem, " hast thou already made reflec¬ tions so just' Thy mothei used to play that song like thyself, when we dwelt at Alexandria, but she is tom fţom mc by the hand of violence, and my happiness was blasted as the opening flower before 'the-pestilence" A deep groan from Theodore startled them
them with surprise. Shechem drew a poniard from his bosom, and ndvnnbed with fierceness towards the door. ·**■ " Who," cried he, " dares to bravo my interdiction » The hand of death be upon thee 1 " Theodore had reeled somo paces from tho door ; he heard the voice of Shechem, but neither by words nor actions at¬ tempted to deprecate his vengeance; tliat indeed seemed his lenst concern, his hands hiding his face as he leaned against the wall. An attitude so unexpected disarmed ih'a moment the resentment of Shechem, hé hastily concealed the poniard, and in a voice of softened reproach said—" Why wouldst thou trespassen my indulgence? 'Why ¡seek to pry into mine affairs, whilst thfesfeerecy of thine own is impenetrable ' Tell me, was it accident op curiosity Urolréhtfthee-hiithír?'' "i t ч . /, ■*' ,ы ВЗ Theo-
Th««odore 'had mastered the émotions that had so powerfully agitated him ; he could not Willirtgly suffer under suspi¬ cion, declaring that it was solely the no¬ velty and charms of the music he had heard whieli led him to trespass. " Retile then," said Shechem, "andlet this matter be neither mentioned again, nor remembered." Theodore obeyed without reply. " This young man," said he to his daughter, when he entered the room, " has certainly suffered some derange¬ ment of faculty from misfortune; but how my words could have revived his dis¬ tresses I cannot divine. It was certainly wrong of us to play, unless we would expose ourselves to his knowledge." ' '' Is he tall ?" asked Eve ; " or does he look very sad? I should like much to know why he will not stir abroad. I am afraid it will not be· possible we should
should live together in the jhçjuse;, witlb out sometimes meeting; an4 I owp ţ should just like to see how he locks." " He looks like other men," rephed Shechem, " and I fancy must be in love; for let me remember if I was not speak¬ ing of thy mother being torp away from me—yea truly; and I believe tøe must have suffered from something of this nature, as I have more than once had occasion to remark." " But if so," replied Eve, " that could be no reason for concealment -, ¡tnd this young man, you say, has,]|ved with you a month without once going out or re¬ ceiving any message. Why do you not inquire his reasons?" " Simply I dare not ; and let not the curiosity of tby namesake tempt thee to indiscretion, for solemnly he hath de¬ clared, tljat on the,day 1щ\% an explana¬ tion of his conduct, h¡e will go, no uţiore to return." " But me," said the young maiden, D 4 "I
"I have pot promised ; аш} surely he wiUh'sţen ţo mc." .," Beware, my dearest," said he; " though thou art strong in thyself, yet perhaps thy heart may be caught, like the wild roe on the tops of the moun¬ tains, who smiffeth at the wind, and bounds forward in the pride of liberty. It was my fear of this chiefly which made me desirous of keeping you asun¬ der ; for thou knowest onr religion for¬ bids marriage with a stranger." " I know it," answered she, with a sigh ; " but thu young man, I am very, very sure I shall not love." " And how canst thou be so very sure, unless thy affectjoiis are already plarecţ* 1 Dost thou know any youth to whojn tliou wouldst intrust thy happiness?" " I do not know any," said she, with emphasis, and blushing deeply ; " I in¬ tend never to marry." Shechem smiled ; and after again cau¬ tioning
tìoning tier to guard agahisťinv^Wesibns which might destroy her rep¿k'eHi¿ ré- tired to his chamber, reflecting on the behaviour of Theodore, and more than ever at a loss to account for the ambigu¬ ity of his laetlone Thebdore, On his part, retired, over¬ whelmed with shame at liaving suffered his weakness to betray him into' so disa¬ greeable a situation ; though some por¬ tion of' blame he thought attached tu the Jew, for allowing chance 'to effect what foresight might have prevented. The accidental discovery he had made of the löss Bensadi h rid sufi 'red, employed his reflections, and excited his curiosity. He knew not by what accident hc had lost the wife hc so lamented, and should have imputed it to sudden death, had not the mention of violence pointed to some more fatal event. Thus divided between the sufferings of otliers, and ' D 5 those
those which preyed in secret on his heart, he sunk into slumber. > ,1 In the morning he rose early, and oc¬ cupied with his last night's adventure, he felt a reluctance to appear before.Sht?- chem,not withstanding tlie pardon he had Wceived; but whilst he yet hesitated to go down, the person he wished to avoid entered the room.—" I am «poitje," said the Jew, " to speak with thee, because I feel for thee the partiality Of a parent. The gift of tongues is given to mah that he. may account ibr hie. actions, and it is chiefly owing to false delicacy and mis¬ taken want ef confidence, that half our •contentions arise» I bad intended) from tby entrance into my house, to »prevent »hy t'ommunjeittion with my dajlghtet, brtt thy ïpdisö4*ion, and our negligent, Jhalh tradercd'tìWt precaution MioSd.i-îl- laost at the moment it besame of use, ' ibr 'eEveliBtbmot yettø«nifcwenty~tbur bouts ¿«,, ί» i ,ι under
under my roof—sbe hath been for some months in the country, withiontj of our people. I do not suspect thy integrity would permit thy forming designs on my daughter, but I know the v. eakneşs of youth, ,and the fascinating power of ac¬ cording dispositions. 'Tis therefore 1 hid thee beware; and if thou art the friend of Bensadi, thou wilt avoid court¬ ing the favour of hia daughter j she is young—her mind is susccptible-^but re¬ ligion for ever denies your union." The eyes of Theodore had been fixed upon the ground—he now raised them, and whilst a faint red flushed the pro¬ minence of his cheeks, he replied with a firmness which marked the sentiments ot' sincerity—" Happy, sir, am I, from hav¬ ing been a wanderer amongst those who «hould have sheltered and protected me, jn having found a being who deserves the name of man ; and still more singu¬ larly fortunate in having discovered ilmt man amongst a people despised and ne- D 6 glected.
glected. 'How then must my reverence ¡wise et sentiments sd just and so noble! How few would have suffered themselves tò suppose, that a youhg lady like your daughter, in possession of unbounded wealth, eould possibly look down on the insignificant thing that I am ! But you know that station is not the object where innocence and nature guides. You have dared to make me the partner of your confidence ; you have bound me to you by esteem and by honour; should I then boast to you that I have overcome pas¬ sion, that reason in me can still the bounding« of tumultuous desire, I should be boasting in Vain ; but if I make any overtures to your daughter, however dis¬ tant, brand me with infamy, mark me in your heart as an impostor, and turn me out -to certain destruction To aifti at preserving the kindness you shew me, will be my chief'endeavöur; and if you désire it, I will ' eedulously avoid «ïven the sight of her." ' " No,"
" No," cried Shechem, in tailmiratioh» at the sentiments he had heard, if that cannot now be.' My dàtìghten knows* her duty ; she will love thee as a friend; and thou shalt from this hour have the range of my house ; thou shalt be as Jo¬ seph waë to Potiphar, though had I u wife I might scruple to expose· her be¬ fore thee." Theodore smiled at this sally, aUd' de¬ scended to breakfast in the kitchen, not choosing to accept the invitation of She¬ chem to enter the sitting-room. " Well," said Kebekah, " you're a for¬ tunate young man in coming to master. I wonder under what sign you 'were born : but some people might have suf¬ fered for'their folly in disobeying'mas¬ ter's orders." ι " It Was undesigned, I ' assure <you," replied Theodore ; "but if y oti would fa¬ vour me, you will not mention it«" '* Don't
" Don't think," said she, " I am one of those that love to make people unea¬ sy , but I know another might have paid for their curiosity with their life ' " How so ? ' demanded he, " but now I recollect, I saw lnm with a poniani in Ins hand, surt he only meant to frighten me' " That s more than I know,' said He¬ bekah , " but this I know, tht hst sei vant we had was a lad of tightten, lit had been ordered never to enter the pas sage leading to that suit of rooms (loi master is dreadfully jealous), however, Dick did not take warning, and one d«ij opened the library dooi, where master was reading, but the instant he saw lum, he started up ш а tremendous f 'u ij , aud pulling out his dagger, which he mosth wears, he stamped with ıage, and flying at the poor lad, ran lnm through the arm His resentment was instantly calmed, and repenting, he had the boy taken «are of, and when he was well, provided lnm another
another placet but never since that has there been,any other servant buerne; and indeed, as we don't dress much food, and Miss Eve is not above doing for her¬ self, there is not much occasion, except for opening the door, and that Jos used to do." This «as a hint which Theodore smil¬ ed at, but was too much employed with the instance of passion he had heard, to reply, if he had found inclination ; but in this sort of conversation Rebekah was always sole combatant. When Eve entered the breakfast- room, which was on the first floçr, she was evidently something disappointed at seeing only her father ; for reflection on the mysterious behaviour of Theodore had awakened curiosity, which, as a li¬ neal descendant, she inherited from her first parent—»"I thought," said she, " Theo-
л Tíheodore Was to have been here, but perhaps you forgót to ask him ? " That 1 have not, my daughtei, but niy words could not prevail he is ena riibured with solitude, and will not readily be introduced to company I thmk ht ıs wise in a\ oıdıııg thy com¬ pan) which is dangerous to a young man" " But not to one already in love, as you say,' answeied Eve, smiling "and were it not that he takes so much pains to avoid me, I should have no curiosity Will jou endeavour to bring him to dinner?' " Thou shalt invite him thyself but if I judge right, thy embassy will be in effective ' " I don't think so, said she to herselt fbr without doubt she was the fairest of Israel's posterity, and might thmk her power extensive as her charms, but that she may not be taxed with coquetry, fbr this
this was not her nature, n hint at her character may not be useless She was then in the bloom of youth, with all the spirits of eighteen, and the softness pf fetling which is excited by a secluded education and fatnilnrity with objects of soriow for though personally, grief had never been her portion, the dis couise ot lier father, which too often turned upon human calamity and inci¬ dents of distress he daily witnessed, gave her mind a softness that counterbalanced the volatility of youth Her features were dark, but in exact proportion, and with¬ out that flatness whicli characterizes some of the tribes of Judall —they ap¬ proached nearer to the ancient Giecian, aud were adorned by two fine ait lied brows, that gave peculiar grace to her dark ey es, where expression sccined tu reside Her stature arose not to the ma¬ jestic, but it was above, the pretty, and possessed m eveiy motion the grace of feminahty
fírtiinahty A figijre like tins was in¬ deed dangerous to the peace of α young man, who mylit not be tlie master lie fanned of passions, wbnh often triumph over reason but Theodore «as not like the universality of men
CHAI'
CHAPTER IV.
Тнг. business of the day led Theodore to the counting-house, to which in fu¬ ture he designed confining himself ns much as possible ; for though he confid¬ ed in his own strength, he wished, by adopting α distant behaviour, to avoid giving a shade of uneasiness to his bene¬ factor, though he saiv it would be next to impossible wholly to abstain from the company of his daughter Eve, on her part, had no thought of looking on him in any other light than as a man who depended on her father ; and it was curiosity alone whieh excited a wish to see a character so strange and so
so worthy, for the one as well as the other had been the subject of her father's discourse. There was indeed a little se¬ cret contained in her bosom that might add to curiosity, but be that as it will, she herself was only confident. No sooner, therefore, was breakfast over, than she hurried with the tea- things into the kitchen ; but not meeting the object she expected, she inquired oi' Rebekah if Theodore was good-natured, as she believed, from her father's account, he was very unsocial. " Why yes, Miss," replied she ; " he never talks a deal, but I think sometimes that is because I am not so young as him¬ self." Eve smiled ; and then demanded if he was tall. '* No, Miss, he v s not what you may eift Й1 ; but he's weftehoiigh for'tliiit mMeť: , - „¡,. Jtó
hes very proud, however, though one would not think it from his appearance. " How then can you tell? said Eve ( " Why you must know, Miss, though he will sometimes clean a knife when I m in a hurry, 1 never can get htm to open the door " Clean knives and open the door' repeated Eve "why sure yon don t ex¬ pect he will do either I am certain my papa would be angry if he did any such thing a gentleman to clean knives' Hut what colour is his hair ? ltcbekah, who expected Eve would have supported her m the point she wish ed to tarry, was not very well pleased at its reception, and carelessly answered, she had too much to mind to notice his hau, but he was no such curiosity Eve was instantly silent, and hearing her father enter the ground parlour, has¬ tened to make some trifling inquiry, m hopes Theodore might be present, but he
he was engaged; and slie returned to her own room, with intention to amuse her¬ self till dinner, when she made no doubt of satisfying her curiosity. It is indeed dangerous to awaken curiosity, because we possess а desire tö penetrate every mystery, to pluck the forbidden fruit, and not seldom is much mischief occa¬ sioned by apparent concealment. What /was there strange in a young man be¬ coming a clerk? What could excite a wish iu the daughter of his muster, so impatiently to desire to see hini? Sim¬ ply, because lie was introduced with a something of mystery, and by that held up to her notice as an object of inquiry. 'Shechem was from home at dinner, and therefore delicacy forbade live to in¬ vite Theodore, «as she had intended; which delay only added to her impa¬ tience; and the'afternoon-was spent at her musie,- perhaps in the hope thať its power would again lead him to liter pre- dehee. At
At near six Shechem returned. He entered the counting-house; ftnd whilst he filed some receipts, said to Theodbre»*- " I have been tO'See Μη Ζ —«—; ond ito theo, Theodore, I know it will be welcome Hews, when I tell thee lie is happier than ever. Iiis wife, formerly so giddy, and fond ofthe world, hath seen, that whilst the Vain and imprudent admire the out- Ward trappings of emulative pride, they can join in the censure of the sober. She hath Considered, that a mother hath ma¬ ny duties ; and as she loves her husband • and her children, she hath given him the direction of her expences, that she may not be tempted to extravagance, by tlie ill examples every way before her. His be¬ haviour is the model of softness. His business flourishes, as he now enters into it with pleasure, as the means of render¬ ing· his wife happy, and his children com¬ fortable; and what pleaees me most, will soon be able to repay the loan." ι .("«Wien,", olied Theodore!. " good yet remains JA
•remains upon the earth, private benevo¬ lence supplies the place of public justice, ană tbe balance of good and evil stands poized. But how many bales of cotton are to be ordered from the firm of Good¬ man nnd Co. ?" " Let me see—hum—that's right. I tell thee, Theodore, I am so pleased with the harmony I have witnessed, that I »am fitted for company, not business. Thou slialt overcome thy bashfulness, and drink tea with mc and my daugh¬ ter. Tliou knowest I seldom drink tea myself, but those girls lead us into ex¬ pences one cannot well afford." Theodore smiled ; and partaking him¬ self in the pleasure inspired by the pros¬ perity he liad beard, be wiped his pen, and, for the first time since his residence m the Minories, agreed to enter into what might be called company. ,ι ţ ".Make, thy-jelf ready then," iaid She· ■. chem.
chem, " and I will go on befóte thee, tt* my house is a little confusing to one tie- acquainted with its windings.—Thefe brought thee a visitor," said Shecheitt, ай- vancing first, " one whom I expect thee to receive as the friend of thy father." ' She turned her eyes to catch a glaWcè of Theodore, whilst she arose to placé her father's chair; but they did nöt té- tain without conveying Intelligence tb her mind which covered her face л +ith crimson, and so fluttered through het frame, that she was obliged to sit dotvh in confusion, which she endeavoured Ш conceal by straightening the carpet. "Theeye of Bensadi hiiä observed thbse changes; he turnéd therh 'with li glitøéB of indicative jealousy oh Theodore ¡ »but theaetill was calm and unruffled, anVl H(f felt that he had been wrong! ihUtotnftiitø to his daughter, other than what might nalftránjr. bffihé, «dinţii at 'İflıe'UAaden ,(flíéb. i. ľ en-
entrance of a stranger. But here he was deéeived by the commanding spirit of Theodore, which had instantly overcome a surprise he as instantly saw might be dangerous to indulge. There was, how¬ ever, in his Voice and manner, an em¬ barrassment which he could not over¬ come, and every attempt at speech was only followed by monosyllables. On the part of Eve, indeed, there appeared so much confusion, that it increased the diffidence of Theodore, and created hi her father an astonishment which de¬ stroyed the pleasure he had expected, and banished the happy family from his mind. How there could be an understanding between the young man and his daugh¬ ter, he was löst in considering. He be¬ gun to fear Theodore might have de¬ ceived bim, and to wish he bad further¬ ed bis intention of wandering in the de¬ serts of Arabia. Eve, however, exerted ' ' some
some degree of courage; she ventured tp look up to meet the eye of Theodore; but hers he constantly avoided, and lejst he should excite suspicion, even with¬ held himself from those civilities of, at¬ tention politeness required. Uneasy in tbis situation, he waited impatiently tbe conclusion of the tea, when pretending to have forgot some letter of moment, he bowed, and withdrew—Shechem not wishing to prevent bim, that he might inquire into what so much surpassed his ■comprehension. " Eve," said he, in a voice sunk down to compassion, " daughter of my first and only beloved, how Cometh it to pass, that Theodore occasioned in tbce so much disorder? Tell me, my daughter, every weakness of thine heart; tell me if thy boasted firmness is established on sand, or if thou hast before known any thing of this young man." The tears at this, pathetic injunction streamed üP m ,. E 3 the
the flne eyes of Eve. She threw herself Upon the bosom of ber father, remaining for a time irresolute and silent—" Why," said he, at length, " art thou fearful of trusting my confidence? why not repose in me that trust which none other can ftilfil SO faithfully?" The delicacy of Eve seemed to struggle with duty, but that duty being attem¬ pered by softness and friendship, she ac¬ quired resolution to say—" I own I have been indiscreet, in not before now mak¬ ing you acquainted with an accident which I confess brought me acquainted with Theodore, whose ways are so mys¬ terious, and it was tny uncertainty aris¬ ing from that mystery which held me in silence ; but meeting him to-day when 'liexpected a stranger, has indeed flurried 'my spirits, and when you shall know 'how deeply I am indebted to him, you will not condemn my behaviour. I twill Own also, some slight hints you let fall-in speaking of Theodore, excited in ще a !> distant
distant fancy that I had again met tbe person who will ever deserve my friend» ship and esteem." < ι 1 She paused, and Shechem, more asto¬ nished than ever, wiped the tears from her eyes, and encouraged her to proceed, " When I was down at Mr. Zandi«. ver's, a man of some property in the country was, or pretended to be, ena* moured of my person, though, had he loved me with the passion he professed, be would not have continued a persecu¬ tion, which, from the first hour of his Attendance, I declared must end in dis¬ appointment; for allowing his qualifica¬ tions and possessions to be great, religion made it impossible we should ever be related, and that, therefore, if he wished me to esteem him as a friend, he would look for nothing beyond that esteem. He pretended to attend to my denials, ceasing the frequency of his visits; so E 3 tbat,
tnat, from intermission, he never catte at all, and shortly gave out that he had .quitted tbe country. I again ventured to take a walk wiic-i the weather was fine, not thinking myself in danger of meeting him. One evening, tempted by its beauty and the instances of а young woman with whom I had a slight acquaintance, we entered a little Wood, bordering the town, where We sauntered till near dirk. Invited by the bttizing of the little insects, and the trembling of the leave«, I was led, with¬ out perceiving it, to the darkest part of tlie thicket. The young woman then suddenly stopped, and whilst she stoop¬ ed to gather some flowers, began hum- ming a fashionable air, which I have silice thought was a concerted signal, as, at that instant, the detestable Romer started from behind a cluster of hazel bushes. I screamed instantly for help, ahd was flying, with all the haste of ft»r ( when my ctótheà entangling with the
the bushes, I stumbled, and was caught in his arms. , ' " I do not remember the words he made usé of; the young woman had escaped out of sight, and I had only my own courage to support me against his superior strength, which was evi¬ dently aided by liquor. A thought suggested to me, that if I prevented myself from falling, I might indeed suf¬ fer from his insults, but escape his in¬ tended violence. Fortunately, I had power sufficient to grasp R young tree which grew near, and that so tight that his utmost efforts could not disengage me. He now became outrageous, en¬ treating and threatening by turns, till finding his own endeavours vain, and that I would sooner dje than quit my hold, he called aloud for his servants, vowing be would cut the tree up by the roots, and сцггу me where I should fihd resistance vain. " In this moment, before his servants E 4 could
could arrive, a young man, which was Thebdore, forced his way through the bàbbèo, 'tom by the thorns in the haste heihad 'made. His eyes flashed fury. His Whole countenance glowed with an expression which to me appeared more than human—it was hubianity exalted to' avenging divinity. He spoke not, Im't Witha stroke like lightning, brought Romer to the ground.—' Madam,' said he, ' this monster has lost his present power ; you haVe nothing more to fear : I'will attend at a distance till you are safe.' The energy of' my spirits now suddenly flagged. I felt myself unable to return him thanks—unable, indeed, to move from the spot, and with diffi¬ culty to preserve myself from falling.— ' I am grieved,' said he, ' that you are so overcome. You look exceeding pale. Shall I support you? It is ne¬ cessaiy we should quit this place befóte the servants arrive.' He supported fiie in'his arms," continued she, blushing and
and looking down ; " I was unable to walk. Dreading every moiuentntì» »coming of tbe servants, and trembling lest Romer should be killed, and my generous deliverer suffer for his hiujrui, nity, I found myself tum sick and gid¬ dy ; I was unable to support the agita· tion of my spirits, and fainted ,iu his. arms." ,j Eve paused for a moment. Shechem wiped away the tears from his eyes, and seemed too much moved to express his feelings. " When I came to myself, the moon shone faintly through the trees, a cur¬ rent of air fanned over me, and enli¬ vened my senses. I found myself in the arms of my deliverer, and felt the tears drop upon my face, whilst he bent himself over me. Returning sense dis¬ tinguished in plaintive accents—'Oh, Eliza' where now art thou ? oh, mise¬ ry'—oh, death'"
" And oh, my daughter 1 " cried Sho chem, unable longer to eontnin, " where Was I that! my band eoirtd not save thee ' that my arm conld not reach to tht-deliverance 1 Oh, excellent young man * oh, yonth of ten thonumd ' But peMKjeed—tell me all." " I endeavoured to return him thanks for the service he had done me; but how could I express thanks for what was superior to every form of acknow¬ ledgment? He supporttd me home, «nd recovering strength as my safety became certain, I desired he would walk in, and receive the thanks of my friends ror a kindness no reward could repay —' And yet,' replied be, ' I am amply -rewarded ; I 'have preserved from a vil¬ lain »be purity of virtue, «nd ptrhapt With "that all the pleasure existence «ea %t?iitow. ï »m M this moment m d»»- ■ger ef bring >dteeov«íreíl.' "I o*rm« then •t-Mpose myself. Atten, 'madamı, arid ' ' ' j «bey
may you nevej- more have occasion for blmilar Services I' , ( , " I would have detained hitn, but ))c instantly hastened awAy, leaving me.^ »ţ» impressed with bis actions and words, that time cannot efface the ohe or thé other. Hie hint of thé danger he rpn 1 then imputed to his apprehension of the safety of Homer; but that intkmpijs man had been only Btuiilled by the blow, and the next day appeared in public, oftbring a reward to «any one who would apprehend the rogue that had endeavoured to rob him the preced¬ ing evening." " But, Theodore !" oried Shechem, " tell me mord about Theodore !" " Alas !" rephed Eve, ," I have litt|e more to add, but that littlpis yet much in his favour. Our friends desjred that, for шу own sake, «the outrage I had suffered shpuld be suppressed, апЫг Ше apprehension of the stranger sljoujil «jell us «publicly to defend him ; and I E 6 will
wlR'mvn, 1 that, knowing the tower 1 1 haï of clearing his character, and refleot- ing'cbnfnsion on his adversary, I •secret¬ ly'wished he might be taken, that so I might have an opportunity of continu¬ ing his friendship, and claiming ftom you some reward that might be accept« able. ■ My wishes and the proffers of ftómer were alike ineffectual—he was not to'be found The only evidence collected was from a farmer, who de¬ scribed his person, and declared he had eteeh him lurking amongst the bushes more than once; that he had likewise seen him two nights past eating- some fruit and dty bread, beside the rivulet which runs through the plantation. From this I instantly remembered the hints' of danger he had given me, and Hbw 'concluded that something prior had heen the motive of his concealment, though that he should be guilty, ef any crime I could not believe, Some weeks Jiaised away, and I no longer had any hope
hope of again meeting with him; „when, one .day, I, with Mr. Zandiver and his. daughters, went on a visit to Mr. Lan-. dorn's, who was a justice of the peace, t We were to remain two or three days,, as the distsnee was more than twenty miles. " In the evening we sat down toi cards, it being dark and cloudy; bufi we were interrupted in the middle ofj the first game, by the clamours of a, number of persons, who had stopped, a young man on the road for uttering a bank note, evidently a forgery, as tb^ innkeeper happened to have another of tbe same number and amount. " A case so curious as this excited our attention, and never having ,Ьеев present at a trial, I willingly attended Mr.Lahdorn into the hall, wrere.thf young man was presented, in the midst of a number of tradesmen and otheşs, who already pronounced him committed and
and hanged; but how was I agitated- how was my interest engaged, when I perceived it was the young man to whom I owed the preservation of my person I " With some difficulty, and support¬ ed by salts, I preserved resolution to attendi for I trembled lest he should be guilty, whilst I ielt perfeotly assured of his innocence. His behaviour indeed ■eemed to impress much in his favour by its gentility. Whilst he attended with a dignity that spoke his rectitude, with¬ out appearing hke the hardened effron¬ tery Of practised knavery. " The innkeeper and his waiter were tbe principal witnesses examined; the one proving that the note he bad was similar; the other, tbat he had received the Jaiged one from tbis young meta, whoühad obstinately refused to declare his »ame,, residence, or business, «nd had tikeme» «udtawured to escapei This last
last assertion was confirmed by several others, and even with me was much against bim» " When the witnesses bad concluded, Mr, Landorn arose, and addressed him¬ self to the stranger.—' Young man,' said he, ' you stand under suspicion of being guilty of a crime justly considere!} by our laws of a very heinous» naturit, as it tends to destroy the confidepice of commerce, and depreciate that medium of barter by which tbis island exists« You are charged with resistance, which ought not to be made against justice, and your desire of Concealment adds mueh to the evidence against you ; you are therefore sensible my office requires that you be conducted »to prison, to meet your trial in the face ofyour coun· try,' and to receive your sentence ifrom the determination of impartial men; you have, however, liberty to speak in your own »defence, «nd may, if innocent, invalidate
invalidate the charge preferred against you.' " Mr. Landorn then sat down, and all eyes were instantly turned upon Theodore, who first bowed to the jus¬ tice, and then to the people. He wait¬ ed a moment, till every breath was hushed into silence; then, extending his right hand, he began, whilst every ac¬ cent impressed itself upon my memory, and inspired me with every feeling it was intended to convey.—' The indul¬ gence you have so willingly shewn me, I consider, sir. as one of the most noble privileges ofa Briton, and wliich I shall endeavour not to abuse. I perceive that my wish of concealment has im¬ pressed you with sentiments against me, and I allow that it was natural ; but is it not equally so for a man to avoid a situation in which innocence cannot al¬ ways appear, or, appearing, must still leave behind it the odium of being held up
Up to public suspicion? But, boweveţ this might act as one reason for my wish of concealment, I confess that some me¬ lancholy circumstances, which have de¬ ranged my family and my fortune, made me particularly desirous of escaping public observation ; and surely, sir, without imputation of guilt, there may be situations so delicate, that it were extreme barbarity to expose: such is mine, and I am convinced the candour of all present will allow an indulgence, I know not strictly legal. I am as sen¬ sible as you, sir, or any one, that the crime of forgery is enormous ; that, for the welfare of the community, it is justly punishable with death ; but ought not the medium of our commerce to be so secured from mutilation that the in¬ digent shall be without temptation ? Ought it not to be so that the most ignorant might instantly detect the fraud? But how few can distinguish a note artfully counterfeited; and what shall
shall secure an innocent man from suf¬ fering imposition ? or whet shall speak m favour of a man like me, who has taken, unsuspectingly taken, a note as currency in the country? Shall a man, on whom is found α bad shilling, be charged with coming it, because he can¬ not mention of whom he received it? I believe you will all answer, no And «hall a man then bc guilty ot forgery, because he has in his possession α note which proves to be false? No The one and the other are alike, and the loss foils on the possessor in whose hands the falsity Js discovered My endeavouring, therefore, to escape with the loss, cannot apeak against me in that point Again, I declare, that condemning а man in my situation, you do ¡more to thé deprecia¬ tion of tina species of circulating me¬ dium, than he who shall counterfeit halt a million of money Who then will take them! but from those to whom they may revert in case of defect? What man
man will ventate to carry them, when, if raise, he may be imprisoned for forge¬ ry ? They will then be otíy as notes of hand, passing from one friend to the other. I shall now come to the point, for though it has been proved tbat two notes of a like figure are held by that gentleman, who has commenced the prosecution, it has not been proved which note is the forgery, and he is equally liable with me to imposition. I beg, therefore, tbe notes be produced and sworn to before I proceed.' " Scarcely a person but who now be. lieved the young man innocent, Spoke loudly in Ills favour, and pressed to see one who had uttered so many truths. The notæs were produced« To a first examination they appeared alike, but on minuter sorutiny, the one the innkeeper held proved defective in the water-mark. Theodore held up his hand to speak, and instantly all were at¬ tentive.—* How,' cried he, ' are we now to
to proceed?' This gentleman, I doubt not took the note in the way of busi¬ ness.» It is true, he has not attempt¬ ed to pay it, and therefore cannot be prosecuted ; but though his name is known to you, he stands on the same footing with myself, in being unable to account how he came by it ; and I have now only to lament the defect which has brought me into so dangerous and disagreeable a situation, which has ex¬ posed me to be branded as an enemy to the society in which I live ; and but for this accidental discovery (and my note might as readily have been the forged one), I should perhaps have languished in gaol till the next assize, and possibly then, for want of evidence, have suffered the law*. I thank you, sir, for the can¬ dour you have shewn me; you have behaved worthy of the office you fill. Alas ! how few are equal to its mighty demands,
demands, who ignoranti;' and wantonly sport with the calamities of men, and abuse one of the most precious deposits —distributive justice » ' A shout of approbation ran through the assembly The innkeeper advanced to shake him by the hand, swearing he was an honest man, and should have free (¡unitcrs whenever he came that road and so much command had his voice and words, that every man seemed happy who could get to congratulate lnm " You will bthevt me, my dtar fa¬ ther, I shared his tuumpli I expl uned to Air Znnthvei who he was, and en treated lnm to prevail with him to stay ' I was certam, said I, mentally, · of Ins innocence He could not, I am cer¬ tain, deceive Alas' his countenance dtel ires him too good to be a Chi istian ' Mr Zandiver could not prevail on him to remain to supper, not even when se¬ conded by Mr Landorn He entreated to
to be excused—that urgent business called him away.—' But,' said Mr Zan¬ diver, ' I would thank you, in the name of a relation, for indescribable services rendered to us, and in tne name of that relation, entreat your company.' " Whilst he said this, be pointed to me. Theodore raised his eyes to where I sat, made me a low bow, and th«Mi turned away, saying—' Cease, my dear sir, I entreat, to overwhelm me with compliments ; my heart is too full to bear more than it contains, and the greatest obligation you can confer on me, bow and whensoever we may chance to meet, ia to pass me over un¬ noticed.' He brokt from him without waiting a reply, and, from that hour till this afternoon, at« tea, I have never seen or heard of him." " Thou hast," said Shechem, " re¬ vealed to me an action that bas raised this young man in my estimation far above princes. Yet my mind is bewil¬ dered
dered in confusion, and lost in doubts. I would, for thy sake, he were an Israelite ; but as it is, the kindred of friendship is allowed, and he shall he to thee in place of a brother." A heavy sigh escaped the bosom of Eve; but she was unable, perhaps unwilling, to express the sentiments it contained—- " I must go," said Shechem, " I mus»t embrace the deliverer of my daughter, and thank him for services I cannot re¬ pay." He descended into the counting- house, but Theodore had retired to his chamber; he followed him thither, and without notice, his mind being too much agitated to admit of ceremony, entered the room ; but the appearance of Theo¬ dore made bim shrink from the intru¬ sion. He was leaning on his hands against the window, the picture, tied with black ribbon, was lying on the ledge before him,
<№n>)!MHUh« Wars were luffei-ed i 1 silence »to еШ1 dewn bis theeke. He started at l^iííMtiiug.Qfithe door, hurried tbe pic- eAHteintothis besom, and with an effort .oyercmne the sorrow that filled him near- JyHo choking. He assumed compara- ЛщвоЦправцгв, de»iringiBensadi to«?p- teţet r «as b« bad something tocommuni- 5 е»<*-э ■ - vim li l "«ido not doubt, sir," said he, " yoqr daughter has mentioned a trifling service rjŢşpnfSf bad the happiness to perform, and ΐίφφ,,,Ι fear, has raised in her tender Ьэдра^а. gratitude bordering on softer setje-jatipjis, j I am not ignorant of the mo. tiqqspfjtjie,human heart. lean discern tbs^lftvsjneots of passion where a copi- рЩц ojftrvrf may perceive nothing Y^Hjjy^U flpt, theiefore impute my sus- picjjjojj jo jsc]ç»ttlatteıy, when ţ fear that ycjijr (jg^ter, is susceptible, a,t Jeasţ^e f 4M , ÍJ'i í < t i , J n P*' í ' ss J 0 ''' of Ρ 888 ' 01 ». 1 « Ί jäs i ' :irÍ° n '
tion, that she dwelt with eagemen «in every word I said. I saw her eye» en¬ kindle, her cheeks alternately flush and turn pale; and though I knew not then the difierence of our religion, yet a bar¬ rier arises for ever between us. How much more then is it rendered impos¬ sible, when religion and fortune unite to divide us ! and though I do not love your daughter in the common acceptance of tile word, I must fly, for her sake and my own." " Not so, not so, my son," repeated Shechem ; " we will establish an union of friendship, puie as the association of Jacob's sons. Tear not thyself away from an aged father, whose grey hairs thou mightest lead down to the grave in peace ; for to thy virtues I could confide the greatest of trusts—the protection of my daughter. I have suffered, and know how to reverence sorrow; thine then shall be sacred. Consider if thy heart is so desolate that it will not afford rest to ''TOL·, i. f affec-
affection— -consider If the charms of so· ciety eannot touch thee with satisfac¬ tion From this moment thou slialt be possessed of independence, only remtun with us " / í »■ ι Theodore was overcome by a friend¬ ship so unbounded, Ins tongue refused acknowledgment, ljut be looked assent, md Sheqbeqn, not wilhng to restrain him by hu presence, returned to his daugh· ter, taking care not to hint at the suspi¬ cions «f TbfWetdore, nor indeed to.ttren- tton anyvthiog that mightllead to«mU> jectibe.iwisleied of aH other&ţu átfoiäebnq π -ι - Ι ' if ί tof η > Il ! ν ι Ι ll İli» и πι Ι II ι Ι «f 1*Io?isil Ι ψιι m Ι t ( ι f I inu non imobil < J 1 Ι ι I Ì 1 I' 33>íñr 4jrt set Hi I in «1 mti{il oii! ! julin >v j bnr ţitimofi 1 ut?iralfj rilrw nv io» ^Ijn^upeil ион γ>ά) douant rniiarn on „tedilo* -»law vliiisupeil nrw ίί ï СЯАР-
,„(,,,' , ut ι ιι,,Ι I ill» , Ι Ш , ι,ι > n>tj I ! 1 ,, ι I COI ι. .......' .- ni -■"" I tıs lllľ- CHAPTER V. , ,ι щт ^^,„^,„ «ι, „if '"«till Uu* tlupiéloeaiVue Ilie'dBteSnl'tloAJs, ' '' '''Add : aj4l,e T |«h*r; ; sn , íaiiwoVŕiWdiy:'· ''' hw - i к i i.l «I Oh tbe UKitrowEvehadbrougbtíhithéll 1 to: that tone of temjier'which'gave'rei.' siguaiion to 'Ы1- 'mindi '«nH'ifetUmrhé» pridelhékl herin sileHoel " iCoiittmtéÖ; it'! not happy, that Theodore remained in the house, she endeavoured to reconcile herself to the idea of being no morethan а nominal relation, though mmy little office« sh* took delight to perform, and the hymn he bad beard, waa repeated with pleasure morning and evenmg. But though they now frequently conversed, fiequently w«re together, no sentiment '1АШ f a warmer
W'ilŕmer tliSh' frletiaä»hip escaped the lip» óf'Tilcodoi'e tibr did he seek to be in Ш C¿m|)atly thoiigh that compahy ever ¡Ше Win pleasure, nierety, perhaps, be- 'cauie there is an invisible chai m in the ¿óflr conversation ofa temile, which fits cibaies filé soiil Of iDli'ft '' ŢÎiou slialt witness, said Shechem, one evening, " a secret source of wealth which flows m upon mc, benefits man- kíhď, and supjiorts a number of poor fa lililíes, whomllst otherwise perish fVom íďe earth 'Tholi Idvéét not tó entrt-lţhe sťreétíí, Ш и№НЫ аШШа óf ňié«t, ihou wñftté shlèlaW fbm dangéf" ι ι After tolbe tttféWn, Théodore ebh- sirili«; ajid aécbWpkiíléd Ш fAéwá"Öito» ι 1 narrc^Wifläing alley 'irt RtísèoMlry %W S AbbW НИШ pacèslíp tHe^ltírtí- ¿ХЩ ďiSíťiVt; U-litíré-stobd- a hoülê'öf ekÄWdWfiS.isfeiiS, bdťrtiibetíittléWŕ- piu-bnce, and suriounded with filth The
"The very dregs of Judah's tribes,seemed gathered in a little yafi, to **ţ)jl ,v i'? swine-house would have been clean, «¡nt to the grunting of whose' inhabitants might be compared the jargon of Dijtch and ill pronounced Hebrew. Tbe ragged group, the disgusting scents, and conci¬ sion of dialect, was sufficient to startle a stranger; and Theodore was drawing «back, till he recollected the folly of fear. Shechem led the way jijto the house, Atta, seated bimself in a large chair at tlie upper end of the chamber, dark with the ţmpke of «leverai old popper lamps. Near a hundred of these people entered, tak¬ ing their seats on tbe benches. Theo¬ dore compeared them» ίη his mind,to a hand of robbers, roet to consult depreda¬ tions on mankind ; or midnight conspi¬ rators, plotting treason and revolution çf .empire« They see,«qj»ed a chosen band for infernul ,*projectş, şpd r Йде'г, ¡Ц -lqoking '"' '' - Äflv l.l , e W"
•eiibenebiNţBwsiiiWanltl ¡.bsrrei -ctnderaned thtm tır thfe galleyiU Ker Wa» thii m unapt allusion, from the raggednëssiand ill-look of their persons and garments, tben}hhial eppearanceiofiithe place, dark adtaié regions of Plutei «with «noti one or¬ nament to meet the eyei.but this reflec¬ tion gave place to admiration at the be- Béadsnce of! th© i»stitbtion«i ' ι ■. < ι -.il .vilim/ ..... ■ '»>. \ TWo Jews, borne down by many days, attended tto'keepi order, e Bensadi »at on alebasTuatl.theiitnti of» large »oak ЛяЫа, alul »eatira/rbeodíiaenin m bench ibetide bini. Annum· instäntlyirpdvanced», and duanviiig from» hi» pocket я purse,,laid it on the table, «toppingia momentitooe»- «i«der, and iii that .momenty ,-T«heode<ie tljtajgib* le wMimdted oneof those Ίώ ť«Ky,Íi»d· portrayed, ι. iu « ι», ıı Луп) •un "-««л» 'ľ í ίιι 11 Umo t 't , ιάΙ irf'l ,<,IMJ faorrowediofijtlieej'' said thjslJtnv, 'f-M sabdmsiwhKb »rade, hath 'énableti me .ВЫ1| ι « ' Oili ι» L birit»
to repay iwith>mtbresbs,-ian<eV«i««yiaU, the childrera of tM Hebrews -bel sei prosi ptnd'' ! II ι ŕ ι ι 11 Ι Kí Shechem smiled, and tatanglheimo-» ney.couhted it over, Whilst another Triade an entry in 'a large book ι I I ! Another Jew advam-ed»-his want was to borrow, he stated the advantage he expected, and «received the sumu Many mom foliowed on the same grounds; anil then advanced others ¡who had soimuclb tmsted to them per month, i with whieh« they bartered, pi-ovidedifrr their families! and for ita use, till trade enabled them to return the principal, deducting ti* She¬ chem « »dividend of their garni Th» ctass was those who hawk «bout the streets, and trade on в scanty foundation.' The last, was a number of the most mi- sa»bl«v together with boys and girls, whoi» not: ieing introsted with cash, res» attved daily from the treasures a quan- * i tity
nty of goods, for which they accounted •ritl'flífcht,' 1 *!** «KírfdlVia^'thc'-f'^iŕB. IfiytmisTfceiDdoiV' lèbriiiea' tirat ttie Whole i№IMiP№tţ abatiré,- 'ahď än ' iíistitutioh -wWthyärö-beimii.^!*'»»' ''"»w ba İ0 99I1I>M I.Ü iJ.iri' /1 lo . «'«Il .'qi .hl* eiŕanglí,*"th<'ugbť l he;'* k thtó-tiòfetórii Oiktrh^'Sholild be buried irť oblIVitíh, Ürií lost'W 'it ««mer;whibtthee!ltóly ( «tf wttrlieeríp^óJr, blteej, not indeed 1 on the h¿Ui*(lttep¿buílí m the Kiteheiii tfW&iti!. ФЬЙ>5*Шк8(*11у'«вЫ58ЬеЛ%111«%Ьх. haustible fund, and may be termeid à self-existing institution. How much bet- teťpoliéy weiild it be* to subscribe'to 1 'in- dttStiy thtm W idleness 1 , 'by supply in'ff'the mentis df-MlJoliŕ' Tn ttrtieé'öf scarcity, suifly'tt'Is'iiot'the Way to pťoéufe pMl ty^'b^becOíiiirtg prodigal ofthe' ¿totíkm hatia »'bîtt if subscriptions went to prcV- vllfe tÃíkàht employ, to give bouhtlés fbr''birapiigtho*iï articles td ; maťKtétŕ #fiiêh'átí ! salt èbradi'wheh thé'friäŕkelj jjrilie'åt horne'wes equal' tO thé 'mark* "abíbiťa, «tií'l " 1
THEODOBE CYPHON. 105 afamad, orund«jr it by sp wMçheiWfcíight and, tare, no» man in Ыч, se#4es n woirtd take the hazard of exportation« ,Tbu*3lo real scarcity could be&lt. Bytbéimul- tiplication of idle hands, the source of productive labour is ,sapped. The old, tbe infirm, and-the feeble, ought ito And .relief and be excused from labour, ι ¡But tbe idle and profligate would he better reclaimed by «enforced employ, than.by hanging, transportation, suhşariptignwor work-houses," I, ,,„ ,| I , 1' ,1 II 111' Theodore might be right, but he wa» A tittle enthusiastic; fow will .give в» gui¬ nea, hut tq procure themselves fäewiwej andı where is the pleasure in, dropping, 9 guUte^byf^iWayin^^niiey^ijBngh liíe?- víh^twbodwwfiiM ibjejstţmiw 1 ^ffJN te »*»pride ^fiithmjtg^Aisfln-! gii^^hen hq Αφ dowft Ще ч г^*т<т B«ÌS4AiP»1rV ^»•еа^.п^^.Д^да^ •pf^-lbsobatelyi-iţjrhlt^* ШтЩ covrkflepers! 1 f 5 The
^itVhuMbiiiities·! 4*11 ouÉduded 'йиМго 'konmiitinţb! gwi»teei»gulaTÌtj», land whei < lüleyiretuın«»Îiıhtmıe('Kve ïeceived «them 'withi*>itrtile, «anď seemed pleased thst ■iThteikreihndiiretiernee imsamtyiftoni his first excursion ; she invited.itbeimto a little supper she had provided with her town hsndt; after which shetnäiteHahied •i»bém 'itn* oneof Handel's ftmoulı pieces ifttrmiíAléxanderl»' Frait, proa*uncing .»iui an«e»ţ)Tessioh"nM to b».raí*takén,- ibi ,11 π 'e 1 1 ' t »1 ài. hib τ , ," Lovely TleAit) ilts beside thee, ţ 6«|ί? ill" ' í 1 .1 )еД Гяке tlıe gouda the gQilBlirelvidettiee»" n J ,niJ4^J 'III Ul fill Jll „Ilill I« И ;¡Au^¡aighi«t«»je»»)ed iron ШвШгщЛе «IWeauiri HlMiuğhtful,! ind soon 'after 1 tè- еДи^'ЛЬ'Ы·! 0İ4»mbfr.-ıBusineMlisl»the iil^lt^iedyit.grtiiut/ell. diseastJSK«n%«ŕ- «WitiwcefcJAtí 'mindi« Weich «Ββ eKhtr ı^eııjıT^iiny.rfıidleneu, «or imutuwdnby ı(^ıtoıit««l%tı»kniı.»iThe nearetoteİNİy '»tólitAipieyjMi-iJpon ШЬеЫогек иетДзп «NİİlınBj-jiNiinıeatd ţdinit геШ IbamtiiÉB- eploy, and even «t (times to be wholly absorbed
efcêorbed amürt papers «iiid,«ece(»itnts. Erirmloyihks-mieifiirnBbed aipretencedf frequeritly abeentíhghimself lìomthetao oharmlngl.tTewessvi.when the.abtence«f «berlflstberiinigblt bave emteŕraaséd thtìt eanmttaÏion.m ■-,■·* ι ι ul ι riti ff ί )Ы"1 U Jul ( ijl lil« . , *He ahuris me,ľ iwoidd Kve 6ay to hersdft Vikt Ы too, high-minded to love imi Alaibheiperhapeisighs fúp another -«far Eliaa! B«t{iwho«u,^lizt,i*i Yet, did he look oii me with afitction, reli¬ gion must for ever divide* us. Were I certain he beheld me with esteem, I *QuMib»,hàppyr storø- thet heehoqld hertsburyhimielf fitimithe Wurld» »And didi! i«ot,think it"irapoeaiWeehe ¡could eghiin ivam,,! ahoitld thi(ikiliehad.li»<Mii unfertunatfe ¡·ι1ο»β/ιι Mystftaoue.lhjţp- doe*eiiwhat,oan b* yoUiir<,»Bone fi>rlip|it0. faindiBtseteecyifl Which, levenuţheiinţdr- rtureiefinehdihijj mtfkob ţjcrrpdeli wd tboaremlleJlibw iatby life intUnger 1Т,,з lliulw «J ч ^ 1,0 )т'6 a ■/ > I t / «So 010» li
*1^у tHM ряваЬп' Whidh »Ме oogjiťt« etefttlfléred tooecàpiyítíe^laoeof every· oHiertnkWghtí' thoUgh'hèrj*jtés o«ly twí vffléďfté 'feelWgiiMrf №UlM!i *Wor ñutí three months no aécide*iť intervin- eatrViisturb'tteirtAnqumtty.îoT'Arok Ш ¡пстЙМпррамюп-вГ Ever whlet» ww Îlî b cdflflnal -<«thin tWŕ 'limiti'Of «ieııtb ship, and gave her father many a pang foťťrtó'^etllthesS^fWŕcbil*?"..? ,tt i; ; !, fc.'-rffc-tli, ..-.i.ţţll-idljift ,,;,rt .,rll«J '/lj-v. Wb ' 'Oníí^iirŕňtíf iíhíerfShíctóMlWíàoiAi Ш-Шз&аЪШ/рЩЪа! ιΟ«ΐ"«νβμι* single ЙЙгж^сиеаоЙГ ä(№ďtíte*Wt№ tferŕof '^IVrbaató/iánd-heA^htmríd^to típ^k^A'ýtóigiW^'mblÄk intetedi ártóWWrn^ÍówíèrlMbiteaftaíUMewhtoh ifitìifrnéaf* withottť v-KÜeteioM -''40 Щт
-«'Sitia* lilt^iHiAihfioKJsitPKftf^ffph, against my v^.to,»pplyt«btär«,pofliinQnj report а»0»1Й()Л»й^4 >Ш «4((áWffi>4?fe h» bien denied byi those wl»b!p#ttţh«mt, »Й*в fötoietianft κηφ,ω« )ц^,,1)еяощсг, njiMteliftiWfceíp.my.itWfítbspeMrf} ÍWÇn Ой»|Яге»е,рНве4*(#я4 .w^nitjşe^c^on, the. t«n)e J,ai» gojjBg/iţtfUronoflB^^aflţ, obliged ibaftt» íi*b4 ^^W4t 4 »ftH¿4fR njeLä ь V»»#m > iiitíf »|ч»[. «#i, ¿ (,ηβ «urti f If,!' 8ш4.Ж1|еч*^,Л»о»К«чад¥чг,е, me to be connected with the business of Mr. Bansedi, Д,даца)(Ц»)1щ^,}^1Чгда8- takaŕ »hotìgb 1.оа»дачеЛ,1р ,bi)i(i щ. raattet^W, Will «»tfáfi^l^W«^^,), n» «rtßt spftugb/wwd 1^№1Уй«ф >,«д jfpu, elft«^qlWgdiHsiBÎJse]f./»»a^ai,|lbjBjŞ, might reject,ss,imjier^ent r /Цу,^^, Mtìil ( bePyed,in ^^ce, фрзщ Щ^ ртЩц I waa ljw^naştne^ uføhjføtøjig hef*ould ltot with discretion, made no ■ ! scrutiny
«jrutje^iBt* . faUııteadeet^ıiıorrıcsMated «gnljKcttotrıOfı the<4noHBe,ı believing' -M «tabüriifld In^tlıe Autdsi a îbm.Aisdö- iuaion'I .wa«ı«roue»sd by-hisra»eth r «nd the demanda of creditors, whoeeicl»inM-I wtiífieď till, nearly inylastliguineaibad been «thmisted. ' Om the strength ofimy establwhtnbnt« 'I had таги«* a ijwwng Itdy» little; itsed to distreia, .bubioť t wree»nei8<if -disposition wbiob &rbe«H upbraiding, and converts complaints into eemüwt and «oueoUtionl--tbe «nore dis- treming to mei a* it makes my situation I o»m»ot indeed-say hew mieereblef Af- toMnachtroublcvI-bavareceiv*! wot ferof-etabliebmeirt abroad, ι wltich,.wUl be lucrative;-bu« for-whWvIflBiuet pay ddwm*lp(c№ium>ll ami unable ι *o»«ai&e, and hmtronly tooffer theetcnrityiof iruy bondam ' ıh i" li ' '*> ' ·»»*<( m чая* тЫР «»И «Iheod^jertňwnto Deeömeof.y*utıwiftS'Ordoe«ehergotvfith yöu?" ■ w '- •"T.herey'.eeiaihlV'<i9 «netheŕ«itó'the c<»w* chief
erfňrf esine c^ffl^triluHét«h«0ájmio1^ to India undera hundred p<xffldt»»«hti«- dred pound* are^toïne afbétun*. '"To l»ve'he»'btliind; Wrings чпеЧо ths'sool, land ι will surely break the heurtoť niy •effimng'Wife/wbo'insist» on sharing my /ortim»í:»ndidivlíing with me'the toils inioet'itiate' Tlil*· ¿rief whiohiyou »ее 'So¡unhian me, isnoťfor whatdias, oi bm ihapperi tb «yself, but I'Sliudderttt**- flecfitm ^emisetisrl'haví bwknghtrtai « Womin, Whom I'prii» топ* thatl <my OXilttnO«.'· í I 1Г Μ »ΙΠ 01 1.-Ч '" ' 'f H^'I'be«*ei!byoi»,'thyideari»ir I" tn*å Théodore, rising tipjand ¡turning Way hitli-Sioétt "'It is-rJinigMOUS'tD герм- 4*»t!y<mrtWlfe«* Ί»» oobers so glowing. Wait till Ii«peakito >BMist«№i daughter, Who may perhaps Muent*" hi* father in your favour, though you muit ac- knOWle«dge 'td"lènd'imon»y vvithout ee- 'tmri^i* ! lrot>oiknmWwl*J^ww Cbrii- tisn. - u' \ 'f»«iljiait»ect)«e,5i sSidıTlıeodorejiKİn ся- loııl.; tering
tering the room Where Ève sat, " to ask a favour of my sister." * * Дпа what," said Ev»a blushing, " can my brother ask, which ï wilt hot willing¬ ly grant?" " I am then," returned he, " to peti¬ tion m favour of two persons brought to distress, hnd who feel for each other that soft? sentiment of union, whicb doubles to each their suffenngs, because the other partakes. In short, it is a young man who must be torn from his beloved wife —from her who should give value to his days, and smile upon his exertions with joy. He must drag out bis life in climes impregnate with pestilence, and he de¬ barred every intercourse of love,, unless you can saVe hitii, and také his simple word for reimbursement." The cheeks ofJEve glpwfd witlţ a tint pure as (he rose of Carmel, ber eyes dart¬ ed'a glancé of undisguised meaning at Theodore.and with inexpressible softness she answered—'' Is it possible, Theodore, you
¡Ψ í·»' I,; «in lei ϊίίΓ»/*.[ lì Ah! I see you^musbhaye tovgd. I will part. with my. w^oh and my,j.ewels, to free those for whom you jilead,, from dls- Í ■
you can so well.palnt the passion of love in Others' and not háv ( e. i&t iţ^qupelf?.
ι you plead r frpir tress." , ,. ' .
Thëoçlpre was coi)fused ; aţ a speech. sţj·^ unexpeetedly kind and almost unequi- vocfjl. He had been touched,,by the, story of the young man, he fattile blood mount into his ohééks ; but Şft 1 ??, Ijèflec- tioiis crowding to his mind, he.sighed, a^ 'he: usually did, »when» he, Telt what he coiild not express; and tbunking live for her goţidness, proposed tiiat β\ψ. should mention it at dinner to her fathei-, and he' would destre thè yourig man to call again in'theevening. » . . ' ,/ , ' ''And why' this form?" said Eve; '' sure. ly youi may command а;8цт » ţp ten time¿ the amount! and I will bie ýóur so.. ΟηΓ%|ΐ;^'' Γ ..Λ!' : '!:Λ: . ) ',ľi: ; ■■ ' .' v ' ';"■""· ■ ' ""■ ' ■ "«And
з ffiìAnétém time» 1 thank you," return¬ ed,he, f' for iso high an opinimi in my fa¬ vour;! but, too lovely girl,..beware that gratitude does not kladi «yon into error. I (Was destitute ι when your father took me in, I was proscribed the haunts of mankind when he received me, and did yau know me, perhaps you would shud¬ der iati imy presence) or fly from me as я plague." , After a confession like this, wllicheir- cumstanoes had wretted from bim, he hastened away, leaving Eve more bewil¬ dered andiiobnfueed than she had ever yet bien» For.YMhat could render Mm Obnoxious to society, but the commital of some erime? and that crime muat be! high in the scale of guilt,, which should lead him to suppose that friends who valued him so greatly wouldithen detest and shun bim ¡limvain she strove to ¡bring some «rime bafore «Iter view, 'that should raise in her mind tbis idea of horK)r;i«bu* !>'i> whether
whether it was, that to ThtMdoroj ¡Whose actions appeared ineapableof' girile, abe could not impute any 'thing bad, ¡she could «affix to hint no one aetioh «mount. ing to such a supposition« She was strongly tempted to -endeavour to draw his -secret from him. She repented »not having followed the opening he· had gi¬ ven her, whieh was the first time lie had ever said so much, and she therefore hoped he might again be draw« into the same subject, ι u » t J » I'Whilst these reflection» agitated'her mind, .ShecHem'returned';'but I'know not how it is,' that in aflfeirs ot' the heart, Children, who make no secret of nny thing besides, conceal with sedulous anx¬ iety every relation to matters of love; so itetøns witbEve, wbo, whilst she trea¬ sured up sorrow to herself, endeavoured to «.OTMal.itiftomdær father, and of the oeonvereaitinn ofthe mcmirtg, related only what towwèrned rthcilatranger. > ' When « I· Theo-
i;iii»dore »appeared at- dinner, Shechem inquired, with .»¡βικίΐβ,. wliat was the name of l»be,y.oiith, whose situation he had w pathetically described to Eve. " It was Collier." " Colher 1 " repeated the Jew, " he is a .wine merchant, and, as he says, has mar- ned «ai young woman, who is truly the ornament of her sex. This is well, for imthis world so many impostors assume the form »of the good, tbat caution is re¬ quired in listening to tales of distress. He is an excellent young man, and when he "married, the world thought that he might. btwe-done, better, es the yourig woman was withct fortune, her father liaving shot lumself in * fit pf despair." . , ι The cheeks of Theodore became pale, his knife fell from his hand, and with difficultly he reached, and tremblingly he drank pert.»9f,nigtass of water; for at ißbecbem.'i tabi« ι the unadulterated ι ею- ι ι ment
ïhent íiipeMeded fermented "liquor. Eve tremblingly inquired what hadi'rø suddenly affected him, whilst Shechem loaned 'back iri his chair, silently woiii- dei mg " I am perfectly well now,'' replied Theodore; " it was only n start of my an¬ cient disorder." ' ' ' " I am glad of it," returned Sheohemr, " let us now consider how Collier can receive our assistance. I have a quan¬ tity of Lisbon goods, which 1 know lie understands; under my eye he might be Again established in business; and that iie may not consider himself my servant, hut may retain his self-importance, which is the spirit of industry, I will propose becoming his partner, and he, for the de¬ fection 'of stock, shall give the whole of his attention." ' s '■'.Ädtó'rablé." cried''Fliewdo№;<"fhe Willfiot'thfetf Hè pür««*, frdm iJieiwilfeţ hc wiWrtiitöft"!«",* countryi-wherei »fter ,» >m every
eyevydtawbmkj ι» hırgür partion of good esìsta 'than is to be found itt any othéi beneath' the ohole df tbe heavens. ' Hé will be blessed, and l òh' : how'blessed in the endearments of a wiffewho loves him, beyond which this earth califiot p'rbdiice a «superior felicity !" < ι « Thou tpeakesfiéaid SHechétti, tht tears'trickling from his eyes, '"as'tine vVeWyihad experienoed, but lotit thè goŕnl in question. I myself ouce was happy with a woman whom I loved—she was the counterpart ef Eve in persoli imd iinnrtors." ' ' " ' "iThee," Kpa«dTheodore,''*youmt«it bavtevbeen happy. I have never VentUM ed to inquire how ytm were deprived-of ber«jibecaiiae I too wét know thd'ber· berity ofDtotWküieg o» grieft bf thtf i№> tute,**(vt . » " 'm« ' ,, 1 e eli«, I İ ,'J TheéyevofBve-head b(^ÜtliMd<WHh r sweet».** »tb· fbijéof TWíí.aert.W-ftb cotoplhnent he bed made her, but they were
-were turned away in sorrow ab tbe deep dejection she observed wliilst heispoke. To his question, Shechem answered*·«' " That his wile had been assassinated, by« a banditti, carried from bis house, and lost to bim for ever." He had not time to say more, ere Theodore had dosed his eyes; his features expressed a feeling not to be. described ; he seemed to tremble through his frame; and struggle with some violent emotion. Iu less than a minute he arose to quit the room without speaking, when She¬ chem caught bim by the arm—" Tell me," oried he, " oh, Theodore, whence -*—«-" The interdiction of Theodore in¬ stantly,crossed him·—he stopped, nob dar¬ ing tp continue the inWmegation-, for« though this mystery was dreadfully pain- fui, he could not hazard the loss of one, who.in «very tlung eh» was so auitedjae a«>mpiinion to Ш »git «nd,a·diameter /n(t t ,1 « , l„ ' il il И.гЛигеЛу IU it
«гЙу found. Theodore-broke from him with' cottitnariding resolution, and hur¬ ried to indulge in private the excess of Ms>feelings, leaving Ëve and her father «Mbjeet'to'Variety of painful conjecture. ' i«" I have' observed," said Shechem, «ittíat-tliere are pointe which touch our ffïend'to the soul, whicli act upon bim i*ith the velocity of electric fire, pro- iducwtg «motions tbat can only arise from Jextíésslve calamity, or secret guilt. I 'have marked that the mention of vio- leilae'striktehim with horror, and thou hast seen how he has been moved this days-^first, by the mention of suicide, and lastly) and mostly, by murder." .i" 4 'Olj,«liorrid !" cried Eve, clasping her hands together; " What is it you suspect? YVhiifrdresdtviHdea do you lead me to? Can Theodore possibly be guilty of the blood of man? he, whose every «word, look, and action are kindness, generosi- 'tyj' and benevolente ! Yet tbis -venyiday M vt 1 1 ' he 'el 1 I I
hetoldme,if I knew him, Iíu^abjíd- der at his presem», aud fly. frum Ушлъ • plague. Oh.dreadful refleDtionl"; ,.-, .«I would;' ^i I | t í ! (íibwhemi, < 'be'íSi« fram attributing «r suspecting guilt, Ш truly I canoot ftjrm to mysetfany other answer to hia oftentimes strange beha¬ viour; and tbe only way I can admit h is innocence, is by supposing a «dérange¬ ment of mind from grief, during which the idea of some horrid crime hath »o impressed itself on his sense, that when any leading point is touched, he »tarts as if actually guilty." « " You have greatly eased me," return¬ ed Eve j " indeed you know not hew much I was affected at the supposition, that he could be .capable of a crime so repugnant to nature; andin future let us beware how we trifle with feeling» not yet properly subdued." Sheehem smiled att the sophistry with which his daughter was willing to be sa- voL. i. g tisfied,
tisfied, whilst in his own mind be was more .tlian ever confirmed, from leading evidence, that Theodore was somehow connected with this highest of crimes. Theitime»that he had rescued his daugh¬ ter, he had been concealed in the wood. When examined for forgery, he had ob¬ stinately refused his name, at the hazard of imprisonment. At the time of his first acquaintance, he was wandering the sticets at the hour of midnight ; and add to this his desire of concealment, and in¬ voluntary emotions, when the discourse tended that way, and every collateral evidence was clear. Yet so many vir¬ tues shone in his actions, so high a sense of j ustice dictated his words, that if guil¬ ty, it must be unintentionally so, and therefore morally innocent. Thus, by another sophism, he reconciled to him¬ self retaining in his house a man hé sus¬ pected of murder. , His chief concern was for Eve, whom lie
he saw, notwithstanding Theodore s sup¬ posed engagements, and the restrictions of religion, still encourage sentiments which sapped the foundation of her hap piness, and which no expedient offti ed to remove, but by parting with its oh ject, or suffenng then marriage spite ot religion and Ian Though a Jew, skilled in the learning of the Talmud and Mosaic law, he was without those prejudices that attend on superstition He saw clearly, that when tliose precepts were first instituted, they w ere designed as a prevention ot toni mumcation between the Israelite and Heathen, lest by the influence and intei change of the softei sex, they myht be lead into the practice of idohtiy \et now taking up the argument m a reh gious way, the danger existed no longei both Jew and Christian agreeing m tlit chief article of worship, though divided about what the understanding of neithei и 3 can
can comprehend. In a dvil light, man was created for the society of man. The distinction of kingdom and people was childish, and fit only to insult the un¬ derstanding. But whilst he indulged himself in these speculations, he avoided hinting to Eve, that there was a possi¬ bility she should ever become the wife of Theodore, that the unattainability of theobject might blunt or destroy the ar¬ dour of hope; for however he might have wished for such a character (so fai¬ as observation could judge) as his son-in- law, under the present circumstances he could not have allowed it, had even the affections of Theodore been placed upon her, which he believed was far from the case, as the observation he had,made when he entered his chamber abruptly, and the words, "Oh, E)iza!" which his daughter had heard, led him to conclude some prior engagement retained him.
CHAP-
CHAPTER VI.
" Again üt« life's »wide occnn tost, The ipRces ol his flit«, «vere bst " Theodoue, awhile overcome by the shock he had received, gave way to a burst of grief that amounted nearly to distraction ; for though passions may, by the efforts of reason, be borne down, and perhaps finally overcome, yet when acci¬ dent lets them loose, consideration and reflection fly before them. As calmness began to succeed, he once more determined* no longer to remain where, though his presence gave plea¬ sure, it was alloyed by pain, Yet to go 6 3 without
without explaining his conduct, he fear¬ ed would brand him with ingratitude, and he trembled to reveal the secret which destroyed every approach to peace, and which, when unemployed, was the subject of every thought Thus he lin¬ gered in determination till his desire to depart became weak, and the barren pros¬ pect of again being cast on the world, where he might wander through life without finding another Bensadi, deter¬ mined his stay ; though had he known the dark suspicions of his benefactor, no argument could have held him. The approaching hour, when Mr. Col¬ lier was to return, awakened him to the business of life ; and concealing the re¬ mains of perturbation on his counte¬ nance, he descended to the receiving- room. Exactly at the hour appointed the young man knocked at the door, and en¬ tered
tered with timidity.—" I am almost," said he,„" fearful of asking my doom, convinced that my expectations were romantic, and not within the limits ot' custom." Theodore stated to him the proposai of Bensadi, softening the obligation by saying, that his master rejoiced at an opportunity, which he hod feared would not have presented, of entering into a line so lucrative. ι ш " I am overwhelmed," cried the.young man ; " I am indeed unable to thank you. ι 'Conceive my feelings at this ıno- >ment, when enabled to remain in the society of a virtuous woman, with pro¬ spects of providing for any children we may have. Think, sir, with youiself, what I have suffered—tormentediiwith the horrid prospect of bringing into life beings to be doomed to misery and all «th* wants »bf poverty * »But, forgi«. ie me, 'f " в i I can
I can scarcely believe my senses; for that a Jew should act' the part of so much philanthropy confounds me with wonder." Shechem being apprized of Collier's presence, hastened to settle thé prelimi¬ naries of the engagement, and whilst he bestowed a favour of so much import- tance, launched out into the benefits he expected to receive himself. Thus will true benevolence, when obliged to ap¬ pear, soften to the receiver the humili¬ ation of acknowledgment. Theodore frequently attended the storehouse in Rosemary-lane, being now more bold in venturing through the streets ; and bad, on emergency, carried letters to the office on foreign post nights. It was one Tuesday night that he was returning, at near twelve o'eiock, when a cry of ltmrder, in a by-lane, alarmed Шш, 'arid he instantly-hastened to
to the spot, where, be perceived aman struggling with a woman, who.,called aloud for help.—" Stand off!" cried he, to Theodore; " sbe is my wife. I have caught her this night with a gallant at a tavern, and will do myself justice I" " Listen," said Theodore, to a man who had lost the power of attending; " if, such be the conduct of your wife, let her,go; surely her crime is no au¬ thority to you to execute vengeance." " D— ι — n her !" cried he, " she has robbed me to give to ber paramour ; she has defiled my bed ; she has ruined me ; and shall die; by Heaven, she shall die!" Theodpre attempted to stay his arm, which was lifted up with a knife in bis band, at the same time calling for as¬ sistance; but the husband, strength¬ ened, by rage, and «injured hpiiour, plunged the fctal wqapon into her hfldy, and, in repeating the stroke, stabbed G 5 Theodore
Theodore (who had thrust bimself be¬ tween them) in the shoulder. A number of «tragglers came running forward at the same time, and with dif¬ ficulty secured the assassin, carrying the wounded woman to an hospital, and Theodore to Bensadi's, for the wound was made in a dangerous direction, and he found himself sicken and turn faint. The good Jew was alarmed at the ap¬ pearance of so many strangers before his door at that hour; but recollecting that he had neither to fear impalement tol¬ tile glory of Mahomet, nor a gentle roasting for the glory of Christianity, he ventured to inquire in person, and felt no little concern at the information. Theodore was conveyed to bed, and a surgeon, who lived at no great distance, sent for to dress the wound ; but whe¬ ther «bwing to its influence; or the per- ' ι turbation
turbation edited in bis mmdi.by.iţlie action of murder, js ипю^ии,,,, hut perhaps both combined to make him lightrheaded before the arrival qf the surgeon, ,, , „ι That gentleman, examined ţbe Wflujid, which he pronounced curable,, må be¬ ing a man of humanity, and casting his eye round on the barrenness of the chamber, inquired if the youth had friepd· who would he aq?weral,)le for the «barges, for, if not, he would un¬ dertake the task for nothing. The eye of Shechem beamed a glance of pleasure, but his attention was, too much, fixed oq Theodore to reply,, and the surgeon, who |ш} combinedi w,ţth the name of Jew every concomitant of narsimqnious ınean,ness,«aşi|y ¡*cqoj¡inted for^eexprps^^oi.^tisfiiiction.,, , I '«III > I V ^llj (VJ-ib 1,1 11 ! Ilin i и Ini^PP^iiäff-w^J-WflinS # e ιοί ti .fji о 6 wound,
wound, =*h* »minhitilre picture boft*e mcntioBéd им« «disoovsrtid, the «are bf whicb'Shechem took upon himself; and tlioilghhiecuiW.ty was great to learn any thing relative to his young friend, hia present situation required the whole of his attention, «and ithe portrait was carefully aerated in hiSpook«-boek. eBetiekah was left to take care of' The- odote,· whilst Shechem, having dismissed hia'visitors, 'hastened to infirm his daughter of what had happened, to pre¬ vent the ill consequences which sudden information might produce; but Eve had aheady béén alarmed; So unusual a disturbance, had destroy «ed «very sweet imagé that smiled on her «lumbfefs, and she awoke, confused and affHghtüd, With the idea of she knew not what She called Rebekah,* but» Rebekah was Wo far distant to hear, and sev«Ml fcøttUs were to be passed t beeide the noue soon céastd to bé loud, though now>*md then she
shéfttiicied «be Oould distinguish a grötftı of distre«. Every moment A* *as ready to brave tèe danger,' and fly 'tö be satisfied ; but every moment shé'he- sitated, expecting her fathér о* Rebekah would come. Trembling, and in the confuslenso natural on suddenly wak¬ ing fiom sleep, she had attempted to dress ; but darkness atid fear took from her the-power ; and at length, having gained the door as she was, she bent for¬ ward to «catch sortie Bound, when she distinguished—" He will do well; the Wound is not So dangerous as might have been expected." Hér father's re¬ ply left her no rooirt to doubt 'who it was that was wounded, and she sunk back on her bed, 1 repeating fiiiiitly— "'Ah! heie killed' he is killed'" Ш thiMutttion 'Shechem beheld the beloved «daughter 'of Ш soul - he cast hlnjeelf lipon the bed, ancl· ferra moment tttMjpid iifunWltfltóg «miplaînt. 'His
'ireioBiik rai(^ttbt«irM^ii4g v ,heeri ! gen]tJe .«4nrit*s H,wii*»l»ttte toi dept^ irecalled vit Ίοη fit».journey, and with a sigh of-r- Λ €**,. βψ. euthecl. «h( .ŢlModoje»!", .she «pened her eyes. ..- r > и ш.1е,< 'ati thank thee,,.oh Heaven, î'. çtied the parent ; " my daughter still liv«ss. Eve I.my beloved Eve (.recall jjhy, senses, «nd be composed!" , , , . «,«'f Is he.not,then dead?" tnHrjnţjjjsd »she*, ill Do уда not deceive ще ? W>4 «he live ¡to be niine?? ,., ,,·,' ., " What askwt thod ii" said Shecbppi, not knowing .whether to impute, tips question to jeiMon,or.delirium; ," is.this youth |then w neeessajy to tbyexistsnc«?" e iAbt!",replieÄ,Eve( hiding hçr f^e with her »hands,," is it then лесвщ^у for me ι to confess my weakness ?, Q^- not you read in« my actions the .senti¬ ments of,my miad ?, B4t,J^l¡t í eniia.e»' < líat accident hl»ib»iipened«ni)iiii«« tn a ¡u " TheottoíWABní^srejiSbtp^iftiPfsp- ling h«r;ih»nd.>l^WeşenWSevi"hiţ*Jb»ei' slightly
slightly wounded by a'man who »was quarrelling with his wif·, bat will· soon recover. It is late, or I would ipeakto thee on a subject of even more moment, for truly I fear tbe wound in tby bo¬ som will be ftr more difficult to cure." ι , Eve held down her headt perhaps ashamed of having said so much; ι «nd Shechem, rejoicing that she 'had reco¬ vered her reason, bade her good night, returning to see how Theodore rested. Thè slight delirium which had at first attacked the disordered mind ofthe suf¬ ferer, had indeed subsided, but a fever began to burn in his veins, and parched his mouth with thirst. Rebekah at¬ tended with care to his wants, and was reluctantly persuaded to relinquish her office to the benignant Jew, wbo «per¬ sisted ih attending him through' the night, counting till morning the hours by his sighs, and by ìeflection that num¬ bered up the evils he had «tifffered, «tad " 'i" the
the distre» gathering, te «overwhelm him «in this Btta-thmént ofhi» daughter, )( · ». - 11 Ull,, u ( , I A disturbed kind of , «leep bad dosed the senses of Theodore; and Shechem, foť'the first time, remembered the por¬ trait, which now he took from his pocket- book to examine, with some «distant hope 'that it might lead to a discovery of mo¬ ment« It was elegantly set in gold. But hit attention was much moreengngedby ftature», that,' taken altagettter, ¡мете lovely, though each detached,, «auld.not tave, » claimed superiority. There ap¬ peared a mildness bf expression that,even in « picture, engaged tiie heart, aad tbe taut ensemble exhibited л mind at peace with itself, and».mankind. Unruffled, by pasiion, .unsubdued hy misfortune, ι The features were light,' tată their exact pro- «poriion nodordediwiţh tlwi harmonyi that dwtìtbent«^-ilieiTa,, Bflhkıd wa^^tti- ,»4jrmi«xtiir» «pf «hair, «fthäiiin gold„latt«rs Äe .angle name of Eliaa, whidi:«oould convey
convey no inteihgence; and all that con¬ jecture could fancy, arose from the va¬ lue ofthe trinket, whieh conld not httve been the purchase of one in even mid¬ dling circumstances. It Was plain, «however, that thit Eliaa was dear to Theodore, and that Eve could have little return of afiection to hope. He taw that thus every concession to friendship only tended to grief, and that necessity demanded the sacrifice of ba¬ nishment, which wealth might make éásy on the part of Theodore, antl time on that of his daughter. Pursuing this idea, and once supposing they must part, 'he determined to brave the interdiction, trad wrest at one: «secret which oxcited ithe extreme of curiosity, apprehension, and wonder. > -The morning dawned upon those re- flttetiohsjlwaroeeíTom the ted, add cast¬ ing his eye upon the tops of the shipping ' ' and
ahdthedistimt 1 hiili«, admiring the pro- ftiúnd" silence which reigned on'aspot, where bustle fend the sons of commerce were ¡shortly to act; wh«si his attention wás drawn towards» light-step which passed along the passage, and to a whis- ■per Which called the name of Rebekah. He opened the door, and a deep blush Dovered« the pale cheeks of Eve, whilst die falteringly asked if Theodore was better, saying, she thought Rebekah had been there, and inquired if her father would not retire, lest his own health might be endangered. "Ahí Eve, Eve'" said Shechem, in a mournful tone, "'thine eyes tell'me tbey have 'been strangers to sleep ; and thy feet have betrayed thee to where »thy thoughts have been wandering. 'It is a dangerous indulgence-, but I» will give l tby heant theiiigh gMtißcation rf Watoh- -iagiethe eduin bets «f id present' 'ihme te. There
There is always a time to be miserable, though few are the moments allotted to happiness." So saying, he passed her; and Eve, trembling, yet pleased, sat down on the trunk near the bed, fixing her eyes on the face of Theodore, who now and then moaned in his sleep, without uttering a sentence of distinction. The fond tender girl wept at the un¬ known troubles he suffered under; and naturally remembering the time when she first had seen him, when she sunk insensible into his arms—-" Oh,'' said she, " that I could then have impressed him with tliose sentiments his present insen¬ sibility inspires in me! But, Elifa! too lovely, too happy Eliza !" « "Who?—where?" said Theodore, start¬ ing from his sleep—" who tells me of Eliza?" Eve was too confused to an¬ swer; she had been betrayed inadver¬ tently to express her thoughts aloud, and dreading that he might'.have heard a con-
confession, which for worlds ihe would not'Willingly have made, she turned has¬ tily refund to the window. " I have been dreaming," said Theo¬ dore, recovering himself; " but how shall I thank you for this kindness? I am bom to be troublesome '" " It is Uo trouble to me," replied she, " waiting on the friend of my father ; he is just' gone, after remaining with you most part of tbe night. Do you find yourself any better ?" " I ktiow not," he returned ; " I feel a confusion in my head—I am parched with thirst ; but the wound is very little p-rinful." '' I hope," »id Eve, " quietness will do much for your recovery—ltt us not talk" Theodore would have obeyed this gentle injunction, m he found himself unable to support a conversation; but putting bis hmd upon his bosom, he missed
missed the picture of Eliza, and inquiied eagerly if Eve had found it. Sbe bad not. " I am then undone!" cried he ; " I have lost the only remains of my Elba 1 I have lost the image of the most excellent of women ; and now let me die !" " Not so," said Eve, with emotion. " Ifyou have lost oqe, is there no other who can compere with her? Is there no other of equal tenderness or charms for you ? at least there may be those who can love you as well." " I fear," replied Theodore, " I trouble you with my sorrows; your heart attri¬ butes too much to gratitude. Think then of me, my fair sister, as one so pro¬ scribed from returns of affection, that to repose in you my confidence would« be to excite your eternal hatred." "Impossible ¡"said the trembling maid. " There is, not a crime I can suppose you guilty
guilty 'óf which amounts to any thing like it ; ai.d let me say farther, I am well assured your fancy must exaggerate, and thaf whatever preys on your spiiits, un¬ dermines your health by being confined to yourself ; endeavour then to live for UB.'*' '-■ »Silence ensuetl—Theodore brooding over wllat hung upon his mind, and on the words he had heard from Eve. He knew· that circumstances formed a bar¬ rier insurmountable to their union, had he wished it himself; but what he felt fbr Eve surpassed not the limitsofa ten¬ der affection—friendship softened by the difference of sex ; and though he might in other situations have yielded to the passion she evidently had for him with¬ out reluctant«, nay with pleasure (for he did not believe, like some of our law¬ making ancestors, that a man marrying л Jewess merited burning alive), it was now
now a matter of,grie£whİQİjı flight ealpne could end. . i n ί,ι To strengthen this resolution, he enu¬ merated the consequences of his night's adventure. In case the woman ■ should die, he must appear as evidence against the murderer—he shuddered at such a si¬ tuation ; for the man had been injured in a way which must rouse up every spark of resentment, must kindle rage and revenge unquenchable in tlie bosom of a feeling man ; but above this, there was something in his mind wliich acqui¬ esced in the action, though justly cen¬ surable, and such as ought to be left to the punishment of public justice. Yet here public justice was incompetent; what could repair the injury suffered? on the contrary, shame would affix itself on the sufferer, and add the stigma of ridicule,tq the feelings oi' insufferable anguish,
Thus
' "PMs two powerful argument« «rged Theodore to determine on flight from the asylum of · friendship, added impa¬ tience 'to Ш confinement, and trouble alt the necessity there was of appearing imgi-nteföl towards Bensadi, and unfeel¬ ing towards the tender girl, who was Hbiirlj Htìtì'iitgib obligations already bnr- dénsorné Ί > I ' Thesèlrefléctiöns retarded his cure to 'rønsideHWé· length, the care of the sur- *>eon having happily overcome, in its comme*eert,erit, the fever which threat¬ ened td be' 'of dangerous consequenoe Eve was сопШМ in her attendance; the dismal chamber'appeared 'preferable to her own ; th^it* smoky walls ahd stat¬ ed window* «hefted nd disgust.-iri a young lady er-ttineteen. 'So tme «if is, that with the object of affection, tbe ex- 'teVnal (htAgS'of this Uffe beoome eoly se- -condm-y CólMíJerlitione. > > ' .· tjí%.¡ îheb-
Theodore learnt the death of tbe; wo¬ man. The husband was imprisoned, and he was subpoenaed as principal wit¬ ness, the trial standing over till hi'» re¬ covery. Sliechem perceived the deep impression this affair had made upon him ; and at his request made every pos¬ sible inquiry into the cliaracter and ha¬ bits of life usual to the prisoner.»·-" For with me," said he, " that will have con¬ siderable influence, though perhaps of little weight in a court of judicature in a case of this nature, as the act of lying in wait will be construed into premedi¬ tated malice; for though the law allows time to intervene, in which the spirits ■nay be supposed to reason after an out¬ rage, to constitute murder, yet who shall say that reason oan act on a mind mised to torture and madness?'' The result of those inquiries stated, that the prisoner was a tradesman wlio had married the daughter of a small vol«, i. H co.
country ,gentlemap,oiierely fôrthecbawns of heţ person, her, mind possessing up other quality than a desire after splendor, dreist, jţnd expence, Щ »calculated to the income of business. That she was petu¬ lant, and not to be, wrought qn hy en¬ dearments, Thţt be had, whilst ару in¬ fection for her person rewained.gratified her,to the exteni o f htr demands; but When prudence restrained a repetitions supply, the lady Contrived underneath to support her espences; and whilst the husband served behind the counter, the lady was ¡sporting on parties of pleasure, with ladies of an equal pretensiflij, ejid gentlemen whose law is honour »ţ t\e point ofa sword, and wliose kigicis the argumentum ad hominem. These were, however in Jscatlet, and therefore men of true courage; they would likewise blow you the brains out of half a dozen ras¬ cally husbands» who (toed to, itjtţrrtjpt their sport; sud courage, is ont grmi path tò,the> femaljj h-şarţ, w^c^^sejdpjjiii , , distin¬ se: -~ *; ι
THEODOEE CYPHON.
distinguishes the man who struts and looks big in company beneath him, front the modest man who avoids dispute, who rather takes an affront than disturb the peace of society ; but who, in moments of real danger, rises above fear, who when called on to act in the cause of his coun¬ try, brsves ever)' form of destruction, and should he fall, sighs blessings on the land of his birth With one of the first of these honour- abk gentlemen, whose sole dependance was a commission, the giddy wife ofthe prisoner had become acquainted, and the usual consequences of such acquaintance followed, till repetition ofinjury and ne¬ glect rankling in the bosom of the in¬ jured husband, wbo found himself em¬ barrassed by a multitude of debts he was ignorant «elf till the' demand fpr payment, changed ih Ihim every sentiment of love to inveterate hatred. All the proxpects of domestic 'comfort' Ее had formed were и ä destroyed,
destroyed, and in the moment of an¬ guish hc had laid in wait to satiate re¬ venge. " Can I then," cried Theodore, when he heard this detail. " can I heap coals of fire upon his head? I may condemn, I may pity—but I cannot prosecute. Tell me, oh, Shechem, what are your senti¬ ments! Conici шап bear the injuries he had suffered?—what could atone?— what, oh, my soul! I can think, but I cannot express myself." " Son of my afflictions!" cried Shechem, " I waited without giving my opinion, until thy mind should have settled its mode of action, for I could not influence thy judgment of justice, when the life of man was at stake. The customs of this country allow punishment of death to him who robs thee of worldly goods to a very trivial amount, whilst he who robs thee of thy wife's affections, who steals away the essence of thy existence, and
and verily a part of thyself (for thy church declareth the unity of man and wife), this man escapes with a trivial fine, which if rich is a matter of little consideration, and the stigma of ridicule is affixed to thy name. To speak of natural justice would be nonsense, it is society which fixes every standard of the penal code; but in this case thou seest the very ab¬ surd difference, and that thy repose and happiness are not equal to a few pence." Art thou a Jew ? Theodore was ready to ask ; but he had prior to this heard the eccentricity of his opinions, and eyed him with that look of inquiry whicli im¬ plies, dare I repose in thee the confi¬ dence thou appearest to deserve ? A ray of cheerfulness spread over his face, where 4 smile was seldom permitted to remit that habitual contraction of brow we have before noticed, and for the first time since his residence with Shechem, he appeared at, repose witli himself. This was not H 3 the
thé' iboivfent When a ma« like Bensadi would 1 call up disagreeable images, and he postpbhed fbr the present the inter¬ rogation he had intended. In the evening of this day, Theodore found himself so much better, and his spirits so high, that he Ventured to the sitting-room, where the powers of music We're exerted to charm him, imd the chords of harmony revibratod those sounds of love which the tongue of their Mistress could Hot express.—"I'Will fly!" áaií Theodore to Himself, Whilst the stiains Öf softness touched his soul. " This is dangerous, and must be resist¬ ed'" Ife had indeed determined this be¬ fore; but (vho'has not experienced the Irrigering· desivé, óf yet a little and a little more indulgence, and at last been arous¬ ed from lethargy to action by some trifle ofinsignificaltlce? The nexit day, and for several succeed¬ ing,
ing, he confined himself, wljully, tçı «hi« chamber, being bufied in a task.be had imposed, of placing in Bensadi .and, his daughter the confidence they sp well de¬ served, but which for various reasons he found it impossible to utter. The sessions at the Old Bailey vvere at hand ; the friends of the deceased had been to entreat his appearance, and but little remained to inaction, when She¬ chem with a peculiar expression of fea¬ tures entered, and seated himself aţ a table Where Theodore had been »writing, and on which lay a packet sealed. " I would," said Shechem, " preface to thee what I must say »by declarations of friendship j. but thou knowest me, and every reserve on my part shall be banish¬ ed. Thou canst not but have observed the partiality of my daughter; thou know¬ est that on religion, tiiough some may tliuik «different, I should, not have op- H 4 posed
posed,'your union; but the mystery of thy behaviour, and above all, the affec¬ tion thou assuredly hast fbr the original of tbis picture, make it requisite that we understand each other." " Ah !" cried Theodore, grasping at the portrait, and pressing it to his lips ; " have I again recovered the resemblance of my wife! my Eliza!" t " Thy wife !" said Shechem, with equal amazement. " Art thou then married? Is Eliza thy wife ? Why dost thou thus acclude thyself, or is the lovely woman thou lamentest no longer living?" " Where have you led me ?" said Theo¬ dore; "I beseech, ask me no more—I cannot expose my situation even to you ; but I will'fly 'ind leave behind me those memorials ν iiich will perhaps call down on me your detestation, and effectually < curethe weakness ofyour daughter I Yet you are not one of the common herd of mankind, and can pity crimes that cry »«loud for vengeance. I am honoured in your
your good opinion ; to that 'opinion I have made confession of what tortur.* Would not have extorted, and which to ébhceál hath shut me from society." " Much," said Shechem, " as my de¬ sire of information relating to thy for¬ tune would tempt me to accept this packet, I will repress that desire, I Will remain for ever in ignorance, ifknöwledgc would be to thy injury ; but if I am to receive it, take this in' return ; tttld as I suspect, nay almost desire that thòu Wilt leave us, in whatsoever tountry, in What¬ soever clime thou wanderest or résidest, communicate with and call upon the friendship of Shechem Bensadi." " Formerly," said Theodore, taking the paper, " I refused ybur bounty be¬ cause it was as a reward for moral ser¬ vice; now I will Bot refuse it, because it is the donation of friendship, and will enable me to defy the chances of life. Permit me also to say a few words con- is 5' cèrning
cerning Ève, for whose tenderness I grieve, and for whose peace I would willingly perform any sacrifice on my¬ self. Absorbed as my whole soul is in the idea of Eliza, the charms of your daughter could not have entered the circle óf my affections, but under the in¬ sinuating form ofthe most refined fnend¬ ship. This I confess I had for her, as how indeed could any man be near her and not be enamoured of her sweetness of disposition and elegance of sense ? and, perhaps, had not my situation been for¬ lorn, had not my whole soul of love been absorbée!, not another woman lives, whom I should prefer to your daughter ; and I find ln «pite of reason, in spite of my re¬ solution, that in parting from you and from her, another subject of sorrow will be added to the many that already crowd upon me." " I am like an old woman now," said Shechem, putting his handkerchief to his eye;
eye; " in the morning we will say more —Good night." '< Good night," repeated Theodore, pressing bis hand ; " may the next morn¬ ing we «meet be pleajiant!" Sensadx rast upon him a look of inquiry, but he turned round dosing the door. " Now," ened Theodore to himself, " now must I fly from the habitation of virtue—«now must I leave the best of the descendants, oi Adam! Oh, Fate, thou art unkind!" On the morrow Shechem arose early, and recollecting the last words q{ Theo¬ dore, «descended into »the parlour, sus¬ pecting his intentions mightb» toppart without taking leave; but hia guest was »already ^one, without в bint pr å tnţce to .tell» where.. Hia «mind was» divided bet ween the singularity of the even!, «úd thenecessiti/ he was under of explaining to hia daughter what he feejrediwould greatlyiaffeot het. The p«v&et ^..pos¬ sessed »held out indeed ioine 'probability h 6 of
of cfirtainty—it would develop ia beha¬ viour which had eluded investigation, and he paused to consider its contents. Once heihad suspected murder—that reflection again returned, and he fancied that, from the discoursei of Theodore on the recent transaction, he could trace his behaviour to a similar crime. Perhaps then, be had murdered his wife—-lie shuddered at tbe suggestion, and hasten¬ ed to the sitting-room to wait the rising of Eve. " Thou lookest unwell," said the ten¬ der parent on her éntranos. " It grieves me to ι see thee sad—thou shouldest re¬ member, that women are rarely blessed with return from the man on which per¬ chance tlieir tenderest affections are placed. Fride and reason should aroute 'thy courage. In this.world, my daugh¬ ter, gaeat and long is the travmi of tor- mw»iiand «ягу I мяцо «ее thou so ill canst
canst suffer. Why not imitate thé man thou admirest—why not brave Without sinking under the common crosses df life?» " I will imitate him '" cried Eve; *' I will shew bim I can suffer in silence ' fbr your sake I will be strong." Shechem paused for a time ; he gazed upbn her, then taking her hand—* Must' I try thœ?" said he; " must I call upon 1 thy energy? be prepared then to receive tidings of sadness." " What, what," demanded she, eager¬ ly, " can you tell me? has Theodore re¬ posed in your confidence his fatal secret' 1 has he told you the crime that under¬ mines his peace ? or has he determined to leave us?" " Yes," replied Shechem, " he has done all this ; he has left me a paper which we will read together." " Thei he is gone," said she, mourn¬ fully. " I guessed so ; I am not surprised." ι '' He is, indeed," said the Jew, glad to' i« «.i see
see she had been sufficiently collected to hear what she must have expected—he saw with pleasure her eyes give way to tears, in which he took part, and patient¬ ly waited until she could attend with something like calmness. The breakfast was brought in and taken away, each be¬ ing too full to desire refreshment. The door being shut, they sat down to unfold a taper, whose contents they were igno¬ rant of, and which, they were warned would create their detestation of a man, at présént во valued by both. A certain Weakness in the eyes of Beq- sadi prevented his reading the paper, and in Eve it required a resolution, alone to be supported by curiosity and love«
ï
CHAP-
CHAPTER VII.
The Confessions of Theodore Cyphon. " Fält а time I have hesitated Ih commit¬ ting to your care a confession Whièh Will exhibit to you, that though now I Vain¬ ly boast being master of my reason, I have been the slave of passions, end the patient of passion. After having foUhd in the world a people possessing tenets established on the social affections, that however specious and apparently virtu¬ ous their actions, self wás the secret ahd efficient power, I turned my eye with sorrow firom their ways, and Was ready to pronounce that good had departed thé habitations of man; but in the hour 1 ' ' when
when about to fly, I was conducted by you to renounce my error; and I now repose in you and your daughter what I had resolved my tongue should never utter to any breathing tbe breath of ex- istence. I must commence with slightly ob¬ serving, that my grandfather was a man of very extensive property, possessing also a title which descended with the fa¬ mily estate. At bis death, the two sons divided their inheritance, the eldest residing on the hereditary grounds, and the youngest on a small estate of eight hundred а -year, a sum which he used to say placed him within sight of opulence, but held him from aspinng, unless he would cease to be independent and be¬ come the minion ofa minister. t He married early in life a woman near¬ ly twice his own age, because,she had great expectations from an old uncle, who had
had hitherto remained a bachelor, and with whom she lived. > But this unele being left alone, and probably not pleas¬ ed at finding the want of those little of¬ fices only feminine softness could per¬ form, adopted her example, and became father of an hair to his own estate. Thus the temper of my father was soured, being disappointed in his first project of advancing the wealth of bis family. It was certainly hard for a spirit, proud and ambitions as his, to See every day before Mm the pompofan elder brother, whom he fancied not so qualified to shine, in the world as himself, for though ranking with nobles, his modes of thinking were despirable and'iow. Mý father, who believed a vast dis¬ tinction resided in the sound of squire Cyphon and my lord D—, turnéd bis whole thoughts towards attaining in a serona 'degree, a distinction,!« could not hope fcr bimself-, and whilst I was un- *·' ' acquainted
.tacquaiMed with,the rights,oflrelation- 'téhip, ¡Iiwas.taught to bow to the-'will, andittiplicitly obey the commands of.my uncle Theodoria > My father, as another mode of raising his pittance, as he ealledcit, Jet .his lands to their utmost value,' pulled down the •cottages of the poor, who,, he declared, like weeds were an incumbrance to the 'ground; jand whilst he«Himself scorned to bow at a court, played in his own 'little domain, every freak of petulant power. « > it I î li Taught to» have Ьо will of my own, or at least to wrap my wishes in' disguise, I was habitually led to suffer restraint, and «endure every indignity in silence. I should perhaps have been vindictive in tum, and inflicted ion others a.portion of what I was iubj»9ctedito,.but my natural Constitution ofi temper debghted in, jus¬ tice and'metey. This happy disposition, if
if I may be allowed tile' egotism, was cultivated to advantage by a Oiend I dis¬ covered, and brought ttom the'shad» of obscurity. My uncle Theodoric, with whom, though an only child, I mostly resided, had in his gift a living of three hundred а -year, which was possessed by a man whose qualifications were an excellent Shot, and a voice, though not turnéd to dictatorial éloquence, yet admirable at a bibical or humorous song^-qualitiee'so excellent, that he wás Well «received'at the table of my lord, and' fout 'd* five times a year condescended tö gruittWr a sermon, copied from áome author whose works were unknown in thé village. The labour of the vineyard was perfortn- ed by a sickly looking man, who retfdfcd at a small cottage in another village, and was noted for his exemplary piety 'and poverty.
Thirty
Thirty pounds а -year was the reward of his exertions—exertions not confined to the pulpit, the altar, and the grave, but extending to the collection of tithes, one of the severest offices of his duty— for with a heart open to benevolence, yet closed by poverty, it was grating to his feelings to take a part from the widow, whose earnings damped with sweat' the grey locks on her temples, whose hands once, perhaps, reared a son (who in place of protecting her age, had perhaps poured out Ms blood in de¬ fence of his country), and whose chief pleasure now consisted ip her hens and chickens. Over and above this, he had to collect the tithes from a distrjet of land, which, in the time of Henry tlţe Eighth, had been monastic property, and Which still retained this badge of feudal slavery; the owner, whether churchman or layman, possessing authority to col¬ lect the tenths. Öltóh
Often had I seen this half-fàmished figure attend his station on a Sunday, and consign dust to dust, and ashes to ashes ; but his singularity passed unob¬ served, because custom had reconciled it; and I was in my fourteenth year, before curiosity was awakened to desire a nearer acquaintance. I had by accident found in the family library (my uncle's it could scarcely be called, as he seldom entered it) a volume, containing some of the actions of the famous Spartans. I admired their vi¬ gour in war, their abstemious mode of diet; yet, young as I was, and untaught but by nature, my soul recoiled from their want of those tender feelings I already felt constituted a refinement of felicity. I saw, that whilst their high sense of liberty made them spurn at a suspicion of servitude themselves, no tyrants famous in history for cruelty cojjeld exert more arbitrary authority than they
they ove^'tile subjected 'Helots. This was something like the behaviour of my father, and the parallel struck me with force, though hitherto I had considered thé state «of his tenants as a matter of course, and what had always been, not having by abstract reasoning been led to form a judgment Tbe mention of Lycurgus by Mr. Hanson in one of his discourses first ex¬ cited my notice: the sentiments of pa¬ triotism he put into the mouth of the lawgiver, made me consider Mr. Han¬ son as a man of great learning and bene¬ volence ; for though I had often occasion to visit the rich and the noble, I seldom heard more than the qualifications of a horse, or execrations of the land-tax; andrfrom the legislators ofthe land, the »rights of contested elections, 'thé price of votes, With «ftuqUisitions on» the game and vagabond acti, I'sawnotMngOf the love of -country thatlgloweď in the voice and
and speech of Mr. Hanson, and deter¬ mined .me to seek his friendship aud iui struction. Accordingly, the next morning I took .1 « alk to the village where he resided, and as I drew near bis cottage,, was sur¬ prised to hear the sound of spinning? wheels, for I had not formed in my mind the difference between vicar and curate. I knew not that the one was a spiritual hack, a greater drudge than a mender of hedges, whilst the other might lpll at his ease, and saunter a drone in the hive. ¡ , The cottage was at the end of a little row of houses called a village. A small garden behind supplied it with pot herbs, and a flower for Sunday, cultivated by its incumbent;, there was round it that air which distinguishes industry from Irør gligence» I« opened tlie door withouti сегегдрпу, «and found myself in company ,,, ' with
vvith three young girle 'who Were eta. ployed in ep4nnlhg, a youth near тИу own age, and their mother, in whose countenance was resignation and good¬ ness ' r 'Ί had never been abashed at entering the' ! hou8es of the peasants, because I fta^vèr felt myself their supenor, but ШЫ I unaccountably sunk in my own tìpltifort, and was so confused, that with ťňmculty Γ Could inquire for Mr Han- Wa 'TlWttoft vdiée and encouraging SfAïlèofliis wife, however, restored my tSöhfiderice I ventured to look round áťtltóýbuAg girla, who blusbed atbe- Ibğ Visited by'the heir-iapparerit of the wráHòr« ' "' " · θ '·. *'П ' . I II) ι I ll , , í" l, My'èyi»rlrtsRrictlvêly fixed-aithfe tíb- ject ЙРШЬсЙЙЙ, ftia'sórftélibW I tltobght myself instantly and unaccountably at· tjfeHlffli-tb-^er 1 " '•WíŕfcUttMf' Äed, 'i'Jiiejii jiíi ¿ ι iiii a 't л· ι!, и: '~m¡([ ίο ι ι „ν
and, as if ashamed, turned down our eyes ¡with that delightful confpsion which trembles through the soul. Itis the refinement of life, the ava¬ rice held in view in modern education, which steels the. heart ' of innocence against lové : but where nature alone is mistress, this passion shall exist between ttie sexes, independent of any »dcsiie greater than gazing upon, and beiiŢg near the object of its existence. Eliaa was twp years younger than myself, and possessed that delieaey so rarely'found m a cottage. In my eyes, Who bad bee» used alone to the sunburnt daugh¬ tei« of rusticity, the beauties Of tbis charming girl were ¡without comparison ur ftult; 'but«, at this moment, see how they ¿äfftet' me, iwhen 1 stray from«-my i»tt»tiv*tod.Wellupun their power* „ Щ. ' , >' m\ 11 twleţcft' of tiekneesí and calming the doubts ; ' fot. r. ι of
of я man of lowly birth, whose days had been spent in labour, and whose greatest crime was sometimes, in the hi¬ larity of mirth, to taste the cup of ine¬ briety. No pangs of remorse at oppres¬ sion could cloud his moments—no wan¬ ton act of barbarity made him shudder at retaliation -, yet he feared to wing his flight from life, till assured by the hopes and tranquillized by the consolations ot leligion. I waited his return with pleasure, be¬ cause'I was delighted with bemg near Eliza. I made advances towards the friendship of Jason. At first, herather «ivoided my questions, till perceiving, by their tendency, his own superiority, the pride of conscious excellence, W.him not only to answer but inform. 1 »w btiuck with his knowledge .of, hjsto- ry. I hung down my head, ashamed to discover, that whilst I had. fanpied myself superior to every one.round дпе, ι lhad
I had only made a few fluttering essays towards a flight in the regions of litera¬ ture. The reflection that I was heir to eight hundred а -year, and the natural rever¬ sion of five or six thousand, could not inspire tne with that self-dependence which elevates the soul of meanness to an equality with genius, and gives to the little man of wealth the strut of ef- I'rontive consequence. I seemed un¬ worthy the company of those cottagers, and vowed within myself to pursue the road to learning with ardour. Perhaps in this vow the eyes of Eliza had some influence, for I already felt, that to aspire at her approbation was an inherent wish, so sure will virtuous love point to per¬ fection, and advance the soul to emi¬ nence of distinction. I was received with politeness by Mr. Hanson,' Who was pleased to 'find that i ä the
the motive of my visit was an inqnirr into tlie laws ef Lycurgus, and not, aa at first he feared, into tlie beauty of bis daughters He flattered the pride of vanity, by praising my taste for subjects so uncommon for my age, and taking mc aside into the fields, «oon drew from me the progress I had made, and gave me instructions to proceed. Sly uncle had given himself no con¬ cern about my education, and my father, considering tliat to take me from about htm might lessen my influence, had never attempted to propose my im¬ pi ovement Theodoric lived like his iellow-aniťnals— hie tenants were at jno- derate rbnts, but then he exacted of lliem almost feudal homage. His game were held sacred by the most exemplary punishment, and though be hgd .never married, as he feared control, many a child might 'bav* called him fitther. With ideas bordering on bruWity, ¡wo¬ man
mau was to him an object of «sense, neaily equal ţo a good ι dinner or »ny other gratification—his wealth gave him power, and inclination was his law : ma¬ ny a marriage had he wantonly broken off to satisfy himself, for against hitn there was no rising up. At present, however, this detestable side of Ins cha¬ racter must be dormant in description, because I had not intimately witnessed its effects. I return then to Mr. Hanson, whom I proposed to benefit ; and in α few days being to wait on my father, I desired his interest to place him instead of doc¬ tor Droinont, who received the emolu¬ ments without performing thé duties ot his office. ·" As,(to that matter," said my father, " he ungs ,well, and pleases your uncle, and it is proper Hanson should, reniai» as he is, ■ Ifall our divutea were»letirited, «-ω» ι 3 and
and took -pains, and that there, to in¬ struct the mob, let me tell ye, most of our nobles would look tiny in the eyes ofthe vulgar. A rich man may live as he pleases, and that, always remember that : but » hat has put this whim in your head about Hanson ?" I ventured to mention my desire to learn, and that, as I was not to have a college education, Mr. Hanson might fit me for the station I was one day to figure in. My father stared at me, and demand¬ ed what station I 1 hinted at—" Foriti" said he, * you mean as lord of the ma¬ nor,'yon have not even occasion to sign your own name ; and mind me, lWe in¬ dependent as I do, and always remem¬ ber that fine maxim of Seneca, be-the •first in a village 'rather than second' in the council." < s r - '' *·-■ ţlf *< " '"' ■ «« 'Butjf*"í»id fy *■'* If torďof Ле «uthor, ' 1 shall
I shall have to decide on cases of law, and, if ignorant myself, how «hall'Iide¬ termine with justice?" ',·', · « " Whew ! ewhew.F cried he, « justice and all that there is well enough to talk on for a man as lives without money ; but let me tell you; the longest! puree has the right of favour ; and what great matter, suppose two poor scoundrels quarrel, and all that, you can but isay one way, and your clerk will write tlie mittimus." " I think, hoWever," replied I, " for the honour of the family, and to pre¬ serve our dignity entire, 1 ought to bnow ι something ; fbr though I have read of α king who bad a plate of brass with, his name cut 'through, t hat.,lie might trace it, with his pen ou grilliti and decrees, yet ι now it is the fashion itu learn, and a »man is,not of «much iKoui>h- quBneenvltQiHt ignorant,of the historysflf the world he lives in." ,b ..... ,,,, «HiiiW^'ianswire'l my Uíberiiffithere ut ! i i may
may«beaemttbing in <||, thatiielj'seee -*«uppcee Hanson wastoihav« a trifle ■ added to his salait fo». taking theiplace of'tntor, and nil that;»,btit.«ind, -my boy, you always obey your unoltv How is his cough?—doetor Flint told mehe thought be looked worse than hi had seen him for many a year." » This was the chief of» my ^conversa¬ tion with my father on tlie subject»; and in a few days the matter Was settled with my unci», Mr. Hanson becoming my tutor. / ' This humble divine,-whose! talents shonid have mised him to' dignity« in preference to so many who dream-out their live» in the stalk laid-downto him¬ self'the plan of my éducation* keepmg m View tli') powerhefaYided w-eelďoiie day be gnen into my hartds-» *t5>r»tt*is purpose, the principles óf justice Wétte stroŕigly delineated : thé eternal 'truth, , «Ul > j that
that though placed by» thfnece»<itiest>f fortune and chance in different jstubous «each man has equally a nght té «Mary advantage consistent with the goorlof tbe whole, wat plantesi ω my mind and as my knowledge- extended I bt held with fai difftrent eyes the i state · I those peasants who were startòng to raise the rents of my father and those who servilely cringed «to filtten oil the lands of my unele i soon became disgusted with the un phot obedience) and hypocritical eonde scension exacted of me but as niy un de seldom extended hi j power to excess aa rny father imperiously adenoid «ny murmur« by commanding me to turft his wishes, andas Mr Hanson strength ehed this obligation, by kw adn«**,* 1 twntSnated to do without reply whatemer Was required; 1 ι j . yo ' 1 I ! i »ПМ J í blJlMllill thn It ι 5 CHAP
«i»«*JU «e. ,tt,\ h ,c ι « >l ι . ), , , ,
' CHAPTER VIII. 1 Ύβ «vrotclitss, ».e perfidious train, Ye«cteta-d ofGod«nd fiteborn itien. Ye murderers of ttee laws AKtMsibE. Mr Hanson was permitted to attend me at my uncle's, where I had two rooms allotted'for my use; and setting aside a httle stretch of' authority m the game laws, I, as! well as the tenants, believed my unde a good sort of man But my eyeb were shortly to'be opened í I'was to behold power carried to the verge of ty¬ ranny, and a transaction that Wottld liave become a Caligula or a Nero." ' ' ι ) j , , t., , <, « .к). Without intention, I happened to be » ) m
in an inner apartment, when Theodoric and his steward met to settle some ac¬ count, and these words of my uncle ar¬ rested my attention. " And so tlietiyil&wwn. fthat Simp¬ son, refuses to deliver me his daughter, you say. Was it not I that preserved him from the workhouise?, Did I not raise him from a dunghill.froje nothing- planted him in a farm of my own, on land I heired from my fathers, and those fathers the descendante of,,,tlı,o»ç who сипе here with WUh»m the„Ç4nquşrqf,? And yefcţ am .rpfused this еЩе^Йц? girl, whft for anghtl know«№Q*ie ofl»3ľ own «begettiug! flut,|What,ptayj is, tfre feUowit excuse?" , ,„ t, ι ι, ,π ,,,« " May it bumtøy t^mß^ymi/ W- sWp,"!^!!^,*?,?^«^. ÍSh.e«iP*WIS)»4s t«iil4Slf*«t iifliiHeJţhţţXiheii qfdhiSfOfiiijrj child; andj^afrsp.^hïîjiibspow.ejjin. alienable of denying or giving her to Wbjpnii^nlj^iei."^,,,,,,^,,, ,,, ΰώι y, u 16 " It's
'l'lt'sa'liecyit'sadı^dıKeJt mwdiTbeo* doric; ft wert? he a peer óf thelreiAn.íshe imght'dispose »Of hereelf WheB'twbdtyj one." " « tí/ » «¡ι -c ν « '' So, my lord, may it humbly please your eminence,'! repreeentfed ;iafld ibore the*jthaťhé ahMild hé rent free; that hi» daughter should, after you were'itus4' be nent' to London, and married} t witli two hwffdred pounds,' tosotue'honai« shopkeeper, as Patty Dickens'and Sutata; Ma b Wŕn'we№í both, mytordjyouiknow' in» keep their own 'Carriagee;"fori thl»; may it .pleas*' yolir efnitıehctît -am won. derfor, 'uporni down, jogging kind ofi * world; But hcsaidhewasaBritoniieuid' would nofrffOeijtitute'Wj daughter for'the> best lord m the land, tliat'he *pwd- loot' and lot, and valued no тип.". ι ι « ι '· He uhall theta,'' Vexiiferatèdw'rhpo- doriC; "be' shall »value №eii«foiV'>th>v«mi4 meneitij-of rum I wmburlupbn'hish«ertj' How tout* letat does hcöwe?" mU. imu " Fietue ye, my IdidtitheMl-aiilaMlong о { lease,
kvutjetWarbmngAiMJktfejiiriMisirtstittraye downvMeg«uäa#ly;.»hiÄ.a&fotttetjŕiliajfát: buDtçUf ipleéK ^емгдаааяти^ак*^«' how we sent- Martin to! thtí East Indiet as· aiisçldièMdaiid; «ılıat ti*ou)dt ljindtw Simpson'f»om,Ľarivymge>.b (musket K'it univ »f'lîhat wori't'do^ke wiüetbetttèscap»! my power I wdl grind bim ihto-aixtfas'i —I will sink him ' I will think oír somet planWhicbelmll notibe lopgidelajnsd," v ti i lì α ι 11 mt» ι!ιί ıvııJî-'ıf'jiBl I itremldediat those ,ánrth»™tt»«,eWhibh' I badı rçoe-pdwer vtori» veet« and;UMt»ııwiı to my ftthejr/iiiiiihapeSiiht» wauldfeixijrt his infiùence.to protect th-fciiwixient 'fremi an ontmge.so great, thatl tetembledwhito the гететЬшткдговвмЬЬаес hut ifaowt was 1 confounded ht hiieaiuwër; 1 ι m . ' II' 'OIIÍC' bli 'UHI 1)1 J Kit tın '< You*îH*ore«ll this^iaid.her/limt tis nothing in life. Hasimat m manı». nght to ido all what hei will, and tbat thevejfwith Mttowufrhoni ıherp»M*ılıMa ι liyeoniii»Mlniii*l»ediï ШжотШ,*( и ) you
yo» pl«3»«,»hcrwe.your bpaatcd Komans behaved) dön! t y ou, know ttwtthoycwere dividedinto patriótán« and pleb^anst and that» those,« tlie-!ast|"Were.elavee.»tK)"the other, the former, and all tbat?< Atid let me tell ye; a man with moneyi may do what he pleases, or elsewhere is .the va¬ lue of ib? 1 ' I '1 -we» II I we» sixteen, but-1 did not perfectly understand this doctrine; only I per¬ ceived tbat) mankind «never considered themselves as free,, unless when possess- ingtithe powerof enslaving «there*. I now considered the great transactions of nations'with precision, and saw uniform¬ ly «tvery incidenti »support this «conclu¬ sion; yeť I ooneidered it an evil no dess for its frequency, and stood, like*shjp- wneWketdimaeineivto lament over wvhet I «ould not save.' , n , , eei-n.i «t i,, ,, , tl î/ ί, ¡,,· „, „ι ^uoltuber • On theievemngief »Aţt day. winflbArst e ltdteAse-ame UM i^M-d^tatjjiimi^tr 1«!{ Э 1«.Ь wards
wards my uncle, I paseed'by the-ftrerttrf Simpson, and saw hi.n employed hi'the yard,'Whilst his wife and daughter wwte knitting at thet door: «She was ari imo- cent blooming girl, with smiles that dim¬ pled on hér cheeks, and looked, I thought, something liké Eliza. And this 'is' the flower, cried I mentally, which the eye of the ravisher hath selected, and which the hand of violence will tear from its native branches' This is the sacrifiée whith is to purchase peace to this farm ' But no; peace will no longer dwell hete —destruction hovers over in 'blackness'! With this romantic sentence I turned away, for my eyes filled, and I could no long« behold the victims before me. The idra of Eliza's exposure in a like si¬ tuation, tore my heart with a'pang of hitherto unfelt sorrow. I rejoiced in the sedulous precaution of Mr. Hanson, who OOrisoterli» thát'j poverty could Ш ι »fence agaihl*' i.äippTetóonV. bed .»«моНнЫ» .hie » ι»«·' daughters
daughter« as much as: possible from oh- •ervatidn, t sè\dom permitting them to pass the threshold, «and himself giving them instructions of excellent tendency I I leemt the next day, that Simpson s house waif unroofed by order of my uncle, uiiderpnétence of repairing it the win¬ dows were taken outi ahd tiie door* off the hinges. The gates were likewise taken from :the fields, the «lause of the lease benig,) that piy lord was to staitd all reasonable repairs Thus stray rattle (probably turned in on (purpose) trod down the com in the ear, and Simpson s cattle ranged in my uncles fields« Who instantly commenced a prosecution Conscious of his uinocénőe, the former entered on tbe defensive, hoping dri triki to statt the -facte with convreteve pWn- ness m I Γη the ihére wantonness' of eihïbitiiig jH>wér with impumtyvcmy ünde ffltötei- several
lejierlllvsqttires to a,hunt,so coijtiiyiţig it as. to tunţ "j^ş staft^to th'^ŞEnof Sirøepsw^usitig^pgi^tnu^jih^yeAis т'тЫ ground?. Ijnìess than β mpnth, the lawyer, whose bread depended olj the *д11 pf my father, pnd who had hPen retained on the part of Simpson, ,arre«t«iid him für moneyi be pretended wa» ţ aue, and lodged him m the county gaol. " , My heart bled at those suffenngs Whattrifle I. could raise 1 privately №nt liitoi tod'by' «t« nate, má feigned band, oonjured him apparently to comply, with the terms of Theodoiae, that во be might quit' tbt gaol, and ι fly to« some distant county; but he eitlier¡áusp«?rtéd the.èd»· vi^eriresttngiatiíisticeíví-teismaei eri ough toetend lagainst a power employer tio crash', hım ι J» »place pf softening íny uncle, lieilóadeďhim with mveetiVe. o ti J 1 I л ι / jit, »'These;Were, however, oslviso many ι,ι,* WOUlJ«,
wound, ' ас they tacitly confessed the shatpbesS of his-sufferings, and my uncle smiled at their 4mpotenrJy." He ordered thé young'woman "to attend him with her mother, who Would not permit her to'leave heť sight', and'tny whole atten¬ ti«!« being engaged in this demoniac pro¬ ems, I considered it no breaoh of'honour to endeavour to overhear. « ' " Is it not foolish," said he, " extreme¬ ly foolish, in poor Simpson, to withstand my'will, and above .all to think of hold- ing'out against a prosecution whieh it*o just? and yeťI shonlďnot have suffered it, but to convince him that my will < is indisputable. 'Tlie»rascal ofl a lawyer who hast ployeďhim this scurvy twok,eI shall find'meane to trounce,) forlthav* too high at« «pinion of both your undan· standings to suppose you will longée re¬ main in your own light. Simpson shall be« put úitóa better, term, andı thi» Jdve- ly egirii.shall «be to'sne-,»every tbinj^imt ,.hi that
that silly thing a wife. On the contrary, if you will yet be blind and foolish, 1 can hang your father; the laW giVedme power: I can grind him in a mortar, brit for your sakes I will stifle my wrath, whicli in any other case would be death ; and all I ask in return is love.« Consider then your own interests by to-mdrrow; and remember that I am lord D——, master of six thousand pounds a-year." After this persuasive speech, he dis¬ missed them drowned in tears, and'I re¬ tired to give vent to the feelings which agitated me. To end at once this story, the poor girl could not endure the' an¬ guish of her parents, when' sacrificing herself, she believed, would procure them peace; and without consulting any'One, she returned, in the dark of the evening, to give liberty to her father, ■ ■·'" - ' Муюи! even now trembles at the de¬ basement oflaman who, iwctooumstanoes like
like these, we»ld accept the reluctant cararø tif theiloathing iqaidu But Ibis njaii was ipy apele. Alas, why wat I -ftWeq* to such a monster !, ţ grieve that ■ iparţicljîof his blood flows through my bjody. I sighed at ibe abjection οξ Ьп- man'nature; I attended not ţo my Stu dies, njy whole faculties, and thoughts be¬ ing eftgqged on, this transaction, where law was distorted and made tbe tool of lust and oppression. í · ' v 7 .My-lord, who valued|himielf on bis generosity, its he called it, sent the law- yet to discharge Sioipson from prison, «no« tn I learnt from'» young man, then under wnfinemeijtifor tvyo,mpnths'(hav- ing knocked down a harel with bH-ham- mer one evening (etwning from work), .wÎisTivtheiliiwyertntered, and dqel-trtid that Simpson *rA"fi!Sfc»r»·*' By Wime'**· thority?" said be '' Who waa so gene¬ rte·,« №9*Т0РугШ»р*ПФ Wme ţi$ " Peace,"
«Peace,*' «ridd the lawyer-, " RDdtatM to rŕviafe the man who. saves you· from utter destruction; let not your rrile tongue Whisper against a'Man oPmtíi virtue, that, though justly offended," he am spare, without regarding your ingrat titude. It is my' liird, it is our 1 excellent master, who forgives yon " "Mylord 1 " repeated he, "what .we his terms? On what conditions am I free? Has my daughter——3ut no, she could not. Nothing but force could have so debased her, besides she was en¬ gaged to another " " That," replied the lawyer, " is your affair «I have done my dutyi and if yoii 'choose to remain here, do it, dnd. welcome." ' ' i Simpson hesitated; heseemedtoidmbt tliefiii^ofthisnnevrpected bounty. fbut, [jertiaps fajlcying/íny linelfaimfgii^ltoW ralenWd; fcriquittèdithe рпща. '■ tt vru not long hefoteiieewehimafcthe castle : '.,»! he
he inquired for his daughter. I heard at aďiutance weeping, but could not dis¬ tinguish the words; he was refused ad¬ mittance to my lord, and spurned with curses and threats at the offer of the steward. He retired to an alehouse to tell his sufferings, and help his resolu¬ tion with spirits, swearing by Heaven to revenge himself. He remained there till night; and not being allowed a room, as my uncle was dreaded, he set out in the dark, almost senseless with liquor, and has not since been seen or heard of m that part. The news of his loss was quickly spread about by the peasants, who ven¬ tured to condemn with loudness the be¬ haviour of my lord, and each felt for the daughter whose lot it might have been. Butihere the calamity did not cease; the young.woman, who had against her will subjected herself to the embraces of a man abe «bated, was struck with horror at
а t- the unknown fateci her father;.hie figure, haunted heíeejjňagjijateioii.jaiid seemed to threaten her for« her weakness. She »saw in lier hver the murderer of her father, »and the ruin of herself; life became no longer worth .possessing. No ray of comfort darted through Hie < im-» pervious darkness, varied only by phan¬ toms of dieadful loi mation, and ip less than а week the lovely daughter of in-« noccnce was blooming and no inore, hav¬ ing prescribed a period to her woes. And what tongue shall condemn an action arising from anguish and unutterable despair ' My uncle, who knew the ill conse¬ quences of exciting popular hatred, en¬ deavoured to compound,, by giving seve¬ ral tkmatipns to i\ie poor, ajnd some hqgs,, hţiade of„ale t9 tbe ( yjftlagers. Hfi also, ptovgdejij, fçr fite, lamenting mother, ,w>d °f e ţ(? a A«l v 4 d Цвп -tøwhft would bring ti ^fti of i§ i P , BW««!4v*or4ţ'id. Thus
thv? vulgar' Were blinded, Mid Mspibio« th№wn frdm himself. Thé country géntìetnèn Vvished nót lie engage where nó redress could be hdd, and thus »B ict, which cried to Heaven for justice, >wm biiried ih a corner, and passei] into Obli- vióh unjiun'islied It is impossible to describe the state of my mind throughout this transaction I abhorred, ahd shunned as much as pos¬ sible the presence of the tyrant My ml» spect was much lessened for my rather ; I condemned his pusillanimity, which, tor a paltry interest, led him to stand by a cool spectator of so diabolical a deed My preceptor observed the melancho¬ ly which destroyed my taste for study, am? éndéavoiired to overcome it try a ijew ¿Ian of pursuit Hè inspired me wíih 'i taste for the eastern grandeur 'of expression, though hót Hir the servility of its' courts. I considered 1 the «-Scythian and
andüWanderiBg Tartar as« approaching n^atetbito freedom;, andı whilst I (¡on* tempbetted their independence of Ufe, ,1 ne«ly«overlooked imy general rule, .till Mr. Hapson remarked, that though law» leşe, themselves, and above tbe luxuries of life, their employment was war, and their trade oppression. With him I learnfciwhat little I know of Arabic, he having been taught by bis father, who lışd been secretary in the train of an am¬ bassador to Turkey. In the mean time my affection daily iijcreastjd for Eliza; and not having re¬ lations wherewith to divide it, she be¬ came to me the centre of every tender- nçsp», She was a treasure concealed from th^w^rld, which I was proud to own. Myyjresence ever excited a smile, and eaijh efejţljp girls seemed pleased with my cflmrønjy but.I fandtsd'the eyes iof E^jjj^giisssrd ·*№*·■? %}» them aU; yet 1 а®Щ' ^Í , 4k-«!í 0 i bc %& < . We j-ţpL. ι. к read
read, in the tacit expression of counte¬ nance, the pleasure we took in each other, whilst timidity prevented an ex¬ planation; and in truth I had formed neither plan nor design, being satisfied with the limits of friendship, and the ca¬ resses of an innocent familiarity ; but one afternoon, when I had stelen from the castle, my lord Ό ----- being engaged with some sons of Bacchus, I hastened to Hanson's, and whilst the girls were spinning, read to them a poem that had some connexion with love; my left hand was placed carelessly on the back of tlie chair, and Eliza having to pass, placed one of her hands upon mine, and smiled at the same time with ineffable sweet¬ ness. There was so much of nature in the action, that my eyes beheld a hun¬ dred new charms, and I fancied her more lovely than I had ever before seen her. I involuntarily trembled, and for a time was too confused to continue theppçm. Hitherto desire had had no share in my passion;
passion ; but her touch had kindled the etherial flame within me. Yet I had often touched her—I had even saluted her; but the manner, the look, in fact I know not what, was irresistibly enchant¬ ing. I hastily finished the poem, and wish¬ ing to examine myself, took a walk along the banks of the river. " She loves me," said I to myself; "the heavenly Eliza sets a value upon me. I am dear to her; we are formed for each other. It would kill me to see her the wife of any other man. I am rich. I will marry Eliza, wlto has sense and beauty to adorn the palace of royalty." These were truly the arguments of a lover, who in contemplating the ultima¬ tum, overlooks all intervening opposi¬ tions. I passed the rest of the day till night dreaming on the felidty I should enjoy with Eliza as a wife. From this к 2 vision
vision I was not awakened, till my re¬ turn to the castle brought my father to memory, with all his schemes of gran¬ deur and alliance—schemes which I could ill comply with, and which threatened to destroy at once my airy fabric. I hod, however, learned to counter¬ mine cunning fay cunning, and coolly to weigh before 1 entered on action. I sum¬ med up in my mind my dependencies and independencies. The former, bejng my uncle's estate, and my father's eight hundred а -year j, the latter an annuity of two hundred pounds, a house, and smaţl estate of forty pouqds а -year, which he- came mine without control at the age of nineteen. As I despised the tinsel ol'grandeur.und in tbe true romanticjjy of youţh consi¬ dered this an ample establishment, where the mind would lţave, |ei(,urq,to| .çoıjetem- plate itself, undisturbed alike by splen¬ dour
dour and by want, I hesitated Hot in fix¬ ing my plan, which was to wait till the period I have mentioned, then to obtain, if'possible, my fatbeťs consent, and if not,,to marry without it. I shall not re¬ peat the arguments I used to represent the rectitude of this procedure, because to a man of your enlarged mode of think¬ ing, the liberty of choice is a fixed prin¬ ciple, 'only to be delayed where a com¬ petency is not secured, or suspended from some moraler personal defect. I knew too well the principles of ho¬ nour which'governed'Mr. Hanson, to trust «him with the important secret. I saw that he closely observed my beha¬ viour to his daughters, and indirectly se¬ conded my father's intentions, by dis¬ coursing on thé necessity of equal mar¬ riages, where no sentiment Was liable to duplläty ftom gratitude, 1 nor any de¬ mandi! iMde by superior'wealth.
КЗ
Jason
Jason had, at Фу uncle's expence, been sent to Westminster school, where he vvas considered as a youth of talents and industry—a character which delighted his father, who naturally looked,up to his patron with gratitude, and pitied the failings of his nature ; concluding, in the goodness of his heart, that hard was the government of passion when placed in possession of power, and ignorant of those principles and rules which teach, that to be beloved is better than to be feared. There is in human nature a strange principle, not easily accounted for, and which is suspicion, when conscious that we are liable to be suspected. Thus ne¬ ver before having formed any plan upon Eliza, I had visited without constraint, and expressed to her many little endear¬ ments; but now I suddenly believed Mr. Hanson had discovered my motives, my visits were timed with fancied cau¬ tion,
tion, my words were guarded, my beha¬ viour constrained ; and so far did this in¬ fatuation carry me, that when present with my father, I watched every word and look to discover if he had any know¬ ledge of my design. The change in my behaviour could not escape the notice of Eliza. She sought to discover the reason in my looks; a shade of sadness and a languid smile dwelt upon her features; and if by acci¬ dent I approaclied her when she did not expect me, a crimson blush dyed her cheeks and neck ; passion, restrained on¬ ly by the presence of a third person, im¬ pelled me to catch her in my arms, and give utterance to ten thousand tender expressions of love and constancy. ■ The 'Coquetry of some young ladies was 1 as unknown to Eliza, as that cold prudery, which to be won, must be ader¬ ii i ed:
cd : in her, bosom the sentiments of ge¬ nuine modesty and innocent nature took place; and as she never· formed a wish inconsistent with either, her tongue was unequal to duplicity» This trifle of con¬ straint but exdted our eagerness to eome to some explanation ; and it was not ma¬ ny evenings after, when chance, the friend of lovers, bitnlght us together in a narrow winding path which led through tbe wood to the river. At that moment I almost wished to avoid her. We mutually blushed—I strove »to, speak—but my tongue falter¬ ed, and we walked several yards together in silence.—" It is a beautiful evening," said I at length. " But why are you alone without your «isters ?" " They were engaged," said she. " But tdl me, Mr. Theodore, why jiou do not come so often as you used? ihre you an¬ gry at Any thing ¿" » ' " Angry,
" Angťy, Elina'! ita. But it is dan¬ gerous ; for who can see so many beau¬ tiful girls »without loving?" " And is it," said she, with a blush and a smile, Whilst, her eyes glanced on my face, " and is it then dangerous to lové? But you, Mr. «Theodore, cannot be in thet danger; you must look up to somebody of high birth, with a laige for¬ tunei" I thought she sighed at this sentence; my whole soul dwielt upon, my Ups, and I ventured to put my arm round her waist-*-" No," cried I, " Eliza, heavenly maid ' never wiU I marry from any prin¬ ciple but lovei my soul doats upon you -т -it tells die you will be kind. Dearest girl ' my Eliza-t-my angel ! your charms have ever given me dehght from the hour I first saw you; and your accom¬ plishments have bound me to you foi ever., Tell Ine then," said I, kissing her cheek, « tell me, my Ehza, what am 1 to hope? 1 ' к 5 "I can-
" I cannot," said she, trembling, and blushing as crimson ; " for were I to say how dear you are to me, would your fa¬ ther or your uncle ever consent ?" " Let us trust," I replied, " to love. 1 have sufficient; and with you, dearest maid, what shall I want mote? But I will make my father consent; hard and inflexible, as he is in pursuit of grandeur, he will not be able to parry my argu¬ ments. I will tell him, that though he married α woman incapable of the duties of a wife, I, for the honour ofthe fami¬ ly will тагу one that is: and I will ask bim which is best, to have money with¬ out a wife, or a wife without money ; for with me, she is not a wife who is incap¬ able of performing its duties." These arguments were the sophisms of love, and served to establish calmness in our minds. The sequel of our dis¬ course was to us enchanting, but on pa¬ per who can transmit the tender expres¬ sions
sions which a look conveys, ór the naïve¬ té which charms in the most insipid dis¬ course of lovers ! My delicacy forbade my pressing Eliza to say she loved me ; I saw it, 'I kneW that she did so, and 1 spared those blushes such a confession must have cost. I laid before her the plan I had formed, and that but two months remained till I should be of age to enter On my little estate, when I would press mý father to consent, and make her my wife at all hazards. To this she objected, being only seven¬ teen, ahd that in two yeurs my father might be wrought on to consent, or at worst I should then be master of my own person. As this was α reasonable objec¬ tion and a reflection of prudence, I rea¬ dily adopted it ; and how cohsUUring Eliza'as partly unlted'td №e,"I disclosed tO her my thoughts'aVid d&lgfls. » Thus not ontfthè fiWt'e^èhiHiT'bf Mt mütnal acknowledgment Ш piiska', but тпапу к ti hours
i ..hours which weafterwards stole ftom ob¬ servation. ' í Perhaps, sir, you may think Eliza was not so prudent as modesty should war¬ rant, or she would not have consented to clandestine meeting; t but reitiember, that wê were known from 0№>¡yíirth to each other, and.that true love shrinks from the most distant approaoli ой guilt; there is Sn it * refinement which bars against sensuality; tmi, m faet, 'ove which is founded on mutual good quali¬ ties, upon virtue and nature, no lopger exists when an injury can be intended. Our eyes, however, were not<tø be restrained, and a certain sinking ot vpioe when we spoke to each other, eould not escape Mr. Hanson, who had biinself, sa¬ crificed fortune to bv?. I observed that be was uneasy, and when; with me, w-ţHjtld often assume, ths posţurepf . в fujrtjeplar confidence, which yeţ he wanted resolu¬ tion
tion to. place »and I on my part,|ţhough I wished to relieve him from this' .unea¬ siness, found it impossible to begin. Thue the time passed away, which brought me to my first age of indepen¬ dence; Mien,in company with.Mr« Han¬ son, I rode uver to the little.mansion to take .possession* I felt од this occasion the stveets of'power, and the pnde. natu¬ rally arising in the heart;:when we-set our foot on the ground, »nd say—¿Ai« is tritine. I saw nt.once ftom whence sprang tyranny, and-that it is the nature of man to aspire at command. I followed every «spot with my eye, planning little alterations .andı improve¬ ments; placing the lovely Eliza by my side; as. a second ι Eva. iu the.terrestrial paradisell had «formed. ,<Mt. Hampn,»en¬ gaged ia his »own thoughts,» didnnot in¬ terrupt the pleasmgedj-eam, andive r^élí- ed the house almost without speaking. ,«».;· The
The -person who'had it in care received us with satisfaction, taking pleasure in leading us from room to room, and de¬ scribing the purposes each had been em¬ ployed in by her late mistress. From one of the rooms, fitted up with great neatness, we had a view of a fine vale extending a considerable way, adorn¬ ed on each side by banging woods and scattered cottages. — "This," said she, " was the room my mistress used to sit in, and call her own, as it is by far the prettiest in the whole house, and most retired." " Then," replied I, without reflection, " this shall be fitted up for my wife, as I would give her the choicest apartment here." " Blet» your honour!" said she, " and will you then forsake the great old ma¬ nor, and the fine seat of you» fïithér, to live in this little place amongst us poor folks?" ι "Come,"
" Come," said Mr. Hanson, " let me add something to the plan. Thwhouse shall be re-modelled into a temple of re¬ pose; those fields round it we will con¬ vert into groves, and never fading bowers-, this valley shall be called Tempe; and when Mr. Theodore and his lady are weary ofthe confusion of high life, they shall retire here, and you shall be the priestess of the place." This effectually disguised the sense of what I had said, and after dining we set out to return ; but these few words had confirmed Mr. Hanson's suspicions, and at the same time given him an opening to pursue. " I was surprised," said be, " at your thinking of fitting up that little house for your wife ; do you imagine any lady of rank and fortune, would live in the way your romantic fancy would pre¬ fer?" "It
r " It does not fiillow," said I, " that I am» not'» make that» house my resi¬ dence, onthat toi plea» another I should te married'to one tæpleastng to me«"» i"Buţ," Said.be,i'l you oannot surely have been SO imprudent as to have form¬ ed any secret engagements, nor so foolish astto make résolves againat the lady your fattier! may perhaps pointout to you? 1 ' " My friend," returned I, " I know what you suspect, and now I am inde¬ pendent, it Woiild hé) unworthy of meto make it lunge« a matter of concealment. ΙΊόνε your<bughter EUaa; I,love her ta dţ»ting~T-nay, be not, SHrprisedi" \ << No," replied hé, endeavouring to hide his emotion, " I am not; but I am very much concerned, and I take to my¬ self tbe blame of not preventing what I ought to have foreseen, andı vvhich, I con¬ fess; I have fon some time feared«'.' , " And where," demanded,!, "is ithe oecasiota of any concern ahout it 1, I will advance reasons to my father he will be 'f ' unable
unable to controvert; and besides, am not I «independent, and a Briton?" 1 But though you are both, tbat will not screen you from duty, and my duty must be to act on the side of yonr father. Forgive me, therefore, if I am obliged to desire you/will not come to my house, Otherwise I shall, be necessitated! to part with my daughter, andı > send her from under my care, a thing which you know would much afflict me." < ¡ "(How μ ' criedl, impatiently ;-"ide you call this friendship and duty? Is it not both the friendship and duty of a good man to ptomote-thé happiness ofanother when it doesinot'take from his own? To marry your daughter is the first wish of my soul; uto love her is become a principle nf iny natures 1 and so long has )«er image, bren combined Wtth every schemei of my mind, that to erase it is impossible, and to substitute another, equally vain." n >>< ■> vi ι n / ·' Youtin" replied he, " usually thinks m thus.
thus. The first passion of the heart is strong, and usually wrong founded, be¬ cause it stays not coolly to reason, but is hurried impetuously forward by phy¬ sical causes, and exterior beauty; but bow seldom are those selections of conti¬ nuance—how seldom are they gratified I and, when gratified, they mostly want the solidity of merit to charm when no¬ velty hath departed." " 'Tis true," said I; " I allow what you say ; for how very few, if we may believe report, marry with reciprocal es¬ teem ! But I love your daughter, and my love is returned—our dispositions and modes of thinking agree, our whole system of being and acting are alike. She possesses so much learning from your instructions, as to qualify her for giving charms to the hours of solitude, without being so learned as to deduce from her softness as a female." "On my word," said he, "youliestow upon her great encomiums; the'rhfjtoric of
of a lover is irresistible ; and if she has foolishly betrayed to you the state of her affections, I know not what to say ; for whilst duty bids me ¡.ct the part of a judge, nature commands me to act that of a father. I will theretore propose a medium. Vou shall restrain yourself from Eliza for one year, at the end of which term, ifyou continue to love, I will not oppose it ; but if during that term you endeavour to see her, I must ac¬ quaint your father, and send her from your knowledge." "A year ι twelve months!" cried I, " and not see Eliza; impossible! I must either see her, or die." " No, no," said he, smiling, « you will not die, but you must stand to this; and if your love be so unchangeable as you flatter yourself, it will easily overcome this trial of its duration." " On that point then,'' said I, hastily, " J accept your terms; but they are dread. fully cruel. I must, however, see her to¬ night,
night, and tell her the motive of my ab¬ sence." "No," said he, "you must not indeed; we must have no adieu—you must be¬ gin to conquer." I now thought Mr. Hanson in his turn playing the tyrant, and repenting of the promise I had made, retired sullenly to my room, reflecting on Eliza, and «gazing fronl my window at that part of the coun¬ try where she lived, not Without strong inclination to brave every opposition, and see'her. The promise I had given was inconsldeikte, the penalty I knew, and should without hesitation have braved, had if not been for the threat of Mr. Hanson.'to end his daughter away, and I knew him too well to suppose him not in earnest. ''Yet when I reflected on the suspicions Eliza mitst entertain at my apparent desertion, and that too at the moment my fortune placed indepen¬ dence in my power, I could with diffi¬ culty
culty sustain my feelings. The only way left me was to write, stating to her the necessity under which I was bound, and vowing ever to remain true. Thus J quieted the perturbance of my mind, and spent hours in writing, and destroying what I had written. If I had promised not to visit them, I had not promised to refrain from going near the house ; but considering myself liable to observation in the day, I stole from my rest at night, and with all the enthusiasm of poetic rapture, visited the haunts of my mistress. Often when even the zephyr ceased to breathe in the grove, at the solemn hour of midnight, I have leant upon the gate facing her window, and called on Heaven to bless with peace the hours of her slumbers ; and with plea¬ sure every moment of the day, the en¬ chanting name of Elina has burst alone from my lips, whilst I wandered on thé margin ofthe brook, whose course pass¬ ed
ed by the end of their garden, and de¬ lighted myself with fancying, that her fair face had perhaps been reflected by its waves. " --------Often to relieve my ρωιι, I'd watch the current—to the moon complain, And as wild fancy taught my rovini» mind Her name, I'd carve upou the aspiu's nnd, Sigh to the winds, or in the woods dark shade, Torn« simple verses on the rural maul," I believed that ' suffered all the hard¬ ships of a lover in romance ; I neglected my studies, to give myself up to all the indolence and voluptuousness of con¬ templative passion. The energy of my mind was absorbed by this alone. I dream¬ ed of Eliza—I saw nothing but Eliza— and delighted in nothing which did not remind me of her. I contrived to convey her my letters ; Ъу these we could converse without em¬ barrassment — tbe softest expressions could
could be repeated without a blush ; but yet 1 was every moment sighingito see lier, from which my fears of losing her alone withheld me.
CHAP-
.eaeOeeeMSJiKj ш л. v »i m ff ora «aerai χ« h? t ' . fi'c*»*«, t iiæY «bexrl bil» I ' « ι" n «m 1 * * ' ţJIBgU l'i'! r Л-) ' í' o iht' r m . i r t £6 . ie, CHAPTER IK. I
, «i^Jjl jultice et le droit Mut dei тя1оев Idéel «ЬеЛ 1ЛСОК ÍK , ľ TjitJgéhad pne month passed a.way, when I.vyas^siHjit for by my father, and received with that politeness I knew him always to assume when he was bent on carrying Sp^jppjpt, where gentleness piiglţt "irst hWfípwry, , t t blue î ' í »»us ι л 'i Ук·*?* 1 no î í# У' ои * w ,# а ? W" #^& "^-»W P»"* а Ч4,·*!! »Ьа». ílí u (b *^4 ca ¡ t10 » has cost PtV w í he # la tWÍ? вРЧ^-гД ll-ìve f^meedjţr^ou The time ıs now come when у gtur^ for¬ tune, and all that, will be made for ever, «u Ι ι ao» nd
and I «hall henceforth rest in peace, con¬ fident that the honour of my name, and that there, is provided and fixed. Your uncle has graciously pleased to signify, that he has fixed on a young lady for your wife ; that confident of your ready acquiescence, and all that (as you have ever been a dutiful lad), he has even taken on himself the trouble of making proposals, and that there, to the lady's relatione, and so, let me tell you, you will have a very trifle of trouble, and the heirship ofthe manor is fixed, and firm, and secure." You will easily beheve that this strange piece of elocution held me wholly silent, and that lost in confusion, I could not collect my thoughts, so as to form a re¬ ply, which gave him room to suppose, tbat never having opposed any of bii commands, my silence was a toben of consent тоь. i.' L "I am
.«,.? Itaraglad," said «be, " tOjseeijíau have ηα objections.!'« ι t . <, ml ŕn/j ·« ч. ι " No'otyectwns ''«Ί midil.at свее recø- veripg myself-«-'' yes, million»·; and im¬ moveable objections prevent 'my com¬ pliance; land make it utterly impossible I ever should." I "How'" demanded he, his eyesflash- mgefire, unused to the appearance of con¬ trol. ".You do not,mean to run the hazard of your uncle's favour—and isure yuu will not spurn the alliance of the ho¬ nourable R. Sankey ? and besides, and aU that, you must know, I can cut you off with sixpence ; and then, sir, let me ask «that will you be' you will be« «nothing έ -tm absolute nonentity." " I shall still,",said.I, V have sufficient to bar against want, ahd with me, peace and ¡happiness are préférable to riches.and titles." ,,' ■ ,. „ í'eD— η that gothic priest«,'' said he, " 'tis he has filled your head with «these grovelling notions, and this «(vere-, but \t ' how
how will you look with your insigni¬ ficant two hundred а -year?->-rthe 'very boys »sill hoot your poverty, and the whole world sneer at your stupidity." " Let them," said I, carelessly ; " with¬ out tbe woman I love, a throne would want charms to entice its acceptance." " I can guess—I can guess '" repeated he, rising in fury. " Tell me, or, by Hea¬ ven, my vengeance sweeps you from the eaiJi 1 Is it not some of those hellish daughters oftbat d—d parson who have turned your brain?—he shall suffer— the whole kennel of them shall be fer¬ reted out·" " Listen," cried I, now too much heat¬ ed to stand on punctilios ; " why load with epithets so mean, a family so vir¬ tuous? At this moment, I tell you I love—I lutve sworn by heaven itself ne¬ ver to marry any other than the object of.my affections, Who is all that woman ca« aspirç to; and at this moment when уоц thlieeteiv vengeance on Mr. Hanson 1 -<·■ L 8 for
Гог-'рготойод ту" wishesi 1 '! am' сот- maifded to leave ibis hoose. Tes, his fan¬ cied sense of honour bas· extorted from me a promise of not visiting his daugh¬ ter, and fbr a month I bave not seen ber. Vét this îs the man 'you traduce—who silently preferred your fancy to' all the claims öf interest—interest, whieh' in some persons lead them to sacrifice every affection df nature, and make a traffic) of justice, honour, and humanity." My father was astonished fbr a time— he was thunderstruck at an opposition he had never expected, but not convinced that tbe plans of his life were wrong, he collected himself to reply—" Is it'thus," cried he, " you shake off duty ahd' obe¬ dience, and dare tto have a will of your own ? but know, that I have never'fe*m- ed a design that I have afterwards chang¬ ed, and Whilst >I' live I will opposet this degenerate passion. " You' are'sotr' yet independent, and that, mid th* whole race of Hanson «)№№ perish, ratft» »ban add
add their -tile »poverty to the family of Cyphon, You have three day» to re¬ flect, «nd »if you would Hot see this wretched ipriest pn » gibbet forty, feet high, aud his wife and girls used as Simp¬ son's daughter, you will agree to what 1 have told ypu." My whole frame underwent a violent tremour at the picture he had drawn ; a Bold chili run through my veins at the horrid remembrance^-»" Ohi" cried I, " oh, my Eliza; never sball it be '" ! * !" It shall be," cried he, «tamping furi¬ ously—" by Heaven, it shall be ! retire to yourchamber, and dare not stir from it till I have your .answer." "Pity те,Я cried!; " ( pity your son, andp«ţtmit me at «Wast to take a last sight of Eliaa!" (f You then comply," said he, with a mtdieioue, smile—" I will not be trifled within give me your promise iu writing, »М.уоц »hall see her;' yeu shal), if you wafelitol^intolbwpinjs,",', 14 ,, «ν«, ι l· 3 "Ťío!"
" iïo^crfed I.'with ïndigAatiun, " such a meşnness would indeed he base, Е1иа shall either be my wife, or tŔé hnghtV name of Cyphon shall be extinct rf " Extinct *" said he, turning jStíIé "Ex- tinct ' So let it—I shall itili be beir to lord t)----- What is your existence, and that there, to me ? ' 1 opened the door without reply, and was going to escape, Wheh he éálléď Bİrtüd to his servants to stop the mafaiiih ttnè of them I instantly itre(^eâ r upó/t the ground, anrt my hand Was raised tostrike the oth», when my father calighi? at my arm, and received thé blow hirhSèlf I became instantly cabin— lalt my 'fire was evaporated I hád not indeed tiürt Mm much—but my hand had done Víótèlice to ihe author Of my «being, and f trem- hle'd vvitli confusion " Thus T siirft'ied myself tO be confine« ili á гоШ m "thé upper story, лра. might %t ЩА ttäíneJit have been drawn Into *njr «аоМяоп' Ila-
да* --Wbej'p vqlpií, tafjf ^рр)% apdjoik- •^^■Η^Α'Ρ'^Ρί Partyt· WM* «tUm WffţiSvi г9 ţbmk ( I siJWjqlearly that ^liB^ffP^t'WWpteiijtleJ to keep ^iifiW..% siSJlf Cf Sffitapsspunt^ he ftiottW, Í» reţnpvedjţţiin ftie country, and some flffectua} (jţep tpken· to prevent my ever discovering his Kiireet I de¬ termined, therefore, at all hazard to es- Cape, iţcyŞywith Eliza to Scotland, and never, again return withiji the circl^of nijf.faţhm'iipower. t JÍ'iqi» t t ι j ι e , J waited, with .patience till çonyijıced the «¡hple.hoiţsşiwaş .at rest „and not haying convenience"for .«destjendjpg д-одц ţhţ|Wim^qw, 1( Ijţ|xamine^ the.dçıor, and found it fastened only by a «tropg lock, which I endeavoured to force. Tbis Was .ψ,ορά WoStffingtbn Ш diiwpv^ng Щ {Ij ^-»Víed \Щ SfOTéwe,^ •ty.jKmje um * ь4 r ration.
ratiopi I then, opened the .føot with pre- cautiqn, end listened ; but aU was sdent, except the hellclock. I descended with care, baiteiJing-to the great out «doer, but it was fastened, double kicked,; and, the key taken away. I P0.W aţniflsfi feared escaping; but finding the, parlour dqor open, I entered, unbarred the window, and leaped into the yard. r I now considered myself escaped from oppression, and ran forward with speed; but I had not proceeded % hundred yards when a mau started upon me, grappled me by the shoulder, und threw me on the ground. I struggled in vain to dis¬ engage myself, and' as he called loudly for help, I discovered by his voice that it was the porter. ' " Peter," said I, " Will you also bean instrument of tyranny ? Will you force me to marry 'this girl I abhor ? I .tell you I will never do it—let me go ¡then." "Poor
«Poorfellow 1 " said he, speakiW^to bimself; " master watti't deceiVed^ihte enough-, he's as mád as a Martm'Wč* " Nó, no," said I, " Peter, I airi hot mad. I thall be your master, you know, I will'make your fortune ifyou will go to Scotland with me." " Ay, ay," said he, " we'll go to Scot¬ land, but thaťl be when we recover dur wits." I saw by this he misunderstood' me I made another effort to escapé, but he was a powerful man ; and not being pos¬ sessed, as he fancied, by a supernatural spirit, I found it impossible to get free. Some servants quickly arrived with lights, and my father at their head — " Take care of yourselves," said he, in a feigned tone of compassion. " Poor boy ι Take notice, Çymon, bow Iiis eyes roll. Tis a sad thing to lose one's "senses, and «фпеж" 1 " ' C »"i™- ' 1 L 5 " What,"
Uhat lam mad?' But your arts tl*H*«et prevail, I WÍH never have her, and since fotím rriénhíis føi««tfobsly,«№«Wlny tltl<№fòât>'4t»té, ЬШ 'stiy ÏWètódisbwH nie, 1 *!» d *ffl ««Ш#-Уо-Л titoi"lh ' ά l-bbrlttì*" bald b',-wltíi ù guitig общ. phftë' *ï Éb fırft d^t'thÏt-flt'-pWsfent átegáoWí «WoutdMiM 'lo tlíéeJ déepi- eablé; 'thy poor head cannot retain İM judgment " ' i \ (^ШЧйиЙ confdUBdèU teiwply Mbu#not h*Vë' beltevtó WPffctment Í>íé4his -wé'beÉiMé^ it Veduti«! efne 'to a «lrl¿ the Í m(Wtlhiil|*rab*e¡ »в ili de«roy- eà'tìié étínfidence bf aïl who might have Ъ<еЩ o*. nnďitWé thè ahn of t*rehtal тШЫ y^etíohs вЧе most ml*mial ·■ Ί kilw.'fMni t*é'b^tmtikof'Sit«fi»eon, tBé*kéreý I Mumpai ЪиЩЬ&ф p^teä-äü а УоЛ** ¿ЫШИ WvrMdi« №m oh" thè 1 feellrignW'-f fethtlti (a|-*-H«JÉI 1 cölitıdered it as t¿ toce to íntímlaáte me,
extremes. , n.Wïwm 1 ι, . tuWfa thee» hope* ii snde»)ţpu,^d; to cheer, my«df ílwrUig tjbe J8rït;njgbt,,flf my life «that ,I,l)ad.felt,perB(jna} flretrfi' edne»«,M,J «aadenip fartJwr »ţtepafltt(tbat «^btiÈOf«scepe,i.having,flOif; кШЩщ- psctatiojM from »he day, ,whe«4,might fierhapsngain «Asistence,· pr-, by ■ manual exertion forcea passage» ·· ι „.,[ ,^ „ , In 4*« taornjngirï wa» f ţwakened ¡by the eirtrenoe o£ юу father·— г" ^Й».,шу iad.ì'JeajiiJie, í' you »theught. to. o«twit tbe eld, boy, »nd,J»lJ„ftat; but I bave αφΑιφη lound, Щяьф Шт *,&$>> Ури ,»ΐώΐ1 be a prisonerj for life, ^qjţsf you marry this young Jady>; and let, me tett^Wk'tbis.wiiyjd^y. ţbţ, wh^e,t4be ofiíftinjKlnsdAa",^ ţiţrşed. aut/j»^), bende, buffati* ^яи^Ч «»ft.tbtó tb«m, *»ιίΓβ4ίι*,9Γρ».«Η»11,%4 thpugh '«m »ii и Jtbi' » ;,ЙЙЙ
«İM« eight hundterjiipoundt' aren better tharttwoij ¡í ι j ,ì,t . ' »\ ^ » ι , 1 1 a и» 'í гКМгиейчпо timsaiïMto thi» »insult, thoughiillftílt. angniih ,€äcn-erd«iat the sufrering»'ií«knews¿h*iwouídvinflict'On the Hansons, and I almost determined Jtfisawiftee myself itt> procure-them «afe- tj>i»[i№t«wi( k' irnhumon' natura vo- Iwitarllyiitoi abandon'the object' of so Idear «n affection? >ba give up the fond ideas of happiness I bad formed, and submit myifortHne 4a the direction of I tníimperio« man, ι who expected mnn- llind to-bowitheir head« before ;Ыщ? No·: 'ÜMre hadsaspiceof hısımım ob- ><MiMteypa«(d fouııdı to concede was nw- ralljiimpoeeibJei- ím ι - s,' ¡ι.ι ν ţd ЬМип /i \ i )\ i«! . f\k\ h< ì í"*MeafU«d the height of tlie -window wirti'my' eyev tad sa w¿« thatiby-tying two Aetts.togetheivil shouldifce.abfe-to reaeh thr l**d»¿r«(!jdoon| wtóch jetted l! OUt
öüt intKV ttìé'igardei, and tìbfbi Amt thence I might leap to the grotmdi. ill admired the precaution of the servants, who only ventured te« -open,-, theı door ajar whilst they put iin niy fttodrjubiit- teninğ'BwWyı<withoUt spwlkiiig.· nniius- .■«n η 1« Л 'ИЧ i tın m "«И '»U As nociv as the dusk of itheittmmwg camoiotn, I/cast my eye round>»ttì disco¬ ver if any observer was near, but uot perceiving« anyji I ventured'to ıdeşeeıld to tbtrleadi, leaping from thtnoe tenthe ground.' "Thii suaoeaaiins > sliredimftiffi№ оопйаяю»; but* knowing Iijahoukl quickly be pursued, I'liastened tahinass the «wall, in ordente reach a little thtok- «st, where I proposed! <to> lay« cpneeated till dark. I had not remNinet} «long, in this place before I was startled by the vdioes-iof some persons ' coming, towards тв.*-^^ wand««," said one, '< whaMias 4UeMedtıhibibraİD,1 for tártain itiiS, -he.is ■quite «tjiníey orile weuiciVnotlhavegiven ' ? his
latifetiiéï tbat blow, nor»,hav«,lpuped 6İO á uiamebe^ht." : -»» .» I j ;i-, .. ; » " I would hnve us ЬкетсагеЛ retutn- etihhesúthet,,·! timt heidon't bita.. He'll beifixoidjol ,kno(w,,ifor thi» dodge, for master sajailie'ljll »ешУмгй toithe mud- house, as he's fear'd he'll either do hnn· self or »us. »ome: mischief »yind» besides, hrfs^nmiisedia re»-»rd to stop him," ;·. J I I A damp sweat came over me at this iritcHigenteu ¡Iiaatw my«telf truly urcled réOnd ibéyond.ieeMepe.;, and in plaueiof «alMfhptinglitf^yviI now judged'itlheit latinee to' haateri) tá theiettnvul, «¡eláílisy before the overseers i tbe »whotø '»fatter, Ithht theu: power might be extrted to pre- lten^>«b·'«mieLa»icheme. Without ííir- thér hesltetioB I ertered: »the town, and wamwBlkmg up toitte magMtrate^»wl*«n I»wli*sei-rt3iì-,at iooee ,c«i;¡botii Iside» *цу two UclEsmimwiawiHk hadielloWédjeta Iitti». dısttuı<»>-'tıHalıecrl НиааЦг Mlftd- ïtu h inumi''
illanót iaiďomij'! ·' wIlat,tyou!ı^.tl*î#e an airing; Dm— me,»«Okk, thu 8ït guineai be ouťnfi n r ι u »■vivat» 1 1 If ¡I »am not .'»ad,!!) said Ij »peaking «adhilyji'liyou «reimucblimposed; or*; and.if yon willego.te-Mi!. Hind's, I mil prove tá yoa »that; i am in «nyiesenseaj and ifyou are to have five guineas for stopping me, I wilt pay you as much to let me go." t «Iti Ли tl, ■ I Hi »» e > They (Were ready tn .consent ito »bi*, but«, started an ohjettaan, to 'going ito Mr.iffiBd'ej MthevUhwild ruBntbe b*· гщй of tmy father's" displeasure, lif known to .Suffer my escape., >*, t j«' <«,, »iWliileirwe· thuS'.parkjied.ieeevtiwlitof theitawn'eitpeoplee came upii. They, had j«t%t,ldtpit япуяЬяф AerøetheiWitodijivv; »ind Jnmsjíetd, joni«nyj going! Uaok »d hitìn my .ptirtjidenmii^mij' tøotte ; «ekriaí-ito M*. Hindi«! Thi^eÄirts^iiedjrBtrtngthr ened their opinioni of my insanity, and
and the expectation of additional reward added conviction. Thus again I was delivered up to parental despotism. My father had even the assurance to apply for the straight'waistcoat; and the next day I was conveyed, in this stite of non-resistance, to a private madhouse. I should have endeavoured at oppo¬ sition, but I found struggles and remon¬ strances only so much against me. It may be wondered how, in the face of' the world, I could be treated with such inhumanity ; but the world gives itself' very little trouble about private inju¬ ries. Who would suppose a father could act thus to an only son? What son in his senses would strike a father who hnd the power of disinheritance ? would fly from his house at night, de¬ clare he was going to Scotland, and, af¬ ter leaping from an upper window, ap¬ ply to a magistrate to tell him be was in his right senses ? Such
Such was the list of proofs my« father advanced to any who ventured¡ to in¬ quire; and these he would conclude with a short prayer that my senses might be restored. Thus was I ex¬ cluded from «society, deprived of my liberty, and left to the mercy of one of the greatest villains in nature, who was keeper of this infirmary. The house itself was situated in a wild part of the country, distant from any public road, and encompassed with a strong wall, held no communication with surrounding inhabitants. It was an old house, consisting of many rooms, jumbled together almost without de¬ sign -, every window was strongly grat¬ ed ; and, in place of sentinels, two large mastiffs ranged the gardens at night. Thus hopes of escape seemed wholly ex¬ cluded, and no other way before mc than to give up my scheme, and take grandeur and a wife I did not love, In place
plac«, of mediocrity and the wtwaa I adojsdli t ι I 1 II J I otSSo ащ who h«4d ever been used to ramble atiwill through woods and fields, confinement' «appeared ffltolefflble, but whm to this was added my fears and aoguislvaţ «the fate of Eliza, I gnashed my teeth m misery, surveyed with tyild- ness my narrow enclosure, and was ready to rush upon tbe graiitjgs of my win¬ dow, hfee a neV4İyTtaken íhird a,gainst Ar/wussof »te,«gé. îi I (retted mysulf almost to madness, and more than once thought of (ending my existenee, huti stjll the imagq of Elusa jnppiréil me with a desire to live Besides, I hadia distant, hope that my father might ι relent, or at least that bis déithiwould jeelease me. î и I u y j ι When a luttieneqoncited tq jfjiy »¡Ιμ- »fioDil endeawpui-editdi soften my kespt il er,
er, promising bim large rewards ür'bé would suffer me to escape, and in' tbro threatening him with vengeance, if un¬ der the mask of insanity he dared retain me in prison. He returned only tauhts and broken curses, from whicb £ «asily suspected«that he hadsomosuibttantia) reward, and that further attempts would be vain. Itkajutt'observatioii, that»'there is no situation but may, in some'degre« be reconciled to 'us« byiioontituahee, Und that we accommodate ourselves to every ¿hang« of fortunet The maxims· my memory had ».stored up, by »degree» shbuw through tbe çloudsof despair thtit hovered tound -me. » I began to discover within' tue a «piri*! of action, and·'ftlt the' energy of resolution 'support.-wiy drooping 1 mind; « I eten' dr^V'»oeuMgé from the greathessof imy sufferings, taking pleasure in rtCtrantiJig Лию,' till they raised me to a height so elevated, that
that I »seemed to triumph over »myself »nd» my enemies, and to set their holts and bars at defiance.« In place of shrinking'beneath the pres¬ sure of tyranny, my spirits arose to op¬ position, and«I sighed to convince my oppressors of their paucity of power. I exerted every possible means of increas¬ ing my strength and agility in my little apartment, by leaping and constant ex¬ ercise; sometimes making a noise so great, that my>»keeper..mme «in alarm to see if I bad not broke, through my apartment, and was half inclined to believe, that if not already mad, I shortly should be so. Confident that, though much less in sta¬ ture, I was able to master him alone, when,supperted by the desire of estjape, I assumed,an appearance of satisfaction, tbat he might venture into my chamber, which ibe never dared to do alone, nor without a large, stick. , -,· , « -, < ι , « . l 5 , .if / o mu ". i ι . , »ι It
It happened, howevei-, one day, that his man was gone to conduct a rr/natie to the house, and not susjiecting an at¬ tempt on my part, he ventured alone with my food. He was no sooner in the room than, with a sudden spring, I threw myself upon him and both fell to the ground ; I disengıijtTPiî myself in a mo¬ ment, leaped down the stairs, scarcely touching the steps, and flew to the door —it was fastened I ran to the parlour, but the windows were grated ; I seized one of the bars, and witJi a convulsive grasp (despair adding to my strength) sherek it in the socket, and the next ef¬ fort found it in my hands, the brick-Work, which was old and rotten,'having'given way. I heard the keeper hastening down stairs as fast aS his hurt would allow, for he had received a videfcnVcon- tusion on the head; but I was now'pro- vided with a weapon, and resolved to die rather than return. With one or two strokes I demolished the glass and wood¬ work,
work, darling myself »through· into the garden, i .wa«, »severely cut, bot that wasa matter,of little consideration, and I advanced to the idam «gate. The keeper had Opened die door, exerting himself to overtake me ; at the «same time his ser¬ vante and sevorabeitout men, with the new comer, entered the gate, «nd seeing my situation, prepared to seize me. " I am determined," cried I, brandish¬ ing the iron bar, "either to escape or pejrisb'on the Spot. ' Let me see the man who dares advance to touch me '" One of them ran away to the house, tbe other» standing at a respectful dis¬ tance; but the gate being fastened, I doubted my ability to open it, proceed¬ ing, with caution, lest they should take advantage behind. i «They were not, however, willing to enter withm the range of my -tem, «mus¬ ing
ing themsélvesiwáthTny vtriniendeawmts at the gate, till the, person. wSo ЬасЬаип to the house returned witli a long rope. 1 had mo conception »of .thein desigti,iun- tilil found it itbrowniover ine,» und my high hopes of escapei together with my¬ self, stretched upon the ground. . < It was impossible now to» act on tbe defensive, my bar was wrenched away, and after being severely horee-whipt, I was, pinioned, and dragged back to my room,» amidst the ourses of the keeper and his man, and expressions of horror ut my outrageous attempt from those who were now convinced that Iwas rav¬ ing mad, and wbo spread it round, the country that I had knocked down the keeper-with my hand,' and severely bit him; that, I had leaped, out at в ««win¬ dow, breaking in my Way the iron hare and the frame ; that I'had snapped with myhandselargeWofíròlieiaiid vaulted i« if »u, n, . from
fte« A» ground ta *Ь«^'«ор#Л*.((|1е líJHf ítpt high, ι Thus was thccountry imposed pn^and thus I was. treated with iiwre bajebarity, by means of my father, than,»¡italefa«> tor in the dungeons of av prison.,»,» ».■ ι« I 'l From this high ferment of spirits I «sunk into absolute dejection; and the only, sense of feehng I was, capable of, arose firom my bruises and tbe lash·»»! had received. I iancied that to think of Uvmg in these torments would be folly. and that I uught plant a dagger, oever to be removed frum the bosomJjf ^Щ &- ther, by endmgatjOnce ¡ny existgyp. , j^^tmuejng over this jefieOtigj^jn a dfŞfffp hrjjigjng tq mindall.thfe.Vjirtiious ψφφ» l соцЦ ircnMml>jr.trøt>i*«li,t^e jjţ^hides tWş.wwlte-ţ^fpjii.Irj^fiJel^ hnhoia ι <<ь* « ■" «o»3Ľ3»Ä8 d atj/l * ' да*'
ШЙШ myself called dil tolmihkfc their example. Who, said I, cari call that cowardice which is the greatest act of èóörege? "And léťthe famous action of eătbvsb much controverted, be-taken in iri trüê light; he saw that to live could not possibly benefit his itountry; for he had exhausted every exertion. His brave soul would not Wait to contemplate the destruction impending; not th it he could fear fer himself, as Caesar wcuid have been proud to acknowledge him as a friend; but how could he behold the glory «Jf ages expiré —the slavery of so mighty Ån empire commence' He turn¬ ed away from the sight, aiid would not withe»* what he could not prevent. As to injuring society, that argument cöühi'tfot apply to me. What father, moth»r'*Älation,oť dependent, vvöüld be iirjtó^ydoith? BVen thè Hansons thtìaieires might be benefited, as their pehecution would fall to the ground. VA. i. m 'Twas
'Ţwas true I brote through tbe laws in destroying 1 an individual from society ; but that individual was myeelf; end I inflicted on myself the punishment of death. Thus I at orice should commit pne of thegreatest crimes known amongst men, and suffer the punishment of the law in my own person. And if in a mo¬ ral sense there was a Crime, it was a crime done against myself, and not against another, and therefore to myself I must answer. To destroy the existence of another was the greatest outrage ; but surely 1 might do as I pleased with my own.—In this manner I reasoned, till convinced that no elimination could attach; and strengthened my resolution,- by recol¬ lecting that Samson pr.iyed for strength to shake down a house upon' himself, and that'thus Strength was given him to mur¬ der his enemies and commit suicide. - ' The
The anguish bf my wounds was ih some degreP'blunted by the knowledge that 1 conld quickly find a remedy ; and if I delayed, tit was not to be convinced òf'thé rectitude, or to'give fortie to my resolution, but to indulge my appetite for révenge, in contemplating the re¬ morse of my father and my uncle, when the only heir to all 'their high honours should leave them to feast alone on titles and guineas. Beside, I had not deter¬ mined my mode of departure My haiids were bound behind me, and not to be disengaged without extreme pain, they being lacerated with broken glass. I had но cup of hemlock or opium to lull me to eternal slumbers. I had no poniard to open at once a passage from life, and the only way left me, was to dash my head against the wall. I waited till the revolving hours had shrouded the earth in darkness; I look¬ ed out at the window, but no object was m 2 visible,
visihliè, nòràiiy thing to 'he heard, but Utti Äing 'of'the wind through the ¥«!$».— "Öh, Elizai" sighed I, "oh, un- ìfòrtiinate ¿air' shall we indeed never, hever, meet again? Is it true, that all our tond schemes are dreams of air, and that my soul is about to depart from this 'world, which seemed once so enticing and cheerftil ' But to where am 1 go¬ ing—what unknown mode of existence am I about to assume? How little is there between this miserable certainty of being, and that which no fancy can reach, ' to? Adieu, then, for ever · Oh, beloved liliza, adieu ' should it be for evir arid ever !" ι 1 closed my eyes, I ceased reflektion, I roused my whole soul to take its flight, and' bending myself, ran with violence agáihst the opposite wall; had It'been ' stone, or indeed firm, my purpose Wťrtitd have been effected, but being only Hith and plaster, 1 fell, stunned and insensible, into
into another apartment. The keeper and two men quickly hastened to the spot, concluding by the blood flowing from my face, that I had done the job. They were under great apprehensions lest they should be called to account ; but as I gave somes'igns of life, they applied their uni¬ versal specific, the horse-whip, and soon recovered me to a sense of feeling. It was thought proper that my father should be acquainted with the accident; in the mean time I was unbound, and conveyed to another room. The blood I had lost and the free circulation now allowed by liberating my hands, effectu¬ ally restored my senses, though I was too weak even to turn on the bed. My father had been instantly sent for, and arriving before day, went first to examine the damage I had done the wall, and then (with a stern inexorabie frown, entered 1фе room where I lay. , e MS " Oh,
"Ql> ho, my bear 1 " said he, '/what, we sliall tame you at lastend alíthat— are,'you »not tired resisting my will? How dq you> like a taste of Roman dis¬ cipline,'and that there? don't you re¬ member those worthies liad a powerof life and «death over thein children i Ay, »and let's see, there was .your Vidiue» Kollis, who oidered one,of hisislaxeeioube «ut down to mincemeat, to feed some fishes m ılım pond; these, are your nobles." ■" Stu," said I, making an, effort tet an¬ swer,' w though »my body ,i» half destroy¬ ed in attempts, to «gate tbat liberty« ypu have so mieanly taken away, and 1 by .the baae treatment of those,demons youihave placed 'over me, iffly'determination, «is unshak.cn> -< Wlulsti.'I' breathe, the »breath of. life, ; I will »puro against tyranny. There «re limits of. obedience itcjnalbdfi- gteti «nd ce«nnexi«MiÉ— haW;nbt:Igiven up to your direction tbeideysiof myidite since I had a will? In,obedience to yon, have I nut'obcyedthecommandsOf an чти«. <· с uncle
unde as a parent ? Have I.ever opposed your authority but in this point¡¡>Whreh is to influence me through life}, And do you think you or any man euistiriy shall fbr a whim link me to posi tive, mi¬ sery? No, »sir; you may torment,« »you may kill, but you sliall Dever overeomeil' " I'will '" cried he, with vehemence, and stamping on the ground ; " whonrt thou? I will!, Do you think tbatdj who have driven many starving .families from their sheds, to shelter under the fall¬ ing snows; who have pluoged the. cot¬ tager in the dampdungeon fprmmt-, who exact the last farthing from tlw labourer; to be enabled-to live'independent and free,-will regard the·headstrong passions of a boy, and that? noU»the struggle be* tween us is for power, and,though liken Homan, I cannot instantly destroy voll, yet iican heap upon you vengeance higlt-i eh than the clouds/' e », ,»' it qu Ше' '. MI4I> » 111 ! I»W» »>1II| I '»4l!(t I )«HU>iled.«t i those'threat« withoubaw ni'»« M 4 s wering;
regained my freedom, to set myself up agallisi his measures of oppression·, and ^blaze !;o the world the baseness of his character He flung out of ïhè room, leaving orders that I was to be stnctly guarded, for if I was allowed to escape lie would make the country too hot to hold him '' I warrant your honour," replied the man, " though he s a desperate chap, we'll hold him tight, suppose we was to clap a little bit of à chain upon him ? ' " I leave him, and all that there, ίο you," said my father, " I shall send Mint to dress his wounds T The «spirit of some might have droop ^d.aţ thpse accumulated sufferings, %у t 1* ψι only roused to overcome ,Jfí» jim»rt m ï ra T" w fe «Я idi - ffa«**
THEODORE CYPHON. 819 glanced towards.Eliza, wereg№at:,but if I hâd hitherto failéíjl in rny .efforts to escape, I considered that wliat does not ТЧГ ' *^ . t V Vf /IU 1 UllJeUJ happen at one time may at another. The «agonies of Цу lpoiţjr were lesseneď.ljy calling to miijd the sufferings or ancient heroes, and that whiUit able to sustajn them, I became more inured to hardship, and of consequence more able to enelure oppression. , , My desire of death was cooled, hy re¬ membering that ij; was in my power to bestow my little estate and annuity qn Eliza, which in case of my death without a will,, would only add to the poyŕer of my father, The accidental discovery that all the walls were not sohd, inspired me with hope oí sometime turning it to advan¬ tage. When left alone, I examined the room.wri'ere I lay, in which some car- i^WtànWorkT afâ amongst ' J m S the
lhe ihavlHgi'î гЪипй nuttig which to írré wie к prinfe'of inestimable Yafeè.. ■ iul ΛΐΓ -nfc ni ; j uıM.ıı.ii I „t ' îtonc^ed it ili>the bed; thutit«light notibi-ftltinderr/ÄngifrWiycloÖie^.wliich they had more than onee examined, and plundered of all the Httle-«rtitiles.«P va. 'lu» 1 Уог л month I'was íonfined twtUë y Be4íy«ly"wòurtde, and thëmonîfrMtl· véred 'by the native vigour of toy con¬ stitution; doctor Flint having content¬ ei hlmetlf frith twe-vfeJtí, aihtÍ4»yJieep- Ws 'notie of the most Indulgènti "Bekig «ihsîdérèd as a'crraíge of trust, aildWie Who ittight'gi+e tiheih· nittch troubtej Ì *a» removed; яа<Шп> as'We№ ubk>'tó stind, Hito a room in the centre «f "thè house, without any window, and deno¬ minated tlie dungeon. 'A logOf"wood (vafe firttellèií tö my leg'by a ebéin, n*k- Iri'g a naitte as'ï moved/ but itte'ÏmteeU ώοή Uten away, fotnot btíhjfdelfeWe öf thê№^ej^ser an*d»ťreqfa«i1íf1e^»ng gitivi * # İt
it disturbed the whole jiqjjse«.. .unfits place Was substituted A clıaiı^of âve feet in length, a burden more intolerable than any thing. I had hitherto suffered» being now unable to take (sufficient exercise·, t I , . J , The «darkness of the room, .tbft.fiq- trance of light being confined to,a snja]l aperture over the door, I considered де an advantage towards facili tat ing^ıoay design of «загаре, and when my stimigtJi was sufficiently repaired, l heg^jj; by sounding tiie waUs nouud me« Jlftviug fortunately secured the chisel- T»W.«wte were solid, the third was ¡the (jour,,and the fourth receivedtlie chisel, being only lath and plaster. »It was necessary be¬ fore I could act with freedom, to literate myaelf from the .chain, and notjbeijjg аЫе to divide the links, 1,ЬЬлцг«е(1|. to wrench the staple Вющ the, floor, и the night af|^«thií4iatíovçry, I w«#«a-#»iV «ned,by^anoijienewme f I rai»td.my ЬйиЬ&ащ *Ь»,г}ж1№Ли\ец, : жк/с<>ф м 6 plainly
plainly Äafingaish the voie« of» several pejjeaiif.oJS»<mdieá-wifh thii asthebome- iksneiiêtt teqonfusion -trom tbe «butcries örlteimaniaft) and thé oáths or thè! keep. ers, I was laying down again, when I [jeroelvea á light reflect against the-Vall, opposite»* ibfe 'holtľ I h«td made Wieth the elteli 'My'ttWention was'instabtly êx- аОЯрЧЧиШ with caution, an* placing íiíý ŕyr ágninst thè Wall, «duld distin: gUiSA Sèvettii- ill-looking men with the keeper and his servants. I listened, ga- theringfromtheirdiscourse,thatamong8t rtffi^^r^Hy^lrpfeeä,' thè houfee'waí a AtíàeWÂii 'for* íhlèvfeft who Were how rbet 46i!iviaé r fhar'plünderí ! m "I " feq^f'. híí. ««« «b <·. ' M5 IB> i *'«' ! ih5r*'gilm&,·' iaid onej ""Cy- pfiöít'sTi'rtml'áog't'tf keep' this heben» «^•»rti'y ψβΑ4οΐ nothing ef alfi" l.i<-« '«■*Ш, Ii^th* HblyA*irgain,"rephedaı«n. ther, " but this 'ul hathing « »H; àt аПДО the trimming he's giv'n to parson Han- ^«P ùtWtUÉi *jte4*Sietól*r4>l«*i*Sfnïp- "ír son,
Son; tiiat tint limb'ofl tbt3íd*vliľsloi«n, first begiten, lord D«-~u- ( ; lœnt>to pinga« tory? ^^"as-ptatty 1 » pair of jewels as we'll see in Kilkenny on a summers day."' ..«<·., ■ » í' Non" rfyour »blarney,' 1 cried the keep¬ er; '^Ήο· tales, ой you know what." ** And what then," cried the Irish¬ man ; " mayn't we be silent amongst friends? ' Arrah I but dan't you remem· ber how the claret ran when we gave him the word' to stand ?" , f I'was too'tnoch affected by tliis hor- ridedescription, and the hints they had dropped of Hailson; to remain silent 1 uttered an ejaculation, and clapped my 1ιι»ή8ί tomy forehead, Oneof the thieves started »p; atid believing tbey were oyer·» heard, flteda pistei in a moment.tbrpPgb theríWeümcot, swearing he would beibe death of whoever was there. jHi-.c ¡(fiìllbtm'sxinìlli/nìtwbg Cytjfbw»" Щ& «io? the
tbe keeper, " and he can't have beard us ; let's see, however, that the spark is not endeavouring to get out again." I summoned my presence of mind to the exigency, and .laying »myself down whilst they were going round, feigned to be dreaming.—*' What," ened I, the moment tihe door opened, " i» my im¬ prisonment to last &>v ever ? Ten years abetjady gone ! But I tell you it won't do—I will escape^-I will tear off my chains. ' .At the same time I seemed to struggle in noy ι sleep, iwlueb soe«sffeetual. ly deeeixed the thieveij, that they laugh¬ ed heartily at the adventure; the one who had fired the, pistol swearing, that bad be found me awake, I should have Ьякеп « fteepifito the world below; for these» jpeople. seldom thmk of the World abovft ¡m „ й ,| « j aï) t*<9 > a tí 'It e' v ' '«'^ I и ¡VA J í » з ' CHAP-
CHAPTER X.
Sleep for that night no more closed my eyes ; there was something so shock¬ ing in being at the mercy of those wretches, and the narrow escape I had had, that my spirits considerably · fell, and seemed to subside-from high toned despair te a sullenness of disposition that brooded on misery« I was angry at the -want of some judicial inquiry into thoaé plac«, where a paltry licence was sufficient' -title to erect a partial bastile, and where private power had the»bberty to play the tyrant. Undoubtedly, every magistrate should examine the chambers of wretchedness, and see that no son of misfortune is mingled with those who V- и í suffer
suffen the greatest human calamity, in a deprivation of reason. The alarm I had given to this noctur¬ nal junto pointed to the keeper the inconvenience of my remaining longer in the same cell, and the next day I was removed into one of the remotest chambers in the upper story, the door of which was secured by two strong chains on the outside. To judge of the pleasure I received from again entering daylight, and breathing the air as it sighed through the gratings, you must like me bave known its privation, though my situation was, very far removed from that of those who pine out their days in darkness and noisome damps, with a mind loaded, perhaps, with crimes, and no prospect in advance but the punisb- «rneptofjlaw. ! id » My first design was to unrivet the bars and leap out; but the height exhi¬ bited
-, τ V* bited the folly of such a scheme, as I must have been inevitably insula in pieces. 1 examined the Walls, and foWnd t'iem all solid; thus no hopes of imme¬ diate escape appeared, and I sat dbWn to reflect and repine. Several days rolled away in unifbrmi- ty, during which I fruitlessly attempted to bring over the keeper, and wMH much difficulty prevailed on him to convey а letter to my father and uncle. I "thought policy, at least, warranted some Uttle'de- ceit, and I attempted to soften'raetit by a recital of my sufferings, and а 'promise, that though I would not marry 1 whom they should appoint, neither would 1 one without their consent. ' ' ¡ My uncle returned no answer, àAd my father' only a triumph over myiäím'de- scension.—" I was a fool," said I, on'read¬ ing the paper, " to think of softening ' Ί Mióse î h , , „ι
those monsters of the creation, whose hearts are harder than adamant." I now gave up expectation of release till their death, and with tears in my eyes spent whole hours gazing on those landscapes where all was gay, and where the inha¬ bitants ranged without suspicion of my sufferings. How often did I wish I had been the son ofa peasant, whose daily labour sup¬ plies the miserable morsel of life, and whose round of existence is only tem¬ pered by breathing the breezes of the mona, and a kiss of some sunburnt dam¬ sel at night' but as for me, the common consolation in wretchedness was denied, and the .only semblances I beheld 'like myeelf, were a disgrace to the form of humanity. All my sentiments took a melancholy turn ; I reviewed in my mmd the actions of men, and sighed at their innumerable follies; for whilst they flat. 1 tered
tered themselves as being next in grada¬ tion to angels, to me they appeared be¬ neath the excellencies of brutality. One night, when my thoughts were too confused, too distracted to lose them¬ selves in repose, and my sleepless eye wandered through the gloom of a half obscured moon, I heard a voice beneath my window, that sung a plaintive air so sweet, that all my attention was fixed. I listened for some time to catch the words, and perceived that it was repeat¬ ed again and again, like those notes, which having struck upon the mind, re¬ turn by mechanical action. What, there¬ fore, I could not make out at first, a se¬ cond and third hearing supplied. The silent heiur of midnight reigns, > Andlicwboie heart in free fro«» cur«, ι » J4ee«m not, the 8ÜUİ ItuvtteiiH^QßtliptHWS, Nor in its murmure takes a sliare llic
ff e Bigbtig wind», the tremblbg Ъгееге> Л moment НИ to hear my voes , Then Mftly flutter thn igb tbe irte», And leHV»· tlie foliage to feipose Seduced by fletttiry'a silver tongue, lite ei.·fiter mun beheld aud smilft I, And stille the syren sweetly sung, tyj l nart by simpering love wan gutted Cut lefl: forlorn on earth's wild witste» r ShiuBP s mourning dnngbter, tben vtai, I Şlıunıı'd by tbe vntuou**, nnd tbe cimate, Ahme to vteep, июне to sigh Bot ah ■ ye umida юте pity give To her whom softness led nstray, And by a silent tear, relieve ТЫ breast wfiere innny sorrows lay And oh, ye fittes ! though hnrd be mine, ţ^tiţr« pot evU on Ыч bend— .But nil у mr k)iidjy pu»ers combine, « 1 о measure bksbiugg in us stead There was something so enthusiastic, so far above nature in the con-eluding verse, that I admired the seWments, though
, , ţ rr ^^ ri t y i{ though I could npţ incitate fheitt-but hers was an injury frpnj^^pver^ It was the true spirit oţ gçojlness,, yeţ it was the soft weakness of feminine failing, wliich yet lingered and loved the des¬ truction she sunk under. The tone of her voice, trembling m its notes, was like that of Eliza when she f.iltenrtgly an¬ sw ered my inquiries, but Eliza had loved only me By me she had not suffered except in a secondary degree, and the horror this reflection at first excited, sub¬ sided into that enthusiasm of grief, which exalts the soul to heaven, and touches on madness. I half envied the fair insensible, who, like the bird of iiight, sung over the sto¬ ry of her loves in mournful melody ; for whilst her song touched afresh all her sorrows, reason was unemployed, and her mind delighted in the tale ? ( , ¥ ì -ί' I 1 il I remembered this ypung wpipan, who » . had
hid ilueen the pnde of the village, the GWoeioť the ewnini, 1 and the bnvy of the ntjjeedeV/ She liad been seduced by a young gentleman, and on his marriage with ano thet, became melancholy, and at lengtb so delirious, that bis friends, to prevent the odium of the village, placed her in this house, where her more lucid inter¬ vals were spent in repeating this dirge, in weeping, and m w atthmg the clouds, in whose varying forms her derenged f mty portrayed a variegation of images buch was the shoit and common his toi\ of this, and ten thousand British muds who like fruit exposed to an un kinilly aspect, drop from the boughs ere tliey attain maturity, who, for the gra¬ tification of man, are condemned to re pint through life, lost to the end of trea- tion, α burden to themselves, and a sor¬ row to others I sat down to trace this pvil to the source, and beheld a multi plication of corruption, I saw а wide ex¬ tending
tending'thebry of reform, bub te ţirtctl*· required the sklllof Divinity, ehdarehb. vation of morality and maxims, WbttM to Heaven that, from the lord to tM pes' sant, every man »who first seduced a fe¬ male was compelled to maintain or mar¬ ry her! this would'be a radical cure for this most enormous crime, and thin tbe large' towns of thousands of miserable beings, whoso numbers are now daily recruited by impunity of vice. This single incident, however, furnish¬ ed me with a long range of amusements, serving to wear away the' hours. 1 placed myself at the commencement of society. I formed lawi, and traced up their con¬ sequences ; but I found in all the weak¬ ness of human nature, concluding with Solomon, that nothing was perfedt be¬ neath the sun. 1 compared the monar¬ chical with the republican, the oligar¬ chical with the representative; and I found, that in the administration of ei¬ ther,
thin, but one thing was wanting to ren¬ der each a blessing to the people, and that was, men of integrity and virtue; without this, -the one only differed from the other by a line in the scale of oppression. Tired at length with forming plans never to be realized ; and remembering that the ingratitude of the people usual¬ ly first singled out those as victims who attempted to instruct tbem, I turned my thoughts from legislation again to consi¬ der the means of escape. I observed, that if I could cut away the lock, I might open the door, as it turned inward, and thence descend to the ground floor. Thus I might probably escape, or sell my liberty dear ; for, pro¬ vided with my chisel and resolution, I considered myself nearly equal to the keeper and bis man. I wondered this design had not pre¬ sented
though mostly tbe tjţst, й№ gMœr« overlook«, il at first, mstjarch of cooptó ity. I waited the inétease oí the ut«»!, that its Ιι^Ιιί might siline on tny labour, fearing uth«. t uise to lose my way in a house ot so ш my turnings, and likewise to prevent tb it timidity darkness always inspires, ο« ιψ to the impossibility of warding míj« mling danger. One nicht uhenthe full moon rose with brillili > iti the heavens, I begati my exeition m a few minutes cutting round th« ι ι« md then with my arm forcing ti s on the outside, t ehtet- ed#elan u \11 w& profoundly si¬ lent, and « Milling in the prospect of li¬ berty, I h i-.li ned towards thé gr&ťjjol. My ardour !»u ι eceived á cheme from a door, tie« U put up at the foototpe stairs, and pi itul with iron. I miist ei¬ ther Bow ι tum or thmk instantly on J. 1 IOW 1*1 ,»°ntt» ι N some
,s^me grappi aftempt., To force the door ^(tøejempi^ible; and to convince them of iny.ajjjrjt more than hopes of escape, I begţm^tp teai¡,4p the stair, though oblig¬ ed tp work fc> w > m f ear of alarm. In less tiian ap hour I had cut through too steps, and taking up the lathing beneath, sq aş, to be able to descend into a sort of lumber place under the stairs. It was ten minutes at least before I could grope out the door, but then it was easily opened, and I now raised my eyes vvith pleasure to that light, whose brilliance seemed to increase at my efforts. Perfectly collected in myself, I re¬ moved many heavy pieces of furniture fiojn beneath the stair, planting them so i\s jit least ţo retard the opening of the door, in case they should awake, proceed¬ ing with increasing confidence to un¬ fasten the door. This was a labour of herculean greatness, and from the hard¬ ness of the wood, and little progress I made,
made, of too great length for the short¬ ness of my time. I hastened therefore to open the door into the garden, but found it equally impossible to raise it off the hinges, or cut round the lock, and was obhged to have recourse to the more tedious way of cutting out the square panel, which was the labour of another hour. Once more I stretched out my arms beneath the open heavens. I leaped from the ground to be convinced of my absolute fieedom, and almost forgot, in the excess of my joy, that I had yet a very high wall to pass. I hastened to¬ wards it with the exultation of a con¬ queror who believes himself invincible ; but one moment overthrew my hopes, for, being too intent, I had no guard on my steps, and was thrown over the trunk of a tree, with a shock that stunned me, and dislocated my ancle, n 2 at
at the same time the chisel severely wounded my hand. ţ found it impossible to move, any other than by creeping into a row of bushees, where I lay down to wait the arrival of my keepers, endeavouring to sooth my mind with their fears at my having eluded tlieir vigilance. I re¬ pined not at this near view of escape, because my mind had ceased to expect much of fortune, and considered that I might hereafter profit by this experi¬ ence. The first who descended in the «morn¬ ing discovered the destruction of the stairs, and instantly suspecting it was I who had escaped, hastened to he satis¬ fied, in his way calling up the principal. I was quickly traced -through the hole in the door, bnd could perceive them running'to «¿d fro, With fury in their
looks, imprecating curses on me for out¬ witting them, and on themselves for , having taken off my chain. They passed me several times, repeating, tbat I must certainly be gone, and that they had nothing now to do but fiy for it, as Squire Cyphon would certainly hang them. " No, no, my friends," cried I, " here I am, safé as a bird in a net. I had only a mind to take a little walk by moonlight." " By my soul, and so you are here '" said the keeper: " you are a d ------ d co¬ mical fellow ; hut if you take any more walks by moonlight, may my neck be stretcbed as long as a steeple '" In their joy at recovering me so easi¬ ly, they kindly informed me, that they forgave me a good round dozen; and that I might not destroy their sfeep by apprehension in future, fastened me by N 3 a chain
uteliain rivetted into the wall. The etevation of tlie room rendered it the mpst secure, -and therefore I was re- iqanded to my old lodging, and obliged to suffer their jests whilst the door was repaired and plated with iron. " Now, master rat," said the keeper, "you may nibble as you like; I war¬ rant we have fixed you in a trap you wont on a sudden get out of." " You think so," said I, smiling ; " do you believe I value that door' no, no, when I please to take a walk, it will open at command. Do you think all your hammering, and bolts, and chains, will keep me? no, my good friend, did I »choose it, I would shake tbe bouse about your ears, and fly away in a mist." » This vaunt created л Ыш t of laugh¬ ter, and Ί w« left to my own .reflec¬ tions. My chief means of escape was > lost
lost with my chisel, for noi*· I'-hafl'ïiêt a single moveable, except'ia 'pláte 1 '«Hd 1 an old nail, was fastened bya' heavy 1 chain, and fixed by gratings," hi' <1'ГГ*Ж1' four stories high. > ' 'Ьи' ' To augment the sufferings of confine¬ ment, a man totally delirious Was'my neighbour, who disturbed my'repose, day and night, by his bowlings altti cries. Sometimes I was awakefrwl'by loud cries of murder and fire ť 'then agáin myi feelings were torn (by the* bittértíst complaints and petitions ¡ fbr ι mercy; But what created' in'me' the greattíst horror was the daily stripes' he endured from the savages who had him' in oará Atı these "times he would- faniyi himself under the'hands of Indian" tormentone' and gave loose to every threat of'horrid retaliation his mind could suggest. At tuatis.heewouMfan^lHniB^utlæigehe- rahlbfi an-armyv undl then» tfiéirwhole apartment rang"with ;hüzzaá/ shouta, ' ■ N i and
and oommandt». »He would ordet Ms mm <it«t tìm riglit» *nflank, and to tlie ebarge: he wouWimitstetl-.e shouts of qon|<u9dii?g armie«, the shiieka of the wounded, the groans of the dying,« and the exultations of the victorious. His hands «nd feet supplied drums and cen¬ nou, md scarcely one hour did« he aUaw to Urakeu (lumber.* At fint I wa» distracted wa· fretted abbia i»te«mptioBi. Soejetiinas I caught the mednem ef hia spirit, and, partook in hi» triumphiv asewerieg shout fas shotit, »ndtliBekingnaycbain:; buttbii coaiplainti I uwelteaífí abk to bear, nati often startled with luvoluBttwy howor. Ш& would feign.hwnself « maid ini («üs· tre« ; ; hft woulii weep viith tli*. bittecet* ш»»Ше|т^«Ы»ю11«<т»и*к>11а. Thmagjue h« mpeœed отегаотв mmde«oiiíitiend, ■^jft^^b«ltiej,,«b«№hewmbldt«>«iäw the sèttMrtionaioith« deaá. f , 1 1<> <i tt -Hl »'J I )-■ 1 'id' ' f» « » ba The
The vigilance with which I was ob¬ served gave me uneasiness, and ramtM- bering that many things had been ac¬ complished by feigned insanity, Ί began to talk wildly at the approach of the servant), threatening to tear them in pieces if they came near, often grinning, and Starting up in fury. I imitated the bowlinga of my neighbour so nearly that I imposed upon them; and my utber WM informed that my brain was actually disordered. He was not, how¬ ever, to be moved by pity; and the only advantage I gained was now and then a sound horsewhipping and fewer visiti, being only looked «t once гыЦу. The «hain we« an ¡МоЬяаЬю load, but recollecting that water, whicb it the softest or fluids, by constantly droppteg, wittpérfbrate тягЬю ef tbe dossat tex·« ture, Ί >set about 'maring awuy ıstan ring with the old nail, * Ьюкеп edge» of the plate serving for « whetstone. I labour· N 5 ed
e* dtìyjijlftér dsvyf wîtli'*tı*tiencii*ıöt)ılng (tWlJq>v-(9eeme.>''> »ŕb'bľ, »»'vi.' »Wand »ш ί ΐί,ιπ 'jur u u. lian nm ! ''mntaWäaent>nöwbmögW lo*ý>vié»V »'tilW-l^ÍTfllíA'^líWrty.'i'hy· present¬ ing an oppcirtunitys^M* -«ig«« in« again occur in the life of man. A storm il>f οΐΗί«α(%ν4Γΐ<Μ«1ιο#'6-ϊβ gtntly *s*ilriãg- éd'^^tSOiltkŕifide efthebűildingT'·** l^tmıtğ"' %Αΐ1%"'^'·«!Γ*!ΐΜ*4Ιίο· Wfffl ЩА Ш*11Й1Г*а« iii «Miger ^'ftllîft^ •^**W!ňiPpé«i<a Vrt4h-propt*«lîa süt*. ШШи^ЫШШг™^ ""<* n* ч ι phi/ ШШ, 1Ш егЭЭПьн till İUJblIl'JİS» í '•¿■stt&tfìm *»y!íW 'ffé«-*'««.- 'élAiH, ШЩп Tnow'èhlr lÄffrťnéd «»'«fe-hob!' of my vWťriáiitírt«ti^*rfir^'affi«tol maihiess prevented suspicion. I there- ^^^io'wm^W^mWé tŕbar ^ť^toteÄ^rte Шйпе^^МечаРк ■Шу 'malik <«nat^ıt>'-wt№!>wrj«% ^пе\1 > ^п^^<ккаНёШШ·^ sthtíilíiiSre *Ш№й1&е&&№Чееакф ЧЩЫ^е -wt 1 brickwork,
britikwerfc » «whfcbiii-uWtSib «tóie^ib 'to moulder gradually, by ojMSíiS/rf.f,!')»! rusty nad and the nins of my buckles. The 4u#t4 .^ W fld„*^tlíe,WÍ«iáSi/ond somiwh wbbUhl^gabwt-tl^grcÄU-jds, »ont»(jeft t »v«K(jiken í i ( , JJ i,f,, í(! , ,,„ н „ '•wile t -гш Io ч||| «iilt ш ιιιι,ο 'пвдг Uiur.jby >qi**nJBe * pwa^.W,|^J¿p^' the Ьоц^),«^^^^^,!^«^ Isatteffoil I».<^4 I B(5aba)(i) 1 y) J ev J sţ 1ще it with thecc*bee4^Bi#blfl«4Í9W«IW· I calculated my ciiances on either side ; tteexiflWQJ^-fiwwt Jjs^tl^imwns (rfe^eiÎHicv» Г01ЭДЦЦ1' «iíiWKpf №№ whkíjfW^i t^4tîajj r jBi ft to, l lïb^lj rv ym t< ,iOj"1 I lt«T4lc|MIP iisjnevrojrt rr-IfetfiSfri „йв .»w ( ,MitattWrøt itøsjSm,^ jtHgt^s^hpald^ei^ieţkj tl^!^ti^ţp«ink ^ej^ce&roi^jjaightiin *Щут:· φϊ Лас««)* md I had
I had marked for my flight was perticu. larly »stormy, and so duk, that not α star/eould« be teen through the douda, nor any object at a trifle of distaace. Undismayed by th· bowling· of the wind, or the descending torrents of rain, which indeed to. me sounded like the rough amine tbat inspired the soul to arduous exploits, I made my way to thu top of the bouse, under a heavy cannoned« in the room of tbe madman; butţhe wind raged with so muoh vio. lence-, timi, unable to stand against its jwweri» sö еясеяеа» situation, i crept on my hands and knees to where the scaffold was erected, bnt was unable to discern any part attached to the bouse. ■J waited' with «(conceivable tøuety, drenched Jwiah tain Mti 'benumbed hy «ài; buťk waa impMsijUe Jo auggert an expedient «to descend, andey ardent hopee wei» begining .to flag, wben-a ι « blaze
blaze of lightning fiashed, through» thc dreadfol darknee». streaming along the horuon, and presenting to,my views ladder teaching to tlie first landing-«! the scaffold. In a second, the thunder mutteredat о distance, and whilst it ad¬ vanced in tremendous loudness, and burst iiivarious direction« «aver bead, Ì descended, the whole pile of building tremblingbooeatb me. A flood of sain now poured, down, but the chief diffi¬ culty was over, the rest «of my wayiito the ground being' cæiparatively tasy. I bad ne time 1п,кме in seeking- »halter from its violence, advaneijBeg caetiously towards the gate«. I admiMd tha woass-eifol effect af the thunder, which was, perhaps, the chief m«ai«> of my escape, in its tertifiti^euts ottethe «bg» which ranged the yárdb- be vontmnd iudeeá tovnvutter i» aa under» growl, hut a loui roll whicb rattled thmagk tfae clouds tamed him to « sU «j * lence,
lence, and brought him crouching to my feet for protection. Inspired with fresh courage by the circumstance, I quietly advanced to the gate, easily get¬ ting over by means of the bars. I cast a look of exultation on the prison I had quitted, rejoicing that I was again free from the circle of infernal power. My former elevation checked my ar¬ dour. I reflected that much remained yet to be done, and that before day I must be far from this land of proscrip¬ tion. My ¡clothes retarded my progress by their weight, and stopping when I had ran myself out of breath, I cast my eye round the howling wilderness, to consider in what point I oould find se¬ curity. Iilonged to'visit the cottage of Mr».Hanson. My feet «almost mecha¬ nically followed tbe impulse of mysoul; but »so rash, an enterprise, was diverted by reflating, that now,, the (inhabitants who had once, emiled»within its'»walls, . were
were too probably wanderers Hke my¬ self. ι I trembled lest my pursuers should be already after me; and considering that if they should not discover my flight before morning, they would pro¬ bably first acquaint my father, and then proceed to my estate, I took the road directly leading from both. I travelled with speed for some hours, now starting at the creeking of the bushes moved by the wind, then fancy¬ ing I could distinguish the sound of a chaise and the clattering of horses through the roaring of the tempest, or that I was about to plunge into a torrent. At length I distinctly heard the jiilgle of bells, the shrill sound passing With clearness ; but as to me the sight of any human being was dangerous, I 'hastily left «the main road, without eorisidering I had the advantage of speed. · lhad
I had scarcely gone a hi.'.idred yards when I heard the rushing of water. I judged it to be some httle stream cross¬ ing the road, and carefully searched for the plank« I found it, but tbe stream was, so increased that every wave dashed over it, rendering the passage extremely difficult, But of any danger not pro¬ ceeding from man I had little regard, being familiar with suffering. I ad¬ vanced, however, with caution, having to grope my steps, when I heard, or fan¬ cied I heard the voice of a man on the opposite bunk. Had it been tbe keeper or my father, tbe effect eould not beve been greater. I shuddered all over, and without re¬ flection plunged at once inta the stream. I was a, practised swimmer, or my suf- ferisge wcuid have been ended; for so strong was tbe cunrent, that it required every effort, not to stem it, but to be carried dow» without sinking. My strength
strength was nearly exhausted, and I had, in the instant of weariness, brought the argument to a conclusion, that life was not worth so much exertion, when I was dashed with violence against a tree which projected over the stream : half insensible, I instinctively dasped my arms round it, and in a state of mind resting between life and death, with equal indifference, I fixed myself amongst its branches, unable to make another effort.
END OF VOL. I.
Fnuted by J Darling, Leaden! ι all-Street, Londo»,
