Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Netley abbey: a gothic story
NETLEY ABBEY. ????. I. A HE baron de Villars was the brighteft ornament of the court of our firft Edward. Sprung from an an¬ cient Norman 'family, he inherited that elevation of fentiment and noble¬ nefs of foul which ufually accompany high defcent ; and poíleíTmg the vir¬ tues of jrallantry, ffenerofitv, and fin- cerity in the greateft degree, he formed the moft finiihed charader of the 13th centurv. ? The
Τ e old baron, his father, dyip.ç to¬ wards the dole of the reign of Ì knry thc third, that monarch, vvho had con¬ fiderable obligations to the deccafid nobleman, determined to take young de Villars under his immediate pro- dion; and accordingly fent for him from Guienne, vv here he was then per¬ fecting himfelf in the athletic exerci fes and manly graces of thc age. On his arrival at the Englifli court, dc Villars had juft attained the age of feventeen. Virtue united vvith youth, and aided by perfonal attradions, is irrefiftible. The candor, the fweet¬ nefs of manners, and the benevolence of heart, which flionc fo confpicuoufly in the young ftranger, gained him im¬ mediately
mediately the affection and efteem of all \hr nobility; and thcir regard was confirmed, vv hen they had an opportu¬ nity of obferving the extraordinary ikill, intrepidity, and addrefs, which he difplayed in the tilts and tourna¬ ments, the favorite amufements of the European courts in the Feudal times. Prince Edward diftinguifhed thc young Norman with particular marks of attention. Tho* he was thc elder of the two by feveral years, yet he eafily difcovered in de Villars, a pre¬ maturity of untlerflanding, a folidity of judgment, and a fteadinefs of prin¬ ciple, much above his age, that entitled him to his confidence and friendihip. Congenial fentiments will always pro¬ li 2 duce
obviated the difficulty, by lending the prince the fum of thirty thoufand marks. With this affiftance he was foon enabled to finifli his levies, and in a few weeks the hoit of Edward de¬ parted from England, with thc bene- didions and prayers of thp v\ hole na¬ tion for its fuccefs. ??? the ardor of de Villars was to meet with further checks. St. Louis altered his original intention of failing immediately for thc Holy land, and di- rcding his .courfe to the coaft of Africa, came to an anchor before Tu¬ nis, which he prepared to bcfiege, at the intreaty of his brother Charles, the king of Sicily.
It
It was in vain that prince Edward remonftrated againft thc pernicious delay which this change of meafures would neceflarily occafion. Louis was deaf to everything but the requeft of his brother, and by his perverfe ob¬ ftinacy feemed willing to affift the dif- penfation of Providence, whicft had decreed he never fliould return from the African fliore. Edvvard therefore perceiving intreaties to bc ufelefs re¬ folved not to interfere in Charles's quarrels, but to retire to the ports of Sicily, and there continue during the winter, that was now faft approaching. Both de Villars and his noble friend were fenfibly chagrined at thfe inter¬ ruption of thc original plan f but as vexation
vexation was ufelefs, and the feafon^ too far advanced to think of profecu- ting the voyage before the enfuing fpring, they determined to pafs thcir time as agreeably as poifible, whilft they remained in the delicious cli¬ mate of Sicily. This ifland during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, was one of the moft pleafurable fpots in Europe. Famous, as now indeed, for the mild temperature of its air, the vernal foft¬ nefs of its breezes, and the rich luxu¬ riance of its vegitation, it teemed with every natural charm and delicacy; whilft its court exhibited a fplendor, elegance, and refinement, unknown to the ruder and more unenlightened kingdoms of the north. The
The prince and his companions, were received with thc greateft kind¬ nefs and refped:; the court and nobi¬ lity uniting in their endeavours to amufe thefe gallant chieftains, who had thus undertaken to aflert the caufe of all chriftendom againft the Saracens. The tournament was a divcrfion in which the Sicilians of that age ex¬ tremely delighted, and nothing could exceed their magnificence in celebra¬ ting it. Shortly after the arrival, therefore, of Edward, a general pro¬ clamation throughout the ifland noti¬ fied that a meeting of this kind was to be held on a certain day in honor of the crufaders, when ail thc knights and grandees were required to attend. De
De Villars was delighted with this information ; fince whatever wore the appearance of arms warmed his youth¬ ful mind. Unufed to the effeminacy and infipid famenefs of a refined court, he could not reliih the amufements of which he had hitherto partaken in that of Sicily; nor reprefs a fentiment of contempt for its gaudy and voluptuous inhabitants. He prepared himfelf therefore for the warlike diverfion with alacrity, and on the appointed morn¬ ing, was the firft who entered the lifts. Here he beheld a fcene, that would have fafcinated a youth lefs ardent in thc purfuit of fame than himfelf. Thc queen of Sicily, the two princeffes, and Ifabel de Parma thc king's niece, appeared in front, feated under a ca¬ nopy
???? of cloth of gold, furrounded by all the grandees of thc kingdom. On each fide of the canopy ran a range of pavilions, forming a femicircle, cover¬ ed with white fattin richly embroider¬ ed with gold, and containing the fe¬ male nobility of Sicily. Thefe were moftly women of exquifite beauty, dreffed in a paftorai ftyle ; crowned with wreaths of myrtle, and wearing chains of natural flowers round thcir necks. Behind this hoft of beauties, on a ftage rather elevated, ftood fuch of the lords, knights, and gentlemen of the ifland, as did not appear in the tournament, clad in their moft gorge¬ ous attire; whilft inummerable mul¬ titudes of the lower ranks enjoyed the exhibition from a painted fcaftblding that
them : and the fignificant glances that efcaped from thc eyes of the fair fpec- tators, plainly told how interefted they already were in thc fuccefs of the young Norman. The lov ely Ifabel de Parma, who had jult reached her f\£* tecnth year regarded him with pecu¬ liar emotion, and fcarcely noticed any other objed during the continuance of th£ diverfion. Prince Edvvard, who had deter¬ mined to afford his friend a fuil op¬ portunity of exhibiting the addrefs and İkili which he poffeffed in thefe martial cxercifes, declined entering into the tournament, that he might not draw any part of the attention of thc fpedators from dc Villars ; gene¬ roufly
rouily facrificing the thirft of glory to thc warmth of friendihip. A pavilion therefore w as provided for him, and his confort Eleanora, who accompa¬ nied him in thc crufade. The trumpets now fummoned all fuch knights tocóme forward, as were defirous of trying their prowefs and dexterity in the tournament. Im¬ mediately appeared Alphonfo prince of Sicily in a fuit of filver armour, and mounted on a milk white barb, at¬ tended by feveral Sicilian noblemen, all accoutered in the moft fumptuoui manner. The joufting then began, and much addrefs was difplayed by the individ- c ? uals
uais of both parties. But the baron de Villars eclipfed them all : every knight whom he encountered acknow¬ ledged the fuperior vigour ofhis arm ; he overcame feveral fucceffivelv, and compleated his triumph by i.*ihorfing the prince of Sicily and bearing him to the ground. The efteem of the fpectators now kindled into admiration; and every one ftrove to give fome token of ap¬ probation and applaufe. The queen herfelf, tho* fecretly chagrined at the ill-fuccefs of her fon, could not permit the merit of the ftranger to pafs un¬ noticed. Untying a girdle of pearls which encircled her waift, ftie threw it round the neck of de Villars, beg¬ ging
ging htm to wear it for her fake, and to confider himfelf in future as the queen of Sicily's knight. When he had received this diftin¬ guiflicd honor, and retired from the royal pav ilion, Edward embraced his friend with thofe fincere effufions of joy which the generous mind experi¬ ences on beholding merit rewarded with fuccefs ; and de Villars felt more fatisfadion in the gratulations of this exalted charader, than in all the compliments and plaudits of the Sicilian court.
? ?
CHAP.
CHAP. II. T'ir""* Â HE amufements of the court of Sicily were now interrupted by thc unwelcome news of the death of St. Louis, who had fallen a victim to a peftilencc vvhich fviept away three fourths of his army, and the capture of king Charles by the Moors. Thefe difagreeable tidings caufed univer¬ fal tciror and diftrefs amongft the Sicilians, whofe minds emafculated by luxury and pleafure, funk under the fhock of any unexpected evil ; diverfions of every kind ceafed im¬ mediately, and the whole kingdom wore a face of difmay and difcon- folation. De
De Villars, tho' he regretted the caufe of this general mourning, was not at all difpleafed at its effect ; a$ it put a ftop to that conftant i\u - ceffion of pleafures, vvhich couid only weary a mind like his, devoted to the purfuit of military glory. The mafque, the pageant, and thc ball had no charms for him ; he feldom, indeed, attended them; and when obliged by gratitude and politenefs to make one of the motley creu, he retired as quickly as poflible from the fcene, difguft ed and fatigued. His hours were chiefly fpent in ma r íha U ing the anm, exercifing the troops, and vi¬ fiting the di fea fed foldiers. Thefe avocations, with the oecafional chace of the wolf, filled up his time both uíefully and ????????. By
By the death of ihc French king, prince Eduard Liw himfelf inverted v\ ith the fup reme command of the cru¬ faders. He therefore determined to make up in fome meafure for the time al read) loft, by preparing h is armament for failing earlier than was originally intended. By the Litter end of Janu¬ ary every thing u as in readinefs; and the prince and de Villars having taken a final leave of the Sicilian court, it was publicly notified that the fleet would depart on the firft of February. Two days previous to this time, prince Edward, who was a pafiionate admirer of hunting, the faihionable amufement of thc Englifli in thofe rimes, determined to fpend aday in the purfuit
purfuit of the wolf; and, attended by de Villars, rode to the wood of Fonta- bia, which abounded with thefe fero¬ cious animals. Here thc gallant friends found abundance of fport; and many of the favage tenants of the foreft fell be¬ neath the lance of each. At length two wolves darted from the covert at the fame moment, and taking different direction?, the prince engaged in the purfuit of one, and de Villars followed the other. After a chace of confidera¬ ble length, which led him thro* various glades and windings, the latter over¬ took his prey, and in a few minutes laid it breathlefs at his feet.
He
He now perceived, however, that his ardour had led him to fuch a dif¬ tance from his companion, that it was utterly improbable he ihould meet vvith him again during the remaining part of the day. He could by no means recollect the many mazes and twinings he had made in the purfuit of hi» game ; and even if he had been able to retrace them, it was likely that the prince would be far diftant from the fpot where they parted, when he ?rrived there. He therefore conclud¬ ed his beft plan would be to preferve a ftrait courfe through the wood, and, at the firft habitation which he reach¬ ed, to get directions to the encamp¬ ment on the fea fhore. De
De Villars rode for a confiderable time through alleys of myrtle, and groves of orange trees, that were ever and anon illuminated by the gol¬ den rays of the fetting fun, which oc¬ cafionally penetrated the thick um¬ brage of the wood. On the lofty fum- mits of thefe, innumerable birds of various plumage, were perched, who in foft melodious notes carolled their evening hymn to the all-bountiful parent of nature. The turf over which he paffed was of the fmeu texture, and brighteft verdure, and thickly enamelled with numberlefs odorifer¬ ous flowers, which fcattered the moft delicious perfume,and balmy fragrance to the furrounding air.
Di
De Villars, who vvas a great admirer of nature, felt the magic of the fcene before him, and funk into a profound revere. " Happy Sicilians!" at length exclaimed he aloud, "thrice happy inhabitants of an ifland that enjoys every gift which the lav iih bounty of nature can beftow ! Here genial funs* preferve a perpetual fpring.—Here no rude wintry blaft is felt to check the progrefs of vegetation ; or freeze the current of the blood.——Fruits, flowers, and plants here nourifh in un¬ ceafing verdure. The gentle zephyr of thc morning awakens thc full har¬ mony of every grove. Thc cooling breeze of the evening bears health and fragrance on its wings."——-"But hoid," continued he, after a moments paufe,
paufe, " let me not pronounce 'too haf¬ tily on national felicity. Shall vve nor find on reflection, that thefe fuppofed fources of happinefs, are the caufes of mi ferv to the Sicilians? Docs not the w' envied foftnefs of thcir climate fink them in luxury and voluptuoufncfs? Does it not relax thcir bodies and en¬ feeble their minds ? The almoft fpon¬ taneous fertility of their foil precludes the neceflity of honeft labour; and the harveft that is procured without toil, is eaten without enjoyment.------ Loft to every thing but pleafurable purfuits, they fubmit too, without a ftruggle, to the arbitrary mandates of a tyrannical individual ; the laws are trampled on ; private property is vio¬ lated ; the freedom of the perfon is d rendered
rendered infecurc; and life itfelf is< often facrdficed to the prince's will." The ftarting of his palfrey now roufed de Villars from his foliloquy ; and looking for the caufe of the ani¬ mal's alarm, he beheld a beautiful boy before him in a pofture of fupplica- tion.- The expreflive blue eyes of the youth were fuffufed with tears, and his cheek glowed with a bluih of mo¬ defty. His form was elegant, but delicate to a degree. He was cloathed in a light Sicilian habit; a paftorai hat ornamented with a wreath of flowers covered his head; and a filken ribband connected his curling flaxen locks, vvhich defcended to his waift behind. Thc baron, whole humanity
wa.s
•was equal to his valour, felt his fenfi¬ bility immediately awakened by the apparent diftrefs of this lovely boy, and defired him to rife, and account for his fudden appearance. " Generous chieftain," returned the youth in moft mufical accents, "you behold an unhappy orphan be¬ fore you, doomed to perpetual mifcry r , unlefs he finds protection in your be¬ nevolence. My name is Bertram ; the only remnant of the Rodolpho family. The count my father died about four years fince ; and grief for his lofs, deftroyed the countefs, my beloved mother, in the courfe of a few months after his deceafe. The king of Sicily taking advantage of my unproteded d 2 fituation,
fituation, feized on the large eftates of my departed parents ; and placed me in the palace as page to prince Al- phonfo. In his fervice I have con¬ tinued ever fmce; tho* from his un¬ accountable, and I may fay, unmerited unkindnefs, my fituation has never been the moft agreeable. This how¬ ever, I could have borne without mur¬ muring; but an impending evil of the moft terrible nature obliged me to feek for fafety in flight. Three days fmce, meffengers arrived from the king of Sicily who is now the prifoner of Muley Azim the dey of Tunis, with orders to levy without delay five hun¬ dred thoufand golden fequins; and to felect fifty of the moft beautiful youths pf the ifiand, who, together with the treafure,
treafure, are to í urm the ranfom of our monarch. This morning prince Alphonfo acquainted me with thc news, and notified at the fame time his determination, that I ihould be inrolled in the number of thefe devo¬ ted youths. I was overwhelmed vvith horror and difmay at the intelligence?, but inftantly refolved to efcape from the threatened calamity, by leaving the court, and throwing myfelf under the protedion of prince Edward, or his noble friend the baron de Villars. I accordingly retired from the palace as foon as Alphonfo was departed, and gained the receffes of this fo¬ reft, where I have fecretcd myfelf during the day. As the evening ap¬ proached, I thought I might venture x> 3 to
to thc Englifli camp without danger of difcovery; and had juft reached the íkirts of the wood, when the founds of a horfes feet, and a human voice ftruck me with confternation. I hefitated whether I fliould again dive into thc gloom of the foreft or approach the chevalier, and fliould have adopted thc former plan, had not an opening glade allowed me to obferve the holy crofs on your fliield, w hich diffipated my terrors, and em¬ boldened me to throw myfelf at your feet. 9 * FIere Bertram let fall another co¬ pious torrent of tears, and again intreated the protedion of de Vil¬ lars* Tu»
The baron who had been much affeded by the artlcfs narative, and innocent appearance of the youth, requefted him to be pacified ; aflur- injr him he would anfwer for his fifety, and take charge of his future fortune. " In the mean time Ber¬ tram," faid he, "I accept, thy fer¬ vice, and folemniy promife that you fliall have no occufwn to repent hav¬ ing made a friend of the baron de Villars.** The fmile of joy now flione thro' the tears of the page, who refpect- fully kiffed the hand of his new protector. " But youth," rcfum.d d. Vxîïars, " can
"can you point out a track which will lead us from ihis intricate wood, for its ma7.cs appear to me to be inexplicable; and as the eve¬ ning is now doling in, unlefs wc fpeed ily efcape from them, we may chance to be benighted here? "My lord," refumed Bertram, "we are even now arrived at the outikirts of the foreft ; a few more fteps will afford you an opportunity of be¬ holding the white tents of the cru¬ faders.'*------A xery iliort time con¬ vinced de Villars of the truth of the page's affertion ; they prefently emerged from the iliade of the wood ς, and difcerned the encampment at little more than a mile's diftance. When
Wn e u the baron arrived there, he immediately went to the tent of Edward; who he found had been returned a confiderable time. The prince heard the adventure of the page with pleafure and furprife ; and united with the princefs Eleanora in commending his innocence, beauty and elegance. In the mean time orders were given for the troops to be in readi¬ nefs to embark on the enfuing day ; as it was determined to take advantage ? ƒ of a favorable wind which then filled the fails.
CHAP-
v.. i 1«\? ♦ 1 j>it iL HE fleet of crufaders was foon under fail ; and the breezes continu¬ ing to blow propitiouily, in a few weeks they came to an anchor in thc port of Jaffa, on the coaft of Palef¬ tine. Various were the emotions which thefe holy warriors experienced on touching the confecrated fliore ; and a quick fucceílíon of contradictory paffions kindled in thcir bofoms. Tears of penitence were followed by vows of revenge ; petitions to thcir Redeemer, by execrations on their enemies ;
enemies ; and foiemn oaths were poured out to deluge that ground vvith the blood of the Saracens, whereon thc Saviour of mankind had fpent his life in examples of mec k-r neis, mercy, and refignation. ??? troops being landed, an en¬ campment was quickly formed ; thc prince appointed a tent for de Villars immediately contiguous to his own, and Bertram had a fmall one fitted up for him in the rear of the other two. Nothing could equal thc grati¬ tude of this amiable ftripling to his protector de Villars. His only ftudy feemed to be to anticipate the w iihcs of the baron—With generous minds, attachment is ever reciprocal. De Villars
Villars faw the grateful attentions of his page, and rewarded them vyith a confiderable ihare of regard.—Ber¬ tram, indeed, would gladly have fol¬ lowed his lord to the field, and fought by his fide; but de Villars could r?ot fuffer his delicacy and youth to mingle, as yet, in the tumult of battle. The infidels, apprifed of the ap¬ proach of the cruiaders, had long been prepared to receive them* They were already encamped in great force with¬ in a few miles of the ihore; fo that fkirmiihes commenced almoft as foon as the Europeans landed. The invincible valour of prince Edward and his friend, was ever con- fpicuous
fpicuous in thefe battles ; wherever they came, tlaughter and defolation marked their courfe ; nor could all the gallantry of fúltan Sel İm, and his fon Abdallah, encourage the Saracens to withftand thc chriftian heroes. In one of thefe indecifive conflids, in the plain of Joppa, dc Villars had encountered the gigantic Arazim, and beaten him to the ground ; when his brother Corah approaching the baron from behind, aimed a blow at his head, with a ponderous mace. At that mo¬ ment the fliield of Edward intervened, received the crafli of the enormous weapon and faved his friend; whilft his fword pierced the heart of thc ? Saracen
Saracen and levelled hirn with the duit. —On their return to the camp they were to crofs the rapid river A roar, f wollen with vernai rains ; on its bank the horfe of Edward fuddenly took fright, and threw him into the wildeft of its whirlpools. Oppreffed w-ith the fatigues of the day, and the weight ofhis armour, the prince muft inevitably have pcriihed, had not dc Villars generoufly plunged into the torrent, feized his heiplefs hand, and dragged him to the ihore.—Mutual obligations are the firmeft bonds ©f friendfliip ; and from that day the ree¬ gard of Edward and the baron for each other, became more ftrong, if pof¬ fible, than ever*
A
A general adion now took place, which was fought with the utmoft obftinacy by both parties, but, to¬ wards the clofe of the day, termi¬ nated in favour of the chriftians. In this, Edward oppofed himfelf to the arm of fúltan Selim, whom after a fierce conflict, he feverely wound¬ ed, and obliged to fly ; whilft prince Abdallah engaged the attention and utmoft prowefs of de Villars, nor quitted the field till he was nearly deferted hy all his friends. The affairs of the crufaders now wore a very propitious appearance. The enemy were evidently much weakened by the laft engagement, and feemed incapable of material ? 2 refiftance,
refiftance, fhould a vigorous attack be made on them in their camp. A nocturnal expedition was therefore planned^ and every thing arranged for its execution, when an unex¬ pected event gave a new turn to thc operations of the Engliih army* On the morning of the medita¬ ted midnight attempt, as the prince was alone in his tent at his ufual duily devotions, a Saracen youth was introduced ; who, juft arrived from the camp of Selim, declared he had particular ^ communications for the private ear of Edward. The atten¬ dants being withdrawn, the ftranger approached, and thus addreffed him. " Commander of the armies of Chrift,
Chrift, the fúltan Selim greets thee in the name of our holy prophet. He fees with confufion and diftrefs, that the votaries of Mahomet mufl yield to the fuperiority of European valour. His wiihes therefore are for peace. Wounded and difabled by thy invincible arm, he retires from the unequal conflid, and fends me, his humble flave, to propofe to thee offers of accommodation. Here prince," continued he, putting his right hand into his bofom " are the fultan's terms, and thus Caled executes his commands."—At this moment he drew a fmall poniard from beneath his veft, and plunged it into Edward's fide. Providenti¬ ally, however, the ftroke of the af¬ is 3 faflin
faílm was not fatal ; the point of the weapon glancing againft the ribs, did not penetrate to the vitals, but only caufed a long external wound. Edward, whofe bodily ftrength was extremely great, fecured the Saracen without much difficulty, before he could repeat the blow, and immedi¬ ately called to his attendants. Their aftoniíhment and indignation on be¬ holding the fituation of their prince cannot be defcribed. Fears for his fafety when they faw him pale and bleeding, firft took poiTeífion of them, and nothing was heard but pafiion¬ ate cries of lamentation ; on learning however that his wound was not dangerous, their grief fuddenly turn¬ ed to rage, and now each was loud in
in demanding that immediate and exemplary vengeance might bc in^ Aided on the criminal. ??? Edward, recovered by this time from the fudden furprife into which the incident had thrown him, reftrained their wrath; and ordered the young Saracen into confine¬ ment, till fuch time as his wound fliould be examined and dreffed. This operation being performed, Caled was again brought into his prefence. "Perfidious wretch,*'cried he, " is it thus thy prophet teaches thee to fight his caufe, by forged lies and treacherous murder? And can the leader of his armies, the fúltan Selim,
Selim, ftoop from the dignity of fo¬ vereignty, and have recourfe to ve¬ nal affaffination ?—But terrible ven¬ geance awaits thy crime ; ftudied, un¬ heard of tortures ftiall fpeedily clofe thy life.** " Christian," returned the Sara¬ cen wdth a difdainful fmile, "thou little knoweft the firmnefs of Caled's foul, if thou canft fuppofe it may be fliaken, by threats of torment, or of death.—Our holy prophet, whofe name thy tongue prophanes, has ftrung the bofoms of his real votaries with courage not to be fubdued.— Think not then I fear thy utmoft power.—One error, however, I would cure thee of before I die.—I fwear by Aila,
Alia, that thc fúltan Selim knew not of the ftroke which Caled's hand intended thcc." The intrepidity of Caled extreme¬ ly exafperated prince Edward, whofe great foible in early life, was the habit of giving way to an ungovernable rage, which frequently led him into ads of cruelty and injuftice. He was determined now to indulge his paffion to the utmoft.— Caled was remanded back to confinement ; and a fcaffold ordered to be erected in the ficht of the infidel army.—On this elevated building, it was publicly notified by a herald, that the prifoner would be expofed to the moft painful pimifli- ments ingenuity could invent on the fixth
fixth day from the proclamation; and a reward was offered to every one who would furnifh the execu¬ tioners with any new mode of tor¬ ment previous to that time. The anxiety of de Villars, til! he Was affured no mortal injury could accrue to his friend from the wound he had received, was extreme. He attended his couch with the moft af¬ fiduous care, and adminiftered with his own hand every medicine pre- fcribed. The care of the forces alfo devolved upon him, which now re¬ linquifhed the idea of furprifing the enemy's camp till their leader ihould be recovered.
In
In the mean time, a rumour of the .events which had occurred reached the ear of Selim ; and on the third day after the attempt on Edward's life, a herald arrived from the fúltan, oflering a thoufand purfes of gold for the releafe of Caled .—Edward, how¬ ever, who had refolved to put him to death, rejected the ofier with dif¬ dain ; fwearing at the fame time, that if Selim would throw till the treafurcs he poffeffed at his feet, they fliould not bribe him to forego the pleafure of punifliing the aflaflin. Saying this he difmiffed the meflenger. Early on the enfuing morning de Villars mounted his horfe, as was cuftomary with him, with an inten¬ tion
tion to vifit and infpeft the camp. The heat of thc climate of Palefline obliacd him to lav afide his armour except when engaged in battle, and he was now clad in a light riding drefs, with a falchion thrown acrofs his ihoulder. He had not proceeded far from his tent, when he perceived a Saracen of noble mein riding to¬ wards him. The ftranger beckoned to liim to ftop ; and the baron, not fufpecting any treachery, complied with the fignal.—He had fcarcely curbed his palfrey, however, before he perceived the horfeman pull thc ftrine of a bow which was levelled ? at him ; and almoft at the fame mo¬ ment he felt the point of an arrow in his breaft. It was in vain to think of
of revenging this piece of perfidy ; the Saracen's horfe was fleet as the wind, and had already borne his rider nearly out of fight. De Villars, immediately attempted to difengage the weapon from thc wound, which he eflcded without difliculty, as it was not barbed. ITc perceived too that it had not pene¬ trated to any depth; and began to flat¬ ter himfelf the injury he had received would prove to be but a flight one. He was, however, foon undeceived by a fmall ftrip of paper wound round the arrow, which contained, in Arabic charaders, words to this effed.—* " Chrißiän, the ßja f t that pierces thy brcajl, is dipped in deadly poifon. — Be- p fore
fôre ihe fôades of night defecnd > ihou ïïilt le gathered io ihy fathers, unlefs bis aid le fought, ίο whom alone amongst the fons of men, our holy prophet has eniraßcd the fecret and the means of cure." Sudden horror chilled the foul of de Villars on reading this terrible paper. To fall in a diflant land, by treachei/, and poifon, when he had fcarce begun his career of glory, and before he had reaped thofe laurels in the field of battle which would hand his name down with honor to * psfterity, was to him the moft cruel confiJeration. He fighed in deep difamiolation, and rode mournfully towards his tent. When
When the event was made known to Edward, regard for his friend overcame all prudential confidera¬ tions, and rifing from his couch, he repaired immediately to him. But what was his diftrefs to perceive the deadly poifon had commenced its ravages. A ftupor already feized de Villars, and fymptoms of approach¬ ing diffolution manifefted them- felves. rt Ohl my friend,** cried the difconfolate Edward, i€ muft I thus early be deprived of thee? Muft I lofe my companion in danger and in glory, by perfidious aflafiination ? Would to god that Caled 's poniard had buried itfelf in my heart, e'er I had lived to witnefs this melan¬ choly hour—But fly "continued he r 2 to
to thc attendants," let proclamation be inftantly made throughout the camp of Selim, that if there be any one who can counterad the effeds of this dreadful poifon, Edward will load him with riches and honors to the utmoft of his wifli." At this moment, Bertram (who had been apprifed of the circumftance) ruihed into the tent, in an agony of grief—" where," cried he, " is my lord, my protedor, my de Villars? Alas ! the hand of death is upon his eye-lids, and he fees not my afflidion. But do not think you will efcape me thus.—No, the tomb which covers the remains of de Villars, fliall enclofe the aihes ofhis faithful Bertram.*' After
? r ?? r a few moments paufe, how¬ ever, he grew more compofed, and turning to Edward, faid f{ my lord, Ict me intreat that you would retire to your tent. Your prefence here can afford no relief to your friend, but may be greatly prejudicial to your¬ felf. I will remain with the baron, till the return of the heralds from Scum's camp. Heaven, perhaps iu compaflion to our diftrefs may fend fome unexpected means for his reco¬ very. His eyes are now fealed in flumber; may the great power whofe battles he fights, grant that he awaken to life and health !" The prince was ftruck with rhe fenfible advice of Bertram, and the ap- F 3 parent
parent calmnefs with which he de¬ livered it ; and applauding him for his attention to de Villars, quitted thc tent with his attendants·
CHAP.
CHAR IV. Τ -* HE fun had now paffed thc me¬ ridian, when de Villars, awaking from a long and fweet repofe, perceived himfelf to be alone. He was afto¬ nifhed and delighted to find that no other ill effed remained from the poifoned arrow than a fenfation of langour. He began to apprehend the threat contained in the roll of paper had been penned merely to excite alarm, and rofe from his couch with the determination to viiit the prince, when he was furprifed by the entrance of an attendant, who informed him, Bertram was in the agonies of death, and defired to fee him.
him for a few minutes whilft his intellects remained undifturbed. Dk Villars íhocked at the intelli¬ gence, inftantly complied with the fummons; but how was his diftrefs increafed, when he beheld the unfor¬ tunate youth. Thofe eyes vvhich fo lately had beamed with mildnefs and benevolence, vvere now dimmed and funken. —Thofe cheeks vvhich had glowed with youth and beauty vvere pale and wan. His lips vvere parched with fever ; and the livid colour of his ikin, betrayed the mortal work¬ ings of a fubtle poifon. The fenfibility of de Villars was overcome^ and he burft into tears. "Mî
" My lord,'* fiúd Bertram in a feeble voice, " weep not for me----- Pafs but a few hours, and I ihail be gone and forgotten; but e*er I die, I would willingly impart to you a circumftance known only to my- felf.'*------The baron having made a ßgn for the attendants to withdraw, Bertram continued —" Generous de Villars, nothing but the certainty of fpeedy diffolution would embolden me to confefs, that the fuppofed Ber¬ tram, the fictitious fon of count Rodolpho, is—bluih maiden modefty to reveal it—the unfortunate Ifabel de Parma !—My ftory, baron, is but fhort, and heaven has kindly lent me ftrength to confide it to your bo¬ fom.—Thc day on which you ap¬ peared
peared at thc Sicilian tournament was the laft of my liberty and peace. I faw you, and 1 loved—Thc charms of your perfon, the elegance of your manners, and gallantry of your con¬ duct affected my bofom with new and unknown emotions—The praifes which every one was lavifh in be¬ llowing on your bravery, candour, and generofity, only rivetted my attachment. The pleafures of thc court grew infipid to me; the de¬ votion of my numerous admirers becamfe irkfome ; and my only folace was the fecret contemplation of your perfection. As you defpifed the trifling amufements of oar court, and feldom partook of them, the opportunities which I had of be¬ holding
holding the idol of my heart, were but few; and thc ftrictnefs vvith vvhich the pri nee fie s and myfelf were obferved, prevented me from aftoid- ing you any token of the regard I entertained. The news of Charles's captivity, threw me into defpair, as it entirely deflroyed the chance of my again feeing you at court. At the fame time too it was publicly notified the cruiaders were to fail in a few days.------Oh ! how ihall I defcribe the agonies I felt at the idea of being feparated foi e ver, from all my foul held dear !------your image haunted my bofom ddy ami night; and 1 found that cxiiter.ee would be but a curfe, unlefs it vvere fpent in the prefence of him 1 loved— 1
I therefore no longer ftruggled with a paffion too violent to be fupprefs- ed ; but determined to indulge it, by renouncing my dignity and the foftnefs of my fex, and accompanying the objed of my regard to the Holy- land in the difguife and charader of a page. I accordingly furniihed myfelf, through the means of a faith¬ ful attendant, with every thing ne¬ ceffary to the execution of my plan ; and when I had the good fortune to encounter you in the foreft of Fontabia, was on my way to the encampment, with a view to inter¬ eft your compaflion, and gain your. protedion, by the tale you there heard me relate, which 1 had invented for the purpofe.------Since then de Villars
Villars I have enjoyed the moft com¬ pleat felicity in your conftant foci¬ ety, and in the poffeflion of your friendihip and regard ; and heaven has at length kindly given me an opportunity of teftifying my grati¬ tude.—When I heard of the wound which you this morning received from the mifcreant Saracen, and the certain death it muft occafion, no language can fpeak the grief I fuf¬ fered. The tumult of diftrefs de¬ ftroyed for a few moments my powers of recolledİon, and I had nearly be¬ trayed the fecret of my fex, by my agony and lamentations. When I had recovered, however, from the firft ihock, a means of reftoring you to health and vigour, of which I g had
had heard in Sicily, fuddenly occur¬ red to me. I requefted the prince and his attendants to retire, and they complied,—It was then—oh ! glori¬ ous moment! that I proved myfelf not undeferving the friendihip of de Villars. —You were funk into an infenfibility, the certain harbinger of death, from which I was convinced I could not awaken you.—I ftole therefore to your couch ; applied my lips to the wound; and—nay ftart not baron—extraded the deadly venom which was making faft ap¬ proaches to your heart.---------Adieu, dear youth, adieu forever!— -I die, in¬ deed, but I die without regret ; fince by the facrifice of myfelf I have faved de Villars." Her
Her voice now failed and Ifabel funk back upon the couch. A va¬ riety of emotions tore the heart of de Villars. Admiration, love, gratitude, terror, and grief took poffeffion of his foul, and nearly deprived him of reàfon. He was fomewhat calmed, however, by the entrance of a foldier, who informed him that a dervife had been found, who was famous for de¬ ftroying the eft'ects of the moft deadly poiíbn. " Bring him in,*' cried de Villars, in a voice choaked with af¬ fliction and agitation. The attendant foon returned, with a noble figure clad in the garb of a dervife, and re¬ tired.— "Holy man,** exclaimed de Villars, g 2 ff behold
" behold that fuffering ano-el ; a mor- tal poifon rages in her veins ; fave her, fave the lovely Ifabel, and the moft precious gifts fliall reward thy bleffed ikill.**------" Chriftian," re¬ turned the dervife, " hopelefs as the » fituation of the fufferer may appear, I will pledge my head for her reco¬ very, if the requeft of Darad be com¬ plied with.**—" Name thy requeft,*' faid de Villars impatiently, " what¬ ever thou canft afk fliall be obtain¬ ed.*' ------" Be Caled freed then," faid the dervife.— Ot Villars was thunderftruck at this demand ; the horrors of defpair gathered on his brow, and with a groan that fliook his foul, he ex¬ claimed.
claimed. " Inhuman Darad ! why doft thou come hither with thy pre¬ tended mercy, only to mock my woes. Doit thou think I could re¬ quire the freedom and the life of a bafe aflaflm, vvho has attempted to deftroy my prince, my patron, and my friend ? No, dervife, no ; recall thy fatal requeft, and accept in lieu of Caled's liberty, all that Edward's power and bounty can beftow." " Christian," returned Darad in a foiemn tone, I have faid, and " will not retract. By the great Alia I fwear, thofe clofing eyes ihall never more behold the fun, unlcfs imprifon¬ ed Caled be releafed."
g s €f And
" And he íhall be releafed," ex¬ claimed prince Edward, who was ap¬ prized of every thing that had tranf- pired, and at that moment ruihed into the tent; " fave but that generous victim from the ihades of death, and Caled and thyfelf fliall leave our camp laden wirh rich rewards."—" Bring then the youth into our prefence/' faid Darad.------Edward gave orders to have him conduded immediately there.— Caled was now come ; and all eyes were fixed upon the dervife, who pulling from his bofom a phial filled with purple-coloured liquor, poured its contents into the mouth of Ifabel.—In a few minutes the wonderful effeds of this elixir were fufficiently vifible. The circulation which
which appeared to be fufpended, again took place; her refpirations became apparent ; the rofes again began to bloom faintly on her cheek; and İler lip to be tinged with its ufual ver¬ milion. In ihort there was every fymptom of reftored animation, and returning health. " Prince,*' faid the dervife turn¬ ing to Edward, " thou feeft that my fkili has been efficacious. E'er the fun fliall have compleated his diurnal courfe, the patient will awaken per¬ fectly recovered.—I now demand thy promife be fulfilled.*' "And thus I keep my word ;" re- turned the prince, prefenting Caled to
to the dervife; " my wrongs are all forgotten, and Caled is at liberty. A paffport ihall attend you to thc camp of Selim, and a thoufand pieces of gold be added to the freedom of your friend." "Christian,'* replied the dervife referve thy gold for thofe who need it. Thc foul of the pretended Darad knows not a mercenary thought. The fúltan Selim,** continued he throw¬ ing back his mantle and difcovering the habit of fovereignty, " is fuffi¬ ciently repaid in the recovery of Ab¬ dallah.*' Saying this, he fell upon the neck of his fon, and wept. The furprize of Edward and de Villars
Villars was now extreme, to difcover the prince Abdallah in the fictitious Caled, and the fúltan Selim under the difguife of a dervife. The latter, however, as foon as he had recovered himfelf, explained the myftery in the following terms. " Thou art doubtlefs aftoniíhed prince at feeing the leader of the Saracens and his fon in the camp of their enemies, under borrowed ha¬ bits and feigned titles. But liften to the caufe of this appearance------ His father wounded by thy arm, and the followers of Mahomet de¬ feated and diiheartened ; Abdallah faw no hope of revenging the prophet and his caufe, but by thy deftruc¬ tion·
tion. For this purpofe therefore, unknown to me, he fought the chriftian camp ; but Alia decreed his fcheme fliould fail.—Soon as the news of the event, and of the cruel puniihment to which my gallant fon was doomed, had reached my ears, I difpatched an herald to thee, offering rewards for his releafe; but, as thou knoweft, it was in vain.---- What means then could I ufe to fave Abdallah? Defpair affifted my invention. I dipped an arrow in the poifon Rufu, known only to the royal line; a venom of fo deadly a nature, that irrififtible deftrudion attends its vidim, unlefs its ravages be counteraded by the healing draught which I alone can mingle.— Round
Round this I wound a fcroll of paper, that notified the nature of the injury, and the only means of cure.—I caufed de Villars* motions to be watched; refolved to pierce the bofom of thy friend, and make my fon's releafe the price of heal¬ ing.------Unerring in my aim, this morning faw the wiih fulfilled.------ Thou knoweft what foliovved,—Our prophet has approved the deed, and crowned it with fuccefs.** t( ??? prince, before I leave thy tent, attend the parting words of Selim. —Thou calleft us bafe aflaífins, treacherous murderers ; yet where¬ fore ?—Is it becaufe we try by thy deftruction to prevent our own?-— To
To hate what injures us is natural— The fmall envenomed adder when it ftings, we turn upon and crufli; but the fierce tyger which may not openly be attacked, muft be de¬ ftroyed by fecret cunning—Behold our,, fields laid wafte ; our towns deftroyed ; our armies fcattered ; and our great prophet's name blafphe*. med; and then pronounce that we are wrong in trying thy deftrudion, the author of thefe evils—Infulted nature and prophaned religion im¬ pel the attempt, and point the dag¬ ger at thy heart.——Yet ftill would Selim rather purchafe peace at any other price than that of blood. -...... - Thou knoweft prince the extenfive territory I have gained by ads of hardy
hardy valour,—This I will rdtgn if thy armies leave our coaft.—The fúltan is content to confine his rule within the 1??? domains which Sala- din acquired, provided his dominion there be quietly allowed.*' Edward was ftruck with the juftice of the fultan's remarks ; and faw immediately the propriety of accepting his offers. Indeed feveral reafons confpired to make a return to his own country particularly eli¬ gible at this time. The approach¬ ing death of his father Henry the third ; thc extreme ficknefs of the crufaders, and above all the languiih- ing ftate of his beloved confort Elea¬ nora, who had brought him a daughter i fince
fince their arrival in Paleftine, had induced him to wifli much of late, that fome honorable pretext might be difcovered to terminate hoftiiities with the Saracens.—The prefent was the moft favorable that could be wiihed.—He therefore without hefi¬ tation agreed to the terms propofed by the fúltan ; and a truce for ten years was inftantly entered into ; mutual oaths were exchanged for the obfervation of it ; and Selim and Abdallah were condudcd wirb all due honors to their camp. In the mean time, whilft Ifabel continued to enjoy a fweet flumber that prefaged a fpeedy recovery from the effects of the poifon, the prin¬ cefs
cefs Eleanora was made acquainted with the finguiar events which had occurred.—She liftened to them with great delight ; promifed de Villars to take the generous girl under her protection, and to diflipate all thofe little delicate fears wdiich would na-^ turally arife in her bofom on find¬ ing her fex and ftory were difcovery. This ihe punctually performed; the fcruples of Ifabel were foon overcome, and ihe yielded to the requeft of de Villars, that their nup¬ tials might be celebrated on their return to England. The fcene of fadnefs was now converted into univerfal joy.—Thc 1 2 bitternefs
bitternefs of war into focial merri¬ ment.—Reciprocal kindneffes paffed between the two camps ; and all ani- mofitics were buried in oblivion. In a fliort time Edward and Ifabel had entirely recovered their health; the troops were embarked ; the fails were fpread ; and a few months brought the whole fleet fafely to England,
CIIAP.
CHAP. v. vJ'N his arrival, Edward found his father, Henry the third, deceafed, and himfelf proclaimed, and univer¬ fally acknowledged his fucceflbr on the throne. The new monarch would now gladly have given de Villars the ful¬ left proof of the high regard he en¬ tertained for him, by conferring on him offices of the firft importance. But the baron was not ambitious of honors and diftinftions ; he knew the envy and malevolence which thefe marks of attention from a monarch. 13 to
to a fubject generally excite; and wifely chofe rather to be the private friend, than the public favorite of Edward. " Allow me,** faid he, " my lord, to decline thefe intended teftimonies of ycur goodnefs.— De Villars wifhes not for power or ele¬ vation. Satisfied with the friendfliip of yourfelf* and the affection of his lovely Ifabel, he will need no other addition to his happinefs.** He now claimed the performance of the promife which the fair Sici¬ lian had made to him,- and their nuptials were foon celebrated in the prefence of Edvvard and his queen Eleanora ; the latter of whom pre¬ fented Ifabel on her marriage with a rieh
rich affortment of jewels, and Ed¬ ward crave de Villars a fmall but ? beautiful demefne fituated on thc banks of thc Southampton river. Days, months, and years rolled happily on to de Villars and his amiable baronefs. He was ftill the infeparable companion of Edward, in his wars and hours of relaxation; whilft Ifabel continued to receive frefh proofs of the queen*s attach¬ ment to her.—Heaven, indeed, de¬ nied them offspring for fome years ; a circumftance that would now and then produce a momentary regret İn the baron, but it never made him long, or ferioufly uneafy.
??
At length, however, this draw¬ back on his felicity was removed, and thc baronefs prefented him with a lovely boy ; whom they named Edward from their royal friend. Three years, afterwards, the birth of a daughter enabled them to pay the fame compliment to the queen, hy chriftening the little infant Elea¬ nora. ^ De Villars now found his happi¬ nefs compleat, and for fome years he continued to enjoy it unabated.— The manly graces ; the generous ar¬ dour; and difinterefted fincerity of the father, were reflected in young Edward; whik the lovely features, bewitching foftnefs, and gentle man¬ ners
ners of Ifabel difcovered tharnfelves in the prattling Eleanor. But alas! the hours of diftrefs muft at fome period arrive; and if they be long deferred, it is only that the more poignancy may be added to them.—A violent fever attacked the adored confort of de Villars, and on the third day from the commence¬ ment of her indifpoiition, he found hcr fnatched from him forever. The baron on this fad occafion, experienced that fudden abruption of all delight, that gloomy vacuity of foul, which the mortal fepara¬ tion of thofe who have long lived in habits of intimacy and affection, oecafions
oecafions to the furvivor. For fome time he refufed all comfort, nor could the kindnefs of the king, nor the attentions of his children, afford him confolation under a lofs that threat¬ ened to deprive him of reafon. The monarch was alarmed for the fafety of his friend ; but wifely con¬ cluded the moft likely method of turning his mind from the continual contemplation of his misfortune, would be to call him to the buftle of the field, and diflipate his thoughts by action. De Villars, ever alive to the voice of military glory, obeyed thc fum- . mons to attend the king on his fecond
fecond expedition into Scotland ; and that he might initiate young Ed- * ward, who was now fixtcen, in a profeifion, which he fo much efteem¬ ed himfelf, he determined the youth ihould accompany him thither. Ele¬ anor he committed to the protec¬ tion of Margaret the fecond con- fort of the king, (who had for fome years loft his firft queen) and flie condefcendingly took charge of the amiable girl. The bufinefs of the campaign pro¬ duced the effect the king had hoped for. The poignancy of forrow was done away ; and the acute affliction which bade fair to deftroy the intellects of de Villars, was mellowed into a fo¬ ber
ber melancholy that tinged the ba¬ ron's character ever after. On the return of the army into England, de Villars wiihed much to have retired from court, to the re¬ treat in Hampihire, which he en¬ joyed through the generofity of the king ; but his royal friend would not confent to the feparation. The baron therefore relinquiihed the idea for the prefent, and bent his attention to thc inftruction of his fon. This youth was now eighteen, of a noble mein, and moft engaging manners ; his generofity was un¬ bounded, and his fpirit invincible* The king had conceived a great af¬ fection
fedion for him, and appeared ex¬ tremely defirous that the prince of Wales would regard him with a fimi¬ lar predilidion. But the weak mind of Edward the fecond, flirunk from the fuperior brilliancy and under¬ ftanding of young de Villars. He had already fingled out a favorite more refembling himfelf; and la¬ viihed all his regards on Piers Ga¬ vafton, a young native of Gafcony, and one of his own houfehold. The baron w 7 as not concerned to perceive that the prince rather avoid¬ ed than fought an intimacy with his fon,- becaufe he knew full well the friendfliip of the weak and the worthlefs, however, exalted their fla- K tion
tion may be, promiies neither fatis¬ faction nor permanent advantages to the man of honor and integrity. He faw, however, clearly, that young Edward's infatuation,, for Gavafton might hereafter be productive of the greateft difcomfort to himftlf, and injury to the nation; and therefoie, earneftly advifed rhe king to baniih the young fycophant, and to com¬ mand his fon to with-draw his ill- placed attachment from him. Edward agreed with de Villars in the propriety of adopting a ftep of this nature. Gavafton was command¬ ed to leave the kingdom, which he inftantly did, iorely againft the in¬ clinations of the prince of Wales, who
who never forgave de Villars for being the inftigator of this fepara¬ tion between him and his favorite. About two years after this event, de Villars fuffered another fevere ftroke of afflidion. His royal friend and mafter, whom he was accom¬ panying in a third expedition againft Scotland, expired at Carlille, to the* univerfal concern of the nation. The grief of the baron was man¬ ly and filent, but not the lefs deep or fincere. He had already deter¬ mined to indulge his feelings in his country retreat, and to confe- crate the remainder of his days to devotion and philofophy, when he ? 2 received
received orders from the fucceflbr of the departed hero, to leave the camp immediately, nor to be feen in future at the Engifih court. He heaved an involuntary figh at this firft proof of the ftriking con¬ trail between the prefent monarch and his father; but foon recovered his equanimity. Returning with his 1 fon immediately to London, he re¬ ceived the blooming Eleanor from her royal protectrefs, and having fet¬ tled all his affairs, quitted the court wdth a determination never to re¬ turn to it again.-r-Before, however, he departed, news arrived of the abfurd conduct of the new king, and the difrefpect which he had fliewn
fliewn to the dying/ commands of his parent. Already,' in defiance of them, had he recalled his favorite Gavafton, and diibanded the mighty army with vvhich /Edw r ard had en- joyned him to enforce the abiolute fubmiflion of the Scots.— De Villars heard the intelligence with deep concern; but bleifed himfelf that he was about to retire from thofe fatal feenes which united ignorance and bafenefs would inevitably occa- - fion.
? 3 CFIAP.
CHAP. VI. AJE Villars was now arrived at the refidence in which he propofed to conclude his days. It was a fmall caftle fituated near the mouth of Southampton river, about half a mile from its eaftern bank. Like all the maniions of the great in rhofe days, the ftyle of building manifefted it had been erec¬ ted for the purpofes of defence ; it being furrounded with a broad moat, furniihed wdth a fingle draw-bridge. It ftood on a fmall knoll or eleva¬ tion ; and the upper apartments, rear¬ ing themfelves above the furrounding woods,
woods, commanded an extenfive view of all the adjacent country.—The ap¬ proach to it was through a long ave¬ nue of venerable elms, which had been tenanted by multitudes of rooks for many ages.—In the back, a floping lawn ftretched to fome diftance from the caftle, and was at length bounded by a wood of majeftic oaks, where through many oecafional openings, flight glances were caught of the river that glided beneath it.—Netley Abbey a convent of Ciftertian monks, ftood about a mile to the north. A situation like this was highly calculated for the indulgence of philofophic melancholy; and de Vil¬ lars entered on it vvith that foiemn pleafure,
pleafure, which the mind, harraffed by misfortune, experiences on re¬ tiring to folitude and quiet. He did not, however, mean to devote himfelf entirely to contemplation in this retreat, to the cxclufion of the folid duties of life; part of his time was to be employed in the regulation of his little family, which confifted only of two female fervants, and his old domeftic Robert ; another portion in the education of his children; and the remaining one confecrated to devotion and prepa¬ ration for his end. As his fon Edward (for hence¬ forth we fliall continue to call him by that name) had reached his twentieth
twentieth year; had already diftin- guilhed himfelf in arms; and pof¬ feffed a found and cultivated un- derftanding, the baron ieft him greatly to the regulation of his own conduct, except that he would oc-* cafionally inftil into him the obli¬ gations of religion, and enrich his mind with that ufeful knowledge which is only drawn from a long and accurate furvey of human na¬ truc Unlike the generality of the young feudal chieftains, tho* Ed¬ ward poifefled all the gallantry of the age, yet he blended with it a delicacy of fentiment, ar ' gentlenefs of manners, which would have done honor
honor to a period of greater refine¬ ment than the 13th century. His reat affedion for his father had made ? him joint participator of ail the bar¬ on's forrows ; and this had gradually moulded his mind to ferious reflec¬ tion, and foftened his heart to the moft expanded benevolence. The invincible diflike which the reigning king had conceived againft the baron, in confequence of his ad¬ vice to the deceafed monarch, ex¬ tended to all that nobleman's con- nedions ; and therefore de Villars thought it prudent to with-draw his children from public life, when he himfelf retired to his caftle. He eafily forefaw the weak and extrava¬ gant
gant Edvvard the fecond, influenced by his frivolous favorite, would ftart into conduct fo wild and abfurd, as to irritate the impetuous barons, and in time occaiion fome change for the better in public affairs. And he was equally certain that fliould any revo¬ lution take place, his intereft with all the greater lords would infure his fon a favorable reception amongft them. The intervening time he thought might bc piofkabiy em¬ ployed by young Edward in ma¬ turing his judgment, improving his mind, and acquiring the little fcience which the age afforded. Eleanor, thc daughter of de Vil- kirs, had reached her fcvcntccnth
vear.
year. She was of a middle fize, and delicately formed. Her face, which might be called rather expreflive than beautiful, was illuminated by a pair of blue eyes, that beamed intel¬ ligence and fweetnefs. Fíer com- plexion and hair were inherited from the deceafed baronefs ; the one being fair and tranfparent, the other light, curling, and profufe. To thefe attradions of perfon, was added all thc lovelinefs of virtue. The foul of Eleanor, pure as when it came from the hands of its creator, knew not a thought at wdiich inno¬ cent" e might blufli. The baron had been indefatigable in implanting in thc nuads of his children, as [oon as
as they were capable of receiving any fixed and accurate ideas, thc ft rons: obligations of virtue and mo- ral i ty; he had encouraged and un¬ folded thofe finer icnlibilities of the foul vvhich diílimniifh our kind from the fubordinatc animals ; and had en¬ forced his excellent precepts, by holding forth the example of Ed¬ ward, and his royal confort, in whom they flione with fuperior luftre. Though Eleanor had lived for a confiderable time in the pernicious at¬ mofphere of a court, under thc pro¬ tection of both Edward's queens, yet her early youth prevented her from being; brought forward into thc dazzling croud. Her mind had con- l fcqucntly
feqiiently efcaped that pollution vvith which gaiety, fplendor, a»vj Jiffipa- tion, are too apt to contaminate it ; and the baron fortunately carried her into rural reniement at that critical age, when the pallions, riling in ail their ftrength, give to pleafure fo inchanting an appearance, that little lefs than abfence from temptation can fave the infatuated victim from being carried away by its perilous turrent. De Villars having arranged his fmall family, entered upon the re¬ gular difcharge of the employments he had chalked out for himfelf, and found his time fully and pleafingiy occupied. The
The unfocial fpirit of the feudal ages promifed that his quiet would not often be interrupted by unfeafon¬ able vifitors ; and indeed fuch was the prodigious extent of the baronial demcfnes in thefe times, that a feudal lord was generally feparated from his immediate neighbour by a diftance of many miles. Flence it happened, the intercourfe of modern days was then unknown, and each great chicf- tian fought for company and amufe¬ ment, rather amongft his numerous retainers and dependants, than in the fociety of the nobles who refided around him. The only neighbour which de Vil¬ lars had, and with whom he wiflied L 2 tO
to have no kind of intercourfe, was ûr Hildebrand Warren, lord of Net- ley caftle. His manfion ftood at the diftance of three miles from that of the baron, and his demefne was one of the moft extenfive in Hampihire. Sir Raymond Warren, the uncle of this knight, de Villars had been in¬ timately acquainted vvith ; but feveral years before the baron retired to his country manfion, frr Raymond, in confequence of the deceafe of his lady, had precipitately quitted the court, and fhut himfelf up in Netley caftle, in confequence of which, all communication ceafed between the two friends ; and de Villars had heard with great concern, about two years previous
previous to his own retreat from court, that fir Raymond and his daughter had died within a few days of each other in a contagious fever. The prefent lord of Netley was a nephew of old fir Raymond ; and as he lived much with his uncle in the abfence of the knight's fon, young Raymond Warren, de Villars had an opportunity of feeing him frequently* whilft their intercourfe continued. ??? he was not calculated to pleafe the baron. Profligate and licentious to the greateft degree when out of the obfervation of his protedor ; referved and apparently modeft when before him, his charader exhibited that def- L ? picabie
picabie mixture of vice and meannefs, that hypocritical villainy, which the ingenuous foul of de Villars defpifed and abhorred. In confequence of the fudden death of old fir Raymond, and his dau&h- ter Agnes, and the difappearance of young Raymond, who, it was report¬ ed, had been affafiinated abroad, the vaft poffefllons of the old knight had fallen to fir Hildebrand, as heir at law to his departed uncle. Before he had ieft the court the prince of Wales, whofe want of un¬ derftanding led him to ihower his favors and affections on undeferving objects, honored Hildebrand with feveral
feveral marks of friendfliip ; and on the deceafe of Edward the firft, the young king had invited the knight to a renewal of their former intimacy. Sir Hildebrand had accordingly been to pay his refpeds at court, and was received vvith great marks of kindnefs ; but the fuperior influence of Gavafton vvith his royal friend, roufed all his envy and malignity ; the narrownefs of his foul not allow¬ ing him to be the quiet fpedator of anothers happinefs. He thereiore de¬ termined to return into Hampihire ; x a refolution that was ftrengthened by an arbitrary and tyrannical fpirit, which he was obliged to curb before the powerful barons of Edward's court,
court, but could indulge without controul, within the extenfive limits of Netley dememe. On the pretence therefore of fol* lowing the pleafures of thc chace, to which he was much attached, he folicited, and obtained leave to re¬ turn to his caftle, a few weeks after de Villars had fettled himfelf in hk retirement. Here fir Hildebrand lived in the rude maonificence of the age; furrounded by a numerous croud of retainers, who, nurtured in indolence and plenty, were as unprincipled and profligate as their chief, and ready at all times to revenge his quarrel, and
and execute his commands, however vicious or fanguinary they, might be. Against a licentious band like this, which in truth the caftle of almoft every baron exhibited in the feudal ages, whofe leader was armed with thc acknowledged favor of the fovereign, the h:ws in their then relaxed ftate, wzre but a poor de¬ fence. In unlightened timeá, indeed, be¬ fore mens minds are fufficiently in¬ formed to perceive the utility of giving every fanction to legal infti- tutions, thefe ordinances will only be obferved in proportion to the virtue,
virtue, adivity, and ability of the reigning prince; and hence it hap¬ pened, that altho' the exertions of Edward the firft for the impartial adminiftration of juftice, had highly improved and regulated the juris¬ prudence of the country, yet the moment the fceptre devolved to the feeble hand of his fucceflbr, the laws relapfed into laxity and contempt, and enormities became as numerous and atrocious as ever. With a neighbour of this defcrip¬ tion, de Villars wiihed not to have the flighteft communication ; and as he had been now fome months at his caftle without feeing him, he
he flattered himfelf their former acquaintance would never be re¬ new ed* A n accident hcwevcr counteracted his wiihes·
CHAP.
CHAP. VII. JCjLEANOR, who took great plea¬ fure accompanied fometimes by her brother, and fometimes by her maid Beatrice, in tracing the mazes of the wood at the back of the caflle, had one day incautioufly wandered thither alone. It was one of thofe foft autum¬ nal mornings, when nature about to clofe her fcene of beauty for the year, arrays creation in its moft gorgeous attire. The fun had already driven the dewy mifts of night from the face of
of heaven, and rifing with tempered fplendor, threw that deep and mel¬ low tinge on every objed, which he only confers in this charming feãfon of the year. The lofty wOods glit¬ tered to his beam ; and the diverfi¬ fied hues of their foliage received frefli richnefs from its luftre.—Thc tuneful tenants of the grove, animated by the genial ray, awakened thcir expiring harmony, and hailed in one full univerfal fong of joy, the broad unclouded countenance of this great chearer of creation. The harmlefs flocks expreffed by playful gambols their gratitude for his farewel vi¬ fit; and the cattle, bafking beneath his warmth, offered up their filent thanks. Not a zephyr agitated the m - trees,
trees, or difturbed the filence of thc interefting fcene. Eleanor felt her fenfibility awak¬ ened at the pleafing profped of ani¬ ma!., felicity. Her univerfal benevo¬ lence led her to fympathifc with the delights or miferies of every living creature, and flie never felt greater fatisfadion than when fhe faw all around her comfortable and happy. " Ah ! blifsful tenants of thefe quiet fhades," flie exclaimed, "how enviable is your ftate. No paflions vex your peaceful bofoms.—No pain¬ ful refledions on the paft, or cruel dread of future, interrupt the pre¬ fent blifs. Supported by the bounti¬ ful
ful hand of nature, you wander whither you will, undifturbed by care, fecure from danger or alarm.** She had juft uttered thefe words, when the diftant cry of hounds reach¬ ed her ear. In a moment flie ob¬ ferved the croud of hinds and ftasrs which had been fporting around, a flu rne an appearance of watchful- nefs and apprehenfion. The noife approached ; the diftrefs of Elea¬ nor's companions increafed, and they at length all ftarted oft'in thc wild¬ eft difmay. Eleanor now began to feel much alarmed for her own fafety ; for ihe found by the direction of the found vr ?. aad
and its gradual increafe, that the hunting party were making directly through the wood in which ihe had inconfiderately been wandering alone. She haftily, therefore turned about, and walked with ail expedition to¬ wards the caftle. Before ihe had advanced many yards, however, the cry was almoft deafning ; and the groves which had lately echoed only the ftrains of vo¬ cal harmony, now rang with howl- ings, hallowings, and execrations. In a few moments flic beheld a ftag apparently almoft exhaufted crofs the path flie was purfuing, foliovved by a mixed multitude of horfes, dogs, and
and men ; formine: a concert of vo- ciferous diflbnance. The confufion of the fcene, which flic had never witneffed before, and the wildnefs of the noife, terrified hcr extremely; and, trembling vvith appreheniion, flie was obliged to fupport herfelf againft a fpreeding' tree. Though all the h unt f m en fa vy Eleanor as they paffed the path, and caft a tranfient glance towards her, yet the fport had fo much en¬ gaged them, that not one ftepped to enquire who flie was, or to offer her the afliftance which her alarmed fituation evidently required. ?? length an horfeman, whofe \r ;] drefs
drefs and accoutrements befpoke him to be of fuperior rank to thc others, appeared, and as foon as he beheld Eleanor inftead of purfuing the courfe which the others had taken, he curb¬ ed his horfe, and turned up the path which led to her. Her fears were not much Ieffen- ed by the approach of this ftranger, who had an air of affurance and fe¬ rocity in his appearance, by no means impreffive of confidence or efteem. He feemed to be about forty years of age, was large of ftature, and of a dark complexion. He might have been reckoned handfome, had it-not been for a certain fierce¬ nefs of afpect, occafioned by a black over-
overihadowing brow which feemed contracted into an habitual frown. As the horfeman approached, Elea¬ nor's fears had fo far overcome her recollection, that ihe was on the point of flying from him; not re¬ flecting the farther ihe went, the more diftant ihe would be from home A and that even then it would be im¬ poflible for her to efcape from a perfon on horfeback. Before, how¬ ever, fhe had refolved how to acr^ he was clofe to her, and had dif- mounted from his palfrey. Assuming an air of as much foft¬ nefs as he could, u lady ** faid the ftranger, " I fear our fports have been
,* been the occafion of fome alarm to you. I ought to apologue, indeed, for your retirement havinfir been thus difturbed by noife and confufion ; but I feel I cannot regret the event which has given fir Hildebrand Warren an opportunity of contem¬ plating more beauty than he ever faw before.**—Saying this, he feized her hand, and would have impreffed a falute upon it. Eleanor blufliing deeply at the freedom of thc knight, haftily dif¬ engaged herfelf from his grafp. The dignity of offended delicacy gave her temporary courage, and ihe replied / with apparent difpleafure.—" It ill/ becomes fir Hildebrand Warren to behaye
behave thus rudely to an unproteded female. But if he do not poifefs the generofity and honor of true knighthood, that never lofes fight oif the politenefs due to the weaker féx, yet it may be hoped he will i not forget the refped which the /daughter of baron de Villars has a right to demand.'* The pride of fir Hildebrand was forely wounded by this fevere retort ; but fuppreffing his difcompofure as much as poffible, he begged pardon for having given way to thofe tranf¬ ports, into w r hich he had been hur¬ ried by meeting with fo fair a form in circumftances fo unexpeded. " But allow me," continued he, " fair lady, to
to make fome amends for having thus alarmed your delicacy. I will my¬ felf be your protector to the caftle, and ihall have particular pleafure in prefenting his lovely daughter to my old friend the baron de Villars.** ?????? Eleanor, who had already conceived a ftrong averfion for fir Hildebrand, would gladly have ex¬ cufed this piece of gallantry, yet fhe knew not in what manner to decline his protection, particularly as he had put it on the footing of paying a vifit to her father, with whom ftie underftood he had been formerly ac¬ quainted. She therefore accepted his offer with an air of modeft referve ; and proceeded towards the caftle, accom-
accompanied by the knight, who gave his palfrey to one of the at¬ tendants. During their walk, fir Hildebrand repeatedly exprefled himfelf parti¬ cularly happy, at the fortunate cir¬ cumftance which had thus given him an opportunity of renewing his ac¬ quaintance with the baron de Villars; an acquaintance that would now re¬ ceive additional charms, from the tranfeendent beauty of his daughter, and the well-known excellence of his fon. With converfation of this na¬ ture, occafionally interfperfed with high-flown compliments to Edward and herfelf, was Eleanor tormented, till ilie arrived at the caftle; when having
having accompanied fir Hildebrand to the room in which her father was feated, ihe haftily retired to her chamber, determined to avoid in future the fight of a man whofe firft appearance had given her invincible impreflions in his disfavor. De Villars was ?? no means plea¬ fed at the unexpeded entrance of fir Flildebrand Warren; he had long difliked and defpifed him, and for the beft reafons. His natural po¬ litenefs, however, prevented any fymptoms of difguft from appear¬ ing, and he welcomed him to his caftle with feeming cordiality. The knight, on the other hand, expreffed
«xpreíled unbounded fatisfaction at this renewal of their former inti¬ macy; launched out into the warm¬ eft encomiums on the attractions of Eleanor ; and male numberlefs offers of fervice both to the baron and his fon; with whom he faid he could eafily prevail upon the king to be reconciled, provided it were their wiih to return to court, and refume their former ftation in pub¬ lic life. De Villars returned his gueft many thanks for his obliging proffers, which he politely declined to ac* cept; and heaving a deep figh, ad¬ ded, cc to me fir Hildebrand, the court has long loft all its attrac- N tions.
lions. —She who alone could it charms in my eye, is now m e. Never therefore will 1 again vifit feenes, which would only add to my aitlidion, by bringing back ideas of felicity that is paffed and gone forever. Nor fliall my fon ever return to a fpot from whence he has been ignominioufly banifhed, unlefs re¬ called by the voluntary folicitation of the unthinking monarch vvho has thus endeavoured to diflionor the family of dc Villus.—But,'* con¬ tinued he, waving the ddcourfe, " al¬ low me to inform myieif of the acci¬ dents by vvhich I loft my valuable friend the late fir Raymond Warren, his ¿lilant fon, and amiable daughter. Enrarcd at that time in the hurry of a cam».
a campaign, I had leifure to make no particular enquiries relative to the unfortunate events, and only learned from vague report, that the deceafe of each was fudden and un¬ expeded." De Villars waited for an anfwer to his queftion for fome moments, when cafting a look at fir Hildebrand, he was furprifed and fliccked to fee that a livid palenefs overfpread his coun¬ tenance ; an univerfal agitation íhook his frame ; the darkeft frown had gathered on his brow, and his eyes gleamed horror and difmay. " True, true,** cried he, in accents rapid and inarticulate, " *twas bafe indeed be¬ yond compare.—And by one who had n 2 Ipccn
been kindly foftered by his care.— A death too, fo tedious and painful· O God! my brain is fired at the thought." The baron's aftoniíhment at this apparent agony of fir Hildebrand, and at his obfcure, wild, and inter¬ rupted accents, was extreme; and he had already moved towards the door to call for his attendants,, when the knight fuddenly recovering himfelf, began to apologi fe for having thus excited thc alarm of de Villars.— fc My lord,** faid he, " wonder not at the agitation into which the abrupt mention of the lofs I have fuftained, has juft thrown me. The warm af¬ fection which I bore, to my deceafed relations,,
relations, and the intenfe grief I ex¬ perienced at their being fo quickly fnatched from me, for a confiderable time after their death fliook the fc.xt of reafon ; nor have I yet fufficiently conquered my fenfibility to hear their refpeded names pronounced without a momentary diforder of recollec¬ tion." Saying this he hafliîy ordered his attendants ; and having repeated his wiflies that a frequent interchange of vifits mi^ht take place between himfelf and the baron*s family, he bade him adieu, and rode from thc caftle. Shortly after the departure of fir Hildebrand, Edward returned from his morning ramble, and the baron n 3 imme-
immediately communicated to him the circumftance of the vifit he had received ; concealing however, the finguiar fcene to which it had juft given rife. Though the difparity of years be¬ tween the knight and young Edward was confiderable, and had prevented any knowledge of each other before the death of old fir Raymond, yet the latter heard with fome fatisfadion that he was now likely to have an oecafional companion in his retirement. The focial principle indeed is fo deeply ingrafted in the nature of man, that though fuppreffed, it can¬ not be entirely extinguiihed,—Ed¬ ward
w r ard therefore, notwithftanding he found himfelf free from difcontent in the feclufion of a country retreat, had at times wiihed for fome little variety in the fociety to which this retire¬ ment neceffarily confined him.—Be¬ fides, he knew not the real character of fir Hildebrand (whom indeed the baron had never mentioned to his children) and incapable of diflionor himfelf, he fondly thought that all around him were alike ingenuous and noble-minded.—With thefe ideas he was confequently pleafed at the in¬ telligence ofhis father; and ftrongly urged him to take an early oppor¬ tunity of returning the vifit of the knight and making them known to each other. ViRX
Very different fcïuimcnts, how* ever, agitated the mmd of dc Vil¬ lars; vvho f. η core 1 y regretted the ac¬ cident vvhich had brought lir Hil¬ debrand ?? ?? oflìe. His penetration eafily perceived, that the fortuitous interview between Eleanor znd the knight, had kind¬ led a fudden flame in the bofom of thc Lurer, which might be pro¬ ductive of much difcomfort both tc his daughter and himftîf. Sir Hildebrand he knew to be a vio¬ lent, unprincipled, and powerful man; vvho wanted neither inclina¬ tion nor means to eïïûci zny pur¬ pofe to which he had ben: his mind ; he therefore Ha J c-ood ioju \u
tion for fearing, that ihould he make an offer of his hand to Elea¬ nor, and be refufed, he would not fcrupie to ufe his influence with the king, to enforce a compliance with his wiihes ; a ftretch of autho¬ rity by no means unufual in thofe days. Besides, his diflike to the knight had been much increafed by the circumftances that had occured du¬ ring his vifit. The extraordinary agitation, or rather temporary de¬ rangement of intellect, which fir Hildebrand difplayed, and the myf- tical words he had uttered, on the mention of his deceafed kindred,, filled de Villars with fufpicion and alarm
alarm. He fhrewdly apprehended, that grief, however exceffive, would not manifeft itfelf by fuch violent emo¬ tions; and could not help fearing it was rather the horror of guilt than the guih of afflidion, which had thrown the knight into fo ter¬ rible a fituation. On what however, to ñx his fears, or how to clear up his doubts and fufpicions, he could not at prefent determine; he therefore refolved to preferve as yet a profound filence on the fubject, to wait with pa¬ tience till time ihould give him fome clue to unfold thc myftery', and in the interval to watch fir HİIdebrand's condud with the narroweft circum- fpedion,
fpeclion, and to prevent, if poflible, his adopting any meafures which might interrupt the peace of his own little family.
CHAP.
CHAP. VIII. jt\ SHORT time had now eiapfed fince fir Hildebrand*s appearance at the caftle, w hen the beauty of a moon¬ light evening, induced Edward to take a folitary ftroll towards Netley Abbey. This monaftery had become in¬ deed one of his moft favorite walks; its fituation (as is fufficiently evi¬ dent from the prefent ruins) being extremely pleafing and pidurefque. Seated on a gentle declivity, which Hoped with a gradual defcent to the river, at the diftance of a few hun¬ dred
dred yards from it, the abbey rofe in all the pride of gothic architec¬ ture. An undulating lawn ftretch¬ ed from its walls to the brink of the water, and allowed it a full view of the noble ftream. Lofty woods cmbofomed it on every other fide, and fhut its quiet inmates out, from the furrounding world. The piety of Henry thc third had founded this religious houfe ; in which he placed an abbot and twelve cif- terfian monks. Afterwards, however, he granted it to the anceftor of old fir Raymond Warren, and through him it had devolved to the pre¬ fent fir Hildebrand
? ?????
About a twelvemonth previous to the diffolution of the old knight, the venerable abbot had been re¬ moved at the infligation of fir Hil¬ debrand, and father Peter, a crea¬ ture of his ovvn had been fubftitu¬ ted in his room ; at the fame t me, aifo, a general change took place amongft the monks, fo that the ab¬ bey was now entirely peopled by individuais devoted to the fervice of their prefent patron and protector. The clock had juft ftruck eight wdien Edward reached this delici¬ ous fpot ; the moon in full uncloud¬ ed majefty flowly mounted the dark blue firmament, fcattering her yel¬ low radiance on the ftream beneath, w hofe
whofe dimpled furface fparkled with the beam ; the night was calm and ftill, and nought difturbed thc filence that reigned around, fave the fullen roar of the diftant curfew, and the foiemn chantings of the monks (vvho were performing their vefpers) which fwelled occafionally upon thc car. ?? length, however, all was hufli¬ ed ; the chantings were discontinued, the curfew ceafed, and Edwardfound himfelf left to uninterrupted medi¬ tation. A religious awe now took pof¬ feflion of his foul, for thc fcene a- round was calculated to excite fe¬ rious emotions. He trod on con- o 2 feerated
fecratcd ground, beneath which were quietly iaid in eternal flumbcrs, many who had heretofore like himfelf, re¬ joiced in the vigor of youth, and glowed with the bloom of health. In this fpot appeared the magnifi¬ cent maufolcum of the feudal lord; and there, the plain turf grave of his humble vaffal ; the mournful yew tree here oppofed its dark mafs of iliade to the beam of the moon, and the lofty walls of the monaftery there refleded back the placid ray. The imagination of Edward was deeply impreffed by this foiemn af¬ femblage of images ; and fancy, ever rnoft adive when left to her ow r n operations, had began to form many ideal
ideal additions to the fcene, when his attention was fuddenly arrefted by a real but extraordinary appear¬ ance. Cafti ng his eye towards the back of the abbev, which was over- w· * crown vvith thick flirubs, he obfer- ved the fimi re of a warrior rife ? from the entangled thicket, ile was clad in compleat armour, and bore a lance in his rio ht hand. Fía vintr proceeded a few yards in a direction contrary to the place in which Ed¬ ward was ftanding, he fuddenly turn¬ ed about, and fixing his hollow eyes on the youth, heaved a molt pro¬ found ficrh.——The vizor of his hcî- ? met being up, Edward had a per¬ fect view of his countenance. it was that of an old man, miferably o j pale
pale and wan, with the bones, as ir were, ftarting through the ikin ; but grief and indignation might be itil! traced in the meager features. Edward uncertain whether the figure were merely a phantom, or a reality/, ftood fixed for a few mo¬ ments in filent doubt and expeda- tion ; but having at length recover¬ ed himfelf, he was proceeding to-^ wards it, when the warrior railing his lance, pointed to the walls of the abbey, and breathing another dolorous figh, immediately difap*. peared. Astonishment now took poffef¬ fion of Edward's mind; he could ??
fio longer entertain a doubt that what he had juft beheld was the fhade of a departed mortal, but for what purpofe it had appeared to him, he in vain endeavoured to conceive. Above all the terrors of vulgar fu¬ perftition, however, and armed with confcious integrity he was in no wife affrighted at the vifion ; but juft¬ ly concluding that fo extraordinary a deviation from the general laws of nature, muft have been permitted for reafons vvhich would juftify a fupernatural agency, he determined to exert himfelf in endeavouring: to difcover what part it pleafed provi¬ dence that he fliould ad, and to ful¬ fil, to the beft of his power, its behefts.
He vvas deeply funk ïn medita¬ tions of this narure, when a loud female fkrick reached his ear, vvhich appeared to hr,vc been uttered with¬ in the walls cf the ?? -vy. He lift- enea attentively; ??\? in a few fe- con-Js heard it repeated», louder and mcîre diftrefsful than before. It was fuflîciently evident now, that thefe fou'.ids of agony proceeded from the monafterv. The apparition ruihed forcibly into his mind, and he couîd not but imagine, there muft be fome connection between it, and v. hat he had juft heard. He r e fo I v cd, ho v. e v ? v. ¡ i r; m e * ! · a : e î y to fatbfy his víci:b"us, and proceeded' to the abbey.
T t N'
In a few minutes he reached it ; but all was once more ftill. He lift¬ ed the maffivc knocker of the outer gate, and rapped loudly at it.—The lengthened cloifters, and hollow vault¬ ings of the pile reverberated the found, and cave a noife like diftant thunder. No anfwer was returned to this appli¬ cation for admittance ; though he could diftindly hear the whifpering of two or three people within the gate. His fufpicions increafed* and he once more applied to the knocker, which he ftruck againft the door with a violence that ihook the building. A perfon at length looked out from the window above, and demanded who
who vvas at the gate below ? " If thou art the porter,*' returned Ed¬ ward, " come down and give mc en¬ trance ; I am the fon of thc baron de Villars, and have bufinefs of im¬ portance with father Peter." " Mv young lord," replied the monk, " I am the porter of this monaftery ; but as the abbot fome¬ time fince retired to his reft, and the brethren to thcir cells, I fliould incur the difpleafure of my lord, vvere I to open the gate at fo late an hour." * r Well but,'* faid Edward, " I promife thee monk, if thou wilt give me an opportunity of feeing father Peter to-night, that no anger fliall refult
refult to thee in confequence j I will engage to excufe you to the abbot, who will readily pardon your irregu¬ larity when he knows what I have to impart.*' On this the monk faid he would immediately awaken the abbot, and let Edward into the monaftery. It was fometime, however, before he came co the gate, and during ihe interval, Edward, by apply ing his ear to the key-hole, could plainly d.f- tinguiili the whiiperings vvhich he had before heard, though they were carried on in fo low a voice that it was impoflibie for him to diftinguiih the fubject of converfation· Tue
?? e portal was at laft opened, andi Edward admitted. ι As foon as he had reached the outer court, he perceived the abbot ap¬ proaching in a loofe night drefs. He appeared to be about forty years of age, healthy and robuft ; fomewhat corpulent, with a rofy countenance, and an eye that betokened no attach¬ ment to mortification of any kind. " Son," cried he to Edward, " I have rifen from my couch to attend your commands : brother Francis, our porter, having juft informed me that the young lord de Villars' had fomewhat of confequence to impart to me."—Saying this he led Edward
Edward into the refedory, and de¬ fired him to be feated by the ex¬ piring embers of a large fire. " Father," replied Edward, " I am forry to have difturbed the quiet of your convent, but I was called hither by the fcreams of female diftrefs, which were twice diu ind I y heard to iffue from within your walls." " Holy virgin !" exclaimed the abbot, " what doit thou fay ?—A female within thefe hallowed wal L! take heed fon not to feandalizc our facred profeifion by even hinting at fo monftrous an offence.—No! the in¬ mates of Netley Abbey have long renounced the fex; devoted to the fervice of thcir nuk.-r, tbcle days p arc
are fpent in prayer and fafting, thcir nights in vigils and ihort flumbcrs. Every office of the monaftery is filled by fonie pious brother, and no female foot has trodden our cloi¬ fters lince the walls vvere reared.— I doubt not, however, my fon, that ftrange uncommon noifes may have reached you r car; myfelf have heard them more than once, when at the clofe of day I have perchance been wandering near the abbey. Foul vifions too have often crofled my fight ; but thefe are all the illufions of our fpiritual foe, who ftrives by thofe means to unhinge our minds, and hurry us into doubt and dif- pair."
Though
Though the fufpicions of Ed¬ ward were not removed by what the abbot faid, yet, as he perceived no¬ thing was to be learned by appear¬ ing to diibelieve it, he feemed to acquiefce in the idea that his ima¬ gination had been impofed upon.— He therefore again apologifed for having difturbed the quiet of thc convent at fo unfeafonable an hour, and would have departed; but fa¬ ther Peter, after a moment's paufe, taking him by the hand, faid, " nay hold my fon for a few minutes; to convince you the more furcly that your fancy muft have been deceiv¬ ed, you ihali accompany me thiough every chamber of our building, and fee whether or not the monks of ρ 2 Netley
Netley harbour females within their walls.—Heaven forbici thc prophan- ation!" Saying this, he took a taper, and firft led Edward round the refectory, in which the monaf- tics affembled to eat their meals in foiemn filence. They next traver¬ fed the lofty cloifters that echoed to their fteps, and by their gloom made folitude more dreadful. They entered the cells of the different brethren, who were repoiing upon a fimple mat, and covered with an hairy mantle. From thence they proceeded to the fpacious cathedral, whofe lofty windows fparkled with the richeft painted glafs, and whofe crifped roof was decorated with all the fanciful ornaments of gothic archi-
architecture. Here the tapers flill flamed, and waited the arrival of the monks, who at the hour of twelve, always rofe to celebrate noc¬ turnal maffes. Edward viewed thefe various proofs of human folly and fuper¬ ftition with pity and contempt ; * f ftrange," thought he, " that man ihould fo perverfely h^ap upon him¬ felf unneceffary difcomfort ; and wil¬ fully miftake the purpofes for wdiich he was created ! Can the voluntary infliction of painful penances and un¬ natural mortifications be pleafing in the eye of that all-gracious being who rejoices only in the happinefs of his creatures ? Or can thc empty ρ 3 pomp
pomp of folitary devotion atone for the neglect of thofe duties to each other, which we were born to fulfil ?— Afluredly not ; adive benevolence and focial virtue are alone acceptable with the deity ; and no life can be grateful to him that is not beneficial to his creatures.** Having traverfed every part of the pile, father Peter led Edward to the gate, who appeared to be per·*· fedly fatisfied that what he had heard could not have proceeded from the abbey ; he then beftowed his benedic*. tion upon him, and bad him adieu«. Edward now proceeded flowly to¬ wards his father's caftle, deeply mufing
mufing on the occurrences of the evening. All the art of father Peter could not prevent him from fufpec- tino: that there was fome dreadful myftery at the abbey vvhich remained to be developed.—lie had obferved the porter to be apparently agitated when he unbarred the gate ; and the abbot's countenance alfo at times to be overfpread with a guilty fu ft u fion. But how to fatisfy his fufpicions he could not tell.—He doubted not how¬ ever, that the fame providence which had already aftorded him proofs of its interference, would in time direct his refearches ; and therefore determined to wait till an opportunity of dif¬ covering the myftery fliould be givea to him* Ok
On his arrival at the caftle Edward found the family in fome anxiety on I, : s account ; it being nearly mid¬ night, a much later hour than he ufually remained out. He obferved his fifter had been weeping, and that his father alfo appeared more than ordinarily dejeded ; but as he attri¬ buted their emotion to fears for his fafety, he made no enquiries relative to the caufes of their concern, and ta kins; an affectionate leave of them retired to repofe. Full of thc events which had occurred to him, it was a long time before Edward could compofe him¬ felf to fleep ; at length however exhaufted with reflection and fur- mi fes,
mifcs, he funk into a profound flumber. Fancy now began to affume her undivided empire, and after com¬ bining a thoufand whimfical and heterogeneous ideas in his mind, at length produced the following con-*· nected and methodical vifion» He imagined himfelf to be again ftrolling over the lawn of Netley Abbey, by the light of the full-or¬ bed moon; when fuddenly he heard his name repeated in a low and mournful accent. Looking towards the flirubbery from whence the found proceeded, he beheld the fame ar¬ med figure which he had before feen,,
feen, who beckoned him to approach. Fíe accordingly directed his fteps that way, but when he had arrived within a few yards of the phantom, it ftretched out its lance, and point¬ ing towards the walls, faid; "Ed¬ ward muft feek for happinefs with¬ in the vaults of Netley Abbey;** and having uttered thefe words it difappeared* Edward novv thought that he walked towards the walls, and had almoft reached them, when he dif¬ covered amongft the brambles a trap door, wide open, through which ftreamed a faint ray of light. A long flight of ftairs appeared. Thefe he defcended without hefitation, and quickly
'quickly found himfelf in a damp and gloomy paflage, that received a fmall degree of illumination from a dim lamp placed in a vault at the further end. To this the youtli fancied he proceeded. When he arrived there, he beheld a large fubterraneous cham¬ ber, vaulted over head, but with no vifible aperture by vvhich day/- light might bc admitted. It was fo extenfive, and the lamp burnt fo dimly, that he thought he could not difcover what the cavern con¬ tained. Fie was therefore on the point of returning, when he heard a deep groan from the extreme part of it.— This excited his curiofity; he
he took up the lamp, and with fome little trepidation, began to ex¬ plore the vault.—As he approached thc further end, the rays ofhis light were refiecied by a fi-i t of armour; and he perceived the figure cf an armed knight fn ciche i l: on tne ground, but apparently without life or motion.—To thc wail above, were fixed his filiei d and lance. The face of the warrior td.:g averted, Edvvard imagined he leered the lamp, and bent forv -:d in order to take a view cf his features, when the fludd fuddenlv tumbled from its fituation, exnn^ui^ed the licht, and left him in total dark- nefs.
Fancy
Fancy now carried him through various obfcure and intricate paf¬ fages, till he at length arrived at a, Hrong door, in the middle of which was an iron grating. On cafting his eyes through this, he imagined he beheld a cell lighted by a fin¬ gle taper, in which appeared a beau¬ tiful virgin kneeling before a fmall crucifix, that was placed on a table. Unwilling to difturb her devotions, Edward thought he continued for fometime, rapturoufly gazing on her charms, but was at length roufed, by the clafh of fwords in the adjoin¬ ing apartment. To this he imme¬ diately ruihed ; and faw a room elegantly illuminated, but floated with gore; at one end appeared an Q_ expiring
mf expiring knight, and at the other a perfon wrapped in a religious habit, and covered with a cowl, ftrcamine: with blood, and lifeiefs,·—A confu¬ fed noife now reached his ears of Ihouting and revelry; and a troop of knights and ladies appeared to be entering the apartments amongft thefe was this father the baron, who called to him with a voice fo loud, as deftroyed the vifion and broke thc bands of flumber. When Edward unclofed his eyes, he found he ' d heen really awak¬ ened by his rher, v ho delired him to rife and attend him immediately in his own chamber. The youth accordingly dicîTcd himfelf without delay,
delay, ruminating on thc finguiar circumftances of his dream ; and having prayed to the fovereign dif¬ pofer of all events, to arm him with firmnefs and fortitude fufficient for any trials which it might pleafe pro¬ vidence to impofe upon him, he re¬ paired with chearfulnefs and confi¬ dence to the baron's apartment,.
0.2
????.
v/ ?1 ? ? · «tfVİt vJ'N entering the room, Edward found his father traverfing it with a quick and irregular ftep, that be¬ tokened unufual perturbation and anxiety. His brow was marked with careful thought, and an air of extra¬ ordinary melancholy overfpread his features.------*' Heavens !*· cried the youth alarmed at this uncommon ap¬ pearance, " what difafters can have arifen which ftiould fo difturb my ho¬ nored parent? Tell me, I conjure you* my lord, the fource of your uneafinefs j perhaps Edward may leffen, or re¬ move it altogether,"— f< For that pur¬ pofe
pofe fon,** returned the baron, " did I break your repofe thus early. Cir¬ cumftances very diftrefsful have in¬ deed occurred, though they arc only what my fears foreboded ; but I deem it necefiary that you ihould be ac¬ quainted with them," "Ever fince the unfortunate day, when accident occafioned a renewal of my acquaintance with fir Hilde¬ brand Warren, you have been per¬ petually urging me to return his viiit, and introduce you to his knowledge. Hitherto 1 have refifted your felicita¬ tions, and indeed had determined to reii ft them ftill, becaufe I knezv the knight to be undeferving of your friendihip ; and fufpecied him ro be O. 3 a deep,
a deep, defigning, and relentlefs villain.-—You feem furprifed, at what I fay ; but that I may not appear to have formed harih judgments, or harboured groundlefs fufpicions, be¬ fore I proceed further, I will explain to you my reafons for entertaining thefe injurious opinions.** The baron then began to inferi» Edward of fir Hildebrand*s character when a youth, of his profligacy, vice* and meannefs ; he afterwards detailed to him the particulars of his vifit, eft. pecialiy the ftarts of confcious guilt which had appeared, on the baron'* enquiry concerning the fate of the deceafed fir Raymond and his chil¬ dren» <( Juag£
* f Judge then,** continued de Vil¬ lars, Cf whether I was not right in en¬ deavouring to avoid any further inter¬ courfe with fo vile a charader. I had refolved indeed not to go near him myfelf, nor to permit you to feek his friendihip ; trufting that this appear¬ ance of neglect on our parts, would alarm his pride, of which he pofleffes an abundant Ihare, and induce him to confider us as unworthy his further notice.—But alas ! all my caution has been vain.—You had fcarcely left the caftle yefterday evening, when Robert came in, and announced the arrival of fir Hildebrand Warren, who was at the gate with feveral attendants > Eleanor requefted my permiffion to retire, affuring me ihe felt herfelf pre-. pofleffcd
poffeffed with an infurmountablc dif¬ like to thc knight, and fliould be wretched in his company. She ac¬ cordingly went to her apartment, and the next minute fir Hildebrand entered. He apologized for calling at thc caftle at fo unfeafonable an hour, but added, that he had been engaged in a long and fruitlefs chace after a ftag, vvhich having given them fport for feveral hours, had at length efcaped; and that as the roid to hisown man¬ fion ran by de Villars's caftle, he could not think of returning home without enquiring after the health of the baron's family.—Betides niy lord/' continued he, " I much wiibed for the
the pleafure of a converfation with you on a fubjed that is very near my heart.—You cannot mifunderftand my meaning; I would fpeak to you re¬ lative to your beautiful daughter, the fafcinating Eleanor, on whom I find my happinefs depends.—Yes, my lord â I candidly confefs to you, that ever fince I had the felicity of feeing this charmer her idea has never once quitted by bofom ; my thoughts have dwelt on her alone; and the fummit of my ambition is to make her the lady of fir Hildebrand Warren." " You, baron, are not ignorant of the largenefs of my demefnes, and the extent of my influence with thc reigning monarch, and therefore will doubtlefs
doubtlefs endeavour to promote my fuit, fince its fuccefs muft be the certain means of aggrandifing your finking family, and reftoring you and your children to the rank and fplendor from which you have fal¬ len." "I speak to you, my lord, in this free and open manner, becaufe I think you have too much under¬ ftanding, and know the world too well, not to fee the neceflity of fpeedily leading your fon and daugh¬ ter from the obfcurity in wdiich they are wafting their lives, whether you determine to fpend the remain¬ der of yours in folitude or not.— Eleanor if united to me, may move in
in that exalted circle which her ac- compliilbiicnts wdl adorn; and your fon, having fir Hildebrand Warren for his friend, will foon acquire the favor of our prince, and arrive to dignities and rank." "Had I applied to the king to de¬ mand your daughter, as perhaps many would have done to avoid the hum¬ bling circumflance of folicitation, you knov, full well, my lord, my requeft would Lave met with inftant compliance; but I chofe to owe the fair Eleanor to my own afliduitics; to poifefs her fice confent, rather than a forced acquiefcence, extorted by the arbitrary commands of roy¬ alty," It
It was difficult for me, continued de Villars to Edward, to fuppreis the indignation and contempt that arofe in my foul at this fpeech of fir Hildebrand, in which pride, in¬ folence, meannefs and indelicacy were united. I had the prudence, how¬ ever, to conceal my emotions. în,- deed a moment's refledion warned me of the neceffity of temporising with the wretch ; fince his laft words, which were meant to convey an ob¬ lique threat, convinced me he was determined to leave no fcheme un- eflayed to accompiiíh his wiflies. I therefore thanked him for thc compliment which he intended to pay my family, but at the fame time,
time, declined endeavouring to biaa my daughter in a matter of fuch importance to her own happinefs, as the choice of her huiband. " In the affair of matrimony," faid I, " fir Hildebrand, it has always been my determination to permit my chil¬ dren to judge for themfelves. No nuptials can be expeded to produce felicity, in which the heart is not freely given with the hand; and Cod forbid that I ihould perfuade my child to beftow the latter, unlefs her undivided affections could accompany it. Affluence alone, fir Hildebrand, is not fufficient to render the mar¬ riage ftate a happy one; we may form the hymeneal chain of gold in¬ deed, but it would be only the more R heavy
heavy and galling to thofe who wear it. However, knight, I by no means with-hold my confent to your foli- citing the ???? of Eleanor from her¬ felf. Her affedions I dare believe are yet difengaged ; ihould fhe con¬ fer them on you, you need not doubt my wilHngnefs to compleat your happinefs· But fliould íhe pre¬ fer continuing the companion of her declining father, to participating the wealth and fplendor of fir Hil¬ debrand Warren, his honor and ge¬ nerofity will I doubt not prevent all further importunities on the fub¬ jed.*' The knight bit his lips at my iaft words, but after a moment's paufe, replied ;
replied; " Well my lord, I return you thanks for the candor with which you have fpoken, and the frank per¬ miffion you have given me to at¬ tempt fecuring the affedions of the charming Eleanor.—But I pant for an opportunity of laying my heart at her feet.—As yet my lord neither yourfelf, your fon, or daughter, have honored Netley caftle with a vifit- On the day after to-morrow, I pur¬ pofe holding a tournament there, at which the neighbouring knights are invited to attend.—Say, fhall the fports be crowned by the prefence of my lovely Eleanor, with her father, and brother?—Not knowing how to re¬ fufe fo dired an invitation, I repli- §d in the affirmative, and fir Hil·- R 2 debrand,
debrand, apparently well pleafed with my acquiefcence, cook his leave, and departed." **As foon as he was gone, conti¬ nued the baron," I fummoned Elea¬ nor from her apartment, and un¬ folded to her what had pafled be¬ tween the knight and myfelf.—Her diftrefs, as you may fuppofe, was extreme. The unpoliihed manners of fir Hildebrands his ferocious afped; and the great difparity of their years,, were objections not to be gotten over by a girl of your fifters vir¬ tue and delicacy· She burft into ä violent flood qf tears, and exclaimed· fc Never, never, my honored parent ??? I coiffent to be fir Hildebrande wife;
.wife; my foul abhors him ; and fooner would I pafs my days in want and WTetchednefs, than ihare with him. all that affluence and power can be¬ ftow.—No, let me ftill continue to be the companion of my aged fa- - ther ; and in conjundion with Edward, endeavour by unremitted attentions, to foothe his forrows, and comfort his declining years.—Let this be Elea- . nor*s bufinefs, pride, and happinefs.'* I appeafed the diftrefs of your fif¬ ter by affuring her, that while i had life and could proteft her ihe fliould never be feperated from me contrary to her inclination; but ob¬ ferved to her, that as fir Hilde¬ brand was powerful, and might ef¬ fect his purpofes by engaging the r 3 royal
royal arm in his favor, it was ne* ceíiàry for us act with fome degree øf diffimulation: and that whatever pain it might coft to conceal her diflike, it would be policy in her to preferve at leaft a kind civility towards him í ** Ibis conduct" ad¬ ded I, "my dear child, will at leaft gain us time, and perhaps an oppor¬ tunity of avoiding his future perfe« cutions* At all events, however, let us make ourfelves eafy, fince we are under the guidence of an over-ruling providence that orders all for the beft, and that will not withdraw its protection from us whilft *we continue to deferve it." « With language of this kind, Ed¬ ward,
Ward, I endeavoured laft night to comfort your fifter; though, heaven knows, my own mind was far from being in a calm and fettled ftate.— I forefee that the impetuous paffions, and licentious violence of fir Hilde¬ brand, will not brook a long delay; and (hould Eleanor once give him the leaft reafon to fufped he is not the objed of her regard, I doubt not that he will inftantly arm himfelf with the king's mandate, and drag her a forced unwilling vidim to the altar." " Not while the I oodof de Villars, my lord, circulates t rough my heart ;* ' exclaimed Edward. ------" Sir Hilde- brand fliall feel tlu temper of this trufty
trufty fword, ere he deftroys the peace of Eleanor. " " A L a s ! my fon, ' * retu r ned the baron, " what could oùr refiftance effed? You behold this arbitrary chieftain furrounded by numerous vaftals, and ftrengthened by the pro¬ tedion of the king. The unaffifted arms of your father and yourfelf, would avail but little againft injuf¬ tice when f ? powerfully upheld.— No, Edward, it will be neceffary for us to ad with cautious policy, ra¬ ther than impotent violence. We will attend this tournament of the knight's, which he doubtlefs holds in order to difphy to your fifter, his ikill and grace in thefe martial cxercifes.
exercifes. She has been direded by me, to endeavour to diffembie her diflike to the attentions of fir Hil¬ debrand; who may, by thefe means, be deceived into an opinion, that he is not altogether difagreeable to her» This, perchance, will protract his fuit in fome meafure; and we muft employ the interval to our own ad¬ vantage.** " It is rumoured abroad, that the barons, difgufted with the abfurd partiality of the king to Gavafton, and his numerous other weakneffes, have confederated together, in order to deftroy this minion; and to re¬ gulate the vitiated government.— The leaders of this confpiracy, are my
my particular friends; Humphry de Bohun* earl of Hereford, Aymer de Valence, earl of Pembroke, and Thomas, earl of Lancafter.—I have taken meafures to affure myfelf of the truth of this report « and ihould I find it to be founded in fact, have determined immediately to folicit the protection of this powerful lea¬ gue.—If, however, it be a ground¬ lefs ftory, we muft prepare, I fear, to leave our retreat ; and by fecretly retiring to the country that gave me birth, endeavour to fecure our Eleanor from the bafe defigns of thc too powerful fir Hildebrand War* ren/* It was fometime before the baron could
could convince Edward of the pro¬ priety of adopting thefe prudential meafures. His gçnerous foul flamed into indignation, at the idea of wan¬ ton oppreflion ; particularly when it applied to one fo dear to him as his fifter was. Having, however, always been accuftomed to pay the moft implicit deference to his father's opinion, he at length fubmitted to regulate his condud according to his diredions ; to preferve an appearance of civility towards the knight ; and to wait with patience till de Villars had received fatisfadory anfwers to his enquiries refpeding the ftate of public aftairs. Edward now thought it proper to inform
inform the baron of the ftrange oc¬ currences which bad happened to him during the preceeding evening, and the lingular vifion thofe even ? had given rife to; not omitting the various fufpicious circumftances he had noticed in father Peter and the porter of the abbey. De Villars was ftruck with deep aftoniíhment at the narration; but after a paufe of a few minutes, re¬ plied; "The finger of providence, my chiid, ^s fufficiently obvious in thc events you have related, to ren¬ der them worthy our ferious regard ; nor can we confider them as the wan¬ derings of a fervent fancy, or heated imagination» Heaven is doubtlefs about
about to reveal fome fearful, bloody fecret, and hath chofen you as its inftrument in bringing it to light. That the abbey conceals a myf¬ tery of a horrible nature I have no doubt; and I am equally certain, fir Hildebrand Warren is conneded with it in fome ihape or other.*— As the monaftery, however, is un¬ der his immediate protedion, and its inmates are doubtlefs upon their guard not to afford any trace by which their evil pradifes may be difcovered, there will be no little difficulty in ascertaining the truth of our fufpicions.------But I will re¬ volve the fubjed in my mind, Ed¬ ward, and endeavour to fuggeft fome plan, the execution of which will s enable
enable us to unfold the latent truth." The bell now fummoned the fa¬ mily to mattins, which were daily celebrated in the hall of the caftle. Hither the baron and his fon re¬ paired, the one with more compo¬ fure of mind than he had enjoyed previous to this converfation; thc other burning with all the impa¬ tience of youthful curiofity, to unra¬ vel the myftery of Netley Abbey.
CHAP.
CHAP X. JL HE morning now at length arri ved on which the baron and his children were to attend the tournament of fir Hildebrand Warren; a vifit equal¬ ly difagreeable to all three. De Villars fecretly detefting the knight, yet cautious of betraying any fymptom of his real fentiments, left he íhould provoke him to an inftant exertion of unwarrantable power.—Eleanor abhorring his ad¬ dreffes, yet conftrained by the com¬ mands ofher father, to receive them with civility; and Edward flaming s 2 with
with indignation, but ftruggling to fubdue the emotions of his mind, and to affume an appearance of con¬ fidence and ferenity. Agitated by thefe various fen¬ fations the baron's family at length reached Netley caftle. It was an extenfive and magnificent pile, but gloomy and retired; ftanding in the center of a large park, and com- pleatly invefted with lofty and ve¬ nerable woods.—The hall was high and fpacious; decorated with the trophies of war, and the fpoils of the chace. When in the poffeifion of the late owner, it had almoft daily been filled with the hungry and the poor* and often rang with the
the chearful founds of thc minftrcl*s harp.—A furly warden now drove the neceflitous from the threihold ; nor was the tra/elling bard permit- ted to chant his legendary fong within its walls. Sir- Hildebrand received his gueft f wiih that air of confcious fuperi¬ ority with which the poffeifion of exceflive wealth is apt to ini pire the mean and degenerate. To Eleanor, indeed, he abated a little of his pride; though by pointing out, and dwelling upon the number of his domeftics, the extent of his demef- nes, and the fplendor of his caftle, he indulged his vanity, and endea- s 3 voured
voüred to imprefs her with an idtn of her happinefs and good-fortune, in having an admirer fo rich and powerful as himfelf. He had the mortification, however, of remark¬ ing, that all his endeavours to ex¬ cite an appearance of regard and attention in his fair gueft were vain; Eleanor was either entirely infenfi¬ ble to his gallantries, or met them with fuch cool referve, as convin¬ ced him he had hitherto made no progrefs in her favour.—The haugh~ ty foul of fir Hildebrand was fe~ merely wounded at the indifference of de Villars *s daughter; but he dif¬ fembled his feelings, and ordered the tournament to commence· The
The company, which confifted for the moft part of the knight's re¬ tainers, and a few of the neareft lords, and gentry, were ???????- ducted to the back of the caftle, where lifts were appointed for thc combatants, and feats prepared for the accommodation of the fpeda- tors. The baron declined entering into the fports on account of his ad¬ vanced age; while Edward alfo ex¬ cufed himfelf from taking part in them, under a plea of indifpoiition; but in reality becaufe he feared the indignation which was ftruggling in his bofom, would blaze out prema¬ turely, fliould he engage in conteft with
with fir Hildebrand, who had given out that he fliould oppofe alî comers. The knight prefented Eleanor with a filken fcarf of an azure colour, with which he requefted (as queen of the fports) ihe would de¬ corate the fortunate w r arrior, who íhouid at the conclufion, remain mafter of the field. The trumpets then founded to the charge; and the fports began. It was impof¬ fible to refufe applaufe to the addrefs of fir Hildebrand, who dif¬ played a perfect knowledge of the amufement in which he was enga¬ ged Indeed his gigantic fize, and uncommon ftrength, gave him an advantage
advantage in this martial exercife which nothing but confummate a- droitnefs on the part of his opponent could hope to equal. He unhor¬ fed fucceffively every knight who entered the lifts ; and added to the ihame of difcomfiture, by many fharp farcafms, and ill-natured re¬ marks on their misfortune» As no other opponent now ap+ peared fir Hildebrand was declared vidor, and had already approached the feat of Eleanor to receive from her fair hand the reward of his valour, when the warder of the caftle entered, and exclaimed ; " My lord, a ftranger knight, who was accidentally paffing this way, hear¬ ing
ing that you were celebrating a tour¬ nament at the caftle, claims the privileges of hofpitality, ar.d de¬ mands the honor of breaking a lance with vou." "Afluredly;" faid fir Hildebrand, * f I ihall be right glad to add one more name to my lift of vidories to-day." In a few minutes the warder re¬ turned, leading in the ftranger knight. He was a tali and elegant figure; clad in a compleat fuit of black ar¬ mour; and mounted on a fable fteed. On his helmet waved a large plume of crimfon feathers. In his right hand he bore a ponderous lance, and his left fupported a maffTve fliield charged with a bloody dagger, under vv hich.
which appeared this motto, a juß revenge* On his entrance he bent gracefully* to the company ; made a profound obedience to Eleanor; and took his place in the lifts. Sir Hildebrand again mounted his palfrey, and the trumpets once more founded to the charge. The combatants ran with great fury at each other ; but though both their lances were fhivered in the ihock, yet neither of them loft his feat. Fresh weapons were now provided them, and they prepared to make a fecond charge. In this, however, fir Hildebrand was not quite fo for¬ tunate
tunate as he had been ; the violence of the ftranger's thruft carried him fairly from his faddle, and (had he Dot recovered himfelf by a fudden evolution ofhis horfe,) would certain¬ ly have borne him to the ground. Sha m ? and rage took pofleilion of the knight ; to be thus foiled in the fight of his miftrefs, and in the moment of victory, was fo fevere a wound to his vanity and pride that he could not conceal his mortifica¬ tion. iC Stranger," cried he, in a voice choaked with paffion, " you may confider yourfelf as indebted to accident, for the little advantage you gained in the laft encounter. The fucceeding one, however, ihall give you
vou occafion to rue having oppofed yourfelf to fir Hildebrand Warren/* The ftranger gently íhook his ????. but made no anfwer. Each novv collecled himfelf for a charge, which both determined íhould be decifive* Sir Hildebrand nearly mad with rage, fummoned all his ftrength and fkili ; and fúriou íly Tuíhed towards his adverfary.—The other met him with equal vigour.—· The ihock was defperate.—The lance of fir Hildebrand however fnapping in the middle, the ftranger's weapon, ftruck with irrefiftible violence againft him; he loft his feat, the reins fell from his hands, and he came with -a moft terrible cruih to the ground, τ Being
Bn ng entirely deprived of fenfe or motion by the accident, the at¬ tendants ran İn to adminifter their affiftance, vvhich gave the ftranger knight an opportunity of repairing to the feat of Eleanor to receive the prize öf victory. When he reached it, he difmounted from his fteed, and falling on one knee, foli¬ cited in elegant terms, that he might receive the fcarf from her hands, and v*ear it in future as the badge of being her knight* Saying this he lifted up the vizor of his hel¬ met, and difplayed a manly, and handfome countenance, the expref- five index of a great and generous foul.—Eleanor with a modeft bluih that made her charms more inte¬ refting,
refting, threw the fcarf acrofs his ihoulder; paying him at the fame time a handfome compliment on the fkili he had exhibited, and congra¬ tulating him on the fuccefs with which it had been crowned. He then rofe; made another graceful obeifance and withdrew. Sir Hildebrand in the interim recovered from the fliock he had received—but it was only to expe¬ rience new mortification.—He ea¬ gerly enquired for the vidorious knight, and learnt his departure with ftrong marks of difguft and diiapr pointment ;—when he heard however, that Eleanor's hand had decorated him with the filken fcarf, his fury τ 2 rofe
rofe to the higheft pitch. The pangs of jcaloufy took poffeffion of his» foul, and his fufpicions immediate¬ ly whifpered to him, that the war¬ rior with whom he had contended in the tournament, was no other than a favored lover of Eleanor's* Her difregard of his addreffes was now accounted for; the coldnefs too with which the baron had received ¡his proffers,, appeared no longer ex¬ traordinary. He doubted not bun tlie knight had been made acquaint¬ ed with the entertainment by one or the other of them ; and prevailed «upon to attend it for the purpofe of blafting the laurels of fir HiU debrand, and carrying off the glory of the day. However-
'HoweveIl unlikely all thefe fup¬ pofitions w r erc, yet the tinge of jea- J ou fly gave them a probable appear¬ ance ; and being once admitted into his bofom, they were received as incontrovertible truths. A deep de¬ fire of revenge, the infeparable companion of this mental malady, novv fettled in his foul. Eleanor who fo lately reigned the eniprefs of it, became the object of his deadly hate,—and his thoughts teemed vvith fell and fanguinary purpofes. He approached de VillarVs daugh¬ ter, and addrefling her in a low voice faid, (( Lady, your minion did right to depart the caftle, e're I had an opportunity of properly τ 3 thanking
fhjtih'w him for his vififc; he miehf elfe have had caufe to repent the hour in which he intruded within its walls.—But though he has now ? efcaped, he ihall not long have to boaft the fuccefs of his infolence ; fir Hildebrand Warren is not to be dishonored with impunity."—Say¬ ing this he fcowled with a frown of revenge on de Villars and his children, and retired without fur¬ ther ceremony inro the caftle. Tije baron on his return, could no: refrain from reflecting on the finguiar adventures of the day, and the unaccountable rage of fir Hildebrand. He had heard the threatning purport of his fpeech to Eleanor
Eleanor, but was at a lofs to con¬ ceive what ftrange workings of the mind ihould have given fo fudden a turn to his fentiments refpeding her.. The real motives of his condud were fo wild and abfurd, that they never once entered the imagination, of the barom Knowing, however,, the violence of the knight's paflions, and the profligacy of his character, he could not but feel an anxiety as to the confequences of the events which had occurred ; and he deter¬ mined on immediately endeavouring to arm himfelf and family againft his power and machinations, by fo¬ lic iting the protedion of thc confe¬ derated barons., ???,
The mind of Eleanor, alfo, was not more eafy than that of her fa¬ ther ; but from a different caufe. Thc elegant form, ensraqina: coun- tenance, graceful carriage, and gal¬ lant condud of the ftranger knight, had made a deep impreffion on her hearr ; and excited emotions w hich ihe had never before experienced. At everv mention of him bv her father, a fudden bluffi overfpread her cheek ; an unufual trembling feized her frame; and though the fubject was the moft interefting to her of any other, yet ihe found herfelf inca¬ pable of converfing on it. At one time her fears were alarmed for his fafety in cafe fir Flildebrand ihould difcover who he was; at another, her foul
foul funk at the refledion that it was probable he might already be far diftant, and never be feen by her again* Edward liftewife fek himfelf much interefted about the ftranger. He had marked the noblenefs of his countenance when he removed his vizor, (which the baron had not feen owing to the fituation in which he was placed) and obferved in it the traces of an invincible fpirit ftruggling with mental anguiih. His compaflion and efteem were inftant¬ ly engaged, and he longed to know the particulars of a hiftory, that probably teemed with many inte¬ refting circumftances. These:·
These confiderations, however,. could not divert his mind from dwel¬ ling on the extraordinary events which had happened to himfelf. He revolved them over and over; fuggeiting and rejecting a thoufand fchemes for fatisfying his doubts, and developing the fecret which Netley Abbey contained. One at length occurred to him that appear¬ ed to be feafible, and likely to anfwer the ends propofed. " My lord," faid he the baron, I have, during our walk, been chiefly em¬ ployed in endeavouring to difcover fome means of penetrating the myf¬ terious condud of father Peter, and the iniquituous feenes, which, it is too probable, his convent conceals. A plan
A plan has at length fuggefted it¬ felf that may be eafily put in exe¬ cution, and promifes to be crowned with complete fuccefs. The ufage of the times, you know my lord, permits the monks to enjoy the en¬ tertainment of minftrelfey; and the itinerant bard is always received right gladly by them. Minftrels they hold in the higheft eftimation, and place in them the moft impli¬ cit confidence.** " I purpose then, on the mor¬ row, to cloathe myfelf in the garb of this profeflion, and with my harp in my hand, to requeft refreihment, and a night's repofe at the abbey. That ■ I ihall be admitted, there can be
be no doubt; and my difguife, an4 İkili on the inftrument, will pre¬ vent a difcovery of the deceit.------ As foon as the monks have retired to their repofe, and all is quiet in the monaftery, I will commence my refearches, and fcrutinize with the utmoft diligence every corner of it. If there be any latent villainy, which it is the intention of providence to make manifeft, the all-wife diredor of human affairs, will perchance af¬ ford me a clue, by which I may be enabled to bring it to light." De Villars liftened to his [on ? with great attention; the fcheme ftruck him as being a very reafon¬ able one; he immediately fanction- ed
ed it with his approbation ; and it was determined that Edvvard ihould put it in pradice on the enfuing afternoon.
£$& OF TBE FIRST VOLUME.
