Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Ringrove: or, Old fashioned notions
RINGROVE.
An old, and may it without presump¬ tion be said, a favoured Mentor of youth, after ten years' silence, steals from her recess to say, that she has, during her retirement, endured afflic¬ tion, and experienced its benefits. She re-appears in a character which she has acquired since her secession ; yet, egotist as she is, no one who really knows her will suspect that she has exhibited Mrs, Loveday as a cast of her own countenance, but as the Brazen Head which she has fabricated to utter the good things she has collected and deems worthy of transmitting as ora- VOL. i. ?
£
cular. If favourably received, " the Old Woman '* may make another visit to the press ; but if she be judged to have turned " driveller,*' and the marks of fatuity be found upon her, the pub¬ lic will commend the decent resolution of preventing her from continuing to be " a show." Yet before she dismisses this, possibly her last appeal to the literary world, she begs to say, that she does not aspire to the distinction of being a fashionable novelist. A key to the work is not necessary ; any re¬ semblance that may be traced to living characters and real events is fortuitous; no known delinquent is pilloried in a mask, and exposed to the peltings of public ridicule under charges which, blending truth with falsehood, either cast a gauzy veil of sentiment over guilt, or magnify infirmity into mon¬ strous crime j no rival or enemy is
3
covertly satirized ; no friend or patron deified ; and if the character sustained for thirty years appears to deteriorate- that fault arises from the feebleness of infirmity, not from change of principle. With this protest against any attempt at auto-biography or personality, she ceases to speak in her own character.
? 2
4
CHilPTER L ?? last I set out for my grandmo. ther's. Twelve years had elapsed since I saw that venerable lady of whom now I had but a faint recollection ; it was on a sad occasion, the death of my own mamma. That circumstance, of course, blended a considerable share of gloomy, disagreeable remembrances with her identity ; besides, as this visit had for the last five years been held over me in terrorem, when I entered the chariot which was to convey me part of the way to Ringrove, my feel¬ ings were, perhaps, similar to those of expatriated criminals on a voyage to Australasia. If I was remiss in at¬ tending to my master's lessons, or contradicted my little brothers and
5
sisters, or went to a party with my hair negligently arranged, or declined a partner who (however disagreeable) promised the faintest chance of a fu¬ ture establishment, I regularly heard this remark from my stepmother : ** It is quite in vain, Mr. Herbert, fbr me to take pains with this girl ; she is in¬ corrigible. We must send her to her grandmother.'* But for the degrading banishment which was thus held out, and a conse¬ quent exclusion from all I had learned to love and admire, my recollections of my threatened gaoler would have been of a mixed nature. I had twice been domesticated with Mrs. Loveday, once at Ringrove with my own mamma, during her long illness, and again in London at the time of her funeral. On the former occasion,. I thought Rin¬ grove pleasanter than my father's town- fi 3
6
house, for I was allowed to ride the donkey, to play with the great house¬ dog, and to luxuriate among the fruit and the flowers of the productive gar¬ den, a plot of which, three yards square, was granted to my especial use ; these I perpetually threw into new shapes, and dug up what I planted to see if it grew. I was a year older when Mrs. Loveday visited Ixmdon ; she looked differently than when we were in the country — paler, thinner, older, and melancholy. The servants said she did not live in style, and was covetous and interfering. My father declared she was one whom nobody could please, so neither he nor I made the useless attempt. I remembered she opposed my having a bugle-border on a crape frock for the dancing mas¬ ter's ball, saying, my bereavement was too recent to justify my appearing in
7
public. She bought me no bon-bons, trinkets, nor play-things; her only ρ r- sents were a miniature of my mamma and a few books, and these were voted to be useless, as I could not exhibit them on my chiffonier, except the Bible and Prayer Book, which, being elegantly bound, my father called her a spiritual dandy. Her manner at part¬ ing was affectionate, and many a tear dropped on my face as she repeatedly asked for one more kiss; yet 1 did not lament her departure, and certainly rejoiced to hear my fatiier refuse her request to have me intrusted to her care, by assuring her he could not part with his little housekeeper. For some months after my grand¬ mother left us, I led as happy a life as an uncontrolled girl of nine years old could desire. Extensive mercan¬ tile concerns kept my father chiefly in ? 4
8
the city, but when he returned to------ Square, it was to lavish upon me the endearments which doating fondness suggested, and the gifts which pro¬ fusion only could supply. I was the best dressed girl in the circle of my acquaintance. My father kept a good table, and there, except when it was graced by some dignified guests, I was permitted to preside. Every one knew I was the idol of a doating parent, every one believed I was the heiress of immense wealth ; for it was thought impossible that so fond a father, so in¬ consolable a widower, a man of such refined sensibility, who had lost so in¬ comparable a wife, a husband, too, whose attachment had been so roman¬ tically formed, so vividly sustained, and so prematurely dissolved, could ever think ofa second marriage. My father's dining acquaintance admired
9
the happy ease of my mariners, and the brilliancy of my wit. The ser¬ vants affirmed I was the most generous creature in the world, for I tore, spoiled, and gave away my dresses with perfect indifference. My masters were all asto¬ nished at my talents, and declared that I gave them no trouble ; and my go¬ verness, a lady of singular command of temper, prudence, and discernment, in opposition to the whisper which some¬ times circulated in the drawing-room, that I was rather plain, professed it to be her opinion, that when Miss Her¬ bert's complexion brightened up, and her features came out, and her figure and manner were formed, her fine eyes, teeth, and hair must make her irresistibly fascinating. Yes, " irresist¬ ibly fascinating" were the well-re¬ membered words. How bright are the paintings of youthful hope ! How ? 5
10
vivid the recoUections of self-love ! Eight years have elapsed since these compliments were paid to my perfec¬ tions, and possibly I am now the only person who recollects that I once stood on an envied eminence with yet loftier heights waiting my ascent. I had just discovered that I had only to ask and possess all that my heart or my fancy suggested, when my father one mornmg requested my stay at the breakfast-table after my gover¬ ness, Miss Plaudit had made an effort to remove. " You too must stay," said he to her in a tone of voice I had never heard him use to any but myself; " the two dearest beings in the world must no longer be ignorant of the situation in which I mean they should stand to each other. My beloved Emma, my own Hypatia " — and here his eye rested on Miss Plaudit's face with Ian-
11
guishing tenderness —- " thus I join your hands, and conjure you to remain through life as you are now, the most affectionate and faithful of friends, but under the new titles of mother and daughter.'* Miss Plaudit opened her arms and almost stifled me with her caresses ; her eyes rained tears as fast as her tongue dropped honied words. Stunned at the suddenness of the communication, terrified, disgusted at having one whom I had hitherto considered as my in¬ ferior promoted to be my equal, (more than that I thought a being so in¬ dulgent to my desires, so fond of my person, and so conscious of my talents, never could presume to become,) I struggled to loosen myself from her embrace, instead of returning it, nor did my tears flow till my father had led her from the room in an agony of ? 6
n
fine feeling, in which I could hear her, in the intervals of hysterical sobbing, exclaim, "Oh! Mr. Herbert, what a gem do you give me to polish ! May I prove myself worthy of removing her prejudices, and asserting my claim to her ingenuous heart ! What delightful sincerity, what unsophisticated frank¬ ness ! indeed, I must have you admire the naivete ofher conduct.'* When my father returned to me, he found that I also had worked myself up to a high pitch of passionate grief. I flew into his arms ; I clung around his neck; my breaking heart could not vent itself in sobs sufficiently to give my feelings utterance. 4 '· Why, what is the matter, Emma? Come, come, no more of this. I have left Hypatia quite composed, and be as¬ sured my motive for choosing her to be my wife proceeds from the strong
13
affection she bears you ; and can you suppose she will ever aHow me to love you less ? " " But you promised, sir, I should always be your little housekeeper!" " So I did, love; but don't you hope one day to have a house of your own : and then what am I to do ? I intend every thing shall go on just as it does, only the servants will mind you more when you are supported by such an excellent judicious mother." "I can't call Miss Plaudit mother, sir; she is not at all like my own mamma, and I have not forgot her." A tear started in my father's eye, which he brushed away. " No one who once knew her, ever can forget her. But, indeed, Emma, a widower's family requires a skilful superintendent. Though much the cleverest little girl of your age I
14 know, you are too young to conduct a large establishment. Hypatia will be your adviser, your directress." « Could she not be so, sir, without being your wife ?" A glow of anger reddened his brow« " She cannot render me the service my fortune requires, without having full authority. Foolish girl, to agitate yourself thus, when really it is for your sake principally that I take this step. For shame, Emma, you seem to weep faster for my consolatory explanations. See, in your tragic airs, you have broken your pearl bracelet. Cheer up, child, and tell me what sum you will require to fit you out for my nuptials, which will take place in a month ; you shall accompany us to the Lakes, and may come out a year sooner, under the guidance of a chaperone so thoroughly acquainted with the great world as my Hypatia.**
15
£ tried to be comforted ; a large sum of money was devoted to my use, and I was allowed to direct the expendi¬ ture. The marriage took place ; the happy pair departed on their nuptial tour, but the bride thought my deli¬ cate health would suffer from the heat of the weather, and the rapidity of their movements. I had used to be called a strong healthy girl, but I was told to consider this as another proof of her kind solicitude for my comfort. In the same scale of obligation I was to weigh my being consigned to the care of Mrs, Turnwell, during the honey-moon ; and my new mamma said so much of the pains she had taken to induce my father to consent to this arrangement, that it was not till I found myself neglected, and uncomfortable, in the family of my particular friend, that I cast a regret-
16
fill sigh towards the banks of Win¬ dermere. Instead of carpet dances, Italian shades, Punchinello, and the Pandean pipes, which used to welcome my visits to the Turnwells, a hint was given about washing-week, and work¬ men in the house, with an injunction to make as little work for the servants as possible. From being "the most delightful creature in the world," I changed, even in my brightest moods, into "a good little girl." Clement was no longer called from the count¬ ing house, to practise with me the new quadrille, and my own particular friend, Lindamira, laughed, at my at¬ tempting to make rice-baskets; and trod on my Italian grey-hound without any apology. Anxiously did I count on returning to my own father's house, and recollected with some degree of consolation, that as my new mamma
17
always reprobated the Turnwells as vulgar time-servers, she must be pleased to find her own penetration verified, by the account I should give her of their behaviour. I intended to be very confidential with my stepmother, but soon found it was impossible. Her embraces were less frequent, her words less kind} be¬ sides, all the morning, she was engaged with trades-people, with shopping, or with visitors ; and I was left with my masters, to be idle or diligent as the humour prevailed, under the stimulus of being sooner fit to be brought out, or sent to a boarding-school. At din¬ ner, there was always some humble cousin or dear friend of Mrs. Her¬ bert's, the best creature in the world, who called in by accident, ready to frown me into silence, and to echo " Yes, certainly," to all her animadver-
18
sions on my deficiencies. In the even¬ ing, there were either " at homes " to be attended to, or parties for some public diversion ; and I was commend¬ ed to the care of the housekeeper, who gave me an almond-puff, and sent me to bed. For one whole week I sought in vain for an opportunity to complain of the housemaid, who had now no time to tie my frock ; my fa¬ ther referred me on every occasion to his good wife, and she was too much overwhelmed by the multiplicity of her duties to hear my remonstrances. I had the head-ache, but no one relin¬ quished her own dinner to sit by my bed-side; I pouted, but every one seem¬ ed the merrier at my evident dissatis¬ faction. Tears no longer gained me a supply of pocket-money, and my mimicry of my masters, which was once rapturously encored, was either
19
received in profound sUence, or I was advised to attend less to their singular¬ ities, and more to their instructions. In six months all my perfections vanished, and in six more they be¬ came converted into crimes; yet in company my new mamma was held forth as a pattern to all stepmothers. She often called me to her, as I sat neglected in a corner, absorbed by in¬ expressible anguish, and after kissing me, and wondering why I was so dull, assured her guests, that it was the de¬ light of her life to oblige me. I won¬ dered why every thing was so changed, was surprised how I grew ill-natured and naughty, and by what means I lost the good opinion ofall my friends. At last, Betty told me one morning, it was all over with me, and I was out of favour, because a fine Uttle brother was come to town. Like most girls
20
of my age, I had no inherent love for noddling squalling babies ; besides I knew enough to be convinced, that I was now degraded from the important rank of sole heiress to Mr. Herbert, the great West India merchant ; yet, as Betty told me my mamma had been very ill, and that my father was very happy, I thought I ought to appear on the scene of action, and stole into Mrs. Herbert's dressing-room. There I saw my father bending in ecstasies over the cradle, and the nurse exclaim¬ ing, "The finest little gentleman I ever dressed* Oh ! bless him, my lady's sweet temper I warrant ; and so like you, sir 1 See if he don't laugh and crow already at his own dear papa." My stealthy step not being per¬ ceived, I gently took my father's hand, and, as I pressed it to my lips, moistened it with a tear. He started,
21
looked at me, asked why I was so pale, called me his own poor girl, and suffered my head to fall on his bosora. But the odious nurse recalled me from what I felt was elysium. " Yes, little Master Newcome, that's your own sister come to welcome you into the world. Dear, oh ! she'll be so fond of you ! There, Miss, feel the weight of him,"—dashing a lump of red flesh, enveloped in flannel, into my arms, and equally enjoying my embarrassment and an additional pinch of rappee, during my efforts to adjust the burden to my own comfort and his ease. The babe, till now quiescent, commenced a puling cry. Nurse, darting at me a look of significant horror, snatched him from my arms, and hurried to his mother. My father angrily exclaimed, " Emma, did you hurt the child ?" and hastened after them, while I re-
22
mained aghast, conscious of having committed another crime, but, as in the former case, ignorant of its na¬ ture. It was, however, of serious conse¬ quence. Nurse protested, that from that hour the little gentleman dwindled away ; and, indeed, within the month he breathed his last. It was some time ere Mrs. Herbert, whom I now ceased to call mamma, could bear me in her presence ; at last, as an exercise of Christian charity, she called me to the sofa on which she languished in the sublime abstraction of maternal grief, gave me a cold kiss, and told me, she forgave me. My father was always so far my advocate, as to avow his opinion that I did not hurt poor little Peter intentionally, but his re¬ marks about my being so horridly awkward in every thing I undertook
23
were more agonising than his lady's benign self-control. The little heir- apparent was now in his coffin, lined with white satin, embedded among geraniums, and sprigs of flowering myr¬ tle. Yet I was no longer the all- attractive, all-accomplished Miss Her¬ bert, but suspected of being the most spiteful, treacherous, and selfish, — proved also by experience to be the most awkward of human beings ; and so overlooked, even at my own father*s table, as to be grateful to a humble acquaintance for a tap on the cheek or an orange. Another and another year passed away, durmf which I was tormented by masters, screwed and squeezed by corset-makers, flounced and furbished by milliners, and still a hope held out that if I would but take pains with myself I should come out the sooner.
24
I was now occasionally allowed a seat in Mrs. Herbert's barouche, and a glance at morning exhibitions. At the close of each year, a brother οί¬ α sister was successively added to our family ; but as a prohibition had been issued against my entering the nursery, I saw them without interest or affec¬ tion. I tried hard to regain my in¬ fluence with my father during my temporary presidency at the breakfast and dinner-tables, but at the former meal, my insuperable antipathy the nurse, always brought in the baby to visit " its own dear papa ; " and at the latter, Mrs. Herbert's usual host of re¬ lations, in all their ranks and degrees, from her cousin M'Bounce to Dr. Squib, effectually prevented a tête-à- tête, and confined me to the business of sHcing the fish or ladling out the soup, wiüiout the possibility of an in-
25
quiry beyond " May I help you to any more ?" My début was still delayed. Mrs. Herbert, after her third accouchement was successively feverish, weak, low, lan¬ guid, nervous, devoted to her nurslings, and at last quite weaned from a vain wicked world. I began to dread that this last obstacle to my chance of es¬ caping from my present thraldom to a home of my own would be invin¬ cible ; but with the declining fame of a popular preacher, religion went out of fashion, and the celebrity of a just-imported opera-dancer induced her to take a box, and become the patroness of genius. I happened at this time to be in my best looks ; the season was not prolific in new faces ; it was voted that I should come out, and try if I could strike. I had now no cause to complain of deficient at- VOL. i. ?
26
tention. We spent the whole morn¬ ings in driving to different repositories, searching for what was cheap, fashion¬ able, and becoming. I was initiated in the arcana of angling for hearts, and taught the leading rules which dis¬ tinguish the stolen glances and half- smothered sighs of an half-pay officer from the stoical stare with which elder brothers take an inventory of the features of reigning belles. I was shown how a marrying man hands you to your carriage, and how a une man orders it I was taught to discern the scrutinizing looks of an undecided admirer, and the assiduous nothings with which an undeclared one plies your chaperone. I learned, while practising my opera steps before a glass, the expressive language of looks, the encouraging smile, the repulsive screw, the disdainful toss, the blush of
27 suppressed consciousness, the sigh of delicacy, and the deep pathos of alarm¬ ed susceptibility. I learned, too, the whole art of cutting such acquaintance as were of secondary ton, when I hap¬ pened to be in the suite of people of high fashion, and all the trickeries and condescensions necessary to regain ad¬ mission to the parties of such acquaint¬ ance when nothing better offered. I soon caught the unmeaning vocabulary current at routs, spoke with a good accent the word of the day, and re¬ peated the anecdote of the hour. Curled by Monsieur Hippolite, and dressed by Madame La Blonde, Mrs. Herbert nodded an approval of my appearance, and declared she thought I should take. Like " Kitty, beautiful and young," I had long fancied that the chariot alone was wanting to " set the world on fire," and one auspicious ? 2
28
day I mounted it with a beating heart. Alas! my first ball produced no lover, and scarce a partner. As usual, it was " all my own fault." Mrs. Herbert declared I looked frightfully out of humour. I own I felt mortified, and found it more difficult to practise the simper of satisfaction when neg¬ lected in a crowded assembly than before my mirror. I was again tried at a city dance, and here the honour of being introduced to me was solicited by two gentlemen of very good cha¬ racter and brilliant prospects, as my hostess assured me, — Mr. Urban An¬ gola, head-partner in the great shawl warehouse; and Mr. Sigismund Fore¬ close, of Clifford's Inn. But my ear had j ust been closed to other sounds, by overhearing a tall officer, covered with military orders and decorations, inquire
29 the name of that fascinating girl with long dark eyelashes. I was sure he meant me, and I was too intent on his conversation to be gracious to the expectant partners whom Mrs. Lemo¬ nade successively introduced. I saw them select less negligent nymphs, just as I discovered that I was not the fascinating girl with long dark eyelashes, after whom the tall officer covered with military orders and de¬ corations was inquiring ; for I saw him lead off Lindamira Turnwell, leaving me to count the sticks of my fan and twist my gloves for the rest of the evening, seated between two ancient spinsters, with no other beau than their brother, the pursy deputy of the ward, and his eldest son, at home for the holidays ; at last having no other prospect and being ashamed of total inaction, I condescended to guide and ? 3
so
shove this gauche bourgeois through one ill-executed quadrille. These and similar failures exhausted Mrs. Herbert's hope of my succeeding in London. I was then tried at Bath, and at Brighton; and was dragged through the routine of the more fa¬ shionable summer watering-places, both inland and marine. All would not do; my case was regarded as hopeless, and the threat of sending me to my grand¬ mother was daily repeated ; but first a chance was to be given me in the do¬ mestic line. I was therefore sent into the nursery, to amuse Petronilla, and to work for the babies. On gala days, too, my services were put in requisition as assistant to the housekeeper, and all our visitants who had marriageable sons, nephews, or brothers, were made acquainted with my housewifely ac¬ quirements. The frocks so much ad-
31
mired were all made by me ; it was I who gave the exquisite flavour to the Italian cream, and the delightful bril¬ liancy to the jelly. Still I had no offer. I well knew that I had been produced at the great public markets, and re¬ turned not vendible; but many girls were in the same situation, and num¬ bers conceal disgrace, while they keep one another in countenance ; but to be hawked and rejected as a single remain¬ ing article at a private auction, was a mortification beyond endurance, and again I was accused of causing the fail- ure,my dreadful temper was engraven in my countenance, and scared away every chance of an admirer. My stepmother could bear it no longer ; all her friends joined in appealing to my father, whether it was just to subject a woman of her superior merit to the espionage and incumbrance of a grown-up girl, ? 4
32
whom no soul would take off her hands. I really must be removed, or the house would be insupportable; and surely no place could be so proper for my resi¬ dence as Mrs, Loveday's. I did think, (I can scarce say hope), that my father would have objected to giving me up ; but he had become a very altered man, morose, thoughtful, and wayward, not merely to me, but also to his lately-adored wife. He was setting down a number of figures during the attack I have described, and at the conclusion bit his pen, tossed his cal¬ culation into the fire, and exclaimed, " Yes, she may go ; as she will not pro¬ cure herself a home, I must try to fix her in one, before—" His countenance grew darker, and he rushed out of the room. I did not think his angry looks pointed peculiarly at me, but I was again accused of putting my father in a
S3
passion, and Mrs. Herbert wiping a few tender tears, hoped that her life in time would be less miserable. A letter was immediately dispatched to Ringrove; and while I waited for the reply, I heard a new word sported in the parlour and scoutedin the kitchen: this was Economy. It was decided that my tulle and crêpe-lisse dresses, when ironed out and re-edified, would be good enough fbr the country, that my Leghorn hat would bear cleaning, and even my lilac pelisse admit of turning. These contrivances the servants passed over in sulky silence ; but when the head nurse's application for new sets of clothes was answered by an injunction to repair and re-arrange the old ; when a prohibition was issued against making ham-essence ; when madeira was pro¬ scribed for culinary uses, and fillets of fowl and almond-soup exploded as too ? 5
34
expensive for family dinners; when hints were added, that perquisites would be withdrawn, and board-wages reduced, an insurrection took place in the world below stairs, such as in my recollection had never before occurred. The morti¬ fying reasons for my exile to Ringrove, I should have hailed as an escape from the perpetual reiteration of " Shabby doings!" "Paltrywork in agentleman*s family !" and alternate threats, that it was impossible for good servants to stay and be so treated, or that nothing should be saved by this squeezing and pinch¬ ing. As usual, I was the origin of these misarrangements. My father found that he could not get rid of me,—I was so disagreeable ; — and he was going to make his poor servants suffer, by starving and stinting them, to save a for¬ tune large enough to buy me a husband. Such was the situation of affairs
So when I left my father's house, after an hysterical farewell on the part of Mrs. Herbert, who bitterly lamented her hard fortune at being compelled to make her dear husband's daughter an exile. Her regrets were certainly over¬ acted, as I saw my father give her an angry glance, and I felt a tear fall on my cheek as he gave me the parting kiss. The chariot was to take me within twenty miles of Ringrove, where it was arranged that my cousin Ellen should meet me. Of her I had heard much ; she was one of the bugbears held out when my offences induced the threat of banishment. I knew that she was a little older than myself, and the only child of my uncle, who fell in the service of his country ; that her mother had deserted her for a second choice, and had a large family, and that my grandmother had brought her up from ? 6
36
her infancy. I was also told that she humoured her in every thing, and most unjustly meant to make her a rich heiress; that she had never been in London, never at school, never had a governess, or any attendant worthy the name ofa master; nay, more, had never been at a country assembly, or race- ball, or public watering-place. So many negatives must,'I thought, pro¬ duce an insupportable quiz, and an en¬ couraging hint was thrown out, that unattractive as I had been proved in polished society, I might supplant the rustic in Mrs. Loveday's good opinion ; or, if she proved singularly docile, I might assume the importance of a tu¬ toress, and mould her into something a little bearable. I thought also that a retired country village was a new scene, an untried field, where (much as my opinion of my own attractions was
37
lowered,) I must have a chance of success. I had heard of squires who " made love with nods," and such an one I might chance " to rack," or per¬ haps appear as a congenial spirit in the eyes of some expatriated Bob Jerom, or seduce some embryo physician, or unsummoned barrister, from flirting with country cousins, or playing tre- drille with a grandmother and maiden aunt. Plans of this kind preserved me from sinking under the weight of my unpopularity, to which, as I could not charge myself with having de¬ served it, even use had not reconciled me ; nor did I allow my resentment of what I deemed ill usage to be subdued by that parting tear, with which my father had wetted my cheek as he put me in the chariot, and fervently prayed that " God might bless his own dear
38
girl;" for pride whispered, " whom he ought to have protected!'* Such thoughts occupied my mind during my lonely journey. At last the chariot drove into the inn-yard, where I was to part with my last acquaint¬ ance, Jarvis, and encounter none but strange faces. I felt ready to faint as I let down the glass, and enquired for Mrs. Loveday*s carriage and servants. " Ob, my dearest Emma, we have been waiting this hour,** exclaimed a lively pleasant rustic beauty, dressed in a dark blue habit, her hair a little blouzed, a large bouquet of woodbines stuck in her bosom, and a branch of dog-roses wreathed round her black beaver. "What, are you come alone," continued she, " neither my uncle nor his lady ?" A tear started in my eye ; Ellen threw her kind arms around me ; and staid my tottering steps. " I am concerned
39
to see you thus affected. I am a thoughtless chattering girl ; but I see the journey has fetigued you. What refreshment shall I order, dearest Emma? How my grandmother will re- joice to have you at Ringrove !" The waiter attended, and I was again urged to name my preferred regale. I ordered maid-of honour cheesecakes and straw¬ berry ice. He stood aghast, looking at Ellen. 4t Any sort of ice," I said, " would do." But no ice could be pro¬ cured in ------ . " Then orgeat, or lemo¬ nade." All was still blank. Ellen, sup¬ pressing a laugh, ordered sandwiches ; and, if oranges could not be procured, a bottle of cyder. 44 1 thought," said I, as hunger and thirst drew me to the tray, and even compelled me to relish the vulgar re¬ gale, " the great advantage of living in the country was, that you could
40
have every thing ; that you had your own dairies for cream and butter ; that you raised your own fruit and vege¬ tables, brewed your own beer, baked your own bread, fed your own poultry, killed your own mutton." Ellen held up her finger with a look of inexpressible archness : " Yes, and feasted on fat pigs, who gave us no trouble nor expence till they walked into the house, and assured us they were ready roasted. The country does furnish requisites and comforts to those who are provident and vigilant, and the care and contrivance of pro¬ viding them helps to keep our minds and bodies in perpetual activity." " But is not ice a comfort in hot weather? and it astonishes me that none can be procured in this large town.** , " If you point out such a want as
41
an impeachment of comfort to my grandmother, I fear you will provoke from her a philippic against that vi¬ tiated taste which attaches import¬ ance to luxuries.'* " What do you mean by a phi¬ lippic ?" " A lecture, with which she often treats me and my young friends.** " What, on optics or chemistry ?" 44 No; on morals, manners, human nature, and sometimes on religious subjects. They rise out of passing events, and are interspersed with anec¬ dotes and illustrations." " Are they long and formidable ?'* " I never think them so ; we gene¬ rally go on with our work, and are al¬ lowed, nay, required, to interrupt her, by asking for an explanation or intima¬ ting our dissent. But if you are sufli¬ ciently refreshed I must order the
42
ponies, for you are later than I ex¬ pected, and I never can bear to give my dear venerable protectress the least uneasiness.*' A low four-wheeled chaise, with one iron grey and one roan poney, now ap¬ peared, with a rosy-faced grinning foot-boy, distinguished from the sur¬ rounding rustics by a yellow cape and a silver-laced hat-band. Ellen helped me in, examined the harness, grasp the whip and reins, and placed herself at my side. " Who drives ?" said I, in great terror. " I do,** said my smiling cousin ; " are you alarmed ? They are the gen¬ tlest creatures in the world. I often ride Frisk by myself to the post-office, and even my grandmother mounts old Grey, and I lead her round the home- close. Nay, my dear girl, I see you are seriously frightened ! Now, do think
43
a moment ; reason yourself out of your fears. Would our grandmother, to whom we are both so precious, trust me to bring you to Ringrove, if she did not think I was a safe charioteer? Well, rather than you should look so piteous, Giles shaU borrow a saddle and ride Frisk. Now, Emma, you see we are quite as safe as if we were cased in a sedan-chair/* Reason myself out of my fears! what a strange doctrine; 'tis Hke people persuading us not to faU in love. Is not fear constitutional, and do not gentlemen say it renders us, who are called "fair defects in na¬ ture," more fascinating? But evi¬ dently, Ellen was a very unrefined girl, and off we started. The poney- chaise was intolerable after a town- chariot We also quitted the turnpike for a cross road, and Giles urged on
44
the steeds till his violent grimaces and their rapidity alarmed me. " Have you ever driven before ?" I exclaimed. The lad turned round with a broad grin, and said, " Drove 'fore-horse at plough, miss, when I was turned seven." Every step increased my alarm : " Oh, stop, and let me get out,'* was my earnest entreaty. ** My sweet timid coz," said Ellen, " of two evils we must choose the less. You see the sun gets low, there is no moon ; the worst part of our road is to come ; we must walk up Rockstone- hill. Don't mind a little shaking ; 'tis worth all the antibilious nostrums in the dispensary ; only let us try to avoid real dangers." I sighed, and endeavoured to rest my pensive head on my arm. What a frightful lonely place, methought,
45
the country seems, and what a positive, unaccommodating, unfeeling girl is EHen. No, not absolutely unfeeling neither, for she pitied my neglected situation ; but she has not refinement to sympathise in my fears, wants, and inconveniencies. Threatened with lectures against my indulged tastes and prescribed pursuits, bidden to reason myself out of my natural cha¬ racter, told that being bandied from side to side in a poney-chaise was wholesome ! I would write to my father, and conjure him, by the tears he shed over me at my quitting his house, to admit me home again, and give me the chance of one more season. No, pride forbade the humiliating and use¬ less appeal ; but how could I endure a life destitute of all the agreeableness of polished manners, with nothing to interest, nothing to enliven! We at
46
last arrived at the foot of Rockstone- hill, where I gladly quitted my uneasy position, and begged to be allowed to rest. A woman with two infant child¬ ren solicited charity. She told a long pathetic tale of sufferings from a cruel landlord, who had turned her husband out of his farm, and left them to starve. I had bestowed my shilling, before Ellen, who had been giving directions to Giles, whispered, ** She is an impos¬ tor;" adding, that on the preceding day she had laid Ringrove under con¬ tribution with a different story. The woman continued to bless my sweet face and kind heart, and begged I would let her poor tired babies ride in my carriage up the hill. Ellen reluc¬ tantly assented; and giving me her arm, intreated me to hurry on and keep close to Giles ; while I, partly from listlessness, partly from the inte-
47
rest I took in the woman's story and commendations, was very unwilling to attend to her injunctions. The carriage gained rapidly on us and was nearly out of call, when a turn in the road, which was here nar¬ row and shaded by trees, disclosed to our view an ill-looking ruffian, with a heavy bludgeon in his hand, crawling out of a ditch about a hundred yards behind us, between whom and our ragged companion we both perceived signs of recognition. Ellen's conduct was prompt and decisive. She blew a dog-whistle and waved her handker¬ chief; then, loosening my arm, ex¬ claimed, — « Fly for your life." I never shall forget the hag's counte¬ nance as she darted to seize my in¬ trepid cousin, who, drawing from her pocket what I thought was a pistol, told the wretch her life was forfeited
48
if she moved one step, thus keeping the enemy at bay till I had cleared enough ground to insure the protec¬ tion of Giles, who understood his mis¬ tress's signal and was running toward us. Ellen having secured my safety, trusted her own to her agile limbs, which in two minutes placed her at my side; in another, she helped me into the chaise, now disencumbered of the squalling brood of violence and duplicity, whom Ellen deposited on the fern with more tenderness than their parents' behaviour deserved. The whip and spur were then skilfully ap¬ plied, and gallant Gray and Frisky Roan soon dragged us to the top of Rockstone-hill, from whose summit Ellen pointed the not distant spire of Ringrove; then, clasping one arm round my neck, she mingled the fond and gratulating embrace with tears. I
49
need not say how cordially the ca¬ resses were returned. I called her the preserver of my life ; I lavished en¬ comiums on her courage and presence of mind. " But do you," said I, " al¬ ways travel with fire-arms ?" " Certainly not," said Ellen, " and if I did I should be afraid of using them : mine, after all, is but a woman's heart. Look, this is only a telescope which I bought at------to amuse us. Guilt, I know, is ever timid, and I saw no crime in the deception, or my dear grandmother's remembered precepts would have forbade its adoption. Oh, how I rejoice that our lives are pre¬ served, not only fbr our own sakes, but for that most excellent woman, whom I may now repay by my needful ser¬ vices for the cares she lavished on my helpless years!" "Shewill," said I, "admireyour dex- VOL. i. ?
50
terity ; but let me tell the story, that I may do you justice.** " Not on any account" replied Ellen. " It can be of no use to excite her apprehensions, and to make her wretch¬ ed in future, when we happen to be absent, and fearful lest we meet with a similar adventure. And really, though I have galloped about a great deal by myself, it is the first alarm I ever met in our quiet neighbourhood. Do not notice me after tea ; I will step out as if to lock up the poultry, run to the constable, and give him a de¬ scription of these miscreants, that a hue and cry may be raised which will rid the country of the nuisance. Indeed, Emma, the woman had a knife in her hand ; when she flew toward me I saw it glisten. Shall you ever forget her look?" "Never; nor that of the villain who crawled out of the ditch."
51
" It was truly diabolical," said Ellen ; "our escape has been indeed providen¬ tial. Let us gratefully remember it in our devotions, till some more singular mercy puts in a fresh claim to our gratitude. But we have now entered the dear little paddock : we must put on merry faces. Yours, I see, will be pale, but it may pass for fatigue. The fears of an old person are very active, and gain strength from a sense of her own infirmities during her many solitary hours. My grandmother will not be able to talk much to you to-night ; but do not from that infer that she does not gladly welcome you to her warm heart. She will think it indecorous to press upon you while all your feel¬ ings are afloat from leaving your own home and friends, and coming to new scenes and new faces; she will sit and look at you, and think of your mo· d 2
52
ther, and you will hear her cough as an apology for the frequent use of her handkerchief. Poor aunt Harriet! I can scarce remember her, but fancy she was the counterpart of my own father, only with darker eyes. Alas! they both died in their eight-and-twentieth year ; but dear, dear grandmamma is to me a more than parent." Frisk and Grey now stopped instinct¬ ively at the garden wicket, which, opened by an elderly woman, admitted me into my future home. " No," said I, as I followed Ellen, " it is impossible to quiz or to rival her ; neither does she need my instructions." I was conducted into what went by the different names of the library and the drawing-room, a light cheerful apart¬ ment, supplied with all that could ac¬ commodate the lounger, instruct the student or amuse the dissipated. Two
53
sides were occupied with well-filled book-cases, and though Ellen was never attended by masters, I saw a harp, a piano, and an apparatus fbr drawing; there also were a pair of globes, and a small orrery, a work- table, and a chess-board, a back-gam¬ mon box, and a portfolio of prints, nor were wanting sofas, screens, and foot¬ stools. Slowly rising from an elbow- chair, and advancing by the assistance of an ivory-headed cane, my venerable grandmother approached. Time had been busy with her since we parted ; but she was a fine ruin, eminently pic¬ turesque ; her figure was slightly bent, her face " sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,* 5 and her white hair smoothed into the Madonna bands, with not one errant thread of silver from them. The lace of her mob and frill was crimped with scrupulous exact- D 3
54
ness ; her gown, shawl, and knitting- bag were of one colour, being composed of dark-grey silk ; her spectacles, snuff¬ box, and books lay on the table beside her, with her watch to note the passing hours, and to witness that they were usefully employed. It could no longer be said, that "grace was in all her steps," for she was slightly lame, and her once vivacious eyes were dimmed; but from them issued benign rays, which beamed of heaven. The silver tones of her voice, and the graceful motion of her hand, realised more of dignity and love than I had ever seen embodied ; and her serene cheerfulness and composed meekness seemed to say, " you may disregard, but you cannot despise me." She resembled, too, my own mother, whose features needed not the memento of her miniature to be indehbly impressed on my recoHection.
55
My spirits were much weakened by mortification and alarm; I sank in¬ voluntarily on ?? knees before her, while her hand pressed my head in the attitude of benediction, and her faltering tongue faintly uttered, " Welcome, a thousand times welcome, most precious legacy frora my own lost Harriet ! "
? 4
56
CHAP. IL -Not intending to put my readers' pa¬ tience to trial, by exhibiting two quartos filled with the details of an uneventful life, I will request them to imagine me established in a small, light bed-chamber; and their fancy may also pourtray the routine of our trio breakfasts and dinners. Tea, I found, was the gala repast to which my grandmother admitted her world; and, greatly to my astonishment, I found the world of Ringrove actuated by the same magnet which moves the world of fashion, and, thanks to " the freedom of the press," enabled to form shrewd guesses of what that great world was about It is the remark of an adept in the science of
57
human nature, that " each thinks their little set mankind." The conception I had formed of those who never were seen in the purlieus of fashion¬ able Hfe was, that they must be peo¬ ple not worth caring about ; possibly not fools by nature, but very igno¬ rant, deplorably contracted in their notions, mere vulgar, money-getting creatures ; a race, useful indeed to the money-spenders, but whom they are therefore privileged to despise. Suc¬ cessors to the maiden aunts, duennas, fathers, and guardians of the old co¬ medies and novels, and of course as sworn foes to whatever was gay, gal¬ lant, and agreeable, it was lawful to ridicule, abuse, and deceive them. Such, I thought, every one must be who lived out of the world. The love and awful regard with which Ellen and my grandmother had unwittingly, d 5
58
perhaps, inspired me, was nourishing a sensation which, from want of defin* ing my own reelings, I called ennui, when Ellen, tripping into my room as I was preparing for dinner, told me she forgot to announce that they were to have an evening party. I doubt not my eyes flashed with delight for my heart beat ardently— " A party! who?" She ran over a list of Smiths, Jameses, Browns, Goodenoughs, Hopkinses. " Who is your restaurateur ?" " Myself." " Who furnishes your soups, soufflés, jellies, pâté, and liqueurs?" " Myself." " Who lights up, and decorates?" " I have done all." " EHen, it is impossible." " Yes, while you have been attiring your pretty person ; nay, my dear in¬ fidel, don*t dispute my word ; I trust much to thegood services of the fairies ;
59 they will dispose the imaginations of our guests to eke out my labours, and you shall find my grandmother's rout will give as much pleasure as if the scene of action were Grosvenor Square. But come, Emma, you are quite late with your toilette ; I must officiate also as your tirewoman, or our cold lamb and salad will not be cleared away before Bridget and Giles must appear to arrange our evening regaje. I see you want to consult me on the style of your adornings; the very cestus of Venus, if it be in your possession. All the beaux are invited, down to young Compound from Dr.Pompous's. The vicar brings his pupil, the young nabob ; the attorney will introduce his just emancipated clerk ; and our best neighbour, Mrs. Goodenough, has sent to ask, if we can admit her son, the brave midshipman, who is now, I ? 6
??
trust, on the high road to preferment, as his name appeared with éclat in the Gazette. He has arrived unexpectedly at Ringrove." The designation of midshipman, although coupled with gallantry, bore no affinity to the word establishment, which for the last four years had been repeated, till it pre¬ dominated in my thoughts. A mid¬ shipman who had appeared in the Gazette must, however, soon become lieutenant. The next rank was that of master and commander; then came post-captain, and post-captains ripened into commodores : admiral was the full maturity of preferment. Good- enough was a pithy, sententious, sig¬ nificant sort of name ; quaint indeed, but better than Smith, Brown, James, or Hopkins. And so much was said at dinner respecting the hilarity which Frederic's last visit had diffused, that though I had taken unusual pains with
61
my hair, I thought Ellen's was ad¬ justed in a more becoming style, and therefore I stole early from the dinner- table, to try if my dress would not admit of a little improvement A party of twenty assembling at the antiquated hour of six, ranged round a room twenty feet square, lighted by six candles, with no ornaments but a few vases of flowers, no attendants but Giles in his yellow cap, and Bridget in her well-saved brown satin gown and stiff lawn apron, with Ellen herself presiding at the hissing urns, and dispensing their respective bever¬ age! Was it not difficult for a girl accustomed to a squeeze of hundreds, to wax-lights and gas-lights, to pyra¬ mids of exotics, to chiffoniers and ottomans, to pandean pipes and opera singers, to eau de Cologne and otto of roses—was it not, I say, difficult for me to suppress derision and conceal
62
contempt? Not having studied the philosophy of human nature sufficiently to discover that the germ is the same, however cultivation and aspect may vary its appearance, I was surprised to discover dandies and coquettes in the atmosphere of Ringrove ; to see Miss Smith and Miss Brown make a decided set at the spruce clerk, to hear the apothecary discuss politics and the vicar literature, while the admired Greenwood, who had spent the last year of his clerkship in Lon¬ don, was absolutely knowing in thea¬ tricals, and as much an adept in "life" and its newest language, as a town Corinthian. Cards succeeded the tea-table. My grandmother and the seniors arranged for quadrille: politics and the muses gave place to whist ; and Ellen, in the centre of the young party, called for
63
a decision in favour of commerce, forfeits, music, or walking on the lawn, all of which were tried in succession. At ten, Bridget entered and announced tray. We chatted an hour round the supper table. It took some time to cloak and great coat our guests; a laugh was raised by mutual consent at their transformed figures, the lan¬ terns were lighted, the foot-boys marshalled, the adieus exchanged, the beaux and belles moved off, somesingle, some in pairs. Mrs, Goodenough seized the arm of her lingering sailor, and Bridget re-entered with her accustomed burthen of the crimson cushion and prayer-book. By twelve we were all in the dominion of Morpheus* Perhaps the pleasantest treat at¬ tached to a London party is to talk it over afterwards ; and I found this was the case at Ringrove.
64
" Did you like your evening, Emma?" was Ellen's morning in¬ quiry. " Pret— ty well." " I admire the candour of that pret— ty well ; I should have spoken in the same tone of one of your first rate 'at homes/ from not caring about strangers." " But are your neighbours worth knowing ?" said I. " As much, if I may trust report, as your general runs of Sir Johns and Lady Marys. They have the same organic senses, as much natural power of reflection, and my grandmother would add, their immortal spirits and immortal hopes are derived from the same origin, and inculcate the same duties." " Well, but my dear Ellen, were they to live a thousand years, the world would never know that these people ever existed."
65
" Not even if they commit some gross extravagance or enormous crime ? Let us suppose Mr. Greenwood mar¬ ried to Miss Brown, and cherishing a tenderness (I think it is called) for Kitty Smith, then killed in a duel by Dick Smith her brother ; Kitty taking poison, and Mrs. Greenwood dying of a broken heart; would they not in¬ stantly become very interesting people? and is it the enviable circumstance of their not being stamped by gross crime or heavy misfortune that makes them so little worthy an inquiry into their character and history ?" " My love," said my grandmother, " you are misleading Emma. I do not like to have crime described as a prime source of celebrity. It can only fall to the lot of few to become objects of constant observation like cities set upon hills ; and when we consider how
66
ill constituted we are from infirmity and error to endure continual remark, let us be content, as Pericles advised the Athenian women, to glide unob¬ served through life, and to think it our bost distinction not to be talked of." EUen bowed with a smile of delight, as was her custom, when Mrs. Loveday favoured us with her sentiments. " I am only endeavouring," said she, " to rescue our village circle from the re¬ proach of being quite uninteresting. It is very plain that Mary Brown in¬ tends to become Mrs. Greenwood, and Kitty Smith's blue eyes indicate oppo¬ sition to that scheme. Now they are both very good girls, and my friends and play-fellows, and should I not also project a scheme to prevent their unfortunately succeeding ?" " Would it," inquired I, " be a bad establishment ?"
67
" It would be called otherwise," said my grandmother. " He is the only son of a wealthy indulgent father ; but what shall we say of the judgment of a man who, visiting the first cit, in the world, the emporium of com¬ merce, science, art, and taste, claims distinction in his own neighbourhood for having acquired only its disgrace¬ ful absurdities?** " Do you," I inquired of EHen, a little alarmed lest my grandmothers looks portended the lectures of which I had been forewarned, "think the attachment of your friends serious ?" " I do not apprehend a stabbing scene, or an application to laudanum. Happily they have too many occupa¬ tions to become desperate: Mary Brown acts as governess to her younger sisters, and Kitty Smith must superin¬ tend her brother's large dairy and
68
extensive poultry-yard. They cannot loll in an arbour, meditating how elegantly Mr. Greenwood carved the apple-pie, or arranged their plaids." " Labour was enjoined in mercy to fallen man,** remarked my grand¬ mother. " I refer half the crimes which are committed by the higher orders of society to the misfortune of being masters of their own time with¬ out any imperative occupation which should withdraw their thoughts from the studious gratification of the fostered passions of pampered voluptuousness, or the fastidious caprices of listless ennui. The man of fashion would be as moral as the ploughman, if he rose as early, fared as hard, and toiled as assiduously. The great lady would haye as few imaginary troubles as the farmer's wife, if her head and hands were as diligently employed in looking
69 to the ways of her family, and making the most of every thing." Mortified at seeing people whose importance in society was so dissimilar, brought into comparison, I decided that my grandmother was in her heart a rank democrat. But not having acquired the courage which Ellen practised and recommended, of con¬ travening her opinions, I led back the conversation to our last night's party. We soon agreed that the young ladies were very well dressed, Mr. James was very sensible, and Mr. Hop¬ kins a man of information. I ma¬ noeuvred to introduce the young officer; Ellen was silent ; my grandmother pro¬ nounced him a noble youth. "Was he too besieged, like young Green¬ wood?" Mrs. Loveday observed he was not a marrying man. All was again hushed, till Ellen emptied the sugar
70
into the slop-basin, and laughed, and coloured at her strange mistake. " But,** I asked, " which was the nabob, Mr. James's pupil ? '* «'Did not you see him, Emma? a silent young man, whom they called Henry. If I may judge by the direc¬ tion of his green spectacles, he was looking at you the whole evening," My grandmother seemed displeased with her darling girl. I learned after¬ wards, she had already discovered my foible, and would tolerate no jest that fostered it. " Personal defects, ** said she, "are sàcred from ridicule; and you know Mr. Delmont's situation too Well to mislead your cousin. He is not sent to Ringrove to form a matrimonial connection, or to delude thoughtless girts with hopes that cannot be real¬ ised. His fortune is dubious ; his views undeterminate. He comes to acquire 20
71
all the insight into every species of recondite and polite learning, which an intelligent tutor can communicate, and a life of privacy allow. His lot is pecu¬ liar, and the more pitiable, as it admits no determinate direction of character. He may possess immense wealth, or be compelled to depend on his own exer* tions, and to look to his father's fortune only as the source from whicli he has procured a superior education, and the means of fitting him for the arena of public life. And though General Re¬ pell's attachment to his illegitimate son may induce the friends of this very amiable young man to hope he will act honourably, no reliance can be placed on one who, in his prime of being, broke through the fundamental laws of human society, to gratify the selfishness of licentious appetite, and who, in declining life, may, from a similar motive, be induced to form what
72
he would call a virtuous connection with some aspiring, portionless girl, whom his splendour may allure to en¬ dure for a few years age, ill-temper, and disease. Think you poor Henry would be an impediment to such an union, any more than the claims of his own lawful heirs were to giving him existence, should such an inclination predominate in the general's mind? Or would the world condemn any gentleman burthened with dependent daughters meeting his wishes? Nay, would the girls themselves hesitate to become the wife and the mother of nabobs ? If, from the details of bridal splendour, the attention of our good gossips was diverted to the deserted son, should we not be reminded that he had no legal claim ; that his father always bade him trust to his own ex¬ ertions, and build up a fortune, as he had done? Perhaps, too, that piety
73
which excludes brotherly kindness from its catalogue of virtues, would talk of the sins of his mother being visited upon him. Believe me, girls, Henry has other employment for his thoughts than to analyse your fea¬ tures." " Indeed, grandmamma," exclaimed Ellen, " you judge your sex too harshly, if you suppose such a man as General Repeli may toss his handkerchief among a groupe of kneeling sultanas, and select whom he pleases. For my own part, I so abominate his whole character, that I declare I will angle for his attention, next time I am in his company, and if ? can persuade him to fall in love with me, I will cajole liim to make a liberal settlement on Henry, and then leave him to wear the willow, and be an object of uni¬ versal ridicule." vol. r. e
74
"'Tis an ingenious plan,** replied Mrs. Loveday, tC and bespeaks a heart not fully aware of its own intricacies, and a head not deeply practised in life's subtle game. You know Ha- zael's history, Ellen. Be well assured that you are better acquainted with yourself, than the Syrian soldier, be¬ fore you angle to entrap the master of Orissa Park, lest, while prosecuting your design, a thought should arise of the great good you might have it in your power to achieve by becoming its mistress. You are in a playful mood, my child, or I should gravely say, that as our prayers are also precepts, those who pray against being led into tempta¬ tion must not court trials. But to return to young Delmont; whatever maybe his fate, he will owe to the paternal care of Mr. James that basis of all solid satis¬ faction, a well-regulated mind. He
75
is not uninstructed concerning the dif¬ ficulties in which he is involved, from the precariousness of his hopes, and the ominous aspect of that prosperity which depends upon unprincipled ca¬ price. Nothing is concealed, through a dread of clouding the bright visions ofyouth ; and the world, into which he is about to enter, is shown to him under its contrary aspects. His visits to Orissa Park familiarise him with the habits of luxurious gratification, and show him their consequent punish¬ ments, —disease and discontent. In the court which is there paid to him by in¬ terested hangers-on and servile depend¬ ents, he reads the projects of sycophants who contemplate a future patron. Not one of the time-servers who crowd the General's table has courage to inter¬ fere in behalf of his equivocal heir, when the querulousness of disease or ν ?
76
caprice sends him into temporary ba¬ nishment ; or the address of some ma¬ tronly lady, or the smile of some young one, whisper the possibility of a matrimonial engagement. Henry re¬ turns to the vicarage, ostensibly to improve in the eastern languages, and the study of jurisprudence. I doubt not of his progress, for Mr. James's capacity as an instructor is acknowledged by our first orientalists and civilians. Of this I cannot judge ; but I know that still more important knowledge is imparted by his revered tutor, by unobtrusive lessons, and not with dictatorial pomp. Our young friend sees the influence of true religion, in the mild, ingenuous, simple manners of the family. He clings to a friendship that is unostentatious, equable, prompt, and sincere. He knows that his charac¬ ter and interests will be supported ; his
77
faults reproved ; his doubts obviated ; his understanding enlightened; his good intentions confirmed; his sor¬ rows not merely soothed by sympathy, but relieved by judicious assistance. It is a good trait in Henry's character that he is disgusted with the full courses and removes of his father's table, and recovers health and appe¬ tite under the auspices of his tutor." Ellen lamented that he did not look a little like other young men, and seem more at ease in general society. " True, my dear, " said Mrs. Love¬ day, "but we cannot create graces which nature has withheld. His slen¬ der form, sallow complexion, and defec¬ tive vision, would only be made more conspicuous by the fluttering manners of a beau ; and it would be wrong to encourage him, who may become pos¬ sessed of ten thousand a year, to fly e 3
78
round the room after the stray gloves and reticules of slatternly girls. His ab¬ stracted, retiring manner may proceed from a mind pre-occupied by severe studies, or from a consciousness that he is probably but a weft of fortune, or perhaps from some undisclosed sor¬ row. Or they may result from Mr. James's prudential cautions, who knows that Henry does not need the addi¬ tional misery of a premature, ill-placed attachment I have often conversed with him, and can speak highly of his general good sense and right feeling. You laugh, girls; but, believe me, if the rage for converting all the young men you meet into lovers and husbands goes much further, you will find the whole race, like our young nabob, glad to fly to us old women for sanc¬ tuary against the attacks of young ones. Unobserving as you suppose
79
liim, he sees there are girls who would gladly take him fbr better and for worse, and incur with him the chance of grandeur or beggary ; as he knows there are Jews, who would, at cent per cent premium, supply him with money, to run the career of vice, and to be¬ come bankrupt in health, pocket, and peace, before the time when any laws, except those of false honour, authorize voung men to sanction the nefarious engagement ; and, perhaps, he is not wrong, if he sets an equal value on the principles of both parties." Grandmothers will assert opinions, and girls will retain their own. I had never heard husband-hunting con¬ sidered to be disgraceful, but, on the contrary, regarded it as deserving to be styled a feminine employment, quite as fairly as the prey pursued in that amusement merit the appellation of e 4
80
Nimrods. Here were three chances of an establishment all prohibited ; the officer, the young nabob, and his fa¬ ther. I could not help asking Ellen, when we were alone, what made my grandmother so cross. She looked surprised, repeated my question, and assured me she was never out of hu¬ mour in her life. " Is she not," said I, " very severe, and uncandid to her own sex ? " " Quite the contrary ; she is most sensitively jealous for our true in¬ terest and honour. Nothing pains her so much, as to see a young woman degrade herself, by appearing to entice a man into providing for her mainte¬ nance; unless it is when she has succeeded in her scheme, to find her disavowing Eve's original character of helpmate, and throwing herself upon her husband as a dead weight in his
81
scale of expence, or it may be an incitement and excuse for his com¬ mitting base acts of injustice and speculation. Perhaps you will smile at what you will deem the frivolous minutiae to which her zeal to induce women to resume the simple, active, independent habits of former times makes her descend ; for she humor¬ ously checks the officious interference which supposes a girl incapable of using her own hands, or exercising her own understanding. Ladies must not be troubled to do the honours of their own tables. The fatigue of serving out tea is too great for their delicacy ; their wants and wishes must be anti¬ cipated, by the offer of bringing them whatever they look at. We are too feeble to walk without support; too charming to receive an explicit answer to a rational enquiry ; too exquisitely e 5
82
attractive to manage our own affairs ; in fine, fit for nothing but to be flat¬ tered, deceived, and ridiculed. ( But, beware, girls, beware,' my grand¬ mother will say, and her dear face will shine with intelligence, « beware of the lover, who offers to carry your nosebag, (vide Waverly) indicating a hope that he will in future submit his nasal organ to your guidance.™ * Tis first a kneeling slave, and then a tyrant.' ** I could not avoid smiling at Ellen's delineations ; and recollected being forcibly struck with a sense of the ridiculous, by a lady's describing her first introduction to an eminent states¬ man in a large party. " He entered the room," said she, " with his wife's reticule hanging on his arm.'* " We shall hear more on the sub¬ ject this evening, I dare say,** said
83
Ellen, " for the James's come : I will give the cue, and we shall either be treated with a lecture ot a conversa¬ tion. You will be amused, I dare not say converted, by the different views of life which are imparted by different habits of society.**
? 6
84
CHAR HL The James's arrived, but without their pupil, respecting whom I cer¬ tainly did feel an interest, maugre the eflbrts of Ellen and my grandmother. It was, however, divided between the old general and the gallant midship¬ man. What girl of twenty-one, taught as I had been, would avoid thinking that there were two methods of se¬ curing ten thousand a year in my neighbourhood, and a dim prospective view of the glory of becoming an admiral's lady ? And though my grand¬ mother reprobated husband-hunting, only look at my situation. No alter¬ native, but rusticating at Ringrove, or again encountering the mortifica-
85
tions of my father's family — even if that were possible. Ofall the people I had ever met, the James's appeared least propitious as abettors of my designs. They were of a middle-age, sensible, well informed, very simple yet elegant in their man¬ ners, and apparently very conscien¬ tious. They had neither sons, nephews, nor brothers, and, though well ac¬ quainted with the gay world, seemed pleased to withdraw from its influence. General Repeli appeared to have sent his son to them, that he might ripen into manhood in safe seclusion from all annoyance. But yet, the presumptive heir of ten thousand a year was their inmate, and suppose I could impress them with the idea that I was a very fascinating ------no, that was not the appro¬ priate term, — a very amiable, unde-
86
signing girl, in whose company Henry would be safe; or, if he shyed off, could I not, through the James's, get a glimpse of the general ? While Ellen encountered, unassisted, the fatigues of the tea-table, in honour of which Mr. James promised her a commendatory Pindaric, the politics of the village were discussed, consisting chiefly of narratives respecting the sick and the unfortunate. The work and the card-tables were set; but the attraction of tredrille yielded to con¬ versation, and, as preparatory to a general engagement, the James's named a summons which Henry had received to Orissa Park. I sat next the vicar's lady, and with an air of nonchalance I avowed my opinion that he was a very interesting young man. Mrs. James bowed. " I am indeed," said she, " flattered that our dear child, for so
87
we fondly call him, should thus excite your solicitude. It does honour to your penetration, Miss Herbert, be¬ cause, in general, he is overlooked in a mixed society." " You will hear with concern, Mrs. Loveday," said Mr. James, " that we are going to lose him. I fear his destination is fixed for India, from whence his delicate health precludes al¬ most the hope of his return. I strove hard to persuade the general to enter him of Lincoln's Inn, to which his own wishes pointed ; but a further removal best suits his father's present views, so he is destined to the judicial de¬ partment in Bombay." A tear shone in my grandmother's eye, and Ellen's caught the infection. " Poor Henry !" was the universal exclamation. " Is the general, then, again preparing to put on Hymen's fet-
88
ters? Who is the favoured lady?" — " The victim," observed Mrs. James. " The Circe," said my grandmother. " Ladies, you grow censorious," observed the vicar. " My cloth pro¬ scribes slander, but tolerates the belles- lettres." The senior ladies applied to their knitting, Ellen drew out her drawer of cottage baby-clothes, and I had recourse to tatting, which I had just learnt, in order to avoid the sin¬ gularity and opprobrium of being un¬ employed. Mr. James arranged on the table the works of a noble bard, which will co-exist with our language, and be regarded as at once its pride and reproach. He read to us the powerful opening of Lara, dwelling with em¬ phasis on those characteristic lines — " Left by his sire too young, such loss to know, " Lord of himself; — that heritage of woe."
89
"Lord Byron," said my grandmother, " always makes me angry with myself, by compelling me to admire what I cannot approve. More talent, whether evinced in command of language, dis¬ crimination of character, or verisimi¬ litude of description, our literature cannot produce. There is a deep condensation of thought an appro¬ priateness of diction, an elegance of sentiment, and an original glow of poetical imagery ; ever happy in illus¬ trating objects, or deepening impres¬ sions ; — which so fascinate our fancy and bewilder our judgment, that we lose sight of the nature of the deeds he narrates, and the real character of the actors. He is alike exact and vigorous, whether he describes ani¬ mated or inanimate nature, or delineates the human heart as far as he allowed himself to probe its moral anatomy.
90
" But," said Mr. James, " what has he given us as an epitome of man? Even his greatest admirers complain of the uniformity of his portraits; and the sullen, revengeful, mysterious Giaour, the haughty Corsair, the assassinating Lara, the deistical, moody, querulous Childe Harold, are all the direct op- posites of what Christianity bids us imitate, or self-love teaches us to select for our fnends. His heroes, uniformly, are either nursing some diabolical de¬ sign, or writhing under some undis¬ closed guilt, while he contrives to invest them with the shadowy greatness which Milton bestows on his fallen angels ; but, by omitting to adopt the reprobating stigma which the bard of Eden affixed to all that ' was false and hollow,* he compels us to admire what we ought to hate, and endangers our adoption of the * worse instead of the
91
better counsel.' Nay, further; the description is so forcible, the sophistry of ornament so alluring, that we are, I trust, mistakenly induced to believe him the man he describes, and to con¬ found the poet with the phantoms he has created ; yet when I look at the fortuitous circumstances which threw him into the arms of flattery and dis¬ sipation, which exposed him to the blandishments of needy profligates, whose meretricious genius, though but the pale reflex of his own bright sun, flattered his vanity, by appearing to revolve in his vortex ; 7— wheu I con¬ sider that a few slight coincidences, a little command of temper, or absence of exasperation, might have turned this mighty sea of intellect into a different course, and made the name of Byron as dear to loyalty, morality, and re¬ ligion, as it is now adverse, my con-
92
sciousness of human infirmity and re¬ verence for the mysterious workings of' Providence turn indignation into grief." My grandmother resumed her re¬ marks, saying, that "though she ad¬ mitted and condemned the noble poet's faulty elevation of savage magna¬ nimity and unbridled passion into he¬ roism, it was chiefly on account of his female characters that she lamented the influence which his school of poetry had obtained. The present age is too enlightened and humane to allow the indulgence of a san¬ guinary spirit : the fatalist is despised, and the misanthrope torments not the world which he abjures. If such characters exist, the evil is limited to their own families ; they are too odious or absurd for imitation. But the model on which he forms his he¬ roines has unhappily acquired some
93
specious sanction, from the prevalent habits of refined society. I allude to the low estimate of our intellectual and moral qualities, and to the predo¬ minant importance which is annexed to beauty, and to those external attrac¬ tions which render us the toy rather than the companion and helpmate of man. Our Gothic ancestors always recognized the equal rights of the gentler sex, and treated them as the daughters, sisters, wives, and mothers of heroes and legislators ; and our early history records many striking instances of noble dames, who, on great emer¬ gencies, acted with a dignity and wisdom which rendered them worthy representatives of their absent lords. Consider the women of the age of Eli¬ zabeth, at least what they wished to be thought by the style of encomium to which their admirers resorted ; look
94
at their fortitude, prudence, delicacy, domestic habits, their industry, studi- ousness, and economy. Turn then to the woman of Byron's poetry, and that of his imitators, and see if you can discern the British or the Christian lady, conscious of responsibility, and aspiring to honourable renown in this lite t and immortality in that which is to come. No : the prototype must be found in the harem queen, or volup¬ tuous dancing-girl, the exciter of ani¬ mal passions, the slave, the tyrant, the victim, and the assassin of man." Mr. James admitted, that the re¬ straints of law and public opinion curbed the ferocious passions, which the exciting character of polite liter¬ ature has for some years tended to generate, and prevented them from breaking out into those violent acts which endanger the welfare of the
95
state; yet in retirement, where men do not always deem it necessary to speak and act as gentlemen, he be¬ lieved that much distress was caused by a probably unconscious imitation of these high-wrought creatures of ima¬ gination, acting from impetuous feeling, yet still preserving some semblance of virtue, and forming a strange combin¬ ation of the hero and the ruffian. " Many an innocent heart," he added, " must also lament that excessive re¬ finement, that invidious and tortuous scrutiny, which affixes meanings (and generally bad ones) to words and actions really casual and irreproachable. To the vague surmises of this fastidious humour, many a woman owes the loss of her reputation and her peace ; nay, instances have not been wanting in which a gloomy temper and fervid imagination, heated by the narration
96
of some dreadful paroxysm of passion, some dire catastrophe, accelerated by Jealousy, revenge, or love, have madly realized the tragic fiction in their own family, and taken on themselves the part of chief actors. To such men," said he, " the quiet connubial tête-à- tête is insupportable. Their minds stagnate in domestic peace ; the high excitements of quarrels and reconcili¬ ations, estrangements and re-unions, the alternate sarcasms of reproach and the whisperings of endearment, become as necessary as are storms and tempests to purify the atmosphere. I must, therefore, retain my opinion, that much evil originates from giving the attrac¬ tion of poetical embellishment to violent passions, and thus increasing the ex¬ citement of over-sensitive minds. With frenzied speed they pursue unattain¬ able bliss, and suicide is the goal."
97 Mrs. James led back the conversation to Lord Byron's females, by observing, " that there was one contrast to his Leilas, his Zoes, his Guinares, and his Parisinas,** " If you speak of Medora," said my grandmother, " admirable as is the painting of her love, anguish, and death, still she only appears as a doating wife, and presents no idea beyond exquisite beauty, softness, and tenderness. In heart and soul she is devoted to one whose crimes and cruelties must be known to her, and which, if not dead to moral prin¬ ciple, she must reprobate ; yet, in her dissuasi ves against his piratical pursuits^ she urges their danger, not their guilt ; she avows her terrors for his safety, but no horror at the accumulation of his crimes. We rather pity than admire vot* ι. F
98 the love which has no solid basis to rest on.'* " I did not mean Medora, my dear Mrs. Loveday,** replied our guest ; " and allow me for once to triumph over your very comprehensive me¬ mory, by bringing forward a defensive illustration of an author, whose per¬ verted talents are a constant theme for my regrets, and whose ultimate return to the best feelings of the man, the patriot, and the Christian, I still fondly anticipate. The character I had in my eye is Angiola, in the tragedy of The Doge. In ordinary life a young woman married to an old man is considered as a fair prize to the libertine ; and in poetry, comedy, and fiction, she is held up either as interested, unchaste, or intriguing. Byron has contrived to invest this hazardous connection with respectability, and, though he does not
99
so far outrage human nature as to pre¬ serve the old husband from the torment of (I won't say jealousy, but) painful anxiety for his domestic purity, yet, by making the lady, with quiet dignity, request that she may be intrusted with the preservation of her own good name, and live down the reproaches of her slanderers, to whom her steady un¬ ostentatious perseverance in rectitude would be sufficient punishment, he represents her as pursuing the very path which the best of your Elizabethan dames, with all their deep learning and high sense of decorum, would have deemed most truly feminine. Angiola knows that chastity, like all other fe¬ male virtues, is unobtrusive." Ellen gently clapped her hands in ap¬ plause, and Mr. James looked round, and then bestowed on the speaker that F 2
100
glance of proud approbation, by which a partial husband condescendingly seems to say, 4t I chose this woman for my wife," My grandmother, with the smile of corrected humility, bowed in acqui¬ escence to her friend's rebm ^ ; but lamented this fresh evidence, that the taste of the public was vitiated, since the poem containing this only correct delineation of woman, as the faithful friend of man, the steady guardian of his honour and her own, not the un¬ reflecting victim of sensual appetites, or the slave of impetuous passion, was among the feast popular of this noble¬ man's productions. Mr. James observed, " that ladies must now be very fastidious if they were dissatisfied with the homage they received; — an homage, he ventured to say, more reverential than had ever
101
been paid, even in the famous days of knight-errantry and chivalry. " Yes," says my grandmother, " only that it is as perfectly panto¬ mimic and fictitious as the deference rendered to the baby king and queen on twelfth night. You do indeed humour our frivolities, and pet us into caprice. In the days you men¬ tion, we inspired and directed the arduous toil of heroes, and, in the absence of our lords, defended castles, led armies, and fortified cities. The hero wounded in defence of the su¬ perior beauty of the lady of his love, always expected to have her for his chirurgeon, a,nd a scarf purfled by the hand of a fair princess was as much an object of contention as her father's crown. But now," noticing an at¬ tempt of Mr. James to assist Ellen, " we are too weak to pile logs on the f 3
102
hearth, and too awkward to snuff our own candles. Do, dear madam," ad¬ dressing Mrs. James, " reprove your husband for abdicating the dignity of his own character, and forgetting that my standard of good breeding is as high as Lord Arbury's, who, I have heard you say, always deemed officious- ness the criterion by which he judged of the manners of his company. Pray, reverend sir, fancy yourself in the earl's saloon, and my grand-daughter Lady Charlotte." The good vicar fell into the vein of badinage in which he saw his hostess inclined to indulge, and relinquishing nis minor gallantries with the shrug of a reproved school-boy, still insisted that the prominent feature of the age was the devotion which man paid to the fair. " Not only," said he, " does the press teem with the incense which
103
poets, moralists, novelists, and sages offer you, but every aspirant to public favour founds his reputation on being the champion of the ladies. Compli¬ ments to the fair sex are the general resource of the dramatist when his muse is at fault, and they prove as successful clap-traps as British freedom, or the martial glories of England. The divine scruples not to address you fiom the pulpit, as the all-efficient stimulators to the distribution of spi¬ ritual and temporal blessings, in the abodes of ignorance and poverty. Nay, even the seat of Themis is trans¬ formed by the spell of your fasci¬ nations, into a parliament of love, and the coifed serjeant talks as a sighing troubadour ; tears stream down the iron cheeks of grey-headed advocates, (at least aflect to stream) while, beating their bosoms and waving their briefs, f 4
104
they appeal to the alarmed jury, con¬ juring them, as sons, brothers, hus¬ bands, and fathers, to give ample damages to some simpering bar-maid who has produced a child of love to the exciseman, or failed in inveigling some superannuated batchelor who had sought relief from the espionage of nephews and nieces in the sanc¬ tuary of a tap-room : qr perhaps a still stronger case awakens the thunder of our Demosthenes', calling on them to inveigh against base seducers, invaders of domestic love, and violators of the immunities of friendship; while de¬ scribing some matronly frail one, who, after daily connubial quarrels, possibly for twenty years, is now brought for¬ ward to enrich the good man, by proving that she has been seduced from virtue's path by an unfledged stripling, to whom the prudent pair
105
agreed to make their house agreeable, aware of his capability of paying large damages." " Let us drop the style of sar¬ casm, my good friend," replied my grandmother ; " it may suffice to lash folly, but is not sufficiently authori¬ tative to arrest a misapplication of feeling which threatens completely to annihilate female principle, and, com¬ bining the love of money and the love of notoriety, to extinguish the fear of shame, once a very effective guard to the outworks of female chastity. The girl who ought to deem herself exiled from society, with an unblushing mien steps into the witness's box after hearing from her counsel a pathetic enumeration of her virtues, graces, misfortunes, and injuries. With a tri¬ umphant consciousness of being very interesting, she displays to the court f 5
106
her attractions, and, by a supplicatory look at the jury, avows her expectation that the illicit possession of them should be liberally mulcted. She tells her tale of guilt as if it were one of honour, and only hangs her head when a severe cross-examination proves that her case admits of' two statements, and that she courted the ruin she incurred. But the scale in¬ clines in favour of injured innocence ; a marriage portion is secured; the nymph smiles, curtsies, and retires. Some old acquaintance wishes to set up in business ; enough has been said to remove ail stigma of reproach from female frailty, and possibly some years after, her marriage name may blaze in the newspapers, the rival in infamy of' some demirep of fashion, and her hus¬ band be again enriched by a compen¬ sation for the loss ofher society."
107
tí You will allow," said Mr. James, " that if added temptations are placed in the way of women, a mound is raised against the passions of men by laying their purses under the most severe contribution." " I would rather trust public morals," was her reply, "to the propriety and de¬ corum of women, than to the worldly foresight of men. In my youth we were instructed that my sex might receive injuries from yours, which even mar¬ riage could not repair. So taught the moral, pathetic Richardson, in his story of t the divine Clarissa ;' but he drew his lessons from higher sources than sentimental morality. So Shenstone told us in his instructive tale of « Poor artless Jessy.' She was a village girl, seduced by a man of fortune ; but she did not hurry into a court of justice, and demand to be paid for having f 6
108
Hstened to the promises of 4 licentious love;' she only asked concealment, and the means of « hiding her shame írom every eye/ 6 The couch of her parents was wet with tears ;' but we hear of no attempts to force Henry into marriage ; that, she affirmed, could neither « heal her peace nor hide her shame.' Certainly, Mr. James, if I were forewoman to a jury of matrons, I would have given large damages to poor Jessy. I would have acknowledged that she did not court temptation, but became the victim of wiles, which it was very difficult for a young and affectionate heart to resist. But neither she nor Clarissa would ever obtrude their wrongs on public observation. Like Goldsmith's * lovely woman,' who has * stooped to folly,' death was their remedy, and, it must be by decided, persevering, and, if requisite, austere
109
attempts to renew this inbred sense of delicacy in the female mind, not by encouraging the artful to inveigle, the wavering to yield, and the bold to prosecute, that judges, counsellors, and juries must set themselves to restore the proper tone of female virtue, and to arrest female profligacy in its career, rather than measure out its degree by proportionate fines on its concomitant criminality. The morals of the mid¬ dle classes of society, ever the most important, depend on repressing this false sensibility." Mr. James replied in his profes¬ sional character ; he spoke of religion as the only true guard of female morals, and adverted to the present prevailing views of it, as affecting the standard of national purity, which he feared was deteriorated, notwithstand¬ ing an admitted refinement in language, and an avoidance of that unblushing
110
avowal of licentiousness,which perhaps, in some degree, guarded inexperience from crime, by exhibiting vice in her native hideousness, without so¬ phisticating our moral sense by an enchanting preparation of soporific pal¬ liatives, or disguising the monster's true features. He 'ascribed much evil to the style in which the crimes that will certainly shut the gates or heaven against impenitent offenders are spoken of in company ; where they are sometimes laughed at, sometimes explained away as natural frailties which could not be avoided, sometimes almost panegyrized under the name of amiable failings and gentler oftences, nay, even termed " the passions which honour the heart." Nor was the pul¬ pit, he said, always exempt from censure in this particular. Many clergymen, inspired with true and
Ili
holy zeal for religion, were not suffi¬ ciently distinct and accurate in defin¬ ing Sin, which, though in every modification offensive in the sight of God, does yet admit of those distinc¬ tions which divide it into infirmity and crime, and give a greater degree of contamination to the offender, in pro¬ portion as the offence is more or less injurious to society, and repugnant to those laws which natural and revealed religion alike imprint on the human heart. Now, though he admitted, in full force, the awful truth, that we shall be judged by our thoughts and secret wishes, as well as by our words ; that motives determine the nature of deeds, and that many people, who bear a creditable appearance are worse sinners than some who are exiled from society ; yet, without the least leaning to the self-justifying, presump-
112
tuous, pharisaical righteousness so often condemned intheir discourses, or harsh¬ ness towards the penitent Magdalen or humble publican, whom they often exclusively eulogize, Mr. James said, that he must, as one of the conser¬ vators of correct morals, require that people who did support that character should not, by some sly insinuation, be arraigned as hypocrites, or involved in the same condemnation with their openly profligate neighbour. Nor would he admit that such a profli¬ gate's spiritual state presented stronger hopes of ultimate salvation. He had generally found, in the course of his ministry, that a life of licentious indul¬ gence petrifies the heart, and closes it to conviction. A guilty conscience shrinks from self-communion, and aftener tries to shun religious impres¬ sions, than it would if it were not
??
burdened with the weight of atrocious misdeeds, applying to a sort of practi¬ cal infidelity, or a vague idea of com¬ muting virtues. And, indeed, when religion did step in to rescue what is called " a brand out of the fire," it was often an ambiguous, anomalous compound of indefinite tenets and un¬ founded hopes, adapted to an inflated imagination and fervid passions. " Most true, reverend sir," said my grandmother, who listened to her pas¬ tor, where he spoke in his own cha¬ racter, with delighted attention ; " and the remark especially applies to ray own sex, w r ho seem, by a natural gra¬ dation, to pass from the demirep to the devotee, as Sterne tells us was the fashion in France in his time ; only the continental ladies admitted the inter¬ mediate stage of the infidel. It is cer¬ tainly desirable that some change
114
should take place ; but I lament that these converts bring little credit to the church, which I would rather have appear as a temple filled with the pure in heart, or an asylum fbr weary pilgrims and storm-beaten travellers, than a penitentiary crowded with re¬ formed profligates. I wish the reput¬ ation of piety to be rather forced upon a woman, than sought by the obtru- siveness of her words and actions. I particularly require that it should be annexed to a blameless life, and the quiet uniform discharge of all her domestic duties, which I cannot per¬ mit to be in the smallest degree sacri¬ ficed to the love of notoriety. The avocations of piety and charity should be like the snow faUing from heaven, silent and continuous. Like that, their essence will disappear when exposed to the warm beams of commendatory
115
observation. Deem me not splenetic, censorious, or uncandid, if I regard these new devotees as beings not less entangled in the mazes of this world, in their new character, than they were in their former one. I fear that notoriety is still their passion ; and that many who once pursued it by gaiety and gallantry, now seek it as sermon-hunters and pa¬ tronesses of schemes for universal re¬ formation and ostentatious liberality." Mrs. James, turning to Ellen, re¬ marked, " I now see why you did not join the Miss Strictlys when they went collecting penny subscriptions for missions, nor contributed your bagatelles to the raffle set on foot by their mother, the produce of which was, I think, to clothe the African blacks as soon as that continent should be converted to Christianity." " Indeed," said Ellen, " it was not
116
my own fault, or, ifyou will, my merit, that I was not a conspicuous actress in both these dramas. Kitty Smith re¬ peated to me many interesting parti¬ culars of wonderful conversions, and the elegant compliments paid by the gentlemen of the committee to what they called their lovely deaconesses, and I own I pouted half a day when my grandmamma gave a negative too decided for me to controvert- They collected fourteen shillings among the cottagers ; and all the beaux in the village subscribed, in compliment to the ladies. As to the raffle scheme, 1 did buy some bugles and gold paper ; but I was told that Betty Robins would want her baby clothes, which, besides my being that week visitor and cutter-out at the girls* school, left me no time for what my grandmother called speculative philanthropy,"
117
" And by this direction of your talent" said that venerable lady, " you were certainly useful, and witnessed the application and effect of your labours. Besides, you did no mischief; a consi¬ deration which I wish all ladies to attend to 9 where they commence being remarkably good. The raffle spoiled Miss Filagree's annual show; which you know greatly assists her in the support of a blind mother ; and at last the treasurer proved what may be termed a charity-shark, for when Mrs. Strictly settled her accounts, and re¬ quired him to transmit the balance from the branch to the parent society, he brought in such a bill for advertise¬ ments, meetings, and stationary, that our very-well-intentioned neighbour found herself liable to a deficit and has since declined taking the chair on a similar occasion."
118
" I wish," observed Mrs. James, " that another rebuff would drive her from oversetting our old system of school-management, which, if she per¬ severes, will render the instruction of girls the ruin of our poor sempstresses, by depriving them of the means of earning a subsistence, from the unre- munerating prices at which Mrs. Strictly's girls execute needle-work, and the perseverance with which she canvasses the country to procure sup¬ plies of unworked frocks and pinafores to employ her scholars." " The proceeds," said Ellen, " are wholly applied to purchase a Sunday costume, which it gives their busy patroness great amusement to contrive and alter. She has at last fixed — no, not fixed, but for the present pre¬ ferred one extremely becoming, and contemplated by her with no small
?9
satisfaction, as she lifts her glass to the gallery while the lessons are reading, and notes down who are absent. There is a jaunty air in the pink bonnet, and a smart cut in the laven¬ der-pelisse, which I have vainly tried to imitate. 'Tis a young seminary of coquettes, grandmamma, take my word for it. Do tell Mrs. Strictly she really does a great deal of harm." " It is impossible to convince her,*' was the reply; " she complains of throwing her pearls before swine, and of the frivolous excuses which the parents ofher protégées make to detain them from school, such as that they want them to nurse younger children, to help them to wash, or to assist in earning their bread. 4 It seems,' said Mrs. Strictly to me one day, 4 as if I were the obliged person. They say, they can refuse nothing to such a good
120
lady ; Betsy shall come, if I wish her ; yet, if I please, they would rather have her at home. Only conceive this, after all my exertions ; but, indeed, Mrs. Loveday, you cannot imagine the ingratitude, ignorance, and duplicity of the poor.' With respect to their ignorance, I could have told her that they are generally more aware of what is really for their benefit than those who officiously try to degrade them into puppets, moved by vanity and conceit, under the disguise of philan¬ thropy. Of the ingratitude of others, no one who reads the Gospels should presume to complain ; nor ought we to rail against duplicity, till we have thoroughly searched the labyrinth of our own hearts. I was meditating this reply, when Mrs. Strictly took leave, remarking, ' It was her duty to bear hét appointed cross with meekness.' "
mi
" Thus," said Ellen, " she perse¬ veres with martyr constancy to spread poverty and a love of finery in the village, never considering that her girls eat at the cost of their parents, and are, in fact, clad at an expence deducted from the industry of others." "Mrs. Strictly," said my grandmo¬ ther, " is not the only self-deceiver, when mounted on her favourite hobby. It is not because she does not know that there are objections to her system, but because her coterie laud her ac¬ tivity and benevolence; and she re¬ solves not to be deterred by what she calls a narrow-minded opposition. How far the rising hope of Ringrove will be benefited as daughters, servants, wives, or mothers, remains to be proved. Having a sort of Cassandra feeling on the subject, I console myself with VOL. i. G
122
thinking that what is fallacious in prin¬ ciple is seldom sufficiently practicable to last long enough to do much mis¬ chief." The evening drew to a close. The James's took their parting glass of wine and biscuit, retiring with a wish that Henry might have spent his time as agreeably at Orissa Park. My grandmother was evidently weary with her exertions; but, in repeating the family prayers, resumed her usual energy, and with peculiar emphasis repeated the sentences, " Shew to them that be in error the light of thy truth. Strengthen such as do stand, comfort the weak-hearted, and cleanse us all from our secret faults." The recollection of Henry by his kind instructor had recalled my thoughts to their usual train, and I answered
123
Ellen's remark, that we had spent a delightful evening, with a faint rever¬ beration of ít Very delightful,*' and an enquiry if she had ever been at Orissa Park, and ifit were a fine place. " Very fine/' said she, imitating my yawning tone ; " there is an aviary and an apiary, a hot-house and an ice¬ house, a canal and a gold-fish pond, a menagerie and a conservatory; more books in the library than Methuselah could read, and more grapes and pines than he could eat : there are footmen covered with lace, carriages glittering with gold, apartments hung with fluted silk, and beds that scud around the room at the touch of your finger. And there is the master, a wee, crumpled, wizened, saffron-coloured beau ; and I could tell you who will be the mis¬ tress." g 2
124
" Who?" exclaimed I, in breathless eagerness. " Neither you nor I, coz, and so good night ; fbr I shall minute down this evening's conversation." " Mercy, Ellen, what a task !" " Not a long one ; I am expert at short-hand, and I may find the remarks I have heard useful, when the aviaries, apiaries, &c. &c. &c. are in ruins, their miserable owner low in his grave, and the bride he purchased with this trim garniture rejoicing over the dear dead old man, and riding into the world on the fruits of his oriental pe¬ culations." " But poor Henry !" " I say poor Henry, too ; but I have prophesied enough fbr one evening, or I would read his destiny. Once more, dear girl, good night. And now silence,
125
or repeat the first line of what I once heard, not unappropriately, given out before a dozy sermon, and entitled, ( A Hymn to Sleep — * ζ Come, sweet sleep, and close my eyes.' **
G 3
126
CHAP. IV. The routine of the week now brought on Sunday : it was the first I had spent at Ringrove, and I predicted that it must be gloomy and tiresome. No callers or calls after morning service ; no promenades in Kensington Gar¬ dens ; no dinner parties ; not even a drive to a fashionable chapel or a po¬ pular preacher. " How do you get through Sunday?" said I to Ellen, who I saw met me with her usual vi¬ vacious countenance. " It is one of our busiest days," she answered. " No, I must not call it busiest; but we always find it too short We twice attend divine service ; we superintend the Sunday-school
127
girls ; we visit our distressed or suffer¬ ing neighbours, be they ranked among the rich or the poor ; we walk in the garden, and spend a longer time than on other days in exploring the me¬ chanism of plants, and learning the habits of birds and insects. In winter evenings we call in the assistance of the orrery and celestial globe, to im¬ prove my little smattering in astro¬ nomy. The household constantly as¬ sembles for family reading and worship, and my grandmother generally expa¬ tiates on what has formed part of the public service. A friendly neighbour often joins our tea-table, prepared to acquiesce in our plans; and I am en¬ couraged to attempt a little sacred music without apprehension, knowing that the feelings of the sincere wor¬ shipper will prevent the censure of the connoisseur. You shall hear what gra- G 4
128
tified our dear grandmother so much last Sunday, that she asked for a repetition." Ellen touched her piano, and in a sweet, untutored voice sung this hymn, which Dr. Hawkesworth composed a month before his death : " In sleep's serene oblivion laid, I safely pass the silent night; At once I see the breaking shade, And drink again the morning light α New-born, I bless the waking hour, At once with awe rejoice to be ; My conscious soul resumes her power, And springs, my gracious God, to thee. " ? guide me through the various maze My doubtful feet are doom'd to tread, And spread thy shield's protecting blaze When dangers press around my head. " A deeper shade will soon impend ; A deeper sleep my eyes oppress ; Yet still thy strength shall me defend, Thy goodness still shall deign to bless. " That deeper shade shall fade away ; That deeper sleep shall leave my eyes ; Thy light shall give eternal day, Thy love the raptures of the skies."
129
" Is it not glorious, consolatory, beatifying,** said Ellen, observing me sob at the concluding stanzas, " that this dear venerable woman, bending under the increasing pressure of decay, seems as if sh& shook off her infir¬ mities whenever the unseen world becomes the topic of conversation? Those anticipations which depress the spirits of all who know her, appear to elevate hers. I love her, Emma, every day in the week ; but it is on a Sunday that the superiority of her exalted character shines brightest. On other days, the warmth of her feelings, and the vivid interest she takes in the well¬ doing of her fellow-creatures, some¬ times give a keenness to her remarks, which they who know not the gen¬ tleness of her temper might call aspe¬ rity ; but on this good day every word is meek benignity, every look tender g 5
130
charity. She has remarked often the effect of the Sabbath on her ardent temper, and required me to witness the tranquillising nature of this blessed institution. It is more truly on this day that the law of God is on her lips, and all her actions seem heaven-di¬ rected." Wondering at the new sensation which induced me to deprecate the death of an old woman, of whom I still stood in too much awe cordially to love, I changed the discourse, by ask¬ ing Ellen how she became musical without having had a governess or master. " It would indeed be strange," said she, " if I pretended to more than being fond of music, and entertaining my grandmother, in the absence of any abler performer, to whom I most willingly give place.**
131
" Your execution," I replied, and I spoke without the least exaggeration, " exceeds that of many who call them¬ selves amateurs, and is far too correct to be intuitive." " Ah, Emma ! you never will credit the services which the fairies render me. Two of them, Emulation and Ap¬ plication, were singularly beneficial to me in my girlhood ; hut listen while I explain the wonder. Our very kind neighbour, Mrs. James, was in early life an inmate in a nobleman's family, being the niece of Lady Arbury, and receiv¬ ing the same education with her daughters. She was entitled to enter¬ tain higher views ; but, preferring the chaplain to a dissipated man of rank, she became our vicar's wife. Hav¬ ing no children and much leisure, she kindly volunteered her services to teach me and two or three of my playfellows g 6
132
the rudiments of polite education. We attended her when she was not better occupied, and as instruction was at once a favour and a rarity, it was dearly prized. I was the favourite pupil, and to excel Kitty Smith in drawing, and Mary Brown in music, was as desirable an achievement as to gain the prize medal at the Society of Arts. My ulti¬ mate rewards were a present of the in¬ struments which you see ; and thus, by being forced to set a high value on my lessons, I became a dilettante." "But does not our grandmother dis¬ countenance accomplishments, and ri¬ dicule those who possess them ?" " Never, unless they are only accom¬ plished, or devote to the lighter embel¬ lishments of life more time and pence than accord with her golden rules of fit¬ ness and consistency ; but here she comes, and we shall soon be favoured
133
with her sentiments on subjects suited to this, her beloved day." After returning thanks for being all " brought in safety to the light and comfort of another Sabbath," and beg¬ ging, in the words of Bishop Wilson, " that it might be so consecrated as to be the beginning of a happy week to the whole family," my grandmother smiled on us with more than her usual benignity, and, seeing my grave looks, gave my hand a kinder pressure. My heart had previously been softened and disposed to reciprocate the signs of affection, and I took my place at breakfast, feeling more happy than heretofore at Ringrove, though the prospect of a long, dull Sunday was not even relieved by the chance of seeing Mrs. Goodenough, who, Ellen told me, was so engrossed with her son during his short stay as to regret every
134
interruption to the enjoyment of his society. " Was he going a long voyage ?" I asked. " A long, dangerous, distant one, perhaps to return no more." "How I pity his mother!" was my reply. " Can oniy a mother's heart ache for Frederick ?" was her answer. " But there is a hope that duty may not im¬ pose the severe sacrifice; and hope shall be my pole-star till his sails are un¬ furled." My grandmother was of opinio.!, that serious conversation is the best . preparative for the duties of the Sab¬ bath, and, from her own experience of its utility, she recommended the prac¬ tice of recollection and self-communion. " It is," said she, " almost impossible for frail creatures as we are to pass a day, whether in society or seclusion,
135
without doing, saying, or thinking something offensive to that purity and holiness which our religion prescribes. 1 fear that last night I spoke somewhat too sharply against the practice of young women going as mendicants from house to house, advocating the cause of questionable though popular societies, at least, of societies respecting whose ultimate tendency and internal manage¬ ment they can only have the partial statements of their pledged and com¬ mitted supporters. Stimulated by the eloquence of orators, whose zeal defies fact and disdains argument, these young enthusiasts engage in the service often without the privity, sometimes against the opinion, of their parents, rarely with the approbation of their regular pastor ; and I know an instance of their being incited to do so, in avowed contraven¬ tion to his precepts and authority. They visit cottagers who are in such
136
abject poverty, that they ought rather to receive donations than be solicited for mites. The good they attempt is pro¬ blematical, the evil certain. Who is there among us so insulated from dis¬ tress as not to know objects to whom our bounty would be most salutary, if we had the power to direct it without impeding other claims, and the relief that our hand bestows, and our own eye sees applied, is not wasted in the transmission ? The services which poor people render to each other are far greater and more beneficial than their superiors admit, and keep alive in humble society that sacred spirit of true charity which consists in being ever ready to perform neighbourly actions. I have seen a t care-crazed mother of many children' pour a tea-cup of cowslip wine from her only bottle, and carry it to moisten the lip of dying indigence. I could name the
187
hard-faring, hard-working labourer, whose only dinner is mashed potatoes, yet who circumscribes his own appe¬ tite to give what he contentedly calls a comfortable meal to a deserted orphan who lives near him. Should the slender stream which waters this sacred soil be diverted to distant, dubious, disput¬ able objects ? Will brotherly love in¬ crease if the pennyworth of relief which the poor can ill spare from the neces¬ sities of their own families be diverted to remote regions, with whose inhabit¬ ants they can have no real sympathy, and of whose wants and situation their views must be vague and indefinite ? I admit that the desired contribution is small ; but they who think it not an object, know as little of the enforced economy of village poor as the French princess, who wondered at the obsti¬ nacy of her father's subjects in dying
138
of famine, declaring she would sooner have eaten only bread." " My dear grandmamma, you are repeating the severe remarks you made yesterday evening." " Age is discursive, my dear girls, and I am now describing how in the silence of the night the subject was again presented to my pillow. I thought yesterday with somewhat of anger on the dictatorial publicity and hardihood by which some persons thus force their own views of charity on their inferiors and dependents. I have since looked at the object which they mean to ac¬ complish. I admit that their intention may be good, and a correct motive will not lose its reward on account of erring judgment. It may also proceed from vanity, and from that stimulating thirst fbr notoriety, which is now so alarmingly prevalent. When
139
sanctioned by parental and pastoral authority, I withdraw the objection which points in full force as prohi¬ bitory to all under my own care, to whom I say that this proceeding is too meddling aud obtrusive to consist with that charity whose essence is humility and privacy. But in reproba¬ ting what I thought wrong, I deviated into a warmth of censure which has made me also an offender against the same divine law. I also allow that I spoke too satirically of the wrong judgment of Mrs, Strictly, who cer¬ tainly devotes her large fortune to acts of bounty." " Even to withholding necessaries from her own family. Indeed, my dear grandmamma, if you go on in this strain of self-accusation, I shall sus¬ pect that you only mean to pique me until I use the puff direct. It is well
140
known that she suffers her pocket to be picked by impostors and beggars of all descriptions, and makes her children wretched by her parsimony. Her sons, from being refused the com¬ pany and the indulgences suited to their stations, now avoid her ; all of them with alienated affections; some with corrupted hearts, have fallen into the snares of bad society, merely because she deemed total seclusion to be requisite for preserving them from the contagion of an evil world. That, you know, is the text which she con¬ siders as the discriminating shibboleth of vital religion," " Nothing," said my grandmother, " as I know from experience, is more difficult than to restrain an ardent temper stimulated by a very conscien¬ tious desire to do right, and prevent it from running into extremes, par-
141
ticularly when we suffer prejudice to mix with our ruling passion, and to keep such hold of our minds as not to allow us to look at what may be urged on the contrary side. I begin to doubt which is most dangerous, a too fre¬ quent mixture with society, or constant seclusion. If the former endangers our morals, the latter is equally un¬ favourable to our hearts and tempers. Besides, the retirement of really good and sensible people from the scenes of active life, while in the vigour of their days, must be highly injurious to the interests of society, both as regards the management of public affairs, and the comforts of rational intercourse. Our divine Master, and by the rule of his example every question should be ultimately decided, did not pray that his disciples t should be taken out of the world.* He sent
142
them to convert it, to « be burning and shining lights;' and his prayer for them was, 4 that they might be kept from evil.' Christianity, as taught in the gospels, is a system adapted to man in an active, probationary, militant state. It is not a monastic rule, but a code of legislation intended to re¬ novate a fallen world ; not * a candle hid under a bushel,' but the modifier of civil institutions, and the curb of individual conduct. If men truly en¬ lightened by this excellent spirit refused to come forward and act the parts which God has marked out for them in public and private life, would not the proud but false boast of Satan be realised, and the kingdoms of the world fall into the hands of his agents ? « Further, in our application of those texts which imply universal depravity,
143
let us remember that the world is now greatly changed since our Lord trod the favoured soil of Judea. Though much remains to be done, the gospel has achieved much in changing the principles and improving the general condition of mankind. Still I admit that there is danger in society ; but to danger, to warfare, and to arduous combat, the Christian soldier is called» He must buckle on the whole armour of God, and fail not to provide himself with the sword of the Spirit, especially when some pressing necessity requires him to venture into dangerous society. Prayer, my children, and the word of God, nourish the soul. Supported by these, if we have entered even into the enemy's ground, we may return un- contaminated. But let us be watchful, and, remembering that * there is a lion in the path,' never relax our vigilance
144
or cease to implore the protection of our heavenly Defender." I ventured to remark here that all the very good people with whom I was acquainted drew such a frightful picture of the world as really to disgust me, and make me often wish I had never come into it. " Nature, my love," replied my grandmother, " never meant her blos¬ soms to be blighted by misanthropy before they arrived at maturity. Are you sure, Emma, that your very good people are not at heart still worshippers of the coquette whom they vilify, with whom their quarrel is only that of a piqued lover, to be appeased by a smile ? I ask this question not in the pride of superior intellect, but from the more intimate acquaintance with that most capricious, most deceitful being, self, which a life of con-
145
strained seclusion has enabled me to form. There is nothing more dan¬ gerous to young people's real happiness than to permit them to start with false views of what they are to expect in life. My Emma, I doubt not that you once deemed this untried world a paradise of pleasure." I bowed. " You have since looked on it as a dreary wilderness, almost barren of comfort." I wept " Courage, dear girl ; hfe is a magic lantern ; the scene will again change ; but do not expect a return of the vivid colourings and gay images of your early youth. They have passed away for ever ; and, in truth, were but delusions, the phantasmagoria of prosperity, which a judicious in¬ structor would have taught you to detect. Your future views of life will present a mixed prospect. Earnestly do I pray that the bright hue may VOL. Ι. H
146
prevail so far as is consistent with that necessary share of corrective sorrow which will suffice to convince you that you are a pilgrim travelling to a better country: a remark, I admit, that wants the all captivating grace of novelty, but yet as necessary to be sounded in our ears as the warning cry to the King of Serendib, * Thou must die!' But, Emma, tell me more of your very good people who are so disgusted with life. Give me a slight sketch of their history. Have they been very unfortunate ?" " No." " Have they sunk beneath the sta¬ tion to which they were born and educated?" « No." " Have they suffered some over¬ whelming, awful, premature losses from the ravages of death ?"
147
" No." " Do they labour under some in¬ curable distemper ?" " No." " Do they suffer excruciating bodily anguish ?" " No." " Then do tell me why they quarrel with the world, or rather with their Creator ?" This question demanded consider¬ ation ; and really the causes of dis¬ content, when set in array, appeared so ridiculous, that I was ashamed to mention them. I knew one lady who was constantly teased by disorderly servants. My grandmother asked if she had paid due attention to their morals by precept and example ? Had she allowed them time for their religious duties? Had she been scrupulous as to character when she engaged them ? h 2
148
Had she exercised sufficient watchful¬ ness to detect peculation and fraud? Did she appear to take an interest in their welfare, and to contribute to their comforts, without humouring them into insolence and fastidiousness ? My an¬ swers were repeated negatives. " Then," said Mrs. Loveday, " I do not see that fate, or the world, or whatever be the name of this evil genius, (for it would be irreverent to mention Providence,) is accessary to this worthy lady's misfortunes. We must leave her to reap the natural consequences of omitting the vigilance and consideration which her duty as a mistress of a family required. Pass over to another of your unfortunates." My next case was Mrs. Gray, whom the world had ungratefully forsaken. She had been the life and ornament of society. Her parties were the most
149
crowded, fashionable, and pleasant. She had brought out numbers of young women, and procured them good estab¬ lishments. She had obtained situations for many younger brothers ; and every body used to consult her when they first came to town, to know what they were to do, and whom they were to visit. And this oracle, this patroness, this most kind hostess, now sat day after day alone in her boudoir, without one visitor, one client, one friend. " I fear," said my grandmother, " the girls whom she helped to hus¬ bands, and the men for whom she procured situations, did not deserve her good offices. How old is she ?" Mrs. Gray*s age was a profound secret, but on mentioning her maiden name, my grandmother discovered that she was much her senior. This I could not credit, even allowing fbr a h 3
150
dark wig, a padded shape, ivory teeth, rouge, a neck scarce covered with crêpe- lisse, white silk sandals, and gauze drapery floating in all the waves of fantastic elegance. A laugh followed ; and we agreed not to quarrel with the world because an old woman outlived the possibility of being fashionable. " I am not disposed," said my grand¬ mother, "to put old women beyond the pale of society, as drones that de¬ vour the riches of the hive. Nor would I revive the old law of Epire, and consign them to the executioner after a certain age. We may be use¬ ful in our proper character. Standing on the pinnacle of experience, we look back on the past, and life appears as a panorama spread behind us ; while eternity, like the mountains ofa country we are about to enter, rises on our horizon in clear perspective. Surely
151
we neglect our duty, if we forbear to direct our warning voice to the young, fearless adventurers, who appear ready to fall into the defiles where we had nearly perished, without any greater assumption of superior wisdom than what belongs to a guide whom a party of strangers employs to show them an unknown road. The guide may be an ignorant rustic, and the strangers phi¬ losophers, but he can preserve them from being benighted in a forest, or ingulfed in a quick-sand. " I have never found young people," continued the mild instructress, "averse to wholesome counsel, provided it was not dogmatically imparted. If it seemed the burst of affectionate soli¬ citude, not the ebullition of spleen ; if it sprang from a desire to serve, not from an affectation of importance ; if it was not the result of prejudice, h 4
15%
or pique at enjoyments in which the monitor could no longer share. If Phanuel's daughter, the widow of four¬ score years, abides in the temple, she not only passes without reproach, but is invested with sacerdotal dignity; and the church of Ephesus partly owed the scriptural treasures which distinguished its first bishop, Timothy, to the early instruction he received from his grandmother Lois. Various benevolent, and even active, occupa¬ tions suit the privacy of declining life. Let age act its own part with decorum, before it complains * of tittering youth driving it from the stage.' Timely re¬ treat is wisdom in the theatre of the world, as well as on the stage. The young should labour and enjoy : the privileges of age are rest and reflec¬ tion. But in its retirement let it keep guard against its besetting sin, misan-
153
thropy. Let it not complain that the gay and young pass its door, unless it be sure that they have not been driven away by querulous complaints, either of bodily ills, or of the degeneracy of the times. There is no apology for dwell¬ ing on such subjects, but that fatuity which makes us forget how irksome they were to ourselves in our own halcyon days. I will inquire no fur¬ ther about your very good, very ill- used people, my Emma. The sermon bell rings; and I trust in this dis¬ cussion of some of the causes of dis¬ content, we have discovered reasons for vindicating the ways of God to man, and have prepared our spirits for acceptable worship, by cultivating that quiet, resigned, grateful temper, which always marks the Christian, especially when attending the house of prayer." In returning from church, I in- H 5
154
quired of Ellen, who were the ill- dressed, unhappy looking girls that occupied what I judged was the ma¬ norial pew, and was informed that they were the daughters of Mrs. Strictly, whose large fortune was so absorbed in various charities, that she could not af¬ ford them either a new riband in their bonnets, or a decent frock. "But these,*' continued my cousin, "are minor mortifications. You will read the comfortless Ufe they lead in their countenances. Mrs. Strictly is one of those who do not apply their religious principles to the correction of the tem¬ per, or the enlargement of the kinder affections. She gives, but not benignly, growling over her pensioners like a kitten over its prey ; and I often think that she is quite as tormenting. As for her poor daughters, they are rarely permitted to associate with young peo-
155 pie, and when they do, it is only to feel their inferiority, since, in appearance and manner, they are the most under-bred girls in the neighbourhood. They know nothing but a routine of servile oc¬ cupations, which their fortunes might allow them to resign to their servants. They are taught to consider accom¬ plishments as vanities, public amuse¬ ments as sins, the proprieties of dress us incompatible with the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, the elegancies of the table as culpable indulgences, and after having been scolded through their daily duties with pack-horse uni¬ formity, they are detained an hour in ' the godly garret, ' and sent to bed. There, unless I am misinformed, the house-maid slips the last production of the Minerva-press under their pil¬ low, and leaves them to compare the world of fashion and the wiles of love ? 6
156
with the life to which tbey are doomed, and to dream of some Feignwell or Ranger scaling the walls, and rescuing them from durance." My grandmother hardly acquiesced in Ellen's remarks ; for while she ac¬ knowledged their verity, she appeared to regard them as ill-timed, and diverting our attention from those better sub¬ jects of reflection which ought to ac¬ company us from the house of God. She turned the conversation to the fallibility of human judgment, even when applied to what we might be thought best to know, that is, to our¬ selves, consequently our proneness to err as to the motives of others. The sermon, founded on the parable of the unjust judge, she observed, tended to illustrate an important truth, besides fulfilling its primary intention of acting as an incentive to fervent prayer ; she meant the duty of discrimination,
157
which consists in regarding the intent as well as the action. He who neither feared God nor regarded man, in order to relieve himself from teasing importunity, redressed the wrongs of the suppliant widow, and in the eyes of his fellow-mortals appeared to perform one good action. The Searcher of hearts saw that action, also, to be equally corrupt with the rest of his conduct. An awful admonition this! teaching us to analyse our every action, and to probe our hearts, especially when the voice of commendation awakens the thrill of self-esteem, lest, like the unjust judge, when we boast of having acted righteously and mercifully, we shall be found only to have sought applause by relieving ourselves from a painful sensation ; and though man has reaped the benefit, God weighs the motive, and finds us wanting. " There is,**
158
continued my grandmother, " another parable of our Lord's, in which he has thought fit to name a criminal action with limited approbation ; I al¬ lude to the unjust steward, who pro¬ cures for himself a home in adversity, by a mal-application of his lord's pro¬ perty. It is guarded from miscon¬ struction by a copious illustration, showing us that it was his forethought as to his future fate in this world, as opposed to our listless indifference to the blessed mansions in the next, which he recommended to our imita¬ tion; for the everlasting hills cannot be climbed by those who do not labour up the steep ascent. He also enjoins candour in our judgment of others. In this base peculator there was some¬ thing commendable; there was the wis¬ dom of the serpent, which we are elsewhere advised to combine with
159
the innocence of the dove. Man, my children, like the world he inhabits, is a compound of good and evil. Let the knowledge of this truth preserve us from speaking with asperity, except of our own misdoings. I believe Mrs. Strictly means rightly, and intends her daughters to be the Tabithas and Eunices of the British church. She has lamentably failed in her sons ; and judging from what we know of human nature, we may fear her success in the female branches. Let us hope other¬ wise, for they are well-disposed girls ; and woman is not so restive under arbitrary control as man. Go, Ellen, to your accustomed duties in the school; I feel unable to attend them. I shall not summon Emma to * the godly gar¬ ret,* she will therefore dispose of her time as she pleases." My grandmother passed through the
160
little wicket into her garden, and I took my cousin's arm. " You have displeased her," said I. Ellen answered, " I regret that I have ; I ought to have remembered, that though no enemy to raillery, and even preserving a keen relish for the ridiculous, there are times and subjects which she deems sacred. She holds it unseemly and abrupt to dismiss the ideas we have imbibed at church immediately on leaving it ; and even ill-regulated piety commands from her not merely indulgence but respect. My feelings, Emma, were too strongly awakened by the melancholy aspect of girls of my own age suffering under domestic tyranny ; for if report be true, their comfort is a sort of expiatory sacrifice to their mother's former im¬ proprieties/* Ellen visited the schools, and ex¬ amined her scholars without display or
161
affectation. We then called on an in¬ firm neighbour, who seemed near the end of her earthly troubles. She re¬ joiced to see " good Miss,** as she called her, and affectionately inquired after " worthy Madam,** to whom she sent many thanks; and by enumerating the comforts she had received, enabled me to discover why a portion of our frugal dinners had been handed from the table in silence. The cottager begged Ellen to read to her. I gave her the Prayer Book, opening it at the forty-first psalm, which I remembered to have seen selected for such an oc¬ casion. She glanced her eyes over " Blessed is he who considereth the poor and needy,'* and objected to read¬ ing her own beatitudes ; saying, that as she came to comfort the afflicted, the sixth and the twentieth were more ap¬ propriate. She then announced an in-
162
tended call from Mr. James that even¬ ing, and we returned home. 4 walk in the garden occupied our time till afternoon service, which my grandmother exerted herself to attend. Our dinner was more substantial than on other days, and I observed more plates handed off than Goody Simp¬ son's, whose hopeless state was de¬ plored. Her bed and cottage, I said, were neat ; but penury was too visible. Did she, I asked, partake of Mrs. Strict¬ ly's bounty ? " No." « Why ?" My grandmother was silent. " Mrs. Strictly," said Ellen, " keeps a register of the spiritual condition of the parish, and Goody Simpson is marked only as a moral character. None are pensioners at the manor-house who do not reach the description of
163
pious. She pleaded want of time, to attend the evening prayer-meetings twice a week ; and it was judged that she employed too much time in mend¬ ing her children's clothes to be a good Christian; besides, my grandmother pa¬ tronises her, which is sufficient to ex¬ clude her from Mrs, Strictly's favour." " Ellen," said my grandmother, gravely, " we have twice to-day confess¬ ed our own offences, and should there¬ fore be indulgent to our neighbour's failings, I have already said I have no confidence in Mrs. Strictly's judg¬ ment, and now remind you that we are unable to judge of her motives. Our views of religion differ in some points which she deems essential; and she may think it right to weaken an influence which she esteems here¬ tical. The warmth of your affection for those you love is quite as likely to mislead you, and make you what
164
is called a good hater. Come, let us to the garden, and see if the lily censures the rose for being thorny, or quarrels with the jessamine on account of its feebleness.** After tea, our little household as¬ sembled in the library; and the twenty- fifth chapter of St. Matthew being read as the afternoon lesson, gave occasion to an impromptu commentary, in which I traced a reference to our past convers¬ ations, it being my grandmother's me¬ thod to adapt her instructions to any incidental circumstances of recent oc¬ currence, yet so as not to appear to point them at any particular person, and to blend general reproof with a humble acknowledgment of her own errors. Thus, in her remarks on the parable of the ten virgins, she bade us observe, that while they waited for their Lord, even the wise ones slumbered and slept; that they had no good works to spare
165
for their less provident companions; and that, after all, human goodness was fallible, and required a higher recom¬ mendation than its own actions to be admitted to the espousals of the redeem¬ ed church. Proceeding to the parable of the talents, she remarked that an in¬ ference was sometimes drawn from the better application of those who had re¬ ceived the largest share, that a com¬ bination of judgment, memory, temper, &c, are more likely to be well em¬ ployed than if the grant had con¬ sisted only of one endowment. There was truth in this remark, provided education and discipline purified these treasures, and preserved them from the baleful influence of affectation and vanity. But this was no impeachment of the impartiality of the Divine Dis¬ poser: an awful responsibility hung over the steward of so great a charge ;
166
and we must observe, that the increase is expected to be commensurate to the means which are confided. Nor has the limited possessor of only one gift cause to complain of his scanty portion. Let him be assured, that if he be not slothful, his reward will be proportioned to his powers of enjoy¬ ment as well as to his diligent improve¬ ment. Over the tremendous scene dis¬ closed in the latter part of the chapter my grandmother reverentially paused, bending at the conclusion her vener¬ able head in devout supplication. She then bade us observe, that though in this particular passage charity to the poor is enforced as the test by which we shall be judged, other places fully proved that many more virtues must be practised, and many evil propen¬ sities subdued, before we can be pre-
167
pared for that audit, where, after all, our acquittal must entirely depend upon the merits and mercy of our Judge. Let us remember, that even benevolent actions, however useful to our fellow-creatures, and therefore in this life worthy of praise, must at last be judged by their motives. Let us also beware of fixing our eyes on any particular passage of Scripture, recommending the virtues to which we feel least indisposed, or the tenets which we favour ; rather let us contemplate the whole combined as¬ semblage of Christian graces, and the general tendency of Gospel-precepts and doctrines, else will our fancies be misled by narrow views, and instead of humble unpretending followers of Christ, we shall be the partisans of a sect obstinate in error, and implacably uncandid in opinion- " Let us," said she, *' to-night fervently pray for a
168
right judgment in all things. This is the gift of God, like genius and me¬ mory; and is fer more precious than either. It is a talent intrusted to us for cultivation, and the power to im¬ prove it must be sought by prayer.** I thought that Ellen*s spirits were depressed the whole evening. My grandmother selected her to lead her up stairs, an office generally performed by old Bridget, who became now my attendant instead of my cousin. " Dear Miss Emma,** said she, as she carefully folded my frock, rolled my sash, and stuck my pins on the cushion, " you must be quite happy here living with such a worthy old lady as my mistress. Talk of Mrs. Strictly, indeed: Mrs. Loveday does twice the good in the parish, and with such little means too; 'tis really wonderful. But I know she denies herself many com-
169
forts, and were it not for.Miss Ellen, would live on a crust. I know it vexes poor miss when she goes among the poor with her grandmamma's charities, to hear of what Madam Strictly does, and how she sends whole bottles of foreign wine to lying-in women, and lets Mary Hawkins live rent free, and sends Lucy Staples a set of china for a wedding present, and Betty Blandish a silk pelisse, — nasty hussy, a white sheet would have been a properer gift : and then the trumpeter goes before all she does, and people say, * Well, if ever mortal woman goes to a better world Madam Strictly must,* though I could tell them what she was once. Such stuff! I wonder Miss Ellen minds it; but she so loves her grandmamma, and knows she is worth ten such as Ma¬ dam Strictly,—the worst mistress in all vol. ι. ι
170
the county : I would not live with her for the Indies !" One secret was unravelled ; but ere I could check Bridget's indignation to ask what had been Mrs. Strictly's early misdoings, she had put my toilette in complete trim, and went scolding out of the room. I attempted afterwards to gain intelligence from Ellen ; but she told me, as she heartily disliked her, she would not venture on the subject. My grandmother called it vulgar gossip. Bridget would only shake her head, and say she knew all about it ; and thus Mrs. Strictly's his¬ tory remains to me as impenetrable a secret as the authorship of Junius's Let¬ ters, and may like that exercise the ingenuity of a future age.
171
CHAP. V. I awoke in the morning disposed to revere my grandmother's impartiality, and to commiserate Ellen's disgrace, of whom I had hitherto been some¬ what jealous, as the prime minister of our little state ; I even discovered that I loved her, though I was still piqued at her never asking me to finish the history of Lady Fandango's ball, which had been interrupted by a quarrel be¬ tween the gander and the turkey-cock, that required her interference. I was also shocked at her want of taste in not attempting an imitation of the trimming of my China crape frock, andi at persisting in wearing those per- i 2
172
petual cambric muslins, without any other improvement than what they received from the washer-woman. At our morning meeting the affec¬ tionate serenity of every countenance announced that the rebuke of the preceding evening had been well received, and the penitentiary humi¬ liation cordially accepted. We dis¬ cussed at breakfast the splendour of avowedly bridal preparations that were going on at the General's. Ellen looked wise, and again hinted that she was in the secret. I expatiated on the lady's good fortune with some feelings of envy and regret, which my grand¬ mother soon detected, " And where, my child," said she, "supposing the intended bride to be (as is most pro¬ bable) a portionless, highly-educated girl,—where is the great happiness of being tempted to commit a solemn
173
irredeemable act of perjury ? General Repeli is a man whom no young wo¬ man can either love or respect. I speak not of his age, of his infirmities, or even of his defective morals, being con¬ vinced that in the state of desperation in which the spouse of such an one finds herself, the two former would be deemed endurable, the last scarce considered ; but I speak of a temper which delights in the wretchedness of all with whom it comes in contact. To show you that mere riches, even without this alloy, do not produce con¬ tentment, unless they meet with a mind properly trained to their use, go, Ellen, to my escritoire, and fetch me one of my old friend's papers. They were bequeathed to me by a lady, who, after devoting the active period of her life to a strict perform¬ ance of social duty, retired unencum- i 3
174
bered by family cares to a small abode in the environs of London, where, a somewhat of celebrity attached to the part she had acted in life, allowed her to continue a close observer of what is called the world. Habits of reflection made that view accurate, and her natu¬ ral disposition would not allow it to be passive. Some of her lucubrations have been given to the world, under what you will perceive to be a disguised name. Others yet unpublished have become my property. In turning them over, I was struck with the appro¬ priate relation of one to the subject yesterday introduced ; I mean the dis¬ satisfaction under which apparently fortunate people often labour ; and, as Mrs. Palanquin may also be con¬ sidered as bearing some resemblance to the future mistress of Orissa Park, allow me to give it to you in the form
175
in which my friend had prepared it fbr the public eye ; and, premising that she was merely a woman of plain un¬ derstanding and antiquated habits, I will request you, Ellen, to become reader." From Mrs. Mac Mendíds Papers, en¬ titled " The Improver. " " 1 shall recommend to the consideration of those who are always aiming after superfluous and imaginary enjoyments, and will not be at the trouble of contracting their desires, an ex¬ cellent saying of Bion the philosopher, namely, ( that no man has so much care as he who en¬ deavours after the most happiness.'"— Addison " Few things are more inimical to the domestic comforts of us c time-worn fragments of an age gone by,' than the great revolution which fashion has made in the hours of repose and re¬ freshment, to which, as they completely govern our social intercourse, we must ι 4
176
pay a lagging, reluctant obedience, at the expence, perhaps, of our health, certainly of all the pleasant associa¬ tions and enjoyments that are annexed to long-established habits. The world of pleasure and the world of business equally require a long morning; and as every body should belong to one of these departments, to dine early, and not to dine at all, alike indicate a creature whom nobody knows, — an invalid, or an old woman. By a slow rétrogradation of half an hour, every two or three years, I have at length removed my dinner-hour to the time when the tea-tray used to make its wel¬ come appearance at the rectory, in my good doctor's days, yet still I and my cat are continually routed from our mutton-bones, either by first-rate fine ladies going to make morning calls, or second-rate fine ladies finding a lounge
177
on my sofa refreshing, as they return from turning over " great bargains," and loading themselves with «real savings,' at cheap shops. This an¬ noyance has lately so increased, that, to save myself from absolute starvation, I shall be compelled to exhibit a pla¬ card, specifying that I am taking my repast, and can only, — ( like the great Mogul at Hindu, Be seen and worshipp'd through a window.* "To speak my opinion explicitly, these morning calls, though deemed a great acquisition in sociability to those who would grasp time in the aggregate, while they throw it away piece-meal, are, with their adjunct, evening routs, vapid substitutes for the exploded after¬ noon-visit, at which, without trouble or expence, we met our friends and neigh¬ bours, after performing the duties of the day, and unbent in confidential, ι 5
178
perhaps in improving, conversation. At these meetings, the old women of my young days (happy, enviable beings !) were permitted to appear in the bro¬ cade, or ducape sacque, which had formed part of their nuptial wardrobe, and which, with the alteration of a flounce, or the addition of a gymp, went on quietly winter after winter, and were always allowed to look very creditable. They did not, like those martyrs to the mode now distinguished by the name of chaperones, find it ab¬ solutely necessary to know every body, but they had sufficient leisure to get acquainted with themselves, which in the present absorption of time is im¬ possible, and, though not wholly free from superstition, they had no fear of being alone. They would have been astonished to hear that "at home*' indicated a desire to open your doors
179 to crowds, or, on the other hand, that " not at home ** signified an inclination to be domestic. Enveloped to their chins in Brussels' lace and cambric, they knew not the immediate anguish of shivering in transparent drapery; nor anticipated the rheumatics and catarrhs incident to sudden transitions from the pine-apple heat of a saloon crowded to suffocation, to the chill of waiting for their carriage in an open vestibule, exposed to the rige urs of a searching north-easter or biting frost. They were not alternately bandied from the corset-maker to the dress-maker, from the shoe-maker to the adjuster of perukes, to be pinched or padded, rur- belowed or curled ; nor subjugated to the insolence, caprice, or negligence not only of those fabricators of shape and beauty, who pretend to pass their dizened-out Lady-of-Loretto puppet ι 6
180
for a living Venus, but also of their own Abigails, whose impertinence they must tolerate, because they are adroit at their toilette. In those golden days of rest for the aged, an annual examin¬ ation was sufficient to keep a wardrobe in creditable subservience to fashion, and it was not deemed degrading for an elderly gentlewoman to be recog¬ nised by her gown or her bonnet. Happy beings, who went to bed when weary, dined when ye chose, conversed with those who were of congenial tastes, dared to give your opinions without waiting to know what the world said, enjoyed your afternoon siesta undisturbed by a footman's pre¬ lude on the knocker of your door, asserted the immunities of age, and possessed its independence ! " My readers will perceive that I am writing under the influence of spleen,
181
and indeed I have been mortified by a combination of those cross-purposes which form the minor miseries of life, and have seen an example of their being mistaken for real troubles. I yesterday intended to enjoy what some call a tabby snuggery\ consisting of a few ancients like myself^ who retain a lingering love fbr old customs. We agreed to defy the world, to meet early without fuss or form, and to have a long confidential chat on the days we had seen. Hyson and macaroons were provided, and as to mental regale, beside what was retrospective, we had two weddings and the last Waverley novel to discuss, not to reckon the episodical anecdotes of cook-maids, lap-dogs, canary-birds, and grand¬ children. But as Seged, king of Ethiopia, observes, or as Jonathan Oldbuck, a later sage, observes ——
182
Possibly my readers will excuse the quotation, and allow me to record my own disappointments. " Half an hour before the usual time, my cloth was laid, and my minced veal and plate of fruit were served ; but before they were tasted, a peal on the knocker, which seemed, like the earth-shaking trident of Neptune, to threaten the foundation of our frail tenement announced company. My foot-boy, green from the country, flew down stairs as rapidly as Betty ascend¬ ed from the lower regions* the one to let in the company, and the other to endeavour to keep them out; and I, hobbling to the window as fast as my infirmities would permit caught sight of an elegant barouche and two foot- men with canea and bouquets, but at the same moment I exposed my own head, and terminated tiie dispute of
183
my household, one of whom was pro¬ testing that I was not at home, and the other hesitatingly affirming that I was ; for the lady-visitant exclaimed, " « There she is at the window : I knew she would admit an old friend. Let down the steps. I shall stop an hour ; so, Miss Badger, you may drive about and do my errands. Announce Mrs. Palanquin.* " All my self-possession deserts me when I am taken by surprise. Ab¬ sorbed in wondering who the majestic figure could be that sailed up the gra¬ vel-walk of my front-garden, I was in¬ capable of assisting my invaluable Betty, who, finding that the enemy would force an entrance, flew to my aid, inveighing loudly against littered rooms, shabby dinners, and her own deshabille. Betty's hands were as nim¬ ble as her tongue ; but all her celerity
184
was unavailing, or rather mischievous. My unfortunate dinner met my com¬ pany on the staircase, and as advance was impossible, retreat only served to expose the minutiæ of my house-keep¬ ing. But of this more hereafter. " I now saw before me a full-formed, black-eyed lady about forty, magnifi¬ cently attired in the deepest, but, at the same time, most fashionable sables, thus at once manifesting the profun¬ dity of her sorrow, the weight of her purse, and her deference to the cus¬ toms of a world from which she was averting her weeping eyes. Her arms were extended, as if she expected me to rush into her embraces. " * Do you not remember me, then ?' said she in a pathetic cadence. * Alas ! I cannot wonder at the obliterating effects of sorrow and time. I am Phcebe Freckle, the girl you once pa-
185
tronised, and made so happy with your delicious strawberries and cream.' " It was necessary for me to throw as much affection as possible into my face at this enunciation ; but really it was a stretch of memory to recollect the child of a slight acquaintance, or to connect her spare form and plain attire with the expanded dignity which now sunk upon my sofa in rustling grandeur, complaining of fatigue and indisposition, and rejoicing to find her dear, partial friend in such excellent health, and so enviably situated. "The employment to which I had in¬ stantly to submit, of opening and shut¬ ting doors and windows, and adjusting screens and curtains, so as to obviate currents of air, the annoyance of the smell of cookery, and the extremes of too much or too little light, gave me time to recollect that Phcebe grew up
186
very handsome, and during a show- winter at Bath attracted the attention of Mr. Palanquin, an East India di¬ rector, and made no objection to bar¬ tering her freshness for an ample dower. Most fortunately I also re¬ membered reading of the husband's demise in the papers, and thus ab¬ stained from inquiries which must have produced incalculable consternation. " When fine ladies aspire to uni¬ versal admiration, they always draw largely on human credulity, and la¬ vish the incense of adulation. Every thing about me looked so delightful, so compact, so social, so like a place in which a person might be happy, that I wondered if I was in my own apart¬ ments among the Alpha cottages, and had not, by an elfin or sibylian en¬ chantment, been transported to fairy land or elysium.
187
46 ' Your déjeûné, my dear Mrs. Mac Mendus, was so nicely elegant, and your gentle soubrette (no very appro¬ priate epithet for Betty) so simply neat, that I could think of nothing but " fair Fidele, who cut the roots in cha¬ racters, and sauced the broth as Juno had been sick." * " Of course, I ordered back what I called ' tray,' to whose contents Mrs. Palanquin did justice, declaring herself satiated with the palling luxuries of her own table, and the obstinacy or negligence of professed cooks, while at my table life was to be truly enjoyed. After this, she favoured me with Young's apostrophe to solitude, and Cowper's encomium on the country in preference to cities. " By this time the carriage re¬ turned. Miss Badger sent word that she had executed all the commissions,
188
and I began to hope for a reprieve ; but permission was asked to introduce her dear Badger, who was dying to see me ; and ere the first civilities had passed between us, all the commissions were discovered to have been wrongly executed ; and as they were all wanted immediately, and Mrs. Palanquin did not dine till eight, as she was really unwell, and as she detested shopping, she knew I would have the goodness to indulge her with my society and my sofa, while Badger went back and endeavoured to make those insuffer¬ able tradespeople understand what she wanted. " During a first visit every hostess attempts to entrench herself behind an invincible rampart of civility ; but though I wondered why so very grate¬ ful and so very attached a friend had not found me dut before, I was more
189
inclined to lament the present than to regret the past, especially as I found the recognition was owing to her de¬ sire of making me acquainted with the history of her misfortunes. I confess, I started at the word, and glancing from the splendour of her equipage and appearance to the dolour of her countenance, I supposed that Mr. Pa¬ lanquin had been a Blue-beard, and prepared myself fbr a tale of misery si¬ milar to the wrongs of fair Ellen of Lorn, or the Jew-lady in Castle Rack- rent. But I soon found that the good old Director had made a very orderly quiet husband, and had resigned his time, his habits, and his purse to his lady*s guidance, only beseeching her to make herself happy, so implicitly, that she really fancied herself inconsol¬ able for his loss. " Inexperienced youth sighing fbr in-
190
dependence will hardly credit me when I aver, that this same business of' making ourselves happy is so arduous a task, that it is better only to aim at being contented ; for in the latter case the labour is comprised within narrow bounds, and the instruments that are to eflect it are designed by Providence to be our submissive servants. Who¬ ever will duly govern their inclinations, subdue their tempers, inform their un¬ derstandings, and submit their wills to a Divine disposer, are sure to be con¬ tented. In respect to a successful pursuit of happiness, I cannot speak sanguinely. Many of my young asso¬ ciates started on that plan. I have met them since in autumnal life, and they have looked so like disappointed adven¬ turers, that I could ask them no ques¬ tions ; while others, who thought more of doing their duty, seemed by their
191
bland hilarity to have discovered the pearl of price. 66 As Mrs. Palanquin's history is re¬ plete with instruction, 1 shall divest it of egotism, self-praise, and the flourish of sentimental exaggeration, and present it in unadorned simplicity; only endea¬ vouring to supply those moral illustra¬ tions which, though the lady did me the honour to call me her counsellor and comforter, she gave me no opportunity to suggest. Her early years, which she now depicted in the violet freshness of felicity, were past in restraint, self-denial, and obscurity, such as prudence recom¬ mends to people who have large families and small fortunes. To Phœbe Freckle, an annual visit to the Rectory, where she sat next to the door, repeatedly admonished by her mother to hold up her head and not pull her gloves about, was a grand gala; and the appropri-
192
ation of a sarsenet gown, derived through two elder sisters, was mag¬ nificence. Her sole dependent, at that time, was a poodle-dog, and her goods and chattels consisted of a tuneless guitar, a few books given by her god¬ mother, and three or four spindling geraniums, which caught a gleam of sunshine through the interstices left by the exotics of the grown up young ladies. But as she always did as she was bid, smiled when spoken to, ran on every body's errands, and shared her chair with her younger brother when there were more guests than seats, Phœbe grew up a favourite among the neighbours, who rejoiced at her advantageous nuptials. " But a mere endurance of incon¬ veniences, and an economic forecast, are very different from the sublime virtue of patience. In the anxieties
193
occasioned by keeping up an appear¬ ance beyond their income, the parents of Phœbe lost sight of the nobler object of elevating their children's minds, which they permitted to become more debased and grovelling with every furbelow that was added to their old jackets, from the importance that was given to riches by bitter lament¬ ations at their own inability to dress and to act like other people. In a family labouring under this twofold indigence, few festivals can occur, but the rigid economy of Mrs. Freckle was observed to relax when any serious misfortune befel any of her wealthy neighbours ; and her vinegar aspect as¬ sumed an oily placidity on being assur¬ ed that one of the greatest " fortunes" among her acquaintance would never get a husband. I have heard that she really was good company for a week vol. i. ?
194
after the calamitous fire at Belle Vue, which destroyed the picture gallery and library, so long the sources of high gratification to half the country. But the misfortunes which befel superior wisdom and exalted virtue met with commiseration, because, if their pos¬ sessors were poor, she never envied them their mental treasures. " With a mind thus early devoted to the worship of Mammon, Mrs.Palanquin came a willing sacrifice to the nuptials sanctioned by that deity. She had no anterior attachment, and had the India director been older, uglier, lamer, and a greater invalid than he really was, she felt very sure that she could have made him a very good wife. Besides some after-gleams of sunshine, I do believe her marriage gave her three months of complete felicity ; two of these were spent in selecting wedding
195
clothes, and the third in wearing them. But, strange as it may appear to the economizing spinster, who turns and re-turns her irreclaimable mantua, while its obsolete form defies con¬ trivance— regret, disappointment, and ennui, will often perch on the shelves of the most costly wardrobe, Mantua- makers are a cruel race of people. They will cut and slash, forget, mis¬ take, and eventually spoil. Milliners are not a whit better, and are such slaves to fashion, that they attend neither to complexions nor to coun¬ tenance, Mrs. Palanquin while a bride, was talked of and looked at, but other brides succeeded to whom taste, or rank, or beauty, imparted greater eclat ; and her gold muslin, her diamond watch, and her bird of paradise plume, were frequently eclipsed by a simple gauze or a white rose. A different ? 2
196
costume was then adopted, but un¬ fortunately, that was overlooked ; and after infinite fatigue, expence, and anxiety, nobody but her " gentle sou¬ brette," and her tradespeople, knew the state of her wardrobe. She con¬ tinually met people better dressed than herself^ and, what was truly provoking, whose success seemed to have been attained without care or trouble. After the noviciate of her splendor, her mind lost the habit of luxuriating in the independent enjoyment of knowing how many hundred pounds were at¬ tached to her person. At the close of the first year, when a sum equal to the revenue of a German principality had been expended, reflection might have told her, that the period had passed without affording her the de¬ light which she used to enjoy while imitating the court dresses for her
197
doll, or listening to the inventory of some fair heroine's bridal attire, who, after three volumes of dismay or dis¬ tress, steps from the character of Miss Jenny of hopeless humiliation, into that of her ladyship. " But riches must contain a mine of enjoyment, and in acquiring the ce¬ lebrity of ton, she might possibly ex¬ plore some other vein. Alas ! in this high-minded, reflecting nation, the celebrity of ton cannot be purchased, and people are oftener ridiculed than admired for trying to take the lead. Mrs. Palanquin aimed at notoriety by every means consistent with a certain degree of attention to an invalid hus¬ band, who could not fly to every spot where fasfiion, on the wings of dissipation, proclaimed Vanity Fair. She planned and furnished fine houses, sported fine equipages, gave fine din- K 3
198
ners, but never could get into the fine world. She could only move in a lower circle,where she excited wonder, no less for possessing so many splendid things, than for the little satisfaction which they appeared to afford her. It never occurred to her, that to feel real delight, our possessions must shine upon us, reflected in the coun¬ tenances of those with whom we are domesticated. Her days were past in contriving schemes of enjoyment, and her nights in lamenting the futility of her efforts. Like the draught proffered to Tantalus, the stream of happiness always seemed to recede the moment she tried to quaff it But as some splenetic or mal-apropos intrusion of human agency appeared to be instru¬ mental in the disappointment, the fair visionary was not deterred from un¬ dertaking another speculation by any
199
acquired control over her own desires, or by the sometimes wholesome re¬ straint of conjugal authority. " In securing youth, beauty, and in¬ nocence, for the companion of his de¬ clining years, Mr. Palanquin fancied that he had acquired treasures for which the 4 wealth of Ormus and of Ind,' were an inadequate price, and for some years he really thought that some nefarious conspiracy, some dire fatality, some unnatural combination of accidental mischances, were at war with his lady's peace; that in time things would take a better course, and if he had but patience, the moans of his turtle would turn into billing and cooing. But time and a husband's patience are not very likely to improve the tone of a wife's conversation, when miseries such as Farquhar so pleasantly assigns to his Lady Lurewell, are for ? 4
soo
ever on the tapis ; and the tirade upon chamber-maids, * for leaving a wrinkle on one side of the bed, and a rumple on the other, the pillows awry, and the quilt askew ;' is followed by a diatribe on blundering tradesmen, whose goods are investigated with, * I don't know where the fault lies, but in short, I don't like them. The things are well enough ; but, bless me, can't you tell me why they won't do ?' If no real calamity occurs, « to give such minds a different cast of thought,* man should assume his prerogative, if not on personal or patriotic, at least on chivalrous grounds, and rescue his wedded lady from the fangs of the demon caprice. The task will not be arduous, for excessive fastidiousness, whether we consider it as a vice oí¬ an absurdity, is easily reclaimable ; ancl thousands who, while they had only their own humours to attend to, were
201
plunged into the depth of misery, or languished on the couch of lassitude, have recovered their peace of mind and their health, on being convinced that they could be no longer indulged, and on being compelled to regard the wishes of others ; thus at length they became obedient to the grand but simple law of nature, which requires us to be social, not selfish animals, and opens to us fresh sources of happiness in proportion as we interest ourselves in the welfare of others. " But when I maintain that fastidious¬ ness may soon be eradicated, I woukl be understood to suppose it combined with a really kind heart, and assumed by a fine lady to distinguish her qua¬ lities from the smiling satisfaction and the bland wonder of less ambitious people, who are avowedly pleased with a life of pleasure, at the expence of ? 5
202
forfeiting their claim to refined taste and exquisite feeling ; qualities, certain¬ ly, very estimable intheir genuine state, but to whose adulteration many of the imaginary miseries of life may be as¬ cribed. Calling things by their right names would greatly tend to correct the errors of our thoughts and actions. If the definitions oftaste and sensibility were limited to an intense enjoyment of what is beautiful, and a quick per¬ ception of what is sublime, domestic comfort would not be sacrificed by pre¬ tenders to refinement, who assume im¬ portance only because they are dis¬ agreeable. " Like most other ill-mated husbands, Mr. Palanquin had much to lay to the charge of his own folly. He had oriental habits, not of tyranny, indeed, but of luxury; and his lady acceded to his wishes, until life sunk under the toil of
203
living. He encouraged her to call irrita¬ bility meekness until contradiction was impracticable, and to fancy caprice de¬ licacy, until the cravings of wayward inclination became insatiable harpies. Quiet, firm, and equable authority, would have made her ' turn and turn, and be obedient/ Uxorious tenderness is not the likeliest way to render a wife happy or grateful, and few women can resist the temptation of becoming des¬ pots, when man offers himself to be their passive slave. Mr. Palanquin lamented his error when increased in¬ firmity prevented him from correcting it. Death interrupted his meditated plans of reform, and his disconsolate widow, left to the uncontrolled enjoy¬ ment of affluence, now finds herself completely wretched and forlorn. "And why is she this pitiable being ? The exterior of her life has been irre- K 6
204
proachable, for she appears to have conformed to the precepts of religion, virtue, and liberality ; but lift the veil, and trace the ruin of wasted talents in her present anguished feelings ; she has exemplified the scriptural warning, that it is possible to * give our goods to feed the poor without having charity.' She experiences the painful truism that we may spend thousands on a host of acquaintance without conferring such obligations as secure the attachment of friendship ; she has participated in all the ordinances of religion without feeling theawful delight ofcommuning with her God; she has read without improvement because her mind has been too indelibly prepossessed with her own excellences and injuries to admit the beneficial ap- phcation of precept and example ; she has attained a situation in life, to which her youth did not permit her to cast
205
one hopeful glance, and on her youth¬ ful days she now reverts her eyes to dis¬ cover the vestiges of real enjoyment. All that she was taught toconsider the constituents of happiness have been more than granted, and yet she ¿annot be happy ; she is an object of envy to strangers, and of contempt or pity, to those who see the bitterness of her soul; she stands on a cheerless eminence, rich and powerful, childless and friendless ; too tenacious of authority and liberty to dare to take a second husband, yet ever lamenting the loneliness of her lot, and pining for the comforts of domestic life, with which her cherished selfishness and indulged caprice are incompatible. Solitude and supremacy contribute to the indulgence, rather than the correc¬ tion of her faults; she cannot, therefore, be improved, but must remain dissatis¬ fied with every person, and displeased
206
with every event ; still the goddess of her own idolatry, and the fancied martyr of ills which she cannot bring herself to consider as correctives or as consequences of her errors, but as sins committed by others to try her virtue, for which she believes they will be punished and herself rewarded. This she calls piety and resignation, and while her conversation is one con¬ tinued self-eulogising elegy, poured forth with floods of tears, she requires you to consider her as the model of patient humility. Her acquaintance, who think her an inconsolable widow, are a little surprised that she should adopt that character ; and as it is diffi¬ cult to exhibit lamentation without some feeling of grief, she has persuaded her¬ self that the man whom she marriedfrom interest endured from principle, and mourned from decency, was worthy of her everlasting regret ; nay, that when
207
her own repose was broken by his anguish, or alarmingly interrupted by his phthisis, she was happier than she now is. That conclusion is correct, fbr there was then one human being about whom she felt interested. " And does not this populous empire contain one person to whose comfort she could now contribute, and be repaid by that person's attachment ? She is too selfishly timid to make the trial, and would tell you, that the world is too bad for her to compromise her few re¬ maining comforts. She has tried adopted nieces and humble friends, who at first promised perfection (in which bright ideal unquestioning submission must be the ruling principle,) but she found an acquiescent companion stupid, and an amusing associate refractory, and even when there seemed no apparent cause fbr complaint, suspicion (or, as
208
she called it vigUance)was required to be painfully on the alert. Beauty might attract beaux, and thus bring some implied censure on her untainted fame-, Wit might hold up her mis¬ fortunes to ridicule ; taking charge of young people involved a frightful responsibility. Ifyou asked her, were there no old ones, had she neither sister, cousin, nor friend ? she would answer, yes; but in declining life people's spirits were broken ; she had suffered too much to condemn herself to a voluntary endurance of infirmities and sorrows which it was not her duty to alleviate. Had she been blest with a family of her own, their superintendence would have been delightful, and the social charities would have met their own reward. It would be in vain to ask herifshewouldexpecttohaveproduced angels or immortals : beings who could
209
neither sin nor suffer ; or to have called her attention to the ' — woee which parents only prove, When daughters sicken or when sons expire.' Celibacy and sterility may derive im¬ provement from such contemplations, but avain undisciplined mind will never look long enough at a neighbour's for¬ tunes to be satisfied with its own. It would willingly deposit its burthen of trouble on the mountain of general misery, and bring away the comforts of another person ; but fo barter diffi¬ culty for difficulty, or sorrow for sor¬ row, would be an unprofitable if not a losing traffic. " Mrs. Palanquin's visit at length terminated, but not till the splendour of her emblazoned equipage, and the bou- . quets of her footmen, had prevented
210
my little sociable party whom I saw successively arrive, from presuming to enter my wicket. I was thus left to so¬ litary contemplation, which, to say truth, I was best disposed to enjoy. Some¬ thing, it is said, may be learned from the dullest book, for it may at least serve to exercise our patience. Great afflictions are, we know, powerful me¬ dicines of the soul, and every trifling event may minister to our improvement if we apply right principles in the task of re-consideration. I will confess that the first impulse of my mind was self- gratulation, but the proud thought was soon corrected, or rather softened into humble gratitude. " Continuing my meditation, I ex¬ claimed, *And can I, with my ready-fur¬ nished apartments, my two servants, my stands of flowers and shelves of books, be indeed the Aglaus whom this queen
211
of Lydiabelieves to be happier thanher- self; compelling me so far to subscribe to her conclusion as to feel the same shiver¬ ing reluctance to an exchange of situa¬ tions with her, as I should to entering the cave of Trophonius, never more to wear that look of cheerful content which is as offensive to her joyless grandeur, as the independence of Moidecai was to the pride of Haman, It is true I have lost my dearest connections, but I do not feel desolate, for the remembrance of those I tenderly loved is present with me ; and I can not only enjoy their so¬ ciety in delightful recollections of the past hut from my perfect knowledge of their hearts divine their sentiments^ and thus converse with them on passing events, correcting my own judgment by their recollected wisdom. My income is comparatively narrow, but it exceeds the prospects of my youth, and I have
212
made it adequate to my real wants by regulating my desires. Though I move in a contracted sphere I have no cause to complain of being disliked or disregarded. I take a lively inter¬ est in the welfare of every one with whom 1 am connected, and that feel¬ ing is generally reciprocal. Of this I am confident, I am not overlooked by Him whose paternal care, through all the scenes of my past life I can trace sufficiently to trust my few remaining days to His providence with implicit confidence. The ebullition of self- esteem subsides at the awful consider¬ ation of my OW1Ä weakness, for I know enough of myself to be convinced, that had I been fostered by indulgence, I should have been capricious and selfish. Uninterrupted prosperity, while it chill¬ ed my finer feelings, would have intro¬ duced its accustomed brood of imagin-
213
ary troubles ; blessed, therefore, be the privations which have habituated me to self-control, and the afflictions which have taught me benevolence !"
214
CHAP. VI. Mr grandmother was fond of present¬ ing different views of life ; sometimes tracing the same passions and desires acting on different characters, under¬ standings, and situations; sometimes shifting the scene, and calling up a groupe of living actors. We had Mrs. James's company this evening; her worthy husband was gone to Orissa Park to see if he could, in any way, mediate for Henry in this crisis of his fortunes. Her information convinced us that Ellen's guesses, respecting a young friend ofher own being the in¬ tended bride, were wrong. The General was entrapped by a woman of great art, and worse than doubtful reputation, who had thrown out the lure of beauty,
215
softness, and affection, to attract amo¬ rous imbecility; and, refusing any other terms but marriage, was soon to be in¬ stalled queen of the Zennana, much to the mortification of its present in¬ habitants, and, it was feared, to Henry's total ruin. From the dreary prospects of this hardly-treated youth, whose miseries Mrs. James now owned were aggravated by a long cherished attachment, the conversation adverted to the point of Mrs. Repell's reception in society, and after determining that her guests must be limited to the usual breed of butter¬ flies that sport in Fortune's sun, the needy, the profligate, the unreflecting, and the dinner-hunting part of the community, and guessing at who might be the new toadies, echoes and fiddles, that would supply the nabob's present guests, Mrs. James and my grand-
216
mother discussed those laws of society, which restrained a woman of lost cha¬ racter from associating with those of untainted fame; or being entitled to the same immunities. Having often met with very agreeable women placed in this predicament, whose advances I was ordered to repel, and whose routs, however splendidly arranged, not a soul abovethedeputy'sfamilywouldownthey had frequented, I had always thought ike law that prescribed such exclusion to be contracted and bigoted, and Ellen pleaded the cause of penitents with much energy; asking why man should be so unmerciful as to reject what God accepted—contrition for having sinned. *« Because,'* said my grandmother, " the Searcher of Hearts can discern when penitence is sincere, and when it is merely a pretext for restoration to the world's favour. I am not here en-
217
tering an injunction against the expe¬ diency of allowing indigence to earn an honest livelihood, against the humane feeling that would mitigate misery, con¬ ceal unpublished shame, rescue frailty from abandoned vice, or open the doors of near affinity and ancient friendship to a backsliding sister ; and from my inmost soul do I abjure that supercilious pride of untempted chastity which, piqu¬ ing itself on a purity which could not be defiled, shrinks from the fallen with con¬ tempt, and withholds the sacred offices of charity from an afflicted heart. All this is different from the loss of caste which true contrition will welcome as a deserved forfeiture, and innocence regard as a warning. Unquestionably it would be more agreeable to live in a world where we have nothing to dread, and in which we might indulge all the kindlier feelings of our nature, and vol· i. ?
218
open our arms and our hearts to all who surround us. But such liberality applies to heaven rather than to earth, and it behoves you young pilgrims, who have just set out on your travels through — shall I call it a wilderness of care, or an arena of trial? — to consider the case of the innocent, as well as of the guilty, before you attempt to over¬ turn those cautionary barriers which experience has deemed necessary fbr the preservation of public morals. How¬ ever hard these restrictions may seem in same instances, partial evil is, in this case, universal good. There is an audit where the tears of penitence will be ac¬ cepted, and the record of guilt effaced. In the present state of being, vice and imprudence must reap the fruits of the seed they sow, that the example of their disgrace may preserve others from simi¬ lar misery. The censor would in vain
219
talk of moral fitness, or the divine hold forth the future rewards of virtue, ifin this world there were neither distinction of character, nor any other social ad¬ vantage, to separate the contaminated from the correct part of female society. And as the force of legislative enact¬ ments depends on public opinion, it is too certain that legal restraints on im¬ morality must be rescinded, whenever general manners become so relaxed as to sanction murmurs against legal aus¬ terity instead of respectful acquiescence in its inflictions." Mrs. James said that she remembered a story affording a melancholy illustra¬ tion of the evil consequences of' one false step, and the very hard case which it included might seem to urge a relax¬ ation of the laws relating to decorum ; yet, as illustrative of the chariness of the female character, and of the diffi- L 2
220
culty, it might be said the impossibility, for a delicate mind to be reconciled to the feeling of conscious degradation, she would (trusting to our kindness in allowing her to engross the evening,) attempt the part of narrator. "Some years since a young lady came to reside in a country town where herself and her connections were totally un¬ known. The common name of Mary Williams, and an intimation that she was .born abroad, afforded no clue to the investigation of the curious, espe¬ cially as the members of her establish¬ ment, which though private was genteel, had nothing to relate, except that they were all hired in London, and had seen their mistress for the first time in her new habitation. Miss Williams had great pretensions to beauty and elegance; she never alluded to kindred or friend, yet the polish ofher manners indicated
221 that she had moved in good society, and her style of living, the punctual discharge of her debts, and her prudent liberality to the necessitous, while it refuted all suspicion of imposture, con¬ firmed her pretensions to the possession of a good fortune. Such indeed were the amenity of her manners, and the propriety of her behaviour, that she soon became popular in a place where sociability was the order of the day. But though the delight of having an agreeable new neighbour induced the most decorous ladies of Fishington to rescind in favour of Miss Williams the rule which required previous intro¬ duction, it was soon discovered, that while she endured visiting with so much well-bred resignation that no one could complain of neglect, she was one of those who esteemed solitude the best society. It was also remarked, that h 3
222
she had ever some reason for avoiding strangers who were casual visitants, and shrunk from an introduction to the friends of friends ; that even in her most brilliant moods, her smiles were pensive ratherthan irradiating, her voice always tremulous, her movements lan¬ guid, her observations tinged with me¬ lancholy, and her general deportment that of one who, while bleeding under a cureless sorrow, strove to conceal it. She would have been set down for a methodist, but that she played at cards ; and, though she did not attend the theatre, she permitted that amusement to her household, and contributed to the distresses of the actors. After a year's residence, it was observed that she did not change the garb of slight mourn¬ ing in which she had made her début ; it was therefore inferred that the hand of death bad broken the staff on which
223
her soul reposed. A few persons fan¬ cied that such lasting grief might result from filial or fraternal aflection, but every youthful heart felt a tenfold in¬ terest in the amiable stranger, from the supposition that she was a self-devoted victim to the anguish of losing her first love. " While every rule of etiquette, or those higher laws of good-breeding which sometimes diffuse a glow of real feeling into the cold forms of well- mannered civility, was scrupulously dis¬ charged, Miss Williams gradually dis¬ tinguished with her favour one lady, vvho, from an intimate companion, be¬ came a confidential friend ; at least so the neighbours believed, and wondered at the selection which preferred a cha¬ racter so dissimilar to her own, that it seemed as if she and Clara Sydney could not have a sentiment in common. Clara L 4
224
was tolerated rather than liked, because she was of a gentleman's family ; be¬ cause she had been an excellent daugh¬ ter, and a most kind sister; because some affectionately remembered her mother, while others were afraid of offending her ; but as she said the se¬ verest and did the strangest things, the trite apologies of having a good heart, or of meaning no ill, were in constant requisition on her behalf. How could a person whose disposition was the re¬ verse of elegance and softness, who studied more to alarm than to conci¬ liate, and strove to prove her inde¬ pendence at the expense of her polite¬ ness, accord with a woman who was all refinement and unoffending diffidence ? But friendship, like love, often amuses itself in contrarieties; and, without seeking for anexplanationin that fund of secret history and degrading anecdote
225
which Clara was known to possess, it was agreed that her talent, repartee, and in¬ formation, must be efficacious in divert¬ ing a mind sick of itself, yet fearing to commune with others to any extent beyond the nothings and the echoes of nothing which circulate in what are called parties, where an intellectual remark is stared at as a prodigy, or pon¬ dered over as an inexplicable problem. "Clara's earliest youth had been pass¬ ed in the great world, where a lucrative profession enabled her father to make a respectable appearance. The means of course failed at his death, and she cheerfully parted with half her moiety of her mother's fortune to establish a darling and very promising brother in the army. The restraints of poverty she endured magnanimously ; not so the coolness and neglect which her high spirit either felt or fancied in the be- l 5
2#6 haviour of those with whom she had associated as intimates and regarded as equals. Incapable of servility, unprac¬ tised in acquiescence, and intractable in acquiring new habits suited to her change of fortune, Clara Sydney deter¬ mined to enter on a new scene ; and feeling rather resentful than depressed, supposed that her wit, abilities, con¬ nections, and knowledge of the world, would allow her to move as a great lady among the bourgeois, a life which she preferred to that of sitting as no¬ body among élégantes, a worn-out fa¬ shionable. " Despising rather than regretting the circle she had left, and ridiculing that into which she was admitted, Miss Sydney seemed like a flying fish, never in her proper element and found but one object on which her naturally strong affections could repose ; that was
227
her absent brother, then urging his rapid career to military renown. Her lively interest in his dangers, her im¬ passioned zeal for his fame, her never wearied eulogy on his merits as a man, and on his exploits as a hero, varied her conversation, which otherwise, not¬ withstanding her natural good sense and literary attainments, would, to say the truth, have too much resembled the memoirs of the Count de Grammont ; for she was known as a walking register of all the fauæ pas that had occurred in high life for several generations, and as an entertaining, though not always good-humoured caricaturist of the ab¬ surdities of her acquaintance. " The ladies had become inseparable companions. Miss Williams was ob¬ served to have stolen a little of her friend's gaiety and archness, and Clara to have softened the acerbity of her L 6
228
dehneations, when Captain Sydney re¬ turned from an unsuccessful enterprise, wounded, out of health, a captive on parole, permitted, by a triumphant but humane enemy, to recruit his shattered constitution in his native country. These were not the circumstances in which the high-minded Clara expected to receive him, but he was still " her heart's dear Harry ;" and however in¬ convenient his sojourn might be in her small lodgings and to her scanty purse, she saw in the broken-down soldier but one more reason for quarrelling with the world, and loving him. Her bed¬ chamber was instantly resigned to the in¬ valid, and her little sitting-room crowded with a press bedstead for herself, In the morning she exercised the duties of nurse, cook, and housemaid ; and in the evening, when her brother was able to sit up, she combated his depression
229
of spirits by a game at draughts or piquet; nay she even allowed him to beat her at chess, which, from one esteem¬ ed invincible, was no small sacrifice. * She also accepted the offer of Tim Titlepage's library, and borrowed a poney-chaise from the young ladies at the Green Dragon, to drive him out. She sat cheerfully rattling the keys of her piano in her rumpled cap and faded gown, exhilarated by the recollection that Henry had relished the chicken and asparagus which her rigid economy had enabled her to procure for him, and had praised her newly acquired culi¬ nary skill. One only comfort was wanting, the society of Miss Williams ; but she could not leave her dear Harry even for a moment, and till he was ad¬ vanced to the second stage of conva¬ lescence, her regard for his appearance would not allow her to introduce him
230
to her friend. That friend regularly called with enquiries and offers of what¬ ever her house and gardens afforded ; while the high spirited Clara, drest in her housewifely apron, was always pro- vided with every thing that Harry wanted, and generally contrived by some piquant remark on her own style of adornment, or Mrs. Mayoress's new ultra-auburn tête, to extort a smile from her pensive friend, and to send her home wondering at Clara's enviable spirits and unexpected resources. "Under the care of such an excellent nurse, Captain Sydney regained health ; and when the feebleness of sickness somewhat subsided, Miss Williams was invited up stairs, where, wrapped in his morning gown, pale and thin, his eyes beaming with intelligence, and his coun¬ tenance alike indicative of reflection and fortitude, the war-worn soldier re-
231
ceived his lovely and elegant guest with expressions of gratitude for the interest she had testified in his recovery. Clara's descriptions had already made them mutually acquainted : they felt at ease ; a sentiment which is either ominous or indicative of reciprocal approval. The Captain was soon able to mount the poney-chaise, and return the visit; and the tête-à-tête which had furnished the neighbourhood with so many re¬ marks, now changed into a trio equally productive. Of course a wedding would take place when the Captain's rapidly recruiting health should be fully con¬ firmed ; and the introductory friend¬ ship of the ladies was satisfactorily ac¬ counted for, by the conclusion that Clara was a sly girl, and Miss Williams on the look out for a husband. " But though the pair, thus suddenly yoked in Hymen's bands by their ac-
282
quaintance, were certainly pleased with each other, they had experienced too deeply the vicissitudes of human affairs to verify so prompt an anticipation. Each had known what it was to love, and to regret the predominance of the tender passion. The Captain's early betrothed had fallen a victim to that insidious disease consumption, ren¬ dered more rapid in its advances by her father's disapprobation of her attach¬ ment; and his tender affections ap¬ peared to have withered with the flower which he could not preserve from pe¬ rishing. Habitual reserve prevented Miss Williams from entering into those details with Clara which usually con¬ solidate female intimacies ; but the flushing variation of her looks, when love or lovers were the subject, and the emphasis with which she spoke of the tender passion as destructive of woman's
233
peace, so different from her accustomed gentleness, indicated that she had not always been so fortified against its power as she now professed to be, but that singleness had rather been forced on her as a penance than selected as her choice. " Still the trio formed each other's little world; their habits, their tastes accorded : and, though Clara had uni¬ versal credit as a successful intriguante, it was not till she saw her brother whistle away the hours of Mary's ab¬ sence, and Mary become ennuyée and vapourish when Sydney was not pre¬ sent, that the possibility of their being united occurred to her mind. The conjecture of such an union was im¬ mediately followed by a conviction of its impropriety. The obstacles arose from Henry's high and generous spirit, as well as from the yet glowing embers
234
of his first love ; his fortune was spent, his military career impeded, and she knew that his noble disposition would never brook the indignity of receiving subsistence from a wife : or, should he be enabled to resume his course to glory, Miss Williams's extreme sus¬ ceptibility would make her an unfit helpmate for one who was bearding danger " in the imminent deadly breach.** Instead, therefore, of the honourable occupation which her friends assigned to her, Miss Sydney regretted their intimacy as soon as she perceived it likely to embitter the lives of two persons whom she preferred to all the rest of the world. But a change of fortune produced an alteration in her opinion. A peace liberated the Captain from his parole, and the sudden unexpected death of a young relation, to whom he was next heir, summoned
235
him from Fishington to take possession of a handsome estate. ' Before I go,' said he to his sister, « and lest I should die on the road, I shall send for an attorney, and secure to the noblest- minded girl in the world the payment of her debt. Clara, I owe you ten thousand pounds.' " « Am I a Jewess, Harry ?' returned she, 'two thousand was all I gave you.' " * Lent me, rather ; ' returned the Captain, * on a risk that doubled the loan, and with a cordiality that in¬ creased it fivefold. But ifyou assume that obstinate air, I shall insist on doing as you did, and will divide my cousin's property with you.' " * Nay,' said Clara, laughing, * these usurious proposals denote desperate intentions, and I must remind you of the claims of a certain fair creditor,
236
who, if I mistake not, has a judgment bond against you for person as well as for effects. Take care that Hymen has you not in durance before you are aware.' " Sydney admitted his sister's infe¬ rence, by saying, that he could not treat it ludicrously- He rejoiced, that the obstacle which had condemned him to silence, was removed by this extraordinary burst of prosperity ; and though the blandishments of youthful hope would never more so irradiate the durance to which Clara had alluded, as to disguise its inconvenience, still he would declare, that to be there incar¬ cerated with her fair friend was l e happiest abode his fancy could picture. But before he committed his own honour, and the lady's delicacy, by an avowal of his preference, he wished to know—perhaps Clara could tell him
237
—-something might have transpired in the confidence of female friendship, which, circumstanced as he now was, it would not be dishonourable in his sister to intimate. He grew embar¬ rassed, Miss Sydney felt a little angry, but considering prudence to be no great fault in a lover past thirty, who had seen the world and felt difficulties, answered by explaining what she knew of her friend's pecuniary resources ; enume¬ rated seven thousand pounds in one stock and five in another, before the Captain begged her to stop. He de¬ clared, that she had misunderstood him, since what he wanted to know was the lady's previous history ; her motive for fixing where she was quite unknown ; why she never alluded to kindred, friends, or acquaintance; and again (he looked very significantly on his sister) why on certain points she was always so
288
warm, and, in reference to the stronger sex, âo uncharitable. Clara took fire, and expatiated on the mean suspicion that lurked in such curiosity ; adding that in any other mind than his own, she would have strengthened the doubts she now sought to subdue. But her assurance that Miss Williams could give satisfactory reasons fbr her seclu¬ sion and privacy, of which he was not worthy to be informed; and her in¬ dignant question, whether he thought she would be accessary to marrying him to a woman of mean origin, or tainted fame, humbled the inquisitor into the penitent ; and a letter was expedited which gave Mary the power of en¬ hancing the gifts that fortune had showered upon him, by consenting to share them. "Clara loved her brother too well to be inexorable, and though very angry
239
that his confidence in the strict recti-» tude of her friend had not the same character of religious faith as her own, she consented to relieve the anxieties of both by calling to see how the letter was received. She found Mary, not ail in tears, like Niobe, nor with the blush of love reddening her cheek, like Juliet, but transformed into the marble statue of despair, wan, shivering, almost distracted, looking as our general mo¬ ther may be supposed to have looked when lingering in the precincts of that paradise from which she was expa¬ triated. She immediately began to discuss the subject of Henry's letter, requesting that it might never be again alluded to. She acknowledged his deserts, her own esteem for his merit, and the flattering views which an alliance with her dearest friend sug¬ gested, but begged Clara to tell him,
240
that it was her own unworthiness, and no other consideration, which com¬ pelled her to decline what, if she could —— she paused, and in a hurried manner, added, if she could think bet¬ ter of herself] would have been the pride of her life. Such lowliness in a woman of fortune, such self-abasement in one so lovely, combined with an admission of self-denial, constituted an excess of delicacy and timidity. — These were the very errors she had often condemned, the only ones of which she thought her dearest Mary could be guilty. As such Clara com¬ bated them, and determined to be satisfied with her own share of penetra¬ tion, by refuting her friend's scruples, and concealing them from her brother, to whom she only reported that her angel Mary certainly loved him ; she accomplished her wishes in time, with
241
the aid of a pleader in the fair one's bosom, and Mary Williams, persuaded that all her disparaging confessions had been reported to her lover, consented to become Mrs. Sydney. " For some time the union was un¬ usually felicitous. The lady's uncom¬ mon gentleness did not prove, as is often the case, the drawing-room robe of a chamber-termagant. It was the effect of real humility and sweetness, and in¬ sensibly brightened into a mild cheer¬ fulness under the influence of an intel¬ ligent and indulgent husband ; while the correctness of her manners and her affectionate deportment made Sydney at times ashamed that he had ever harboured doubt, and again surprised at the reserve, which never in their happiest hours reposed that prompt confidence in his affection, which deli¬ cacy forbade him to solicit. But rely- VOL. i. M
242
ing on Clara's suggestion, that her friend's sorrows might be too agonizing to bear repetition, he avoided with the most guarded care every disclosure of his own feelings, only hoping that time would soon so far subdue hers, as to permit the unreservedness which in his character of husband he felt that he had a right to enjoy. " Every requisite for happiness seemed now in their possession, except health. The captain's constitution had suffered from his wounds, and from a warm climate. A residence at Bath was proposed, but the invalid could not exile himself from the society of his wife and sister. Mrs. Sydney's dislike of public places yielded at length to conjugal affection ; yet was it evi¬ dent that she submitted to the change with reluctance, and felt more dissatis¬ faction and uneasiness than were justi-
243
fied by the mere privations of the comforts of home. Sydney was too sensible a man to be vain ofa handsome wife, or unduly to appreciate a domestic one ; yet he could not but remark with surprise, and also with pain, that his Mary never would go into public, and that even in her morning promenades she was enveloped in a large bonnet and a thick veil. Had she never mixed in society ? Her manner disproved that conclusion ; and surely, attended by a husband so conversant with its forms, and a sister so competent to comply with its requisitions, diffidence might venture where admiration would be its sure guerdon. What could be the cause ? Sydney was meditating on this subject one morning during their usual lounge, when he felt his wife's arm tremble as it rested on his, as with a faltering voice she entreated m 2
244
to go home directly. The deadly paleness of her cheek certified her as¬ surance that she was taken ill ; but as he threw back her veil to give her air, he observed a bold-looking man of mean and vulgar appearance, with his eyes fixed on her countenance ; while gasping for breath, and tottering from weakness, she drew her veil around her, and hid her face on his shoulder from the gaze of the stranger, who now ad¬ vanced to offer his assistance with a look of pleased recognition, which planted daggers in the husband's heart. " The offer was declined : Mrs. Sydney reached home, soon recovered from her faintness, and assumed unusual gaiety. This might be a commendable artifice, to divert the fears of affection. There was nothing strange in a delicate wo¬ man's swooning after a fatiguing walk ; nor was it strange that beauty should
245
attract the notice of an uncouth man ; and the look which the captain caught might be the offended sneer of vul¬ garity at finding its offered aid rejected, for it corresponded well with the stranger's rubicund face, goggle eyes, purple coat, coachman's wig, and im¬ mense chitterlings. Other unpleasant incidents soon occurring, proved how adviseable it is that married people should cherish a confidence without any reserves, and either avoid what they know is disagreeable to the other, or if compelled to act otherwise, conduct their affairs with openness, and defy discovery. There was no harm in Mrs. Sydney's writing or receiving let¬ ters without her husband's privacy ; but as he found afler this rencontre that a correspondence existed which was care¬ fully concealed from his knowledge, vague curiosity gave place to a more m 3
246
determinate feeling in regard to her former history. She might go out at an unusual hour after declining to walk with him, on an innocent or even commendable errand; but when he recognised her as ^he came out of an obscure lodging house, he started, asked himself if that could have been a charitable visit dogged her home, and then, repassing the house, saw the rubicund face of the stranger peeping over the window blinds. W T ho or what could he be ? father ? kinsman ? friend? A just pride forbade other conclusions. Mary had evinced suffi¬ cient inborn worth to reconcile his once reluctant mind to the degradation of a low alliance; but she ought to have been explicit. Yet he would wait the event. " The party returned from Bath amended in health but depressed in
247
spirits. Mrs. Sydney purchased no ' new clothes, and was circumspect even to parsimony in her domestic expences. Yet she was without money. Traces of tears were often discernible on her face, and she grew prone to those querulous complaints on the waste of servants, the hardness of the times, and the dearness of provisions, which, in establishments subject to the control of wives, who pique themselves on domestic management, often prove the death-knell of connubial enjoyment. The secret correspondence, commenced at Bath, was continued ; and the recol¬ lection of the purple-coated stranger introduced a host of anxieties into Sydney's imagination. At length lie received a letter, superbly sealed, with emblazoned arms, from Timothy Jilkes, M. D., soliciting his recom¬ mendation and vote, as a proper candi¬ di 4
248
date for the appointment of physician to a charity which the Captain pa¬ tronised, giving reference to Mrs. Syd¬ ney for full information as to the pro¬ priety of his pretensions, expressing entire reliance on her good offices, and adding his perfect confidence that the Captain, on further enquiry, would warmly second his application. " A request, conveyed so much in the form of a demand, a claim made on his wife's friendship with such offensive freedom, determined Sydney against compliance ; indeed, had he fully re¬ tained the feelings that animated him during the first months of marriage, he would have burned the letter without deigning a reply. But after a few days' struggle between mortified affec¬ tion and doubt his desire of an éclair¬ cissement determined him to name the affair to his wife. He began with
249
stating that he had received a letter from Dr. Timothy Jilkes. A piercing shriek prevented him from proceeding. He looked at his wife ; she did not faint, but with glowing cheeks, uplifted eyes, and clasped hands, sat like a criminal expecting a worse doom than death. Sydney started from his seat: * For heaven's sake, dearest Mary, deem me worthy of your confidence ! * A torrent of tears relieved the afflicted lady ; her head rested on her husband's shoulder, and while she pressed his offered hand to her lips, the peace-cor¬ roding secret seemed ready to escape. Again she recoiled, and with a faint smile of hope on her face asked, " 4 What does he say to you ? ' «« * He begs,* replied the Captain, * my services,—my very active ser¬ vices he presumes upon, to get him appointed physician to — Hospital ; m 5
«50
a strange request, from one whose name, until his letter arrived, was per- uctlv unknown to ?? I would Vil- itngfy serve him in some other way if he be any near connexion of yours, for he assures me that you will interest yourself very warmly in his fiivour/ ** * There ?? villain miscalculates,' exclaimed the ladv. 5 He is a wretch equally destitute of ability and charac¬ ter. I will never be instrumental to his advancement, and will brave hi?» malevolence. Give me the letter : I will answer it* " * You use strong language,* said the Captain, * and certainly do excite the greatest uneasiness in my mind. There, Mary, is the letter; answer it as you please, remembering that you are the guardian of my honour, as well as of your own.' In giving her the fatal epistle, lie
251
again pressed her hand, but it was now cold and tremulous; it returned no response to the kind greeting. Such pertinacious silence, and at a moment too when he reposed such unlimited, apparently undeserved confidence in her conduct ! He retired indignantly to iiis study, where, as his sister was absent, and as he received no summons írom his wife, he sat too much absorbed in angry sullenness to notice how the time wore away, till midnight was passed. ** He was roused from his reverie by Clara's appearance, who, with a hor¬ ror-stricken aspect, asked what was to be done ? her sister was not returned. The servants were called : they could oulv state, that about half an liour after their master left the dining-room, their mistress went out with the house¬ maid, who carried a bundle, and they m 6
â52
thought they were gone to visit a sick pensioner. The butler anxiously asked if he should inquire at the inns ; but the return of the terrified maid ren¬ dered inquiry useless in that neighbour¬ hood. She said she had accompanied her lady to the high road, and saw her get into a stage coach, whither travel¬ ling she knew not ; she only perceived her to be in severe distress, and she thought her wrong in her mind, for she said at parting, that they would see her no more. " In a short time the mystery was re¬ vealed. Sydney received a packet, which thanked him for his unremitting kindness, and conjured him to treat her memory with as much lenity as his known delicacy would admit. It ac¬ knowledged that she required forgive¬ ness ; but added, she did not dare to ask for what if granted, would afford
253
no alleviation to sorrows long endured, and now become too acute to receive other termination than from the hand of death, on which her principles for¬ bade her to rush, though she must wel¬ come it as her only friend. Another letter was addressed to Clara, strongly, but affectionately, reproving her for having withheld from her high-minded brother that general confession of un¬ worthiness which was all she could bring herself to divulge to friends whom she valued too dearly to renounce their society. Had what she said been re¬ peated, she now, too late, discovered that Sydney would have declined his suit, and she would have avoided the misery of involving him in a disgrace which she knew he must, in another's case, deem indelible. She could not describe her own anguish, because words were inadequate. My readers, like her ago-
254
nised husband, will anticipate her his¬ tory * Seduced by affection, abandoned by levity, and the prey of avarice, she strove, in vain, to attain a station in so¬ ciety inferior to that in which she had once moved, but capable of yielding her the solace of privacy and peace. Her seducer and the guiltless evidence of her shame were both dead ere she had ventured to become a wife; but there were many who knew her as one of a noble family, and believed that through caprice she was now a resident in a distant quarter of the globe. One person only knew her disgrace, and could also fix her identity ; that person she had accidentally met; he had learned the connection which she had formed ; and she had ever since been the prey to his rapacity. Convinced of the impenetrability of that tiger's heart, and disdaining to compromise
&1o
Sydney's honour, she saw no alterna¬ tive but to divorce herself from all she loved, submitting the reputation she had vainly struggled to preserve to the reproach she merited ; and only hoping to gain pardon from heaven, and find rest in the grave. " A heart less humane than that of Sydney could not fail to have softened at this address. He now condemned those nice feelings which had led him to question whether it were possible for a fallen woman to preserve delicacy ; and Clara execrated the bitter irony with which she had pursued female frailty ; for both now too well recol¬ lected that Mary's cheek always blanched at such conversations. To find and to console the fugitive became their dearest wish, and the packet, though undated, furnished a clue : but she had left her first retreat \ and when,
256 after long search she was traced to an obscure lodging, the discovery was too late. The faculties of her mind were enfeebled, while disease made irresist¬ ible progress in her frame. Reasou re¬ turned previous to her mortal struggle : she saw Sydney, recognised and blessed him ; but declared, that after her shame had been divulged, no confidence on his side could have silenced her self- reproach, or have restored self-esteem. She excusedin Clara the duplicity which arose from unsuspecting innocence and strong regard. They then told her that still her disgrace was undisco¬ vered, the villain Jilkes having left the kingdom, and the good people of Fish- ington had ascribed her flight to a disor¬ dered intellect, which was also regarded as the cause of the few eccentricities discerned in her behaviour. On hear¬ ing this, her dying features evinced her
257
high estimation of untainted fame, even at the moment when every human feel¬ ing was fast subsiding. With a faint smile she articulated 'That is well!' and laying her finger on her lips, as enjoining silence, expired.'* " And do the conservators of public morals," said my grandmother, (re¬ membering her objections on a preced¬ ing evening to the meretricious elo¬ quence of counsel, and the verdicts of juries in recent trials for seduction and adultery,) " do the conservators of pub¬ lic morals wish to modify this feeling, which is the surest guard of the sanc¬ tities of life, though it sent an erring, but not abandoned young lady, to a premature grave, while these frequent appeals to publicity assure us that de¬ licacy is losing ground, and religion is evidently paralysed in its restraining influence? Will the vices which the
258
word of God assures us must even¬ tually exclude from His kingdom, be restrained in their demonising triumph by that lenity which would snatch the scales from justice, and condemn de¬ corum as a rigid bigot ? Is it not the most palpable perversion of Christian charity to acquit bold unchastity in that scriptural form of forgiveness which is proper to be used by him alone, the Searcher of hearts, who know T s and absolves true penitents ? The practices which forfeit our heavenly hopes, wiU promote neither our earthly prosperity nor our country's welfare; fbr the more this world resembles the future glorious inheritance, the happier will be its inhabitants. To subdue passion, is to secure not only purity, but peace ; to indulge it, is to incur pain and peril. Ask what most decidedly banishes re¬ pose from the husband's mind, and
259
comfort from the father's heart, and do not expect to find the most miserable of men in the dwelling of disease or poverty, for there may exist a hope of restored health, and of better cir¬ cumstances ; but look for misery in the abode ofhim, whatever may be his station, who has a faithless wife or a wanton daughter. The universal mania fbr seeing girls richly married, and pro¬ viding amusements for the young and the fair, stifles those affections which help to preserve the sanctity of mar¬ riage : and the clamours of perpetual dissipation drown the voices of con¬ science and religion. What then is there left to guard the wife who. too late, finds that she has been sacrificed on the altar of Plutus, or the young woman who is taught that the end of her ex¬ istence is to secure a lover, from yield¬ ing to solicitations, seconded by a trea-
260
cherous advocate in her own bosom, but the conviction that the world she idolises will then reject her ; that the discovery of her offence involves ba¬ nishment from those scenes of splen¬ dour and gaiety which are her heaven ; and that she must ever after hide her dishonoured head, or glide about, a nameiess outcast, the jest or the pity of her late companions, who, with prin¬ ciples, perhaps, equally unstable, have had the good fortune to escape tempt¬ ation or publicity ?" Mrs. James, repeating the sentiments of her husband, acknowledged that the love of praise and the fear of shame, considered abstractedly, were not Chris¬ tian motives of action ; but argued, that a salutary direction might be given to them ; and that, in times of relaxed morak, they must be secured and en- gaged to do service to the altar, and
261
to render them efficient auxiliaries, pub¬ lic opinion must remain fixed at a high standard : not (so witness Heaven !) fbr the purpose of diminishing a general consciousness of human infirmity, or of extinguishing sympathy with those who fall ; but for that of checking the con¬ tagion, and diminishing the number of unhappy women who forget that coward and strumpet are equivalent terms of reproach, applicable to the degradation which, in the respective sexes, is deemed indelible. And, surely, it would be too much to endanger the sacrifice of one husband's peace, or one parent's hope, fbr all the specious eulogies with which sophistry deludes our weakness, by mis¬ calling it " the milk of human kind¬ ness ;" thus inducing us to increase the burden of general misery, by our vain attempts to prevent the weight from falling into that scale where it would
262
assist the injunctions of conscience and the warnings of religion, forming a counterpoise against the allurements of our great spiritual enemies, while it operates as a preservative from sin, and consequently from sorrow.
263
CHAP. VII. The Browns and the Smiths came one evening to tea, and the subject of ac¬ complishments, as tending to recom¬ mend young women to the notice of their superiors, and possibly, also, to advantageous connections, was intro¬ duced by Mrs. Brown's evident triumph at the distinguishing attentions which her daughter had received at an election ball. Mary had been taken out by Sir Frederick Flutter, the popular and successful candidate at our neigh- bouring borough town. The Miss Flutters had commended her frock, and the lady mother had invited her to Flusterly Hall, whither she was to go as soon as a suitable dress arrived from London, In fine, if one might credit
264
the smiles, nods, and inuendos, that abounded on this occasion, our friend Mary was in a fair way to become a great lady* This ball took place just on my ar¬ rival at Ringrove, and I had some sus¬ picion that Ellen longed to go„ and was interdicted from indulging that wish by my grandmother's disappro¬ bation. Mary's triumph, as detailed by her mother, and indeed indicated by a visible elevation of her head, and a newly-acquired bend, designed to be graceful, but, unhappily, only produc¬ ing a screw, had some effect in cloud¬ ing Ellen's joyous face ; and certainly did increase the usually sombrous longi¬ tude of mine. I believe we were both glad when our guests were gone, that we might give such vent to our spleen as respect or affection permitted. " AH the girls, I think, have strange good
265
luck," said I, looking in the glass, " and yet no pretensions to beauty. A little crump thing; ill drest and no air of fashion.** Ellen came to the point at once. " How very fortunate Mary Brown is! Dear grandmamma, why did you not let me go to the election ball ?** "One reason was, because the sum that must have been expended was otherwise appropriated.** I caught her eye directing Ellen's to me as she spoke ; and a blush of detection tinged her pale face. She held out her hand to me : " Emma, love, I fear you find the country dull : whatever comforts and enjoyments 1 can procure are freely yours." Then turning to Ellen, "I have answered your question, and in return must beg you to tell me, why is Mary Brown deemed so fortunate, and VOL. i. N
266
your seclusion from this scene of gaiety so dolorous?" " Dear grandmamma, I never com¬ plained of any restrictions which you imposed ; and you have said enough to convince me that you were right. But surely, dancing with Sir Frederick and an invitation to Flusterly Hall, are very agreeable distinctions." " Neither of which would have been your lot; for I cannot command se¬ venteen votes in the borough : and I much doubt whether Mary's honours will be repeated ; at least, not unless she continue Miss Brown at the next general election, and her father be equally prosperous in his manufactory." " Well, but, grandmamma, allowing our fine people to be interested in their attentions, it will permit Mary to see the world.'* ** Name the advantage of this to a
267
young woman who has no chance of living in it, and whose head seems scarcely steady enough to bear the slightest elevation : you see even anti¬ cipation has added a twist to the little affectations which heretofore injured her appearance, and has evidently chilled her affection for her former friends." "But, grandmamma, she may—she may—" Ellen faltered, and I assisted her by saying, " She may get an esta¬ blishment." (i So, my dear, by putting twenty pounds in the lottery she may gain 30,000/. Indeed I think this last chance is the greatest. Two or three really mar¬ rying men are all she can hope to meet at Lady Flutter's ; and each of these has, doubtless, seen a thousand marry¬ ing misses, who in face and accomplish¬ ments are, at least, Mary's equals, and in birth and breeding her superiors.*' N 2
268
"We do hear of such matches some¬ times.** "Yes, and we hear of private sol¬ diers becoming general officers, and low mechanics and Jew pedlars amassing millions ; but we do not calculate on the hosts of brave men who fall unno¬ ticed and unknown, while '* seeking the bubble reputation, even in the can¬ non's mouth." Nor do we take into account the corresponding multitudes who have rushed on bankruptcy and crime by an eager pursuit of wealth, through desperate, unwarrantable spe¬ culations ; or the numerous victims to female vanity and man's levity whom erroneous hopes have conducted to dis¬ grace or to death. I have a narrative from the same pen which amused you a few days ??% it wears an air of tratil ; it is simply tole!, and illustrative of ray opinion, that when no particular
269
circumstances warrant an intrusion into higher classes of society, young women are safest and happiest in their own. Ellen, you shall recite the tragedy. I do not think that our young neighbour's visit to Flusterly Hall is likely to have a similar termination : her mind is cast in a different mould, and she will only import absurdity, not misery, from the new world she is about to explore. " The Improver. ** Why did you praise my blushing lips, Yet make their scarlet pale ? And why did I, young witless maid, Believe the flattring tale. — Mallet, " Without subscribing to the fanciful theory which Prior developes in his Alma, we must admit that there is, ge¬ nerally speaking, a period in our exist¬ ence which not only stamps an inde¬ lible impression on the memory, but also models the future character. While N 3
270
sitting in one of the Alpha cottages, itt my smartly furnished drawing-room, looking down on the world of Padding- ton, and catching a distant view of Primrose Hill and the heights of Hamp- stead, and then turning to the verdant groves of the Regent's Park, or at¬ tracted to the bow window of my bou¬ doir by the Emperor Alexander, or the Commander-in-chief, (in the shape of geraniums,) requiring my attention ; even while amused by the lively anec¬ dotes of a Peggy Moreen, or melted by the eloquence of a Doctor Pleadwell, haranguing in behalf of a, fashionable charity, my thoughts, like those of Crabbe's Allen, are wandering « „ .....j Ju those scenes Of my best days, amid the vivid greens, 1 " Partial, however, as I am to the old rectory, I dare not compare the stunted vegetation of Bleakwood and Barren*
271
dale to that tropical luxuriance on which the broken-hearted sailor rumi¬ nated, even while soothed by the mi¬ nistry of his faithful Judith ; but moral f fertility more than compensates for the sterility of an hyperborean climate; and my readers must allow me, as an old wOttian, frequently to recur to the time when I was of consequence to some living being besides my maid and my cat, and looked at human nature as attired in a variety of modes, not pre¬ scribed by Mrs. Bell, or the four-in- hand club. " A description of people flourished at Bleakwood, who, for intellectual hardi¬ hood and public utility, might be com¬ pared to the oaks which covered the hills on the north of that comfortable hamlet ; I mean the unsophisticated, unpretending English yeomen. Among that respectable class the family of the n 4
272 Saveacres were distinguished, not only by greater wealth, but by better blood, having frequently matched with cler¬ gymen's daughters, besides having to boast one alliance with a near relation of an esquire of antient extraction. They could also glory in possessing the same hides of land for which their ancestors were recorded in doomsday- book; and though the good fortune, the industry, or the skill of some of their progenitors had occasionally add¬ ed to the estate, a larger family or a smaller share of prudence had as fre¬ quently dissipated the newly acquired property; but to have parted with an acre of the old farm would have been considered a species of parricide enough to summon the shade of every defunct possessor whose dust reposed in neatly- turfed graves on the south side of the chancel A Saveacre of Bleakwood,
273
walking over the ' lands which his fore¬ fathers tilled,* assumed the port: *of a petty king. c Some village Hamp- dens' might be enumerated among them ; and others also, who, not con¬ tent with resisting * the little tyrants of their fields,* like true whigs, played the bashaw in their own families. Some were distinguished by Squire Western's love of rural sports; and others, by Boniface's passion for home-brewed ale ; but, upon the whole, they were a manly race of true-hearted Britons, who uever turned aside to the calves of Bethel or of Dan; but worshipped « the God of their fathers,* and med¬ dled not with those who are given to change : ' While ample stores enrich' d their field*, And orchards rose around/ Their hereditary benevolence acquired celebrity, not only from the cures per- N 5
?74
formed by the Saveacre eyewater, and the Saveacre cordial mixture, but by the donations of bread and coals be¬ queathed by the bachelors and spin¬ sters of the family, recorded in golden letters over the belfry door ; and, dur¬ ing my residence, I can testify, that their jug of caudle and bundle of baby- clothes were duly sent to lying-in wo¬ men, and their bottle of cowslip or elder wine to the sick. Their sub¬ scriptions also to parochial charities were promptly, liberally, and unostenta¬ tiously bestowed. Their labourers were distinguished by more orderly beha¬ viour and greater comforts than others of the same class ; and the whole fa¬ mily, including their dependents, were regular attendants on the ordinances of the church. Beside this, they pre¬ served the convivial and cheerful man¬ ners of older, and in some respects, bet-
275
ter times. Plum cakes and pasties diffused gladness through the village at their sheep-shearings ; and their har¬ vest-homes retained the jovial character of indiscriminate hospitality. There my good Doctor and I often witnessed the ceremony of drawing the old wo¬ man's tooth ; and the enacting of * Prince George, that noble Baron bold/ was preserved at Mr. Saveacre's long after Beelzebub and his frying- pan, with all the exhilarating append¬ ages of savoury cookery and nappy stingo had been expatriated as quite vulgar by their more refined, or at least more fastidious neighbours. " The person who, during my resi¬ dence at Bleakwood, stood as chief or head of this family, was a well-mean¬ ing man, who, by a happy marriage, had greatly increased his respectability as well as his wealth, which seemed n 6
«76
likely to centre in an only daughter. Lucy Saveacre was considered as the first match in the neighbourhood by those who heard of her fortune, and the most desirable by those who saw her attractions. She combined a superior share of beauty and elegance with a very creditable degree of information, and the most correct discipline of the heart and temper. We must, therefore, allow her to have been entitled to the éclat she enjoyed in her own sphere, and admit that she was also * a flower of that lovely tender kind/ which might not disgrace the loving careful hand « that transported her * _ into some feir garden Where the sun ever shines/ " Mr. and Mrs, Saveacre were fre¬ quently congratulated on their daugh¬ ter's probable advancement to a higher station, even while the happy, uncon-
277 scious girl was bounding over her skipping-rope, or ornamenting her doll. On these occasions the father used to rub his hands, kiss his child, snd give an assenting nod; while the mother, after sending Lucy out of the room, would reprove the incautious augm, asserting that happiness was more likely to accrue from strict attention to the duties of that state of life for which people were fitted by habit and educa* tion. She then pointed out the ill effects constantly produced on the human mind by disappointed expect¬ ation; and to particular friends she spoke more strongly of Lucy's pecu¬ liar character, and of the danger to be apprehended from extraordinary ex- citements on a temper which, though gentle and compliant, was susceptible of deep, nay, of indelible impressions, and already disposed to be romantic.
27»
4 Were die cold and selfish/ said Ae prudent mother, « the might» by in- judicious hints, mnd extravagant com¬ mendations, become vain and absurd ; böl- wkh ?? wsrai hemrt and variable, though buoyant spirits she is more likely to be rendered wretched.' «* Congeniality of character establish¬ ed a gì eater degree øf intimacy between the owners of Allestree Hall and Mrs. Saveacre, than even the titen social and affable demeanour of gentry to¬ ward their inferiors warranted; and Lucy, stili a happy child, generally tripped by her mother's side when she visited Lady Allestree as her almoner aod privy counsellor. * You are sin¬ gularly blest in that very amiable Uttle girl/ said the benevolent dowager, while the young ladies were loading their favourite with flowers and sweet¬ meats, and when Mrs. Saveacre lamented
$79
the impending separation which school would occasion, Lady Allestree depre¬ cated the thought of removing a girl of such feir promise and strong sus¬ ceptibility from the care of an affec¬ tionate sensible mother to a pro¬ miscuous assemblage of different characters, where the eye of superin¬ tendance could not be always watch¬ ful, and where Lucy could not acquire anything that she might not better learn at home ; except possibly a few accomplishments, attained at the hazard of having her mind vitiated by art and intrigue, her spirits broken by cabals, or her simplicity sacrificed to that system of display which is too essential to the prosperity of a semi¬ nary to be discouraged by tlie gover¬ ness. * If,* continued her ladyship, ' you think my daughters competent to teach Lucy enough to save her írom
280
feeling a painful inferiority, I am sure they will be delighted to have her for their pupil; and when they are too much engaged to give her a lesson, you will have the satisfaction of know¬ ing that she is cultivating the most essential part of education under your own eye.* " Mrs. Saveacre was all gratitude, Lucy all transport, and her father,— though he did wish his girl to warble and declaim, dance and paint, as ??? as the children of farmer Black¬ berry, — agreed, that instruction from the daughters of a Baronet was a high honour, and that the money saved might be added to her fortune. Thus was this fair rose-bud preserved in all its dewy bloom. She was neither vain nor awkward, confident nor shy, ignorant nor affected ; accustomed to good society, but not alienated from
281
the enjoyments or duties of home ; taught to respect others, and meekly to appreciate her own claims to con¬ sideration, she seemed to be secured from the dangers of the world. And I must here record the reproof which Lady Allestree gave to her favourite son, the Colonel, as an instance of her fitness fbr the charge she had assumed. Tapping little Lucy's cheek, as it blushed through the fair ringlets ofher hair, he talked of the murders her blue eyes would commit : * And of the children and the dairies she will bewitch,* said his mother with a look of unusual displeasure. * When you stray into the fabulous, Edward, give your imagination free scope. The times of men dying for love, and those of nailing up horse-shoes against witches, are both happily over; and neither her family nor her friends
m 4 !
need wish our dear Lucy less agreeable øn philanthropic considerations.* " When Sir Dormer Allestree took possession of the hall, Miss Saveacre was in the full bloom of youth and beauty ; but as it never occurred to so high-bred, so high-learned a lady as his wife, that a farmer's daughter could be other than vulgar and ridiculous, she allowed herself to be diverted with the history of her conquests, till chance threw in her way the young beauty, whose manners instantly confirmed her fitness to enter into the best society. A pressing invitation to the hall was the immediate consequence, and it was given with a cordiality which would have done honour to the fair hostess's apparent dereliction of her own claims to pre-eminence in beauty, had not sel¬ fishness and vanity been the real sources of this importunity. The manor-house
283
must be the grand emporium of all thè lions in the neighbourhood ; and if the beaux grew tired of looking at the belles of fashion, she would show them that rara avis, a well-informed, well- bred, unaffected rural charmer. " But Lucy, engrossed by solemn duties, was fixed to the sick-bed of her dying mother, and could only decline with respectful regret an invitation which, in happier circumstances, she would have rejoiced to accept. I have often surmised that Mrs. Saveacre's interment might have suggested the beautiful description of the good wife's funeral, which Mr. Crabbe has given us in the Parish Register. There was the same respectful, solemn, and sub¬ dued sorrow ; but the heroine of this essay evinced less firmness than the eldest daughter in that exquisite pic¬ ture. Under the guidance of her
284
excellent mother, her life had been innocent and happy. A presentiment of coming evil often seizes the imagi¬ nation, especially when the spirits are weakened by affliction, and we after¬ wards revert to this augury as pro¬ phetical. " Miss Saveacre's grief injured her health. Lady Pastorina was intended by nature to be affectionate and hu¬ mane, and though the love of éclat generally determined her actions, a better spirit sometimes predominated. She visited the young mourner, advised change of place and society, and finally succeeded in removing her to the Hall, where at first she was per¬ mitted to indulge her grief in seclu¬ sion, and was gradually induced tojóin the society there assembled. Mr. Save¬ acre's attachment to his daughter made him occasionally accept the Baronet's
285
frequent invitations ; but as he did not understand the political discussions of the gentry, and had not always suffi¬ cient command of feature to refrain from laughing at their theoretical agri- culture, he felt himself out of his sphere, and acquired a habit of sliding away to a snug cup of tea in the gover¬ ness's room, where Miss Flunkey had covered her sandy locks with a turban decorated with lilach and laburnums. The flowers first attracted his atten¬ tion, because they were the fa¬ vourite shrubs of his wife, and were very natural ; but as there was not the slightest resemblance between the la¬ dies, I cannot account for the subse¬ quent transfer of his attention from the turban to the wearer. This transfer happened, however, most opportunely for Lady Pastorina, who, having an unusually large stock of undisposable
286
protégées on her hands at that time, was extremely glad to establish her in¬ estimable Flunkey at Saveacre Lodge, being sure she would make the good farmer just the wife he wanted, and suffer her sweet Lucy to spend more time at the Hall. " The fair, or (to use a term more appropriate) the radiant bride, found herself transplanted from the spare regimen, fatigue, and restraint of the school-room, to plenty, quiet, ease, and liberty; and her imagination became so bewildered by the bulky stores which surrounded her, that it transmuted them into gold ; and determining not only that such wealth must be inex¬ haustible, but that her very honest, very well-meaning husband's fault was parsimony, she conceived it to be her first duty to circulate his cash as briskly as possible. During the protracted
287
honey-moon of uxorious dotage, Save- acre Lodge appeared to be a vice-regal appendage on Allestree Hall, and the delighted farmer not only dined every day like the Lord of the Manor, but saw his wife dressed like a baronets lady. A numerous second family, however, soon abridged this purple and yellow splendor. Mr. Saveacre grew old and morose : unpaid bills proved by their accumulation, that an unwelcome stranger was treading on his heels, whose acquaintance he could not shun. Convinced of his folly when too late, he sighed over the blasted prospects of his darling daughter, and anxiously wished to bar his gates against the intruder Poverty. " During the progressive overthrow of Saveacre's happiness, the want of comforts at home made Lucy a frequent guest at the Hall, where, instead of
288
her father's sullen melancholy, her mother-in-law's querulous volubility, and the cries and quarrels of the hu¬ moured nurslings, she found wit and information to amuse, and admiration to bewilder her inexperienced mind, and at length met with treachery to inthral her susceptible heart in the person of a man of very high fashion, 4 the heir of an earldom and of an afflu- entfortune.* Nature isathrifty goddess; and a being endowed with qualifica¬ tions like his, has no need of the grace ofa Paris or the dignity of an Apollo. Had Lord Rubicon been born a village swain, it is possible that the contour of his Grecian head and Roman profile, now so much admired, would not have eclipsed the lustre of a rural beau's scarlet waistcoat decorated with a Sunday nosegay of pinks and sweet marjoram. It is at least indisputable,
289
that poor Lucy would never have dis¬ covered him to have been the first of mankind, had she not been told so, and had he not only breathed in her ear the whisper of adulation, but that which she mistook for the sigh of love. " Lady Pastorina soon discovered, in what she deemed a very amusing flirta¬ tion, occasion to detain her restless guest, the only one of his rank then at Allestree, and to keep him in good humour amid the dolours of a prema¬ ture fall of snow, and the prospect of a bad hunting season. No harm (that is to say, no imputation on herself fbr bad management) could ensue, for Rubicon was not a man likely to com¬ mit a preposterous marriage, while the girl was secure in virtuous principles ; and, admitting that her affections be¬ came ensnared, absence and time would efface the impression. She would call vol, i. ?
290
her good sense to her aid, lovers would flock around her, and the attorney or the surgeon would be most happy to carry off the long contested prize, who, in the duties of a wife and mother (for Lucy was a very good girl), would soon surmount the depression of defeated hope, even if she were so ridiculous as to suppose the heir of the Earl of Longdate could mean any thing serious. " The noble Lord may certainly be acquitted of any hymeneal intention : early educated on the principle of Otway's Acastò, * Let marriage be the last rash thing you do ;* and impatient of the paternal curb on his expences, wbich a rather too limited allowance imposed, he had turned his thoughts to the expediency of swallowing the bitter pill, by way of improving his condition ; and he qualified himself to
291
become land-agent or stock-broker to all the unmarried heiresses in the king¬ dom, whose real and funded property, improveable leasehold or copyhold, en¬ tailed or disposable, free or encum¬ bered, was registered in indelible cha¬ racters on his memory, together with a few addenda respecting the age, tem¬ per, and character of the person by whose means the said lands or funds might be annexed to the dignity of Rubicon, Avarice and vanity are en¬ grossing passions, and probably they left no space in this nobleman's bosom for another, which, at any age under thirty, is generally paramou t. But if he dared to view the flower of Bleakwood as likely to bear transplanting to the bower of illicit love, there was a chaste lustre in Lucy's eye, a maiden blush upon her cheek, a simple dignity in her movement, a saintly purity in her ex- o 2
292
pression, which told him that the scheme would not succeed, even if her treacher¬ ous heart were to favour his designs, which thus became gloriously limited to the desire of amusing himself at the expence of her peace. " Since the termination of the affair, his Lordship has sworn upon his honour, that, so far from making any promises to Lucy, he never named the words love or marriage ; and, probably fbr more than Touchstone's reason, he has not been foresworn. To keep his eyes rivetted on her face, to admire ail she said or did, to choose her fbr his partner at a quadrille, or his com¬ panion at piquet, is not making love ; nor is it an offer of marriage to say, that she would reflect honour on any station, ot to commend Lord X. Y. and Sir Q. P. for selecting women of humble birth for their wives (yes, Lord
293
Rubicon could reprobate, without blushing, the reflex of his own cha¬ racter,) in preference to the dissipated mercenary girl of fashion, pushed for¬ ward by her mother. There was no vow of attachment in a sigh, or tender squeeze of the hand ; there was no re¬ nunciation of paternal authority, when Lady Pastorina rallied her young pro¬ tegee on the conquest she had certainly made of old Doctor Shearem, the rich Rector of Nettlefield, by Rubicon's cast¬ ing a look of supplicatory devotion, and wishing he was at liberty to state his objections to such a preposterous lover. His lordship is acquitted of any serious design, and the poor girl's in¬ experience must be condemned, while day after day she waited in trembling hope of hearing words spoken that were never designed to be uttered, but which the full confidence of prepossessing
294
attachment held to be so inevitable, that she had ruminated on the allow¬ ance she could make to her father out of the savings of her pin-money, when she should be La y Rubicon ; and even assorted imaginary presents for her mother-in-law, to show that she did not resent her unkind behaviour. " Among the visitants of Allestre was Mrs. Blandy, a lineal descendant of Lady Bluemantle, whose ravages in the field of reputation have been re¬ corded by the never-dying pen of Isaac Bickerstaff. Mrs. Blandy inherited the same avidity to acquire, and industry to disperse anecdote. She was secre¬ tary to three Bas Bleus coteries, and maintained a regular correspondence with the most popular book-makers. Her visit to the country proceeded from her thirst for information. The reading world had shewn symptoms of
295
satiety at the mannerism then prevail¬ ing in the belles lettres department where gentlemen without heads, and ladies without hearts, of every rank, from a duke to a simple esquire, had flirted, fainted, danced, laughed, and talked, at London, Bath, Brighton, and elsewhere, till every body yawned and declared it to be so like real life, that they could bear it no longer. Mrs. Blandy hoped that by spending an Autumn in the country, she might pick up something new among the natives, to give a zest to morning studies and evening conversaziones. Her qualifications for this undertak¬ ing were indisputable, for with great command of language, and powers of amplification, her observations even went beyond her natural organs, ex¬ tending to what was not to be seen, and never was nor could be uttered. Her ? 4
296
imagination also was so finely blended with her memory, that it was doubtful whether, while reciting her narratives, she herself knew the diverging points of truth and falsehood, or could dis¬ tinguish the gate of ivory from the gate of horn. " Let us now suppose Mrs. Blandy re¬ turned from a morning tour among the village gossips, seated in her dressing- room, where a projecting bow-window gave her a command, not only of the lawn and pleasure grounds, but also of the library, the usual scene of morn¬ ing tête-à-têtes, and a light closet af¬ forded a back view of the offices and poultry yard ; a quire of gilt paper on the writing table, and a silver inkstand completely furnished. Conceive one sheet commenced with " Dearest Lady Seraphina,'* intended for the high-life narrative, and another indited by Kitty
297
Pry, in case an incident should occur in the kitchen. Suppose repeated but vain attempts to snuff an intrigue be¬ tween Sir Dormer and the dairy maid, or to see Lady Pastorina apparently engaged by a favourite author, while a dandy, systematically braced and stuffed, lounges over her chair, alter¬ nately staring in her face, and adjust¬ ing his own mustachios. Still there would be nothing in all this but a re¬ print of worn-out characters ; and she did not rusticate fbr the purpose of committing plagiarism. When she was almost in despair of taking any original or interesting portraits, she saw Lord Rubicon give Lucy Saveacre a paper, which she confusedly shuffled into her work-bag. Many hours did not pass before this repository was explored, and the following song, a confessed tribute of his Lordship's muse, was copied into ? 5
S98
the common-place book of the lady in· quisitor : "Stormy and cold is the loud wintry blaat, And my love is far away ; But he will return, when winter is past, And tell me the cause of his stay. And whether he's clad in a silken vest, Or in homely russet gear, My heart will be fain to fly out of my breast, When his welcome voice I hear \ For far hae he wsnder'd since last we met, And I too have much to say; Butat sight of my love I shall all forget, And turn my face away. And then will he say, " Have I left thee long, UnweicomM to depart?** But the love that dies on a maiden's tongue Will throb within her heart. « From that hour every glance of the noble Lord's eyes and every blush on Lucy's cheek were watched and re¬ corded by Mrs. Blandy, till her enthu¬ siasm m a biographer so far predo¬ minated over her knowledge of the world, that she persuaded herself of the
299
probabUity of a denouement which must make her novel go off, by sup¬ plying a few friends with a key to the chief characters, and allowing them to hint that it was not only founded on fact, but was the actual history of Lord and Lady Rubicon. "At last the frost broke up ; the morn¬ ing tête-à-têtes terminated : evening amusements proved less favourable to the tender passion ; my Lord, though still attentive and gallant spoke not the word Lucy sighed to hear. Somebody, she thought, always interrupted him ; yet if he really loved, if he meant ho¬ nourably, he might find opportunities. Her pale cheek denoted sleepless nights; her blue eyes often shed a humid lustre through the tears she strove in vain to dissipate. Mrs. Blandy thought that the crisis must be at hand, and became every hour more assiduous ? 6
300
to gain Lucy's confidence. The crisis did soon occur ; it was no other than Lord Rubicon's sudden departure from Allestree. The resolution was secretly formed, and precipitately executed. The ostensible motive was a circular from his party to assist in the tug of parliamentary warfare ; the real one, an assurance from a confidential friend, that Miss Moreland had rejected the addresses of the Marquis of Tilbury, and was now without any dangler. Possibly also he was weary of the perpetual in¬ trusion of Mrs. Blandy's sharp profile, and thought that her peeping eyes would be better fixed on great and little casino than glanced askew at what was passing at the work-table, where neither Lucy wanted remarks on her OTOroidery, nor he an observer of his badinage while he threaded her needles. At the ceremonious leave-takings of
301
old times, there was at least an appear¬ ance of reciprocal obligation in the farewells uttered by the grateful guest and the liberal host, both of whom, after being some time domesticated, gene¬ rally parted with an avowed desire to meet again. Lord Rubicon said no¬ thing about returning to London till he ordered his horses at night, after the ladies had retired. The omitted tea¬ cup at breakfast and a remark on the probable time of his getting to town, first announced to Lucy that he was gone ; gone, without any intimation of his intentions; without even the hu¬ manity of an adieu ! Had she miscon¬ strued his assiduities? Evidently not; for the eyes of every one were fixed upon her. Maiden delicacy imposed the necessity of self-command. She stooped to caress Ponto ; she rose to feed the pea-fowl ; she even swallowed
302
her coffee, and attempted to read a bon mot in the newspaper ; but break¬ fast never seemed so tedious ; and when it ended, her retreat to her own apart¬ ment was instantaneous. Here we would leave her, and respect the an¬ guish of an anxious heart, indignant at , its thraldom ; but Mrs. Blandy was otherwise disposed. With much af¬ fected good will and real curiosity, she was soon at Lucy's door, to inquire after her health ; and not receiving an immediate answer, she intruded into her chamber. The plea of indisposi¬ tion could not account for eyes swollen with tears. The confidence long im¬ portunately solicited, was gained, or rather wrested, and Mrs. Blandy ac¬ quired a capital scene fbr her novel. " 4 But, my lovely girl,* said she, 4 consider me as your mother.' Here Lucy's tears flowed fast* 4 1 can have
303
no interest in wishing to know the whole of this unhappy business beyond a desire to guide your inexperience. I long to account for this caprice. Did you in any way offend him ? I don't mean by levity ; but by increased coy¬ ness ; by resenting any lover-like free¬ doms?' The humbled girl felt still more degraded by this inquiry, though the flush of modesty gave dignity to her reply. ' Our situation, madam, warranted no freedoms. I have already said that he never declared himself my iover« I have nothing more to disclose. My own vanity was the source of my delusion. The privacy of my father's house, to which I will immediately re¬ turn, will, I hope, conceal my mortifi¬ cation ; and its employments may help me to forget my folly. Would to hea¬ ven all who have witnessed it would do the same !'
304
" Lucy's secession was not opposed. She could no longer add to the attrac¬ tions of the Hall ; the hunting season was over, as well as country flirtations ; the beaux had dispersed, and Lady Pas¬ torina, engrossed by her studies and her charities, had no time to devote to a broken-hearted girl. But Saveacre Lodge was changed as well as the pros- spects of its once-admired heiress. An ill-raaîched assortment of shabbiness and faded finery; anxious, but futile efforts to economize ; the fatigue and bustle, without the cheerfulnesss of labour, told Lucy that other sorrows besides those of love awaited her, without diminishing the tortures of the shaft that rankled in her bosom. She sickened at the sight of her father's turned coat and pieced shoes, and re¬ collected the day-dreams of filial libe¬ rality. To stay the falling fortunes of
805
her family she relinquished the niceties of attire and the comforts of leisure, and alternately assisted as cook, dairy¬ maid, or nurse ; striving through the busy day to banish thought. But the long lonely night would succeed, and sleep was a fugitive, like Lord Rubicon. Her slender strength was soon dissi¬ pated by fatigue and sorrow, and her cheek grew more pale, except when fevered by a hectic flush. Her father was too much depressed by his own perplexities to observe the change, and she rejoiced that his age was respited from feeling that pang. One indulg¬ ence, and only one, she allowed her¬ self; it was to take her infant sister in her arms, and hush her to sleep in the church-yard. The spot she preferred was her mother's grave i for she could there ruminate on past happiness, and apostrophize the tenant of the tomb :
306
* Dearest and best of mothers and of friends,' she would say, " I never loved or lamented thee aright Why sacrifice my peace to vanity ? Why not treasure thy counsels in my soul ? Why suffer ambition to mislead me ? Why, by a stubborn indulgence of useless griet did I neglect to make my father's house comfortable to him, and drive him to seek another companion instead of thy daughter? 'Tis my own fault. I have deserved all the misery I feel. I have ruined my own peace, and my father's fortunes. Dearest mother, would that I were fit to repose beside thee!' " But I must not forget Mrs. Blandy, though I suspect that my readers would rather remain with Lucy. She re¬ turned to town with a rich common¬ place book. The Bas Bleus met ; in¬ cidents were contrived ; fresh charac-
307
ters were worked in, and the whole thing was got up in style. The manu¬ script was consigned to one of the first houses in the trade, who declared that it was sure to take, as the marriage of Lord Rubicon to Miss Moreland en¬ sured its celebrity. The very benevo¬ lent Lady President of the coterie then suggested, that it would be a most kind act to bring the broken farmer's poor daughter to London, and establish her in a small haberdasher's shop in the vicinity of the squares, and that it would be a most delightful lounge, after reading the book, to drive to look at the pretty heroine, and buy her netting silk, by which means she might soon amass a fortune, and be happier than ever. " A subscription for this purpose was set on foot, and Mrs. Blandy hurried down to Bleakwood ; but the intended protegee was no longer susceptible of
308
patronage, or sensible of neglect. A typhus fever, which devastated the village, found in her an unresisting victim. Grief had inflicted such in¬ curable wounds, that there was little left for disease to accomplish. I wit¬ nessed her last moments. Shame at having bestowed her heart where it had never been ingenuously solicited, imposed such a rigid silence upon her, that the name of Rubicon never escaped her lips, no, not even when she fainted at the intelligence of his mar¬ riage. But in her sickness reason deserted its throne, and her babbling tongue dwelt on the too well-known secret. Her night-clothes seemed bridal attire to her disordered imagin¬ ation. Rubicon was faithful; every sound prognosticated his arrival ; he was so near that she could not sleep, or take refreshment till he came ; and
309
when her weeping friends held her frenzied arms, she complained that they detained her from him. The last effort of yielding nature was to repeat the song he had written. A gleam of sense shot across her mind while chaunting a confession of love, unal¬ terable and refined as her own. Maiden delicacy chilled her frame, even while sustaining the last convulsive struggle, amlfaintly whispering ' I have talked too much/ she sunk upon her father's shoulder, and expired. — She was buried in her mother's grave." #
310
CHAP. VIII. Mb. James's social duties interfered with his pastoral care on the next Sun¬ day, and the pulpit at Ringrove was filled by a young divine who had just received orders, and was on a visit to a neighbouring clergyman. The ser¬ mon was in a different style from that to which the parish was accustomed ; and the vehement oratory and corre¬ spondent gestures riveted the eyes and fixed the attention of the congregation. The gentleman was evidently a candi¬ date for popularity, and as the word " estabhshment " still haunted my brain, I could not help recollecting the inquiry of Patience Gentie, in the Spectator : " Ah ! did you design to win
311
me to heaven or yourself?" I cer¬ tainly thought the discourse a very fine one ; it reminded me of some which I had seen draw down rivers of tears. Mrs. Strictly stood up during the delivery, leant over the pew, and some¬ times nodded approbation. Her daugh¬ ters were busy with their pencils taking notes; but turning my eyes to ray grandmother, I perceived disapproba¬ tion in her countenance. She walked home in silence, and in her conference with her household, refrained from taking any notice of the sermon, which I found was her practice when she could not commend. We had an unexpected pleasure in the arrival of Mrs. Goodenough to tea, especially on perceiving in her counte¬ nance a relaxation of the maternal anx¬ iety that preyed upon her spirits. She told us that her son and she had been
SİL
in London on some important busi¬ ness. " Preparatory to his voyage ?" said my grandmother. A glow of pleasure lighted up her friend's face as she answered, " It might be for a still better purpose." " Is he not to go then?" inquired Ellen eagerly. " The event,*' answered the mother calmly, " is in the hand of Heaven ; maternal affection will not allow me to dwell on the result, lest I should so far weaken my mind as to want fortitude to sub¬ mit" Ellen put her handkerchief to her face, and my grandmother and her friend exchanged significant glances. I knew that Ellen had a bad cold, and wondering at their grave silence, I asked if she had increased it in church ; she pressed ray hand, and begged me not to notice her. A conversation was immediately commenced by the senior ladies, of
313
which the discourse we had heard in the morning was the leading topic. " I reprobate," said my grandmother, " every practice which tends to change the humble scholar into the dogma¬ tizing critic ; but, indeed, when the very words of the bible are unstat¬ ed in the pulpit, the tenets of the church contradicted, and the prayers we have just uttered turned into mockery by denying the hopes that they inspire, and evading the precepts that they enjoin, it becomes the duty of attentive hearers to repel the errone¬ ous inferences which haste, zeal for some distinguishing tenets, and very warm feelings have caused our spiritual guide to leave unremoved. I hope and believe that there is no worse mo¬ tive than a spice of vanity, that beset¬ ting sin which cleaves to us all, for the meagre and sometimes pernicious food vol. ι. ρ
314
which is dealt out to us under the title of " sincere milk of the word." " It was my lot," she continued, * f to have my early principles fixed and enlightened by an amiable dignitary of the Irish church, whose 4 flesh now rests in hope, but being dead, yet speaketh.' He was a firm believer in, and a defender of the vital peculiarizing doctrines of Christianity ; yet I have heard him lament the triumphs which infidelity acquired by having some tenets pressed to an extreme, or treated unskilfully. He particularly alluded to the fall of Adam, and the consequent corruption of the human race, and he recommended to me Archbishop Seeker's Lectures on the Church Cate¬ chism, as a safe guide between the perilous extremes of implicit trust in our own righteousness, and passive reli¬ ance on the merits of om Redeemer,"
%15
My grandmother gave a tear to the memory of her departed friend, and proceeded : " The impassioned eloquence of a fervid mind, warmed by contemplating the indescribable distance between the ineffable purity and dignity of God, and even the virtues of fallen man, far more of his frailties and crimes, is no less likely to mislead our understand¬ ings as to the actual state of human nature, than the cold, dry arguments drawn from false views of its perfections, dignities, and claims are calculated to close our eyes to the merits of our Redeemer, and the necessity of his atonement. I did not think it right to draw the attention of my servants to discrepancies between the preacher and the liturgy, which I trust escaped their less acute observation ; but to you, my children, I deem it my duty to lament, ρ 2
816
-—and happily in this instance I can do so without abating your confidence 'm ourow r n spiritual pastor,—that some of the younger part of our clergy seek notoriety in the way which I own youth is too apt to prefer ; I mean in innovating doctrines, in saying some¬ thing new T and strange, as if religion, like natural philosophy and mechanics, admitted of discoveries, or as if their fingers were able to unthread knots which the fathers of our church, finding insolvable, recommended to the repose of reverent forbearance, advising us to dwell on the promises, instead of the absolute decrees of God. The gentle¬ man who this dav favoured us with his opinions did not indeed, go into the horrifying subject of universal repro¬ bation ; but he trenched on its contigu¬ ous doctrines, affirming that it is totally impossible for us to abstain from break-
317 ing all the commandments of God, the thoughts of our hearts being evil con¬ tinually ; thus removing every curb on passion, and quenching with the hope, the desire of fighting against evil in¬ clinations. If I am continually re¬ minded that I have received from my Creator a nature so prone to offend that I must hourly break the laws he commands me to obey, and that eternal death is the punishment of this failure ; can I be grateful to him for life, at least fbr the revelation in which these humiliating truths are enforced, or de¬ sire to know what is obedience ? Should this doctrine of corruption ever be en¬ larged upon, without at the same time opening the healing waters which will wash away the stain ; I mean the sup¬ port which faith and humility may re¬ ceive through the medium of the Holy Sprit, sought by devout prayer to ρ 3
318
counterpoise this propensity to sin ? In the world before the Flood, though the earth was then labouring under the curse of barrenness, and man in his most depraved state, 4 Enoch walked with God,' and was * translated to Heaven.' Under the law 4 Elijah, a man of like passions with ourselves,' had power to open and shut the foun¬ tains of rain, and was also removed to regions of bliss, without passing through the gates of death. Many are recorded in the Old Testament to whom the epithets of * good, perfect and up¬ right men, doing that which is right in the sight of the Lord,' are awarded, and in the New Testament we read of Zachariah and Elizabeth, who * walked in all the commandments of the Lord blameless.' He who was the word of 4 truth proclaimed, that he had found in Nathanael, t anIsraeliteindeed,inwbom
319
was no guile.' An inspired apostle enu¬ merated numbers who ' obtained a good report through faith,* and we claim the same rules of interpretation fbr these commendatory authorities which others claim fbr condemnatory expressions. Our catechism asserts that, though ' we are not able of our¬ selves to keep the commandments of God, and to serve him,' he has pro¬ vided the abundant help of * his special grace,' and that prayer is the medium by which it is conveyed. This doctrine preserves us from self-con¬ fiding righteousness, and from despair of ever performing what, on penalty of losing our salvation, we are required to do ; and I sincerely wish that our pub¬ lic instructors would keep this clear consoling view of religion ever in their eye." My grandmother paused, and asked ρ 4
320
if she had wearied us ? We entreated her to proceed. " I must also enter my strong pro¬ test against any change of the positive words of Scripture for the sake of eftect, or for any other purpose. Mr. Strain, when expounding his text, 4 the Son of Man came to seek and to save that which was lost,* interpolated the word only. It is not in the Gospel ; it con¬ tradicts much of its import; it is in opposition to that best interpreter of the New Testament, our liturgy, in which the collect for the second Sun¬ day after Easter and other passages ex¬ pressly state, that the Redeemer of Mankind also * came to be an ensample of godly life.* Some of our divines believe, that the infinite efficacy of the mediatorial sacrifice may extend to yet uncreated worlds. Scripture intimates, that it was efficacious to that out of
321
whose ruins the globe which we inhabit was formed. Such limitation of the effects of the incarnation does not in¬ dicate that ardent affection for the Saviour which gentlemen who have the same leaning with Mr. Strain, try- to inculcate. It is haste, negligence, or a desire of producing effect by say¬ ing something new and astounding which makes them, in their zeal for the salvation of sinners, forget that the victory wrought by Christ points at the final destruction of sin, by intro¬ ducing universal righteousness. Allow rae to lament one more departure from gospel truth, and from the tenets of that church of which by ordination he is a sworn expounder, and I have done. He told us that after conversion, (I know not what precise meaning he affixed to that term, it was not baptism, or the light vouchsafed to infidels or ρ 5
$?
heathens,) that after conversion, I say, such a renewal of the whole man took place as to cause not only an entire change of principles, views, motives, and desires, but also a mastery over our inclinations and natural infirmities, so complete, that we no more offended. I object alike to the doctrine of the impeccable saint, and to that of the universal sinner, and I affirm that they are equally disproved by experience, and by the word of God, if that word be studied, not by disjointed texts, but as an entire rule of conduct." Mrs. Goodenough here took part in the conversation, and complained also of the effervescence of imagination which sometimes led aspirants after oratorical fame to present distorted, or falsely coloured scriptural facts and portraits to their auditory, in a manner calculated both to amaze and
323
to mislead their hearers, Scripture biography always wears so sure a stamp of truth, that it reveals the failings as well as the excellencies of its subject ; but it is brief, ancl allowing no space for explanations is therefore difficult to unravel. We should remember, how¬ ever, that a moral inference cannot be instructive, unless fairly deducible from the event. The humble student well knows that these characters are re¬ corded for his instruction ; that the New Testament acts as a comment upon the Old ; and by patiently combining all the scattered features, he tries to correct his moral portrait. " I am disgusted," said she, " at seeing * the grey fathers of the world* tricked out in a drapery of embroidered senti¬ ment, when I expect to behold their failings and virtues, their trials and punishments, related with true patri- p 6
824
archal simplicity* And not only is the verbal similitude gone, but the actions are so modernized, (if I may use the expression,) that I scarce know whether I am listening to a discourse from the pulpit, or to some lecturer on the Belles Lettres, imitating Gesner's Death of Abel. Surely it is the duty of all who aim at instructing or re¬ proving us through the medium of a scripture narrative, to see that the ex¬ ample tells ; to study the text before they pen tlie comment, to read what¬ ever bears upon. the subject in Holy Writ before they excite us to imitation, or urge us to avoidance. I remember a sermon on tir character of Jacob, which I might call a series of fables ; it began with commending him for integrity and sincerity, and in this respect held him up as the spiritual, as well as tihe natural father of Nathanael
325
and all true Israelites; an assertion which the twenty-seventh chapter of Genesis positively refutes, lt dwelt with puling pathos upon his being ex¬ patriated from his father's house in early youth, though scripture chro¬ nology informs us that he was then near eighty years of age, and had even in that period of longevity, passed over more than half the time of man's life. He was said to have entered the house of Laban conscientious and sincere, as well as pious ; to have there learned the arts of deceit, and to have imbibed an inclination fbr idolatry, in tolerating his beloved Rachel's con¬ cealment of her father's images, and even in partaking of her veneration for them. This charge is utterly un¬ founded, and entirely at variance with his whole character, which was so dis¬ tinguished by ardent devotion to the
326
true God, and desire of his favour, as to fall into the temptation of taking un¬ warrantable means to procure his bles¬ sing. I was too indignant at these per¬ versions of scripture to attend to the deduced application, but I heard the sermon called very ingenious and im¬ pressive." " And thus," said my grandmother, 44 was the example of this patriarch lost upon us, and God's dealings with him left unvindicated in inexplicable mystery, or subjected to the imputation of severity. The historical parts of scripture require the strictest adherence to truth ; and the identity of each portrait should be most faithfully traced without omission, palliation, exagger¬ ation, or fanciful interpolation, because they are indeed an accurate map of God's providence. And in looking over these toxüom of scripture, I think
827
we may discover that the Searcher of hearts, who alone can appreciate the real extent of penitence, and weigh the actual degree of guilt, is often said to reprobate some offenders whose crimes to us seem comparatively less, and to continue his favour to what we should call greater sinners ; yet still he leaves even those whom he has pardoned to take what, with reference to his general laws of providence, we may call the natural consequences of their crimes. t( The history of Jac oband Esau, when correctly told, is one of the strongest warnings against yielding to the tempt¬ ation of expediency, that ever was re¬ corded. Those are unskilful architects of the Church of God, mere daubers with untempered mortar, who lacker over the guilt of Jacob and Rebecca ; for they unquestionably used criminal fraud to obtain that desired distinction
328
which God had determined should be withheld from the profane Esau, who sold the privilege of birth-right, involv¬ ing his claim to be the hereditary priest of his family, fbr the gratification of transient appetite, and was therefore held unworthy of the peculiar blessing of Abraham, though he did not mean to forfeit that also. This high distinc¬ tion, not yet clearly understood, but dearly valued, because repeatedly con¬ firmed by God, with whom these Pa- triarchs held an immediate intercourse, was assured to Jacob, who, notwith¬ standing this lapse of integrity, still, in the most forlorn state of destitution, and in the exigencies of mortal fear, ever fixed his eyes on the God of his fathers. Impatience to secure to the son whom she preferred, the rights which, by birth, belonged to the first¬ born, tempted Rebecca to project, and
329
Jacob to execute an act of falsehood, fraud, and injustice, which made the latter an alien from his father's house, confirmed Esau in an irreligious dispo¬ sition, and irritated his violent tempei to meditate the crime of fratricide. It also deprived Rebecca of the society of the son who was her delight, and that son of his rightful portion of his father's great riches; sent hira with only his staff in his hand, when past the meri¬ dian of his days, to toil for bread under the stern inspection ofa semi-idolatrous uncle, unlike the son of wealthy Isaac ; to be defrauded at once of the bride whom he had earned by seven years' labour, and of his stipulated hire ; to pass, as he himself avowed, 4 few 'and evil days,' living in anxiety, fear, and distress, a pilgrim and wanderer ; to have the fraud which he practised in his earlier years more cruelly retaliated
330
in his old age ; and to see the beloved orphan of a beloved wife the object of hatred to his brethren. Take note, my dear girls, how a spark of evil kindles a destructive flame, I could go further, and speak of the bloody wars and ran¬ corous hate which subsisted for ages between the posterity of the alienated brothers, all springing from want of that patience which should wait God's good time to give us what we ardently crave, and from recourse to indirect means fbr gratifying what is in itself a pious and highly commendable desire." " And yet," said Ellen, " we do not read in scripture of the displeasure of God at Jacob fbr his duplicity, or of his contrition." " Scripture, my dear, contains so much instruction in such small space, passing over the whole period of re¬ corded time, that where an inference
331
can be drawn, it is often left to the sa¬ gacity of the attentive reader to extract the moral. We know that God abhors falsehood, iniquity, and wrong, Jacob's stormy, melancholy life, and Rebecca's maternal bereavement, are as legible a comment on their deeds as the crime and death of Amnion, and the rebellion of Ab - salom, are signal illustrations of God's displeasure at David for the murder of Uriah, in which case also temporal pu¬ nishment was inflicted after the sin was affirmed to be pardoned; proving, I think, that Omnipotence will not (per¬ haps according to his own rule of go¬ vernment, cannot,) in this world sepa¬ rate guilt from its concomitant misery. They who fraudulently grasp at the rights of others, must expect to have the world combine against them. The conduct of sons is generally reflective of that of their father. Parental par-
332
tiality meets its own castigation in the envy and hatred which it inspires. No one ever yielded to the temptation of walking in indirect paths without hav¬ ing cause to regret his deviation from * truth and upright innocency.* " But, in the case before us, do not suppose that I set the stamp of repro¬ bation upon one who was evidently high in the favour of God, and with whom we are encouraged to hope that all true believers shall * sit down in the kingdom of heaven.' I speak of him as a fallible character, not in all things to be imitated, but in many to be re¬ vered. Let us, in extenuation of his fault, observe, that the birth-right which Jacob unfairly purchased, and the bless¬ ing which he fraudulently obtained, did not convey temporal possessions, but were * sacraments, or outward visible signs of inward spiritual gifts,' Esau
333
inherited all that Isaac possessed, and in so doing gratified a disposition that seems to have looked no further than temporal good. The privilege which Jacob personally possessed was an in¬ timate communion with the God of his Fathers ; a blessing which only a devout mind could appreciate. Re¬ mote and distant was the honour of giving birth and name to that nation who became * the keepers of the lively oracles of God,' and still more so, that of being progenitor of the Messiah. Yet this portion of the blessing of Abra¬ ham seems ever to have predominated in his thoughts ; and we find him on his death-bed, in confiding obedience to the divine will, bestowing it on his son Judah, who had no particular share of his aftections, and not on Joseph his beloved, to whom, with the delighted reiteration of passionate fondness, he
334
gives the double portion and temporal blessings which Essau had borne away from himself These, Isaac's first-born not only personally enjoyed, but trans¬ mitted to his posterity, among whom Moses records the existence of kings and dukes ; while the issue of Jacob groaned amid the brick-kilns of Egypt, or fasted in the wilderness. So true is it that worldly prosperity is not the rule by which we should measure the favour of God." My grandmother and her friend now discussed the fatal consequences of ad¬ mitting expediency as a rule of conduct, and an excuse for actions acknowledged to be evil, a disgrace which adhered to the Romish church, the school of in¬ fidel philosophy, the lyceum of antient dialectics, and the modern temples of Plutus. They spoke of doing evil that good may come, as diametrically oppo-
335
site to Christian principles, as the reason why Caiaphas and Pilate gave up the Lord of Glory, (though they believed him to be an innocent man,) because it " was expedient for one man to die for the people," or "lest a tumult should be made." My grandmother remarked, that even the guilt of Judas might be vindicated, if the excuse of expediency were admitted. There is great reason to think that when he be¬ trayed his Master to those who he knew sought his blood, he did not anti¬ cipate the consequences that followed; but believing that Christ was the person who should restore the kingdom to Israel, he expected such a display of miraculous power as should free him from his enemies, and assert his right to the throne of David ; he committed a profitable treason to himself, and looked for legions of angels to rescue
336
his Master. Hence his remorse when he beheld Him " led like a lamb to the slaughter." Hence his dreadful sui¬ cide, and the awful certainty of the fu¬ ture doom of " this son of perdition," are astounding warnings to all who think to further their own interests by the commission of crimes the devil in¬ timates to be only venial and unconse- quential* The conversation soon turneel ?? a different subject, being led by Mrs. Goodenough's remark, that Rebecca's behaviour in the method she took to ensnare her husband into a fulfilment of what she knew to be the divine will, savoured not of that simplicity pre¬ scribed to holy women, which forbade " their good to be évu speken of/' but denoted the politic craft of an artful wife, determined on carrying her own design. She seemed indeed to have
337
had the enunciation of God's purposes for her children, more clearly present to her mind than Isaac, and to have fixed a steadier, more desiring eye on the prophetical promise. But, instead of reminding him of the revelation re¬ specting her unborn babes, she seems to have wanted courage to contend with his paternal partiality fbr Esau ; and either from timidity, or from the vanity of a little mind, piquing itself on its capacity fbr plot and stratagem, to have avoided the sure and direct road of conjugal advice, choosing to trick him into a fulfilment of her desires, rather than entreat him to obey the designs of infinite wisdom and fore¬ knowledge. " Rebecca," said our grandmother, " had studied the character of men bet¬ ter than the immutable laws of truth. I am always disgusted when I see the vol. i. o.
SS8
lords of the creation stubbornly refus¬ ing advice, but easily cajoled ; for does not this prove, that an artful woman, who conceals her purposes, models men to her will; while a frank-hearted one has no influence? I will premise that in both instances the wife means to promote her husband's honour, hap¬ piness, or advantage ; and I here de¬ clare that I prohibit ill-humour in all its various forms, from violence to pout¬ ing, as utterly unlawful arms for a wife to use, even in the best cause, and as an excuse for the contumacy of her partner. But I also protest against the practices of wheedling, coaxing, finessing, or (what is vulgarly called) * getting the blind side,* as me¬ retricious arts, suited to designate an illicit and temporary, not an honourable, permanent connection. These, though emitted to, and even admired in a
389
mistress, are always considered in a wife equally derogatory to her who adopts, and to him who endures them. It has been said (I believe truly), that few wives govern but those who are unfit to rule ; and Crabbe, in his pleasant tale of the Wager, has given us such a just and lively portrait of the pretty petted toy to whom man willingly and uncon¬ sciously submits, as will not greatly stimulate the fair reader to descend to a like degradation of her own character for the sake of being * queen fbr life/" " You do not then, Mrs. Loveday," remarked Mrs. Goodenough, "join in admiring the address of Caroline Queen to George the Second, who concerted public measures with Sir Robert Wal- pole, and then carried the point they had agreed on with the pertinacious King, to whom they proposed the di¬ rectly opposite course, and piqued a α 2
340
man absurdly jealous of his own aumo- rity into an adoption of their plans through the spirit of contradiction ?" " Unquestionably not,** was the re¬ ply; "because I would ever have a husband appear in the eyes of his wife so respectable as to be incapable of being duped, even for his own good. We must however, allow much in be¬ half of royal spousals, and of all unions not founded on previous anection, where it is our duty to make the best we can of a lot which was rather forced upon us than chosen. A well-principled woman will not marry a man of whose understanding she has so mean an opi¬ nion as to foresee that in her future commerce with him she must have re¬ course to what I deem the greatest mental prostitution, a system of con¬ stant duplicity. In tlie case of this princess, it is admitted that she had to
3él contend with an unusual degree of po- sitiveness, joined to those contracted views which are the consequence of early neglect, and also of licentious morals, unchecked by discipline, and authorized by paternal example. The influence which she obtained was nobly exercised. She shed the brilliancy ofher enlarged mind, superior information, and graceful manners, over his court, while in her carriage to him she pre¬ served the perfect devotion and obse¬ quious respect of a really attached and dutiful wife. Yet one part ofher con¬ duct I cannot pardon, and must hope that it is misrepresented : I mean her choosing the more than suspected mis¬ tress of her husband for her particular friend, and treating adultery with levity, by calling the favourite 4 Sister Suffolk.' Perhaps she wished to show that she discredited court scandal. It is wise for 4 3
342
a lady to shut her eyes, if possible, on her husband's crimes as well as on his errors; but surely she impUcates her own purity by acknowledging that she has detected them, and yet, neither as a wife nor a christian, shrinks from their enormity by treating with ridicule what ought to excite abhorrence and grief. In this part of Queen Caroline's con¬ duct I bok in vain for that conscien¬ tious magnanimity which signalized her early rejection of the hand of an Aus¬ trian Arch-Duke, afterwards Emperor, which was offered to her on condition of her renouncing the Protestant faith, and becoming a proselyte to the Church of Rome. But where, among the sons and daughters of Adam, shall we find perfection, or even consistency ?" The matrons joined in censuring or pitying those wives who do not occupy their due station in their family* whe-
343
ther owing to their own indolence, selfishness, or cowardice, or to their spouse's impatience of having a rival near his throne. "Where else," said one of them, " do you in general see chil¬ dren turn out so unfortunately as where the mother had no voice, where the sons were early told not to regard her, and were trained to insult and teaze their sisters ? " I wondered to hear self¬ ishness enumerated among the causes which prevented ladies from attempt¬ ing to lay hold of at least vice-regal power, and quoted Pope's well known aphorism. " Go on," said Mrs. Good- enough, " ' But mark the fate of a whole sex of queens, Pow*r all their end, but beauty all the means.' Our empire, Miss Herbert, is generally founded upon the sands, and is every day liable to the inroads of the tide of ?, 4
344
time. Unhappily we do not seek a more stable foundation. We deem it so much more congenial to dress, trifle, ami look pretty, than to acquire the adornments which St. Peter recom¬ mends,- that we (no, I will rather say some of us,) dare not risk our husband's liberality to our desires and indulgence of our caprices, by standing forth to protect an ill-treated child, or even to rescue himself from his own follies, and to save our family from disgrace and ruin. And do men blame us for this ? Is it not the character which modern poetry and literature, I must not say deify, but certainly idolize ? Is not an ever-smiling, unmeddling wife esteemed the highest prize in the conjugal lot¬ tery ; while a shrug of the shoulders, and a blank look, ever attends the an¬ nunciation of a faithful» admonishing, provident wife? The woman whom
345
King Lemuel's mother pointed out for his consort, has slight charms in the eyes of a modern fine gentleman, who casts an enraptured look on Egypt's voluptuous Queen, ' whom every thing became;' who made defect perfection ; * whose infinite variety custom could not stale; and whose every passion strove to make itself fair and admired.' " " But surely," Ellen asked, " nature has not fixed an insuperable barrier be¬ tween what is estimable and what is agreeable ?" " Decidedly not," continued Mrs. Goodenough t " and the controversy be¬ tween men of all ages and us old wo¬ men arises from the pertinacity with which each side holds forth to exclusive adoption those qualities to which the tendency of their respective views as¬ signs the preference, a custom ex¬ tremely prevalent between disputants, q 5
346
who, if they allowed themselves to be explicit would often find that they were of the same opinion. There is no more necessity that a combination should exist of ill temper and prudence, of entertaining talents and extrava¬ gance, than there is that a good wife should be very ugly, or she who is pos¬ sessed of a good fortune be very dis¬ agreeable." "We have seen," said my grand¬ mother, " women who blended in their character all that can elevate with all that adorns their sex ; and again I will take my illustration from some who have worn the crown of England. The consorts of the third WiHiam and of the third George were distinguished for talents and virtues, and for the quiet magnanimity with which they sustained their domestic trials; never swerving from duty ; never suffering the prying
347 eye of slander to detect a blemish on their fair fame ; meekly submitting to the inflictions of Divine Providence ; and holding fast the faith by the anchor of religion. To the memory of Charlotte every chaste matron in England must look with gratitude, as to that of the conservator of her especial privileges ; for she first purified the atmosphere of the court from unhallowed approach, and thus gave a law to the higher orders of society, which inferior grades would not dare to rescind on pain of forfeit¬ ing their claim to gentility. Her af¬ flictions are well known, as is also the fortitude, the persevering affection, the uncomplaining patience with which she sustained them. But as those afflictions proceeded immediately from the hand of Providence, they were perhaps easier to be endured than those which arose directly from human causes. Mary's α 6
348
brief career , was esteemed fortunate ; but the penetrating eye of curiosity, in turning over the private remarks of con¬ temporaries, has detected many latent sorrows, which sprang from the austere temper and sensuality of her husband, and also an anguish hidden in the deep¬ est recesses of her heart, and probably even unacknowledged to herself: I mean a partiality for a highly gifted no¬ bleman, whose presence and attentions ever used to agitate her frame, though with the magnanimity of determined virtue her eyes were turned to her moody lord, studious to moderate his humours and to sonen his asperities. Mary, by her conduct both as a wife and as a queen, deserved a more gra¬ cious anda more faithful husband; and at her death, William, though still the dupe of the licentious Countess of Ork¬ ney, did justice to the virtues of his
349
departed consort, whose premature, awful, unexpected end overwhelmed him with anguish, and deep, though not reclaiming remorse. It is known that he preserved her hair and wedding ring concealed near his heart, as they were so found on his corpse. 4 1 cannot but grieve,' said he to those who strove to console him, * for a wife who, in seven¬ teen years, never committed an indis¬ cretion.' This was the character of youth, beauty, royalty, vivacity, great natural talent, extraordinary sweetness of temper, a finely cultivated under¬ standing, indefatigable industry, and exemplary piety. It is a proof that such combinations are possible ; and it was given her bya husband faithless to his vows, cold to her perfections, and unkind in his behaviour, yet one whom she had dared to reprove for offences which, as her enlarged knowledge of
350
tliø divine law taught her, would ex¬ clude from the favour of God." I burst into exclamations against the " Hero William," in whom the most uxorious dotage would have been par¬ donable, and bitterly lamented this excellent lady's peculiarly hard lot ** Your judgment, my Emma," said my grandmother, " is, I fancy, founded on the perusal of fictions, in which the claims of poetical justice, as it is called, are strictly attended to, and virtue re¬ ceives that high guerdon of esteem and happiness which certainly are not its constant portion; nor are they held out by Providence as its sure reward. Much evil is done to the principles of young people, and their peace is sub¬ jected to the severe trial of defeated hope, by that delusive art which paints in false colours the world they are about to enter» instead of giving it its true
351
aspect of a probationary, not a retribu¬ tive state, a scene of trial rather than of enjoyment. Equally fallacious are the lineaments which fiction also gives to characters, when it generalizes vice and virtue without admitting those, lights and shadows which man, as well as the events in which he is an actor, constantly exhibits in his conduct and designs. History would clear our views in these particulars, and it would also reform them, were not its pen guided by the same fallible beings whom it describes and instructs. Is it not therefore, liable to mistake or mis. representations, when it pretends to judge of motives, or to record private actions, and may it not also be warped by prejudice, and blinded by party ? " But in this volume," continued she, taking up the Bible, which, espe¬ cially on a Sunday, lay at her elbow,
352
** there is neither mistake nor miscon¬ ception, prejudice nor party views ; for the facts it records were commemorated by divine inspiration, and, in those pas¬ sages where the heart of man is laid open, its real nature is unreservedly disclosed." I spoke of the gloomy de¬ pression which must result from such a view of men and things, and of my¬ self as being already quite tired of the world. " That,*' said Mrs. Loveday, " pro¬ ceeds from your having been taught to expect a different one. Tell me, Emma, what that world should be to the endu¬ rance of which you would be recon¬ ciled. Give us the result of your own experience. Tell us if you have ever felt quite happy, and what would now make you so." These were all soul-searching ques¬ tions, and the first could only be an-
353
swered affirmatively by referring to my very early days, when í was too young to reflect and to discriminate, but when I was alive to the enjoyment of infantine pleasures. I had since been at balls,, where I was neglected ; at parties, from whence nothing resulted ; and at public places, where I was not amused. I had indeed felt an exhila¬ ration, resembling happiness, while anticipating scenes that had ended in fatigue and disappointment ; but as I was ashamed of giving that name to the satisfaction of putting on well ex¬ ecuted dresses, and well arranged plumes, I was forced to own that I had never been quite happy since the days of bon-bons and skipping-ropes. 1 paused, and added,~~but as the mistress ofa respectable establishment I thought it possible that 1 might be happy. My grandmother smiled at this frank
854
acknowledgment of the summum bonum to which my eyes had ever been direct¬ ed, and, after asking me if I could tolerate a William of Nassau for its master, observed that marriage did not change the condition of humanity, though, if the union had been wisely contracted, it secured to us the blessing of a faithful partner, a guide in diffi¬ culties, a comforter in sorrows, an assistant in ew labours, a partici¬ pator in our cares, a companion in all life's varied scenes. Still the scenes of life would continue to be varied, and our partner would be, like our¬ selves, beset with passions and infirmi¬ ties. Among many solid comforts in the marriage state, we must experience difficulties, labours, and cares ; the latter rather multiplied than diminished by an extension of our social ties. " We may,** said she, " in general
355
point to the mother or the mistress of a large famUy, rather as a very useful being, called to great exertions, sacri¬ fices, and trials, than as a very happy one. Her bodily pains, watchings, and exertions, during the infancy of her children ; her subsequent anxiety for their health, safety, prosperity, and good conduct, make her life anything but that state of peace and self-posses¬ sion, in which the nearest approaches to real happiness are supposed to be realized. There are occurrences, not unfrequent ones, which impose upon her a martyr's sufferings, and in which like a martyr, her lips must be sealed against complaint ; I mean those bitter sorrows which arise from the miscon¬ duct of those whom we love, and of which some portion generally fells to the parents of large families. There is no stroke so agonizing as that in-
856
flicted by the vices of those to whom we are nearly allied, and whom it is still our duty to cherish and to love. Yet this, I think, is a situation on which our clergy rarely expatiate, though it calls for all the aids of religion, all the stimulants to fortitude, ail the elucidation of a Light Divine, to inform our judg¬ ment and tö support our spirits, while pondering on the tremendous conviction that those who to us are so precious, are at enmity with God, Compared with this, the modified affliction of weeping over the grave of a dead child, of attending the couch ofa suffering one ; of mourning the blasted fortunes of one who is unfortunate, of sympathising in the aspersed innocence which we cannot vindicate ; or even of joining in the tears of some ill-married girl, worth an empery, but thrown to a villain; all these woes are endurable, * the light
357
affliction of a moment/ sorrows which death will relieve; they are light in comparison with the anxiety concern¬ ing a rebel child, and the fear of missing that child among the happy multitudes which surround the throne of God. Blessed be that God, such anguish has not been mine ! I have buried children, not lost reprobates! The bodies I com¬ mitted to the earth, in humble hope, were buí the exuviae of a more glorious creature/' We were all deeply affected, espe¬ cially Mrs. Goodenough, whose sorrows I found bore the character alluded to. My grandmother's sublime and grateful resignation had transported her into a momentary forgetfulness of her friend's trials. It led me to think deeply on what might be called the sinister side of a good establishment which seemed not impregnable to affliction.
358
Ellen now asked if Gray was right in his advice of concealing from youth¬ ful minds the nature of the world on which they must soon enter, and re¬ peated his lines, "----------- Where ignorance is bliss, »Tis folly to be wise." " By this rule," said my grandmo¬ ther, " we should forbid an actor to study his part till he is pushed upon the stage. I do not say that we should call the sprightly boy from f chasing the rolling circle's speed,' or ' urging the flying ball,' to listen to the death- watch ; but is childhood, is even infancy exempt from a share of human calamity? Is it not most erroneous then to bestow on the prospects of advancing youth and manhood an un¬ real gilding, and to hold out prosperity and sublunary bliss as the certain re¬ ward of desert? This is wrong, be-
359
cause it is untrue; it is most pre¬ eminently wrong in forming the mind of a young person, when, whatever is untrue, should be abjpred. I should say, speaking to parents, accustom those under your care to be exposed to those petty disappointments which are their trials, without studying to avert the vexation, or contriving for them some compensation of future pleasure ; without weakening their minds by pity, or inducing them to believe that they suffer more than others, or endure any thing which either can or ought to be averted. I do not recommend what I understand to have been the practice of a vei ν learned and distinguished pre¬ late ; I do not say, ?. údy to cross their wishes, and contrive for them mortifica¬ tions as exercises of patience, because I reprobate all needless severity, all art and contrivance, and do verily believe that
360
even happy childhood has enough of sorrow to discipline it for its future duties. But I will affirm that improper indulgence of children, by habituating them early to luxury, encouraging the intenseness of their feelings, and inflam¬ ing their passions at the expence of their fortitude and prudence, causes one half of the folly and misery that we see in the world ; it produces the inordinate, disreputable, exclusive pur¬ suit of wealth, the profusion of dis¬ sipation, the ennui of enjoyment, the clamours of the disappointed, and the villany or despair of the desperate. If young people were early accustomed to expect that their opinions will be contradicted, their hopes repulsed, their desires mortified, and were taught that they must labour up the hill of difficulty, burdened with their fortunes, as Sisy¬ phus rolled his stone, ever expecting
361
recoils, success would appear a boon, not a recompense, and people would rather be disposed to be grateful than querulous. I am for imparting, not gloomy, but just views of Hfe ; my aim is to prevent, not to foster melancholy. There is now, as there was in God's primeval world, much that is veiy good. The calamities of life which proceed from our own follies, vices, and im- prudencies, or the vices, follies, and imprudencies of near and dear connec¬ tions, must rather be referred to the sufferance than to the direct infliction of God. The material world is always ve"ry interesting, often beautiful. The inferior beings of the animal creation, who appear to have much fewer com¬ forts, and many more privations and sufferings than man, always seem to enjoy life, at least to be satisfied with existence, except when suffering with vot. ι. ?
362
pain; and as to'the inflictions which God sends us in the shape of unfruit¬ ful seasons, — sickness, not resulting from intemperance, — poverty, not the consequence of extravagance, — the death of beloved friends, — the ravages of the elements,— public calamities, or any similar visitations,—let the child, as he is early taught to avoid folly f vice, and improvidence, and thus to save himself and his connections from at least half the impending evils of his future career, be also instructed to regard those inflictions which I have enumerated, as trials designed by God to prove his virtue, to exercise his forti¬ tude, and by the woes and perils of a probationary state, adapted to his decay¬ ing mortal vehicle, to prepare him for a glorified body, and an entrance into heaven." Our desultory, but to my mind
363
interesting and improving conversation, was terminated by the appearance of the domestics fbr evening devotion. My grandmother put her hand before her eves, and devoted a few moments to recollection ; without naming her design, she seemed desirous to supply the omissions of the pulpit, and pro¬ pounded the example of our Saviour as our best guide to the heaven which he promises to his faithful servants. She spoke of his whole character as the most peculiar, the most varied, yet consistent, extraordinary but not ex¬ travagant, ever presented to the world ; and contrasted it with the opinions and practices now so prevalent In every stage of society, she said, it was the peculiar advantage of Christianity to hold up the portrait of her founder, as Aaron did the censer of incense, to stay the contagion of moral destruction. r 2
364
That lust of empire which led to devas¬ tating war, that cruel contempt for the sufferings of others which aggravates the woes of slavery, the more audacious deeds of licentiousness and rapine had now ceased to be predominating sins. But still our passions were rather fostered and excited than restrained; and writers who acknowledge that they have never read the scriptures which they profess to disregard *, ask why these passions «re implanted in our bosoms if we are prohibited from indulging them. A christian, t '»r versant with the book of God, knows how to reply: theyaregiven as motives to action, and preventives of apathy, into which, without such im¬ petus the soul would be too apt to sink. They are like winds that move the ocean, and impel the vessel to its de-
865
stined port. They are the links of social affection which bind us to our fellow-creatures, but their tendency to excess requires continual care, lest they should degenerate into appetites, in¬ stead of being exalted into affections. Here then let us study the character of our Lord. He was angry with the Scribes and Pharisees, but he did not sin ; he loved his disciples, but not with partial fondness. He wept at the grave of Lazarus ; he felt for the anguish of his mother when he was hanging on the cross; but in both cases, his was an useful and chastised pity : he feared the approaching agony of his passion, but submission to the will of God induced fortitude. He felt the revilings and mockery of sin¬ ners, but resentment did not urge him to retort. He saw schemes laid for his destruction, but no guile came out a 3
366
of his mouth ; no art appeared in his conduct ; he treated Judas with kind¬ ness, though his prescience detected in him his destined betrayer. What a lesson to us against cherishing cause¬ less dislikes, inflicting harsh chastise¬ ment for slight offences, or acting on the vague impulses of ill-defined sus¬ picions. She proceeded to direct our admiration to the meek condescension of thè Fountain of all wisdom in asso¬ ciating with ignorant men of lowly con¬ dition, thus affording a lesson to those vain mortals, who, deeming themselves highly gifted, shrink from aH contact with what they call the vulgar and un* informed. The entire submission of Jesus to the will of God, and his patient endurance of every privation, she opposed to our querulous com¬ plaints at trivial inconveniences ; con¬ trasted our insatiable ambition with his
367
general disregard not only of the splen¬ dour, but of the conveniencies of life ; and denounced our unthankful usage of the blessings which we enjoy, and our high opinion of our own extra¬ ordinary deserts by reminding us of ??? uniform lowliness of His mind, and his gracious acceptance of the most hum¬ ble services. She added, " The con¬ duct of Christ also suggests to us prudential rules to guide our judg¬ ment. He ever aimed at a higher reward than the praise of man, yet on all occasions he was desirous to avoid reproach, and advised us not to let our good be evil spoken of. He forcibly reproved that reigning error of this age, the love of notoriety, evinced in a public display of good deeds, either of piety or charity ; yet he commanded us, on fit occasions, to let our light shine before the world, and not to bury a 4
368
our talents in the earth. These in¬ junctions implied that we should never be deterred from avowing our religious principles by the fear of ridicule ; never shrink from a plain duty on account of its having become unpopular, and always give to piety the attractions of a well-regulated temper, and amiable manners. Ellen here asked my grandmother's permission to repeat, from the works of a lady whom she much respected, some rules for our conduct in regard to notoriety in good works, which seemed remarkably clear and definite. ** Pursue always one straight path, without ever stepping out of your way either to attract observation, or to avoid it. Choose to do good in the most private manner, whenever that is a matter of choice ; but as this is in many cases impossible, do, as quietly
369
as you can, all the good that is incum¬ bent on you ; that is, all the good you are capable of in your station, and with¬ out interfering where you absolutely ought not to interfere."* My grandmother smiled, either from a perception of the train of Ellen's thoughts, or from approbation of this application. She praised these instruc¬ tions as plain and practical. " The character of Miss Talbot," she said, " was distinguished by Christian graces and rare talents. She was peculiarly remarkable fbr a quality which the Lord of Glory put on with his mortal habiliments—the virtue of humility; it was conspicuous both in her manners and in her mind. This virtue can only be learned in the school of Christ, and is repugnant to the precepts of every
r ?
370
other master, to our own inborn feel¬ ings and acquired principles, to the ge¬ neral practice of the world in this and every former age, to the models pro¬ pounded for our imitation, and, it is to be feared, also to the parental admo¬ nition which youth generally receives. Yet is this grace of lowliness (repeat¬ edly enjoined and sanctioned by the Gospel) admitted, even by its revilers, to be most conducive to the repose of the world, and also eminently advan¬ tageous to the individual who has for¬ titude to practise it. * Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth/ * Whosoever exalteth himself shall be humbled ; and he that humUeth him¬ self shall be exalted/ These are the beatitudes which Scripture pronounces on humility ; and who among us can look back on our past lives without owning that they are prophecies as well
371
as precepts, realised by what we call the natural course of events, and thus proved to emanate from Him who knoweth what is good for man.
il (i
372
CHAP. IX. Μύ good grandmother discovered that the life she led had too much sameness and seclusion to suit my habits, and was, perhaps, also too sedentary fbr my health. I had neither taste nor skill for the active employments which gave elasticity to Ellen's mind, and a ruddy tinge to her cheek ; and fancying that they would be quite useless to one who only looked on the country as a tem¬ porary sojourn, I felt no inclination to become her pupil. My health was an object deemed worthy of consideration, so the ponies and the chaise were put into daily requisition. Giles being withdrawn from his offices of gardener and footman, Bridget kindly volunteer¬ ed to weed the onions, Martha cleaned
373
the knives, my grandmother shelled peas and picked currants, and Ellen drove me about, and showed me all the lions in the neighbourhood. It generally happens that when great pains are evidently taken to please us, an idea of innate consequence intrudes, and we receive that as a tribute which was meant fbr a boon. I blush to say that my mind was now of this wayward cast. I saw pretty houses and fine views ; we also called on several simper¬ ing misses, who, after peeping through the blinds, to see who we were, and hastily arranging their lettered bou¬ doirs and neglected toilettes, were ex¬ cessively glad to see us, and had nothing more to say, except wondering we did not come oftener. Ellen then again drove me home without one adventure, except perhaps Gray loosing a shoe, or Roan being a little galled by his collar;
374
yet EUen's invincible vivacity always found some subject for piquant remarks. My grandmother was uniformly cheer¬ ful ; Bridget was in constant good hu¬ mour, except when scolding Martha, or railing at Mrs. Strictly's stingy doings ; Giles wore an everlasting grin on his face; the kitten was never weary of playing with her tail ; the lambs danced and ran races every evening ; the birds sang; the butterflies sailed from cab¬ bage to cabbage. " The country," said I to myself! "for such a dull, stupid place, is surprizingJy merry. I wonder that every thing should appear comfort" able where I feel wretched." There is such a thing as thinking aloud, or at least of wearing looks which are as easy to comprehend as words. Taciturn and pensive, I reclined one evening on the sofa, in a languid, inte¬ resting position, hoping, from the ex-
375
perience of former kindness, for some¬ body to humour and amuse me ; but my grandmother, who had discovered my disease, adopted another mode of treatment, and resolved to show that she and Ellen could be comfortable without me. She observed that a trio was preferable to a duet, and bade her fetch Mrs. Macmendus as a fillip to conversation. " Emma," said she, with a look which rather implied pity for my listlessness than admiration of the folds into which I had composed my drapery, or the elegant curve of my left arm, " Emma is, as you see, incapable of assisting us ; perhaps we may do her the service of reading her to sleep." Ellen immediately began : " The Improver. *< Amid the waste of years preserve entire The undecaying spirit's nobler part, The vital glance of intellectual fire, And all the gentler graces of the heart. ???. Carter.
876
" I hope I shall not be deemed too obscure to perceive, or too insensible to catch the prevailing humour of the times, if I endeavour to give my lucu¬ brations a cheerful cast and to recom¬ mend contentment instead of adopting what is certainly easier to write, and, to judge from its popularity, pleasanter to read : I mean that mixture of the lachrymatory and vituperative style which is denominated grumbling; a word so thoroughly native as to be deemed in close affinity with English¬ man. Now, though my political prin¬ ciples lead me to wish that things may be kept as they are, for fear that by meddling we should make them worse, which is a symptom of the old woman's prejudices and infirmities ; yet, as I hato being singular, and as grumblers are seldom thought to be in earnest I will try to be a little dolorous, and,
W
blending my private inconveniencies with public disasters, persuade my readers that I deserve a better fortune than I have experienced; and that, like Milton, I have fallen upon « evil tongues and evil days.' " I know that I live in a ruined coun¬ try, under a government which, having acted wrong for centuries, must be now become most intolerably oppressive. I am aware that the whoie human race (myself excepted) has proceeded from bad to worse ; that all the virtues uni¬ versally practised in my youth are out of fashion, and that even nature has deteriorated ; that the seasons are less genial, the summers either hotter or colder, the winders more damp or more frosty; and, as vas observed by the mis¬ anthrope in Gil Bias, even the peaches are smaller than when I was a girl. Add to this, everv body is undone. To
378
be sure, considering that we are all undone people, every body does con¬ trive to look and fare better than they did fifty years ago, when England was prosperous and I was a young woman ; but I am aware that this is owing not to their unconsciousness that they are crape-attired puppets, acting a tragic drama, but to that most poignant sen¬ sation of despair which induced the Epicureans to say, « Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die.* If la¬ dies and gentlemen grumble all the morning, and engage in gay amuse¬ ments every evening, it is no more a proof of their being happy and pros¬ perous than a maniac's averment that he is a deposed monarch is demonstra¬ tive of his royal birth. Medical people my, that not only in some diseases (hypochondria for instance,) incessant complaint is a relief to the patient, but
379
also in cases of severe pain, groaning and lamenting has been found to pro¬ long life, while the silent sufferer has fallen a victim of noiseless anguish. Far be it from me, therefore, to wish to deprive my compatriots of their prime satisfaction, or to require that the unfortunate should ask themselves if they have not * also been unwise,' lest it should induce a sort of apoplec¬ tic determination of these peccant hu¬ mours. I know that every body is unhappy, and that none are rewarded as they deserve ; and I will not give one soporific drop to silence the uni¬ versal ullaloo. I might as well inter¬ dict many of my fellow-creatures from the gift of speech. What would fine ladies have to say at morning calls, if they might not declaim against the shivering coldness of one rout and the crash of carriages at another? How
SSO
could fine gentlemen live through the ennui of a deep snow, if there were no valets, tailors, or corset-makers on whom to vent that spleen, which the non-exhibition of a new varnished den- nett and a well-tied cravat must other¬ wise throw back on the system ? How could managing housewives exist with¬ out that description of infamous ser¬ vants who are ever affording exercise to their virtues ? Why should I anni¬ hilate those reservoirs of small scandal, tiie shops of chandlers and green gro¬ cers, who coUect the tributary streams of kitchen defamation for public sup¬ ply, and thus bestow the satisfaction of grumbling on those who are scantily supplied with domestic discomforts, and who there learn from the indubitable tes¬ timony of maids of all work and errand boys, that they Uve in a very wicked worid? Nay, might not the revenue
381
suffer if the art of contentment were moie generally studied ; for of what do letters that are not dictated by business, science, or affection, generally consist but of grumbling ? Three or four times a year, as habit may have imposed the rule, the post-office is enriched by the missive of one miserable biped, (in fur¬ therance of the plan of being all un¬ happy together,) informing his distant chum (friend I must not say, fbr I ex¬ clude affection from an intercourse which aims at giving pain), that he should have written sooner, but that his family have been out of sorts ; that his tenants have failed ; that his best horse is lame ; the town dull and empty ; or the country intolerably stupid ; and that a host of blue devils are always fl) ing round him : or if none of these domestic calamities occur, he may note that ministers are going on at such a
38^
tate, he is sure it must soon be all over with Old England, and he would emi¬ grate, if there were another place in the world in which he couid bear to live. Or change the miseries with the sex : Miss Plaintive writes that she has a cross papa, who dislikes the agreeable captain ; or Mrs. Plaintive, if too pru¬ dent to speak of her dear good man's very odd ways, has odious neighbours, and is either moped to death, or perse¬ cuted, or the physician cannot find out her complaint, or she suspects that little Alfred will soon be indisposed ; and all alike, conclude with tirades against this miserable world. ' Light grief is proud of state and courts compassion,* and «a fellow-feeling makes us wondrous kind.' The favoured correspondents reply with similar elegiacs, and perhaps have the satisfaction of* adorning the epic narration of their own distress
383
with an episodical embellishment on the sufferings of good Mr. and Mrs. Such-a-one, who is also, though one of the best creatures in the world, very ill-used, and very unhappy. " Having said enough to prove that I have observed this predominating pen¬ chant, and considered the pleas fbr its utility, I trust that neither my patriot¬ ism nor my philanthropy will be im¬ pugned, should the character which I am going to exhibit disclose some ad¬ vantages that may result from the habit of making the best of every thing, be¬ cause it is only delineated in an old woman, and meant to be confined to those anomalies in society, or to such as are outré enough to be preparing them¬ selves to rank among them, of whom, whether considered as the shadows of days that are past, or the cloud that nangs over beauty and youth, it may
884
be said that no creature cares for them. It is at least desirable that these Strul- bergs, whom I once heard a gay lady (herself then past the meridian of fife), devoutly wish taken hence out of every body's way, should make them¬ selves as innoxious as possible. My friend Erminia seems to have succeed¬ ed in this design, and also to have ren¬ dered herself not merely tolerated, but beloved by all around her ; and I hope I shall not injure the galled kibes of morbid sensibility by describing how, without escaping the infirmities of age, she has preserved herself from social privations. Wrinkles have obtruded on her brow, but certainly they have an agreeable inflection» ** My acquaintance with this excellent woman began late in life, and I am in¬ debted to a vety pleasant species of egotism, by which, without making her-
385
self the faultless heroine of her own tale, she contrives to draw instruction and amusement from her past adven¬ tures, and detail to me the events which formed her character. I have heard her say it was her misfortune to have parents who, by a too sedulous desire to render her pre-eminently happy, sowed the seeds of future wretchedness ; and, but for a rare instance of felicitous counteraction in her wedded lot, she must have become a wayward com¬ pound of social apathy and nervous selfishness ; a creature floating between indecision and self-conceit ; a maudlin historiographer ofher own high deserv- ings, and of the wrongs and insults sus¬ tained from a cruel, base, selfish world ; and, of course, a miserable being, dis¬ liked by others, on sufficient grounds. Such was the lot her indulgent parents prepared for her when they infused vol. i. s
386
into her mind the notion, that, because she was their only child, she was the first of human beings ; and, fearing she might encounter calamity when they were no longer able to avert it, they resolved to ward off all those puerile disappoint¬ ments in infancy and childhood which are designed to inure us to the labours of youth, the sorrows of maturer life, and the pains and privations of age. Having thus endowed her with acute feelings and an undisciplined will, they married her to Probus, whose lucrative occupation promised the means of con¬ tinuing her present enjoyments, whose character for good sense and good con¬ duct was unimpeachable, and who was moreover deeply in love with her, and would make the happiness of their dear girl his chief study. So indeed the fond devotee of Cupid promised in their sense of the word ; but Hymen's cap-
387
tives see through a different medium ; and though Probus continued to love his wife, it was soon apparent that he had tastes, pursuits, inclinations, and pas¬ sions, as well as Erminia ; that they did not always accord with hers ; and that when they did not, he looked atthe terms of the marriage contract rather than to the vovvs of dalliance and the records of expected obedience, Erminia had good sense, good principles, good temper, and naturally a great degree of dis¬ cernment : she loved her husband, and reposed implicit confidence in his judg¬ ment. Nothing was so dear to her as his good opinion, and she saw that re¬ sistance weakened her influence, whilst it always proved unavailing; besides, she candidly owned that she was rather tired of having her own way. She dis¬ covered that she was not always right ; she began to dislike being the anxious s2
388
object of constant solicitude ; and grew offended at the supposition that she should require humouring. She there¬ fore adopted submission and acquies¬ cence as novelties, and soon found them so pleasant in relieving her from the responsibility of doing wrong, that a few months after her marriage she cheer¬ fully put the reins into the hands of Pro- bus, and made no subsequent snatches to get them back again. I have heard that she was a most admirable wife ; and the artless veneration and subdued regret with which she speaks of her husband, convinces me that she was a happy one. A numerous family (all of whom it has been her lot to survive), and a larger share of what are called trials than generally befals people in easy circumstances, affected the spi¬ rits, and subsequently the health, of Probus ; but, in the daily discharge of
389 minute, circumscribed, and monoto¬ nous, but important duties, Erminia found occasion for that full and con¬ scientious exercise of the benevolent affections which, when combined with devout aspirations of the soul to Him who seetli in secret, constitutes 'the peace of God which passeth all un¬ derstanding.' I have said that her oft¬ spring were numerous ; so were her do¬ mestics, among whom must be classed a number of young men whose ser¬ vices Probus required, and over whose conduct he was old-fashioned enough to exercise magisterial superintendence, by making them inmates in his family. The whoie household had a patriarchal appearance, for Erminia imitated those primitive matrons who have had the distinguished honour to be regarded as symbols of Providence. 'Tis true she prevented them from « eating the bread s3
390
of idleness ;* but there was a kindness in her vigilance which made ' the eyes of her hand-maidens look to her,* not merely for instruction, but also for sym¬ pathy and protection. She did not con¬ sider servants as automatons, wound up to perform certain useful offices, but as sentient beings, who had similar desires, infirmities, and hopes, with herself; fellow-pilgrims bearing dissimilar bur¬ dens, but bound to the same country, and destined to pass through the same separating waters ; and she thought too deeply of the impending estrangement of her own boys to forget the golden rule of doing to the children of other mothers as she would have others do to her children, or to consider the youths who assisted Probus in his office as mere conduit pipes for conveying a larger stream of worldly advantage to her family. The sums which they paid
391
for instruction, and the services which they rendered, she thought, required remuneration ; and how could this be better conferred than by the moral in¬ fluence of an amiable and intelligent woman presiding over them with ma¬ ternal solicitude for their welfare. But I am referring to a practice which, if now obsolete, was once universal. The firm of Probus was one of the last which continued to spread this inesti¬ mable shield over the young candidates for commercial eminence ; a protection which withheld the gay from criminal dissipation, and preserved those of a domestic turn from studies equally per¬ nicious. I have heard that habits thus formed amid the household lares of these Thoroughgoods, Freemans, and Tradeloves of olden times, proved per¬ manent ; that forgeries and peculations were less frequent; and the writings of s 4
392
infidels less popular. The greatest dan¬ ger a ypung man incurred while pre¬ paring fbr his establishment in life was, to fall in love with his master's daugh¬ ter j and the fair belles dwelling ' East¬ ward Ho/ having often a swain at their elbow, were not compelled to fly about the town to acquire one. But to resume Erminia's history. 44 It was not until the decline of life that she was dismissed from this con¬ tinuous call to exert discretion, tender¬ ness, and fortitude. She entered on her days of widowhood with impaired health, and dissevered by death from maternal comforts and cares. But she was surrounded by numerous friends, whom her kindness had obliged ; and though the vivacity of youth had been chilled as its roses faded, she preserved a serene cheerfulness not lessexhilarating. Still attentive to Scriptural models, she,
393
like the venerable Anna, frequented the temple; and, like Dorcas, made clothing for the poor; but without neglecting the claims of society, or the pretensions of merit. In her youth she had been remarkable for a joyous relish of amusement, and for the studious elegance of her attire ; but as Probus had no leisure for public diversions, and little regarded his wire's dress, she endeavoured to change his taste ; but, after a few struggles, conformed to his peculiarities, congratulating herself that she was not, like many wives, compelled to make more essential sa¬ crifices than that of a play or a ball, a plumed tiara or an embroidered train. She had found opportunities for exer¬ cising her taste and cheering her spirits, in arranging the wardrobe and directing the sports of her children ; and when the death of all whom she best loved s 5
394
allowed her leisure and Hberty, she either thought herself too old to grow gay and fine, or had the delicacy to persevere in the habits of her wedded life, lest she should cast an implied reflection on the memory of him whom she so truly honoured. But, though decorously abstemious, she is never morosely prohibitory. Her opinions are so liberal, and at the same time so correct that her young acquaintance apply to her as a casuist to draw the line of distinction between Lady Grace's sobriety and Lady Townly*s 4 dash into the stream of pleasure.* They also select her to determine cases of deUcacy and points of moral eti¬ quette. Long experience, superior penetration, kindness of disposition, and singleness of heart give authority to my friend's decisions, which, though ever guided by the rules of abstaining
395 from all evil, and constant self-commu¬ nion, are carefuHy modified by peculiar circumstances as well as by attention to the character and situation of her clients; and she smilingly observes, that were the decrees of her court of equity collected, they would be found to include too many apparent contrarieties to command general deference. Thus, Miss Tiffany was dissuaded from going to Almack's ball, while Erminia exerted herself to procure a ticket for Hebe Homebred ; not from partiality, though Hebe certainly is the pleasantest girl ; but because her spirits had been de¬ pressed by a beloved brother's depar¬ ture for India, and Mrs. Tiffany's ill state of health made it unkind in her daughter to be absent from her one evening. For similar reasons, she au¬ thorised our young friend to witness a chef d' œuvre of the histrionic art in Miss s 6
396
O'Neillsdelineationof Juliet, as she had an opportunity of going with a matronly party; but interdicted another from that indulgence, with Captain Sparkish at her elbow, lest she should fancy him another impersonification of Romeo. But in this latter instance, her inclin¬ ation to deprive restraint of all aspect of severity induced her to invite the half-ensnared maid on that evening to one of her own select parties, where, by a judicious direction of the convers¬ ation, romantic love was proved to have so much more of dramatic effect than of domestic expediency in its com¬ position, that the young lady, who had been bred up to the comforts of an equipage and a suitable establishment, * relinquished the idea of living upon bread-pudding and potatoes in country quarters with the man she loved. She soon afterwards actually found out that
397
this man was not Captain Sparkish, but a gentleman who made his approaches in form, supported with parental ap¬ probation on the one hand, and recom¬ mended by a settlement on the other. I have also heard that in the other playgoing case the theatre acted as a school of improvement, and communi¬ cated to the fair auditor's heart a touch of the etheriai fire, which, though often ' a light that leads astray,' may pre¬ pare the mind for that which is really heaven-born, and determined her to prefer a man of real merit, for whom she felt a preference, to a wealthy rival whose unamiable manners she once re¬ solved to tolerate. " During that period of Erminia's life when health, strength, and an abund¬ ance of animal spirits prompted acti¬ vity, I cannot learn that she acquired celebrity by schemes for general im-
?
provement, or pushed amy ofher virtues into publicity; and now, though her usefulness to her fellow-creatures is only limited by her ability of serving them, she certainly is not one of those noto¬ riously benevolent ladies whom pro¬ jectors ky under contribution. She has a pertinacious habit of seeing with her own eyes ; and as she shudders not at coming into immediate contact with distress, she, as her own almoner, de¬ rives a double blessing from the lessons which real affliction and extreme po¬ verty read to those who personally ad¬ minister to their wants by retrenching their own superfluities. Thus Erminia is rather quietly employed, than offi¬ ciously busied in serving her fellow- creatures ; and with respect to her dis¬ tribution of time, as it regards herself, even indisposition is with her no apo¬ logy for yielding to ennui : that is a
m
disease which she never can know, un¬ less mental weakness be added to bo¬ dily imbecility. Éf Having spoken of Erminia's select parties, I must dilate a little on them ; not only because they are the me¬ dium through which her benevolence most powerfully operates in her own line of society, but also because they are reaHy very pleasant amusements. The presiding inteihgence assumes no state, requires no tribute, imposes no restrictions, but such as every one must voluntarily approve on pain of forfeit¬ ing their own pretensions to good man¬ ners. Opinions not inimical to deUcacy and to truth, if advanced with pro¬ priety and supported with sense and ten.per, have here fair play ; and she is so ready to acknowledge the triumph of an opponent, that sometimes she scarce allows sufficient weight to her own ar-
400
guments. Instead of being ready to complain that our hostess devours all the intellectual regale herself we are rather anxious to make her talk; fbr she has not only mixed in the workl, but observed it; and is not merely a chronicler of past events, but an anno- tator upon them. In exercising that office, she will delicately continue to ask us for an elucidation of some topic, or request that we will kindly correct her in a date, by way of making us co-partners in the information which she bestows. By acknowledging men¬ tal decay, by speaking of herself as of one who has outlived her compatriots, whose interest in things present in subordinate to another interest, who contemplates future years as not affect¬ ing herself but her fellow-creatures, she so nicely blends the infirmities of hu¬ manity with the irradiations of a supe-
401
rior being, that I have seen the girls gradually drawn from the whispering corner, and foregoing the discussion of beaux and bonnets, to listen to her ho¬ nied accents; and have known sages (unmarried ones I admit, and my friend has an ample dower) allude to Plato's Lyceum on the banks of Ilyssus, t where the vouth of Athens listened to the voice of truth, and the wild tumult of the passions yielded to the soft per¬ suasion of wisdom and virtue.' I once met a dandy at Erminia's party ; but he looked very miserable, having no ad¬ mirers ; and she, like every one else, was forced to give up the unfortunate anomaly as a creature who piques him¬ self in unimprovable impenetrability. " It is not at these social parties that my friend puts on what she calls her Chancellor's wig and long robes. She is too well bred to talk at any one who
402
is present and too candid to cut up the absent. Her conversation in ge¬ neral is either literary, or of that ani¬ mated reminiscence to which I have already adverted. She loves to trace the wise and benign influence of Pro¬ vidence through a series of past events, to vindicate the ways of God to man, and to allay the agitation of those who, either from not having lived so long or to so good a purpose, are always either shocked, terrified, be¬ wildered, or enraptured with passing events, which appear to them like a magic lantern that shows off oddly grouped but alarming extravagancies. Erminia, always placid, wears what she calls the sober livery of age, and views the passing scene with an ob¬ servant but serene eye. Her affec¬ tions have still all the warmth ofyouth; and as this subjugation ofher passions
403
cannot proceed from apathy, it must be traced to a higher cause. To be conscious that you have had enough of life's banquet, without feeling sur¬ feited with the provision, displeased with the provider, or jealous of coming guests, indicates an acquired relish for the food of angels. To partake of the enjoyments of youth with merely reper- cussive emotion, to pass over privation in silence, to endure lassitude with meekness, and pain with fortitude ; to look back on the cares and sorrows of a long life with thankfulness, not only because they have been endured and surmounted, but also because they have been beneficial to the moral character ; to be superior to envy, not so much from a propensity to undervalue the good things of this life, as from resign¬ ation to the will of the donor and from general benevolence to those who
404
enjoy them, argues a strength of mind and command of the passions sufficient to have conquered armies and to have legislated fbr nations : at least quali¬ ties like these in a masculine frame, stimulated by ambition, might have produced those results. Combined with female softness, and circumscribed within the limit of private duty which has been wisely assigned to women, they have conducted Erminia with purity and propriety through the diffi¬ culties of domestic trial to a calm and respectable old age, which she welcomes as a friend, and hails as the harbinger , of another visitant for whom she sedu¬ lously prepares, and therefore expects without dread. Erminia is as inti¬ mately acquainted with the King of Terrors as one in the body can be. Her physicians have disclosed to her the existence of an incipient disease,
405
which at some time or other must, and probably speedily and suddenly will, remove her from all terrestrial duties. She lives, therefore, as if sitting under the sword of Damocles, or as one con¬ victed awaiting a suspended punish¬ ment, but with full confidence in the wisdom and goodness of his judge. But her manner more resembles an exile looking for a summons home ; and her gratitude at being spared any ex¬ cruciating pangs reconciles her to submit, with uncomplaining patience, to the sacrifices which lassitude im¬ poses. She often alludes to her own situation while conversing with those whom she best regards ; and a favourite topic is the unpretending heroism of the old Scotch woman, to whom her numerous descendants, when annually assembled to celebrate her birth-day, regularly drank a happy departure, and
406
who, pledging the toast, thanked them for this dutiful mark of their affection, adding, that she had lived decently and hoped to die so.* She relates this in¬ cident with unaffected cheerfulness; and then, immediately referring to our concerns, tries to divert our attention from the inroads which time and disease are making in her interesting figure. And so radiant is the ethereal light of her unclouded faculties, so genial the warmth of benevolence re¬ flected from her unchilled heart, that absorbed by the enjoyment of her society, it is not till we have left her that we recollect with the selfish pang of deep regret that her face is paler, her voice more tremulous, her steps feebler :
........ But she must die; She must; the saints must have her.'
407
« « The general fav'rite, as the general friend : Such age there is, and who could wish its end?' " With all these excellencies which consecrate Erminia's character, there is a touch of humanity, a shade, a defect— it can hardly be called a fault because it makes us more dearly love her. As the warmth of her affections, not the vehemence of her passions, made her active when young ; so her strong at¬ tachments, now that she is old, make her, not indeed opinionative, but par¬ tial. She loves her living friends, and cherishes the memory of those on whom death has set his seal with a devoted¬ ness which induces her, perhaps too often, to refer to their conduct as a model, and to their opinions as a text¬ book. This often causes a smile among her guests, while her enemies (for even Erminia has enemies) alternately make it a subject of ridicule, or a topic of ac-
408
cusation ; yet, allowing a little for the tautology and garrulity of age, a can¬ did listener will always find these ebul¬ litions of true regard worth remem¬ brance; for Erminia has conversed with the learned and the eminent, and she was beloved by the wise and good of past times, of whom she is a faithful describer. 44 Her present popularity is creditable to human nature. Her doors are not besieged by legacy hunters, fbr it is known that she considers the claims of blood to be sacred. She has no para¬ sites, because, as she never aims at higher praise than that of being a good woman, the privilege of being ac¬ quainted with her communicates satis¬ faction rather than eclat. The young prefer her society from a conviction that they shall find the wisdom of old age shaded off with sprightly sallies. The
409
heavy-laden spirit confides its cares to her bosom, assured of finding relief in her sympathy, probably assistance from' her counsel ; and certain that the in¬ trusted record of its woes will not be converted into entertainment for the next group of idle callers. The divine who seeks her converse is pleased to find a devout woman rather than a pet* ticoated polemic ; one who exemplifies» Christian graces instead of criticising last Sunday's sermon. The man of science visits Erminia with the animating hope of communicating his researches to an enlightened sister, instead of encoun¬ tering a smattering philosophist: and the man of the world, if he be also a man of decorum, ventures into her par¬ ties without the presentiment that he shall undergo a severe penance« He expects to hear some literary subject ingeniously treated, or to . see some vol. ι. τ
410
light thrown on literary topics. He knows that at these parties he may get out of the circle of common-place ; and though there may be snug card-tables for dowagers and big-wigs, there wUi be Httle danger of his being wedged amongst them, as the pretty girls by choice crowd round his hostess, to whom good-breeding demands his prin¬ cipal devoirs ; and never are the laws Ôf good-breeding better observed than when they are freely and voluntarily administered* "Thus, having proved the possibility that an old woman may be not only a re¬ spectable and contented, but also a be¬ loved and amiable creature, I ask leave to address a few explanatory entreaties to those who are still young, advising them to begin to qualify for becoming like Erminia. Formidable as age is to youth and beauty, its grasp can be
411
avoided only by an embrace still more benumbing. It is impossible to be¬ come interesting, when we are old, with the same stock of materials as will equip youth for its amatory conquests. The garniture of gawds and cosmetics, of frivolous wit and showy accomplish¬ ments, will prove incumbrances to their possessor, when they arrive on the con¬ fines of a country where there is but one object of adoration, and where truth is the only language. " The dissipated, the vain, the capri¬ cious, and the ill-humoured, would do well to consider, that, as man is the child of habit, they are chargeable with egregious folly if they employ the most improvable part of their time in acquir¬ ing what will be worse than useless during the greater part of their exist¬ ence. Ere long (unless they have wealth to bribe mercenary servility) τ 2
412
they must depend for every social solace on the remunerating tribute of affectionate gratitude, or on the humi¬ liating offices of pity. The years of secluded loneliness wUi be insupport- ably tedious, if we enter upon them with a vacant mind; and irritability will make the untented wounds of pain yet more excruciating. A time must arrive, when the bands that unite us to this world will be so relaxed that there will be nothing left in it that we can enjoy. How then is that divine flame of charity to be kept alive, which, we are assured, must be our guide to immortality, ifin our best years we do not strenuously cherish a love for all our fellow-creatures, and a zeal for their welfare, sufficient to resist the frosts of age. It is not necessary that we should be philosophers or literati to render us tolerable to ourselves and to
413
others, when our bodily functions decay, and when pleasures fail to give delight ; but it will be pleasant to have mental resources, and we must cultivate benevolent affections. These are ac¬ quired and improved during an un¬ ostentatious discharge of our domestic duties. To act well our part in youth, is, therefore, the best preparative for age ; as a serene and pious old age is not only a preparative for a blissful immortality, but the dawn of that brighter day."
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
