Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The world we live in
WOELID WJE UVE IN.
-Parbleu' les officiu
Wj; , U || , U)U l,„ c t |, e paity dt tilc houst uf .Mi Hastings, and tuin oui eyes huk« αϊ ils to sonic jieisonagts in London. vol, п. в Loid
Lord Portcarns, in possession of affluence and a title, was а more wretched being than the low-boin and indigent Archdale This Nobleman vi as α prey to secret discontent he fancied Ins brother possessed of α feci et on which much depended, yet he could not imagine what prevented that brother fiom asset ting claims so valuable. Immediately after Arthdale s precipitate •Jepai ture from Arlington Sti eet, (asahead) lelated), Loid Poitcains walked hastily and m gieat trepidation to tl e Temple, and having mounted four pair of stairs m Pump-CoHrt, the names of " BracUeigh and Raven' saluted bis eye " Сейме in,' sounded to the knock of Loid Portean is, w ho immediately entered, and beheld Kaven suiroundetl by bonds, deetls, musty parchments, tom t calenders, directories, red tape, old tiunks, andali the paiaphemaluot an attorney's oftice Haven no soonei perceived who it was, than he said insolently— " Oh'
" Oh ' is it you?—What are you come bothenng about now? But goto the fire it you will, and 1 shall come to you as soon as I have done writing." " Oh Lord, Mr. Raven '" cried the poor Call, '* wheie is Mr. Biackleigh? I hope he w dl nevei know any thing of this sad affau I I should have money enough to throw awiy by stopping his mouth—it costs me ι gieat sum to obtain your silence. But don t believe 1 grudge it, Mr. Raven , no, v on are ι good man, and deserve it, so I dont giudge it you at all— no, upon niy sou! I don't, and yet five hundred а vear ıs а gieat sum too " " I ıeally believe, my gcneious Loid, ' replied Ravm, sneenng, and coming <ό the fue, " that theie is not a gentleman m onr profession who would not have de¬ mandili twice as much. Do you con¬ sider the value of the secret— а seciet tint would put а bastard brother m possession of so much—not to mention the disgiace that must attend you, who will certainly be known to have bten в 2 uisti umental
instrumental in concealing a document of such importance ? As for Mr Biackltigb, I shall certainly not inform him ot llns affau , not that I suppose Ins debt ite conscience would keck at the know le Ige of it, but it is no concern of bis—he is an old man, and a \ ery w eak one— а sillier gull never existed I—His wife to be sure, rules him with а rod ot uon The dev ι! take the Yorksbıı ι busmess that kept me out of the way while that foolish aH m was negotiating' One comfoit is, tint the woman is uiihclthy, and must soon tip thepeich, thanks to the biindv bottle Weie she о ice fairly in ι wooden ptlnse, leave me alone to oust the relations I h iv e wound myself round the old fools heirt and I 1 now I am down for it upon the will , else elo vou thinl I would faun, and ennge, and fetch lum his υ ill ing- stitk hiiidhimluiglovts oi pickuplnsliat as I tlo —Oui affin ıs not tobt tıustcıl to one se vieil I (lutei hun lm n y in¬ tens! but vi ilin it suffer by hbfolly If j oit had any ¿,ineiosity, my Luid, you would piesent
present me an odd hundid now aad then, (peihaps I shall insist upon it), besides the paltty five hundred л yeai Suppose Mi. Bratklei^h knew of this ifiair '—He is an old man, and not a I ttle aliud ot the devil —suppost he should thmk it tetessarj, for tht good of his soul, to divulgt wh t I hope is now concealed, thttt w nul I bt a blow up, and what now do ƒ not desene for holding my tongue' lie upon it, my Lord'—j ou have no moie soul than this old pen, to call such a paltiy annuity a large sum '" " Don t be angij, Mi Raven," falteied Loid Poitcams, " indeed, indeed I will be very gcneious, only help me out of this sciape That conscientious rascal has been vuth me again, and pieached me almost out of my senses. He lefuses any lewaiel. I assured him that I would give up all the ready money to that abominable bastan!, (I wish lie was at tlie elevi), I'm sine '), and so I suppose I must do, but could not jo«, Mi. liaven, call upon this в 3 infernal
infernal brother of mme, (as soon as we can find out where he is), and ask lum to take fifty thousand pounds, or forty, or thirty ? Oh bless my soul, it will kill ine to give up near а hundred thousand pounds, and keep only л paltry twenty for myself !" " What nonsense you talk, my Lord '" cried Haven, standing with his back to the fiie, and holding up the sknts of his coat. " Js soon as ite can lind out where he is '—Why, is he not m Arlington- Street'" " Oh Loid, no, Mr Raven ' that is the worst pait of the story , somehow or another, he ovei heard the conveisation between me and tliat devilish fellow, and I am afiaid that he kuows all " Raven started—his cheek turned to з deathlike ytllovv—his many-colouied lips quivered, At length, in a voice resem¬ bling the hollow echoes of a vault, he cried—
" Somehow
" Somehow oi other overheard ' —I thought what would be the consequence, confound me if I did not ! when I em¬ bai ketl m an undertaking with a numb- scull that has not sense enough to shut a dooi —Why did not you proclaim the business ii Charing Cross, vou great oaf' Itwould have saved time and trouble ' " Don t be angry, don t be angry, dear Sn ' sighed lortcains, his frame tiein bhng and voie faltenng Ike that of a schoolboy going to be whipped " I с ul shut the door, upon my life I did ' But he does not seem to know all—he would not speak out—he wanted to pump me, I thmk, though I was in such a fright, I haidly knew whethei I stood upon my head or my heels —I don t think he knows all so perhaps he only wanted to pump me " And I wished you had been literally pumped, cned Raven, " with all my heait and soul' It is by such idiots as youiself that the best concerted schemes n 4 m scai ry
ıııtscatry. but go to Hulcy-Stıect, (if your wisdom can find the way without knocking your nose against a post) , for old mothu Brackleigh Ins moved to hei new abode If vou can gtt admittance, (winch is no easy matter), ask the fellow for the maniage artıtlıs In the mean¬ time I will step to youi bouse. Peihaps Aichdale may have sent foi his illeits I tan İtam lus piesent itsidtuce that way." " Yes, Su," whined the poor cowed Nobleman, " but w hy should I not gam admittance ' " What the devil do you stand theie, asking foolish questions for'' ıeplıed Riven "But, if you must know eveiy thing, Mrs Biackleigh will not suffer any peison to come near liei husband, but such as she appi oves even ƒ struggle haul sometimes to maintain my ground She has ι dations of hei own to provide tor But if she be drunk, 01 asleep, or in a pietty good humoui, (In both she nul the
tbc devil aie so when tliey are pleased) yon may get admittance Go m yom own clianot, and sind in yoai name—she is fond ot titles but fonder of money , so as both passions may be gratified at once by seeing youi coroneted chariot at the dooi, and you closeted w th her husband which vv ill icelound to his profit, peihaps I say, youmayganndmittance ' Lord Poıtcaım, sick at lieatt, accom¬ panied Raven on foot to Arlington Street, having piescntetllumwithafifty pound note to softin his aspenty Here they learned Aiehd de s address from Abraham, who was lenioving the effects of his master Го lìiompton Raven sped, (as has been rei iteti), halt afraid to face the injured Arthtlile, while Loid Portcanis wis con¬ veyed in an elegant clnriot with two powdeieel idle rascals behinti it to the splenditi mansion ot the atto ney Bratk- leıglı, in Hai ley Street A thundei ing Knock announced his ainval A servant in lively shewed him в 5 luto
into a side pai lour IhefUlo« said, in reply to his I oidships Inving given Ins name, that he vi ould ask his muti ess if his master was at honn About five minutes elapsed btfore the henpecked attorney made his appeaiance His wig was nicely powdered , his shoes shone like α minor, and his dress would have been very neat and gentlennnlj, if the fore patt ot lus sdtc waistcoat had not been covered by about two pounds ot the best rappee A bow down to the ground greeted his noble visitor, who now, in his turn, tasted the swtets of supenoi itj. Loid Portcarns paced the room with a strut whith he meant tc betiay conscious dignity Tratklcigh, though an adorer of Nobility wasshotked at his insolent ans, though bis spmt was almost bioken by tl с tuibultnce of В irb ıra Biatkltigb, it ray of the self importance ot man bioke tipnn his benighted mind but the iay w as short hv cd —he heav ed a sigh—the struggle
struggle ceased, ant! lie was again the humbled attorney Brackleigh having delivered all the necessary papers to Lord Portcarns, that nobleman retired —Then dul all Ins πη¬ ροί tance cease, lie remembered that he wai in the power of the contemptible linen, and, had not shame withheld him, he had blubbered outnght The chariot no soonei diove from the door, than Brackleigh seized hi hat and cane, and would have escaped quietly from his own house His wife seldom suffered him to leave it, except when he w ıs about to enjoy his afternoon s nap, whin her thundci entnely tjok away all possibility of re\>o t lust as he thought to steal а march upon the enemy, her tongue sounded upon tin stant isc and tht iiistling of her silks piochimcd hci nt ι ippioith He shrunk baik ami sin cnteutl l'ıı jaibur befire lit could put dov η the ^ııllv evidences в (ι of
of his intention, the bat, cane, and gloves " So, Mr. Brackleigh!" cried she, "going out vv ithout saying a word, aie you? Piay could not you have had the civ ihty to send up, and ask if I wanted any thing m the city ' I can't spare the servants to run on enands evtiy moment I But you may put y our lut down just now —I shall want you by-and-by. Who wae that Lord wha' s lus name, that was here?" ■' Lord Portcarns, my dear." " Lord Portcarns ' antl pray what did Loid Poitcarns want'" " He came for his marriage articles, my dear, and I gave lum them." " How often have I told you, Mi. Brackleigh," said the wife, " that I will not have any of your filthy law business transacted here? Will you make an office of my house?—No, Su, not the first Lord Poi teams m the land shall make а house of
of my office ----- 1 mean an ofiice of nty house ' I et me hear of such conduct agam, and y ou shall repent it, Ipromisejou' III make a new will and you shan t touch a guinea ot mine Su— mind tint' What is come over you lately ' W ho is mistress heic Sn— hav ' Poor Biackleigh now perceived that his better halt had been making r thei too free with the brantly bottle he was glad she was so good humoui ed , foi, on some occasions, she was veiy liberal of oatlis and blows, which she disti ibuted a¡ the spiut moved her He attempted te allay the storm by soothing words, but lound the hurricane inciease " Don t talk to me—I won't hear а wortl ' ' " Indeed, my dear ----- " Hold voui tongue, Uli Brackleigh, this moment, and don t let me hear a vi oid agam' How dare you he so iude as to interrupt me ? I tell y ou, once for all, tint I will have no such doings m my house '
house ' It it were not f >i me, the place would lie α bear garden, and as foi your scrubby paitnir, I don t know what you mean hy p'liumr him at /ду table' let lum go to a che p house, if the fellow яшм eat well '—5 r, why don t you speak '— an I not v/oithy ot an answei ? ' " My near Mrs Brackleigh, I -----" " It don t si^iuly talking, Mr Brack¬ leigh, you shall eithei get rid of that mean looking fellow, or of me—of my fortune ' I shall talk o" t us head more to morrow, at pilsent I have some im¬ portant business in iny dressing-room Do you wait here till I come back, and attempt to stir out at your peril ' ' Pool Brackleigh sat down, sighing ready to break lis hent, he even slitti tiars, and txilumed mentally against the barb nous tyianny of lus wift, vvho, retning to her own tputment, took out a bottlt of hır favouııtı liquor, and, afttr a htarty pull, laid clown upon а sofa, and fell asletp A smeje
A single tip at the door announced a visitor ot infcnoi note It was a woman whose husband rented a small shop in M u ν lihone, the pioperty of Urackleigh Altı ι she had shivtred in tbe ball tor half an hour 01 more, she was admitted into the attorney s presence Her talt vvas soon told , she could not pa) her rent Biackltigb stormed,—half a years lent was thirteen pounds ten shillings'— \ prison was promised to her limband, and many an opprobrious idle hus y bestowed upon her The pooi woman ıetıred with the teais running down her checks, exihiming against thecinelty of those m power, and vented hci angei on her return home, upon an ttnfoittiuatt n ud seivant for which her husband, who came in drunk, gave her α soumi beating 'Huis .toes tin woild Kaven hcetoied lord Poi tein ıs — Ititi Poi teaı ι ıs ins ılted Bitil lcL,h—Mis Ih к Meyli ıvvcd her husband-lie ıev ileti his ten mts vık, J v\ lıo
who abused ber niaid-seivant, and at last got a beating from her own domestic tyrant. \v hen Loid Portean ıs ıeturned to Ar- hrgton-Stieet, he waited vuth impatience, jet titead, the coming ot Kaveu. At к ngtli he « as ushered up mto the di iwing- loom. " Your Loıdshıp's most obedient sei¬ vant 1 ' cried he Tliefootimnietinng, lie added—"You arc a pretty fellow, tiuly'—■ jour abominable stupidity almost made me betray m)self '—I was moie than once tempted to offer ici mi to Aichdale, and confess the whole' lhat be guesses at something, Ipeiceue, but I am ceitain he has no pioof, 01 he would use it. All I request of you, is to hold your tongue, or your folly will betnv you 1 shall call upon the fellow again shoitly, and oñer hmi four 01 live thousand pounds, whith 'ns poveity will cause lum to giasp at Leave me alone, and tío not you rottici It. I told hnn you wished to see him
lum next Wednesday, (foi 1 declare I liiitlly knew what to do), but he re¬ pe itetlly said that he dist linned you Pietty Imgtiige ftom а fellow not woi Ih а guinea, to a Nobleman of eighteen thousind α yeai '—It η quite out ot cha¬ racter If theiefore, you will be quiet, all liny ytt b hushed up I hive been iltnust (lightened iode ith m y o u semce, so I suppose you w ill not mind letnng nie luve ι hundí«! moie m addition to the blinking fitty you gave mc this morning —a diatt upon your bankéi will do ' The unfoi tunate Poi teams wai obliged to comply with this shameless extouun , and Riven, carelessly thinking him, put up the papei, and havı ig tuld hım to set lus heait at ease, retired to lus clnmbeis m the 1 empie Sonic tune after, Raven, hop» ι t'nt the necessities of Archdile would in luce him to accept ι ftw thoustiitt pounds, t ılıtıl igaui at Biompton, and w is not α lutle
little surprised to bear that he had left the plate. He called again and again ; but Mrs Jami m, thinking lum tobe a bailiff, by the meanness of his appeaiance, re¬ fused to give hnn any satisfaction.—the more urgent viere his enquiries, the more reserved was Mis. Jarman, upon whom the sweet temper and condescension of Aichdale had not been thiown away.
CHAP.
CHAP II.
" Sure there ι яо -nething moie than « tchctift in tl tin, " Tl nt n asura с en the wisest of ut aH
WllILE Aichdale, Westemlle, and Harford were reci uiting then health and spirits in the hospitable mansion of Mr, Hastings, m Oxfoielslure, the worthy Mi. Stapylton passed his tunc veiy little to his satisfaction The capuces of his youthful w ite daily increased One morning, as tliey sat tete à-têtc, a note was deliveietl to Mis Stapylton. As she
she perused it, lier eyes sparkled with i"i " Oli, get me ι card, get me a card í ' cried she, " I shall certamly go ! " \uy invitation, iny dear-' said Stapy lton ' Yts, ıeplıed she " а private play at Mis A 0 ntvv s — Love Jor Love, and Miss ut her leens ' " At Mrs Agnew s ! ' cned Stapylton ; " assuiedly, my love, you do not think ofgoirg'" * " Lord, whv not?" " Because," «aid Stapylton gravely, " Mrs Agnew is by no means a woman with whom I could wish my wife to associate, her character, though not such as wholly to preclude her from society, is only tolerated by the lespcctabihty of her family, and the largeness of her foitune " " And pray now, dear Stapylton, what would you <tsk foi moie' 'V ou aie always telling* me I am veiy young, hit I am not so foolish, I am suie, as to go aniont; people
people no one will speak to Mrs Agnew is veiy fashionable, you know the Pi nice was at lier last niasqunadc, whei you would not let nit go foi a gnat while, till I coaxed you to it —I ant sure evtiy* body of fashion visits Mrs \gnevv ' " Nevci theless, my diarest Matilda, ' saitl Stapylton, " I must lequest you not to think of going I would not conti oul v ou in any thing th it vv as not essentially wiong corsidei tht many dangers you have incurred bv indulging youi fancy at the expence of j ason, and lor once give up а party which will ifiord but Ii'tlc imuseineiit t) von ami ciuse ι senous uneasiness to me " JS ov indeed, Mı Stapylton cuci! tlie youthful wife, ' this ıs sing ne qi ile like a child —Loitl ' I was tolti that when 1 wis uni ned, 1 nu ht ,o whete I ] leased and do wlnt 1 woultl ' \ ш woultl n it wish to be seen in in inipiiptr p' ice siti Sttpylton, i edden 1 1 0 ,
reddening, " and it shall be my care that you nevei aie " M hat, Su ' ilo y ou mean to say that I shall not go ' "I am soiry ν on force me to thwart youi wishes, Matilda, but vou shall not be seen at Mrs Agnew г " But Ι ν ill though srre-med the cniagctl gul * I vuli go, thatswlntl will, and it you lock youi doors, III jump cut of the window, but whit 111 go ' " I am glad I know youi mind, Aladain, foi in tint case you will make vom esit from ι thud stciy ait down, Matilda, antl be quic I will not sutler my w ife to 11 seen at f he house ot any uoman of doubtfil chaiacter " But 1 will go for all tlat' ened Mitilth " \ou nasty, ill mti ied man ' is tins the love you are pietcntlmg eveiy minute I ou shall find, how cvei, that I am not „uch а fool neither, and I will ring foi i caul dır« tly ' She
She then approached to ring the bell. Stapylton, beai tdy provoked, tied the rope out of her reach " Since, sa cl he, " you still act like а child, you must be contented to be tieated as such ' The fiee of Matilda giew cnmson with ι ige at this msult hei eyes daited fire, she made seveial ineilecttial attempts to reach the bell ope th"n sitting clown upon tlie fiooi she burst into an agony 11 cues and tcirs while she beat the caipet with both hands Stapylton, shocked at a violence of tempei so much giiitei than he liad ever vi ttuesscd, would htvi rused hci fnm the gro u nil, but ! ir raj^e fu fiom th m lushing, seinied to aequne new v gemr she repeatedly struck lier husband and when he was obliged to confine bei hands, vi ith а cattish fierceness she spit m his f tee ' loi beai ance Ind now been cowml cc Stipylton seized her bv the shoiildeis, int.
and giving her a hearty shake, foiced her into a thur " Gul* eVchimed he m a voice of tliutidei, " weie I to use jou accordili., to your deserts-, I should return ] ou thr blow ^ J.OU dealt ' Sit still, and heir me'' " I won t, ' said she, tenilied, but not subdued, " tlut s wlnt I wont'—-iou arc α η i»tj wicked man, and I hate vou ' III tlo nothing j ou biti me'—I wish I lud been a bundled miles off when I minted jou— y, ou— j ou— you great, uţ>lj, îll- iiatuKil licu · I .t,itfť go to Mis ågiiew s foi all vou 1 — and III tell liei husband w It tt jott s ty of hei, aud 111 get him to kill juu — tud I wish jou weit killed alietdj ' \\ hy don t you beit me iğim, jou tow nd r —beat me τ_,ιιιι, do' -i by dt n t vou beat me, jou cuit! »utili ' ' Ptihips ' said Stapvlton, " vom iee]uest is not impiopei, md I should not be vttj blamcable in comply inj with it, but 1 n» n it is a task / am uiitquil to luibh 1 manage, Midim, vuli not hue the
the effect you seem to think I have tornied а ι esaltinoli, and I vuil abide by it 1 will be trifled with no longer girl' 1 therefoie command )oti to hear me ' "I »oat '—no, tlut I won t ' cned Matilda, stopping her eais, " I w on t hear а word' You may beat me, and shale me, and kill nie, but 111 plague your bent out, that s what I vv ill ' I «ıslı I had married Sn Lionel Glenlnm-^I should have been a Lady then'-Oi I wish I had mm ι ied Bob Hartord, without а farthing for he is handsome and young, and y ou ai e an ugly scai ecrovv, old enough to be my great great-graiidfathei ' Stapylton tiembled with anger aud sinme His wife perceived her vietor), nid with л laugh, such as fiends might indulge, continued— " W ho asked )0u to many me, piay '— Did 1 ? 1 w ıslı it was to do over again ' I had rathei bt man ied to Jack Ketch. thm to such an ill natured, ciabbed, old, inflittili ----- v 'n. π с "A truce
"Λ truce with invective, Midam'' cried the agitited husband " I told you I had formed a lesoiution —I will send lor your father He -witnessed our ill- advised marriage—let hnn witness oui puting 1 " Stapylton sit down toa table, and took pen and paper Matilda now trembled in her turn Hei husband began to write She looked anxiously at him, hoping he would relent, but his resolution seemed fixed He finished the note, folded, and was about to direct it, when Matilda, with а childish whine cried— " Oh dear mc, Mi Stapylton, don t write to my papi ' piay don t wnte to my papa!—He 11 kill me, I m sine'—He is veiy terrible when he is angry, besides, I love papa, and I should be very sorry to vex him' ' " Kecollect the language you held but iidw, Madam, andjudge whether I ought fe> listen to any thing you say " ' Oh
' Oh dear me, eltar me I Why vou dont lealii/ num to stnd that nasty letter I m sure I w as only in fun ' — Λ aa ' «lon t stud it, my diai Mi Stapylton and III bt a very good giti indeed—and I von t go to Mrs Agnew s—ind III d j as you bid me always Come, that s a vicar good man now '—give nit а I iss, and let us forget v hat is past She then flung her arms round her husbands neck He was softened, he did not return her embrace, but he did not îepulse her ' Whv did j ou foi ce me to vuite ' said he w ith ι si^h almost amounting to α sob Indeed M Hilda, y ou have used ше cruelly ' I must send the let'er—our niiitutl peace depends upon it " Naa now, naa now, don t send it '' cued she sitting on his knee and hanguy on his neck " you can t think how good 111 be '—indeed 111 be your own dear little gul again, and never offend you '—Now, с 2 that s
that s α s« cet dear man, dont send that lettéi ' Tint Mr Stapylton, m many lespects, w as no philosopher his ab eady appeared 1 he blandishments nf Matilda conquered, her coarse expressions, liei violence of rige, hu blows so liberally distributed, vi ere foi gottei 1 he lettéi vv as bun t, and fifty pounds given to the youthful wife, who stepped mto her coach quite at a loss how to lay the mone) out at various shops Matilda had never know η restraint her natural undeistandmg w ıs left without cultivation and hei heait cherished every malignant passion \ due caie on the pait of the falliti might have collected tbe latter by improving tbe former, but Mi Bailhe s idol was wealth and vv hilt he bowed down to the golden image his avance had set up, his daughter passed thiough the tegular hours of study with liencb, Italian, music, and diawing masteis, while her religious principles weie
were as much cultiv itrd as Ihose of the ignonnt nitivc ot Plltll Although the iindeist niding of Matilda was truly weak, she w ι, not deficient in Lunnnij, she could distend to the lowest aits to g tin α point, and then hugh at the folly of liei dupe 1 his unhappy cieatuie had scartelv lei the house when Mis Dmvuclcliesihariot slopped at the door lhat good lady was shewn into the drawing roo η " I hear, said she, as she entered, " that Mrs. Stapylton is just gone out, but no matter I wondei why women ut never to see the other sex in the morning But what is the mattéi, Stapylton '~\ ou look η her downcast »Íny matrimonial duet, hey ' Never mmd , you aie not in the wrong, 111 lay mv life so you may oomfoit youiself with that îeflection Stapylton, who had а sincere îegaid foi this worthy, yet eccentnc woman can¬ didly confessed lus ııı ťasmess lie had long placed an unlimited confidence in с 3 hci,
liei, hi theiefore ïehted every tiicum- stantc that b id taken pi ice, and con¬ cluded by asking liti adv ite bow to act "Huig youiself' replied Mis Din¬ widdie, " I see no othei way α ριαι- tiec and α bell юре aie youi best fnends in tlus woild But no, anothei thought strikes me,—instead of leading lectuiis to Mis Stapylton on the duties of а wife— instead of shewing examples fiom histoiy of wedded propriety, buy а two penny birch broom to be at hand for occasional ute, for if you fail to convince hei head, it is but just that you should" apply else* я here ' Stapy lton sighed, and did not seem to approve of railleiy on the occasion " You ask my advice," continued Mrs Dinwiddie, " it is singular that you, vvho ai e as old as myself, should make such an application When you mai ned, I told vou (perhaps the looi Η ot the piophecy is to conic) what would happen, and said tint you had much bettei take the vv tdovv Dinwiddie,
Dinwiddie, if she would have you. See now what you have lost!—Dear me, vve two might luvt lived like Daiby and Joan I would have nuised you ln.tbe gout, and y ou should hive shed sympa¬ thetic teais ovei my cramps and iny corns, and then when gum Death called upon us, away vve shoultl have hobbled togethei - " To scenes where love and bliss immortal »eign · " Deai Madam, exclaimed Stapylton, " you would not îally me so mercilessly, could y ou know what Γ reel. ' " Then, scnously," said Mis. Din¬ widdie, " I am as much at a loss asyour- sclt I feel foi you, though Ι ι ally. Gentle measures have been used, and have failed m effect.—what thmk you of hai slier ' ' " I cannot bear to see my girl vexed. I own my vv eakness, but -----'
с 4 " Upon
" Upon mv life, Stapjlton, exclaimed Mrs 'ìir-viddìi, " vou absolutely talk ' f-ol I— С nino' bear to see youi gul ed' lour gul, as you call liei, can hear to vtx you And then you say you own your weakness ' Prav Sır is α con kssion of whit ill the world sees md liughs it, to itone for its absurdity Indulge Mrs Sttpylton in what is light, and restrain hei from vv hat is wrong let not her tears or her wheedhngs have any effect ----- Where's Hai ford > ' " He is gone to Oxford, Madam, for a few days ' ' I don t like him,' said Mis Din¬ widdie, " he is а by poente Were I m ■your place, I would foibtd htm the house Stapylton, though he paid every respect to Mrs Dinwiddie s opinions, could not heai this attack upon his favounte with¬ out some tokens ot ehssatisfiction ' I own myself suiprised, Madam, «aid he, " that vou, whose j idgincnt in eveiy
evciy othei iaşe ıs soumi and candid, should bt so insensible to the ments ot my dc ti Harfoid I have adopted Inni as my son tiom bis mt incy hu gratitude is un iffccted When I m urini, who was moi e delighted than that excellent youth ' M lien Mis Stapylton 0 ave mc hopes it having a legal heir to mycstiti did ι murmur esc i| ι Inni' On the coiti uy, I am tint utcd he sinteitly ujoicce], and vv eie be even so ν ile as you insinuate, am I to doubt that Mrs Stap)!ton j honour would not be a suit guaid a 0 ainst an im ptopeı ıttıchment I insinuate nothing replied Mis Dinwiddie, ' I pi uni) utter what I hue seen with ıegıet You are not α voting man— liirtoni is I hough youi peison is elegant enough Hartord to the figuie of α Heicules adds the fate of an \don19 I say, and I îepeat it lint youi adoptie! son is not the peifect bung your paitnhty would illow Mis Stapylton has by liei min tonlission, wished she hid been с 5 mari ıcd
marned to hint. The child is incapable of disguising her senilmente one veised m the woi Id, would have been moie guarded ; she is only seventeen." " She wants two months of that age," said Stapylton " But may I ask, or lather ought I not to ask, a/i«. you have seen to itistity join doubts of the in¬ nocence of Mis Stapylton, or the honour ot Mr llarfoid ' ' "I have seen, ' replied Mrs Dinwiddie, " what might alai in the pride of a man even less pione to jeilousy than youiself. When jou have been absent, I have (thanks to my squint) obseivcd Harford to look in а very peculiar manner at Mis Stapy lton, v hile she sat at tht pt uio-toi te She disliked tht nistiument till his voice accompanied hei, she now piactiscs evciy hour 1 " " Good Goti, Madam'" exclaimed Stapylton, " can a woman of youi sense judge so ¡laishlj of what I am comincid is perftttly innoient - Äly wife is an excluent
excellent perfoi nier instrumental as vv ell as ν ocal , and is it not natui αϊ that she should loin in duets with a voice so me lodious and scientific as that of Harford' I sent him foi several y ears to Italy " I hope she nuv jun in no worse duets, cntd Mrs Dinwiddie, ' andas foi Italy, I think you must have been thcrt lately youiself 01 vou would not so coolly see youi wife ttttndcd by hei eicesbeo ' W liat ıs it the physicians say— Vemenu occurrtte moibo I bilievc it means— mind n hat you are about before it is too late 1 am no Latinist , but if y on will ι îofit by my adv ite, you vuil leep youn a Haiford at Oxfonl, ci Cambndge, or Italy, 01 Constantinople, oi my wheie but it youi own house You may be ι ight, but Oh Stapy lton ' if you should be χι ι ong ' Stapylton who loved Haifoid as hi« о vn son, who thought lum as faultless as Mis Dinwiddie thought lum vile, thus uldiesscd his monitoi — t 6 " We
" Wc have long been acquainted, Madam, and our long acquaintance giv es nie the right of speaking aa plainly to you as you do to me. Mts Stapjlton is violent—I saw it, not foi the first time, to-day, but I will not theiefore suspect her innocence. Youi objections to Harford are ceitainly unfounded. 1 love lnm, Madam, and am convinced tint I have not sown the seeds of obligation in α barren soil Had I eieii cause to suspect him, I thmk I may trust the mnocenct of Mis Stapylton." " Her innocence vv til be her min I ' said Mis. Dinwiddie " How should a child guani against the arts of a seti ucci ? '1 he pai tiahty she now encouiages, maj tin n in time to a criminal attachment. Vere your wife twenty years oldei, my ach ice would be ridiculous, but if jou have a gr^in of sense unadulterated by foolish tenderness, you will cleai joui house of a serpent, who waits but a favourable moment to sting ) ou to the heai ť " " Am,
" Am I, Madam," said Stapylton, " to b misli an amiable mortal fiom mv house, bcciuse my wile is only seventeen' Am I to desert one, whose eveiy action proves his ittathment to mc, because idle people miy vent then clamour against hnn 5 Harfoid is my fnend, my son , md lie is intapable ot wronging nie in a point so diltoate, unliss his mind weie as black as bell itself' " His nunc! may be as black or as while is) ou please, 'said Mrs Dinwiddie "All this is prett) nietaphoi,—I am no con- nonseiue in colouis, and as I never have been, and never may be m the place you mention, I tannot speak as to the pro¬ pilei) of the e\piess.on I believe Mis. Stap) lton to be v irtuous—I mean e/iaite, as yet, how long she vv ill remain so, must depend upon)out conduit " Upon my conduit, Madam ' ' " \ cs, Stapylton, upon youi conduct, mai к me, and believe me to be your leal well vushei— hold a tight leni Mis Stapylton
Stapjlton may become а good wife, а good mother, а good fnend —indulge her whinii, and what is now gulisli foll), will becomenierctntious ellitiiiiti) ' " Heavens uid ι nth M ulun ι vom strom, expressions suitu tnt ' " I «bh them to do so, tud Μι Dinwiddie, " mil wish f nun iu\ soul tint Mrs Stapvlton uu) havi stust enough to avoid tht mil Ittudint op a diirht- tionof dutv 1 in Mı ulu ι ι u> piutkui nt uu c intuit, than to α ι hild* sense of right or wiong I see plainly that my blnntiiiss is ι t usne but I betti that verj lıtüe 1 iuti мш t uljusıble l\- cuse to get Hai furd outo! the house "Indeni, M dam, exclaimed S*ap)l- ton, " this ıs too much i— Ivo, I uill not banish that worthy man upon the nditu- lous surniisis of tattling old maids and disappointed widows ' I ıeally Urnost believe you aie in league vuth ni) wife to dnve me mad ' If I hav е а comfort left, it is in the sotitt) of my good boy , and of tint
that comfort you would cruelly depnve nie , and for w liat ' Your suspicions ate so tin id, tint lamconhilent you will, on rcllcttion, blush foi hiving tntcrtamtd them My blushing days ate over, said Mis Dinw nielu W tll, good mon п., toyoii' It you ııı illírt, I im 0 lilof it, it you ite wrong vou may comfort youi¬ self fioni the old b ill id (which used to be atlniiribly sung by my poor elcceised fnend, Johnny l'eartl) — ' Wl о s tkon h js th s Г r h s con fort Tec а j n) morc between th s phce and Romford " So once moie gootl morning lo you You asked mv aduce, and you have it, but a sigh or ι crocodile ten, will put reason to flight at any time Oh you mini you men '—upon my life, I thmk ye ate the weal ei sex ofthe two ' She thtn walked to bei chariot, leaving the wietched Stapylton а picy to anger, gnef, and shame ι CHAP.
CHAP. Ш.
11 Tior can 1 ctoucht* and writhe my .awn* nge my\c " To some great patron for my best avaylc ' ARCHDALE, Westemlle and llaifoid having remained foui days at the house of Mr. Hastings m Oxfoidshne, returned to London. Westii ville, fastinatcd by the chaims of Blauche, would have pro¬ longed bis stay, but propriety ко .red that he should dcpait, and lie obeyed its dictates On their ainval in London, liai ford pressed Westemlle and Aichdale to accompany him to Mi. Stapylton s. 'ihey
They agi eed to the proposal, and found the husband and vuft together Anger lowered upon the brow of Airs Stapvlton , but she leceived Hu fotel with joy, and his friends with civility After a little time she enquired the state of the weathei, and being informed by Wester¬ ville that it was a delightful day, she tumed to her busbmd, and said— " There, Sn í I knew, I said it was fine weather" " I do not deny, my love," said Stapyl¬ ton, " what is so very evident, but since Dr Jameson very positively ordered that you were not to stir into the air, 1 deemed α walk highly improper " V Int tben am I to confine myself like a Nun, because I had a cold t othei day' "iou never want an excuse, Mr, Stapylton, when any pleasure is to be denied me'" " Let us talk on the subject ano'her time, said Stapylton —"Any new s stilling m the political world, gentlemen ' "No,
" No, no, Mr. Stapylton, don't think of getting off so ; you see that I am right, and want to shuffle into politics and nonsense ! Now is it not a fine elay, Mr. Westerville? and woultl a walk have done me any harm—would it now?—Don't you think it would have done me a gieat deal qf good ?" Westerville replied— " Whatever may be my own opinion,. Madam, it must natur illy yield to that of Dr. Jameson, whose, skill is sq universally acknowledged." Mrs. Stapylton pouted—tears of childish disappointment rose to her eyes ; then getting up hastily, she left the room, pull¬ ing the door hard; aftqr her, and saying, as she went out— " Well, I'll not do as I am bid this fortnight, that I won't !" Stapylton felt relieved by her absence, and after a cheerful conversation, Aich¬ dale and Weien ville retired.
Mis.
Mrs Jarman was highly delighted it seeing her lodger agun, aud he was ïe- mstatid in his toinin apaitments Some days afttr, Mr Stapylton called it lhompton, and aftei a veiy fnendly ottei of lus puise, informtd Archdale that α lucrative situation would in a shoi t time be vacant, the present possessor being about to go abroad in a diplomatic cha¬ racter , and that he wis convinced it was in his power to obtain it for him, if his wishes pointed that way He then gave lum an account of the nature of the place, and enumerated the many advantages he would derive fiom its acceptance Aichdale thanked him with fervour, ind irecded to the offer Mr Stapy lton bade bun be assuied of success, antl in¬ foimeli lum that his attendance would not be wanted at least for two months. He advised him to cheer his spirits in hope of better days, told him his house vus always open to lum, and retired.
Duung
Dunng the short tinicllaifoid had been known to Archdile he bail nude great pio 0 rcss in his esteem His manners were prepossessing, ind though he was ν ciy oiipei fieni, a frankness and gootl humour atoned, in somo degree, foi his deficiency ot understanding Mr Stapj lton had scarcely left Arch¬ dale when Hartoid wis announced Alter iome common topics had been discussed— " I have had a very curious discouise with a very curious woman, ' cried he " You know Mrs Dinwiddie r ' " Peifeetly, ' replied Archdale " She is a very worthy creature, but unlike any other moital breathing ' ob¬ served Harford ' She has taken it into her wise noddle to believe me too fond ol mj fnend Stapjlton s wife " Impossible' exclaimed Archdale, " how could so preposterous an idea entei the brain of a woman of Mis Dinwiddie s good sense? I donot look upon you asa saint, but I will not believe jou to be а demon.
demon I cannot conceive how that vi orthy woman should ha bonr an idea so detrimental loyoui reputation, and which (by bung communicated) may rum the peace of Mi Stapylton's family ' " Though I allow the old hdy much ment, said Haiford, " I must needs say that she is too fot 1 of meddling with othei people s concerns She called at our house this morning, and because I was accompanying Mrs Stapylton in the duet of Love rt thine Eyes she made as great a clatter as if she had caught us between α pair of clean sheets in shoit, she lec- tmed poor Mrs Stap) lton so unmerciful!), that she fairly ran aw aj, and left me to beai the brunt of the viragos eloquence. Aftei α few polite epithets of ungrateful uietch and worthless pi ofligute »he veiy senoualy advised me to leave Mi Stapyl ton s house I protested mj innocente, but it was talking to the deaf and the dead, m short, all the suspicion ai ose, be¬ cause Mis Stapylton ordereu heiself to be denied
denied to every body this moinuig Mrs Dinwiddie scoulJ come in while we weie singing, and abused us as it ve weie about to indulge the fashionable w oriti vuth a column of a newspaper " " I am leally concerned at Mrs Din¬ widdie s error," said Archdale. " 1 hope she will have more prudence than to com¬ municate her thoughts to Mi. Stapylton ' " He knows me too м ell, I hope, " ci ted Harford, " I could not bear his unjust suspicions. Hei-a woithy man, and I have ob'tgations to him, but I will nol fawn upon a patron, when I should expect tnc love ot a friend. I shall soon put an end to all surmise on Mrs. Dinwiddie s part I am tired ot dependance, I am held m ttlken bonds, but they are not less bonds I aspire to be independent I am four-and-twenty, and not worth four-and- twenty pence Mr Stapylton will, I know, provide handsomedy for mo, but he may live as long as I, temperate as he is I wish to put my affairs bey ond the reach
ıeach of chance I am engaged to a gnl, the only d iu B hter of ι jeweller She is not veiy lundsome, her complexion is not fai fiom tliat of a negro, she is пси, howevei, having an independent fortunt bhe has igreed to elope with me, I only vv ait some favourable opportunity ' " Upon my word, Harford, ' cried Archdale, " your scheme dehgh's me, though I do not approve of stealing a match, your present situation almost justifies the measure Mrs Dinwiddie, fiom a mistaken notion, may deeply m- juieyou, if, therefore, my assistance be needful, I offei it with pleasuie " I thank vou, anıl accept the offer, said Harford ' ' VI ill y ou accompany us to Scotland ' "I will replied Aichdale, it your join ney take place shortly, for Mr St pyl- ton has informed me tlut my piesence will be itquuetl it an othce whete he has pm emed, or will piocure, me a situation, m about two months ' " That
" That will do," cried Hai foid ; "and I am happy to shew how ncliculous aie the tears entertained by Mrs Dinwiddie. 101 the present I wish y ou a good moi n- ing You have promised to assist me, and I depend upon you ' Harford took his bat, and retuetl Aich¬ dale was ν ery much shocked at the idea of suspitions so dreadful attaching to the character of his friend , and although his conscience sometimes pained lnm when he ι eflected that he w as about to aid m taking а girl from her father's roof, he consoled himself by the thought that he prevented greater mischief bv so doing. But, ah, unhappy youth ' the first deviation from rectitude may appeal slight—sophistry may blind us, but the stiaight path ot' justice is the only sure conductei to self- approbation
CHAP
С1ИР IV
Vluţt olten τ pc a bloo tv noţp Gır jrOUlt tlıys al!« Ilus conversati ııı а masquei itle w ıs Ί) tike pl ice at thi Ρ in¬ thetni M S ŞtipvltOll insisted upon _,0!llg, ind li i hush ititi agreed t., unst lus will, to actomp mv het Su h uı uıteıtuı- lucnt v i paıtııululy suite el to ïhe tını ti ot Mis Dinvuddie, İm stıcisiıı liuti our finnel tlıeıc imple mom fur ılisplıv slie williiiglv on leilit isked |t mul llie paity Untold likewise niemt to go, nul vor n ι» lu.
he engaged Aichdale aud \\ esternile to accoirpany lnm On the d iv appointed the three ) oung gentlemen dintd at Aithdiles lotlgmgs at Bioniptin, intending iff urards to take а coach to London, and pioceed to a nnsqtieradi uaithousf to piocure dominos Øiniiei w ıs not ind) (ill seten Mrs Juman s 1 itchcn ilimiiicv hid taken fite, and the loin of veil md otlu ι eatables vi eie S| oılt d A hasty d n ner w ıs seised The bottle «as attended petty bnsUv, *Όι Η ıı foi il «a« in so^oo.l ι burnout tl at ebit ν as totali) baiusnetl Midnight appioathcd mil it ι uned wilh violence It had been t uelt) to diipjlcb an untort mate maid st naut in sueh «fithei and at tht pioposal of Archil 1< who«e spuits mie eltnted to the lu„hist pitch ot goo I humoui, the gentlemen a^ieed to st ty t ltt it tl ev were, ai tl ..t t up all ietta οι the masquer ule for tlut lugnt Harford,
Haifo) , who was flushed with wine, gave vent to every theei ful idea his ob¬ sei ν ations vtcrt so whimsical and oulil, tint he kept Ins auditois in a continual loar of laughtci But this was too violent to last by thiee o'clock Aithdalt slept quietly wheie he sat. Wcstcivillt flung himself over a couple of chaus, and Haiford took pos¬ session of the sofa Atfiveoclocl lnthemoinin- a violent knock at the door summoned the sleepy maidservant and soon attti Aichdale was aw ikened by the loutl cries of—" A ■mad n oman ' — a mad и oman ' ' " Don t talk tome about mad women se reamed a female voice, not in the most dulcet tonts " bit shew me tu youi 11 istei s loom '—I un'l sec him, I tell you, whether he is in hed 01 not' ' The dooi then buisl open, and Vis Dinw ideile appealed, but in such disoidci as to justify the siispii ons ot the gul. Hei donimo vvas tucked up m a bunch n 2 behind,
behind, and her misk covered the fore pait of her stiffly fri-ezlcd hair " She is gone ! she is gone I screamed Mrs Dinwiddie, " Oh Mi Aitbdale' help mt to find tl'ein I Oh poor Mr. Stapjlton' Oh pooi little lost girl' I thought what would come ot handsome favourites 1 Oh Mr Aichdale' help me to finei them ' Aichdale stammcied— " Who' wlnt'—what, Midam? who am I to find How cm I sent you? " ΓιηιΙ Mitildi Stapvlton, and that lascai II ufoni ' I tel! jou lit is at this moment m α chaise and six, tijittg to gtt out of tlie kingdom ' lhe shock rtstoied Anhdile to Ins reason " lhat Mrs Stapvlton, said he, " may have been so impiudeiit I do not deny , but Bob Hai forel has been with me all night Harford, use, aud ¡irove that you aie not in a chaise and six. '
Hal ford
Harford got up, and rubbing his ey is, said— ' Holli, Aleúdale' do y our women visit you at this time о day ' She s pretty ancient too llovv long luve you Intl in intrigue with this delectable cieature ' ' " I have no intri,nes ' tned Mis Dinvuddie, " nor am Ι α dilectable ci ci¬ tare But Oh Ileavtn, ditmtl me' what a thought stukes ine! Aichdale, you aie in the plot'—you are α villain'—I sie it '—I im convinced of it ' Aichdale really be^m to beli",e tint gnef had tuinctl her brain and Westei- ville being now awake, and the fumes of wine being dissipated bya good long nap, he jomec! with the othei gentlemen ш pointing out the extieme folly sht was guilty of " Iheie is no other pirson she could hav e gone of) with ' said Mis Dinwiddie, ' Isiyit and! will sweat it' W by were you ill thiee hue caballing Why did you not come to the masquciach as you d 3 piomised'
piombiti? \on ait thiee ungrateful vili uns, and I will not stu till I have seaithtd the house fiom top to bottom ! " Le it so, sud Archdale, heartily vexed at the old lady's peitiuacity " Would you please to look under the sofi, or behind the window curtains ' " Yts-, yes, I shall look behmdeui tains, ' ictuinetl Mis Dm viddie " Shcvvmeiuto youi bedchamber this moment ' ' Nay, Madam, cried Westervdle, jeenngly, " would that be perfectly couect ' " Oltl wonen are of no sex ' ' cnedMrs Dinw idtlie pettishly " The bedchamber I must and will see' " Lut sup oie, M uhm, my fnend An helale should insist, asafoıfeıt, upon a åalutc ? ' ' You nnvalbalutc—wlnt you please," sin erti she ' Open the dooi this mo· nicnl Arci dale obeyed.
' You
" You will find the usual quantity of combs, to« els, vnshballs, and stissars," said he did) , " unit ss Mrs Stap) lton be hidden in ι tootlip,tk tase, oi tn tht -----' " No, she is not heic incited," fried she with a deep sigh, " poor little lost soul '-»-she is inund foi tier' \\ bat preis ıs tb it '^-Optti it this moment '" Archdale now seriously assured hei that although he had complied wttb her whim thus far, he would not extend the in¬ dulgence He said that the press in ques¬ tion had nevei been opened since be had had the lodgings, but that the unstress of the house had ntoimcd lum that it contained books, belonging to a gentle¬ man in the West-Indus. " AU this, ' said Mrs. Dinwiddie, " I believe as much as it it wei e vu itten m the Alcoian." She then put her C)e to the keyhole. " I sic j on'—I set )ou>' sci earned sht, "OhMatilda, Mati'dal pool deluded d4 g !
girl ' come out, and all shall be for¬ given ' ' No answer «as returned, but something evidently moved within " Booh ' ' continued she with a sneer, " please Heaven, I'll see how the/ arc bound " She then beat the door with bei hands, and knocked her high heels to pieces in attempting to foi ce it Westerville, ever on the watch for mis- thief, went to the fire-place, unperceived by Aichdale, and taking the poker, at one blow the lock was burst, the door remained shut, and while Archdale at¬ tempted to wiest the insti ument fiom lus indiscreet fnend, Mis Dinwiddie stepped nimbly forwaid, and thiew open the fold¬ ing doors vnth violence. A figuie lushed from the closet, and clasped lier in its aims! ' " Ihaveyou'—Ihavcyoul' exclaimed she exultmglj. " Oh Matilda ' come back to
to youi poor broken-hearted ----- >0h Lord! meicy clifind me'—help '—mulder '— fut '—the devil I" Lltunig these expiessions, Mrs Din¬ widdie, disengaging herself from the em- biace, spi ang fiom tlic closet, and ran into tlie next room, wheie, falling head- foiemost over a chair, on which Wester¬ ville had been sitting, she hy extended on the flooi vv ithout sense 01 motion. Indeed a linner spuit might have yielded toa suipnse like- the piesent, as the obliging embiacei pioved to be nothing else than а sletetou, in а light di.apeiy of faded Pcisiau silk. The foimcr loclgei li id been а surgeon ■ lus duty called bun to the W est-Indics, and he h td desired Alis linnan to keep the piess untouched till his icturn By a. bhincwoithy ingenuity, lit hid contrived, by t'ıc aid ot springs, to cause the ghastly inniite to catch any cm mus impei tiiicnt m its arms. D 5 lhe
The gentlemen, though not a little startled at the first appearance of the skeleton, soon guessed the cause, and ran to the assistance ot Mrs Dinwiddie Her senses slowly returned Archdale informed liei that she bad nothing to fear, but added— " Indeed, Madam, though I com¬ passionate youi situation, I cannot but observe that your suspitions are highly ungenerous and unjust " I owu, said Westerville, "that such conduct is highly uiiwoitby Mis Din¬ widdie , nor did I bebev e that α woman so eminently sensible, tould have acted α part more hke a bedlamite tlian α lation il agent ' " Tell me, Madam,' exel umed llaifoid, " what reparation you can make to me for suspicions so odious ' I solemnly pio- test I have been heic all night Look at my dress, is it calculated foi а jouiney ? İmletti, Madam, you havt ciuelly w longtd me ' Gentlemen,
" Gentlemen, said Mrs Dinwiddie, looking round her ruefully, " I tm highly obliged to you all three foi your compli¬ ments, and I own that they are very ]ustly confeired upon me It is said th it vutue is its own reward, and I hope the consciousness of having endeavoured to do my duty, will rewaul me for α bioken ι ose and the loss ot α tooth, but if you luve my tomp is iou, t,tve me α glass of vint I own I im in old fool, there foie \ou neeil not tell me so igain I luve vi lunged vou Mr Hai foul andjou, Mi Anhélale, and vou —hive I wronged jou, Mi Wtstciullc? Oh ves I tilled vou ι viilun I tlnnk t Vitli centieméi, you ue amply uviiigcd I i a un ask y out panions ml tiust j ou will to 0 ne mj cuoi in fivoui ot its mohvc " Buttili us Mulini id II tifoni " whit tliiadtul aici lent hasl ppined Is it | osstl к tl tt Mis St i| j t jn eau h ivc el ipri ? 1 own I sometimes suspected Sir Lionel Gltiilum to bt too putial to my d 6 li icnii s
fnend's wife—How does Mı Stapvlton beai it' " Mr and Mrs Stapjlton, sud Mrs Dinwiddie " and vour most unfortunate humble servant, set out in three chans foi the niasqueraile Λ jockty w as verv tiott- blesome to us, and Mr Stapylton elesned hım toseck othır company Mrs Stapvlton said she w is tircel, ind wished to go home I was sutpnsed at this, for in geneial she vi as tlie last to quit a public place Isı« Mr and Mis Stapjlton mto then chaus, and waited in the hill foi the tinning up of my ciunge, whith I bad onlcitd to be ready for me, and in the interim I put on my mask and stood by (he file I had not been long ш this situation, befoie Mi Stapjlton rushid into the hall His lips trembled, tnd lie was as pılı ts α he-, I iinnidsktd When his emotion woulel pennit, lit informed me that bis witt »ъ not to be founel —after he had beni с tt ι ied somt tune, he looked fiom tht window of his stdan, and peıceııed tint lib
lus wift s cimi di 1 not precede hım He stopped and asked the ι casou The cimr¬ inin ııplıed that the sedan carrying the lid), hid tinned down'W ardour Stieet. St ipvlton Ic ipee! out, and threatened the fellow s wilh death if they did not instantly puisue the * _,ıtıve The men cılmly ic plied tint it was impossible , how should tliey be able to puisne а sedan-chair in such α plate as I ondon and especially sutl a sti eet as "W ardoui Sti teť— btapv lton thiew them mouev, and teanng oft his domino he cast it mto the kennel, then ian bitk to the Pantheon m hopes that some mistike had occuricd and that a stiange donuno Ind betn put into the sedan, while Ä rs Stapylton mi 0 ht be mxiously stekiu = lum at the masquerade In this ho| t we perimbulated the looms, but in vain At length he a,rted to r tiun honit md I detti mining to have some able ctatljitor to puisut the lug tives tane hitliti without gomito bt I I own, Mr Huloid, tint I suspiitctlyou, and
antl I once moie ask youi pardon Where ran tlie deludetl girl b«' Oh gentlemen 1 help me to find her '" " How dots Mi Stapvlton beai the blow dem indeel Haitortl, earnestly " ^oti sud you hid suspicions of mc, Matiain , ıhıl vou ciinmunintc these sus¬ picions to Mi Vipvlton' " loo often too otten, tu mv slume and sonow ! said Mis Dinwiddie "but be pacified, Su lie detlarttl that y ou ıı cie incapable ot the deed—tliat y ou were lus coınfıııter his Inend, lus son ' Hastın to Inni —be meds v oui piesence ' " Most uıllııigiy would I do so cited Haifoid , ' but I own, to my shan с, that I am not in ι emuimon to appeal in sa delicate au olficc I have indulged mue than usual ni the pitasuici t ť с bettle, antl I now fxpenentL its рдш A lew liotus sleep will lestoie me t ) sulci uasoii. Id! then I will not insult h Stipylton bj my pteseute
"'W ell,
" Well, gentlemen, ' said Mrs Din¬ widdie, " I find I have made myself а very ridiculous personage I tan set two of you down in London, and I think it lugli time for Mr Aitbdale to retire to iest I shall be at Mr Stapy lton s as soou asi hav e slept You, Mr Haiford can be accommodated somewheit in London, till the tilects of youi night s not have sub¬ sided Mr Westemlle will see the pro¬ priety of not appealing it Mt Stapylton s, who must be too agitated to admit any but veiy ¡lifletilir fnends, and, Mr. Aichdile is I tiust you have a heart to let! h ι the di tresses ot ι most worthy m in, I sh ill hope to find you in readiness to co-opei ile in my plan which may serve to detect the ei mun ds " And л liv, Madam, cned Wester¬ ville, " may ƒ not partake in atisk so pi use« utby' I kno ν tint my fnends Arthdale u d II irfoiti Inve ol lum ıstı Mr Stipvlton, but un / w ho h u e sh itd your ccnsuies, to avoid the t isk ot exposing
exposing the villany tint called them loi th' " You slnll do as y ou please, mv woithy young fnend said Mrs Dinwuldit, " I own, and will own, that I hav t vviongtd v ou all Γοΐίοιν the dictates of vour good bents md once moie púdon my suspi¬ cions Vi ho accompanies me' Harfoid handed Mis Dinwiddie down stans She w liked with difficulty Wester¬ ville followed Λι lived m Piccadilly, Hufonl and Westervdle alighted The fomiti slept at the Gloucester Coffee Hi use md the latter proceeded to his lodgings while Mis Dinvvidtlte, alone and melancholy tired, hi uiscd ind maimed was com eyed а long jouimy to lm«bury Square
CHIP
CHAP. V.
" Who wt thou, Son of Night? The children of the feeble aie utop The midnight wind 13 in my hall '
A FORTNIGHT elapsed, but Mr. Stapylton refusetl to admit any society hut that of Harfoid, even Mis. D.n- vutlclie was excluded Aichdale was depiived of the society of Westei ville by t summons ioi that gentle¬ man toa neaı ıelıtıoıı, tiom whom he hail gieat expectancies. His tune was, of course, solıtaıy At length it was enlivened by
by the appeaianc; of Ilaitord, who called eaily out citnn g. All coniniiiiiKation from this quarter was ot .111 afflittive nature. Mr Stapylton. ittuscd rumloit, and bitterly rtpenttdihe folk w huh had induced lnm to join hint* self to a Ljiil so young. > Aithd Ue aiiMOLsly tnquned if Mr. Stapylton had bttuniflueuetd by tlic ideas of Mis. Dinwiddie Hai ford ıeplıed that he knew to the contiaiy, and that Mis. Dinwiddie had extulpatid hi in by letter, even ivhen she was lefused admittance. " I will not doubt your woid, Aich¬ dale," continued he, " you promised to accompany me l /ш m¿ht w ill ciown my independente Miss Matthews will be the companion of my flight 1 hav t a liai kiiey coach at the dooi. You will not hesitate to entei it ' " I piomned, and my p.onnse issatred," replied Aichdale, " butyoui piee.pitancy surpnses me. Whv not give me. some little previous notice- ' " lhe
" The opportunity only offers this mg/it," said Harford. " Old Matthews and his wife are luckily in the country. Come, my dear fellow, put half a dozen shuts in a haedkerclnef, and let us away for Scotland." " On any other occasion I should he surpnsed, Harford, at your leaving youi benefactor in lus hout of distiess. But I will attend you." Arthdale then desired Mrs Jarman to make a packet of netessary apparel, and lelluig liei ht should be absent about thiee weeks, he left the house, and was conveyed, with his companion, to the cornei of Rathlnne Place Dui ing the ride, Harfoid very gravely additsscd hnrailf to Archdale— " You will thmk my conduct very stianti, said he, "but 1 begot .ou not to txpress an> stuprisi m the healing of Miss Mitthews,—leave mt to explain evtiy thing In the hist place, Teauestly lequest that you will not speak a single word
word to the girl during our journey. I have my reasons for it : you shall have them at α future time." " Not speak during a journey to Scot¬ land I" exclaimed Archdale, laughing ; " you are joking, assureelly !" " We shall not go the direct north road," said Harford j " and I enjoin you silence for two days only." The coach now slopped. Harford got out, and lelt his cotftpanion, who began to reflect with no great degree of self-appro* battuti on the undertaking he was cngageeL in ; but the die was cast. In about half an hour Harford stepped' into the coach. ' ' You will be surprised at what I am going to say," cried he; " but let me entreat you to go alone to Bristol. I will join you at the White Liim tomorrow. Perhaps I may be there as soon as your¬ self." " To Bristol!" exclaimed Archdale; " that is a singular route lo Scotland." " I told
" I told you, said llirford, " that I did not mean to take the direct north mad \es, I say to Bnstol Do not ask me any questions now, but eternally oblige me by taking a chaise directly ' " \otu conduct appeals downnght in¬ sane, said λι elidale, " but all cities are alike to me—you »ill find me at the place you mentioned He then sprang from the hackney coach, and walked to the first stable he saw lie lined a chaise and four, and was tonveyed fiom the metiopohs It was e uly in the morning when Aicb¬ tlale amved at Bnstol He had slept m the chaise and therefoie did not retire to bed Night came on and he began to wondei at the stay of Harford Perhaps some dehy might have taken place, or the scheme might have failed He wis nteitunmg this idea (ubith m fact was not disagieeable to lnm), when Harfoid < η tei ed the coffee room ni a hurned mimici "We
" We must away this instant ' cned he, "tome along my dear Archdale—I hav e horses ready for us ' ' Horses ' ext launed Archdile " Do not stop to ask questions I w ill send foi your packet. Net er mind finish¬ ing your negus, but let us be off I Archdale really began to entei tain fears for his tuend s sanity, but followed him Hat tord led his companion to the out- skuts ofthe town, where the half finished houses ev inced a rage for building and its failure He knocked at a mean house A servant out of hvwy opened the dooi Both gen¬ tlemen enteied " Is every tlung prepared, Ned de¬ manded Harfoid ' Yes, Sir, replied the man, " the hoises aie saddled, the pistols are pruned, and the masks ----- " There is no need of masks, the laely wears a veil. Bung the hoises lound
The
The f llovv obeyed " Go to the M Inte Lion, 'said llaifoid, " and get iny picket and Mr. Anbei des. You will follow us m л ch use, you know the route' " I do, Sir " Haifoid then mounted his horse, anil l"d another with α side,saddle Aichdale, wondenng at α (light so uncommon, like¬ wise mounted Harfoid igain cautioned him not to speak to Miss Matı' ıvıs and rode on They took the road to the Ni vv Passage. M hen they irrived at the outskirts of the town, Harfoid stoppiti his hoise it alitile pot house He dismounted, ami blew a whistle on the top of his whip Soon afttr ι female form appeared, vviapped in α thi к colouied silk pelisse She was lishttil by the woman ot tilt house Her veil vva s of very thick muslin, and tntnely covimi her tict , but Aitbdale perceived, is Harfoid lifted her upon the saddle, that her пик vvas of the ve; y biovvnest hue The
The lady maintained a pi ofound silence she was in evident tiepidatton, and fre¬ quently sighed. Amved at tin New Passage, Ilatford lured a boat, and in halt an hour they weie safely landed m Monmouthshire. Hoises were leady saddled for their use, and tlie party proceeded towaids the west. The night, which was uncommonly fine, nowchanged its appearance the daikness became terrific—the thunder roaieel, antl the fi equent blue lightning glared thiongh a thick wood, but discovued no beaten path to the Havellers Miss Matthews scieamed frequently, but spoke not. " We have lost the load," cned liar- ford " How the devil did we gtt into this wood? Let us not, howevei, alarm ourselves unnecessarily , perhaps we may yet find some shelter " " Oh, no, no'" sighed Miss Matthews. "Silence!' exclaimed Hartord, vehe¬ mently, " ot I will keep my wot d '" Sliss
Miss Matthews buist into tears Arch¬ elale wis shocktd, and resolved upon quit¬ ting his companions at the next stage lhe hghtiiiiij, now grew less vivid, and the mn pouied in tonents Archdale pioposed to thght, nnd lead Miss Mat¬ thew s s horse, as be feared they might be betii>ed into some quagnuie, or be ex¬ posed to a fall fiom the ineqinlitiesof the s iouiid liai toid alloned bis idea to be just. both dismounted Miss Matthews de¬ livered the rem to ber adunici, ind the pu!) onu moie pıoceedtd lhe ı in toiitmuid to Wl in tonents, md tic ti iteli ıs in vini attempiti! to e\ploıe the pathless «oj Ι ΊΙιιν looked anxiously foi 1 1 ¿ht At ltıı_,th, by the help ot а flash of li 0 htnin 0 , α 1 ırge pile of building wis diacoveiid at t distante, and thither tht vıeaıy tiiv ellus rep tired. 1 rom whit they could disctin, it ap¬ peared to be the remains ot а momstery Ihrfoid drew а bottle of phosphorus fiom voi ti t Ins
his pocket, and twisting up a letter, set tt on fire. The place they were m affoided but in indifferent shelter, yet, to the gieat joy of the tratellers, some biushwood and straw were discovered, protected from the vet by an arch in the will This was soon collected, and a cheerful fue blazed, " Perhaps," said Hai fold, " wt may find a plate still moie shelteied than this " He took some blazing striw, a iti all three explored the unn, but the seaictt lias ineffectual the whole building was unroofed, and nothing was piesented to the view but long aisles, bioken columns, and matted grass, 01 large docks, podding under the weight of w ater They returned to the fire " Let us remain as we are, ' said Har¬ ford , " daylight will soon appear We shall not be molested by the ghosts of the venerable Abbots ' Miss Matthews screamed loudly 'Tor
" lor shame 1 ' continued Harford, " do not give wiy to such weakness'— This sainted spot was not always so void of good cheu I feel the w ant of refresh¬ ment, and vt ıslı some bearded and hooded Friar would use and administer a cup of sack, or α flask of Rheuisli llaifoid had scalee uttered these words when а stieam ot pale blue fue covered the whole building, accompanied by such an awful buist of crashing thundei, as to shale the t ine-woin vv il's Ilus was followed by α noise almost is tenific—- A tovvei, vvlutli had long braved the weathei, had been stiuck by the li 0 !itinng, and fell in frightlul rum to tht ground The whole edifice totttitd lhe luly, who was seatul on a bioken column neu the lite, thiew up hei veil and rlasptd hei hinds, tooinueh tenifitd touttei a sound, but, Oh Ht iv ins and eaith' what was the honor of Aichdile, when, in despite of the yillovv oelne with whith her t hceks L 2 «eie
weie colouied, he beheld tbe featuie» of ----------- Mrs Stapylton ' I ' Uttering а cry of despan, Archdale flew fiom the rum, unknowing whither be Went, and unconscious of what he did He continued to mn with speed, his only idea seemed to be that of dying fiom ι lion ot he could not define Huge stones often obstructed his passage, he fiequently 111 to the gioimcl Heedless of biuises, and of tlie bloot! that llowed copiously fiom his head, which was cut by α fill, lie continued his caieer His lut was lost—his feet « ere fiequently entan B lt<! in bnais, fein, and lushes—he often sunk up to his knees in quagmncs yet still lit pursued lus com se, lost to reflection, and alive only to a deep sense of despan At length nature could no moit, and he fell upon α using mound of eaith, on which w as а small tiee, ant! he mis so exhausted, that he fainted aw ay, and 1 ly for halfan hour insensible to miseiy S W lien
THE WORLD Vit LIVE IN When he recov cretl, he vv as so benumbed, that he could not rise The storm was over, and tbe darkness not so intense Aichdale coukl not at fiist lecollect 1 ow he came into this situ ition He lis¬ tened fur the sound of distant bells,—all αι ıs silent At length α gioan seemed waited on the «mil Aiilidait listened attentively ile thought he heaid а pl un¬ tile oıee, but aftei a tune he believed himself mistaken he closed his еуеэ, and tortili ing anxiety rent his heart While he lay thiiu, a ν one close by him, said in a phmtiv e, ) et upbraiding tone— " Who shall judge my son?—who shall judge my son ' Aichdale started, his hoiror increased —he would have sprung upon his feet, but was unable He oeheld, by tlie very impeifect light the figure of an old man, vv rapped m what appeared to be a robe. H is long ban and beard w ere gi u/led, white, and " stieamid like а meteoi to the tioubled air ï 3 " Who
" AVlio sh ill judge my son ' ' cned the old man, " who shall judge hnn' Wilt thou, or the Being who made thee, and who made my son ?" " It is my fathei ' ' thought Aichdale; ant' the hair ot his head giew auimited at the idea " Do not ]udge my son '—dare not to judge lnm '—His body is bunttl m peace, and Ins spuit is returned to God who gpve it i" " Here tbe figure utteitd a gioan so hollow, doloious, and long-driwn, tl at it seemed to pioceed fiom llie bosom of a reprobated spirit, and completed the terror ofthe unhappy Ai thdale. With the utmost difticulty he was enabled to pronounce— " In the n.une of the awful Bung you mention, declaie who you aie I" The figuie, uttering a piticing cry, exclaimed—
"He
" He is not condemned for ever '' then turned from the piosirate youth, and the foim was lost in oliscili ity Archdale did not in tlie least doubt but tl at the figuie he hid spcn, was nothing " tint ihis eai th owns Hetitmblcd with feai and awe, but nature demanded ìe- pose m despilt of Ins agitated thougnts, he fell "sleep and was iwakened a little befoie sunrise by а couple of countiy lads dnvmg α tut " Where do you come fiom ' said the elder "Why you have not slept here all night, have you ' I would not have been m youi place, to be made Punte of Wilts " h the place then so elaiigeious? de¬ manded Ύιιΐκίαίε " Dangeious enough,' replied the bumpkin, " for tint matter ' Why wt- zaicls and evil spuits ν Ik ibout it all ni-Jit' I saw lite dev tl here (Gcd keep us from htm ') « Uh my ow η eyes ' I oid love you' dont you know tint y on aie ii ly ing
lying upon pool Davoyth Moigan's grave, that hung himself in his fathei's barn?" Hi tubes, fatigue, and pain weie in a moment forgotten Aichdale sprung upon his feet, but the efťoi t vi as tiansient—he staggered, gioaned, and again ftll with Molence upon the unhallowed giave ofthe suicide. The boys staged it cat h other, аш! а tonvel sation took plite between them in Welch, ulule Aichdale Ity upon tin grave in astate not fu fiom insiiibibihty. He slowly recovued, and now perceived that what he had taken for a small tree, vv as nothing less than the stake which had been driven thiongh the body, and the grave was made whcie foul ways meet. Having promised to ìeward the boys liberally foi then tiouble, they laised and placed lum in the cart, and he at lived at Usk about eight о clock in the moiumg. He was, with somcdimculty, taken fiom h s humble vehicle, and put into a bed A sutgeou was sent for, his wounds were cliessed,
THE dressed, and a composing draught ad- niiiusteied J ust as Ai elidale was dropping asleep, a, groan, as in au adjoining room, struck Ins ear Then a voice, solemn and slow, cried— " Nay, do not judge my son ' Judge not, that ye be not judged' My son s body is buned in peace' Who shall judge niy son ? He cursed his fathei '—But who shall judge my son ' ' Aichdale was now convinced thatarest- less pertui hed spnit was about his pillow The lantll uly entered the room sottly, to see if liei lotlgci was in want of any thing The voice continued— " My son cm sed lus fathei, but judge him not! Davoyth cuised his father I— But who shall judge my son? ' " What voice is that?" cried Archdale ti enabling " Oh Sir 1 I declare I begyour pardon. LH send the old man to anothei part of £ 5 the
the house It is only mid Owen Morgan, Su Ht ran mad when lus son died Poor creature '—it is ι veiv sad stoi) I An hilale whost inclination to slicp was totali) divena α) ind whose ınmd rcquned some alienation fiom lus piesent thoughts, begged he land!id) to tell lnm Ihe particulate She said she v ould, but must first put mad Ow en into an ither room She iettici for tint pu [ose but soon ι etui mil and scati ig herself on α chair at the head of tht bed began to rtlati the tragical y tt sin pie tale of Davoylh MIoigan and Шагу Llewellyn " Ovien Morgan, Su was once a creditable farinei near Usk He vi is a gootl 1 md of man, only he las veiy passionate Whenever bis chiiditn com mitted tin sligl test fault 1 e used to beat and shake them, that it was л shame to be seen
' He
' He had two sons Sir, Lewis and Davo)th Lewis dud when be w as tlev en yeais old, and all the pansh said it was a judgment upon the f ¡ fli er for his cruelty " Well Sir, Davoyth was beat and biuised whether he did right or wrong, but foi all that, he grew up to be as fine a)oung man as evei the un shone on. His father, though he left off beating lnm vv hen he vv as a big man used to curse and sweai at hnn that you nevei beard the like and foi what —Davoy th was а good young man, and α sobei )oiing inan, and kipt no bati company, but mai к the end of aM. ' ' Mary Lltvi elly n was the daughter of faimei Llewellyn ot tht С ι oss Sht was the nitest voung woman in Wales, but ohe was veiy pom Old Owen Morsan heaid that Ins son kept lompany with Mary, but lit took little notice ot it, he only used to s ly sotnetin es that he did not mmd what his son ıhıl, it he did not many hci, tliat he would take care that e 6 he
he aliould only marry one as neh as him self foi I do really believe, Sir, tlut old Owen had not less than sixty oi seventy pounds a y ear " Well, Sir, now comes the bad patt of the story Then w as a ıev el about six miles from Usk, and young Davoyth w ent there with Mary, and though he was always veiy sober, somehow or mother he di ink a little too much that night, and so, somehow or anothei, a few months after llie pansh officeis were upon the lool out foi voung Davoy tb Morgan "Wtll, Sn, and so Davoyth sud that he didn t can α fig foi them, for he was ready intl willing to many the gnl and that ehe li ul no need to sweai tbe child, because he knew he was the fithei of it but foi all that it is a wise f itliir that knows his own child, as my pooi husbind used to sav Howevei, nobody beltevid to the contiaiy, for Maiywasas gootl a girl befoie she played the tool, as any in Monmoutlisline " When
" When old Owen heaid this report, he asked Davoyth it he was in earnest, and when the young man didn't deny it, he cuised hım bıtteıly, and swore he would prevent the match, or turn linn out of doois " Davoyth said he might do as he pleased about that, but declared himself to be in duty bound to marry the gul be had biought to shame " And so, Su, the banns were put tip; but w hen Mr Richards the paison, asked if any body knew any just cause or im¬ pediment why Davoyth Morgan and Mary Llewellyn might not be joined together in holy matnmony ----- Oh Loid, Su ' I shall remember it to my tly mg day ' ----- Owen Moi q m stood up, and sani, ' / da ' bolt in the paison s face The congttgition was all thiown into confusion, and the distuibautt was so gieat, that it waked Squne Recce. ш " As sewn as tin service wa-,ovei, every body Hoiked about old Owen, and tolti hım
hun «Int a slume it was foi hım to be¬ li ne so But be fill upon his knees, and held out his Bible, ami und — ' It mv son Divo)th manies Maty Llc«ellv,n, I give hmi nt) bittel tinse' — 1 wish that his niislortuius u a) dnve hım to a n otsel of biead, ami that tht worn in and hei b ist nils mi) n akt htm as un¬ happy as ht n ikes ше ' " Ihe p u son told hmi that he tin! not act like aChnstian, but Ovtcn bid lum hold his tonkin, if lit only meant to encoiu igt undutitul clultlrtn " Divovth was standing near, and tould not help ci)in.ï bittuly , but oltl Otten no s ionet saw hun tinn he filtrat hnn likt a tigci, and pulled oil his hut b) liuitlfuls Davovthboe ill this, be¬ cause it w ts lus f it liei he was the lest boxer in tht ρ ıı ıslı , but İti nivu ollııed tontuin ι blo« to in·. Jal hei " lhe рагчап sutl, ıs soon as they weit pni teil, tint he ne ι ci itisiied to meddle or in ıkc «uh timiiy niatteis, only he
he must say, as tht paities wue of age, а tatlın s coıısınt vťas not absolutely ne ccssııy so Sn, the banns went on, and they weie ııı u ι ied, and only think- Owen stood m the poiib and cubed them both going in and coming out I ' Divo>th, howevei took а little cotti ι aud foi some time he went on tolei inly well His father cc ntniuetl ei uel, and sw me if he с une neat lus house, he viould set the dogs at hım, but Seveni aud Ciptain knew 1) tv dv th too well foi tint and wlicucvei tl cy siw hun, they u cd to jump ou hım antl ıvı 0 their gieit tulsfct ¡ny —they viere not ungrateful, although tley w ci e only dogs --------- Arthtlile sighed, fmn his late ex¬ peliente he hid reas 11 to think that in 0 i ilitudew is tl t vice oi »iwi done lhe 1 nielliti, coitiiiued — " Will Sn all went in veiy well, except that Divoyih nul lus latliei wtie as ingiv vuth ont mollin as could be and
and that the whole place called out shame upon Owen, when, just as Mary s time was coming on, pool Davoyth was taken ill with the yellow îaundice' —He was very ill— Oli ciuelly ill indeed '—'lhe whites ot his eyes weie as yellow as а kite s root, but he would work, and work, and woik till he almost fell dead at tlie p'ough oi spade for Mary was expected to lie in every day, and he couldnot beai to see his wife want, you know. " At last she was brought to bed, and wretched enough they were Alaiy had а bad tune of it, and vt hat with one thing, and what vuth another thing, the poor creatines were toicetl to sell the very bed they lay on, and Mary, vv ith a sucking child, was obliged to cieep to a fein heap " Davoyth remained ill, but hoping to move his fathei to pity, he took his half- starved child in his aims, and walked to tbc f ai m. » " Owen
" Owen Morgan was silling it the window, smoking ι pipi vi ith ι large jug cf ile btfoit lnm lie hardly 1 new Ins son md no gre it vv ontici foi instead of α handsome, comely ruddy, nrat man, poor Davoyth was quite thin and yell ην, vvitli m old pocket handkerchief tnd over lus heul, and under his chin " 4s scion is Owen Morgan kne« his son, he put his litui out nt the window, and said— ' Get away, you haidened villain l'— and yet poor Davoylh was upon his hum¬ ble knees —'Take your bastard out of my sight !—Go, starve as you deserve ! I it my curse ι emani upon you ' Go, beg of others'—See if they will piovule foi your -----' He used ι very ciuel name to poor Maiy, Sir, who befóte this unfoitun ite aftan, vvas the best gır! in tlie parish " I heard ill this, Sn,' continued the I indi uly, ' md is 1 limili! poor Davov th might w mt ι belly tull, I told lum to come home
home to me, and eit some fine fit bacon. But his poor stomach was too weak, and lit said if I would gue hım а slice ot it, lie would rairy it to Maiy, viho vas almost famished, and the child dying for want of milk " Things vent on fiom bad to worse Mary and her child w eie found dead upon the fon htap mdDavoy th, without mv hopes ftom his fithei who cuised him is bıtteıly as before, lay sick and brokui- heaitcd upon the tern heap where Maiv died '—It is asad thing to be so worldly- nnndttl as ohi Owen Moigm, Sir, but maik the end of all Owen was a worldly man, md he lus h is punishment foi it One ¡¡raining he ins с tiled up by the outtnesot ι gicat nunibti of pco| le He put on Ins ni 0 ht & own auel went out of doois to Ins btm, white lull th pansh v is got togtthu 1 he fiist thin lie saw, vaslnsson Davoyth lnn_,i , liomalic ш lie |iini[t(l uid iiimptd dm htm bit Divoyth was out ol lib icach, body and I
soul too ' '1 he iitighboins told lum lit deserved it all, yet that vv is crud of them too toi though Ovun was very wicked to bi sine, it was ι sati thing to stolti hım at »Ueli a lime " Well, Sır, and so every body thought tint Davoyth would have been buried alon.> with his wife and child, neaı the old chancel w indovv , but the Citmnei came, md as oltl Owen was h tlf dıstıacted, anıl ıııı-ııl himself mil even body lound lnm, the veidick was biought mjolhwda sea' I suppose that is Greek for being buned in α cıoss roatl, and having a stake dime thiough the botly. I have heaid, but I don t believe it, that rich folks aie always thought mail when they kill them¬ selves , but I don t wish to speak tieason, so 111 bold my tongue. " Now, Sır, don t you flunk old Owen Moigan veiy hud-he utcd ' Divovth vv is Owen s son—tint all Monmouthshi e knew , anil the pool child vv is Divovtl s son—tint evetv bodv believed so tli t vil ell í'
whether he would, oi whethei hevi ould not, tin poor ciulii was old Owen s fl. sli and blood, il even the mother hid been a »41 r " So, Sir, Owen Aloi^m, from being α eolici man, uscii to dunk troni ιηυιηιιι π till ni„ht lie nevei three! to go to Chuich, tot when he liiani thi pvison sav , ' //.ra s/e«tï ilo ilo mulder ' lit shtml lil e a 1 il At liiütth hr hei uni fluttuiteli , and, tohnishtht business, his housekeeper, tint tveiy body thought lum too great with, ran away with a htap of money and all the plate lhen three of hiebest barns viete buined down and Ins sheep dietl >>y dozens and twenties ot the iot, so that, what with one loss and what w ith another loss, old Owen \loigan, fiom a nth man, camt upon the pansh, and, what is worse, nobody pitied lnm " I foigot to say that a paper was found in pool Davoyth's potket, (lie was an ex- t ellent penman), and the paistin shewed it to evtiy body, bctaufe it wtswiitten to
to hun Divoyth said tliat Ins father had c uistil Inni, uni he lud cuiset! lus I ither and hoped th it lie might be as vt ι etched m this woild, as lit hid made hnn " Soon ittu, oltl Owen ν cut to the puso i, anil asl ed il be tbou 0 ht that his son md biniseli weie tl miniti " Ml Hich mis icphid that ht hopid not, and that ht should bi veiy soi ι ν to say as inutil ot llie vuekttltst suinei tint evn lived, that oui God w us úimcicijul, nid did not Hitlåt wilh tint utility he seemed to expect ' Who slnll iluc to juti/ your son said Alt Kith nils- (/v s In) , —'he his now been it tlit pidgincnt se it of God, whose mu t v ıs b mmllcss Itt those vv ho condemn htm, likt i silu! uy t\ imple, uni bevine tliat litt v Iso y it Id not to misfoitunc " Owtn Motrin vviuii, Ins hinds "nil s ud it w ıs ti ml that /lia son shoultl bt buned woise thin α tlu^ " Ни
" His madness no« grew woise and vioise lit went about Usk, and asked eveiy bod) «no should judj,e his son — He «ent «uh a pn)ci-book, and lead the bunal semte ovei the gl ive limaseli he knows it now by Iicai t, and icpcats it t dozen times а da) " flic p ıı ıslı put lum heie, and I f,it st\ sli Ilings a week loi hi» boaid, little enough in all conscience now th it bultti is fourteen pence a pound Оисп will nevei vieil a со it, bit« ilks aironi diessed just as be w ıs «hen 1 1 sa« lu, sun hang¬ ing— m a loose gen n vuth ,teit sleeves lit .rocs ıvcıy iu_,ht to ılıt t,ı ıvt in the viood, mil moms ovei it, and sometimes savs the butt 1 scum 1 hopi Goti Al ni,ht) «dl hive mei cy upon lnm, and all ol us ' " People stt 1 Unit no nass would t,iow tipon Dav 0) lb s gì ne , but my husband uid I thoii 0 ht it oui dut) to put somt lloweis upon it Ьо I galliti t d ı ise» anıl vt ill flowers, and old nun, and mint, and wonnwood,
wormwood, it being Easter eve, aud put them in a basket " I must needs say I was afiaid , but as my husband, who is dtad and gone, was with me, I didn t so mueh mmd. " We weie vuy busy in putting the lionets moitlu, (it vns а moonlight night, foi we didn t tlaie to do it by d iv, foi foi ot having an ill namı), when we lintel sonietiiing cry, ' Who shall judge my son? —who slnll judge my son"'—We dulu t vait to be told tv ite to run away , but, aftu all, it was only pooi old Очен, who tomes then eveiy 1114ht ' Aiehd ılı coniti not but biave a sisţh it the relitaisalot ihis villici anual Паи, he found, was ivu tlie same —the ,lU- sufficient 1 uinu was but ι bumb'., copy of the non eleviteli miks, who puniit self-intutst to supeisetle tvuy moial duty.
CH U'.
CHAP. VI. ' Tliese shall the fitrj passions tear, " ¡he\u!turisof lîîLinmd — 1 lîiidamfül Лпсег, pallidi tır, " And ïhamc lint ·■] ult s bellimi. ' Or pimnt; Lott sliill »i le thui >oi h, ; OrJt*Voib>,iMtli runklim'trPtli, " Tlut mly gnaw, ılıt. secret huit , ' Λχχιί Ltıvy ,viin, and f «leti Сме, ■ Gum visrigi.il, comfortless DL¡»:tir,
A ITER a few day s, Aithd.de was enabled to leave his bed. Ho had reflected, dining his confinement, on the most eligible mude of infoi ming Mr, Stapylton of the infamous conduct
conduct of Harford, —he therefore wrote a lettéi to Mrs Dinwiddie, in which he ïehted all he knew, and begged her to communicate the intelligence as delicately as possible to Mr Stapylton He con¬ cluded by saying that lie should be in London as soon as his health would pei¬ mit lum to travel He now felt rather relieved from anxiety The weather was bad, and he asked lus landlady if she could procure hint a book. She brought him an old Practice of Piety, in black letter This was a book Aichdale had hule inclination to peruse at that moment He enquned it her library were not more extensive Yes, she had a Bible and Common Prayer Book, but both were in W eich Archdale smiled, and owned he wished to have something to read that he could understand " Why then, Sn, said the landlady, " if written papers will do as well as a book, I beheve I can suit you They were vol il. F biought
brought from Manchester by my husband They were vuitten by a veiy odd sort of a young man, who lived tliere toi some time. I knew him veiy well, he was the best tempered creature in the woild, еч- cept »any body used lum very ill indeed I believe he loved every body better than himself, and woidd always be giving and giving·away, till at last he h id nothing left to give, and then the people he helped to serve, called Inni a fool for his pains. It is a bad woi Id we live in. Sir' He had been cruelly used by some rascals in London town, who told а pack of lies, and did all in then power to keep bun back in the world, and suie enough they succeeded Jt might have been hi» own fault too, for though a Child might Uad, the devil could not drue hun He was ■vei) obstinate, and nould till every body what he thought of them So you may guess what a tune hi li id of it, when he bad a paik of knaves to deal vuth 111 fetch you the writings dnectly, Su ' The
Tlie landlady then went out, and soon returned vvith a large bundle of papere. " There was a good deal mare of it," said she; " but I have used some of it to put round my candles, and wrap up butter." Archdale thanked her. She retired. Archdale untied the roll. It contained some short philosophic tracts, a few essays of an humorous nature, and two or three pieces of poetry. Archdale perused, with some pleasure, the following lines :—
LINES WK1TTE» ON МГ BIHTH-NICHT. Full thirty years have (aken flight Since first I open'd to the light A dim, reluctant eye", fvn ttais uf joy a moth« sheé, But o'er my drooping infant head ï'ell drops of agony.
в»
Bv fine reprieï'd, mynorthtm uw, (Itt urift career of glory runi , Soon ¡«ft my (butted tight t And ill the tcenn, Ъу Fancy drawn, A* youthful hupe btgan to áãwn, Ή ere lott In lengthen Λ night. Why iieav'fit ihou thm, rebellious heart ^ Wliy deprecate the lifted dart * Submit to Henv'n's decree ! Come all who mourn в mother's doom, Come bend with me around her tomb, Ve may have felt like me. Ob thou, for whom toy tears yet flow 1 Be», dearest morter, canst thou know My gratitude how warm » Yes, faithful Mcm'ry, never weak, Imprints thy kisw nn my cheek, And gives me back thy form That beauteous form, which Nature gaye AU hearts to conquer and enslave, Who remate шйаепсе own, That smile which spoke the feeling heart, Tiie getnlifcc tcar*a spontaneous start, At Sorrow's lightest tone.
Cun 1 foîgrt ΐίΊΛ watcMu! look, THhen ono bnnk, or пгяга brook, With hfrtiW siepO trod» Or, («crchenih d bc the thought That first by ihre m; longue tm iau h lii Τοίιβρ ılır nume of Cod» Trn surnmrn, with th) presence bìctt* i RCnrty, sfilili Dli, «ni. tO rt«, Nor thought of raming woe But tutee ten mitten, elowlj gone, Haie hcaril me verH the bitter monn For jojs I hop'd to know 1 hnp'á, when manhood nerv'd my arm, (Wfien thy ftir fbrm should cease to charm), To she* a filiei care, 1 о shield ihee from Misfortune's blast, And (mindful «till ot ftvtmrs patt). Of muu wave the share. To shew thee thit к Krutrfu! mim! No time can bound no pnssion blind, № '.ophtst lead abtray "ft b ic gently down life's *iopin£ hill ï му á ihy tottering font,» jr, stilt, Лш1 clear'd each rugged w^y I 3 And
And when Щ late« patting breath Should gently couit the hand of Death, In pamlat sighs «prest , Then, then, my Wither, would thy ion Eicium—" ureal Got!, thy wtll le dont ' ' Otr take tier to thy rest ' Tis night, and dim the taper gleams ; My mother, vuit yel my dreams, Since more » not for tnc; And e'en ihoold patriarchal yem (Uowish'dj be mine, my filial tort Shall flow itili fresh for thee 1
" So good a mother deserved a letter poet!" thought Archdale. " The plea of affection ought not to disarm critical cen¬ sure ; but the feeling mind will allow it great weight." He then amused himself by reading tlie more humorous tracts. Return of post biought him a double letter, superscnbeil by the hand of Mrs. Dinwiddie. He opened
opened it, but his senses almost tailed lnm when he beheld his own letter returned. In a rage, little shoit of madness, he ordered a chane, and was cons eyed to the metiopohs He lust tailed upon Wester- ville. lic h ul not returned to London He then went to linsbury Squire. Мгь. Dinwiddle was looking over the Vene'ian blinds lhe fnntman denied her Arch dale, stung to the soul, pushed the man aside, and enteied the parlour. M^-s Dinwiddle's face was the colouc of crimson. " How dare yon, Sir, be so impertinent as to intrude upon me '" " What hai e 1 done, Madam, tobe treated w ith such contempt ' ' " Oil nothing at all !" said she, fanning herself violently, " nothing to signify '— To assist a fellow in running away with his benefactoi s wife, is a mere trifle!— You will cut a figuie in the world '—In¬ gratitude and pimping will qi'alify ) ou for the highest rank ' You will tome to i i prcfci ment
prtteiment m time'—I may live to see you m a bitch of Peers!" " May I pensh at your ftet, Madam," exclaimed Archdale, " if Ideseive such censure'—I knew not the lady tobe Mrs. Stapylton." " Tısa he''returned Mrs Dinwiddie, "you are not such a fool '—Travelling I don t know when all with Matilda Stapyl¬ ton, and not know her !—Her voice must have betrayed her, if her person were dis= gmeed '" " She never opened her lips but once, Madam, and then was checked by the villain Hai foi d " " Impossible 1 " cried Mrs Dinwiddie; " she never could bridle her tongue two minutes' You are woise than Harford he, at least, has too much shame to attempt a justification of his conduct !—I have sonie pleasing intelligence for you. Mi Stapylton is dying. I see that he Will never gel over it He admitted me oply yesterday at my earnest solicitation. He
He fainted away when he heard that Harford was the wietch who had wronged him Oh young man ' if you had seen his piteous lountcnance, even your hard heart woultl have been touched with lemobe' lie pitied that little vixen, his wife, and called her ' unfortunate child l'— A vile, impudent, silly hussy '—I asked hun if he viould not bav с recourse to law, and puisut and punish the offender, He replied that he would have nothing to do with law —that Haiford was veiy cruel and base, but he might himself be in fault—fiiet, tor having oveilooked the extreme youth of his wife, and ne\t for exposing her to tlie society of a young and handsome man Mr St ipy lton even forgives you, .md looks foiward to the woild, when tiny neithei many, noi are given m maniage ' ' You distract me, Madam, by these moat cine! suspicious' cned Aichdale. " ltll mc how I shall atone for my m- discietiou in accompanying the villain : ' ì 5 "If
" If you are sincere," said Mis Din¬ widdie, " supply the deficiency of the law.—Pursue the wretch, and take his blood ' The laws cannot affect his life A man is hanged for stealing a silver spoon , and shall a monster breathe, vv ho has lobbed a family of repose, and who may cause the death of a worthy membei of society ' ' " 1 had aheady determined to be ïe- venged," said Aichdale, " your un¬ merited contempt alone brought me to London I will instantly puisut the ι fugitives, and punish the villain who has mined me in your good opinion !" " If you do this, " said Mis Dinwiddie. "you will be lestored to that good opinion. I must otherwise deem you an accomplice. At present, Sir, I beg y ou to shoi ten y our visit \ ou have acted very ι udely, and unlike a gentleman, in foi cmg yourself into iny house 1" Archdale, exasperated by the taunts of Mrs Dinwiddie, left Finsbury Square. He
He went to his lodgings, packed up some clean linen and other necessaries; then· putting notes to the amount of one hue- died and fifty pounds in his pocket-book, oidered a chaise, and was conveyed back to Usk. Having desciilfctl the object of his puisuit, he easily got intelligence, and tiaced them to Holyhead. He there learned that a gentleman and lady, such as he enquired for, had set trail for Ireland but a few days before. Keso. ved to over¬ take them, he secured a passage ; and after· a long and dangeious voyage, he arrived sate in Dublin. While Archdale was pursuing tins- un- piinciplcd couple·, the Countess of Strath- navern an ived at Oxford, to the great joy of Emma and Blanche Hastings. Her Ladyship had been obliged to relinquish' her idea of a tour to the north. The young ladies look an affectionate leave of their falhei ; but the thought of the г ő pleasures
pleasures they weie about to ехршепсе, soon dned then teais The fiist fortnight was consumed m a lound of company, whcie the lovely strangers attiacteu general admiration, but when the novelty of public places had worn olì, both sist« s sometimes bi eatlicd α «ί«Ιι to be again by the quiet fireside in Oxfordsluic. Westeiville, who had lately hael a large fortune left htm, ıeturned to London, and flew with laptuie to the liouse of his illation Blauche saw him with pleastue. His visits were daily At length he declared himself hei admiier. Blanche was soon brought to confess a paıtıalıty in his favour. Mr Hastings gave a joyous assent, and the wedding was fixed on the day that Blanche should attain her eigh¬ teenth year—a period at about sne weeks distance Among the visitois of Lady Stiath- naiein, was Mis Montait. Westerville, though
though lie knew the lady's chaiacter to be none of the best, gave way to the customs of the world, by which she was very vi ell leceived, and did uot hint any thing to bei piejudice either to Lmma or Blanche Hastings. Emma appeared stiuck by the elegance of Mis Älordent, who answered hci advances with equal waimth. Westei villi would have objected to this violent attachment of his future sister-m- law, it by that means he had not liad moie fi equent oppoituuities of btmg aloni with the object of his alleinoli. Ciuma II ìstiugs had of late been subject to long fits ot abstraction her smile was as sweet as evei, but not so frequent. Westei ville was too much taken up with hei sistei, to notice this change in her tempei, but Mrs. Moident was moie observ ant. Ľiiiim called one moinmg in Devon- shue Plate. She sat down in the diawing-room, and fell into a diep musing.
musing Mrs Moident soon entered, but was unnoticed " I'inma, my deal cued she Emilia stirted " Bless n e, M td im, I isli your pirdon ' — I don t know «h it I was thinking of Do 11 you 9 demanded the widow, pointedly Liiimi blushed tlecpl) her lips weie tiie scat of ti t th She leniamed silent and confused ' Oh Tnima Гпипа! cried Mrs Mor dent " I cm ie id all that passes in your little heart !—You are m lote, child ·' " I inlo\et — la Mis Moulent how ein уоч takt uch a notion into your he id ' Because it is a true one replied the widow —" Come, child who is tht happy mm' Lmnn s countenince changed -Iltei nately from crimson to «lute " Oood Heaven my ileal ' you will famtl continued the widow " Make use
use of my salts Compose yourself, and open your heait to a friend who loves you " " Oh Madam, Madam' ' cned Emma, " youi suspicions arc but too just''—She then flung her arms round the neck ot Mis Mordent, hid her face, and con¬ tinued—" It is death to me to forfeit your fnendship , but I must iun the risk of it I feai ) ou will hate, despite, and shun me, when you know the cause of iny sorrow ' Yes, Madam, I do love '—I love the man whom it ıs a t rime to love!—I love ----- Oh I can never bear to tell you '" " You lov e IVestervilk ' ' said the widow tahlil·). — " Loid, my dear, could you not have told me so, without all this foolish emotion' When you have seen a little more of the woild, child, you will be ashamed of your weakness —Well, my dear, by what means do jou ptoposc to bieak off the match'" " Good Heaven, Mis Mordent' tan I have suth а thought ?—No, though I own my
iny guilty attachment, I vv ill not seek to giatity it by tieaclieiy ' I will return into Oxfoidshne and beai my soirovvs m ïetirement ' " Do so, my dear, said Mrs Moident, " go into the country , fry pancakes, nuke ketihup, antl listen to tht uiglit- nigali— idd Romances, anddainwoi ted slot kings—talk siiituiient to youi pt ultiy sing lullabies to tht farmers children, ami thronitle small beer —lie upon it, Lniinal I thought you had more soul ' Considei what α tnumph it will be foryouryoungei sistei, not only to be man u d befoie you, hut even to cany off the man ot vour heait'— I v ill assist you in breaking on the match lotu sistei Blanche j| ptais to mc a veiy mtwkish gul, you aie tuce as beautiful l—I wonder at Westen die s blindness ' " lud rtiHv so do I cried Emma lustily, ' for though I am not v un of my person, I cannot help thinkiii/ th tt I am lather handsomer than my biotti But indeed,
indeed, indeed, I must not think of break¬ ing oft the match ' Besides, my dear Madam, my dear Mrs Mordent, suppose we should try, and be discovered г " And what then? said Mrs Mordent, coolly " We fashionable people laugh at these things At the very worst, а para¬ graph appears in the daily paper, it is read, smiled at, and forgotten." "Assuiedly, Mrs Mordent, you aie in jest I" *' Not ac all, my dear. Who would stick at half a dozen harmless lies, a little innocent forget), or a fetr venial per¬ juries for tbe sake of getting an admirer fiom a rival, and that rival а sister !—You know but httle of the voi ld, iny diar ' ' " Indeed, Mrs Mordent, said Miss Hastings, with a gravity that llarmed the widow, " I nevtr before heard such epithets attached to three crimes so atro¬ cious ' ' Mis Moulent perccivetl that she had gone too t u The mind of Em па, although
although irritated by constraint, and fired- by an ardent love, was not to become at once contaminated. The crafty widow theiefore drew a ludicrous picture of high- life ; and her conversation was so spi iglitly,, that Emma often smiled. This conversation, though flowery, con¬ cealed the serpent; and Miss Hastings. entered her carriage in a. frame of mind wavering between good and evilj torn by the conflicting passions of love and jealousy, and haU'.determineďtobelieve that all Mis. Mordent said, was wisest and best. The widow was not much pleased when she reflected tliat she had laid her character open to Emma Hastings. Her gentleness might recur, and reatan gain the ascendant of passion. Yet she ti usted much to some indications of' a violent tempor whioh she had observed in hei pupil) and flattered berseli that she might be perhaps no loser by the connection.
In
In fact, Mrs Moident, whose appear¬ ance in the world was at the exptnce of her creditors, and who was short of current cash, Ind been obliged to enter into at tides with a certain noble Mirquis, not ts his misticss, but as his pander Гог this puipose she drew to her house all the new Jaces she was so lucky as to discover Miss Hasting* seemed a proper object to inflame the passions of an old debauchee —her beautiful form, her youth, and con¬ versation were calculated in no common degne to attract the eye, and interest the heart This was the character wanted by Mis Mordent, for although the noble Marquis was an adorer of beauty, lit could not dispense with mind The Marquis had seen the fascinating form of Blanehe Hastings, and tonteived hopes of obtaining her Her coi itti a with Westemlle pei plexed bun M s Moult nt promisul to obviate the difficulty, uu! the passion of Γιηηια foi her stst ι s- îutendtd.
intended husband, presented itself most opportunely Miss Hastings did not fad to attend ul Devonsline Phce is enly the next morn¬ ing as custom would authorize,—in short, the spnited I'mma, who relied so much upon a noble contempt of impropriety, fell into the snare of an ai tful woman, (if she deseived the name of woman), and was impelled, by a blind passion, to act con¬ trary to every dictate of feeling, justice, and humanity One morning, Westemlle was sitting alone with Blanche Hastings at the house, of Lady Sti ttlinavern. Tlieir discourse turned upon their future prospects, the d(ltt,httut theme engaged thtm till they forgot tht passing bouis At length Blanche, with α gay an, cned— " Indeed, Wtsttmllc, you hivt used me veiv ill — W e women love fluitai) m mır hi irts lıoııcveı vi t may chose Io dıny rt —You are a vtry i/utwiuA. lour,—you did
did not like my ball dress the other day, and told mt how badly I played the rubber at whist You have not once so much as written veises on my angehe beauty '—In¬ deed, Westerville I take it very ill of you ι Go away '—I am angry !—I don t think III have you, aftei all I Go, get about your business, and don t sec mc any moie ------till I call you back, Wester¬ ville I * " Dear girl, your reproaches are just," said the vouth, fondly smiling, and pass¬ ing his aim round her-a liberty she faintly rejected " I am a clownish lover, but is it wonderful, my Blanche? I never limed any but you ·—I have flattered many ι ' '* Fit upon j ou, saucy creature ' cried she, tipping lum on the knuckles with her fan , " take your arm away this mo ment' How dare y ou ust such liberties' 1 Indeed, Westei v ille, you are too boistei ous You shall wnte me a hne copy of verses to ask my paidon. ' "The
" The penance is too severe, my lovely girl, for a fault so venial, " said Westerville ; " but accept an imitation of Anacreon in lieu of it; it will explain the state of iny mind.
THE ANACREONTIC* Led bj hit wanton, мИе play, Cupid eipy'd me t'other day. And teeing that my Acori im frec From Love's omnipotent decree, Mc made a deep incuion there, To tee what more than common air Had Itcpt me from hi» quiver free, And dirts so often tnm'd at me Ht, enter'd, but too soon the wound, (Not long divisible), grew sound, And left vnlhm the little Cod, Who (erring where he ne'er had trod), Now rudely winds my heart about, Striving to find the passage out.
·· vt ny,
" Why, you saucy being I ' cried Blanche, " so you would not love mc if you could help it ! Now I am deteiinuud I » on t have you '—You go on from bid to worse! Pray ltt prisoner Cupid at large, and thtn, ' shesigbtd, and smiled tenderly, " 1 will do the s ime ------it I can ι" The enraptured M esterville repeatedly kissed the hand of lus f ur mistress, and though women of an elevated sphcie allow even greater liberties in a public room than any attempted by Wi sterville, the deli¬ cacy of Biam he prompted her to retire, lest any impruelence on his part might give htr a serious cause for anger The sweet girl quitted tht room, and Westemlle was not long in following her He waited mdeed to see Loid Sttath- navern, but as his I oid-diip did not an ive, he rung the bell tot the door to be opened When he was on the landing- place, he pulled out his handkerilnef, and as
as he was putting it up again, he beheld a crumpled piece of paper lying near him Thinking it might be some note he had thrown out, by taking his hand¬ kerchief from his pocket, he picked it up, and carelessly put it by
CHAP
CHAP. VU * Whosoever piesiunes to th nk to act, or to leel for h m df, к set down either as affected or nsane Prell i Gl an ngt m Eldland İVİRS Dinwiddie, to divert her many lonesome hours, took great pleasure in the tiansaction of money concerns she was a lomioisseuse in the stocks, and wint ïegulaily to leceive large dividends at the Bank One morning she read an advertisement in a newspaper relative to the sale ot а laige hotel, the lease ot which wanted six vot ii r months
months of expiration She wrote to her attorney, and told him that if the house answered the description, she would be the purchaser Ihe attorney called soon aftei, but his client was not at home He then wrote that the house was very eligible in pomt of ι epair and elegance, and that the pur¬ chase had been completed Mrs Dinwiddie, with all the eagerness of a child to wear new clothes, flew to set her new purchase She had had a cold for sometime, therefore, although the weather -was sultry, she put on a scarlet ridmg- habit, lined with white silk, and richly laced with gild, which she vvoiewhen the catnp was at Coxheath, nearly thu ty years before She like« ise put on a heav er hat, some и hat less than a round dinmg-table She «ort neh lace infiles at her wrists, and her hair was plaited m а large club, white with powdei, and stiffened with pomatum The
1 he house lately purchased, was in Soho Squale Mis Dinwiddie oidtred her coachman to stop in Greek Streit, where she meant to pay a morning visit to a physician s мне Ihe lady w s at home After a shoit chat Mis Dinw «Idit s foot¬ man appeared, and said that one of tlie m hetis ot the carı nge was damaged, but tint it would soon be put in order Mis Dinwiddie, impatient to see her new pui chase begged Mrs Sabine to order а chair This was soon procured, and the gootl lady was conveyed to Sobo Square lhe house vas indeed very handsome in outward appearance Mis Dinwiddie was ushered into a patlour, very elegantly furnished In α short tune awell-diessed u olitati appeaietl She seemed rather sur¬ prised at the figure of hei visitoi, but civilly asked her business This was explained m a few v ords, and the hostess declared herself ready to attend hei. Several well furnished parlours e 2 were
weremspccted The conductor then civ illy obsei ved that she could not shew all the upper rooms, because tliey were engaged by families, but as some weie vacant, she would open the doors Mrs Dinw iddie, whose curiosity needs no affirmation, followed her conductor. " Elegant indeed!" cned she, " I declare my own house is not so well furnished 1 " " We are at a great expence, Midam," said the woman " to be sine the trade is brisk, but really I shall be obliged to lay down my carnage, if times do not mend "Your carnage 1 " said Mrs Dinwiddie with a sneer, "Oh, if you are obliged to lay down your cannge, tunes must be hard indeed' What nice order every thing ism! Aye, I see you have two watch-pockets at the head of all the beds I suppose many families of distinction fiequent this hotel ; " ι " Yes,
" Yes, Madam, many greit persons, paiticularly the 11 ıslı nobility and gentıy —The Union has been ot vast service to us in oui wíj ot business ' " I don t doubt it, ' said Mrs Dm- Middıe giately The ladies now enteicd anothei aptrt- ment, but had no sooner crossed the threshold, than Mrs Uinwiddie uttered an exclamation of surprise " Bless my soul' do I see right' Hotv long has it been the fashion to hat e black velvet quilts to the bed, unti black velvet sofas ?" " Only two or three rooms are furnished with them, Madam —thei e is no account¬ ing toi taste " "Truly," said Mis Dinwiddle, "it is past my compi ehenston Why the room onls, wants a coffin and nt\ lights, to re- prebent a peison lying in state ' The I idles then walked down st-urs, and the tenant asked her visitor it she woultl g 3 please
please to take a cup of chocolate, or α glass of noy au Mrs Dinwiddie w ho h id no ol jecti ns to the good things of this world nnd was besides fatigued with hei jaunt, consented to take α diop of the I ittcr The tenant rang for a servant, and gave the necessiry commands When the man retired— " I assure you, Madam,' said Mis. Dinwiddie, " that the great order md reguhnty of youn house delight me I expect a widow lady and her three daughters m London shortly They will only stay a foitnight It will be useless to take lodgings for such a htt time, and I will the efore recommend them to your hotel They are all veiy handsome, and prudent quiet, religious people Piay is the Clergyman of your parish а good pieachei ( " I beheve so Madam, ' replied the woman, " but really I have so much business to mind, thit I can seldom go to Chuich.
Ohm ch I sometimes go to Mr. V. Int- litld's Tabei natie and the Blacklmis Chapel " " I daie say you are a very good woman," said Mis Dinwiddie, " I stt it in youi countenance, and I am seldom or never mist iken in people. Since von don't go olten to Church, I suppose )ou read prayers to youi servants ever) nigjjt' It is an excellent practice, it won't keep them ten minutes or a quarter of an houi from their woik, and will prevent them fiom picking and stealing " " I wish it would answer, Madam," said the tenant, shaking her head, " ami I would give them enough of it ; but bleas my soul, I believe if the bench of Bishops was to preach from moruiug till night, servants like mine viould never leave oft pilfering." "That is a pity too," observed Mrs. Dinwiddie. " I wonder how j ou areso unlucky. I suppose you are veiy atten- c i tive
tive as to character, and would not take a man-sen ant unless he was sober, pious, and diligent, or a chambermaid, i?sliew is a giggling, wanton hussy, alw ay s clamber¬ ing upon the fellows backs, instead of minding her business - ' Here the footman entered with a blue pint bottle of noyau, and two small glasses upon an elegant silver salver. île put tlitm down, and left the room. The woman of the house presented a brimmer to Mn. Dinwiddie, who took it, hobbedand nobbed, and graciously smiling, said-* " I have so good an opinion of you, Madam, that if you wish to renew the lease of this house, my attorney u Mr. Nicholls, of the Inner Temple Call upon him, antl I make no manner of doubt but that every thing will be settled to our mutual satisfaction ' Mrs Dinwiddie sat on the window seat, and was half concealed by the curt un 'lhe
The mistress ofthe house was putting the glasses on the sideboard, and the visitor was about to rise and take leave, w hen the door fit« open, and a y oung man, with dishevelled Inn, habited in ¿chintzdress¬ ing gown and gieen »lıppçıs, mide his appeaiance ' Halloo, old gnl' cned the young man ' liow long am I to ruig filrcoftce, hey ? Wh it do you stand pinking, and winking aı d blinking toi ? Come, the little „nl wants her bleikfast, and two о clock is late enough in all tonstieiicel ' Bless my soul, Sn Lionel ' exclaimed thewomiii, ' don t you see I have com¬ pany 6111 1 you be pitient and ask the sei vants foi wh it you w utt It all your lodgeis aie like this gen- tltinin sutl Mis Dinwiddie " I am aliani I praised youi ie s uluity utilii too sot n bu utk by a voice so peculiar as that of the n oul lady, the gtutleinan tumul towaids 'iti о 5 " Mrs
" Mrs. Dinwiddie !" exclaimed he ; " good God, Madam ' how came it that I see you here ?" " Is it so very extraordinary to Sir Lionel Glenham," replied she, " that I should come to my own house ?" " Upon my soul, Madam, you arc the very last person I should have thought of finding here '" said the Baronet " And why so '" demanded Mrs Din¬ widdie " Is not the house as elegant and neat as can be? I declare I think I never saw a place more snug and comfoi table * " Snug and comfortableX' ' ' exclumed the Baronet, " upon my soul, Mis Din¬ widdie,} ou carry it off with great sang f ι oíd ' How long bave you been her" ' ' " What is that to you ? ' demanded Mrs. Dinwiddie snappishly " Suppose 1 chusc to come and keep tins house, aftei the lease is out, is it any concern of your s " " Come, come, ' said the Baionet, " I am willing to allow that this rencontre is" rather
rather unplťasant for you ; but don't mind it—I am a man of honour, and will keep your secret " " I hive noseciets to keep '" exclaimed Mrs Dinwiddie " Why, what do you mean bj all this mipeitinetice? You might to be tubameli of disturbing tins good lady as jou have done ' Don t you see how fnghtened sht isf" " bhe fnghtened ' ' cned the Baionet; " no, no, she has л gieat soul, that is un¬ ti Hinted by impusonment 01 the pilloiy ' But, my good, my pious, my sarcastic, my witty do« ager, oblige mt so hi as to explain how I find j ou drinking di uns m the moinmg with as notorious a Inn i telan .ıs any m tlie united kingdoms?" A few woids now bctiayed the whole tiuth, mil Mrs, Dinwiddie, tohti'on- f tıstım and shame, found that she was in a bouse w litre «omen of chastity had ueıeı bcloie set a foot.
β ff
She
She at first stood petrilied with fear her natural sallow complexion varied to a dusky yellow, and liei tace soon grew of all colours. She attempted once or twice to speak, buí could only produce inarticu¬ late sounds. The mistiess of the house poured out, and ottered her a glass of water. Sirs. Diiwiddic dashed it on the floor, and she was at length rcstoietl to the use ot speech. " Oh jou wicked woman '— jou boi- rid woman!— jou abominable мотан'' screamed she, " how did jou dai e to let me come within your doois' It was not for nothing that the chairmen laughed when tliey set me down I It is pioper the magistrates shoultl know that there is such a terrible house in the parish of St. Ann's. Meicy upon me' and as I have a soul to be saved, 1 was going to lecommend Mrs. Hanbury and ber tinte beautiful daughters to a -----Oh me ' w lut shall I do ? I shall find my name in eveiy newspaper, .md
aml my peiEon in every caricature shop 1 You nicked, devilish cieature'" Mrs Dinwiddie was interi upted m her vehement Iniangue by the appeaiance of а lovtly Iemale figure, who ran into the room "Come, Str Lionel, "cried she, "coffee is waiting ' " Oli Heavens and earth '" screamed Mrs. Dinwiddie, " may I believe my eyes? Oh Matilda Stap)ltoT' Matilda Stapylton ' is it possible ' Can you bear to be m such a bouse as this? I wonder the root does not fall in, and crush you all, and me tor company ' But come, young lidy piepare to go with me 111 see if something cannot be done for youi good yet 1 Mrs Stap)lton seized the aim of Sir Lionel—" Hut I wont go with you, though, said she, " that ь what I won t ' I will stay with tlus gentleman 1 '
" Sir
" Sır Lionel, ' cned Mis Dinwiddie, " I hope you have not ihe lıeıııt to plunge a girl into inevitable destruction ' Some¬ thing may yet be clone Look at her, Sn ' How could you beai to see that bemtiful figure reduced by miseiy, want, and f imine ? ' " Madam," replied the Bironet, " I have nothing to say m tins case I brought Mrs Stapylton hcie last night, but am noway s interested m her concerns " Matilda now burst into a violent fit of passionate tears " Ob you wicked story teller ' sobbed she, " did you not promise me—yes, that you did '—ditl you notpi omise me to love me all the days of youi life' ' " Oh, that was yesteiday evening'' replied the Baronet " But don t «ob so, child, foi when you have lived а little longer in the u oriel, you will find by ex¬ perience that suth promises aie not very binding ' ' Mrs.
Mis Dinwiddle, though she reprobated tht conduct of Mis Stapjlton, could not bear to hear one of her own sex tieated with insulting cruelly. She theiefoie took Sir Lumii severely to tisk, anel concluded by saying that, all hough his observitiort might have truth on its side, that was a veij poor excuse for its barbarity " Well, Madam," sutl the Baronet, " since you have finished jour leetuie, pei mit me to wish you a good morning. Mis Stapylton, may tsery happiness it- tend you 1 1 shall be dlwajs glad to see you orcasionally, but must decline the honour of being your pai ticular protector !" "Go, getaway, you cruel, barbarous creature' I wish 1 bad never lett Mi, Stipj lton, with all iny heaı t > for 1 luve had nothing but unhappiness since ' ' The Baronet bowed, laughed, and left the room.
Mrs.
Mrs Dinwiddii, shocked it his inhu¬ manity, was almost teni| ttd to sooth Matilda, but now the liistitss of tlie house с night hei ey e " Imi as for you, abandoned wietch' screamed slit, almost in fits with rage, " date to delam the child, oi tvm to hai bour Ыг and you shall ude to the p/lloiy m yqui oun tarnage ' Ine woman ıeplıed tint she did not mean, or wish to dttain hei that the hdy came willin s ly, and had always been at libeity to depait, had sht been inclined to it " I don t peıce ve Madam, said she " how I ment all tht ill n unes you L,ne me I have used you with eveiy civilttv. If 1 da keep a house th it some people с ill an ımpropeı one, I live in gnat ciedit with my neighboius and nobody evir saw my thing wipioper earned on Who cvei heaid of α not here' Γοι the matter or that, many ¿/tat houses, tint I kno ν better
bittel tlian you may think for, aie not always so circumspect, and yet you, Madam, andali the fashionable people, are not ashamed of entei mg them for the sake ot ι good supper!" " It is time to grow good, when Satan iebukessin' said Mrs Dinwiddie "But oider my chau, and let another be called for this unhappy girl " ' ' Truly then, Madam, " said the woman, " you may call it yourself. I did not ask you to come into the house, nor do I like to be insulted in it, Aa for the girl, I don't want to have any thing to say to her, you may both go, and the sooner, the better." The woman then left the room. " Come, young lady, get youi hat and cloak," cned Mis. Dinwiddie, " you must go along with me Do you go wil¬ lingly?' " Oh yes, veiy willingly," replied Matilda sullenly , ' for I have no other place to go to, that I Know ot." She
She fitchtil her hat and pelisse, unj they deputed. But the misfortunes of Mrs Dinwiddie did not end here Several passirs by perceived them leav с the house , aud knowing its chaiactu, tanned Mrs. Dinwiddie, by hu grotesque appearance, to be the misticss ot it. 1 Ins. smunse vvas coiroborated by perceiving a beautiful girl in tears leaning upon, htr aim A mob was soon collected,—she was covered with mud m a twinkling, eiery oppiobnous term- was lavished upon her, and if her carnage liad not luckily timen by, on its way fiom bung mended, she might have been treated still more roughly. " Well," said she, as soon as they wens safely seated, " I have made a pretty mornings job of it, methinks Tired to death with my jaunt!—trepanned into an odious house, and that house mo own too · —imposed upon by a procuress '—laughed at by a lake-'—abused by the mob'—and •tow seated by a wicked little vixen I am ashamed
aslnmtil to be seen ν ith '—Since I mcd lied vuth youi affairs, gnl, I havı met with nothing but misfortunes I I ilmost vow ec' to leave ofl tumbling myself with other pioplt, w lien I knocked out ι tooth, and nearly dt inolished my nose in your sei ν ice ' I suppose I shall get my uetk broke shortly , and it is just what I deserve for tioubhng myself with hussies, knaves, and foo's '" Mrs Dinwiddle's temper was totally ruffled Mrs Stapylton was about to speak , out the old lady bade her sharply to hold her tongue, and pull down the gretn silk curtains.
CHAP.
CHAP. Vili.
" Un н tttn· milhittfiux où tout li giure tmmiln " U nimim « I· Pır i U mila, " Ni invilii· qu' к » de/Urt, " On ne »uralt trop nonortr " Ciuk qui, d'humeur plu· dé bontulre, * " X· chirehini qu' к 1« réparer» Paviuok. WHEN Westen-nie reached his lodg¬ ings, he carelessly took liom liis pocket the paper he found at Lord Strath naver» 's. - He opened it in order to see what it was, hefore he toi e itto pieces But what nas his astonishment when he read -----
" Ľearest
" Dearest Planche, why scruple to see the man who adoies you' Piudence is a cold word, and but ill accords with tbe piofessions of love you deigned to bestow upon me whin last we met at-----"
The rest of the papei was torn off. Westervdle s hair bristled up—his eyes struck fue— his teeth gnashed, yet this emotion was not caustd by suspicions of Blanche, but by detestation of her slaudeier He hastily walked to Lord Strath- navein's. The party had retuetl to the draw ing room, and consisted only of the Earl, his Lady, and the Miss Hastings's, who
who were about to proceed to Covent Gaiden 'lheatre. Westervdle entered in evident pertui há¬ tion. Blanche anxiously enquned if he was unwell. Her lover put the paper mto the hands of Lord Stratlmavein. His Loidship perused tt. " Do you know the hand, young lady ; ' said he gravely to Blanche. Blanche cast her eyes upon it, and replied coolly in the negative. " Your conduct shocks me, my Lord 1 " exclaimed Westervdle, "youinust peimit me to say so · Why expose to the eye of purity a scroll so infamous ? ' " I have lived longer in the world than you, young man," said his Lordship, " and, as rimes go, I think the question not improper " Blanche, nowsenously alarmed, begged to pei use the paper, over which she had before only cast a transient glance.
She
She lead it with a look of disdain at Loid Stiathnavern, and said— " I presume there are many vi ho bear the namt of Blanche as well as m)self" " Not in this house, said I ad) Stiath- navein—" Bless mt, my dear Lmma' what is the maltei with you^ " I -I—I am shocked at----- snocked at-----' Emma's eyes closed, and she fainted awaj in the arms of Westervdle " The vile slander on her sister has ov et powered her ' ' said Lady Strath- navin Eveiy assistance was afforded usual on such occasions At length Emma re¬ coveied " Be comforted, deal est Enima, " cried Blanche " I know how tendeily you love me Let not that foolish piece of paper give you any concern Dtn t trem¬ ble so, ni) dear ' I cannot beai to see you so distiessed 1" " Dear
" Dear Emma," said Westerville, " do not grieve at what should cause surpnse alone It shall be my care to detect the authors of this foigery, and the vengeance I shall take on them, shall fill the heavier foi having pained your feeling beart " "I cannot bear this' exclaimed Lmma, " indeed, indeed I cannot 1' " Poor girl' ' said Loid Strithnavern, " her pure mmd is shocked at a knowledge of such depravity I My dear Blanche, I ask youi pardon, your excellent, heart should have caused meto ludge you in¬ capable ot the conduct alluded to, but I could not master my fiist surprise —Be comforted, Emma, and enjoy with us all the disappointment tbe m iltvolent forger must experience, when he see» us but the more imitad from his ineffectual attempt The carriage was announied, but the party was too much disconcerted to think of the play that evening
Westerville
Westervdle now eageily solicited the hand ot Blanche befoi e the day appointed Ht was seconded by Lord and Laoy Stiathiuvern Overpowered by then united entreaties, Blanche gave a timid consent An express was sent to Mr Hastings, and on his ainval, the ceremony vi as to take plate Eiiimaiemamed ill, and desiteli to retire foi the night Blanche accompanied bei , and the Lari, the Countess, and Wester ville examined eveiy seivant, first sepa¬ rately, then collectively, but obtained no intelligence whatcvei Weaned *nh conjectuies, Westervdle took his leave, and letinng to his lotlg- nigs, pissed ι sleepless and melancholy night lhe two sisteis rctued to their pillows —they 'ay togethci, but sleep did not visit then eves Oli Imma' cned 111 nche "what vu lul pople thtie are in the woild! W hit in instei in the human toi in, could toi u H invent
invent such a wicked plan to rum me in Westervdle s opinion ' " A monster indeed ' «aid Lmina. " Oh Lmina' continued Blanche, buisting into tears, and throwing her aims round lier sister ь neck, ' I kept up my spirits in the chawing room , but now I feel my self ovei powered ' Oh good Heavens' if Westervdle bad really be¬ lieved mt so base, so tiuly vile, how wretched would have been my fate '—I could not have sui vii ed it, for I will own to you that I lov e most fei ν etilly, most tenderly love my dear dear Westervdle ' She ceased, and sojbeel herself to sleep upon the bosom of the aeacherous En ma The next morning tbe sisters arose at an early hour Lady Strafhnavein be¬ held their altered countenances with sonow ' My dear guls, ' cried she, I must request you will take a short aning In the way, call upon Mis Moident, and leave
leave this cai d it is an invitation for Thuisday fortnight ' Blanche, whose leal motive was a wish to stiy at home to receive Westeiville, excused herself, under pretence of a severe heidach Lady Stratlinavern was unable to go out, hiving letteis to write, but Lmma Hastings, with much alacrity, declaied her willingness to go Lady Stiathnavein thanked bei, and delivered the с ml, and the misei able girl stepped into the caniage almost aliud to fice Mis Moident The widow was at home " Well my sweet gul, cued she, " wlnt has happened r How has tht scheme succeeded ' Are they not all in a delicite peiplexity ' " Ihe house Ins been thiown into con¬ fusion replied 1 nima " and the scheme lias had all the success it deseived " I un quite delighted to heai so, ' said Mis Moident, " for, by youi woe bigotte face, I should have imagined it h td t tiled h 2 " And
" And it/iaifailed ' ' exclaimed Emma, " completely filled'—nay, I am glad of the failure' Oh Mis Moident' if you eould know the pangs I have suffered ever since I deviated from tlie dnect rend ot integrity, you would pity me ' A wrong indulgence of a hopeless passion has led me, step by step, to thcbiuikof rum ' I might have caused a sisters death '—and even had I broken the match, how could I he assured that Westerville would have turned his thoughts on me ? But I have failed '—Oh' chopping on her knees, and clasping her hands, " I thank my God that 1 have failed ' " Piay, child, stan 1 up, and leave your heroics, cned the widow sharply " Are you going to act Desdemona, or some tiagedy Queen' I protest I believe the girl is mad ' Are w e d stovereel ' Have you been so clumsy as to be eletetted ' Emina roused by a 1 inguage to which she had been uuattustomed, looked with a degiee
г degree of disdain on the wietch before her, then nflectmg that she was α partner m her nelui ions plans, though she knew not then motive, she sat down, and burst into an agony of tears " Come, tome, Emma, said Mrs Moulent, "tlo· not act like a child, if one plan t ul, anothei may succeed " lw ill have no more to do with plans, ' sobbcitLmma, "and I bitterly lepcnt that I ever took " dissimulations winding way ' " Nay, child, if you begin to quote, I thall have some hope of you, but let me hear all about it " Lmma then related that she had watched for a fair opportunity of throwing the torn note, written by Mrs Mordent, in the way of Westeiville, or some of the ser¬ vants She saw her sister pass from the drawing room, and walk up stairs Hear¬ ing somebody still m the room, she, with¬ out the least noise, placed it at the door, H 3 so
so that n might appear to have betn dropped by Blanche blie then related all that passed ou tiie occasion, and thus toncluded— "Maik now, Mrs Mordent, the revvaid of mean intngiie' That which wis in¬ tended to prevent the match, Ins acce¬ lerated it— they will be mai ι itti m a ftw days Oh my too happy sistei ! 1 will never moie attempt to distuibyour feli¬ city · But 1 cannot, will not witness it ! No, I will leturn to my father—I will never leave htm more I" " You aie ш the right, my dear," sneered the widow ; '* go to your father— * weave cbaplets of willow—throw them into the hone-pond, and call it a purling ttrean , or found a charity-school, and teach tailors' and caipenters' brats their chriss cross rtrv Give the pious Doctor Watts's Hy nins, and John Buny an's Pil- glam's Piogress to all the oltl women m the pansh, and when you die, full of years,
yeais, and full of honour and glory, let the newspapers announce the death of Mis Emma Hastings, a maiden lady uni- v ersally respected by a large circle of cats and acquaintance —Nonsense, girl I vou are born to better prospects I vv ill engage to get Westervdle for you yet ' " No, Madam, no," said Emma, " I will not be induced to set myself а second time at variance with my conscience. Blanche's sweetness would, I know, have forgiven and concealed my crime, but I did not dare to implicate you, and was silent " Mrs Mordent's eyes darted lightning " Insolent girl'" exclaimed she, "do you think I will be beholden to your foibearancer—Relate the affair at your peril '—I have lived too long in the woild to be awed by a child ' Relate the affair, I say, at your peril ' I would so turn the tide of ciamour, that your chaiaetei should be ever lost, while mine would remam unspotted '" h i " I am
" I am so despicable m my own tyC3 said Miss Hastings ' that I hav t even lost the right to tontemn you M ad un '— Your manneis weie seducing I vv is blinded bv passion, and fell into youi snare! Why you spiead it f r me I know not unless the love of evil ftn the sake of evil dwell in youi bosom' Oh Mis Moident, you aie without excuse l Would to God I had nevci known vou' Our piesent altercation shews that there can be no lasting league in guilt ' I leave you, but, Madam, for Heaven s sake reflect that the longer you live in the world, if you only live to add vice to vice, you will cai ry a grey head to the grave, loaded by the maledictions of many, and unreverenced by all' Miss Hastings therrthrew Lady Strath- nävern s card upon the table, α d walked to the carnage, Wishing to compose bei t oubled spuits she oidtred the manto di n e tor an airing on tht llampstt id load, and
and by the time she arrived at Lord Stratlinavern s slie w ıs enabled to assume something like composure, but every tender lo ík eveiy fond expression of M esterville to lier happy sister, gave а stab to her quiet When her fithei came to town her pallid antl mournful look suiprised and grieved lum She said that the London air was the rum of her constitution and entre ited lťate to return with Mi Hastings mto О fordshire In vain dub Loid and Lady Stratlmavein urge her to call in a physician —she persisted in hei refusal, and her father alarmed at her indisposition declaied his intention of leturning into the tountiy the day after the maniage of his youngest daughter The ceiemouy took place Emma was unable to attend Blanche would Inve postponetl the day, but Westei ville vi ould not hear of the idea в 5 Ih
In vain did all the united piayers of her family assail Emma, she absolutely forbade them to mention a physician In other respects she was mild, gentle, and resigned Her father, ıeally belieung that her ill¬ ness proceeded from the bad influence of the London air, at her pressing instance ordered a chaise to be sent for When it arrived, Emma, feeble and pale, received the adieus of her noble friends and of her sister When Westemlle approached to embrace, and support her to the chaise, her colour vaned from pale to red, and »he sunk, nearly fainting, in his arms " Good Heaven I ' exclaimed he, " in¬ deed, my dearest Emma, you are unfit to go so long a journey ' Stay among the iriends who love you, sweet girl, be persuaded '" " No," sighed she faintly, " if I must die, I may as well die in Oxfordshire. Why, why should your joy be damped by witnessing
witnessing my ill health ? I wish y ou all happiness, Westervdle—from my soul I do and you, Blanche, indeed I think you cannot miss it I teel faint, help me to that chair —Don ţ ciy so, Westervdle it is so sad to see a man cry Will you remem¬ ber Emma Hastings when she is dead? But perhaps it is best to forget me I vv ould not deprive you of a joyous moment for worlds ' " Dearest best Emma, ' cried the weeping Blanche, " if you love me with the affection I feel for you let me entieat ) ou to send for a physician " My sweet sister, said Westervdle, " let me peisuade you , if you love me, send away the chaise, and have advice ' Then be it so, said Miss Hastings, " I can îefuse nothing to you ----- and to «uch friends, and such α father But hold— Di Jameson lives only in the next stieet Perhaps he has not yet ltft his house Sınıl tor hım, bl olhei , but н 6 let
let the chaise remain he will second my wish ol going into tl e countiy Westervdle seued ι is hat, and walked hastily to ϊ)ι Jamesons He was not ytt gone out lhe good Doctor said that he would be at Lord Stratlmavein s almost as soon as his sumnioner When Westervdle ıeturned, he found Emma preserved fiom tainting only by stiong volatiles, but her eyes beamed with a faint joy as he approached her She held out an emaciated white hand Westervdle kissed it ıepeatedly ' ' You tremble, my Emma, cried he " Oh Heaven ' you are worse than y ou would have us believe I " I thmk, said Emma, " that I shall not be long with you ' Mi Hastings groaned m bitter anguish " Oh my dear, dear papa > continued she, " I forgot that you were present'— You will feel my loss '—you love me, I know ' ' , " Unkind
" Unkind Lmma ' tned Mis Wester- ville, bursting mtoa tiesh flood ot soirow, " do »e not all love jou " Pirdon my lolly, said Miss Haaiings faintly, ' I stai ce know what I say ' Dr J imeson now entered He It It lui patients pulse, dud elesned to be leu alone with hei When the door was closed, he enquired. wheie she expenenced pain Miss Hastings raised her head with difficulty fiom the pillow that supported it " Common report," said she, " pro¬ nounces Dr Jameson a man of humanity If he be so, I am convinced he will listen to me w ith patience, and accede to the pttition I am about to prefer Sir, I suller no bodily, complaint, my piesent state is the itsult of mental tonlhtt I wish to IIj from а place w litre eveiy thing tends to make me unhappy, and endeavoui to conquei my feelings in solitude
solitude Ob Sir! persuade my friends to this measure! " Evidently a live case '' thought the Doctor Then addressing her, he said— " From what you have told me, Madam, I perceive that I am not wanted in my medical capacity, but nnv I not be othei wise useful?— lam in old man, fair lidy, and you may open youi heait to me Am I light when I guess your complaint to uiseirom loie 9 " You are, Sir Miss Hastings drciv her veil over her face " Well, then my fair and candid and good young Udy, I think 1 had best prescribe you the man of your heart If you have qutrrelled make it up, dont stand in your own light ' ' No, Sir, I vv ill make ι half avowil He never can be mine!—I love the husband of another I ■ i Ae
" No uncommon case theie again '" thought Dr Jameson " This young lady has really very fashionable propensities, only scruples to gratify them " " In that case, Madam," said he aloud, " I can only prescribe you an observance of your duty and chaiacter. I approve, and will recommend your plan of leaving London ' Emma threw up her vert her eyes re¬ sumed a fire long extinct. The family was then summoned Di Jameson addicssed himself to Mr Hastings "'1 his lady's case, Sir, is neither un¬ common nor veiy dangeious I can only presei ibe bei country air, and exertion of mind — theei up, young lady, I have many patients in youi situation, and none have diet! ot the complaint Do not let youi spirits be cast down, and my life for youi s, you will eclipse every beauty ot the next year' ' S Westerville
Wcstervule would have presented a fee at parting " No, un, s. Dr Jameson, "where theie is no presei ipt ion written, I never take a f' .· The lady must not travel moie thn twenty or twenty-five miles a day ; and if she di inks two glasses of wine after dinner,, and one atiei supper, site will be the better tor it." Dr. Jameson then took his depili ture. Emma seemed, cheered by this com» pliance with her wishes. She made an effort to tise upon her fiet; it was fi wit¬ less, and she again sunk upon her chair. " Will you not defer your departure for a single day?" demanded Loid Strathr vavein. " Indeed, Emilia, you aie unkind to refuse me this favour—only till to- morrovv^ The chaise shall be hei e at an eaily hour. Consent, my dear, to this shoit delay." " Ob, how you pain me by your generous sympathy, my Lord !" said Emma,
Tınma looking at him ν ith grateful and teaı filled eyes ' But why dehy what must h ippen > Will our ρ irting be less melancholy then than no t * " But your weakness may not beso gr at Lmma I »itT/beweakti sudshe "nothing can restore me but retirement —Dtar papa assist me to use ' Mi Hastings ton R 0 ittted for expos tulation, would have done so, but Westerulle, raising her carefully and gently m his arms, carried her to the chaise Pillows were placed about her Mr Hastings took his seat by her side, with a heart torn with agony fhe chaise left the door at a very gentle pace, and Wevterv die retired to atlmmistti consolation to his beloved Blandii vvho wtpt profusely upon tht bosom of Lady Stratlmavein.
CHAP
CHAP. IX.
" Dcpul« qu'il oonnott mı foibles« " Je ne into plus te itême era pi enemem. " Hélu 1 ce qui devicu шипиг un amam, " Fût Ыепшоижсгн expirei 7* tenâiessé" Xf Cemaoal de Fernste— Oc RtotlAtt».
W HEN Mrs. Dinwiddie arrived in Finsbury Square, she ushered her young charge into a bed-room, up two pair of staiis; and turning the key, left her to her meditations. Mrs.
Mis Stapylton frightened and subdued, offered not any resistance, indeed heronlv wish was to ıetuın to her husband and such was her ignorance of the world, that at fiist she imagined he would give her a seveie lecture foi her imprudence, and take liei home again Yet, childish and silly as Mis Stapylton was, she rtmtnibertd that she could not plead ignoiance of the eharaetei of the house to which she had been taken by Sir Lionel Glenham, and where she had been discovered by Mis Dinwidd.e She guessed, and v ery truly, that the old lady would make no seciet of the place where she had been found, to Mr Stapylton, she knew ev en his mild temper could not over¬ look such a tlagiant bleach of propriety At length she sat dowtn, and leaning her beul upon her hand, began to fíame some »Illisible takthood to palliate, if not vindttate, liei tondjtt
But
But here Matilda vus at a loss lier invention wis not very bulli mt, and be¬ lore she hid formed two or thiee excuses, she peremed, to bei vexation, that they already contimeli as many contiadutions She heaid а female foot upon the sl urs ,— perhaps it was Mis Dinwiddie She woultl tell all, and rely upon her n ercy pei hips α fi ink confession nitvrlit soften hei —How often dots the weak iiiuiil hit, tccidciitally, »poo the btst mode of aition I The dooi opened, md Mrs Dinwiddie appeared She hnd taken off the unfor· tunate riding habit which had caused her so much uneistniss, and hid put on a Fienth night dn ss n t Iisa giotisque "Well, voung lady' said Mrs Din¬ vuddie, ' now tint I have changed my tlothcs, and bık suinething like a Chi ıstı in, let nie hear whit you have to si ! ι youiself, and mind me, child, do not ull ι be—I hate а liai I Perhaps I miy loi 0 et all 1 have sulleied on youi account,
account, and restore уоц to your husband and former connection), but it you utter a falsehood, I have α good large rod in the next loom, and III whip you better than ever you were whipped at school '" " I never was at school," punted Mis. Stapylton, " and I nevei was whipped in my lift. I would have totn Mis Jarvis's «y es out, if she b id attempted it. Papa would nevei let mi he scolded " " And he now itaps the blessed fruits nf hie foolish uidulgcnct'"sud Mis Din¬ widdie. " But let ine hear all v oui stoiy, and a pretty one I suppose it will be, or I will call up Polly and Jenny, and put y ou to the qutstion ordinaiyand extraordinar*,." " I'm sure youi behavioui is extia¬ ordinary enough'" cned Mrs. Stapylton. " I wish you had left me vt hue you lound me'" " Polly !" cried Mis. Dinwiddie Matdtla sci earned —" Oh no, Ma'am ' piay don t call the maids'—I'm too old to
to be whipped—indeed lam' I will tell you evtiy thing—upon my word I will 1 ' Mrs Dinwiddie again cautioned her against a lie, and Matilda burst mto tears, not tears of repentance, but those ot shame anil impotent ι age At length, 14 a voice half choked with sobbing, she thus began — " Oh Mrs Dinwiddie ! you will think me a very naughty girl, and so I am in¬ deed ' I am sure Mi Stapy lton always behav ed ν ery well to me, only somehow I ν as afiaid of him, for all I nevei used to do what he bade me—He is so much older '—onlv think, he is fifty four, and I am not seventeen'—so I could not love lnm as I did Bob Harfoid, you know, a nasty, vile, ungrateful fellow as he was, aud sinte lie died -----' " Died'' extliuntd Mrs Dinwiddie; " ait tlitic any hopes that he is out ot the woi Id ?
"Oh
·" Oh yes, Ma'am, I saw him dead myself, only I should not naie known him, foi his head was crushed so But you shall liear " " Yes, I shall hear a pretty story 1 " said Mrs Dinwiddie " If ν on tell me а lie, woe be to you ' But first ltt me know when jour attachment to llaifoid com- ■menced " "As soon as ever I set etes upot> him," cned Matilda " I was intioduced to hnn by Mr Stapylton, at our house, when we came fiora Chuith Haitoid was just aimed fiom Itili, jou know I thought hini the handsomest man I tvtr saw in my life, and so he was w ısn t ht, Mis Dinwiddie r" " Hold youi tongue Jiout handsome men, gul' csel umed the old lady, ' and go on with your stoiy t " Well, Madam, continued Matilda, " md so in а few moi ths 1 Ьецап to think that he loved nit ıs well as I loved hnn,
him ; for though I doted upon him then, I never told hnn so. Whenever Mr. Stapylton lefused me any thing good to eat, because I was In the family way, he й|"е<1 to get it slily for me., andj-fftlly believe that my keeping a secret fiom my husband, was the fiist cause of all this hubbub. ' " You have hit upon»an awful truth by chapee," said Mis Dinwiddie. " 'lhe woman ıı ho has secrets fiom her husband, by nifnnging the confidence which should foim the principal charm in married life, paves the way to her own dishonoui " " But I thought it veiy gootPof lum then, Madam," said Matilda, "and I used tocal]Mi. Stapylton every ill-natured creatuie I could thmk of. At last hesaid that he lov ed me Ί W hen my husband told me so, I hardly knew the meaning of the woid , but when llaifoid said it, I undeistood Inni in a minute
" I make
THEiVOllLD WE IN '* I make no manner of doubt of it, said Mis Dinwiddie.with а groan, "and what answer did you give? * ' ' Tint there was no lov e lost replied Malıkla " but tint it was impossible I could nun у lum, because I had ahushantl already, but if he would wait with patience till Mi Stap lton vv is tleaJ, I would have hnn with, all my heait and soul ' " A pretty ai ι ingénient I thought Mis Dinvuddie ' Now, Miam you see I tell you all the tiuth ¡Infortì laughed it my pioposal, which ^thought a veiy fin one and said the people noo a days had ι shoi tei way of settling mittels He then pioposed my lunuing away with bun Oh eleu nie I was deh B hted it the thought ' Besides, Mr St ipylton hid vexed me that morn¬ ing We intended to have gone off tht night after I was taken ill it Мь Moi¬ dent s, but I could not go then, you vol ιί ι know
know. When I got well, I had several meetings with Harford, when Mr. Stapyl¬ ton was out of the way ; and you, Ma'am, had very narrowly discovered that we were too fond of one another, when you would come up one day, when I had given orders to be denied to all. At last I began to think I was doing very wrong, for I felt uneasy,, and all -of a tremble whenever I saw Stapylton ; so, to ease my heart, I used to scolti him fron) morning till night, for fear he should scold me. One day he got very angry indeed, and threatened to write to papa. I declare I was quite frightened at this; for papa would have watched me quite close, and I should have had no opportunity of run¬ ning away with Harford, you know. Well, Ma'am, though I could not help thinking I was doing very wrong, I de¬ termined to go on with it ; for Haiford said he would kill himself if I did not go off with him. So what could I do, you know ?
know' It would have been downright murder I should have broke his heart; at least, I thought so then." Mis Dinwiddie turned up her handı and eyes. She could not but wonder at the infatuation of Stapylton ш marrying a girl, whose understanding was of the lowest order " A blessed experiment this! ' thought she, " of moulding a young mind, as Sta¬ pylton said. What has not hei father to answei for? His criminal indulgence and inordinate love of money are justly pu¬ nished by the wreck of his hope " Matilda continued, though the maiks of surprise evinced by Mrs. Dinwiddie, alai med her not a little " I tell you all the tiuth, Ma'am. So he begged, and be prayed, and said fine things out of play-books, something about tlie Tuscan grape, and, m shoit, I promised to leave Mr. Stapylton, and go abroad w ith him. I was to run away ι 2 fiom
flom the nnsqiieiade He wis to be there in tlie dress of ι jockey, md fol¬ low my sedan till the clnirmen could give Stapylton flic slip I consented, and you know, Mi im, you was thtie jn your yellow domino trimmed with blue and green —Loid ' I could almost laugh when I thmk of it " I shall make you laugh on the w long side of youi mouth, цп1·' said Mis Dinwiddie, laldemng, " il you elo not leave off such nonsensi, and tell уош stoiy stiaight forwards " Lord, so I do, Ma am'—Will then, as soon as Mi Stapylton s ch ur w is ltft а little behind mine the jockey oi dered the mtn who cinnel me, to tum down anothei stiett, and then down anothei, antl so into α little couit tint I dont know the namt of, and thtn vve both went into the house togethci " I nn out of patience at this abomi¬ nable web of lies ! scie mieti Mrs Dm w iddìi
Dinwiddie " Child, child, to my know¬ ledge, Harford was at Biompton and had been theie all night 111 oidei Polly and the other girl up η α minute ' " " Ob, piay don 1 1 supplicated Mis Stapylton, " indetti I am not fibbing now only hear—When vve got into the room the jockey pulled oft lus m tsl , and—Oh deai me' how 1 did stieam when I saw it was not Huloid, but a person I knew nothing ot ' The man begged ftie to be picihed and said that he had been ordei cd by Mi Huloid to bring me fiom tht masquer ule, tint Ins master would call upon me in α thy or two, and take mc ibroad Two days passed away, ami veiy lonesome tiny weie, 1 only saw an old luly but she was kind enough, to he sine Siittola nie that I vns at peifect 1 bcity ti d* what I pleased cscept that I was nevei to leave the house, and vv is to obey hei in all things Indeed I did not much ι 3 care
care for going abroad, and as the hdv was very cıvıl, and gave me tails ind pies, and let me drink as much sweet wine as I pleased, I liked the place vuy well, only I wanted to see Harford At last be came, but he ouly staid witl me from seven in the evening till one in the morning He begged me not to think of Stirling out, antl said he would come as often as he could, but that he was obliged to attend to Mr. Stapylton at present (vvho had no suspicion of bini); and that we should soon go abroad. I consented to every thing, for (I don't know how it was) I began to be more afraid of htm than ever I was of Stapylton, yet, for all that, I could not help laughing when he told me how the skeleton taught you, and how y ou tumbled ovei a chair, and how you knocked youi teeth down your throat, and broke your nose, and --------' " I wish his bones had been broke for an insolent jackanapes ' ' cried Mrs. Dinwiddie
Dinwiddie, in a rage, " and yon, hussy ' how did you dare to laugh at mis fortunes, of which you were the cause ' ' " I didn t laugh at you. Ma am , only he was so funny, that I laughed at what he said —Just a fortnight after I lelt roy own house, Harford called in the evening in a large gre it coat, w»th a patch upon his eye He told me to get ready to depart, for his plan was blown up, and that Mi Stapylton would know all tn a short time I was playing at tetotum with the good woman of the house, and said in joke that I would not go He seemed rather out of hu¬ mour when he came in, so I did it to plague hım, as I used to do Stapylton, but Oh gracious, what a difference '—lie scolded for a gieat while, then began to cuise and swear, and call me all the ugly names you ran think on. 1 cned, and told him he used to he more respectful fijrmerlj;. He sneered, and asked me if ι 4 1 thought
I thought my conduct was suth as to lommind lespeetr Uovi Stap)lton never said suth a cruel ¿lung to nit m bis lde ' Tine Mitilda, ' observed Mrs Din¬ widdie, " andjlet this be а wauling to )ou, if )βιιι husband will )et receive you on re| tntance tint the «onnu who toifuts liei title to itsptttabilit), will be sute to he first nproached by the man who seduced her ' " But what had I done to him? said Matilda " I am suie I used to plague poor Stapylton s heart out, and he gave me good words foi m) pains I only just said ι single woid to Harford, and he fell into such а fuiy, )ou can t think , in short, he fnghtened me out of niy wits, and I promised to do all he bade me — But, Oh dear ' w hen I saw him next, that vt as w orst of all He came to me m a hurry, apd said that Mi ^Ai elidile was waiting for us at the corner of a street, t in *· «
in á liacknty coach, whicli was to take us to a ch use he had hired I asked wh) Mr Aicbtlale was to go with us, and whither vv e weie going He bade me not be a fool but get leady I had drank two 01 three 01 four glasses of Mountain at dinner, and somehow felt myself very bold I sud I would not go, unless he told me where to, and what for He scolded me, and I scolded lum agam, just as I used to do Stapylton , at last he flew at me with a gieit oath, and gave me several violent boxes on the cai He then left me on the floor, and bounced out of the loom , but returned in about ten minutes Oh the ciuel, nasty, bar¬ barous creature ' I can t bear to thmk of his behav lour ' I would have sciatched his eyes out, if I daud, but somehow he managed to fiighten mc, for I saw he did not nunti whether I w as pleased oi angry— a vie fçllovv '—When he camb back— ι 5 ' Y Jur
* Your cursed obstinacy,' said he, 'has conquered this time, but i will see that you obey me better in futui e, unless y ou wish to have a few moie salutations of the kind I have just offered I have sent Archdale to Bristol alone, vie must fol¬ low him. Fifty pounds reward has been offered for your apprehension—I suppose by old Mother' (I mean Mrs ) ' Dinwid¬ die Stapylton would not have offered such a paltry sum—nay, I am sure of it, for he has no secrets fiom me Your name is not mentioned, but 1 fear the chairmen who carried you, will discover the aecret, and I cannot find them to stop their mouths 1 wish that meddling old --------· " He called you very sad names, Ma¬ dam 1 am afraid to say what " " You may," «aid Mrs Dinwiddie, bridling " I own lhat I advertised you TţţH me what the vv retch said of me " * Indeed, indeed I can't, Ma'am, yon will be so angry. " I shall
" I shall be if you don't tell me all directly," said Mrs Dinwiddie. " Speak, girl '—What did the fellow call me ? ' " Why then, if you must know," re¬ plied Matilda, with a malicious glance, " be called you an ugly, old, meddling hell-cat " " Mercy upon my soul 1 " exclaimed Mrs Dinwiddie, " what will this world come to? " Then, Ma'am," continued Mrs Sta¬ pylton, " he bade me prépaie to get into a chaise that was coming to tbe door. 1 begged his paidon, and coaxed him, for be quite frightened me, and I was not willing to get another beating I'm sure I wished my self back with Sta¬ pylton, instead of running over hill and dale Haiford then told me that since I behaved so well, I should know his plan I did not think lum so cunning myself, and yet I ought to have known him too ι 6 by
by his behaviour to Stapylton I m sure I have often wondei ed how you could guess we were fonti ot each other, foi whenever people came in unexpectedly, Harford used to look as innocent "as α Saint Perhaps you n ay have found it out by me, but he taught me to be a little cunning too — W ell, Ма am, he said that, as there was тю hope but that Stapylton would discovci lnm, bethought it best to decamp, and as he had been my Ihisbands adopted son he thought the damages (if it came to ι trial) would go haul agnnst lnm but is it wis best to ţiieptiit for α defence, be intended tct make another peison tppc u as bad as himself, so lint lie me mt Mr Aichdile (who lud bem gieitly favonio!, it seems by Mr Stapvltor) to bear us company Then be told me a long storv about α jeuellei's diughter and though I was veiy much fnghtened, I could not help 3 hughing
laughing, to thmk tint Mi Aiehd dt was togo a journey with mc, and not Imi» и bo I svas ' ' " Mrs Dmvuildie now felt lur blond curiile in bei veins ' All the truth rushed upon her muul —the rtlltttiou on hu unkind treatment of Aitlulalt—htr n- turning his lettéi — bei liaughtv md ib i- sive hnguigt to an innocent man, almost thiew liei into a swoon Ioituinttl, α t,ush ot ttais nltevcd lier oppi esteti heart, and she (by α sign) oidtred Mrs. Stapylton to proceed. " Mell, Ma'am," continued Matilda, " I said I would not speak a word, but it was too latt. Μι Anhélale was gone to Bnstol by himself, the chaise came to the dooi, and away we diovi I deilaie, somehow or other, although I was fright¬ ened, 1 felt a great pleastue at being car¬ ried away at such a rate, to plates I knew nothing of ! So I chatted, and laughed, and coaxed , but llaifoid tool, tin/ little notice
Tioíice of me —Dear me I how different it was with Stapylton ! Whenever I laughed, he was happy , whenever İ was out of humour, he w as misei ible ' " The exact difference between a hus¬ band and a seducer, said Mrs Dinwid¬ die " Oh Matilda' if you may vet hope for peace, lay these awful lessons to your heart Your worthy Stapvlton hoi e your humours beciusc you were young and inexpenenced, vour seducer, or rather paitner in your guilt, knew how weak were the ties tliat bound you An illicit connexion, whatever may be its commencement, finds its end in mu¬ tual reproach " " Indeed I bclieveyou are very right," said Mrs Stapvlton, " I neve' was used well since I left my ow n house When we got near Bristol, Harford told me that we must travel by night, and on horseback, as he was afraid ot being tiaced in a chaise, tliat vie should take round
round about roads and if I behaved well, he would love me as well as ever When we got to Bnstol, Harford took me to a little paltry ale bouse, though it was tole¬ rably clean, and bade me go to bed He aat up all day m the kitchtn (as he told me afterwards) with two loaded pistols by him As soon as it was dusk, he came up to me, and baile me dress myself He rubbed my fate and neck v th yellow· paint He said that the horses were ready, and that he м ould be with me as soon as he had called for Mr Archelale, he then put a pistol to my head, and swoie bitterly, that if I dared speak а single word on the journey, he would blow my brains out, if I had any He went away, and soon came back with Mr Archdale. I did not date to speak, for fear of being killed At last we lost our way in a wood, and got to the rums of an old Church where Harford frightened me so about ghosts and hobgobluis, tint I screamed
screamed very often though I did not daie to sptăk foi tear of the pistol At list 1 lhought the Chinch was falling up m oui heads, uid 1 Hun,, up my tao muslin vcls I tliought Mi Aichdale vmild have lictn vtiy angry with me, but instead of th it he cited out just as if he had been huit, and nn away I don t know uhat became of him , but I lenowthat Haiford beit Ine very severely, and called me sail names I cited bıt¬ teıly, but he only giew the woise tem¬ pered, I fell upon my knees to ask pai- dou, but he kicked me away Ought I to have expected such tieatment fiom him, Mrs Dinw iddic ' ' " What could you expect better, girl' replied the old lidy piitcnilmj; to firm¬ ness, though hci htait began to méltat this lecital " I m suie / dul not expect it, said Matilda, bursting into teais " I thought he would have loved me, considering that I had
I had a gieat deal of money in my pocket, given to mt at different tunes by Mi. Stapylton, aud all my jew els " " All youi jewels, girl I—Why, thev vici e w οι th not less than fifteen thousand pounds to my certain knowledge '" " Л icy were woith α great deal more than that,' said Mrs Stapylton, "but liaiioid would not touch one of them. He ordered me to sew the necklace, ear¬ rings, and lockets m my belt I believ e hs was afiaid of bemg thought to have stolen them, for I lemember he called England a d ----- d matter of f act country, and wished a thousand times that he was safe m Italy." Mis. Dinwiddie enquired what liap- penccl when they left the Church " Why, Ma am," continued Matilda, " as soon as it was moinuig (and I was veiy glad to see daylight), we got upon oui boises, and iode tq the fiist town vve could fmd Heie wc ptocured a chaise > <fcr
(for Harford said there was now no dan¬ ger of pursuit), and we got at last to a place called Milioni Haven. Here Har¬ ford hired a ship, or boat, or whatever he called it, to carry us o*er to Iielantl. I had never seen the w ule sea before, and was terribly frightened ; but he insisted upon my getting on boatti. —Oh, how sick I was, though J heard the ship was only at anchor ! 1 wa» very, very ill ; I wished myself dead α thousand times' At last, Harford came, and told me we had set sail.—Oh, how the wind roared ! I heard a great noise ; and though I was as sick as sick could be, I left the cabin, and crawled up the ladder. When I got to tbe upper step, I fell dow η upon the deck. My forehead bled ;—Harfoid came to me. I would have clung to him, but he abused me dreadfully, antl asked me if there was not danger enough without tny cursed squalling to make it worse. But Oh Mrs. Dinwiddie !—while he stood », cursing
ТПЕ cursing, and swearing? and blaspheming, a large block of wood fell down from the top ofthe ship, and struck him on the head, anil—and—Oh Madam ! he fell down; and his brains flew upon my clothes !—, You »ay see the stain upon my pelisse yet!" ' # Mrs. Stapylton here burst into an ex¬ clamation of giief and dismay. Mrs. Dinwiddie could scarcely support herself. She had wished for the death of"Harford ; but so shocking a catastrophe called forth all her commiseration. She offered a mental prayer for his salvation ; tears dropped from her eyes, and she felt at the moment, that the Christian's second pre¬ rogative is to forgive. " If you are tired, Matilda," said she, mildly, " you may defer the rest of your story till to-morrow. You have erred ; but you have been greatly and justly punished."
" I may
" I may as vvclWtfll you. «ill now, and have done with it '' tried Matilda, wiping hér swollen eyes — ' lhe w utber was so Tlad, tint the ship was foi ceti to put back *d don t know how Harford w as biňVd hut the Captain, who saw nie s ife fo an inn and who supposed me to be the w ife of Harford, gave me the lu^gatjC and ill the papers that were found u,ion lum and then it was that I discovered Ins wicked plans—Only think, Ma am '—he wanted to shut me up among a parcel of nasty Nuns, at a place called Genoa He was very fond of Italy, and wanted to îenew his acquaintance with some Marchioness rr another I was very ill for some time after I found out how w îcked he had Ъееп , but 1 comforted, mvself vv hen I thought . that I had got the money and jew tls safe W hen I giew quite well I asked the mas- jter of the house how I ijuld get back safest to London He said I might go in the mail, 01 tn^a postchaisc, if 1 could *
could afluid it Го piove that I could, I pulled out my pocket book that had notes m it to thi,aiuount^of six bundled pounds at least, md my puisc ν luth cont unid t« raty right guineas uid some " silici İhın I tsl id lot ι | au ol sassal«, aud unripped my hilt, I shew id lum my nccklne and e ir nn s anti th ops, aiti mv bulli uslies, aml mv sult ma ind Λίι Stapylton s pittine He lutriul me not to let any body else set them lot so many ν iluible things nii_ht expuşi me to rolbeis Achusiwis,ot icatlv, and I tiavelled on veiy site fit some c'tvs, till Isttppcd t Mulboiouji It «as neaı duk when I left tins plue, but I t jıılıl not help pliviţi^, with my tnnketsas 1 n_, as the h 0 lit lasteči but I w ıslı they h id been safe in ni) btlt t ü un foi I h id not got f ti, befon ut in put ι pistol inthet nise, intl asi id í t n ) I uisl I « ıs iii a htcntd just as I tısı 1 Ι ) lu it il ilord and ·, ive luni tvtıy thııi-, — dini) jewels, ılı my
money, even my pocket-book —Oh Mrs. Dinwiddie, what a miseiahle creature was 11" " Go on,' said Mrs. Dinwiddie, groan¬ ing. " When I got to the next stage," con¬ tinued Mrs. Stapylton, " I did not know what to do At last, when I saw the tiunks brought I recollected that Hai foul's clothes and mine were safe. The robbei had left my keys. I opened atiunk, and took out two gold watches. I said I had been lobbed, and begged tlie master of the house to give mc the value of them He said he did not know what they weie worth, but that he would not distress me. His wife should look at fbe contents of my trunks, and if they an¬ swei ed the expectation, he woulel let me have any money I wanted 'Hie mistress of the house came in, and said that, as I was so t ery young a lady, she would take care of my trunks till my friends sent for them.
them Rut I had no fi lends, you know, IVI ι si' D m wield te, jet she gave mc twenty guineas, and I got sa<e to London —I tliought at fitst I would go to my hus¬ band , onh/ somehow I was ashamed So w hen I got out of the chaise, I vv alked about the streets, and did not know vheietogo I had not walked far, be¬ fore I felt for my purse, it was lost '—some nasty ugly pickpocket had stolen it. Oh, how I cned !—At last 1 happened to meet a gentleman vvho knew me, it vŕas Sir Lionel Glenham He asked me how 1 came into the sticets alone at suth a time of night? I told lnm how I had been used He saitl that he would bung me to a plate where we should be well leceived I must own I guessetl what he meant, but I went along with lum We hid a good suppei, and—and—and then — uid then—you know the rest, Mis. Dinwiddie '
Mis.
Mis Dinwiddie paused. At length she said— ' ^ * " I, am undetermined, Matilda, how to act You hive been, intl I fear will Iff, \eiy vuckcd "If I coukj peisuade myself that youi sufici mgs hid acted as icoircctive to your follies (to call them by the nulilcst n ime), I might perhaps appeal as youi advocate ' " Why, don't you think tint I have sulleied enotah exclaimed Mis Sta¬ pylton ' It y ou only knew how sick I was '— I m sme а link would have pitied n e I thought I should have died, and H u ford only came once to me and he d ----- el me then " All these surklings, said Mis Din¬ widdie, " weie tht natural consequencts of youi wickedness I have heaid you compi un of no unhappiness of mmd "No' exclaimed Matilda, ' was I not unhappy enough in my mmd vt lieu I vv is siti , and thieiteued, and highland, antl
and cuffed, and kicked ?— I m sure I dont know wlnt you call unhappy, if I was not so, but the seasickness was worst of all I wished twenty tunes that Haifoid would thiow mt over boaid Mis Dinwiddie now explained the dif- fcience between vtxation and contrition, intl gave Mis Stapylton a veiy giave Icctuie upon liei futuie conduct Slit then allowed liei to go into a little par loni w heie llieit weie books and ι piano foite Sht ivin tuned her gootl nature so f u ıs to dine ind sit with hci— а civ ι hty Mis Stipylton would vciy willingly li ivc excused Hiitoid had mentioned seveial of his phnsto the fugitive vuft but mucho! Ins conduct was ytt to bt cxph ned Mı Stapy lton Ind educated hım as α sou n iv, such wis Ins fondness that many who weie unacquainted with the tımıly con ceins beinved hım to be his mturil voi ir к child
child This, foitunately, was not the case He had been sent at an eaily age to Italy, where his handsome peison and fnvolous manners guned hnn the hearts of many Italian bciuties He loved Stapylton, when he left Lngland, as much as it vns in his nature to love any thing, but five vears residence under an Italian sky, obliteiated ill thoughts ot his benefactor and lus native countiy Among the beauties of 1 loi ence, the Matcliioness Olympia della Pcıalta was the tauest, she was tascinating aud art¬ ful The libeial allowance remitted by Mi Stapylton to his /if otê^é was lavished upon hei, and such vieie the attractions of this Ibais, that Harloid determined to reside in Italy tor evei His long íe- sidence in the country had given him an Italian character, his head teemed with plots and he called Γ ngland а d ----- d mattel of Jaet lountry, because justice was administered with an even hand At
At this time, he wis summoned to Lngland Mi Stapylton informed linn of his intended maniage This Hirfoicl esteemed an insult and an injury He legaided his benefactoi only is lus stewiid, and wondered how he dared to alienate any of the propei ty he already looked upon to be his own. He tote himself ftom the arms of Oly m- pn, and tletei mined to exert his Italim cunning in the little sea ¿nt island When be beheld Mrs Stipylton, be looked upon her as a foolish child Hei unless vivacity disgusted him, he could scarcely allow bei to bt beautiful, for all his ideis of fennie charms centeied in the Marchioness Olympia Stapylton s kmd and afftctionate recep¬ tion made no împiession on the selfish mind of Hariord lie wished to get an independence in Ins hands, and lacked his invention for the puipose w 2 Whcthei
1! Iicther the foggj an of our climate be uiihvoiuable to plotting any thing but tieason, 01 whcthei Harfoid iris alt ud that ι brutal Com t of Lai would male no illuwancc for littie elcviitions fiom common t tiles, his invention vi u toituitd to lio pui pose At length, he sjw tht* Matilda loved hun Hopt agun «.vivid,— lu, cartel net foi hei peison, but thought he mi_,ht tuin hei passion to good account foi tin» puiposc, lit in aweitd hei ulv mus He kntw that slit ludjiwclsto ι vtiv eonsielcrableamount, tht money alisin^, it om the sale of these, would niakt him independent m his tkat It ily He would hav etiken them fio η liti, and hivt lift tht house quietly, but he teaied puisuit detection, and consc- q nen t punishment —besides, as he mijlit hatt ок istou to icvisit 1 n D land at some lutine penod, lit hid moie pi utleine tiun to tonimit an act which would p telude the possibility He
He theiefore detei mined to mike Mrs St ipy l'on the partner ofins flight, and let bei keep clnrgt ol the jevvtls, that in tase they weie oveitakcii, lit might be deem d innocent of the robbciy at It ist His ionianne finty now conceived it possible that even Mtpylton might bt kept ignoi mt of the seduca of lus w ifi He intended to keep her concealed 111 London foi a while, thtn (under pre tenet e f illness) isk lc ive to return to Italy t ikt hei with lum and confine her in a Convent, the Abbess of which was an Irish woman, well known to the Marchioness Olympia Harford w rote to her, and received fot answer, that, foi the sum he mentioned, the greatest care should be taken of the lady, that she should never see any but the professed Nuns, and never have pen, ink, or paper, or be admitted to the gi ate к 3 But
Btit Haiford s hopes of concealment weie almost put in end to by the pene- tntion ot Mis Dinwiddie Vilien the reward was ofleied for Mrs Stipylton s discovery, they totally vanished He had some time befoie invented the stoiy of the jewellei s daughtei, by wluch he imposed upon Archdale tl is he did with a view of making hnn appear а guilty paity in tht flight, if flight became ne¬ cessary, fos damages to а laige amount would as fully preclude lnm from revi siting England, as the commission of a robbei у Unwilling to take tbe route to any common seaport, be ordered a trusty servant (the same who had taken Mrs Stapylton from the nnsqueiadc) to hue horses at Bristol and at the New Passage When he had decoyed Aichdale two or three days journey, he meant to m loi m hım of the whole affair Nor did he dread his vengeance He knew be was unai med,
unarmed and confided m Ins evidently superior musculir stiength, should vio¬ lence lie ofttieti He guessed (and very truly) that all the woild would deem Archdale guilty, and flattered himself that as he would not appeal the only cununai, antl as Mr Stapylton was so much oldei than Ins wife, the damages would fall light if rctouise should bt had to liw He sent his seivant to Mil ford Haven with his luggage, and bis intention was to go fioin Ireland to Trance, and from thence, by land, to Italy He therefore put his deep laid scheme in practice, but that Pow er which, though it may for a time permit will ultimately punish cnmmality, cut shoit his un¬ principled career The servant, seeing bis masters ten ibi« catasti oplie, very coolly rifled 1ns pockets of what money he possessed, undei pre¬ tence of taking caie of the coipse He к 4 left
left only a few useless letters, winch were delivered to Mis Stapylton by the Captam of the vessel The booty ot the depre¬ dator did not exceed sixty pounds, and he made oft with it to I ondon as soon as the ship put back, leaving Mis Stapylton to shift for herself
С ПАР.
CHAP. X. " It ts τ singular injustice *htrh is often exercised toward. women, first to give thera a .ery defective education, and then to cspect from them the most unuLvntini, purity of condjet Mas lliss.it Mom A HE ncwspapeis now announced— " On Satin day last was mai ned, by spe¬ cial licence, at his Loulship s house in Aihngton Street, T.antred, rail ot Poit- tanis, to Miss Susanna Mostly, a young lady ot gicat ment, beauty, and foitune." Mis. Dinwiddie, hiving locked up Mrs. Stapy lton, flew to congiatulatc them. к ä I he
The ceremony of kaving town was dis pensed with, as the new Countess thought it would be attended with ι igieat and useless expence Mis Dinvuddie wis admitted,—she found the loom full of company She knew, and wis known by the greater part After the usual cougi atulat ions— " Piay, my I oui sutl Mis Din¬ widdie, "doyou know wlnt is become of your bıotheı ' " Who, Madam cued Loid Port- earns, tuinmg pale, and mentally cuising the enquuei " Mr Aichdale my Loid He is a character any Nobleman may be proud to be allied to " You are cutting your jokes, Mi¬ dam, I suppose, said Lady Portcarns, simpenng " Im suie you hive no îea- son to speak well of Mi Archdale (I don t know why my Lord lets hnn keep the name, noti) since lie used you so veiy ill, and as for his behavioural terw ards, it
it was a chip of the old block,—and I have heaid that he bioke open Mi Sta pyltons bureau, and stole all the dia¬ monds —'i on have not seen »ıı/ diamonds, have you, Mis Dinwiddie' " Noti, ıeplıed the old lady , "noi do I care about them а set of garnets indeed would be woith looking at ι —But let me tell you tint I think Mr Aich¬ dale to be as worthy a character as any I speak to now lhe stoiy ot the robheiv is ibsuul I know it to be filse, and foul betitle the black heait that set it afloat' Your bıotheı, my Lord, is as guiltless ot robheiy as youiself ' Loid Poitcmiss teeth chattered, and his consternation w ıs so ev ident, that it v is universally remaiked by the com- panv " Indeed, Mis Dinwiddie, filtered he, vet e ldeavouring it compostile, 'I must nccels say tint your obsen ations nullit have been bettti timttl this is no к 6 hom
hour to talk of family matters You damp the gener il joy " " This is the fiist tunc,' said Mis Dinwiddie, "that I cvei beard the excul¬ pation of one brother could damp tlic joy of anothei, at least, I never heard it publitly avowed " " Wby now, Mrs Dinwiddie,' cned the Countess, "did you not come and tell mc, and tell every botly, tint Mi Aichdale (as he is called) was the gieatest rogue, unhanged, in Lngland-' " If I said so, 1 now unsay it, replied Mrs Dinwiddie " I have giossly « ι onged hnn,—he is perfectly innocent Nur avas he accessary to Mis Stapy lton s flight ' " Pardon me there, Midam," ob- seived a gentleman, significantly, "I am ceitainly infoimeli that Mis Stapyl¬ ton, Mi Harford, and Mr Archdale are now m Pans I had a letter from an English lady (a near relation ot mine), and
and she siys ----- Where is the letter ' ----- No—I have left it in my other coat pocket.—Mrs Stapylton still ret uns her name,—she was at the Consulai Couit, diessed in white nuislin and sky blue rib¬ bons, and danced with such elegant, un¬ taught grace, that she vv as called la belle sauvage ' " La belle /iddlestiik s end 1 ' exclaimed Mis Dinwiddie " Play, Su George, have you ever lead the Seliool foi Scandal? If so, please to recollect the ¿«Wer, the bronze Shakespeare, and the double letter Ji om Northamptonsha e ' 'lhe Baionet now began to defend the veracity of his pietended relation He said that she was a hdy of undoubted vencity, and a neaı friend of the Consul s wife " Now j ou hav t clenched it, Su George, ' said Mrs Dinwiddie, " if sht is the friend of that paragon of women, her character foi veracity and candour must
must needs be undisputed But you nny till the lady whin you wnte next, bu Geoige, that Mr Harfoid is not in Pins, but in a Welch churchy aid, and that Mis Stapylton is not tl tuang at tht Con sular Court in vvluti muslin and sky blue ribbons, hut undu double lock and 1 cy in my little gieen palloni in luisbiny Sqiiart ' Here eveiy eye was turned upon Alis Dinwiddie, who continued— " Peihaps you will bt sui pi iscd when you hni that Mis Stapvlton was taken away against her will I do not say it sias so, but I bibeve tint y ou will beai sonii- thing very soon to astonish you antl you may see hei tinting away as usual, though not at tht tonsuhi Couit, Su Geoige----------my respects to your ι ela¬ tion " Loid ! exclaimed the Countess of Poitcarns, villini,, to tum the conveisa »ion, " there is the Duke of I inibs talking
t liking to my father who is gunning like the bead of an old fiddle I daie say he will out with а great deal of vul- ganty about the stocks but its impossi¬ ble to make a silk puise out of a sows eai Mis Dinwiddie who perceived that his Giace was quizzing the Mderman, histened to his ïelief Though she de¬ lighted m plaguing chuacteis who as¬ sumed airs they were unqualilied to sup¬ port she could not beai to see contented humility abashed 01 insulted She sat down by lum and offered her congiatu- lations on his diughter s maniage " Mairiagc do you call it' cried pooi Jeremiah Moscly who was dressed out m а pompadour coat with gold but¬ tons black velvet breeches and white s,dk stockings—" maniage do you call it Mrs Dinwiddie'—Why, Ma am I huclly know whethei my Sukey is mar¬ ried oi no'—When I took my wife Jor belter
better foi storte, I lud the banns pub¬ lished, and walkcel to Chuich like a Chi istinti , but now α davs, the people nniry (as they call it) at hi me —just for all the u οι Ul like the ľiench (as I am told), and I hate the pai lu ш« as I tlo the devil, foi they ait all Papists ami Deists, and (Goei forgive mt) I believe vie in England aie getting no better " Mis Dinwiddie concurred in his opi¬ nion, and asked aftei Mrs Moscley. " Wife is very ill, thank von, Ma'im. She woulel take some cuised slop oi othei last night, and now she is laid up with the gripes, but shell live as long as a bettei thing, that s my comfort." Mrs. Dinwieldie approved of his philo¬ sophy , and after expressing her sonow at the good lady s illness, made her com - tcsies to the newly married pair, and re- tucd She oidcred her coachman to drive to Mr. Westervdle s lhat gentlinun lud taken
taken an elegant mansion in Bedford Square She was admitted Mrs Wes tenille was done —After some chat, Mrs Dinwiddie asked aftei hci husband " I abhoi morning female visits, sud she, " wheie nothing but silks and scan dal aie talked off, as Peg Wofhngton used to obseive— Ό heic is Mi Westei ulle? " I believe, replied Mrs Ή esterville, " that he is it present under the hands of hisvaltt I will desne hım to step here as soon as he is dressed We are quite an old fashioned couple, Madam, and are never so happy as when we are together. I make no doubt but )ou and Mr Din¬ widdie were formerly the same " Humph ' said Mis Dinwiddie, " not much of that my good man loved lus business, and was more attentive to the stocks than family pal ties He used to dunk a little now and then at the club, and I used to scold lnm sometimes, but he
he never beat me, and I never distin¬ guished his brows We were polite m public, aud rubbed on very well together. We took each other s foibles in good part, and when he died, I declaie I was sin¬ cerely son y for his loss, and woultl have given halt my foitune to have had him back again So tint, upon the whole, I think we were a very happy coupl-, as times go.— Old-fashioned love, my dear Blanche, is all nonsense '—When I was young, I used to talk about old-fashioned love, and I dare say my gieat-grand- mother did so befoie me. we always pre¬ fer times past, but I believe that the world is just the same as it was centuries ago" " Your observation may be just, Ma¬ dam," said Mrs. Westerville, smiling; " but I hope you will allow the possibi¬ lity of a happy union taking place at all times. If not, I can contiadict you by my own experience " " May
" May your experience long conti nue' cried Mis Dinwiddie, benevolence throbbing at hci heait, " and if good sense woith, and beaut j can maintain then empite ovei the mind of man, İdare hope that your union with Westervdle will be productive of every felicity ' " Deai, dear Mrs Dmwiddte! ex¬ claimed Blanche flinging hei aims round her, aud pressing her closely to her bo¬ som, " who ever could call you cross, peevish, and ill natured' ' " I own I am all thiee, ' said Mrs. Dinwiddie, " but my bad temper is sel¬ dom exerted but upon the worthless You have cracked walnuts, Blanche, the shell is rough but the kernel is sweet. At the bottom I am good natured — Come, Child, I can t stay making com¬ pliments ,—ring the bell, and say I want to see your husband ι Mrs Westemilt obeyed The senant appealed, and Westei ν ille s voice sounded on the stans " Come
* Come in^ Beneehtk, cried Mrs Dinwiddie, ι mining to the door ' 1 Ime not seen л ou but once since you wert noosed and long to imel how mitii- moii) i¿tees with лон M esternile gaily shook hinds, and si lutetl hei on the cheek Mtrty upon mc tschmied Mis Dinwiddie— ' I hope лош wife won t be jealous'—Indeed Mi \\ esternile, I Ime not had ι kiss ftom a young gentleman these fue and twenty jearsand upwaids Mis Westei ville declared that she should be very jealous if Mrs Dinwiddie piaised her husband so much, and the trio sat down to a cheeiful conveisation But although Mrs Dinwiddie felt happy m witnessing a scene of domestic hat- mony, she did not forget the main pur- poit of her visit, she theiefore asked W esterville whethei he had heard any thing of his fnend Aichdale Westei ville replied in the negata e , but added, that be
he vi is confident, in despite of ill her suspicions, lus fnend wis innocent " İhı novel hippuiess I expenencc in the man ltd lite, continued he, fondly picssing the hind ol blanche, ' Ins ren¬ déiül me too icings in my enquiñes ibout lnm, but I will ilium Madun (wlntcvei you nny suspect) tint lie is guiltless ol prer.iedit iteci nusihiel " And I will atinin the sime cried Mis Dmv tiltlie " I w ıs ι fool once, but I do not wish to peısıst in my cuoi I have wioitged hun most ttţitgiioitsly —■ I don t knuvi how it h ippenett, but every pirttculu m wlueh I h tve mteicsted my¬ selt about Mrs Stapylton Ins tuinctl out untoi tunate loi mt ' She then ulåten lui Soho expedition, at which Blanche was shotktd, while Wcstcivillt tould vuth dtlhiulty lefiani fioin ι downiiLjit hugh Much lonitttiut vv is ν isted as to the piesent situation of Aichdale Westemlle appeal td
appealed scnously concei ned , Mis Diu- ЛА »Idle wept, and blamed hersclr, by tuins She said that as she had accused Archdale wronglully, she vi ould become lus public panegynst Mis Westervdle acknowledged the many good qualities of \rchdale, and said that, although she had deemed hun guilty, it was with leluctancc, while his acquittal gave hei the smceiest loy, not only as an act of justice to inoceiicc, but as she considcieJ the plcasuit hci husband would expeliente fiom the vci diet After some furthei conveisation on the same subject, Mrs Dinwiddie rang for her carnage She chote to Mi Bullits in Peicy Street, and luckily found lum at home In as delicate а way as possible, she informed hnn of the situation ot bis daughtei bhe natuially expected that so fond a father would have pioposed tal mg
taking hei home,—but heic she was dis- appointid Mi liadlie sud that he had intended to hive vein uned single, for the sake of Ma- tilth , but that as she had turned out so bid he was just on the point of mar- lying а viltlovt lady, а very good soit of а woman, vuth only tluee children, ill vv ell pi ov uled foi If Mi St ipy lton wt ulti not tike bei buk agun (which he lmdly supposed woultl be the case), he woultl pay loi hei bo irti somewhere in the coun¬ tiy, but ht woultl never look upon hei as Ins daughtei again. Mis Dinwiddie pointed out his cruel neglect of her in the most eneigetic lan¬ guage " neglect' exclaimed Bailhe "Did 1 not gtt her misters ot every knul m Trench, Italian, music, and dancing?— Her education cost me at least tw о thou¬ sand pounds, and see what I have got by it' " You
" You have got by it just what you deserved cned Mis Dinwiddie, waxing warm " You might have flung as much awav up η ι panot, and pu haps Poll viould İme pıofıted moie by tlie lessons Wlnt caie did you take to form hci mind ' Hei mmd ' cned Bailhe opening his eyes to double then usual stire, — " why, what would you hive had me done Did I not 0 et the fiist Signais and Signons to attend hei —I m suie people of fashion educate then clnldien m the same via) md I wanted my Matty to be a woman ot fishion Be sides did I not get her a „oveiness cliaim nigly lecommendtd —Mint could I do Inore " Mis Jeivis ' ι e[ lied Mrs Dinwul die, " was, in tact ι veiy worthy wo man , but if you do not know, I üo that she was a bigotted Irish Boman Catho he "I
" I knew that veiy well," said Ihillie, "and it vi as foi tint very icason I took hei, foi as she used to tl ot to confession once a month, I hoped she viould be too much afiaid of the devil to plaj any tricks with niy daughter, about putting loiers into hci head Besides, I veiy stnctly chaiged her never to speak one single woid about lehgion to the gnl ' ' ' Oh Solomon, what was thy wisdom ' ' exclaimed Mis Dinwiddie, " thou must fully yield the palın to a London Com¬ mon Councilman — Λ governess, who ought to supply the place of maternal tenderness, is never to talk upon the sub- jett of lehgion to her pupil '" " Win, zounds, Madam," tned Bail- lit, angiy m ins turn, " you would not have h 'd the gul biought up а Puput, would ν ou ? ' " Why not'" lep'ied Mrs. Dinwiddie, calmly, "anenoneousicli >tor, lsbetterthan none it all If she had beeil brought up vol il. L as
as a Jew, she would hive had some rules to go by ,—you have neglected the most impoitmt duty, and now throw all the blame upon your daughter Tie, fie, Ali Badile'.— Do yourself justice intl \ou will blush foi the caieless, ciuci put you have acted " Let us speik without anger, Mis Dinwiddie said Bulhe "I know tb it y ou are a tei y good sort of a tmaian Mrs Dinwiddie was about to entir hn pt tuest against this lompliiiint, but Bailhe continued " Piay, now, do you senously think that I could spare time to talk about ich gum and— md —and all that soit ot а thin,» — M by I shoul 1 not hive I now u huw to have set about it lhe gul would have I iu a hed at me I am ι h ile stout nan, aud vias only ciulit and f nty last bu I htlav , it would hive bten foolish to luve tılked lo the girl aboat sin, and (.uth, and the dev d, and—and—and all that
that soit of a thin," Twenty years hence it will be liatiu d enough to besine, but why should I bother mvsilt about wlnt may not hippen this long tune to comer ' Harfoid thought tlie same no doubt " ıeplıed Mis Dinwiddie but ι block of wood knocked out bis bums toi all that ! Peihaps, some loose crane at ono of youi vvaichouses, may he as obliging to you ' Bulhe turned as pale as ashes —his teeth chattel«! I must needs sav Mis Dinwiddie faltered he tlntyouaie downnght ıutle I un thinking of maimiig and you tell me about my brains hein 0 knocked out ! 'i ou have mule mc quite uneisy mil un¬ tomtol table I Mis Dinvvidd e now tliou B ht it α good tunc to pie-as his letoncilntion with his <Uu B htei but hcie hei penetiation intl judgment failed hei Ballin was alai med nul pıtı ıslı, not softened He sullenly L 2 ıeplıed
replied that he ι ould pay for hci board somewhere in the countiy, and tint tlut was moie than he was obliged to tlo Ihe girl had behavetl veiy well (except nmo and then) while m Ли house, and it she had behaved ill elsevvhcie it was no fault of his He said that he did not want it to come to а tual if he could help if, and would theiefore squee/e a point to pay fo; Ins daughteıs board somew heie in ţorKshuc, 01 any other leniate county Hie moie Airs Dinwiddie said in f ι vom of lus diughtei the mort pettish and ill ttmpeieel vvas Mi Bailhe lhe old hdy theiefoie resolved to dtci her pi in L tillit often hintet! tint he lit I oidcred his с image on p и titulai bu mess She tui ned а dt tf ear to tv ery insinuation of the kind At last, slit said i»tiflin a hei nal feelings undei tlie mask of seve iity)- " Pray, Mi Bullie, what is to become of the ¿u!, til! you can find a plico J for
ftıı het Dtı you f! ink tint / vul! Ini- l nu hu ЛЬ Ь Uon vuil oi emu e 11 İt İt tıvc VI tll ν ίο Ins ι sed Ι Ι Ίι» ill -SI Ц Ι с ııı leie tins cvet ι, //i-s Cucito bul sı Ι í 1 Κ ıı ioc! the vu ¡I s v li ci i t η ι »и ι ei I İten 1 n ty hni ι v ııı ι., 1 ι ly ol ι ι μ! id vuil i L su sih Ilı s tt ν ι ι αι y d u ,ΐιΐ ts 1 ι miv be gıvtn n < Mis Dinwiddie made a low curtsy " So then it seems," said she, " that the niainttiiuicc of youi dumhtti is to be at mj chaige Do ) uu think tb it 111 Ii u uoui α good fot notimi., little hussey? ì^o Su, you пш t pi ov itle for hei v im¬ seli —Well, Su Ishall olióme and bid lui get out ot my house She has no clothe, tint is one com oit, so it will not tile any time to pack Indeed, I must sav, I inte no pity lor het ¡et her go, intl 0 tt hu Liead as she may 1 have L 3 ttd
ful liti long enough, and she must now pıovıtlt loi herself 'Why ι ow—why— пои, Alls )) ıı- vutlilitl sud 1 itliie, soituun.» you loulcln tbc u to set hei st n с could you' 1 id is she is it would bt haul to tuin hei into the stietts 1 —Pooi little „ill ' (liais stood in bis cyis) ' she wis niy dailtng one — lurn htr out' — Lotti, Mis Dinwiddie' you cant think of it, 1 m suie ' " V ny should I ht more tendei hea-tcel than hit own fithei ilimandtd Mis Din«iddìi " Why aie my doois to be open to her, while your s are shut ť —Upon matine reflection, I think the best thing we can both do, will be to let her go on in her own way She will never menil, she is incorrigible, antl I wish she may meet with all the misery she desei ves ' " Oh, fie upon you' lie upon you, Madam ! ' exclaimed poor Bailhe, ago¬ nized as much by returning affection foi his
lus diughter, is by a fear of the shime her iniscondi ct woultl teiltet ou hım " I will цо foi bei directly , and tlie sooı ci she ıs out of y our hmtls, the better 'Itun my pom Mitty into the stiects, in¬ deed' tnd then v ıslı her ill the iul in joui potet' —^ou talk ibout lehdon, Mulam, but I elon t think you shew muh by Ktiuj; so etiiillv \ lurk or 1 util would bt mote t imp issiotnti '— I lu n s'il h ь no ılotlıcs neithei ' She th it uscii to be tlttsseel out ι-, fine is ι Pini- cess !—lye, md finei too '—11! hive hei home directly ' ' " Not you ' said Mrs Dinwieldie, "your unkindness Mill rttnin, and so indeed it ottelit My c u π ige ıs at the door, but voi will no more _,et into it, and fetch ν oui diugiitei baik, thm í sh ill sufici btr to leniam α minute in шу botisi " But I «ill go' exel ι ned Bulbe in a rige " I dont uant your «ringe, L 4 Madun,
Mulam, lieilhei , —thank God I have one of my own I am sure some unlucky aicidmt would befal me if I iode along ν ith suth a ciuel, hud hearted woman Mrs Dinwiddie, lepeitingherassuiinccs tliat he would not come, and that she viould tuin his daughter pinniliss mto the stieets, left the house with affected igea; and ic 1 joy She irtived at home only time enough to i foim Matildi that lei ratUi would soon be with her Pool Mis Stapylton, tei ified at the news, buist out a ciymg , then sat dow η upon the flooi (her usual w ly, when m distress) and lamented her self as if she bad been banished fiom all society, rathei than lestoied to а fither Soon after, a violent knock it the dooi announced Mi Bulhe " Oh, he will kill mc' he will kill me ! ' screamed Mrs Stapy Ittm " Oh Mrs Dmw iddie ' my gootl Mis Din¬ vuddie' my deai, den, deirest Mis Dinwiddie '
Dmw iddic ' don t let papa sec mt !— Oli Lord, lit w ill kill mt in hi | ι st m 1 am suit lit will ' He vuil knoel me down, antl---------- line the dooi opened, antl Mr Pullie it pencil Mis St i| v lion flew tiom lnm, and vv lapped beiseli up m tht v indovv tui- tains Hit pool man stop, cd iinolun- tmlj " Oh Mitty I Mitt, ' cried he, vuiiiging his hands, "you luvt matlei sad piece of woik of it ' You have almost bioke your poor fa'hei s 1 cut, intl now you wont so much is look at hun' Oh Matty' Matty' He stopped, and the tears buist fiom. his eyes " Yes, I will look at you said Ma¬ tilda, " I only thought y on would not love me again lhen Hying towai 's him she covered his fice with kisses uid t linij; upon her knees, earnestly impiotai lus púdon Bailhe
LiiUic (tlie fust slioek ovei) appealed lritsoltite lhesiLJilot his child, of his ι nl v tliild, in tt us, and in the att ot Mippliiation, did not pioduce h If so ι inch efiett as the prtttuded miniminity ot Mrs Dinwiddie lteling was not а s tiled innia e of bis husom He thought of tin vuil m t > whom he w ıs tngı^eel — hot should he pievail upon bei toiectne his dai = lıteı > Mı Stapylton oıı 0 lıt to pioudt lor Ini lie ıı ı H lıı lint a lu 3 t lam lv , money v ıs ıi"vtı so ι net U lcn n th, tuiuuig to Mts Dinuuldit, he entreated liti to luibour Ins daughtei for a week or two, till he tould get ι pıo¬ peı phce to receive liei " What! vont jou tike ne home then, papa f cried Mrs St ipy lton, h inj mg about his neci ' Oh, do pi ly tal e ne home, md 1 11 bt а vety gootl gul, ind nevei tlo so any moit, I wont, in diedi won ť —my tun, itti papi, III et tj, at hume, and sing to vou, just as I ustd
used to tlo when you came fiom Dow nmg Street ot the Indu House—onlv I wont hue Mis lei v ıs ıgıın, you know ' " Be quiet child,' sud L tillie pee¬ vishly, " nul let Mis Dinwiddie spe ik ' Ihe good luly plunly putenti! tint ι ν tolult opposition vv is tht only method she could itlopt with succtss to induct Bailhi to takt home his diughtii " I tannot ste, Sn Eaicl she " how youi rcijust tm bt letonciled eithei to cominou piopnety or cominou sense'— Why, Su, am 1 to ι e butti ened with the circ of а young woman, whose chai acter ıs so notoı ions' I thank God that I w as nevei in such tompany befoie, except once indeed, antl then it was that I dts- covcied your uinaway You may do is you please vuth hci, Mr Bailhe, heic ihe shall not stiy but it you aie weak enough to takt bei honu, let mt stie- iiuously advise you to lock hu up in ι paliet, feed hci up m biead aud viatei, and
nul but hltlu ol il tt ^ı u! iv hır α stoldııı, regıılıılv tl uı lııtsit'ıv, t tl be sine alvi ivs И t ι ici ı li mi ι soi tul limbi m t it 'u ıs ciut İv v u 1 sıbly t m—(n n un cin I e t tl ftıı hci)- i id il she tl rs n 1 li' c ·Ίι , you nuv ull hu ti expeet wot e in tu tui' —Put I nuti not n,c tlı t tl i,s to iou (tl Unovt у utili ι vtiv br ı- ttl 111 11 ( 1,1011 yon bel ut) ίο ι с at youi own iiciusi this me. i u , , airtl if you tint youi visitois so pc lit ly, how will you use vont own ť u lilt ι' Bid as lhe gul is, I pilv hci η Γ ould any fellow citatiut undti ι ι a ct s pivi " No moie а tigei il η is It, Alis Dinwiddie ' exti umed Cullie, in α ι agt, " no, noi so ninth ntilbu 'iou te imglitv temí ι he ltttl tinlv '—And so youi tendu heaitcdness wo ltl it si ms, luve mc tuin Mitty out of doois' Put don I mmd her, ihlc! 1 wont but nul loikyouup, but İOVC V Hl JU t uS well s I iw tl
I u etl to do I 11 sec whethei I can t put all to lights with volti husbind, if it was ouli to ilisippoiiit this ciuci, uiifoi 0 ivmg vv oman " S) site is ' cned Mis Stapvlton, liei eves spat kling with tiiuinpliiut nn lict ' She thicitcned to n hip me, and 1 dont know \v Ii tt intl cautil me uj;!), n ist) u mies Conic alon = , ni) de u pipi, conic aloıı^ deal, deal, t'c 1 ic G t ] tpi'—Oh, III be so B ootl, vou emt t unk ' "Avı, ivc, thıltl Ictus he B ing¬ ulfs Dmw iddìi a «l moi iiin_ţ lo voti , and I vusu ) m une ihuitv uni , God¬ ìi itine — С t nt lon., M ıttv ' 1 hough Λ!ι Dinvvuldie vi ь shod cd it tilt evident tui] t i Uis Stipvl¬ ton s Inait, s'il felt ι φι tl it invìi, attui tousistei liv vuth iti tinti uni was not a little pie tsecl it (inilin., liei house cleaied oí such dis ι ,iec tble ν ¡sitoi- Al!
AU her thoughts wt t now employed upon the fate ot \itlulilt Ilei futile f mej conjured up mia 0 es of honoi U one time, she unarmed llut lus une isy feelings nu, lit luve piompled hun to Miieide at inoMicr, tint lit hidpeiishid by the h nuls ot lobhus, or accidents on the load W tsteiv ille h id not seen lnm at his 1 ist appear nice m London as lit vv is thm attending tht sit к bed ot the pei son who lift lum Ins 1 iţţc minu¬ timi Westuvillc 1 ad not usul hım til, though she hid, yet Westuvillc Intl ucciseci no nevis, ot iny natuie, nspect- nir, 1 tm В th were equally surpnsed mid con ctiiied, and Mis Dinwiddie lcpcatedly, .»tiicasiouoflued pieleucd the tulostuu ot Archil île m eveiy mixed conti шу , iuti sneh was hu л I ind acciiiaey ot dttail, tint he stood itquitted even in the bosun s
bosoms ot tlie most piejudiced to tlie gi t at an tiny nice ot Ioni ant! Lady Pon¬ ein is who wislud tht nirritor m tlie Hi iv ens above oi in tlic shades below
Í.MI Of 101 II
