Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The haunted palace: or, The horrors of Ventoliene: a romance
??? HAUNTED PALACE, OR The Horrors of Ventoliene. JSkS soon as the company returned to the hotel, they were all anxious to learn each other's sentiments of what they had seen. All expressed their ????^?? and amazement ; but none more so than the captain, as he had been led to expect ? ?*??? different ceremony, Thc sacrifices ????? liad been made the time before, ????? he was there, he thought ????? be repeated, ??&1? Vol. IIL ? ????
some more awful ceremonies. He wished to iearn frora the father, why it was omitted, though it gave him great pleasure to hope he should ???'?? see it- performed again. The father said, He hoped so too, and he was ex¬ tremely happy in the idea that those ívnom he trembled for, a fortnight ago, had so agreeably disappointed him ; " as that ceremony,*' said he, " is ??¬ ?'?? performed, but when a member is, by his perseverance in vice, entered on the black list "That*sacrifice is their sacrament, and, by the Jaws which ivere instituted in tlie infancy of this society, the of- fm&umg priests, tiiough repugnant to their natures, are obliged to comply, if a member insists on being one ofthe black associates. Each brother of the wMte is,obliged to drink of the bowl ; but, fi»m, that moment, they are sworn enemies, and it is the business of each to
to counteract the designs of the other. If the number of the black exceed that of the ?????, a thousand schemes are invented and put into practice, to harrass and distress them. Nothing, that demonical ????????« can devise, but ??1^ is tried to effect their pur¬ pose, and lead the good, by the most artful means, into the commission of deeds, whieh, when once perpetrated, they know will prevent their return to their former friends. Hence those crimes, which have so recently caused the den Hi of the five members we saw to-night; their being takeu off in one year, ban lessened their ??????, and the unexpected .seceding of the brothers now with us, will enable the white to complete their good intentions, respect¬ ing the tlead at Ventoliene, which, it was prophesied many years ago, would be accomplished, when a parricide, and destroyer of the nearest ties of nature, B Q should
should be bis own murderer, in the presence of him be had most materially injured, "ma m mon as hb soul bad taken ib final flight, then might the remains of the innocent be collected, and put to rest for ever ; tbe vicious should become virtuous, and the power of God be »iade manifest " By the .death of Owen, this pro¬ phecy is fulfilled ; the dreadful sights ws witnessed there were occasioned by tbe evil spirits, that attend on the black members, who are perpetually counter¬ acting any design that militates against their own evil propensities. Their power is now effectually humbled ; and t trust and hope, when a final division is made of your property, that there will not be one among you, but will rejoice at what you have seen to night, and again become useful members of society. The Prince Bononi has, through
through accident, been made sensible ofhis ?????*, mé will te filterébe m honor ?? high kirol* ??????? many virtus bat they wm ??????? by his tott^Ä. ?? months ago, be was at the head of tbe table fift He got wounded in m scuffie, among his profligate companions, who were at¬ tempting to carry off a lady few» a convent The danger he lay m Ibr three weeks, the pain he suffered, and the good counsel of Father Theodore, altogether wrought the happy revoke tion you have this night witnessed» which every one who loves virtue must rejoice at, as he has now the power of doing as much good, as lie had before of doing ill. "There is none here," continued he, " I flatter myself, at present, but ?vhat will in future make the conduct of tlie prince his guide and director. He ? 3 will
?? ånd morc ?? ft&efep ? ??1??*? a«d ίκκ^Ι ?????^ tlian in dì Uu $^®????? femma m the ??% liceo» tons nut. The ^»e brings permanent ^tkfÄCMon m iti ? } tbc ottor a «?«??^1?? atjoyncBt» whkh, upcrø tIbelea^#eÉ€€tkiii, toascnÄéemM* plan«! daggers m tbr ìmemi t that can- ?? he dram-n, without ^ungrng de^- ?? î»|0 ?? aaá §??. You mmt aM ????? ^ ?^? ??1? în tl^ day ; I lå^be «eady to attend you," The ?? tkm retired tø ???. Price came forward to the captain, with aa expression on hk countenance, that plainly indicated a sincere abhorrence of his fonner life. The captain took him by the hand, and congratulated htm on bis contrition ; Price was much affected Parlari and G uwerat ad- vaiic£d*"~fche same good omens were oliservable on the face of each \ they *■' all
tW tbtir lorroet kt-ndnoe t# them, irød bc^gvd tbett future ptotectio« «ad ad* ι tee. Thk wa» protnâ^. İt wa« tkm aftwsl they'tli«iid«cciiffîti theis«^ mannt r they had coinc ; which wat ? ? early øn the nart day. Tbey dtd* a»d arriad at Napfe rø saÄty* Fitmllan raimedîaldy went to s«e Michael, whom he f tmné reixjwerrøg fast He recollected his master, hut was not collected enough to arrange any ideas øf what had passrd* The physician assured Edward, that a shoit tİ nie Mould perfect his cure. ? waited some time for the return of the father and Joseph, who had been to sec Vashti. She was still very ill ; a rooted melancholy had taken possession of her mind, and the faculty despaired of ever removing it. She seemed for a moment happy at the sight of Joseph; ? 4 and
«4 wis« ? ???? Atóá røitk ?? 1^???» ? ?? «? ?????? ??5*?&???????? ???, bok Arpretemt- ly sank apém tato te fwaer dtes^- de«cy. Tbebeirtof%ie^wa#wrumg witfe ???? ; fee lo^ed bis wîir with tlie te^ierest ??????, ??!, when he rended her as lost io htm fer ever, tbe poor fellow's feelmp were poignant¬ ly ??????. Father Gregwy endea- vtmred to persuade hint, tbat she would recovar; he fed Mm to hope every things and as hm presence seemed to give her pleasure, he said he would dispense with bis attendance at Ven- tøhene. The remainder then departed, and entered tbe palace, by the usual way in the wood» As they went along, they were agreeably surprised to hear thc soft music, tbat charmed them in the pri ì tbe fatber hailed it, as a presage
íbcyhadfeftit ?^????? ti··a» frøhn^nt, tte^Äer «??? ???^%?* ther they would seareira that diy, ot» the next, it being ??? to tó» ; they chose the ktter. Some of them i*e*e apprehensive of Imng ??? wmføeå % the Smal ; imi thb, father ???? assured them, woukl not be «be aid Price and Parlati were under trepida¬ tion ; but, on the capiün ** promising they should not be kit alone, the«* fears decreased, and they went to rest m confidence. The next dey, the captain, father Gregory, and Edward, call«! tbem all together in the hall, and read to them their instructions, whkh were, ? ga oa the first, second, or third sound of the music they should hear after their return, to that part of the pabce they Bj hai
had explored, at Üie fime it fell in Tbey were to cause a certain spire of tlie ?? to be taken down, aod, « tiat- ever they might find there, uas to ix* collected and buried in a part of thc cemetry, belonging to the chapel of the palace. Tliey were u» follow the ,*?? p* of any form they might $ee 5 and, at whatever pkee it might stop, or disap¬ pear, tbey were to dig, and the bont«, if they discovered any. were to be ta¬ ken ίψ, and biukd in another part of the cemetry, over which a monument was to be erected. The remains of ?? ? ??????? tobe taken from wliere they were laid, and deposited in that precipe spot the others should be taken from. A statuary, to make the monument, should be sent from Naples, in ten days after tbeir arrival, by which time, the prince hoped every thing would be completed. The artist would likewise bring with him an architect, who would have
have arders to repair thc chapei to take «í'in-n ami remove tho^e parts ofthe p.tk<c% uh uh utic too bml ??? n-n- dmd habitJiie, and to pat the remain* fît-r mt*> a state afilie ιηο^? pedcct te- pair, ït má** îo br done * it Hout the ??? delay ; ulicu nnbhed, the prince Mould iiMt them Thc\ were in tbc midit of conver¬ giti ui, u hen they læaul tfie mu^ìe, as it íiojtiiiiç o\er their iieatls. They liokrd ? ith earnest exp, ctation of see* ??«; the loiely form they had beheld before in the ruins ; but nothing was ihiblc. The sound's seemed leering to the south entrance ; they followed it, and found it go befoie then», from thc south angle, over the ruins, in the great court, to a broken iiight of stairs, whieh ivere in too bad a state to admit of their ascending them. While they were pausing in ivhat manner they ? 6 ihould
àh^ld get uj^ the sounds seemed sta· tionary. Fttmlka pro|K^ed getting a ladder, «ud ascend that way. They did* and found themselves in the very apartment they had come up to before from the rooms below, when they were involved in the strange dilemma. They drew up the ladder after them, and used it as a descent to poor Michael's woman-horse, which he had so griev¬ ously bestrode. Close by it lay the cursed great bunch of tlowers, as he tenned them. Those that were present then laughed at the recollection of the poor fellow's disaster. The music still played a soft and plaintive air. When they were all down, those who had not seen that part before stopped to admire the beautiful fragments that lay around, each one wondering it should have been left to perish
perish in such a rueful manner, as they must have belonged to a most magnifi¬ cent apartment. They would have continued much longer turning over this piece of mutilated grandeur, and tos¬ sing over that, had they not been roused bv the loud strains ofthe music, which sounded in full key, along the roofs of the empty apartments, that led from the room they were in. The captain said; " We are summoned, father, " pray lead on." They went first, the rest closely followed, the music still becoming louder and more brilliant. They entered the room, in which they had seen the ladies before. Fitzallan and the father endeavoured to mark out that part ofthe wall to which they had pointed. They had placed themselves near the centre ofthe room, and upon the spot where they had observed the first vanish»
vanish. Thev turovi, tn answer srnu t qut->tfon put to th'*ni by one of th< can»p.iu). m hen tlu\ ??? fhe \rn ladv standing i>etwecn theni. bhe seemed to ?? her evi-s tifll upon the fatlicr; h*r \%fìok* trame tremhletl, and bei countenance di«*pb\cd a kind of hot ι oì , She threw up a small veil that *>hadul pírt of iier face, and iu an apparent &gony, pointed to the wall, the ???» all the time playing the most loud and harmonious stiaitis. Her haud conti¬ nued near halfa minute pointing to it, her eyes all tlu time rivetted on the father. As her hand gradually dropped, she uttered a deep and hollow groan ; then raised her hands clasped towards heaven, and, in an instant, when thc iv hole form bore the semblance of a corporeal substance, it appeared a mu¬ tilated skeleton, the right hand being cut off at the wrist It then moved slow¬ ly a small distance, and vanished. They
They marked the spot where they then stood, anil the one she pointed to in the ???. The whole of the com¬ pany were not tn the room at the time —only thirty ofthun ; thc rest, with the captain, were exploring the other apartments; but all present had seen it, among whom was Price, whose tenor, tm seeing the transition from the lady to the skedeton, l>eggared ali description. Ilis hair lifted up—his eves seemed starting from their sockets —his mouth and nostril» were extended —-and his whole body appeared con¬ vulsed. He caught hold ofthe father's arm, saying, "Blessed Lord! this is worse and worse." They comforted and earnestly begged hhn to be more the man ; for his fear would only serve to intimidate others, and, as they were enjoined to complete what they had begun, it was a folly for any one to draw back, as none would receive any personal
peramal injury, unless what their ?? π fears occasioned. At this expostulation be strove to gain courage sufficient to assist in raising up the floor, while some of tlte others were making an aperture in tlie wall They were thus employed, when the captain, with the remainder ofthe com¬ pany, eame into the outer room, follow¬ ing a beautiful young lady, the same he had seen before. He beckoned the fatiier and the rest of them to notice her. She entered the room they were in, advanced to the spot tiiey were raising, and, with a heavenly smile, pointed to the wall. She then walked slowly back to the outer apartment. Tliey followed, and, in a moment, she appeared in the room above, looking down. When they ???? to place the ladder to
to descend the stairs on the other side* she was seen going down them, with¬ out any apprehension of their falling. They descended and fblbwed het to the park. She was seen at a distance making towards the kke ; they pursued her steps. The music wts^m herd; but, instead of one, various instrumenti seemed playing in concert It was nothing that resembled mortal sounds, but something that lulled the senses into a pleasing melancholy. The ådr vision took the east walk to the lake r she paused near the middle of the side, then lifted up her hands in an attitude of prayer near a minute, and, as they drew nearer, she dropped them î took a handkerchief and bound about her head, but in such a manner as to cover tlie upper part of the face ; then plunged into the lake. They had by this time advanced close
close ? tlte spot from whence she dis- appeared, Tiiey rushed directly to the edfe mf the water, but could not dis¬ cover any tiling ; the surface wa* per¬ fectly smooth. The music ceased» Tbey instantly placed up some ish ort poies, aad got the necestaries to (?? the Me öt that place. The whole of tfe patty were preient. They toiled memt three hourj, without being able, £œ weeds, to get to the bottom, and were going to give it up, and look upon it as a delusion of fancy, wben the same bvelv form was seen to rise three times out of the water, and sink again. One ef the company, who held a lead in his hand, festened to a cord, proposed to throw it in, to mark the precise spot. That done they went rouiul to tbe otlier skle, and fetched a little boar, whicii enabled two of them to as.si.4t the drag. The lead they had thrown in directed them, and, after a few efforts
eCoîts, they found the drag impeded» They put duwn a long boat hook, aad brought up a large wo#den ho% f ??? and ? ery shallow. %Vhen they had got it on shore, they opened k, and discovered die body of a lady, irlme person ?? Mt spkît exactly re^ml^kd. ?? wm in ?? same dress in which abe appaated to them > and round her head, aad half over her face, so as to ?????? ? &??? way below her eyes, was tied a silk handkerchief, embroidered at the cor¬ ners ivitb gold, in a cypher L· P. A, The body was not in the least injured by lying in the ??????. A large quanti¬ ty of lead bad been placed in the box, ivhich was of Engliih oak. That, they supposed, occasioned the obstacles they had met with in raising it. (i I am happy, " sídd father Gregory, s s to th in ? you did not give up the search. 1 would
wmbà jrtedp ?? life, that those wb» placed tbe lotely šútíkm hite litttó thought the would be brought up again. Would to Gød I knew who was thy murderer t H They prepared to take it to the pa* teit. Thc corae-was carried tø the ?? hall, and some of them set about rnakrng a proper cofrm, whkh was not €øm}Éfei#d mk iate in the day, awing to the umkiilfurøm øf the workmen. As soon as done, they put the body into It, wrapped In a silk coverlid of a bed, instead øf a winding sheet ; they å&tesffd down tbe Ud, and the father said, He thought it best to let the body remain, till they could procure an in¬ scription to be placed upon the coffin, stating in wbat manner she was found. They had finished about ñve minutes, whea the music was heard agam, as if directiv
directly orø .the coffiiu They listened to it /rltfe delight, andreven Bice s$erø#$ to liave foi^ot his- ???????* ??? heafd it with a great degres of pleasure. When they were retrcshcff f the father proposed going again to the ruins, to complete their search ; as, he said f he could not rest in peace, till he liad finished his charge. They wer e all as- anxious as bimself, and none hiit Price shewed the least fear. They descended again to the ruins, and began again their work. Price kept close to the captain, and watched with the utmost anxiety all his motions. They took off the ftocripg of the raona, but nothing could be discovered. Tbe wall was at length opened, but with a deal, of dîjiftculty ; it appeared. as if the stones had been cemented with bitumen, tbey were so close bound together. Wlien they had opened a space
THE IfAfXKTED PALACE, OR space large enough to admit a person entering, the father ascended, and found an opening, like a large closet. He entered it, and dkl not observe any thftíg. Itwas dark; the captain got in; and Edward ; but they coukl not see any object. Tiiey desired candles to be brought, whicli were handal to tffem; andin an instant, discovered the skeleton of a woman, without the right hand. This they immediately concluded to be the remains of the lady they had seen. Upon examining the space, they found it to be a large square closet, of rough hewn stone on all sides; the roõf : of the same, without the least appearance of any opening. ???? the bodycoulddie placed tn such a situa¬ tion·,-was-a mystery they knew not liow téléivé; unless she hadbeen pût in, and tøe wail closed up afterwards. But whv
why a corse should be put so near to a suite of apartments, which had evi¬ dently been appropriated to pleasure, puzzled them exceedingly ; and ivliy laid there, ?????^ anv of those exter- nal marks of kindness ever shewn to the dead, bewildered them in conjec¬ ture. NoiTOss, no ??1?1?^ sheet, no coffin, nor any insignia, ????? might be supposed due to the meanest being. "Sure/* said Fitzallan, "this mortal must have been either detested for her crimes, or nearly as ill used as that dear object wc have raised from her ivatery; tomb. But, whatever it might be that caused her being immured here in so strângea manner, I think, father, it is uot wrong to suppose something ex¬ traordinary occasioned it; and I heart¬ ily ivish ??? could unravel it. When my curiosity is excited, I am never at rest until it is gratified. Noiv how amusing it would be to have an Eng¬ lish
Ibh old maid here at this moment, to hear the various conjectures she would form upon the subject, and how impa¬ tient she would he to spread her own opinions ofthe matter !" Edward spoke this in a careless man¬ ner, in order to en courage Price, who began again to be İn just such a trepi¬ dation as before. It had the desired effect ; he cheered up, and pretended not to be in the kast hurt. The cap¬ tain and Fitzallan drew the bones out, and laid them on the floor. "Are we to search tor any more such mementos of mortality ?" said one of the men to the captain, "or are we to stop here and not search further?" "Oh God, I hope so," said Price ; " though I think we may as well go and search the place under the chappel, and make a judg¬ ment day of it at once. By the Lord % of Heaven,, if I had thought so many dead
dead bodies had been dispersed all over this monstrous vile place, I am sure I should not have been able to stir an inch. That it should all happen to come out at this present time, seems mighty odd. ? Lord, Lord 1 I would not live in the palace again, if the piinee \yould give me his whoie ??? ? ?- nue.'' "Nor I neitlier," said thc fa¬ tiier ; "I have that hope and faith in your conversion, that induces me to t Inn ? vuur life, in future, will never occasion your witnessing such scenes again. ' * · ? men, father, " said Price. Tliey uow debated, in Λν?^ί manner to dispose of the bones. One of those wlio had assisted to make thc coffin, said, he thought it better to let them He there till they had made another, then to carry them into thc great hall; f specially, as they were not to be buri¬ ed together. " Very true," said father Vol. III. ? Gregory;
Oregory; "for, if I mistake not, (look¬ ing earnestly at the arm-bone from which the hand was gone, ) this ivoman, whoever she was, must have been a state criminal. " " Wby do you think so ?" asked the captain ; " Because, if you observe, the bone ofthe arm is not perfect at the bottom ; it appears as if an inch of it had been taken oft* by an axe." They all looked, and found it true. " Good God !" said thc captain, "then this, in ail probability, is the remains of' Vashtls mother. She was taken up, ????????, and, I believe, tried ; buther fate, from that hour, ???? never ????? n . Jt was generally supposed she was pri- lately put to death. If that should be the case, she must have been condemn¬ ed to lose her right hand, before she snfiered the coup-de*grace.. But, why tbey should place her body here, I can¬ not
nöt think. These were her apartments, I am certain. " "I think I have beard Joseph say so," said the fether ; " anil she must have been immured alive tn that dreadful recess. The poor fellow said, when he saw her, that she resem¬ bled the picture of Vashti's mother, which he must have frequently seen. What argues more strongly for it, is, the orders given at the time tbe pa¬ lace ivas destroyed, that it should begin on that part of the mansion first, ????1* was accordingly done ; and, if you observe, those very apartments were supposed to be destroyed. For ray part, I always believed so, till the day we met with that terrible disaster.'* r l Terrible indeed," said Price; "for, I believe all tbe devils in hell came out then to keep holiday. They made rout enough that is certain. *' t * Poor wretch¬ ed sinful idomán!" 4a*d the father; C S "if
" if this should be thy remains, for the sake of thy unhappy offspring, we will pay thee that respect, which, without that claim, we might have denied thee. " The captain asked the father, If lm would make any farther search ? He said, No ; h$ thought there was no occasion, as he had executed the orders they had received. One part of the ??????? then went to prepare a coffin, whde the others went to take up the ren*ains of' Owen, and sink them in the lake. This they effected in two hours : they then dug the grave agreeably to the directions. The father and captain had gone, during the latter employ, to Edward's room, to which he went previous to Owen's being taken up. The father sketched an account in what manner the youug lady had been taken out of thf late, ?? mentioned the letters on the
the handkerchief. They debated for some time, whether it would be best to send İt to Napkâ, to be engraved on a plate, to fasten on the lid of the coffin, or to write it on parchment, and place it there. At kngth, the latter was fixed on, as they feared, if it was sent to be engraved, the singular occurrence it related might excite the curiosity of the artist. They were soon summoned to at¬ tend those who had been at work below. The father found every thing executed agreeably to his wishes. They thought it best to pay the last duties to the lady first. When they had placed the parchment on the lid, a thought struck them, that the earth, or damps, might possibly destroy the writing, unless they could think of something to prevent the earth falling upon it After a little contriving, ? 3 they
they nailed over it a thin plate of brass : this being done, and the coffin fastened down/ they carried it to the grave. The spot pointed out tn the iostructions liappeued to be an arched vault, sup¬ posed to be where some of the family had been deposited. Oa tbe skepers in this vault, they laid, with the usual ceremonies, in whjck all the members joined, the remains of this once lovely flower ; but, just as the father had pro¬ nounced, tbe last words, the cemetery was illuminated im a moment, as if ten thousand tapers had been brought in. Tlie light drøled and brought to Price's remembrance the scene near Bononi. His fears were visible ; he seenied to dread every thing. The father proceeded; the same heavenly music and seraphic voices repeated the responses ; and, when the ceremony closed* they sung, " I know that
that my Kedeemer, BccA' The whole company, as if by some secret impulse, joined the general chorus. The voices and the music died gradually away; the glorious blaze of light disappeared by degrees, and left them lost in wonder and amazement. When they had a little recovered themselves, they went back to the great room, and took a large sheet to wrap the bones in, as weli as the coffin, and hastened to complete their work. They took the skeleton up, wrapped it, as well as they were able, in the sheet, aud laid it in the coffin, then closed it, and wrote on parchment, like the other, these words: "Within are deposited the bones of an unknown woman, found immured in a stone recess, on the south side of the palace, the 16th of March, one thousand seven hun¬ dred and——." They fastened it clown, ? 4 and
and took it to its resting place, where the father offered up his prayers for the repose of her soul. The burial cere¬ mony he performed in the same manner as the other ; but no music was heard, no heavenly light appeared; all ivas silent as the grave. When they returned through the body of the chapel, the father knelt down, and offered up his thanks^ to heaven, for having finally completed the work they ivere enjoined. Tliey then once more assembled in the great room, and prepared their suppers to which they sat down, ivith that con¬ fidence and pleasure beaming in their eyes, which the consciousness of doing good ever diffuses over the frame. Fatigued with the labor of six-and- thirty hours, they retired to rest A week after, the statuary and ai chi tect arrived, when a survey ???? taken, und, in
in a few days, workmen came to sel about the repairs. Father Gregory had written to Bononi, and waited only for orders for their return. As Edward began to be very uneasy at his not receiving any account from England, he earnestly desired the father to hasten his departure from Ventoliene, tbat he might be at liberty to return to his family. The captain also wished to be at Florence, as he \?as desirous to see his brother, and finally settle the affairs of the community ; whicli could be soon done, if the prince chose it* However, in a few days, when the fatiier expected letters from the princë^he, arrived himself, and expressed f ;the highest satisfaction of every thing that had been done. The day after his arrival, he was informed by the father of the wishes of the captain and Fitz¬ allan to return to their families. ? 5 The
The prince said, 1% should be complied with, as he hád orders from the brothers at * Bononi, to settle every thing. Those who chose to leave the society, were at full liberty to do so, and at Florence they would receive their share of thfe general stock. The captain and Fitzallan begged leave to decline the parts allotted for them, and dfcsired that fathers Gregory and Theodore ifcoufd accept it, fo dispose of in the manner they should think fit The prince said, It was his intention to hare the palace put in complete re¬ pair, and to make it the occasional re¬ sidence of himself and as many of the members as should not choose to enter into the world again» and to form it into âsort of rellgíous society, of which fatber Theodore, or father Gregory, should be the superior. This gave a great degree of pleasure to all, and the prince,
prince, who was become a sincere con¬ vert, was extremely happy to hear that the greater part of the community would chose to stay, saying, that their property should become one general stock, and be placed in the bank of Naples, for their mutuafsupport. He agreed to let them have the whole pro¬ duce of thc rich domain, as long as any of the members should be living; and, if the allotted part of those who went out was inadequate to thcir wants, to place them in situations to gain a subsistence suitable to their birth, they should receive whatever was farther necessary fiom him. They all thanked him for his generosity. He soon found, tbat out of one hun¬ dred and twenty, only thirty-six chose to go, (including the captain and Fitzallan) and seventeen of those de¬ sired permission to return and close ? 6 their
their life there, if circumstances should combine to prevent their settling in the wx>rid, agreeably to their wishes. This was readily acceded to. Among* those who meant to stay, were Price, Parlati, andGiúVerat. The prince paid particular attention to them, and said, He hoped he should soon have the pleasure of seeing them some of the most happy of the b¡ others, in a state of sincere repentance. All this being settled, the father, the captain, theprince, and Edward, agreed to return to Naples, and from thence to Florenee,as the father,before he made up his mind to reside at Ventoliene, chose to return, and see his son, and the amiable Genevieve. Fitzallan rejoiced in the idea of being once more at liber¬ ty, and the captain felt a glow of plea¬ sure from the same source. Though he was happy in being liberated at that time
time, yet, a few min utes before he quit¬ ted them, he made the same request as the seventeen others had done, being certain that, as his dearest hopes had been blasted, he should never enjoy a sufficient share of felicity in the world, to induce him, young as he was, to continue in it. He found, in spite of everv effort to the contrary, the image of Mrs. Brisac too deeply rooted in his bosom, to be eradicated by any other objeet whatever ; and, as he never eould hope to be blessed wdth her, he was determined to return, as soon as he had seeu his brother, and arranged with him the manner in which his in¬ come was to be remitted. He had an ardent wish also to see his father once more, to receive his blessing, and to quit him for ever. Under these impres¬ sions, he took leave of the community, as did Fitzallan, the prince, and the father,
father, all promising to visit them, as soon as the palace bhould be finished. When they arrived at Naples, Ed¬ ward went to see Michael ; he wa«·. gathering strength daily. His master informed him, that he must endeavour to get well, for he was about to return to England, and only ?vaited for him. The intelligence seemed to have more effect than all the medicine in the world could have done ; and, when his mas¬ ter promised to sec him often, the poor fellow ???? nearlv mad again ??'?? iov. Th is gave Ed ward the greatest pleasure, and he returned to the hotel in high spirits. In the mean time, the father and the captain had been to visit Joseph, whom they found in tolerable spirits, as his ivife was getting better, Ilis being near hcr had contributed much to
to her repose, and the physician gave him hopes that time ivould per¬ fectly restore her. They felt a happi¬ ness at this quite unexpected informa¬ tion ; they gave Joseph an account of ivhat had been done, and that, on his ivife's recovery, he would be at liberty either to return to the palace, or remain at Naples. The father thought it best for him to come and pay his respects to the prince. He accordingly went to the hotel for that purpose; his high¬ ness received him with great marks of condescension, and said, He much piti¬ ed the state of his wife, and desired that she might be supplied with every thing necessary in her situation. He gave him a purse to defray his present expences, and bid him draw on him for what he might want in future. Soon after Joseph had taken leave, and thev were in earnest conversation respect-
respecting Vashti, the prince said, He did not wonder at her illness, as he was pretty certain she had been informed that the spirit of her mother wandered on thc domain, and that she had been seen among those fiends that tormented them İn the pavilion, "Does your highness then think," said the father, " that the skeleton ?\ ? ? found in the wall was that of her mother?" " Yes," he answered ; "I know i t to be so ; an d r as that affair seems to excite your cu¬ riosity, I will tell you all that I am acquainted with concerning it" "When the mined palace, whh its estate, ???? granted by the crown to my uncle, the cardinal, he proposed to pull down the remaining part of it, and build on the scite a noble mansion for himself. With this intention, he visited Ventoliene, attended with pro¬ per people^ to make a survey of the whole
whole. A few hours after he had ar¬ rived, a violent tempest came on and prevented his return to Naples ; they were obliged to take up their lodging for that night at the palace. His emi¬ nence had laid down upon a bed about an hour, when he was surprised by the appearance of a woman entering his room. The attendants did not observe her ; she stood at the side of the heâ^ and beckoned him to follow her. He had not taken off his clothes ; and, from the violence of the storm, and the broken slumbers he had, he ima¬ gined it to be a delusion of the brain. As the lights in the room seemed to be obscured, he thought it a dream, and turned on thc other side. He had not lain long in that position, when thc whole apartment was apparently in a blaze. Thinking that the lightning had set fire to it, he started up, and was attempting to leave the room, when he
he found the lady stand between him and the door. He asked her, Why she did not escape, and permit him to do so, from the fire that seemed to sur¬ round them ? She made no answer, but beckoned him to follow her. The two pages that waited in the room, and those without, were in a profound sleep. He attempted to wake them, but Ms voice was not heard. He de¬ sired the lady to quit the room ; she made no answer, but by signs request¬ ed him to follow. She advanced to* wards the door, and he pursued her steps. He thought she passed through several apartments, but his fright pre¬ vented him from noticing the different turnings. At last, she stopped, and, pointing to a small cabinet, that stood amidst a heap of ruins, said, " Search, find, read, and remember, " then vanislir ed, and left him in total darkness.
The
" The astonishment of his eminence may be easily conjectured. He had no belief in supernatural appearances ; but how to account for the lady's sud¬ den departure, he knew not. He was- certain she did not quit the room by the entrance, as he stood in it. He, strove to make somebody hear, by hal¬ looing for lights ; but nobody came, and he remained in that state of dark* ness for full seven hours. He strove, by every means in his power, to find his way out ; but the more he sought, the more lie Was bewildered : and at last, giving bimself up for lost, he sat down upon the floor, in the utmost despondcnc}'. He had remained thus. near 1ml t an hour, when he heard the- voices of liis domestics at some dis¬ tance. Overjoyed, he jumped up, and again called for them. They heard bim, and, following the sound, found they must remove a great heap of rub¬ bish,
bish, before they could get to him. It was near an hour before they ejected it. The surprise of every one was ex¬ treme, to find his eminence alone, in a room without light, and surrounded with heaps of broken furniture, and rubbish» " He briefly related, how he got there, which spread amazement over all, as the way that led to the room he was in had been blocked up by a vast Quantity of ruins, ever since that part of the mansion had been demolished, He pointed out the cabinet ; the at¬ tendants took it up, and he ordered it to be carried to the apartment he had been in, when he wandered away, and which had not been on fire. He asked them why they had not answered when he spoke to them ; they all said, they bad not heard a single word ; but that they had felt an uncommon drowsi¬ ness
ness creep over them, which they coukl not shake oif ; that, when they waked, and missed him, they had alarmed the rest, and sought him every where, but without success. At last, despairing of finding him at all, they agreed to go to the beach where he landed, and make enquiries ; wben, as they passed the south side, they heard his voice ; and, as there was no way to direct them how they could get to him, they were obliged to remove the rubbish, and at length succeeded. " It was with great difficulty they could get back again, but at last they did. His eminence had his own thoughts on what had happened, and his domestics had theirs; which wrought upon their imaginations in such a man¬ ner, that nothing could prevail upon them to stir one step alone. They were so importunate for him to quit the palace
palace, lest any tnore danger should happen to him, that he gave orders to leave it directly, without settling any thing respecting the building, they be¬ mg all glad to get away. However, he ordered the cabinet to be taken with him, not in the kast doubting but there were some papers contained in it of moment * * When he got to Naples, and had rest and refreshment, he hastened to open it, and found a small manuscript, entitled The Confessions of Claudina. It began by relating her birth, and subsequent consequences of no great moment, till her fifteenth year, when she became a wife, and, from that hour, commenced her career in vice. She went on to relate the despicable light in which she regarded her hus¬ band; the numberless intrigues she had, with almost every young man of fashion
fashion she saw. But her ambition aimed at captivating the second son of the King of Naples. She threw her* self in his way ; her charms attracted liis notice; he caused offers to be made to her, which were accepted ; and, lost to every sense of honor and virtue, she quitted her husband, and went to Ventoliene, in the character of his avowed mistress. Here she exercised unlimited power : the weak, and dis¬ solute, prince saw but with her eyes, and acted but from her direction. She soon found the influence she had over him, and thought, if she could get her husband disposed of, he would be weak enough to marry her. Many schemes were planned for that purpose, but they all miscarried. Her husband was then in Piedmont, a war being expected* Her influence over the prince increased daily ; but she was in continual dready lest any rival should supplant her. " She
" She had, at first coming to the Palace, found there a beautiful young lady, who had been, through the emis¬ saries of die prince, decoyed thither; but he had not seen her, as she had been brought there during his absence. She ???? the only child of the widow of an officer, who liad bred her up in the tenderest manner, and bestowed upon her the most liberal education. This beautiful flower had been seen by some wretches employed by tlie prince, and, despairing of gaining her by mo¬ ney, (her mother lieing ? ?????? of the strictest principles,) they caused her to be watched ; and, one day, on her return from a visit, they contrived to get her into their ??????. This ???5 a short time previous to Claudina's coming. She had been informed of it ; and, when she arrived, ordered her to come to her ; but the lady refused.
" Fired
" Fired with resentment at Tier re¬ fusal, and dreading the power of her charms, she had caused her to be poi¬ soned, and her remains thrown into the lake. The lady, at the time of Claudina's arrival, was in the pavilion, in the park, to ????? she Λνβηί, When she found the prince's mistress was come; and, upon her desi ring an orange might be sent her, Claudina artfully contrived to draw a needle, dipped in the most deadly poison, through it, and caused it^ with some other fruit» to be sent her. The lady ate, and, in about three hours, ???? no more. Claudina had ordered a fellow tbat had served her in many diabolical schemes, to watch the lady ; and, as soon as he saw her dead, he was to get her body sunk in the lake, and give out shehad made her escape. This he effected, but not tilbtwodays after her death, as he could not get a box till then, Vol. III. D when,
when, in the night of the second day, he caused the box to he brought to the side of the lake. He then carried the body to the spot, and, by the help of Claudina, who met him in the park, he plunged it into the water. 11 Not long after this, she caused the fellow to be accused of some crime ; and, during his confinement, when she went to visit him, under pretence of bringing him his pardon, she found means to give him some of the same poison she had given the lady. When he ivas dead, she thought herself se¬ cure. Soon after, despairing of taking oñ her husband, she had caused him to be accused of crimes against the state he served : which happened at the very crisis, when she was engaged in drawing in several young noblemen to plan a scheme of revolt against the King of Naples, in order to pave the way
way for the prince's ascending the throne; but it had been discovered, and herself, with the prince and his companions, had been taken up, tried, and found guilty. What the sentence was against them, she ????? not ; her*s ????, to lose her right hand, then to be taken to the palace, and kept on breatl and water, till it was ascertained whe¬ ther she was pregnant or not. tt As soon as that was proved, she was to be immured alive in a stone vault, fitted for the purpose, in the wall ofher dressing room, ?????? an astrologer had told her, that her bones ????? remain, till the innocent victim she had tlinnvu into the lake should be taken up, and the space her body had occupied Λί -as filled up with the cursed remains of a parricide. He further told her, that till her remains ????? committed to thc earth, none but the most abandoned of D S men
men should reside in the palace ; for, the curse of tbe, innocent woujd rest upon the place. She had written that witb her left hand, as the first part ot the sentence had been executed on her» and she was in daily expectation ofthe remainder. Slie earnestly begged the prayers of those who might find the writing, for her miserable soul ; tliat it might not continue among the damned. "There was something more added to it, tmt I foxget what. It was some¬ thing about a handkerchief, that was tied over the lady s eyes, which I sup¬ pose to be the one you found ; but what ît meant I believe his eminence could not ???? out After he had perused tbis wkh repeated attention, he resolv¬ ed to abandon all thoughts of repair¬ ing the palace, or building another ; and the servants who had been with ?> him
him magnified the adventure to such an extraordinary pitch, that every per¬ son that heard of it verily believed it was the den of devils, and not fit for any mortal to reside îti. However a the man, who was Joseph's father, and his family, who had the care of it, previous to the grant to my uncle, agreeel to continue on it as before. " When I returned from my studies to Florence, his eminence made me a grant of the domain : to what purpose I appropriated it, you know. We are now, I hope, sensible of our follies, and I have most sincerely to ask the captain's pardon, for sending him there. I thought it then a famous exploit, and enjoyed the idea of your confusion, wdien you found yourself among those, who feared neither ghosts, devils, nor men ; but this season, of vice and folly was soon over. D % "Some
" Some time after that event, some of my companions had been to see a nun professed, and, among the novices, had discovered one that had charmed him* He was bent on possessing her ; for, to all our party, to like, and to get into our power, was the same thing. We found, upon enquiry, that she was the third daughter of the Duke de ?. and, like many other females, was obliged ?? her unfeeling family to enter upon her noviciate, totally contrary to her 4 inclinations. Here was a fine field open for quixotism, and we determined, at all events, to rescue those charms from the gripe of insatiable monks. Full of this exploit, we immediately set about devising the means ; but we found it more difficult than we expected» But the more obstacles we met wdth* the more we determmed to accomplish it. We learnt that one of the lady s bro¬ thers, who was abroad; was unknown to
to the prioress. This brother, one of our party personated ; and the young lady was permitted to see him in the parlour. Here he gave her a letter, and as soon as ît was delivered, took hb leave, promising to call on her the next day. The contents were such as you may suppose an enterprising young man would say, to induce her to elope with him, and my name was made use of, as the ostensible person. "He went the next day, when she gave hira her answer. She thanked me for my intentions respecting her, but ultimately declined accepting my offer. After a fortnight debating, we found means at last to silence all het scruples, and to consent to go off with us, the eve ofthe festival of St. Agathe the patron saint of the convent, whicfi wouid be in three days. Two of us were to get in, while the prioress was D è engaged
engaged with the nuns. When in, fhey wete to secret themselves in the garden till night, then be at a certain part of it ; and the remainder, on the outside, were to throw over a rope ladder, which those inside were to fasten beneath. ** Every thingsucceeded to our wish-» ts, and we had got a league on the journey, when we were stopped at the barrier, and challenged , refusing to give a direct answer, we were not per¬ mitted to pass. Fearful ôf being pur¬ sued, we attempted to force our way ; a scuòle ensued; oneof the guard being Wøunded, gave the alarm ,* this made ns desperate, and we all fought with fury. In the contest I received t\* ? Wounds on my head, one on my arm, and a fourth laid me on the earth, senseless. At the moment when I tell, he who had charge of the lady got îîcr off, thiottgh the hurry and confa
sîon, though he was wounded in the side, and bleeding fast. He walked with her to a house, a short distance from tlie scene of action, where, for a sum of money, he got assis tance, chang¬ ed his clothes, and those of the lady, and set off again. She was conveyed iu safety to France. " In the mean time, I was pronoun¬ ced in the utmost danger. The whole of our party, except the lady and gen¬ tleman, were secured ; and, as they had made their escape, without it being known that they had been with us, we that were taken, were supposed to be all, and were not even suspected of carrying her off. As soon as she was missed, every possible search was made,. but without effect ; and, as every oné ofour party had been wounded, more or less, the affair was regarded as a frolic, 'and no notice was taken after D S the
the first few days. The centinek were rewarded for their vigilance, but con¬ demned for not being first sure who we were, before they engaged ; but the whole» by the interference of the cardi- mal, was soon settled-, " Thc surgeon stiU gave me no hopes of recovery; the wound on my arm baffled all their skill, and a mortifica· tion was expected* This information awoke roe to a full sense of the folly I had been guilty of, and every unjust or vicious action then arose against me. My heart was not wholly depraved ; I had suffered myself to be led by fa¬ shion into all the crimes and. follies inci¬ dent to the gratification of headstrong passions ; I ran into vice, without con¬ sidering what it might lead me to ; but when eternity seemed expanding before me,, I became at once sensible of my errors andseverely condemned myself* What,
What I had caused to be done lo you was not the least in my thoughts, I wished to live, that I might have an opportunity of convincing you liqw much I felt for haying done it "I was ignorant of the fate ofthe lady. I would have given half my fortune to have had her restored to the convent; but, as not the least mentioa was made ofthe affair, I did not think it proper to ask any questions, as, in case of my death, which I saw was ex~ pected, I inight lay under the censures of the church. However, I, at last, ventured to make my confessor ac¬ quainted with it ; from him I received those reproofs his sacred character en? joined hira to give me ; he convinced me ofthe enormity ofmy offences, and implored pardon and forgiveness for me. Seeing me sincere in. my sorrow,. and thoroughly sensible of my errors^ D 6 he
he Må me hope før salvation, and, ta set my mind at ires^ promised to find tmt the lady, and have her restored to ??? friends; but, till that conld be done, he should take care that nothing trans¬ pired. He promised likewise to address a letter to you at Ventoliene, claiming your forgiveness for me. This was a .few hours before an operation was per¬ formed on my arm, which, contrary to every expectation, had thedesired effect, and irty life was preserved. From that îtour, I have lived totally different. My conversion, (if yon may give it that name,) ^was made known to the elders at Bononi ; my name was erased Irom the black list, and I hatl the hap- piness of receiving the white ivory. - ** Iwas bat iccén tly recovered, wh en an account came ofthe death of Owen, and the subsequent circumstances. I looked up with gratitude to heaven, fol
for having drawn me from the society of those, who, in a very short time, ivould have led me to the commission of crimes, that might have brought on a death like hh. I rejoiced in the idea of my emancipation from vice, and de¬ termined to be the direct reverse of ivhat I had hitherto been. I can so¬ lemnly assure you, I enjoyed more satisfaction, the night I saw so marry members clothed with the white robe, than in the gratification of all the un¬ bridled passions of my life ; and I am fully determined no future action of mine shall tarnish the good opinion the ïvorld entertains of me." The narrative of the Priuce ended; they all made their acbwvledgments for it, and a general conversation ensued. About an hour before they retired fo rest,
rest, a messenger came with letters for the captain ; and, to the great satisfac¬ tion of Edward, they were from Eng¬ land, brought hy one of those charged vyith liberating Mrs. Owen, and the children* One ???& from that lady to her brother, another from Owen*s mor ther, and a third from Mrs, Owen to the captain. She expressed the war ην est gratitude for the generous interest he had evinced for her return to peace, and the society of those she esteemed. To her brother, it ???? nearly the same; but regretted much her deprivation of M$ company, as she had a deal to relate to him, and by letter she could not say what she ??1?!?1, having suffered so much from hardships, that she was un¬ able to hold the pen but for a few mi¬ nutes at a time. She referred him to the bearer, for particulars of the state in which herself and children ????? found ; and, though cruel as her hus¬ band
band had used lier, she could not help lamenting bis end. The elder Mrs. Owen's letter barely stated the satisfac¬ tion she felt in once more beholding her children ; she earnestly entreated Fitzallan to return as soon as possible, for she much feared she had not long- to live, as she was sinking fast with sorrow to the grave. They apologized to the prince for reading their letters, and informed him who tliey came from, and stated some circumstances relative to Owen, which he was unacquainted with. He com¬ miserated the sufferings of Mrs. Owen» and said, lie would advise Edward to return to England with the utmost expedition, and console those who re¬ garded him as their only friend. He said, he should pay a visit to that coun* try himself soon ; therefore, if' there was any busmess, that he might, bya suddea
sudden departme, leave undone, he would undertake to complete it, and give a good account of, at seeing him ; "but," said he, "I think you had bet¬ ter see the messenger, who brøught the letters ; as he had the satisfaction of seeing your sister, and the children, it certainly will be requisite to hear from him how he found them." The gentleman, on this, w^s desired by the prince to join them. After thc usual ceremonies, Fitzallan ivas impa¬ tient to learn in what manner he had found Mrs. Owen. He said, He went, agreeably to his orders, to a house, near half a league from Caen. He enquired for the lady of it, to whom he ???? introduced, and delivered his order, which was to demand the imme¬ diate delivery of Mrs Owen and hcr children to him. She looked at the ugnature ô» amoment, then hesitated * to
to speak, and appeared very much con¬ fused ; but observing those thatattend- ed him were entering the room, she desi red them to be seated, and said, Mrs. Owen should be with him present¬ ly ; but the children were not thea there; they, by thc orders of Mrs. Owen, had ' 4 en placed at the house of industry, ns he did not choose to remit money for their board, and that there was a great deal due then for Mrs. Owen*s, ha ving been obliged to purchase wearing apparel for hei\ "That is nothing to the purpose now," said I ; "your demands will be paid, and I shall insist on seeing the lady directly, as I have express orders to see her on the instant ofmy arrivai í am not to stay while the lady's dress is· changed, but see her in that she may have on at thc time ofmv arrival ; and • < I insist
I insist on going ??1? you to her room this momenta u Seeing it was of no use to refasev she desired me to follow her into the garden, at the extremity of which ????? some small miserable rooms. In one of these, on astraw mattress, lay the lady ; the clothes she had on were vile in the extreme/and her emaciated form plain¬ ly spoke that her diet had been equally as wretched. She rose up at our en¬ trance, but was too weak to continue— she dropped back again. I darted alook of fury at the woman, and asked her, by whose orders Mrs. Owen had been left to perish in that cruel manner? She said, every thing had been done hy the direction of her husband, Mr. Owen, and she thought no person had a greater right to do it, than he had. " And you/*replied I, "were unfeel¬ ing
ing enough to obey him exactly ? Be it so ; you shall answer for this in a proper place. Guard this woman," said I to two of those that came with me ; " and do you," turning to the other three, "go and fetch a chair, that we may place the lady in it ; she is too weak to stand." She turned her eyes towards me, with ???^?? and amaze¬ ment ; tried to speak, but could not. She seemed to wish for an explanation ; I begged her not to be alarmed at any thing ; I was only come to release her ý and the children, from a state worse than death. At the mention of the children, she burst into tears, and said, though scarcely articulate, "do they still live ?" I was kneeling beside her at the time ; I assured her, they did, and hoped she would soon fold them to her bosom. This was too much for her debilitated mind to bear ; she faint¬ ed, but soon recovered ; I then, placed
'her în a sick chair, and assisted to car¬ ry her to the house ; but, before I left tlie wretched hovel, I bid the two men aot stir from the spot, or suffer any per¬ son to see, or speak to the woman, tiil I ???? back. 1 * I hastened to convey Mrs. Owen to the house of a medical man, about a hundred yards distant. The moment she was brought in, he started, and asked, whether the lady had not been brought from the great house ? I told him, Yes, and desired he would instant¬ ly give her something, and tell me what her disorder was. He said, a pleurisy, and he was much surprised to find her %ing, as he had been toid three days before, that she was dying then. "You have seen the lady be¬ fore ?** " Yes," he said, He had attend¬ ed her when she first carpe there, but had been discharged* because he said
she was not mad, and refused to admi* nister medicines that were calculated for those only who were really insane. **Can you furnish me with a bed?" said I ; "she is too ill to be removed farther." "I can," he answered, and gave orders immediately. The hed was soon ready, into which his wife and sister placed her. She ivas then blooded, a proper cordial given, and everv thins: done for her that could be at the moment. I put some money in¬ to their hands, and bid them get the lady's linen, and other necessaries, and I would return in about three hours. " I then hastened to the house, and gave orders to have 4 the woman con¬ veyed to the chief magistrate at Caen, and went thither myself. Befoie him I laid my complaiiits, stating the suf¬ ferings of Mrs. Owen in ??? house, imd requested he would oblige ber 4o say
my where the children were, and by whose authority they were parted from their mother. He interrogated her: her answers were, that Mm Owen and the children had been brought to her house by her husband, and a lady; that they were to board there, and Mrs; Owen was to pay one hundred pounds a year for them. Mrs. Owen was represented to be insane, and or¬ ders were given to treat her according¬ ly. The first quarter was paid in ad¬ vance; and, when the second became due, they wrote to Paris, to Mr. Owen for it, but he refused to pay, and said, he would not give more than fifty pounds a year for the three. After some altercation, they agreed to take it; but they could not, for that price, let them be in that part of the house they had before, and they were, of course, re¬ moved to the garden. He remitted but <?? quarter more» but they never heard
of him afterwards ; and that as they were unable to maintain three at their own expence, they thought it best to send the children to the house of indus¬ try at Caen. She said, Mrs. Owen had been a long time ill, and as they could not think of paying for advice, when they did not know whether they should ever be paid or not, they had done no¬ thing fot her. "The unfeeling brutality ofthe wo¬ man, shocked all present : the magis¬ trate bid her go, with messengers of his, to the house in which ¿he children were, and return with them to him. She went, and, in about half an hour, returned with two lovely children. I presented them to the mayor, who re¬ ceived and embraced them. The woman he ordered into custody, and tlte house to be searched, to see if any more un¬ happy beings were confined. The chil¬ dren.
dren, I had immediately stripped of their ??????1? cioathing, bathed, and dress¬ ed in a manner suitable to their rank. They then, with me, paid their respects agaia to the magistrate, and hastened back to Mrs. Owen, whom we found in a sweet sleep, in which she continu¬ ed several hours. " When she awoke, I consulted the apothecary, ????111?? it ????? be best to present the children to her then* or wait till the next day? He said, he would go to her, and see if she ???? ??, to bear it. In abont a quarter of aa hour, be returned, and i said, he be¬ lieved ??? might venture ; I had prepa¬ red tlie little QRes to see their, mamma ; the, thoughts qf that piade, f tbem fran¬ tic with joy ; they capered a»d jump* ed ahout, likefaries, saying, they ????? gkd their dear mamma w&s come to life again -;< forj the bad woman had said, she
she was dead. When they came into the apartment, and saw their parent in a neat room, with attendants round hcr t they cried for joy. When lifted to her bed, they hung round her neck» and kissed her a thousand times. Their little endearments had the desired effect ; Mrs. Owen burst into tears, and con¬ tinued weeping for some time, the lit¬ tle cherubs hanging over her, and ming¬ ling their tears with her's. The scene was so very aifccting, that every one present wept. "We told her, the children were come to continue with her, till she was well enough to go with her brother to England, who would probably be with her soon : she expressed by her looks the most heart-felt satisfaction. We at length begged her to part with the children fbr a short time, while she took some more rest. They were very loth Vol. III. E to
to leave her ; but, when ive said, their mamma wanted sleep, which their pre¬ sence prevented, they begged to kiss ber once more, and then they ????^ go ; but hoped we would let them eome again, when their manimawaked, which vge promised. We requested her to court sleep, as that would tend more to her recovery than any thing that c ould be administered- " In a few days, she wïls able to sit np ; and, as she appeared composed, I briefly informed her, in ?vhat manner her brother had found Owen, and by that means discovered were she was Confined. He had hastened to send «md have her liberated, as some circum¬ stances prevented his coming himself; but I had orders not to leave her till she was safe in England. She feared you were ill, but I assured her of the contrary, and at length,told her, that Mrs*
JVfrs. Owen's death occasioned your stay to settle his affairs. She was ex¬ tremely affected at hearing of her hus¬ band's deatli ; but, by reasoning Λνίί?ι her, she became calm. She ???? anxious to leave Normandy ; and, as soon as she was able to bear the motion of a caniage, we set off for England, ????? we reached Λ^ί?ιοηί any accident. "Thcy^continued atan hotel, whiht I went to make enquiries respecting her ???? house, and that ?????? her fa¬ ther-in-law used to reside. The former, I found, had been disposed of, Λν?ί?ι the furniture. At die latter, I found Mrs. Owen ? senior, ???? had remained in London, for medical advice, as she had laboured undera complication of'dis¬ orders, for many months. When I had sent her vrord, that my business related' to her children on the continent, she or- deredme to beadmitted immediately. She E ä ????
was reduced, through grief, to such a State of weakness, as to render her incapable of moving without assistance. u At my entrance, she burst into tears. * I am, Sir, ' said she, Ä sorry to receive you thus ; but domestic trou¬ bles have reduced me so, that I am unable to stand/ I said, I was in hopes that the news I brought would go fat- to wards her recovery, as I came to in¬ form her of the safe arrival of Mrs. Owen and her children. 'What do you say, sir ? do not, I beseech you, trifle with my feelings; those dear objects, I was many months since in¬ formed, were dead/ 'Indeed, madam, 1 said I, 'you were misinformed, as I, last night, had the happiness of placing them in safety, at the hotel, in Jermyn Street» from which placç, I will instant¬ ly conduct them to you, if agreeable/ 4 Agree-
4 Agreeable! Sir/ said she; 'youknow not what happiness you will bestow npon me/ " I ran, or rather flew, to the hotel, and quickly imparted to Mrs. Owen the situation of her mother. * She wept much at the account, and, as soon as she was a little composed, we took a coach, and went. When we entered the room, we found the servants em¬ ployed in restoring their mistress, who had fainted twice since my depar¬ ture. We were almost afraid of letting her see the children ; but, happily, she soon recovered, and wkh the greatest transport embraced Mrs. Owen, and the children, whose endearments seem¬ ed to bring her back to new life. When she was a little calm, she told Mrs. Owen, that her son had sent home a letter, importing the death of his wife and children, by the small pox, at E 3 Desauxj
Desaux, in France, and that he meant* shortly to return and settle his affairs; but, from that hour, they had never heard from him. " I then briefly informed her of some few particulars, relative to the conduct of her son towards his wife and family, and said tlieir lives were saved by the immediate interposition of Heaven, in directing Mrs. Fitzallan for their pre¬ servation. I did not think it prudent to relate the death of her son and daugh¬ ter. It was then settled, that Mrs. Owen, and the children, should remain with her mother till your arrival. When I had rendered every service in my power, I left England with the utmost expedition, as I knew you would be impatient at my delay, it haviug much exceeded the time thc captain thought necessary. Both the ladies and the little ones joined in their wishes, that I would
I would return to England with you. Thus, **ir, I trusti have executed the task enjoined me agreeably to your wishes." " You have indeed, Sir," said Fitz¬ allan; "and, from this moment, I rank you as my dearest friend. " The prince, the father, and the captain, all joined in bestowing their commenda¬ tions, and they all agreed to go to Eng¬ land together, if Fitzallan would ac¬ company the prince and the others to Florence. This he assented to, provi¬ ded it was not long before they left Naples. They said, they would leave it in three days, if the captain received letters from his brother, to inform him where he then was. The next day, Edward proposed to make some enquiries after the lady they found on thebeach, at Torre del Greco ; E 4 and,
and, while the prince was engaged with a party at court, they set out on their visit- They crossed one of the public walks, when the captain recollected he was near the coffee-house, where his letters were to be left. They went to it, and found there was one, which in¬ formed him, that his brother was at Home, and should continue there three weeks. This was exactly what he wish¬ ed ; he imparted it to his friends, and they agreed to leave Naples, as soon as it might be agreeable to the prince. They found the lady had left Naples for England, near a month. Fitzallan then went to Michael, who was mend¬ ing hourly ; he informed him of his intention to set off for England in three days at farthest, and asked him, whe¬ ther he thought he could accompany him there. Yes, he said, indeed he could ; for, nothing could induce him to stay behind his master, though it
ît was evident, he was ill able to go such a journey ; but his master thought it'best to take him, though he should be retarded by it. In the morning of the next day, the prince agreed to set off in six hours ; arid, as he was under a travelling name, little preparatidn was necessary. The gentleman that returned from England, Fitzallan, and Michael, were in one carriage ; the prince, the father, and the captain, in another. They stopped at Rome, where the captain had the happiness of meeting his brother, whom he introduced to his party. They re¬ ceived him with a deal of pleasure, and were agreeably surprised to see him wear an air of extreme cheerfulness. Frederic's heart beat with rapidity ; he thought nothing less than his marriage with Mrs. Brisac could occasion so wonderful a change. He rallied ?? E 5 on
t on it, but could not help trembling at the idea of an explanation. Charles saw his agitation, and pitied it, but was determined not to explain tlie rea¬ son of his gaiety for the present. The prince having many intimates at Eome, requested his fellow travellers to stay a few days, that he might have an opportunity of introducing them. They all consented with pleasure, ex¬ cept the bewildered Frederic. His bro¬ ther's silence served only to confirm him 'm his suspicions. Full of this idea, he resolved to leave his friends, in the same manner as he had his father As soon as he had formed the determina¬ tion, he set about putting it in execu¬ tion ; and for that purpose, sat down to write a letter, to leave behind for Fitzallan. Just as he had finished it, his brother catered
entered the room, to desire he would accompany him to the English hotel ; this he declined, saying, be had business of the first importance to his peace, to transact at that moment ; therefore could not go. * ' But, " said he, * f Charles,. I have one question to ask yo% before you leave me. Are you married ? Mrs. Brisac ?" """My God," exclaimed Charles* fetching a deep sigh ; " ivhat makes you think that? Surely if it had beet* so, I should liave informed you>** '* Your uncommon cheerf urnesc ** said he, "induced me to-think so." " But could not I be cheerful ott »ny other account, think you?" "I don't know, " said Frederie ; "I guess of you by myself."
? ß "Ajusfe
"A just conclusion truly t however, as you seem unhappy, you shall see and judge the cause of my satisfaction, if you ??? come with me." *' Don't trifle ??&? my fed ings, Charles, I beseech you," said Frederic ; " you know my weakness, and at the same time must be convinced, that not one on earth would rejoice more in your happiness, than myself* "Ay, ay, "said his brother, "Iknow; but cannot a man be happy more ways than one? ör do you think it impossible to be in love with more ladies than one at a time ? Might we not adore ia onr, what we admire in another l' 7 "I don'tknow, " said Frederic, "from my own experience, but it certamly admits ofa possibility· "
"WeU
" Well then, come with me, I say, and, ifyou are not convinced of the truth of my position, then call me by the name of blockhead. We shall be back time enough to dine with the prince, and I know the fathe is en¬ gaged with Fitzallan, to view the Castle of St. Angelo,*the Amphitheatre of Ves¬ pasian, and other rare and dainty arti¬ cles of antiquity. Let them go, and view antiques, and we will explore a more modern structure, infinitely more pleasing, I'U warrant you·." The high spirits of Charles, and his enigmatical expressions, raised a spirit of curiosity in Frederic. On they went ; but, instead of going to the English hotel, he entered a chapel belonging to the Carthusians. Few people were present ; the service was nearly over. Charles took his station under a statue of St. John, and threw his eyes anxi¬ ously
ously to one particular spot What can this mean? thought Frederic, and me* chanically looked the same way. In a few minutes, those that had been pray¬ ing rose up. Charles's eye was still turned to the spot ; Frederic in a mo¬ ment observed a lady hastily pull her veil over her face ; and, as sh« raised her hand to do it, sawa small paper, in thc form of a ktter, appear from the back of it ; and at the same time, per¬ ceived bis brother raise his hand in the same manner, in whicii was a similar bit of paper· When the service ended, he observed the lady and two others, move on to the entrance of the chapel, where a servant was in waiting. At the steps-, ??? ofthem drew back, said something to an old woman, and slipped the ktter into her hand. As the ladies descend¬ ed ?? steps, the old woraau approached and
and madesome sign to Charles, witli her fingers ; he understood, and answered it ; she came beside him, put the letter into his hand, received his in return, and instantly disappeared. Charles hurried away to ? -coffee house, and read ivith avidity the contents; thert catching Frederic by the arm, said, " Now for it." He walked with hasty steps through several streets, and at last entered the Castle of St. Angelo, bidding the man that atten led, to shew him ivhat was most remarkable in the fortress. As they passed the gate, a carriage drew up, from which came the very ladies they had seen in the chapel. They entered directly after them. "Now," said Charles, "remark that lady's form in the middle; what do you think of it ?" * f Very handsome," said Frederic*; "but
" but I never like to give my opinion ofa lady, till I have seeu her face ; and those ladies, I presume, are not disposed to gratify us in that particular." "They will throw aside their veils," said Charles, " presently, when they think they are not observed. Come this way, and we shall be sure to meet them." He turned to the right, and tliey to the left. As they came round the an¬ gle of the north turret, on the ramparts, the ladies met them. "Bon Dieu !" said Frederic, and started; "it isas I feared ; ????, Charles, did you bring me here ?" The ladies went on. " What do you say, Frederic? why did I bring you here ? ????, to see that lady : is it not much better to view her, than the tar- peian
peían rock, theatres, amphitheatres» pagan temples, catacombs, obelisks, cirques, sepulchres, triumphal arches, baths, aqueducts, fountains, bridges, churches, porticos, statues, paintings, colleges, hospitals, and though last^ not least, the castle we are now in ?" "You distract me, Charles," said Frederic, " with your fooleries. Why did you not tell me, when we were to meet?" " Upon my $oul, it is more than I ????? myself." " ???? can you talk so ? not know .Mrs. Brisac ! surely you are out of your senses? Come, let us go; I don't choose to stay any longer : you took me from finishing what I had so much ;rI heart ; on purpose to bring me here to tear open wounds, which I foolishly thought
you would heal. You knew I was un* happy, and brought me this wild-goose chase, t φ make me more so/ r "No t on my honor," cried Charles, ls I did not My real intention was, to see whether the charms of a kdy, would have the same effect on you, Which they have had on me." " Of this,*' said Frederic, "you were con· vraced before, and needed not such ati abuse of friendship as this, to confirm it" "Pohl poh !" said Charles, "this ? idle talk î I never meant to give you pain/* At that moment, the ladies again passed them ; but, on Frederic's agaiu looking ? he imagined it was not Airs. B. ; and yet, as she walked down the steps that kd to the interior of thc citadel, he could have sworn it was she; The confUsioa lus thoughts were in, tîie
the rapid fluctuation of his ideas, and the doubts he had, impelled him to fol¬ low them. Charles laughing, descend¬ ed likewise. The lady smiled on Charles, as she turned ; and, not regarding whicli way »lie ????, stepped on the train ( A one of the ludirá Thc check * h e re r ? ived, caused her to slip from tlie step she was on, und fail. Charles jumped forward to ??\ .e her, saymgt He hoped she was not mueh hurt She answered, No, thanked him for his politeness, and was going on, when he said, If it was agreeable to them, him¬ self and his brother would be happy in the honor of attending them round the fortress ; as they were tliemselves strangers, and came purposely to view it. The two eldest thanked him, and, after a little ceremony, accepted his ofier. The distant air with which he ac¬ costed
costed them, the manner in which the ladies behaved, pulled Frederic ex¬ ceedingly. The youngest lady had not spoke ; he was anxious to hear her voice, being persuaded it could not possibly be any other than Mrs. Brisac ; though, at times, he thouglit she ???? rather too tall ; but every look, every gesture was her's. The mystery thick¬ ened í it was evident his brother and she were not strangers to each other ; but why she did not speak to him, he couid not tell. This circumstance confounded him more thau all ; and how Charles could be so well acquaint¬ ed with her, without the knowledge of the other ladies, surprised him beyond endurance. t I will speak to her,' said he to himself ; e at any rate, she must ?????? me. I shall tlien be convinced ??????? it is, or it is not, Mrs, Brisac* He took an opportunity, while his brother
brother was explaining something to the other ladies, to ask her, Whether she had been long at Rome ? She an¬ swered him, in bad French, that she did not speak Italian. Her voice con¬ founded him ; it was, it must, it could not be, any other than Mrs. Brisac. But why pretend she could not speak Italian, or ivhy speak bad French, when she could speak both so ivell? 'I ivill convince her,' thought he, 1 that, in spite of these manœuvres, I know her.' " You have forgot me, Madam," said he, "I presume ; is my father ivell?" " The latter, I do not know, Sir, as I have not the honor of being acquaint¬ ed with him ; and, as to the former, I can say, that, till just now, I did not ????? that gentleman had a brother/* pointing to Charles.
She
She said no more ; Frederic bowed ; the ladies came close to them. He was still strongly persuaded it could be no other than the lady he imagined. About ñve minutes after this, as they were intent on viewing a particular piece of ordnance, they were surprised by the entrance of Fitzallan, the father, and Signor Pasquinelli. They were amazed at seeing Frederic and his bro¬ ther there, as they had "both declined going with them, under a pretence of business of moment Fitzallan whis¬ pered Frederic : i( We know now what business of moment deprived us of your company. How well the poet says, * But when a lady's in the case, 4 You know, all other things give place." " No, on my honor/' said Frederic, u you are mistaken. What I told you was really the case, as far as it relates to myself; but I cannot say as much of
t>f Charles. He absolutely pressed me to follow him ; but I wish to Heaven I had adhered to my original inten¬ tions ; I should not then have to re¬ gret this waste of time." He spoke this loud enough for the ladies to hear. " You are not fond of arms, Sir?" said one of them. " Not much, Madam," said he ; "I find no amusement in viewing them, though I might in using." * ' Tlien you probably think i t strange that ladies should visit a fortress, to view articks whose use they have not the kast conception of ?" " Not at aH, Madam, as I think nothing strange that ladies do;" and he fixed his eyes full upon the youngest lady. She seemed confused, and asked her companions How much more there was
was to be seen ? " Oh ! not much, Madam,** said the attendant. The ladies looked surprised at Fre¬ deric, as they thought he had said something not over agreeable. Whea they were about to return to the car¬ riage, Frederic took the hand of the eldest lady, Charles that of the young¬ est, which he seemed to regard with pleasure; and Edward that of the other lady. When the coach drove off, they all bowed, but Frederic : he sullenly turned upon his heel, and addressed the centinél. "Upon my soul, Frederic," said Charles, "your behaviour amazes me : don't you think, Fitzallan, that he is a very ungallant fellow, to turn his heel so churlishly upon three such fine women ?"
" You
" You may find your account," re¬ torted his brother, peevishly, "in your attentions to them; but that is not the case with me ; and I think you have not shown your wisdom, noryour friend¬ ship, in dragging me here, to see a wo¬ man, who denies she knew your having a brother/ 7 "And well she may; for, she does not yet know that I ever had a father." "You may play that "off upon any other," said Frederic, "but such shal¬ low talk shall not affect me. I am con¬ vinced of her folly, and your want of honor/' " Hey day !" said Edward, " what means all this ? surely you cannot be seriously angry?" "Indeed I am," said Frederic, ct he might have sparet! me the mortification of being denied by Vol. III. F . Mrs.
Mrs. Brisac ; for, she, I am certain, the youngest is." " If she be so/' said Charles, "it is unknoivn to me ; for, I declare solemn* ly, on my honor, I do not know who they are* I saw them first at Naples, on the very day they left that place. I fol^ved them here, labouring under the same belief that you do now. In a week, I ???? undeceived ; I had the good fortune to speak to the lady m question, one evening, at the French Opera, and learnt, she was come to Home, ivith an uncle and his family. Finding she was not the lady I sought, I tried to find out ivlio she was; but I could only learn that she was under the protection of an aunt, who had come purposely to Rome, to meet her uncle, who meant to go soon to England. She was extremely shy of saying more, and I forbore to press her, but resolved to watch
watch and meet her in every public place. I succeeded in seeing her, but never could speak to her. However, I contrived to get a letter conveyed to her, stating the situation of my heart, and, if no prior engagement existed, I would presume to solicit the favor of being acquainted with her family. Her answer was free and candid. She ac¬ knowledged, she was under no engage¬ ment, but that her will was not her own, she being under the immediate direc¬ tion of her aunts ; and that, if I wished for an intimacy in the family, I must first make an acquaintance with them. How to do that she was unable to say, but must leave it to me. Several other letters have passed between us, by means of an old woman, and this morn¬ ing, she informed me of thcir inten¬ tion to visit the cliapel, and, if I would be there, she would contrive to let me know where I might have an oppor- F â tunity
tunity of seeing her aunts, and proba¬ bly of speaking to them. Delighted with this news, I hastened directly to Frederic, being determined to see if the lady would make the same impression ou him, as she had on me, and you see the event. I declare solemnly, I did not imagine he could be so much de¬ ceived; now, telime, am I to blame ?" " Certainly not,*' said Edward ; "come, shake hands, and then try which of you can win the lady. There is no¬ thinglike courage in love matters ; you remember the old saying, A faint heart never won a/air lady. i i True, very true, " said the father; " I remember that say¬ ing very well, ????? I ???? in England, and I think, if I was young like you, Ishould take that for my motto; vir¬ tuous love is sure to be crowned ΛνΗ?ι success in the end ; therefore be both friends, try to win the lady ; and which ever
ever she makes choice of, let the other be satisfied witb her decision. You will then, both of you, show yourselves worthy of the name of good men, by rejoicing each in the success of the other." Frederic felt mortified at his weak¬ ness, and, taking the father by the hand, said, " Make my peace with Charles, I beseech you ; for, I am a- shamed to ask it myself; I shall act in future as you wish." " Bravo 1" said Fitzallan, " what mischief this love makes ! Oh ! thou dear little blind deity, long, very long let thy tormenting shafts fly wide of me !" "Well, Edward," said Charles, " I hope I shall see thy indifferent heart F 3 beat
beat as quick a tune to Cupid, as either of ours, in a short time." " When that comes," said Edward, "so be it; at present, I bid the sly dog defiance." The rattling manner of the charm¬ ing young Irishman put them all to rights, and they set off ín high spirits for the hotel. They found the prince returned, and a gentleman, who proved to be the friend of Charles, who had come with him to Ventoliene. A most agreeable day was spent among the friends. Charles made no scruple to relate his mornings adventure, saying, how much he wished to know who the ladies were. The old gentleman, Iiis. friend, promised to use his endeavours to find it out ; the prince was diverted at the fracas, and approved much of tlie father's advice. The
The next day, they were all to go to the tarpeian rock, and then to the vatican. They had not gone from) the hotel a~ bove five minutes, when they saw the carriage of the ladies, standing at the door of a famous statuary. t£ Here's the carriage, by Jupiter Ammon !" said Edward; "now for a second rencontre, better than the hrst : now for an Orlan¬ do Furioso scene, or a gentle Petrarch, an Abelard, ??? a Werter, or some such dying swain, ?????? plaintive numbers \youid raise the soul to sympathy and love !" This rhapsody set them all a laugh¬ ing, and the prince entered the shop of the artist. "Shew me," said he, "a good copy of Venus de Medicis, Apollo Belvedere, or any other; but these gentlemen," added he, "are the great¬ est admirers of female beauty," tum- f 4 ing
ing to Charles and his brothers ^there¬ fore, they would prefer your Venus/* As he said this, two gentlemen and five ladies descended from an upper a- partment, Fitzallan and Frederic start¬ ed. * * There is the lady we found up¬ on the beach, " they exclaimed, and advanced toward them. The party turned on their 'exclamation ; she im¬ mediately recognised them, and ad van- cediíkewišer and, close to her, thesup- poied Mrs. Urisae. Edward and the captain, each presented their hands; she took them in her s, and turning to her company, said, "These are the gen¬ tlemen, to whom I owed my preserva¬ tion, at Torre del Greco." a>--i The whole of them crouded round inan instant, to pay their acknowledg¬ ments. Amongst them, she severally presented her mother, brother, and sis¬ ter-
ter-iti law, theyoung lady, her cousin, her father, and her aunt. The captain and FitzaUan introduced their company· Afters viewing every thing worthy of notice, the lady's party desired the princes company, *to accept a general invitatiou to tlieir hotel, and the father of the young lady insisted on their dining with him tlie next day. To thia they assented, and several hours ??? were spent in seeing the curiosities of the Vatican. When the gentlemen returned ta dinner, they ????? all full of the adven¬ ture. The prince said they might be English or Irish ; he was certain they would prove a valuable acquaintance, especially as they talked of going to England. Fitzallan ???? rallied most unmercifully on account ofthe young lady, whom he found on the beach; ?5 '
hut he seemed to be proof against all they could say. The next day, the father asked Fre¬ deric, if he was now convinced that the lady was not Brisac ? " Yes," he answered, he was, and therefore the field was open for his brother. They then all set off for the appointment, in the highest spirits imaginable. Every thing they found served in the most splendid style. After dinner, the fa¬ ther of the young lady informed them, that he was recently arrwed from the East Indies, where his health had suf¬ fered much, and, to restore it, he had come to Italy. His journey had been over land, on account of some private business ; his wife, son, and daughter, were desired to meet ?? at Naples, at which place, his son married the lady then present His sister, and niece, ?? eome there likewise } their names were
weie Macdønald. He said, he bad found himself mucb better tban he ??«· pected, on his arrival, in Italy, and, ©n that account, did not make any stay at Naples, but proceeded on to Borne. How long be should stay, he did not kuow ; but, as soon t as his affairs were settled, he should prepare tö return to England ; he meant to visit Florence, and make some short stay there« The prince's party said, it was their inten* tion likewise to go to Florence. A very ?? discourse ensued, re* specting tbe melancholy affair at Torr© del Greco. Mrs. Macdouald informed them, that, on her getting to Naples, and not finding her daughter there, her grief was extreme. Her son was too ill to do any thing, and she had given up every hope of seeing her again,, wJie» she was so happily restored to bet- Three weeks after, she had thepleasum f 6 of
of seeing ber husband and her son happily recovered. She said that, when she reflected on that awful night, she thought she couid never offer up thanks enough to Heaven, for preserving her child in such a miraculous manner. The brother made the warmest ac· knowledgments. He appeared to be a very worthy young man, and his wife a very amiable young woman. From that day, the different families became inseparable. No parties were formed, without the whole joined ; but this did not continue long. Mr. Macdonald having arranged his affairs, informed them of his intention to leave Rome, which place they quitted, and the whole of them arrived at Florence ; where, to the unspeakable satisfaction of father <3tegpory, he found his son, with Gene¬ vieve, her* husband, and one daughter^ Ttež pleasure this afíbrded huit was great
great indeed. His son and niece were grown so much since he last saw them r that he eould hardly believe they were the same. His son appeared to be every thing he could wish, and his niece he thought an angel. The mo¬ ment she was introduced to Fitzallan, he felt what the power of love was. He gazed with mute astonishment on her lovely form, and, when spoke to by the father, hesitated, stammered, and an¬ swered Yes, for No. Charles observed it in a moment, and instantly bega» his raillery. "Oh ! spare me, for God's sake l* •aid Edward ; " surely, if I am at last caught by that little urchin, I have no occasion to complain [of the choice he has made ; for, is she not a divinity ? now, if her dear little heart is engaged to some more happy swain, ah ! Mon Dieu, whatjwill become of me! I must go, learn
karn ofthe father, whether she is ; for, as f told you, I shall make short work ont." "But how will you do, if she is en¬ gaged ?" "Why quit her, and try to find ano¬ ther as fast as I can ; to be long in suspense, I am sure, won't do/* Charles was about to reply, when Genevieve came up, and said, she should request them to stay a few days with them. The prince, who appeared equal¬ ly struck with the charms of theyoung lady» declined it then, but said, he would renew his visit in a very short time, as he'was obliged to go to BoimnL When he was gone, a delightful con- mmikm took place. The fatber was lost
lost in contemplating his son, whose every look and gesture remi n tied him of his lost Maria. They had ten thou- «and things to talk of. Genevieve's hus¬ band, said, The business which called him to Florence was partly on his ac¬ count, as they had received from Eng¬ land seven hundred pounds, which he had lent many years before, to a mer¬ chant in distress, but ?????? affairs had taken a rapid turn, and he had honor- rably repaid it, with interest, though never called upon to do so, and had sent a most elegant diamond ring, as a present to young Maribro'. "Then, that sum, my dear Genevieve," said the father, " shall be sent to the son of the good Moor at Sallee, to redeem some christian slaves; it will make many a heart glad." " May the God of heaven blcssyouf «aid Vaucluse, u and I will add my mite
mite to the bequest" "And so'will I/* said every one. They were soon com¬ posed and happy, all but Frederic, who was still restless ; however, in a few da3 T s, he became more easy. Charles did not once mention his father, and Frederic was afraid to say any thing, fearing to hear that he was the hus¬ band of Mrs. Brisac. A short time after they had been at Florence, Charles told the father, He had a wish to make overtures to Mrs« Macdonald, for his consent to address bis niece, and asked him, whether he thought it advisable to consult Fre¬ deric, before he did it He said, Yes, by all means, as an open and ingenuous siode of acting was sure to have the approbation of every good mind.; he would take an opportunity of talking with his brother upon the subject, that afternoon; but there was one thing hg would
remark to him, that no engagement of that sort ought to be entered into, with¬ out the approbation of his father, and he would advise him to write to him at Turin, lay open the stateof his heart, and implore his pardon for leaving him in the abrupt manner he had done. This, Charles knew not how to accede to ; he could not be brought to believe that he had done wrong, in absenting himself, and, on that account, did not know how to pen a letter ofthat kind ; but, if the father would write for him, he should think himself for ever obliged. This, the good man promised, and iu the afternoon of that day, took an opportunity of speaking to Frederic. He was surprised to find him enter with pleasure into the affair; he said he- thought Miss Maalonald every way calculated, to make his brother happy» and
and he sincerely wished to see him so* This point being settled, he immediately wrote to Count Kraun tzic, stating every particular that he knew relative to both the youths, and earnestly requested his pardon for them, as they ?????, notwith¬ standing their elopement, very worthy and deserving young men. While they were waiting for the Counts answer, they were agreeably entertained by the various amusements they entered into. The prince admi' ied^ and would ???^ tenderly loved the young Genenieve, had he not perceived in her a warm attachment for Fitzallan ; and, as itwas reciprocal, he would not wound that tranquil pleasure they seem¬ ed to enjoy. Pasquinelli, who had conducted Mrs. Q wen to England, was a man of refined feelings, and noble sentiments* born of adis-
a distinguished family at Verona. He had been a dupe to sharpers and de¬ signing men of every kind ; his fortune had become a prey to them, and, at the time he was sent to England, with Mrs* Owen, was employed by the prince in going from Bononi to Ventoliene, and back, as he ???? a man whose integrity he could rely on. The prince, at his return, shewed him distinguished marks of his fa? τ or, and made himTiis confi¬ dant and friend. He ?????1?? took him to all places with him, and of course he had always made one in their parties at the Macdonalds*. The sister, who· was the w^idowofMr. Macdonald 1 s bro· ther, a lady rhout forty years of age, saw Signor Pasquinelli, and fancied him. Her fortune was large, having all she brought hcr husband settled on herself. She was left ???1??1 children, and had adopted Miss Macdonald, who was the daughter of Mr. Macdonald's younger brother,
brother, and brought her up as her own. On her she meant to bestow a very handsome fortune. She had spared no cost in her education, and had formed her manners with the tendcrest care. The prince had narrowly observed the attention this lady paid to his friend, and a thought struck him, that, if he could make this couple happy, it would be rendering a very essential service to both. He took an opportu¬ nity to sound Pasquinelli ; his answer was what he expected, That his humble fortune would wholly exclude his at¬ tempting to profit by the lady's prefer¬ ence. The prince instantly obviated that, by saying He would make him his hrst secretary, with an income suit¬ able to his rank, and what further lie could do for him, should not be want¬ ing. The poor man, overcome with gratitude, fell at his feet, The prince
raised him, and with pleasure sparkling in his eyes, bid him be composed, say¬ ing, He did not think he had done more than his duty by him, as he had served him for many years faithfully, and thc humanity he had evinced to¬ wards Mrs. Owen fully convinced him he was deserving all he could do for him. With tears he thanked the prince, and owned that he had loved the lady from the day he had seen her at the; fortress. Conscious ofhis want of for¬ tune, he had resolved to conquer his attachment. " But now," interrupted the prince, "you must do it no longer; ï shall be at Macdonalds to night, when I shall purposely say something in your favor." This was too much for him to bear, and hs was obliged to leave the prince abruptly, to give a loose to his feelings. He did not offer to stop him ; a heart like
like the prince's alone can form an idea of ivhat he felt. It was a satisfaction, suchas angels feel, ivhen commissioned to make giad the hearts of the unhap¬ py. The prince soon joined the father and Vaucluse, ivho ????? in earnest con¬ versation, respecting the young Gene¬ vieve. The father had remarked the groiving passion of Fitzallan, and had heen asking his brother, ????^?? the heart of Genevieve was at liberty. Vaucluse assured him it ????, for any thing he knew. The prince ???? about to leave them, when Vaucluse hastily desired his high¬ ness to stop ; they were only, he said, talking over some love aflairs. ζί That is a subject," said the prince, l ' whicii seems to engross every body's thoughts, but yours and mine ; and yet, upon my honor, I must confess that mine are not wholly exempt from it ; pray, ivho
who are the objects of your conversa¬ tion ?" " My niece," said the father; " we see, or imagine we see, a mutual attachment between Fitzallan and the young Genevieve. I know him to be an amiable and deserving young man ; and as we aim rot at titles for her, I know not with whom she can be more happy." * * True, " said the prince ; * * Monsieur cannot, I think, make any objections." " None in the least,' 1 said Vaucluse; " I have but two children, and them I wish to see as happy as their mother and I have been. 51 "You say right,'' said the prince; "while you prefer happiness to splendor, you cannot fail to enjoy it ; and I sincerely wish to see more than one couple equally so. " " And I too/' said Vaucluse ; "my other
other daughter Maria, will he here to* morrow, and I hope to see her blessed under the protection of young Maribro. " "Yes, "said the father, "there rest all my hopes. My son and his cousin have been brougiit up in the tenderest affection for each other ; that affection is ripened into love, and, if my son and the dear girl love as sincerely as my lost Maria arid myself did, I shall be blest indeed. This done, the re¬ mainder ofmy life shall be spent in the service ofmy God." " Then yotrr highness approves of the matches we have made, for our children ?" said Vaucluse. "Indeed I do," said the prince, " and I hope you will add me to the list of the hap¬ pyones; for, I begin to think there can¬ not possibly be any state so blessed as a married one, where the couple study each others felicity." I know not any thing
thing would give me more pleasure,* said the father, "than to see you uni¬ ted to a lady; deservingof your virtues." As he said this, Frederic entered, " There is an English family," said he, 4 'this moment arrived ; will your high¬ ness step to the window and observe them ? They are the most curious set I ever beheld." The company moved to the window and saw an old gentleman, iviapped up in the strangest great coat that mortal ever saw ; an old lady, the exact counterpart of the gentleman, another lady between forty and fifty, and a young man not quite twenty. Those were all at the door of the oppo¬ site hotel, disputing with two postillions. Theyoungest ofthe ladies was scolding most un mercifully, ¡??^??? bad French, somethingaboutalapdog. The oi&gen- tleman ???? swearing in English vocifer¬ ously, calling them all the sons of wh-—, Vol. III. G scoun-
scoundrels, dogs, and blackguards, that he could pronounce. The old lady was walking about, and seemed to lament the loss of something, while theyoung gentleman perfectly unconcerned, was whistling an English tune. He seemed by his countenance, and the arch looks he, every now and then, threw towards the scolding lady, to say, Now, what wouid I give to see her boK those fel¬ lows; what rare fun it would afford me ! Nothing that the men could say to ex¬ tenuate their fault, could appease the lady; her fury increased every moment While the prince and his company were laughing immoderately at her ges¬ tures, to their amazement, they saw Michael run towards tlie young gentle¬ man, and è say: "Ah! and upon^my soul, your honor, and is it your own dear self, that is come?" " My good fellow, Michael," said theyoung man, tukin p·
taking him by the hand/ and shaking it in the most friendly manner, " How do you do ? Where is Ned ?" "Ah ! and plaise your honor, my master is in this here grand hothel!, along with some dear 8Λνεεί honies of ladies." "Oh! oh! ? ? ??? fortunate by Ju¬ piter," said the gentleman, " prytliee, take me to him, that I may get from this damned confusion of Babel." "Ay, and thc devil Babel it, and so it is, and plaise your honor ; a cursed ©Id cat, she plays it off^ for the honor ©f St. Ursula, upon my faith; your honor has been ???И beset, ifyou came all the way [from England with that old Jezabel, ????, I was in hopes, was long since laid in her shroud." "Oh ! thc devil shroud her !" cried the ypung & 2 man ;
man ; "she lives on purpose to plague young fellows like me, or she never .would have been brought all this way, without having had her neck broke." They tamed, and entered the hotel,, leaving the combatants to scold and fight, as long as they chose. Fitzallan was engaged with Madame Vaucluse, and had lost the pleasure of seeing the fraeas. Tlie father, the prince, and Vaueluse, were at a loss to guess who the party could possibly be ; it was evi¬ dent that Michael was well acquainted with them. While they were conjec¬ turing, Michael tapped at the door. "Cornein," said Vaucluse; the door opened, and he entered, saying, "A» plaise your highness, and your honor, hare's røy master's own dear brother* eome ali the way from dear England, with diat develish old cat ofthe bog, that is <&wû ?????, firing off her jaw blunder-
blunderbusses upon them there lankey french crackers of postillions. Ah 1 the devil bum me, ifthey haVt enough of it." While Michael was making this fine introductory speech for the young gen¬ tlemen, the priuce and Vaucluse found it very difficult to preserve their gravi¬ ty ; and theyoung man found it equal¬ ly as hard to keep his. However, the father seeing their fsituatíon, stepped forward, and said; " You are welcome, sir, to Florence ; as Mr. Fitzallan's brother, we are extremely happy to see you. Go, Michael, and find your mas¬ ter. I think he is in Madame Vaucluse's dressing-room." " Yes, your honor," said he, and away he ran. Fitzallan, in the utmost astonishment, entered. The pleasure of thé two bro¬ thers was great indeed, at meeting so (? 3 unex-
unexpectedly. Edward then intro¬ duced him ; "Henry Fitzallan," said he, "my brother, who will, I am certain, be extremely happy in the honor of' your friendship." They received him, with much pleasure· " You have had an unpleasant rencontre," said the prince, "with your postillions." We have, sir," said Henry, "but this is but a breeze to some former ones. The lady, whom you observed to possess such a happy taknt of scolding, has found opportunities, at the end of every stage, to exercise her accomplishments in that science; this broil was occa¬ sioned by the loss of a favorite lap-dog, that happened to be of such a delicate constitution, that it coukl not bear thc inside of the coach, without being dis¬ ordered ; he was therefore placed in a cradle, and committed to the care of one of the postillions, who, not being- used to curs in a cradle, by some means or
or other, lost it on the road. It ivas the old lady's pet, and, upon my honor, I could not help rejoicing in the dis¬ aster." " Surely," said Fitzallan, " tb% saying that old women may live as long as they like, is most truly verified in that abominable Miss Frances. I ivas in hopes she hadbeen dead long since; she is," said he, turning to the prince, " an English old maid of the first class, and lives ivith my aunt, Λνίιο is the wife of the gentleman that was left joint trustee ivith Mrs. Owen, to my brother, sister, and myself. She has had, for many years, the sole direction of all things, spiritual and temporal ; and I believe no slave-driver in a plantation ever exercised his power with more scrupulous exactness. " I should like much," said the G 4 prince,
prince, " to have the pleasure of being in her company, she seems such a per¬ fect original/* "That pleasure, if your highness can deem it so," said Henry, "you shall have shortly. But, for the consequences of such an interview, I would not be answerable; for, your highness must expect nothing less than the lady's falling violently in love witb you, as that is a propensity she h par¬ ticularly inclined to/' The prince laughed much at the con¬ ceit, hnd Henry assured him, if he chose to have the joke played off upon him, ft should most certainly be done. "Ohi pray," said he, "let us have it; I'll warrant tomanage the lady. " * t Then your highness shall see her, you may depend upon it, in all her pristine lustre/' The idea diverted the young men exceed-
exceedingly, and íhe next day ?\ ? ?? ap¬ pointed for the introduction. Fitzal¬ lan then asked his brother, Λν1ι»? brought them so unexpectedly to Tuscany ? ' ' A travelling whim ofM iss Frances, '* ■>aid Harry, "who has taken it into 4 her head, upon reading Pinkerton, that her knowledge of medals, by far exceeded his, and as soon as this idea took pos> session ofher brain, she never left teaz* ing my aunt, and niy complaisant guard¬ ian, to accompany me to Italy, and she plied her advice so well, that she actually made them believe that such a tour ?????! renovate them both so much, that they ????? return to Eng* land ia full -possession of health and beauty. Vanity never forsakes- the la* dies ; my aunt, Λνίιο, forty years ago, ???? told she was another Venus, has been actually led to believe, that she wanted only the soft air of Italy to G S breath
breathe on herfor a few months, to re¬ store those charms, which her glass in¬ forms her she has absolutely lost. My guardian was persuaded that he should lose his gout, and be enabled again to dance aminuet. Miss Frances is fii mîy of opinion, that her rare and uncommon ^acquirements in the knowledge of me¬ dals, gems t aud statues, cannot fail to gain her a wise man for a husband, hi a country, so famed for paying a pro* per respect to all lovers of the fine arts; and at her return, have her bust pre¬ sented to the public as a rara avis. Sim affects to despise all persons, who can¬ not tell the difference between an Otho and a Louis, or say, upon viewing a gem, whea it was engraved, or whe¬ tlier İt is ancient or modern." " The description of this lady," said the prince, "amuses me much ; I shall leally be anxious to be introduced to her."
her." "I suppose," said Henry, "by this time, the breeze is blown over. I shall inform the amiable Miss Frances, that my brother is here,". He took leave of the company, with a promise to return early in the evening ; and Edward went to pay his respects to his guardian. Soon after, the arrival of Maria, Vaucluse was announced. Maribro and Charles had been about six leagues to meet her. She was received by the fathers with transports of joy ; the prince thought she rivalled Genevieve. All was harmony and pleasure, and the re¬ mainder of the day was spent in inex¬ pressible delight. In the evening, Henry joined them, as did the Mac- donald family ; a general introduc¬ tion took place, and a more agreeable party never met. Henry was particu¬ larly struck by the mild and placid charms of Mary Macdonald, of Torre G 6 del
del Greco, but distinguished hy Charles as the lady of the beach- The next morning, Benry came, full of his intended presentation of Mist Frances. He informed fus brother and Monsieur Vaucluse, tliat he had made the lady believe, that one of the first princes in Italy had heard of her un- €ornmon abili ties in the study of medals, and was dying with anxiety to have the pleasure of paying his respects to her, and, if she would give him leave, he wouki appoint an early hour that day. His guardian, he said, had la¬ boured to persuade her tbat ? coulé not be any such thing, and that he on¬ ly m ant to teaze her; but, having con¬ vinced him it was the prince who was at Monsieur Vaucluse's, 'that bad ex¬ pressed such an ardent desire to be in¬ troduced to her, he said no more, but that he wished to know from Edward whether
ι whether it was so> or not, as he could hardly believe that a prince troubled himself about such old canker-eateti nonsense, as broken Nigers, Pertinaxes, Pupienuses, and Cæsars, with a long rigmaiole parcel of stuffy whether it was Adlocutio, m Adlodutio ; but Edward, he said, had confirmed what he had told her, and she had sent him, with a full budget of compliments to the prince, a like number to Madame Vau¬ cluse, and the young ladies ; and to say, she should be happy to have the honor of receiving tbem ???& Fitzallan, any time that morning. In less than half an hour, the ladies, attended by Edv/ard, went ; and were received by the old gentleman, his la¬ dy, and Miss Frances, with an immense deal of ceremony. Mr. and Mrs. Aker¬ worth were extremely pleased with tóìcir visitors, and expressed the highest appro-
approbation of Fitzallan's choice, he having introduced Genevieve as his spouse elect. They promised to atid to the circle of their friends, as soon a» they ivere a little recovered from the fatigue of their journey, and the grief Mrs. Akerworth felt for the loss of her dear little Fidge. Madame Vaucluse desired her by no means to grieve for a poor little animal, whose place she conld immediately supply ???? a most bvely one, which her daughter Maria had brought home for a kdy, who had left Florence, before she arrived, and the little creature should be instantly sent for, if she would accept it. She replied, she should be for ever obliged, as it would serve to divert her mind. Edward sent one of the servants to fetch it, and Genevieve presented it to her. "Now, that is something like a dog," said the old gentleman ; "my dear Susan, don't thmk any more about ?????
what cannot be recovered, but transfer your regard to this little thing, who ΛνίΙΙ not fail to divert you, n Miss Frances was in raptures with it, and said, she should gaze at it, with as much extaçy, as she should at a first brass of Vitelli us. After a deal more such trifling discourse, Miss· Frances wab desired by her micie and „aunt to return with the ladies, and make their compliments to Monsieur Vaucluse. This ???? just what Henry desired, and, with the ladies, returned the female virtuoso. She was about forty, tall, and very thin ; with a brown complexion* black eyes, long face, Λν??ν high cheek bones, and very bad teeth. She was dressed in an elegant French travel¬ ling dress- of pale pink silk ; on her bead, a small grey English beaver hat, placed over a light brown wig, and the whole ¡toute-naemble cf her person was
was, as she thought, strikingly capti¬ vating* The prince, Monsieur Vaucluse, the father, and young Maribro', were wait¬ ing tø receive her. Henry took her hand, *and, with all the solemn pomp of agreatman, introduced the bloom¬ ing Miss Frances to the prince, He accosted her with all thc becoming dig¬ nity that marked his character, and was not, at the same time, a little pro¬ fuse in his compliments, of the won¬ derful accomplishments he had been told she possessed, and the profound knowfedgeshe had of a study, tliat wa?, even by 'gentlemen, regarded as dry, learnedj and abstrase. She returned his compliments in the most scientific manner; said, that she should think nothmg of a journey to the antipodes, sø she couîd^ at the.en$ of it, enjoy tbe pleasure rfco&vemng with a gen- tleman*
tleman, who had a taste for her darling amusement. The prince highly ex¬ tolled her unexampled pursuit, saying, it was such, as none but individuals of sound sense and uncommon abilities could attain to ; and he should, at all times, be happy to render her all the assistance in his power, towards fur¬ nishing her cabinet, which he did not in the least doubt would be superior of its kind. Miss Frances was in raptures with the prince, declared she would not pur¬ chase a single medal, without first con¬ sulting him upon it, as she meant to make, before she returned to England, one of the compietesi collections, that had been ever formed. The English coins, she ridiculed much, and, in that particular, she coincided with Pinker- ton, whornshe hoped, at her return, tø rival, in every respect. Tho prince most
most admirably kept his* countenance, andas he spoke pretty good English, the bad French of Miss Frances, or the worse Italian, was not calkd forth, though Harry wanted much to make her speak both ; but to tbis the gentleman had objected, saying, her blunders wouid overturn their gravity. The ladies were extremely amused with her, and Madame Vaucluse re* quested her to wave all ceremony and let them see her aa often as possible, and to prevail upon her unck and aunt to do so likewise^ This she pro¬ mised, as she said, she was certain she could not feel any felicity, when ab¬ sent from the prince. This speech to¬ tally destroyed the composure of Hen¬ ry and Fitøallan, who, looking archly at the prince, said, " Did I not teli you so ? Over head and ears, hy Jupi¬ ter Ρ and set up a laugh. The ladies alarmed»
alarmed, lest Miss Frances should di¬ vine the, cause of their mirth, looked earnestly towards the window, and exclaimed ; " Lord bless me ! overhead and ears sure enough," pointing to a hog-driver, ivho, at that moment, happened to be passing, with an unruly pig on his shoulder, screeching most unmercifully. The whole company looked that ivay, and hatl their laugh out, at the expence of the pig. Soon after M iss Fran ces took her leave, Harry and Edward attending her. At her return to Mr. and Mrs. Akerworth's, she overwhelmed them with a torrent of applauses of the com¬ pany, to ivhich her dear Henry had introduced her. The prince was a di¬ vinity—a man of the most profound erudition, with a person that would rival Apollo's. " Did I not tell you, sir," turning to her uncle, " tliat, in France^
France, Tuscany, and Italy, we should meet with beings worthy to be ranked among men, imd not such a set of vulgar barbarians as our own country¬ men, who know nothing beyond the gaming-table, their bottles, and their wenches? Learning and politeness have been long since banished from our island, and it is a moot point, whether there ever was any in it I am sure that, in this country, we shall begin to live ; and, when we are a little ¿ettled, and I begin to form my collec¬ tion, we shall be ready to hang our¬ selves, to think we have murdered so meny years ofour lives among such a set of brutes*" "For God's sake? Frances," said Mrs. Akerworth, "do, be a httle ra- ! íkmtâ; Ishall be happy, if you can make your words good ; for, hitherto, mm v|nmiey has heen scratching and tearing
tearing to pieces all tbe customs, man¬ ners, and persons we have been amongst, since we lost sight of the cliffs of Dover." "Aye, but we are now," said she, " got into a new re¬ gion, and the air we breathe, as philo¬ sophers tell us, acts upon the persons of men in a «surprising degree." - ' And upon women too, God knows, " said the old gentleman. '' Oh Lord ! sh*, " sakl she, ' t you will, I fear, be always the same ; but I hope my aunt will feel tbe good effects of it, if you don't." t£ I hope not, 1 * said he* " if she is to be as much metamor¬ phosed as you are likely to be." Miss Frances was angry at this, and kft the room. Edward then delivered the compliments of the prince and tfae ©ther gentlemen, and iuformed htm, И?? would »ext day watt upon him. " I shall
"I shall be happy," said he, " to see tiiose gentlemen, who can persuade that nonsensical ?????? uot to make such a fool of herself. " Harry laughed till he was ready to drop, at the ridiculous ideas of Miss Frances, and told Mr. Akerworth, that nothing could contribute so much to his, and his aunt's amusement, as in¬ dulging her in her present conceit ; and, as her fortune was large, and no man, he was certain, ????? be plagued witb her r she might as well spend it in the collection of coins, as in any other more idle pursuit. Mr. Akerworth told Edward, he should with the greatest pleasure cultivate an acquaintance with Monsieur Vaucluse, and tlie father ; as he greatly admired the ladies, and was led to think he could not have made a better choice. He was sorry, he said, the other girl was engaged, as
she would bave been a charming wife for Harry. " Ah, never mind him, sir," said Edward ; "I think he Λν?ί find a wife to your wishes before he returns. You must be among the circle of monsieur s friends, and then try whether you can't pitch upon one for him *' Well, well, boys, I shall see. " Edward soon took his leave. That day, they were nigaged at thc Macdonakis" ; the next was spent in visiting Mr. and Mrs. Akerworth, and the French Opera ; the day after îyas appointed for a dinner party at M. Vau¬ cluse 's, at ivhich ivere the Macdonalds, the Akerworths, the prince, with Pas- •quinelli, Charles, Mr. Dupont, his friend, and Frederic. After dinner, the frolicsome Henry wanted to show off the accomplishments of Miss Fran¬ ces;
<€s; bitt the ladies opposed it, mid a dance was substituted. The prince desired he might have the honor of arranging tbe company, which he did. Mr. Macdoaald took the hand of Mrs, Akerwörth, who, tliough old, did not decline it ; Signor Pasquinelli, that of Mrs. E. Macdonaid ; Mra. Macdotiald, Mr* Dtipon t ; Charles, M iss Macdo* Bald ; Henry, the lady of the beach ; Fitzalian, Genevieve ; Maribro', Ma¬ ria ; Frederic, Mr. Vaueluse ; and last, though not least, ike prince, and Miss Frances* Father Gregory, Mt*. Aker* worth, and M. Yauciuse, engaged in conversation, which ended in thei t approbation of the choice the young people had made of partners, and which tney hoped Ββοιι to see united* Thus Sea Jhe evening in mutual pleasure. Ata ra.jnal hour, tke com¬ pany teofetilf. Miss Iranees was nearly
nearly out of her senses with joy ; she set doivn the prince as her future spouse, and ran over İn her mind what vast elegant collection of medals, statues» gems, and pictures, she would have, such as should set at nought all com¬ petitors ; and fondly anticipated the splendor, ivith ????? she should return to England, when Princess of Bononi. Three days after this, an express arrived from Count Krauntzic, at Tu¬ rin, in answer to father Gregory's let- , ter ; likewise a letter from Mr. Dain- ville, stating, that the count lay dan¬ gerously ill, and requested that Charles and Frederic ivould lose no time in reaching Turin. Expresses, he said, had.been sent, a fortnight before, to Loudon, Paris, Vienna, Florence, Rome, Naples, and Venice, to endea¬ vour to find either one, or both ofthem, and get them to return immediatelv, Vol. III. H as
• the life of the count had been in imminent danger for some months; but his complaints had rapidly in¬ creased for the last six weeks. That from the count, by his secretary, said, the present state in which the count was, wholly precluded him from giving his consent to the union of his sons, and requested their immediate return. The young men, alarmed at the un¬ happy state of their father, lost not a moment in preparing for their depar¬ ture ; but it was agreed, that, as soon as the Macdonalds left Florence, M. Yaucluse and his party should accom¬ pany them to Turin. The prince also promised tojóin them there. Charles took a tender leave of his Juliana, and they set out. When they arrived at Turin, they found the count in the greatest danger, but sensible. The presence of his sons appeared tö give
him the most heartfelt satisfaction ; he was raised in the bed by the domes¬ tics ; his sons knelt to hfm, and im¬ plored his pardon. He embraced, and forgave them, saying he was happy once more to behold tliem, as their ab¬ sence had reduced him to the state in which they found him. He mildly re¬ proved both, but said he feared he was as much to blame as they had been ; but now he would endeavour to forget what was passed ; and, to make his last hour comfortable, he desired they would not leave his apartment, as he had much to say. They both assured him, that being fully sensible of their faults, nothing should induce them to offend again» Charles asked after the countess. "The countess!" said his father, "what do you mean?" "Is not Madame Brisac," said Charles, " our H 2 mother-
mother-in-law? we were informed, she was to be so, and naturally concluded we should have to pay our respects tô her, as šach." "Ah ! my boys, how much you have been misled ! you know not the worth of that amiable woman ; she is more than deserving all the rank I could raise her to, but her heart is too generous to take advantage of any man's love. She is still single, and more worthy than ever of our esteem m Mine is not the only title she has re¬ fused ; she prefers peace and humble retirement to all the glare of fashion¬ able greatness. She is afraid of expe¬ riencing again thc treatment she re¬ ceived from the unfeeling Brisac, and that induces her to continue with her father, who has remained at Turin ever since."
Frederic
Frederic felt a satisfaction, which it would be difficult to describe, at hear¬ ing Mrs. Brisac was «till single, but, when he found that the Counts illness arose from their unkind behaviour in quitting him, his heart smote him^ and he regarded himself as Httle less than his murderer. Charles was nearly as much affected as he, and when the ser¬ vants had left the room, he burst into tears, and again knelt to his parent The count bade him rise, saying, he had long since forgiven him, and whe¬ ther he did, or did not, recover from his illness, he should find that their happiness wouid he preferred to his own* They then related to their fattier, at his request, in what manner, and where they had spent the time of their ab¬ sence. The incidents they recited seemed to divert his mind^ and give H 3 him
him temporary ease. The description Charles gave of Miss Macdonald, witb the resemblance she bore to Mrs. Bri¬ sac, seemed to please him, ??!????18?- ed he might recover, to see both his sons happy. He said, he had found in the society of Mr. Dainviile and his family every solace it was in his power to recente ; Mr. Dainviile, Jie said, would be with him soon, and bring his daughter with him. Frederic's heart fluttered ; Charles was composed ; his thoughts reverted to his Juliana ; but both fervently prayed for their parents recovery. About two hours after dinner ; (which they had taken in their father's apart¬ ment,) Mr. Damvilie was announced. He was extremely happy, ????? he saw the young men f and congratulated them on their return. His family, he said, were all well, but very much af¬ flicted
flicted at the Counts illness, Mrs. Brisac had corne^ witli him, and his daughter-in-law, to pay their respects to the count; but hearing they were witif him, had declined coming up. The Count, whose spirits were much better, begged Mrs. Dainviile to desire the ladies to comç to him, he went, and returned with fhem. They ex¬ pressed much satisfaction at seeing the brothers, and said, they sincerely hoped they would not elope again, as they were sure nothing could accelerate the recovery of their father so much as their presence. The ladies were very glad to see such a vast alteration for the better in his lordship, and began to entertain hopes that he would regain his health. The physician coming in, was agree¬ ably surprised at seeing such a wonder¬ ful change, in so short a time ; especi- H 4 " ally
ally as he had the day before pronoun* ced the counts life in the utmost dan· ger, he having kept his bed near two months, and it being a ^nervous fever, it had baffled all medicine. He had been prevailed upotf to take two glasses of wine, and, though extremely weak, had set up- in his bed near three hours. They stayed some time, and were happy, at their departure, to see his lordship's spirits, instead of decreasing, increase. They requested the company of the young men the next day for a few hours, if the father could part with them, which his lordship promised to do, if he remained better. Whea the ladies were gone, beseem^ ed inclined to rest, he fell into a sweet sleep, and reposed for many hours. Charles and Frederic retired to a double bedded room, adjoining their father's, having given orders to be awaked, if he
he enquired for them ; but they were not disturbed, and the next day, they had the pleasure of seeing him in a fair ivay of recovery. His ideas had under¬ gone an entire revolution ; the sight of his sons had done away the gloomy reflections which dwelt upon his mind, and he lost all apprehensions of not liv- ^ ing to be blest ivith the society of his children ; they ivere returned, and he was happy. They breakfasted with him, and he desired they ivould pay a visit to Mr. Dainviile. Charles immediately assent¬ ed, but Frederic rather Λνίβη^ to stay ivith his father, as he could hot recon¬ cile himself to the idea of its being his real ivish for him to go there, and he ???? resolved never to offend him again. His father- saiv the generous struggle in the breast of his son ; he admired it, and was determined, from that mo H 5 meti t
ment to unite him to Mrs. Brisac, if it amid possibly be accomplished. Full of this, he permitted Charles to ga alone, but desired him to make Fred¬ eric's excuses to the ladies, and bring Dainvilk back with him, as he had something of moment to impart to liim. When Charles was gone, the count reverted to the time of Frederic's leav¬ ing Turin, and desired he would raore fully enter into the circumstances that had occurred to him since that period, Whicb the young man did. The count knew not what to think of the society at Bononi. He said, he had heard of -it, but never could learn any particu¬ lars. The scenes which Frederic rela¬ ted he had seen there, subsequent to those at Veatoliene, amazed him ; he longed .to see the prince and father Gregory, as he should much wish to become a member. The account of Owea
Owen shocked him much, but con¬ firmed the opinion he had always enter¬ tained, that the damned rest not ; and, from the bare conversation of his son, he was become an absolute convert to the father's doctrine, to whom he de¬ sired him tosend, and request he might sec him at Turin, as soon as possible. This command pleased Frederic, as he liad not the least doubt ofthe father's hastening his journey. Charles ????, in the mean time, agree¬ ably amused at Mr. Dainville's, Λνίιο re¬ ceived him with the greatest pleasure. The ladies were earnest in their enqui¬ ries after the count and Frederic. The relation he gave ofthe vast change for the better in his father gave plea* sure to all, and they began to indulge the most flattering hopes. Thc ladies withdrew in about a quar- Η ? ter
ter of an hour. Charles theu asked Mr. Bainville some particulars respecting his father's illness. He informed him, that on the morning ????? Frederic was taken ill, the count had made an offer of his hand and fortune to Airs. Brisac ; but that she, as Widi as him¬ self, had politely declined it ; not from motives of dislike, but from the very same that had actuated her in the re¬ fusal of himself The count had made use of every argument that could be devised, to shake her resolution, but in vain. At leaving them, lie desired that the intimacy between the families might not suffer by this circumstance ; and, though she had negatived his visits as a lover, yet he flattered himself she would not refuse to admit him as a friend. This \vw consented to. At his return to the hotel, he ???? greatly surprised to find his son in such a short time so very ill Every advice was procured ;
procured ; but a delirium, with alarm¬ ing appearances, baffled their skill for some weeks, during which time, his father had discovered the state of his heart. He saw, he felt for, and pitied him ; and nothing was left undone, to make him understand that the count w r as sensible of it, and would try to re¬ lieve his anguish ; but he was lost to every thing, and they at last thought it most advisable not to say any thing more upon the subject, till the course of the fever was abated, and he might be composed ; but this was not for some week* At length, he gathered strength to walk from room to room, but obstinate¬ ly persisted in a gloomy silence. His preceptor had agreed to seiz&the first moment that offered to let ?? know what had passed, and his father's in¬ tentions concerning him. Bni at %he time
time when they were led to hope for an opportunity, he privately left the hotel ; and, notwithstanding every search that was made, could not be found. This misfortune, added to what the count felt for his other son, and his own dis¬ appointments, brought on a violent fit of illness, from which, after four months confinement, he was restored ; but his health did not continue long, for, find¬ ing no intelligence could l>e received of either of his children, he fell ill of a nervous fever, which had been con¬ tinually increasing, to the time the let¬ ters came from Florence. The jay of receiving them had nearly been fatal, his spirits being so weak, as to be iuca- pableofenduring any particular reverse; but they were happy, he said,, to find so pleasing a change, which they trust¬ ed would continue. Mrs. B. he said, had condemned herself for being though unintentionally, the cause of so much uneasi-
uneasiness to so good and generous a man as the count, ?????? happiness they should ever consider as their own. Charles then related to Mr. Dainviile ????1?? ? ?? had occured to him, and the prospect he had of being happy with a laely, who ???$, he thought, the re¬ presentative of Mrs, Brisac. . This gave much pleasure to M. Dainviile, and he was certain it would to bis preceptor, who had been the constant attendant of the count. Charles said, he should never be sufficiently grateful to him and the good doctor, for their kind at¬ tention to his father; but himself and his brothei should make it their study to return it by every means in their power. He then delivered his father's message, and they took leave of the ladies, with a promise of bringing Fred¬ eric the next day.
Mn
Mr. Dainvilk and Charles returned to the count, whom they found agree¬ ably amused with the relation Frederic had given of his adventures. The doc¬ tor had joined them a little before, and had listened with the greatest attentiou to some anecdotes of father Gregory and the prince, whom he wished much to see. Whik Frederic was writing the letters, the count, the preceptor, and Mr. Dainvilk, were engaged in earnest conversation respecting him. The count said, he had desired the company of Mr. Dainvilk, o.. l ρ j$e to make a proposal to him about his son Frederic ; which was, that he would use the influence he had over Mrs. Bri¬ sac, te induce her to accept his hand. She was not ignorant of the sincere attachment he had evinced for her ; %nd, as one of his sons was likely to be happy in the object of his choice, he had an ardent desire to see his other so
so likewise, and by so doing, it would secure his peace, and be the means of restoring himself to health ; and he the more earnestly desired to promote it> as hç witnessed the struggle his son had to conquer his hopeless passion. He thought, he said, that she could not possibly object to him, as he had neither title nor fortune to boast of» superior to her own. His income would be only twelve hundred a year ; therefore, he hoped she would not ob¬ ject to give him the right to call hev daughter-in-law. Mr. Dainviile was so much surprised at this proposal, so wholly unexpected^ that he knew not what to say ; but r being pressed by the doctor to give his consent, he acquiesced and promi¬ sed to say every thing in his power, to prevail upon his daughter to admit the addresses of Fred eric, though he would UütL
»©% by any m^ns, vouch for the suc¬ cess of it This point settled, the count and the preceptor, who loved his pupil with thu fondness ofa parent, enjoyed as much pleasure ín the thought of heing the e means, (though unknown to him) of his felicity, as if they were to have been placed in the full possess¬ ion of all their wishes. They agreed to keep the whole a secret from Frede¬ ric, till M. Dainvilk had seen whether he was likely to succeed with Mrs. Bri¬ sac. He promised most faithfully to execute his commission, and to use the whok of his infiuence to prevail upon her to accede to their wishes, and said nothing could so much contribute to his future felicity as the pride of ha¬ ving his child united to such a noble family, whose virtues would reflect ho¬ nor on any rank, much moie on his— he left them soon after to execute bis négociation. The
The count continued to mend daily, and in less than a week from that time, he was able to sit up to dinner. Three days after, they were agreeably surpri» sed, at receiving a line from father Gregory, intimating the arrival of himself and family at Turin. Charles and Frederic immediately ?????? on thera. The former had been led to expect his Juliana, but was 'disap¬ pointed ; the Vaucluse family and Fitzallan only ????? arrived, as Mr. Macdonald's could not conveniently leave Florence for a fortnight ; but, as they had nothing to detain them, and Edward ??1$1^ to be with his sis¬ ter, they set off. Thc prince meant to join them in a few days, and proceed ???? them to England, at ??!??? place it had been agreed for Genevieve to give her hand to Fitzallan, and Marta hers to Maribro*. Mr. Akerworth ?? enquired for, and the lovely Miss Fran¬ ces*
?. Edward said, he knew not how the ????? would come aff ia that quarter,, for the kdy was most desperately ia hm witb him· Harry was quite in despair, as all the diversion he had promised himself wm absolutely negatived, and he fear» ed he should be doomed to make the tøur oi* Italy, in the company of hb encbanting cousin* without the relief of the prince or any other good chari¬ table person» Harry, he said, had by the consent of his guardian, made a formal declaration of his passion to Mr» Macdonató, who had agreed to bestoir øn him the hand of bis daughter, with tea thousand pounds, immediately up¬ on hm retern from the continent ; and be made uo doubt that he would now play ??' his tricks so effectually upon Miss Frances, as to induce them to leturn much sooner than waa at first proposed*
proposed ; especially as the prince meant to go to England, and leave her collection to be made, when she returned princess of Bononi, which she firmly believed woukl be the case. Af¬ ter an hour spent together, they return¬ ed, accompanied by the father, M. Vaucluse, and FitzaUan. The count and the Aoctor received them with great satisfaction ; they were profuse in their acknowledgements of the ob¬ ligations they were under, for the good advice and assistance they bad given Frederic. The day passed in the most agreeable manner. In the evening, the young men left the company, to pay their respects to the ladies, and apologise for the longer absence of their friends. Frederic said, be was much happier than he had been for some time, as the recovery of his fether was the first wkh ofhis heart» "Aad
* t And the second," said the arch Ge¬ nevieve, *' is, that you may meet with a Mrs* Brisac. Could İ see the lady, I think I c#uld persuade her to let that fine face of yours be decked with smiles," Maria joined her sister in requesting to be introduced, that they might endea¬ vour to prevail upon her to be kind. t i You know not what you ask," said Charles: " Mrs. Brisac is not young ; she does not wish to be again in the world : she mfffereá so much from one man, that ¿he doubts the professions ofali ; there¬ fore, I think Frederic had better go to England withyou, and see whether he cannot, among the fair Islanders, meet with a lady who will not beso cruel." u I will most gladly take him there," eaid Fitzallan ; ' r and, if he will place himself
himself under my care, I have not the least doubt of succeeding/* Frederic thanked them, and declined their offers ; but said, he was certain the ladies would be introduced to the the Daİnvilîes, before they left Turin. Charles and his brother soon took their leave, and went to Mrs. Brisac. She received them with her usual politeness, but seemed much embarrassed when Frederick took her hand, and he appear¬ ed no less so ; but her brother and his wife coming in, a general conversation ensued. Mr. Dainville's sisters, at whose house Mrs. Brisac had resided, a short time after her liberation from her husband, was, he found, dead. Her fortune, which was large, he had divided between Mr. Dainvi le and his two daughters : in consequence of this bequest, they had agreed to reside ûl together at Turin, especially as young Dainville'a
Dainvilk's lady preferred it to France» They lived, though in separate hotels, as one family, Mr. Dainvilk was in high spirits, * rallied his daughters much, and, when he found the Vaucluse family were arrived, said, they must go immediately and leave their names, if they could not see the ladies. He pressed this with so much earnestness, that they were ram to comply. He said, he had tio idea of frivolous ceremony ; they were a family he wished much to be acquainted with, and Mrs. Brisac, whose embarrasment still continued, was gkd to have an excuse to leave íht gentlemen. They, therefore order¬ ed ¿e coach, and set out. When they were gone, Charles desired the two Jtfr. »amviik's to accompany them back to thfe count, which they did. ??? G*?$ory was stiU there ; they were
were reciprocally introduced, and »the count was, in tbis agreeable company, quite restored ; the satisfaction wbich beamed upon bis countenance, and that of Mr. Dainviile, convinced Charles there was something passing between those gentlemen that be waa unacquainted with. A long and very interesting conversation took place» respecting the society at Bononi. The count expressed a wish to become a member of it. Father Gregoiy said, at his return from England, he would not fail to gratify him. From that evening, the days were spent in the most agreeable manner, by the differ¬ ent families. The ladies had seen each other, and, had not Fitzallan been anxious to return to Englandi they would have been happy to have spent some time at Turin ; but he was miser¬ able at every delay, as liis sister had aa Vol. III. I earnestly
earnestly pressed his return. The de¬ ranged state of Owen's affairs, he knew, would take up some time to regulate, and, till Mrs. Owen was happy, he could not think of being so himself. He, therefore, urged the departure of M. Vaucluse and father Gregory ; but, at the request of the count, he was prevailed upon to defer his journey till the arrival ofthe prince, who was hour¬ ly expected* On the day preceding that on which Edward meant to go, he came ; and, two days after, to their amazement, the Macdonakis and Akerworths. Harry had succeeded, in kicking up, as he caiied it, a precious row, with S|bs Frances, by telling her, He was certain she was forsaken by the prince ; Iris scheme succeeded to his wish, and she declared,'that, sooner than she would go through Italy with such an ignorant,
ignorant, illbred, scandalous fellow, she would return to England barefoot. Finding she was determined) Mrs. Akerworth prevailed upon her husband to join the Macdonalds ; fbr, she had been so many years accustomed to have Miss Frances manage all her do* mestic concerns, that she did not knoiv how to do without her. This was a pressing argument, and the old gentle* man thought it better to comply, than go on, and have nothing but wrang*. ng and jangling all the way, as Miss Frances vowed the most terrific vem· geance against Harry, for daring to say the prince liad forsaken her. Under- all those weighty reasons, theyhad reached Turin* Young Mari¬ bro' hastened to pay his respects, ivitb Charles, to whom Miss Frances /elated her grievances; and then Harry playcif her off on anotlier quarter,, saying,- , - I '2 that
that she differed very widely from every lady in romance ; for, she had literally mm after the prince, and how shocking that was to a man of delicacy, to have the lady pursue him ! He was certain the prince would think as he did, and he would advise, now she had gone so far, to keep her resentment to herself. She was so much offended at his re¬ marks, that sh<¿ declared she would box his ears. Henry hearing this, thought It best to retreat, as he was sure she would put her threats into execution. When he was gone, Charles and Marl¬ borough dkl and said aU they could to compose her, and at length succeeded. To Charles she listened with pleasure, as he humoured her conceit Maribro*, she thought, favoured Henry too much, and declared, that, if he followed such ?? unf raeious young man's example, be wild make but a bad husband for the bvely Maria, or any lady else.— They
They, ????????, prevailed upon her, at last, to think no more about him, but perm?*· the ladies to pay their respects to herself and aunt. She consented, and they came ; she received them in the most pompous manner, but could not help saying, She thought the prince rather ungenteel,not to wait at Florer, ce for her final decision, ivhether slie meant to continue there, or proceed £o Rome- Instead of which, he had left it, ??,(,??^ intimating to her when ha intended to return, and assist her in the researches she ivas about to make, and ivhich it ivould be ????И? out of her power to accomplish ivithout his aid, as she had not found a single gentleman^ whose information she could depend upon like his. The ladies pleaded the cause ofthe priuce so effectua. /, that she promised to forget his want of gal¬ lantry, and join in their little parties, I 3 during
during the short time they had to stav. Monsieur Dupont, who had likewise come toTurin at thc request of Charles, undertook to procure lier all the rare and valuable medals he could select in Italy ; some few that he had in his own cabinet* which were R R R R, should be at her sei vice. This promise per¬ fectly reconciled her, and all was in unison immediately. Charles, Frederic, Maribro', Fitzallan, and Henry were desiied by the count to arrange a splendid entertainment, which he meant to give upon his recovery and their return that day fortnight. This they set about with alacrity,and, in two day*, near three hundred cards were sent to different families residing at Turin. While this was preparing, the old gentlemen seemed to be equally bi^y abc-ui.
«ibout something, ivhich they kept ? ith much care to themselves. The ladies were engaged in ordering dresses ; buí thc count desired he might be per¬ mitted to choose one for Mrs. Brisac. The notaries were employed, though none but the elders kuew about what. Miss Frances Was determined to eclipse the whole assembly, by the splendor of her dress, aad ransacked all Turin to procure the first French milliner to form it. Three days prior to that on which the fete was to be given, the count desired tlie prince, Pasquinelli, Charles, and Frederic to attend him in tiie library. When they entered, they were surprised at finding there Mr. Macdoiia.d, Mr. Dainviile, the doctor, and father Gregory. Wheu they were seated, thc count asked them Whether the preparations would be completed by the day appointed? They replied, Yes. "Well then," said he, "it is 14 now
ηοΛν time to show you that ??? on our parts have not been idle, and that what we have planned to complete the festivity of the day, is in such a state of forwardness, as to want only each of your assents to finish it." The young men looked at each other, as if to ask what the count's speech meant; but tiiey all were ig¬ norant of it. "Ah l' said Mr. Mac¬ douald, "that eye enquiry won't do: you must refer to us for an explana¬ tion." Charles said, He should be extremely happy to obtain it. " Well then," returned the count, " let us see. I think you toid me that nothing could so much contribute to your felicity, as being the husband of Juliana Mae- donald?" I did, sir," answered he, "and I spoke the sentiments ol' my heart." "Then now prove it,"said his father, "'by giving your consent, iu the
the presence of this company to receive the hand of that lady, on Wednesday next, and set your hand to these writings"—pointing to some that lay on the table. Charles was astonished ; it ???? a plea¬ sure he did not expect for many months* lie hesitated, stammered, ami appeared absolutely confounded. "What makes you hesitate?" said his father; "ifyou don't like thc lady, I know one that does, aud Λν?ί take her immediately." Charles recovering himself said, his em¬ barrassment arose from his happiness coming so unexpectedly; if ????? was told him was realy mean t,h e should think himself blessed indeed; but he thouglit the huí ? ought to be apprised of it. " Don't trouble yourself about that," said the count; "she is informed of it hy this time. I don't do things by halves ; so consent with a good grace, I S and
and have done with it" "I do indeed consent,*'said he. Poor Frederic fetched a heartfelt sigh, and said softly to his brother, would to heaven I were as happy as you are. ' The last words were heard by his fathc. "That you shall be, my boy, ifyou will as readily consent to take the wife I have selected for vou, as Charles has done." "I wish I could, sir," said he, "but that, vou alreadv know, is out of my power." " 1 kuow not any such thing," said the count ; "you may be ?? happy as your brother, if vou think proper; but you are obstinate, and re¬ ject wdiat would insure your felicity/* "Pardon me sir," replied Frederic, " í am sorry to disturb thc content you pro- miseyourself; butyou are too well assu¬ red I cannot command my affections." " But suppose ï command them," said the count ?—» "I think sir you wil! not
not be cruel enough to do that; you know what I have suffered already* and w hat you have felt yourself: therefore, pray, do not urge me: you may banish me from your presence, and the society of yourfttends; that I couid submit to; but what you propose I cannot." "Then I promise you," said his father, "you will never be happy ; for unless you give your hand to the lady I have made choice of,you see my face no more." "Be it so/' answered Frederic, and he strove to suppress a tear. "I know the duty I owe to him, whom, till this mo¬ ment, I always regarded as the best of fathers; but I am sensible of the duty I owe myself, and shall beg leave to be permitted to quit this roof for ever. "So saying, he was about to leaVe the room, wheu the count desired to ask him one question, before he went "Would you" said he " be so obstinatly I 6 bent
bent ob refusiug to become a bride¬ groom, if the daughter of this gentle¬ man could be brought to accept ??? with all your perverseness. " Thatt sir, said Frederic, "is a subject, I dare not dwell upon ; what is impossible to ex¬ pect, I will not admit" "There is no impossibilily İn the case," said his father.—"Pardon me, sir, î cannot admit of what I don't believe, and I beg you will permit me to retire. " Mr. Dainvilk then spoke, and said, he knew not what he should say to his daughter, as he had undertaken to gain tLe consent of Frederic to receive her as his wife, at the express desire of the count, an honor he had been little led to expect, and his daughter had been brought to believe that his attachment to her had ever been sincere, and she had given her consent, iu consequence of it, to give her hand to him at the same
same time Charles received that of Miss Macdonald. Frederic and Charles appeared thun¬ derstruck. All they had lieard seemed by the power of magic : however, they were, at last, made sensible, that what Mr. Dui n vi lie said was true, and that Mis. Brisac, at the earnest wish ofthe count, consented to become the wife of Frederic, and reside with her father-in- law, whose happiness, in future, de¬ pended on this union. Frederic, who, but a few minutes before was wishing for annihilation, was now, as if re¬ stored from death to life. He fell at the feet of his father, and invoked a thousand blessings on his head. Whea he was a little composed^ his father told him, he must stay and hear that somebody else was to be happy as well as himself. "Oh ! for the Almighty's sake,
áake," said he, " make every one so ; for, you only possess the talent of do¬ ing it." Mr. Macdouald then addressed sig¬ nor Pasquinelli. " Your merit, sir," said he, " first attracted the notice of my sister-hidaw; ber fortune is ample, and, as I approve hcr choice, and his highness yours, I have to inform you, that, at the same time which presents the comit with two daughters, I shall be happy to give you the hand of my sister ; and, belie\*e me, I shall rejoice in seeing yott both happy." The signor endeavoured to express by words what he felt, but his looks plain¬ ly evinced the gratitude of his heart. Tiie prince took him by the baud, and said î " If you are the worthy mau^I think ymi* regard me in futuie as your brother and your friend." This ???? too
too much, and, to bide the tear of gra* titude, he abruptly quitted the room. To describe the happiness of all present would be useless; each enjoyed the prospect of felicity which was opening to view. The count was as happy as % his sons. The goodness of his heart was such, that nothing so largely con¬ tributed to his peace, as the tranquillity of others. Mr. Dainviile, the doctor, and father Gregory, participated İn Irø joy ; but none more so than Mr. Dain- ville, at the hope ofhis favorite child's happiness. The prince desired he might be permitted to attend the gentlemen to thc ladies, to apprise them of what had passed, and solicit the honor of being one of the bridesmen. For thc joke's sake, he said, he should desire the hand of Miss Francis in the dance. The day preceeriing the happy one was ?pent by the ladies in arranging the
the particulars of thcir dress for the bail. Mrs. Brisac, at her earnest re¬ gnest, went to the altar in a plain suit of white taffety. Mrs. Macdonakls the same ; but her niece was more ele¬ gantly dressed, in a white robe orna¬ mented with silver crescents ; her hair bound in with a crape and silver net. The bridal dresses for the evening were strikingly splendid. That selected for Mrs. Brisac by the count was a rich gold striped crape, most beautifully ornamented with embroidery of myrtle and roses. The head dress, a ehaplet of the same, braided in by a string of pearls—pearl necklace and earrings. Mrs. Macdonald's was white satin with- gold rosebuds ; her head dress, an em¬ broidered handkerchief, in gold, a la turque ; diamond necklace and earrings, Aliss Frances's was superb beyond de¬ scription, but more calculated to dis¬ play
play profusion than taste or elegance. The Miss Vaucl u ses chose robes of white spangled taffety ; their hair, of which they had a profusion, was braid¬ ed \yith peat Is. Mi¿. Vaucluse's, a plain suit of white sattin trimmed ???? silver fur. Mrs. Macdonakls similar, Mrs, Akerworth's ditto, but without fur. The lady of the beach, an Eng¬ lish dress of vhite sattin and crape, intermixed with gold stripes, A ban¬ deau of diamonds, ueelace and earrings ofthe same. The junior madame Dain¬ vi lie's was the counterpart. The gen¬ tlemen were all plain, but elegantly dressed. A grand cavalcade of coaches attended them to church, w hieb ???? so immensely thronged, that it was with the greatest difficulty they could return. Ilie gentlemen had ordered a hund¬ red
dred guineas to be distributed among thc poor in the neighbourhood of the count's hotel, and the like number in that of Mr, Dainviile s. M. Dainviile junior had the ilircctiou of it; hi«» laely added twenty guineas to the bupiest. The day and evening flew on rapid wings ; Miss Frances was m raptures, at the admiration bhe thought hcr per¬ son and dress excited, but which was in reality directed to the preposterous decorations of it. Henry, ever mischievous, longed to play her a trick, for which puipose, he gotayoungman, ofa disposition similar to his own, to pretend to be most vio¬ lently in love with her, and to recent the attentions paid her by the pi ince, whom he knew to be fairly tired ofhis. paitner. This friend of Hand's no sooner saw the prince had quitted Miss Frances, which Henry had previously desìi ed
desired liim to do, than lie hastened up to pay his devoirs, and request the honor ofattcuding her, till her partner's return, which he took care should nol be soon. She was delighted with his compliments, and was never in such good humour, every thing conspiring, as she thought, to gain her admiration. She entered into the most familiar dis¬ course with him, aud he so ingratiated himself into her favor, as to prevail on her to dance with him the remainder or' the evening. They had danced near a quarter of ini hour, \vhcn the pi ince, who had re- tel\ed ids instructions from liai ry, ic- turned, and demanded his partner. lhe gt titlcman refused to give her up ; .in altercation took place, which ended in a challenge for the next morn intr,. The prince withdrew and joined the company in another room. Tha bu&tìa rl-i«
this seemh *r*ica* occasioned afforded an infinite fund of mirth to t u»-* e who were in the plot, and even to those 'hat were not so ; many wondered at the strauge taste of thc prince before, and many more afterwards were not lest surprised that such a strange incom¬ prehensible person, as Miss Frances, should so far have captivated such a young and handsome mn\ 4 as to induce him to call out a person, every way his inferior. No one seemed to envy him his conquest, but the young man who then possessed the hand ofthe lady, and who appeareel determined to keep it This was no small affair for Miss Frances to plume herself upon, when she saw two of the finest young men in the assembly contending for lier hand. She looked round with the most ineffable contempt on tiiose ladies who* pridea
prided shemseîves on their accomplish¬ ments, youth and beauty, and who thought themselves more entitled to admiration tban herself Harry went up to her when the bustle had a little subsided, and said, the prince was so much offended, that he meant, as soon ?? he had chastised her partner for his presumption, to leave Turin, and pre¬ tended to be much displeased with his friend for presuming to rival a gentle- man so much his superior. Miss Fiances desired Harry to leave then, and not trouble himself about what did not concern liim ; he had a la y ofhis own to attend îo, and she thotight she was of years of discretion enough to ? hoose for herself. * * Bes ides, " said slie, "did not the prince oifend me, by his departure from Florence, without once consulting me, or saying when he would return? That was a breach
breach of gallantry, I think, and voit fiave rather uldcd to his impertinence ; but, ifyou have not spirit enough ta resent his hehaviour, this gentleman has, and ï have not the least doubt that he will prove himself well deri¬ ving of the good opinion 1 have form¬ ed ofhim; so do, pray. Hany, go alonpr, mind your own party, and don't trou¬ ble yourself either about me, or this gentleman, who, I am certain, knows how to chastise insolence/' ti 1 kave you, madam,"said Henry, bowing/ 4 hut recollect that your favorite will havi: more than one to draw his sword with." Thc gentleman bowed and said, he was welcome to bring halfa dozen, if he tdîose, he should certainly be reaily to meet them i u such a glorious came, and those that were biave alone de¬ served thc fair. Henry smiled, "you talk well, sir, I hope your deeds will support your words. If so, ?? your «trøm lìv
By this time, a considerable crowd had gathered round tbem, and Henry finding he had succeeded to his whh y left the room ; and the lady enjoyed her triumph. Thc evening was spent in great festivity, and ????? one return¬ ed to their houses, fully pleased with the elegance and hospitality ofthe en¬ tertainment. The next day, the duel was the talk of the whole city ; every one was anxi* ous to know whether they would ven¬ ture to fight on so ridiculous a subject, but it was soon found that it had been amicably adjusted, the priuce having resigned all right to the lady, ???? was equally well pleased Avith the one as the other, and he had left Turin, that the young man might enjoy his con¬ quest Λνί?Ιιοηί interruption. But this departure of the prince, had been pre¬ concerted, and tae whole ofthe count's and
and the Bainvİlle's family were appi ised of it, as he had to meet father Theo¬ dore at Geneva, on business that would detain him some time at that place, but which he hoped to finish by the time thc Vaucluse and Macdouald families could join him. He took an affectionate leave of his friends, with a faithful promise of spending some time with them at his return, which he hoped would be in about six weeks. Miss Frances declared she was happy at his departure, as she found more polite attention paid to her by the young gentleman, thau thefprince was capable of offering to any lady. Tbe count, ???^? happiness and health were now perfectly restored, began to plan the establishment of his sons. His eldest be proposed should return ??1? his lady to the family do¬ mains, while the count chose to reside at
at Turin with his son Frederic, with whom he promised himself much feli¬ city, as father Gregory had agreed to re¬ turn and introduce him to the society at Bononi, in which he ivas more than ever anxious to be enrolled, lumi¬ nelli and his lady were to accompany Charles and his Juliana to Sweden, and then return to spend their days at Florence, to which place the Dainviile family meant to go, when father Gre¬ gory and father Theodore returned, and which was intended tabe witb the prince. M. Dupont being urged hy Charles^ consented to go 4 with him to Stockholm* Tliis arranged, Fitøallan hurried M»l Vaucluse, and! în three dayls,. father Gregory^ hb son .Edward, and kåe Vaucluse family left Tiurt with a deters mination not to stop i for any tirnem (???????? accident happened>, till ? -. *Voi*¿JH¿i2f4i Kj *♦',/. -. imcbeê At
reached England. Ibe Macdonald and Akerworth rara ilies meant to stay some little time longer The count was very unwilling to part with them; but the necessity there was for Fitzallan's re¬ turn made him avoid pressing their longer stay, and they parted amidst the good wishes of all. They were to meet the Macdonalds in London. They reached Geneva four days after the prince had arrived there : he had finished the business he had come upon, and father Theodore was to accompany him . to England. They stayed but a short, time at Geneva: Fitzallan was quite happy at the accident of father Theodore's being to accompany them ; be was a man whom every one spoke well of* The mildness of his character, and benevolent disposition, endeared bim to all llie prince placed the moet unlimited *. confidence in him* It was evident he had seen trouble, tmi had sunk deeply into his heart. He
He frequently appeared lost in deep meditation, though he would soon re¬ collect himself and be cheerful. They left Geneva for Bern the next day, and then proceeded to Basle, where they intended to stop one* day ; but changed their minds, and cou tinued tlieir route to Strasburg, Deuxponts, and Treves, at wliich place they rested, as M. Vaucluse had a re¬ lation there, prioress ofa convent, and it was resolved to stop three days at that place. The ladies and M. Vau* cluse paid their respects to the lady St Julia, whom they found hastening fast to the world of peace. She took leave of them for ever soon after thcir arri¬ val. They were' detained, out of re¬ spect to this lady, two days longer than they intended ; however, they felt a satisfaction in having seen her. ln the evening ofthe fourth day she died Father Theodore asked some ? ?, questions
questions respecting the lady Julia, and expressed a wish to ????? whether she had not a sister, that died about Uveiity years before, in a convent at Namur; M. Vaucluse said, yes. " Would to God then," said he, « I had been happy enougli to see this lady, though it might have torn open ???????, that I could Λν?8?ι for ever to be closed, still I would have risked all, could I have once been blessed with the sight of her, in ?????? arms my suffering Victoria died." "Victoria! did you say," asked Vau¬ cluse. ** Yes, said the father, **my long lost murdered Victoria. " "Good God! you cannot sure be the gentleman to whom that lady was en¬ gaged. " "Yes, I am the same wretched, un¬ happy, Durbanne, who lost that angel, and
and my peace for ever, by the vilest treachery; bat the God of mercies is just" " You will oblige me much," said Vaucluse, * * if it would not give you too much pain, to inform me by what means that lady died, as I was told, some years ago, that she came not fairly by her death. " " You were informed right, sir; I will tell you a few particulars of my un¬ happy story, though it will afford you very little entertainment " My father was by birth an English¬ man, nearly related to an ancient family in that kingdom. At the time James of England abdicated the throne, my father, a very young man, followed the fortunes ofthat monarch, more out of regard to a beautiful kdy of the ? 3 court,
court, who had gone with her royal mistress to St. Germains, than to anv attachment that he bore the king. This lady was by birth an Italian. His family disliked her, and he was in¬ formed by them, as soon as it was known where he w as, that, if he did not return and swear allegiance to Mary, he would be regarded as an alien to his family, and be disinherited ac¬ cordingly. The threats of his parents had no weight with him ; he continued in France, and shortly after married the lady, changed his name, and be¬ came naturalized to that country. He received an appointment at the com i of St. Germains, and continued theie till the death of thc queen of James. " This caused a great change in the affairs ofmy father ; he had but liti«; money, and less expectations. He leu. the court, and went to Versailles, wheie í
I was born. Soon after, with the little he had left, he embarked for the West Indies, where he had been led to ex¬ pect a lucrative employment, but found his hopes, on his arrival, vanish into air. This was too nmch for my mo¬ ther to support, and she fell a victim to lier feelings. My father survived her but a short time, and I wns left zu orphan, in a country, wheie even thc name of my parents was scarcely known. The humanity of one of the planters took me under his protection, till an opportunity should offer of send¬ ing me to France. He'gathered from the effects my parents left at their death, the sum of three hundred pounds. This he carefully preserved for me, and a family soon after return¬ ing to Fian ? he sent me home, with orders to have me placed under the care ofa distant relation of his at Soissons : with the interest of my little pittance, ? 4 thc
the good man discharged the duties of the best of parents ; I was educated, fed, and cloathed, as if I had been to inherit an elegant fortune. i( I saw not mv benefactor, till I had attained my twelfth year, ????? he returned to France. He appeared much pleased with me, and the proficiency I had made İn every branch of learning. He asked me manv questions concern¬ ing my inclinations, whether they tend¬ ed to merchandise, or the army. My father, for such I had been taught to call him, had been destined to trade, from his infancy; but his mind had ever revolted from it The will ofhis parents were to be obeyed ; he was obliged to sub út, and at the age of sixteen, was sent to one of the colonics, ?????? he had been five years, when my father arrived. He wm the first to shew him attention and respect, and, when.
when the failure of his hopes came, he was the first to pity and condole with him. "Seeing the helpless situation I was left in, he was resolved to become my rather and protector. I was sent home to France, as his own son, and it was generally beiieved 1 was so, though it was known he was not married. Upon examining me, he found 1 had no par¬ ticular predilection for any pursuit; I was ready to be guided by him in every thing : this docility pleased him, though he would, he said, have been happier to have seen me evince an at* tachment to one thing more than ano~ ther. I delighted in books, and, if I could be furnished with them, as fast as í read, I was happy. He, therefore, placed me under the tuition of a father; whose judgment and learning he could rely on. His business calling him K. 5 agaia
again abroad, I was to remain under hh instruction three years, and then, he hoped, I would make my election ; but, beforethat period arrived, ill health brought my more than father to his na¬ tive country. " I had seven months unexpired of the time intended to complete my studies, but, finding I had made an improvement greater than he expected, he chose that I should quit them, anu he altogether with him. He went to Paris for medical advice ; I attended him there. It ???? some months before any visible change for the better took place. At last, however, his constitu¬ tion got the better of his disease, and I had the felicity of seeing him restored to health ; but he declined going out again to his former situation, and turn¬ ed his mind to the improvement of the fortune he had acquired, He had a taste for
for agriculture, and purchased an estate in the neighbourhood of Versailles, and went to reside on it. To this place he took me, and seemed to enjoy a secret pleasure in teaching me any thing I wished to acquire. " We had been in this happy retreat near three years, when a family came to reside near us, upon a domain left them by distant relation. They con¬ sisted of a gentleman, his ?\^?, and four daughters, the youngest about fourteen ; all pleasing young ??????, and, in a short time, came another fa¬ mily. They had been acquainted at Paris with the former, ?????? name ???? Vaucluse, the other's Glacier. An in¬ timacy soon took place between both of them and my father. The urbanity of his manners, and the independence in which he lived, induced many to seek an acquaintance with him, 4 and, ?? as
as I was regarded as his son, my com¬ pany w r as sought after by all who had daughters to settle. The Glaciers had two, and one son ; they were reputed to be large fortunes ; the son was a captain in the Swiss guard, a young man of the most licentious and aban¬ doned principles ; he was near seven and twenty, but unmarried. He had been handsome, when about twenty ; but vice had stripped w him of all his charms. He had been but a few days in our society, when he desired me to assist him in an amour, which he ?? ished to form with one ofthe daughters of Vaucluse. Those lat! ies I had never considered in any particular manner, except the third daughter, who, I thought, possessed the preeminence; her name was Victo¬ ria. I had, I thought, discovered in her a taste similar to my own, and, as I saw
I saw it gave my father pleasure to see ns together, I attached myself more to her than to any other. Draxa, which was the name ofthe second, frequently shewed evident signs of discontent. If I spoke to her, her answers were short, and carried with them a vindic¬ tive kind of tone. If I had occasion to ask her for an explanation of any thing, bhe would hastily say, * ??? Victoria, she is best able in inform you/ " I was Ion«: at a loss to account for her singular behaviour ; and not being conscious of having offended her, gave myself no trouble about it But she knew what I was ignorant of myself, that í loved her sister, and that she was tenderi v attached to me. Young Glacier soon convinced me of it It was Victoria he had pitched upon, as thc object of his gallantry. The mo¬ ment he mentioned her, I felt that I loved
kved with the greatest ardor. I was fondly led to hope I was not indiffer¬ ent to her ; a thousand little incidents occurred to my remembrance, to fiat¬ ter the illusion. I lost not a moment fco inform my father of k, fearing that my rival, from the power he boasted to possess, would tear her from me. I laid open the state ofmy heart, and earnest¬ ly implored him, if he approved my choice, that he would not delay to make known my passion to M. Vaucluse, aad solicit his consent to our union. " You are too warm and ^ρ??ιιοι?5, ,? said he ; " but the ardor of youth is excusable ; moderate your passions, and strive to keep them under the guid- anee of reason. If the young lady is as much attached to you, as you ima¬ gine, you need not fear the power of a rival. She has, I think, too much good sense to be lured ?? the appear¬ ance of grandeur* or deceived by splen¬ dor.
dor. Fear not this Glacier; if she has the least delicacy, she must reject him ivith contempt. I will see her fa¬ ther ; but things of this nature must not be doue in a hurry ; be composed, and rest on my endeavours to make you happy." " This was the language of that good man; he fondly thought that avarice and ambition had no more weight with others than with him. Ah ! how much was he deceived. I asked him, before I left him, ifl had his full consent to address Victoria. He assu¬ red me I had, and tliat he should use his interest to see us united. I flew to the idol of my heart ; I found her alone. She had been lyeeping ; I im¬ plored her to tell me the occasion; she declined it 5 but the earnest manner in which I urged my request, at length, prevailed, and she informed me, tliat»
for above three weeks, young Glacier had pestered her with letters, stating the violent passion he entertained for her, and requesting she would grant him an interview, unknown to her friends, as he had something of the greatest moment to impart Xo her, but she had returned the last unopened, with a positive refusal to meet him. That mornmg, he had been to her pa¬ rents, and formally demanded leave to address her. He had made such pro¬ posals, as had induced them to enter into his views, and they had compelled her to see him. This was what made her so unhappy, as she had taken a violent dislike to him, from the first sight. " I lost not a moment to speak com¬ fort to her, and, ivithout the least re¬ serve, told her what had passed between my fatherand myself, and earnestly be¬ sought
sought her to say, ??????? I inight hope for Iter concurrence. Thejoy that spark¬ led in her eyes, plainly spoke her assent. I pressed her to my bosom with rapture; she acknowledged her attachment, and' confessed that she had long loved me ; that her sister Draxa had discovered her weakness, and had not been back- ???? in reproaching her, for her attach¬ ment to a man, totally indifferent to her. It was this observation of her sister's, that had occasioned the tears I found her in. She said, she bad tbat morning, told Glacier, without the least reserve, that her determinati¬ on was fixed, never to reeeh r e him in the light of a future husband, as slie would prefer a convent to a marriage with a person her heart could never approve. He said, that he admired her frankness, but should never give up tiie hope of making himseif agreea¬ ble
ble to her ; therefore should ???И; upon her again in the evening. "The pleasing and unaffected man¬ ner in which the dear girl related Λν -hat had passed, convinced me I was secure of her kwe, and that nothing but ab¬ solute force would compel! her to be¬ come tlie wife ofa man, whom almoat every one regarded with ??? tempt. However, I could not help being un¬ easy at the influence his offers might haveover the inclinations ofher parents. I left my Victoria, after two hours con¬ versation, with a promise that I would be w ith her again early in the evening. In the mean time, I was leti to hope my father ????? see her parents, and that the offers he would make woukl be such as to induce them to prefer me to my rival. But lovers are ever too san¬ guine, and, from that hour, I have dated every misery of my life.. " When
"When I .ïeturned, I found my fa¬ ther absent, the servants told me he was to come back to dinner. I waited near three hours, impatient to see bin«, that I might impart my fears, and en¬ treat him to hasten his offers to M. Vaucluse. When I saw him come up the steps, I ran to meet him. He re¬ ceived me with a smile as usual ; but I observed a thoughtfulness on his brow. We sat down to dinner ; he Was silent ; but, when the servants were withdrawn, I ventured to ask him whe¬ tlier any thing liad happened to give him concern, while he had been absent. He said, " Yes, 1 haveseen Vaucluse, for you, and have had a long conver¬ sation with him, on the subject ofyour discourse this morning, and am -sorry he has entered into an engagement with that fellow Glacier, for the amia¬ ble Victoria, who, I fear, must be sa¬ crificed to avarice and ambition. His cfleis
öfters are mote splendid than mine, and, of course, you are rejected ; but he offers you thc choice of either of his other daughters, and especially recom¬ mends tiu second. 1 think her name is Draxa ; she has avowed a partiality for you, but 1 caunot, for my own parf> think her so amiable as the one you have chosen. However, as it İs, I wish you may be abie to conquer your re¬ gard for this lady, as I am certain it will be attended with unpleasant cir¬ cumstances, if you persevere, as the father is not, by any means, the man I took hira for." " My heart ?? wrung with anguish at what my father related. 1 inform¬ ed him ofali that had passed between me and Victoria. He more than ever admired her, and applauded me for re¬ jecting with contempt her sister. He desired me not to go there again ; but, wheu
when I urged the promise I had made, to be there that-evening, he consented ; but begged it might he thc last time, as he should be hurt if I ????? desired by her parents to omit my visits. I said, he miglrt depend upon it, that it should be so. "I will rely upon your honor, 1 ' said he, " and, for this once, you may go. i pity the poor girl, but I fear you will not be able to serve her," I passed the two hours, which inter¬ vened from that time to the hour I was to see Victoria, in the most raking misery. The farther I was about to be removed from her, the more anxi¬ ous I was to be near her. I devised a thousand schemes, to circumvent the designs of Glacier ; but they ap¬ pearetl, upon the least reflection, futile, and impossible to be realised. 1 tra¬ versed the room with hasty strides ; at last, the time came; I hastened to Vau¬ cluse's, and passed on to the room I was
tras to see Victoria in. She was not there ; Draxa received me. " Where is Victoria?" "She is engaged, Sir." "I have somethiug particular to say, cannot í see her ?" " You cannot, sir ; she is engaged with Mr. Glacier." "Glacier!" said I, "is he here ?" " Yes, he is, and by the appoint¬ ment of my father ; he has made a pro- pqsal for my sbter, which cannot be rejected, and I have not the kast doubt but, in a fewdays, you will see her his wife." u That wdl never be/' said I, " she cannot
cannot, she never will forget her faith to me. " "So then," said she, with a malici¬ ous smile on her face, "slie is, as I al¬ ways thought, engaged to you ; but you will find a girls engagements will have no weight, when opposed to that of a parent. Besides, I see no repug¬ nance on the part of Victoria to receive the addresses of M- Glacier. The al¬ liance will do her honor/' i i I will not pretend to dispute the honor that will accrue to thc family by such an union; but I eannot be brought to believe, that the soul of Victoria can think that the honor, of an alliance with a family is a sufficient to eradicate all ties entered into, before this man was known, or his alliance either." "Those, sir, are circumstances not to
tö be discussed by me ; 'tis sufficient for her to know the dutv she owes her ftrnily, in preference to idle engage¬ ments, entered into without the con¬ currence of those, who alone have a right to direct her choice, in a point so material to her future happiness." " I am sorry to have a lady talk thus, but as you say, it is not a point for you or me to discuss, I will drop the subject, and enter on some other topic, till I can have the pleasure of seeing your sister/* " That pleasure you will not have, sir, as I have orders from røy father to tell you, that the nature of my sisters engagements will in future, be such, as to put it wholly out of her power to receive you again ; and, as, your visits' were hitherto paid to her, your com¬ pany at t thb house will be dispensedwith ƒ ' I looked
" I looked at hcr with amazement " It is impossible," said 1 ; " your fa¬ ther could not give orders for such a message to be delivered to me. In what have I offended him !" "In nothing," retorted she, "butyour pre¬ tensions to my sister." "Pretensions to your sister!" said I ; "and could that possibly offend, when your father and your whole family, solicited the acquaintance ofmy father and myself?" " People's opinions, sir," said she, va.y with circumstances. My sister had not then those offers she now haf," "Your ideas, madam,!'said I, "are much too lows and too sordid ; I can only tell you, that 1 despise them ; and as î shall certainly disgrace mine by any farther conversation, I shall beg leave to bid you a good evening." So saying, I abrabtly quitted the room, Vol. IIL L and
and hurried home to my father. I threw myself into a chair, and gave vent to the feelings of my heart, in a shower of tears. My father saw mc ivith the deepest concern, and when I became a little composed, reasoned with me. He pointed out the folly I should be smiltv of, in giving wav to m ν dissappointment. lie said, he was cer tain that Glacier's wish to possess Vic¬ toria arose more from a desire to rival me, than any real attachment to her, and that the only way to overreach thc designs of such a man, was, without auy apparent uneasiness to give up the sub¬ ject of contest, when he would soon grow tired of the pursuit, and, instead of ful¬ filling his engagements, be the first to break them. "Í listened with eagerness to all he said ; but couid not bring myself to give up the thoughts of my Victoria, and
and I determined, at all events, to get a letter com r eyed to her, stating iphat had passed, and imploring her to let mc know her situation, and how I could serve her. I earnestly besought her to contrive, by some means or other, to let me see her, if it was but for a few moments. I waited several days before í received an answer ; in it, she inform* id me, tliat she \^as confined to her bed, occasioned by the agitation ofher mind ; that it Mould be impossible for m ? to see her ; but I might depend upon her faith, and that she woukl prefer death to being Glacier's ????. She intreated me to adopt my father's advice, put an air of indiílerence re¬ specting lier, and mix ia company, without betraying any concern on hcr account, and she would take care to inform me of any thing that occured. She concluded by saying, that she L â held
held the promise she made to me sacred, and nothing but death should break it, " I shewed the letter to my father ; İt pleased liim, and he desired me to abide by its contents, and wait the event ia silence. He admired the sweetness of her temper, and fondly hoped he should, one day, see her my wife. I resolved to be guided by him in every thing, and, instead of appear¬ ing concerned at the rumor of Victoria s approaching marriage, I visited every wherewith gaiety. We heard of nothing eke ; my father contented himself with saying, he honed theyoung lady would be happy, and I echoed the same. I continued for three weeks to re¬ ceive from my Victoria repeated 'pro'· mises of fidelity.. In the last which I fever received from her, she said, that her father had just been with ber, and said,
said that he had fixed tliat day fort¬ night for her marriage, as they had some reason to think M. Glacier would be obliged to go to Paris, and they ivere resolved it should take place be¬ fore he ivent ; but she bid me rest in firm confidence, that she would sooner die than be his wife, and she had every reason to hope she should find some means to escape from her father's house, before the time came, and that she would not fail to let me know what place she should fly to. If possible, she tiiought to try to get to Namur, where she had a relation, who had late¬ ly taken the veil, and she was in hopes if she could get there, the sanctity of tlie place would secure her from vio¬ lence ; and, if she could not be mine, she would become a nun ; but, let ivhat would happen, she would not fail to inform me.
L3
" After
"After receiving this letter, I was like one distracted. I hoped, yet dread¬ ed every thing ; a kind of terror and apprehension hung over me. My fa¬ ther had the same, and would often say, how happy he should be, if she was in a place of safety. I passed day after day, in the greatest auxiety, hour¬ ly expecting a letter, but none arrived. At last, about three days prior to that appointed by her father to seal her misery, my servant, who had been out to endeavour to see the girl that waited on Victoria, returned and said, the greatest consternation prevailed at the Vaucluse's ; for, tîie young lady had made her escape, and I was condemned for being an accomplice in it, and he would advise me to go and make known my innocence to the magistrate, or adopt any method to secure myself f ι om t he vengeance ofthe malicious fa¬ milv.
mily, Λνίιο said every thing they couhl to prejudice every one against me. " My father ?? -as out, ????? the poor ????? brought me this relation. I re¬ joiced moat heartily at her escape, aud began to hope every thing. My father came in soon after ; he appeared much concerned, and said, * ( I think you have much to dread from the malice of disappointed pride; ivould, therefore, have you go to Paris immediately ;* they can do nothing against me." I said, it was impossible they could think of implicating me ; and, if they did, ir. v innocence would soon be apparent. ¿4 Yoa are ignorant, my boy," said he, <t to what extent this fellow's malice may be carried. I, therefore, beg that yeu will not delay a moment." "I consented, though reluctantly, to his request, and was preparing to go, ????? an officer entered, and pre- L 4 sented
stnted a lettre de cachet—I was taken away, and conveyed to the Bastille ; " My father followed me to Paris, to prove my innocence. For two months, he tried, by every means in his power, to obtain my discharge; but all proved ineffectual, and I was con¬ fined near eight months, before I was permitted to see him. That blessed moment, at length came, and, in a fortnight after, I obtained my release. What ï had suffered had worn me to a skeleton, and, when I came out of the coach, at the hotel where my father lodged, I fainted, and continued for several days scarcely able to speak. At last I recovered, and, though I longed to ask a thousand questions, yet I dreaded to receive an answer. The anxiety I was under checked my icco vering strength, and I determined. at last, to beg of him to inform me of the
the worst " If Victoria is the wife of Glacier, kt me, I beseech you, know at once." 4i If to know that she is not will give you any satisfaction, I can assure you of it," said my father. "Say that she is iu safety, and she has not forgot me," said I, " is all I will ask." * c She did remain faithful to the-——" and here he paused. " To the what ? Oh ! my God, thea she is surely married?" " Not in this world, but· · ·." " But what ? surely they have not murdered her?" He was silent " tn pity, tell me/* cried I, " what L 5 can
can all this mean. Oh î rack not my heart, but let me know the worst. Have they destroved the sweetest ilowei that ever blowed?" "I fear they have; if you will be composed, and harken to me, I will tell you alíthat I have learnt, since you were taken from me." " I promised to listen with compo¬ sure, but my heart ill accorded with timt promise. As soon as I appeared to attend, he said : " Immediately on your being put into the carriage, 1 ordered my horses, and hastened after you, with all the speed I could make, and came up with the coach within a league of Paris. I saw you enter the Bastille ; I would have given worlds to have been permitted to enter with you. I came the next day, but was denied admittance, I went to the different offices,
offices, to gain an order, but could nob obtain it. Fo* two months I wearied every one with applications ; but they were alike unsuccessful. I could neitlier see you, nor learn the cause of your confinement. Tired out with repeated emit avou rs, I resolved to fmd out f ? what place Victoria had iled ; in this I was alike disappointed. I spent three months in journies, from my own home to Paris, and from Paris back again. Glacier was gone from- his father's, and had again plunged into every vice. The loss ofthe lady seem¬ ed not to hurt him ; but he still boast¬ ed of what he should do when she was found. He kept a mistress at Paris, that reign¬ ed ???? him with the most tvrannic sway. This ?????? I found means to be introduced to, being led to hope that she could give me some intelligence of f ( j Victoria.
Victoria, I toid her, in a few words, my business, and intreated her> if she knew were she was, that she would, out of pity to you, inform me, that I might he enabled to obtain your liberty. Sh e heard me out, and then said, ifl was sili¬ cei e, in what 1 told her and would pro¬ mise to get the lady, and immediately make her the wife of my son, she would find means tokt me knowwhere she m igh t be found. I faithfully'promised; she then told me, that if I wrote to a certain person at Namur, I should know in what convent the lady then was. I left her, a nd wrote directly. I waited nine days, and at length a letter can: ? informing me, that the lady mentioned in my let¬ ter had been in a convent of carmélite nuns, about three months hefore; but he believed she was then dead, as he had heard as much about ten weeks past.
I lest no time in hastening to the place; I reached it, presented myself at the grate, ???! desired admission to the superior. It was granted. I requested her to inform me if such a lady had been there. She said yes, there had been such a one, but ivas sorry to tell me, that she had fallen a victim to the ma¬ ii ce of some unknown person, near three months before. She had seemed to he happy in hersituation till at length some letters came, one adressed to her, and another to the then Prioress, who was ill, and one ofthe sisters officiated for her. That le 11 c r was from her father, and seemed to speak the deepest resent¬ ment against his daughter, saying, that he would never forgive her, but should insist upon hcr entering on her noviciate directly. The other was from one of her sisters, ivritten with the greatest acrimony, and informing her, that her favorite was safely lodged in the
the Bastille. She read the letter over several times, and thc other latly did the same. Miss Vaueluse, she said, being near sighted, had held it close to her face, but the other had not. They were both, in the course of an hour, seized with a giddiness in the head, and vio¬ lent spasms. Miss Vaucluse's was attri¬ buted to the uneasi nes* she felt, at her lover being confined. Her complaints every moment increased ; the other la¬ dy's were much less violent, though the symptoms were exactly the same» Medi¬ cal advice was procured ; as soon a* the doctor saw them, he pronounced it out (ú* his power to save Miss Vaucluse, as she was poisoned ; but thc other lady he could, and did preserve. Miss Vaucluse expired two hours after, in the arms of a lady, a near relation of hers, who had been a mm some years. An express was instan tly sent off toVcrsailes to her father with a particular account ofher death, and
and requesting him to make a proper enquiry; but, instead of taking any steps for that purpose, he only sent a draft for her expences, and said, that her death he regarded as a punishment froni heaven, for her disobedience to his com mauds. " Thus then," said the lady, " every wish ofthe superior and Miss Vaucluse** relation was frustrated, and the perpetrators were left to enjoy the success of their diabolical scheme. fc * I heard hcr out," said my father, " with tolerable composure. I then a^ked her, ifl might be permitted to take with me an attestation of the facts, as it might be thc means of getting you liberated. She consented, and, as soon as I had obtained it, I set off for Paris. I hastened to the mistress of Glacier, and imparted to her the whole I had learnt. She appeared much shocked at my relation, and said, she could
would take care that you should get your liberty, and, as soon as you were out, she would advise me to set on foot an enquiry, and she would assist me with all her power. She bid me draw up a full statement ofthe case, and let her have it, and she would effect your release. I complied ; the next day, I had an order to be admitted to see you, and twelve days after, another for your liberation. You are now, my dear son, to exert yourself, and become the aveng¬ er of the innocent. Learn to command your feelings, and assist me in bring¬ ing the guilty to punishment " "I heard my father out in a kind of stupid horror, out of which he could not rouse me. For several days, I con¬ tinued lost to every thing ; at length, an order carne, for him to attend the office of justice, and confirm personally what he had been told at Namur. This had
had the desired effect ; I was roused in a moment from my lethargy, and hastened to the office with him ; though í was obliged to be supported, while I was there, as I had become so weak, I coukl with difficulty stand for a moment. I was interrogated, rela¬ tive to the last conversation I had with Victoria, aud the »promise she made me of corresponding vvith me. I gave up the few letters I received from her ; my father's attestation was taken ; and he was bound to prove, as the accuser of M. Vaucluse, and his second daughter Draxa, that they were the murderers of Victoria. They were secured, and proceedings commenced against them ; but, a short time before their trial, tlie whole was suspended by the sudden death of Draxa ; previous to which, .she had made a confession, that sJic wai alone guilty of the dC9t\l
death of he** sister, and her father to¬ tally innocent. Her deposition ran thus. " She had been stimulated to it by a passion she entertained for me. It was through her that matters with Gla¬ cier had been carried to the extreme they had. As "long as she had hopes that her sister would be his wife, she formed no other plan : but when Vic¬ toria made her escape, and Glacier took no steps to recover her, she was deter¬ mined to discover the place of her re¬ treat Fearing I should anticipate her, and make Victoria my ??1??, she per¬ suaded Glacier and her father to pro¬ cure a lettre de cachet for me : it was executed as I have related. She then set a person to bring all letters directed for either my father or myself, toner; a udby tliat means, discovered the place her sister had tied to, by a letter she seat
sent to me. The contents were, that she had effected her escape, and was at Namur, under the protection of a re¬ lation of her father's, at a convent of carmélite nuns. She said, it was her intention to continue there, till her father's pleasure should be known, to whom she had written, stating her rea¬ sons for the step she had taken, and her full determination to take thc veil, rather than be Glacier s wife ; and, as the little fortune her grandmother had left her, independent ofher parents, was sufficient for her admission, she would never again return to Versailles, as İt was impossible for hcr to be happy with any other man, than him she had pledged her faitli to. i( Draxa said, that this letter she took to her father, who had just re- • ceived the one mentioned in it. When he had read it, he seemed deposed to : W '"ite
write to her in a style, ivhich, though it severely condemned her, yet she thought inclined to wave the pretensi¬ ons of Glacier, and favor me. The very thought of it drove her to mad¬ ness, and she so far worked upon her father, as to induce him to write the letter he sent. As she could not help fearing that I might gain my liberty and obtain her sister, she had planned the scheme to poison her, having read of a drug, that could be sent by pow¬ der in a letter, whose effects were of such a poignant nature, that the per¬ son who read it never lived above six hours after. She procured it, and, having taken proper precautions, her¬ self, rubbed the letter with it, and fold¬ ed some up in it. She sent it away, without once considering whether it might be fatal to any other person or not. She knew the necessity her sister had of holding, either writing or read-
ing, close to her face, and, from that circumstance, never doubted its effects, as no one eould possibly guess at the cause of her death. She hoped 1 should, when I was convinced of her loss, be perhaps brought to pay my addresses to herself, especially as it was tbe wish of her father. FuH of those presump¬ tive hopes, she sent it, ami heard the death of hei sister with pleasure ; but, conscious of what she bad done, pre¬ vailed upon her father not to trouble himself to enquire in what manner she came bv her end. It was sufficient! she told him, that her diso' edience had been so soon followed by such a punish¬ ment from heaven. Her mother, who always said and did every thing as her father chose, grieved for an hour or two, and then thought of it no« more. Her death had been kept secret in the family, and not even Glacier had been made acquainted with itu "She
" She said, since she had been in custody, the enormity of h er crime, and the danger her father was İn, had rou¬ sed her to ásense ofher guilt; and as she could not bear the thoughts of appearing before a public tribunal, she had, while ?????^ that, placed some more of thc poison on the paper before her ; and, while she ?????, she ?\?? beginning to be sensible of its effects. She earnestly implored mine and her father's forgiveness, for the misery she Iiad occasioned us ; and, as she had uo fear of a future state, never having* be¬ lieved in any, she should die without any violent apprehensions of where bhe was to go, or be hereafter. She desiied we would give ourselves no kind of concern about her, as it w as wholly in¬ different to lier m hat became of her soul. This confession was found about three hourt.
hours previous to her death, during the time she was writing the last three or four lines. It appeared, from the form ofthe letters that she must have been very much convulsed, as many ofthe words were unconnected. She had, it seemed, desired to have pen and ink brought and to be left alone for a few hours. Her request was complied with ; but, being a considerable time longer alone thau she at first desired to be, the man that at tended on herwent to the cell, and found her extended on thc iloor, in the agonies of death. On the ta¬ ble lay theconfessionaud a small phial of pale brown powder. Itappeared|asthough bhe had fallen from her seat, as the pen was still between her fingers. She was taken up and assistance got; but no¬ thing could save her. A few minutes before she expired, her speech returned, and with great earnestness, she heard that those near her would pray for her. » They
They did ; but, in the midst of thc prayers, she started up and exclaimed, " I know it, I know it, vou need not shew it me. There is, there is a Hell, oh ! save me, save me ; pray for me ; keep me, in mercy keep me from it. But oh! it opens to receive me; it spreads its gaping jaws ; ah ! they are ad vancing; must I enter? must I be pluuged head¬ long? oh ! save me, saveme ! A stong con¬ vulsion seized her, and amidst the most dreadful agonies, she breathed her ia' The doctor took the phial, examined it and declared the ???\?!?? contain in it had occasioned her death, as it wns an Italian prison ofthe most stibtüc na¬ ture. Her father ???? soon informed of the catastrophe, and that, as he was declared innocent by his daughters confession, he would soon be at liberty to*leave the prison ; but the shock he had before, recived, added tó this hor¬ rible
rible event, had such an effect npon him that he lived but three hours after his unhappy child". My father, w ho was at Versailles at thc time, w as sent for at Paris immediately. He found, on his arrival, that I had been informed ofali lie endeavoured to sneak comfort to me. I listened to 4 liim; but his reasoning had no eilect. I wa>s lost to every thing for many months. At length, my reason return¬ ed, when my heart was tor n vh an¬ guish to see the emaciated form of my more than father, who had watched over me with the most unremitting attention. I gazed at him wiih the most poignant <orrow, and blamed n^self severely for not attending tohis advice. I mused ail the dormant faculties ofmy soul, and became determined to abide by every thing that lie should say. When lie found my rcasou returned, he rc- Yol. III. M joiced
joiced over me with all the tendernes·» of the best of parents. He sought to amuse me hy every meam in hi* pow¬ er, and succeeded so vred, that, in a short time, I wab perfect ? restoi ed. " I then, iu my turn, endeavoured to amuse him aud icpay, h\ my attention j, thc many blessing* I derived from him. lie never mentioned a word that might leeal my fonner sorrow^, and time ena¬ bled me to forget them. We lived at Versailles, in the moat retired manner, for nine years, wheu my best beloved and everlamcntcd benefactor died. He left me 1?? sole heir, but unable to remain in a place that continually re¬ minded me ofthe loss ofali that I held dear in life, 1 hastened to quit it. I went to Florence ami became a mem¬ ber of the mendicant society of St Jcmme. I had not beeu long there be¬ fore 1 was solicited to become a brother of
of the friends at Bononi, where I have continued ever since. My fortune I have dedicated to the relief of the mi¬ serable, and the little services I render to ull that call upon me for assistance makes my life glide away, if not iu luppine ■>, yet in peace and tranquillity; and the comfort I feel, in going once ? ???? to \i&it the spot that contains the remaiiv» of my dear Victoria, makes life pass on imperceptibly. When 1 haw bhed a tear over her tomb, 1 bas¬ tea to that of my father, and this >eaily tribute paid, I return again to my ceil, and spend each revolting year in the same round of employments, as marked the preceeding one ; and, if I can save on-: person from distress, I think mvbdf happy. tv f bus my dear fiieiub, have I re¬ lated tiie few events ofmy unhappy life. 1 should have esteemed it fortunate to M '2 ????
have seen the lady you mention. She was the relation in whose ami? my dear Victoria breathed out her angelic ítou! ; but, ?? that happiness was deni¬ ed me, I submit obedient to my God, and the will of thc Most High be done. ín the regions of everlasting bliss, I bhall behold her, and then pour out my soul in gratitude before her, for closing the eyes of my suffering angel, fbr which good action her spirit now rejoices in the beatitude of heaven." At saying this, the countenance of the good man beamed with celestial transport, and seemed as anticipating tlie joys of heaven. The whole of the company, whose eyes were suffused with tears, thanked him for the recital he hail given, and the prince instantly thought of something to divert his mind. He began to relate many little incidents, relative to his adventures at ????
Paris, and Vienna, and said he regarded ita* fortunate thnt he had not, a twelve month before, visited England. Had he done so, he was certain he should not have enjoved that peace he then did, as, by what he hnd heard ofthat famous city, it was notdeficieut in any kind of debauchery that was practiced in any of the capitals upou the conti¬ nent, lie was happy when he reflect¬ ed that he shoultl now have the com¬ pany of so good a man as father Theo¬ dore, who would not fail to warn him of errors which he would unavoidably fall into, fitzallan remarked, that, in thc company of lather Gregory and father Theodore, a man might pass thiough iife, without tlic least reproach. Two days after this, they left Treves, und, at the request of father Theodore, made a short stay at Namur, but none at either Brussels, Ghent, or Bruges. M 3 At
At Osteiid they embarked for Dovei, where, as soon as they landed, Michael, \\1? had stood upon deck, waiting with üuxious eye their near approach to where he called England's blessed shores, diopt upon his knees, and ex¬ claimed : t< Now the holy saints and martyrs be praised, we have got rid of ihe d i· vils that have so long pursued us, and now, please your honors, 1 care not a potatoe for any ot them/' The odd manner and expressions of the poor filîow, ratted a loud laugh against him by the sailois ; but he valuer! it not; he wt^ once moie in England and he was happy. I'hyallai; was as pleased as hb sei vant and, in a transpon of pleasuie, emhraetd h»o Genevieve and vehomtd her to a countrv, thatwas to bless him with hci hand. ihe>
v They rested one night at Dover, and thc next morning sef oif for London, where, as soon as they arrived, they sent Michael to Mrs. Owen's, whom he found better than was expected. Her joy was unbounded, when she heard her brother was returned iu safety. Michael beged to see thc dear hortes of ehildren ; they came to him; he took them alternately in his arms, blessed, prayed, and stammered over them. His joy was so great, that he could not properly articulate a word. "Thedear sweet nonies, "and " heaven preserve them from going again to thc burning mountain, and the palace of hell," was all that could he made out. At length he began to recover himself, and hatted away to his master, while Mis. Owen was left admiring the honest simplicity of the poor fellow, who had evinced his love for lier family iu sucli an evident manner. M 4 Ja
In a short time, Fitzallan was with her ; though he had been! led to ex¬ pect his sister looked different from what she was when he last saw her, yet he did not think to find her so very much altered iu person. Still her health vas better, than coukl be expected. She was in such agitation at seeing him, that he found it difficult to ???? pose her. He asked after her mother ; she was confined to her room ; she had been very ill, but was then getting better. He took the little ones upon his knee ; they were delighted to sec their unck, and he was equally pleased with them. They begged of him to go and see their grand mamma, who, they said, was apprised of his coming, and .insisted upon getting up to receive him. They led him to her; this poor afilieted lady embraced him with tears of
of joyï as she looked upon him as the only hope she had on earth. Her tears relieved, in some measure, her oppressed and care-worn heart; and, when a little recovered, she begged Fitzallan to re¬ late to her what he knew, relative to her son and daughter. He told her as much of their story as he thought re¬ quisite, but forbore to relate particulars. He was, he thought, justified in withholding every circumstance, that would, in any manner, add to her dis¬ tress. He wished her to regard the losis of her son as a blessing, rather than a misfortune, and that of her daughter likewise, as both of them had ever been a source of the keenest distress. Their total disregard of hers and their father's commands had ever been the leading character of their lives. He spoke all the consolation in hîs power, and staid with her a consider- M 5 abie
able time, and, before he left her, had the satisfaction of seeing her perfectly resigned. He exacted from her a pro¬ mise that she would appear again in her family, and enjoy, in the company øf her grand-children, tîmse pleasures which their innocent years could not fail to afford her, and the additional society of a few valued friends, that would constantly be about her, now he was returned. He told her and bis sister of his in¬ tention to settle hnmediatelv, and that he should introduce the lady he had made choice of, as soon at it might be agreeable to them to see ber ; they ap¬ pointed the next day. He then said, he should immediately order his stew¬ ard to investigate Mrs. Owen's property, arrange the whole, and pay his debts, when they wouid be at liberty to rc side in Wales, or in town ; as it might best
best suit them ; and, as soon aš that was completed, he should enter upon his own establishment. Mrs. Owen said sîie would readily give up hcr claims, and those of her children, upon thc estates of her husband, till all de¬ mands were satisfied. This being settled, he left them in much better spirits than when he came. He that day gave ordets for the gieatest dispatch to be made İn his sis¬ ter's affaii s ; in the mean time arranged every thing for himself ; but, not be ing determined whether he should stay in England or Ireland, he hired ontý' a ι eady furnished house. M. Vaucluse did the same; and, as the prince meant to remain under a travelling name, ho accepted thc offer of Fitzallan tó be with him. Father Theodore did tlic like, and accompanied the prince.
??
In
ln a month's time, every thing re¬ specting Mrs. Owen's affairs was near¬ ly settled, and a day was fixed for the union of FitzaUan and the young Maribro 1 , with the tw ? o amiable sisters ; when the prince, who had been obser¬ ved for many days to be extremely thoughtful, desired with some earnest¬ ness to speak with Fkzallan alone. He said he was about to make a proposal, which he feared would not be approved of by himself and an amiable object. Fitzalku was surprised, but begged him lo make it, as lie was certain it would meet his full approbation, let it bi whatever it might, having that confidence in him that he would make none but what he must approve. The prince then said, that, thus encouraged, he would venture to solicit his good effinces for him with his sister Mrs. Owen. Fitzallan started." What does^ your highness say ?" said he, and his face
face ?1?$ covered with scarlet as he spoke. The piince'b was no less so. "I say" returned he, ' S I must beg your good oßices for me with Mrs. Owen. From the first moment I saw hcr, I became her slave. She is every thing that I coidd λυίαΙι for, or desire, in woman ; dvidy if I might hope that she could be bt ought to think favourably of my pretentions, I shouid deem myself the happiest man on earth. You must be my advocate ; you must plead for me. I know not what it is, but I feel a dif¬ fidence in myself, which I cannot con¬ quer. Say that you will use your en¬ deavours to prevail upon her to accept my baud and heart. You will make mc the most blest of men. My fortune is large, and free from every entangle¬ ment. I wished to be settled ; you het me tlie example, and I shall not, cannot
cannot be happy, nnless I follow it ; therefore be my friend. My whole life shall be dedicated to make her blest, and you will bind me to you by the most sacred ties." Fitzallan heard him ovit f without the kast interruption ; the surprise of such an offer was such, as wholly to put it out of his power to answer; but, at length, he recovered himself and was not backward in thanking the Prince fbr the honor he did them; but, at the same time, begged leave to rei n ark a circumstance, that must have great weight agamat such an union, namely the difference of religion. His sister being a protestant would place an effectual bar against it, as he was cer¬ tain she would not embrace the catholic. The Prince sard, if no other obstacle should oppose their union, that could fee easily ©Viated ; he should leave her in
in the full exercise of her religious tenets; and, as he was no bigot, he had not the smallest doubt of being happy on that head. His uncle, he said, was a man ofthe most liberal sentiments, and not inclined to condemn any one for differingfrom him in modes of faith; antl whatever related to Mrs. Owen s ehildren, it should be left intirely to her own discretion. Fit ??1 la n said h is offers wore noble ; but still there wns one thing more he should beg leave to observe, which was, in what manner liis sister might be rece¬ ived by his highness* relations, as he could never bring himself to consent to her marriage with any man, however great, whose family might hi inclined to regard her as a person unworthy of their alliance. " Every apprehension of that sort" replied the Prince " I can do away, I have no relation but the car¬ dinal,
dînai, and tlie character of his emi¬ nence is too weil known, for me to animadvert upon it. He admires beau¬ ty and virtue in the most humble situ¬ ation; then how much more must he regard it in your sister, whose family ï esteem not inferior to my own, and w hose virtues far, very far, surpass those of any lady I have had the honor of being acquainted ??И?, in Italy or Tuscany. Fitzallan seeing he was determined to set aside all obstacles, promised to sound his sister upon the subject, and to suspend his marriage for a few days, till it should be known what Mr. Owen's sentiments were. The prince hastened, as soon as he had left Fitzallan, to fa¬ ther Theodore, to whom he imparted what had passed, and said it was his full intention to wed Mrs. Owen, if be could prevail upon her to accept hb offers.
öfters. This information gave the fa¬ ther the most heart-felt pleasure He was as great an admirer of Mrs. Owen as the prince. Hcr mild and pensive manners had attracted his warmest re¬ gaid ; he felt for her past misfortunes, and uas greatly rejoiced to find that the man he so greatly valued, and whom he so much wished to ste happily mar¬ ried to a lady dtseiving of lus virtues, had nìade choice of one in every respect what he desired for him, and he had nor thc least doubt but the cardinal wouki fally approve it. He applauded liim mueh for lhe offers he had made and most fervently prayed they might be accepted. The approbation of father Theodore was what the prince earnestly elesired, and, meeting it, he was happy. Yet lie spent many hours in the most anxi¬ ous suspense, and, like all* iovei s, fear,-
fat of shadows that might intervene be¬ tween him and happiness. At length, Fitzallan returned, pleasure sparkling in his eyes ; lie had seen his rister, and succeeded beyond hk wishes. Mrs, Owen, whose whole soul towered above the narrow prejudices of her sex, had candidly confessed her approbation of the/prince. She acknowledged with¬ out reserve, that shehad regarded him, from the first moment of being intro¬ duced, as the only object she had ever seen, that she could entertain a tender esteem for ; but, as his rank in life was so mueh superior to hers, and a native of another country, she had strove to conquer her rising admiration. The prince was neariy mad with joy ; he embraced Fitzallan, called him his sa¬ viour, his dearest friend, his more than brother. Fitzallan seeing him so wild with the intelligence, began to blame himself for having communicated it so abruptly ;
abruptly ; but father Theodore enter¬ ing the room, it save a turn to his rap¬ tures. Full of his happiness, he inform¬ ed him of it, and earnestly besought him to partake in it. " That I do," said he, "most truly, and shall fervently pray for blessings on your union ; for, a hetter choice you could have no where made, and may the Almighty God, who delights in the union of souh, make you as bless¬ ed as your virtues deserve 1" Thc prince was that day presented to Mrs Owen, and he desired that their friends the Vaucluses and father Gre¬ gory might be made acquainted with it. He begged Fitzallan would make his apologies to them, for urging a re¬ quest to have the marriages delayed for a short time. The next day, father Gregory, who partook with sincerity the
the happiness of his friends, waited on Mrs. Owen, to inform her of the ladies' acquiescence with the desire of FitH- allatb He congratulated her on the prospect of future bliss, and assured her the whole family rejoiced with the ut¬ most sincerity. The young men, he said, would think nothing of their joy being delayed, ifit would in any shape, contribute to her felicity ; it would, therefore, depend upon her to say when his son and Fitzallan should become bridegrooms, as it was the wish of the prince to be united at the same time. She very frankly thanked the good man, for the kind interest he took in her concerns, and said nothing .should be wanting, on her part, to contribute to the general felicity ; but she had a wish to see her youngest brother in England first ; and, as her mother was not quite recovered, she should per¬ haps have a desire to continue single longer
longer than they might be willing to wait. She, therefore, begged that the ?veddings might not be postponed on her account ; but the father said he ^as certain they would, as their happi¬ ness Λνοη^ be incomplete without her partaking in it. She was about to reply, ????? a ser¬ vant entered vrith a letter ; it ???$ from her brother Harry, to inform her of their arrival in England, and that, instead of going into the country, his guardian proposed spending some months in town, the house in the coun¬ try being under repairs, which had been ordered to be done during their absence, and their unexpected return being so precipitate, it could not be in a situation to receive them. Miss Fran¬ ces, he said, was as mad and as mag- gotty as ever, but he had turned, he mid) topsy turvy all her fine schemes of
of collecting metíais and enjoyed the fun most prodigiously. He had told her, and made her believe, a thousand fantastic stories, to get her to return to England, and had, at last, prevailed upon her to come back, with a family theyhad been fort u u ate enough to form an ancquaintance with at Florence, and whom he should take an opportunity to present in the course of a few days* Father Gregory was highly pleased with the circumstance, and thought, as one of the objections was done away, the other would soon follow. Fitzall¬ an and tke^princelentcretl, as she finish¬ ed thc letter. Tlie contents gave tbem the greatest pleasure, Theprince, who was all iife and gaity, humorously rcr lated tø> Mrs. Omen hit adventures, and the delectable maimer İn whieh be g#t tuI of hk amour, fbr which he was w? Am
der obligations to Harry. She was much entertained with his account She had, she said, when a chikl, al¬ ways been led to fear Miss Frances; theiefore, never had any predilection for her; and, as there was not much intimacy between Mrs. Akerworth'a family and the elder Mrs* Owen's, she had not seen mueh ofher; but, from what she had heard from several peo* pic she was led to believe her the same tjrant as ever This arose, she was informed, from a disappointment in love, at a very early period of life, having been deserted by a gentleman, to whom she was engaged on the very day appointed for her marriage ; and, as no other offer was made her for ma¬ ny years, notwithstanding her large fortune, she had affected to despise the gentlemen, and attached herself to put- suits directly opposite to those which gener-
generally engaged the attention of the ladies. She had always resided with Mrs. Akerworth, who was her aunt, antl she beiug ofa very indolent turn, Miss Frances had obtained the sole management of the house of her aunt and guardian. For some )ears past she had absolutely guided and directed them in every thing, and they had. brought themselves to acquiesce in her everv whim and fancv. For the la^t three years, she had been engaged in collecting natural curiosities ; but ha¬ ving been persuaded that the study of medals was a far more elevated pursuit she had relinquished butterflies and stuffed birds, för every rusty coin she could pick tip, and actually got toge¬ ther^ itt a short time, enough to load a horse, all which she really believes to be antique, though there could not ???- sibíy be so many in all Europe. Yet, possessed with this idea, she had per¬ suaded
suaded herself that she only wanted a certain quantity, that could be obtain¬ ed upon the continent, to make her's one of tlie first collections in the ivorld, and to accomplish this arduous under¬ taking, she had prevailed upon her aunt to accompany Henry upon his travels, and the result of her expedi¬ tion they knew. Father Gregory said, he had observed that ladies, ???? had not been fortu¬ nate enough to marry, had always at¬ tached themselves to one particular bobbyhbrstcal pursuit. "In general,'* said he, " cards and scandal engross all their thoughts ; but this lady's has the credit of being nouvelle. Henry, he said, sppeared to be a great torment to her. He always ;ivas, said Mrs. Owen, and it wassurprising ivith what degree of patience she would bear wijth hiß misehievous pranks.. They should Vol. HL N expect
expect to see her soon, and hear all her complaintsagainsthim, whichsh^dmst say would not be a few. Her mother, said she, could never bear her ; but she would not now despair of reeoti€ÍtSng all parties. Fitzallan and father Gregory went to pay their respects to Mrs. Owgn senior, whom they informed of what had pass¬ ed respecting the prince and her daugh¬ ter-in-law. Trie'old lady could scarce¬ ly believe it real t but, when persuaded of it, she burst into tears of joy, and said if any thing could make her for¬ get her griefs, it was the pleasure they had imparted ; but she hoped rhey would not take her dear little grand- Children from her. Fitzallan assured her they would not. They were ia the room when their unck and the fifther entered ; they paid particular attention to the discourse, and, when their unck asked
a-îked tbem whether they should like tit« prince for a papa? They said, yes iiadeed, tiiey should ; for, he would be good and kind to their mamma and grand-mamma. Mrs. Owen asked whether the prince jneant to stay in England after his marriage. Father Gregory answered, he did not know for any certainty. "Well/' said she* f* teli them bpth, that i f any thing could restore ?? 4 ?????, it wouki be to see theni united·." This pleased both die gentlemen and they soon after took their leave, and hasten¬ ed to Mrs. Owen and the prince^ to whom they related the discourse witli lier mother. Tbe good father, who knew the wishes of his son and Fitzai- ¡un,sajd } " Now madam* botb^ourob- fftactes, of this* morning are removed, aud I, laust bg that you will permil me to plead the cause of lo\ e, and I
will wait upon you to morrow morning, to make a proposal/' " I shall be at home," said she smiling, "to receive you." The gentlemen soon after departed, to visit Harry and Miss Frances. She re c vc t them with a great deal ofstatc, yet seemeâ flattered at their early atten¬ tion. To the prince she was reserved, but said she fancied thc air of England agreed with his highness vastly, as he looked much better, she thought, than when he left Turin. " Love, madam," said Fitzallan, "can do wonders. Thc prince is shortly to become a benedict. " "A benedict .'"exclaimed Miss Frances, "and in England too ? Pray, who is the mighty fair one that has wrought such miracles in so short a time ?" "One that you well know, or, at kast, did a few years ago ; but who it İs must at present be asecret," said Fitzallan; "but wc
we shall request 3 our company as brides maid. You were so polite at Turin, that ï am led to hope you will not deny us the favor here/' "A pretty fancy truly/' said she, '*to ask me to a cere¬ mony, that may, like the other, involve mein a thousand disasters," The prince was about to apologize, but she stopt him short, saying his apologies would have no weight with lier. She had been taught better than to listen to the language of a person who had treated her so rudely. His highness bowed, hut did not attempt; to speak. Mr. and Mrs. Akerworth we re now enquired after. Might they be permitted to pay their respects to them ? No. she said ; they were, ?? usual, much fatigued, and should see no one for two or three days. They observing Miss Frances was disposed to be cross, took their leave, desiring N 3 Harry
Harry would come to Fitzallan's. t * Ay, ay, " said she, " 1 will havehimsent,,and I positively hope he will stay among you ; for, he is not fit company for any one else. He has told me a thou¬ sand falsities ; I shall believe in future nothing that he says. 1 am certain 1 have Übt, through his nonsense, the purchase of the second brass of manila scantina, another of domitktn, and one of pÍHí'/itiius niger, and ?? veral other*, that were unique ; some very iare gems ofthe fiist måstets, and ί bust dug up at Pompeii, that has been bt ought to England, and absobitdy adored by evcîy one. ?И those hopes I hate * sustuhivd through his folly ; and now to complete my vexation, }Ou come to desire .my company to a ceremony, that is to involve me iu now perplexities Positivelv, I thiuk all the men and bovs are gone mad, aiul want me to join them in their fooleries; but, goy>u:
ways, I wiil not be made a fool of again, that yon may be assured.*' Tlie gen¬ tlemen bowed and took their leave. Iti a few minutes after their return home, Hairy entered. *'Welcome to England !" said he. 4i I find you have seen the dear, the delectable Miss Trances, whom you have most mon- -stiously offended, by telling her jour highness was going to be married. Iu t!:e name ofthe kind Cod, how tould vou do s** : surei) itv rs cmel, when you mibt be com inced the fair nymph had a \ iolent fjticLmt f<>r \ou herself. ?? ?/?/- 1 Duu ! \.\?? '? charming tiling it ? '? be ÎMiulsome ! here have I, poor de\ ti. füvu running from England í ? Fiíuuv. »Vom France to Tuscany, and fr« -ni "ÌMrCany to England, wiilmut having one dear sweet gentle kind cap¬ tivating old maid failing in love with me. Zounds ! your highness must in- N 4 ' strm· t
struct me in the art of pleasing, or I shall hang myself for mere vexation. " The prince laughed at his lively folly, aud asked him how he could expect him to be constant to Miss Frances, when she had made choice of another possessing more eharms and more con- .**????. "Tuie," said Hany; "I had ibrgot that rival of yours; she has absolutely out stept me in conti i wince, îv making her helieve that he should fellow her to England, and, in t he face <*f the ehu veh, bid you defiance." " Surely,"said Fitzallan, " .shecould not be such a fool." u Upon my honor, " Síid he, " it is a fact, and by this pre¬ cious maneuvre, I got her to return to England, saying, that a very illustrious nobleman luid sent over a vast collec¬ tion of every thing she wanted, to be disposed of there, he having, as they sav, out run the constable, and wisely thought
thought he could sell his rarieties to far greater advantage, in a country where true judges were scarce, than in that w here they rise in plenty. Full of this, and a desire to be revenged, in the face of the world, of her inconstant swain, I accomplished my design ; the old folks acquisced without asking any question. So here I am much at all your services. " The Macdonalds were asked after. They were well, he said, and had been much diverted with Miss Frances's oddities. Fitzallan then infomedhim of the arrangements they were making, ??. of the happy fate which awaited his sister, and the hope he had thatthe three weddings would be together. Harry looked grave for some minutes, then started up and exclaimed ; "Now, upon my conscience, this is too much. Yououghr, upon my soul, to let me into N 5 the
the secret, that I may not be kft, like a hanged dog, in the lurch. How un¬ merciful this is i Three weddings before and then I was left out; and now, here are three more, and I cannot make a fourth. The devil take mc, if I doift try for it. Vll go home and kick up such a row with that fair spinster, as shall make the old Jockey consent to my being put in the way of getting an heir to the family, and shoving out the lap dogs. I'll set about it straight. Ill not be left single, while all the rest are double, and so good morning to you/* and away he ran, leaving them in amazement, not doubting but he would inventsomething or otherto accomplish his design. Fiteallan said it was his wish to have all parties dinewith him, the second day from that In the mean time, he would desire the good offices of father Gregory
Gregory and father Theodore, to per¬ suade his sister to appoint an early day fbr the marnage, as it would depend up¬ on her entirely. The fathers promised not to be remiss. Tickets of invitation for their friends were ordered by Fitz¬ allan to be sent immediately ; and, as they were to be confined to their oM'ii soeiety, he did not doubt of the invi¬ tations being accepted, though on so short a notice. The prjnce and he then went to give directions, relative to mar¬ riage writings, jointures, and so forth, whicii were to be expedited as fást ?? possible. Fitzallan proposed the wed¬ dings should be private, as he thought thc ladies would like it best. The next morning, the steward came with the final arrangements of Owen's affairs, which he made his sister acquain¬ ted with, and she founçjj by the sale of N 6 one
one estate, and putting the others to frust for five years, the whok would be cleared of every incumbrance, and a very handsome fortune would then come to her children, and Mrs. Owen senior, by this arrangement, would be made nappy. He took an opportunity of pleading for the prince, and told her it was his highness' intention, if she approved of it, to live half the year in England, and the other halfat Bononi. She bid her brother assure him, that, whatever he should propose, she was ready to acquiesce in, having too good an opmion of his honor to suppose he would require any thing that she ought not to assent to. Her brother told her he should see every thing settled with the prince, relative to her future esta¬ blishment with him, in such a manner as she should have no occasion to com¬ plain of* as- it was the intention ofhis highness not only to settle the whole of
of her own fortune upon her and the children, but to add a considerable yearly sum to it. Slie was very much affected at this mark of his generosity and nobleness of soul, and desired her brother to make her acknowledgements for İt, promising to be of the party the next dav. «r Before he ivent, the ladies Vaucluse ivere announced. They had come to pay a morning visit to Mrs. ?????^ and to have some chat about dresses, kc. Madame Vaucluse had determin- cp to be tbe prince s advocate, and,. accordingly, by indirect means, led the conversation to that point, and so wise¬ ly conducted her discourse, that she, at last, prevailed upon Mrs. Owen to consent to name that day three weeks, for the happy one ; but she desired İt might be wholly private. This was approved of by all parties, and Fitvallan set
set off with the news to the prince» This arrangement made a reasonable being of liim, or rather, an unreason¬ able one ; for, he hecame as lively and joyous as the mibchi^vous Henry. The next day, about an hour before dinner, when Fitzallan and the prince were dressing, Harry entered, in a vio¬ lent hurry, his brother's dressing room, and exclaimed; "As I hope to bo saved, Ned, she is coming, and, ifyou don't shelter me, I sitali have iny ears pulled, that's certain," A violent lap¬ ping wm liezrd at the door, anil, hi a minute, entered Miss Frances, with all the appearance of rage and resentment. Michael dropped the curling tongs, and stuck the comb into his master's head, with such force, as to make him jump up with pain. u What the devil are you about, Michael ?
Michael?" he cried. "Dont ask," said Miss Frances, who that moment entered, " what that great Irish hotten» tot is about, but ask what yonr good- for-nothing brother is doing» A little insolent, worthless, insignificant puppy ! "Arrah! by Jasus Î" said Michael, tí and upon my soul, but you are a lit¬ tle too flippant ofyour tongue., forali you are a lady, and so you are ; and, was I his honor, I wouhl turn you topsy turvy down stairs* and solwou'd." "»You turn me down stairs? you Irish bog-trotter !" said the lady. " How ean you, Mr. Fiizailan, keep such a vulgar beast about you ? Every gentle* man has a proper degree of pride be¬ longing to him, and, instead of having such a scoundrel as this, keeps a well behaved foreigner." Michael was going to reply, when fitzallan who had been so much stir- prised
prised as to prevent his speaking, now advanced, and desired her lobe seated, and tell him what she had to complain of. ** 111 not set down, no not I. I came to demand of that young mon* key, how he could dare to enter my presence, after he hail imposed upon me in so gross a manner/' " What is the meaning ofali this ?" said Fitzallan;' turning to Harry, "In what have you offended this lady r" " In nothing itt all, as I hope to· be saved ; not inten¬ tionally I declare upon my honor." "Tis false/' said she, " very false; he has imposed upon me, and this boar ofa fellow of yours aided and abetted him." " Now, by holy St. Patrick !" said Mi¬ chael, "that is a bouncer. I ne vet- aided and abetted his honor in any thing, but fetching home them great stone faces that 1 carried to this lady, an please your honor."
"Silence,
" Silence, booby," cried the enraged Miss Frances, "and let me be heard. " Yesterday, he came to me, in the most violent hurry imaginable, and said he had seen two busts, of the most exquisite workmanship, which hadbeen dug up at Herculanum. They were the property of a private gentleman, whom he had the good fortune to be intimate with, when at Paris ; and, as thc gentleman was wholly indifferent about such things, if I would accept ofthem from him, he would undertake to purchase them ; for, he was certain Civy wire originals. I was quite pleas¬ ed at the opportunity of possessing sueh rare models of antiquity, and told 'um i.e would oblige me much, if'he wouid procure them. He set off im- mediately to do it, and returned in about two hours, saying, he had luck¬ ily succeeded, and I should have them sent home in the evening. He refused to,
to let me pay for them ; but, if I would do him a good office* he should think himself amply repaid, and would make it hL· study to collect whatever, his frieud and himself could hear of, that was antique. I asked him what it was he wished me to do for him. He said it was that i woukl use mv interest with vl his guardian, to consent to his being united to Miss Macdoiudd, at the same rime that you were to Mis*» Vaucluse. Though the request appeared preposte¬ rous yet 1 consented ro it, and actual¬ ly did succeed vdth Mr. Akerworth and my aun; ; and, in consequence of that, they scut to the Macdoualds, to mv flum this morning, previous to our coming here. " They came, about two hours since*. and, wouL. you believe it, while Mr. Macdouald was engaged with the old people, to thc door conies a vulgar fel· low
iow of a broker, desiring to speak with thc gentleman who bought two heads yesterday. I was passing from the parlor to the stairs at the time. Think¬ ing it was the person to whom the busts belonged, I ordered the servant to de¬ sire him to walk in, aod I would speak to him. He did, and, to my utter amazement, told me he was the man that sold Harry thc busts, and that he kept a broker's shop in Brewers Street, and was come to infumi him that he could procure a Venus and a Minerva for him of the same maker's. "I heard the man out; but, thinking he was mad, or liad mistaken thehouse, í v/as going up stairs, without saying auy thing more, when in bounced that miscreant; but, seeing the broker, he was struck all of a-heari, *What do. you w ant?' said he turning to the man. 4 was come, sir, said he, to inform- yotit
ymir honor that I can procure you a Venus and a Minerva, and something else of the tame maker's as the beads you brought yesterday I ' What heads do you mean l said he to the man, ?????^ to him at the same time. 'Ahí 111 tell you/ said I, * Λν -hat heads he means ; pray, look here, friend ; are those the same ? pointing to the busts that stood on the side-board in the par¬ lor. * Yes, madam,'answered he, t his honor ??? ? ? me three guineas for them, and, indeed, they are very cheap ; for, I have been told they are copies of Roubiliac.' Thc moment thc man said this, that graceless rascal bur-* t out a laughing, and ran prrvipitately out of the heuse. Seeing I had been so grossly imposed on, I hastened after him, and I am come here to insist upon it that you call this insolent imposing impertinent to an account, for thus daring to insult me, and that good- for-
tbr-nothitig booby of your's was the monkey that brought them home from the broker s. Now, sir, have I not cause to be offended ?" " Indeed, madam, you have,'* ^said Fitzallan, who could hardly suppress a laugh, to see the whimsical appearance of his brother, and the furious looks of Miss Frances, who seemed very much inclined to advance to Harry, and lug his ears for him; but Fitzallan made •use of all the rhetoric he ivas master of to reconcile them. Michael, it was evident, did not much relish the lan¬ guage of pacification his master made use of; he rather wished to have the dear lady turned over to him, as he wanted to resent the word hottentot, and, all the while Fitzallan lyas en¬ deavouring to make peace, he ivas fgrum bling, and every now and then whispering Harry to let him speak, and he'd soon send her off. At last, bis
his master happened to hit upon some^ thing, that admitted of a possibility that the busts might be subjects of *ad* miration, as many a valuable curiosity had been picked up at a broker's, and he would undertake to have tlieir value ^ascertained by fathers Theodore and Gregory, who were well acquainted with the arts, and the prince, whose refined taste every one allowed, would not fail to decide justly upon it. He, therefore, begged she would not think of returning, but permit him to send for the busts there, and let the gentle¬ men estimate their merits ; and, if they were found worthy of her notice, he hoped she would pardon his brother, who, he was sure, did not mean to affront her. This reasoning had the desired effect : a servant was sent to fetch the subjects of dispute, and she consented to stay dinner,
dinner, as she said she was wholly care¬ less about hcr dress, since the young jackanapes had so discomposed her. She left Fitzallan to finish dressing, while she amused herself in the library- When sîie was gone, be asked Harry how he could think of such a scheme* "Why, now/' said he, "would tiot you have done the same, if mch an idea had entered your head, if by tbat and no other means, you could obtain the hand of your adored Genevieve ?'* " I don't know," returned Edward, '"but I might" "Well then, don't blame tne ; for, who the devil should have thotight of the blur dering fellow's coming to me, and that she should be so devilishly in thc tf.iy, at the time, to see him ? I hugged myself ih security, and, for that reason, got Michael to bring them home, not chusing to trust one ofyour own
own fellows, lest it should come out, and how the hooby found out where I lived, I don't know." "Ah, an, please your honor," sakl Michael, " that was my fault; I found them so confounded heavy, that the man offered to help me home with them, and so he did, and I persuaded him to , let your honor know when he had any more ; for, I thought it wculd do well to divert the old lady ; for, your honor knows she don't like me, atid, by the holy St Patrick, there is no love lost" When the busts ????? brought, they were taken into the library ; the gen¬ tlemen were desired to announce their opinion, and they gave it unanimously, that they were worthy of her notice. This put her quite in spirits, and, when the company assembled, she joined thc ladies with a great degree of con se¬ quence,
quence, assuring them she was pleased to hear of their approaching happiness ; but her own, she said, \vas unavoidably postponed for some little time, or else bhe certainly woukl have made one of the happy pairs, at the same time. The evening was spent in festivity that pleased every one ;. each thought his own choice the best The next day Mr. Macdonald informed Fitstaliau that he had gwen his consent to his daughter's marriage ???? his brother Henry, and as soon as the marriage writings were ready, he should have no objection to sec them united, at the same time that he received the hand of Mis* Vaucluse, The only reason he had to uige against it, was his not being of age ; but, as thc intervening period was so short, he had been brought to wave that objection, and trusted they would be happy ; though Harry was Vol. III. ? rathei
rather a little in the rhodomantade, he flattered himself that would soon subside. Soon after he was goue, Harry en¬ tered, full of his good fortune, and positively declared he should tove busts as long as he lived ; and, if his first child was a boy, he would have him educated to be the first statuary in thc World, if instructions could make him one. "Why, my busts bought at a broker's," said he, " have done me as much good as ever pigmalion's did him. JIÉh Mon Dieu I whenever I see the dear delectable marble, I shall not fail to exclaim with the enamoured artist : " Yes, dear enchanting glory qf my art, Life of my life, and partner of my heart, Vthose merit could the wond'ring gods incline, To let thee live and let me call ker mme ; To thee alone 1 heb my soul bestow, Ana »U i»y future ?? from thee shaM ftow. "See,
" See, Ned, what ?yonders marble can do, when placed in proper hands. Ah ! my dear Mary, thou too must be grateful, whenever they fine eyes shall glance across them." He ???? running on in this manner, when thc fathers Theodore and Grego¬ ry entered, and a serious conversation took place between them, on the duties they were about to enter upon, Father Gregory earnestly besought them to let Owen's example be ever before them, as no other state was so miserable as the married one, entered into without proper consideration, and reciprocal love. Henry, who did not want virtue or good sense, was pleased with what the good man had said, and promised to be every thing his friends could desire ; and, as every couple would be united agreeably
agreeably to their wishes, and none were influenced by rank or fortune, they concluded none ever bid fairer for felicity. Father Gregory said, he had seen Mrs. Owen the elder. Λνίιο was so pleas¬ ed with the priuce, that she declared she should spend the whole of her time ??? h them ; and, as her daughter ???$ in America,, with her husband, and she had no other ties but Mrs. Owen and her children, she should aiwavs accompany them to Italy, as long as her age and infirmities woukl admit. 9 At the expiration ofthe three weeks the four couple went, nothing loth, to the altar of Hymen. Miss Frances was vainly Jed to expect in a few months the arrival of her dear swain, ????? she said she also should join the happy pairs*. The
The weddings were conducted with the greatest privacy; but few, very few, bid so fair for lasting happiness.
F I N I S.
4j|S>
Vol. IIL Ρ
