Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The romance of Smyrna: or, The Prediction fulfilled!!
THE ROMANCE OF SMYRNA; Kc av.
CHAP. U ■ . , ' ■ from his tongue Th' unfinish'd period falls : while borne away Oo swelling thought, his wafted spirit flies To the vaia bosom of his distant Ыт. İHE Church of St. Roch stood open,,the last bell had tolled for vespers, and many pious matrons were ascending the steps, when the miserable suffering Alphonsus entered with them the sacred edifice, He paused for a moment, as he quitted the portico, threw his vacant eve * around, and, asjŕ wholly unconscious of , the presence of the Most High* passed, covered, with hurried footsteps, up the great aisle, nor stopped till his progress Vol. L В ivas
was impeded by the rails of the altar. Ibe sudden shock he met with, roused him-from his reveries he cast aa eager look upwards, and his eye iastaa^y en¬ countered the image of a dying Saviour. —His whole frame became agitated ; he gazed earnestly ,at the aient memento, then snatched the covering from his head, and, dashing it with precipitation on the pavement, receded a few steps, with his eyes stiil fixed upon the scene before him ;* theà dropped upon his knees, and, in an attitude of the most fervent devotion, ex¬ claimed: ** Oh 1 Thou, eternal, merciful, and just God î who thus bled upon the cross.for the sins of the whole world, deign to pity aad forgive the unconscious offence of this thy servant ; impute it not to Want oT respect for Thy holy dwelling, but to the cruel anguish that rends his tortured heart ; speak comfort, Oh Thou, God of Mercies î to his care-worn bosom, that he may with composure address Thee* to implore Thy Almighty
τ Almighty protection for bis wife, his in¬ fant Carlos, his suflfering sister, aad, though last, not least ia his remembrance^ his wretched and deeply-afflicted mother. Amid the thorns with which she is ea- vironed, let her possess patience and re¬ signation to Thy divine will, until I can return to sooth her sorrows, and lull her aged bosom to eternal rest. Let Thy benignant spirit instruct me where to find the lost Alzira, and my infant babe ; thea shall my weeping parent rejoice, and tears and sorrow be no more." He was about to proceed, when a voice/ tbat seemed to issue from the statue of St Roch, at a small distance from him, said : i( Rhe, thou complaining mortal, and quit this sacred spot ; the wife, for whom thou supplicatesi, is unworthy of thy pe¬ tition. Remember the admonition of a suffering Jesus : ' Seek first the Kingdom of God and its Righteousness, and all things shall be added unto you.' В 2 Alphonsus
s Alphonsus heard the words with the most profound amazement; he knew riot what construction to put upon them. ,The voice hád ceased—he listened to hear more—but ail was silent, save the organ, which, at that moment, burst upon the ear. Three times he - crossed himself—three times he bent, with the greatest humility, his head before the altar, and offered up a'silent ejaculation; then rose reluctantly from 'the spot, and with hesitating 'steps, and trembling limbs, obeyed* what he thought, the hea¬ venly mandate. The eyes of all were turned upon him; his singular prayer, the sudden manner in which it ceased, and his agitated countenance, induced all who saw hkn to conclude that he was an unhappy being, disordered in his reason. ч They involuntarily arose from their knees, as he passed them, and devoutly crossing themselves, begged the holy Virgin's pro¬ tection. He cast a wistful look at each, and hove a bitter sigh. 4ζ Those pious people,"
9 people," said he to himself, "can remata without molestation or rebuke, whilst J, poor wretched being, am an outcast in the world, without friends, without money, and without a place to lay my miserable head, and am denied even the privilege of prayer in the hotuje of my God. What can have been mv offences, what my crimes, that the vengeance of the Most High should thus pursue me ? When will my miseries end, and when, oh God ! shall my tortured spirit be at rest ! Oh ! my Alzira, Oh ! my Child, art thou;too, guilty? hast thou, too, incurred - the curses of an offended God î My heart cannot charge me with crimes, nor can the baneful tongue of cruel malevo¬ lence wound the fame of an aged parent, or taint with slander а л irtuous sister. Yet ihey, too, must suffer—they, too, must be imolved in misery—and yet, thc Ak mighty is just ! My Alzira, what can the cruel monitor mean? c she is unworthy of my petition ! * In what has her guilt- B 3 less
10 less soul offended ? Oh í teach me, Hea¬ ven, to bear this additional affliction with fortitude and resignation, until thy indul¬ gent goodness shall call me hence to that kingdom, where all secrets will be known, and the good and evil meet their due re¬ ward."* He quitted the house of God, though he knew not where to bend his wretched steps; be lingered for some time around its aacred precincts, and, like Our first parents, driven from Paradise, The world was all before him, where to choose, His place of rest, and Providence his guide. At length, a thought struck him that he would go to Belem. The court was there, and he recollected that, among those who attended upon her Majesty, there was a young gentleman distanti}" related N to his wife. ťí I will go thither/' said he ; 44 perhaps his power and influence may liave weight enough to cause some en- quiries"to be made respecting my family." No sooner had the idea suggested itself, than
π than he turned to take the road that led to the palace. He had gone about two hundred paces from the church, when a lay-brother ofthe Order of St. John came up to him, and presented him with a let¬ ter and a purse full of gold. 44 Thy name," said the brother, " is Alphonsus, of Coimbra, is it not?" '* It is," said he. " Then take this," replied the brother, " stay not a moment ; begone, and may the Holy Mother of God be thy Guide 1" He then hastily left him, and was out of sight Л η an instant. Lost in wonder and amazement, he viewed by turns the letter and the purse ; the former was directed in a hand he knew not ; the latter was well filled, and tied up in a leather bag, on which were wiitten some characters he was wholly unacquainted with. " Oh 1 God," said he, looking at the letter, " grant that I may in this be informed why I am commanded to leave this spot." Anxious toread the con¬ tents, yet pressed by hunger, he hastened В 4 to
to the English hotel* It was nearly dark, his eyes, with unavailing sorrow, were so dimmed, tbat he could scarcely read the superscription. Add to this, he had not broke his fast for thirty-seven hours, nor had his wretched limbs known the com¬ forts of a bed for ¿wo~and*twenty nights. As spon as he entered,he bade the attend¬ ants bring him sooie coffee,—"Surely,*' said he, " this gold must come from hea¬ ven 5for, have I not found that Man is deaf До the sufferings of bis fellow-creatures? and to have them fly you, you need only say that you stand in need of their assist¬ ance; I will then use some of it without scruple." He eagerly tore open the letter, and, though the coffee was set before him, he regarded it not : his whole soul was occupied with the contents—they were as follows : 44 Miserable Alphonsus, < " Thy prayer has been heard, 44 and, when heaven shall deem it meet, tby
13 u thy petition will be granted. At pre- " sent, rest satisfied with knowing, that ** Alzira Uves, but not for thee—the child 44 exijls, but it is not thine. Seek to learn 44 no more ; but as thou valuest thy life, 44 and dreadest the fury of the Church, I 44 charge thee, quit Lisbon, and its en- 44 vnons. Seek in another kingdom that " peace which is denied thee in this; 44 and, when, in a J oreign land, thou s hatt " succour a dying penitent, then tvill the 44 crisis oj thy fate be at hand. Learn to " forget 1кг, who has forgot herself, and " remember the prophecy that hangs " over the house of Aranjuez. Be pa- ** tient and resigned, and in the haven of 44 peace thy virtues will meet their full 4t reward. But stay not here ; thy life " will be the sacrifice, if thou art found " in Lisbon in twelve hours from the " receipt of "this. Seek in the harbour a 44 vesiel that is ready to sail, no matter 64 whither bound ; get on board,.and, if " the sum 1 send thee is insufficient for В 5 « thy
14 ** thy necessities, let Father Jerome of fi St. John's, be mformed of it, and they * shalt be supplied; but take^not the " least notice of having received this let- 44 ter, or what accompanies it ; if thou u dost, thou diest. Thy message must ·** run thus : * Let Alphonsus of Coimbra 4 be visited by the Holy Father who at- * tended, him last.' This only, if sent 44 from the most distant regions, will be " attended to, and thy wants will be ** abundantly relieved ; but, if thou triest " to find from whence this comes, thou " drawest not the bream of life another " hour. Thy motions are watched ; there- 44 fore, on thy life, I charge thee, fly. The 44 bag which encloses» the gold, I enjoin " thee to preserve ; in a distant country\ 44 the characters will be explained. Thy " mother and sister live, and will be ta- " ken care of. Farewell;" * He read it over and over again^*^-he pondered oa it till all reflectkm was lost, and
15 and his distracted brain began to intimate the loss of reasoa. The words **Tfay Alzira lives, but not for thee—the child л exists, but is not thiae," were particularly marked by the writer, evidently to impress them on his mind, as were also the re¬ peated injunctions made to him to quit Lisbon. " What is life," said he 44 with¬ out those dear objects, that can alone make it desirable r I will not, Gannot fly." Then, the prophecy on the house of Aran¬ juez recurred to him, and he started. 4i If it is my fate to suffer for the sins of my fathers," exclaimed he, "then m ust I learn patience and resignation indeed. To provoke my fate, argues not the christian ; and to avoid it, is impossible. He that , sends me this, is evidently my friend. Yes, thou unknown monitor, I will, what¬ ever may be the event, follow thy advice. Where can I be more wretched, than í am here ? and, surely, whoever thou art, if thou didst not wish me to live, thou wouldst not have supplied aie so pienti-" В 6 fully
ïê fully with the means. Yes, Ì will obey Wy dictates, and trust to heaven for the #eët. ï know the prophecy points at me, as weft as my brother—-be it so, I will wait its accomplishment, and be silent. ОЫ Ahn%hty Ruler of the Universe, endue ray soul with fortitude ; let it not sink under the various trials, to which Thou art pleased to expose it. I know the direful prophecy ; yet, I married, and 4 vainly thought, that, by obtaining child¬ ren,,! could avert the decrees of Fate. —^Poor delude^ mortal, how are thy schemes for perpetuating the honors of thy family levelled with the dust ! Hea¬ ven's commands are equitable, and the sins ofthe father must be visited upon his children/' He then eagerly caught up a cup of coffee, and drank : it seemed to refresh him ; he cast his eye again over the letter : the words, f< Alzira lives, " but not for thee—the child exists, but it *< is not thrue," struck him forcibly. " Be it so," said he, " happier perhaps will be his
f 17 jırş fate, than if the wretched Alphonsus were still his father." He opened his purse, threw a pistole on the table,, and with pre¬ cipitation left the hotel. He hastened to the Grand Quay; it was dark, and near full tide/ the wind blew fair for quitting port ; three ships were under way ; he hailed one of them that was nearest to him ; it proved to be an English Merchant-man, bound to Smyrna. ** Would they take a passenger?" he asked. " Yes/' was the answer. " Then let me," said he, " immediately come on board." 44 Who are you?" said the Cap.-« tain. 4( I will satisfy you in your cabin," returned Alphonsus ; u your terms shall be mine." The Englishman, struck by the earnest manner in which Alphon¬ sus spoke, bid him step lightly on th& gunnel of the next vessel, and leap on board. Alphonsus obeyed, and In a*few minutes was in the cabin. The Captaia spoke good Portuguese ; he addressed Alphonsus with politeness, and asked if be
m Ье wae to regard hmi as a merchant or a traveller ì ·* же the latter/' rejoined he ; «* Ishave no particular business; the world and I arc at variance - r I want only to find a spøt, wtìere I might indulge my sorrows, and where my care-worn limbs might sink to rest/* The Captain re¬ garded him with fixed attention. if You appear greatly agitated/' said he, " and J think stand much in need of Tepose : but have you no firiend nor servant to accompa¬ ny you?" ** I have no friend," returned he, in a hurried tone : ** all is fled, gone, lost, * for ever-—but, generoos Englishman, be you a friend to me, and he that rewards ihe virtuous actions of man, will not fail to record it." A benignant pity beamed io the countenance of the seaman. *' I feel for your situation," said he, 44 and the enly fear I have ts, that you will not be so comfortable as I could wish. My ves¬ sel is not large, but if you can put up with •ksmcøiivemences,! will make it my study to accommodate you to the best of my abilities ;
abilities ; aad, though the' voyage is not short, I hope tomake it agreeable-^-Have you any baggage ?" " Nothing ia the world," replied Alphonsus, u but this small bag: get me what is necessary, charge what you please, and I will pay you ; but let me repose myself." " You shail, directly," said the Captain, who, though he regarded him in the light of a maniac, yet would not withhold his pro¬ tection from him. He opened a door in the cabin, and pointed to a small bed;^ 44 There, Sir/* said he, ** you may lay yourself down. The vessel is under way, and, till she has cleared the bay, I shall not be able to be with you; but, first, I will desire you to drink a glass of cordial; it will serve to compose your spirits, and, when you have had some sleep, I will visit you again." Saying this,, he lifted up a locker, from which he took a bottle of rich cordial; he poured out a large glass, and gave it to Alphonsus. The benevolent and hearty manner in which the
rø fhe Captain presented it, won the heart of Alphonsus ; he took and drank it ; then lard himself down upon the bed, and was left to his repose. When the Captain came upon deck, he was asked by his mate, who was at the helm, whether the gentleman con¬ tinued on board, or returned With the pilot. 44 He stays on board," said he ;" "for, though I have some reason to think his head is at present disturbed, vet I could not find it in my heart to deny his request of remaining. He has tieither servant nor baggage, but I am firmly per¬ suaded he was never before vyithout both. He seems to suffer greatly under some dreadful disaster. Bût he is in distress, and that is enough." " True, very true," returned the # mate, <e and you will meet your reward, one time or another, in the .ţiarbour of Heaven.", They had a fine freeze, and stood out to sea, with all their capvass spread. The cordial had such an eilect on Alphonsus, that, when the Capo¬ tam, tii: '
21 tain, two hours after, came down to look upon his passenger, he found him in a sound sleep, and a gentle perspiration,— He retreated softly from the bed, and re¬ tired to his own r In the morning, he had been upon deck near an hour, when the cabin-boy, who was preparing breakfast, was observed by Alphonsus ; hê beckoned him ; " Where am I ?" said he, 4< and who has afforded me this comfortable bed ?" 44 You are, Sir," said the boy, who imagined he asked where he was " on board the Juliet* of London, bound for Smyrna, J.. Brindley, Captain." This was spoken in English ; Alphonsus understood it not ; he told the boy so, who did not know enough of Portuguese to propçrly ex¬ plain ; therefore went to his master. The Captain came, Alphonsus arose, and with all the dignity of superior greatness, though tempered with sweetness,repeated his question; The Captain jnformed him % mì what had passed, and added,, they were thea
then many leagues at sea, and nearly off Cape St. Vincent, as there had been a тегу fine wind. Alphonsus sighed deeply. ** The kindness you have shown, Sir, to an unhappy stranger, whose mental facul¬ ties are in some measure deranged, will ever call forth my warmest gratitude : I had a confused idea of what had passed ; but was not collected enough to ascertain it. I have gold, but I have not necessa- ;ries for the voyage ; accommodate me with what you deem proper, and let me claim you as my only friend." Saying this, he put fifty pistoles into the Cap¬ tain's hand. ** Ifyou should want more," said he, 44 let me know, and, when I am a little recovered, I will inform you who I am, and the cause that brought me here. Of this be assured, you Will not find me unworthy of your protection." " I did not think I should/' said the Captain, 44 from the moment 1 saw you ; but it was sufficient for me, that you stood in need of assistance ; and, all the little fer¬ vices
23 vices I can render you, you may always command. I have some little knowledge in diseases, and you seem to want medi¬ cal aid : if you will repose a confidence m me, so far as to take what I would pre¬ scribe, I think, through the blessing of Heaven, I shall be able to restore you to health and peace. I have seen sorrows myself, aad feel for yours." Alphonsus looked at him with earnestness, pressed his hand, aad burst iato a flood of tears. ** Pardon this weakness," said he;. **your unmerited kindness overpowers me." **I would v advise you/* said the Captain, " to undress, and get into bed ; you have a latent fever, which, if not checked, will, perhaps, in a few months, prove fatal." " I will do any thing you advise me/* faid he, " aad take whatever yoa think proper." The Captain rang his bell, and the lad entered : " Prepare this gentleman's bed/* faid he, ** aad let the medicine-chest be takea out—but have the goodness, Sir," 4 added
24 added he, 4< to come into the cabin, and take some breakfast." He did so; tbe |oy hastened to perform the orders he had received, «nd, before the breakfast was ended, all was ready. The Captain, who had narrowly observed the different changes which the countenance of Al¬ phonsus presented* saw that he was la¬ boring under-every symptom of an alarming fever. He hastened him to bed, and then administered what he thought would counteract its malignance ; but, in spitç of those benevolent precautions, the suffering Alphonsus < was attacked with violence. For one-and-twenty days, his^ life was despaired of: at length, Na- % ture prevailed over the disorder, and the humane Captain had the inexpressible sa¬ tisfaction of seeing his patient out of 'danger. They had excellent weather, and he proposed to touch at Cândia, in order to prpçure a few articles, whicli Alphonsus stood in great need of When they came * i % * « ia
25 în sight of the bay, they made the signal, to enquiry whether they might enter, Aa answer was returned : no plague raged there ; they, therefore, immediately made for the port, and brought Alphonsus upon deck. The Captain thought, that if he could get him on shore, though only for four-and-twenty hours, it might be of service. This was done, and, whilst the Captain went to procure the necessaries he wanted, Alphonsus amused himself by viewing the beautiful gardens that be¬ longed to the house to which he had been removed. He seemed in a few hours to be much mended, and, when his. friend returned, he felt.inclined to consult him, Whether he had not best continue there. He mentioned it. " Good God ! Sir/* said the Captain, * f can you have a wish to remain in a Turkish cemetery ? for such you must consider Camlia. Views like these are but ill promoters of health." 44 True," said Alphonsus, casting a look at some ruins at a small distance ; " par¬ don
26 doa me, шу friead; I should but ill de¬ serve tbe kindaess you have shown me, were I to act in opposition to your advice» I bad forgot that you were unacquaiated with my story ; but, lest death should cut short the thread of life before I inform you of it, I will, as soon as we reach Smyrna, impart it to you ¿ I think I shall then be well enough." The Captain bowed. " I trust you will," said he ; '* but, unless it will,in any shape, contri¬ bute to your peace, I beg I may remain in ignorance. I have obtained every thing you were in want of, and, when we ar¬ rive at Smyrna, I have a friend there, who will accommodate you in a comfort¬ able, and even elegant manner, if you wish it." Alphonsus seemed to enjoy satisfaction, ahd, tho' his mind was still tortured, yet he wished to appear serene and composed. They left Cândia in two days, and arrived in safety at Smyrna. Alphonsus was taken to the house of a Portuguese Merchant, who resided there ;
27 there ; but he was desirous of seeing the city, and observing the customs and manners of the inhabitants, before he chose to make himself known. He did not, therefore, avow his name, but was received as Captain Brindley's friend« As soon as his strength would permit of his walking about, he mixed with men of all nations, with wdiich this city abounds, Turks, Jews, Greeks, Armenians, and Christians. His friend, when business would admit of it, accompanied him in his different rambles round the city, to view the orange and olive groves, vineyards, and romantic gardens. Sometimes he would stop on the margin of the Melus, and view, with an eye of tranfport, the banks where the immortal Homer first faw the light. On his return, one evening, from along walk, he turned to the Captain, and said, Now he was fo far recovered, he would venture to relate to him the circumstance that led to their first acquaintance. The Captain acquiesced, and he began. CHAP.
* » CHAP. П. ÏVy thee, see thou Ì behold! look! h\ how say you? ■ ------------- the times haye been, That, when the brains ware out, the man would die, And there m end: but now* they rise again. Macbkth, '* I AM the second son of the Duke de Aranjuez, and was bora at Lis¬ bon. 1· lost my father when I was about two years old ; he left two sens, and two daughters. He had been a favorite at court, and in the last reign was the avowed rival of Don John de Parvero, in the af¬ fections of Donna Louisa, second daugh¬ ter of the Prince of Brazil. My father's pretensions were authorized by the Prince, but the Princess,his wife, strongly opposed it. She had long wished to see her daugh¬ ter united to Don John, who was of her mother's family; a man by no means un¬ deserving the hand he sought. He pos¬ sessed
20 sessed virtues that might have done ho¬ nor to the brightest sages of antiquity ; but, though gifted in the strongest manner with every shining excellence, his ex¬ treme diffidence prevented them from being generally known, and, though a complete master of every science, he was regarded by rriany as little better than aa idiot ; unless it was by those, who^e judg- ment could discern between the timid and deep^read scholar, and fhe frothy chatter¬ ing of a courtier, whose learning extended not beyond superficial acquirements. 44 The Princess was of manners pleasing, gentle, affable, and kind. She admired in silence the timid virtues of Don John, who, like tbe generality of the Portuguese, was fonder of domestic happiness, than all tlie glare and p om p of courts. My father was the reverse; he had been ia France, and, being by nature-gay and vo¬ latile, had returned from thence corrupted and depraved. The Prince of Brazil, of a melancholic and pensive turn of mind, Vol. I. С was
30 was happy to have any one near him, that could divert his thoughts. My father saw this ; he had learnţdissimulation in France, and was determined to turn it to account. He soon became thc prime favorite, and had, hy the natural pliability of his mind and manners, so far ingratiated himself with the Prince, that he undertook no¬ thing of moment, without first consulting Aranjuez. He had long designed the Princess Louisa for Don John ; but, when my father ventured to make proposals to him, he immediately agreed, and bade the Princess receive him as her future husband. She regretted the command ; but, as she had been taught the strictest obedience to the will of her parents, she submitted with¬ out a murmur. The Princess, her mother, openly opposed it—The King and Queen neither assented nor dissented. 44 My father saw, with concern, the cold manner in whicn both the Princesses re¬ ceived him; but hé dissembled, and af¬ fecting not to notice it, resolved to rid himself
51 himself of his rival. For that purpose, he took the first opportunity of intimating, That it would be much better for the go¬ vernment of Brazil, if Don John was sent out as viceroy. The Prince paused, and said, He would propose it in council the next day, which he did, but it met not the approbation of their Majesties, and the idea was given up. 44 Don John tenderly loved the Princess, and had many reasons to think she was as much attached to him. The thought of being separated from her had given him the most heartfelt uneasiness, and to see her the partner of another, wrung his soul with agony. iC I cannot," he would often say to a friend ofthe Princess, " stay, and see the object of my earliest hopes snatched from me. I will embrace a monastic life, and take myself from her sight for ever." The Princess was ap¬ prized of his intentions; she hastened to her mother, and informed her of what she had heard. The Princess had just been С 2 told
$2 tdd the same; she left her daughter, went to court, and imparted it to their Majesties, earnestly intreating them to make use. of their influence, to unite Donna Louisa with Don John. The King heard her with complacence, and promised to interpose his authority. He had never much liked my father—he did not approve his principles, and therefore, the more readily acquiesced. Thus as¬ sured, the Princess returned to her daugh¬ ter, and bade her hope every thing. The King was true to his promise, and, that evening, when he saw the Prince, he laid his commands upon him to unite his daughter with Don John, as soon as pos*. sible. The Prince heard the command in silence ; be would have expostulated, but the King forbade him ; he bowed to his father, and retired. 44 On his return fo his palace, he sent for my father, and communicated to him the orders of his Majesty, which he knew it was impossible to disobey. My father pretended
33 pretended to regret the loss of Donna Louisa in the most moving terms ; the Prince consoled him, and said, that, in his warmer friendship, he should find a solace, that in some measure might miti¬ gate his loss. My father appeared to be reconciled, but it was only that he might plan in secret the death of Don John. " There was among his domestics, a wretch, who, he had reason to know, was capable of every base and cruel action. Ad soon as he returned to his own house, he ordered this villain to attend him. He sounded him, and found him ready to do whatever he desired. It was then agreed between them, that the night previous to the marriage, they were to contrive to enter the apartment of Don John, and dispatch him, as he lay afleep. They knew he would rest that night at the pa¬ lace of the Prince, in a room that opened on a terrace in ihe garden, from which the centinek were too distant, to no¬ tice any thing that might happen. He C S proposed
Si proposed to my father, that, as soon as it was dark, he should conduct him to the window of the room ; they were both to enter, so disguised as not to be known ; and, while my father held a pillow on his face, the other was to stab him to the heart. They were then to leave the apart¬ ment by the same way they entered ; De Aranjuez was to return to his own house, the other to go to that of a priest named by my father, and there wait his coming. But the whole of this plan was frustrated by Don John's being detained at Belem by the King, and returning from thence with their Majesties, only a short time pre¬ vious to the ceremony, which took place that day—A happier and more virtuous couple were never united. ** My father was still determined to pur¬ sue hfs victim. He therefore entered upon the study of poisons. He had Iieard much of the Italian ones, but none was expeditious enough. At length, when he had found one, he determined to try, its effects
So effects on the servant whom he ^had dreaded, ever since he put himseif in his power, though the villain had repeatedly offered to complete his engagement. He took an opportunity, one day, to give, it him, at the very moment he was bargain¬ ing for another attempt on Don John. The miserable wretch drank it, and, in a few minutes, was dead at the feet of his mas¬ ter, who expressed great concern for the loss of such a faithful domestic. This was a grand step gained, and he hugged himselt in his security : but an over-ruling Providence baffled all his designs. " Wearied out by disappointments, he had nearly sunk under the weight of de¬ spondency, when he saw Mary of Co¬ imbra, a young, and beautiful woman, adorned with every virtue. He imme¬ diately made overtures to her parents; they were accepted, and, in a few weeks, she was the Dutchess de Aranjuez. The Prince of Brazil congratulated him on his happiness, and seemed to partake all his С 4 joy.
36 joy. Eight years glided on, and nothing material happened, save that my mother bore him four children, 44 One morning, about two months ar¬ ter thc birth of her fourth child, she was surprized with my father's hastily entering the room, and, in a tone and manner that spoke the greatest agitation, said : < * Mary, I have seen an infernal spirit.' At that moment, the ghastly figure of a man, with a countenance that spoke a thousand horrors, glided round the room, and sìopped between them, holding up a scroll, on which was written · 44 * The house of Aranjuez shall become extinct, when a maiden, fair as t he faires t morning in spring, and chaste as the new* fallen snozv, shall be murdered by the hands of the another that adores her. 1 < 4 Three.times did he wave this over the heads of my trembling parents, and in an instant vanished. " My mother, overcome by terror and amazement, fainted —My father, with frantic
37 frantic wildness, summoned the servants. He questioned them respecting the hide* ous phantom that had entered, but none coujd give the least account;-it had not been seen by any of them. They thought a fit of madness had seized on both my parents, and flew like lightning to the apartments of the domestic Father. He hastened to the room; my father, on see¬ ing him enter, bade him take care of my mother, and, when she was composed, to come to him. The good old man caused her to be bled, and removed to a bed, then went to my father, whom he found in great agony of mind. It was some time before he could get him to speak. At length, moved by the earnest intreaties of the venerable man, he said: * Can you, Father, forgive me for thus alarming you ? I know not whether you admit that the damned are permitted again to visit this earth, and toappear as they did when living?* * f know not what to say to you/ replied the Father, « upon С 5 such
1 such a supposition. We ought not to decide too rashly: but what induces you to make such an observation ?' 4 Such a sight/ said my father, * as would appal even a soul like your's ; see what it has left behind/ holding out the scroll, which he found upon the table of his room, when he returned from my mother. The Father read it again aad again. ' This/ said he, at last, * is strange, very strange : but I would not have you be alarmed ; it has been done by some diabolical agency, and is meant by the father of lies to dis¬ turb your peace; but mind it not; the Holy Mother of God will destroy those spells ofthe wicked one. £ The house of Aranjuez shall become extinct, when a parent is the murderer of her child !' The very circumstance is next to impossible ; and, if it should take place, what effect can such an event have on the house of Aranjuez? there is not one of its branches but what is in the p?>Jc of the Holy Mother church, aad can bid defiance to such ma¬ chinations.
39 chînations. Then be composed, my sori; look upon it as an illusion of the brain, and let not such idle fancies be propagated amongyour-dornestics: are they acquainted with the contents of this?' * They are not/ returned my father, * though I saw it waved over mine and my wife's head, yet I found it not, until I returned here ; and, though there had been two of my wife's women in the room when I entered, yet they saw it not, nor the horrid figure that brought it. I was in my own apart¬ ment, when 1 saw the door open, and the ghastly monster enter. Frightened at its appearance, I hastily quitted the room, and flew to my w T ife, to tell her what I had seen ; but, before I could explain, it entered that room also, glided round, and then advanced to where I was supporting the Dutchess, and held up the scroll till it supposed we had read it, then waved it three times over our heads, and vanished/ * Mere delusion all/ said the Father; ' your head, my son, must have been С 6 disorder-
40 disordered by seime unquiet rest; for, surely, such beings can have no business here, whatever they may have ia the house of guilt. Here, all is innocence, harmony, and love..... * Save/ inter- * ľupted my father, * the guilt that dwells with me. Nay, start not, Father; I know what I say i do not deceive yourself, but look upon me as I really am, a monster not deserving to exist, not fit to draw the breath of life. Those flights, those inco¬ herent starts of passion, which spoke the mind at variance with itself, and for which you have so often reproved me, were the bitter stings of a guilty con¬ science. Ia the enjoyments of domestic felicity, I have been damned with recol¬ lection, and even, in the chaste embraces of my wife, I have cursed the hour that gave me birth ; but the* time of retribu¬ tion is fast arriving, and the vengeance of the Most High will be accomplished.' " The good Father was confirmed inhis own opinion, that the J>uke Was seized with
41 with a sudden fit of phrensy. He repeat¬ edly crossed himself, and silently prayed to heaven to preserve him. He was going ţo leave the room, and call up some of the domestics ; but the Duke, eyeing him attentively, by a sudden spring, caught hold of his arm, and in a voice that struck horror into his heart, said : * Art thou, old maq, going to accuse me? what canst thou say, ungrateful hypocrite, that can militate against me? 1 —* Nothing, my afflicted son, I feel for your disorder, and would fain relieve it, if medical aid can effect a cure/ 4 Damned falshood all/ said he ; 4 thou art going to accuse me to the fathers of the Inquisition ; but I defy them all ; their racks, their wheels, their fire, and hell; yes, Aranjuez shall defy them/ 4i He raved in this manner forsorne time, still keeping between the Father and the door; at length, exhausted, he sunk into a chair. The Father approached him, and attempted to rnajtş Ыт ealţn, and, at last,
42 last, gained his conseht to be let blood, and take some rest. * Rest/ said he, * Father, is fled for ever ; neither in this world, nor in the worid to come, shall I ever rest; but I will do as you desire, more in compliance to your wish, than my own/ Some attendants were called, and he was bled; he then eagerly enquired - after my mother They said, she was better, and wished to see him. 4 1 shall not see either her, or my children, any more/ said he ; then, as if recollecting himself, he added : 4 Go to the Dutchess, and tell her, that, as soon as I am unen¬ gaged, I will come to her; but say not that I am unwell ; I shall endeavour to sleep/ He apparently reclined for that purpose, having been removed to a couch —the physician continued in the room. " He slept not, but listened attentively to their discourse. He found that they formed very strange conjectures on what had happened, but all seemed to con- dude that himself and wife were seized with
43 with madness. From that hour, he never saw my mother. He was the next morn¬ ing, what they thought, better; he tafted rationally with the Father, and seerned concerned to find, that the phantom had had such an effect on my mother, as to throw her into strong convulsions, which weakened her so much, that she was now in a state of stupefaction. 4 Tis well/ said he ; 4 then I hope she will soon be better; but for me.......' and here he stopped. * # From that time, he was for twelve hours alone in his closet, surrounded with pa¬ pers, to which he seemed to pay uncom¬ mon attention. He arranged them, and went to rest; slept two hours, and awoke, apparently perfectly recovered. He sat down again to write, and continued to do so for some time. When he had finished, he ordered some tea, then bade the do¬ mestics leave him, as he was going to walk in the garden, whither the Fatherwas to come, when he returned from his devotion. Whea
44 ff When the good priest arrived, he was informed of the Duke's wish ; he was happy to hear it, and hastened into the garden ; but he found him not ; he was not there. They sought every where, but in vain; the Dutchess had not seen him; they therefore concluded he was gone to the convent of St. John, to which he often went. On this idea, they made them¬ selves easy ; but, after waiting the whole of that night, and the Dukê not return¬ ing, the Father went thither to seek him. He was not there, nor had been ; and from that period to this, he has not been heard of. *' After every search had been made, which the invention of man could devise, it was determined to examine his papers; nothing in tbem led to the least discovery ; but a short letter was found from my fa¬ ther, addressed to Father Joseph, enjoin¬ ing him, in the strongest terms, to be care¬ ful of my mother and the children, as he was determined aever tobehold them more He
45 He said, He should forbear to assign any reason for his conduct, as he was answer¬ able for it to himself alone. The Dutchess was an only child ; her father had been dead some years ; but her mother, a lady of exemplary piety, w r as still living. This lady, he desired the Father to prevail upon to come, and stay with my mother, till the violence of her grief was abated. He concluded, by requesting him to remem¬ ber him in his prayers, as he stood more in need of it at that time than at any other.
CHAP
46
CHAP. III. Lo, crowds on crowds, în hurry stream along, From street to street, írom gate to gate roll'd on : This, that way, burst in waves,, by horror wing'd To distant hill or cave : while half the globe, Her frame convulfive, rocking to and fro, Trembles with fecond agony— Mallet. " THE poor old man lost not a moment in communicating the contents of the letter to my grand-mother. She immediately complied with the w T ish con¬ tained in it, and, though very unwell/has¬ tened to my mother,* to whom, in the presence of the Father, she recounted what she had heard, and earnestly en¬ treated her to preserve that fortitude which marks the real christian, and look for¬ ward w f ith hope ; that her husband, not¬ withstanding what he said in his letter to the contrary, would return to her again, when
47 when his reason, which seemed deranged, should, through the blessing of God, be restored. 44 For a long time, my mother was incon¬ solable. Religion and philosophy, at length, calmed her griefs, and she devoted the whole of her time to her children, whose tender affection gave her the only consolation she was capable of receiving. My eldest sister avowed, at the age of twelve a predilection for a convent, and, though strongly dissuaded from it by my mother, nothing could alter her resolution, and in a short time she entered on her no¬ viciate, at the end of which she took the veil, but died of the small pox eleven months after. " My youngest sister was every thing we could wish, and, of course, in her centered every hope of comfort, to the best and most afflicted of parents. The whole of the Royal Family showed my poor mo¬ ther repeated marks of the tenderest friendship ; her sorrows they felt for and pitied*
48 pitied, and sirove, by every humane at¬ tention, to alleviate them. 44 1 was at home, and had received my education from Father Joseph. My bro¬ ther had, at a proper age, an establishment of hisown, and was very attentive to my mother and sister ; but, being, of a me¬ lancholy disposition, seldom staid long with us when he came. He is not mar¬ ried, but was, at the time I left Lisbon, at St. Salvador, in Brazil, to whieh place he went about fifteen months since, on business of his own, andi thank Heaven* by that means escaped the general cala¬ mity. 44 My sister, a charming young woman, has been addressed for some time by a young Grandee, Aid-de-Camp to the now Prince of Brazil. His suit has been ap¬ proved of by my mother, but"——Here Alphonsus stopped, as if unwilling to pro¬ ceed. The Captain perceived it, and re¬ queued him not to go on, if the recital would give Ыт pain. H it will not much" said
tø said he, "but I will let it pass, and hasten to my own affairs. " I was married, two years ago, to a lady, lovely and accomplished ; by birth, an Italian, and nearly related to Don Jo¬ seph de Sall, brother ofthe Cardinal ofthat name. She was the choice of my mo¬ ther for me, who seemed to have had an earnest desire to counteract the effects of - the prophecy. My establishment was such as might be expected. Seven months after our marriage, through a fright, my wife was thrown into labour, but was safely delivered of a son, who bade fair to be a fine boy. This circumstance, quite con¬ trary to my expectation, appeared, in¬ stead of satisfaction, to give my mother thc greatest concern ; and, when my wife r ecovered, and went to pay her respects to her, she received us, I thought, with visible coldness ; and vvhen the child was presented to her, she hardly deigned to notice it. My wife observed it,.and, with something of resentment in her manner, desired
50 desired I would have the infant immedi¬ ately taken back. I also bad seen my mother's reserve, and was distracting my¬ self with conjectures of what could oc¬ casion it ; but, when my Alzira made her request, I took the child into my arms, and asked my mother, Whether she did not think it a very fine boy ? * Yes/ said she, coldly, * too fine for its age/ My wife darted a look of anger at the Dutchess, and abruptly left the apartment, without taking leave. 44 1 had been used to pay the greatest at¬ tention to every look of my mother's. revered her as a suffering saint. The be¬ haviour of my wife shocked me, though I vyas not pleased with that of the Dutchess. However, I did not follow directly Akira, but chose to stay, and request an expla¬ nation of what seemed to me inexpli¬ cable. " * Why do you stay, Alphonsus ?' said my mother. * Wby do you not follow your lady ? she should not return alone?' This
Şl This was spoken, I thought, in an accent of stifled resentment, mingled with pity* * Pardon my rudeness, Madam/ said I; * I dare to stay, to ask one question. What can my Alzira have done to merit your displeasure ?' * Nothing, my dear son/ said she, f but what I must over· look. She is young, and has not been ac¬ customed to our manners ; she should not have ventured out so soon, it might do her and the child an injury, and you know my first wish is to see you happy, and the next to be blest with grand-children.* 4 The Almighty, then, Madam/ said I, 'has heard your wbh, and granted it in both * instances.' * True, my child/ said she, * and I ought to be grateful for it. Go home, my son ; let not your wife think I detain you. I admire her child ; it is as fine an infant as I ever saw, even when the parent went out its full time. She must be careful of her health ; tell her so; and why she should be displeased, I know not. Go, and may the Eternal Being, v vho di¬ rects
ш
reets in all things the events of this life, make yoa as happy as you deserve/ " Saying this, she left me, and I hastened home to my wife, whom I found in tears, I flew to her, and earnestly enquired what v had occasioned them ? f Nothing at all/ said she, sullenly. 1 4 Has the coldness of my mother/ said I, * discomposed you ?' # Oh no/ she answered, * though it was a behaviour I shouid not put up with from any other person ; but she is your parent, and as such, I must perforce regard her/ * You mistake her meaning, my Alzira/ said I ; ' you know not the goodness of * her heart. I enquired, after you were gone, into the cause, and she told me it arose entirely from her concera for your safety. She thought you ventured abroad too soon, as she is anxious for your own and the infant's health, and she positively as¬ sured me, that she thought it the finest child she fød ever seen, especially as it came before its full time.' u Àfôira regarded me with attention*, aftd said:
53 said t f Is this all the remark she made?' 4 All, my love ; what rerriarks would you have had hér made ?' * None/ said she, gaily ; * but, as she does not like to re¬ ceive visitors, I shall not go again till she desires it/ " In this 1 acquiesced, and the evening was spent agreeably. The only thing that I observed wasa kind of const rairit hi mv wife's behaviour. She wished to seem kind to nie, as usual ; but she, at times, appeared absent, sighed much, and twice, when I attempted to take heť hand, she has¬ tily withdrew it, and appeared disturbed* - However, I thought it best not to notice iţ. " She remained in the same strange tem¬ per for two days. On the morning of ţlie, third, alas I that dreadful day, for ever to be recorded in the book of fate, that sealed my doom, and the doom of thousands— oh! that it could be for ever blotted from my remembrance· I that recollection would Cease, and what then happened would bê eternally sealed in deepoblivion ! Vol, I. D Щ
54 But it is not to be ; man is bora to suffer, and he is taught by the Almighty to sub¬ mit. Be hushed, then, my tortured soul ; let not dire remembrance compel thee to forget thy God." At this, the tears paced each other in torrents dowa his cheeks. " Pardoa my weakness, generous Englishman," said he. *· You feel for me ; therefore do not condemn it." He arose, and walked about tbe room for some minutes ; then, as if gathering strength from sorrow, he re¬ sumed hb narrative. * c We were seated at breakfast ; the infant and its attendants were in the room ; I had taken a cup in my hand, and was presenting it to my wife, when I was sur¬ prised by a most violent shock of an earth¬ quake. We all started up ; I caught hold of my wife with one hand, and, with the other, endeavoured to clasp roy child; and, whilst we stood trembling, a second shock came more violent than the former. Alzira fled with precipitation to the street; she
bö
she lost the recollection of her child ; I snatched it to my bosom, and followed her. She had run towards the Church of St. Mark; but, before I had proceeded many steps, the infant was torn from my arms by a monk, who flew with it to the church, to which I attempted to go likewise; but a third shock came------1 saw—I felt no more^—I was buried in the ruins of a housç that fell behind me at the moment ill " When I came to myself, I found myself stretched on straw in a tent ; a poor wo¬ man was assisting a gentleman in endea¬ vouring to restore me. , My right arm was broke, and I had received a violent con- tr.sion on that side of my head and body. I was unable to speak ; I opened my eyes but to close them again in the most ex¬ cruciating tortures. * Poor sufferer ť said the gentleman, with aa accent of pity; * I fear we shall not be able tp preserve thee. Hold this bandage' said he to the woman, 4 whilst 1 try to get something within liis lips/ So saying, he opened my D á mouth,
56 mouth, ánd poured a cordial into it. I swallowed the whole, aad it gave me in- stant ease. In a few minutes, I spoke, arid begged to know where I was. € You áre among the few/ said he, * that have been, by the mercy of Heaven, miracu¬ lously preserved amid the general de¬ struction. You have received many hurts ; but, as I think none of them is mortal, you may with care recover/ e Where is my 4$Me arid child?' said I, < do they live?* 9 We know not, Sir; it is impossible, at *ff4mbti to ascertain any thing. You must tiot, if yon wish to preserve your life, think of any thing. ТЪе Alrnighty only can tell Who lives ; all that we can inform you of щ that every diligence is used that our ^aflaraitotfs circumstances will admit of, to search farinose whr>might be still alive аййег the ruins/ * What, then/ said I, f 'h this unfortunate city destroyed ?' *1 hsrdly know/ said the worthy man, try¬ ing to change the discourse ; 4 we n^st attend solely toyour wounds at present; whea
a 4
when I have dressed them, 1 will talk with you/ " All this tirne, he had been, with the poor woman, busied in binding up my arm. I was silent, and neither he nor his assistant spoke to me for near half aa hour. During the whole of that time, I thought I heard the groans and sobs of people in distress, and the footsteps of many hurrying backward and forward ; but I spoke not. Indeed, from the acute¬ ness of my pain, I could not; my mind was filled with the most .direful images * I pictured to myself tea thousand horrors. One rnoment, I thought J saw roy wife, my child, mother, sister, servants, all crushed beneath the falling , buildings. The next moment, I thought I saw them extending their feeble arms, earnestly im¬ ploring my assistance to save them frora impending death. Then again* I would, picture them laid before me, each a life¬ less corse. Several times did I attempt to mis&myself, but as oftea fell back. I D 3 fouad
- sa 4bund iiy wretched head was fractured in such a manner, that, the moment I en¬ deavoured to set up, my sight would for¬ sake me ; the whole place seemed as if going an eternal round. At length, their good offices were completed,and tlie straw- was placed in such a manner, as to ena¬ ble me to stretch mvself at case. The gentleman then said, he would leave me, after giving me another cordial, in vvhich I believe was a strong opiate, for I lay in a state of torpid insensibility for sixteen hours. 44 When I awoke, I saw the good womaa kneeling oa the ground near me, and praying devoutly to the throne of Heaven for my recovery. I listened with earneht attention to her prayer, and, as she closed it, most fervently said, 4 Amen/ Her back was towards me ; she started, and said : * Ah ! my dear child, art thou aWake ì The good doctor has left this for йЛЬ to give thee ; take it, my child, thou •èilt soon be better, I hope/ * I am bet¬ ter
69 tet already/ said I ; 4 give me the me¬ dicine, and then tell me, I conjure you, whether my wife and child, mother and sister, live; if you wish meto ex¬ ist, tinder this oppressive load of misery, inform me.' 4 That/ answered the good creature, 4 1 cannot do ; I know not the fate of my own dear child, who was the prop and comfort of my age, the only one that I have left of many, Ah ! Senhor, you are young, and may hope, if you have lost one child, to be blest with more ; I am too old to expect any such blessing. But the will of Heaven be done ; 'tis not for me to complain. I should have pe¬ rished too, had I not been gathering oranges at the time. But my poor dear boy ! he was gone to the harbour, and, as he cannot be found, he's gone, I fear, for ever, and a poor aged bejng, like me, must soon follow him : but I am glad, Senhor, in the midst of my own trou¬ bles, that I can, in any measure/soften yours/ D 4 « At
OC "At tliat moment, the doctor entered j his countenance bespoke grief unutter¬ able. He knelt down by me, took my hand, and^attentive|y regarded the pulse $ then asked how long I had been awake. My attendant informed him, and said, I bad taken the medicine. c Hoţy does- your bead feel ?' said he, * Extremely painful/ I replied. * Let me examine it/ The poor woman supported me, whilst the dressings were taken off. I feinted twice, under the operation ; but, when, finished, f { sqoi* beçanıp easier*— * You rnust npt let the gentleman şp^akç dt all,' said he, * qnless. ţp;» ask, for what he wants; his hurts require that he sliould be iţept perfectly quiet : those cold sjaiyes* indicate fever.* 44 1 was, at that moment, though appa¬ rently scorching, seized with violent shi¬ vers, which encreased every minute. The doctor bade the attendant go to a person lie named, apd desire him to come directly i «he left us immediately. I watched her out,
61 ©ut, but I remember no more ; and, when my senses returned, which was many months after, 1 found myself in a krge room, among many others, who looked like walking spectres. The scene shocked me. I dreaded to open my lips to ask where 1 was. I sat down again on my lit¬ tle bed, to which I was confined by a chain, fastened round my body. I wanted to make use of my hands, but could not ; they appeared to be confined too ; none in the room was fastened but myself. I looked with terror on all around, aad re- maiaed sileät, ia hopes to gather ftom their discourse where I was. I sought ia every counteaance the good old wo¬ man, but she was not there—all were in¬ valids, aad spoke but little. **I continued, for many hours, in this state ; at length, some short time after dawn, I had the happiness of once more beholding the good phyfician. He stop¬ ped to speak to two patients that were aeat the door, and then came to пае. He D 5 started,
62 started, I held out my hands, as well as I was able, towards him, and exclaimed : ' Oh ! my earthly saviour, do I again be¬ hold you ? you will now tell me where I am, and by what means I was removed from the tent/ * Blessed be the Lord !' said he ; 4 your reason is at length restor¬ ed* You have suffered much, but, now, I trust, those afflictions will cease. If you continue to get better, I will soon cause you to be removed ; but, for a few days, you must be content to remain where you are.' c I shall be happy to ac¬ quiesce in every thing/ said I; ' but where ' is the good - woman that I saw before in the tent?' 'She iş now attending her son, who is in an hospital, at some dis¬ tance from here ; he was ill of the epi¬ demic fever that has raged here some weeks, but is now out of danger. That good creature has attended you with un¬ remitting attention for some months, as for as she could serve you, but there have heen trøes, whea her services were of no avail.
63 avail. I shall see her in an hour, and shall tell her of the happy change.'— * Where am I now ?' said I ; 4 pray, inform me !' ' You are ia a temporary building, that has been erected since the great ca¬ lamity, to receive all the fick and wound¬ ed, the hospital having been destroyed/ 'Shall I venture to ask one question more ?' c You may/ faid he. 4 Can you then inform me whether my wife and child, mother and sister, are still living i* 4 1 cannot/ he replied, * unless you tell their names/ " I informed him who I was ; he survey¬ ed me with the greatest ama2ement— ' Surely/ faid he, * it cannot be ; why, that nobleman has beea returned, as dead/ But, at length, I convinced him of the truth of it, and besought him to make enquiry after my family. He pro¬ mised me every thing I could wish, and 4 lamented much the necessity he should be uader of leaving me still in the same confined situation, as he did not dare to Ό 6 set
€4 set me at liberty, until he wast certain there would be no relapse. 4 Your suf¬ ferings/ said he, * have been great ; in¬ deed, your body is wasted by pain and continuai exertion ; but I hope you will, when at liberty, sooa regaia your strength. You mufl not be too solicitous, at first, respecting those that are dear to you ; you must patiently wait, till I think you are able to hear from, or see, those dear objects. Be assured I will do every thing ia myp ower to serve you. I will send the good old Benedicta to you, and see you agaia to-morrow, as early as I can/ Saying thk, he took his leave. 44 Soon after, a man brought me my breakfast ; it was milk and fruit. I took some of each ; the man spoke not ; but, whea I had ate what I choose, he bowed, and retired. The others·* in the room passed шу bed several times, but took aot any particular notice of me. Ia about two ho^rs, I had the happiness of seeing my age d friend; she was between sixty and seventy,
í 65 seventy, about the middle sbe, with haif like silver. She hastened up to me, knelt down, and, without beiag able to speak a word, took my hand ia her's, aad bath¬ ed it with her tears, She coatiaued so sorne minutes. At leagth, whea her emotions had a little subsided, she said t * The holy and blessed Virgin be praised, that I do oace more, Senhor, see you able to know me. I have many times prayed for this happy hour ; 'tis aow come, aad the poor old Benedicta is blessed. Ah \ Senhor, this will make my poor lad joy¬ ous indeed ; for, I have oftea talked to him about you and your dreadful suf¬ ferings, whilst he would sigh, and wish he could serve you/ * My good and valu¬ ed friend/ said 1, 4 you know not Ле hap- piaess I experience ia seeing yo» agai*/ %Ahî Seahor, you must not talk; our good doftor says so ; -but-1 forget myself ia my joy to see you.* **" One of the attendants aow came up, to see if I wanted any thing. *I am come/
ев eome/ said she, * to attend the dear gen* tleman for a short time, till I am again wanted by my son, and that won't be for some hours, so I will do what is necessary to his head/ She then got up, and undid the bandage, examined it carefully,, put on what was needful,«and then, with the greatest care and gentleness, bound it up again. I observed among them, a guard for the back part of my head, and I asked her the occasion. * During my derange¬ ment/ she said, * Ihad struggled fo much, that I was obliged to have it, lest the brain should be injured ; but it would be takea off, if I continued quiet.' My arm was perfeâly well,, though kept, as I thought, bound up ; but the fillets proved to be bands, which held my arms in such a position, that I could not bring them ia contact witb each other. The chain I looked at with] a kind of thriving horror. I would have begged„to, have it taken off, but I recocted what the doctor said, that I. must submit to be confined fos some
«-7 some time, till they saw whether I was likely to continue sensible or not. I, therefore, said nothing respecting it ; but, when the worthy creature had performed her Samaritan office, aaď was sat dowa beside the bed, I ventured to ask her what had been the event of the dreadful day, and in what manner her son escaped. % « 4 Ah ! Senhor, I am cautioned not to say any thing to you about it, as the sud¬ den return of reason might be overset again, ifi was to do it; but I will tellyou how my poor boy was preserved, if that will amuse you, aad I hope many others* escaped ia the same manner/
CHAP.
tø
CHAP. IV. ——Earth's solid sphere asunder rent With final dissolution, the huge mase Falls undermined—down, down th'extensive seat Of this fair city, down her buildings sink Ì Sinks Uie full pride her ample walls enclos'd, In one wide havoçk crash'd, with burst beyond . Heaven's loudeft thunder ï uproar unconeeiv'd ï Image of Nature's general ŕVame destroy'd ! Mallet, 44 c MY son, Senhor, was employ¬ ed at the harbour in helping to unload an English ship, laden with bale goods. He was on the great quay at the time of the first shock, and, by some means he can¬ not account for, was thrown on board a vessel, which, at the second or third shock, I don't know which, was carried with many others out to sea ; but, in a few minutes, the waves returned, and dashed
69 dashed the vessel he was in against tht rocks. She bulged> but tiie sea sinking to its accustomed level, the poor souls on board her all saved their lives, some by tbe boats, and some by swimming. But, oh ! Senhor, it was a most piteous sight. tC « I was in the garden of an English gentleman, who used to employ me and ray poor Pedro. I was told to gather a basket of oranges for diaaer, aad went into the garden fpr that purpose. I had raised my feeble hands to gather one, when, oh î blessed Maria, 1 fşlt the, grqujd lift up under mp f Iwas so uiueb, frightened, I could *qot stir frpia the spot» but turned ray eyes towards the harbour, to try if I could s^e tny poor Pedro ¿ but my 3ged eyes wece tqo dim, and^ before J: could commend bha to. thè holy Virgin, another shoclş: cţurae, which set all th§ bells a jtagltag. I dropped uppa rny knees, and p-payşoV щ earnçft aş I could. Whilst ţ was thus, employed, I he^rd th^ ıpo^t dre^df^l şçrtaırışj 1 îpofe^d ^own, aad
İÜ and saw the streets full of people running. The holy and blessed Cross was elevated ; but, in a few moments, I found myself lifted up again, and thrown at a great dis¬ tance, among the trees·. H 4 When I came to myself, I saw fhe garden-wall thrown down, and part of the house. No one was near me ; I look¬ ed down upon the city, and, oh í dreadful to behold, I saw it in ruins i The fields were covered with people, beating their breasts, and tearing their hair, in the greatest agbny. The ships, that so short a time before^ were riding in the most perfect safety, side by side, were now dispersed and gone. Some were upon the rocks, others were thrown upon the land, and some were struggling with the waves, as though they were on the top of a boiling cauldron. Ah! Senhor, judge what a poor aged Woman like myself must feel', When I looked, and saw such desolation) I thought the end of all was come, and that I should soon see my Saviour
71 Saviour in the clouds ; I sought for the palace, but saw it not ; the church I used to so to was no more/ 44 'At the mention ofthe church, I eagerly asked, * W r hat church ?* The poor old creature looked at me v/ith earnestness, * Ah ! Senhor/ said sbe, 4 1 must say no more, for I see you cannot bear it/ * Do not be alarmed, my dear friend, I only wished to know what church, as I was attempting to reach that of St. Mark when I was thrown down.' * Ah ! Sen¬ hor, that was not the same ; it was that of Sit Benedict ; St. Mark's, I believe, is still staading/ I sileatly ejaculated a prayer of thanks ; then, thought I, my dear wife aad child may possibly be saved. She went oa. ♦ 44 « Every thing being so different from what к was before, I could not think what to do. I looked behind me, and saw my master's house, though not quite dowa, yet the wiadows were out, aad the roof off. I at last attempted to eater it, but I could
l'i
1 could not get in, the door was blocked up with rubbish. 1 called as loud as I could, in hopes to make somebody hear, but there was nobody to answer / all had fled, and left poor old Benedicta : dis¬ tracted about my poor boy, and my wor¬ thy master, I struggled to get out, and, at last, over the ruins ofthe garden-wall, I got into the street : all was deserted and silent. 1 tried to find a path that would take me to the harbour, whither I thought my master might be gone. I saw a great many people, but did aot knpw how to get to them. At last,, after I had tpijed over the ruins for some hours, I reached the quay. No one that I spoke to could ÇÎve me the feast inteligence. I prayed to the holy Virgin ; I implored the blesse4 ¡Saints, but* after some hours spent ip vain* I was ob%ed to give цр my search. I , kagW aot where to go, my 1&Ц habita¬ tion, <$u!d;not he r found* 44 ТЦ| was, wandering I knew n#t wherø, №Ще gejp$enien aiet tae^ tliey took ρίψ on
í о on my tears, and bade me come with them, and they would lead me to the fields, where, they said, in all probability, my Pedro was. Heaven bless their right¬ eous sou h ! two of them helped me along, for I couìd scarcely stand. They bade me be comforted ; they would take me where the King was. I cared not where I was taken to, so I could find my son; but blessed and praised be the hour I met them, for that was the means of saving you. They were helping me over -some rubbish, when one of them said, he would go down on the other side first, and pull away a large stone that hung over the spot below. He was a young Irish gentleman, that belonged to a mer¬ chant's house; was about two-and-twenty, strong and active, and possessed a blessed heart. He, therefore, leaped off the place we stood on, and \vas no sooner down, thata he cried oot: * For Goďs sake, place the old lady in safety, and jump down, for here is*» a -gentleman under¬ neath,
74 »eath, but, by .the manner in which some of the broken beams lay, I think I can draw him out, if you will try to support the stone above/ Oh ! how my poor heart beat ! I was afraid to stir, lest I should, by moving, slacken the stones, and cause them to fail, I, therefore, sat dovvn, and, oh! blessed Virgin, they succeeded in getting you out, but, to all appearance, dead. They looked round to see whether they could discover any other person. One they found ; it was a man, he was dead, but your pulse was observed to have some little motion. They could not get you out the way they meant to go* therefore, were obliged to bring you up to me. They then agreed to go another way, round ; three of them took you up, and another supported me. «* 4 In about ten minutes, they found a clear opening, and ia a short time they reached the fields. You were preseatly, with others, laid upoa some straw, and Ihe good doctor, who was almost the first
75
first we spoke to, came to you. The gentlemen held you up, whilst you was bled in the neck. The blood at last ran ; your head was examined, and something 'done to it ; but your arm was so swelled, they knew not what to do to that. The sleeve of the doublet was cut off, and some ointment put to your arm and side, which was bruised so, as to be all sorts of colors. When this was done, one of them went avvay, to try to get a tent to cover you, while the young Irishman, and two others, went out to see whether they could find any more poor souk. 44 * They were gone two hours; and I found, when they returned, they had assisted to resene seven, but were pre¬ vented from doing more good, by tbe fire breaking out among the ruins.. By this time, you had a little tent spread over you¿ the good gentlemen spoke comfort to me, 3nd said, If I would stay, and take care of you, they would seek my poor Pedro, This I gladly consented to, and they set out.
76 oat. In the rrieaa tîrhe, Senhor, you never stirred br spoke. . The doctor came twice, and brought rhe something to give you when you should open your eyesj but that did nbt happen till the good gea- tlernan was examining your head, áad then, you know, we gave you some me¬ dicine, ** * The next day passed, and no news eould Ы heard of my poor child. As you had beea placed at a distance from thc multitude, I cotrfd see no one, to ask of; and I would* not leave you. ,1 could therefore do nothing but pray to thè holy Virgin; and she, blessed be her hcly aalae, at last, heard my humble prayer. Tou hád slept for many hours, the doctor had iíêéa twice, ¿rid the gentlemen five times, when you àvvbte, and the doctor soon after entered. ^You were sensible tti&i, bűt ihe gentleman thought you wbaţâfoot long be so arid thought that I s%0tíŠ té biit ä роОГ creature to take cate ÖÍyoa, ifyou got #ofse. He there¬ fore
*
77 foie, sent mp toa particular part of the fif Jd» wh^r# the others were to be fouad, çxcept h.inKwho was searching for w ƒ son. Lh^sten^d away to the place, when; just <ış I «got chouta hundred paces fiom thetenţ,Imet tbaţdearyoungmlanispoke of, bringing my Pedro, who had been searching for his*wretched mother every where, as somebody that knew me had told him I was alive, aad had been seen to go over the ruins with some English¬ men« Oh 1 Senhor, what was my jo v ? I dropped upon my knees, and invoked a thousand blessings ou his head ; then told the dear good gent lemun why I had left the tent. He bade me go back with m v son, and he would go on ; I did as he bade me, " € The doctor was surprised to see me return so soon, and bring vvith me a per¬ son fe did not know ; I hastened to tell hini what had passed; he was thankful, as well as me; you looked earnestly at uà by turns* but did aot speak. la a short Vob* í. E time,
7g rime, the geatkmen carnet the doctor talked with them ia English. When4hey had consulted for some time, I found they had agreed'to get a bed for you, if possi* Ые, aad two of them were to wafch you, by tarafe* They asked me whether J would stay with you, now my sea was found ? I told them, Yes, that I Would ; and my son, too, 'ή he could be of any service ; they were pleased at this, aad said, They would aontrive tosend as some wine and fruit, for there was ao bread. One of them then went away, and in two hours returned with a bed. " 4 AH this time, you appeared to be get¬ ting worse every minate ; yoa were, there¬ fore, by the geatlemen, put to bed, and every thing done for you that the distress¬ ed state we were ia would permit Allthe families that had escaped were obliged to take up their abode ia «bc o^éa fields, as thgyhad no houses to re*öprn tW The Royal Family, as well as the poor, shared the same fate, for to fire destroyed as much
79 much as the earthquake. Ia five hours, you were ia a rágiag *fever* so that you were obliged to be held down, While your arm was set, and your poor head Waê obliged to teve the guard put oa it. Each by turus, watched over you. It was with the utmost difficulty we could keep you in bed, and they were obliged to confine you ; in a few weeks, however, your head and arm got better ; but your senses grew worse. My poor boy did all hè could for yoa ; at length, the good Eng¬ lish, who had been informed of our cala¬ mities, sent over people to build us some houses, and a great many stores. This plaice "we now are in; was sobn rear¬ ed, and to it j%u were removed ; as were many bthers\ My son Went' to work every day, and I was putto watch ovet you. la this manner we continued, till my sOn was taken ill of a fever; that háš ragéď very much, but he is now out öf danger, blessed and praised be the holy Saviour for his mercies ; and I shall now E 2 be
Ш feiPfpŕ fòt he Fill be able tO; $щгк again, and I shall have tbe р^ашге of seeing ypu well, tøo ; and then ţvha t νψβ ¿щф a poor old woman as me bav^ ,, to wish for minore ? Thus, S^nhori baye J feild yon, w^at I said might perhaps amuse yøiu* *M thanked the worthy creature in the most grateful terras, for the information şhje had,given roe, I wished to know what J^cajne of rriy preservers, and whether Jcojuld npt see them, to ţhank ţhem for thiïir hurnanjty. - The young Irishman/ gíiid s^,/■* is gpn -э home, I believe. One ^the pther gentlemen is dead, and the others are near neighbours of the doctor's. They will, Jtam sure^ be happy to hear you are sensible. Our dear doctor lost in this dreadful calamity every relation he had, Ш wifei two şişten, and a brother wi th ( two ; :şerva|its,,;:.; They had taken refuge in щ churchy the whole of the building fell ever them, and tliey were crushed be¬ neath it, He had been to see a poor gardener's
dl gardener's wife, that was ill, and was on his return home, when the direful event happened. He was led to hope they were safe, till the next day, when he was convinced of his misfortunes. He was for fome time very unhappy aad mi¬ serable ; he is novv a little reconciled to it, but, in the midst of all his distress, though he found himself stripped of every thing had in the world, besides the loss of those dear relations, yet he has never ceas* ed to administer all the comfort in his power to the afflicted. You will love him much, Senhor. Their Majesties have taken great notice of him, ever since ; and I am sure he deserves it.'
£ 3 . CHAP.
m
CHAP. V. -™He -------- The story heard attentive, and was íiíľd With admiration,—— Milton. For thee I heave the heart-felt %h, My bosom meîtîng at thy woe?, For tbee my tear-di$tillbg ţ fye, t In streams of tender sorrow flows, POTTEUV " THUS ended the faithful crea¬ ture's narrative ^—she left mê soon after to go to her son. I passed the whok of that night in the most anxious suspense, eagerly watching, when the morning ap¬ peared, the motions of every one, in hopes that I should see this worthy good man enter. At length, he came ; my heart bounded with joy, as I thought I should soon hear the fate of my family. I thanked him for his care, in the warmest expres¬ sions of gratitude my lips could pro¬ nounce ;
85 nounce ; he pressed my hand, and urged me to say no more, as he had done no¬ thing but his duty, and for that he was amply repaid by the prospect there was of my being restored to society. " After some conversation, respecting the good Benedicta, I ventured to ask, what he had learnt of aiy family ? 'lean/ said he, 4 give you the satisfaction of knowing, that your mother and sister are living. Their house was not injured much, aor did they lose a single domestic ; but they are not residing where they then did ; they are uader the protection of some of the great dignitaries oí the church ; why, or for what reason, I know not/ * Hea» vea be praised/ said I ; ' but where is my dear wife and child?' c That, re¬ plied he, * I cannot so readily inform you ; but they are not returned on the dead list, andean aU probability, are safe. I will make it my business to enquire this day, and hoge, to-aaotrow, I shall be able to give you the account you wish for/ Цщ E 4 then
84 thea gave orders for the nian who had at¬ tended me to take off the bands that con¬ fined my arms : this was> a luxury indeed. He examined my head, it was nearly well, 4 but your arms/ said he, * will not be straight. The unhappy derange¬ ment which immediately followed your misfortunes, obliged us to have recourse to coercive measures to confine you, but your strength at times was such as to baf¬ fle alt our efforts, and in one of those violent struggles which distracted reasoa exerts, yèu tore awáy the splinters which hound your arm, and, for several days, we could not succeed in placing it in its for- tnet position/; but, even then, it was im¬ perfecta and, on that account, the arm* is fiút s# straight as the other.' * I thank GotV'l&id'I, * that your merciful kind- rjfese* towards me preserved ît it all. I nrdst 1 * be ungrateful, indeed, Iwere I tore- gtev the fashion of ir, áfteir so i^uch trou¬ ble as it must have given yóù/ He said, He could not venture to take off the chain, i . until
until he had consulted his brother physi¬ cians ; they wpuld meet, he said, fn»the afternoon of that day ; and, a* the pre¬ sence of strangers might give me pain, he should minutely report ray situation, and his opinion upon it, and he did not doubt but they would agree with him. He asked me several questions respect iag my wife and child. I told hirh every thing that passed on the morningof the earth¬ quake, and said, as I was at breakfast at the time, I had only my morning éress On, which accounted for the cloathsil was in, when found, and the reasoa why I had nothing of value about me; at least, í did not recollect any thing. Minutes of what I said, he took down» and soon afi ter departed. " He had not been gone long, before the good Benedicta came. She rejoiced when she saw my hands at liberty. She was come, she said, to stay with me, and talk to me a tittle, as it would amuse my mind î for the good doctor had told her Г was E 5 likely
86 h'kely to be removed, ia a few daysi to another situation. « Though, God knows, Se&hoWthere are very few houses left, but we shall soon have more; the English ar-, 4 tHícers åre very active. God bless their pioas>s4>nîs \ they have brought us a great nmny things, but I hope we shall sooa be $Ыё to retura it to them ľ '* I speftt the greater part of the day ia conversation with this good creature, and í oslepí sound at aight, but waked early, and earaestîy wished for the coming of my friend. How foadly did I hug the pleasing idea of again seeiag my wife ; of again clasping my infant to my bosom ; of again beholding my afflicted parent and my mtrchdoved sister* I anticipated the pleasure they would enjoy, when they found that I was living.—Vain, delusive hope !-wWild, fantastic dream !—- Gone— fled, for ever—aever—never—to be rea¬ lized ía^gahw— Ah ! why, thou great Om¬ nipotent* didst thou suffer me to be pre¬ served? why didst thou aot permit my mangled
87 mangled body to become a prey to фе ч devouring flames ? Why, why, oh, Gqd f didst thou not suffer rne to fall amidst the general desolation, ? " Saying this, he arose, traversed the room with hasty strides, then advance to the Captain, and» catching t bold of his hand, cried, with great earnestness ; " Pity me, my friend» but dpn't condemn these emotions." " Condemn them !" said the Captain; tc what must that man's &ρμΙ be who could? No^Sir, I "sensibly t feel for your misfortunes, and greatly wonder that you have supported them irb|he тщ- ner you have. The recital distresses you too much ; we will put off the содипца* tion of it to another oppor t unity. Reco¬ ver yourself a little, and we wiJJ go and take a. walk. I want to call upon aa Annenjan merchant ; he has promised to ргохцге, me something for aa English Щу that I cannot readily purchase ; therefore !,<&hall be obliged to yau if you will çorne, with me." , » . · ι j « - Е б Saying
8fr 4 ^ayîng^^thîs, he took the arm of Al- ^mňmii who/ without speaking, accom- •páèféàW friend: They passed oa to one of the great squares. Oa their way, Al- rjihonsus expressed a wish to enter a tìuireh of the Latias. ** My spirits," said Ke, «would be more composed, ifi Could pray for a few moments." TheCap- taln acquiesced, and they entered. After his devotions were ended, they arose to depart. As they quitted the Chirrch, a man, with a venerable aspect, accosted them, and asked, ia good Portu¬ guese, Whether they were at Lisbon at the rime of the earthquake ? The Cap¬ tala started at the question, turned quickly roufid, and said, He was not, but the gentleman with him had been there. « Then," said the old maa, 4< if I might be permitted to watt upon you, at your dwelling, ľ would venture to ask a few questions respecting that rrelaneholy event, as I had some correspondents there at that period, whom I have not heard of since."
89 sin ce. " ** We are eOgaged this evening/* said the Captain ; ** but if my friend is well enough, we shall be happy, at any other time, to see you ; here is our address ;" giving a bit of paper, on which was writtea the name of the persoa at whose house they were. Each bowed, and parted. As soon as they were alone, Alphonsus said : ** The old gentleman could not, my friend, have made a request I could so . unwillingly have complied with." " Ne¬ ver mind that," said thé Captain ; u if you do not wish to see him, it is very easy for me to make your excuse, as your ill health is a sufficient plea." M True, and I believe I shall avail myself of it ; for his counte¬ nance, I know not why, distresses me." " Then think no more about it," re¬ plied the Captain ; " I believe I have seen him before somewhere in the city; I will describe him, and enquire who he is/'
By
Эу this time, they had reached the merchant's house, which they entered; hm was at tome, aad received them with great affability. The Captain began upoft the subject of his visit, which being set* tied to his .wish, a general conversation ensued. He took an opportunity to ask thé merchant, Whether he knew an el¬ derly gentleman, such as he described.— ** Yes," said he ; <c he is well known, as a very singular character* He is not a native of this place, nor does he con¬ stantly reside her«;*no one knows what country he is of, but most people believe him to be a Portuguese. He seerøs to come here for ao other purpose iban that of devotfon. His name is not known, a$ he associates with no one. The longest time he was ever kaowa to stay, was two months at a time ; and» whea he goea froerhere, ihe isáiways obsewd to take, his passage fer loppa or Gata, and ţo^e-f tura about the time that the Levant tra¬ ders are expected from Lisbon. He pays for
for what he has in the most princely man¬ ner, and never quits the place without de¬ positing a sum to redeem a certain num¬ ber of Christian slaves." They'were both surprised at the ac¬ count of his singular manner of living, and, upon the Captain's mentioning the circumstance of his speaking to them, in the church of the Latins, the merchant was equally astonished. However, he gave it as his opinion, that it would be best to see him, especially as Alphonsus appeared in such an ill state of health :— '* For," said he, " I have heard that he oftea sends medicines and advice to poor diseased beings that he meets in the streets. His prescriptions are generally successful, and many, for these last tea years, have benefited by them." This information induced the Captaia to persuade Alphonsus to admit the old gentleman, when he should call, as he was anxious to see him in a more perfect state of recovery, before he left Smyrna, than
9% thaa he had befcn yêt, and fearing, when he was obliged to leave him, he would not readily get acquainted with any per¬ son, in whom he would like to place ЪЫ< coafidence: by that means, his misfortuties would prey upon his spirits, and he would fall a victim to them. When they returned from the mer¬ chant's, the Captain and Alphonsus had a long conversation upon the subject, and he was at last prevailed upon to promise that he would admit the stranger. This point gained, the Captain was more at ease in his mind ; he, however, longed to hear the remainder of Alphonsus's story. ТЪе riext day, he took an opportunity, whea the stranger was mentioned, to drop a bint bf that kind. " I think/* said Alphonsus, « I left off at that part of my story, when I rvasr in fond expectation of liberty. When the doctor came in the morning, he smiled, and said, He was come to set me free, and, if I chose it, to take me to a little house of
93 of bis ovvn, where I might be at liberty to stay as long as I liked, till my family Were made acquainted with my being alive. I left the hospital, and weat to this wprthy friend's house, supported by him¬ self, and one of his friends. It was dark, and I was closely wrapped up, but it was with the greatest difïiculty I could stand, and, before 1 had been assisted half the way, I fainted; however, I soon reco¬ vered, when I had been borne iato the house. He said, The air had beea too powerful for me, but he hoped I should sooM get iaured to it. " With what transport I hailed the aext day's dawn, caa be better imagined thaa described. My л flattering fancy painted me happier than thousands ; for I had re¬ ceived aa assuraace that those I loved were alive, and I should agaia behold ţhera^ Fallacious hope !! 44 1 had been aţ the doctor's three days, and oa each day begged him to bless me with some account or other of my family, when,
wheií,, on my?ıîr^aghiaı, he desired me, in theimastiearaest mántief, aot to press ljia* On that ^bjecV till | was better able* «o;lbeà9 the isi^i* of those fliat were so deàtí to me ; ' Therefore, I beseech you, mst satíffieá with my endeavours to serve voa/ , ^A fortnight passed, andT heard not the kast mention of what I had so much áèhearí.- 1 was rather afraid to ask, lest I should be suspected of thinking the gooé man did not sufficiently interest Wift^tf abøtitase. However; ohehtortb ing, he came into the room where I Was sitting, aa4 asked me, If ¥Ш not recol¬ lât what I f if«ght have iá 1 niy pocket, at •#h«?time Iwas alťhreákfest with my wife. l^oto Ы1Ш that, to ttò best of rny re- inembiånce, I had not j utiy thing besides apctcke^íadkerchíef/and% small Latin author. « That/ said he, m wás fountf; ft was Ludan's K«îogaès/ * T#ue ^ ît was, gad between thé feaves, W^ a énlalldráwž mg
9* İng I had made,the day before, aad some writing with my name to it/ 44 4 You; will excuse me/- said he, * for being so particular, as your being returned among the dead, makes it very difficult for me to convince the world that you are living ; and, as ypur life was preserved in such a miraculous manner, it is no won¬ der that those to whom I have applied raise doubts of your existence, and regard you as an impostor/ * Good God ľ said I, * can it be possible there should be * doubt, where the evidence is supported by so just a persoa as yourself î' * I know not/ replied he, * what can be the rea* son. I am certain myself, but, whatever is the cause, they persist in saying, I am imposed upon. I have applied to your wife's family, I have entreated to be per¬ mitted to see ypur mother ; but they are deaf to every thing I can alledge to sup¬ port it. Would to God, there had beea something about your person that, might be recognized by those who are dear to you.
уайь There is, I am sorry to say, an air of mystery attends the business, that I am aot able to corhpreheiid. However, I would have you make yourself easy for the present, aiid be assured, I will, With my friends, do every thmg I can, to con¬ vince them.of their error/ *' * Ah ! my friend/ said I, * let me but know where my mother is, and I will go with yoa to her, whea you will be coavinced, that Г am the person I say/ TRié agftatioa with which I spoke, and the earnestness I expressed to go to her, induced the worthy maa to promise that he would take me the next day. The whpte of that night I spent in the greatest distress; and, when the day returned, I was impatient tobe gone, but we did not set out rill near eleven o'clock. A car¬ riage was procured, and I was accompa¬ nied by the doctor, and one of the gen¬ tlemen that preserved me. « We were takea to a convent, at a short distance ftom Lisbon. As soon as thc
97 the carriage was at the gate,,my goç>d friend desired to speak withthe Lady Ab¬ bess ; it was permitted, and he went in, but we were left without. *,My God ľ said I, * surely my mother will not deny tq own her child, a son for whose hap¬ piness she ever evinced the most pain¬ ful anxiety !* I would have followed my friend, but the gentleman detained me. * Be patient/ said he ; * you must not attempt to enter ; there is something I do not like, in your not being permitted to make yourself known ; I sincerely wish your biother was in Lisbon ; surely he wouid not be so incredulous ?' · He would not, indeed/ cried I ; c did he know of my distresses, Ъе would fly to their relief.' * We have written to him a circumstantial account/ said my friend ; ' it was the best thing we thought could be done ; and, if you can stay till we hear from him, I think it will be much better, than to urge an explanation with people that are disposed not to be con¬ vinced,
ŠS vinced ; bui: we ahali see, whea oúr friend corneront, whether he has been success¬ ful/ u As he said this, the portress came, and desired we would enter the parlour ; I eagerly obeyed the summons, and, as fast as my trembKng limbs would permit, hastened to the spot, not doubting but I should see either my rnother or my sister ; but, oh ! dreadful to relate, I was denied that happiness !
CHAP.
! 99
CHAP. VI. In this wide ruin, were my fortunes sunk : Myself, as one contagions tö his kind, Whom Nature, whom the €ocial life renotmcM, U nsumman'd, ummpieaded, was to death, To shameful deatb adjudg'd ; against my head The price of blood proclaim'd, and at my heels Let loose the murd*rous cry of human hounds· Mallet. « WHEN I came into the room, my friend advanced towards me, and taking me by the hand, said, turning to the Abbess : * This, madani, is the gentleman—--this is Alphonsus Of Coimbra ; and, if he mzy be permitted to see his parent, I am certain you will ' fcoon be convinced he is *no impostor/ She eyed me attentively VI advanced towards her, and earaesfly entreated she would permit me to see my motheror my sister.
юо sister. * Tis not in my power/ said she. * The Grand Prior has issued orders re¬ specting them, which I dare not disobey. I have no doubt, from what this gentle¬ man has said, that you are the person you pretend tobe ; but, notwithstanding that, I cannot allow you to see the Dutchess— I have ventured beyond the limits of my order, in speaking to yoa. However, I promise you this, that I will faithfully re¬ late what I have beea informed of to my superiors, ,and, in all probability, they will not deny you that happiness. I shall be very particular in the description of your person, and, if 1 succeed in obtain¬ ing leave for you, } shall not be wanting a moment ia imparting it to you.' So saying, she beokoacd the doctor to leave her; be did, aad I reluctantly followed. " As soon as we were ia the carriage, I could not spppress my tears; I wept lik|h a woman—my fetched heart foreboded cyery UL I trembled with agony, when I admitted the possibility of never seeing those
101 those objects more, for whom only I wish¬ ed to live. My friends endeavoured to calm me, and they at last succeeded; but, oh í what was that calm, but a bitter presage of redoubled woes. " A week or ten days had elapsed, be¬ fore any message was received, when my friend, the doctor, was desired to come alone. He obeyed it, under a pretence that he was going another way, and re¬ turned İn less than an hour, but said no¬ thing, at that time, of where he had been ; nor did he, for some days after. At length, when he saw that my patience was quite exhausted, he ventured to tell me, That he had seen the Abbess, and she had Jnformed him, that she found it impossible to gain what I so much wished for, and had advised hím to prevail upon me to quit Lisbon, as she did not think I was safe there. I had, she said, some secret enemy, that plotted my destruction, and who was determined it should not be proved that I was alive. Vol. I. F 4( I heard
102 u I heard my friend with calmness and composure, but spoke not. I observed him tobe under great agitation, which Jie wish¬ ed to conceal, but my eye saw it, and I earnestly implored him, if he had any thing more to impart, that he would do it ; f Ah !' said he, * Heaven knows with what sincerity my soul sympathises in your sorrows, and how happy I should be, could I alleviate them ; but fate will not have it so. You are denounced by the church, and those that assist you, are alike implicated in your crime. But that shall not deter me from rendering you every service in my power ; I will ven¬ ture to advise you to quit Lisbon directly ; you are looked upon as an impostor, and will be treated as such ; therefore, let me take you to a friead of mine, a short dis¬ tance from here, and wait the arrival of your brother ; who certainly will not be wanting in hk duty fo clear up this mys¬ terious business, and restore you to the arms of your family/ tt He
103 " He was here interrupted by the sud¬ den entrance of my other friend, who ran up, and, hastily taking me by the arm, said : 4 Rise, for the love of God, and come with me/ So saying, he caught up a large wrapping cloak that lay on a chair, threw it over me, jumped precipitately out of the window, and pulled me after him. I was too weak to make any resistance. The eagerness he evinced alarmed the doctor ; he jumped after us, and asked what was the matter. f Speak not a word, but follow me/ was the re¬ ply. * Take hold of hini by the other arm, and run for it/ 44 The house we had left stood on an eminence, and was one of those that had been recently raised among the ruins. A garden surrounded it, at the bottom of whicli were the remains of a Capuchin convent, over vvhich they dragged me, more dead than alive. We passed through several streets, and, at last, stopped at a house, the upper part of which only had E 2 been
104 been destroyed. They took me into the cellar of it ; my friend hastily drew a raæor from his pocket, and cut off my hair, then took out a box ia which was a kind of ointment; this he rubbed over my face, neck, aad hands. All this while, not a word was spoke by either party— for myself, I was literally d&mb. He bound my head with a handkerchief, then stripped roe, and fook off my linen, put- tins on again my doublet and drawers; but nothing else. All the time this was doing, he seemed in the greatest hurry imaginable, every moment listening to what he heard passing in the street ; but, whea it was done, he caught up the cloak, my Iirien, and my hair, and thrust them eagerly into a part of the wall, which had been rent asunder; then took up some loose stones, which he crammed after them. He walked again towards the steps of the cellar, ascended a few of them, aad stood listening, "AU
105 ** All this while, the doctor, though he had assisted my friend, seemed to be panic-struck. He gazed at me, then at him, with wonder and amazement. On his descending again, he could contain himself no longer, but earnestly entreat¬ ed him to tell him vvhat all that was done for. He made no answer, but put¬ ting one hand upon his mouth, with the other took a letter from his pocket, and gave it to him. The contents were : 49 * Sir, 44 'If you are the sincere friend * of Don Alphonsus of Coimbra, which ' I think you are, I entreat you to lose * not a moment in flying to the house he * is now at, and convey him instantly * from thence. The holy Fathers of the ' Inquisition have------ but I say no more. « — -----The moment you have him safe, * anoint his face with the matter con- * tained in the ,box I send herewith; « and disguise him any way more your F 3 * friend-
106 * friendship shall suggest, so as it wifl 4 preserve him—and the voice of angels * shall bless you." " After the donor had read the letter, he returned it. His countenance bore the strongest marks of distress. In a few minutes, a signal was givea at the top, my friend ascended; the doctor kept close to me, and appeared to be as much agi¬ tated as himself. As for me,.1 seemed to have lost all ideas of fear or recollection. In about ten minutes, he came down, at¬ tended by two men and a woman.— * Come/ said he, taking me very rough¬ ly by the arm, and giving the doctor and me a significant look; 'will you be a little more quiet now, or I shall put on your chains again/ 4 If you will not do that/ I answered, * I will do any thing you desire/ * Come along, then/ said he, 4 with those gentlemen ; and ifi find you attempting to make your escape again, they shall have orders to punish you as you
107 you deserve/ They went up the steps, supporting me between them, thea hur¬ ried me towards the shore, where they placed me in a boat. The doctor and my friend followed ; they rowed swiftly along for about half an hour, whea they put into a little creek, near to alittle cot¬ tage belonging to a fisherman : into this I was conveyed ; one of the men proved to be the owner of it, and the other his brother. " As soon as I was in, the woman set about getting me something to eat; I took some, my friends did the like. When they had finished their repast, my friend Spoke to the doctor in a low tone of voices they then bade me be passive till they came agaia, when, if I had behaved well, they would take me out on a party of pleasure with them into the bay. I promised every thing, and,soon after, they left me, with, strict iajuactions to obey those who were to guard me. F 4 "I soon
108 ** I soon found, that I was regarded in every respect as a madman, and brother to my friend, who had escaped from the place I was confined in, and they did not think it safe to take me back there again. I was treated kindly, and, as I appeared perfeñly passive, they did not lay any re¬ straint upon me. I walked about thejit- tle cottage and its environs, wrapped up in a great coat ofthe fisherman's, and tiiey contented themselves with watch¬ ing my motions. I felt a great incon- veaieace from the want of linen, and was in hopes my good friends would, when they carne, bring me some, as they had promised a bed, and other necessaries. But, oh î my God ! I waited in vain—I saw them no more. I began to grow ex¬ tremely restless ; my host seeing me so very uneasy,* was fearful I was drooping into those raving fits, which he had beea informed I ofteii had. I was, therefore, more strictly guarded, and they determin¬ ed to go to Lisbon, and inform my friends of
109 of it ; but how to go, and leave me with his wife only, was what puzzled them exceedingly. " At length, it was agreed, that my host's brother should go, and return in as short a time as possible. This done, he set out, but he did not return at the time. Several hours elapsed ; I saw they were both uneasy ; each was afraid to speak his thoughts. The woman wished her husband would permit her to go and seek him ; he consented, and she was about to leave the cot whea he entered. They were overcome, with joy at seeing him» and eageriy asked, what had detained him. ť Matter enough/ said he, c I think ; for, would you believe it, but both the gentlemen are în the Inquisition ! They have been accused of some crime against the holy Fathers ; so we must make a bed up ourselves for the gentleman ; aad, as he seems pretty quiet now, Bede herself will be enough to watch him, whilst we go out with the boat ; there will be a good F 5 market
по market for the fish on Wednesday, and then we caa enquire something more about his friends, who, I hope, will not be long before they are out again.' 44 As they regarded me in the light of an insane person, they spoke without re¬ serve before me. To tell you what I felt at this intelligence, would be impossible ; my heart was wrung with agony inex¬ pressible. I had not the least doubt, but they had fallen victims to their friendship fop me, and I was determined, let the consequence be what it might, to go to Lisbon, and give myself up to my ene¬ mies, if I could obtain the release of my friends. Full of this, I went to rest, and was resolved, as soon as my host and his brother were gone, to attempt to find my way over the vineyards; but the wind did not set fair for them to go out, and it was fall ten days before an opportunity offered· ** During the "time I was waiting, I often heard my host repeat a wish that he could
Ill could learn for what my brother was con¬ fined, aad expressed a desire to see oae particular persoa ia Lisboa, who, he had been informed, belonged to some of the holy Fathers·;- but I never could gather from his discourse where this man lived. However, I was resolved to endeavour to fiad him out, aad not oaly him, but those whom I had, before my misfortunes, re¬ lied upon as friends. The hour at length came, and my host departed ; I seized the first favorable opportunity that offered, and set out, but I was so much bewilder¬ ed among the vineyards, and fields, that it was four in the morning of the second day before I got to the city. I hastened to the first house that I saw opea, aad ea* quired after a gentleman of my acquaint¬ ance, who, I thought, would serve me ; but I sooa fouad, he aad several more, whom I had kaown, were among· the suf¬ ferers in November, At length, I learnt that oae was living ; to him I went ; he was at home, I made myself kaowa to F б him,
112 him, told him my distress, and requested his assistance. He affected aot to know me, and threateaed to have me takea up as an impostor. To others I went ; but was treated by all alike. I thea determined to go to the office of the Inquisition, but where it was I could aot tell ; none of the places I once kaew, could I now see* At last, I was resolved to search till I fouad it. ** Ia this thought, I walked about from oae distressing scene to another ; which way soever I turned my eyes, all was de- solation; at leagth, I reached the spot where the church of St. Roch stands. I had, ia vain, sought, for many hours, the church of St. Mark, near which my for¬ mer habitatioa stood ; but, by some means * or other, I could not find it. I saw seve¬ ral people coming fast towards me, and ascend some steps. I followed them with¬ out regarding where they were going ; I entered with them, and passed up the great aisle* my thoughts were distracted; I kaew
»
113 knew not where I was, till roused by my foot striking against the rails of the altar." Alphonsus th$n related what has been already told, and ended by asking the Captain, what his opinion was? "Have I not reason," said he, " to curse the hour of my birth, and earnestly to impfore the God of Mercies to take my afflicted spirit to himself?"
CHAP
114
СЙАР. V». Yet оме again, dear purted shade, Meek Nature'* child, again adieu i - Collins. " YOUR sufferings," said the Captain, in reply to Alphonsus, " are great indeed, but not so as to cause you to curse the hour of your birth. 'Tis your duty, and the duty of every one, to meet affliction with patience and resignation. The Almighty has his designs to accom¬ plish ; and you are certainly preserved for some great and wise purpose, which it is not in our power to divine ; for, what says one of our great English poets ? « The ways of Heaven are dark and intricate ; « Puzzled in mazes, and perplexed with errors, * Our understanding traces them in vain, * Lost and bewildered in the fruitless search/ "It
115 " It is not every one/' answered Al·- phonsus, * f that can reason calmly. Re¬ ligion and philosophy are but weak bar¬ riers against the encroachments of dis¬ tress. I am sensible of vvhat I ought to do, but how to accomplish that I know not. Would to Heaven I had remained in ignorance of my father's crimes ! I can¬ not help, at times, reflecting upon them, and this is what adds to toy afflictions." " How came you, w said the Captain, 44 to be made acquainted with them ? I think it was wrong in any one to com¬ municate them to you." 44 It was by accident," returned Al¬ phonsus. " You may remember, I mentioned a domestic chaplain of my fa¬ ther's ; he was an old man, and one very much esteemed by every one that knew him ; he was treated, for his virtues, with the highest respect, and revered by all as the father of the family. After my father left us, this good man was never seen to smile, and, though he endeavoured to administer
« 116 administer comfort to my mother, it was evident that he stood ia as much need of it himself; but he aever omitted, for a smgle day, to discharge the duties enjoin¬ ed him by my father ; he watched over cur iafant years with the most tender care, aad paid the strictest attention to our education. 44 Ia this his whole time was takea up, aad I had arrived to my fifteenth year, without the smallest alteratioa ia our dai¬ ly employmeats, whea a letter was one morning delivered to our pastor. The domestic said, Ithad beea delivered by a stranger, a Moor, or a Turk, he did not know which. The poor old man, unused to a strange correspondent, hesitated to opea it, saying, He much wondered from whence it came.. Like all youths, I was anxious to know the contents—I thought it as singular as the good father ; I urged bim to open it ; he did, but our surprise was heightened whea he read it : " * Father,
117 4i 4 F α τ н ε R, you are requested to go to 4 the post-house ; a packet is left there ' to be delivered to you/ 44 The old man concluded there was some mistake,and said, He would go him¬ self to clear it up. After the business of the morning was over, he went out—he staid near three hours. At his return, he appeared very much disturbed ; and, con* trary to his usual custom, dispeased with my sister and myself attending him in the evening, saying, He had some business of moment to write about, that night, aad requested we would leave him, but come agaia early in the morning. We told my mother what had happened ; but she bade us make no re¬ marks upon it, as the good Father had, no doubt, some very urgent reasons for his conduct. 44 The evening passed ; in the morn¬ ing, we waited upon him ; he appeared more distressed thaa the night before, but we did not make any observations, lest it might
IIS might offend Ыгд —we contented our¬ selves yvith asking after his health. He joined us in the duties of the morning, and, after paying his respects to my mo¬ ther, retired to his apartment. The Dutchess noticed his extreme dejection, and said, She would wish him tò consult the family physician ; as ^ mah of hfs great age required the most tendér care. He thanked her, in very grateful terms, for her solicitude, but declined having me¬ dical advice^ saying, He hoped he should soon bé well 'again. * He left us, but at dinner he was not present. My mother «ent to him ; he apologised for not com¬ ing, but trusted he should be well enough to w&tt upon her in the evening. The Dutchess was alarmed, and ordered the physician to his apartment ; he went, and found him with a large packet of papers before him. He seemed hurt at the in¬ trusion ; but, as the Dutchess had sent, he suffered hiš pulse to be examiaçd, and promised to take? what he might prescribe. My
119 My mother, myself, and sister, were anxi¬ ous to hear the doctor's report. He re¬ lated the manner ia which hf fouad him employed, and said, He thought his mind was much agitated ; he would, therefore, send something to compose hita. My mother, though very unhappy at what the doctor said, yet would not permit either of us to intrude upon him. He waited upon her in the evening, and attempted to appeajr calm, as usual, but it was e vb· dent he laid a violent constraint upon his feelings. She saw it, aad requested he would not stay with us, but retire to his room, and take what medicine should be sent. He fervently blessed us,, withdrew, and we saw this heavenly pastor no more. 44 At two o'clock, that morning, we were alarmed by the cry of fire. My room was next to that where our good Father was ; I jumped out of bed, and ran eagerly to it ; 1 hastily opeaed the door ; the flames rushed out, and caught the top of the door. The servants, hurried to
120 to the gallery ; oae of them caught rne up, and carried me into the' garden, where my mother and sister then were. She clasped me to her bosom, and thanked Heaven for my preservation. * But where, oh ! God/ said she, c is our aged pastor ? , Have you seen him, my child ?' I replied, € No ; for, though I opened the door, I saw him not/ ** The fire was soon extinguished, but, to our irretrievable loss, the good Father had perished. He was found dead on his face in the room, and a vast quaatity of burnt papers round him. Others were found under him, which the servants brought to me the aext day ; they were written in Latin, and from them I gathered the particulars relative to my father, "which I have imparted to you. I shut myself, in the evening, up in my room, and read them with a kind of stupid hor¬ ror. The good man, by what I could guess, must have been transcribing the relation, or ebe bad been writiag it for *some
121 some one's perusal ; as it was all in his own hand writing ; but it came ao fur¬ ther than what related to the day oa which the shocking prophecy was record¬ ed—the beginning of the relation had also been destroyed. When I had read it over and over, I was as much at a loss to reason on it, as though deprived of every sense. I traversed the room ia tears, I threw myself on the bed; I pray¬ ed earnestly for the Almighty to take me to himself. Young as I was, I felt a presentiment, that I should be a victim to the crime of my father. My mother! my poor mother ! for her I felt a thousand agonising pangs. My sister, my brother, all followed in quick succession to my mind ; one momeat, 1 thought it most advise- able to keep the coatents a secret from every oae—the next, to impart it to my mother. 44 la this marmer I passed the aight ; I aever took off my cloaths, aad ia the morning, when the servant came to dress me,
122 toe, he found me as I had dismissed him * the night before. He looked at me with astonishment, and rah back to the Dutchess apartment, ia a violent hurry, sáyín¿, I was dangerously ill, for I was ap, and, drowned in tears ; and more than that, hè did aot thhik I had been in bed all liightr My mother, who was before inconsolable for the loss of our good Fa- * ther, hurried to my apartment, and en¬ tered, before 1 was aware—I strove to hide the papers. '* How is all this, my child ?* said she; * what are those papers ; and why háve you not been in bed ?' I hesitated to answer ; I looked first at the fragments, and then at her, but spoke not. * Cöriïe with me, Alphonsus ; you distress me more than you can imagine.' So saying, she took the papers in one hand, me by the other, and passed to her apartment. The servants were ordered to leave as ; rny mother, then, with her ac¬ customed gentleness, urged fne to tell her, What occasioned my distress ; and what the
123 the 'contents' of the papers were. I an¬ swered, * They' are some of those found in the good Fätheťs apartments; some¬ thing that he was writing ; and, as they were very melancholy, I found myself sur¬ prised into tears on reading them/ * There is something mysterious İn your manner/ said she ; ' you withhold your griefs from me, who ought alone to be made acquaint¬ ed with them. Sit down, my child, be Composed, and tell me what those tears mean?' " The tender manner in which she spoke encreased the reluctance 1 felt to say the real cause of my distress, and I still continued to hesitate. Seeing this, she became still more anxious ; and said, If I would not tell her/ she would send for the Grand Prior of St. Francis, and from him, she hoped, I would keep no¬ thing. Startled at this, and wishing to hide my fathers vices from the knowledge of a stranger, I quickly begged her to for¬ bear sending for the Prior, and I would let
124 let her know the whole. I thea gave a relation of jvhat I had read,; she heard me with patience—she was convinced of its truth by some incidents, which were known oniy to herself aad my father. Whea 1 had finished, she strove to hide her tears, and, clasping me to her bosom, bade me keep the secret within my own breast, and, by ao means, impart it to either my brother or my sister ; end, if I ever mentioned it to any other person, I should draw down her curses upon me, unless I should be ia such a situation, when an absolute avowal might be neces¬ sary. That period, since I have been with you, I have thought arrived ; and to you only have I disclosed it, aad I hope that you will respect her sorrows, and whenever you shouid be in Lisbon, be wholly silent on what, in confidence, I have imparted to you." The Captaia assured him, in the strong¬ est terms, that he might rely upon his honor ; " And let me," said he, *« en¬ treat
125 treat you to endeavour to forget your af¬ flictions. To divert your mind, I will tell you a few particulars of my short story ; which, when you have heard, I think you will be convinced that there is no state of life exempt from sorîow." Alphonsus replied, Nothing would, at that crisis, give him greater pleasure, as he had observed him frequently sigh deeply, and» twice on the voyage, seen him weeping over a portrait, but which he had hastily put up, on his advancing towards him. 44 This portrait," said he, 4t I wished to keep from every eye ; it is the source of all my griefs, as it once was of all my joys; but'tis over novv, and, since I have heard your distresses, I will learn to think lightly of my own." He then took the picture from his bosom, and gave it to Alphonsus. " View it well," said he ; 44 it is the exact semblance ofher it repre¬ sents." Alphonsus surveyed it minutely ; it was the portrait of a lady, exceedingly Vol. I. G beautiful.
IŠ$ čsri^irád) <rf ^is must hàv% been ffie per- feeť wc^maiiísbip Pf Heaven," "And leii mind," said Ше Captain, ** was irt imbf^Ä with her person; but she is no more; she bas, knig since, joined ber kmdred^ngqlîS,i;iliit I fbiigot I meant to give yon my short history; it may serve you to reflect upon, when I am gone frora ypU/',/.;,-..-.
CHAP.
127
CHAP. XI. Åh me, hr aught that I could ever read, Could ever hear by tale or history ; The course of true love never did run smooth : ------ if there were a sympathy in choice, War, death, or sickness, did lay siege to it. Midsummer N. Dream. " I WAS the only child of a pri¬ vate gentleman, in one of the maritime counties of England. My fortune was genteel, independent of what I was to inherit from my father. I lost my mother when I was about four years of age ; a sister of her's resided with him, who sup· plied the place of that tender relative, by the most unbounded affection. 44 When she was about nineteen, she had suffered the keenest of all afflictions to a young mind, tbat of being deserted G 2 Ъу
12g by the object of her tenderest regard. In her person, she was extremely amiable, and ber fortune by no means despicable ; yet, was she destined to feel the misery of disappointed love. When on the point of marriage, her lover cruelly deserted her, for one nowise comparable to her, in point of beauty or mental accomplish¬ ments ; and what aggravated his guilt was the wanton manner in which he sported with her feelings. He had been for some months received by her family as her de¬ clared admirer ; the marriage writings were drawn, signed, and the day fixed for their union, when, on the evening preceding it, he came İn a great hurry, and said, That an affair of the first im¬ portance called him to a short distance, which would detain him all night, but that he should be back early enough the aext morning to fulfil his engagements ; he added,That asthe church was at least two miles from their house, and the vil¬ lage where it stood was in the road, he must
129 must unavoidably pass to come to her, he desired she would, with her friends, meet him there, a little before eleven. His pro^ posai was agreed to by all parties, and he bid her adieu, lamenting the perverseness of the circumstance, which deprived him of the pleasure of conducting her to the altar himself. " When the appointed hour arrived, my aunt, with her friends, repaired to the church, where they found the gentleman and another party of ladies waking, nei¬ ther of whom was known to them or family. When tlrey had passed the morning salutations, he desired the cler¬ gyman to begin the ceremony. The whole of the parties present drew near the altar, and, when the parson came to that part of the service which require the gentleman to present the lady, my father advanced a little forward with my aunt. At this moment, the lover took one of the strange ladies by the hand, and said, That was the person to whom he was G 3 to
ISO to be united ; шЫ ss tlie clergyman Was a stfcmgsr to all the parties, he proceeded arid joined their hands, before the con¬ sternation of my aunt, or her friends, was enough subsided to prevent it. The shock was too great' for my injured relative to support; she fell insensible into the arms of my mother, and in that situation was conveyed out of the church. '*· That sacred place was not a proper one to demand aa explanation in; but, the instant they had all quitted it, my fékhtt iasisťed on the young man's imme¬ diately accompanying him to the house of á friend in the neighbourhood, where the Worthless fellow endeavoured to vindicate Ws consueti but, as the language he rnade use of was not by any means cal* erfåfed to mthfy my father, they agreed to decide their difference in fhe park ofthe gentleman, at whose house they then Ware. They fought ι the scoundrel Was woaad^d, aad, át first, it Was apprehend¬ ed, гйоАзИу*, but he recovered in a few weeks.
İSI weeks. Äs soön as he was oat of dan¬ ger, my father returned to his house, and soob after married my mother ; bat it was loBg before my aunt regained her health ©r tranquillity: frora that moment, she bade a final adieu to love and marriage, and dedicated the whole of her time to the society of her sister. 44 When I was bom, she underfoot the sole care of my infant years, aad, after the death of my mother, became, by her kind attentions, the same as a parent to me. I had attained ray seventh year, whea my father, by the death of a very particular friend, became guardian to a lovely orphan, nearly of my own age. My aunt received her ¿ts a gift from Hea¬ ven, and determined to attend to the education of the charming girl herself, and the more readily, as I was shortly to be placed under the tuition of a clergy- ifcaa who resided near my father, and pre¬ pared tea pupils for the universities. G 4 « ï coi*.
182 ff I coatiaued at home but a few months after the arrival of my father's charge ; but those few months, young as I was, I thought the pleasantest of my life. I had found, in the dear Susan, a play-mate, and a sharer in all my joys and griefs, and whea the time came for me to go to school, I earnestly begged my father and aunt to permit Susan to accompany me: but this, I was given to understand, could not be, as the educar tion of a female differed so widely from that of a boy. But, notwithstanding the arguments made use of, it was with the greatest reluctance I entered upon my new situation without her. However, I was, at last, a little reconciled, when I had obtained a promise that I should spend all the holydays at home with my sister, as I was disposed to call her, ." I continued at the seminary six years, and, during the whole of that pe¬ riod, was never so happy as whea I could gaia an iadulgeace ofa few days, beyond the
1S3 the limited time of vacation. At the ex* piration of the six years, I wm removed to Oxford, previous to which, my aunt, who had discovered our mutual attach¬ ment, hinted in pretty plain terms, tbat, if I conducted myself in a proper manner at college, I shouid, at my return; be blest with the hand of my Susan, provid¬ ed she approved of roy addresses. This ι was a prospect I anticipated with the truest rapture. Our fortunes were nearly equal, and, with all the ardor of youth, flattered myself I could not fail to obtain the approbation of my sweet girl. I em¬ braced myľaunt with transport : and pro¬ mised, and indeed was determined, lo be every think she could wish me. I should have thought no task too severe tp obtain the object of my fondest hopes. It w T as agreed by my father, who bad also ob¬ served our mutual partiality, that I was not to mention any thing to my Susan of the hopes I entertained, till my final re¬ turn from college, Jest it might be a check G 5 upon
iífíoti héŕ irıeBtâtfons, and prient bét (ШаШчШЛщ á éhmm more congenial to hèfwfehesj iitt Ihfe circimistuncei I fànâfy hoped, would never happen. I Obehli Шу father's commands, and left thé îàol ofiBjr heart. *< As lay sister, 1 frequerttly wrote to her froin college, under the title of bro¬ ther, aad as frequently received letters in return, fhe language of which gave me the truest pleasure. As sooa as røy time was expired, I returned to my fa¬ ther's oh the wings of love ; I flew to embrace my angelic Susan, whose ma¬ ture beauties entranced my every sense. She felt ehibarrassed at the warmth with which I addressed her, but that soon wore off; and I could perceive that she was as much pleased with the alteration in my person, as I was with her improvements. My fkther and my worthy aunt saw the pleasure aad evident satisfaction which appeared in both our looks, and seemed to enjoy ás much happiness ia con* templating
feåptatlhg Oats, as we did ourselves. I seized the first moment I could fiad, to ask my aaht When I mi^ht ventare to make known my pretensions. She gave me liberty to act as I chose, aad assured aie of success ; being certain, she said, that Susanas heart was all toy own, as she had refused many tery advantageous of¬ fers. I could have hugged my tínore thaa mother for this kind assurance. I lost no time to profit by her indulgence, and, as my Susan had been brought up to act above disguise, I was not long in obtain¬ ing an avowal of her partiality for me, and to be mine should depend solely upon the will of my father and aunt. Their consent was sooh obtained, and, before I had been at home many weeks, I received from my father the hand of her whom I esteemed the perfect work¬ manship of Heaven. My friends shared my bliss, and I suppose a happier fa¬ mily never existed. G б 44 We
m k ~ ** We had beea married about five пювЛ*. Tvhen my father was advised J>y his physician to visft the German Spa, aad it was immediately decided that pyself aad wife shquld accompany him. My aunt was likewise prevailed upon to go with us. Every thing was sooa ar¬ ranged for. our journey, and we set out in great spirits, not in the least doubting but that my friends would benefit much by the change of climate. We arrived at Spa in safety, and, soon after we were there, had the inexpressible happiness of seeing my father mend daily, insomuch that he appeared to have regained his youth, and my worthy aunt enjoyed a sa¬ tisfaction in seeing us happy, such as she had aot experienced since her cruel dis- appoiatment ** We continued here for several months. My father was so much pleased with the domeftic felicity he enjoyed, that he did not form a wish to retura to Eng¬ land. My wife was some months ad¬ vanced
1ST vaneed in pregnancy* when she was seiz¬ ed with an epidemic fever, that raged with violence in several parts of § Germany, and the third day from her being ta¬ ken ill, it was announced fatal. I never left her, day or night, aot withstanding the physician assured me I had imbibed its baneful effects; nothing couid prevail upon me to leave the apartment, and, on the morning ofthe fifth day,, as I support¬ ed htr, whilst the surgeon was endeavour¬ ing to bleed her, she sunk upon my bo¬ som, and expired without a single ftrug; gie! 44 I will not attempt to describe what my feelings were at that awful moiaent. Grief unutterable, joined, to the fever which I had then got to an alarming height, soon deprived me of all recollection. - It was many months before I recovered, so as to be able to converse rationally with any one, and scarcely had I obtain¬ ed that blessing, when I had the irrepara¬ ble misfortune to lose the best of fathers, t ahd,
№ă t Мий tAè^ Ш^ ^-^^^^ ШН ii тая Щ:Щ;рф!е^Щ ШШ^ Thus; íh lešš еу^гуШг^А^ ¥ * I Was potóse öf Шпепсё, but Ί ЪШ^:Щ^^-\Ш^ : &ЩЛ- tm. I wari- ď^ďalatíť, Wè a deferted bëirrg, bereft ЙГ ¿veiy caŕfňfon. My oiily amusement Wás to retrace thè steps iny deair^lost Susan had trod, and I frequently knelt döwri aftd kbsèd thé ear th, Which I fond¬ ly fancied had beeri pressed by her feet.— In this diètrácted manner I spent many months, carefully shunning society, and •fondly foriging fet that moment when my Söul Would be free to mount the yielding air, and meet fier heavenly Spitit, far, very lar^ bèyörid mır cloudy atmosphere. " öne Шу, as I Was wandering alone in ¿iié òf ťhfe pılblîc gardens, I heard two gentletnen fe earriést conversation re- i^tting inaptes; í listened attentively ip tfeiť Ш;<ШЩ and itraîsëd in me â èësïtè io [iUìi íhafeity. I had nò ¿oónèr " embraced
139 embraced thOfdea, than I hastened to put it into execution* vainly hoping, ia every change, to find relief from my sor¬ rows. I arrived there; it happened to be carnival time ; the scenes were new to me, and I observed them with atten¬ tion, but felt ao desire to join in the amusements. However, one day, I put on a domino, and followed a considerable throng, which I saw entering one of the public walks. I spoke Italian, but very indifferent ; therefore, did not address myself to any one; but walked on, con¬ tenting myself with observing the dif¬ ferent whimsical figures that passed me in all directions. " I had been about an hour in this sort of amusement, when I was met by two white dominos, and accosted with great smartness by one of them, who requested me to join them. I thanked them for their politeness, but decliaed the invitation on the score of ill health aad want of spirits. They expostulated, condemned
140 condemned my want of gallantry ¡n very ludicrous terms, and insisted on my ac¬ quiescence; and, without, giving me time to make any other answer, took each of them an arm, and hd, or rather dragged me along with them. The mo¬ ment we gained the street, I was desired to enter a carriage, which seemed to have been in waiting on рифове. Wholly re¬ gardless of what might be the end of their frolic, I obeyed, and suffered them to conduct me where they chose. They were pleased at my passiveness, and laughed immoderately at what they had done. Though I understood but little of Italian, yet I knew enough to gather from their discourse, that this frolic had been designed me ever since the day after I arrived at Naples. ** They drove out of the city, and, about two leagues from thençe, stopped at a large building, the outside of which had nothing to recommend it : but, when they had gone through the outer court, they
14f they passed on to a smaller, in which stood a very handsome portico, that open¬ ed into a saloon. We entered, and as soon as they had fastened the door, they bade me throw off my disguise, as they wanted to have a full view of my face, which I readily complied with, aot doubt¬ ing in the least but they would soon disco¬ ver their mistake, as I had all along sup¬ posed that they took me for another per¬ son, who, I imagined, had come to Naples, the same day I did, and that, as soon as the mistake was cleared up, they would send me back again. But in this I was greatly mistaken ; for, on my saying·: * Ladies, for such I presume you are, now that you are convinced of your error, I trust you will be polite enough to order me to be conveyed back again to Naples/ they made no answer, but laughed to a most violent degree, then beckoned me to follow them. ** I was more surprised at this con¬ duct tlian at the former, and though I had heard
142 heard much of Italian ladies aad their intrigues, I never bad any desire to be engaged in one,and, therefore,reluctantly obeyed. They perceived it, and, hastily taking hold of me in the same mannei they had done when I first encountered them, hurried me through a long gallery, the extremity of whkh seemed to termi- aate that wing of the building. They then entered a magnificent room. On a table, at the upper end, was spread every delicacy that luxury could procure ; they set me down at the table, placed them¬ selves on each side of me, and immedl· ately offered me the choice of the various delicacies before me. I took the same as they helped themselves to ; they then plied me briskly with wine, aad drank each as freely. 44 All this while, the faces of both were covered, their masks being so contrived, that they could eat and drink without taking them off. When the repast was over, they gave ще to understand, I was to
Î43 to continue there the night, and, for that purpose, led me to another apartment, ia which w T as a magnificent bed—there, they told me, I was to repose. All to me appeared enchantment ; I ventured to ex¬ postulate, but all I said was turned into ridicule, and nothing but excessive laugh¬ ter followed ; I was therefore constrained to acquiesce. They left me to my repose ; a night-cap, gown, &c. of the most beautiful taffety, were placed for my use. *' As soon as I was alone, I surveyed the room with the strictest attention, though my head, from the wine I had drank, was not very clear. The more I looked, the more I became bewildered. At last, I concluded that I must certainly be in an enchanted palace, and that my conductors were some famous princesses, who were disposed to amuse themselves at my expence. My door, I found, was fastened on the outside, and, though I was in such a splendid apartment, I was actually
i H actually a prisoner. I wearied myself with conjectures of what might possibiv be the end of this adventure, till I fell asleep. " I had not slept long, when I was awoke by the close embrace of some one in the bed with me. It was very dark, but I soon found, by the delicate form that encircled me, it was a female companion I had got. I was not long in returning her caresses, but I could not prevail upon her to tell me to whom I was indebted for the honor done me. Her voice she care¬ fully disguised ; she bade me ask no ques¬ tions, and, if I was pleased with my si¬ tuation, desired I would not in any shape refuse to comply with what she might re* quire, as I must continue there till the end of the carnival. She said, She knew 1 had no business at Naples but amuse¬ ment, and, so I met with tbat, she suppo- - sed it would be no matter to me in what mannerit was obtained. She said further, Thai she had taken care to have my Eng¬ lish
145 lîsh servant satisfied of my being in safety, and what time I should return. I was much amazed at all I heard, and con¬ cluded it was best for me to comply im¬ plicitly with her will. 44 She left me before it was light, and, when I arose, I was surprised to find on the toilet, the dress of a woman, and a direction pinned to it, intimating that I must put it on, as my own had been taken away, and would not be restored till my leaving the place. I concluded there was no alternative ; therefore arrayed myself. It w T as a loose dress, something in the Moorish style. I put it on to be sure, be¬ cause I had no other, but I could not help thinking I cut a sorry figure—not quite so handsome as Achilles, among the daugh¬ ters of King Lycomedes, and at the same time, drew an inference, that, if 1 should be discovered as he had been, in all pro¬ bability, I should not come off so easily, but, instead of his fate, meet a stiletto. However, as I set but little value on life, and
146 aad this intrisile was not of røy own seek* iag, 1 soon reasoned myself into an easy acquiescence. " There was a fortnight still to come of the carnival ; the whole of that time I passed in the same manner, and, though my mistress came to me every night, and spent the greater part of tbe day with me, yet her face was so artfully concealed, that I neyer could get the least glimpse of it ; but, by what I could conjecture at night, it was most beautifully formed.—- W T hea the time expired, I was taken back the same way as I was brought there, and at quitting me, the lady whom I imagined to have been my companion, put into my hand a ring of great value, and bid me wear that în remembrance of the carnival——They left me in the exact place they had taken me frora. " 1 returned to my servant, who told me, He had received a letter, to inform him I had made a party among some English gesìtitemen, and should aot return till that evening.
147 evening. I coacluded from this, that the lady, whoever she was, had taken her measures securely. I sought to find her out ; but, notwithstanding all my endea¬ vours, she remained wholly concealed.— I therefore set it dowa in my miad, that, whatever their other qualifications might be, the Italian ladies are, of all others, the most complete adepts in intrigue. ** Soon after this, I by accident became acquainted with the captain of a trading vessel belonging to Smyrna. He was aa intelligent man, and used to amuse me much by describing the customs and manners of the Turks, and the other na¬ tions that traded to that port. He inflamed my mind with a desire to see it, and, when he sailed next for Smyrna, I accom¬ panied him. The voyage was prosperous, and we reached it in safety. I was greatly amused with the new scene that opened to niy view, and, when we landed, and he had perforoied all that was neces¬ sary respecting his cargo, he took roe to all
ш «Il the different parts of the city 5 intro¬ duced nie to all his acquamtance, and they to their's, so tbat I had not been ia Smyrna aboveda fortnight, before I was kaown to all the consuls there. I was *very where received with great respect ; I spent my time ia a very agreeable man* ner, and became so attached to their mode of life, that I resolved to take up my residence there, as I knew not, if I changed, where to find more ease to my mind. I imparted my design to my friend, who would not advise me either way. ... /' Captain Brindley was about to proceed, when a servant entered, and told him, The dumb-man wanted to see him—this was the appellatioa by which the strange gen¬ tleman they met with in the church was known. The Captain ordered him to be admitted—he entered with a profound salem. He took his seat, and apologised for the trouble he gave them. They as¬ sured him, so far from deeming it trouble, they
-149 they were happy to have the honor of Ы» compaay* and if any information of their's could give^him pleasure, they shouid be happy to impart it. He thanked them, and said, " Pardon me, gentlemen, if I appear disturbed at the dread of hearing what amounts, I fear, to certainty. You told me, Sir, I think, that this young gen¬ tleman was at Lisbon at the time of the dreadful calamity. I had an intimate friend, a merchant, of the name of Fer¬ nandez de Silva, who traded to this port for many years. He was a man of great probity, and one whom I had much rea¬ son |o value. He served me in many in¬ stances for above fifteen years. This gen¬ tleman I have not heard of since the dis* mai catastrophe—was he, .Sir, known to you? or have you ever heard of his fate?" Alphonsus paused—"That name, M s said he, ** 1 think I have, heard ; but, though I was at Lisbon at the dreadful moment, yet I am as ignorant of the fate of the in- Vojl. Ι. H habitants,
fc&i*mntø* aa ¡f I bad beea a thousand leagues dbtanŕ. i vras а particular suf¬ ferer io that mehmcholy event, and my s-^^sqoeoadrst meies have been such, as topreckebeevery sxiÄt o-f knowledge; but my feiend here hai correspondents at Lieboa, âod will, I urn certabb be happy fc* malse eveüy enquiry yoa car* wish/'— This the Captai* aseuped hmi of, aad said» Ал he should touch there on his re¬ turn* he would make ia his business to Irara eveiy particula*. The aklgendenftam seemed much pleas¬ ed at their eamestRess to serve him, and said, He should not feil to retata it with gtat&ude. «* felţ,** said he, turning to Alphonsus, « ch> yo» mean ? Srr, to take up yont residence here ^ rf yöa tte, i shall be prøud to liave the honor or your ac¬ quaintance, for the short time I am gene¬ rally hete.** Alphonsus sighed deeply. " I know not at present," returned be, « f whether I shall continus here or йо*; tø the misera¬ ble,
151 ufe, all places are alike ; tim« alone ещ& assuage their grkfis*" fi Yoa have beea* thea/' said the old geatkmaa, " a great sufferer; I am sorry that I have inadvert¬ ently awakened your sorrows— pardon me for thus distressing you—1 could not have supposed^ that oae so young as yourself should have drank deep of the cup of affliction.'* ** Affliction/' said Alphonsus, " is felt in a greater or less degree, accord* ing to the temper of the persoa afflicted* One man regards as a trifle what would render another miserable all his life ^ therefore, I must not think my sorrows are more thaa anotheťs-r-only, 1, perlai ps* might feel them more acutely.", "True/* returned he, ** you reason well ; and, as 1 have known troubles rnyseif r t might bø the more acceptable acquaintance to you, 1 have travelled over the greater psafoi the globe, and find, from sad experience, that the longest journey we can - take is to ga from ourselves ; far, though we tra¬ vel aver, rejprøiafter regb«^ aaclteave the H 2 world*
152 ШШрШАЬттв, in a speck behind, yet 4 t^ K >á>*ŕítí#s^Mt' ŕ corrode the -heart will stììi %mğ round '«к, 1 and nouğh fc but Hea- vëh Can shakß ; dffithe indefatigable intru¬ der. I İpeâk from expedience ; often have my grèy habs been scorched by the burn¬ ing rays of" the sun, on the parched sands or Arabia* and as often have they been drenched witb the cold dews of the night felling thick upon them. And yet, though my tottering frame suffered alternately the extremes of heat and cold, my sor¬ rows altered not j and whether I reposed on a bed of down, or with the camels in the open air, still I was the same, still the same images presented themselves, and still did 1 find my griefs the same ; but yours, I trust, arise not from a source Hke mine., Yon are too young to be inured in tbe ways of vice. Your afflic¬ tions may fiad à solace, but mine never can. At this,*bis countenance bespoke the most bitter soferîpgs. He arose, in great agitation—
153 agitation—·" I mast fake my leave/' Wid he; *< respect my*grey hairs, and4etinbt this weakness be spotted with ; I will see you again soon." Saying this, he hastily withdrew. " Respect thy grey hairs," said Alphon¬ sus, after a pause ; " couldst thou think that we would not ? Ah J my God, per¬ haps thou hast met with beings, whose hearts are callous to all the feeìings^oì humanity; buUours are not; I pity hié distresses, and, as far as I am able, will soften them, and assist him." " This poor old man," said the Captain, " inte¬ rests me much ; I really think there is something in your person that awakens his grief. He eyed you with the strict¬ est attention. I would wish you to cul¬ tivate his acquaintance ; he is certainly a gentleman, and a man of learning, and in the company of such a person you will insensibly lose a remembrance of that which now afflicts you." cc I feel an attachment for him already," said Al- H 3 phonsus -,
154 phonsus ; м шпа yet 1 cannot divest myself ofthat terror which his presence flrst in¬ spired me wkh*. There ís, though such ţin old man, a fire ia his eyes that awes me. I really believe I should be unhappy* if he had not said, he would see us again. I am,determiaed now to stay here, till you return from England* I think I shail not be more at ease any where else." The Captain confirmed Alphonsus in his inten* tions, and resumed hit story.
CHAP
155
CHAP. Χ. The fringed curtains òf thine eye advance, And say, what thou acest yond ì ----- »- What ЬЧ? a sffíftt?*— —— - ľthe name of^omeihiö^holy, Sic, wb^ ataodyon In this s у ange bture? 44 ICQNTlNlIEØlicre-afterii^ friend sailed ι I formed a lar^e Acquaint¬ ance, and joined with them ia all the a»isnuseme«ts of the place. About #&$ months after he had left me, l hâd an eri- igsgemertt to dine with a large patty, at a merchaat's, whose chief trädfe was 10 Aleppo. Amotig die company, I ré- snarked two gtntlewien, whtí^er»^ by their raaaaor^ though diserà m the Tar¬ tar habit, lo be EarorpeA«s-^h¿y had be«H iotroducwi m wpetthaats betoftging to îh* H 4 Grand
1Ď6 Grand Seignor—Tliey quitted the com¬ pany early. 44 After they were gone, I took an op¬ portunity to observe to my host, how much the gentlemen's manners resembled those of the Europeans. 'True/ said he, * they do ; but it is not to be wonder¬ ed at ; they are subjects of your kiag.'— * Then, how came they/ asked I, 4 'm the Grand 3eig*tior*s service ?' * That/ an¬ swered s he, 4 is rather a mystery ; they were, I have been iuormed, gentlemen, who bad risked their all in the restoration oÉ.onp of their kings, or his son, I know ■not¡Which. ЖЬеу failed in their attempt, and fled/ Tbey took refuge at the Porier-rUnder the disguise of missiona¬ ries, they entered, Natòlia, and stayed three, years among the miserable Greeks and Armenians; they then returned to Bursa. Here /they were noticed by one ¿of îtbë Bashaws» wfeo had ^considerable influence, with the^yizfer.' They were ffjc<røaieaded to hirøj tbey шгегасЫ the *v ~r t i I: Mahometan
157 Mahometan faith, and soon rose to con¬ siderable eminence—they married two la¬ dies provided for them by their patron,— For seven years, they were happy, but the Vizier being deposed, they were thrown from their elevated situation, aad their riches seized on. However, they had the precaution to secure a sum suffi¬ cient to place them above want, * and fled here with their families. One of¬ the gentlemen had tw r a daughters; the other, one son/ the son is now here, with his father, and one of the daughters of the other. They have ahvays been in¬ separable, and fate, which iri general parts friends, has been particularly kind to them. The wife of the eldest, and his other daughter, are to be here-soon, and I will, if you are desirous 'of it, r in¬ troduce you to them.' s * : 44 I embraced his offer with pleasure 1 ; I was glad to fly to any thing that would make me forget myself. He was faithful to his promise, and, three weeks after,* in- H 5 troduced
158
traduced me to the amiable family, The eldest daughter was a most lovely woman. The youngest charmed you the moment you beheld her, and my fancy pictured a resemblance between her, and rar dear lost Susan ; but she was engaged to the son ofher father's friend. In a short time, I saw them united, and the young man, with his wife and father-in-law, soon after .·left Smyrna, for England. " Not long after their departure, 1 felt a growing inclination for the eldest lady. The only obstacle í had to dread, was thc difference in our ages—I was near seven years older : but, when I made my in¬ tention known, I had the inexpressible satisfaction to learn, that I was warmly approved of by all the family. My for¬ tune was such, as could not be objected to, and, soon after, I became the husband of the amiable Zelica. I fondly hoped, in the bosom of this lovely woman, I should forget my Susan ; but, alas î she was too deeply engraven on my heart, ever
Ш' ever to be banished thence. I have oftefc reproached ttiyself for not feeling that warmth, that tenderness, and anxiety, for my charming 2etícâ, that I once felt for my Susiin, whose r^iernbrarice I fondly cherished. 44 For two years, I lived in the greatest harmony. At that time, the plague broke out at Smyrna, and in that dreadful me*- lady I lost my father-in-law. By his will, which was made soon after our. marriage, l'was appointed his successor in the bu¬ siness he carried on, and enjoined, if I had any children, to extend nty concerns, and etabark m ν private fortune in the firm. He laid down the mo$t exact rules for my conduct, aad divided thc whole of his property, after the death of his Wife, equally between his two daughters, and their husbands. ** As I had one child at his death, ahd was ia daily expe<?tatioft of another, it was uot long before I put his orders in ex^- ecution. My mothfcr-iti-law was an ex¬ il б ceilent
160 cellent woman» and, though she was deeply afflicted by the death of her hus¬ band, yet she never slackened in her at¬ tendance on my wife—she was almost constantly with her. My second child was a son ; this seemed to give her un¬ bounded pleasure, as her daughter in England had not any children. I gave orders to my brother-in-law to dispose of all that I could sell of my landed property, and, by the addition of this capital, we were enabled to extend our commercial concerns considerably. ** For six years, we were remarkably fortunate, when a ship richly laden, wholly consigned to me, and which, by some unlucky means, was omitted to be insured, was taken in the Mediterranean, by a French ship of war; and we lost a hundred and fifty thousand pounds.— This blow was so severe, that I neaily sunk under it. We collected immediately the whole of our remaining property, and settled our affairs, to the satisfaction of every
101 every one. My brother-in-law was pre¬ vailed upon, by his friends in England, to embark again, and I reluctantly consent¬ ed ; but there was one circumstance that softened that reluctance. I had long en¬ tertained a predilection for nautical pur¬ suits. I thought, if I could make myself acquainted with navigation, I might soon be able to take the command of one of the vessels which vvere constantly going to and from London, as we had reason to think that the master ofthe captured ship had wilfully separated himself from the convoy. This scheme 1 imparted to my wife and her mother ; they at first oppos¬ ed it, but, being at length convinced by my arguments, they consented, and by the arrival of the second vessel, I was deemed competent to take charge of her. I however thought proper to take the Captain with me the first voyage. On the passage, he took great pains to instruct me in my new office, and I rewarded him for
for it, and he has occasionally been my preceptor since, ** During my abfence, on my first voy¬ age, my dear Zelica had the unhappiness to lose her. mother. This had a visible effeet on her spirits,, which continued to encrease so much, Л hat,, when the rime came for me to sail again, I found myself ander the necessity of taking my wife and children with me. The first clerk on my formet establishment coatiaued with me, and be, ia conjunction with the merchant to whose house I first took you, transact tbe business for me during my absence, and I thank the Almighty that a prospect aow begins to open for retrieving our for¬ mer losses, ** 'Tis now, f 'our years since I embarked in a maritime Hie, and 1 have four chil. ¿rea. I know not whether my wife will ever return again to this place ; I rather 1 thbkshe will not ; she seems foad of the English, and, as 1 have a wish to rear my childrea
im children in my native country, Jt mftjr be- most advisable for them tocoatíáue there. Ifi hada household, as formerly here; yoa know aot how happy I should be to see you an inmate of my family; bu% as it is, I must be content. I trust that you. will now be convinced, from my simple. story, that no state of life is exempt from distresses." Alphonsus looked at the Captain with a mixture of admiration^ pity, and re*- spect. " Your sorrows, my friead," said he, ** will implant in my mind stronger lessons of morality, philosophy, and reli¬ gion, thaa L could ever obtain while I. have existence. It will never b^ effaced from my remembrance,, aad I shall make your example, through life, the rule of my conduct." Their conversation then turn¬ ed oa the old gentleman ; they formed a thousand conjectures on what he might he, and.srilUUey could ik oa no on^with certainty.
Three
164 4 - Three days passed, and they saw him not On the fourth, they received a kt¬ ter iro» him, saying, that he was unwell, but Would see them again, if possible, be¬ fore he left Smyrna. They were both gfeatlý concerned to hear of his illness, and would have gone to visit him, but fmted to offend. Two days after this, as they were leaving the Kane to pass down Fraak-street, they observed a gentleman walking hastily towards them. They ad¬ vanced to meet bim ; he was a Greek merchant, well kaowa to Captain Brind¬ ley. * As he came йеаг, they saw he was in the greatest agitation. ' f For God's sake, my friend," said the Captain, ** what is the matter P' He turned quick, and looked earnestly towards the Custom¬ house belonging to the Franks, which im- mêdfetfcely #eed them. *' book at that spot/*^aidhe; " do you see that object?" 44 What?" said the Captain ; " I see no¬ thing but a Frank leaning on a stick."—- " That
ш " That is what î meart," replied he; 44 do you, or do ybu not, believe in supăratului beiŕigí»^' "That is an odd question," a#· sweredthe Captain; "why do you* ask it?" «Come with me," rat&rfteď Mev "and you will know." So-saying; he took hold of the Captain's arm, and hastily walked towards the place where the Frank was seen to stand; but, before the-phad reached halfway to the «pot, hebadva^ nished. « There," said be ; " now Lam confirmed." « Good God ľ' said At- phonsus, ** which way did he go ? didymi observe ?" ** No," said the Captain. * * They stooji for some minutes, as if feat in thought -, each one seemed bewildered^ At last, the merchant said: . ,c Youar« convinced you saw some one rest osüia stick,by tbe ddor of the second entrance?'/ 4i Уев, a am," said Alphonsus. & And so am I,"answered tbe Captain ; ^Içan parti* subiti^ hiş/dr^sr-^A^arğe moritínggôíWií; щ$& Hat^øuer ovçr ; bis facje;i heiseérøed №nì ^iTíhat^ye^genllefoari^i.fibld the Greek,
lee Greek, " you saw at my home, tfcree years ago. Hh/nvrntt was Morland, and he belonged io thc firm of Morland ¥«a- sam and Morland . He was the youngest, !M*d, lo my certain knowledge, has been dead two years. I had been to the Cus¬ tom-house, concerning k bak of Persia silk, which had been detained through a WfOagfentry. I was talking to one of the men about it, when I saw quickíy pass me, this very person. I was startled, utud turned souad tobe satisfied. I saw him pass before me up the street—I followed him quite round the Custom-bouse—at the South-side I bst him j but, cai coming into the street again, 1 sa w him dose be¬ fore me, leaniag as you saw. I came close up to him, and held out my hand, ^heáitost^ aod hastened on toward« you, I iooked rouad ag^n, and saw hini standing ia the same poskioo as he was before. Now, if ; you had not seen him, as well as I «lid, £ However
■■'■■' ï&t liôwever, I will get to thé 1ю There is one of the holy fathers Щ fee at my house thfc ev^aiag, and 1 wiH dfeiglare to him whatlliave seen. Lord hêî^rae! what a silly noddy l am¿ to be ft%htai^l but nevermind; the Holy Patriarch ín^- teet 4LS." [ '"''. The Captain and Aîf>boasus reg*j«i4ed tlie poor man as a little deniagc^ he riil on ¡a such an unconnected mannen He beggec^^^them to go homewith Ьш^ for he had some traag to say to them, respecting what they had seen. They contented, aad attended him, though rather with an 'm* tention to see bim safe* than aiiy ťhfeŕig else. When he reached home, he begged fliem/for the Jo ve of the Holy Saints, not to teaire Mm^'fötf* said he, " he might es well come to us here, as in the opea street, where one may stand a chance of biang h^ied at, for talking with a dead man ; but you; ť^aj^ one of die fooiiih Frenai; ^ İka at
16S af every thing, when they ought to be serious/V ч t о . , This speech had nearly destroyed his position,- for they found, it difficult to sup¬ press a tmile, but they conquered it, and listened to him. He said, The Mr. Mor¬ land they had that day seen,., was the youngest of three, brothers. * 4 Were they all ia Ше firm ?" asked the Captain.— *fl No,".returned be, " they were meant tø be* Iwitbo'røehow it was managed, the eldest was drOwned on his passage, though the Lord above knows how, but drowned he was* Now, there were se- veral strange stories told about it, but it was-sooa?hashed up: however, now I havç «een .the* youngest myself, whom Τ know, to be dead, and you have both seea hime* ^begiaMtìiink there's a little more la it than I was aware of. I should have heard a gpod*deal about it,* but there were soroerpiaguypranks ia company, who* as asuali tet^hed ,at ir. Lord help your na¬ tion i
169 tion; they are the greatestparkof them fool$ or madmen/' - * ~* r * Tbe Captaia smiled. ¿ * 44 Ay, you may smile, But itis si>,— Thefe may be many honest men; to6, es¬ pecially those that live out of the reach of that folly of laughing. There is aa in¬ stance of it in yourself; I have known you, novv, these seven years, and I do really believe, I never saw you guilty of those fooleries above five times. But I will tell you what I heard about this same Morland. You must know, that Yessam and Zadick's house *was about to be dis¬ solved. Yessam was inclined to take two or three gentlemen into the concern with himself, and as his business was very great with the London merchants, he wished to have a partner of that nation, and, after proper enquiry, found three brothers of the name of Morland disposed to treat with him. He proposed the terms, and they were acceded to. and they agreed to send over the middle brother directly, the eldest
170 eldest and youngest were to follow. Soon- after, the middle one came, as appointed, and entered upon his engagements, as well for himself as his brothers. " Well, the time came, when they were expected, but the younger brother only came, for the eldest, they said* had been drowned in the passage, by being washed overboard ia a gale. 'Twas a lame story, to be sure, but as nobody in the ship contradicted it, why nothing was said about it ; so, the firm was only Morland Yessam and Morland. This very man whom ypu have just now seen, died two years ago, or thereabouts; I was iavited to his fanerai, therefore, Гт sudpe he s dead. Every body said he was in love* as he always appeared very me- laacholy, and did not laugh, as those of his rraûön generally do. His brother did not grieve at all about him, but was ra*- ther pleased, ше thought, at the event ; but* ferali he has got both his bcothers* •fi^tunesr, yet be is not happy, and 'tis re¬ ported,*
171 ported, that the devil, or something like him, appears to him very often, for he won't be left alone for a moment, hnt hallóos and bawls for his slaves, a« if a whole legion of spirits were going to run away with him." ** But what account, Sir," asked Al¬ phonsus, 44 did the people on board thé vessel give of the death of the eldest bro¬ ther ? ,: 44 Why, there were many accounts," re* turned he ; <f but that I think was the most likely whieh the men gave, whose watch j t was -I had mine from one of them.— He saîd, There had been some very rough weather for several days ; the ship sprung a leak, and made so much water, that they found it very difficult, by constant pumping, for two-and-twenty hours, to keep it under. She was deeply laden, and had many passengers oa board.—* On the evenmg of the fourth day, se¬ veral of them had heen oa deck, to assist at the pumps, among thera, the two
172
ÎW0 Mortands* They .were observed to bß on the.forecpstle, close beside each ^|her f , when a vfolerjt swell came—'the vessel-heeled prodigiously^ and shipped a. large sea. When she righted, the elder Morland was missing. All hands were instantly forward, to see if they could discover him, but he was never seen to rise again. Every one lament¬ ed him, but none more than his bro¬ ther. The storm continued many hours longer, but at length subsided, and, they reached this port in - safety, without losing any other person in tbe voyage. But strange tales were told by the sail¬ ors ; one afirmed, That, a fortnight af¬ ter Mr. Morland was drowned, he saw him standing by the side of his bro* tjber's bed, ^bolding something * in his # hand;» and another swore, He saw him iojhe shi»u4^ -surrounded by fire, twice in one night. But what I believed roost, was the testimony of the Captain» though I did not, at the time h^ related it,
175 it, mind it any more than the Franks, who laughed at it most abominably, and, said, The Captain was become an old woman ; but I don't now think him an old woman.**
Vol. L I СНДР.
m
CHAP. Xï. The expedition of roy violent love Out -тап the pauser Reason.— Here lay Duncan, His silver skin lae'd with his golden blood ; And his gash'd stabs look'd like a breach in Nature. Macbeth. " HE told us, He was sitting in his cabin, three days before he entered port, at a table, examining the log-book, and<«was looking over that part which related ta the storm, when the door open¬ ed, and the elder Mr. Morland entered. A chair was by. the opposite side of the table, which the mate had just quitted. He drew close to it, and seated himself, raised his elbow on the table, and rested his head on it, as a person might do, when oppressed with the head ach. He seemed to look at the Captaia in a sup¬ plicating manner, aad held out something 'in
175 in his left hand, like a letter, partly burnt. He satin this posture near a minute; at length, rising from his seat, he looked at the Captain, who had not power to stir, full in the face—pointed to the letter, and vanished. That he did not go out at the door, he was certain, nor did he see him move above a foot from the chair. " While he was lost in thóughCtbe mate and surgeon came in. Hè ïmrfié- dlately asked them, Whether they ìiaB seen any one enter ihe cabin f They an¬ swered They wore-certain no one * had, which was con firmed 1 by one of the cabin- boys, who was in the cuddy the whole öf the time. The Captain was'laughed at very much, but he-persisted ín ff, that he realiy did see Mr. Morland, after he was dead. The two brothers, I believe, were very glad, when he sailed for England ; they took care tbat he should not be sent out again, and I have not seen him since. Now, gentlemen, what is your opinion ? I 2" do
176 do you think the Captain did, or did not, tell rhetrutfeli*' - < " Upon, my honctr," said Mr # Brindley, ·· I know not what to think of it; tbey could not,J should suppose, be all deceived—unless they mistook one bro¬ ther for the other." « That," said the merchant, " was not the case, because he that was drowned was a short fat man, and the one we saw just now was tall and thin, and always appeared very un¬ healthy." As be iaid thia, a priest of the Greek church entered. The merchant instantly related what be had seen, and asked him, Whether he thought it would visit him again? "Itis impossible," answered the priest, "for me to say what will he the event ; but, as these gentlemen saw bim, too, I should be rather inclined to think you would see him, if it does come again. Be under no fear, but boldly ask in what manner you can nerve it-*-I wish it would appear to me/' Scarcely
177 Scarcely hâd he spoke, when the same form passed through the room as they had seea ia the street, ** There he is," said the merchant, "speak, speak," The priest instantly rose, but saw no¬ thing, though the others did. As they all siood looking towards the opposite door, they observed it come in agaip,and glide swiftly out of the house. The priest instantly followed, but lost sight of it, close to the Custom-house. He returned, and said ; " There is something more thaa ordinary in all this, and accounts for the report of the devil's visiting John Mor¬ land. If I do see it again, I will speak to it, though I follow it into the sea." A long conversation took place be¬ tween the four, respecting the reality of ghosts ; and they were all of opinion, that they were permitted to take again a corporeal appearance, when any particular circumstance was fo be revealed. * f I will give youanexample," said the priest, ' in my own self. Before I was destined I 3 for
178 for the clwrchyi said my addressee to a young lady, who was much celebrated for the beauty of her person, but not much for tbe brilliancy of ber talents. Another young raan, øf nearly my own age, lively and accomplished, but of very little for¬ tune, likewise made his court to her. Neither of us weţe much approved of by her parents ; if there was any balance, it was in шу favor j but of that I could not avail myself, as I was by my friends sent avvay to a distant part of the country, oa $ашс urgent business, which detained me sçvçral months. At length, the business was settled* and I prepared to return. 44 My servant had placed a dish of frølt on the table, and was gone to give some orders før me î I was in bed, and waited bis return, to leave it, when I was surprised by the entrance of the very young Ыу· She came close to roy bed¬ side, and held out toro -за little infant, wbkh shç h*4 w entering, clasped to h£f bnsast» It appeared to be covered, on one
№ one side, wift Ыоо$. She spoke aot, bat drew aside the veil that haag oa her bosom, aad discovered à large wound, which seemed to stream with crimson» I started up, and exclaimed, *ia the name of God! Abra, what does this mean ? how саще you here ? aad who has done this diabolical ^eed?' She looked earnestly at me, and said, * Perciò ! Percio ! Percio Г then vanished in a mo¬ ment— Perciò was the aame of my ri* val. 44 The suddenness of her appearance, the shocking sight óf her blood flowing, the little infant in her arms, aad the tone of her voice, had such an effect upon me, that I sat, when my man entered, a per¬ fect statue. He was surprised at my at* titude, and fearing he had offended me, hastily drew back, and was about to leave the room, when I called him, and bade him search about the floor, aad see whether there was aot some stala on it; The fellow was aow more* surprisc-d^hai* 14 before,
180 Mlìbre^ an^ tìv^i^ *1дак1Ш М-ШшЖЩ1$&. * I see nothing/ said he, î ЛШ what i kft there.'·^-* Did you see tio lady enter the roOm> with an infant in her arais ?~ r None, Sir ; I should never have thought of such a thing/--'Then have I dreamt it/ said I, and tried to reason myself into that belief ? 44 1 arose» was şoon^dressed» and pre¬ pared to leave the house. As I turned round, to take leave of the gentleman, the owner of it, I saw the lady on the road before me, with the child still held to her bosom· I started at the appear¬ ance, but lost it again. I left my friend, and hastened on my journey. It is im¬ possible to tell the agitation of my mind ; \ was then certain it was no dream ; I had ao idea of her heing dead, and hpw to account for her appearance, the blood, or 4 the infant, distracted me with conjec¬ ture^ I was anxious to reach my home, but 1;]ща*ургу long journey, and it was . hear
ısı near three weeks before I accomplished^ it. '· Oa the evening previous to my arri¬ val, I felt a violent head ach, and, to ease it, I ordered roy servant to stop and get me some sherbet. It was a sandy plain we were in, and I "could see a considera¬ ble way around. He gave me the sherbet, and I was returning him the cup, whea I again saw the same distressing object· She pointed to the iafant, then to her wounded bosom, pronounced again the name of Pereto, and vanished. From that moment, I thought I should have gone mad ; I was so impatient to reach home¿ and be convinced of the meaning of what I had seen. 44 The first question I asked, whea I got there, was, * Where is Abra î is she well ?' My sister, whom I saw first, and to whom I put the question, hesitated to answer. I entreated her to tell me, as she could not, I said, inform me of any thing worse than I had reason to guess. 15 She
ш ._ ■ . ^étítèift ЩЙ m^ and had beeft so sear three weeks. ■'* bi ШЙ ÄÄ this, аШ^аШШШ^ wms found ;iapifeiăiş^ öne question mote, ^nd I have Jane. Is it known by whb^n it Was pèípctrated !*— 1 No ; she Was fouad dead, in a cham¬ ber that overhangs thè water. What adds to ftè horrors Of flie crime, is, that she was pregnant, and very near her йейас.* ^^THÄto^i-Älie "íuiŕäíS:- --iii-iiírriecl,* -/sâni I. -^* Wè dotft kno^r; it is generally sup- posed that she was, pfivately, to Perciò/ ; ■ V Perciò/ cried I, * is a villain ; when did you see him ?'—-' He has not been here these three months ; he is now with his 4nefe^^^ c W they oot discovered any thing to guide them to the murderer ?*—* None.**— «Tliéh í will give them a clue/ <* My father coming in, prevented her Γ ^ when I j fomid an oprjortunity, I told her what I j '■'v- ■'■■ i .--. ' : had
m had seen,ønd at what tirne, wbich, upşg comparing, J found exactly to correşporţd with the d%y$ md y supposş d h#ur, of hßr ¿ea,th. í foki røy mt§r* I was mplm d to become ?mck>*ß цвешг· $>e ед#е^т vopred to dissMgde ще firoj» it, |>rat ajl ţhaţ she cpuld say was of no avail, Sefore J did it, I thought it most advisable to consult rpy father ; I therefore, that even¬ ing, related to him wh^tj bad previously to my sister. He was perfectly of my opi* nion, with respect to Perciò; ţ>ut he thought such evidence would have ţiuţ little weight with his judges, especially as we were known to hw bfen rivajs j and such an accusation wouhj only tend to involve me in tţpuble aad vexation, ţ therefore determined to let it restfbut,g¡r) whe rever 1 woald, í still thought í saw the murdered Abra. 44 Ţhreş months passet, зш! п*у mind always reproached me with not accusing Perciò. 1 had been one evening talking with щу sister respectief him; we sat I б up
Ui ap rather late, aad I had gone to my apartment, much vexed with myself, for having said any thing to roy father about if, as I thought it would have been much better if Ihad followed the first impulse of my heart, gone to the Cadi, and boldly accused Perciò of murder. I was lost ¡a thought, when I saw a light shine across my room, different from any kind I had ever seen before. I started up, it increased, aad in a moment the whole room was illuminated with celestial ra¬ diance. Before me ftood again the bleed¬ ing form of Abra. She seemed to look at me with reproach—then bared her bo¬ som, aad shewed the gash—again pointed to her infant, aad solemnly pronounced die aame of Perciò. * Overcome with a kind of stupid hor¬ ror, I dropped oa my knees, aad, as well as I could apeak, begged her to tell me, whether I could serve her îa bracing oat die murderer. * You know him al¬ ready/ said sbe; 'revenge an injured wife»
ÍS5 wife, a murdered infant—behold this wound, survey my child, bathed ia the 1 blood of its mother—be her avenger, and seek the criminal ia the person of her husband, the cruel Perciò/ "This said, I lost sight ofher ; I fainted away, but soon recovered, and got to the bed, with a full determination to go, the aext morning, to the Cadi, and inform bim of every thing I had seen.
wI"fÄI%
л*
CHAP. XII. Site I killed î I did ш : but thou strik'st me Sorely, to say I did $ ît is as bitteyr Vipm thy tongue, as iirmy thought. « ......> Wiwtee*» Tale. 44 I COULD not fleep, but lay restless till the dawn ôf day, when I rose. At length, the time came when I could see the Cadi. I went to his house ; I en¬ tered, aad begged to speak with him alone. It was granted. I entreated his indulgence to hear an accusation I had to make against a gentleman. He bade me make it, he wouid attend to me. I then minutely related all that 1 had seen. He heard me through, with great patience, and then said, Was I apprised of Percio*s marriage wtth another lady ? I replied, No ; and thea gave my reasoas for not waiting
waiting on him before. 'Then/said he/your father did wrong ; you ought to have imparted to me your thoughts, whatever might have been yoar former acquaint¬ ance. In cases of an atrocious nature, like this, even your brother ought to be given up. I shall take care to have hiai secured, and I expect you will confirm, in his presence, what you have now re¬ counted/ This I promised to do, orlóse my Hfe.—fl was then dismissed, and, three days after, f was summoned to attend. I went, and there, in the presence of all the officers of justice, repeated what I had before told. 44 To describe the horrors visible on the countenance of Perciò would be wholly impossible. The Cadi asked him, What defence he had to make ? He he¬ sitated for some time ; at length, as if In agony, he said, He had none, for he was guilty. He then begged them to hear his confession. " He
im * He had, he said, about fourtéea months before, prevailed upon Abra to be privately married to him, in the chapel of the Franciscans, and from that time, he had, regularly every night, been admitted to her apartment, as he was in hopes to get some friend to break the account to her parents, but that she, dreading their anger, had not pressed it. There had been no oae privy to the marriage, but one servant, and the priest. She had not been his wife above three months, before he began to repent of his union, especially as he had seea by accident, a lady, who, he had reasoa to think, would not be averse from, receiving his addresses.—» From that time, he became less frequent in his visits to Abra, and set about a de¬ sign io destroy the evideace of his mar¬ riage. The priest, he sooa fouad, he could, for a sum of money, make subser¬ vient to his wishes. There thea only re¬ mained the servant This woman, by the assistance of the priest, was conveyed away
189 away to a aplace of saf^ty. That done, he thought there was no longer any occa¬ sion to keep measures with Abra, and he so far succeeded with the lady, as to get her to promise him her hand, if her parents consented. He, soon after, saw Abra ; she reproached him with his neg¬ lect, and insisted upon his going to her father, and avowing their marriage. This he refused to do, and said, So far from avowing it, he should take care that it should never be known ; and then told her, He had got in his possession the only evidence there was, and that, whatever she might think, he was resolved to marry another. A violent altercation en¬ sued ; at last, Abra drew a dagger from her bosom, and said, If he did not imme¬ diately go with her to her father, she would stab him. He still refused, upon which, she attempted to strike him ; he wrenched the dagger from her, and plunged it directly to her heart, and as soou
Irø soon as he< had done it, be made his esn cape. " As no oae suspected him, he pro* ceeded in his intentions with the other lady, and she, soon after, became his wife. But he had been one ofthe most misera¬ ble beings in existence, as Abra had ap¬ peared to him, in the same manner as« she had done to his accuser, whom he freely forgave. " The confession was registered» the pajrerits of Abra were sent for, and made acquainted with what had passed* a.nd that he was to siţffer immediately. After some short time spent with his confessor, he was beheaded. From that hour, I never again saw the poor bleeding phantom ; but it had such aq effect on my temper, and so fuUy convinced me, that all the doctrine which I had heard relative to supernatural agency* was not a fable* such as I had before regarded it, that I re¬ solved to embrace a religious life. I communicated roy wishes to my father* and
191 and my reasons for it. After a little de¬ mur on his side, I entered on my novi¬ ciate. cc Thus, you see, in my own person, I have convinced you of the reality of what most people regard as visionary ideas, and the work of a distempered brain. I am determined, ifit is my lot to see this spec¬ tre again, for such I am sure it is, to speak to it. If I am not so fortunate, and either of you, gentlemen, should, let me entreat vou to do the. same, as I did by the dear Abra; for, be assured, there is something that ought to be revealed | and 'tis our duty to search it out. I am firmly of opinion, that either the gentle¬ man we just now saw, or his brother, came not fairly by his end. You, Sir/* said be, turning to the merchant, 4i seem to be pointed out by Omnipotence, as the person to discover it; therefore, do not omit to speak, whea you see him again/* This he faithfully promised, and should*
щ shpuld, he said, at first, if he had not left him so precipitately. Alphonsus was much taken with the Greek priest, and said, He should be hap¬ py to cultivate bis acquaintance. They then took their leaves. When they reached home, they were informed, A message had been sent from the dumb man, that he would wait upon them the next day, as he was much better. This gave them both pleasure, as they were anxious to seu him again. The next mornmg, he was announced ; he appeared much de¬ jected^ and said, He had been very unwell, but was then much more composed.--· " The recollection of past sorrows," said he, ** will prey upon the constitution of an ©id man, sinking under years and infir¬ mities ; but, in your conversation, whilst I am honored with it, I think my griefs will be hushed." They assured him, that his company would be the mpst desirable acquisition they could obtain ; therefore, begged him to
to be with them as often as he could make it agreeable. To amuse him, they gave an account of the adventure they had met with the preceding day, and what had passed between the priest and them· 44 That man," said he, *' is a worthy cha¬ racter, though I never held any conver¬ sation with him, but I have had several occasions to call upon him, to perform some good offices for me, that I was in¬ capable of doing myself What he says, you may rely on. The Morlands I have heard of, but know very little about diem ¿ the account seems strange which you re¬ late, but I believe it, aad am of the priest's opinion, that it ought to be at¬ tended to. There are many men in the world, who are, to all appearances, of the , first character and rectitude ; yet, were their private actions known, would prove monsters. I have uniformly found, that a man cf grave and reserved habits is less to be trusted, thaa he, whose giddy, thoughtless manners, seem ever to put you
194 you on your guard: ifyou have occasion to transact business ofisecrecy with any man, Dteerve his countemmce, whether it be a ruddy or pale complexion ; if the latter, with a flat face, small crooked nose, grey eyes, fiu* set in the head, a small mouth, ajad a large foot, beware of him, he is a prodigal and a knave; let him not be trusted with any thing. Another charac¬ ter» whîph I have found equally danger- Qus to society, is the man, who has risen, by chicanery and deceit, from a mean and abject state to affluence. He will jtfeter*d to be ypur friend ; he will advise щва!тст¥Щеуощ to trust yoiir property into his handit, undera pretence that he means tOtServe you ¿ but no sooner has he obtained U, than he secures it to himself, and bids you seek redress from iaw. He knows ypur poverty, a#d fears you not. The *maa tliat mn do this, bass a long full faoe^gt^y ey& » the hair ingenerai falls pff tbe front of the head ; he is slow of speech, and, if irritated* stammers. Such a man
1$5 а man wül aot hesitate to rob the widow and the orphan, aad throw them helpless into the street." " Ia Loadon," said the Captain, ** you meet with many such persons ; I think there are more villains of these descrip¬ tions, in trat city, than ia any other I know." " I am not much acquainted," said the old gentleman, " with people of your nation, but 1 have beea told, that, notwithstanding there is not a better code of laws, aor a more happy constitution, than that you can boast of, yet there is tio people under the sun suffer so much frorra the roguishness of lawyers^—which I am surprised at, as they appear to me to be, ia all their dealings with other nations, the most brave, honest, and just men, I ever met with." " They are so," said the Captaia; ** there is not a country in the world, that ought more to be credited ia their coa- ceras with foreign rdierchants, or in their leagues with sovereigns, than England. The
196 * The^evils I mention are local—there is aot a set of men existing, mòre anxious to deceive each other than they are; though the vilest among them wouldj at the same moment he is cheating hii neighbour, start at the idea of defrauding a foreigner, unless he lives among them aad thea he is as ready to be imposed oa as another/' 44 This," said the old gentleman, " ap¬ pears to me a strange solecism ; but, alas î it is impossible to find either a country or a people wholly free from the vices incident to man, I have ahvays had an unfavourable opinion of John Morland. His eye has wandered over surrounding objects, with a kind of scru- tiaisiag fear, though, aţ the same moment, he has been conversing with a merchant, aad concluding with him a considera¬ ble bargain. That man's mind, I have said, as I surveyed hirn, is ill at ease, and I have turned fro^him with disgust, though, in general, I like the English. The
f
Ì97 The other brother, whose form appeared to you yesterSay, I never saw above twice· He did not, I believe, live long here ; he seemed always melancholy, like many of his countrymen, who are anxious to gaia wealth, that they may throw aside the merchant, and assume the private gentle* man, which all seem to aim at ; and, so they can attain that desired end, there are few amongst them that care much by what means they acquire it. The honest road appears too tedious for them ; but I can boldly venture to affirm, that ao man yet, however great his riches were, if ob¬ tained by unfair means, ever enjoyed his ill-got wealth, nor did his children after him. I knew one of your nation, with whom I was intimate many years back,* who lay under that imputation, and con¬ firms your remark, that they will de¬ ceive their countrymen without scru¬ ple. I know his story, and will tell it. you." Vol. Ι. К > They*
щ Tføy ш4* They should be başpy to bearjţ, l^it wquld oot give him too much
»Ш» OV THE ŕllST VOLUME
Küiffht ind Cottjpton. Pf inte», MídJlá Street, Čloth Fair.
