Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The romance of Smyrna: or, The prediction fulfilled!!
THE ROMANCE OF SMYRNAj Xc. Sc.
CHAP. I.
-· I shall die contented,
To think that oncel saved mv friend his life. HOÔLE " Most dear and valued fiiend, « VV ITH more sincere plea¬ sure than I have known, since I parted froni you, I sit down, to say how thank¬ ful I am to the Eternal Being, that has preserved you alive, and in safety. Had 1 received the news by any otber means, Ishould have doubted it altogether; but Vol. HL В the
6
the incidents which Captain Brindley imparted convinced me of its reality— You have escaped, and I am happy. I new/glfiry in ťhe idea, thar neitìier Mon¬ caraz, nor myself, suffered in vain—You may remember that *was the name of that dumb friend of mine, who shaved your head so expeditiously in the cellar, and conducted you with me to the fish¬ erman's. That was a dreadful moment, but it fell far short of those that followed. At the earnest request of Captain Brind¬ ley, I am going to give you a long ac¬ count of all that has happened to us since that fatal period, *« You may remember that we promis¬ ed to see you again in three or four days, 'and to send you those necessaries which your distressed situation required. We ; retu?ned home, as fast as possible, in •order to lose no time in procuring them, må to see Whether any enquiries had been made after us. It was late in the evening, before we arrived—no one, we found,
7 found, had beea there, but those belong¬ ing to the patients. I staid in doors, and sought among my little property for some articles to send you, whilst Mon¬ caraz went to proeure others, and was to be with me early the next morning.— jWhen I had selected what I thought would do, I went to bed, but had not beenasleep long, before I was awakened by a shriek from my servant, an d the »room was instantly filled with officers of the Inquisition. I was directed by signs to rise.—I obeyed. My apartment was most carefully searched, as were the outer rooms ; not a single place was left ; the garden and all was ransacked. They threw over me a long black cloak, and hurried me to a coach. I was not at a loss to guess the cause, and was happy in the thought that you were in safety. 4S I was taken to the office, and de¬ livered over to two wretches, more like devils than men. I trembled for the fate of Moncaraz, as he, I thought, was al- В 2 ready
8 ready in tbe prison, or would shortly be there· For myself I felt little, but for him a thousand pangs—-he had a wife, he had children,, who were then at a friend's bouse, near Belem, and would, of course, be ignorant of his fate. As for myself, I Ъца no ties whatever. I was conducted tøy tho$e horrid fiends, I may with truth call them so, to a cell; my cloak was taken off, and a small jug of water, and some bread, was placed beside me. I threw my ^yes around the dreadful place, and, as the double doors were fastened on me, sunk senseless on the floor. How long I continued thus, I know not, but I at length awoke to reason. " It was many hours before I again saw those ministers of hell. They entered, and looked at the bread and water they had kft the day before, and bade me, by signs, to eat it—if I refused, they gave me, to understand, I should be compel¬ led. They left me more, and went mny, ^ « Three
9 ** Three days passed as before ; on the fourth, I was ordered to attend the superiors. I followed my conductors, with trembling steps, through several long passages ; at length, they stopped, and I was led into a large hall—but, to you, who know that diabolical seat of hellish justice, I need not describe it. I will only say, that I was interrogated respecting you. My answers were such as displeased my examiners, and I was ordered to the question. I underwent it with firmness, and persisted in not giving up the place to which you had been re¬ moved. I was taken back to my dun¬ geon. It will be useless to say what I suffered, but more on Moncaraz's ac¬ count, than my own ; I sincerely prayed he might have fortitude to support his sufferings, and persist in saving you. * * Not many days passed, when I was again brought before them, and interro¬ gated. I was as determined as eyer, and again underwent the torture. I was car- B % ried
ία ried back, and by cordials brought to life, onljf to Ы irfoîfıııe4 That, if I made not a confession lit three days, my liie simuld atqhe fot my obstinacy. I heard " it l with cídmüess^ and was resolved to meet niy fate with firmness» if death did not close mý eyes before·- <ť I remained for many days in a state df stuprfaetion^vab length, I was again! thought able to> undergo the last grand ¿struggles of sabering nature; but, on, the evenmg preceding the day appointed» the dbor&'Of my dungeon were opened. I concluded they were come to take mo out, and finish tkdr work that night, and looked at the man that entered with pleasure; but Iwas surprised to see a strage face ;-tnstdad of sigar, he bade me tó^^éíWloWhm**! said bvtra* unable* being too weak to stand* He looked at me with aái ^^aifc ofpit^*then <aimed:rburid, anè left me. Iní aífisw^ minutos he re* turned; emth twoothár>men, and a chairs they ItfteJ meinto it^dnd hastily carried^ me
11 rae along several dark.gaÄerks* At îa^, they stopped before a large gate, whkh one of them opened, and I found we were in the street. A- coach was near, into which they placed me, but spoke not a word ; they made signs to the coach¬ man, aod he drove огь In a few minutes, I perceived they were entering. the plain where my house stood, and* to my utter amazement, they stopped at the door of it-—I was lifted out of the coach, r and carried in. The first «sight that met my eye was my friend Monearan. I read in his emaciated form that he had undergone the same tortures as myself, and, turning my head round, perceived my poor ser¬ vant in the same wretched situation.— Whether it was joy, grief, or resentment, Icknow not;.but I couldionly.g^e, a£ tbem by turns* The* селсЬ was gone, imd we three miserable and almesţ езз- piting beings were left together. * e The first that spoke was poor Diego, who attempted to cernie towards me, hut В 4 in
12
în vam, and, dropping on the ground, exclaimed : * Oh ! my master!* Creeping On my knees, I went to assist him, as did Moncaraz. He raised up the poor fej- low*s head, and said; c If thou canst speak, Gonsalvo, join with me in cursing those monsters that have reduced us to such a state/ * Yes/ I said, C I will join thee, and here imprecate, in the most solemn manner, tbe deepest curses that the tongue of man can pronounce upon those damned agents of hell ; and, if, in the infernal regions of Etna, there ís one place more full of torments than another, may that place be theirs!' Moncaraz joined with me in the curse. " At last, I had the satisfaction of see¬ ing the poor fellow open his eyes, and Moncaraz, who had the most strength of the three, made an effort to reach the door, wbere, seeing a man passing at a small distance, he called to him. The man came, and he desired him to go to old Benedicta, and tell her, and her son, to
İS tocóme immediately. The man' went» and, in lesñ than a quarter of an hour* the poor old woman was with us, and Pedro came soon after. She wept bitterly at seeing us, and hastened to get what we wanted. We found every thing as it was on the night of our being taken thence. Her son assisted us to bed, and each having taken what I thought proper, went to rest, Benedicta*and her son agree¬ ing to watch by us during the night/ « We had, thank Heaven! sound sleep, and, in the morning, founď our¬ selves much better. The whole of that day, and the next, we spent in bed ; our tortured limbs stood in need of quiet. The third morning, we got up, and in a few days were so far recovered, as to be able to see a few of those who came to congratulate us oh our return alive, as the report of our being taken to the Inquisi¬ tion was pretty generally known. " The day after our return, we sent to Donna Moncaraz, to apprise her of her husband's safety; but her joy was so Β α great
great, that it hád nearly pome iatah^· Oa that account, she eould not comeìt^ Ыт?» but all of his family tbati could» «Md. Irt & few days, he was able to in> fornirne of what haé passed with him*» He waif taken away from his house* at ther &ame time tKat I was from mine, and suf¬ fered nearly the same tortures; binVbe? thought, in a less degree. Diego under* went but one examination^ and was put to the question but once,, as they found he was ignorant of the whole transaction. We sent to the fisherman's tk» enquire for you ; and, to our great distress, found you had left them. ** For several weeks, we sought you in every place our imagination could sug- • gèst ; but all our efforts were vain. We, at last, were reluctantly obliged to give it up, and, till· the happy moment of seeing Captain Brindley, concluded you were dead. At times» I wás led to fear you had fallen into the hands of those merciless tormentors % thenb my heart would
n would shrink back, with terror keonceiv* able, and I denounced as many curses oa them, as, I am certain, woulch reach from hence to Heaven, could they be heaped one upon another. But? the satisfaction Moncaraz and I now feel* is more than any one can imagine, to think those hell¬ hounds were deprived of the prey they so eagerly hunted after. You have, I am certain, some secret friend among them. What first gave me the idea, was, that, whilst we were using every endea¬ vour to find you, a note was, one day, left at my house, which contained these words. " ( The friends of the persecuted and f unfortunate Alphonsus are requested to c make no further search after him, lest c they again endanger their own safety. * The person that sends this applauds r their friendship, but entreats them ta * take this advice,' " Thus, my dear friend, have I given you a concise account of what passed sincţ Β iì I last
Ιβ I last saw you, as far as it relates to my¬ self. I sincerely wish it were in my power to write so readily on the affairs of your family ; but I find myself inadequate to it, 'tis painful for the hand of frieikU ship to wound the feelings of those they would wbh to comfort and console; especially when they cannot hoid out ацу future flattering hopes. The scene that presents nothing but dark and dreary prospects we wish to hide even from our¬ selves ; then you cannot wonder that I am averse from mentioning circumstances that have come to my knowledge, when I am sure they would only aggravate those afflictions which you already feel too heavy ; and which a man less endued with fortitude than yourself, must long ъ'тсе have sunk under; but, as you are superior to others in misfortunes, so I trust you will rise above them in patience and resignation. 'Tis this, and this only, that marks the righteous man. Arm your soul with the shield of meekness, and
17 and bring to your remembrance what an English poet says : To him that sutlers much shaU much be giren, And patience wear the brightest wreath iu Heaven« * c I will tely on that assurance, and trust that you will likewise. I am, you know, the Child of Sorrow, like yourself. I mourn the loss of every tender tie—a wife, sister, brother, all swept away in a moment. May the pitying hand of Hea¬ ven chase away, in its good time, the shadows that at present cloud your days ; and may those that err be made sensible of their crimes, and be again deserving of your love î This is my daily prayer, and I still hope you will be happy. I often refiect on these lines : Hope cheers the weary traveller's breast, And leads him on to peace and rest, Where joys eternal flow.
" Mankind,
It u * Mankind, теяету* station, are bom to suffer ; some more, and some less ; but he that bears affliction with the greatest patience, certainly brings the most ac¬ ceptable offering* to his Godb Remem¬ ber this, and I trust you will read what I may recount with calmness and sub¬ mission. * € Captein Brindley, before he left this place; earnestly requested, that I would gain every particular that I could, relative to yourTamily, and send it you. I have, therefore, done every thing in my power to collect the necessary information, which has delayed my writing to you much longer thair it would otherwise have done, I was afraid to ask any body my¬ self, and equally averse from letting Moncaraz do it, knowing that we were both obnoxious to those that oppress you. u After resolving in my mind a thou¬ sand expedients* I very fortunately re¬ collected
1ST collectée a worthy Father of tbe; order of Pît^ who was> well known tm\me¿ He resided? at Almada,, and had bram several times^ to console ше ino my misfortunes* I had not seen him for a considerable time, as, his age and infirmities encreasing fbst, he-seldom carnete Lisbone I sent, and earnestly requested to see Ыт ; be came at my desire. I ventured to impart fo him my embarrassments and requested his advice in what manner to act, to gain the intelligence I wanted. He heard me out, and, with the greatest readiness, ofíered to take the note to Father Jerome. He said, Hehad know» him for many years. He was the Grand Prior of St. John's, and a man. of great consideration, piety, and virtue. I deli* vered to hirn the note left røe by the Captain : he went away, and I saw Ыш no more till late the next day. On his return, he smiled, and said : * I am come, røy son, at last : I have succeeded to
20 to thy wish, and thou art requested to transmit this, with care, to thy friend' ; and he put into my hand the papers I send you herewith, ahd the drafts on olir consul, for the inclosed sums. ** I will not trouble you with any re¬ marks on the conduct of this truly good man. He speaks in the most exalted terms of Father Jerome, and, if I am not greatly mistaken, he is the friend that preserved you. One of the letters I send you, I believe is from your brother.— He is now here, and is shortly to be married to a lady, whose parents came with him from Brazil. The other, you will see, is from your mother, which 1 implore you not to read, unless you can arm your soul with fortitude. Do not, by unmanly weakness, shew yourself un¬ worthy of so great, and so good a parent—a parent, who, for so many years, has borne up against such various afflic¬ tions. Let her example be yours, and you
21
you will prove yourself worthy of the illustrious descent you boast. This is the sincere prayer of your most ardent friend, - ' « D. Gonsalvo."
CHAP.
it
CHAP. II. -■ и„ . Who, aïas ï Can now inform me ofhim ? I'm distracted Amidst a thousand cares and dread suspicions. How many fatal images has Fear Raised in my tortured breast 1 Who knows his fate ? Who knows if yet he lives ? HôOLE. FOR some minutes, Alphonsus sat the statue of Despair. That there was something contained in the packet before bim, which would add to the distresses he already felt, was but too obvious ; and yet, he could not bear to continue in uncertainty. He sat irre¬ solute. One moment, he took it in his hand ; the next, he dropped it on his knee ; again cast his eyes over the Captain's letter, and then over Gonsalvo's. The excellent advice given by his friend, in the latter part, at length, decided him. " I will
2$ f * I willrnot,** said be, " by this puerile weakness, disgrace шу motber: she is the best of parents, and her virtues shaU not receive a tarnish from me : I will read—And, if I cannot come up to her in goodness, I will, at least, imitate her. So saying, he again took it up, broke tbe seal, and took, with trembling hands, the letter of his biother« " Ohce more, my Alphonsus, am I returned to my country ; and, amidst the desolation that has spread its wide ravages over my native city, I am not a little consoled to find, that none of my family, in his person, has sufiered.-* You, it seerøs, have beenr the greatest loser. If fortune were the only thing, уод. bad to regret, that affliction would be but small,, as I could easily replace it. But* when I find you estranged from your wife and child, and obnoxious, to, the holy church,, I know not haw to console» or in what manner I can serve you. ** I have
«24 ** I have been informed by a worthy man, who feels for your misfortunes, that you have been preserved in a miraculous manner. Indeed, had I not very strong proofs to convince me that you are living, I should much doubt your existence ; but I fiatter myself, that, as you are, through the blessing of Heaven, still alive, I shall have it in my power to obtain permission for you to return -to the arms of those, who still love you.— Had your banishment proceeded from fhe Crown, you should not long languish where you now are, a prey to unavailing grieft No, a son of De Aranjuez should insist upon knowing his crime, and not suffer uninvestigated calumny to blacken his name. Buf your offence is against the church ; in this His Majesty cannot interfere. Your crime is a secret to all but your accusers; how, then, can we seek tohave it done away? It rests with a power too great for me to hope at present to serve you ; but that period, I fiatter
tø ι flatter myself, will,yet arrive, and I shall again behold my brother, cleared from imputations, which my heart, and that of every honest man, acquits him of. Were it in ray power to bring your unjust ac¬ cusers before the tribunal of my country» then might I be assured of proving your innocence, and Alphonsus of Coimbra^ be again the valued ornament of his family ; but, unhappily for me, I cannot accomplish that. All I desire is, that you will rest in hope. Nothing shall be wanting, on my part, to search into a pro¬ ceeding, that will not fail to damn the authors of it. <c I have insisted upon seeing your wife : there is a mystery in her conduct, which I cannot fathom. To-night, she has requested my mother to attend her. Your sister is well, and accompanies her mother. You are still dear to us all, and will ever remain so. *' I am going, for some short time, to the house ofa gentleman, whose daughter I have,
£6 I have, fcr røany^motlths, highly esteemed. Your si^er is soon to be united to Don Lorenzo de Aregos. The marriage ^would bave taken place some time since, -liad the eertaiuty of your fate been known ; ' but she declined being happy t*erse3£ till she knew whether you were »dead oHiving. " OurTOOtber's health is not what it «sed to be ; your misfortunes have sunk «leep into ber heart; and she is led to think she shall not long survive. Sbe ^bas urged me to give my hand to a lady, whose parents returned with me from Brazil : she is nearly related to the father of De Aregos ; but I know not the reason ; though I meet the full approba¬ tion of both her parents, yet I fear I have not that place in her heart, which I earnestly wish to obtain ; but, like all lovers, I hope tbat time wdll do much in my favor. ** As soon as the Dutchess returns from Cálvela, where your wife is at pre¬ sent,
27 sent, I shall write to you again, if possible. Whatever money you may want, draw on me, and it shall instantly be ackiiowledged. Let every thing that can contribute in any shape to your' comfort be procured. Let the same elegancies you have ever been accustomed to, surround you now. A son of Aran¬ juez must support that greatness his dignity demands. u God bless you, and may the Holy Virgin have you in her protection, prays your sincere brother, " Xa. de Aranjttez." This letter Alphonsus read with com¬ posure. The thought of his mother and vşister seeing his wife, gave him the bright¬ est ray of hope. He was, from that, in¬ duced to think, that his brother would soon be informed in what he had incurred the resentment of the church, and his flattering imagination hoped that his wife's powerful relative would exert himself to prove
28 prove bis innocence. Poor deceived Al¬ phonsus ! thy heart was free from guilt itself; and thought hers,, who was the partner of thy bosom, was so likewise. Too soon thy feeling, generous, soul was undeceived. Too soon thou wert con¬ vinced, that she, whom thy fond heart had regarded as the pattern of immaculate purity, was wholly undeserving of thy love, and plainly proved, how difficult it is to read the heart of a woman, whose soul has deviated from the paths of honor. When once that barrier is thrown down, she bids adieu to every virtue ; the ties of wife and mother are forgot, and the name of her husband sounds like the trump of death upon her ear. She flies, she hate^ she despises him. If he is a good man, his virtues are a continual reproach to her She trembles at the sound of his voice, and dreads his coming, as the coming of a serpent. Her thoughts are ever wan¬ dering to the infamous partner of her crimes ι even her children are regarded with
29 with antipathy, and she abhors their inno* cent endearments ; such strange infatuai tion is there in vice, and such the hold it ever has over its votaries. Elated with hope, Alphonsus took iip the packet from his mother. To be as¬ sured she was in existence, threw the most delightful sensations over his whole frame. " Why did my friend alarm me? Surely, if I had more to dread, would not niy brother have imparted it ? and does hè not say, that my excellent parent was sent for by my wife ? Yes, he did. Ah í Gonsalvo, you have been deceived ; you certa 'nly know not that my brother is my friend, and that my mother is to see my Alzira." Thus saying, he tookthe packet, broke the seal, -and in ecstacy pressed it to* his Jips. tc This is my mother's: writing," »»aid he, cc and her affectionate and ^ma¬ ternal hand has pressed it. This, no doubt, speaks of my wife, and nif little Carlos." He stood with it in his hand Vol. III. .C for
'SO for some minutes ; his youhg attendant -had not ventured in, as he thought, if Al- ^hdntâis chose his attendance to open the packet, he wouid summon him. But his patron had evén -forgot that the poor boy was so near him. At length, he sat 4own again, and began the letter. , " My dear» my much-loved son, " It is granted me, at last, to haVe the satisfaction, before тау eyes are closed forever, to hear that you still »exist ; you, for whose fate my anxious heart has .suffered a thousand pangs, and whom I had long since numbered with the deadi I have been informed of all your sufferings. They were great indeed. Tby mother, rhy dear son, has been a sufferer tbo; but her afflictions are, in some measure, mitigated, to hear that thou still Hvest, and mayest yet return to &iess me, ** Since I saw you last, in company with your wife, I have been a prey to grief
31 grief and sorrow; but пощ, some gleams of comfort dart across my path» and whisper to my widowed heaft a ray of hope. Your brotber is returned,; and, were you but here, to comfort me like¬ wise, it would be all I could wish for in this life. Your sister I shall shortjy lose. Now we have heard that you are living» čhe has consented to become the wife of De Aregos. I give ray acquiescence to this union the more readily, as I know him to be eminently deserving of her love, and think Francesa is fully sensible of his vir¬ tues. Your brother Xavier is fondly attached to a cousin of De Aregos. Her father was, three years ago» Viceroy of Brazil. She is very sensible and accom¬ plished, and universally allowed one of the greatest beauties in Portugal. The only thing that gives me concem, on this subject, is, that the young lady does not favor the pretensions of your brother with that warmth he wishes ; but that» I hope» he will soon obtain. С V "I wish
32 * I wish I could give you as satis¬ factory an account of your wife and the chilabas f have of my own family ; but that I cannot. I have endeavoured to trace oiit the place where she now re¬ sides ; but in vain. I have desired your brother to see Don Joseph, or the Cardinal, and, with as much gentleness as possible, insist upon seeing her ; at the same time, to obtain some knowledge of what your offence is. Their Majesties have already been importuned to exert their influence, to gain the particulars of your imputed crimes, that you may have an opportunity of clearing yourself, and that my longing eyes may be once more blessed with the sight of my beloved child,; but I believe their interference, as yet, has had very little effect. How¬ ever, I will still hope that this great blessing will be granted me. ·* I will not flatter my dear Alphon¬ sus ; nay, I cannot, that his wife enter¬ tains the same wishes as his mother.— No,
s» No, my son ; I can never be led to sup¬ pose it : if she had tbat sincere affection for you she ought to have, wouid she not fly, on all the wings of tenderness, to her holy and powerful relative, who has it in his command to see that you are made acquainted with your crimes, per¬ mitted to justify yourself, and be suffered to return to all those tender ties that unite the world in love? No, my^son, «he cannot love you ; nay, I will doubt she ever loved you, since she neglects the common calls of humanity. Pluck the bandage from your eyes, my son ; try to regard your wife as unworthy of your love, and peace may again find a residence in your breast. You have seen me bear up against affiictions of the most poignant kind : imitate thy mother's example, my child, and shew the world, that a son of Aranjuez and Coimbra is not unworthy of the name he bears. I will say no more on the subject. Prove yourself what С 3 I once
s* í once flattered myself you would be, and I ask no more. €<f 1 witt now, as near as Γ am able, give y^u an account of what passed with me anď your sister, on that dreadful day, when ttte^avengiag hand of Heaven fell so heavy on- its» as you, no doubt, wish to know in what manner we escapeé the generaf oalàmity. *^Tbe preceding evening of that me- Itøehøly mørning, I had been let blood, having felt my head much disordered ; and, as I thought the air would be less oppressive m the garden* I ordered a beêto be prepared in the ľower pavilion. Francesa desired I would permit her to sleep there likewise, that she might be near, îf î wanted arty attention ia the night. The servants got every thing ia readiness, and at an early hour, we re¬ tiree to rest. Francesa read to me for an hour, whe» I requested her to go to bed, and ordered one of my women to take the book.
35 book. She did» and read for a consider¬ able time. ** I remained very unwell during the whole of the night, and, in consequence» did not rise at ray usual hour. Francesa- would, not leave me, but desired to break¬ fast m my room. . It was ready* and my, daughter was standing by ray bed-side, with a cup of coffee in her hand fçr me., Three of our women were in waiting, апД two servants, were in the anti-room, when ri at the moment I raised myself to take the : cup, the shock of an earthquake was felt·. We immediately recommended ourselves to the care of the Almighty, and, in the midst of our prayer, another shock, stiU more violent, came ; we were all thrown to the other side of the apartment, and, before we could well recover ourselves, a third followed· We distinctly heard the shrieks of tbe sufferers, and found that the steps of the pavilion were torn away, ano\ the room we were in, le$ in a falling di* »section, С 4 "So
se *' So great was our consternation, that neither of us had power to stir from the position we were in. At length, the cries a«rd groans we heard, induced me to go to the window, though it was with the jgreutest difficulty I could stand ; when» obi' my dear son, what dreadful horrors met my sight! I looked down towards the city; I sought for the houses; they were rrø more;. I shrieked aloud, and fell ££ffšeie&s at the feet of my child, and hit my head witb violence against a cornice that projected near the window. When 1 recovered, I found my poor Francesa in the same situation ; the poor women were weeping over us botb. A thousand tu¬ multuous images rushed upon my mind ; thee, my Alphonsus, I concluded to have inevitably perished^' and my dear girl ap¬ peared as if her soul was fled for ever* but Heaven, in pity to my agonies, soon restored her. > I tried to comfort her.— *AM my mother/said she,* you speak that comfort to me, of which you stand in need yourself,
$7 yourself. Ahí my dear brother I my lost Alphonsus! but we are preserved» and must be thankful that we are not bu¬ ried beneath the ruins of this place: blessed and praised be the God of Mer¬ cies !' *' We continued on our knees for a con¬ siderable time ; each was afraid to go to the window, as the manner in which the fioor leaned convinced us, that the pavi¬ lion, though not wholly overturned, was. shaken to its base, and would, if we moved, perhaps fall upon us. It is impos¬ sible for me to describe my feelings, in those moments of horror, when the seat of life appears to hang upon a single thread. 1 cannot say. how long we con¬ tinued in this dreadful situation, but we were roused from it by the men-servants returning to the pavilion, who were in it at the time oft he first shock, but had sprung into the garden, and made towards? the other side of it. As soon as they had a Httle recovered, they came back tó us ; С 5 but
buli ад the iteps were thrown to a distance* mê Bitt of the terrace was sunk away, th^r fouad it impossible to reach the door; therefore, Ventured towards the windows, {the lowest erf which was nearly half bu¬ ried in the earth,) and called to us, being afraid to come too near. Neither of my women answered, being too terrified to open their Hps* ** ТЪе me& continued caUing, and pray- mgú if we were alive, that we would sa¬ tisfy theni. I, at length, resolved to go myself, but laid a .strict injunction on Francesa and the women, not to stir ; be¬ ing light myself, and nearest to it, I thought, that in all probability, I should not shake it much by moving. They obeyed me, and I crawled to the window* Lopez was nearest ; he saw me ; I beck¬ oned him to come nigh, and told him, We were neither of us hurt, but begged him to tiee by what means we might get out. I bade him go round and examine whether we might, without endangering our
our lives, attempt to descend from the side where the steps had Ыеп, as that . was the highest. In a short time he came again, and said, If I would venture ori a ladder, which fortunately happened tobe in the garden, he thought we might with safety get out. I bid him bring/ it$ Am did, and I ordered Frante^ апа г /оптего1г the women to move gently towards-the door, which had btsen throVra open by the shock. They did so, and I followed them» I wrapped something round me» ашЬ; having satisfied myseif that they could'get down, bade the men leave fht ladder.·^ I then, with the woman, held it, whilst fhy daughter descended. The otber wo¬ men came to me, and I, with one of them,' held the ladder, while the other twocame down, the fabric tottering the whole time i w When they were all safe, I weno down myself; we then all dropped on our knees, and most fervently returned^ thanks Ho tìeaveii for our urnost merciful preservation. But, when I looked arquad* С 6 and
40 агЙ saw the* dreadful horrors that sur* rounded us, rny soul sunk within me, and 1 feinted, but was restored to behold, as I thought, triumphant death in every va* ried shape. I lay extended on the grass» with røy distracted head resting on the bosom qf my child. My wretched ser* vants, who felt for my afflictions,, knelt round me, and by their looks, invited me to take comfort,though, atthe same time^ there 'was not one of them but felt as much for their own relations, who, they seemed certain, bad been swallowed up* I knew not what to do, nor what to say· I was afraid to ask after the other servants, lest, as I saw them not, I should hear they were lost. The house, in the hurry of tny spirits, appeared a heap of ruins ; but there was nothing to dread from that quartes j the chimnies only were thrown down; that part of it which looked into the garden» had sunk in the concussion about two? feet, ада the windows were nearly aß eut» « We
41 " We continued in the garden for some time, on the spot where I had dropped, unable to move from it ; for, every time I looked towards the city, saw the devas¬ tation, and knew that my dear son was among the inhabitants, my brain whirled, and a kind of torpor overspread my whole frame. I was unable to weep. We re¬ mained thus for some hours, till some holy Fathers of the Order of Saint Urban, whom Heaven, in mercy, had spared, ap¬ proached; we were noticed by them; they instantly came to our relief, and took us to their Monastery.
CHAP«
СЦАР. Ш. Aod wherefore should these good news qialip me sick ? Will Fortune never come with both hands full, But write her fair words still m foulest letters í Henry the Fourth. * FROM these good monks Г learnt That all my servants had been saved, but you, they said, was lost. Yes, my son, I was by these good men inform¬ ed, That you had been crushed beneath the buildings that surrounded St. Mark's church, and that your wife and child had shared the same fdte. For some time, I forgot that resignation I have ever evinced to the will of Heaven. At length, the gentle soothings of my Francesa, and the repeated admonition of the Fathers, restored me to calmness. I was taught, that the Almighty had been more merci- ' : ful
4g ful to me than to thousands, tas I was pre-, served, and had still two children left tc* bless my declining years. I caused every search to be made after your body ¿ but it was not to be found. Many were of opinion, that it had been consumed by the fire, which broke out amidst the ruins. " For many months, we were led ta believe so, when, one evening, an attend¬ ant of mine came, in the greatest hurry,. and informed me, She was certain she had seen you in the church of St. Roch ; that she bad heard your voice, and could not mis ake it. I desired one of the Fa-» thers to come to me immediately. To him I related what my woman said, and carnes. íly entreated him to send there di¬ rectly. My request was no sooner made* than complied vvith j he hastened, him¬ self, to the church—no one like you was there ; but, from enquiries he ruade, he found that such a person had been in the church, but had precipitately left it, ¿md every
every one had regarded him as a maniac. He understood, from those in the street below, That you walked towards the Great Quay; he went thither, but no such person Had been seen there. He traversed several streets, enquiring of every one ; but none could give him the least intelligence. Tired and distressed, he returned to me. ** That you had actually been ih the church, or some one much resembling you, he had not the least doubt of; but where you could go, in that short time, he could not form any idea. I had been in¬ formed, previous to this, That your wife and child survived, and were with her uncle at Cálvela. I had sent, and re¬ quested to see her, as soon as I heard of it, but she refused to come. I sent not a second time; but, when I found you could not be traced in Lisbon, I was led to hope you had heard of your wife, and were gone thither. I accordingly sent ; but, instead of hearing the joyful news of your
45 your being with her, I received for answer, That Don Joseph was surprised that I should send a messenger on so strânge an* errand, since it was well known, that Don Alphonsus perished in the general cala-» mity, and that, if there was any person who pretended to be him, he must be a great impostor; and, if I was not dis¬ posed to be regarded as an enemy to the church, I would not trouble myself about him. " This answer shocked and surprised mc. However, there was no alternative; I was, therefore, constrained to seek no more, but leave it to the will of Heaven, to restore you to me, if you were really living. Neither Francesa, myself, nor my woman, could be persuaded but that you still lived ; though how, or by what means, distracted us to think. Oh ! how did I earnestly pray for the presence of your brother ! To him I could have con¬ fided my anxiety ; he would have sought you every where ; but a weak woman, like
4§ like myself, could dø nothing. Some un¬ foreseen events prevented your brothers return^ and your sister and myself were doomed to remain a prey tò doufyt and fear. * e The ^second day after our misfor¬ tunes, we were removed to tbe Convent oí St. Fţancis, the holy sisters of which had consented to accommodate us, till the house coukl be repaired, and in thb Convent I have continued ever since. I frequently pressed my dear Francesa to giye her hand to De Aregos ; she always evaded it* by saying, Till sbe was certain oß your fate, she never could enjoy any real happiness; but now, when she is blessed with the news of your being alive, and in a state of safety, she has consented to reward his faithful love. Every thmg is> preparing for their nuptials, and that their union may be more happy than yours, is my fervent prayer. De Aregos is now attending the Prince, as first Aid-decamp, ?t Algar va; but they are expected in Lisbon
47 Lisbon every day, as the Prince means to be present at the marriage. " Your brother is taking every mea¬ sure he possibly can to facilitate his own, and I think he will be the most envied mortal in Portugal, when he calls that most beautiful creature his wife ; for, be¬ lieve me, my dear Alphonsus, I do not exaggerate, when I assure you, she comes the nearest to divinity I ever saw. These two marriages completed, and my dear Alphonsus once more restored to the bo¬ som of his family, I should have no more to ask of God, but lay me down in peace» and die. " Your brother will not suffer the smallest circumstance to pass, tbat may, in any shape, contribute towards your return, which is earnestly looked forward to by all. I have desired the Father that sought you in the church of St. Roch, to exert bis good offices for you, and I arn led to hope we shall soon know what your offence can bo, " Your
48 * f Your wife and child I have not heard of for some time» and even the good Fa¬ ther, who used occasionally to speak of her, evades it now. This morning, when I asked him, If he had heard where she now resided^he shook his head, and said: * You will do well» Madam, to think no more about her. She is not deserving the attention of so good a Christian as yourself i' " I would wish you, earnestly wish you» my dear son, to be at present easy in your situation. I doubt not but you will shortly be able to appear here, and confound all your cruel enemies. This letter I shall request your friend to send off as soon as possible ; but, in a few days, I shall write again, as it will be the greatest consola¬ tion my wounded heart can admit of. ** -God bless you, my dear, my valued son ! and, that I may soon be happy with your presence, is the prayer of your affec¬ tionate parent, , Mary of Coimbra.**
cc Now,"
49 * " Now," said Alphonsus* ** has not my good friend been deceived ? what is there in this letter I may dread to hear ? does not my dear, my tender mother, hold out the most flattering prospects ? * does she not bid me hope, that I shall once more return to my native country ? and that those clouds that now cover me will be chased away? Mošt likely, my Al¬ zira has been deceived too. She has been taught to regard me as dead ; or, perhaps, she has been led to think me false, or that I was an impostor, and not her husband that sought to be restored ; what could she think otherwise? had not many months elapsed, since our fatal parting? and might she not conclude, that, if I had been living, I would have flown on all the wings of tenderness and love to her arms ? Then, surely, she is not to blame ; I cannot believe her undeserving of my love/*
In
50 In this pleasing reverL he continued for sometime,wten hispupil,who had waited with anxiety his patron's summons, ven¬ tured into the room, and, with much diffi¬ dence, asked Whether he might be of any service, in opening the papers, or getting any thing for hirn ? Alphonsus, whose spirits were elated with what he had read, smiling, said, He would take some fruit and wine. The boy, delighted to see htm look so cheerful, hastened to get what he had Ordered, and, having set it before him, said: ** Now, Sir, only see how right I was ; fbr, I'm sure you have had good news, you look so merry. Pray, eat some fruit; Azeph would have brought it in, but I would not let him ; and yet, as you are happy» I am sorry I did not, for he, poor fellow, will be as pleased as myself; shall * he be ordered to bring in some sher¬ bet?" -" Ay, my dear boy/' said Al¬ phonsus. ι Berry
f Berry ran eagerly tò the slave, and bade bim hasten in with some sherbet, ånd see bow his master looked. The sherbet Was brought, and the poor slave went t>ut, as much delighted as the youth, it being the first time he had seen his mas¬ ter happy. Berry pressed Alphonsus to eat, and said : * f Now, Sir, if our good Father was but here, to see how joyous We are, I am sure he vvould be so too. I have done my task for to-day, and to¬ morrow too; for, I thonght, when letters <ame, you Would be too much engaged to mind me för a day, or so." " You are an excellent lad," said Al¬ phonsus; " and, if I àm fortunate enough to return tö my native land, you shall certainly go With me; there, I hope, I ishall be able to do for you better than I -can hèfre/* ------" I don't love you, Sir, for the sake of what you could do for me ; you have lent me books,^corrected my errors, and placed me under tuition, that I cannot fail
52 fail to improve from. If I did not love you for all this, equal to my father, I'm sure Ishould not deserve the least favor.'* Say¬ ing this, he looked at the letters. " Oh I bless those letters 1" said he, " that have made you contented. 1 shall love letters as long as I hve, especially from Lisbon," He jumped and skipped round the table where they lay, and plainly declared, by his looks, that he would have kissed them, could he have presumed to have taken them in his hand. The poor boy's antics diverted Al¬ phonsus, who would not check these ef¬ fusions of his joy. He ran into the closet, and out of it again ; then took up some fruit, and laid it down again, without tasting it. "* Why don't you eat some dates?" said Alphonsus. ------ " I don't know, Sir; I am so glad, that I will to¬ morrow write a poem upon letters, if you and the good Father will promise not to laugh at me." — " No, depend upon it, we will not laugh at you ; therefore, you
53 you may write what you please, and when you please." " Thank you, Sir," said he; " then, I declare I will set about it early to-morrow morning." In these moments of pleasure the time passed, till, dinner being announced, they arose to go ; when "Berry observed a packet, which lay, unopened, under the sopha. This Alphonsus had dropped, in the hurry of his spirits. " Oh ! bless me ! Sir," said he, " you have not opened them all, for here is the large letter yet s" and, taking it up, gave it to Alphonsus. " I did not see this before," said he ι " how came it there ?" " That is the packet," said Berry, iC I offered to open before I went, and which I believe you dropped ; there were two parcels within the outer case, but I fancy you noticed only the uppermost." Alphonsus looked at the superscription ; he did not recollect it, and it was closed in a different manner from the others, " This will do to read bv and by, won't it, Sir r Shall J lay it on 'Vol ЛИ. D the
5*
the table ?" Alphonsus said, u Yes," and went to the other room, lost in conjecture of where it could possibly come from : during dinner, he was uneasy, as he wished much to be sa¬ tisfied. The lad observed it, and said: * € I hope that letter don't vex you. I am sure, if I thought it would, I would run and throw it into the sea. If I was you, Sir, I would not read it. Hang the packet ! now we were so happy, before, that odious thing came. Ah ! Lord, I wish»! had known it. I vvould hâve run to the captain that brought it, and desired that he would take it back again. Shall I, Sir, do so? I won't be gone ñve mi¬ nutes." *· By no means, my dear f>oy," said Alphonsus ; " you mistake me.— I' am not unhappy on account of the packet ; I am only lost in thought of who it can possibly come from; there¬ fore take your dinner, and, wben we re- tarn, you shall open it." This
ss Tüfe sfôt matrers fö right for fhť pfešéftf, 3írfď rhe dinner wasŕ concludérf. But, be*- fere* tfreyweňt back tothéoťher гЬоп¥, the Father carmr, tb "whom* Alphonsus Ш* parted rHat He ftáď received the ion^-e?x- pected letters, and that the 1 rrews they cotf^ tained had given hinï more sátfefuttfoir than he had hoped fbr. This" ga?e th'è fc Fártorr sincere pleasure ; Й^ coWgfatuiafeď Alphonsus uporr it, una the bwppy bo^ danced round theFither wi*e»ľsťíicv, be¬ ing glad he was come tb partake of life 1 joy. The Father then töök his' pupil tö examine, and Alphonsus retired fo open the packet, having' told ВЪгггу tø would dispense widi his servicer, aš he could Be* better employed with* the Father. When he entered the room, he drew near the table, took up the packet, and examiued the writing on the outside.—· He was surprised to think he should have missed seeing it, being so large. Hs felt a trembling seize him, as he broke the D 2 seal;
■ : U "'u . Об ■ seal ; and a cold sweat, like the damp of death, overspread his face. ** What can. this mean ?" said he. ".Surely, that dear boy augured right; he would have thrown it into the sea, had I permitted it. Then why not let him do so now? if the mere breaking of the seal can affect me, why read it atall ?" He sat a long time irreso¬ lute,One moment taking it up, the next lay¬ ing it down again, and earnestly wishing the Father and Berry were with him. At last, he put it down open on the table, and sat musing, when, turning his eye towards the window, he glanced it over the papers, and saw the word, "Alzira." This roused him in,an instant; he took up the first sheet—it was from his mother's confessor—he read—
, CHAP.
57
CHAP. IV. Ill-fated pair !—— This day, your kindly stars in Heav'n were joined, When, Ы an envious planet interposed, Aud threatened both with death. - Œdifus. « PAINFUL as the task is, now enjoined me by a suffering Saint, to impart to thee, my son, those dismal tid¬ ings, that, sooner or later, thou must be informed of, yet I am led to hope, that the great example of thy heavenly parent, and those precepts that were inculcated in thy breast, from thy earliest infancy, will enable thee to bear every storm of adverse fate, as becomes the Christian and the man. Remember, that thou art not the only sufferer: thousands there are,. that feel the bitter pangs of unremitting D 3 sorrows
m sorrows, without one gltam of comfort, either from future hope, or their own согь science. But thou, my son, art free from Şuilt ; therefore» cannot.fail to find, in thine own heart, a divine solace, which the world can neither give nor take awty—a blessmg, for above the empty enjoyments of thk life, and which will not fail to support thee under every addi¬ tional calamity. ** Bear up, then, my son, with manly fortitude* against the rigour of thy fate. I knowthou wilt think it severe, but the Most High know« what is fittest for us* It is not foe man to dictate to him ; poor Aort- sighted mortals» who measure every jpotl or til, according to our own weak Judgments; but we must be taught better, та к к no where so readily understood as W Ле school of affliction, where the wå that chastens instructs. Look for* ward, then, my son, to that period, when· фу sorrows ín this world shall ceasfc, amf thou shall find thyself again united to those tender
59 tender ties that connect mankind, Chcrer thy heart with the heavenly promises of a dying Saviour, whose word never fails. " Thy blessed mother promised that she would write to thee, again ; that sa¬ tisfaction h denied her, and 1 am ordered to communicate the information, which, had it pleased Heaven» she would haVe done. By the miàutes she has given me of her ktter, I think it concluded with a very flattering prospect of happiness for Ш her children. She had; at that period, every reason to indulge that sanguine itfea ; but hope, like a meteor, flies when We think her nearest, and leaves an empty vacancy, that never can Ы filled up th this uncertain life. л Your sister, that dear and amiable object of her tender eàrei she hud inform¬ ed you, whs very soon to tie united td a man, every way deserving of her Ibve.^~ The hout wñé appointed; your mother anticipated the coming moment; when D 4 she
60 Ae should see the chiid of her bosom happy in the protection of a man, no less great than good. But, the all-wise Disposer of events decreed it other¬ wise, f * Tbe morning came, and brought with it every pleasing hope. Eleven was the hour fixed upon for the union of tvvo the most deserving that ever blessed that happy state. Don Lorenzo was with * the Prince at his palace, but had spent three hours, the day before, with your mother and sister. He left them, in com¬ pany vrith Don John, the King's second * Sob 5 each of the gentlemen promising to fee with them at an early hour, to'break- fast. Don J#hn had requested to be of the party, with his sister, Donna Josepha, who presented your sister with a most va¬ luable set of jewels ; and their Majesties likewise had not been unmindful of their favorites. u Your mother had risen at an early hour, and gone to your sister's apartment,
61 to see her dressed for the occasion, which* being finished, they entered a^ room, that commanded a fine view of the country for near three miles extent. Donna Francesa went up to the window, and amused herself with watching the great carriage road that led up to the house, every moment expecting the Worthy ob¬ ject she was about to bless with her hand* ** Above an hour had elapsed» beyond the time they were led to expect their guests. Your mother was lost in con¬ jecture of* what could be the occasion of the delay, when a great number of men were seen approaching, in a very slow and mournful manner. Struck with amaze¬ ment at the sight, your sister ordered the window to be opened, and she entered the balcony, where, the first object.she distinctly vie wedt as they came towards the house, was Donna Josepha, appa¬ rently lifeless, supported by four men, and, close after her, lay extended, on D 5 the
6% th# branches of a tree» tlie body of Ia renzo de Aregos ; behind Ыт fo Ibwed Don John, in a state of the utmost de» spair« Yom sister shrieked» and fell at the feet of her mother, whom the dread* ful щфг had riveled to the spot. They were boft taken into the room by the do* mesties* while the dismal procession en¬ tered the house below*-—The servants of Don John and Lorenzo were, to all ap- ţearance, ш a ita te of stupefaction ; their master» were, one dead, and the other bafcely alive*—Donna Josepha was insen* tibie. ** During the miserable confusion which this scene occasioned, none was collect¬ ed enough to think of sending for the physician« and full· twenty mmutes passed before such a thing wa» thought of. I happened to come at this crisis ; what I saw nearly rendered me ш incapable of reflection as i*ny of tbem. At length* a little recovered» I hastened to get every assistance ia my power ; but it was near- Jy
ss ìy in tiouŕ before returning reàstfh visit¬ ed the forms df your mother, sfëter, or Donna Josepha. Don Lorfeŕížo's life, wè found, fled for ever. Don John could not recover sufficiently to ¿tve tbe lekat assistance. Josepna breathed,ånd fhîtt xväs alî ; but ýdur mother aŕití síáíeŕ only recovered out of one ñt 9 to drop into ari- other. Thè hotfsé wás crowded with me¬ dical mert; brit their endeavours #ére ineffèctuàf. Ev'é'ŕý thing Was tried, för sis hours, fháť hurmtn árt couM suggen!, but all in vain. " I v*as extremely anxious to knovv how the shocking catastrophe nafjpenéfl, and at last learned, That Donŕ John, Dan Lorenzo, and Donna Josepha, left fhe palace, attèndedby eight domestics¡; and, as the carriage passed the ruins of thè Lower Aqueduct, to enter the Orange Grove, the front horses grew restive, and refused to go on, Several of the servants got round, and attempted to lead them ; but the moré they endeavoured to make D 6 thera
64 them pass ttie spot, the more unruly they became, and with strength, actuated by madness, broke through all resistance, and ran with amazing velocity over the ruins ; when, coming to that part where the descent is rather abrupt, they plunged precipitantly down it. The carriage was dashed to pieces, and one of the horses, wbo had disengaged himself, turned quick round, and trampled upon the body of Don Lorenzo. Don John was thrown to some distance, but received little hurt.— Donna Josepha was left under the shat¬ tered remains of the coach, and lay with¬ out sense or motion. Two of the horses were killed ; one had escaped ; the other lay with two of its legs broke» They had tried every thing tö restore Don Lorenzo and the lady, before they ventured to remove them, but in vain ; and, thinking tbem botb dead, were at a loss what to 4 do, till Don John ordered the domestics to convey them to the house. Upon ex¬ amining Don Lorenzo again, it was found>
65 found, that a blow he had received on the side of his head had occasioned his death. " Thus, my son, in one dreadful mo¬ ment,, was the happiness of so many in¬ dividuals for ever destroyed. But we must not ask the Divine Being why such miseries are permitted, as it certainly is for some wise and good purpose : there¬ fore, I conjure thee, by all the sufferings ofthy sainted mother, to read rny account of these disasters with calmness, and be resigned to the \vill of thy God. Your sister is now released from all her trou¬ bles-—She lived but five days after. She was sensible a few hours before her death, and begged ţo see her mother,— She did ; and, in the moment of bless¬ ing her, for all her paternal care, and begging her to be comforted, she ex¬ pired í u Your mother bore this additional af¬ fliction with fortitude far surpassing that of any Roman matron. Thy brother is now
ей nô# het constant cóifìpariioil. He ši#, with tfiäf feèlìtìg #h1ch becomes a mán, the dust of his beloved sister áííd Doft Lorenzo consigned to the" grave. * ť Donna Josepha has not been rernöVed to Lisbon ; she is still wifh thy mother.·** She was much hurt, but ťrovidénce hás preserved her life. Don John is still so much affected, fhat he has not admitted áfly person since the fatal day. As soon ás Donna Josepha returns, your mother goes back to the convent, from whence she had removed for a short time, till bet daughter was settjed; which place she äéýer means to leave, t№ the moment of heť final release—that, дпу son, I fear* will not he far off. « Thy wife I háve seen, as did thy Worthy mother, the day before that ap¬ pointed fdr the marriage. She had been ill, and is so now; would to the holy - Virgin that I could inform thee of her death l Ýeč, my son, I say again, that í wish Г čouľd fell thee she Was numbered with
ef with aH that åre Al rest. Шёл íöiotriál rejoice, and then might thy mother hoţie, before she leaves this World foť ével, to see thee, arid onee rnorfc gire thee het paternal blessrng. I am to see heť again this day; she desires it in an earnest manner, aud ï äm roo much the sertant of my Saviour tö deny her request. It iá better for me to go, than thy afflicted parent, who has too many sorrows to contend with, to bear any addition tø» them. " Vice, my son, however concealed, will sooner or later be most certainly ita own punishment. Never háve I yet known the marriage vow broken by either party, but thcy fell victims to their guilt. However they may riot ín their crimes, and ţ>rd' defiance to discovery» yet the all-searching eye of fífeaven^ itt its proper time, causes it'to be revealed. Thou must expect, my sen, that I will keep nothmg from thee. Ttis necessary thou shouldst be mfofrned, that thy r%fitécüs
68 righteous heart may- not grieve hut for those that are deserving of thy love.~-* Thy brother cannQt write; the task, therefore, devolves on me. Be comforted, and doubt not but thy troubled soul will yet have rest. I shall now lay down my pen : to-morrow^ I will address thee again* May the blessing of Heaven, and that of thy parent, be thine !" Alphonsus read thus far, with a com¬ posure that at once bespoke the greatness pf his soul, and the resignation of a Christian. Still a kind of stupid dread enchained his faculties. He looked at the other folded papers that iay before him, without making any attempt to take them up. He cast an enquiring look towards them ; they appeared to contain a great deal of writing. He sat in a state which it w T ould be diificult to de¬ scribe. He lamented the loss of his sister; he felt for his mother ; he dreaded to hear tbe sequel—it related to his wife—she was unworthy of him. This last
69 last thought was like the strdke of death. The keenest anguish harrowed up his soul ; yet, he could not weep. His whole faculties appeared suspended. He took up the papers-—dropped them, and again took them up. . Near an hour was spent in this kind of irresolute grief, when, clasping the papers in his hand, he exclaimed : "Assist me, oh, thou Eternal Being, to bear up against these accumulated miseries; and, as it pleases thee to oppress the house of Aranjuez, let me bear thy chastisement with fortitude and resignation. Enable me to pass this last grand trial, so as to ensure thy kindness to me, and to be assured, that, in all thy punishments» thou rememberesi: mercy." He opened them ; his hands trembled ; he dropped them. " I cannot read it," said he. " Oh! God! Godi why am I doomed to suffer this?" A flood of tears, at that moment, came to his relief. In a few
ΊΟ a iew i&intøtøé, he again took the packet, and fcead ; ** I can *ioW-, my son, ϊ hope, address thfee, ss one determined tø withstand the froXvfts of fefe. Reflection, I trust, hau taught thee the necessity of following my ргесерш. I wiil^ therefore, go on from that period I kft at yesterday. I wäfs thetî going to thy Wife. I did : read .What follows-, and titøen see whéAer Ibón hast cotise to rrrøufri ot ЩоЫе. " I attended her, 'agreeably to hef re¬ quest; but, on account of writing to thee, í Was ШпеГ letter than I should otherwise håve been 5 so that* when I à¥ri¥èd, »íhe Was too fár gone fo hold à tohve^tkra of àríy length. I s£oke tø became my holy office; fòt, though I trorra^töVed her m Щ account, isf^l I hoJ>èd aie Would obtain à párdon frotn hér God. She had confessed, it seemed, for ¿ome hour s previous to my seeing her ^ had received the eMrenie-unctioñ, and life appeared quivering on her once- beautiful
71 beautiful lips. But, ah ! how changed ! а Ыаек and frightful color surrounded that once-iovely mouth ; her eyes, that once captivated every heart, 4 were sunk, and dim ; her cheeks thin and pallid, and her whok fta me distorted bv convulsive pangs, Such did i now behold the once- charming Alzira. ' " She cast her eyes mournfully to¬ wards me, and, when she was informed by my voice that I was ne«r, as she could not properly disc#m me*—' 1 thank you, Father,' said she, * fbr thus coming to see a dying sinner. This visit I should not have requested, had I not been in¬ formed that you know where my husband now is. Take this/ said she, drawing some papers from under her pillow; * see them conveyed to him, and, if it is m your power to obtain from him for¬ giveness for me, when I am consigned to the dust, then may my soul hope for peace. I have spent several days in dictating them, at the intervals my agonies would
72 would permit. I will not dare myself to ask his forgiveness. . No ; I know too well that his righteous soul abhors deceit ; but do you, Father, plead for me, and hasten, I beseech you, to send to him : not but that 1 hope soon to be removed from his resentment, long, perhaps, before the papers will reach him. Where I am to go to is a circumstance I am not quite . clear in ; nor am I concerned about it. One holy Fathei unmercifully consigns me to eternal damnation ; another points out Paradise as my habitation, if I will repent. Say then, Father, what I have to hope for. Sp#ak, I conjure you.' ** These last words were spoken in hurried accents; and, before she had finished thera, she was seized again with convulsions, which continued with great violence for a considerable time. At length, they abated, and she sunk into a stupor, in which she remained. I at¬ tended for some hours, in the hope that she might be again sensible, but I staid
73 in vain till ten that night, when, as no alteration took place, I left her; but not till I had given her my benediction, and for thee, my son, pronounced a pardon. In this, I trust, I acted right ; and on it, I am certain our blessed Saviour smiled, as the first of his attributes is to forgive, and all who wish to follow his glorious example would smile likewise. Now, arm thy soul with fortitude, my son, and read the inclosed papers witb pitying horror—and forgiveness."
CHAP.
•7-fc
CHAF. V. î coukl а Ые unfolds whose lightest word Would bamm up thy »ul ;, freeze thy young blood; Make thy twa^yes, like stars, start from their «phere ; 1Ъу knotty aod combined locks to part ; And each particular hair tò stand on end, Eike "»jttìì.s upon «He fretful porctrpine. Hamlet. THE CONFESSIONS OF ALZIRA THE PENITENT. " TO Alphonsus, the much- injured and suffering husband of Alzira, are the following confessions addressed ; not witb any hope to obtain forgiveness for crimes long since committed, but to show him, that she, whom he once loved and respected, never was deserving of the smallest regard. No, Alphonsus; she, whom thy honest heart looked upon aş a model
75. model of perfection and purify, was more degraded, more abandoned, than;, th© most guilty wretch' that ever expiued under the torturing hands, of an unr#lent* ing executioner, ikit l· am? now. about- to expiate in death (as my associatie» have, I trust, already done) those crimes that nature shrinks at¿ (e But, how shall I relata what Ь must be certain will strike thv soul with horror î Start not, Alphonsus : it is. ne¬ cessary, before I go hence, that he* who once calbd me wife, should be informed how wholly unworthy I was of thafc sacred name. Sacred I will call it ; v for, did, not the virtuous Alphonsus and his righteous parent deem it so ? They did ; but^ alas! I was taught to regard, itî otherwise. Oh> damning thought b where is now thy soul, thou base deluder?^ Purgatory is. too. mild a. punishment fori thy crimes ; nor will.thy vast possessioni* purchase for thee a moment's respite from those torments» to which thou aa& I are
76 I are -doomed for ever. Yes, doomed for ever, thou blackest fiend of hell, where» when my ,soui arrives, it shall triumph in thy pangs, and, notwith¬ standing my own tortures, yet will I rejoice, when I shall behold the fangs of scorpions fastening on thee------But I must tell thee, Alphonsus, who this monster is. " You may remember, when I was introduced, that I was presented under the character of Don Joseph's niece. Your worthy family, as well as others, regarded and received me as such.— * Would to God I had been only that ! I will repeat it again, and call down, if I could command them, the bolts of Heaven to crush his damned remains, that not the least particle might mix with the dust of those, whose happy souls are fled to eternal rest ------ where his, or mine, will never go—no, never. Glorious thought ! we shall be in hell, to torment each other. Oh ! how I anticipate that moment,
77 moment, when I shall with transport urge the fiends on, to add new serpents to the lash, and hold before him, with exulting triumph, the reflecting mirror of his aggravated guilt ! ------But I will strive to be collected. i( I was born, you have been told, at a village near Rome—I was so ; but my mother was not the person represented by Don Joseph—She was a nun of the Order of St. Theresa, My father was a younger brother of Don Joseph's, and third son to the Marquis De Sal, to whose title and estates Don Joseph succeeded some years since. " My father had seen my mother at one of the public processions. He thought her lovely, and was not long before he visited the grate of the con¬ vent, and soon found she had a great dis¬ like to a cloister. He persuaded her to place a confidence in him ; informed her of what family he was, and earnestly besought her to go away with him. She, Vol. III. E at
78 at length, consented : he effected her escape from the convent, and she became his wife ; but his family never wouid see or receive her. ' f My father joined his regiment, being an officer in the service of the King of Naples, and my mother accompanied him. They were happy in each other ; but that happiness was destined to be of short duration. My father fell in the field of battle, and his death was foHowed by my mother's, who lived but to give me birth. I was taken by my uncle, Don Joseph, who had me placed at nurse, with the wife of his valet, where I was educated, not as his niece, but as a poor dependant on his bounty. I was never sought after by any of the family, but brought up in total ignorance of my birth. €C I remained with this woman till my fifth year, when I was removed to a con¬ vent at Rome. I had been given to understand, that I had been abandoned by
79 by my parents, a month after my birth, and that Don % Joseph having been in¬ formed of my helpless state, had gene¬ rously caused me to be taken care of, and sent me to be educated at the con¬ vent. Orders were given that I should be instructed in every polite accomplish¬ ment, but under certain restrictions. I was not permitted to converse with any of the nuns, but' what absolute necessity compelled. ct I was envied by some, and pitied by others. The Abbess, and two of the oldest nuns, were all that I ever spoke to. I was told by them, That I should quit the convent, as soon as my edpcation was completed, as it was the design of Don Joseph to take me with him to Por¬ tugal, whither he meant to remove, 'l was taught to regard him as the most generous and noble of men, whose delight centered in seeking out objects of charity, and relieving their wants ; and, from what I daily heard, I was led to expect a E 2 man»
Bö man, who rose by his virtues and benefi- nence apparently above mortality. *' I had passed my fifteenth year, with¬ out once having seen my benefactor, when, one morning, Sister Constance, the name of one of the two nuns, came into my room, and bade me prepare to dress, that'I might be able to receive my protector, who was expected every hour, as a courier had just arrived to the Lady Abbess, to announce the intended visit. I know not what was the reason, but this intelligence threw me into the most vio¬ lent agitation. I trembled exceedingly, and was some minutes before I could make any remarks to the Sister, or ask what dress I should put on. She saw my disorder, and, smiling, said, If I was so much disturbed at the mention of Don Joseph's approach, what should I be when taken into his presence ! * For,* said she, < I make not the least doubt, but he will appear to you, what he does to ¿every female, one of the most fascinating men
81 men in existence, and you must guard* your heart, Signora, against his powerful attractions, or you will certainly become enslaved, especially as you owe him so large a debt of gratitude ; for, what would you have been, had not his bounty preserved you ?' " Her language astonished me ; it was foreign to all that I had ever heard. I looked at her with amazement, and, hast¬ ily recovering myself, turned, and said : ' Your speech, sister, is very strange. What have you ever seen in my conduct, to suppose, that one brought up by the hand of charity, and who is sensible of being an outcast from the world, should have the vanity to think she could ever aspire to any notice, beyond that of a wretched dependant on the bounty of so= good, a man ?' ^ c Nothing, nothing,' re¬ turned she ; ' you mistake my meaning ; I only remarked how very handsome Don Joseph is, and how very hard it is for any of our sex, especially one so young as you? E 3 are*
are, to preserve herself from feeling a too tender attachment for a man, whom all must look upon and admire.' ,s * Then you, Sister, admire himr* said I. * I do,' returned bhe ; ( but my admiration is of his virtues ; those wbo live in the world, as vou are destined to do, may admire hb person/ f I bhail admire neither,' said I, ' farther than what my duty demands ; beyond it, 1 have no ambition.' So saying, í turned from her, and asked What dress I should put on I ( The best,' said she, f of your last new ones, and the ornaments for your hair and neck.' " I was not a little pleased at being permitted to put on such elegancies. It was a close vest and train of pale blue sattin, trimmed with silver. I set about preparing myself for the metamorphosis. My hair, which had been taken great care of, was not the smallest of my em¬ bellishments. The nun assisted me, and, while I was dressing, I thought of nothing but
83 but the surprise the Sisters would expres.?, at the very great change in my person, by means of my dress ; and, every time I glanced my eye in the glass, I could not help thinking how much I surpassed the other ladies, in point of beauty. This idea threw me into rapture. " When dressed, and I descended to the pariour, the Lady Abbess started back, and exclaimed : ' Well ! this ex¬ ceeds all I couid have expected. Why, thou art loveliness itself, my child. How will thy benefactor rejoice, to see thee honor his favor in this graceful manner î I shall lose thee ; for, thy benefactor in¬ tends to take thee with him to Portugal, if he finds thee as accomplished as he is Jed to wish, and I am mucli mistaken, if thou do not meet bis full approbation. He will be soon here, and whatever he is pleased to appoint, it is thy duty with gratitude to accede to.' I told her, I should be the most ungrateful creature in existence, if I did not immediately com- E4 ply
84 ply with every command of so muRiflccnt a friend. My young heart was flattered with the idea of being approved of, though I trembled, I knew not why, at the thoughts of seeing him. " At lengtb, he was announced; my heart beat violently, and I vvould have given the world to have been permitted to shun his sight ; but I was not allowed that blessing ; some dreadful power, the iron scourger of hidden crimes, decreed it otherwise. " I was introduced ; he seemed to be little more than thirty, and appeared very mueh surprised at my appearance ; com¬ mended the ladies for their care of me, and the choice they had made of my dress, which, he remarked, became me much. My acquirements he was likewise pleased with. He told them, It was his intention to go shortly to Lisbon, accompanied by his niece, a young lady nearly of my own age, and that he should take me as a com¬ panion for her, as he had always designed me
85 me for that situation. I thanked him, uv the most grateful manner, for the kind¬ ness intended me, and said, I should make it the study of my life to render my¬ self agreeable to the young lady, who- might honor me with her friendship. He left us, with a promise to send for me, in the course of a few days, saying, It would be necessary for me to see a littie cf the world, before I departed on so long a journey. M When he was gone, the Lady Abbess and the Sisters were abundantly profuse in the praises of Don Joseph ; but, though 1 felt the warmest gratitude for the bless¬ ings I enjoyed, yet I could not see him in the light which those ladies regarded him. I viewed him in the light of a ge¬ nerous friend, and in that were absorbed ail other ideas. " The time came, when I was to be removed ; and, as 1 had little intercourse with any members of the society, but the Lady Abbess, Sister Theresa, and Sister E 5 Constance,
86 Constance, I had but few to take leave of, and those few did not appear to regret my departure in the least, as my clothes, and the certainty there was that I should »ever take the veil, had rather excited mvy than created love. My head was too full of what I should soon see, and the compliments, which I did not doubt I should have paid me, to regard their in¬ difference, and I left them, without the least wish of ever seeing them again. * ( I was taken by the lady, who came to fetch me, to a large and elegant house, where I was given to understand Don JoseptPs niece resided, who was then conñncd hy illness to her apartment, and oould not see me till the next day, if she was then well enough. The room I was shown into was elegant beyond any thing I could have supposed on earth, as I had only seen the house of my nurse, and the convent where I had been brought up. I gaæed with wonder and amazement at the marble pillars, that formed a kind of
$7 of colonnade round the room, and the stupendous looking-glasses which covered tbe pannels, and were decorated in the most rich and costly marmer. They were overspread with a painting of luxuriant grape vine, which seemed to twine its branches on the glossy surface» and re¬ flected ten thousand variegated beauties* I was like one transported from the gioomy wails of a prison into a paradise. I was for some minutes afraid to speak or move; at last, I gathered courage, and ventured to approach that side of the room nearest to the door at which I entered. I put my hand upon the glass ; for, so well had the artist executed the admirable work, that I could with clirficulty persuade myself that I was not in the midst of a celestial vineyard. I continued near half an hour, as if entranced, when a domestic came, and requested me to follow him to another room, as dinner was served up. I enter¬ ed, and found two ladies, both in the Ε β decline
за décline of life. They appeared much struck with my appearance, received me with great politeness, and helped me to every thing they thought I should like. They regretted the illness of the Princess, but hoped she would be able to receive me the next day. They entered into a conversation respecting the company, and the various places í shoudd be introduced to, and asked me, Whether I did not think such a situation far preferable; to a gloomy cloister, where nothing was talked of but prayers and abstinence. I per¬ fectly agreed with them in their opinion, and rejoiced most heartily that I had left these dull recesses for ever, being deter¬ mined, in my own mind, never to return to them. My heart danced with rapture at the change I had made, and I every moment blessed Don Joseph for his kind¬ ness to me, as I saw I was not regarded by the ladies in the light of a dependant. They staid with me the remainder of the afternoon, and, when they left me, ordered
ordered a female servant to attend me to my room, which I entered, and was as much surprised at the elegance which shone conspicuous there, as in the room below. It was nearly half covered with looking- glass, onJy not painted, as the others were ; a simple decoration of gold ran round them. The bed was of yellow taffety, lined with blue, and trimmed with silver. A beautiful painting of Venus was opposite the foot of the bed : on each side, Abelard and Eloisa. ** As the servant undressed me, I stood admiring those pictures. The more I looked at them, the more I was astonish¬ ed ; they seemed alive. I pitied tbe fate of those unfortunate lovers, whose story I had heard from Sister Constance.— When my night dress was on, the servant left me, and I remained for some time examining the various ornaments of the apartment. I found it opened upon a garden, which, at an early hour the next day»
(IO day, I went into, and round it corres¬ ponding in beauty with the house, ** I was summoned from thence to breakfast, where I was again joined by the two ladies, and the one who came with me from the convent. They were aH earnest in their enquiries after my health, how I had slept, and whether I was pleased with my situation. To all I gave satisfactory answers, which they appeared much pleased with. The morn¬ ing passed in their taking me to view the other apartments of the palace, which were as superb as those I had seen before. . <£ After this,, they said they would take me to the Princess, as she was by that time up. I was anxious to see her, as I longed to pay my respects to a lady, who, it was evident, had given orders for me to be treated with great respect, I went to the anti-room of her apartment, but did not wait long ; for» one of the iadies came» and desired me to enter, I did, and
9í and vvas introduced to a lady apparently about eighteen yeajs of age. She was very iii, and supported on each side by cushions. She, with great mildness, de¬ sired me to take a chair near her, and said, Sbe was sorrv she had been too ill to see mc before. She regarded me at¬ tentively, sighed deeply, and iurned her head aside, to hide a tear. ' My illness,' said she, 6 is of such a painful nature, that it almost robs me of the little forti¬ tude I once possessed ; and I fear, in your attendance on me, you will find it extremely dull; but I hope I shall not long be a trouble. Yes, my dear young friend, I sincerely hope I shall soon be released from all my cares.' " As she said this, the tears paced down her cheeks in quick succession. * See,' said she, * how much illness enervates the frame. I would fain possess strength, but I know not how to acquire it. My heart sinks within me, at the moment when I ought to be more firm
92 firm and collected.' I begged her, in the most earnest manner, to look forward to brighter hopes ; as she was so young, she had every reason to expect her disorder would take a favorable turn. * Ah !' said she, ς if my complaints lay within the reach of medicine, then might I natter myself, if I had any desire for it, that I might recover ; but my wishes, my desires, are long since wedded to the grave, and I soon, I trust, shall be there.' ** I was affected beyond any thing I had ever felt, to hear her talk in this manner. Stranger as I was, I felt an interest in her griefs; I was anxious to relieve them, and, as well as I was able, endeavoured by my discourse to dispel them. She seemed pleased at my efforts, and, as she looked a little more cheerful, I was led to conclude she might soon get better, by my assiduities about her. This nlled me with a good opinion of myself, and I did not doubt but a litt4e time would ccnfirm it. " I con-
03 fí I continued with her for several hours, and she appeared, when I left her, to be much restored. She said, She would dispense with my attendance any more that day, as a sick chamber was not an agreeable place for one so young as I was ; especially as Don Joseph had not promised that I should be with her tiil they began their journey, which would not take place for near a fortnight. I told her, That, so far from not thinking it agreeable, I should deem myself happy to be constantly with her, if it would give the least ease to her mind. She thanked me, and gave me leave to be with her as much as I chose. I left her with a determination to spend as much of my time with her as possible. " The whole of the night following, I had nothing but unquiet sleep. The Princess was before my eyes, whether bleeping or waking, and I racked my brain in conjectures of what could occa¬ sion her illness, which she had told me was
94 was beyond the reach of medicine. Her face, though emaciated by sickness, still preserved the marks of beauty, and it wa* evident that her mind suffered more than her body. I would have given all that I possessed in the world to know what would give her ease. One circum¬ stance I particularly remarked, which was, that, whenever Don Joseph was mentioned, a violent shuddering would shake her frame, and she would be some mmutes lost in the deepest thought.— This, young as I was, did not escape my observation ; but I busied myself in vain to explore the cause.
CHAP.
95
CHAP. VI. So falls the rose, plucked from its drooping tree ţ Its form disturben!, its sweet leaves on the ground. Yet, after death, its iovely voice is free, Casting, with honied breath, a fragrance round. Anonymous. " IN the morning, I hastened» as soon as I could gain admission, to the Princess's apartment. She was in a slum¬ ber, and her attendants said, They fancied she was something easier. This made me cheerful, and I took my breakfast very pleasantly with the ladies. " Above ten days passed in the most agreeable manner, and my patroness was supposed to be getting better, when one of the servants came, and informed his lady, that Don Joseph was arrived. This had such an effect upon her, that she fainted. All was instantly confusion ; at length,
96 length, she recovered, and burst into a flood of tears. This relieved her much ; she apologized to me for her weakness, and entreated I would not take any notice of it to her uncle, which I readily promised. '* In about two hours after, he came into her room, walked up to her, asked kindly after her health, and said, He hoped she was enough recovered to begin the journey, which he meant should commence in three days. She answered^ That, whatever was his pleasure, she should study to comply with it. At the same moment, her heart seemed bursting with grief. He did not notice her emo¬ tion, but asked her, How she liked the companion he had procured for her. She said, Extremely well, and was mucb obliged to bim for me. He then turned to me, and said, He hoped I liked my situation. I answered him, Yes, and should ever be grateful for the blessing I enjoyed, in being near such an amiable lady·
97 kdy. He appeared pleased with my answer ; then, turning again to the Princess, desired she would give the necessary orders for her departure, which she promised to do, and he soon after left her. " When he was gone, she again wept much, and said, She wished she was not compelled to take the journey, as she was certain it would not be of the least ser¬ vice. * But, as it is,' said she, fetching a deep sigh, < I must submit.' I ventured to ask her, Whether, if Don Joseph was made acquainted with her desire to re¬ main in Italy, he would not consent ? * Ah ! no,* answered she ; * it is deter¬ mined on, and I must go. It will be of no avail to shew the least reluctance. My uncle is a man, who, when once he has fixed upon any thing in his mind, there is no dissenting from it. He is led to think this journey will restore my health, and I must submit to his opinion, however contrary it may be to my own. You
98 Tou will, therefore, I hope, if you see me not so cheerful as I could wish to be, not impute it to sullenness, but to my unfortunate state of health, which will, I trust, soon be otherwise. Travel linjr may do great things.' * I hope it will,* said I, * and more than you are led to expect.' She faintly smiled, and said, 1 Perhaps it may.' " From that time, all was hurry to get every thing in order for our depar¬ ture. The day before, one of the ladies gave me to understand, that the trunks marked with my name I was tp regard in future as my sole property, to take what I wanted from them, and wear it accordingly ; and that I should find money in each, suitable to my wants. I thanked her warmly, and requested her to make my acknowledgments to my benefactor. I went to the Princess, and found her again in tears; but took no notice, fearing to offend her. The ïiext morning, we left Rome» and took the route
99 route to France. Don Joseph, the Prin¬ cess, one lady, and myself, were in one carriage, and the female servants followed in another. " The first week w r as spent tolerably pleasant, but the second commenced un¬ der unfavorable circumstances. The Princess became hourly worse, and the evening on which we entered Roses, she expressed her total inability to proceed. She was, therefore, at her own urgent re¬ quest, taken to a convent, in the town. They were all strangers to her, yet they most willingly received her, and, as soon as her rank was known, every attention was paid her that became them to shbw. " I was miserable to see her so ill, as I had contracted a most tender affection for her, and I would most gladly have flown to the utmost regions to sen^e her. Alas ! I was then innocent ; I was a stranger to guilt. Had I died then, I should have had no horrors to contend with, no dread of a future
voo future states ali would have been calm* tranquil, and serene, and my God would then have received my soul into his hea¬ venly mansions—But it was reserved to suffer woes unutterable ! Be it so— but I shall have companions in my tor¬ ments ----- that reflection is my oniy solace, under those damning pangs which I now suffer." Alphonsus had come thus far in the confession, when Berry and his pre¬ ceptor entered ; and, as he had not given orders for them not to be admitted, they were in the room before he had a thought about it. Seeing him engaged, they in¬ stantly withdrew ; but their coming in bad drawn off his attention for a moment ; he recollected the necessity there was for his being alone, and summoned the slave, whom he ordered to tell the Father, That he should be engaged for a few hours, and would dispense with their attendance for that time. When that was done, he again
, löi again betook himself to thè cétìfeésibn, with a heart agitated by ten thousand ter* rors. He was afraid, when bé háď read one line, to see what the other would re- late. He, at length, proceeded. ** We continued at Roses, arid I was permitted to attend the Frihceis. Don Joseph came daily to see her; but shi grew visibly worse, and the faculty were all of opinion, That, to proceed on the journey, would be attended with the fnost fatal consequences. Soon áfteť/ they in¬ formed Don Joseph, that it was impossi¬ ble she could live out the night. He heard the report, I thought, with great indifference, though he turned to one of them, and earnestly besought bim to call in some other assistance 5 but he as- л sured Dön Joseph, that all thè aid ín the world could not prolong her life twelve* hours, He assigned some particular rea-' son for the assertion, Which T did not un¬ derstand, and the event proved fhey were Vol. HL F * not
102 not mistaken ; for, in eight hours, she ex¬ pired. " I was for some time inconsolable ; it was the first loss I had ever met with, and» though I had been with this poor suf¬ ferer only such a short period, yet I felt for her the tenderness of a sister. Don Joseph gave orders for her remains to be put into a leaden coffin, and deposited in the cemetery of the convent, until his re¬ turn, when he should have it taken to Italy, with great pomp. " When we had paid the last sad duties to this murdered angej, for such she af¬ terwards proved to be, Don Joseph pro¬ posed his proceeding on his journey. Till that was mentioned, I had never once re¬ flected on my helpless situation ; but it now, roused every sleeping thought, and I begged the lady who travelled with us, to ask my benefactor to permit me to at¬ tend, till his return, the corpse of my mis¬ tress; or, if that was too great a favor, that he would give orders to have me sent back
103 back to the convent I bad been taken from, at Rome. She smiled %t tbe pro¬ position, and said, She'was surprised I did not know Don Joseph better, than to suppose he had taken me from a convent, to have me sent tbither again. * Ab'! bless your innocence,' said she ; * yoa will be taught better soon. No, no; be¬ lieve me, a much happier fate åttetids you than you expect. You have nothing to do, but study to please your patrona and, as his niece, who has long bee« ψ burthen to him, is now removed hence, there will be a much better opening fol you. He is immensely rich; you arb handsome, and without any friend but him. Learn to obey him in every thiiig,and you will appear to the world as his niece.' " The conversation of this #òtnan I thought very mysterious. She was one of those who had received me on my árfíväl at the palace. I could not imagine %hat ч she meant ; I was lost in wild conjecture. F 2 SJie
МфазШеа slightly ßifihß Process, şmd seemed i^h^rit# felfee than tøraent, th^t tífam»sxtpti&* ¿ I ¿щр$ m wpçihte *itís- iike;to hi^. i4oW Jietè 'öi^t $he must be .conrinoed I could во<, *fter so many fa- íiÑÉfc had beeu showend on me» suppose» Ébìttl cottìd foff etţh^h^d^hat4ispensed thera, and had preserved ew» when I was teft в helpless AaRtør/ §^e said, I Ш right to remember th^t ; she would speak ^0 Dort Joseph, -and I sbould be more e^- phciily iatformed wh^t werehi^ intentions jrapi^tfeg me> I thanked her, but said* Ifíf-ftógfcf heitìowed jtø m$ke my choice, I should -prefer stay -щ at the convent, where the remains of the Princess tømte teft, tkm my øther place. « ^y, шу; &atd ¿be, * we shall ^ee j about thai ; Jiut remember what I have told you, m#t, to ph^^wr patron in every thing, is ail that y4U he required of you. He will щМхас* şny rigW task from yo# ; he iş toofott^ of handsome ^ща1е^|о do tfcrt. She^te^4eft nie. u When
юз ·* When she was: gone, UcbuW ínoť help reflecting how much this womanfsr discourse corresponded with that ol Sis¬ ter Constance. Sle hadi sakk Th^ß Dohi Joseph Was mueh admired^ by all the la- dies r and he admired them ; ye« r I was sensible that I had nothing to^fear from my own heart. I looked upo« Doá Jo¬ seph as a íbfhér aüd mftìmdr but) to see* htm 'm any otim %ht,út found to be im* possible, and not tø obey hiin irt that character, V thotight would be ihe »Wight of ingratitude. I éwett on>sfveral wo^bi tbat she bsţd dropped with enereased pér- J piexity. What ean his HigMiess require of me that I would not do ? thought L I will ask her to explain her rneuniog. « In this state of confused thought, I spent the day» and earnestly pray ed that she might gain per missina for me m itay at the conveni. Ah I had uiat been tny happy lot, how blessed would have been my iate» instead of this cursed and diabo- F3 Heal
106 * Heal one bbüt I mţist gø on*^yes, I must proceed; < ♦ ** I lost not a moment in seeking an ex- planation when I saw her; but I did not obtain it. She heard what I had to say ; smiled at my emotion, and said, If I would have patience, she would tell me what was Ша Joseph's intentions. She had just left htm, and it was his Highness's desire for me to proceed on with him and herself, it being his wish to have me placed under the protection of a lady» a тшш relation of her ow(i, at Barcelona. « With ber*', said she, * you will enjoy every blessing that you can wish for,—His Highness .spares no expence for the ac¬ commodation of those whom he regards as be jfoeayou.« You will continue wkh her till you decide whether you will go on with me to join him at Ijsbon,, or stay there. The servants,* Ле said, ' that were now in their retinue, would return to. Italy;.only one man, ivduld be «left at. Roses, to wait his orders respecting the remains
Ю7 remains of his niece, and no one was to proceed witr$ them but a valet, who had lived with Don Joseph from a child; as he should, now he bad lost his niece, pre¬ fer hiring domestics when he arrived at Lisbon.' This arrangement being settled, I could not presume to make the least objection; being wholly dependant on the bounty of my patron. The day came for our de¬ parture, and we left Roses in the most private manner, on account, my cornpa^' nion said, of the death of the young lady. When I left the place, I wept bitterly, and earnestly prayed that I could be left there ; but my tears were laughed at by the infamous creature. " As we proceeded, Don Joseph threw off that dignity and reserve which he had hitherto kept up, and treated me with the - greatest familiarity; so much so, that, on the third day, I began to be alarmed.— I saw that my vile companion was the abettor of the liberties which this diabo- F 4 lical
10« licaî fiend took with me, and I was great¬ ly surprised to find, at the house where we stopped for the night, that there was not any servant attended but what were total strangers to me. I was ordered not to address him by his title, as he was deter¬ mined to finish the journey incognito.-—I wa& miserable at all this strange alteration and trembled whenever he spoke. I slept at night, at my own request, in the ьагае bed with my guilty companion, who failed not to extol the generosity of his Highness, and the manner in which he was esteemed hy all ranks of females. I heard her witb apathy ; it mattered not, I thought, what opinion ladies had of him ¿ he might be very handsome ; but I saw nothing in him more than in another, and the freedoms be had taken with me, disgusted, instead of pleasmg me. His manner was widely different from the Fathers I had seen at the convent I had been in î and I thought it very inconsistent for one of his rank to talk tó a girl like me about love. I began to feel a great antipathy to him. & "We
109 €t We travelled on, fbr four days more, when I began to be impatient to get to Barcelona, thinking I should then be free firom those attentions I was obliged daily to receive, and to hear no more dis¬ courses, which, at times, shocked me, and made me regard them both with a kind of horror ; the woman especially, as I was persuaded that Don Joseph would neither have talked not acted as he did, had he not been stimulated 1 to it by that cursed wretch. So true is the observa¬ tion, that, if an action more wicked than another is wanted to be transacted, you need only employ an abandoned female, and the work is accomplished» I saw this literally fulfilled. Ohi horrid! hor¬ rid thought ! when will my tortured soul be freed from this body, that I may fly, on the wings of vengeance, to satisfy my hatred on those damned beings, who, I am told, are gone before me. Happy re¬ flection!—but I must proceed, lest this F 5 gasping
no gaspffig føreath should quit my hated body before I have related аД * u . Ще, werei come, I thought, to within a shfOîţ distance from Barcelona, when Щп Joseph §aid» Ц$ should rest at the houset урррщ we then stopped» for a day or ţwo, ^ he w^s pleased with the situa¬ tion of iL·, Iwas ^retched at thjs delay» v but, tbere, was no alternative—the wo¬ man never left, me for a moment. In the evening» I observed him put a small bit of paper into her hand« She read it, wrote something on the same, and re- * turned it tQ him, which he read, then tore it into small pieces. I was requested» soon after, to take some wine, which they said they were certain was the finest in all Şpaitţ. I was strongly urged, and at last JUtoolţ some. It was the most plea¬ sant I baci ever tasted y but I bad not drank it lonj» before J felt my head grow giddy. I asked permission to go to bed ; it was consented to, and my devilish compa-
πι companion took me to it, as I was almost> unable to stand. * " I was no sooner in bed, than I fell» into a profound sleep, and awoke not till it.was morning, when, oh ! horrid sight l· instead of the woman, I found my* self in the arms of Don Joseph. I shriek¬ ed aloud, and endeavoured to disengage. myself; but my strength was inadequate. I struggled, till that and my speech were^ exhausted, when I fell a helpless victim^ to this worse than devil. "> " For several days, I remained stupe-" fied ; when I could speak, it was only to draw down curses on my base, my cruel betrayers. I threatened them with every vengeance I could think of. At last; finding that I remamed inexorable «to all they could say to sooth me, they Hoé recourse to the vilest menaces, and both swore in the most solemn manner, thati if I did not submit to the caresses of my patron, I should be immediately deliver* ed over as a heretic to r the- biqufeitiooi F 6 On
íl£ On Ae other hand» if I chose to submit quietly to my fate, the greatest wealth atla Honors should await me. I sbould bit introduced to the world as his niece, and receive the same respect as was al· wap paid to her when living. f ' For several days, I hesitated, in hopes that I might gain an opportunity to escape, but those having elapsed, and being again threatened by those fiends, I consented, and, from that day, be¬ came the guilty partner of his crimes. When they bad brought me to their pur- ~pese, I was informed, That it was his Highness's intention to continue there for »unie months, after which, we should procted to Lisbon, where I should be in¬ troduced to tbe world. I heard all their determinations without the least assent mr dissent, „and calmly agreed to every decision. " We contmued at this place near a twelvemonth, but in the whole of that tee I could never leam the name of it I spoke
in I spoke nothing but Italian, as Twas not allowed to attempt the Spanish, aad all about me could speak nothing but their native language. " I had grown much while I was there, and, when they thought I was sufficiently altered, as not to be recognised by any one, that might by accident have seen me, when with the Princess, we moved on towards Lisbon, where, when we arrived, I was, as they had promised, introduced as his niece. Among other ramifies, I had the inexpressible misery to be receiv¬ ed under that title by yours, when your fatal attachment took place. Wherever I went, Don Joseph saw with a jealous eye the young nobility pay their court to me. He would often return displeased, and threaten his vengeance on me, if I gave any of them the least encouragement. My life, though surrounded by grandeur, wa» nothing more than splendid miaeiy. and in the morning when I awoke, ша saw the wretch beside me, I have forgot myself,
ш nlynelf, aéé shrieked with horror. For this, he frequently abused me in the most scandalous terms, and would never fail to finish his harangue, by threatening me with the Inquisition». Tbe wicked wretch of a wojßan, who still continued with roe¿ was the watchful guardian of my actions, and no lese severe than her em¬ ployer· H We had been at Lisbon about four months, when bis Highness рай a visit to; obe of tbe Grandees, and took me with* bim. í mw a cavalier nearly of my own age, and for the first time I felt the power of love. I hao/not been long in his com¬ pany, before I was led to suppose, I had made the Kke impression on him. He was,! found, the nephew of the gentle* man at wbose houţe we then were. Hts fortune wis large, as be was an only son¿ I know not whether Don Joseph took notice of our mutual embarrassment j but, whatever was the cause, he chose to? a .11 : /,.>;» ..-..·. shorten t * - - „ **
us
shorten his visit, and returned with me tc* his palace. " From that hour, I became truly mise¬ rable. I found no felicity in any thing,. unless it was to go to any kind of amuse¬ ment, where I thought I might by acci¬ dent meet the gentleman, which I did twice. A short time after this, Don Joseph received an overture from the un¬ cle of the young gentleman, for me, as a wife for bis nephew ; but the applica* tion was rejected, on account, it was al¬ ledged,] of his youth. This refusal occa¬ sioned in me the most poignant grief; but I was obliged to conceal it frora the eyes of my cruel Arguses. But a circum¬ stance soon after occured, that made him regret the refusal he had given to the young gentleman—I was found to be pregnant ; no sooner was it known, than a thousand schemes were devised to pre¬ vent its discovery. For myself, I was wholly regardless of it, or its conse¬ quences, as the young cavalier had left Л ..... Libón,
tie lisbon; ätíd gone to join hit regiment in a distant province ; and, as »nothing had now any * charms for me, I let them thmk and act ás they thought proper.
CHAP.
117
СЙАР. VU. Between m two let there be pesce > both ]ошШ£, As joined in injuries, agamst a fpe By doom express asíignetí us ------- < l^ťcťdefserpeuläiJ--* h MftTöir; «· AŕBOtrtr á week sŕttfŕ Mi d}«c^reiy p , I #asinfoŕrhed by tfee-woiftaiî, than his Highness, Ae tntraghf, ^onlď liiîtén to sdmfc offers irrade hirrf Ьт Máry of Coimbra. Örfë éf her sons hud forni¬ ca ai violent attâchrtrent for me, añd, uè the match was in every respect sucb as he could wisb, be sbould expect m*e, if soaie particulars were settîeoVto receive the young gentleman as my future hus¬ band. I shuddered, and suole on ffie floor. ' " ijlthea 1
IIB ** When I recovered, I became a prey to the most agonizing thoughts. To be¬ come tiie wife ofa nobleman whom I had never noticed, ,when my heart was in the possession of one, and my person in that of another, not to mention the guilty pledge of my Infamy, which he would be obliged to acknowledge as his own, all this nearly drove me mad. I fell on my knees, and earnestly besought her to en¬ treat Don Joseph, not to oblige me to commit an .де t. which my soul-trembled at ; bu^be was'deaf to all roy argument* and frankly toH me» that, so far from dis¬ suading hipo from it, she should urge him to cpmplejte it, and I ought, she said, to be thankful, as it was a blessing I had no reason to expect. , ** Her souj was,,too depraved to listen' tp any фщс»1 could say, and I found, that, within three 4ay r s, I wns to be, again made a sacrifice ^ an d thou, too, poor de¬ ceived Aiphonsus, íbr whose sufferings my heart has felt a thousand convulsive pangs.
119 pangs. But thou art now fully revenged % if thou couldst but be sensible of what I have suffered, and what I at this moment suffer. But those are nothing to what I ^hall endure in hell, where I arri now hastening, to join those devils that first made me criminal. " I saw you ; I pitied, but could not love you. I disdained to affect a tender¬ ness I did not feel, and I became your partner, under tbe threats of the most damned of beings. Yes, Alphonsus, I had no choice but the Inquisition, or to become thy wife. You may remember the stipulation, which Don Joseph made for me, to be as often with him as the na¬ ture of my situation would admit : but that was only that he might gratify, with· out the least restraint, his licentious appe-, tite. This occasioned my frequent visits to him, unaccompanied by you. Every tender endearment I received from you spoke daggers to my guilty heart, arid f never closed my. eyes without offering, • « up
tm upa silent prayer, that God would punish, is tbcy deserved, those fiende tbast com¬ pelled iee to abuse уои. " Tbo» knowest, Alphonsus, what passed after I became thy wife, down to the morning when thy tender kindness took me to thy mother, and presented her the ehild* Conscious guilt flashed in my face* as it wm hebd Щ tó tke Dachess. ТЪе observation she made âtung Une t<* the soul* aad I was certain that she sus¬ pected my infamy. I found к impossible to bear bar scrutinizing eye, therefore kft her, with the child, m the abrupt manner I did* I need not caU to your raind what followed when you returned to me, but will pa«« over to tbe dreadful moment of the earthquake, when we were for ever parted. " I scarcely know what I did, any fur* ther than hurrying to the steps of the church, where I thought I saw the infa¬ mous woman who had first sealed mf perdition. My child I neither thought of fr nor
1 121 nor regaråed, ps the sight of it fififed my soul with the most unconquerable de¬ testation, and I should have been happy to have seen it dead at my feeU Ah ! couldst thou have known what passed in my guilty bosom, even thy virtuous soul would have pitied me. m When the third shock took place, I was, with many omers, thrown against the wall of the church, on the inside, and, TbeMeve, was stunned by the blow, as I remained insensible for sometime. When I came to myself, I was stretched on the floor, within the rails of the altar. Several others were with me; some, on their knees, were fervently invoking the pro¬ tection of Heaven, others lay as senseless as myself. Pray I could not. iknew my guilt, andthe supplication I was about to offer up 4ied upon my lips j but 1 could utter curses, and those I imprecated upon the heads of my undoers. i saw èeath »Uirrourid где, as å thought» and shuddered to
122 to think into what a gulph of torments my soul would be hurled. * f I cast my eye around, with frantic terror ; I sought the wretch whom I re¬ membered to have seen as I came to the door of the church, and, not seeing her, concluded she was already with the damned ; but I was mistaken ; she was preserved, wbile thousands of righteous beings perished. I heard the most dis¬ mal groans : I tried to get up, and reach the door, to see if, among the throng, I could he informed where I was ; for, so confused were my ideas, that I could not be persuaded I was in the church of St. Mark. 1 attempted twice to move from where I then was, but the throng pressed so close upon me, that I could not leave the place, therefore, continued there, in a state of despair a thousand times more dreadfal than death. ." I thought of thee, Alphonsus, and hove a bitter sigh. Then my wretched thoughts
123 thoughts wandered to thé hated partner of my guilt. He, I earnestly hoped, had perished, and been sent to hell, with аИ his crimes upon him ; for, I gathered from the incoherent discourse of those near me, that the city was destroyed, and only a few, besides those present, hail escaped ; but my hopes, in a short time, were blasted ; for, at the moment when I was about to offeť up a prayer of thanks for my deKverance, I saw the abandoned being making his way towards me, at¬ tended by a priest. They blessed the surrounding multitude, and impiously de¬ precated the wrath of Heaven. As the monster assisted the priest to elevate the holy cross, my soul cursed him, while those wbo were sensible of their situation, earnestly implored the prayers of those apparently righteous men. Oh! how I shuddered at that holy symbol being raised by such unhallowed hands ! " When
124
$ ¿ørtwt ţfiey had fijnisbed their player, щпф Фр >RrîeH k®& hestQwed Ιψ bene- diction, they c^m^ to me, and* by the gşsiıtşnce of ,sorne one near,! was helped $μ% of,thf *hrøng. A door was opened # thf 4^d^of the jaltar; it was smali, but disçov^^öb^P.nAe stone, stef s, down which we 4e4ç^fad$d A aş, did ,the priest, and iaşe ^tì>^r«· W#t walked ^I^ng a nanrow P3s«3g£ f^r^ Щ$Ф whifai then agaio as* cenjşd a few^tt^ş^ and enteché ågarr ğen belonging ţo a monastery. It was jpied with people, tearing their bair, and wringing tb^ir hştodh 'm gli the bitterness of grief· Fi^om this place I was huiriod hymy conductors, *nd takáto a small yillfige, a shpjt d|stş#ce from Lisbon. When l.camt? t^ere, jl asfød ф&туощ ^nd*w^ toid уод^ Ьз4 perísbe4, « » %ş ask % A^ûhcpstts/ mid Don bs^flh, / ^ut щг iMrthing lima your child: «l^jţtpirtt^^y^r'^idL 4tis/ returned he ; * but no thanks to its un- ,*7/ « feeling
125 feeling mother. This good man,' point¬ ing to the priest, * preserved him, at the risk of his own life.' * I wish he had not,' replied I ; * since Alphonsus is dead, it would have been a happy circumstance, had it perished also.' ** I know not what it was that caused me to speak the feelings of my heart ; but he turned round, and regarded me, with a sternness I had never known him put on before, and left me to the care of some peasants, who were nearly dis¬ tracted themselves, at the dreadful hor¬ rors they had witnessed. ** I continued here some days, when he again came, and said, He should take me to a convent at a short distance, till his house was repaired, which, though not wholly destroyed, was still so much in¬ jured, that no one could remain in it. He said, If I had a desire to see the child, it should be sent me, or he would let it remain where it was. I said, He might do as he pleased ; if the child could be Vol. III. G conve-
126 conveniently with me, 1 should be haf>py to have it; but if it was better accom- modated where it was, I would have ' it stay there. He made no answer. ** I continued at tbe convent, but the child was not brought to me. He came every day. Once, when he was there, one of the company (as calamity had levelled, for a time, all distinctions) con¬ gratulated him on his escape, and asked, How he had effected it ? He looked sig¬ nificantly at me, and said, in Italian : * These strangers evince a curiosity that you do not ; perhaps you would have been better pleased, had I shared the fate of your husband ?' I said nothing. He then turned to him that* had asked the question, and said, He was not at his own house, at the time, but at the mo¬ nastery of St. John's, whither he had been at a very early hour, to see a holy Father, who was dying. When he ex¬ pired, he had, to recover himself from the scene, gone into the garden. When the
127 the first shock came, the Fathers preci pitately left the dwelling, and descended to a passage, under the garden, which led to the church of St. Mark, whither he hurried with them. Himself and one of them ran to the door, wbere the Father saw Alphonsus, with the child in his arms, from whence he snatched him and ran into the church again. He, in the mean time, had found me, stunned with the blow I had received on my head. He caused me to be carried inside the rails of the altar, and then went to seek the Father with the child, but could not find him. When the last shock came, he gave all over for lost, but the church did not fall, and few that had taken refuge in it were hurt. When the confusion had a little subsided, he again sought the Fa¬ ther, and found him, with the infant, and many others, in the vaults of the church, whither they had fied. G 2 « This
123 r · This circumstance, of his, and his relative's being saved in such a singular manner, made those people regard him as a being little short of divinity. Oh ! " how my soul abhorred the adulation he received ! í never once asked after the infamous woman, who had been the cause of all my miseries, and, not seeing her, thought she was destroyed. I made many enquiries after your mother, but could learn nothing satisfactory. One would say, The Duchess and her family were buried in the ruins, and another, That they all escaped, except thee, un¬ fortunate Alphonsus, doomed by my dia¬ bolical crimes to suffer a fate,which thy generous soul did not deserve. " I had been at this place above two months, when Don Joseph came, and said, He should take me, the next day, to a house he had procured for me at Cálvela. This was what I dreaded, and I earnestly desired to stay ; but he would
129 would hear nothing—go I must with him. I ventured to ask, Whether Signora Pac¬ cela was to be there ? He said No, she was too ill ; c and, I think,' said he, * you have not evinced your regard for that lady, by not asking for her before.' I excused myself, by saying, That my mind had been so much disturbed, by the calamities I had witnessed, that í was not collected enough to ask about any one ; but now, 1 was about to be removed, I thought it necessary to en¬ quire after all whom I had known. " I enquired for the domestics; five only had escaped, part of the house having fallen on them, in their attempt to ieave it, and two of those had been very much hurt, in saving the Signora, who dropped under the beam of one of the rooms, from whence she had been taken alive, and carried to the church of St. Mark. She was then among the suf¬ ferers, who were under medical care, in the south district. I should, he said, G 3 go
130 goby water, as it would only distress me to view the horrid devastation that had been made in so short a time. It was a consolation to me, that the female fiend was not to be with me. Oh ! how earnestly did I wish, that 1er torments might be doubled, and that she might feel ip body what I feh in mind. " I was fetched the next dav, and, as I stood upon the opposite shore, and saw the ruins of that so lately beautiful city, I could not help bursting into tears. He hurried me along to the house I was to reside at. Your image was, I thought, before me the whole of the way. * c I had been there three days, wben the child was brought me. I trembled as it was given to me, and earnestly wished I could never behold it. Don Joseph observed my emotion, and said, I did not deserve to be a mother, since I took so little pleasure in viewing my child, I sought not to disguise my thoughts, and freely told him, That, as I had
13i had never in my life been at any place > where there were infants, I had not any predilection for them, and he would oblige me if he would let some careful person take charge of it, where I might occa¬ sionally visit it. This be consented to, and the babe was placed at a ¡short dis¬ tance, but amply provided with attendants ofevery description. ** We had continued at Cálvela about six months, during which time I suffered the most keen distress. I saw no one, nor would go any where. I loathed my¬ self, and tbe monster I was obliged to reside with. I never saw the Signora, but my tormentor informed me, That tho hurts she had received, had brought on a lingering fever, which, at times, was ьо violent as to deprive her of reason ; when, one morning, I was surprised by a messenger from her, requesting me to visit her, as she was dying, and could not close her eyes in peace, if she did not ьее me. His Highness hesitated. Seeing G 4· htm
152 him irresolute, a thought struck me, That I should by all means go. I there¬ fore desired that he would permit me to comply with her request, as it might be the last she would ever make. He, at last, reluctantly consented, n I was taken to a house, at no great distance, where she had been brought to from the Hospital. When 1 came, I found her near her last moments. She was sensible, and attempted to raise her¬ self, but could not—Nature was too far exhausted. She held out her hand, and said, Now she saw me, she should die in peace, if I would grant her my forgive¬ ness for any thing "she might have done to oSend me. I told her, If my pardon would be of any service to her in death, I freely gave it. She seemed satisfied, when I again assured her of it. She then desired to kiss my hand. I held it to her ; she took it between both hers, then faintly said : « Oh ! that this hand had never been given to the worthy ob¬ ject
133 ject tfeit it was ľ * í wish so tşo/ said lì * but 4is now too tete/ * Tis not/ said she, looking me earnestly '\n thç face \ € 'tis not too tefe to q^it h|rn, who has been your ruiii. Fly from Ыт**^ seek poverty and wretchedness, in any state, rather than stay with hirø. You know not the extent çf those torments that await you, if you do not. l,et my Confessor see you, as ßoon as I am teid in the dust, and he will explain what I dare not. Follow his fcdvjcej and ущ, may yet be preserved froni evertestbg horrors. Leave me now/ said she ; * I have your pardon ; that is all I a$k f and the death-bed of a sinner ,canno£ be pleasant to you. Do jas I advise ; ^ee the holy man, and you will find I ask -nothing, but what will refate to ypur eternal welfare.* I promised to do itj and, having again assumed her of rny partion, left her. The next morning, I was told that she expired spon aftør J bad left her. G 5 « When
134 ** When Γ -came back* Don Joseph wás extremely anxious to know all that hád passed with the Signora. . I said, Tháti her only desire to see me was, to entreat my pardon for any thing, wherein she might have offended me. He asked : * Did"she· not mention any thing par¬ ticular.' I said, No; and,from the short time I staid there, I believe he thought ft tröe. For several days, I was in hourly expectation of seeing the Confessor ; but he came not. I racked my imagination to divine J what it could be he had to impart, " Near three months passed away y and I had nearly forgot the conversation, when; one morning, his Highness came into my room, and said, He had heard that a report was in circulation, of my husband being living; but, added he, * the reporters would do well to make good their assertion, and he should go to ' Lisbon the next day to make himself certain. A gleam of hope darted across ' my
135 my bewildered senses at this account; and, in a moment, I determined what to do. I thought, if it was true that you were living, I would fiy, in spite of every dreadful threat, and lay open all my crimes before you, as I seemed persuaded, that you would pity, though you mjust condemn me. Full of this pleasing vision, I anticipated the moment, when he would return, and confirm the re¬ port. " He left me the next morning, and I saw him not for tbree days. I was eager to learn, whether it was true or not, but he refused to satisfy me, saying, He was not sure yet ; but he should go again, as soon as he received a letter from a person he had written to. The next day, in the afternoon, the answer came, and he in¬ stantly left Cálvela. " He had not been gone above three or four hours, when a monk camo, and desired to speak with mc. It was con- • G 6 trary
ise trary to my usual custom to see any one in the absence of Don Joseph ; but, hoping he might bring some news of you, * I ordered him to be admitted. After the usual compliments, he delivered into my hands a sealed paper. ' This packet,' said he^ * I was desired, many months ago, to deliver to you, by Signora Paccela.' H ' Ahí my God İ' said I, * were you her confessor ?'—' I cannot, Madam, for some particular reasons, say who I am ; but it is my sincere hope, that you will attend to the contents, and follow the advice given in it— -it comes from a sinner, who has long since obtained, through the mercies of her Saviour, some remission of her punishment ; but do not open it, till you are inibrmed, that Father Thomas is no more ; that intelligence will be sent yeu, in a blank letter, sealed with blacks when you receive that, you will be at Bberty to open it, but not before ; in the mean
m mean time, bury those papers in a jar, in the garden : trust no one with the secret : do it yourself, and that before Don Jo¬ seph's return ; for, if he were made acquainted with thé purport of my visit to you, I should be certain of expiring, under the greatest tortures, in the In¬ quisition. Remember then, Madam, that on your discretion depends the life of móre than one. When you receive the blank letter, you will be at liberty to open the packet, as those that now dread his power will be then far beyond his reach, and that of his minions. I know the errand Don Joseph is gone upon.— Alphonsus lives, as also his mother and sister : his brother will soon return, and you will know more.' Saying this, he hastily left me. " c Aiphonsus lives, as also his mother and sister ; his brother will soon return.' Those joyful sounds reverberated on my ear. The packet was forgot, and I re-» solved
138 solved,.the firft moment .1 could leam where you were, to fly to you, entreat your forgiveness for my crimes, and beg that you would provide an asylum for me, in some temóte convent, where I might waste the remainder of my guilty life, in penitence and prayer. At last, I recol¬ lected the injunction respecting the papers, and punctually obeyed the di¬ rections. That done, I amused myself for many hours, in reflecting how happy I should be, when placed out of the reach of my infamous tyrant, whose very sha¬ dow I detested.
CHAP.
Ί3ί?
CHAP. VIII. ------------ In Heav'n there still is justice For all, and may sometimes be found on earth. I will implore it, both from Men and Gods. .__------------- to all the world I'll publish he's a traitor : infamy Shall still pursue his steps, that ev'ry one May hate, may shun him, and,with just abhorence, May pomt him out to all that know him not. Hoolb. " DON JOSEPH did not re» turn for near a fortnight, when be came back much vexed and out of humor. I asked him, Whether he was confirmed in the opinion that the report was false ? He said, Yes, he was ; for, after the most di¬ ligent search, no such person as Alphon¬ sus could be found. ' But/ said he, * I have -discovered that his mother and sister, who are still living, do not believe any
140 any thing about it. They look upon it in the light that I do f and regard it as the scheme of an impostor/ u I heard all that he said, without making thé least remark ; but I was cer¬ tain still in my own mind, that you were living, and cherished the hope that you would, by some means or other, find out where I was, and send or come to me. In this pleasing vision, I passed several months. In all that time, I could not find out where your mother was. Though I dreaded seeing her, yet I would have sent to gain some kind of information. His Highness seemed to guess my thoughts, and I observed, that he sedu¬ lously avoided all discourse upon the sub¬ ject. ** I began at last to sink again into despondency, when I was roused from it by the arrival of the blank letter. I opened it with avidity, as I hoped, when I came to see the contents of the packet, I should leam something about you. Ah ! Alphonsus,
141 Alphonsus, that guilt, which I thought so enormous, was nothing to what I had to be made acquainted with. Oh ! mo¬ ments of complicated horrors! worse, tenfold worse, than those that haunt the damned î " I seized the first moment that offer¬ ed, to take up the papers, free from dis¬ covery. When ï had done it, i hastened to my closet, and, taking care to prevent intrusion, sat down, with an eager hope that I should hear you were in some place of SBfety, where I might send to you ; but, in a few minutes all hopes were flcd¿ and with feelings harrowed up, I read the confession of Paccela. In it, she gave me an account of my birth ; who my parents were ; and that I had been brought up by Don Joseph, for the express purpose of administering to his pleasures ; that his niece, one of the most amiable of her sex, had fallen the same unhappy vic¬ tim. She advised meto put myself imme¬ diately under the protection of Fatber Jerome
Jerome of St. John's ; and, if I had a wish to save my »soul from everlasting perdi¬ tion, that I vvould make a full confession of røy crimes to him, and àhow him her confession, which would be subscribed by the father to whom it was made. She earnestly implored my pardon, for every step she had taken in my ruin, and said, That nothing but the threats of Don Joseph, whose power she knew, and dreaded, obliged her to comply with all he commanded, She had endured much in body and mind, but she was ltd to hope that her sufferings in this world, would soften those in the next. She again entreated, that I would not delay to do as she requested, or my soul would be lost for ever. u I read over these papers with a brain on fire* I sat, and reflected, in what manner I had best to act. As fast as I planned one scheme, I changed it for ano¬ ther. I panted to make known what the horrid packet had imparted. I cursed myself,
14$ myself» tny dairkned undoêr, and the whole world; I braved everi Heaven itself. At last; I concluded on making a request to go to Lisbori, as I might, when I was there, be able to devise some means to see the Father. My requeñ was reluct-' antly complied with, and I was permitted to go, but not alone. I was obliged to consent to his accompanying inej and, - that he might not suspect any thing, I affected to be more cheerful than usual, and persuaded him, it was only curiosity, to see how the new buildings went on, that made me desire to go. " When we came there, I affected to be greatly amused with the different arti¬ ficers. At last, I fortunately recollected thè name of the Father who saved my- child. I desired that I might be permit¬ ted to pay my respects to him 5 be agreed to it, and we went thither, but he was from home. ï said I would wait, as I should be happy to see him before I re¬ turned.. « While
144 u WhiJeJ was reflecting in wbat man¬ ner I should gain sight of him I wanted, Father Jerome himself came in, with two others, to pay his respects to Don Joseph. His n^me was scarcely pronounced, before I desired to speak with him alone. His Highness, who had perceived my emotion, started at my request ; but the Father com¬ plied with itin an instant, and, before he could recover from his surprise, I had left the apartment. ** As soon as I entered the room he took me to, J requested him to take care that nò one might intrude. His surprise was equal to Don Joseph's, and I believe he thought me disordered in my head. When the door was fastened, I dropped upon my knees, and earnestly implored him to hear me. He held out his hands to raise me, but I refused to change my situation. He was astonished, and, with visible per¬ turbation, begged me to be composed, and he would attend to every thing. My soul was too much agitated to weep ; but, in
%
Иэ in a tone of anguish that seemed deeply to affect him, related all that I had suf¬ fered, and then delivered to him the Sig¬ nora's confession. I shall not attempt to describe the different emotions that ap¬ peared on his countenance during the re¬ cital—it would be impossible. When he had read the papers, and carefully observ- ed^the signature, his breast seemed agi¬ tated by the most violent agonies. He raised me up, for 1 had sunk on the floor, and begged me to be comforted. Yes, Alphonsus, thou much injured husband, this holv man pitied me, he pitied the mi¬ serable, ì Alzira. " Fr me moments, he walked the room i t utmost agitation ; then came to me, ι с my hand, and said : * Who is there that w r ould condemn thee, thou poor helpless victim ? but be comforted ; thy crimes were not voluntary, and those that are not, the Saviour of Heaven has promised pardon and forgiveness to.— Thou hast, my daughter, evinced thy de¬ testation
146 testation of guilt by coming to me, and I will venture to assure thee, that thy God will npt regard thee with an eye of seve¬ rity ; for, though thou mayest be looked upon by the rigid, as a contaminated and guilty wretch, yet, in my opinion, thy soul is pure. I know not, till I have con¬ sulted my brethren, what steps to pursue to serve thee ; but I think it will be most advisable for thee now, to return with Don Joseph ; I shall take care that he may not suspect the nature of our conver- , sation, be composed before him ; endea¬ vour to appear cheerful, and leave the re^r. to me. Depend upon it that thou shalt, within three days, be taken from him, and placed under the care of some peo¬ ple, who will not fail to serve thee.' ff I thanked him in the most fervent manner, for bis promised kindness, and said, I would submit implicitly to his di¬ rections/ I then ventured to ask, If he knew whether you were living ? * Of that/ said he, c I am not absolutely cer¬ tain ;
147 tain 2 ; but I am led to hope he is^—for se veral reasons ; and now more than ever, ' as ï have this day received information that he was alive three months ago/— * Blessed be God Y said I ; ( can you in¬ form me where I can send to him, as I earnestly wish to implore his pardon r'— ς I cannot/ answered he, * at this mo¬ ment ; but you shall know in a few days. I believe you are ignorant of the place where the Dutchess now resides ; here is her direction/ taking a letter out of his pocket ; * and if you wish to send to her, let it be done as soon as you return-' " I took the address with transport ; and, when I was a little more composed, he led me to Don Joseph. The Father to whom the visit was paid, had, in the interim, returned, and he was with the others in the room where I had left them. I entered with a cheerful air, went up to him, and enquired after his health. He seemed pleased to see me, and gaily en- * tered into a conversation which I joined in,
148 in, without any visible embarrassment.— His Highness, however, frequently cast his eye» op me and Father Jerome, as if to read in our countenances what might have been the purport of our conversa¬ tion. Seeing this, I was upon my guard, and, during the time I staid, gave him no reason to suspect any thing. I observed that he appeared restless and uneasy, aad, when I rose to go, expressed great satisfaction. ** When I got into the carriage, he in¬ stantly asked me, What I had wanted of the Father, whose nanie he supposed me ignorant of. I told him, That a thought struck me, he could possibly give me some information respecting the reports that bad, been in circulation about Al- phonsus. What business had I, he said, to make any enquiries after a person, who, I must, if I had only common sense, be assured was dead ? He bade me think no more about any such idle nonsense, unless I was disposed to incur his deep resent-
149 resentment. I affected to be much hurt at his reprimand, and promised never to do the like again. " When I came back to the house, I requested to be left in my closet, as I had some music to finish ; he nodded assent, and I left him. " As soon as I was alone, I gave free vent to my tears, which I had for the last half hour found difficult to suppress. In a short time, I felt much relieved. I then took a pen, and wrote a short note to your mother, desiring to be permitted to see her. That done, I waited an opportunity to send it, which I effected in the evening. I had not been inter¬ rupted by Don Joseph ; he had neither come nor sent to her. Midnight ap¬ proached, but I did not undress ; all around me was still as death ; nought was confused, but my distracted mind. " I was about to leave my cipset for the room adjoining, when I was surprised by a light, which seemed to approach Vol. III. H the
150 the house. I stepped to the window to see what it could mean, when, in a moment, I discovered the officers of the Inquisition. They were instantly in the house. Before I could recover from my consternation, I heard a voice in the gallery, and some one came to my door. I instantly opened it, and saw Don Joseph. He came in, shut the door after him, and advanced to me, with the most diabolical fury flashing in his eyes—he held something in his hand. * Tis well/ said he, * thou damned hypocrite; but, secure as thou thinkest thyself, thou shalt not escape my fury. Take this, and swallow it imme¬ diately. No hesitation ; take it, I say.' « I will not/ replied I ; 4 it cannot serve me/ * But you shall/ said he; and, grasping both iny hands with one of his, forced a small pill down my throat,™ * Take that as thy reward, thou damned deceitful ——/ He was going to pro¬ ceed, when the officers, forced themselves into the room, threw a long black cloak over
151 over him, and, without saying a word, hurried him from me. ** I stood for some moments insensible to every thing, when the light again glanced on my window, and I saw the coach pass tbe avenue. At this, two servants entered ; their countenances were the picture of horror. They fell on their knees, and prayed most fervently. Before I could desire them to rise, I felt a giddiness in my head ; I reeled to the sopha, on which I sat, without being able to speak. A burning heat seized my throat, and every object appeared to me to run round» I tried to steady my¬ self, but mv efforts were vain. The domestics looked at me, and then at each other, by turns. I attempted to order some water, but could not. A convulsion seized my mouth, the giddiness increased, and I fell on the floor, but did not lose my reason. " The servants came to mv aid, and sent some others for medical assistance. H 2 Thcy
152 They laid me on the sopha '; the heat in my throat enereased to such a degree, as to seem as if burning iron was searing it. I made several attempts to make them comprehend that I wanted water ; but they could not understand me.— Every moment added to my torture ; at last, the physician came, to whom the servants related what had happened.— At first, he was inclined to think that the terrors into which I had been thrown occasioned it ; but, when he came near, observed my mouth, and understood, by my signs, that I wanted something to drink, he found there was some other cause. He ordered some milk to be brought, and, by his assistance, I took it. He then examined my tongue ; but, on seeing it, started, bade the servants take care of me, and he would be there again in a few minutes ; then left the room with the greatest precipitation. íť He was gone about ten minutes; when he returned, he caused me to drink something
153 something which he brought ; but, before he came, my stomach and bowels were in the same burning torments as my throat. In a few minutes, I was seized with a violent retching ; the convulsions subsided ; the pains abated, and I was, at last, able to speak to him. He de¬ sired to know what I had taken : I answered, Nothing. He was hurt at my reply, and said, He was sorry that I had a wish to deceive him, and that I had so little regard for ray soul, as self-murder was never forgiven by tbe Deity. I was hurt, in my turn, and assured him, That the thoughts of self-murcjer I had as great a detestation for as himself. * Then how comes it,' said he, * that you should take poison ?' " I ordered the servants out, and then told him what Don Joseph had done. He started. ' This is too horrid,' said he ; * the poison he has given you is of such a nature, that I fear it is not in the power of medicine to counteract it, miless the H 3 antidote
154 antidote had been taken a few minutes sooner. However, its effects are İn some measure lessened ; but, as the stomach was affected, before the remedy was taken, I cannot promise that you will escape its violence. If you are easier on the next attack of pain, your life may be saved, but I fear the worst.' " I heard all he said, wdthout the least emotion, but thought, if I could be blessed with the sight of your mother, İ couid die contented. I, therefore, re¬ quested he would send thither imme¬ diately, and beg she would come without delay. He sent off a person directly, and, in a few hours, I had the happiness of seeing her, and receiving her forgive¬ ness. I should have had a longer con¬ versation with her, but my torments re¬ turning, she was obliged to leave me, as lhe sight of my sufferings affected her too much. α 'Tis now many days since I was first seized with these dreadful tortures. —Mj
I $5 —My life, within these few hours, ebbs apace ; and, now I am a little calm, I am led to hope, that I shall yet obtain mercy from Heaven. Yes, Alphonsus, thou dear and much injur¬ ed husband, I hope that I shall again behold thee, but not in this world. No, a few hours, and I shall be no more. Yet, as there İs mercy promised to the most abandoned, I will still trust there is for me also. But do thou, righteous and vir¬ tuous Aiphonsus, do thou pardon me,— The sufferings I fear thou hast undergone on my account, are great indeed; but great, in Heaven, will be thy reward.— Thou art sure of happiness, but my trem¬ büng soul will not, cannot dare to say it will be so. Pray for my soul------Oh ! I am seized again------Farewell—-Fare¬ well for ever !'. !"
Η 4 CHAP.
156
CHAP. IX. There is a history in all men's live«, Figuring the nature of the times deceased : The which observed, a man may prophesy, With a near aim, of the main-chance of things As yet not come to life, Henry the IVth. NO pen can describe the feel¬ ings of Alphonsus, as he perused the sheets; and, when he came to the close of them, he sat the living image of despair. He cast his eyes on the papers, then to Heaven, and, in broken accents, ex¬ claimed : " Dear, miserable, suffering Al¬ zira ! Pardon thee, thou deceived inno¬ cent ! for such I deem thee. Yes, I do pardon thee ; and, if thy soul could wit¬ ness my emotions at this instant, it would be
157 be convinced how eagerly I would fly to thee to confirm it, could I wing my way to those regions where thou now art." He then, in an attitude of the most fer¬ vent piety, earnestly implored the God of Mercies to shorten his date of life, and let him hasten to join those, for whom only he had wished to live. His thoughts then reverted to the infant Carlos—this drove him to madness. He rose, with the papers in his hand, and, with frantic wildness, imprecated curses on its father. Then he would sink again into blessings on the poor Alzira. In this manner he continued for near an hour; it was growing late, and he had not for so long a time summoned any one to attend him. The slave began to be alarmed, and was about to rap at the door, wdien Berry and the Father entered. They had been there twice before, but now it was become late, and they were determined to go to him. The Father tapped, and begged permission to be ad- H 5 mitted.
IBS mitted. He put up the papers, and open¬ ed the door. fc I am glad you are come, Father," said he. tf My thoughts are be¬ wildered, and I stand in need of com¬ fort." The good man said every thing he could to compose him. " I have lost," said Alphonsus, " a sister, and, for aught I know, a mother, and I have lost a still more tender object. Then do I not stand in need of consolation ?" * f You do, in¬ deed," said the Father, u and, if you can bear up under such accumulated distres¬ ses, with the firmness of a Christian, I will regard you as a being, in whom the spirit of the Most High delights to dwell." Alphonsus sighed deeply.—" I will let you," said he, " see those papers, when I am preparing for my last grand journey. At present, do not think me wanting in that friendship I have many times avowed, if I keep their contents a secret from every one I am now, more than ever, thankful
159 thankful to find in you and that dear boy, a solace to my sorrows, which I could not hope to find any where else." Berry stood weeping at the side of the Father " Ah ! Sir/' said he, " had I known what those papers contained, I am sure you should never have seen them. I hope you will not keep them with you, but let me lock them away—Oh 1 how miserable I shall be whenever I see them I" " You shall lock them away," said Alphonsus; " fetch that little cabinet in the closet ; remember where they are now put, and, if any thing should happen to me, let this good Father take them." The cabinet was brought, and the pa¬ pers put into it. 4Í I shall, to-morrow," said Aiphonsus, " add something more to them." The Father and Aiphonsus continued together for a considerable time, and Berry, who had watched every turn of his patron's eyes, requested per¬ mission to sleep in the same room wdth him, as the poor boy seemed persuaded H 6 that
160 that he was very ill. Alphonsus consent¬ ed to it, and begged the Father to be with him early in the morning. The Father soon after,took his leave, as his friend ap¬ peared very composed. They retired to rest, and passed the night very well. The soul of Alphonsus rose like the ра^щ -tree, the more it is op¬ pressed ; and, in the morning, when the Father came, he found him perfectly tran¬ quil. Berry, whose fondness for Alphon¬ sus enereased every day, left him not a moment to muse upon his griefs. The Father had enjoined him to watch Al¬ phonsus, and, when he was Jost in thought, to draw him out of it hy every means in his power, either by showing his improvements, or in reading to him from some English books, which the Father had procured among the European * Consuls.. By those means, his sorrows were soothed, and in a few weeks he was prevailed upon once more to walk out.— He was anxious to hear from his mother's confessor,
161 confessor, or from Gonsalvo. He flatter¬ ed himself that his mother lived, and that she was happy in seeing his brotber married. Under this delusion, he passed near two months. Notwithstanding his appa¬ rent fortitude, it was evident that his health suffered greatly. He had often ex¬ pressed a wish to see again bis old friend, who left him abruptly at Melasso* He told the Father, That he had a strong in¬ clination to go thither, to learn whether they had heard any thing respecting him ; and, if he wouid accompany Berry and himself to that place, he should be very happy. The good man agreed, and tbe week following they set out. They reached Melasso in safety. Al¬ phonsus went immediately to the French merchant, who seemed greatly pleased at seeing him ; but to his enquiries he re¬ ceived nothing satisfactory. They had not heard of the old gentleman since, but they were led to think, he would be back
im back sooner that time than usual, as there was a report, by a 4 vessel come from Alex¬ andria, that one of the Beys was raising an army, and it was generally believed he was going to make head against the Porte, as Egypt appeared on all sides to be in com¬ motion. The Mamalukes were making great preparations,, and a thousand vari¬ ous reports were in circulation. Alphonsus then enquired after the young kdies, andhis friend, the Turk. The young English lady, he found, was mar¬ ried, and had left them a fortnight before, tnd one of the merchant's sisters was soon to be united to his Turkish friend. He then asked what sjaves he hajd to redeem ?— *' I have a list," said the merchant, <e sent by my English friend, of seventeen, now tt Constantinople ; and, as he has strong¬ ly recommended them, they will be the next I fliall liberate ; but, at present, my stock is not adequate to it ; therefore, I must wait till our good friend returns." H How much do you want ?" asked Al¬ phonsus.
163 phonsus. fC I shall want/' he answereď r * # a very large sum—not less tban three hundred pounds sterling." f * Then, that sum," said he, " you shall have of me ; and, if two hundred more can purchase some, nearer than Constantinople, I will empower you to do it." The merchant was quite surprised at the generosity of Alphonsus, and said, He would, that day, order search to be made after European prisoners, at Rhodes, and another island, where he had heard that some had been taken. He then re¬ ceived drafts for the sum, on the Portu¬ guese Consul, at Smyrna, and promised to send off directly to Constantinople. Alphonsus was persuaded by the Fa* ther to go to Rhodes, as, in all probabi¬ lity, they might be able to hear something more satisfactory there concerning his old friend, that being the port from whence he gained the intelligence before. Al¬ phonsus consented ; for, as all places were alike
164 alike to him, he did not mind the jour¬ ney. They agreed to stop a couple of d*ys at Melasso, and then set out. They paid a visit to his Turkish friend, who had, the time before, assisted him in the search. He made ihem every offer of friendship and service bis native hospi¬ tality could suggest, and furnished Al¬ phonsus with letters to two houses at Rhodes, who, he knew,, had considerable dealings at Joppa and Alexandria.— They preferred going by land, as the Fa¬ ther did not much approve the journey by sea. When they had taken the name of the man who brought tbe former information, they set out for Halicarnassus, where they intended to make a short stay ; that place they reached in safety. They found very hospitable entertainment, at the house of a Greek Missionary, where Ai¬ phonsus was greatly amused by his host, with various accounts of his travels.— Alphonsus
165 Aiphonsus desired hım to make enquiries, whether there were any Christian slaves in the town ; but there was none at that time, as all that had been there were removed to the market, at Constan¬ tinople. One morning that they had rambled out on the shore, to view the Bay, they met a poor miserable looking man, who craved their charity. The Father regarded him with pity, and Berry, looking ear¬ nestly at him, cried out, " Oh ! dear Sir, this is Muley Ismael, the very man I saw, when I was with my father, at Scanderoon. Would you believe it, Sir ì He told my father, that he would not take me back to England, but somebody else should, who would be a great man* and not a sailor« My father laughed at him then, and called him an old fortune- telling fool ; but, I'm sure, he is no such thing ; for, an't I along with you» and is not my father gone to England without me ? Oh, dear, Sir, I will, if you please» give
166 give him a piece of money; for, he is very poor, and I'm sure he deserves it, for telling me such good news.'" " Ay, do, my dear boy," said Alphonsus ; " give him what you like ; if you have not enough, give him this for me," and he handed him a gold ducat. It is impossible to say which was the happiest at the sight of gold, the poor beggar, or Berry, who skipped and jumped, with the greatest glee, round the poor old man. ** You told me," said he, w that I should be a great man, and now you see it's coming to pass; for this dear good gentleman, Don Alphonsus, has got me from my Either, and lets me make as many verses as I please, and I am learning Greek, Latin, Portuguese, and Turkish ; so, when I see you again» I shall be able to talk with you in some other language than Lingua Franca." The miserable man blessed, most fervent¬ ly, this excellent lad» and bis two pâ¬ tirons. Alphonsus
167 Alphonsus walked on a few steps, when, recollecting himself, he bade Berry go back, and ask the poor man, Whether he was going to stay at that port, or go any where else. If he meant to stay, to desire he would call upon him the next day, and something should be done for him. With tears of gratitude streaming OOwn his furrowed cheeks, he thanked them, and said, His intention, when he landed there, was to have gone on foot to Bursa, as he had there some friends ; but being, through weakness, unable to proceed, be was forced to stay where he was, till he had recovered a little strength. Berry said, That he was glad he had been detained, €( because now, Fm sure, Don Alphonsus will not let you go such a long journey on foot, if you will come to biro to-morrow, at ten o'clock, to the great Missionary's, at the cast entrance of the town/* With blessings on the dear boy, he said He would. * f Mind you don't
168 don't forget," cried Berry, and away he ran· When he reached his patron, he was asked, What the man had said ? " Oh !" answered he, ff he has promised to come ; for, do you know, Sir, that poor old man was going to walk all the way to Bursa ; but he was so ill, that he could not. I am very glad of it ; for, now, I can let him have some money, which you have been so kind as to give me. I don't want it ; for, I am young, and you take care of me ; but he is old, and has no one to take care of him, which, I am sure, is much worse : therefore, if you please, he shall have it all. I can't bear to see his poor aged feet walk over the hot sands, and rough stones, which have cut his feet, and scorched them very much. He really deserves I should give him all I have ; for, he told me I should not go back to England, but stay in Asia, and be a great man, besides being a good one. I had no money then, only a few
169 few aspers, and those I pţit into his hood, unknown to him. I was ashamed to offer them, they were so few, and he was then very poor." Alphonsus looked at the Father, then at Berry, and said : " Surely, if there is any blessing greater than another, it is in the possession of a grateful heart. That speaks at once the residence of every virtue, I cannot be thankful enough to my God, that, in the midst of my sorrows, he should bless me with this lad, whose excellent heart gives me comfort, when nothing else would ; and, from this hour, I adopt him as my son—a better I shall never find. Oh ! how blessed h the mother that gave him birth ! The union of his parents most certainly met the full approbation of the Most High, who sent this dear boy as a pledge of his love to them." Berry's eyes were suffused with tears— τ his patron walked on. When
170 When they returned to the bouse, Alphonsus asked the youth, How he became acquainted with Muley Ismael, as he called him ? " It was/' said he, ** at Scanderoon. I had been making verses, very bad ones, to be sure, and I had no paper, and did not like to forget tbem. I wrote upon the top of my fa¬ ther's wig box, for which, when he saw it, he was going to lick me. To avoid him, I ran across the Quay, and my fa¬ ther after me ; but, as I was running, poor Muley saw me, and got between me -and my father, begged him not to beat me, for I was a good boy, and did not deserve it, and would be very soon taken from him ; for, I should not return to England with him, but with a stranger; tbat I should be a great man, and live to be a blessing to him ; and he would ra¬ ther have the blows himseif than I should. My father bad not the heart to beat such an old man, so he did neither, but con¬ tented himself with calling him an old fortune-
171 fortune-telling fool. I did not see him again, because we sailed in a short time," The youtJťs talk amused Alphonsus and the Father, till they parted. The next morning, Alphonsus observed Berry get out of bed, and look at his watch ; then to see how high the sun was.— " Ah," said he to himself, *« it will be ñve hours yet ; but never mind that, the time wiil come/' He went into bed again, and fell asleep. He did not lay down long, but rose as before, and again returned to his bed. At length, the slave came into the room, to say, Break¬ fast waited. They were soon dressed, and, in two hours, they had the satisfac¬ tion of hearing that Muley was come. In a minute, Berry vanished, and presently returned, leading hitn in. Alphonsus, with the most condescend¬ ing affability, desired him to be seated, and ordered the slave to bring in some refreshment It was brought, and pre¬ sented
172 sented to Muley, while Berry pressed him to eat. He partook of what was set before Ыш, but in a very sparing manner. The good Father, who had just cpme in, urged him to take some wine, as his spirits, appeared extremely low. With much entreaty, he was, at length, pre¬ vailed upon, and he soon seemed better, at which Berry was, much rejoiced.—· Alphonsus ordered a slave to bathe the poor man's feet, and bring him every necessary to put on. The Father and Alphonsus then left him with Berry and the slave ; his orders were obeyed, and, in about an hour, they had the pleasure of seeing JBerry with the poor man, pro¬ perly equipped, enter the room. He would have thrown himself at the feet of bis benefactors, had not Alphonsus pre¬ vented him. When he was a little composed, the Father asked him, What had brought him toHalicarnassus? He said, Hehad come there
175 there from Scanderoon, for the purpose of going from thence tq Bursa, where he had some friends, with whom he hoped he should spend the short remainder of his life. Alphonsus asked W hat situation bis friends were in ? and whether they were able to maintain him, as he seemed too feeble to obtain his living by labor, having, by his appearance, suffered many hardships. " I have, Sir," said he; "but theyare passed,and í must not reflect on them. lam happy to think my journey in this life will shortly end—I have not above three years longer to contend with fate/' f< To me," said the Father, your observation appears strange. Do you not think, that, if the cares of life were lessened, and you were enabled to enjoy those comforts which age requires, your life might be pro¬ longed to a much later period ?" Cť No, Fatlier/* said he ; (( I am well assured of the time, and look forward to it with Vol. Ш. I pleasure.
174 pleasure. My days of slavery are already ended, boused be tbe holy Saviour ľ' " Ifit would not be intruding on you too much," said Alphonsus, (t I would ask in what state your life has been spent, as your appearance, and your speech, seem to be contradictions." rt My life, Sir*" said he, u is hardiy worth notice. A poor worm, like myself, is like a grain of sand upon the sea shore ; but the few incidents that have occurred to me I wiil relate. " My family, by both parents, was no* ble. I was born at Malta, and, at the age of sixteen, being animated with a desire to signalise myself against the Turks, I entered myseif among the Knights ofthat island. My education had been liberal, but astronomy was my chief pursuit. cr I had not been enrolled a member of that noble Order above five months, when an opportunity presented itself to prove my courage. A Turkish corsair, of considerable force, appeared near Malta,
173 Maita, and dared even the city. It was¬ not long before we sailed to attack her. I earnestly requested to be one of the destined number, and was admitted,— Our ship was a fine new galley, but only one-fourth the size of our opponent. We met, and engaged, not far from the Isle of Candía. For four hours, we maintain¬ ed a most obstinate fight. Seven times we were boarded by the infidels, and they were as often driven back, with the great¬ est slaughter. " At length, enraged to madness, at the repulses they had met with from so small a number, in comparison with themselves, they again made a desperate effort. All firing of the ship's guns had ceased on both sides, for the last twenty minutes, and, as we were grappled, the fight now lay hand to hand- Their com¬ pany consisted of seven hundred men when they first bore down upon us. We had two hundred and fifty-six. All, as is usual, determined to sell our lives I 2 dearly.
ne dearly. When this last attack took place, we had but sixty-two left, and they had bst above three hundred and fifty. They net ιψ a loud shout, and» with frantic wildness, again made good the boarding. For twenty minutes longer the fight con¬ tinued, when, overpowered by numbers, and sinking under wounds, fifteen of us surrendered, which were all that were left alive. I was among the number ; those scars which you see on my face and hands, are some of those I then re¬ ceived. However, wounded as I was, they did not throw roe overboard, but turned us all into the hold of their own ship. They sailed with their prize im¬ mediately for Candía, where three of my companions died, within a few minutes after they were landed, and five others the next day ; but I was stiil to live and suf¬ fer. " A poor Greek slave was the only surgeon we had, and his skill was but very little. 1ц a miserable hole, in one of
177 of the ruined castles, we remained, till our wounds were healed. When we were pronounced cured, we were taken to the slave-market, and sold. It was my lot to be purchased by a merchant, who , resided at Grand Cairo, to which place I was taken. " As soon as we arrived, he enquired What I was able to do, as he wanted some one to attend in a particular manner on his two sons, whom he wished to be instructed in the European languages. J gave him a specimen of my abilities ; he was satisfied with them, and I entered on my office. The boys were pleased with me : the eldest was about nine years of age, the other six. I found them apt to learn, and took great pleasure in in¬ structing them. Their father was pleas¬ ed with the progress they made, and my time passed tolerably easy. " I had been with them about five years, when my master expressed a wish that his eldest son should be instructed I 3 in
17S in astronomy. This youth was the favo¬ rite ; he had been born of a Christian slave, whom my master had much loved ; but she dying, soon after the birth of her son, he transferred the love he bore the mother to him, and in¬ dulged him in every wish. He had an ardent desire for every branch of Euro¬ pean learning, and having, by accident, mentioned to him, one day, that I had, when about his own age, been engaged in the study of astronomy, he was eager to know the elements of it ; therefore hast¬ ened to tell his father, that he wanted to learn it ; in consequence he came to me. I described what I should want for the purpose, and at the house of a French merchant it was procured. cc We set diligently about it. His fa¬ cility was such, that I found it difficult to keep pace with him ; and, as the know¬ ledge of one science begets a desire for another, he became equally as anxious to learn astrology. This we likewise pursued,
179 pursued, and by the help of an old man, who professed a knowledge of stars, and foretelling events, in about two years, we became adepts in that science. We con* tinued learning, tili he reached his eigh¬ teenth year, when he lost his father, and I a worthy master. " I was now so reconciled to slavery, that I never once bad a wish to quit it, and 1 had been treated by the famiiy, more with the indulgence of a relation than a slave. The will of my late master obliged my young one to go to Aleppo, and I was ordered to accompany him. My other pupil was ordained to pursue the business of his father ; but my now master was, if he chose it, to remain at Aleppo, and there enjoy his own favorite amuse¬ ments. " We were not long at that place, be* fore my master expressed a wish to know What the future events of his life would be. There was a man, at Samosatb, fa¬ mous for the study. To him, therefore, F 4 he
180 he was resolved to go, and try whether hc could inform him better than he could himself, lt was a long and troublesome journey, but we readied it, and the com¬ pany of this extraordinary man repaid ali our trouble. My master was so much ' pleased with him, tbat he was determined tocontinue therefor some time. " Four months we spent at his abode, and travelled vvith him into Per¬ sia. At Ispahan we took up our resi¬ dence, and continued with him till his death, which happened fifteen years after. During our stay with him, he made us perfectly acquainted with every circunv stance of our lives, past, and to come, and I have now more reason than ever to re¬ vere his knowledge, since the very kind¬ ness I now receive from you was foretold me. u After his death, we returned to Aleppo, where my master died about fourteen months ago, previous to which, he had given me my liberty, and left me in
İSI in possession of an mdependence. He or¬ dered his remains to be buried at An¬ tioch, which I was to seç performed ; but, before that, I was to lodge the eflfecte he had bequeathed to his brother m a merchant's hands at Aleppo. I com¬ plied in every thing with the will of my master, and saw his remains interred us he desired. " I had often had a wish to visit tho Holy Land, and for that purpose left Antioch ; but I was acting contrary to the advice of our old friend. He had told me, that, if I took the journey, I should have occasion to repent it ; but it never occurred to me, till I had fallen in with a party of flying Arabs, who strip¬ ped me of every thing I had in the world, and left me, on account of my age, in a sandy plain, between Antioch and Tor- tosa. Over this plain I travelled back again, and, after great sufferings, reached Antioch, where I was relieved bv a «ren- tleman, to whom í had occasion to apply, I 5 when
132 when I buried my master, and, by his as¬ sistance, I reached Scanderoon, where I was led to hope I should gain some em¬ ployment ; but, on account of my age, I was rejected, and I could not bear to so¬ licit charity. Cť At last, the person, in whose hands my master had ordered his effects to be placed, sent me a small sum, and a letter of recommendation to a friend of his, at Bursa, who, he said, would receive and employ me during the rema-nder of my life. I gladly embraced the offer made me, and immediately went to the harbour, to enquire after any vessel that might be bound for Marmora, or any of the ports near. I waited several months, during which time, I used every day to go to the Quay. It was at that period I had the happiness to see this young gentleman, whose physiognomy struck me. I nar¬ rowly observed him for several days, and, when he ran from his father, I had an op¬ portunity of seeing him to much greater advantage
advantage than I had before. By the aid of that knowledge I had obtained at Samosatb, I pronounced what I then did to his father. I had not the happiness of seeing him again, as he sailed soon after. " At length, 1 found a Venetian vessel, that was bound, first to Halicarnassus, and from thence to Marmora. I embarked in her, but had not been at sea many hours, before I was taken violentiy ill, which continued till we arrived here, where I was sent onshore ; and, as the ves¬ sel was to stay but a very short time, I v\a* left at this place. My illness con¬ tinued, and my little btock of money was soon spent. I found myself unable to at¬ tempt going by any other vessel, as I had not wherewith to pay for my passage; and 1 resolved, as soon as I got a little sirength, to set out on foot for Bursa. I have been for tliese last six clays nearly without meat or drink. The people of the house where I abode during my ill¬ ness, had become tired of me, and, when 16 I had
184 I had the good fortune to meet you, gen¬ tlemen, I was nearly expiring ; a few hours must have ended my wretched ex¬ istence." u God forbid !" said Berry ; <f I hope you will now live many years ; ^nd, as í shall be a great man, you shall never want." ,c Ah ! thou blessed child !'» said the old man, " what a pity it is there are not more such souls as thine in the world !" " I thank you, Sir," said Alphonsus, if for the relation you have given me. My stay here is but short, as I am going on to Rhodes, but I will see that you shall want no more. I shall not be long at Rhodes, and, if you will continue here tili my return, you shall have every thing you desire done for you." The poor old man was too much op¬ pressed to speak his thanks ; he burst into tears. Berry consoled him, and, when he was a little composed, Alphonsus de¬ sired he would dine with him, as he should
J85 should like to have some more conversa¬ tion. It was accepted, and, for three days longer that Alphonsus staid, the old man was constantly with him, and they dis¬ covered, as he regained his spirits, his wonderful acquirements in the sciences he had studied. The Father saw it re¬ lieved Aiphonsus's mind, and proposed their taking him with them, if he chose to go. It was agreed to, and matters being arranged, they set out by sea to Rhodes.
CHAP.
1S6
CHAP. Χ. Prom seeming evil still educeth good, And better thence again, and better still, In infinite progression ! Thomsom. THEY were not long on the passage, and, as soon as they arrived, sent off a message to the person who brought the news to Aiphonsus, at Melasso; but he was not at home» nor would be for a fortnight. This time they intended to spend in viewing the Isiand. They ordered every enquiry to be made after the old gentleman, but they were unsuccessful in all. Tlie man, when he returned, could give no other account than what he had done before. They were, therefore, constrained to return, without obtaining the least intelligence.
When
1S7 When they came back to Melasso, the merchant gave an account of. what he had done, and it gave Alphonsus the highest satisfaction to hear, that he had agreed for the redemption of five slaves, two Venetians, two French, and an Eng¬ lishman, whom he had sent on to Smyrna the day before, as he thought Alphonsus was returned there. After staying two days at Melasso, they left it for Smyrna, both the French and Turkish merchants promising to send word immediately to him, if they gained the least intelligence of their aged friend. Alphonsus took great delight in con¬ versing with Berry and his companion. The Father also was greatly amused, and said, He thought it would not be amiss to retain the poor old man, as an instructor to Berry, who understood a science, of which he himself had but a very imper¬ fect knowledge. They proposed Jt to him ; he very thankfully accepted the offer, and at Smyrna entered on his office, at
im at which Berry was nearly out of his wits for joy. Alphonsus seemed hurt, when he found no letter had arrived for him in his absence; and, though he strove to appear cheerful, yet his mind suffered acutely. To amuse it, the Father, vvho was with him as much as possible, per¬ suaded him to be with Berry, when he took his lessons from Muley. He pas¬ sively agreed to it, and, for several days, ordered them to attend him in his closet. One day, when they were there, and very intent on the erection of a sphere, they had occasion for a small instrument, which, by some accident, had been broke ; to remedy which, Aiphonsus opened a cabinet, to take out a compass used in drawing. In the drawer where those instruments were put, Alphonsus had placed the leather bag, which had beeri sent to him with the money, when he was hurried from Lisbon. The strange cha¬ racters upon it he had often looked at, and as often been puzzled to think what they
189
they could mean. Tbe draWét was placed upon the table, and, while Al¬ phonsus was taking out what he wanted, Muley kept his eyes fixed upon the bag, but said nothing. At last, when Al¬ phonsus was going to put tbe drawer in again, he begged permission to look at it. Alphonsus gave it him. Ci They are strange characters/' said be to Muley, " are they not ?" " They are, indeed/* re¬ turned he ; " but, do you know, Sir, what they mean ?" M I do not/'said Alphonsus. Muley took it, turned it over a number of times, muttered something to himself, then turned, and looked earnestly at Al¬ phonsus, w It must be so/* said bet then, eagerly asked, Whom be had it of r* " I don't know/* said Alphonsus; и it , was sent to me in an hour of great dis¬ tress, and delivered to me by a person I never saw before or since."------·* Then you are the person mentioned in these characters, and the last of a long and illust» »ous race, You have suffered many sorrows ;
lÖO sorrows; but nothing like those of the person to whom this bag belongs. He is „now groaning under the most cruel captivity, for a crime he is innocent of. It is destined fpr you to set him at liberty; you can prove his innocence ; he will die in your arms, and in him you will find a father* You must immediately prepare to go to Gaza; a delay will be fatai. If you reach there befQre the last quarter of the next moon, you will save a life dearer to you than your own. If you are beyond that time, you will have cause bitterly to regret it." Alphonsus was amazed at what he heard. " You certainly," said he, " do not mean to send me a voyage on a vague and uncertain circumstance ľ* ťi I do not," returned Muley ; " and, to con¬ vince you of it, I can inform you of every incident of your grand-fatheťs and your father's lives. To them this belonged ; and, if I am wrong, you shall be at liberty to givs me up to the Cadi, as an impos*
191 impostor. If you please, I will accom¬ pany you—you will want a friend. If you had gone there, or to Joppa, when you were at Rhodes, the friend you will now find had not been in confinement. Let the good Father go with you also ; his evidence will be necessary." Muley urged the matter so strongly, that Alphonsus sent for the Father, to whom he related what Muley had said. He was equally surprised ; but, being likewise urged, he consented to go with them ; though he could not believe, that a leather bag, on which were painted such •»strange and uncouth letters, could con¬ tain any such information. But it was not so with Alphonsus ; he recollected the injunction laid on him, at the time of receiving it, to preserve it, as it wouid be of future consequence to him. Another reason induced him to take the voyage, which was, the hope he entertained of hearing some news of bis aged friend, as he
* 192 he was now become more anxious than ever to see him. It was of no iconse- queace to bini where his time was spent; and, though he was still anxious to receive letters from Lisbon, yet he thought the contents must, of course, be such, as would only add to his uneasi¬ ness, and serve to precipitate that decline, with which, he was certain, his consti¬ tution was already attacked. He had loved Alzira with enthusiastic ardor, and had cherished a hope, \hat he should, when the clouds that en¬ veloped them were dispersed, again re¬ turn to love, to joy, and bliss. But, ©ow, aH hopes of happiness were fled for ever, and nought appeared but a dark and dreary void, bereft of every comfort, every cheering ray, and his soul panted for the hour when it should be wholly freed from this cumbrous load of clay, mid bound with transport to those regions öf immortality, where he was sure
Ì9S sure his loved Alzira was already gone. Nothing could persuadfe him, but that she was, and ever had been, as innocent as he first thought her. Her crimes were crimes of compulsion, such as her soul shuddered at, and whieh nothing but her helpless situation obliged her to commit. She was still the idol of his soul, and he considered her to be as pure and spotless as an angel of light. He invoked her name with blessings, and implored the God of Mercies to shorten his existence, and call him to tbat home, where he should rest for ever, and enjoy, in uninterrupted felicity, the company of his dear and tender relatives, and his innocent, suffering, murdered Alzira. He therefore desired Muley to go immediate¬ ly to the hatbour, and enquire, If any vessel was there bound to the Levant ? Muley hastened to execute the orders he had received, and the Father went home to prepare for his departure, while Berry
194 Berry and Alphonsus did the same. The former was quite pleased at the thoughts of seeing the Holy Land, of which he had heard and read so much, and, by his talk, confirmed bis patron in the idea, that it was absolutely necessary to comply with the advice of Muley, however vague and extravagant it ap¬ peared. Muley returned, and said, There was a small trading vessel, belonging to the Isle of Chios, tbat had offered to sail with them for Gaza; and, as the master of it appeared a man well versed in his pro¬ fession, he would strongly advise Alphon- sus to hire him, as such an opportunity might not occur again. Alphonsus, whose thoughts were wholly abstracted from every thing but his sorrows, bade him do as he liked j the old man hastened to engage the vessel. The master said, He had come direct from Caliimacha, laden with inastick, and meant to take back some European
195 European goods ; but, as the ships were not yet arrived, he would undertake such a short voyage, instead of laying in port to wait for their coming. Muley was not long in settling terms with the master, and ordered him to make all possible dispatch. He then returned to Alphonsus,* related what he had done, and said, The vessel would be ready by the next day, Aiphonsus gave orders respecting his letters, or the arrival of his friend Captain Brindley, whom he was led to expect by the coming fleet, and the next day, at the hour appointed, sailed, in company with the Father, Berry, and Muley, who seemed as anxious that no cross accident might impede the voyage, as though his own life depended on the success of it- He was continually on the deck, watch¬ ing the progress of the vessel, as she cleft the lucid wave, and the beautiful shores of Cândia receded from his view. He fre¬ quently asked the master, Whether he couid not hasten the rapidity of the ves¬ sel,
196 sel, by hoisting more sail ; and, when he assured him that its sinallne$s wholly pre¬ vented bim from crowding more, he would devoutly cross himself, and fervent¬ ly pray that they mighjt arrive in time. The master thought him mad, and desired that he would keep below ; but he would not listen to him, and nearly day and night continued on deck. The Father, Alphonsus, and Berry, amused themselves in working problems, and attending to the lessons Muley had given him at Smyrna ; for, he being so very intent on the motion of the vessel, never once thought of his pupil. At lengtb, the welcome sound of " Land a~head," struck upon bis ear, and he would* bad his age permitted it, have mounted aloft, to have descried it himself, so desirous was he to have it confirmed. It wm near evening, when he first heard it, »md, about two hours after dark, they gained the port of Ga^a.
Tbe
197 The moment he was set on shore in tbe morning, he hastened to the officers, to give an account of himself, and to request, permission to make enquiries after a per¬ son, who, he had been informed, was in confinement there. He was allowed to do as he desired ; but, after the strictest search, the object he was in pursuit of was not there—he was at Joppa—he had been carried there, a few days before, by the command of the Bey. To him he went, requested permission to speak to him, and was admitted. He told the Bey the nature of his visit, and begged lo be informed, Whether the person who had come to Gaza, on the fourteenth of the last moon, in company with two Arabs, had not been charged with some crime that endangered his life. ** Yes," said the Bey, ** there was such a person, a» European, and a Christian. He has been accused of entering into an engagement with his nation, to assist the rebel Bey, now in arms against the Porte. As he had Vol. III. К preserved
198 preserved an obstinate silence, and some particulars having occurred, he had been sent on to Joppa, to be confronted with his accusers ; but, in all probability, he was now dead, as his crime would not be long in proving." Muley, almost distracted, earnestly besought the Bey, to permit himself, and three others, to go on immediately to Joppa, and prove his innocence, as he had in his possession incontestible proofs of it. The Bey, seeing him so very ear¬ nest in his request, granted him permis¬ sion, though he said, He much feared he would come too late, as execution wouid take place directly afţt^.J|iş trial, and he appeared almost afiqß№toms sent away. Muley flew to the port, and bade the master to sail immediately for Joppa— they had not a moment to lose. His ea¬ ger and agitated manner convinced them that something very material hung upon Ле moment, and they obeyed his wish.— Muley
Muley earnestly begged the master to make more haste than he had done before, or they should be too late. He did every thing in his power, and Muley had tbe sa¬ tisfaction of entering Joppa in a few hours after he sailed from Gaza. He had not said a single word to Alphonsus, the Father, or any one but the master ; so that they were wholly at a loss to know why they were hurried in such a manner, from one place to another.- The moment they could land, he bade them ail do so, and follow him to the Bey of that place, and whatever he should say, they were to attend to. He had a line of audience with him, from the other Bey, which he showed to the officers of the port, and, as by that his business ap¬ peared to require dispatch, they were conducted to the Bey. The letter was delivered, and they were instantly ordered to attend* Having made their obedience, tbe Bey demanded the nature of their visit»—* К 2 Muley,
Muley» who was eager to impart it, said» He had received intelligence, that an European was accused of assisting the rebel Bey. He had come from Smyrna, in company withs those, his friends, to clear him of a crime, of which he was wholly innocent, and entreated permission to prove İt, if he was not already exe¬ cuted. w That he is not," said the Bey, " is owing to a circumstance which I am nôt at liberty to disclose ; and if you and your friends can prove his innocence, beheve me, I shall rejoice in it, as I would much rather have it so, than to be under the painful necessity of seeing him executed, which, would have taken place yesterday morning, but was postponed on account of the reason I alluded to." Muley's eyes glistened— w Blessed be God," said he, ** that it has been pre¬ vented ; else, an innocent man would have suffered for the crimes of the guilty : therefore, if your Highness will inform us
20! as of the nature of his crime, I will undertake to clear him of every impu¬ tation, 4>r give up my own life for his." The Bey observed the earnestness with which Muley addressed him, and nar¬ rowly regarded Alphonsus and the Father, who had not spoke, but attended to every thing that was said. They were wholly lost in wonder and amazement, to think how they could, in any shape, prove the innocence of a stranger, whom they knew nothing of, of course could not possibly say any thing relative to his character or crimes. They began to think they were, by the mad actions of Muley, likely to be drawn into a very disagree¬ able situation, especially at a crisis, when Palestine and Egypt were in the most distracted state, from the defection of the Bey. Muley looked at them, and seemed to say, « I know your thoughts, but you shall soon see that I will make good my assertions, or die." Berry did not like К % the
202 - the soì^mn faces of the Turkish soldiers that surrpjtmded the £!aee. He frequently east a look at Alphonsus, and then at the Father, and appeared by it to say, " I wish I had never seen this man, or that we hád never come here," Muley having requested to hear the charge against the prisoner he came in search of, the Bey said, That, on the four* teenth of the last moon, a person had been arrested at Gaza, on the information of a deserter, as a man who had, for m&ny months, carried on a cerrespond- encer with the rebels, and had furnished thent, by some of his own countrymen, with large quantities of arms and money, which had been sent to Alexandria, and from thence, by bis contrivance, dispersed among them. That several letters had been intercepted, which he had sent to a fFacba, at Grand Cairo, who had long f been susjpected of nefarious practices, and made the Bey only an instrument to sound
«03 sound the people. The two Arabs taken with him had already suffered. " When was the alledged crime sup¬ posed to be committed ?" asked Muley. ** About eight months since," said the Bey, * c he conveyed the succours to the rebels." " Is he known to have con¬ veyed them in person ?" asked Muley. " Your Highness will pardon me for being so particular, since, on that circum¬ stance, every thing depends." " He was known," said the Bey, " to be personally concerned, and bis footsteps have been traced to Gaza, where he was appre¬ hended," -----/« Then^thank God that he yet lives, and that my friends can prove that he was at Smyrna, at the very time, your Highness mentions. His life has been, for many years, wholly ab¬ stracted from the world, and all its con¬ cerns ; and I will suffer death for him, if those gentlemen/' turning to Alphon¬ sus and the Father, ** do not prove his presence with thero, at the crisis alluded К 4 to.
204 to, and likewise the utter impossibility of his being capable of committing an action so repugnant to his nature, since his whole employment has been spent in the relief of his fellow-creatures, and the re¬ pose ofhis own soul." The Father looked at Aiphonsus. *' If," said the Bey, tf your friends can prove wbat you assert, I shall rejoice, as it will give me pleasure to find so old a man innocent ; but how are they to prove it?"— " Let your Highness give orders for the prisoner to be brought hither, and then see if I do not make my words gOOü. The Bey gave orders. It was some time before the guard returned, during whose absence Muley spoke not, but his countenance evinced satisfaction mingled with anxiety. Alphonsus, the Father, and Berry, were agitated by many various reflections ; but all ultimately tended to make ftem dread tbe moment of the prisoner's arrival, being fully persuaded
205 that their testimony would go ţmt a very little way totvards preserying the Ijiboo/ the unfortunate man. The Bey seemed as anxious to have such an extraordinary affair cleared up, as either of them. The Father gave himself up fqr lost. He naturally concluded, that, as it was im? possible for them to prove any thing in his favor, the Bey, enraged at the attempt to impose upon him, would not fail to take their lives, as accomplices with tbe delinquent. But the thoughts of-Al¬ phonsus, though in such a perilous situa¬ tion, were stiil engrossed by reflecting on his domestic sorrows, apd was wholly regardless of what the event might be to himself. Berry trembled for зЩ» and earnestly prayed tp himself, that they were all safe back ţo Smyrna. A confused noise of voices was heard,. and, in a few minutes, fpur soldiers en¬ tered, bearing the apparent lifeless body of a man, whose death-like countenance seemed to have bereft the executiqner К a of
206 of his office. He was laid down before them ; when, the moment that Alphonsus and the Father got a complete view of ^hls face,they both exclaimed : *· It is he, it is he htmself; the aged friend we have sought at Rhodes/' « Oh ! thou eternal Göd!" said Alphonsus, " is it thus I find him ?" and, with a kind of frantic , ' wildness, he threw himself beside him. He raised bts head from the cold marble on which it lay, and, turning to the Bey» said, in an imploring accent : " In mercy, let your Highness command those dread¬ ful chains to be removed ; he is innocent of every crime ; my life shall atone for his, if you do not find: it so.** Thé poor man opened his eyes, and faintly looked at Alphonsus, who was on his knees, supporting his head, while the big tear rolled down his cheek, and drop* ped on the face of the wretched victim. The Bey stood and gazed in suent as¬ tonishment, andali around him appeared deeply affected. He beckoned to a sol¬ dier
207 dier, who approached. He bade him tabe off the chains that bound the prisoner, and another he ordered to bring a sopha. His commands were obeyed, and Alphonsus saw him, with pleasure, laid upon it. " Get a cordial for this Frank," said the Bey. It was brought, and given to him. He had not taken it manv minutes, be- fore he again opened his eyes, and looked at Alphonsus, then at the surrounding spectators. The Father stood beside him, as did Berry, his eyes swimming in tears* The scene was such, the Bey was so much affected, that he left the room, saying, He should return, and hear them soon. The guards stood at a respectful distance, and showed by their countenances, that, though Turks, they were not less affected than Christians. Alphonsus spoke to the prisoner in the most soothing manner, and begged him to speak, Thepoor man tried to answer; but his lips refused their office. Muley K ô had
208 had not spoke the whole time, but stood at a little distance, his face covered with his robe. Berry had taken tbe sufferer's hand, which he frequently pres¬ sed to his lips, and washed it with his tears· They all remained in this anxious state of suspense for some time: at length, the Bey returned, and, looking on the prisoner, said, ** I think he must want some as¬ sistance, and, as you all say you can prove his innocence, I wish you to convince me immediately : is there any one at Joppa to whom either of you is known ?" The Father said, He was known to the Chief of the Janizaries, if it was the same who was there two years before, and likewise to some Armenians, whose residence was at Joppa, one of whom was frequently at Smyrna, and, he was pretty certain, would assert, that the person before them was there, at the very time he was accused of assisting the rebels* " Send
209 " Send for them," said the Bey, * im¬ mediately.." Their names were given and a guard went to fetch them. They attended ; the Father was mstantiy recog¬ nised by the merchants and the Janiza¬ ry. The Bey bade the merchant look on the prisoner ; he did. " Do you know him ?" asked the Bey. €t I do," said he, " and have known him for many years» and, I make no doubt, but your Highness has heard ofhim. He is known in aimost every town in Palestine, by the name of the Doctor Pilgrim. This is the man. who did so much good, three years ago,, during the plague, and who visited every house, whether Turk or Christian, with¬ out troubling himself whether he might catch the disorder or not. I have seen him at Smyrna, and other places in the Archipelago, administering the same re¬ lief." ** Do you," said the Bey, " remember seeing him at any particular time at Smyrna,
210 Smyrna, within the last twelve moons ?" ** Yes," answered the merchant ; " I remember well seeing him there, when the last fleet sailed for Europe, in com¬ pany with the Father now present, and that gentleman," pointing to Alphonsus. f * He left Smyrna in his company, and I was informed they went from thence to Melasso.** ** This account," said the Bey, u sur¬ prises me much, and I am sorry I was not informed of these particulars before, as, perhaps, the men who suffered yester¬ day were innocent. Will you become bound for this gentleman and bis friends, if I permit them to take this afflicted man with them, as he stands in need of care V* 4< I will, most readily," said he, Cf and so will my brothers, I am certain» if your Highness thinks it neces- sary. ,t The Janizary made the same offer. The Bey paused ; at length, he said ; * You are then at liberty to remove this
ЯП this poor Frank. I believe him innocent ; but, till I have proved it to the Bassa, who sent him here, it will be necessary that a guard should remain near the house he may be taken to ; not that I doubt either of your words, but it is necessary for my own safety. I must investigate this business more narrowly. I fear there is some treachery in it. I shall send a full account immediately to the Bassa. You all say you are ready to prove, that the prisoner was at Smyrna, engaged in his ordinary vocation, at the precise time that he is charged with having conveyed the succours to the rebels ?" €€ We will answer it," said they, «* with our lives/* Muley now stepped forward, and, throwing himself before the Bey, said : " Your Highness is now convinced that I uttered nothing but truth." if Rise, friend," said he, *' I admire virtues like thine, in every nation» and, frora whatever country
% 12 eountry thou art come, thpt country is honored in calling Лее her son. You may all depart ; I am satisfied/' Muley, with the highest reverence, bowed to the Bey, as did the &st, and hastened to re¬ move the unhappy sufferer^ who, at times, looked round, and, though perfectly sen¬ sible, yet was too weak to pronounce the least word. The Bey withdrew, but not till he had again conjured them to take care of him. Alphonsus and Muley now took up Ле sopha, assisted by the Fatber and the Armenian, who said, " We will take him to my house ; he will there be t^ken care of/' They paced slowly on 5 Berry walk¬ ed by tbe side, and held a handkerchief over the poor man's face, that the sun might not incommode him, whilst tears of joy ran down his cheeks. Muley sob- hed aloud, and most fervently blessed the • Saints, for granting him the comfort of re¬ lieving one fellow-creature from the jaws of death, and that the most dreadful to human
213 human nature. They made what haste they couid, and were not long in reaching the Armenian's house, the guard following them.
л
CHAP.
%и
CHAP. XL Yet, yet a few short days of erring grief, Of human fondness sighing in the breast, And sorrow is no more. Now, gentle youth, And let me call thee son ; for, oh, that name Thy faith, thy friendship, thy tnie portion borne Of griefs for me, too sadly have deserved. Mallet, THE merchant hastened to get medical assistance; the poor pilgrim was put to bed, and, shortly after, the physician came. He examined his patient, and could give but very little hopes of his life. He was a Jew, but a man of sound knowledge and experience in his profession. There was life, he ob¬ served, and that was all. For thirty hours, his patient never spoke, though he bad often very sound sleep. Alphonsus could not be persuaded to leave the apartment, nor would he suffer either the Father,
215 Father, or Muley, to assist him. He sat by the bed-side, and was ever watchful to observe any change, or to administer any relief. - At length, after five or six hours sound sleep, he awoke, and, looking round him with enquiring eyes, fixed them on Al¬ phonsus and the Father, who happened to be near. Then, as if recollecting him¬ self, he said : ** This is a blessing, indeed I Do I live on earth, or is my soul released from its abode of misery ?" ** You are Still on earth," said the Father, ■* and surrounded with friends, ready to relieve and assist you in every thing that you may want.. This is Don Alphonsus, your Smyrna friend, and I hope you recollect me." ** I remember you both," said he» «* but by what means did I come here î Was not what I saw in the presence of the Bey» a dream, or is it a blessed reality ?" * f All is real," said Alphonsus ; " the Bey is convinced of your innocence, and
2İ6 and now I hope you will live to bles» your friends." * f Am I still at Joppa," he asked. u You are," returned the Father $ « but I hope we shall not Jong continue here, as I think you will be better at Smyrna." *« Ah !" said he, ** that is the hope of friendship, but it will never be realized. Though I am better bow, yet I am convinced my time is .short y but there is one comfort I shall have, which exceeds my greatest earthly wish, that is, the happiness I feel in having two such friends aa your*ehe£ near merin my last sad moments. Yes, Father, seeing that good youug man and yourself confirms my hopes in Christ, and I can say, with Simeon, * Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, accordmg to thy word/ for my ^yes are now blessed with the sight of him, whom шу soul panted to behold." At saying this, a heavenly emanation overspread his aged eheeks, and the glow of
517 of Heaven seemed to rest upon him.— ** Be composed/' í>aid the Father, ** and, if you would give pleasure to the hearts of those who are anxious to preserve your life, you will take what İs ordered for you, which, i trust, will help to restore you." " I will do any thing you desire," said he ; " but, now, my last and only wish is accomplished ; I can die content, since I hope I shall breathe out my last sigh in the arms of my child." Alphonsus started. " What is it you say, my much-loved friend ? Chiid !" ** True/' returned he ; α but do not, at present, urge an explanation : I am not able as yet to do it ; but, if the God of Mercies, who sent you to my rescue, will prolong my existence until to-morrow, you shall then know all my wretched story. Oh i how little did I think that God, whom I have so much offended. would bless my sight with an ob¬ ject,
21β ject, ten thousand times dearer than life itself. Oh I blessed, blessed mo¬ ment !" He took Alphonsus's hand, and pressed it to his burning lips, then laid it on his heart. α Ohî that this agitated heart may not cease to beat, till I have told thee all ; my child, my son ľ' Alphonsus was too much overcome by the mixture of contending emotions—he sunk insensible on the floor. The poor pilgrim, who saw him drop, uttered a deep groan, and endeavoured to catch him. ** Oh ! save, save," exclaimed he, ** my son, my dear Alphonsus." The Father, who heard what the patient had said, and observed the emotions of Al¬ phonsus, at the names of son and child, was nearly as ill as either of those before him. At last, he rallied his thoughts, and called for help. Every one instantly ran to his assistance ; but, when they saw the scene before them, they were as much affected
219 affected as the Father. They raised Al¬ phonsus, while Berry hung over him in the greatest agony. ** Ah ! why," said he, " were you so cruel to let my more than father stay here to die. I thought he would ; he has talked of nothing else, since that poor old man was taken from prison." The Father begged him to be pacified. u Alphonsus," said he, u is not dead; but, overcome with fatigue, he has fainted." He and Berry then tried to restore bim, whiie Muley and the Armenian strove to reanimate the apparent lifeless body of the pilgrim. They, at length, succeeded ; but it was some time before Alphonsus showed returning life. At kst, he opened his eyes, and faintly said : «* Have I in reality found a father ? or is it only visionary? Did not that good man call me son ? And did I behold, in him, the long-lost Duke De Aranjuez ?" * c Thou didst, my beloved son," said the suffering
220 suffering penitent ; « I am De Aranjuez, thy father, 'though unworthy of that name." Alphonsus threw himself on his knees, and wept bitterly, wholly unable to arti¬ culate a word. His father's tears streamed, likewise, while he pressed one hand of his son to his heart. Their friends stood round the bed in silent amazement ; Muley, only, did not appear surprised.— He looked on, with a satisfaction in his countenance, that the consciousness of doing a good action alone can give.— Tbe Father, for the first time, regarded him with pleasure and astonishment. Betry, who could not restrain his tears, looked first at one, and then at another, with the most enquiring eye. Ail ap¬ peared to him as the work of enchant¬ ment. He could not imagine how the person, whom his patron had been in company with so often, and had travelled to Melasso with, should be his rather, and he
iti be not know it till then ; as-fce seemed certain in bts orwn mind, that'he sbould fenow his own father any where; then, how was it possible Don Alphonsus did not know his? He wept aloud, and would bave ventured to kneel beside his patron, if fear of offending had not with¬ held him. The merchant, who beheld the scene with the greatest emotion, asked the Fa¬ ther, Whether it would not be most pro¬ per to remove JDon Alphonsus ? ff By no means/' said he ; " tears will soon tran- quiflize their souls* This is a most unex¬ pected event ; till this period, I always un¬ derstood, that Don Alphonsus had lost his father at a very early age ; oh î that worthy man, if it had not been for his di¬ vine knowledge, this would not have hap¬ pened ; this aged sufferer would have died an ignominious death, for the crimes of another,"
Vol. III. L
Berry
223 Berry heard this last observation, and turned his eyes on Muley, with pleasure sparkling tluough his tears, and seemed to exult in the thought, that it was he that had met with him. Muley advanced to the foot of the bed, and said, " Sup¬ pose we leave rhe room for a few minutes ; the feelings of a long-lost father and son are at present poignant." They followed Muley's advice, and left the room, when the Duke endeavoured to raise himself in the bed, to bless his child, and give full vent to his tears. " Oh í Almighty and just God," said he, lifting his hands to Heaven, " accept the thanks of thy sinful servant. Bless, ohi bless, this youth now before me; and, as thou hast permitted my aged eyes to behold him, before they are closed for ever, in pity, extend thy mercies.— Avert the curse that hangs over his wretched family, and dash, in mercy, dadi the cup of sorrow from his lips,—
223 Let me $ and me only, drink the bitter draught." Alphonsus could bear no more ; he earnestly implored his father not to invoke more distresses on himself, since he was already too much chastised. ** My whole life," said he, " shall be dedicated to make you happy, and, as you claim me fòr a son, I will prove myself worthy of that name." " I do," said the Duke, u claim thee as my son j thou art the exact image df thy deserted mother, who de¬ served a iar better fate. JLook at this ten¬ der resemblance of a much-loved wo¬ man," taking a minsature in his hand» whkh had been suspended from his neck. He hastily drew off the velvet that cover- edit, and, as his trembling hands held it to Alphonsus, said : f * Is not that, roy son, thy righteous mother's face ?" ** It is/* answered he, and he pressed it with fervency to his lips.
LS
*'Abl
S*4 "Ohi my mother» couldst thou but witness this scene, what transports would be thine ! Oh ! why art thou deprived of them !"—" Thou must not lament her ab¬ sence, my son ; she is far happier than I could ever make her. She was ever too good for me—I was unworthy of her.— Oh î my son, 1 have a great deal to im¬ part to thee. My father was as faulty as thine, but he has, I trust, expiated his offences,, and is now at rest. Soon, my dear son, I shall join him. I cannot now say what I could wish—I find myself ex¬ hausted. Do thou, ray child, take rest ; but, first, humbly beseech the Father of Klercies to prolong my existence till my affiictions and sins are known to thee.«— Now, ieave me, my son. I wiil try to com¬ pose myseif. Go thou, too striking re¬ semblance of my beloved, my much-injur¬ ed Mary, take that rest thy agitated body requires."
Alphonsus,
225 Alphonsiïs, though with the greatest reluctance, quitted hitn, having first re¬ quested permission to come to him again, as soon as he awoke. His father consent¬ ed, and he withdrew. When he came to the outer room, the Father eagerly enquired after the Duke. i( He is now composed," answered he ; " will you, my more than friend/' turning tö Muley, " attend my father, whilst Γ seek some rest." " I will, Sir/* said he, * * and have not the least doubt but I shall be able to prescribe something that will do you both service." ** Do whatever you will," said Alphonsiis ; w ť Will be di¬ rected by you in every thing." The Är¬ menian and Muley hastened to the Duke, while the Father and Berry attended Al- phonsus to a room, which ode of the other gentlemen of the house had ordereft tö be prepared. He Was so much absorbed in reÔëction, that he did not at first perceive Berry ^ LS but^
but, when he advanced in tears towards him» he took the youth by the hand, and bade him be cheerful* as he would soon be so himself. "Thou art," said he, « the favored of Heaven, or thy feeling heart Would not have pointed out to my notice the good man who has restored to me a father. How unsearchable are the ways of the Most High 1 Bless thee, my dear Ьоу, and may the All-wise Peing recom¬ pence tbee as thoa dcservest." Berry could not speak» and he covered his face to hide his tears. The Father requested Alphonsus to go to bed; he did* but earnestly desired him to attend to the Duke, and relieve Muley when he should want it. The Father promised» and Alphonsus retired, where, in sleep» he found a relief for his agitated frame ; and» as he sunk upon his pillow, im¬ plored the Almighty to restore his fa¬ ther, that he might speak comfort to " his troubled souL Though bereft of every
227 every comfort himself, yet he fondly hoped he should be able to sooth those afflictions that had for so many years been the companions of his parent.—- Under this impression, he fell asleep.
END OF THE TJUR* VOLUME.
Emght & Compton, Pnnleri, МШк Simt, Cloth Fair
