Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Ancient records: or, The abbey of Saint Oswythe: a romance
mwmmmKm>mammitmtmmmmmmemamtmmmiit0mHmmimmm*in
ANCIENT RECORDS,
■—i>*«>##j<3|£>J£s*»»«
CHAP. I. u Better be with the deaJ, ** Whom we, to g«in their ieat, h wc .'en to peace, <$ Than on the tortur v of the min J to He f * Inreftlef$ acony/* Shakespeare. <* \\ hzx a Hate is gu : it, ** When every things abnas it! like a ilntlntl ** Whoilecps upon his watth, It w;4:esin thead ■* Even at a broth of v ind.'* Havard. N that dreadful night, io dcftrudively fatal to the life of Conftantine, his re* morfelefs brother, returning through tlie vaulted caverns that led from the Caftle VOL. Ill, JP tO
to the Abbey, entered once more the honible chamber that had wituefled the deed of dark¬ nefs, guilt, and murdtn With gloomy dif- 1 content he call his eyts in fear around hitn : all was hail as the grave. No objed met hi> harrowed fight to appal his thouglits; the bleeding code of a murdered brother met not his view - 9 nor wis i trace of blood, that before had ftained the ground, nov \ii,hle io mortal ken :—but confeience, that never-fleeping partner of the guilty, pre¬ fented to Ins mind the dreadful fcene afrefli, and fancy p\<tiurcd to his ftartlcd fight the ftruggling Conftantine, vainly attempting to ward the accui fed ftroke of his fell de* ftroycr; then gafping in the arms of death, and pi a} ing for the monfter that inflided the damning deed of honor. Again he fees the upraifed dagger reeking io blood, warm from the fide of his murdered vidim— again beholds the gaping, piteous wound— the laft convulfive pang of nature outraged, parting from exiftence, as it yet quivered on the dying lips of the fpeechlefs Conftantine, The
The facrilegious ad is for ever new to his harrowed thoughts, nor can any tears or pe¬ nitence waih its foul enormity from his bijod-ftained foul$ no reftitution can recal the accurfed deed, or rob it of thofe never- ending agonies of remorfe that will rife in- iultingly to remind him of his crimes, and proudly claim fuperiority over the fallen criminal! As he (till gazed upon the ideal bloov- flained fpot, images of horror blanched h^ pallid cheeks, and retributive confcicnce pre- iented to his light the bleeding, mangled form of a murdered brother, with all the appalling cii cum fiances attendant; and, throwing himfclf upon the ground that had fupported his facrificed vidim,he in anguidi exclaimed, as a momentary paroxyilti of penitence awoke remorfe"in his overcha-ped confcicnce— «« Forgive, iorgive me, Heaven !— Heaven ! — Oh wherefore dare J invoke that £ 2 Powei
whole fight turned ab¬ horrent from a murderer, a blood-ftaincd iiatricide !-—Confuiioni hc'l! and torment! —Oh deed of darknefs, honor, and defpair 1 recorded in the Joweft pit oi fathomief, infernal mifeiy ; whole monftrous aft the fiend of difcord viewed with triumph, re¬ joicing in the crime tiuit dooms my foul to cvcrlafling torment! Hide me, Olifeas!- cover me, mou'italns, from the juft wrath of Heaven's putfumg vengeance!-—annihilate the efftnee oi that divine fpirit 1 poffefs! erafe the record of my immortal part from the facred volume of the book of life! that fo my foul may efcape the tortures of the damned, fince the hope of parad!le is loft for ever, See, ice," he added, finking on his knees, and purfuing with his eyes fome imaginary objed, " yon pale, poor, ghoilly fpedre ! Oh fave me from the har- roAing profped of its fiowning looks, and mangled, wounded form that cries aloud for retrioutive juftice! H,.rk! hark! I hear its
itsholloWjCchulngvoic-as in tcnirW.jrr- t ^ they fink upon my toituieJ fouh 0\\ s P:- libly avcnidnj!; to its nvar.V.er. I* v .:r..u defpair! deij a'.r !—- t'n.rc is a C? dot ii;{ io- oufnef", and a phce of i'tiL:j ! A.; i ro.v it \anifhes in fl'mc-^ Ihit rue with bh/ai.u; certainty of r.y eternal cnm»Mti( »r! Stiy, Oh injured fh.v.le-! ftu : 1 i*'e muvy va tliy ! s\*thcr ! lave i/cn—-piead for hi a ai the throne u? Heartu ! Oh flile'd him i>^>n ,! .e ereat l.tein^r^ v v / e:m r c ! JI Such ever :uc the ultim.ifc ^e^fe v ?i m.c ^ of a guilty, >*mbiiious v\\.\ ! ; iucli t v e ii .<i» i irs tl>at ;*Me, d ; * \*v ,t > ^ ^ ., 1 \ remain u^i , .1, :. M d t *. , . !,v \,, i> they have been ootai ied, be*.*** ^e it- ei : 1 ! 5 punifhment. In a ftate of ^lc*>.n\ ditdid., and fhort repentant tienzy," he tiirc.v h mfeit on the floor, whcie he remainetl till hb grim attendant once more entered tne bloody chamber, and aroufed htm horn his fhort- lived trance of contrition. At the found of the voice cf his impious accomplice he b 3 ftarted
ftarted op ; the " compundious vifirings 0 of ccnicience gave place to the necefllty of piefent immediate concerns ; and vehe¬ mently ieiziu^, Vvith trembling hand, the aim of the dark-fcakircd Harold, he de¬ manded—- s * Where haft thou plica] the body ?'* u Sunk it to the bottom of the ocean !" l lilily replied the adminiftering demon of an impious mafter. " Slave 1 dok ! villain !" furioufly ex- claimed Gondemir, his eyes ftarting with rage and wildnefs from their (trained fockets, and ftrikitiCL to the earth hk detefted affift- a.,t—" the tea,'* he continued, with increafe of paffion, " will waih to the fhore again the mangied corfe, and cry aloud for vengeance and redrefs upon its blood-ftained deflroyers. Wretch ! thoj haft undone thyfelf and me j and, by the Power above! fliall rue thy treachery. Hope not to e'eape me; for ihouid the dead proclaim our mutual ad, thou dieft I" Harold*
Harold, raifii.g himfelf upon I is knee, and conquering for a momtnt hk tcm>i; # faid-— u Let my Lord's L*u:t crJ ii the -words of his bumbkU of fl:i\eb : not aP. ,he i\;gings of the a. gry d^cp, when toffed vrith llonn-beteitmg winds, can raife the de:vJ from the bottomiefb gult where Co.iftanline ij now entombed. My Lord h not to Uz i.iioirncd rivac ne.ir the eaiitrn cliffs of the fliorcll.tre u a wliiiipo^ 1 , vLoie trou!)!ai waters no lea-Mi e crc caiM fiuhom ; thi¬ ther, fopka.c ir.y gia^!.^ m.dler, 1 cua- veyed tin corpfe,tlo:>jj; tl and weighed tlowt., almoft bcyoad m\ (ir-n^, a to ! a\c h fio a the boat, with fiords tt.wt ib'>n d:.» t ;*/i down the inienhble- O/nilantine ; and h: funk inftantly bencitii the bottumieii abyti of waters, never to r:fe asiatn " " *Tis well—I wi 1 reward thee/' replied the gloomy fratricide, aiiured indeed of his fecurity. But whither could he now turn Ins guilty fteps ? To enter the prefence of his father B 4 or
Or the wis fliould he on 'either of their countenances diicover ihe niaiks of fufpicion, his own upbraiding, guilty thouglits woukl mantle over his feature?, and too legibly difplay his fatal fecret iu their murderous charaders™ He dared not then prcicut himfelf withia the caftle i but he ietaincd his dread at¬ tendant there as a fpy upon its paffing occurrences» Of Rofaline Le now became afraid ; and at times his breaft heaved with the con¬ tending emotions of love, hatred, and fuf¬ penfe j he loved tier for herfelf, but he feared her as the living witnefs of his enoimitics; and had often paufed upon the gloomy al- tunitivc of deltrojinghcr, oi forcing her to become ihe lhar.r of his l.beriine j;aflion, and hib guilty fecret. From his accomplice he had nothing to dread, who had been a voluntary partner in the deed of horror, and whole ian^uinary foul was but too accordant vuth his impious mailer's wiihes. In
In circumftances addition to the horrors of a never (lumbering confeience, the total deprivation of that am¬ bitious hope, that, by the minder of a bro¬ ther, he fliould pave for himfclf a road that would lead to the goal of thofe gl.ttcring, dear* bought pofleffions that had tempted him to commit a deed of fuch atrocity $ whilft the poor objed of Iris guilty love was no^v protected fiom his impauous pui lints by a flronger furety than the barrier of honour or lefiftance: for the was acquainted with the knowledge of his crimes, vvhich p;oved at once her ovvn fecurity and guard againft his attempts, as well as awed him to forbearance from his rclentlefs purpofe^ He had, indeed, extorted a horribly bind* ing oath from the objed whole exiftence he was for .ever kept in fe.ir of; but to his terror-ftruck, guilty mind tin's fecurity fi^r the concealment of,hi* crime, was but a tot¬ tering, unliable lvliance, on which he trem¬ bled to lean; for he was unacquainted with b z the
the purity of Rofaline's foul, which woukl not fuffer her to break an engagement, though enforced and violently obtained, which flie confidered facred, becaufe fo fatally pledged to the Supreme himfelf. * Hurried by the intemperate impctuofify of his ungovernable paflions, and the proud, unyielding cruelty of his nature, he had madly plunged into the blackefl of crimes, and committed a deed of enormity, that for ever after darkened his ambi¬ tious hopc$, and coloured his future profpeds with a tint of the fame, that rendered him a gloomy, loft, and wretched being, alienated from his home, his family, and friends- loft to the world, himfelf, and all who knew him, and marked with indelible difgrace, never :i De effaced. His foul, in the moments of calm meditation, be* came a hell, anguiflied by the loud vo»pe of his ftruggling confeience, that fpoke in a language no effort of falfe hcrjiim could fhake off; whilft the deep revolves of his mind
mind at once own torment, an the dangerous bane of thofe unfortunate o!>- jeds on whom either his thoughts, hh fear., or his wifhes refted. The charader of the Baron of Caftlenuco needs little, interpretation :—ambition and avarice were its leading traits, but his re¬ ferved temper of mind, and the artificial refined fubtilty of h:s manners had enabled him fucceisfullv to <iloU over thefe dangerous qualities. Ills temper and difpofition were warlike, but fierce, revengeful, and remo:fe* lefs; and from the prirxely ftate of hk Baronial privileges, it frequently happened that he became a feudal deipot to thofe un¬ fortunate beings w r ho had fallen beneath the weight of his refentment; for if he once hated, his hate was mortal, nor could the pleadings of the Baronefs fave the life of the offender, who perhaps became the guiltlcls ftcriiice of cruelty, pride, and tyranny.
r» 6
X *lv
The lon^-coiitlntied abfence of Conftan¬ tine bciran to wear from his thoughts, till in the end Le rather rejoiced at a circumftance that left h>m an ur.controuled will in Urban¬ dine, and fecured his fuccefs of thofe long- imagined plans that only waited a favour¬ able opportunity to be enfo r ced, and which, being derogatory to the happinefs and honour ui the Lady Ruithvina,"could never have found foeceii whilft h'u* fon retn;\med upon a demefne where, in auother year, his right to Urbandfoe became fecured, and his power to protcd the ll.ronefs (upcrior to tint of his father's dreadful defigns to do her injury : whilft Rofaline, the too unhappy Rofaline, unconfciJus of ker danger, was referved for ircili tiials of a natuic leaft expeded, but alirmingly bolide to her future repoie. It was on the fecond evening of her return to the C.tftle, that, foilorn aud defolate, ihe v*v> fiitmg near the whidiw of her apart- .ueiit, whtn -i I 'ir tn\in oi pv'c.ful rcfl?dions, that
that for lime employed thoughts, was broken by the fudden entrance of the Baron :—flie obferved not the pe¬ culiar meaning that lighted up his eyes as he approached her with the ufual evening falute. Gently reproaching her for her con¬ tinued abfence from tlie faloon, he took her hand as he feated her, and fixing on the in¬ nocent Roialine a deep impaflioned glance, thus began ;— {i The Lady Rofaline cannot butxemem- ber the convcrfarion that palled upon a for- mer interview in this very chamber. 1 then informed her of a ferret I had to impart, relative to her own and the happineis of another being concerned for her future welfare. The long-forbidden hourof difclo- fure is arrived ; neither yourfelf nor Otho are longer reftrided by prohibited ties; and I am now fully at liberty to declare my con¬ feflion of a fervent paflion that has Lto long been kept fecret from its objed, and pioved the joy and to;uient of my life, Know then,
then, moft angelic of creatures! that I love— love to diftradion your all-perfed felf. Nay, flart not—fliriuk not ; I do, by Heaven ! adore you with a paffion honourable as your vviflies would have it, I fee in your looks and clouded brow the frown of denial to my fuit -, but hear me out. You would remind me that my faith la Ruithvina's— that dje h mv wife : (he is no longer fuch : (he has difgraced a Ration which you alone can fill: and 1 have at length obtained the long widied-for hoj e of a legal emancipation from vows that bound me to a confort un¬ worthy to poffefs the title die has too long dishonoured. The See oi Rome has yielded, to my juft petitions, an affent to our - divorce - s which, as foon as it is ratified, gives me the proud triumph of calling the charm¬ ing Roialine my own for life." " Great God ! great God 1" ejaculated in horror the amazed Rofaline, her eyes and hands raifcd, in fuffering agony and fupplica- Uon, to her heavenly Piotedor, her form and perfon affuming almoft angelic beauty, and her
whole countenance and manner exprcf- five of a volume of revolving thoughts im¬ poffible to defcribe or do juftice to; fhe feemed to have forgot that any earthly being was near her, and the licentious Otho felt difconcerted and confufed : he had involun¬ tarily loofened his grafp from her hand with a feeling of refped that he could not fup¬ prefs, whiift thofe emphatic words—'* Great God! great God !" fo forcibly pronounced* fo awfully add* effed, ftruck him with a mo¬ mentary convidion of the inhuman cruelty of hb defigns. There was fomething fcra- phic in her whole appearance, as with eyes and arms upraifed to Heaven, in the appeal¬ ing Attitude of injured virtue, flie feemed to be invoking the only Power that could awe the libertine, and fend her ftrength to bear up againft this moment of bittereft trial. After a paufe of filence, in which ihe ftruggled to regain compofure of mind, fhe faid, as flie fixed her pale, anguiflied coun¬ tenance and exprefiive eyes full on Otho, 4 %v ho
who ftood irrefolutc and abaflicd— - u You knew my heart was Con—flan—tine*s."—- Tears of agony choked her utterance, and flie could not finifli the afflidive fentence : her voice becime broken and inarticulate, and died away in indiftinguiihable founds j but thefe few words were deeply exprefllve of the meaning of her foul, and to the con¬ feience of the Baion thub powerfully ex- claiiiud—" You have deftroyed for ever the happinefs of two virtuous beings ; you have plunged the one to an untimely grave, and robbed the other of every joy in life j and, to complete your ciuelry, )oi\> the father of Imn that fou r ht me for his biidc, now dare to acknowledge an almuft inceftuous paflion for the betrothed uife of your ruined fon, doubly ciiminal to yom* aliance with a noble, fpotltfi. Lady, aad outrageous to every binding tie, divine or human." It \^as too true a fuggeflion, and for this I urpcfe it was that the Bason had fo deter¬ minate^' oppofed the union of his ion with avoiaiinc i
Rofaline s he had himfelf beheld her match* iefs perfedions with the fdlifh defire of pof- icihng them ; and bent on the gratification of his v\ifhc% at the cxpuicc of his fon's peace, his own honour, or the claims of juf¬ tice and humanity, he had lefolved to divorce Pviiithvina, for whom of late he had felt dif¬ guft, indifference, and averfion; for the re- fiftlefs beaut us of Rofaline had caiuht Lib eye, and had it not been that the negleded nnd infulted Baronefs was of a rank too fu¬ perior to countenance the pradicc of any daring violence, he would not have fcrupled to have committed fome of thofe daik-con- cealed fchemes for the luccefs vf his pro- jccls, vvhich his miicliiet-tceming ioul ima¬ gined, though, fiom the powenul and illuf¬ trious friends of the Baronefs he dared not put in execution* As a chief Minifter of State, however, his influence was powerful, and his will uncontroulable ; and fuch vvas his intereft with the Roman Pontiff, that, with large fecb and holy bribes to tht moft Chriftian Prince of the Papal throne, he obtained,
obtained, on certain conditions, a legal procefs for a divorce from the injured Baronefs. To Lave compelled Conftantine to an ttnion with Paulina, was the firft neceflaty flep towaids the advancement of his o\\ n vvith Roialine; and for this purpofe it uas that he had oppofed his fotfs wifhes, and fo (he- celsfully worked upon the unfufpeding in¬ nocence of the open-minded Rofaline. The unexpeded difappearance of his fon, how-* ever, fruftrated this nearly fatal projed; and though his continued abfence was aftonifli- ing, it vvas too fortunate a circumftance to be long regretted by the Baron, for there was now nothing to impede his tieacherous de¬ figns or to defend his helplefs vidimsfrom their eonfequences. The late brilliant fucceffes of the York powers were entirely owing to the ftrength of Urbandine, and the fervices of its com¬ mander—an event tlul gave him increafe of power,
power, as well ab a claim to the and afliftance of the new-made King, to whom he had lendered fuch important aid. The Caftle was now become the feat of war, and more than a thoufand men in arms filledi ts ftrong holds, beneath the banners of tlie tri¬ umphant Oiho, v.ho, proudly fecured from every fear of (elf-danger, was become obdu¬ rate to the touch of pity or icmorfe. Tiie nominal title given him in the papers of Sir AUred, as the future guardian of his child, placed her entirely witmn his power; and as for the affedion ihe might have entertained for Conftantine, he confidered it but as an infant paflion, that was too harmlefs to excite his fears,-fince he doubted not but that flie woukl gladly yield to his wiflies, from the aflurance of the fplendour and grandeur that awaited her in an union with himfelf; whilft the mifery and defpair he might oc¬ cafion to his fon, never once difturbed his heart with either ihame or repentance. He had by fotne as yet unknown channel made himfelf acquainted with thofe ni}fterious concerns
concerns tint profound obfeu- nty the fate cf Kofa'ine; and from the knowhdje hehad gained, it is certain, of whatever mturc they were, tluy had aded as aflimuluive to his prcfent purpofes, and procured the fated Ro'aline an honourable acknowiedgment of his paflion for hei felf. ' To the Baronefs his behaviour was cruel and infulting ; for as he now defigned to keep no terms with that unfortunate Lady, he rather wiihed, by the tyranny of his con* du£t> to bring her voluntarily to the point he liad fo long defired—namely, a divorce : he had deprived her of the piivileges of her high rank, and even commanded her to confine henelf to her own apartments. With niev.k foibearance ihe had fub¬ mit ted to his will;—and when informed of the Lady Rofaline's return to the Caftle, though anxious to pvefs her to her maternal bofom, lhe found that any attempts to pafs the confines of her own chambers were for¬ bidden j and her pleadings, as the guardian of Rofaline,
Rofaline, to ice and have with the latter, vvas overruled by the pe¬ remptory commands of the Baron, who fe- vcrely reminded her, that the rights of a huf- bnd were fupeiior': and with increafe of mifery the Lady Ruithvina was obliged to accede to the ulurped power of her harfh* ferocious Lord, who, anxious if poffible to prevent all intercourle between the Baronefs and Rofaline, had iflbed Uriel: orders to his confidential page to guard the entrances of both their chambers, kit, fliould an interview take place before a certain period, his dark defigns might be .difcovcred. This open eonfeffion, however, oi his love for Rofaline, was the effect of his certainty of their luccefs they vvere ripe for execution ; thcdiflembled maik no longer concealed the hypocrite from his unhappy victim, and ihe vvas now to learn not only what in future awaited her, but to trace to its fource the main (pring of her own and her Conftantine's ruined happi- jiefso
Little
Little was the Baron prepared for that refiftance he now found he was likely to* encounter j for Rofaline, fixing on him an eye or orep-Teu: exprcnion, as ,tbe indignant biood ruflied alternately from her heart to her face, and crimfoned all her countenance with a language that powerfully declared the emotions of her foul, energetically pro¬ nounced— €i I cannot ftoop to the language of deceit, my Lord s nor will 1 condefcend to difguife" the feelings of my heart, whkh hid me proudly fay, you have formerly, as well as now, injured a being that never wronged you. It is of little confequence to me to attempt to fathom your Lordfhip's purpofe,; but the degrading infult of this moment demands., from me as firm affuranees as the heart can - give, that Rofaline St. Ofwythe never can be any thing to the Baron ofCaftlenuco. ,, She was haftily rufhing from the chamber, overcome with the indignation of her feelings, when
when the what at the firmnefs of x manner in which (he had deli¬ vered her reiolutfon, caught her hand, and forcibly led her back again, > " Whither would you go, Rofaline ? n he fternly enquired. « € To the poffeffions of mv father,'* flie proudly replied ; " they can at leaft fecure me from a moment like the prefent.". *< Miftakcn Lady," interrupted the Baron, " let me undeceive you: you have no pof¬ feffions that can receive you; for know your father was an impoftor, and ufurped the title and heirdom of St. Ofwythe—a domain he never had a claim to, nor his daughter the heirefs of,'* V Rofaline funk back on her feat, over¬ whelmed with aftonifhment and horror 5 till, recolieding herfelf, fhe in an inftant reiiimed her compofure, as with fpirited looks lhe haughtily replied—•
" Were
* € Were my dear father living, he woukl have protedcd his name, his honeft, honour¬ able name, as well as his child, from this op¬ probrious infult, and filenced the iianderous calumny caft upon his unfullied fame, too fpotlefs for the tongue of the Baron of Caftlenuco to tiaduce with impunity/* « " Nay, more,*' interrupted the Baron, ftung with the contempt thrown into the countenance of Rofaline, as, uttering her laft words, (he fixed her eyes indignantly upon bim," your father knew full well the fidious title he had affumed could never defcend to his daughter, and therefore placed her under the protedion of the Houfe of Urbandine, to fave her from the juftice of thofe himfelf had wronged; for know, Lady Rofaline, you are at this moment demanded, at friy peril to detain you, by the real heirs of the Abbey of St, Ofwythe/' Rofaline, ftruggling with the overwhelm* ing torrent of her feelings, calmly afked--* *
" Then
*« Then who is the heir of St, Ofwythe, my Lord v ?" " The daughter of Matilda, its former inheritrefs,*' replied the Baron, concealing a look of triumph, " your avowed and mortal foe, the prefent Baronefs of Edmondville. 0 Rofaline felt as if a bolt of thunder had ftruck her to the earth. That name, fo ter¬ rible, fo often myfterioufly mentioned, and the poffeffor of which (he had been taught to t dread and fliun, was now quoted with fuch confirming mental teftimony of its truth, that for a moment daggered the faith and firm reliance fhe had on Sir Alfred; and * (he almoft queftioned inwardly, ** Who was my father, and what his real title ?*'—But fot" the dreadful myftery that Ihe well knew enveloped the name of Edmondville and her own, fhe would have concluded the Baron again meant to deceive or terrify her to a hafty compliance with his wi(hes, and enfnare her to her own deftrudion/' vol. in. c ** Unable
^ Unable to fpeak, flie copld no longer fupprefs the tear of anguifli which ftarted, unbidden, to her eye ; and covering her face with her veil, ftie remained paflively atten¬ tive to the Baron, who thus went on~ ** Think not I mean, by this unwelcome difcovery of your prefent danger, to advan* tage myfelf-, no, lovelicft of creatures, I adore you with a paflion lading as life, and fincerely difinterefted as your own thoughts ; eife whefefore fliould 1 repudiate Ruithvina, to ally myfelf with one whofe fortunes are Joft, and whofe very name is unknown, or at leaft myfterioufly concealed ? You muft do me the juftice to acknowledge, that in my hoped-for union with your charming felf, I feek not fortuitous advantages; and though now coldly, proudly aferfe to my ardent wifhes, I truft my gentle RoMine will fee the benefit that muft accrue to herfelf by - acceding to them with conferring willing- nefs, fince the unwelcome tidings I have, with deep reludance, communicated, muft, ia
in a mind of fuch uncommon judgment, have their due weight, and will, I truft, ad¬ vance my hopes to certainty. I will no longer,*' he continued, refigning her hand, and flowly apprdaching the door, " I* will fto longer prefs you with importu¬ nity for a decifive anfwer to my fuit, but now leave you to the effed of your own me¬ ditations, and truft to their decifion for the fuccefs of my wifhes: but be careful, Lady, how yon determine, nor forget that your own as well as Otho*s happinefs refts with your¬ felf; a refufal may plunge you to the depths of woe—-nay, raife a ftorm terrible to your peace, and blading to }our every opening profped. Remember alfo/' he continued, a look of fternnefs darkening his features, " you are preferved only from the vengeance of an injured heir by the love of Otho; and fliould you trifle with his paflion, and refufe his oflered hand, he has no longer a right to fave you from the fate that awaits you % Should he once deliver you to thofe wronged beings wiio feek to puniih the c 2 guiltlefs
guiltlefs daughter of a guilty fire for the crimes, that fire has darkly committed, yqu will then in vain lament your fate, and feel, in the dreaded mifery that purfues you, a deep repentance of lhe folly that tempted you to refign the happinefe and protedion you might eife have found in the arms of Otho. 5 * Rofaline's hands were clafped, and raifed in pity-ipeaking anguilh on her bofom, as the Baron, with haughty ftrides, was quitting the apartment, when the Lady Ruithvina fuddenly entered, i Otho for a moment loft his command of feature; for in the ftedfaft gaze of the ftill beautiful Baronefs, he faw an unufual degree of expreflion, widely differing from the fub- tnifiive obedience with which ihe had ever till now yielded to his inflided tyranny; he law in her countenance the firmnefs of an Irjured fofferer, guiltlefs of the mifery him¬ felf Lad occafioned; and felt, for the firft
time, abafhed, and trembled left in this in¬ terview, which he dared not openly oppofe, his vidims fliould difcover to each other the circumftances relating to himfelf, but which he had the ftrongeft reafons ftill to retain a fecret from either of them : and, whilft a gleam of fury ftiot from his eyes, and unperceivcd, was caft on Ruithvina, he left the.room, refolved this fliould be the laft interview they fliould ever have, and curling the negied of the -officer whom he had placed as a fpy at the chambers of the Baroneis, for permitting the latter to pafs from her confinement* Rofaline, the guiltlefs caufe of Ruith« vina's ruin, now felt herfelf unable to appear compofed in the prefence of the latter; for fhe experienced as deep a confufion as though flie had been guilty. Meekly cafting her eyes on her guardian, to read if in her looks the Baronefs had difcovered the tranfadions of this fcene, flic faw nothing to alarm her fears, and only perceived, if poffible, an c 3 increafe
of tencfernefs in her friend, into whofc extended amis fhe iupk, and was foldedina warm, maternal embrace. Some moments paffed before cither be« came fufficiently compofed to fpeak j and in this unexpeded interview, the unhappy Rofahne feemed to find a pre r ent relief from the anguiflied emotions that had ftifled the te£i*s of her indignant heart, which now flowed plentifully, and would no longer be icftraincd. The eyes of the Baronefs were moiftened; and it was fome time ere fhe could truft her trembling voice to.fpeak ; at length ftie faid-— J <c My child, my Rofaline, for fuch I muft #vcr now confider you, wherefore this excefs - oi forrow ? wherefore thefe tears, and thefe tumultuous throbbings of the heart, that fpeak in a language too impreffive of forrow to be miftaken in their caufe by one long, familiarized with its fharpeft pangs of mifery ? Alas! I come to you for confolation, but fear my
my fearch, like my griefs, is hopelefs $ fo*** Oh my daughter 1 the fo long threatened ftorm has at length overtaken me, and foon or late muft fall on my devoted head I Heaven is my witnefs, 1 know not in thought or adion how I may havje offended my Lord $. but he feeks my ruin and difhonour, and the many years of my fubmiffion to his will, the uncomplaining, unupbraiding patience with which I have endured the frowns of bis anger and negled, plead not in my be¬ half j I am become & difgraced captive m my own—in the manfion of my great fore- fethers; and ftained, and degraded from that pure name and unfullied good report I had hoped to have preferved from calumny, and kept for ever inviolate. I am become a ftranger to the heart of my Lord ; and he means my further deftrudion in divorcing me for ever fiom bis hand and houfe. Oh ! whither can I look for hope of future peace but in you ? In your gentle bofom I feek a balm for the mifery that awaits me; and fince it is too certain that I fhall foon be c 4 entirely
entirely miftrefs of my adions, would repair the misfortunes of my own def- tirjy, in giving happinefs to my children t ye$,„ my much-injured*fuffering Rofaline, I would redrefs in part the injuftice you have meekly fuftained, and give myfelf a double claim to the dear privilege of being your prbtedor* Should but my fecret emiffaries find the re¬ treat of my boy* and bring IiinAo the long* ing arms of his mother, that inftant fliould behold you his i and in the defired union of my children, I ihouid again partake the only remaining" profped of felicity left ia ftore for md** , * * ** Oh never, never will that hour arrive that fees me the wife of Conftantine 1" inar¬ ticulately fighed forth the anguifhed Rofa¬ line, wkh a voice of deep defpair* 4 The Baronefs viewed the latter with won** der and amazement ; for Rofaline had, in the mifery of her own harrowing feelings, uttered an eKpreffion that evinced ftie had forgot the neceflity that compelled her to filence, and
and even remembered not her en¬ gagement* * " Is it poffible my ears have not deceived me ? Do you no longer love my fon ? Do you rejed Lord Conftantine ?*' queftioned the Baronefs in a hurried tone of furprifo and difappointment, " Oh moment of unequalled, bittereft agony P* ejaculated the now completely mi*- ferable Rofaline. " Holy mother of God V* exclaimed the Baroneis, alarmed at the ftruggiiog emotions of horror and defpair fhe faintly beheld m the writhing form of Rofaline, <c what in- comprehenfible myftcry is couched beneath thefe fearful expreffions I Oh fay, know you aught of my (on ? Are you not ac¬ quainted with the caufe of his abfenre ? Or is his wretched mother to experience ftill greater increafe of fuffering in her fears for hinl? ,, «« He is^ ------ " Rofaline feebly began* and Would have added, « loft to us^ both for c 5 evex Pt
ever as the words were efcapinf her lips, and (he had, from excels of faint- nefs, thrown herfelf into a high-backed chair, and ky reclined upon its fupportcrs, a hollow voice, in low whifperings, breathed in her appalled ears~ <c Remember your oath, and tremble to betray it !'* Wildly (he ftarted from the feat, and caft her eyes around the dark fides of the gloomy chamber; but twilight had veiled every objed from her View but thofe immediately iiear her, and (he faw nothing to .convince her of the certainty of her auricular organs. She had fortitude to refift the fliriek of agony that Nature would have^fent to her relief; but the well-known founds were too indelibly imprinted on her memory for her to miftake their exiftence for an imaginary creation, and (lie groaned inwardly. The evening was fortunately too dark for the Baronefs to diftinguiih the agonized A working
working of her countenance, and thus continued— * fe Affured as I am of the merits of the objed my fon has chofen for his future partner, the greateft happinefs I can now experience, will be in his union with the loved daughter of my venerated friends* But,, ah! why thefe unwelcome exclama¬ tions, fo derogatory to the t ^ure (tmplicity of my Rofaline's heart ? Why thefe tears, thefe agitations and dilorders I I cannot fuppofe a mind fo virtuous is capable of change or in- conftancy. But my conjedures* unlatisfied* outrun perhaps the reality of what I am to dread ; if, therefore,-you have any unknown reafon that fliould make you rejed an alli¬ ance with Conftantine* v\hicb, unfettered by fuperior ties to the Baron of Caftlenuco, I fliould joyfully have fandioned, 1 know full well the noble truth of my Rofaline's foul will at once encourage her to declare its caufe, nor ftoop to the unneceflary degra- c 6 dat bet
dation of deceiving the parent of her once* loved Conftantine." "Oh God!" inwardly ejaculated Rofa¬ line* <c whv was I referved for this moft fevere moment of my wretched exillence ? Oh Conftantinc, worfbipped idol of my foul, iaft ? iSrfl: image of my fleeping and waking medi¬ tations, to whom in fecret I have (lied the never-eeafing tears of low, withered and ruined by thy timelefs death, look from thy brighter fpheres above, and into the burst¬ ing heart of thy once-remembered Rofaline, pour that effence of balmy fortitude, now needlefs to thyfelfl And Oh! may thy beatified fpirit hover over my devoted head, and enable me to refift the fubdrS"- asonies of this bittereft of trials 1" The Baronefs took the trembling hand of Rofaline.—* 6 You are cold, and unwell,** fhq faid, with a tone of foft compaffion; " yoa tremble, and do not anfwer me* Say, (peak to my requeft, I conjure you, Rolaline, by the
#
the affe&bn you once had for him whd now r I fear, has loft for ever the regard of the only being he will ever love J* Urged by compaflion for the feelings of theHaronefs^ yet withheld both by (acred ties, and the horrible oath (be had but an inftant before been reminded of, Rofa¬ line had now no power to confefs how vain were the hopes of the Baronefs ; and with the caimnefs of defpair, (lie faid-— " I have reiigned for ever all thofe promised profpeds of felicity that dazzled my tranfient fight, and led me to forget my- felf! Oh Madam!*you know not that I am the child of penury, and a creature that has no trace left to difcover whom in ccr* tainty I really am; even the name of St. Ofwythe I am taught to confider as no longer my own. Lowered and humbled from that honourable refped I thought my- felf pofleffed of, is it for the unowned, namc> lefs Rofaline to raife her prcfumptuous hopes to
to the heir of Urbandine? Shall (he meanly, ignobly take advantage of an affedion (he is now by birth and fortune no longer wor¬ thy to afpirc to ?" ** You are not unworthy,** quickly in¬ terrupted the Baronefs, embracing her trembling, agitited ward with maternal ten- dernefs 5 " my Rofkline f in nobility of birth* is equal with my fon, &nt] her alliance would icikd an increafe of honour on his own.** " Oh Madam P* haftily interrupted Rofaline, with impatient eagernefs, * c if you regard my prefeut honour, my happi- nefs^and future peace, explain, I conjure you, your laft myfterious fentencc; in you 1 am taught to hope one day to know my¬ felf. Oh i then have pity for my orphan ftate, and lay who was my father ? Inform me of myfelf—am I indeed of rank as equal as your own ?" The Baronefs for a few moments remained filent, and appeared confuted; but at length replied—* " The
#c The .virtues of my excellent render her in birth* fuperior to the fplen- dours of an illuftrious name ; nor needs my Rofaline the addition of nobility-of defcent to make her equal in rank and riches to the heir of Urbandine/* This fpeech to Rofaline appeared equi¬ vocal; and the emphafis laid on its words expreffed a certainty that the Baronefs wtfhed no further to be queftioned on the former -Xubjed. Rofeline^ however, urged by tl\Q iftrong neceflity of her circumftances, and :theimpulfive curiofity of her feelings, raifed to their utmoft ftretch by the dark expref¬ fions of the Baron, now fell fuddenly on her kneesy and feizing the hands of the Lady Ruithvina, which ihe kiffed and moiftened with her tears, thus ejaculated— " By the dear memory of my beloved father, and by the friend (hip and regard you once had for both my parents, let me conjure you to narrate the fad ftory of their misfor¬ tunes.
tunes. name of my father, has beerr difhonoured, his adions traduced, and even his truth openly queftioned: if you com¬ panionate my fufferings, then declare at once, am I the child of obfeurity, or was my fa* ther indeed the real inheritor of the Abbey?**' Rofaline then related the difcovery of the mutilated papers of Sir Alfred, and the my fiery that enveloped them, finiftiing with the account of the Baron's converfatjon relative to her deprivation of ber rights, Ruithvina tenderly raifed her from the ground, and feated her. She had liftened with filent agitation to this account, and for fome moments remained buried in deep thought after Rofaline had ceafed fpeaking* « You are then cut off from every chance of difcovering the myftcry of Sir Alfred's afflidions," fhe at length ejaculated; ** and every hope that might tend to the develop* ment of your own fate without the tnterpo- fiiion of Providence, is for ever at an end. The.
The trifling knowledge I have of Sir Alfred's affairs, mil not ferve to unravel the myftcry of their intricacy 5 and by the lofs of thofe papers, which doubtleis woukl have enabled you to prove your birth¬ right, fliould it be difputed, I fear you have an enemy too powerful to conquer. Thk account alarms and amazes me, and I even tremble for your future fafety. Oh ! had our Conftantine now a legal claim to protect you, this hour of danger had not been to be ' dreaded; and J fliould no longer be withheld from explaining fuch parts of your birth, as for ^the prefent I am bound never to re¬ veal.**—She paufed, as if in fufpenfe how to acl;; at length added, " It fliall be fo, , Rofaline ; if unreftrained by- the peremptory imprifonment of my perfon, I will exert my¬ felf in your behalf, and to-morrow evening, though forbidden by the angry commands of Otho, I will return to your apart¬ ments, and difclofe to you the fecret'that was committed to my keeping. I have pledged my word to him, whofe memory is not
not more and yourfelf,. my weeping mourner, than it is to the heart of Ruithvina, that the orphan "child of his Daren ted fove fhould find in mv care a ffuar* dian fiom the machinations of her enemies* To fecure you from their treachery it was that 1 braved the refentment of the Baron, and would have given you to the protedion o£ my fon; but—*—'* At that moment the outward portal grated harihly on its hinges, and four fierce- looking men entered the apartment; the fore^ofl, who feemed their leader, addreff- ing himfelf to the Baronefs, faid, with an impertinent tone, ** 'Tis my Lord's com* mands that you, Lady, fhould inftantly re¬ tire from theie apartments; we wait to con* dud you/' There was a degree of infolence in the peremptory manner in which thefe words were delivered, that made the cheeks of Rofaline glow with indignation and fax
by the little refped paid to the Baronefs, flic (aw too plainly what in future fhe muft herfelf look forward to, (hould fhe be left entirely at the difpofal of Oiho. The Baronefs feemed (hocked; but, after a mo¬ mentary ftruggle, recovered her outward compofure, and replied—* ** Wait a few minutes in thejmrichamber, and I Will attend you." ** It muft not be,'* anfwered the forcmoft, the lamp he held (hining full upon his dark vifage, and difplaying features the too appa¬ rent counterpart of a heart capable of exe* curing any dark deed at the command of his employer £ " my Lord's orders muft be obeyed, and you muft leave thefe chambers immediately/* " 'Tis well,*' fighed the Baronefs j «I fol¬ low you.—-Droop not, my love/* flie foftly wbtipered Rofaline ; **this is but a continua¬ tion of the injuries I have too long patiently endured. I would have concealed it from you 4 as I have done from ail the world befides,
befides, but the Baron is no longer regardful even of appearances; and, alas I his power here is too defpotic to be difputed."—She killed thecheekof Rofaline, and was goin^;, but obferving the increafing pale, anguifhed looks of the latter, flie added, in a lower tone of voice—** Exped me to-morrow evening i and in the meantime, let me entreat you to- exert your refolution and fortitude, for I fear you will too furely need them in the trials that await you."—Cafting a look of companion on Rofaline, fhe retreated, and the door in a moment after clofed her from her view,. For a length of time Rofaline remained in the fame almoft inanimate pofture fhe had thrown herfelf in as flie funk fainting on the couch ; and her fenfes feemed for a period benumbed with grief, from the va¬ rious caufes of forrow this night's events had created. So varied and diftra&ing were her refledions, that flie knew not on which fro dwell with a hope of relief from the mifery ♦ the%
they The and tronfeflions of the Baron, flie now found, however repugnant to her feelings and to ber belief, were confirmed by the words of the, Baronefs, who had mentioned with cer¬ tainty the expeded ruin of her name and honour; and whilft fhe felt extreme concern for the furTerings of her only friend, fhe was ftiocked to be compelled to acknowledge that herfelf, however innocent, was the caufe of her difgrace, and defigned as a fubftitute to fill the vacant dignities of the injured Ruith¬ vina. The unexplained words of the latter now fatally convinced her that fhe had not only to guard againft the defigns of the daring Otho, but alfo the fecret enemy of her myfterious warning. She now reviewed in her mind the adions and words of her father, during their two laft^. interviews, with minuteft fcrutiny $ but, in a tranfport of confiding afiedion, fhe clafped her hands ardently together, as with a raifed tone ihe animatedly exclaimed-— ** No,
%< No, no, my father, my fuffering, wronged father never wonld deceive his chi'd; he w r as the patient vidim of cruelty and ir^achery indeed, but not thevotarv of tliflionour. Pardon, pardon, fainted being, the unnatural doubts of thy diftraded daughter! Ai d Oh, may thy unequalled example teach thy Rofaline to bear with refignation her lot, which eife will over¬ whelm wkh accumulated horror, and de¬ stroying mifery, the laft remaining wreck of hope that is left her !** She fell on her knees, and fervently ad* drefling herfelf to her Creator, befoughtthe Power Supreme that guards the innocent, to extend his guardian arm over her unpro¬ teded ftate, and preferve her frojn the com- « pletion of thofe threatening dangers that fhe too fearfully faw would ci e be the effed of thofe ills that already opprefled her, ^-~~ A little eafed in the confiding reliance (he placed on the hoped-for protedion of a mer¬ ciful
dful Dircdor, Ihe arofe pofture as Jannetta entered the apaitmcnt with lighted tapers. *f Oh my dear Lady P* faid the latter, in an accent of pity and concern, " there are fad doings below ; and my Lady Baronefi» is fliort ly to be tried and divorced from his Lordihip, the Baron; for it feems he his taken it into his wife head to fufped the iruth and honour of his admirable Lady, who, I am fore, is too good for fuch a wicked*hearted Noble as his Lordihip— Heaven pardon him his fins I" u Tried ! divorced !" exclaimed Rofaline, with indignant aftoniftiment: then recol¬ ieding hcifelf, (he demanded, €i Waence gained you this intelligence ? M " From the horfcnun that is juft arrived at the Cdc, Madam/* Jannetta replied. **lthas long been his haughty Lordihip's defign to divorce ihe Barone.s, t. at he might marry fomebody clfe * and even the houfe* hold,
hold, my Lady, know of his partiality fo? another perfon,*' ** Another perfon 1*' exclaimed Rofaline* ihame, confufion, and indignation dying with crimfon her innocent cheeks." " Yes, my Lady, to be fore," continued Jannefta, ** It was not for nothing the Baron was fo often fliut up alone with the imperious Lady Paulina Othin; and fince lie could not force my dear young mafter, I mean Lord Conftantine/* added Jannetta, archly—' 6 1 fay, my Lady, fince his gallant Lordfhip could not, like a noble gentle¬ man as he is, be forced to be unfaithful to his love, and marry her haughty Ladyftiip, his provident father means to marry her himfelf/* Rofaline, much relieved to find that her¬ felf was not the fubjed of fufpicion, care- leffly afked— « Is the Lady Paulina at the Caftle ?" *< Oh yes, my Lady," Jannetta replied | ** (he and her fine young lover have been plotting
plotting the ruin of his fweet uncomplaining Lady, and now mean, I fuppoie, to put their fhameful defigns into execution. Every eye in the Caftle weeps to think how (lie is ufed $ I am lure mine are almoft blinded. Pardon my freedom, my Lady j but indeed to fee fuch wicked doings in the great hall, is enough to provoke the tears of St. Thomas: already are they preparing it with feats and benches, and to-morrow the Lady Baronefs is to be brought to tiial before the Knights and Cavaliers that remain in the Caftle." ** Has the Lady Ruithvina none to whom flie could appeal ? Is (lie to be denied the privileges of fupportcrs and pleaders for hci caufe ?" " Oh yes, my Lady; the Virgin be praifed, the Baron, great as he k, is not to bave all his own way ; for the holy Fathers of St. Auftin*s IMonaftery are appointed to fee her Lady (hip righted, But, my Lady, I forgot to tell you that you muft not attempt to pafs your own chamber door ; for as the vol. n i, o great
great gallery over the hail, there are to be guards placed in every corridor, to pre¬ vent any paffage from the upper fuites of apartments." Rofaline now difmiffed Jannetta, who, from being in earlieft childhood her only companion, had contraded a degree of fami¬ liarity in her a* Id re fs and convertation to her nvftrefs, vvhich became too habituat to be reftrained $ and Roialine, though ihe knew this to be her greateft fault, had tried to fubdue it, but found the taik hopelefs. She (lit for fome moments refleding on the words ihe had heard, which teemed to pro- mile one on y remaining prolpeft of eicape from the dangers and miferies that fur- rounded her The Baronefs, as her guardian, claimed the difpoial of her peribn; and ihouid a ieparaiiun take place between her- felt and Otho, the latter could no longer retain a power over her adions. To every future hope of happineis in this life the had
bad entirely bade adieu; and all that now could give a healing balm to her lacerated mind, was to pafs the remainder of her days in peaceful feclufiom " If," (lie mentally continued, u my un¬ known oppreffors have fraudulently deprived me of the proofs of my birth, as well as the inheritance of the venerated St. Ofwythe, there is yet one laft refource left me, where, in undiiturbed repofe, I may reft fecure and unknown. For me this world has no charm left potent enough to heal the wounds of a broken heart, or occafion regret when I fhall have quitted it $ and the facredprofeffion, to which I will cheerfully dedicate the remain¬ ing term oi my unfortunate exiftence, will teach me to regain compofure of foul, and free me from the malice of Fate, and the dangerous defigns of thofe that feek my ds- ftrudiom Shut up for ever within the walls of a monaftery, I will devote my foul to my God, and the miid influence of religion fhall ftrengthen the wcaknefs of my heart to n % refift
refift the remembrance of that fatal pafliba that has withered in the cold grave of my murdered love!" The idea of taking upon herfelf the folemn engagement of a facred profeffion, had a balmy effed upon her thoughts, which were but too congenial with the refolution (lie had formed; and (he even wondered, depri¬ ved as (lie was of every hope, that (he had never befon refleded on this defign, which alone icemed to promife her the only proiped of eafe this world had to give her; and (lie bow determined within herielf, that if (he once obtained her removal from the Caftle, ftie would inftantly enter a fifterhood of Nuns, and take the vow of ieciufion for ever. With conclufions to this effed, (lie retirtd to her couch ; the fleep of innocence foon weighed heavy on her fenfes, and for¬ getfulnefs lulled to inanimation her haraffed ijnrits. She
She had lain for fome hours a and refreihing flumber; but fharp-panged mi¬ fery is too watchful to permit a long ceffa¬ tion of pain, and a flight noife thafc broke upon the ftillnefs of the ni^ht, awoke her. - As the opened her eves, the feeble mifty glare of a lamp, held over her as flie lay, dif¬ covered to her horror-ftiuck fight the rufty, blood-ftained point of a dagger, aimed at her own botom, ready to give the fatal blow. She fell back, incapable of thought or U&ion \ and though fhe tried, Die found th&l excefs of Hidden terror and affright had de¬ prived her ot the power of fpeech to plead for mercy* The light (hone ftdl upon the murderous countenance of Gondemar, for it was him¬ felf, and portrayed the purpofes of iiis deadly vifit. With a deep*toned voice he ■pronounced-—
» $ ** Yon
my add per¬ jured yourfelf; your life is juftly forfeited. I come to claim my awarded rights, there¬ fore prepare to die ; your fate is inevitable* and hope were impoffible/' Rofaline, in the foregoingpart of the night, had caft herfelf on her com h in her apparel; fo entirely had grief difordered her mind, as io mke I u caieleis even cf the common form*; of life. The fudden horror of fuch a Biomcnt, and the fight of the gloomy form of her deftroyer, had for a moment robbed her of fenfe and refpiration; but the near danger of fuch a fcene almoft as inftantly recalled her facultks, and ftarting from his murderous grafp, lhe fell proftrate on her knees,: 3 ihe ejaculated— *< Spare, Oh relcntlefs man! fpare me but a Httle. I never betrayed your fecret, or broke my folemn engagement; and though I own the miferies that overwhelm me ren¬ der
der me almoft weary of exiftence, yet thus to perifli is indeed hard, and I could wifh to avert the ftroke of horror, and if polftble deprecate your mercy and forbearance,*' ** There is but one hope left you: re¬ member you are in my power, and that no- earthly afliftance now can fave you. That I once loved you, I n.ed not now repeat ^ 'tis that ftill exifting paffion that can alone afford vou an efc.ipe from the fored^ath tiiat eife awaits you, Hatred and love at this moment contend within me for pre emi¬ nence ; if you would preferve yourfelf from the efieds of the former, you muft unhefi¬ tatingly y ickl to the latter^ and quit with me for ever the Caftle, and every other connec¬ tion but Gondemar*s: but if you have cou¬ rage to refufe, behold the alternative !" dif¬ playing liis tatal poniard with a fiercely ex¬ prefllve look* At that moment of horror, a hollow groan rung echoing through the chamber*and funk & 4 to
to the heart cf the appalled Gondemar * who cafting his eyes around on the re* petition of the groan, beheld a pale and bloody form, whofe well*remembered fea** tures bore the fhrunk fhadowy refemblance of the murdered Conftantine. A cold horror benumbed his fenfes; for he now remembered the folemn appeil that the defpairing Urbandine had made to Heaven in the laft moments of his exiftence, and aghuft with horror he beheld the now awful petition realized. The fpedre became ftationary, aad beckoned, in angry geftures, for his de¬ parture, as it pointed to the turret clofet door, which ftood open, and by which Gondemar had entered. The mulcies of the latter fwelled with horror and convulfive agony; his eyes glared dreadfully, and he re¬ treated in hafte towards the clofet. The form il wly purucd him; and as it reached the portal, it lifted up its hollow funken countenance
countenance, and on a pitiful look, difap; eared in an inftant from the chamber. The frenzied Rofaline became dunned with horror; and, utter¬ ing an agonizing fliriek, funk fcnfelefs upoa, the. couch-
0 5
CHAP;
«eHSSBiBa8S9as»9sssss9|r
GHAP. m ^Oh thou eternal Power I whofe piercing*eye* *« Difcerns ea^h fecret guilt, fearch thou my, hearts!* ** And, as thou know'ft me innocent, fupjpoit me, ** And to the world acquit myiblemUh'd fame." KfilUFt* A HE Caftle of Urbandine was now be¬ come not only an armed fortrefs, but a^ prifon ; the defeat of the Lancaftrians had. filled its holds with captives, and obliged the. Baron perfonally to remain there as chief ctnunander of the forces left for its defence.
Queen
CJueen efcaped the purfuie ©f her foes ; and when the warmeft of the fearch was over, had, in the night, ventured from her fecure rceeis in the Abbey of St- Ofwythe, and once more reared her warlike ftandaud in oppofition to the powers* of Yoik ; and being quickly joined byherpar- tizans, and an increafe of friends, foon gave promife to revenge the late defeat (lie had endured at Urbandine, which was again threatened with an attack, but was left in a ftate of fuch ftrong reinforcement, as to* prevent the coniequences of a fudden fiege* The long-expeded mandate from the Court of Rome at length arrived, and the miffionaries of the Baron on the laft evening returned with the documents of the fupreme Pontiff; but Otho, notwkhftanding his in- tereft at Court, and the tnignificent bribes he had prefented to the. Papal Chair, was doomed to a difappointment of his wiihes, and could not obtain an ecciefiafticai repeal of his marriage with the Baronefs, till the d 6 caufe
c aufe of his difcontent was duly invefti^ited:: nor would the edid of the Pope admit of a divorce till, on full trial, it was evinced that Ruithvina had proved herfelf unworthy of thefandion which the Church was refolved to afford her, if innocent of any crime that could provoke the Baron's proceedings. A decifion fo honourable to Ruithvina had been obtained through the interpofing reprefentations of the Abbot of St. Auftin's Monaftery, who, informed by Father Bene* d*ne, the Cbnfeffor of the Baronefs, of the real views of Otho,hadexerted his influence* at the Ecclefiaftic Courts | and being a maa of well-known piety and exemplary charac¬ ter, as well as of great rank and fortune in his own perfon, and high in the dignitaries and honours of the Church, he had intereft fuffi¬ cient to procure this favourable award j and was, by the Bull of the Pope, inverted with unlimited power to pronounce fentence according to the juftice due to etcher party.
St.
St. Aufttn's Monaftery was fituated not m'ore than a league from the Caftle of Urbandine ; and its Superior was a man of fuch eminent rank and unfullied virtue, that to hope to bribe him to the intereft of the Baron, was impoffible. The latter knew full well that the decifion of the Abbot muft im¬ mutably be pronounced againft him, as he did not dare to apply to the laieal.judicature of the laws for a divorce; for vvell he knew the exemplary goodnefs of the Baronefs's cha¬ rader gave him no pretenfions to hope for fticcefs, if,, as was the cafe, herfelf was averfe to a mutual feparation : and it is poflliethat his fplendid bribes might have procured him the award he defired, but for the interference of die Father St. Henry. This then was a blow dcftrudive to his hopes, fince he well knew the power of the Church in matters of this ferious nature, when thoroughly inveftigated, woukl never procure him a favourable decree. He had, indeed, attempted to bring the injured Ruithvina
Ruithvina to a compliance with his difgrace^ ful purpoles forh.r avowed difhonour; but forthe firft time he was fated to find that,, meddy fuhmiffive as fhe had ever been to his moft abfolute will, flie was, in this parti¬ cular* firmly refolved that her own voice* fhould never affent to the ruin he defigned her: and not even his threats could now move her from the refolution lhe hai j fflly formed, to fave, if pofhbie, her unfullied fame from the blaft of rude, unmerited ca?- lumny. Foiled in his hope^ of fuccefs, he had no alternative to fave his own difgrace¬ ful report, but in the total ruin of the Lady Ruithvina, whilft the only projed that offered itfelf, was in the execution of a dark and cruel defign that had now entered his mind,black and remorfelefs as his own vicious heart, from whence every fenfe of truth and juftice *&as baniflied, and even the pleadings of pity or humanity unattended to. The morning of trial arrived. The hall was already filled with the Knights and Cavaliers ^
Cavdiers $ and the Abbot St. Henry, with a train of venerable Fathers from St. Auftin's Monaftery, had affemblcd at the Caftle. Otho, proudly fecure of fuccefs and triumph, entered the hall—the inflexible enemy of his injured Lady, regardlefs of the fliame he meant to heap upon her; whilft, by an ad of premeditaad falfehood, he ex* pedetl to preferve his own honour inviolate,. and fubdue entirely every oppofition to the lawlefs gratification of hi* paflion for Rofa¬ line, and the fuccefs* of his impotent defigns* With an imperious, undaunted ftep, he took his feat on the chair of ftate; whilft the pages of the Monk Su Henry were dif- patched to the apartments of the Baronefs, to fummon her prefence in the halL As the doors of her fuite were thrown open, every eye was caft to the gallery from whence the illuftiious Ruithvina was to de- kend s who, attended by her Co ifefTor, the Father
Father Benedine, Jeflica, and Ella, foon after entered the hall. port this infulting moment of calamity with- that firmnefs and innate fortitude which* proceeded from the virtuous reditude of con- fctous innocence, and fpotlefs, unblemtlhed* honour. Her fine, majeftic pertbn was ha*~ oited in a robe of flowing white fatin, looped! with pearls and precious ftones•$ whilft fromt her head depended a pui^ple, thin drapery,> or veil, which fwept along the ground,, and, was fchtown half negligently behind the* ftandingruff which rofe nigh rourd her neck;, her fine hair, ftill retaining its bright auburn hue, was fuffered to fell, as Nature had de¬ figned it, in ringlets over her face, which,, being parted on the prominence of her fore¬ head, was only confined by a part of her veil, and the.twiftings of feveral rows of jewels:. and thus attired, (he feemed a being fo inte- reftingly engaging, that almoft every perfon prefent who w&ited to judge her adions,, were
were ftruck with admiration, and alhamed of the difhonourable caufe they came to be a witnefs ofj and but that many prefent dreaded the anger of Otho, they would have gladly tufned from a fcene of fuch unme¬ rited, infulting degradation. The Baronefs was conduded to her feat by the Abbot St. Henry ; and as flie bowed* to the Court, all but the Baron, who proudly kept his feat,arofe to return f f -e involuntary proof of their pity and refped. At length* recovering from a momentary emotion that had at firft deprived her of her firmnefs, (he aroie from her chair, and addteffmg herfelf* with an unufual degree of dignity, to the Baron, flie thus laid— u My Lord, and huiband, in obedience to your pleafure* 1 have (ubmitted myielf thus lowly to your will; and with a full convidion upon my mind that you feek my difgrace aAd fliame, have enured this place, and bow to vest decree, though God is *iy \\itnds
witnefs you have never had a juft caufe to fufped my honour, my truth, or my fidelity. Certain as I am of this, it ill becomes a daughter of the Houfe of Urbandine to ftand here even in thought a criminal, ex¬ pofed to the difgrace of a trial fo humiliat¬ ing i nor could I have fupported this mo¬ ment of iniulting fliame, if the inward knowledge of my innocence did not bid me firmly abide the award of thofe my honour¬ able fupportcrs/* bowing to the Fathers', **who, 1 truft, will feejuitice performed to a moft wronged wife, unconfcious even in the u| ht ot having pro\oked the heavy dif- pica uie that now fails unmeritedly upon her/* c< Of that the Court fliall judge/* replied the Baron, fternly. c * Was it becoming the duties of a wice, in fecret to plot againft the peace and wifhes of her huiband, and trea- chctufly to affift in the forbidden union of her ton, expreflly againft die will of bis* father t %
u la
" In that,** replied the Baronefs, u I aded from the didates of maternal affedion, and the law of Nature. The hand of Con¬ ftantine was engaged to the being who had long pofleffed his regard and love, ere the Countefs of Othin, who was firft deftined to the Lord Gondemar, declared her eledion in favour of his brother; but convinced that my fon*s happinefs muft be the forfeit of fuch a forced union, I do acknowledge that I oppofed an alliance which i was affured every fentiment of juftice, honour, and affedion forbids the fulfilment of," ** Of that no more!" interrupted the Baron. " But how will the Lady Urban¬ dine defend her condud againft the cha ge ihe is fufpeded of, when informed that her meeting fome months back with the ftranger in the foreft, at midnight, was difeovcred ?** Fur> flafhcd ftom the eyes of Otho as be added, 4i That ftranger was the pretended St. Ofwythe, the fecreted objed of her cri¬ minal love, and my diihonour; and for which I here, in the open Court, impeach thee.
thee, Baronefs of Urbaudine>and fue for an award due to the injuries a wronged fau£- band has fuftauied*'* The Baronefs became pale j fhe was m> longer able to fupport herfelf, and funk on her feat, overcome with the cruelty of a blow fo dreadful and unexpeded. Unable to? confirm or refute this affertion of her rclent¬ lefs hufband, flie muft have fallen to the earth but for the care of Jeffka* r Otho beheld the fufferings of the fpeech- hk Ruithvina with triumph* for he now felt fecure of vidory, fince flie made no effort ta» reptai the charge; and this was the dark fcheme he had formed for the fuccefs of his, daring enterprife. The countenances of the whole atlembly were evidently exprefGve of concern and tuipenfe, and the eyes of all were caft on the unhappy Baronefs, in hopes to hear that ibe would deny the Barons report*
The^
The Father Ab-\i£, rifing from his feat, pronounced— 6C If thib be true, y >u are juf¬ tified, my Lord; and fliould it prove fo, I am no longer empowered to withhold the article of divorcement from its due fentence. Say you, Baronefs of Urbandine, or not, aught that may clear fufpicion trom your hufband's mind, or are you guilty of what be doth ac^uie you ?'* The Baronefs raifed her head \ a fow tears, exprcfiive of the feme of her deep-infulted feelings, came to her relief; but thefe die foon dafbed awa), and with audible firm- nels replied, as (he addreffed herfelf to Otho— 4t My Lord, you have triumphed, and have fucceeded-—Heaven knows how un- juftly—in the ruin of an innocent and guilt¬ lefs wife; you have, by dtfloxal means, obtained yuurrruel purpofes, nor will 1 degn to refute the falfe calumny you have caft upon my fame* You have with imft untrue and 6
and Iianderous breath, aiperfed my "name with the fuppofition of a crime that I will not deign to repeal, becaufe the fidelity ofmv obedience to your pleafure, and the unftained purity of my life and adions, will of themfelves difprove the detradion, and ^ make the hearer bluili to fufped the honour of my unfullied charader, But it is enough, and this laft remorfelefs iniuit has taught me to refped myfelf, I will no longer be compelled to remain in this diigraceful Court; but now entreat the award of the judges prefent to comply with the requeft of the Baron, and do here freely abfolve him from thofe vows he feeks to annul: for never fhall the daughter of the Baron of Urbandine sgain endure the deep degradation of fuch a moment as this/* She was quitting the hall, when the Father St* Henry requefted her to return.—-" Stay, ni>< daughter/' he mildly exclaimed j " if you have been wronged, 'tis your duty, as a wife, a mother,
% mother, and a Chriftian, to clear your con¬ dud from the afperfiom that are thrown upon it ; and be afiured }ou fhall not need fupport to juftify you, and relcue your name from die difadvautageous mifconcep- tions of circumfta ,ce, and I truft unfounded caufe of jealoufy/' <c I thank my reverend Father," the Baronets replied ; " but the juftice of my caufed have to Heaven, fince he on earth who alone can judge me, knows 1 am guilt* lefs of the crime |ie has raifed againft me. I have, alas ! no oiher living witneh of my in¬ nocence but my Lord, whofe heart is fleeled againft me w th determined fternnefs, md too implacably bent on my ruin, to give cre¬ dence to the ufelefs report 1 (ha'l make of my freedom from the guilt he charges me with." ** Did you not meet Sir Alfred St. Of vythe in the foreft ?" queftioned St, Henry. ** Once, and only once, I acknowledge to have fo done," replied the Baronefs, with the
the firm, unhefitating openncfs of innocence. ** The female attendant who accompanied &1e, was witnefs of our interview; and were (he ftill living, could teflify the purity of our intentions, and refute the ungenerous fuf¬ picions the Baron has fo unjuftly drawn from a meeting that proceeded from no dif¬ honourable defigns, either derogatory to my own honour, or thofe of my Lord's, and the deceafed Sir Alfred's/* ** Explain its purport, Lady/* replied the Baron fternly; ** if that accords truly with your report, I am fatisfied, and will rather feek your forgivenefs than your divorce/* The Baronefs fighed deeply, and after a paufe faid— " In that I am forbidden by a folemn promife never to explain the truft repofed in me, till a future circumftance, relative alone to the heirefs of St. Ofwythe, tho daughter of Sir Alfred, fliall have freed me from engagements, which not even the difgraceful
difgraceful fufpicions 1 now wrongfully fuffer for, can juftify my betraying a confidence fo facredly committed to my keeping. I am therefore content to fubmit to your will, which I no longer will ftoop to oppofe, fince no circumftance can now have power to clear my fame from the reproach of a crime my foul abhors, and which too furely was un- juftly urged to overwhelm me in fliame and unmerited deftrudion. As Providence, to whom I* now, with fearlefs confidence, dare appeal, is witnefs of my innocence, fo to its almighty power I leave the redrefs of my in¬ juries, which even here I hope to receive, and with fortitude refign myielf to its fu¬ preme diredions ; but till the hour of con¬ vidion arrives, that fliall clear my name from the foul difgrace with which it is tainted, and reftore me again to the unfullied purity of a fpotlefs charader, this is the laft meet¬ ing* I will ever fubmit to: and that your Lordihip may no longer be reftrained by the prefence of Ruithvina, (lie means to with¬ draw herfelf to the Siftcrhood of St. Auflii/s; vol. in. e and
*
and that end, again entreats the holy Father to pronounce an award, fuch as (hall free me for ever from the indelible difgrace I have too fubmiffively endured, in wilhing to lengthen an unhappy marriage, that now cannot preferve me from the difhonour that has been bafely heaped upon me,* 1 The tears were, with an effort of un- common fortitude, fuppreffed from flowing down the cheeks of the unhappy Baroneft, who, fupported by confciou& reditude, had finifhed her foliloquy with an unufual dig¬ nity, that, powerfully fpoke her guiltlefs of the charge reported by the Baron againft her. She bowed reverently to the venerable Father St. Henry, and with a majefty eff de¬ portment, and an imprefiivc emanation of indignation and iniuked virtue ftrongiy de- pidured on her countenance, quitted the hail, none prefent prefuming to prevent her j and, unmolefted^ (he retired through the upper corridor to her own apartments.
As
As foon as the commotion of ber depar¬ ture fobfided, Father St. Henry exclaimed— ** The Lady Ruithvina is unjuft to her¬ felf in this adherence to a promife that, with¬ out violating its engagements, might be ex¬ plained, in part, to the fatisfadion of your Lordihip, and the re-eftabliihment of her fame and honour, were (he permitted again to plead in her defence. And your Loxd- (hip muft forgive me if I add, there is ftrong reafon to fuppofe flie is unmeritedly ac- cufed of an error that (lie is innocent of." * ** She has criminated herfelf,** fternly in¬ terrupted the B.iron, " and acknowledged the truth of my accufariom Further inv\*f- tigatjbn is needleis, fince I am myfelf fatis- fied of her guilt, and will not brook the dii* honour of a continued difgrace by a longer connedion with Ruithvina of Urbandine; but now demand the juft fentence of the Pope, and the reverfion of her fortunes and thofe of my fon's to be committed to e 2 my
my guardianihip, in truft for the Lord Con¬ ftantine,** The Abbot formally' replied, as he deli¬ vered one from among many papers he held in his hand to the page of the Baron*— <e This, my Lord Baron, contains the ar* tides of your feparation, but not of your dtvonr ; for on fuch flender grounds for caufe of difcontent, I cannot, without the leave of Iris Sacred Holinefs, the; Pope, before whom this caufe muft be laid, pafs due fen¬ tence t neither are you permitted to claim" $. right to the fortunes of the Baronefs, which,' in her feparation from your Lordfhip, remain entirely at her own difpofal, and defcend not to her fon till (he has departed fron^ this world/*—St. Henry,giving(ome papers into the hands of an attending Monk, then added,. addrefling himfelf to Father Benedine— " Bear to our daughter, holy Friar, the greetings of the Lady Abbefs of St.Aufttn's, 6 m
in whofe facred manfion fhe will be joy¬ fully received, and find an honourable fliel¬ ter from the violence and dangers of the times, tiil her own refidence is again rendered fafe for her return/' \ This fpeech, fo openly expreflive of the Monk's difapprobation of the condud of - Otho, filled the foul of the latter with rage and difappointment. ** By what authority/* he exclaimed angrily to the Father, «* do you prefume to didate in the Caftle of Urbandine ?" " By that which here you have forfeited/' fternly replied the Father i " the Baronefs ' of Urbandine is now the ward of holy Mother Church, and I doubt not, my Lord, but flie is able, and will proted the per- > fecuted that fly to her for fuccour/* The Abbot then, with all the pomp of faceidotal dignity, difdained any further £ 3 intercourfe;
intercourfe ; and with a (lately deportment, impreftive at once of awe and reverence, quitted the hall, followed by the venerable train that had accompanied him : whilft the Baron, foiled in his fchemes, and enraged at their double failure, did not dare oppofe a power fo arbitrary, and from which there was now no appeal
CHAP.
CHAP. IH. " Virtue nuy h* kfl'.uiM, but never hurt— ** SurpribM by \m}\i\\ foi cf> but not eutbra)l*J; ** Vea # even that whtcb mifchief means moft harAi, •* Shall, in tha happy trial, prove waft jjlory." MlfcTON, , *« Virtue, when diftrefs'd, <* Can fmile at death, and, aa a friend, embrace it." Mahtyns». JxOSALINE awoke not from a heavy flumber till late on the morning of her laft night's horrors j and happy was it for hef that mifery had rendered her mind fo dif* ordered, as to be in doubt whether the hor¬ rific tranfidbns of the preceding midnight E 4 were
were not the gloomy effeds of a diftempered imagination, that had, in fleep, prefented unreal images; and though (he well remem¬ bered to have feen the Ihadowy form of Conftantine purfue her deftroyer 5 from his fell intents, yet fo confufed were her ideas, that, from the ftrong ftupor that had feized her faculties when the reality of this fuppofed tifiori'had taken place, ihe now concluded the whole to have been the fiSion of a horrid dream, which, from the anguilh of her mind- and thoughts, had* received a more than common impreffion on her Numbering fpirits. The day was paffed in liftlefs im« patience and anxious hopes and wiflies ; for on its decifion refted her only chance of freedom. She heard the tread of feveral people in the adjoining corridors, and trembled for the t fete of tlie injured Ruithvina, whom fl>e re¬ folved, if poffible, to fee, that by her care and prefence (lie might fupport her thrqugh the humiliating cruelty of fuch a trial; M*d
rfnd for this purpofe (he opened her"chamber door, and was proceeding down the gallery, when flie fou^d her paffage flopped, and herfelf obliged to return again tocher apart* meut$ * for the guards, placed at every portal uf the corridors, peremptorily forbade^ her paffing* lc I am then indeed, a prifoner,^ fighec! Rofaline, doling again the door ; u and the injured Baronefs, in this hour ,of oppreffioa and tyranny, is dented the poor confolatioi* ©fa friend to fupport her in a moment of fuch injuftice and infult P* Several hours paffed flowly ons even Jannetta did not appear; and her impatience to know the fate of the Baronefs became eve» painful to endure. Evening and twilight at kngth came on ^ doubt lefs all was decided* She was on the point of once more trying to make her way to the prefence of Lady Ruithvina, when the door opened and Jeffica haftily entered* m 5 ** Hafte%
** Haften, Lady Rolaline," (he exclaimed, m from thefe inhofpitable towers; the Baronefs waits for you at the Caftle gates, and only the chance of this moment can> iecure your efcape/* ** Heavens! 1 * exclaimed Rofaline, " ha& the Lady Ruithvina quitted Urbandine ?'* ** She has," replied Jeflica; " but there i$^ not an inftant to lofe, my Lotxi is now en- gaged on the north battlements; and (hould you no ttakead vantage of tins moment, his return will prevent the poffibility of your departure." Rofaline looked at Jeflica with furprife* but faid nothing; and haftily wrapping, around her a long cloak* (he took the arm. of Jeflica, and together they quitted the apartment. The galleries were ipeedily feft behind, and in filence Jeflica conduded the- Lady Rofaline to a flight of fpiral flairs tha% kd from a turret of the fouth corridor,- and opened upon the veftibule of the hall gates* The
The agitation of Rofaline was extreme * and as (he once more beheld herfelf in the courts of the Caftle, and near the portculHs poftern, ihe foftly whifpered her com¬ panion— ** Where is the Baronefs l" " Without the walls of the Caftle,'^ Jeflica replied ^ " where, to avoid fufpicion,* the waits for us. Courage then, dear Lady, and we fhall fooa be ia fafety." They were huTryrng r towards the fmall poftern, when the hopes of Rofaline were cruihed by the unwelcome appearance of the Ihron, and the fudden glare of his torches, which flopped their further progrefs; and Otho, pointing to the defpairing Rolaline,. fternly commanded his people to convey her again to the interior of the Caftle^ Aroufed from her terrors to fome degree ©f courage, Rofaline aflumed a dignified command of perfon as the proudly quef- £ 6 tioned!
tioned—*" By what right, my Lord, do you prefume to detain me here ?** * c By a right which, as your guardian, I retain over vour adions/* renlied the Baron* ** and which you will find both dangerous and ufelefs to difpute, fince there are no means to free you from the power I am in¬ veftcd with by the will of your late father/* ** I acknowledge,'* haughtily replied Rofli- litie,.** no guardian but the Baronefs of Urbandine; nor will I fuffer any other to affqme a right which belongs alone to her. Open your gates inftantly !'* flie courageously , faid to the caftellain. * * * c Touch them at your peril \ n furioufly exclaimed Otho; u when I give command, they fliall yield, not eife/* Then turning to his guards, he added, " Tremble, ye flaves I longer to delay the performance of my will I Condud the Lady St, Ofwythe to her own apartments ¥* Further refiftance was in vain, and the latter was in m inftant hurried through the courts
courts, and through the hall to her formeT prifon, for fuch it now too clearly appeared; and from fo open and undaunted a ftretch of defpotic power, Roialine was too iiirely convinced that (he had every thing to dread, fince ftie was now deprived even of the fen> blance of the Baronefs'^ protedion, and ex- pofed, with not even a hope of fuccour, to the lawlefs oppruTion and fuccefsful villany of, the triumphant Otho, Her only hope of fafety now /efted with herfelf ; and though deprived of every means of aid, (he refolved not to fink under the weight of her afflidions, but re-animate her fortitude to refiftance, and endeavour to procure her en- largement from a tyranny that threatened her with danger- fiom which no human affift^nce could releafe htr. She had not long re-entered her apart¬ ments, before the Baron made his appear¬ ance. She did not now tremble at his pre¬ fence, for the dark-veiled treachery of his charader was revealed to her knowledge; and
and a ftrong fenfe of indignation and ia» fuited virtue overcame every other feeling. bis fight occafioned in hex thoughts* u Rofaline,*' he exclaimed, as he ap¬ proached her, with a look of cruelty and fuc¬ cefsful triumph depidured in his counte¬ nance, ** you are at length in my powers and nothing hinders you from being indiifo- lubly mine but the mummery of prieftcraft- I come not now, as formerly, a fuppliant fuitor for your favour, nor need you be told that there my power and will are abfofote and irrefiftible $ therefore, if you defire to infure the continuance of die love of Otho* youi muft unhefitatingly meet him to-morrow at the altar* or dread the eonfequences that at refufal may occafion/* * * ** My Lord," replied Rofaline, with calm firmnefs, <c you have already received my final refolution on thb fubjed; and it would be needlefs to fuppofe that any inducement* either of apprehended danger, or the reverfe^ can now fhake my fixed determinations* and
and though yon have taken an linjnftifiabic advantage of the unfufpeding truft repofed in the Baronefs of Urbandine, and, from a nominal title only, prefbmed to give yourfeif a claim to controul my adions, I muft un* deceive you fo far as to affure you that no authority, however fnperior, no danger, however near or preffmg, (ball induce me to yield a compliance to your demands,, or ac* cept a title which alone belongs to the deeply wronged Lady Ruithvina. And though your Lordihip, with lawlefs power, may trample im the rl 1 ts of thofe who are compelled to own you f way, you would da well to remember that the will of Rofaline St. Ofwythe is free t and cannot be fuo> moned to yournfurped tribunal. She may„ indeed, for a time be unjuftly fettered in her perfon ; but her mind (hall ad with the free« dom of unreftrained truth* which now in¬ cites her to declare, that did not her abhor~ fence of your crimes fill her heart with dif- guft and averfion, no power, no infiided mifery, however dreadful, fhould compel her to
to become the wife of htm who was tlm father of the man (he will for ever confider herfelf as ftcredly betrothed to, though Fate has now fundered them never to meet again t nor will fhe ever give to another Rcfaim to her duty nnd love, which is only Conftantine's* p»d fo fh$ll continue to remnin till the grave clofes her eternally from life, and tenders aE dtftinftfon forever at an end/* Tlie Baron liftened with the utmoft afto* niflbment to this refolute anfwer, and paufed, , in confufion and difappointment, how to reply; for h& felt awed by the fuperior powei of virtue that brightly Jfaone in^ the adions and perfon of his intended vidim* , * f You .cannot poflibly need a ftronger prbof of my honourable regard, lovely Rofaline, than the offer of my hand—an» offer which, in the ruined ftate of your for** tuae%it would heobftinacy in you toperfiftto Iefufe, fince it is un^ceffary for me to repeat* that yon have no fooger a home to receive^ or
or a friend to (belter your unproteded ftate from the ftorms and dangers to which your delicate form and matchlefs beauties were never defigned to be expofed." ** You miftake, my Lord," proudly re¬ plied Rofaline j «* the Abbey of St, Ofwythe is a (belter fpperfor to my wifhes j and you mnft forgive me if I thus openly difavow all credence to the report of the Baron of Caftle* nuco, when, to enfnare a helplefs creature committed to his ficred truft, to the ruin that was concealed beneath the treacherous inafkof friendfhip, he would in idea mly % rob me of an inheritance which I am undoubted heitefs of: neither can he wonder if, after the deception he, on a former occafion, ftooped to pradife, I (hould confefs that his words have loft their effeds nor are they longer confidered but as falfe dclufions, meant to betray my unfiling nature to a wretched compliance with your Lordflnp's purpofes; but ufelefs was the mean afper« lion, fince there is happily in exiftence in* difputable proofs of the truth and honour of &*y
my fufficient to overwhelm with (hame his infolent revifers, and puniih with convidion df their guilt, the oppreffors of a helplefe, injured orphan/* ** Produce thofe proofs then," interrupted the Baron, u and fave yourfelf, if you can, from that power which, but Tor my inter* ference, would long ere this have crufhed you/* Her infulted feelings had fupported Rofaline through her fpirited reply, and the firm reliance of her heart upon the word /and honour of her now fainted father,hadgi vea ber courage to maintain her difputed rights, fince it was become an incumbent duty that ftie Ihouid not lightly yield her claim to the poffeffions of her parent, whofe facred cha~ rader would eife ftand impeached* From this caufe, and from the encouragement which the recolkded folemn affuranees Sir Alfred in his laft moments of exiftence had given her, that (he was really the heirefs of St. Ofwythe's domain, (he had refolved not to
to refign her juft pretenfions to the birth¬ right (he doubted not (he was born to in* herit: but the bitter convidion that (lie could not prove her claim by producing the demanded proofs, now ftruck forcibly on her memory 1 and fighing deeply, flie mentally confeffed herfelf the fad %idim of unknown treachery and intricate myftcry. Her fate was toofurdy clouded and obfcured beyond all human (kill to difcover or unravel; fince Ihe now found that if the Abbey was frau¬ dulently claimed by another, (lie was de- fpoiled of the means of doing herfelf juftice, or of clearing the fame of her wronged fire, of whofe truth and honour it would have been Ireafon to her heart's affedions to fuffer even a doubt to arife in her mind* She knew, according to his own words, the demefne of St. Ofwythe had defcended to «Sir Alfred from a diftant female branch of its valiant anceftors; but every other ac¬ count that pertained to the proofs of her own inheritance, were loft in the melancholy certaiuty
certainty of his death, who alone could have proved the reality of lifer claims, fince the papers he had !£ft, that might have done fo$ k was too evident had been plundered by the unknown claimant, and that daimant was, according to the Baron*s report, the heirefs of Edmondville, the forgery of whofe proceedings were too apparent to admit of doubt, eife wherefore fhould (he, niaiked in fccrecy* fteal upon a pofleflion that, were ftie the lawful iuheritreft of, fhould Iwre been ppenly difputed ? The Baron, watching every turn in tht - countenance of Rofaline, almoft read the tenor of her moft inward thoughts, as he thus continued-*** *< I will now inform you, Lady Rofaline, that you muft no longer attempt to confider the foreft of St, Ofwythe asyourown**4t bat this day received its rightful oiiftrefs, whofe claims are lawful and indtfputabie ; and bui for my protedion, yourfelf might become amenabk
amenable to the juftice of thofe you I confefs, undefignedly and innocently wronged: .but as my rank and power guard you from their enraged purfuit, you are yet fafe from their vengeance; and that yon continue to remain fo, muft depend entirely on yourfelf I will allow you three days to confider my propofal, at the end of which period, you either become the Baronefs of Caftlenuco, or muft exped to be refigned io the prior claims of thofe who demand the future difpofal of your deftiny. Weigh welt my offers; and remember that in your defo¬ late ftate, you have no other friend but Otho, no other reliance but in a willing compliance with his wifhes, which can alone preferve you from the dreadful eonfequences of a fate you dream not of/* ** I rely on the merciful care of an omni¬ potent Being/* interrupted Rofaline, with animated firmnefs; ** nor do I need the de- fpifed pity of Otho to fave me from thofe evils he threatens, fince, without divine per- million, they cannot happen; but were they real,
real, the mind of confcious reditude will re* fign itfelf fecurely to the difpenfations of Providence, and ivait with patience the end of its probation. I know full wehV* fhe added, after a momentary paufe, u that from the pity or humanity of the Baron of Caftle¬ nuco nothing is to be expeded, I there¬ fore do not deign to demand my right to leave the Caftle of Urbandine, be* caufe affured of a refufal; and fince the freedom of mental will is all that is left me, I will ufe it to affure you firmly and foiemnly, that I never will accede to your demands, or confent to fink myfelf to that laft ftage of human degradation, by making myfelf fo guilty a creature as becoming the wife of a man my foul abhors, in whofe breaft the voice of confeience cannot excite remorfe for the injuftice of his condud, not only to a friendlefs orphan, whom he ftiould rather pity and refped, than feek to deftroy, but to a ftill more injured being*, whofe rare vir* tues and exemplary charader ought to have fecured
fecured her the efteem and love of an apof¬ tate hufband." Rofaline was foon compelled to repent the unguarded expreffions of her words; for the Bamu, feiaung both her arms, with a look exprefiive of rage, irony, love, and triumph, in hurried accents exclaimed-™* ** Thou art a fweet moralizer; and fince, fo fearlefs, thou canft brave the anger of thine oau Otho, he will reward himfelf, proud beauty! for the fcom he has fo patiently endured/'—He caught, her hand to his lips, and covered them with kiffes, which Rofa- * line in vain ftrugglcd to prevent.—** And fince you have resolution," he continued, u fo bbftinately to percft in your refufal, the peril of your future punilbment be on your¬ felf, who have juftly provoked the eonfe¬ quences that follow. I once defigned you the honour of my alliance ; but the title of wife you have refigned a claim to, and muft fubmit
fubmit to another equally gratifying to mf wifhes/' * * - He clafped his arms around her, and would forcibly have imprinted a kifs on her cheek; but the infulted Rofaline, with a , ftruggle that only the agony of her indig¬ nant feelings ^ould haveoccafioned,fnatched her arms horn his libertine grafp, and fud¬ denly drawing the (hort dagger from the (heath of his veft, firmly prefented its. point to her heart, and retreating from the amazed Otho towards the turret clofet, (lie firmly pronoun- ced—-** Approach me, and I will bury this fteeldeepinmy heart! You have forced me to the extremeft defperation of mifery: mf foul can endure no more, and this plunge will free me from your opprcfling tyranny and injuftice. Stir but a fingle ftep towards this aprtmentyand it (hall teach you that a foul of innate virtue is immoveable in its * principles, nor can it be perverted or fub¬ dued ; forit will rather meet a felf-inflided deaths than yield topollution and dishonour/* She
uttered thefe words, as retreated within the portal of the clofet, with the em¬ phatic energy of dignified innocence ; and the Baron, amazed, and awed from his de* fign, did not dare approach her: when, find¬ ing herfelf within the oratory, fhe haftily clofed the door, and ftrongiy bolted it within; and ftaggering ftili further into the chamber, funk, exhaufted and fainting, upon a couch that fortunately broke the violence. of her fall.
vol. ui. CHAP
gaw»a»gBeuii!!a t jai i E i J!jg-^ ^
v^JEjl/i,t • AV# * E Yc Powers! ** Why Sx'd you not a brand on Tieafon's front, ** That we might know t'avoid periidious mortals ?** Dbnnis, " Gbofts ride on the ftorm to-night: (mtt are their voFces ** between the gujh *f wind! for their fongs are of other *< woilds." 08SIAN» ** Thou haft a grim appearance, and thy face *' Befpeaks com mand in it," ShaKESTSARE, l\OSALINE for fome time continued in a ftate of fufpended faculties; but as foon as ftie became fenfible of the late tranfac* tions, fhe threw herfelf on her knees in fervent
fervent gratitude to Providence ; and kiff* ing the dagger with a fmile of defpair, flie, deeply fighing, exclaimed— * c You then are my laft, beft, only friend '/*~and concealing it in her garments, Ihe refolved never to part with it. For a length of time (he continued deeply to revolve in her mind her prefent dangerous fituation, whilft almoft every former evil feemed chafed from her thoughts, in the re- fledion of thofe that now awaited her; and to efcape, if poffible, from the ruthlefs Otho, now employed her moft determined refolutions: but to fly to the Abbey was im¬ poffible, fince it appeared too plain that flie was indeed deprived of this Lft retreat; and Ihouid fhe even obtain her liberty, it could no longer afford her fecurity, or flielter her from the dreaded purfuit of the Baron t or even were fhe again to enter its loved and venerated interior, it was but too poffible, from the awful warnings (lie had received, f 2 that
that (lie might expofc herfelf to the unknown dangers of her fecreted foe :—fhe reeolWicd alfo the words of the myftctious manu- Icript—■" Shun the heirs of the Houle of Edniondville P* It was the poffcflbrs of that Houfc, (lie doubted not, who vvere the'Cnemies of her fa¬ ther j it was the hcirefs of that Houfe (lie her¬ felf muft avoid as a foe, and from the Baron's report (he now concluded, was the fraudulent fpoiler that meant to difpoffefs her of her inheritance of St. Ofwythe. Roialine vainly heaved the ligh of regret to the mifeiy of her myfterious deftiny; and owned that fince all human chance of d \f~ covering the $ue to its dark labyrinth was hopelefs-, Ihe muft refign herfelf patiently to the effedsof that powerful villany (he was too furcly the.vidim of. She remembered that the cftate of Malcolm Tower, vvhich her father pofleffed in Scotland, ftili afforded her a home j but as the papers of Sir Alfred that alluded
alluded to his patrimonial concerns, were ali deftroyed, ihe did not even know to what qua; ter of that kingdom to cli:eft her flcps, fhoukhlhe e^en gain her freedom ; and in was but too probable that if the Abbey was now iii the hands of another, her old faithful. dependants were dii miffed, and any hope of their ailiftance melcfs to entertain : even the faithful Jannetta ihe had not feen fince the preceding day ; and it now appeared but too clearly that the Baron had deprived her of this only dependant true to her interefts, that every chance or fcheme for her efcape might be totally prevented. The conjedure was but too juft, and Jannetta had been peremptorily forbidden to enter the apart¬ ments of her Lady, who was no.v attended by a ftrange female, and her meals femd by the page of Otho—a creature devoted to the interefts of his matter, and the t o ready in- flrument of his (hanicful plcafures. Some days paffed in a dead an J liftLfs calm, and Rofaline was left to the quiet, f 3 unbroken
unbroken pefleffion of herfelf and thoughts, for the Baron never came near her apart¬ ments ; and (lie now began to hope that he had given over his cruel defigns, and had en* tirely forgot her. Feelinga degree of cafe and confidence again return to her heart, (lie re¬ folved to try how far her hope was juftified $ and for this purpofe, covering her head with a, fong mourning veil, die ventured to open the door of die antechamber, and was proceed¬ ing to crofs it in her approach to the gal¬ lery, when the page, who was now a fta* tioned fentinel at the entrance of her apartments, rudely demanded wfahber lbs Was going. " Am I then fubjed to your contropt ?** haughtily pronounced Rofaline, " Forgive the duty, Lady, which renders obedience harfh," replied the page, bowing low with affeded humility j **but as the fer- vant of my Lord the Baron, his commands are abfolute, and I dare not difpute them 5 nor muft any one have entrance or egrefs from
from your apartments without my fpecial notice/* Rofaline caft on the man a look of dig¬ nity and proud fuperiority that feemed for a moment to awe him to refped ; for ihe was deceimined to uncover, if 'poffibie, the ex- t<<:£ oi her confinement, and his power to detain her. * 6 Your's, Sir," die laid, with a command¬ ing majefty of manner, and elevation of voice that made the officer (brink within himfelf, " your's, Sir, Js an office well fuited to your abilities; but as the ward of the Baroneis of Urbandine acknowiedg s no fuperior claims of her obedience to any other than her guardian, fhe demands a free paffage from this caftle to the prefent refidence of the Lady Ruithvina.*' ' ** That, Madam, cannot be: the Lady Baronefs no longer rcfides here, therefore has forfeited her power over thofe that do; nor dare I permit your Lady(1 up to pafs the - F 4 gates
gates of the fortrefs, without the leave of my Lord the Baron. If it fhall pleafe you to walk on the terrace, or the ramparts, I am allowed to attend your Ladylbip to either, but beyond thefe you muft not attempt to e-o " Rofaline, inwardly pleafed with this fmall privilege, refolved not to refufe it, fince it might open fome unknown profped of cfcape, that while (he continued to confine herfelf to her own chamber?, ihe could never hope to obtain a chance of. It was already evening, and only a faint twilight remained in the heavens, when (he fignified her inten* tion to the page of walking on the ramparts that overlooked the foreft $ and for this pur- pofe, fhe entered the gallery, and was haften* ing down the ftairs, followed by Albert, when (lie found the hall was filled with the Knights and Cavaliers feated at the evening banquet.
To
To enter the latter was now impoffible, without fubjeding herfelf to the infuits and notice of the Baron and his riotous affo- ciatesj the only other way by which (lie could gain the terrace or the ramparts un- molefted, was by the private, unfrequented ftairs of the eaftern corridor; but no induce¬ ment was fufiicicntly powerful to tempt her again to approach near that fcene of compli¬ cated horror and guilt. The page, feeing her irrefolutton, concluded (lie meant not, as it was now quite dark, to take advantage of the air, and, walking to fome diftance from her, awaited in the lobby gallery her re¬ turn to her chamber. Rofaline, however, was determined to u!e the little freedom (he had obtained, in the faint hope that flic might elude the vigilance of her guard, and, undifcovered, gam the oppofite gallery, which ihe knew led to iha Baronef&'s late apartments, and to the fecret recedes of the Caftle ; and could ihe be fo fortunate as to hide herfelf in one of thefe f 5 mazy
mazy labyrinths, it was even poffible they would conceal her till the firft purfuit was over. After taking feveral turns up the corridor,, ihe placed herfelf upon the ftone bench that ran along the baluftrade, and remained for fome time in fufpenfe and hefitation to put her fcheme in execution, left the page (hould ftill oppofe her further progrefs,, unlefs him¬ felf accompanied her. She caft her eyes unconfcioufty on the guefts of the Caftle, as they fat with the Baron caroufing in the hall beneath her; they all feemed freely to have partaken of the fpoils of the banquet; and in the Baton (he beheld a degree of inebriation and favage ferocity* that made her tremble with apprehenfion, and turn her eyes away from the unpleafing fight with difguft and abhorrence ; whilft the unexpreffed figh of her heart, though it (poke not, feemed to fay, " Ah how unlike my murdered Conftantine are the condud and manners
manners of his tyrannic father !'*—Ha feemed deeply engaged in clofe converfation with a cavalier near him; and in the ceffa¬ tion of the peals of laughter that echoed to the lofty roof, fhe caught the found of her own name as it was wafted upwards, and now alarmed her fears, and excited her ut¬ moft attention. She leaned ftill clofer to the fpaces of the open fretwork of the baluftrade, and with aroufed and trembling agitation, liftened to the increafing found of their voices, as they uttered fome words, whofe meaning rendered her ftill more impatient to hear the remainder, ** You will not marry her," exclaimed a cavalier that fat next the Baron s *« wherefore ihen delay the gratification of > our wifhes ?** €€ A foolifh trial," replied Otho, <c that I made, convinced me her mind is too high fet to yield on other terms. 1 am re¬ folved to make her mine, and have theiefbre fixed the enfuing morrow for the celebration of our nuptials." f 6 Part
Part of this fpeech was fpoken in an un¬ der tone, and what remained was quite drowned in the fudden (bout of rude mirth inat uuuifiuui iijc uiuuiiis ui icvcra* young warriors that fat at the other end of the table. As foon as Rofaline was again able to diflinguifli, flie heard the former cavalier thus reply—» <* 'Tis ftrange, my Lord Baron, that you, who formerly were not wont to be negledful of the gifts of Fortune, fliould refolve to marry this girl, this unknown, portionlefs Rofaline, who, it fliould feem, has only beauty to excufe your dotage/' fe By Heaven P* cried the Baron, violently ftriking the table with his hand, "the beau¬ ties of this portionlefs girl, as you think her, might well infpire a faint with love, and withdraw his thoughts from ceieftial vifions to earthly realities."—The Baron paufed; then leaning over the table to be ftill nearer his attentive auditors, thus conti¬ nued—" All of you know that princely Edward
Edward has here inveftcd me wit& fovcre^gn fway ; and while Albion continues to war againft herfelf, this caftle's fealty is bound to the interefts of the Houfe of York : but fliould H^nry ever regain the throne of Britain, I am no longer the Lord of Urban¬ dine and its proud towers, which, with its fortunes, muft be yielded to the cloifteredhy¬ pocrites of St. Auftin's Monaftery. Attend! This poor, friendlefs, unknown Rofaline, as you fuppofe her, is a treafure worth a million of you all; and let mc but once be legally freed from Ruithvina, (lie will trebly overbalance the lofs of thefe fea-' girt turrets, for flic is ------" Here the voice of Otho funk fo low s that echo could not catch the found that iffued from his lips; and whatever were the words he uttered, they were delivered with fuch extreme caution and fear, left any but thofe he defigned to honour with his confidence ihouid overhear his utterance, that hisguefts were obliged to lean ftill nearer over the table
table, that thev might not lofe the heat¬ ing of what was expreffed only in a tone of whifper. " Ha I is (be fo ?*' cried the foremoft cava* lier, ftarting up j ** then by St. George I fwear to affift you, (hould you need my aid." ** So will I,** exclaimed another. <c So will all," re-echoed the whole party, fave one Knight only, whom Rofaline per¬ ceived to be the lame that had firft difturbed her in the purfuit of Queen Margaret. His form was manly and commanding, and his perfon (he diftinguilhed to be handfome and dignified. He did not rife from his feat, nor even join in the riotous confufioa of the mirth of his companions. u Wherefore, noble Commander," ex¬ claimed another warrior, * € fhould you delay your wifhes ?" , " Aye, aye, let it be done this very night/* cried feveral others* tl By the valour of Knighthood,
Knighthood, (lie fhall be your's this inftant. Come on then; lead to the chambers of your fair bride/' €< But hold !*' cried the Baron to his fierce, inebriated companions, who had thrown down their goblets, and were milling to the ftairs of the gallery, regardlefs of his voice* till, affuming a tone of imperious command, he called on them loudly to defift : and at length, obferving the frowns of anger that were knit in the brows of their Chief, they turned from their defign, and again ap¬ proached their fea£s. Rofaline, affured of whom the meaning of theiralarming fpeech related to, would have quitted the difgufting fcene, fo hateful to her delicacy, had not the danger to which fhe was expofed warned her to ftay, that (lie might, if poffible, inftrud herfelf how to avoid it. Ail her utmoft efforts, however, could not enable her to diflinguifli the pur¬ port of the Baron's former concluding fpeech; and when (lie had perceived the fudden
fudden approach of the cavaliers, whofe dreaded purpofes they had openly con- fefled, terror and alarm- for her prefent fafety overcame every other remembrance and feeling; and fhe had nearly arrived at the Gothic portal of the eaftern chambers, when its doors flowly opened, and a form, half enveloped in the mifty glooms of the interior of the dreadful chamber, prefented itfelf; its pale and ghaftly vifage rendered ftili more horrible by the faint and dif¬ tant refledions of the lights from the hall below. Rofaline funk againft the wail, horror- ftruck and motionlefs. The fpedre waved for her to enter the apartment; but all power to ufe her limbs was denied her, and in an inward, inarticulate tone of voice, ex¬ prefllve of defpair, fhe foftly ejaculated— *< Oh Conftantine, my worfhipped Lord 1 not even in death are you unmindful of your loft, ruined Rofaline!" A hollow
A hollow figh, breathed from within the chamber, ftartled her j and as the fpedre ftill beckoned her to enter its awful precinds, flie tried to do fo, but fell motionlefs to the floor. A deep*toned, impreftive voice now funk upon her ear— ** Avoid the ruin that awaits thee, and haften from the inhofpitable towers of Ur¬ bandine !"—The door turned on its hinges, and then clofed with a violence that aroufed Rofaline from her fufpended torpor. She had not quite fainted, though terror had robbed her of her ftrength to move; but the increafing confufion in the hall, and the frequent repetition - of hei name echoing from below, gave her almoft fuper- natural courage : for, regardlefs of what fhe did, fhe rufhed from the door of the terrific chambers, and entering once more the fre¬ quented galleries, was paffing haftily the head of the grand ftaircafe, when her former alarms were increafed to agony, as the beheld the
the Baron and his licentious, riotoui com¬ panions afcending towards the corridor, who, as the torches of the pages gleamed full on their countenances, declared their approach to be the forerunner of fome dreadful pur* pofe dangerous to her peace. Harafled between the horrors (lie had jftownfrom, and thofe that were advancing (for Otho had feen her as (he paffed, and loudly called on her name as he daggered more quickly up the fteps), (he darted down the weftern angle gallery. The voice and ir* regular movements of the Baron gained upon her ear, and convinced her (he was f urfued j $nd flsj?, if poffible, quickened her pace, rill the outftretched arms of the guard oppofed ber paffage. But even thb impediment fhe avoided ; and hurfting from his graip, con* tinned for a length of way to outfpeed her purfuers, till entering a dark paf¬ fage that branched to the left, it brought her, by a circuitous turning, to the fouthern corridor; and (lie -;rived at the door that opened upon fome of the chambers of ftate, into
into which (be ran, unconfcious where (he was, till, entering a magnificently furnilhed apartment, (lie beheld the Lady Paulina feated, and furrounded by her women, ** Save me—Oh feve me 1 J * (he wildly ex¬ claimed, and funk, on the back of a feat near the fofa on which the Countefe reclined^ unable any longer to fupport herfelf. *' Who is it,** exclaimed Paulina haugh* tily, ** that prefumes to break thns rud^y on the hour of my ietiremenj ?** "One that fues for your pity$nd protec¬ tion I'* almoft inarticulately replied RoftUne t fainting and fmkjng to the earth with the £xceffive tremblings of terror and affright. ** |s this th$ unrivalled, matchlefs beauty that d^red to rob Paulina of the lord of her affe&ionsf* imperioufly demanded the haughty Countefs, as, with glances of fcrutiny and triumph, (he beheld the altered, pity- moving {arm before her, whofe pale, an* guiflied looks, and difordered* grief-worn countenance
countenance demanded the tendered aid of compaffion and friendfliip. Paulina, proudly rifing from her feat, approached the fuffering fuppliant, and feiz¬ ing her arm, harfhly pronounced—** Wretch! *tis thou, a worm whom my power could crufh to death, that haft robbed me of my Urbandine, and dared to be the rival of OtluVs Countefs! Remembering this, what pitycanft thou prefume to hope^ fliould deign to fbew thee ?** ** Such only as common humanity md juftice fhould teach you the pradke of; iuch only as the haplefs Rofaline would afford if, like her, neceflity had compelled you, in the hour of danger, to feek in her protedion a flielter from the lawlefs purfuits of hateful vice, and unmerited infolent op¬ preffton.*' Paulina paufed; and the bent of her thoughts feemed, in thetranfuion of a mo* ment, to undergo a complete revolution: fome
fome fudden mental rcfledion feemed to have changed the inflexible nature of her proud heart to the fofter feelings of huma¬ nity £ for, cafting on the defpairing Rofa¬ line a foothing look ofmildnefs and com* paffton, (he faid— " Forgive, Lady Rofaline, the feeming barbarity of my condud ; but my mind is tmfettied, indeed at times di (ordered, and I frequently know not what I utter.**—-Here lhe heaved a deeply drawn, unconfcious figh. " Believe me, though the unhappy colour of our deftinies has hitherto fundered us from the claims of friendfliip, 1 feel for, and la¬ ment the cruelty of your fituation^ for with Ibame 1 acknowledge myfelf not unac¬ quainted with mv guardian's daring defigns : but as my father's will (the late Lord Ru¬ dolph of Othin) gives the Baron an ablblute authority over my adions, ] dare not openly cenfure a condud that 1 difapprovc, nor outwardly feem the friend of diftreffed vir¬ tue i butbeaffured that in this unexpefted and
and fortunate interview, I (hall experience the moft fincere pOeafure, fince it gives me the inexprdlible fatisfaaion of prcferving from danger a lovely being, whole mtSd- fuffermg gentlepefs has, with fuch uncom¬ mon fortitude, endured the evils that en- compaffed her„" Here Paulina again paufed, and whi(per- ing one of her attendants, the latter haftily quitted the apartment, whilft Rofaline, foothed and encouraged by a behaviour fo nnexpeded, b£gan to recover from the dreadful agonies of her mind, and a faint glow of re-animated hope and courage once more mantled her pale countenance. She gracefully thanked her new friend, though not without an emotion of wonder, who thus continued— * "With grief I muft inform you, Lady Rofaline, that having, by a means unnecef- fary to mention, become acquainted with the Baron*s defigns, I know, notwithftandirig 4 yom
your fortunate efcape frcta prefeife danger^ his intentions aim at your future peace ; and to-morrow (fo he has purpofed)fees you hk bride indiffolubly* unlefs fome fpeedier jmeans be found to free you from his dread¬ ful purpofes j for were you even to afift the ceremony, you would find your appeals and proteftations in vain, fince the Prieft that is to perform it, is devoted to the interefts attd will of the Baron, and will not regnrd our entreaties, or difapprobation of the tyranny that will be exerted to force you to compli* ance with their wifhes and defigns :*— neither can thefe apartments prove your fanduary, fmce Otho will here doubtlefs feek you—'tis only immediate flight that now can fave you. If then you will deigri to confide in one who has been too long infenfible of your tranfeendent merits an inftant chance of efcape prefents itfelf, and you will have given mc the delightful privi¬ lege of preterving you from the threatened dangers that here, if you remain but a few hours longer, will unavoidably overwhelm you j
you; if, on the contrary, you accept of freedom from Paulina, it is this moment in your power, and the me^ns already pro- video." *' Madam, can it be f Is it indeed pof¬ fible ?'* exclaimed Rofaline in a wild tranf¬ port of fudden joy. " Oh Lady Paulina! will you indeed protcd a friendlefs orphan in this moment of fevere calamity and dan* ger?" Rofaline paufed between fufpended joy and doubtful hope; (lie could fcarcely be¬ lieve Paulina really meant as (lie expreffed; and ihe fixed her eyes ftedfaftly upon the latter, to difcover if indeed fhe might rely on this fo aftonifliingly changed deportment, Paulina unflirinkingly met the gaze of Rofaline's eyes with unaltered looks,— ««I fee," fhe replied, " you doubt my truth, and my former condud juftifies fufpicion. At icaft, however, you are yourfelf con¬ vinced of the danger that purfues you, if you here
iere remain; but to prove my concern and regard for your happinefs, and that I had not been negledful of your fafety, even before this interview, I had provided for your efcape from the dreadful defigns of Othb. If, therefore, you will take advantage of my offered friendfhip, and fearlefsly commit your¬ felf to my directions* you will at the bafe of the north cliff, find a boat and guides ready to convey you to a place of fecurity, and Chriftiana fliall conduct you to the beach of the fea, far from the pvrils of Urbandine.** Rofaline, diflracled with fears for the coufequencvs, fhould the remain in the Caftle, yet ftill in doubt and iufpicion of the truft lhe nri^ht repofc in Paulina, wavered ho \ to act. H,-r d m^er, if lhe ftaid, flie had no hope or evaltngj and if (1)2 •wen*-, might ihe not bo ag,im betrayed bdvk more iec. rjly to the power of tic Baron? Yet it was ungenerous to think Paulina capable of an adion (o bale and un- iexual, or to fulpect the fince] ky of the only vol, in. g ofier ,
offer that could have power to faye her^*— A moment's panfe convinced her of the cer* tain ruin that awaited her, fhould the com¬ ing morrow difcover her in the Caftle ; and with the firm reliance of trufting innocence, (he took the hand of Paulina, which Hie fer«* vently tmpreffed with a dilute. <c By this token," (lie firmly pronounced, " I foiemnly commit myfelf to God's and r your protedion. He that infpired you with the benevolent defign of fuccouring the diftreffed and helplefs, fhall reward you as you are fmcere 5 whilft the never»ceafing prayers of an oppreffed and friendlefs orphan ihall, when far away, and buried for ever from the fociety of the world, be offered at the throne of grace for the long continued happinefs of her only bencfador and pre* ferver." Paulina feemed affeded; for the tears ftreamed down the cheeks of the haplefs Rofaliiie as (lie fiuifhed her fentence, and preffed
pteffed the hand of Paulina, who turn¬ ed afide her head as fhe flowly pro¬ nounced-—" The mother of God proted you I" for flie was now unable longer to behold the anguiflied agitations and folemn appeal of her too unfufpeding vidim, and (lie trembled left, overcome with pity, fhe fliould be tempted, by its influence, from her ruthlcfs purpofes: but flie was fpared *the trial; for Rofaline, flowly receding from the apartment, foon difappeared through its portal, and the momentary re¬ morfe vanifhed with the fight of the pity- moving objed. Taking the arm of Chriftiana, Rofaline onc£ more, with caution, entered the gallery, and ftepping forward, carefully infpeded, as far as her light would permit, the diftant cor¬ ridors ; but all feemed quiet, and a death¬ like ftillnefs had fucceeded the late fcem of terror and commotion. Fearful, however, that her light might difcover her to fome ftragglcr of the pailages, flig defired Chrif- & 2 tiana
tiana place a nich of the vaulted window of the gallery, which being done, they haftencd, by the (hade of ifc ri*Hrfi\-f*A Kf»ime nlnnnr fKp> f*nrriAr*r ***** OO.V 1V»«<VVVU WW»*A«»J, »tvu» »•<•** *^U* # >%4.vr( • r~ for a diftant found of foot fteps alarmed and quickened their flight; and Chriftiana, opening the door of a dark porch, led the trembling Rofaline through a fmall vaulted pailage that branched wide from the cor¬ ridors and the inhabited ikies of the Caftle, and was, foe informed the latter, a fecret avenue to the north terrace. It was totally unenlightened; and nc fooner had they en¬ tered, than they heard the increafing found of footftcps paffing from the eaft wing of tlie gallery, and approaching the palfage, where Rofaline, fecret ing herfelf behind a clufler of fmall fluted pillars, refigned all hope of eicape fiom her purfuers, who had doubtlefs k^n her enter here ; for as- ihe call her eyes through a fmall chink, (he be¬ held the rays of a lamp Aiming on the coun¬ tenance of Albert, the Baron's page, and with him, to her increafed amazement, (lie diitinguilhed
diftinguiflicd the form of Jannetta, who held the light ftill lower, to examine the paflage, " My Lady, my dear Lady P r exclaimed the weeping Jannetta, with a voice that was choked with lobs, and cfoplayed that flie was unhappy; ""Oh my dear Lady Roik- Ine, where are you V* " Peace I peace !*' angrily interrupted the page ; " you will betray us if you con¬ tinue thefe cries I This way—this way, I fay 1" Rofaline felt the tendered regret that (lie dared not anfwer the calls of hox humble but faithful companion, on whofe fidelity flie knew flie could have relied ; and much ihe forrowed that flie was denied the fatis¬ fadion of making this affedionate child of nature the partner of her efcape; whilft a tear ftarted to her eye at the refledion that perhaps flic was quitting her for the laft time, and might never again behold her$— for ihe foon alter left the palfage with her g 3 companion,
companion, and entered again the frequent** ed gallery. Not an inftant now was to be loft ; md with as much fpeed as theiotal darknefs of the place would allow, they groped their way along the vaulted paflage, Rofaline, however, could not refrain from inwardly pondering on the appearance of Jannetta at fuch an unexpeded moment - 9 and flie fcarcely knew to what motive to impute fo ftrange an event, unlefs the un¬ fufpeding girl had been compelled to attend the page in his fearch of her miftrefs, for the purpofe of artfully betraying her. Chriftiana now, taking the hand of Rofa¬ line, conducted her down a flight of narrow ftaiis. Arrived at the bottom, fhe croffed a veftibule that received a partial light from "a diftant taper, and approaching an arched door, which opened to the touch of her con- duftrefsj!
dudrefs, Rofaline found herfelf upon the north terrace. A (qw ftars glimmered in the heavens; and Rofaline, perfedly ' remembering where (lie was, advanced to the parapet that overhung the ocean; and, as well as the tremendous height would permit, endea¬ voured to diflinguifli the objeds beneath the caftle cliff. The fea furf appeared troubled, and boif- teroufly driven towards the fhore by the wind, which raged in hollow, loud, refound- ing echoes, and almoft filled the bofom of the haplefs fugitive with terror, and hefita¬ tion to commit herfelf to the ftormy bil¬ lows. But this fenfation of fear was only momentary; for as flie turned her eyes around, arid once more caught a view of the angry, frowning towers of Urbandine, flic trembled to think on t)ie certain ruin that awaited lier, fliould ftie difregard this only chance of h«r efcape, and to avoid which - c 4 fhe
flie felt (he could rather plunge herfelf from off the moft tremendus battlements of the Caftle, and bury herfelf in an eternal grave, than ftay to be the wretched creature that the fucceeding day would make her,— As well as the darknefs would permit, flie diftinguiflicd two forms at the helm of a fmall pinnace, that lay flanting on the fands beneath the wcftern rocks. Chriftiana, af- furing her ihey were her guides, hurried her down the terrace j and they were paffing a fmall black tower, which feemed, from its grated windows, to be a prifon, when Rofa¬ line fancied (lie heard the found of a human voice rife from the earth, and faintly pro¬ nounce her own name. Not doubting but it proceeded frorn fome of the Baron's people in purfuit of her, (he ruihed forwards, re- gardjefs of the watch-pofts that were placed in the loop towers of the terrace, and flop¬ ped not till ihe arrived at the angle poftern of the opening to the cliff*.
" Who .
«'Who-goes there?" loudly pronounced a. harfli-toned voice 5 and Rofaline,. defpair- fog, concluded Paulina had betrayed her, and was unable, from terror, to make any reply. In a moment, however, flie was un¬ deceived ; for Chriftiana, drawing from her finger a diamond ring, (hewed it the warden, and bade him inftantly unbolt the gates.~ The warden examined the flgnet, and re* turned it to Chriftiana. " Mean you to return by this pafs, fair dame ?" he (crutinoufly enquired, fixing on* Rofaliric a look of furprife. " No/* replied Chriftiana, refolutcly,- " we (liall enter through the fouthern gates,. and therefore need i,ot keep you from your reft; the caiUlliia i^uquainted with our intention, and our Lady's orders muft not be difputed/' The waiden now, unfalletiing the poftern,. g 5 admittul.
admitted them through the firft and portals of the gates \ and Rofaline, haftily crofting the bridge of the fort, gained, m fafety,, the oppofite cliffs. Not daring, however, to hope fhe was ie¬ cure, flie flew down the pafs that led to the beach; and when arrived at the bottom, took a grateful leave of her female compa¬ nion as foon as flie had conducted her to the boat, and the latter again returned the ' way fhe had come j whilft Rofaline, forlorn and defolate, entered one of the natural cavi¬ ties of the rocks, to await till the tide came up fufficiently for her guides to put to fea. Here, deeply employed in the mifery of her faddened thoughts, her ears were fuddenly aflailed by the found of foft melody, which, fweiling on the wings of the breezes, fecmed wafted in mid air, and floated along in prolengthened echoes among the reverberating acclivities and excavations
of the cliffs. The drains were more like the touches of heavenly than mortal mufic ; and the laft cadence, as it fwept upon, the wind, feemed breathed by a fuperior being, whofe foul was harmony and melody*. It was only in the paufes of the blaft, anc£ the fliort ceffation of the agitated billows, that Rofaline was enabled to catch the foul- enthralling founds of the invifible mufician* whofe foft notes fofenfibJy lulled her to a pleafing forgetfulnefs of prefent objeds, and charmed her attuned mind with a fweet and melancholy emotion, that fiJed htr eyes* with tender forrow. - The heaven-breathed ftrains fometimes fwelled to the full-toned notes of fublimity ; then as fuddenly funk to the fofter thrillings of ecftatic pky^and ioul- melting harmony, and lor a moment Rofa¬ line's iorrows } ielded to the power of mufic ; and tears of rapture eafed the burthen thafc fo long had opprefled her heart.
o 6 The
The, mufic did not remain ftationary, but feemed, from its founds, to proceed fotnetimes from the hollows and cavities of the dins, which, as it floated wildly along, and became foftencd in diftant rever¬ berations, made her almoft fancy them the exhalations of fpiritual airy beings tuning their fong of nightly praife to their great Creator. Thefe more than common war- blings raifcd in her mind a thoufand fan iaftes of ideal beings; whilft thefe time- repelling, auful cliffs teemed to infpire a momentary Tuggeftian that their rocky grottoes were' the refort of Nereides and fea Syrens, who nightly met in thefe their fecret haunts, to celebrate the glad return of darknefe, and their midnight revelry* This little fidion of imagination, how¬ ever, foon gave place to one more dear to* her faddened foul; and (he could not refrain from indulging in the belief that tlie fup- pofed heavenly mufician v/as the fpirit »£- her murdered Conftantine, whofe (hade now wandered:
wandered around the once loved fpot of its living happinefs and dreadful fuffering* " Perhaps,** flie mentally exclaimed, ** thefe fweet breathings arc the foreboding harbingers of fome awful event. Even ia death his fpirit guards hi* haplefs Rofaline, and thefe folemn ft rains are permitted as a warning forme to prepare to meet my Con¬ ftantine in the regions of happineis and un¬ broken peace/* There was fomething fo balmy in the in¬ dulgence of this melancholy idea, that Ro¬ faline could not difmils it. It gave vent to her forrows j and in tears of tendcrnefs her heart found relief. She wiihed, ihe had long prayed for difiblution. Death was the laft hone, the only real friend (lie had long fighecl for j and to meet fpeedily in heaven thofe dear friends ot her affedions, was a confirmation from wliich no earthly charm could now have power
power to withdraw her thoughts. Life had Jong been a load, tfaxt with enraptured joy (he would willingly have fliaken off for ever, did not the piety of her mind inftrud her, with patient fobmiflion, to await the fiat of eternal mercy, and not wilfully expofe to deftrudion that which was committed to her care, and of which a ftrid account muft hereafter be rendered, fliould fhe volunta¬ rily refign the facred charge. Rofaline was truly the early child of for* row; and fo rapidly had the difaftrous events of her unhappy fate fucceeded each other* that not even an interval of eafe had been granted to her grief-worn heart. But deep and mfurtnountable as was her lofs,. (lie found, from felf-experience, that forrow will not kill, though it may weaken and under¬ mine the health and conftitutfcm of its vic¬ tim—a floiv^ but flie trailed fure, way to free ber from a hateful world, whofe fevere trials had robbed her of happinefs, even of hope*
yim
With the caimnefs of defpair^ (he had of late met the buffets of misfortune with ant undirinking ftrmnefs; and, till this moment, had never experienced the reai luxury of a free indulgence of thofe terrible, overwhelm¬ ing emotions and feelings which continual and unceafing apprehenfion for prefent fafety had fuppreffed, but which the near approach of freedom from, and the unexpeded founds of harmony, had now fo powerfully awakened. As the laft cadence of the in- vifible mulician funk echoing through the rocky caverns, and died away in melancholy fweet notes, a harfft, difcordant voice broke upon her ear, and put to flight the blifsfui charm. The moon, at intervals piercing through the clouds, cait its beams upon the white cliffs ; and Rofaline, by their faint reflections, was enabled to dittiiiguiih her guides, whofe features, as they concluded her down the beach, infpired her with a flight degree of fear and doubt. The
The tide now ferved ; and Rofaline, with fomething of terror, allowed the men to* place her in their fliallow bark, which was, now agiiatcu oy the waters. The men had already daflied their oars* into the foaming billows, when cafting her eyes, as for the laft time, on the hated towers of Urbandine, (lie beheld the white robes of a female leaning over the terrace battlement, whofe repeated motions with h^v arms, which were waved in the air, (hewed flie was anxious of notice ; and in the nonemaiy paufes of the wind, Rofaline's car ditlin- guifhcd the wcll-kiurvn voice of Ju'inctta,, who loudly fliriekcd for her Lady to ftay aad take her with her, Rolaline, convinced it was Jannetta, and feeling that, could it be effedcd, her fociety would indeed be a wel¬ come relief, begged her guides to wa.t till ihe arrived ; but Ruffo, the foremoft, harihly reminded her that they were ftill in danger of being all difcovered, and fliould they delay but a few moments longer, it wa poflibl
poffible the cries of her attendant woukl lead to the knowledge of the place they had efcaped from. Without waiting for Rofaline's affent, they puflied the boat haftily from the fands, and jumping into it, plied their oars with fuch celerity, that Rofaline, in a few moments, beheld herfelf encompaffed by a world of waters, beyond the reach of either friend or enemy ; and though vexed at the difappointment, (he could not but acknow¬ ledge the fooner ihe was beyond the dreaded precinds of the Caftle, the more fecure would be her fafety. Sighing, (he waved her veil to Jannetta, as the laft fad token of her remembrance; and from the velocity with which the pinnace (kim- med on the furface of the waters, ihe was foon unable to defcry her faithful companion and follower, Even the proud battlements of Urbandine began to fade from her fight, and in half an hour became a fpeck of buildings above the furface oi the rifing cliffs, Rofaline now
now calmly refignecl herfelf to her def¬ tiny ; and as the Caftle receded from her view, felt once more the bleffings of regained freedom. The boat, as it fcudded fwiftly forward, kept within the diftance of half a league of the fhore j and although Rofaline was afllired there was no danger, (he could not help feeling apprehenfion as the whelm* . iiig billows burft againft its (hallow (ides, and the white foam of the angry furf fprayed over the deck. The moon, at times, broke through the clouds, and its beams, playing on. the frothy billows, produced an appear* ance fablimely pidurefque and beautiful j. whilft the vivid lightnings cut the waters, and added an awful variety to this* midnight fcene, They had paffed a confiderable time on the ocean, when, as a fmall bay opened upon her view, Rofaline difcovcred the faneb and turrets of a large pile of buildings. Deli- rou^
mus of being informed to whom it belonged, flie made the enquiry of her guides, and re¬ ceived for anfwer that it was the Monaftery of St. Auftin's Sifterhooch Quick as thought, (lie demanded to be inftantly landed, for this was the very haven of her wifhes ; here (he (houtri find her beloved friend, and'in its relhriou^ folitudes, her fa- * ture ays woukl paft in unbroken fecu¬ rity and peace, free from the fnares and oppreffions of Iut malicious foes: but toiler repeated demands for landing her, (he received no proof of obedience; and the bay and Convent alike receded from her view, % without the fmalleft effort to approach either. Alarmed with fears of die fcarce knew what nature, fhe again repeated more pe¬ remptorily her former requeft, but received, with amazement, a poiitive denial from Ruffo, who, in a furly tone, anfwered that lie had his Lady's orders to condud her to a place of fafety; and that as he was anfverable
anfwerable for what became of his charge* flie (Rofaline) fliould not quit him till he had obeyed the commands of his employer.'* u Whither is it you arc inftruded to con¬ vey rae ?" fearfully queftioned Rofaline, now wondering that (he had fo thoughtlefsly committed herfelf to the power of ftrangers, whofe looks and adions did not fpeak them fair: and from this laft account (he eveUj trembled for the event j for the man, rudely replying, faid— * 16 To a feat of my Lady Paulina^, where you will be nobly provided for.** This anfwer had, in its delivery, a tone of Snfolence and equivocation, and in increafing alarm, (he again afked—• " How far diftant are we from the Caftle of Urbandine." " About three leagues,*' replied Ruffo ^ <* and yonder promontory that juts into the k^ is our land-mark $ thither we flees
our courfe, and you will again touch Me ground, if the tempeft that I fee coming on, do not make warm's meat of us." *' Bv St. Georoe- *rwill h^ a difmal one V f replied the other; " and this fpecimen is no flight fample of what is to come." Some large drops'of rain falling on the neck of Roialine, verified the words of the guides; and a loud peal of thunder break¬ ing in tremendous rebounds along the vault of Heaven, rung, in awful reverberations, among the cliffs and rocks; whilft the ful- phureous lightnings blazing acrofs the murky atmofphere, prefented a fearful view of the angry deep, which rolled in mountainous billows, and daflied the little pinnace in a moment to a whirling gulf of waters ;«•» and even the (lout and fearlefs guides threw afide their oars as ufeieh, and gave them¬ felves up as loft. Rofaline calmly leclined herfelf on the feat, and refignedly awaited, with fortitude, the approach of inevitable death. Ci The
The ftorm increafed, and for an hour raged with unabated fury, The boat filled ' with water, and was on the point of finking. The wind and waves, however, ftill drove it towards the fhore. It feemed as if moving back. Rofaline, benumbed, and fleering with the drenched garments that clung to her fkin, at length lay totally fenfelefs.— The faft descending rains beat upon her un** flickered head, difregarded and unfelt— She had heaved a fi^h to the memory of her father and Conftantine; and cloiing her eyes, expeded foon to open them in the re¬ gions of eternity. For fome length of time the thunders continued with increafe of vehemence, till iuddenly they ceafed, as did the rain. The tremendous fwell of the billows began to abate* and at length the boat was waflied upon the lands. Rofaline was raifed from her dreadful couch ; and the men, taking her in their arms, waded through the waters; and (he
flbe once more opening her wearied eyes, found herfelf on kind again ; but all was pitchy darknefs, and indiftinguifliable ob¬ feurity. She was unable to ftand, or even move; and meekly fubmitting to the will of her fierce condudors, they led her for¬ ward, . The darknefs, if poffible, increafed; and Rofaline, as faintly (he exerted herfelf, was unable to perceive a fingle objed. The guides, however, feemed well acquainted with the path, and led her on with fwift nefs* and eafe. After along walk, and the found of the billows becoming fainter and fainter, Ro¬ faline diftinguilhed, froni the hollow moans of the wind amid the branches of the trees, that flie was now in the precinds of a wood, whofe-deep and gloomy folitudes, and al¬ moft impenetrable recedes, impeded the freedom of a paffage, A new terror now took poffeflion of her thoughts, for ihe had for fome time paft felt doubt and fufpicion
of the purpofes of her guides; and with & voice that powerfully expreffed her alarmed feelings, (he feebly demanded,- " Whither will you lead me ?" But ftill file remained unanfwered, till fuddenly flopping, and withdrawing her arm from the fupport of her attendants, (lie again exclaimed— ** Whither do you lead mc ?**—Then added refolutely, " 1 will go no further 1" Ruffo, uttering fome dreadful impreca¬ tions as he again feized the arm of Rofaline, * fternly replied— 46 Lady, this is no place for explanations; at fome little diftance (lands the fabric I have orders to condud you to, Haften forward, ere the tempeft again befet us/* fit Mean you to murder or betray me ?'* fearfully and tremblingly enquired Rofaline, clinging to the body of a fmall tree, to fup¬ port herfelf; for (he now felt terribly affured
tffured that fome evil was defigned and that (be had too incautioufly relied on thf protedion of her enemy 0 ** Refiftance will but provoke your dan* ger!" Ruffo replied fiercely, as he violently unclafped her arm from the tree; u let it iufike you to know that you are now a pri¬ foner, and muft fuhmit to what you will find it a hard matter to efcape from." " A prifoner !'* repeated the now defpair¬ ing Rofaline, " Oh God I am I for ever doomed to be the vidim of deceit and treachery? Oh Paulina! falfe, remorfeicfs, cruel woman 1" She fpoke no more; for this laft blow had ftruck her to the foul, even more than ihe ihivering anguiflied torments (he en¬ dured from the pains of her limbs, drench¬ ed m the waters of the pitilefs ftorm, She became pafiive and u|irefifting to the will of her ftern companions, who led her quickly onward. vot, hi. H A glare
A glare of lightning, piercing through the thick entwined branches of the trees, pre* fented to her fight the rough unpitying countenances or her terriuc guides; and the fairit hope that the pleadings of mercy would foften them to aid her, vanilhed with the lightning that had difplaycd their features. They had wandered for the fpace of an hour through the difmal darknefs of the woods, when, as they entered another more open avenue, a diftant light was feen bla¬ ding through the broken panes of a cafe- ment; and as Rofaline arrived at the top df the avenue, (he perceived, by the fainter lightnings that flatbed, in fliort intermit* fions, through the angry clouds, a few ruined and mouldering towers belonging to a building that was as inftantly clofed from all further escamination, and loft in total fuo ceeding darknefs*
The
The guide now appro* ched the cafe¬ ment, where the light ftill * mained ftation¬ ary j and, entering a wild farabbery near the walls of the building, hi quickly funfe t as it were, into the earth, whilft a loud knocking againft a door fooi* caufed the light to be removed j and RuTo leading Rofaline to the flbrubberv, th^s latter difcovered a fmall deep entry* com** pletely concealed from all infpedion by the underwood that grew near the portal, which, in its approach, was guarded by feveral fteps* that defcended into the earth, and were not difcoverable till the layers and bufhes were turned forcibly afide. After waiting for a few moments at the fmall portal, it was at length unfaftencd, and Rofalme was forcibly lifted down the ftep* and carried into a cold and dreary paffage, dripping with damps, and flippery with mildew and green mould. «* So» St. George be for us ! our journey H 2 IS
is ended; arid here, miftreff," roughly added Ruffo, to a tall, lank, fierce looking woman, that ftood fcrutinoufly viewing the heartsfick Rtffaline—" here have we brought' you your promifed gueft, who truly, 1 war* fant her, is exhaufted, and needs refrefh- ment % fo as you regard our Lady*s plea&re^ condud us to a good fire, that we may dry our wet garments, and give us fomething t& keep the cold ftom -benumbing our nancfe.** Rofaline caft a fearful glance upon the Ibrm and countenance of the w®mao; flie felt the blood recoil in her veins to hm heart, as flie beheld the fierce fearch- ing glances of the alarming ftranger, Jbent full upon herfelf, with looks that even made her tremble. Her face feemed onta to have been beautiful, but was now deeply lined &nd wrinkled, more from the feeming effeds cf a vicious and guilty courfe of life, than age; for flie did not appear to be above five or fi&~aaad*thirty j but there was a wildnefe and ferocity
ferocity in her la*-ge eyes, that Rofaline viewed with fliuddering defpair, and even felt more dread of this almoft terrific being, than (he had done in the openly expreffed dangers (he had to apprehend from her guides. Her arms were nearly uncovered, nnd ihe wore a robe of black depending from the (houiders, fixed to her waift in hardly any form whatever. It was faftened by a ftring of beads, that refembled the girdle of a religious penitent. Her (km was ihrunk and cadaveroufly pale; whilft her long treffes of matted black hair hung in loofe dlfbevelled diforder over her neck and fhoulders, and was partly covered on the crown of her head by a thick black ferge of rufty coloured hue, as was every part of her habiliments, which were ertirely without ornament, and in various parts (hewed them of long continued wear. Still there was a cer¬ tain air in her manner that impreffed Rofa¬ line with a degree of attention, although Ibe felt herfelf tremble beneath the fcrutiny HJ Of
of | and and delpairing, fhe withdrew her eyes from an objed whofe countenance feemed unacquainted withfoft> nefs, and whofe mind was iufenfible to mercy or companion. Every hope of moving her keepers to pity was then in vain; and fubmi (lively (he al¬ lowed them to lead her through the paffage to the ruins of what once had been a fpacious apartment, the roof of vvhich had fallen, and laid extended over three parts of the floor*, The windows, broken and gone, had no othex fences againft the ftorm than Come ceqmants* of mouldering Abutters, which were here and, there nailed in irregular diredions acrofs the, heavy Gothic frame-works. The ceiling was in many places expofed to the elements; and the only place of fafety in this, defolats ruin againft its fall, was the angle near the fire-place, in which were ftill remaining a few faint unextinguifhed embers*
With
With a dreadful oath, Ruffo , more fire $ and Agnes, the name of the fear* ful hoftefs, fullenly proceeded to repleniih the hearth, which, in a (hort fpace of time, again blazed cheerful with the crackling fuel* A table, in like plight with the reft of this dreary p!ace y was foon fpread with the fcanty fare it afforded 5 but Rofaline, who had funk upon a broken bench, was unable to partake of any kind of refrefliment, and remained wrapped in the anguifli of her own fed thoughts. ** Haft thou prepared for the Lady Ro¬ ialine the apartment defigned for her ufe ?" demanded Ruffo of Agnes. <* Aye, truly," replied Agnes, ftill retain¬ ing her fixed eyes on Rofaline j " 'tis ready to receive a Princefs."—Then, with a look of feverity, fcorn, and malice, fhe added to Rofaline— u If, Lady, your delicate palate cannot relifli our homely meal, 1 wait to con¬ dud you to your future prifon—chamber, I h 4 mean,**
^ean, h correding herfelf % but in fo regard* lefs a manner, as plainly evinced (he wast aware of her miftake, and indifferent that flie had made it. 4t Peace, beldam 1" furioufly interrupted Ruffes with a look of fiercenefs, that, though it filenced, could not terrify the woman* who caft on him a look equally full of Cleaning.—" Peace, I fay, and remember !'*" The laft word, however, had an inftant effed on Agnes, who made no effort to continue her fpeech; and the terrified Rofaline liftened with all the attention diet could colled, in hopes of hearing more that would lead to the development of her &k ture fate. The woman, however, in filence* took a lamp, and retreating to the door* beckoned her prifoner, who, with much difficulty, arofe and followed, well convin¬ ced that either refiftance or entreaty Wduht be equally ufelefs.
Agnes
Agnes her to the of an old mined itftircafe, which (he began to afecitd, as did Ker meek fuffering captive, who was obliged m cling to the broken balnftrade, to affift her enfeebled limbs to bear ber to the top* for benumbed wkh cold and wet> and het joints ftiffened with the pains and iilnels (he endured, (he was fo completely weakened and exhaufted,. as to render it difficult fo& ber to prevent herielf from falling back ;— and era* the dec lyed ftairs trembled beneatlr her light preffurs a& (be ftepged. upoi^ them, At length (be reached in fafety the head' of a ruinous landing-place. The walls lay ia many parts fcattered on the floor, which, warped and bending beneath their tread, feerned ready to divide, and coniign them. to inevitable deitrudion. As Rofaline followed the fteps of her gloomy condudreis down the murky (hades H 5 of
of the gallery, (he obferved ruined doora; and arriving at one lefs decayed than thofe fhe had paffed, it flowly opened to the touch of Agnes, and admitted her t® the interior of an old chamber, of fpacious dimenfions, and lofty height*, " This is your apartment," laid Agues* with a look more forbidding than even that which lhe fixed on the poor fufi* ferer at her firft entrance into thefe defolate uuins* and which now? feemed to fay to the fuppliant eyes of Rofaline, c * I am invulne¬ rably fteeled to all the pleadings of pity; nor know I in thought, fcarcely in mme f the feelings of humanity or commiferation,""-— A faint ficknefs again crofied the heart of the defpairing Rofaline, as (he caft her eyes fearfully from her ruthlefs condudor around the dreary chamber; and again fhe fhud¬ dered as (he viewed the gloom and difmal blacknefs of the ruined walls. i§ Here,^
*< Here,** added proceed** ing forward, and undrawing a coarfe cur¬ tain, that difcovered a fmall recefs beyond it-~- w here is your bed r which doubtlefe you will find very comfortable j whilft the hootings of the owls, and the hoarfe croak- ings of the ravens, will prove a m©ft confo* ling lullaby, sad charm you. to. fleep." «« Leave me, H mildly interrupted Rofa* line; u I am much fatigued, and wifli, if poffible, to gain fome refpite from the pains* and anguilh 1 endure*** An angry, fierce glance (hot from th$ eyes of Agnes on her wearied fuffering cap¬ tive i for this gentle requeft feemed to lice narrow, and envenomed heart like ihe lan¬ guage of commands—a tone of fpeakingp Agnes was determined to puniih, as ihe thus. exclaimed, with an infulting degree of triumph in her manner— «*• You will foon grow* ufed to my foeiety $ h 6 and
and the tiae Will come wheh you wilt kneel at my feet, and beg me rather to ftay thai* go«**when thefe imperious tones w'dpftftk to ^bjed fupplications, and you will curfe the hour that made you ufe them/* With fomewords of threatening me^iiing^ but muttered only through ter teeth, and rendered Particulate, ihe furioufly fet dowa the lamp, and hurried through the door, which lhe pulled with fuch violence, that the fabric trembled, and Rofaline e&peded nothing iefs than to be buried beneath its ikfk The hatfh gratings of the key turned in the w^rds of the lock, and the bolts, as ihey were (hot into their holds without,. founded in echoes tdong the gallery; and the heavy tfcad df her keeper was hiard for fome moments, $s (he receded from the ioor of Rofaline's forlorn prifon, who, as foon as all was again <|uiet, fell proftrate on her knees; and railing her innocent weep¬ ing eyes i^t^aven, ferve&tly ejaculated—
*«For
*< For what, Oh Providence, is my Wretched being referved ? Oh what crime,. What fttal crime have 1 committed, thSt (uch Isxeeis of mifery (hould thus for ever puriue my thread of exiftence I Once I had &. fa*- ther, ind for a little (pace of happinefs was blei&d with his (heltering love and protec- fibhl"; In his paternal care I found a fecure retirfeat from all the ftorms df life* and for- S-ow was a ftranger to my foul. Innocerit,- I truft, of wilful error, I was happy in my¬ felf; but never fhunned the miferies I be¬ held iti others, or fefufed, where I could, to ifibrd them relict A noble youth had obtained my fiticereft regards $—and m ripening promife of days of blifs and tirtuefeemed to give a foreknowledge of my future ftate; but Ohl one darkly fatal hour, accurfed in the records of Death's deeds, the guardian angel of my Lord, itiyteve, flept on his watch, and deftiny, in- ftrutabk to mortal ken, confented to a deed of horror, guilt, and murder, and Conftan¬ tine became the bleeding vidim of a fratri¬ cide, In that hour of diftraded horror, 3 when
when tny was rent afunder, ,and all its affedions annihilated in the grave of my worfhipped Lord, 1 flew for confolatioa in the tender embraces of my expeded parent;, but found. Oh foul-angnilhed femembrance! a pale corpfe^ and in one ihort period of time was I bereft of father, lover, home, of liberty, and all 5—- all that was dear to me wasioft-^defpair and death alone remaining I Madnefs purfued nie; ruin and perfecution awaited me; but yet with patience I endured tlie load of complicated mifery,. nor dared to, murmur at the almighty difpenfations oi my God fupreme. Deep, deep in my own fed heart I engulphed my cup of afllidion, nor pre* fumed to reproach the juftice of unerring Wifdom* Oh then* Father of Heaven t 4 for whatever thou.haft defigned me, whether it be for fpeedy difiblution, or a con«* tinned term of fuffering, renews within me a ftrength equal to the trials that await me» endue my broken fpirit witb in?* creafe of fortitude, and teach me to m#ec my approaching deftiny with that refigna** tioa
Hon and which thou alone art aUe toinfpire j—fo (ball the envenomed (ling of my enemy lofe its (harp poignancy; and, in the laft moments of exiftence, when the friendly fleep of eternity ihall have freed the prifoned foul of thb grief-worn tenement of clay for ever from its mortal ftrife, then fhall it wing its courfe to thofe emparadifed legions of blifsfuj reft, where the perfec¬ tions of the vicious can no longer opprefs the broken-lpirited viftim of their lawlefs cruelty* and the wretched and peHecuted find a reward for the earthly fufferings they have endured."------» Somewhat calmed, (be arofe from her knees, as the faint ftreaks of morning dawned through the crevices of the window Abutters * but too ill for any further exertion, (lie hur- ried off her drenched garments $ and having cloathed herfelf in a coarfe plain wrapper, that Agnes, in fullen (Hence, had thrown befide her, fhe caft herfelf on the tottering couch, and merciful forgetfulnefs for a few hours clofed her forrows in a balmy lUnnber. CHAP.
GMAP. T- «« SliipwreckM' •« Whew no pity, no friends* no hope I no kindred 1 ** Weep for me 1 Almoft n» grave aJIow'd me! ** Like the-lilyv that oiice wasmtftrefs of-the field, ** And ISonriihM^Xll hang-my head, and periihi** l Shaessphare.- ** Thapc is no courage but in innocence j «* Noconftancyb«tinanhoneft«aare.'* XlER deep, though heavy, was refrefh- ing, and flie awoke not till late on the following day. Till her waking fenfes became more perfed, flie was for a mo¬ ment uncertain where die was* but the gainful
painful convidion foon came to her heart that (he was the prifoner of a jealous rival* whofe unpitying nature would teach her to purfue her vidim with a power that not the arguments of juftice, or the pleadings of injured innocence would be able to with- ftand; and from which (lie was fatally a£* fured, as (he caft her eyes around her dreary prifon, theie was no hope ever to efcape— perhaps not even a chance of ^iercy to fofo ten the melancholy horrors oj^confineuienU Dreadful forebodings now agitated her mind; for the review of this gloomy dura* geon feemed to prefent images of long-fuf¬ fering, and foreboding prefentiments of mi¬ fery, and deeds of horror. Fearfully clamp¬ ing ber hands upon her bofom, (he mentally exclaimed— <€ Wretched, loft Rofaline, child of early forrow, refign thee to thy fate 1 The crifis of thy fuffering approaches, for thou art the Cuts vidim of an unrelenting rival; and cvq
even now the fpan of thy remaining hour$ of life is compaffed ; prepare thee, for the end of thy woes will foon receive their fiat*'* She caft her fuffufed eyes, blinded with tears at the painful remembrance of paft happinefs, around the defolate chamber, which flie found enveloped in gloom, and almoft twilight darknefs, from the want of the admiffion of heaven's light; for the narrow pointed embrafures, that marked the receffes of the windows, were all concealed behind fome crofe boards that were fecurely faftened in the jambs of the frame-work, and repelled all the light, which eife would have enlivened the chamber; and even thefe were placed fo high from the ground, that the arm of Rofa¬ line could never have reached the lower part of the cafements. A few flanttng beams of day, however, were admitted through the crevices of the boards, from the extremeft point of the fmall Gothic arch of the frame-work, fufficient to
give a gloomy horror to the afped of all around i and which, from the remnants of faints and religious emblems, cut in the carved work of the walls, (eemed to fpeak the place once to have been the refort of facerdotal worfhip, or perhaps a prifon confecrated for a place of penitence, belong* ing to monaftic ufes. All around was dark and defolate $ and the oaken fculptured ornaments, ha had once lined the vaulted walls, were in many places falling and crumbhng to touch¬ wood. The place itfelf was fpacious in the extreme, which added much to its for* lorn and terrific appearance. There was no furniture, except the remains of one broken table, and a high back leather bottomed chair, on which the dejeded Ro* faline paflively funk, hopelefs, defpairing, and completely mifeiable, *s flie feebly exclaimed—*
"Oh
<c Oh God ! could the remorfelefs Paulina pierce through the veil of fate, and difcover the miferable end of ali her hopes, how fliort would be her triumph, how vain the attempt to increafe the fufferings of that wretched creature, whom (be now purines with unavailing hate and ufelefs jea- ioufy P*——-Rofaline, well convinced of the caufe for which fhe was now a prifoner, re¬ iigned herfelf to a fate that (lie faw was the eonfequences of Paulina's fears and hopes, who no doubt expe&ed, that in depriving her fo- myfterioufly of her liberty, fee fhould weaken the regard of Cbnftantine;- and that, when he ihouid once have re¬ turned to the Caftle, and found that (he was loft to htm for ever, he would th^n gladly obey the willies of his father, and become thehufband of Paulina. Some days of dreary liftlefi folkude were paffed unmarked by any event of confer quence. The female conftantly, once im ihe day, brought in tlie neceffarie$ of exiftence*
exiftence, whic 1 * (he either fet down in fullen filence, or, if her haplefs prifoner ever ven¬ tured to afk any flight queftion, (he deigned ber no anfwer, but in language didated with unyielding harfhnefs, and infolent fu¬ periority, that was generally foreign to the queftion, and ended in threats alarming and myfterious;—but even this could not move the ioul of Rofiiine, who, in this hour of in- xrreafed affliction, proved anew its greatnefs, vdiicb, relying entirely on the goodnefs of her Creator, enabled her patiently to en¬ dure thofe evils (he could not fly from. Her difappointment in being fo bafely betrayed from the only remaining with of her heart, on which it had built for at leaft a peaceful haven of reft from the oppreffions of her unproteded ftate, in the choice (he had mentally made of her future defliny, in* creafed the feverity of her regrets at the treachery ihe was the vidim of; but even this caufe of grief found aa aflu&five in the rcfledion,
j^fledion, that though (lie had too pr#bably forever lok her liberty, (he was fecured from fhe more dreaded alternative of being the bride of Otho j and now, as the firft fcnfa- tions of her anguilh wore away, and (he was fuffered to remain in unbroken eafe, ber fpirits began to recover from the dreadful agitations they bad endured, and a kind of mournful deceitful calm fucceeded, giving to her faddened thoughts a new turn, which at times rendered her forgetful of her ftate, as (he reverted back, in the volume of her , memory, to the contemplations of paft oc- currences, wherein lhe traced the counter* past of thofe refembled beings, whofe images never ceafed to be imprinted on her heart, which, faithful to its affedionate love, again prefeated, in pidured exadkude, the forma and features of her noble father, and het once adoring Conftantine, on whofe loved idea her thoughts dwelt with fuch teaaci* ous tendemefs, fuch enthufiaftic reverence, that fancy, difordered and deluding, became an active minifter of ideal vifion, and pre- fented
fented to her fight the images of thofe whcmi her foul never ceafed to recoiled. Ading as if thefe beloved performges were really prefent, flic would, in incoherent converfe, talk to them with impreffive car- neftnefs, weep over the narration of her fuf¬ ferings, and pathetically conjure them to free her from the miferies which fhe fancied they had power to end *—and only the unex¬ peded appearance of her cruel jailer dif¬ turbed theie fad deluficns of an unfettled and injured mind, broken with excefs of afflidion, and foftened almoft to infant weaknefs* The agitating fever of hope would fome* times, in fpite of convidion, crofs her thoughts with a fudden emotion ; and for¬ lorn and defpau ing as was the reality of her fituation, flie endured all its horrors wich weekly fubmitting patience, nor ever once murmured at the mifery of her deftiny.—- At the further end of the dreary chamber wm a large heavy bow window* fixed in a deep
deep vaulted recefs, whofe approach was de¬ fended by an afcent of four fteps, which tendered it lower than the others, and eafief of accefs* It had frequently engaged the attention of Rofaline, who had more than once attempted to climb to its frame, that through the unblinded panes of the upper part, (he might, if poffible, gain a view from without, and difcover if flie was imprifoned near any human habitation j for the thought had frequently ftruck her that the cafo- ments were thus blocked up to prevent her being feen by fome pafling paffeoger, who might perhaps have been induced to pity her condition, and afford her aid to efcape it. The effort, however, was fruit- lefs ; for the panes, that were unbearded, it was impoffible for her to reach, and fhe was, with a deep heaved figh, compelled^ to give up the unavailing trial. In descending, as her hand clung for fup¬ port to the image of a faint, placed in a hol¬ low niche of the cumbrous frame-work of the
thecafement, it fuddenly touched fome ob¬ jed, that as inftantly fent forth foit faint founds of mufic. As foon as the echoes had ceafed theis* refponfes, and her amazement fubfided, fho removed with care her ,fcat, which had helped her in her former refearches; and placing it under the image, again climbed to its heidit, and from the back of the niche, brought forth that which, upon examination, proved to be an okl and * dufty mutilated lute, of curious antique workmanihip. Removing it entirely from its fuipended fituation, flie deicended, and though much broken and injured, it ftdl, upon trial,, was capable of pro L^:i^ har¬ mony ; but as flic lightly caft iur lingers over the chords, and liftened to the deep- toned drains they produced, (he couid not repel an inward ihudrierinj;at the rcfledion that this inftrument mi^ht polTihly have been the iad and only folace of fome poor fuffering capt : ve, who, like herfelf, was*the vol, 111. 1 vidim
vidim of tyrannical opprefilon and trea¬ cherous cruelty. A^in ihe touched the yielding firing*; but ftill flie fhuddered, although (he fcarce knew why, as the melancholy founds they pro* duccd ftruck on her ear. Well as the dim light of the chamber would % per- mit, (lie examined it more clofely ; and wip¬ ing the duft from its disfigured frame, fhe found fomething had obftruded the chords, which, on clofely obferving, appeared to be two or three loofe papers, that feemed as if they had been forced in among the fret¬ work of the handle and the firings. It was near the approach of evening, and the light too imperfed and gloomy, to admit the poffibility of peru(ing the interior of thefe papers, which Rofaline perceived were filled with writing. Her curiofity was excited % and for the (\\k time fhe even felt impatient for the entrance of Agnes, that ihe might, by the more friendly afftftance of the
the lamp, be enabled to decipher the con¬ tents of thefe fo ftrangeiy difcovered relics. Todi/ert the time till the hour of her keeper's vifit, (lie again took the lute s and after having tightened, as well as fhe was able, the flackened chords, (he ftruck them with a melancholy wiidnefs, fuited to the fad nefs of her foul, and accompanied them with her voice, as thefe irregular ftanzas arofe to her thoughts* 11111WW1 UNI «n Ah j Hops I ftraphic, heavenly maul, Impart thy lenient power § Oh fwift defcend, and with thy aid Come cheer the dieary hour! Oh, hafte and bring thy aid to mej««- Come, foothing balm, dear Liberty 1 Ah ! break my chains, and fat me free, A* d from thb gloomy dungf.ni drear Let me once more with tranfpert fee Delights, wiiich only you can cheer*
* * Sometimes,
1 s
6t metlmes, with giief oHieart opprcibM, Urg'd by dtlpa^r, the c|aor I try In vain, in qiieft of liberty* * The U uitleft fcffori fills mine e^e %Vitii tears, th»tt twUs<t«e to tuy tdl. 0renm§ of liope tin n fill my min<t } ViHcfts of t)Y\($ l)c j foi0 me fly, * And in my fleep I ftem to find A conftatrt view d jLtba'ty. J wake in peace, but, hd teveife! The heavenly serial is not there | Around my dungeon al! is hufb, All glocfoy, fikjit, d^uk defpair.
TKen welcome Dta'h, thou fcar*d, U»t fntndly fot! V.Mcomethy (hudd«r»g p'll, thy aula', dead!) blow !
„ ..... , } " hat frees a rie "K'.^g m.ut tium ^omzing woe j J And huh thefuC-nng wretch rulgn his bttuth, To be at peace withiin the arms of Psaih,
MMWnww
Rof^'ine had fcarcely finifhed her invo¬ cation to Liberty and Hope, and the laft edicts of the harmonious ftrains ceafed their refponfes,
refponfes, whofe thrilling notes ba.l filled her eyes with t^&n of foftened forrow, when the harfli gratings of her prifon door dif¬ turbed the peaceful filence ; and Agnes en¬ tering, with an : :j:y gefture, approiched the table on which Rofaline had laid tne lute, and cafting her eyes upon it, her pallid coun¬ tenance received a deathlike hue, as flie vehemently queftioned— u How came you by this inftrument ?— Speak ! '* ** 1 found it in a niche within die recefs of yonder window," replied Rolaline, pointing to the one flie had lately quitted, and fixing her eyes on thofe of her fierce keeper.*-* •*-I pray of you, good Agnes, allow me the uft of this harmlcfs obj 'd \ ic will afford me a melancholy amufement, and cheer the lift¬ lefs heavy hours of a weanfome confine¬ ment," ** Will itfo?** interrupted the fury,fnatch- ing the lute from the table, and vvith piti¬ lefs unconcern tearing oft the ilruus, arul i 3 dalhing
daflung it to the ground >wkh violence; * ** thou feeft, however, 'tis offcnfive, and thus 1 pnnilh it for your infolence, 'Twere well, indeed, fhould I fuffer prifoners to find amufement when the power of liberty is denied them. She, who laft played upon its hateful chords, had more prudence than openly to uie it in my prefence; or had 1 fooner difcovered that the Baronefs Matilda cf Edmondville had concealed it iu her pri¬ fon, it had never been thus found by her~—" Agnes here made a quick and fudden ftop; fome inward recolledions withheld the clofing fentence from final utterance, mid the hte cadaverous palenefe of her face ttas iucceeded by fluihes of fcarlet; whilft Rofaline, ftarting at the found of a name thus m> fterioufly mentioned, raifed her en¬ quiring eyes from the mined inftrument, and fixing them on Agnes, who appeared dilordered and confufed, tremufoufly pro* nounced-— ** Are
"Are you the agent of the beliefs of Ed- mondville,as well as the Countefs of Othin ¥' <* How dare you prefume to queition me ?" replied the woman, in hurried ac¬ cents; whilft from her dreadful eyes (hot (parks of living fire, that made the fuffering Rofaline tremble, and turn afide her alarmed fight j but relolving, if poffible, not to dif¬ cover her terrors, fhe took up the delpoiled lute, and, to hide her emotions, pretended to be deeply engaged in repiiring the injury it had (attuned, difdaining even to hold further convcrfe with a wretch who feemed created without one atom of feeling, tender- nefs, or humanity in her whole compoii- tion. ** You vw ill repent this infolent refiftance to my will," (he added, retreating towasds the doo..—** The haughty Rofaline St. Ofwythe ihall yet fvell the tiiumph of that ruin i have laboured to achieve, and feel the vengeance of the dcfpiied, rejected Agnes. Tremble, for ih:m knoweft n^t thy ciicmy. Prepare, for Fate has fpun thy web cf life, andfpeedy ruin awaits tiicc/' 1 4 With
With a glance of dreadful expreflJon, foe retreated through the door, while, as it clofed, Roialine madd hafte to con¬ ceal the papers ; for alarmed at the threats of Agnes, ihe did not dare perufe them, but fat iu trembling expedation of ihe knew n<,t what, and felt a weight upon her heart like a ,forehoding prefenti* ment of impending evil. Several hours elapfed, and the ufual time of her retiring to reft had alfo pafted unno¬ ticed ; for her agitations increasing, (he felt no inclination to fleep, and ihe ftill conti* nued to liften to the wind, as it whiftled loudly round the building, and was at times accompanied by the harfli hootings of the fcreecl>ow'. Soon after the ftillnefs of all within was broken* and her heart throbbed with affrighted expedation as the bolts of the door were flowly unfaftencd, and through the mifty glooms of the chamber (he diftinguilhed the entrance of a tall female figure carrying a taper, who, as (lie advanced
advanced ftill nearer, Rofaline knew, from die haughty, imperious tread of her foot¬ ftcps, was the Countefs Paulina. A variety of contending fenfations filled her mind with prophetic emotions of de- feending evil, and in mute fufpenfe (he awaited the unfolding of this ill-feafoned and unwelcome vifit. Paulina, as (he approach¬ ed, fixed her frowning glances upon the countenance of her grief-^vorn vidim. ** You are at length completely in my power,** (he began after a paufe, in. which flie had, with looks exprefllve of the natural paflions of her foul, been contemplating the pale objed of her jealous fears and trea* chery, " and can no more become the fuccefs¬ ful rival of Paulina, Doft thou not trem* he at my fij,ht, and curfe the folly that tempted thee to provoke the fate that here awaits thee, and (or winch thou waft hither brought to expiate in imprifonment and death ?" 1 5 Rofaline,
Rofaline, railing her eyes, in which were expreffed the confcious emanations of un¬ fullied innocence, to the gloomy counte¬ nance of Paulina, fearlefsly replied— ** No, I do not tremble. Wherefore fhould I ? Virtue indeed, when writhing be¬ neath the infliftit>ns of the wicked, may weep for its fufferings, and wifh them ended; but its influence poffeffes an innate fupport- ing dignity that the votaries of treachery and cruelty never can attain to—-namely, an un- fpotted confeience, which raifes its inheritor above the oppreffions of vice, and teaches the guiltlefs heart to know and refped itfelf* J£, therefore, to be guiltlefs, even in thought, of injury to you can infpire the mind that is governed by unblemifhed rectitude with confidence in the hour of threatened dan¬ ger, wherefore fhould I fhrink from the evils you have already pradifed but too fuc- cefsfully f 11 -—She paufed ; then fixing on the confufed Countifs an impreffive look, thus continued,
continued, in a firm tone, thatjmade the latter tremble, " Paulina, you have perfecuted a being that Heaven can witnefs never injured you, You have cruelly broke your word, and betrayed me in a moment when even God himfelf was foiemnly calied on to anfwer for your plighted faith; but had you not can¬ celled the bond of truth, and forfeited your honour when you meanly (looped to the artifice of betraying a haplefs creature to an unwarrantable imprifonment, Rofaline had never again interfered with thofe profpeds of promifed happinefs that eife might once have known completion ; and had the been permitted the laftonly wifhed-for gratification of her heart, (he had, in the moment that freed her from the dangers of Urbandine, become a voluntary convert to the feclufions of a monaftery, whofe flickering retreat was the laft poor hope of her wretched and defo- lated happinefs, in which for ever ihe might have refted in peap, free from the uncca* fing perfecutions of a world, that for her i 6 had
bad not,alas! a fingle objed to occafion & figh of regret at the mifery that drove her to. this only afylum of the wretclied» But even this, with unlicenfed power, you have rudely compelled me to forego, and, with a v bold and lawlefs hand, deprived me of liberty, immured me in a dungeon, and (hut me out from Heaven's light and air. But can you alfo clofe from the keen fight of Providence the injuftice of your condud, or think you that, in depriving the wretched Rofaline of freedom, you can alfo conquer the inborn integrity of her foul, which now inftruds her to meet, unfhrinking, the evifa . that await her, nor tremble beneath thg tortures which triumphant greatnefs, with ufurping fway, has prepared to level at the undefended vidim of its cruelty and'op* predion ?*' Paulina, with aftonifhment and difap- pointed pride, beheld th|unfliaken firmnefs of virtue in the animated form of ber in¬ tended vidim * 3 whilft the revengeful paf- 3 fions
fions of her haughty mind received a check, but little expeded, in the undaunted man¬ ner of Rofaline's delivery of her laft woids. Love, difappointment, and rankling* jealoufy by turns aflailed her breaft, and urged her to the commiflioh of fome fearful ad, that flie one moment refolved on, and in the next did not dare to execute. Hatred, revenge, and malice Ihot their baleful effeds, in unreftrained glances, upon her deftined vidim, whofe arm flie roughly feized, as with tones, rendered from excefe of pafliOii, fcarcely articulate, flie faid— "Rofaline,.thy fate is fcaled, and with thyfelf alone it depends to foften or to fix it; for know Paulina's hatred is thy fiat, and upon her lips refts alone the power of thy hfe or death. Thou haft, in one fatal point, fo much offended, that mercy or forgivenefs cannot find for thee a hope of abfolution from the effeds of thy unconfcious guilt; but if ever thou exped to pats ahve the por- -talofthy prifon gates, one only chance is left
left thee; y tis this.';—Paulina then pro«* cecded to demand a fearful oath that Rofa¬ line would reveal the place of Conftantine's prefent afylum, and fwear foiemnly never to fee him more, but to refign all hope and claim of his heart and hand, and bury her¬ felf in fome remote habitaticn, where it might be reported foe bad died.—-** This fwear," fhe added, ** or meet the vengeance of a deadly foe, whofe arm already is nerved with the power to crufh thee, (houldft thou dare deny the only means that can preferve thv life," Rofaline, till the beloved name of Con¬ ftantine was pronounced, which called afrefh into her mind the dreadful harrowing fcene of his timelefs end, had really felt the cou¬ rage and fortitude which, in her latter fpeech, (he had exerted ; but now the fatal chord of all her hopelefs, never»ceafing woe, thus hardily touched, vibrated, in anguiflied emotions of defpairing tendernefs, to her foul, which, though they had of late for a little flumberedi
flumberedj were ftill unfubdued ; and thus again awakened, came, with additional for¬ row and unabating poignancy, to her fuU dened recolledion, and deep-drawn tears of mifery filled her eyes, as (he thus diilrad- edly replied, unable to fuppreis them, whilft an impreffive figh of defpairing remem¬ brance, from the inmoft receffes of her foul, accompanied her words— f * The facrifice you require is ufelefs, fince I am already your prifoner, and no more could interrupt the fulfilment of your wiflie^, if indeed myfelf were the only impediment to their gratification ; but, alas I Paulina, he is loft to me for ever, and I have refigned the ecftatic tranfport of again beholding in this life the only being that couki have made it valuable," Tears now choked all further utterance, and (lie covered her face with her robe, un¬ able to proceed, and unwilling that Paulina fliould triumph in the delpairing mifery flie was
was now the complete vidim of, which not the moft violent effort of her pride and for¬ titude could enable her to conquer, or even reft rain. ** Is this the boaftcd fortitude and virtue of the Lady Rofaline St# Ofwythe ?•' ejacu¬ lated Paulina, with accents of cmtempt and* rage.—^ Wretch V* lhe furioufly continued, ct darcft thou ftill to love the gallant being devoted to the arms of Paulina V* "Lovehim 1" exclaimed Rofaline, with a tone of fudden re*ammation, as (he unco¬ vered her face, and raifed her clafped hands and (peaking eyes to heaven—" love bim V fhe repeated; " Oh never, while this bleeding Heart throbs with exiftence, fhall I ceafe to adore his living idol engraven on my foul, though his angel form is dead to me for ever. Oh 1 he was the objed of my tendeieft affedions, and my plighted faith ; he was my King, my fecond parent, the ford of my * iflies, my guardian, huiband, and pre- fetver—endearing titles which none (hall ever force
force from my widowed heart, where lives alone, with holy thouglits, the memory of his virtues, unfullied by a care for meaner, trivial circumftances that now cm never more cngrofs my mind, which-only finds enjoyment in dwelling on the foft perfedions of my worfhipped Conftantine 1° Rofaline fpoke from the feelings of her ruined affedions, and the certainty of never more beholding her adored Urbandine ; fhe confidered not that Paulina knew not the deftrudion of her hopes, and that this ex- cefs of openly • expreffed tendernefs ferved but to enrage her jealous feelings to a pitch of defperation* 4 * You refufe, then, to comply with my requeft, and will not take the oath de¬ manded?" interrupted Paulina, maddened with contending rage and hatred. Rofaline indeed knew too fatally with what fecurity flic might obey the oppreffive commands
commands of her dreaded rival, but her inmoft foul fhuddered wiih horror at being again compelled to thefe terrific en¬ gagements; for was flie. not already the vidim of a forced vow, {which, from the ftridntfs oi her principles^ fhe was too pious to break), or fhe might have, difcovered to Paulina the fatal fecret, and ended at once her jealous perfecutions. She remembered alf> the papers of her father, which had fo fo¬ iemnly enjoined her never to fuffer herfelf to be betrayed into engagements of (b dange- * rous a nature, and (he now firmly refolved that no power or danger, however threaten¬ ing, {hould compel her a fecond time to pledge her faith and peace of mind, even to procure her life itfelf; not only ib, but the tender and entire love ihe bore to the me¬ mory of Conftantine overcame every felfiftv fenfation i and although he had long been the filent inhabitant of an unknown grave, yet wa^ it treafon to the purity of her regard to fuffer any confideratioa to have weight fufficient to make her retrad tku noble affedion
affedion which every principle of virtue fanc- tioned, aud which the innjcent purity of her foul needed no falfe fhame to difavow* She therefore only replied^— ** That I love the memory of him whan, in this worldl I can never again hope to be¬ hold, is a truth which no earthly power fliall compel me to difown; nor did the noble Urbandine regard me with an affedion lefs fmcere than his profofllons warranted. His eftcem and love r as well as his plighted faith, were mine ere he faw the Countefs of Othin; and let her recal to mind the cir» cumftances that attended her partiality for a being, who was commanded to pledge un¬ willing vows at the altar of intereft, not of mutual affedion. Forgive me, Lady Paulina, thai. 1 pronounce thefe unwelcome truths which, had your juftice fuggelled, I bad b,vn fpirec the mifery of this moment, and the wrongs you feek to in Old upon an already broken*hearted vidim of forrow.— Remember alfo the priority of our paffion, aud
and rather commiferatothan perfecute a being guiltlefs of injury, and who can novv never interfere with your happinefs more/* The paffions pf Paulina overcame her rea* fon ; and fo ardently did fhe love the heir of Urbandine, that ftie never once confide*ed her regards were returned with only cold refpeft and indifference. When at length, however, flie became fenfible of the latter, her haughty foul was but ill piepared to re¬ ceive a refufal fo mortifyingly humiliating to her hopes and pride. She had ever been accuftomed to, the unlicenfed indulgence of her every with, and unbounded wealth had early taught her to expect the moft alJect and implicit fubmiffion to h*r will. The firft real difappointment, however,, that fibe was fated to fhd,, proceeded from a caufe on which her heart was fet upon the gra¬ tification of i but the pang which fucceeded, the ruin of her hopes i#as exquifite, and more excruciating to her ill-governed paf- fions than the fevereft grief which misfortune had
bad power to inflid : becaufe, in a mind foinfenfible of true fecli .g or fympathy, (lie knew not what it vvas to foci fur any one's Calamities but her own. Maddened with the fmart, die fought the hateful caufe that liad occafioned it, and in the unrivalled beauties of Roialine too foon difcovered how little (he hid to hope a con- fummarion fuiuh'e to her wiihes. En¬ raged with the pangs,of unrequited love and racking jealoufy, the thiriled for revenge; and theie, joined with fome othvr caries of hatred agaj»,ft her l\3p\ ier rival, made her refolve for ever to ciuih the i ;tal love'.incis of that beins:, over whofe Lie and anions ftie had K t lieifjf as a i] y : aad watching the moment, lavour.^ble to her iorg imo- theredprojedsof dcftiu:ii'-:i, die, in a luck- lefs hour for tl:e betrayed Rofaline, ileured her haplefs prey; and now, with thoughts infla'iied, and bent on dark defons of lonty- brooded mffchief, was come refolved to i ChU
end for ever the objed of her future fears and prefent defpair. To the demands of truth or inftice (he was invulnerable, for rcjeded love had com¬ pletely ftccled her heait againft all pity for the objed of her deteflarion; and, as Rofaline concluded her unavailing effort to engage her jealous rival to refped the rights of the former, (he more refolutcly demanded, the oath required, which, with a decided firmnefs, Rofaline peremptorily refufed to LviK*e# ** Then behold thy death F* pronounced Paulina, with a voice fcarcely articulate, as ftie damped the floor with her foot; and Rofaline, cafting her eyes forward, faw the door open, and Agnes enter, who, with a ihiile of haughty exultation, ftiided into the chamber, bearing in her hand a goblet filled with liquor, which, in fiierce, flie piefented to Paulina, who, drawing a poniard from beneath her garments,
garments, held the poiibncd draught to Rolaline, and thus, in accents hollow and terrible, pronounced— , u The laft hour of your exiftence ap» proaches; drink the contents of the giblet inftantly !" She raifed her vengeful arm, which held the inftruments of lingering or fpejdy death, with unrelenting refolution tg terminal im* mediately the exiftence of her fared victim* It was now the hour of midnight; and the natural glooms of a dreary chamber, whnfe forlorn and defolate afptdbwas of it* (elf fufiicient to overwhelm with terror the ftoutcft heart, needed n^t the addition of increafed horr^r> to diftr-.ee the mind of its unhappy inmate, who now, confined ia an unknown manfion, depiived even of the common bleflin&s of li^ht and ai:, and purfued by a reaiorfeieis foe, was at length duotnetl,
doomed, by an horrific death, fo fall, uhpt* tied, unlamented, and unavenged, to aft early grave, A fate fo fearful 'might well overcome the refigned fortitude of Rofaline, 'who, fhrinking from the dreadful inft/u- ments of murder, feebly ejaculated— " Is there, alas! no other remedy but this that can appeafe thy malice ? Oh ruth¬ lefs woman T* * e None but this 1 Your death alone fe* cures me a hope of triumph,'* replied Pau¬ lina with (ixcd; unyielding determination. Then turning to the terrifying Agnes, who flood at fome little diftance from the rays of the lamp, her figure, enveloped in the darkened (hades of the gloomy prifon, receiving an almoft honible appearance, (he pronounced—" Leave the chamber!" The latter, obeying the haughty toned expreffions of her employer* bowed fubmif* < fiveiy to the mandate, and was quitting the . fcene of dreadful execution, when Rofaline, urgecl
ut^ed by the impuUive command* of nature, rufoed pift Paulina, and feiztng tlie black robe of Agues, funk proftrate at her (est a% in defpairing hurried accents, flie exclaimed, ** Stay, do not 4eave me, 1 conjure yqu! But if onefparkof pity or remorfe ftill finds a refidence in your bofom, by that I implore you to ftay, and fave me from the dreadful death that f fee awaits me," ** Did I not prophciy aright," replied the fury, with a demon's triumph, ** when I (aid the haughty Rofaline mould Hoop t'> fupplicate even the pity of the rejected Agnes ?'* ** She does, (lie does indeed fupplicate thy pity," continued the defpairing Rofaline, clinging ftill clofer to the ruthlcfs Agnes.—- f ' She bends before thee in humbleft proftra- tioju. Oh think, ere it be t too htc t on the future honors that will avenge this moment of guilt, ftiould you become an accot&phce In the pitilefs deed ! Thitrft alfo that the kippliant at thy feet never injured thee, and vol, in. k by
by fo much the more will you become a partner in this act of darknefs, fliould you deny your aid to the prefervation of a life that* you alone have power to fave or de* ftroy. But ah I if ftill you are remorfe¬ lefs, and your heart callous to the plead* ings of pity for an helplefs innocent, at leaft let it melt to the touch of nature—that all-powerful, impulfive inftincl:, which even beads of prey acknowledge fome regard for* Reflect what would be your agonies, if in me you beheld the offspring of your love, expofed, defencelefs, and purfued to death as I am now, finking beneath the upraifed arm of deftrudion, and perifhing for the want of that timely aflifting care which mothers know, and feel for their own chil¬ dren. Oh then would you not ihterpofe, and fnatch your daughter f om impending ruin? Would you not fave her when God himfelf commands you to the act, and delegates to you that power' which every other earthly being is denied ?**
"Thy
" Thy efforts will not avail j I know not the touch of nature, nor is the weaknefs of pttyagueft within the invulnerable bofom o^ Agftes: for know thou pleaded at the feet of thy mortal enemy, who, from the moment of thy earlieft exiftence, maintained againft eliee an eternal enmity—-an enmity fo unceafing, that eighteen years could never erafe from my foul the dear hope for which alone I have endured life, to be aven¬ ged in thy ruin, for the wrongs of thy fire, who dared to r^jed the offered hand that courted his acceptance, and return with fcorn the Jove which now urges, me to affift and glory in the deftrudion of hh hated offspring/* With a vehement ftruggle, the myfterious Agnes at lcrgth fucceeded in freeing her¬ felf from the grafp of Rofaline, who, as (he foft her feeble hold of the mercilefs wo* man, fell with violence to the ground, as the latter darted fiom the chamber, and clofed the door upon her proftrate fuppltant* k 2 Faulua,
Paulina, with impatient fooki, awaited the departure of her inhuman affiftant, arid ftooping down, fhe rudely feized the arm of Rof line, which as (he (hook, flie thus eja-* cufatcd* with a tone fc and luok that might veil have added distortion to the countenance of a Seed— u Js this- the- fortitude of the heroic, tin* fhrinking Rofaline—this the courage with which fhe meets a fate, that but a moment fmce flie diidaincvi? 1 had expeded to re¬ ceive not refiftance, but thanks for tlie friendly means my vengeance gave of fpeedy difiblution ! But thou art ungrateful for the mercy which fnatched thee from pollution, and the exalted foul of Rolaline can dugn to court exiftence even from the hands of a menial j but thou feeft Paulina f $ word k fure, as k the death that here awaits thee. Her agents, hke herfelf, are invincible to qorruptton; and all that is kk thee is to chufe thy inftruments of definition, and niwet the d*eftiny, that thou canft not fly * * - - from,
from, with becoming refignation. Behold ! make fpeedily thy eledion, ere choice is de¬ nied thee—the poifon or the dagger V 9 hold¬ ing, with impatient eagernefs, the dreadful means of murder towaids her deftined vidim. J . Rofaline had raifcd herfelf on her knee?, and now, with a look of reiigned, defpairing firmnefs, pronounced—* c Yes, Paulina, your laft woids Ihall be fulfilled $ the foul of Ro- faline you cannot conquer, although her life and libei ty are at your difpofal. She fees, indeed, that her doom is inevitable, nor does flie'eVen hope to avert it?'—Railing her hands and eves to heaven, with folemn ear- neftnefs, (he thus continued :— u Father of mercies, if it be thy will that a deftiny fo fudden, fo untimely, fhould fcal my eyes in the deep of death, and unprepared, thus plunge me to an unhallowed grave, accept thelateft figh of my departing foul, and re¬ ceive its fpirit to thy everlafting kingdom, where alone the wearied fuffercr may find- reward and peace, In anv other fhape lefs & 3 terrible
terrible to the fenfes, my heart, wkh refig¬ nation, could have met the ftroke of death unflbrinking and unfhocked; or had but a few intervening days been permitted me to have colleded my Mattered thoughts, and, with religious rites, mmh re&dytmy imper¬ fed accounts for the great day of future re¬ tribution, my mind would* in its laft mo¬ ments, have been prepared, But it is forbidden; I obey the hard decrees of my wayward fate; and even in his prefent tre¬ mendous form, will t^eet the awfol king of terrors with the confiding truft of my eter* nal Fadiet's mercy and forgivenefs for thofe unatoned errors which, guilty or guiltlefs, I have committed.**—Here, as (he paufed for a moment* and ftjll continued bended to the earth, in fupplication, fhe raifed her eyes meekly to the now difordered and irrefblute Paulina, and thus, with folemn fervency of gefture and articulation,—-** ¥m* lina,** fhe pronounced, *« in thefe the laft moments of my parting life and foul, in the hour of death» when none will dare bkf- pheme,
phenie, with falfehood, the utterance of their lips, receive the affuranees of pardon from her you are about to rob of "that hfe which only God has given, and which he alone with right has power to take away* May your contrition for this deed of guilt and murder be finceie, and your repentance find in its lateft hour that mercy and forgive- nefsfrom your Almighty Judge, which your earthly vidim, now from the inmbft receffes- of her heart, freely accords you ! Give me the fatal draught i" The crifis of her fate was arrived, and Rofaline took the dreadful cup from the now trembling Pauliha. At length a faint fpark of pity dawned on the rugged foul of fhe latter ; an awful monitor within withdrew the film that hadfo long obfcured her darkened reafon, prefenting to her fight the precipice of deftrudion on which flie ftood, whilft an appaling voice fternly for- Ixde the cruel deed, and filled her foul with horror*
Hater* at kn§th^pwri^d| th^dkad&l * tonfiid ceafed i ^ber fuff^rbg vidim, ev^n in the Jaft jtimr* ft het ^iftence^ had pathe¬ tically implored the di*in* gtuc^e of hex of* fended Makers forg#ene6 of \mr murdet- efit >vhtch ar^ufed the^twch of remorfe fo her callous bofom * whilft* the re¬ figned piety that lhe beheld in tU adions and words of her intended facrifice, as the latter took the fatal cup, difplayed to het guilty foul the fure dependence of a mind ^collcded, and firm in the pradke of virtue and tmftffkd reditude. She faw, (lie trem¬ bled, and for a moment the haughty, impe¬ rious Paulina bowed to in fuperior influence, and was, in her tirn* the h&lf repentant vo* Uj of Mercy, The facred influence of the heavenly deity was (lied around the unpro¬ teded, defencelefs Rofaline ; Paulina felt its afcendency; guilt weakened her nerved arm; (he dared not fititfh her bloody pur** pofe, but felling the cup from Rofaline, and throwing it on the floor, lhe exclaimed, in hurried accents— " I will
41* I will nol Income th|^ executi^ierl^ md ruflied precipitately from,the chamber* Rofaline, amazed at the unexpeded, fud¬ den reprieve, could fcarce bclteve.it real, ttif liftening, in mute (ufpenfe^ (he beard the b^avy door clofe, and the noife of the bolts found as they were forced into their holds. The loud howling of the ftorm had for (ome time burft with fury over the ruined fabrfo of Rofaline's prifon* The^ wind whittled in melancholy echoes, as it ruihed through the galleries, and en¬ tered the broken, ill-defended embrafures of her dreary abode, blowing cold and com-* fortlefs on her pale, Slivering form, and add¬ ing tuereaie of mekmchoy to the dreary fcene $ but the tempeft, that at this mo¬ ment was even tremendous, could nol equJ that which palled in the thoughts of the unhappy captive. To delmeate them would be impoffible, arid the attempt ufe* lefs—they were iuch as furpaflid the power of deicriptioii 4 nor could Fate k 5 add
add an increafe to the fufferings Ibe already endured. She inwardly ejaculated a mental * petition for a renewal of that fortitude which Ihe now more than ever felt would be infuf- ficiemt to fupport her through the certain approach of that deftrudion, w1iich» though for a time it might be fufpended* was never* thtfell inevitable; for a moment^ recolledioa ferved to convince her that, though Papliaa'i confeience had prevented her from putting the final end to her wretched existence* her a^ent was unrelentingly implacable, and in** capable of even remorfe' or pity i whih% from the myfterious jwords fhe had uttered, ilie was but too well convinced that in Agnes flie had a determined foe, ready to aid the wtfliea of her employer with better fuc^ cefs than the late attempt had been defeated by. Some few tears fell from her eyes as the bitter refledion croffed her heart, that fhe was completely deprived of every hope of refcue, and might perhaps, in alitde fpace #f time, receive from the dreaded Agnes that terminarion
termination to her exiftence, which there was • but Jtoo juft a probability to fuppofe was the defigned purpofe of Paulina. A death by means fo outrageous and terrific, aggravated the mifery of her mind even to madnefs.— She could have met the ftroke of NatureV difiblution with triumphant gladnefs, and* Bleffed the grim majefty of ttme*s deftroyer for the welcome releafc hm aid afforded to thofe burthenfome loads, which r with tranf- port, Ihe would have caft for ever from her wearied fpirit 1 but to fail beneath the murderer's dagger was fo repellent to the, feelings of nature, that, fbrtnkbg from the horrific idea, (lie ftarted from her feat, and once more vai-ly began to fearch around her dreary prifon for the means of efoape. With tottering fteps the again examined the i fey walls of her ruined dungeon, hoping to find feme yet undtitovered outlet, by which (he might free herielffrom the irremediable evils that purfued her. Again (he tried the dour, the uiercilefb bulwark that clofed on her a Ming confinement, and (hut her out (roiu k 6 - hope,
hope, ftdm liberty, and even life | bit^ilas | it was too ftrongiy fecured, nor could the itnpulfive ftruggles of defpair evea move it* The effort was ufelefs; it did not even (hake beneath her repeated attempts to burft kk With hurried fteps, that fpoke r the palpi¬ tating anguifli of her heart, (he quitted the fruitlefs attempt; and paffing forward, ftop* ped before an objed that had often, during her confinement, engaged her attention. It wasa largeiron cheft of antique ftrudure, and too heavy even to move; its appearance, and the manner in which it ftood, feemed to de¬ mand the examination of curiofity; for it was placed on one em\ f and leant flantingly againft the wall. Rofaline had* frequently beheld k,not without wonder at its being (uf- iered to remain in this dreary chamber; aud ihe now found a momentary ceffation from inter* nal anguilh, in conjeduringfirom what caufe it couid have been fixed in a pofition fo uncommon*
uncommon. Nothing, however* appeared to lead to a development, or aid her hope, of means to efcape* It was too heavy to make it poffible for her to lift it an inch from its place, nor did it feem to promife any re¬ ward for the ufelefs trial. The lid was faft fecured; and as (he tried, ioeffedualiy, to force it, a faint rumbling noife within for a moment ftartlcd her, and founded like the fall of fomething that had retained an upright pofition, as well as the cheft it¬ felf. She liftened till the noife had ceafed* and not without fomething like furpnfe, re¬ tired from the objed, and gave over, for the reft of the night, her too fuccefslefs, una¬ vailing efforts for freedom. Throwing her wearied frame upon the couch, (lie reclined her innocent head upon her pillow, and for a length of tine continued to ponder on her hopelefs ftate, and the fore event (he muft now pre¬ pare her mind and heart for the eonfequences of. Infenfibly. however, the mercies of for-' getfulnefs
getfulnefs ftole over her waking faculties; i heavy flumber fealed her eyes, and a death* like inanimation overpowered her fenfes,.
CHAP. VI. *' When Nature reft% •* Oft in her abfenos mimic Faucy wakes^ •« To imitate hei* \ Hut f misjoioing Siaps, ** Wild works produces oft, and moil i» dreams,. ** IU matching words, long pail or late.** Milton.
*««••#•«•
** AH things nre poflibl^ ** And grief on earth finds fi Sends in Ht:aven.
*••> *»***.
** Then when the woe-ft aught heart Is lin*d with care, ** And every human prolp"^ bids dci^air, 41 Break but one gfeara of heavenly comfott »n, ** And a new race of triumphs thence begun 1 * AN the villous of her fleep Rofaline was. tortured with a lepetition of the preceding fcene of horror, and buiy fancy prefented 6 terrific
terrific forms to her difordered, imperfed fenfes. Again fhe trembled beneath the infuriate wrath of the implacable Paulina, who, feizing her by the waift, prefented her dagger, now ftained with blood, to her de» fencelefs bofom, as with wild, difordered looks (he (hrieked— " Reftore him—reftore the heart of Con* ftantine, or meet a rival's vengeance!" Releafed by feme unknown power from this danger, (he found herfelf again before the iron cheft, when, as (be was trying to* force the lid, a deep and hollow groan from within founded awful on her ftartled ear, and the lid fuddenly burfting open, a pale and ghaftly form flood before her. Its garments were a female fliroud; the form, for a mo¬ ment fixing on Rofaline its hollow funken vifage, pointed to the cheft, and inftantly tanifhed*
Awaking
Awaking in horror and affright, Rofaline, unknowing what fhe did, caft her eyes to the dark fide of the room where the cheft was p ! aced, expeding to fee her dreidfoi vifion realized ; but the lamp had expired, and the chamber was obfcured in pitchy darknefs. Nothing, fave the murtmrs of the wind, difturbed the ftillnefs of the hour* The ftorm was abated, and onlv the fb ill and harfh cries of the fcrcech o vl among the battlements of the building proclaimed the exiftence of any living creature near her t ' whofe horrid yells at firft appalled her ear, and kept her fpirits for fome time in con* tinned agitation. A drowfy heavinefs, how* ever, again weighed them down in fleep, and again thefe fearful villous purfued her. The dreadful icene of the eaftern chambers of Ur¬ bandine was re-aded, and ihe faw the lifclefs Conftantine fiak beneath the murder¬ ous ftroke of his brother* She ihricked aloud, and the dungeon re-echoed with he» cries, as a ftiii in fleep, fhe exclaimed™
u Forbear,
.*« Forbear, fratricide, forbearl" A fhort ceffation of thefe horrors gave her a momentary eafe, and (he lay for a time in a deathlike flumber, when fancy once more feized its hold upon her fenfe?, and presented the pale, but mild, benign afped and form of her deceafed father, who, with looks of foothing compaffion, flowly approached her, as (lie lay weeping on her couch, in the habit which he wore when living, and audibly bleffing her, again as flowly receded to a diftant end of the apartment, which fuddenly became illu¬ mined. The form, which but a moment before ihe had loft in the (hades of darknefs, again became vifible; and beckoning her to*» wards the iron cheft, ihe arofe with confi* dence, and approached the latter, as the fpedre, pointing to it, bade h^runcioic the lid, which, in attempting to perform it, .fuddenly of itfelf flew open, and prefented to her mo¬ mentary light a fkcleton. Shrinking from the taJk, (he was about to leave the dreaded Objed,
objed, when the fpedre bade her.a^ain look towards the cheft, which iirefiftibly flie was compelled to do; and to her afto- nifliment found the late horrific fpedacle was vanifhed ; «nd, on a ftill neirer view, flie perceived there was no bottom to the cheft, which appeared oaly to ha\^ been placed in a perpendicular pofture, for the purpofe of concealing a broken aperture of, the wainfeot, which feemed to lead to an opening beyond. The form of lier'parent, ftooping, paffed through the holloa of the cheft, and down the cavity; and beckdning her to follow, (he »did fo, and found her* felf on the landing of a fteep flight of fteps* which, as flie I egan to defcend, her foot fud¬ denly flipped, flie fell to the bottom, and, m the effort of refcuing herfelf from the confe- quences, ihe a.voke. Her eyes, flic found, were deluged in> tear ; and »r was fome moments ere flie gouid diftinguiih tlie objeds around. The fear¬ ful vifions q( the night for a length of time engaged
engaged her attention undividedly. It was now (he difcovcred, by the faint ftreaks that tlie (battered enclofures of the cafements ad¬ mitted, broad daylight. Intently bent on her fad and melancholy retrofpedions, (lie arofe, and with difordered movements, paced the length of hejr defolate chamber. Her eye?, as well as her thoughts, were oftentimes caft on the now almoft avve-infpiring cheft, and a flronger d fire than curiofity incited her to the wiih- of difcovering its hiftory; but to queftion Agnes (he knew woukl be io expofe herfelf to an ufelefs infult; and the late vifion t>f her dreatris had rendered it an objed of fuch tenor, that fhe almoft trembled, as with hurried fteps fhe approached, and re- paffed it. Cafting her eyes upon the darkened win¬ dow embrafures, (he perceived oce that ap¬ peared lei's ftrongiy boarded than the reft ;~~ it infpired her with a kind of Faint hone* and ihe refolved to make a laft effort for freedom, or
or at leaft, if poffible, difcover where flie was imprifoned. - * Having with much care dragged die antique table and chair beneath the Hurt¬ ing of the window frame, flie placed the latter on the former, to raife4ier fufficienfly to reach to the top; and cautiouily afcending this weak and trembling platform, ftie found hor felf high enough for the puf pole. The lower boards were old and rotten, and foot! yielded to her exertions* One of the pieces that crofied the frame gave way, and, with ano¬ ther effort, the full glare of daylight was admitted within the chamber; and the daz¬ zling rays of the fun (Inning furl upon her, prevented her from perfedly feeing the ob¬ jeds beyond. As foon as its fudden effect had vaniQisd, (he put her head through the open fpace. Amazement feized her fenfes. She ftarted, looked again, and again beheld objects familiar to her view.
"Oh
*« Oh God !" (lie exclaimed, u can this be real, or is it but the vifion of my diftrad¬ ed imagination ?** It was no vifion ; for the objed that firft prefented itfelf to her wondering fight vvas the ruin of St. Anna's lowers, backed by the lofty foreft trees of St. Ofwythe's domain. A third examination convinced htr, 4 un- doubtingly, where (lie wa»; and with horror flie beheld hcifelf encloled within the ruined angle of tlie fouthern part of the Abbey, whofe well-remembered mouldering turrets now appeared juft as (he had laft left them, though treacheroufly they had confpired with the enemies oi its wronged miltHs, and had now become her prifon. <f Amazing Providence ! M Rofaline ex¬ claimed, as foon as her aftonifhment would permit her to ipeak, * 4 what new horrors furround me? Oh Po.\cr Supreme, into whofe hands haft thou refigned me, arid who-—
who —who is Paulina ?*' — Convidion, powerful and undoubting, ruflied upon her fenfes.—" She is, flic muft be my myfte¬ rious enemy, the long concealed, dreaded heirefs of Edmondville/' New horrors now feized her heart, and filled it with confufion, doubt, and diftrad* ingalarm. It wasbut too evident, in the out* rage of the preceding night, that Paulina had been urged, by deeper motives than jealoufy, to the commiflion of fo daring an ad as murder. The Baron, it was now proved, had told her true, when he faid the Abbey was no longer a place of fecurity for her to re¬ turn to; but the pretenfions of Paulina to the title of Edmondville aftoniflied her moft, pnr C013 ] c j h er utmoft endeavours to con* jecture the reality of her being its heirefs, difcover the caufe that had kept a circum¬ ftance of fuch impoitance a fecret from all tl e world, for not even the Baroneis was ac¬ quainted vvith it: till it ftruck her that Pau¬ lina either was not Baroneis of Edmondville, or
or that title, that her dreadful defigns mieht be concealed from her fated vidim. All was myftcry and obfeurity, and vain the effort to attempt its elucidation. The danger, that flie now found had a double motive for its exiftence, demanded her utmoft fortitude to guard againft, and efcape the effeds of: and with a kind of defpairing hope, flie caft her eyes to the bafe of the tower, which compofed the outfide of her pri Ion ; but it afforded her no profpwd to aid her efforts, and was at too great a diftance from her prifon win¬ dow to make an efcape that way pradi- cable, With forlorn and defolated feelings, fira fat for fome time viewing the dear vene¬ rated woods of St. OlwytLc, witn fenfations of unutterable regret and anguilh, ,as each well known objed brought afrelh to her mind the memory of ten thoufand tender, pleafing,painful occurrences, that now ferved to remind her of the wreck of paft hap* pineli,
pinefs, vaniflied for ever from her view.-* As thus mournfully employed in mental r'e- trofpcdions, her favourite little fawn, for whofe prefervation (he had hazarded her own iafety, increafed the long train of mifery that occupied her thoughts, as at this mo* ment it bounded paft the open fpace be- fore the walls of her prifon, and was loft in ' an inftant amid the enclofures of the foreft. Rofaline, as ihe loft fight of it amorigft the trees, couid not re (train the tears of re¬ gret from bedewing her face, as flie mentally ejaculated— <s Ah ! my poor little animal, how much happier is your (hte than that of your wretched mi iIn fs I Thought lefs of danger, and anx¬ ious only f r your prefent meed, you expe¬ rience the ble flings of unconfcious liberty, and find contentment in the bounteous kind nefs which Nature provides for you 5 but not fo is the lot of your haplefs miftrefs, who, without a friend on earth to pity or redrefs her
her wrongs, robbed of liberty, of hope, and happinefs, is now a wretched captive in her own domains, waiting the fiat of death from the hand: of a murderefs/* For fome little tuii? longer flie contiiuel to inha'e the freflinefs of the morning air, and obferve the gradual brilliance of the in- Creafi^g fun,as it fhonercfplendcnt upon a*l around, on all but her unhappy felf. Her thoughts again refted on the luft nijh/s extraordinary vifions, whilft the imprjfiioii they had left on her mind made her fre¬ quently caft many glances of wonder and inward a.ve towards the cheft ; nor could th; effeds they produced be eafily chfcuded, fince there vvas fomething in thefe uncom¬ mon dreams, thu, in fpte of reafon, teemed tocncouragc her with hope of (he hardly knew what nature : and from the liftiefs fever of defpair, (he felt herfelf ftrangeiy incited a jain to make another effort to diicover, k pjf- fib e, the truth oi^ her vifion, or the cui'e for which it had been plated ia a pofuioa lo VOL. III. L Ui.ufoal,
unufual, as powerfully to excite fufpicion, and aroufe curiofity. Clofing up the board of the cafement, that the ruthlcfs Agnes might not deprive her of this only real comfort her dun¬ geon would in future afford, flie approached the myfterious cheft, which (he again nar* 40wly fcruiinized. It was placed flantingly, leaning on one end againft the wall, leaving at the bottom a vacant ipace of two or three inches.—- This Roialine ftooped down to examine $ and accidentally putting her hand behind, was furprifed to find a ftrong current ot air blow cold upon it. Convinced that there muft be fome inlet that admitted fo forcible a guft of wind, flie refolved, if poffible, to attempt the removal of the cheft; for already a flight re-animation of hope had taken pofi» fefiion of her mind. The circumftance of her dream gave her frefh courage; and, with an almoft Herculean ftruggle, (he at length fucceeded in moving it two or three paces deeper from the wall, and again ftooping, be¬ neath
Heath the interfpace fhe found it wide enough to admit her head and arms beiind s when, who can exprefs her fuhbnjiv ai beholding a large opening in the will, more than wide enough to admit her wh )4 perfon through to its oppofite fide, wlbcii feemed to be a long continued vacuity !-— She was prevented making any further re¬ mark by the found of approaching foot¬ ftcps, and (lie had only time to regah haftily her feat, when the unwelcome Agnes entered with the ufual provifion of the day. Her eyes were caft, in (cowling angry glance 6 , on her trembling captive; and their exprefffons feemed ro grudge the haplefs Rofaline the fliort pjor Vcfpite (he had obtained from death. She fet the food down with anner and di.ap- pointment ftrongiy depidured in her every feature ; and muttering a wiih between her teeth, that it might be the laft meal ihe fliould ever have occafion to bring, quitted the chamber, and refaftencd the prifon door, f. % Rofaline
Rofaline liftened to her receding fteps with trembling agitation $ and now, fince there was a faint dawn of hope ftill left her, flie felt thankful that (lie fliould pafs ano¬ ther day without the fear that it would be her laft. A thoufand wild conjedures filled her rgitated mind; and the reft of the day wss paffed in anxious impatience for the arrhal of the hour when ftie might fearleflly proceed in the fearch her late difcovery had rendered pradicable. The hours, as they flowly pafled away, never to ihe hopelefs captive feemed fo tedious and wcarifomc, or imprifonment more dreary and unwel¬ come. At length, through the difcovered open¬ ing of her broken cafement, ihe joyfully be¬ held the night advancing, and daylight no longer ftreak the heavens with its azure beams: fucceeding darknefs enveloped the face
face of nature, and (lied its gloomy mantle on all around, , It was yet, however, too early to venture on her enterprife with fecurity; and to divert her thoughts from their melancholy fource, (he took the bulf-defpoiied luce from its hiding place, and feaiLg herfelf by the fire, which blazed in the wide hearth, and had been kept alive by the broken pieces of wainfeot, that in various parts ftrewed the floor of the chamber, as it had, from ex¬ treme age, deferted the naked walls that it once had covered, ihe began to ftrike the few remaining chords with Iuch foft notes of harmony, as they were ftill able to produce, whofe melancholy ftiains fuited the fad nets of her foul, and lulled her agitated fpirits to a deceitful, but prefent compofure. At length, however, her impatience could no longer be reftrained j tlie burning of her lamp told her that it muft now be near, if not paft, the hour of midnight, and lhe ar >fe, ^ 3 with
with trembling hope and expedation, to purine the only means tha. fo wonderfully feemed topromifc a chance of efcape j—but as the heavinefs of her fable robes might in¬ terfere with the progrcls of her adventure, ihe caft them aftde for a light flowing mantle of plain white, and throwing a thick black veil over her head, (lie approached, with palpitating heart, the door, to hften if any founds below yet gave notice that her dreadful persecutors were not yet retired to, their beds i but all was filcnt* and not the^ Jeaft noifc diftujbed the ftillnefs of the dreary gallery and paffages beyond.
CHAP.
M^iaag B MgM i Jj,.,j | ,K i ^ l ,,^ ! ff , ffa
CHAP. VII. «• Pkau|nt from the way of the defert the voice of mo fie mmt* h turned* at firft, the nolle of a diiUnt are^ni, far 4iftant on its rocks. Slow it rolled along the hill* like the ruffled breeze, when it takes the lufted beard of the jock in the HUI feafon of night/' OSSIAN, " *Tis guilt alone, ** Viks bt'ain.fkk fremy^ in its feveridi mood, fill* the tight «* Air with vifionary terrors, and ftiapdeia forms of Jeau" Francis. RETRIMMING her lamp, Rofaline ad¬ vanced to the cheft, uhkh, after a fecond laborious efLrf, ihe ajain renuved a iu(» h 4 ikicnt
ficient ljpr.ce from the wall for her to pafs to the aperture it had concealed, which uas of fuch wide dimenfions, as to ad¬ mit her with eafe through iu cauty, and in an inftant ihe paffed beneath its thick. and cumberous recefs, and landed, in fafety and unhurt, in a long op-en paflage, whofe yielding planks trembled beneath her weight, and proclaimed the weaknefs and defoiation of its totteiing, dilapidated con* dit ion. Rofaline paufed a moment to look around her, and beheld feveral antique por¬ tals, lhat doubtlefs led to the lefs ruinous anple of the eaftern chambers. She now well recoileded the fituation of thefe rooms, which, from their very ruined ftate, had never, in the lifetime of her father, been opened, as the north and weft wings of the fabric had been found more than fufficient for the ufe of his family \ and thefe, with the fouthern ruins, had been fuffered to re^ main in their prefent date, as being too weak and dangerous to be amended, or even approached without apprehenfion of ex poling
expofing the intruder to the chance of being buried beneath them. The only apartments of the Abbey, near this fide of the ftrufture, were thofe which Norman and Blanche occupied, or did once occupy; but Rofaline, as ihe debated oa that painful remembrance, almoft felt con¬ vinced that the good old fteward, as well as ali the houfehold, had doubtlcfs been dif- miffed by her guardian, the Baron, who, there was no reaibn to doubt, had confpirec! with Paulina in the ruin of his injured ward * 9 and, in (tripping her even of tlielc humble means of protection, meant to deprive her of a chance of efcaping their mutual defigns,, though it was but too clear that Otho vvaa not aware of thofe of Paulina* She was well convinced that there was a palfage which kd m the lower eaflern chaixu bers j and if (lie ihouid fuccecd in fiding it, and Norman vvere (till an inhabitant, what a lureproiped would it prefent ot her entire t 5 cma.i*.
cfnamiaition from the cruel, unrelenting pv rile* tion of her deadly foes I Infpirited h\ r ii hope, fhe turned down the eaftern eati of the gallery, and (hading her light f.on the effeds of the wind, which blew in from feveral apertures of the ruined ceiling* fljcpaflld fwiftly down, nor flopped tdl a ftiearn of moonlight, beaming through the Gothic window frame of the corridor, ai refted hci attention; and placing her lamp upon the floor, fhe approached the cinbraftnv, which was low, and gave her a free profped of the ruins, and an unreftrain¬ ed opportunity of partaking the bleffiogs of atr, which, for many a weary day, file had of late been deprived of. Putting^afid* fome of the mantling ivy that q;^ r *d her per¬ fed fight, ihe remaincdt \unmg on the bro¬ ken window frame for fome moments, loft in fublime contemplation of the tranquil fcene its view afforded. It was now mid* night; but not a cloud darkened the filver fplcndours of the moon, whofe beams, caft¬ ing their miid radiance over the tops of the fable
fable woods, and now and then fhining on fome ruined tower, or broken window arch, rendered the profped almoft roman¬ tically enchanting, Not the fmalleft guft of wind difturbed the atmolphere, or fcarcely moved the branches of the trees. The fcene was avv- fullv frill and folemn; nor did the grey fpires and turrets of the Abbey and its ruins ferve to decreafe its natural afped* From an opening fhe had a view of fome of the battlements of the habitable fides of the Abbey. A deep-drawn figh efcapKl her lips, and for fome moments flie ftood anped in the rcfledions it had occafiotua, whilft bufy memory prefented inftantly to her c * mind's eye** a re¬ petition of the once happy hours of her you> h, in all their charn;ing,,vivid colourings, and opening promilcs oi future felicity.— Alas ! the pleafing profpeds were now for ever vanifhed, every bud of joy nipped i6 bv
by adverfity, and all its blooming hop^s quite blafted! The lofty fanes of Urbandine glittered at a diftance in the moon-beams, and fome¬ times a faint fparkle of lights moving in its interior, marked the fituation of many of its moft prominent towers $> and now* for the firft time fince her dreaded imprifonment, ftie thought on the injured Ruithvina, and for a moment endeavoured to conjecture what her fate had been fince laft (lie faw her. This fubject, however, foon gave place to another; and the memory of an objed more deeply regretted, and as well* if not better, beloved, foon chafed all other remembrance^ from her fan:y—the engravened image of him, whofe worfhipped idea could never be forgotten, never beerafed from her thoughts, whilft Hfe and fenfe were left her* As in mournful retrofpedion flie was thus engaged, her eyes unconfcioufly fell upon the Gothic ruins of St. Anna's Tower, and either
either the diforder of her mind, or fancy con- fpiring with the iblemnity of the hour, con¬ joined to cor jure up unreal fantafies; but (he thought (he diftinguiihed the form of a human being flowly glide among the broken columns, and diiappear through the dark foliage of fome yew-trees which grew near the cloiiters that adjoined the great Church.— Refolved, if poffible, to convince herfelf, (lie continued to fix Iter eyes upon the fpot, but all was ftill; no objed appeared to con¬ firm the unfounded fancy* and it was very probable that the impreffion left by her laft night's dreams* together with the circum¬ ftances attending her prefent fituation, had prefented to her difordered thoughts ideal forms, which reafon and nature ought to bave repelled. Ifot though her eyes might, in an event of fuch momentary adion, have deceived her, her ears could not; for at this moment they were audibly convinced by a fudden ftrain of melodious mufic, like the voice of a fingle being, which did not feem to be far removed from the window on which flie
(lie leaned j and for a moment (he remained fo entranced in rapture and amaze ent at the founds (lie heard, that (he fcarcely re* fpired, left (lie flv»uld lofe a note, which* however mjfterious they appeared, were fo heavenly, that for a few minutes (he felt her fenfes irrefiftibly enthralled with the un¬ expected melody, that every faculty of her foul yielded to its magic ftveetnefs. The drains were varied, and at one mo¬ ment fwelled to the fublimity of grand and, fblemn harmony, and in the next as fudden» ly declined into the echoes of melting ten* dernefs and love, whofe fcul-fubduing notes funk thrilling in ccflacy to her heart, and die almoft iuppoied them the fame which file had Hftened to on the night of her efcape from the Caftle, and were now fent as awful harbingers of forewarning danger, to encourage and prepare her to receive, with refignation and fortitude, her approaching difiblution. Rofaline's
Rofaline's mind, weakened by long fuf¬ fering and habitual forrow, found a melan¬ choly pleafure in dwelling on the teeming ' caufe of her wiflies; for accuftomed from childhood to an encouraged belief in fuper- natural agency, flie could not but feel the prefent awful circumftance as a confirmation of what (he bad more than twice before re¬ ceived iuch convincing proofs of. Refolved* however, to be affured that it was no delu- fion of her imagination, flie leaned ftill fur- ther from the window frame, which was in the fecond ftory of the ruins, and having fummoned courage foi the important occa* fion, fhe exclaimed aloud—* " Who is it that fing? ? If mortal, and thy breathings and thy foul are capable, as thy ftrains befpeak thee, of pity or humanity, exert it now, and help a wretched captive from defpair and fure deftrudion.** She then, as nearly as fhe was able, fong a few of the Uft notes which tie myfteriou tiu fic«an
mufician had given utterance to, and waited* in liftening expedation, to hear them again repeated ; but as the echoes of her own voice ceafed, no anfwering founds befpoke that (lie was heard, or if heard, attended to : for the myfterious finger was now far re¬ moved ; and the drains, floating on the air, were wafted from her hearing, and finking in fainter refponfes among the diftant groves of the foreft receffes, were heard no more. She fighed as (he liftened to its laft warbling echoes; and although (he could not conjedure who the mufi* cian was, (lie felt affured the form (he had had a momentary glimpfe of, was the airy fliadow of her father's fpirit, which now perhaps wandered over the ruins of his. pa¬ ternal inheritance, mourning the fate of his haplefs daughter, whom ftill, though tnvi- fibly, he was permitted to proted. This idea filling her mind with a kind of affedionate courage, (lie again caft her eyes around, in hopes once more to behold his awful
awful (hade. They were now fixed upon the battlements of the great Church, of which fhe had a fide angle view, and of the grand altar window;—the moon, (Inning brightly through the fouthern fides, gave her a full profpeft of the middle aide, and the dark antique pillars of the in¬ terior of the venerable ftrudure. She even fancied ihe could diftinguHh the fpot that contained the facrcd duft of her father; and while thus deeply employed on the fad re¬ membrances it occafioned, die thought (he perceived a figure glide among the pillars, and flowly vaniih through the dufky (hades of the interfpaces, which were enveloped ia murky darknefs. If indeed her fight had not deceived her in the momenta!y view, it was now im¬ poffible tobeaffured of its certainty; for a thick heavy cloud at this iuliant obfeuring the bright luminary of the night, veiled the face oi Nature in the mantle of obtcunty and darknefs, and at length reminded Rofaline that
that thefe melancholy indulgences, if con* tinueci, might prove fatal to every hope of rcfoue or efcape from the appalling dan¬ ger that eife too forely awaited her; and therefore taking her lamp, as fhe wiped the tears of filial love and remembrance from her eyes, (lie proceeded down a fmall vaulted veftibule, which opened on another long, gallery, that feemed to have formerly led to the cells of the monaftery; for at thejbot- torn ftood a large (battered ctofs upon a marble pedeftal, with an image of a faint, and a (ont that was in former times defigned to contain the confecrated water with which the holy Siftcrhood bathed their foreheads^ as they paid reverence to the facred (hrine. With agitated fteps Rofaline paffed along. The time, the place, enveloped in almoft complete darknefs, together with the ex¬ traordinary objeds (lie had witneffed, con¬ jured up ten thoufand fearful ideas; and only the faint hope that by perfeverance ihe fliould
fliould be repaid by a chance of freedom, could have infpired hef, alone and unde¬ fended, to purlue her fearful enterprife. Gaining at length the end of this dreary and ruined corridor, fhe found herfelf at the fteep turning of a narrow flight of turret ftairs, whole opening was beneath a fmall arched portal in the wall, and feemed too private to be the grand liaircafe leading to the lower apartments of the Ahbsy. She did not, however, hefitate; but committing herfelf to the merciful care of that Being who, already feemed fo wonderfully to have con¬ duded herfootfteps, (lie began to defcend* and had gained the third landing of the ftairs, when a fmall open door, in an oppo¬ fite diredion, attraded her attention, and ftie would have haftily entered it, had not a ftream of light fliewed to her horror-ftruck fight the hateful form of Agnes, who was pacing, with her back towards Rolaline, the length oi the chamber ihe was in. Not
Not an inftant longer, had fhe remained, could have (aved her from the fight of Agnes, who was on the point of turning as Rofaline darted down the remainder of the fpiral ftairs, and with light trembling fteps reached the bottom* Paufing to recover breath, flie liftened to difcover if (lie had been purfued, but all remained quiet ; and having overcome her terrors, ihe refolved to proceed forward, for it would now be im¬ poffible to return undiscovered—a circum¬ ftance that would certainly prove fatal to any future effort ibe might make for freed** were (he to give over the prefent opportu^ nity. Defcending an immenfe quantity of irre* gular fteps, that now feemed to have loft all fliape, and were evidently cut in the bofom of a ftrata of clay and earth, which con¬ vinced Rofaline (he was beneath the foundations of the Abbey, (he at length en* te:ed a clofe low arched paflage that, froiu the, condenfed humidity of the vapoury air, allured
afiured her lhe was now in fome of thofe branching vaults that led to the cells and fubterraneous labyrinths of the fabric— a circumftance that filled her mind with apprehenfions of defpair; for it was noc poffible to fuppofe that thefe deep receffes could ever lead to a chance of liberty. But ftill undaunted, flie refolved not to give up her hopes till every profped was rendered inipofliblc; and pioceeding forward, flic paffed beneath the arch of a portal, whofe door lay on the ground, and entered what appeared to be a fmall fquare ftone chamber or cell, which, upon examination, flie found had no other outlet than the one by which fhe had entered, and vvas evidently, from the pieces of iron chains thai ftrewed the ground, and the hooks and ftaplcs ftill remaining in the wall, the iecure prifon of the Abbey in former times. Here then ended her hopes ; and fhuddering as ilie viewed the terrific dungeon, (he was rccroif- ing it in defpair, when her fot received a fudden wound from a hard knotty fubftance, that
that had impeded her progrefs. Stooping down toobferve what had occafioned her fo unexpedtd a blow, (lie found it was a fmall iron ring; and holding the lamp ftill nearer, flie, upon a clofer examination, per* ceived a creale in the ftone-work of the pave* ment. Hope once more re-animated her fpirits; and flie funk on her knees. " Great God," (he fervently ejaculated* ** affift me in this moment of danger I" Placing her fingers within the iron ring, fhe tried to raife it, and with tranfport found it move; and after a confiderablc time, and by great exertion of corporeal ftrength, fhe at length fucceeded in railing a fmall fqnare trap, that had concealed fe* curcly another ftill deeper department of tha vaults, Rofaline, waiting till the noifome va¬ pours had afcended through the aperture; and
md urged by the impulfive hope of free* dom, ventured to place her foot upon the fteps of the defeent, which was not very deep, aad arriving at the bottom, found herfe s fin t e fubterraneous caverns of the A^bey, whole putrid and unvholelbme air enveloped her light in a ui fty obfeurity, and rendered it fcarcely paths hie for her to dif¬ tinguiih a fin 0 le objed through the darknefiu She however continued to ad¬ vance through theie awfully profound re¬ gions of night and eternal filence, a'ld paff¬ ing down one of tlie many branching paf¬ fages that offered, fhe approached a fmall recefs, that feemed clofed by a door that had no fattening; but what words can exprefs her fuel Sen ies ror when, on opening the latter, fhe beheld, by the bright rays of a tripod lamp within tiie eel!, the figure of Paulina leaning aganft a projed ion of an arch, aad deeply engaged in examining fome objed which ihe held in her hand.
Rofaline
refigned every hope of pity. Ex¬ cels of forprife had deprived her of her fa¬ culties, and (lie ftood trembling and mo- tionlefs, unable to retreat, and only, by an inftindive movement of her arm, drawing ftill lower over her face the long black veil that covered her head, Paulina had been difturbed by the un¬ expeded opening of the door; and railing her eyes, (lie fixed them on the form of Rofaline, and became, for a moment, as immoveable as the latter. It was evident, by the wild gefturc of her adions and looks, that (he miftook the real perfon of Rofaline, whofe face vvas now completely hid by the drapery of her drefs; for no fooner did (lie fee her trembling vidim, than the lamp, as well as what (he held in her hand, fell to the ground. Her whole frame (hook with terror and affright; fhe retreated, with wild and terrific looks, from the vault by a back entry, exclaiming, as her eyes rolled dreadfully on Rofaline— "It
" It is the flmde of Matilda!—-Oh nwful being, when wilt thou ce;fe to perfecute me?'* and with horro-.ftr ck movements (lie tottered from the place, leaving the amazed Rofdinc to winder and rejoice at the efcape (he h ^d fo un.-xpedc Hy effedcd, from whit caufe ihe wa^ triable to judge; but from the extraordi ar^ iclions of Paulina, it was evident lhe was bchoiden to t'^e terrors of the latter for her prefeut fafety, and for a moment ihe ft it the fweet reward ot poffcffmg a miud and con.cienee uncontaminated by guilt, or rendered fear* ful by guilty adions. Not a moment, however, was to be loft, Paulina had deceived herfelf aad circum* -fiance arid appearand had faeoured .tiu deluiion; but if the pauicd to cosuiacu du might return and diilover her miiiake ero Rofaline c ull avoid the coidlquenco^.— Mere then ended ah further hopj or far. In It was impoffibiw to go far: i •% without (oh lowing the footftcps of Paulma ; a.id *di ti. s t vol, jii. m u,w
now was i io perform, uas to return the road fhe IimI come, which fhe w.is a! out todo, when her loot kicLed a>anft fo ae- thim*. Holdinu; the lamp towards the grou.jd, P,*c |)erc vivc 1 a packet of papers, whith, as Hie ca° h r c y e- on the erne! i t e, di covered i^> hw aftoniiheJ (i^ht ibmc v,el!-knOi\ n thaiadeis. A faint fhriek of evmiifi'e joy efcaped her lips; lur l ni'b ue id»led t u.ul»'e to Support tl cii bm then, and (Lc iuiik, u.ircfiil»ng, io the euth, a;, s uth hunkd eager looks (he reavl— €£ Tie (ukt «ec r !b of Sir A'fre 1 St. O.^vrl^, auJi\i-td tu In oi.Iy d.iu 0 Uur, *-0 i n Cd of ji/!ire, t\ u doft not i u.» u » a f > »..i t iv c. i j \, t * i a buiom ; fc * .' t.vu. i .i \ d .au ai ascOiidt.cted tha
the records of a fu her's fate in the very moment they we:e doomed to eternal obii- vion. Ah ! ever ; et me adore thy woivjer- workinc; way*-, and bles the un j^Luj.c abundance of thy tcrcler meui s M iie- rious inftrument < f apa't,»t\ lu.'f riiu-, tlnu art atkngth, by Vie om^i/'ie t p,o\iJei^e of God, reftoicd. At the fo\>tfl oi (f I is empyreil th^o^e let the foce*d: of my dfi.v onions ari'e in g' aliunde to Heav-n, aud fj'cik the mimea mabie thanks of my de¬ voted heait. Oh m»y the m j fly ot Lis all-iccii ginflumce il II [ ro»e;t nu, an i re- diets the v\rungs wbich putkntly 1 hav'e en- dined r* Kiffi 1 : thep"i\is, flic put then h 4 *.l'dy into hti b Ion, i\hd s'.as n treat i*.g to^a <k th^ \auit^, aIwI, i » a * i.a.i n c ,, an <1 i- (\)\c»t«l a u: ^ ik; cL«I ! , <.»* U,n?-^ \w it the jKj j j.v * r Li]clj'i ii i i th* h> . S!ie ap[;io,» difd, and ij a t t u i t i. it „. I but thiG v,a^ ilu L\ Cl r» p >nr >;y w a a 1. r h;tl.er*^ 1"; w j c! ( , v< t J ,<. t.u c*. u.,j ' I
hi*! apartments, fliould have intruded her how to ha**e found, hai t'.e ]*uns siioft ne- ceflarv lor that purp* '** not been io trei- cheiouflv torn a^ay ; and that Paulina mas the eulj,rit w.is no v ccirain, fince Hie had a'"quain*ed herfr!f of the ap¬ proach to this receii, &nd had taken away the kc> from the drawer in the cabinet, and «$ th»s very night employed in the pcuf l ofwhit (he doululcis never intended jhould have been regained by the tlaughter of Sir Alficd. Rofaline now caft her eyes into the furk, and d.fc v^red a caie of jewels, i:i\t ieenud late.y to have been r iaeal in it. There v\crc aifo (cveral papers i-.'-vi'Vc to the tire docc's and writings uci/a but fecmingly oi too arear bulk fi.r 1 ' r to cany. Tiiey were not to r ;e» fo n.atcVi as th »e (he had io woiderfuily fuUa 1 , nnd ab fm. t'ir^w tht m into the cheft t\ , n, a hii'il n noi.e, ilit in j from the palfige, L) v*!i.cli IVviiuu hai t»ifap t eared, aiarnved her
her from further Lm m. Sh.e haft'.lv c".-.. <t the lid ; aii'i taki- , th.* ki\, vuit u lhe a 13 full} affu»^v! itone » -a 1 > . iJ a aiM^iu i^, u:^ daited th.rcu'di tl*v i (cio t i»k ':, 4 i.,:i i * t a dtttant l.gut Ilr u* 1 .., ii ; •*» u»j - iid-^ ' - }ouU it, and which 0 ''-i*u i*-. t t i.y cp, 1 ;» Aln;c»ft defpair 1 >f i f-f e c»p'n.; u ., . , - vercd, lvolaimc .uili *. j r li, 1 u ,1^ t .1 . :* the dt\arv cavvrns ;,* , uu^l; u t. w ii < «t the trap. Tnc.e ihv ^i ti^i, vij at ■ ' - ping for a monunt to 1m«- t »a c ' .,5 heard a il ric, echo th 011 it «* v/u. t ^ i..- neath. HaltiJy ami i^jU^ c oUr^ 1 no ,. >j*i upon the dp^rtuic, ib* unnanii -«ii^ s 1 akmuviiol , ai.v! u'.uu taud n\ i.^f fecunng {he tcd t > bo»n i;^^ng «<,> ^ j ;ji bcloA •, a use .mua^e of n.i l>c.*t k, ^ st would fecure h-r ictrca, a A ,dA t>*. t,Ju- fion her enemy k ev*dvud) laboured utut,r # WVring a moment to rerovir pdp«ra¬ tion, flic ib J hflenod, and h did in: c«.i.'ics ai voices tiom below, as they app.<u' lied.-— m 3 Co»*vi*i^ed
Convinced of her fafeiy, flic did not fly, but continual to at tent! to what palled in the caverns, vvhich in a moment after echoed—™ ** Here is a night of flairs ; kt us'afcend thefe/' It was the voice of Agnes, and founded harihly. *' 111 go no further,** replied Paulina.—- u If I am alive, and may truft my fenfes, I law tlie foeelre of Matilda, drellcd in the very hab t that her icfembbuco repreft nts, m the picture ^allciy o\ Kclmoud- v;lie/* " Thou art deceived, a;d terror has de¬ prived thee of thy judgment. Thefe ftairs lead to fome \et undifcovered communica¬ tion with the ruins and I am refolved to fee further into this myftcry/* A paufe of fome moments enfucd, and it f.tnaoi as if Agnes was endeavouring to ktxc the trap* « It
u It uill not yield," flie exclaimed.— i( Let iv *%\m fea.ch the recefs: ii vou (hid not the ] a; ers, conclude that we are either difcovered or bet raj ed, an 1 muft with «'/cater viiiilancc obferve the adions of our 2 rifoncr." In a few mo:ncnts all brcame quiet ; and Rofaline, fiom the laft ipteeli of A^nes uvmbh;d, Lft fl.c flic/uld have gueffed who in icaiity was the fpectre that had alarmed Paulina. She now hurried up the fpiral ftairs; and crofting the coiridors, arrived, unmo t du.d, at the aperture, at which, tor a mom'.-M, fLe paufed to liften if ali within wis tjiikt ; but hearing no noife ia the chamber, fhe pafled beneath the br< ken entry, an 1 once more found hcifelf iu her dreary prifon.
CHAP. VHI. *< Prepare to hear ** A ftory rhat fljull turn thee into ftone. ** Couki there be hewn a monftrous gap in nature, « A flaw wade through the center by fome god, through^ <* Which the groans ofghdb might ftrike thy ears, w They wouia not wound thee an thit ftory m\V* Dltt>»EJt# ** *Tis thu* that Heaven its empire does maintain j «' Jt may affM, but man muft not complain.'* < T AVING thrown off her former drefs for a loofe wrapping robe, and drawn her chain clofe to die table, retrimmed her lamp, and added frelh fuel to the dying embers of her ■fire^ Rofaline took the befoved records of her father's labours from her bofom, and killing the well-known characters, deluged the ai
H
them with a flood of unreftrained tender- nefs, as the fad remembrance crofte i her thoughts that the hand, which had Ouce traced them, was now mouldering in the tomb, and cold as the marble that covered its facrcd duft from worldly profanation. It was fome time ere flie could fummon fortitude to unfold thefe facred relics for the tide of forrow which opprefled her heart. At length, however, feenng the necefllty of fubduing thefe unavailing regrets, lhe fucceeded in regaining compofure j and opening the fnft paper, which uas dated three years anterior to the prefent time, thus began ;——
<* When my child Ihall have perufed thefe papers, let not ha* thoughts be im ittcred by the reco*»cdion that her h^her t* 1,0 longer an lunab'Unt of this wcjid ^ let !u.r
rather rejoice that he is now at pdace for ever, and that thought will give ferenity to her mhid, and fupprefs the too tender weak¬ nefs of unavailable lamentations for his lofs. " Providence, at whofe awful throne I have never ceafed to offer up my prayer, has at length heard my petition, Five years and more have elapfed j my mind is ftrennthened, and I can now bear to enter on this neceflary duty to my Rofaline f s fu¬ ture welfare, and relate the events of my difaftrous fortunes. Juftice demands her rights j and in thegrave the power of op¬ prefilon ccafes. Oh, may my fincere repent¬ ance for the errors of my life wipe away my ftains, nor be they vifited, Oh merciful Heaven! upon my wretched child 1—May thy guiding hand, Oh Power Omnipotent, in time unfold the dark myftery of my wrongs, and j toted my daughter fom the perfecutions of that dreadful, un- tdeniing foe, whofe deadly malice has pur- ft.ed atie to ruin, mifery, and death, and whole
whofe deftroying hatred a knowledge of thefe papers willalonc teach her how to avoid. When it (hall have pleated the Supreme Director of all things to releafe me from a life which only my afiedion for thee, my child, can make defirable, then v-iil mv laft wifhe.s be obeyed, and the papers in my cabinet will inft'rud thee to regain thefe which, in any other form, I am forbid to convey to thy perufal and knowledge, "Attend, my child, to my unhappy nar¬ rative, and know thyfelf truly; for Oh Rofalme! thou art not what thou feemeft, nor is thy fire the Lord of St* O^vythe's domain, which, in right of thy angel mo¬ ther, is alone the inhe/itance of her daughter-——.** ** Gracious God I 1 * exclaimed Rofaline, ** what may this mean ?'* She now placed another leg of wood up* a the hearth, for her lamp (hone but iaimly, m 6 aud
and (lie was unable, by its fight, and the dimnefs of her eyes, rendered imperfed of fight through her tears, to decipher the writing minutely. At length, by the blaze which proceeded from the fire, flic thus continued:—» " The birth and title of your father, when fortune and profperity foiiled propitious on his happier days, wtire as illuftrious as any of the proudeft Nobles England had to boaft ; but now, alas! ftripped of his name, his birthright, and hk honour,,he is become the unrefiftmg vidim of an unnatural brother, nnd only iecrecy and obfeurity can fave th® miferable remnant of his loathed exiftence from the accurfed perfecutions of a vindic- tive, remorfelefs opprcflbr. The undifputed Barony of Edmondville once claimed me for its Lord, although it now invefts the perfon of an ufurper. 1 will foj.prcfs as much as poffible the ufelefs indulgence of my feel¬ ings, and only detail fuch leading circum¬ ftances of my unhappy narrative as (hall be neceflary
neceflary to the re*eftablifliment of my in¬ jured child to the inheritance of her ancef- tors, and the redrefs of her own and her pa?* rent's wrongs* a My father was haughty and inflex¬ ible, and eafily mifled. He had never loved me like a parent, but on his younger fon Rudolph laviflied his entire regards j— whilft^ I, the heir of his houfe, was committed, from earlieft infancy, to the care and guidance of his Confeffor, a man of fuch auftere and bigoted principles, that he fucceeded but too well in the defigns of his employer* In the education of my youth, he, from my earlieft days, had inftilied info my mind the fevere and fuperftitious doc¬ trines of his own faith, with aft its various infcrutable myfteries, its fails, vigiK, and mortifications j and from the hour of my bro¬ ther's birth, I had been negledtd and foi got¬ ten. My mother, the firft Baronefs of Ed¬ mondville, was dead ere I knew what it was to receive the maternal regard of iuch a ia...i.t,
parent, but the Baton had foon fopplied her place j and the influence of his fecond wife fucceeded in banifhmg from hb me¬ mory the affedion he bore to his firft, and thv pledge flie had kk him of her regards. To fwell the foi runes of my brother, !ho had bribed my tutor, the Father Vincentio, to her interefts \ and in the hope of deceiving my Lord and father, (lie had inftru&ed him to infill into my mmd a voluntary love for religious occupations, hoping, from fuch an education, to give my mind 1b melancholy a turn, that when maturity and manhopd fliould have ripened my judgment, the choice of tny future life would fix itfelf on the monaftic feclufions of a cloiiler, and fe¬ cure to htr fon the inheritance of my birth¬ right. At the age of eight I was, by the directions of my ftepmother, configned to the care of Vincentio, and entirely deprived of tlie notice or fight of my father* Vin¬ centio removed me to one of the BaronV moft retired caftles, where lie feklom viiited, and where, for ten years, I remained in
in total fcciufiom The defigns of the Baronefs fucceeded* and I became, by the inftrudbns of a bigot, devoted to all the miftaken tenets of fuch an education. The artful Father had fo deeply rooted himfelf as well as his dangerous principles, into my beart and mind, that I became the convert of his dodrmes, and the vidim of his em* ployer's fifties; nor awoke from thedelufion till it was too hte to remedy its fatal effeds, and I then difcovered the caufe for which he had been permitted to bend my young mmd to a life fo oppofite to the dignity of my birth, and the great poffeffions I was one day to inherit. I had reached my twentieth year; and during the laft twelve of my ex* iftence, had lived in total retirement in one of my father's principal feats in the veft of England;—neither the Baron nor my brother, who was two years younger than myfelf, had ever vifited me s nor had i been permitted to pay my duty to the former, by leaving my inadivc Ieciufion.
£i It
** It was on the eve of my birthday, that a courier arrived at the Caftle with difpatches for the Father, m hich, as he read them in my prefence, 1 fiequently obferved caufed tht colour of his cheeks, alternately to come and go, At length, with an air of meaning, and a folemn;ey of anticipation, that at the mo* ment dti ply i rpreffed mf mind, he inform¬ ed me the Lady Gertrude,, my ftepmother, had been lome time deceafed ; that my fa* ther was (honly expeded, with many * noble vifitors, ar. the Caftle, accompanied by the Lady Agnes, heirefs of the Houfe of Methven, whom, in future, 1 muft confider as my eleded bride, and ptepare to receive her hand as toon as the neceffaryadjuftmejits of the nuptials were fettled* u Vincentio had no fooner hurried over this to him unwelcome intelligence, than, with ail the iubtile artifice and fophiftry of his charader, of which too long 1 had been the unfufpeding dupe, he fet forth the many ar* guments which, ftom my earlieft days, he ind
fcad educed to convince rae how far more preferable uas the choke ota uli^ous life, to all that wealth and iplendour cou.d offer to tempt me from the eledi >n 1 u:d already made ; and bade n»e refted Loj/ ferenely my future days woul 1 glule away* and what real advantages mu I atteud me m a future ftate, if, by devoting myiaf ia this to the fervice of my Crvaior, I ivere fecurec from the dangers of profperous great¬ nefs; and that I fliould be tranflated, in a ftat© of perfed virtue, to immortal bhfs, unconta- minated by the vices which a free commu¬ nication with the worid would unavoidably occafion, and fuch as but too probably would corrode, if not deftroy my peace of mind and future happinefs for ever, u I mention thefe circumftances, my child, that you may the better comprehend tho following events that I am about to detail, for they appertain but too clofely to my un* happy flory ; and to the power and influence which thi:> fanatic had been fuffered to obtain
obtain ov^r my mind and adions, nmoy of thk miferies of my fate are owing, Attentively 1 meditated on the Father's words 5 and (ha ing the intervention of the time between the arrival of the courier and the coming of my father, his importunities for my elec¬ tion of a monaftic life hecame unceafing and even didatoriah Hh arguments, concealed by fophiftry aiid falfehood, mifled tfty daz* zled reafon* which, alas! he had fettered in chains of fuperitition and falfe enthufiafm 1 and but too fecurely fucceeded in clofing up every avenue of'its ftruggling powers sgiinft the^ligfet of nature or truth, laltnoft refigned riiyfelf to his wifhes, with a perfect conviction that he was direding my judg-* ment aright: I even gave him % promifo that if 1 could efcape fiom the union in¬ tended, I would yield implicit compliance to his advice. *« At length my father and brother ar¬ rived. The former received me with £ warmth that I was unacquainted with till then*
then. The aufterity and forbidding hi?igh- tinefsof hi t manners fee-nedentirely va uhed, and for the firft tine I received a f aterual embrace from Ins aims. My heart v br ted to the touch of nature dml xijrexptcH-d kindnefs, andi did not,as foimeily, tremble in his prefence. My brother, tre Lord Rudolph, received me withreferve md cold- nefs; our meeting was reftrained, and damped die plcafures of my father's affec¬ tionate falute. The influence of the de¬ ceafed Baronefs no longer kept huti fiom the remembrance of h?s deleft fon, and I rejoiced Id the prolpeft of being feftored to that afiedion I had fo long been deprived of.— With a confiding tendernefs of manner, he conjured me to refign mf \u(hes of a mo¬ naftic life, and meet his own for my union with the Lady Agnes Methven, with eon** tenting approbation, "I had never beheld my deftined bride, but waited now with impatience and ftrong cutiofity
curiofity to behold the being thut was togO* vera the choice of my future deftiny. fC At length, with a train of noble vifitors, flie arrived at the Caftle; but no fooner bad 1 belield her, than my heart refufed to acknowledge her its homage. There was fomething repugnant in her mien and de¬ portment, that though her beauty might have excufed, my eledion would not, 4< My father foon demanded m private my determination and opinion, when as freely 1 told him it was not in my power to obey him, ** He frowned in anger on me, and bade me, as i valued his bleffiag or his curfe, pre^ pare to receive as my wife the heireis of Methven, or quit his fight for ever, « Hard ta(k! impoffible to perform-1— For, Oh my Rofaline I 1 had no heart to b$- flow. Among the tram of illuftrious beau¬ ties
ties that remained within the Caftle, was one whofc penfive, foul-fubduing charms had rivetted my attention, and in a fhort time gained my moft empaflioned love. <c Matilda St. Ofwythe came, accompa¬ nied by the Lady Ruithvina of Urbandine, then fingle, and efcorted by the father of the former, Sir Hubert St. Ofwythe.—Some days paffed in the celebration of revelry, feafts, and warlike fports ; and I, who had once been devoted to feclufion and pious meditation, now found myfelf a being fo altered, fo unlike v^hat I had been, that 1 ceafed not to wonder at the change, and forgot entirely the pernicious max ms of Vincentio. Afliamcd of the flrtered inadivc life I had hitherto fed, I haftened to ihake off many of the gfoomy prejudices the Father had inflil'cd, and found new life and new (eniarioris in ti e rational chcerfulndb 1 flowenpyed. My father, however, on one fide urged me to the completion of my nur- ri:i£C with A^ics; whilft, on the other, the Monk
Monk aflailed pie, with all the* rhetoric of prefl hood, to comply with my promife, for¬ cibly portraying the dangers of apoftacy in matters of ftich high and ficred concern, (th ukl 1 rclufe to take the*vow of monaftic feclu fion* c * To my natural father T liftcnecl with ' alarm and dread; for well knowing the haughty inflexibility of his ioul could never be moved fiom the purpofe he had fet his w 4 ota thouglits upon accomplilhing, I trembled, by a repeated refuial of his vviChes, to lole the httle hold I already had ob¬ tained in his heart and affedions; whilft to my fpiritual one I liflcned with reve- jence, i ut no lunger with blind, deluded conviction ; for the enchanting Matilda had Junk into my foul, and her bright idea alone pofleffed my enraptured fenfes, I ad )ied h«.r for herfe'f alone, and viewed her &bibe being commififoned from Heaven to tha v afide the veil of error that had fo long obicurtd aiy reaibn, and reward me for the ytais
years' of happinefs I had loft, in thofe that were to come, if bleffed with her fociety aud Jove, <€ In the company of Matilda, and her amiable friend, the Lady Ruichvina, I paffed fome of the moft bli.sful momenta of my life, 1 had not yet declared to th i tlol of my devoted paflion the regard jh; iud in* fpiud, although my imfnii^nce to do fo could nolon 0 cr be within Id b} 4 y conh Ju¬ ration for my hih,i°\ eo ,auu ib, or i«ic claims of Lady A & ms wuo.u is \wt Hud oiJy p.uii*^Iy adJreucd with polite iuuif* foreiicc. c * One evtning, as I entered the : '»'»*«« mentw a^l^, v d for Mud !„ ,vm Ltr u l 1,1 diicoyued tho Int ral ie\ an 1 wa\Mi> 4 — Fheftaift'd ihiht attai «:; i^* eyes * n heir- i f u ' ,i y v^tee ; ... cn,uit^i ihtd .a what I bj- fold, I \ik.i e/iiieitueli <>^ iuu kd t i^ c >mc oi htr tvars, and could nut ^ut o >U*ive luc evident dilordcr und coniuiion ot her Iools,
u She, gently fighing, attributed het feeming nnhappincfs t<> the foft tones of her lute, which lay on her lap, and affured me that front infancv mufic had ever produced that effed upon her feelings. I enquired no further* iS For the Lady Ruithvina 1 bad, as foon as I became acquainted with the goodnefi of her heart, felt the moft brotherly intereft; and there were moments when, had 1 never feen the furpaffing lovelinefs of Matilda, my heart would have confeffed the unrivalled perfedions of her gentle fnend. It was this very evening I refolved no longer to defer the confeflion of my paffion, and I hefitated not to make Ruithvina a confidant of my unalterable attachment to Matilda. €< Ruithvina* as flie liftened to my fecret, turned pale, and I obferved her tremble when about to fpeak fome words that would have efcaped her lips, but which died away without befog expreffed. Alarmed, 1 begged her to m.tke
make known the caufe of her apparent agita¬ tion, for fhe evidently ftiuggled to fupport herfelf; and after fome inward emotions fhe faid they were occafioned by the unhappy deftiny of her friend, who, to fwell the for¬ tunes of her only brother, was condemned, by the harfli feverity of her father, to pafs the reft of her days the fad vidim of monaftic vows. ** This was a ftroke fo unexpeded, that, like the coldnefs of ice, it for a few moments benumbed my fenfes, and all my youthful hope? of happinefs feemed for ever blafted* My defpair, however, and the deep expref¬ fions of my fincere regret, and entire devo¬ tion to the lovely Mattida, engaged the mediating commiferation of Ruithvina in my behalf. I will not fwell thefe papers with a narration of the repeated interviews that Ruithvina procured for me with ray * foul's treafure, nor the arguments which Love lent me ftrength and wit to ufe in the voj,. hi, n pleadings
pleadings of Love's paffion. Matilda gave nte at iergth the ecftatic aflurance that (he would I e mine, and mine only ; and could means be found to efcape the deftiny of her father's decrees, fhe would ratify her promife with her hand at the altar of Hymen, Thus encouraged, I confeflcd to Sir Hubert St, Ofw}the my affedion for his daughter* He was my father's bofom friend, and well I knew his power over the mind and adions of the latter; but Sir Hubert was deter¬ minedly avcrfe, and reminded me that my baud vvas publicly engaged to the Lady Agner, and that honour now forbade my re¬ treat, or lis O'li'ent to the uaion of his* an^edc Mar Ida wkh me. 1 fall urged all that lene tuu'd dldate, and oa my knees Cv lAiic 1 him to be propitious to our mu¬ tual wifodion; but he fternly refufed my I r.i\e«, and quitting nvc in anger, haftened to in-, father, to prove to the latter the ftrich'cfs of his hnnour, widch would not ajfowhmi to fanction nur iorbiddcn union while die Baton's cunfent was wanting. Ah ! what
what defpair filled my breaft when, on the following morning, 1 was informed Matilda was no longer an inhabitant of the Cattle, but had been forced in the night from tlie arms of her friend by her rclentlefs father 1 nor did any tidings, for a length of rime, ar¬ rive to eafe my racking fears. At length, however, the fatal courier came, and Ruith¬ vina received a packet from her loft Matilda. Its contents were thofe of the lift defpair.— - She had been forced by her father into a monaftery, and there compelled to take t!*c vow that for ever feparated her from her adoring Alfred. Ruithvina gave me the fetal epiftle, but I read no farther, and for weeks lay an objed of pity to all that beheld me. It was one night that fenfe and feehng again began to chate away the dcliriun of my brain 1 had fo long endured, when Fa* ther Vincentio, in a curfed evil hour, entered my chamber, and, like the fiznd of dark¬ nefs, tempted me to my undoing. Again he urged his former argument's for my vo~ luntary reii^uatiou of the world, and educed N 2 due
the late caufe of my unhappincfs as a fulH- cient proof of what affliction awaited me, fl^ould I not take advantage of ihe peace¬ ful feciuGon which, in religious duties, I fhoufd find from every care of life. Dif¬ fracted at the irreparable lofs of my Ma¬ tilda, detefling the thoughts of marriage with another, and every promifing hope of }0 ,»hful Lapfindsand expeftant joy being now blalted forever, I became indifferent of life, and ai the plcafures it might fttll have afforded me, and with the gloomy reverie of my dreary profpeft, I no longer remained inattentive to the Father's dclufive argu¬ ments, but madly implicitly refigning my- felf to the guidance of a treacherous villain, contented, to abandon for ever a world and all its empty glittering profpects of deceiving b.ippineA, that no io ^er had a charm to make its ii .ercourie defuable. All was to me a dullj w-arifim?, uuinicretling blank j and, re y d! diets of the future^ I refigne.i- ----- 1, Oh fi d! Rofaline, will you not cuiie, abhor, dcipiie your guilty jarenr, when, in thefe futccedmg
fucceeding lines, you fliall difcover that in a fatal damned moment, he fet his hand to an inftrument, that robbed him for ever of the power of reclaiming his birthright, and plunged you, my injured fuffercr, in that abyfs of myfterious woe which never, during my exiftence, could have been unfolded.— Ere I proceed in my fad tafk, let me exact one laft, one only requeft from the filial re¬ verence and love of my Rofaline's difpofi¬ tion, which was ever the foremoft virtue of her nature. ** Rofaline, remember thou art bound by no tie, nor does the influence of fo¬ lemn engagements fetter thy freedon of adion. Nature and juftice confpiring, prompt thee to obedience; nnd tlie laft wiihes of a wronged father are facred to his child, nor uill (lie difregard them. The power of vengeance I have forfeited, but in thee it lives. Reflect, as thou readeft 4 iu paCtge, that it is tne vo»ce of thy father ipeakbg from the tomb, and caking upon N J thee
thee to avenge his fufferings, and reftore thyfelf to thofe poffeffions which fraternal villany and infidious artifice have fecurely wrefted from myfdf. Let, therefore, no weak jears or womanifii compaffion intimi¬ date or fwerve thee from a purfuit of juft retribution, which the world will applaud, and God himfelf, with mercy, will proted thee in. By the memory of thy fainted mother, by the affedion 1 have ever borne thee, and the laft folemn wiflies of him, who, when thou fhalt have pcrufcd thefe papers, will ceafe to have an exiftence, I charge thee to unmafk the hypocrite, and drag forth from their dark oblivion his guilty deeds. Retrieve thefe years of dreary b&~ nilhment and mifery into which he ha$ plunged me, and refcue my fame from the Iianderous taunts of the deceived world ; fo fliall my injured fpirit reft in peace, and the vuiiigs it hath endured, at length find ledi'viS.
"it
*** It were needlefs to repeat again the falfe arguments and meek pretended humi¬ lity with which Vincentio fucceeded in gain¬ ing his deceived vidim to his purpofes. He triumphed in the fedudions of his treachery, and my benighted reafon, overcome with defpairing love, aided his fell defigns. At the dead of midnight he led mc from the Caftle ; and attended Only by him who had weaned my foul from every foetal endear¬ ment, loft to 'myfelf, and mifdably reck- leis of my future deftiny, I became hb paf¬ five inftrument, and fuffered him to condud me, Unknowingly, to the eaftera borders of Englarul, where, on its ftiore, ftood tha proud fpires of St. Stephen's Abbey• ** In th*? religious houfe I fondly imaghud 1 had atiail reached the goal of all my for- Ml hiws, and low in future ftuuld experience the bleffings oi returning eafe. There was fom.'tliing g. >t! ; Ing to my love in thus faciificin; n>y Jl it the ftfonj'afiedion I bore its objeu, tuw s * Marilda. The time n 4 ^lid d
glided away with a kind of torpid, inanimate ferenity. I even biefledmy betrayer, that his watchful care had foatched me from the now hated fociety of the world £ and at the appointed peiiod I took—Oh God 1 for¬ give thy guilty apoftate, and may the mifery of his latter days, and the prolengthened fmcerity of hk penitence and long*fuffering atone for this one ad of difobedience !— yes, Rofaline, 1 took the firft vows of a monadic life, and became, in part, a Monk of the brotherhood of Carthufian Friars. Father Vincentio, ftill my con¬ ftant attendant and companion, now fre¬ quently urged me to haften the conclufion of my laft remaining oath, which, once puffed, would flint the gates of the monaf¬ tery lor ever on me, and clofe up all world¬ ly intercourfe : but Frovidence, or rather au Dver-ruling deftiny, in mercy ftaid the per¬ formance of this laft fatal ceremony of ini¬ tiation, and I ftill, from the liftleflhefs of my grief and defpair, and the growing in¬ creafing adoration I kit for the devoted Matilda*
Matilda, delayed this only bar to my lafting feclu fiom ** Some few imnths had eh^pfcd, and the melancholy udncis of my foul found an increafe, as it here found encouragement. Iperformed the feveral fundions of my pro- ftflion with mechanical exaditudc, which, among the Fathers, gained me much t fteem, but not with the fervid fmcerity of a d^yo- tionift ; for, alas! the image of the angelic Matilda purfued me, and her fair idea became the fecret fo!ace of my exift¬ ence. Devoted to her beloved remembrance, I had no heart for the facrcd profeffion I had chofen, which had only been the effed of defpair. I never, *howc\er, regretted the lofs of my illuibious poiieflions, but with freedom refigned ail though*ts, and even right, of again leckiming them. The mid¬ night vcfpers, and the filent Iblemnity of the monaftery and its cloitlered aifles, had fomething fo gratifying, fo fuhahh* to the gloomy ftate of my mind, that I cealed k 5 to
to remember the world had other boundaries than the Convent walls j and but for the near approach of an unexpeded feftival, I fhould have complied with Vincentk/s tm- * f It was on one memorable morning, that I was early called to officiate at a neighbour¬ ing Convent of black Nuns, where a Novice of che order was this day to lay afide her No* viciate habit, and take the Lift vows of a veftal. I entered the church as the ceremony was beginning. The intended vidim feemed to infpire univerfal pity, for it was reported (lie had been compelled to make this felf-facrifice. 1 approached her with fympathetic feelings of commifcration. Oh, never will the remembrance of that moment lofe its poignancy; even in the pangs of death its cherifhed idea will re¬ tain its place in my heart, unabated and mtfubdued. She was of middling ftature, but her form and perfon were fymmetry itfelf. A murmur of forrow rung echoing through
throiidi the church, as ■ the ' Abbot led the trembling veftal towards the altir, and be¬ gan the facred rite of initiation. The ilfter drewafide her veil as I held out my hand to receive it—a duty, affigncd me-to perform j when, great God J what was'my amazement and Hidden joy to find* in the devoted fieri* fieei my loved, my angelic Matilda. She law and knew nie as the cliftratted traniport of the moment made me loofcn my cowl, which difcovcred the features of her Alfred. «The laft fatal vow had been'defi*rrcd till this hour; and a ilrong infenfihiiity, oeca- fioned by my unexpected appcaraiiccj no,v prevented its conelufiou. In that niOiiient of univerfal afloni'lhinent, I ieized the fa¬ vourable opportunity to declare that Mui!- da*s vows were proliibilcd ; nor could the ceremony of their completion be fiuifhed till the concurrence of a being vvas obtained, whofc prior claims to her obedience forbade the prcfent procedure. The funClity of my manners, but chiefly the -knowledge of" N 6 tJie
the nobility of my birth, fucceeded in gain* ing me attention, and the ceremony was, for a time, delayed till the affair could be pro* pedy investigated. Matilda was borne in* fenfible from the Church. 1 did not dare to rufli to her ailiftance; for I well knew, if the Monks had even fufpeded that I was the caufe of this fufpenfion of her vows, the eonfequences would have been fatal, I dared not therefore difcover further; nor can I even now defcribe or do juftice to the various feelings that, hke a whirlwind, ruflied through my amazed fenfes. To find that my worshipped Matilda was ftill in part at her own difpofal, and unfettered from thofe holy engagements that 1 had fo long (uppofed were the fatal bars to our felicity, came, with atorrent of overwhelming joy, on my fo long benighted (oul, ami fwept before it every other oppofmg confideration; but the profped of that happineis I had con* eluded w as loft to me foi ever, Matilda had fainted in the arms of a Ly-fifler, whofe ved felling offj expofed the features of Ruith¬ vina*
vina. In the confufion of the moment, I haftily whifpered her to grant me a private interview that evening in the cloifters of ihe Abbey. She gave me a hurried afl'ent; and, at the hour fucceeding vcfpers, I attended her appointment. There was a degree of melancholy in Ruithvina that at fiift alarmed mc for its caufe, but lhe af- figned no particular reafon for it; and as I found Matilda had no (hare in it, 1 fo.bore to prefs her further, 1 learned, however, that Matilda had been forced by her cruel father and brother, to take her Noviciate's vow; and, to deceive her friend and me, ha I been compelled to write the fatal epiftle that had fo precipitately plunged me into the confequetices of my defpair, t ** Jt would be needled to enter into mi¬ nute details of what alone cm be intercftinrt to my fad heart to remember ; and 1 would fpare thy too fufceptible nature, my chikU the unavailing knowledge of my intern il fufferings, It is fufficient to add, that with lo. J' r
long; unceafing importunity, and much par* fuafion and difficulty, I at length prevailed, and your fainted mother refigned herfelf to lore and me. Aided by the afliftance of a Monk of St. Stephen's, whom I bad bribed to fecrvcy, the inaufpicious ceremony was performed, the angelic Matilia became the bride of your father, and I experienced a happinefs never expeded. ** 'Twas on the night fucceeding our nuptials as I was returning through the garden of the Convent, by a fecret poftern, of which I kept the key, and was flowly mufing, as I went, on the wonderful change of my fortune, and the means by which I might fecurely withdraw my lovely bride and m\ (elf from our prefent religious engage¬ ments, when my paflage vvas intercepted* *.id a filler, as I then thought, of the holy community, approached me, a'*d in a tone of voice, that implied command, and en* forced obedience, bade me follow her.
** She
u Slid led me to a retired grove in the gnrclens, remote from every intrufiori, and flopping before its entrance, drew afide her veil, and, in aecenrs of an^cr, de* manded if 1 knew her. Tlie voice was fa¬ miliar to my ear ; and as the moon, with uncommon bright nets, (hone upon her countenance, I di (covered her to be the Lady Agnes Methven. Sudden fun rife made mc- (hit* and-bowing, f wa*> ie.ving the p'ace, when, feizinginy arm, ihe (aid, with a determined refohuion of manner, that filled me with wonder— * You have (lighted me—vou have ne%~ leded the chard,s of Agnes to marry Matilda! Tremble, fur your icci^t is known, and the vengeance of an intuited woman has a patency that will for ever pur- fue you. Ruin awaits you, and the thun¬ ders of the Church, fer the outrage you hava committed on its facred Jias, will overwhelm you with deftrudion. You are become an apoftate to your religion and your Goth You have d'.filed Lis holy altars, and
ftolen from their piiefts a veftal devoted to their facrifices. For crimes like thefe the flames await you, and^the voice of Agnes is tlie fure fate of Alfred. For you, ungrate* iul man, ihe has caft alkie the native delicacy of lier fox, foregone the dignity of her birth, and forfook thofe fptct.did glittering plea- fmes that courted her acceptance, and watted on her nod ; for you flie has im* mured herfelf in the haled glooms of a Con¬ vent, and for you fhe would'cheerfully re¬ fign the gay delights of fociety and grandeur, to live an holy hypoctitc in your loved com¬ pany/— Softening her voice, and raifing her cyca with tender blandifhnicnts to mine, fhe added—* Defpife me not, defpile me not, * Loid Alficd, nor fpurn the concjucft yoa have made I Oil think how lafting muft be that love whofe influence can make me forego thefe dear loved advantages, to facri* fice all for you 1 As deep and irrevocable as is my affedion, fo can be my revenge and hatted ; and if pity will not, at leaft Jet in¬ tereft mo\e your hean in my behalf, with wh.m
whom alone now refts the power of your own and your detefted Matilda's life or death ; for know your confidence is be¬ trayed, and the mercenary you bribed to fecrecy, by bribery "has revealed your crime. The offered friendfhip of Agnes alone can now preferve you from the dread¬ ful eonfequences cf your perjured oaths :— accept U, and quit with her the monaftery; leave Matilda to the fulfilment of thofe vows fhe, but for your interference, wo'dd have plighted ; refign her to her fate, and in the arms'of Agnes find a balm for every other ill/—« * c 1 liftened to this harangue as to a language that had profaned the angelic worth of my adored Matilda ; and, leaving the mifguided Agnes, whofe vows of ven¬ geance, even at this moment, ring in my ears, haftencd to my love, in whofe (oft and mild, endearing converfe I forgot, for the time, the threats of the unhappy Agnes*— They, however, ferved to quicken my pur* poles for our efcape, which, with much dn- iivnh ,y lit. <t**l. J ^
ficulty, v.efffcclcd j and embracing our beft and dcareft friend, Ruithvina, whofe affift* ance had promoted our endeavours, we, on the enfuing midnight, quitted our Convents* and I received Matilda from the gates of her feclufion in fafety, and undifcovered, The care of my faithful fervant fecured our flight* and we gained the fea fhore, intending to pafs over to Germany, till an appeal tu* T the fupieme chair of the Papal Prince ftiould have rendered "our return to Engknd fafe from the effects of the vengeance of the difc appointed Fathers of the Church. We were* however, compelled to alter our defigns, for alrcadv had the meflenrcrs cf our Convents bcei dispatched incur purfuit 9 and fortu* nately for us, we did not gain the feaport» where a veflll had been previoufly engaged* fo foon a;> we cxptftcd ; for our jerkcu- tors, no doubt urged by Agnes, had huined their mandates t > the purluit, and only the timelvii.t rvention of mv do i.eftic laved us from ixen i*ig ther p ifo.Krs. F'ecipi* tauly aoflmg the kin^dvtn in a ontrtry dircJlijn^
diredion, wc journicd night and day till we arrived at th^ wilds of the Sjottifli f!iore» where I had an undent Loidlhip, the inhe¬ ritance of my mother's brother, fo left to me by him, that none couki deprive me of ih~Ma!coIm Tower was a romantic old ruin, built many centuries ago, upon the fmnrait of a long chain of lofty mountains that were fituated near the fea. Thither we haftened, as the only remaining feclufion left us that enfured fecurity and protedion; and here we w r ere foon blefll*d with that peaceful ferenity that feemed to promife a ceffation from the dangers we had efcaped. u If the perfonal charms of my adored Matilda had firft fafcinated my fenfes, the equal and even fu paiFing beauties of her mind rivetted the chains of happy love, winch, if it was poffible to know an increafe, was augmented in the events of each fuc* Ceeding d.\y % that difplajcd to my tranfport* td fo ji fome new, and till then, undifco* vered 'erfectbn. •4 uw
* s The pleafing calm that had fucceeded , tl e late ftorms, lulled us to forgetfulnefs and • deceitful fecurity; whilft the wild romantic beauties of our antique a K odc procured for us an inexhauftible ftore of varied amufements, that, with its charming furrounding fcenery, became the boundary of our utmoft wants and wiflies. We ceafed to remember that we had claims upon fociety, or that a more fplendid pofleflion awaited our return, though, for the prefent, it had been paf* fiveiy negleded, ** A few months after our arrival, our ftock of happinefs was increafed, and Matilda became the mother of a lovely boy:—but the difpenfations of Providence had otherwhe provided for him ; and it feemed that iu his lofs we were to receive a j relude of thofe future woes that awaited the punifhment of our errors, in the partly forbidden union of our mutual loves. Our firfl-boui lived to be regretted, and then winged Mb aerial form to the dwelhn ;s ijt Ik Maker. Our aip of joy
joy had been too blifsfui to be iafting; and this fudden ftroke was but a whole fome leflbn to remind us that we had drank too hviflily of its inebriating fweet s. It was the firft forrow we had known fince our union, and now powerfully recalled the remem¬ brance of thofe dangers we had yet to dread. c< In the following year Matilda again prefented me with another infant, lovely as herfelf * and you, my Rofaline, were or* dained to be the happy afluager of our deep regrets for your brother's lofs. It was now that I awoke from my long inaftivity, and determined to re-aflume my former felf. The correfpondence of our only friend, Ruithvina, informed me Oi my father's late deceafe, and I refolved to reftore my Matilda and her infant to the fplendid birthright they were born to poffefs, nor longer continue myielf in thdi inglorious eafe which for the laft two years 1 had palled my dajs in* My rank and inCuence, as a Biron of the icalm* I knew would foon pro¬ cure
cure me intereft fufficient to ftop the perfe¬ ctions of she Monks of our Convents, fince neither Matilda nor myfelf had taken the laft irrevocable oath that muft have feciuded us for ever from each other; and thofe vo^s that had already teen plighted, were not of that binding nature to render them impof¬ fible to be annulled, or our marriage illegal; fii-ce, through the intereft of the illuftrious Ruithvina, we vvere, 1 afterwards difcovered, freed from the future apprehenfion* of the oppreffions of the enraged Church, and even our marriage ratified by the abfolution of the Pope's Legate, then in England, Thefe were circumftances which I had entruftcd to my brother, though he, from finifler mo¬ tives never revealed their events; nor did I ever diiiovet their certainty till my arrival at St. Ofoythe's Abbey again renewed my friendfliip with the Baronefs of Uibandinc. <€ But to proceed.—Refolved to reftore in} felf ro my inheritance, as Baron of Ed- n,oaduiie, I difpatchul a mcflcnger to my brother, 5
brother, defiling him to prepare f ;r my re¬ ception at the Ca'lle of my anceflors, where I meant firft to icikfe ti;l the at rival oi the Pope's abfolutiou from our [ receding en¬ gagements to thofe of our marriige, fliould have difannulled them, and given us fecurity from perfecution. With fincere regret we quitted Malcolm Tower, and fet forward on our expedition to England. li During the whole of our jour¬ ney, 1 could not but obferve a mjre than common fedatenefs that fat upon the fta- tuies of my adored wife, Tiieie was a re- ftraint in her manner that difconcerted me ; and the tiniic thai l^ad ever lighted up her countenance vriien i addreiied her, was wanting to g'uc a zeft to my hippincfs.—» The nearer v\e approached the end ot* our journey, the deeper became her iUerve, which at lengih funk into mcl.Utclioly and filence, although the warm pit flu re of her hand in mine convinced me her Rkxi in was Hill as warm ab ever. In vain, however, 1 enti eatcU
entreated to know the caufe of her changed condud ; (he only afllgned it to her regret at quitting the beloved feclufions of our late habitation, and her dread that we were leav* ing it to return to fplendid mifery. ** As we came within fight of Edmond¬ ville, and upon our nearer approach, I point¬ ed to my brother, who ftood upon the higheft battlements of the Caftle, to greet us with welcome to our home; (lie caft her eyes flightly upon Rudolph, trembled, and fink¬ ing into my arms, prophetically exclaimed-— * Would to Heaven we had never feen thefe tcwers! Oh my Alfred 1 1 have an ill foreboding mind; and could your Matilda guide your wiflies, they fliould in fafety convey us back again to the beloved ruins of Malcolm Caftle/ ** Alas! I knew not then the dreadful meaning of (his exclamation, but thought it only the effufions of fear for the perfecution we might ftill be in danger of from our Chutch enemies, Oh God ! had I but followed
f<4lo%vec| this only wifh of my too yielding Maiikk, the appalling horrors of our difaf- trous fate had been averted, and the oppref- five remembrance of my woes would never bave occafioned this iad memorial to relate their dreadful events! Fatal was my return to the manfion of my great progenitors, and dark-boding deftiny fat hovering over with raven hue, and frowning averted afped.—- My caftle proudly withftood its Lord, and opened its treacherous portals only to be¬ tray, and make him their prifoner. «* My brother, the Lord Rudolph, re¬ ceived us with courtcfy and refped ; nor was it poffible, in his reception of us, to difcover the dark and dreadful purpofes of his unre¬ lenting foul. The train of my vaffals, with obfequious obedience, awaked in the great hail to bid their Lord and Lady welcome. The domeftics who accompanied us from Malcolm, were only four; but in the nume¬ rous throng I was now in future to call my own, I was furprifed, as I (lightly caft my voi» iu« o fight
upon them, to not one of the old eftablifhed retainers of my father's houfe*—- All prefent wore new faces, and all to me were flrangers, I enquired of Rudolph for fome whom, in my youth, I had imbibed a value for, and ftill retained a friendly re¬ membrance of; he informed me that moft of the oldeft of my domcftics were deceafed ? and others from choice had, on my father's demife, quitted their fituation. I knew not then the falsehood of this account, nor dif¬ covered, till afterwards, that my faithful vaffab had been, by the affumed tyrannic power of Rudolph, removed from their offices, to make room for the mercenaries fufofote for the performance of lib dire de¬ figns ; and happy in the power of reftoring my beloved Matilda to the iplendour (he me¬ rited, 1 thought not on a circumftance that at any other time 1 ihouid haVte regretted, and which wouki have prompted me to more mi¬ nute enquiries. We partook of the banquet pirpared, and at a late hour retired torepofe. Unfu'picious wf the treafon plotted againft
its, and fatally confident of my fecurity, I flept in peace, nor awoke till the murderous fwords were pointed againft my breaft. A ftrong glare of light, however, aroufed me from my heavy flumbers, and opening my eyes, in the horrible fuiprife of fuch a moment, I ftarted from my couch, as the flame of light beamed on feveral dark vifaged countenances, whofe drawn weapons declared but too certainly their dreadful purpofes. ** Betrayed in my own habitation, I foatched my fword from beneath mypillov* and was rufhing on my deftroyer?, when Matilda, awakened by the fudden clafh of weapons, threw berfdf into my arms, ex¬ claiming— * Oh God ! my prophetic fears are veri- fitd i Alfred, hiy life, n,y Lord, my bufband, we will die together !* and fainted on my bofom. The favage murderers would have torn her from my ftrong graip, but my arms were nerved with Herculean ftrength ; o a I de-
1 defended her from their approaches, and for fome time with but one hand kept them at bay. The room, however, filling with increafe of numbers, my Matilda received a defperate wound, aimed at her now frantic huiband. A deluge of precious blood iiTued from her fide. Great God of retribu¬ tion! when will the memory of that (oxd* harrowing moment ceafe to live in my dif¬ traded thoughts, or its impious adions be avenged ? * u Raging with madnefs at the accurfed deed, 1 kiffed the quivering lips of my Mati'da, and la) ing her gently on the couch, ttruck to the earth the monfter who had deftroyed her, defending her inanimate form from tie ruffians, as they advanced t> inatch my ufelefs tteafure from me*— At (iril the viILins aimed only to deprive me of my ii* eu> ; but enraged to fee one man hi? to the earth (o many of his oppo¬ nents, thty ail together ruflied upon me, and, vtiui related wounds, at length over* came
came me. Fainting from lofs of blood, I fell to the ground 5 the horrid fcene was clofed upon me, and I knew no more t ff On my awaking, as if from atrovbled vifion, to fenfe and feeling, the full tide of my irreparable mifery ruflied, in terrific con- vidion, on my heart. 1 groaned in the anguifii of my foul? &**d became alike a maniac to myfelf and to all around. How long I remained in this ftate I know not; but on my recovery 1 found my felf a prifoner in a gloomy chamber of the dungeon tower, whofe lofty windows admitted no particle of daylight but through fome narrow fpaces, half unclofed, and railed high above my head, " Oh God ! who can conceive truly the nights of reftkfs anguifh, and days of vain cxpedtng hope that here 1 paffed, or w Iut heart forma faint idea of the half of my un¬ utterable fufferings, or the diflraded horrors of my fickening ioul ? A gloomy lilcnce o 3 marked
marked the countenance of my jailer when¬ ever he made his daily vifit, and to my en* treaties to be informed of the fate of my loft Matilda, he gave only anfwerir#g looks of deep impreffive meaning, but never deigned to fpeak, €< Some months had rolled away, to de* fuibe which, 1 will not, my child, fo f&rafHid you; but haften to relate the crifis of my indefcrtbabie mifery. The deathlike ftill* nefs of my dreary dungeon was one night difturbed by the entrance of the defofted Rudolph. His pnud, triumphant ftride, &nd dark*vifegcd afped, fpoke too certainly the iad conclukon of a brother's wrongs;—* and approaching me as I lay chained to the floor, he orew forth a paper, the damned in¬ ftrument of my own ruin, and with horror I beheld the charaders to be my own. Their faia! contents were the total refignation I bad iigned of my birthright, and given to the villain Vincentio ; and in this interview %kh ihe unrelenting Rudolph, 1 difcovered that
that the former had been the fecret agent of my brother, as well as his mother; whofe art¬ ful pretended fandity of manners had de¬ ceived my father, at the very moment that he was plotting with Rudolph the ruin of his pi'pil by the inftructions of the latter.— He was encouraged to inftil thofe monaftic notions of worldly feclufion into my educa¬ tion, which he hoped would procure to himfelf the undifputed poffeflion of a bro¬ ther's inheritance, as foon as f fliould have withdrawn myfelf for ever from a poffibility of recal j but this hope failing in my union with Matilda, his dark foul, infpirittd by ambition, no longer hefitated to deftroy, by foul means, a brother's fair fortunes, to fe¬ cure his own* •* The fatal inftrument of my own ruin ftood in charaders never to be erafed* 1 bad betrayed myfelf by the infidious ma¬ chinations of a villain, and I now found that this accurled paper had fecured my brother the hchdorn of my poi&lfipns, and that he o 4 was,
was, and long had been, the acknowledged Lord of Edmondville* From the hour that I had firft entered the Monaftery of St. Ste¬ phen, he had fpread the report among my vaffals and tenants, that I had voluntarily taken the monaftic vows. My father lived not long after my difappearance, and at his death Rudolph's claims to my poffef¬ fions were admitted beyond a doubt i whilft the inftrument of my refignation of the Barony of Edmondville fecured it to bim beyond the power of litigation, I was then the deceived and wretched dupe of a brother's ambition, whofe undifputed power couki not now be withftood $ and loft teal thit I held dear, ftripped of my birth¬ right, and now become the viftim of an un¬ natural monfter, who had forgot the ties of propinquity and nature, I was the facrifice of a confeffed fratricide j for prefenting his dagger to my defencelefs breaft, he bade me chute my deftiny, and either refign for ever the pofllflion of Matilda, and the heirfhip of Edmondville, return to my Convent, and
and finifli thofe vows, which, with triumj h, he confeffed that he, by fecret agency, had been the inftrument of; or meet in prifon the end of my exiftence, and his daitard apprehenfions* ** Oh who fliall, with true certainty, be able to judge the feelings of fuch a moment, or the unutterable tortures my foulendured, to behold myfelf enfnared, betrayed, ruined by abrother% accurfed treachery ?—To fee at laft the end of all my happineis cruihed for ever, smd to know the outraged conclufion of my unequalled injuries, robs me of the fundions of life. My trembling hand can fcarcely write the damning fentence ; my blood runs cold from the feat of life, con¬ gealed in horror, when I think on the mad¬ dened recolledion! Let me haften through the dreadful fcene.—His heart was filled with an inceftuous paffton for the wife oi "im brother. The brutal monfter triumphed. No pitying arm was ftretched to fave her helplefs innocence; no miniftering angel o 5 looked
looked from his heavenly region to guard connubial purity. My wife, my (lirieking, hornr-ftruck Matilda, was dragged to the arms of her hufband*s brother. The iniqui¬ tous pander of an infamous employer, the double-faced villain that had early wrought my ruin, and drawn fucceeding deftrudion on me and mine, had that very morning profaned the ordination of his Goal, and over the inanimate form of the infenfible Matilda performed the facred ceremony of marriage with avowed triumph. The ac¬ curfed Rudolph acknowledged the hell-born deed, and bade me return Matiktewthanks for the life fhe had preferved, , * „ 14 The raging fury of my foul gave me almoft fuperoatural power. I tore my gall¬ ing chains from theiriaflenings, and with a furious aim, daflied them at the monfter*—* My oppreffor fell beneath the violence of my blow, and fuecl fer mercy. I pvc him my curies, and wag milling from my prifon, when
when l|is minions feized, and again enchain* ed me, "Here let me draw a veil of oblivion over the paft, and, if poffible, (pare thy ten¬ der fufceptible nature, my child, a full knowledge of thofe mental agonies, which no time can alleviate, no balm affuage. Defpair and madnefs aftaiied me, and a torpid hor¬ ror kept me for many months in a gloomy uncertainty between life and death* 1 was myfelf unacquainted with any thing that concerned nie 5 and the ftupor of infanity for a long time held me in merciful infen«« Ability***
o 6 CHAP.
»ffiBBBPffBw*TB8« i ffw l BffWBB^
*< Ambition \ nothing is too hard for thee I ** R«t"d by the influence oi thy fatal charms, ** Man fears so law, nor human nor divine*** Tracy* JuiERB Rofaline paufed a moment to give free vent to the convulfive agonies of her forrow. With deep angiuih (he mufed oh the contents of thofe dreadful records, and but too fully partook of the miferies of her fuffering parents. It was fome time ere (he could compofe her agitated fpirits fuffickntly to go through the reft of this tale of horror ^ whilft the tears which fell from her eyes, often prevented her from difttngnilhing the meaning of the writing, till, by a fecond 5 perufa3 t
perufal, (he was enabled to decipher the charaders. At length (lie thus continued; -— u Some time elapfed after my firft reco¬ very to the ufe of reafon, when my jailer, one night entering my prifon, bade me fol¬ low him, Grief and defpair had fubdued my foul. I was indifferent to my fate; for many months no words had paffed my lips; nor had a human voice, till this moment, broke the filence of my dungeon.— Recklefs of their defigns, I followed my condudors from my prifon, and being led through many vaulted paffages, I once more found myfelf in the open air. They bade me enter a clofed vehicle, that ftood beneath the walls of the Caftle j and when I had done fo, my jailer became my companion within, and four others on horfeback, armed, rode befide our caravan, to prevent the poffibility of my efcape. We were driven forward with a fpeed that fucceeded in aroufing nie to mental adion, and I awoke from my lethargy of defpair and madnefs to
to the recolledion of what I once had been, I now remembered that I once had a wife whom I adored, a child whofe birth had given increafed felicity to her once happy father; and with the ftrong tide of affitding mifery thefe endearing re- colledions occafioned, I awoke to an inte¬ reft in their fate, and fupplicated my com¬ panion to make known to me their end.—• With much entreaty I at length learned that 1 was going to tlie place where they were confined* It was enough ; and for the reft of the way a torpid filence kept me obfti- nately fullen to every thing my jailer faid. u On the fecond night we entered the boundaries of a large foreft. I faw no more, nor knew I whither they conveyed me ; for they had covered my eyes with a (hade, which they removed not till 1 was led between my guides up Several flairs, when they unblind¬ ed me, and I entered a dreary chamber, where, at the farther end fat a lady in mourn¬ ing habiliments, with her face reclined upon
upon her arm, and concealed by her veil She rofe on my approach, when 1 difcovered not the features of my outraged Matilda, but thofe of the Lady Agnes Methven. "An heel lc glow of triumphant malice irradiated her eyes as fhe threw open the lid of a large iron cheft, that ftood in the mid¬ dle of tlie ruined, defolate place ; and point¬ ing to its hollow, I beheld-—Oh God 1 Oh God of Juftice, v^herefoie flept thy aveng¬ ing thunders ?—mot the once blooming Ma¬ tilda of my conftant thoughts, the fweet image that even in madnefs cheered my fmntic hearty but the poor, pale, dead form of her who had once been my al of joy, 11 y heaven of happinefs ! Matilda had ceafed from her miferies, and Fate and Mahcc had done their wot ft. No longer cou.d her oppreffors triumph in her angufii; no lunger cculd her fuflcdng foul wikhe btmcath a nionftcr*& tyauiny. Her gentle fpiiit, too meek for the rude blafts of an
an adVerfe fortune* had burft its narrovr prifon, and flown to a better world, to re** ceive an immortal crown of glory for its a unci ings in this. ** Curfes, deep and foul* wrung, fuch as the greatnefs of my wrongs fent forth, were all the fad, poor retributions left me; but what could they avail ? Could they reftore the dead ? Could they bring back an angel wife, unpolluted, to my arms? Oh Godt—* awful injuftice, terrible in anger, wherefore fell not thy tremendous judgments on the fratricide of a brothers lawful rights ?~— Alas I I rail in vain, and the fbarp memory of my wrongs again has conquered my rea* fon* The recolledion of this foul-barrow* ing moment renews afrefli my inexhauftible griefs, which never, while life remains, can be fubdued or foftened : yet would you think it, my child, that as I viewed the pale, inanimate corpfe of her whom my foul adored, no tear moiftened my cheek, no figh
figh pafled my lips, and I looked upon my ruined love with a fmile of triumph, that only my regard for her happinefs could have occafioned!-~yes, I even rejoiced that death had clofed the fcene of her miferies, and robbed her infulting ravilher of his facrifice ! The flmee$ of my e}es were parched and dried to an inward growing grief that was immoveable \ nor could the relief which Nature bounteoufly bellows on others, rt* lax the tenfive horror of my feelings* My mifery defied the vent of words or lamenta¬ tions, and was too facred to be expreffed in this den of murderers. I kiffed the cold lips of my angelic love, as fhe lay cramped in her narrow prifon; for even the common ritual of the dead was denied her by the cruel Agnes, **ho feemed to have obtained a right over the fad remains, and now refufed her the laft only office of humanity. She had become an apoftate, and the friendly recep¬ tacle of nature's decay was forbidden by her relentlefs foe \ nor could there any prieft be found whofe charitable principles would allow
allow him to contaminate the facred bofom of the Church, by a performance of its holy fundions, ** As wkh the ftupified gagje of defpair, diftradion, and love I was ftill beholding the poor infenfate remains, whilft every feel¬ ing of my foul ivas torn with contending horror and indignation for my wrongs, the inhuman Agnes bade me view the facrifice of flighted love, the juft atonement of ber injuries, * Remember,' added (he, * the oath I took to avenge them; my day of retaliating triumph arrived, and Matilda is my \ idim; not herfelf only, but all that (he has borne, (hall dread my power, and feel my ven¬ geance!* f Away, fiend of hell P I franticly cried, as 1 threw her arms fr jui mine ; * be* gone to thofe dark regions, where thy kin¬ dled fpirits formed riiecoi heart hard enough to harm this precious murdered innocent; but if thou haft in the leaft degree increafed
increafed her afflidions, may the curfes of Alfred afcend to Heaven, and draw its ven* gcance on thee I May the keeneft punifh- ments and torments be inflided on thee; and while thy life continues, be confcience thy tormentor, and thy foul the vidim of its fevereft pangs 1* ** Imprinting a laft kifs on the cold lips of 4he poor injured faint, they hurried me from the fatal chamber, and again blinding my eyes, concluded me to the vehicle. Refift¬ ance was ufelefs ; and, in the excefs of my diftradion and defpair, I only remember that 1 was once more conveyed back to my former prtfon. *« This laft blow was fatal, nor did my foul ever recover its effeds, or my conftitu* tion efcape the wcakneis it occafioned, i forgot e\ery thing but the horrible fate of my Matilda, nor did I recoiled even thy pleading helpleffnefs ftill remained to draw jnc back to Be ; neither was it for fome time after
after that 1 became acquainted with the real fete of my wife and child, ** The jailer, who had ever, till lately, attended me in filence, at length, ftruck with fome fenfe of pity for my fufferings, in* formed me that Matilda, on the accurfed night that we arrived ac the Caftle from Scotland, had been conveyed to other apart* menu as foon as 1 was overcome. Her wound was but flight, m& foon healed |—and immediately flie recovered from its effects, Ihe was ordered to prepare to receive the mou* fter Rudolph for her Lord and huiband, or behold the death of hitn, as well as her child* whom in future fhe muft confider as no longer fuch, fmce her marriage with myfelf was unlawful, by the vows I had plighted to the facred profeffion of monafbedevotion, and from which notwithftanding I had apofta* tiaed,our cynnedionwas guilty and forbidden. To fave her child and huiband, the haplefs Matilda confented to the facrifice of herfelf, fince, without this immolation of her peace and
and happinefs, the following day was to be¬ hold the two beings her foul moft loved, butchered before her eyes, or fui rendered to iho flames of monaftic facerdotal vengeance! «* 'Tis enough to add, the ufurper tri¬ umphed in an angel's ruin, but guilt and hor¬ ror converted his inceftuous love to hatred and remorfe; and refigning the vidim of his luft to the power of his greateft agent, the ruthlcfs Agnes, he left her to the mercy of that dreaded foe, though not till ihe had borne him a daughter— Helen Paulina fo named. " It was about a week fucceeding my re* imprifonment, that the monfter, followed and guarded by his mifcrcants, entered once more my dreary dungeon. I read my fate in the expreflion of his dark frowning vifage ; but difdaining to foe, i turned my loathing eyes from his abhorred fight, and bade him quit my prefence,
u Wich
** With haughty language the villain^ again offered nie a choice of deftiny in the chance of life and death that awaited my eledion. Once more lifting my difgufted eyes to hh detcfted perfon, wich a look that pierced his alarmed heart, and *t*ad$ the monfter trerrble beneath the appalling fcru¬ tiny, I drew back from his near approach, as thus I ejaculated—* ** By what right haft thou affumed a pri* vilege to enter the prefence of a brother thou haft ruined ? Knoweft thou not, inhuman monfter, that between thee and Alfred God has placed an eternal bar of Juftice, never tobewhhdiawn till that great day Ihall come when bleeding brother's suid his wife's polluted fpirits (hail (land at the awful tribunal of thy Maker'* judgment feat, nur vainly cry foi letribution; but (hall hud thee headlong to thofe everlafting gulphs of mifery, where, hopelefs, thou (halt foe for relief, and endure all the hell of hell's torments, for thofe crimes committed againft the injured, that never wronged thee^?-— Aw*.y 1
Away! begone 1 and quit my ever! My foul abhors thy blading view; and my curfes, the curfes of a brother, purfue thee here with horror and remorfe, and hereafter with anguifli everlafting/ "The.ufurper trembled; pale horror fat on his countenance, nor dared he longer remain in my prefence. Precipitately he fled my prifon, and I never after beheld his detefted perfon. ** But the deeds he himfelf wanted courage to pe form, he was but too readily fop- plied with hirelings to execute ; and on the following night, as I lay on my fleeplefs couch, his agents entered my prifon with you in their arms, whom 1 had not for two )ears feen~a fight that recalled the af¬ fedions of my foul to parental c.notion, and I was rufhing to foatch thee from the ruf¬ fian's grafp, ' Give me, Oh give me my child !' I cried, in a tremulous fenfation of joy, which, at beholding
beholding thee for the firft time, fprung up anew in my heart; but they prevented my approach with their fwords, and I was told that my Rofaline was brought to die with her now irantic only parent, unlefs he would confent to fuch conditions as could alone, if complied with, fave our lives, and reftore our liberties. Raving for thee, my child, whofe infant ftrugglesto embrace your father rendered me ftill more impatient, I eagerly demanded the terms of our eman¬ cipation to be explained. The ruffian that withheld thee from my arms, had railed his unflieathed fword over thy little form, whilft another, his companion, informed me that liberty and life awaited me, on con¬ dition that 1 took a folemn binding oath to forego for ever my claims and inheritage of Edmondville^ become a ftranger to my na¬ tive country, and fwear never, in any degree whatfoever, to make known whom 1 was, or contradid the report, which was univerfally believed, that 1 had become a votary to monaftic feclufion. If I confented to this, proper
proper guides were already engaged to carry me on beard a veflel that was io convey us from the fliores of England to thofe of France, where every accommodation, fuit* able to my rank as a private gentleman, was provided for me in a retreat near the confines of that kingdom: if, on the reverfe, I re¬ fufed, the upraifed f>vorcl againft my child was in my fight to perform its dreadful pur¬ pofe, and my own life then fcal the fears of the tyrant in the murder of his niece and brother. At firft 1 ftarted from the horrid facrifice, but a moment's paufe, however, convinced me that I had no redrefs, no al* tentative allowed me; and the hope, had I been permitted to live, of reftoring myfelf to my inheritance, was a vam one, iinccb.' kfting imprifonment for life wouki render' it impoffible. My foul had loft ail te(t for worldly fplendour, and to me the pofleflion of a monarchy could not reftore that foil happinefs, which was for ever buried in the grave of my deftroyed Matilda.—Hod, I been their only vidim, death woukl have vou if i. r baa
a paffport from my fufferings and my wrongs; that g f ad!y—Oh how gladly!™! woukl have received ; but thy life, my Ro* feline, was alfo to fall a martyr to the mon* lier*s fecurity* Providence, however, even in that moment of defpair and diftradion, painted to the duties which Nature and the ties of a father ftill claimed the performance of j you fmilcd upon your wretched parent, and inftind prompted your little infantine endearments. Your outftretched arms, as they were eagerly expanded towards me, bade me fave your harmlefs innocence from the cruel tyrant's fword. 1 obeyed the foeet itupulfe, yielded to the dire neceflity, and from that moment involv¬ ed you, my child, in fuch myfterious moth **s perhaps it had been better we had both petiftied, than to have complied with the accurfed, only terms that could have i referred our lives. An oath, horribk in its native, and binding u the ties to heaven couWmakeit, wasadminifteredi the &tal vow efcaped my lips, and 1 fokmniy Iwore
fwofd never to make knovm to mortal breathing, but particularly to thee, the facri¬ fice I had made, or the dark events that had caufed it. This accurfed deed performed, the ruffians no longer withheld you from my arms, and we were conduded at midnight from our dungeon. The ecftacy of again pofl&Btng you, my Rofaline, overcame for the moment the memory of my wrongs; and I prefled you to my heart, as the only trea¬ fure left of my fainted Matilda. As our guides conduded us from prtfon, Philip, the jailer* from whom of late I had experienced feveral ads of kindnefs, put into iHy hand** nnfeen by his companions, a flip of papar, and bade me perufe it when alone j then hurrying us forward with feeming feverity* we foon gained the outfide of my rebellion* Caftle, whofe proud, inhofpitable towers had difavowed their Lord, and fent him forth in mifery from its dreadful gates. I tried to perufe the paper Philip had haftily put into my binds, bui it was midnight $ and ere the r % break
break of day, our guides had conveyed us on board the veflel that ftill lay at anchor near the (hore. "The ruffians, who had conduded us to the (hip, gave us in charge to its crew; and concluding every fear of my return tm- poflible, foon left us, 1 haftened to the cabin, that by its lighted tapers I might de¬ cipher the paper of Philip. It ran thus;-— M.....iMwnffWfw ' i '" t i ' Truft not your brother's word ; he has deceived you i —the veflel you iuppofe de¬ figned to tranfport you to France, is in reality 'a pirate, intended to convey you to a Barbary corfair, to whom yourfelf and child are fold. Be fecret, as yoyf value this cau¬ tion ; and fliould you efcape, make known to htm, who now riiks his life to fave you, the place of your refidence. * FHfilP/i ■ H nim ii wt l W l im iii» n > " My
fc My fears were verified, and our tyrant had ftill in (lore for me increafe of perfecu¬ tion. He had not the courage to fteep himfelf fo far in blood as io take our hap¬ lefs lives; but by fending us to the (bore of a barbarous coaft, he doubtlcfs hoped his every fear would end, and that wc fliould there meet the ftroke which he dared not himfelf perform. *' It was not yet daylight, and with eager impatience I watched to the fhore the guides as they rowed from the veffel. The appre¬ hensions of a parent for the dreadful fate his child was about to receive, nerved my arms, and quickened my invention. As it was yet very dark, t entreated the Captain of the (hip to allow me to remain on deck till we failed. Tiie requeft was granted; and the failors, bufy in unfurling their fails and rig* ging, paid no attention to their charge. cl The veffel was only a fmall trader, and lay at anchor upon its fide, not far from the p 3 fhore;
ibore; for the water wa? very ftiaiioty, md the flow of the tide would not yet permit ihem to draw their cable. cc The moments were precious; not an inftant was to be lofk$ and unioofing my cloak, I wrapped you fafeiy in it, and faften¬ ed you fecurely round my neck* You were aftoniflied, but not terrified 5 and to my en¬ treaties that you would not cry, you feemed to take an intereft in what I d^d for both our lafeties;—for your4ittle arms were clung faf| round my neck, nor did you even fpeak# I feteed a r^pe $t that fide oi the veffel whte^ leaned towards the water. The pitchy dark? mfs was favourable, and in filence I kt my¬ felf dowa* and was enveloped to my cheft in the lea. Gently pining the other end of the veffel, I fwam $ with little noife, towards the fhore, whilft the riotoui revelry of the crw on board, ami the roughnefs of the waters* much agitated by a ftrong gale of wind, lecured our retreat 5 and Providence, in pity to a father's fufferings* aflifted in thp preiervation
prefervation of his child, and in fafety we reached the (hore. ** Nature had Strengthened me with un¬ ufual power* I ftrugglcd with the feel¬ ings of a hateful exiftence, and for your fake, my Rofalme, I preferved a lite that, to myfelf, had no value to defers a fingle care for* ** As we landed, I hurried through the tracklefi darknefs of night with all the fpeed my nearly exbaufted ftrengu v*ould permit; and as the day begm to break over tlie tafkm hills, I de.crie t a diftant cottage on the verge of a wood. Thither I bafteoed, and beneath its (helteruig roof refted my weary limbs in fdety from my j urfuers j a poor but hofpt*able couJi ga e rec.*,n to tired Nature, and once more I tailed the bleflings of long-loft liberty. Sleep foon clofed your eyes* j and the unconfcious flum* bers of balmy infant innowtnee rendered F 4 JOU
you infenfible to the fufferings of your un* happy parent. * 4 Some days were fpent in th*»$ retreat, as well to recover from an illnefs that I endured, as to fecure mc from all fear of being again made a prifoner. O^en (for he was the mailer of the cot) was poor % and having - Ltely loft his wile, with much zial and g'adnefs confented to become my fervant.— By his means 1 procured fuch conveniences a& were neceflary for my dtfigns ^ and ac«> companied by that faithful domeftic, we journicd at midnight from the cottage, and after feveral days, arrived at length in iafety at my aucient poffefilon in Scotland* " But here, alas I though freed from per¬ fecution, I was not from mifery, which* if poffible, was greatly increafed by the conftant remembrance which this delight* ful retreat prefented of thofe once happy hours of refined pleafure which, in lhe fociety of my adored Matilda, I had enjoyed.
enjoyed. Each well-known objed of her care and notice, every little indefcrtbabie circum- ftance attending our mutual cares or joys, were again renewed, and brought to life her dear idea to my foul, over whofe -fufferings I have wept till Nature's fources were ex- haufted. Melancholy madnefs for months and years gave me the only relief from thefe tortures of the mind which I endured; and not even thy endearing careffes, as infancy began to ileal into adolefcence, could remove them. Time had no power over my grief; years paffed away, and its poignancy was ftill as freih as at the firft hour of its exift¬ ence, nor was its anguifh to be afluaged.— Buried in the conftant confinement of my own apartment,- I feldorn admitted any but my child within its interior ; and my only companion vvas the inanimate reiemblance of Matilda, to whom, in the mfauity of my gloomy and immoveable forrow, 1 w r ould converfe as to a living being.
* s
** You
€t You had nearly reached your eighth year, when one morning the long reign of peaceful ferenity from oppreffive perfecu* tion was difturbed i and Philip, the rough but honeft jailer of my prifon, wbfft mur fined at Edmondville, entered my apart* meat. The importance of his looks* and nnexpeded vifit, awoke me to attention, and declared the greatjaefs of his miffion* Ru* tiolfih had difcovered that not only myfdf, tmt you, my child, had efcaped, and were Hill in exiftence i for the veffel to which Vie were carried, was deftined by the vil¬ lain for the deftrudion of yourfelfc His defign, when he enforced the horrid oath, was to have delivered you not as the re- wd of my confent to his unnatural deedt, fe^t as a being already nearly deftroyed 5 for the nurfe, who had you in care, before our leaving the Caftle* was inftruded to admi*- mfter in your food a fuhtile poifon, that in a little time would render you a corpfe* Pity, however, and the belpleffuefs of perfed in¬ fant innocence* prevailed* She deceived the 3 demon
demon with a falfe tale, and your precious exiftence was ftill preferved. Philip, at the hazard of his life, had haftened on tha friendly office, to warn me of our danger* * Fly,' cried the humane man, * whilft the power of flight ts permitted you I A few hours only intervene between you and cer¬ tain ruin. Lord Rudolph, with a nume¬ rous band, is haftening to execute his cruel defigns. Had you not efcaped the veffel, a watery grave had overwhelmed you j but this laft purfuit is fatal, and nothing but immediate flight can fave your lives/ * <f He ruflied from my prefence, and haf¬ tened back to his employer's manfion by a contrary road* Not an inftant was to be loft: my domeftics were faithful; they readily iwore themfelves to fecrecy* and con¬ fented to follow the fortunes of their perfe¬ cuted Lord, and we haftened ? for ever fron* the bofpitabie retreat of Malcolm Tower, On my journey hither I debated whether I p 6 fhould
fliould not feek redrefs openly in the kws of juftice and retribution; but, alas! my oath forbade the aft, and confeience powerfully fettered every thought of refiftance. I re^ membered that I had already become an apoftate to my God, and an alien to the iacred vows I in part had taken ia the refi* dence of his holy altars. Love had tempted me to forget my folemn engagements; but fhould i dare again to break a fecond oath, which Heaven itfelf was witnefs to, what but increafed mifery could I exped: from the juft anger of an offended Maker ? It was in thefe moments of doubt and indecifion that I truly beheld the heinoufnefs of my former crime 5 and in the injuries which an earthly agent was permitted to inflid, I viewed the chat* tening fconrge of an all-wife Punifber for the errors of my paft fins i and though ftill doting to madnefs on the objed that had tempted me to fwerve from my duty, I was refolved patiently to refign to the will of Providence the redrefs of my wrongs, nor (miher draw his wiath upon me by a repe¬ tition
tition of my former guilt, fince the privilege of all earthly appeal for relief was forfeited in the unhappy coniequences of my perjuiy to Heaven„ * c The poffefBons of your angel mother,, after the deceafe of her father and brother, who both died on the field of battle, were j»ot inconfiderable; and had flie liveJ, flie had been their undoubted heirefs. Her child, however, ftili exifted ; but had 1 ven* tured to claim this her dower, I fliould have eat poled myfelf to a difcovery, fince the tyrant Rudolph had feized alio thefe eftates, as the legal inheritance of Helen, his daughter by Matilda Sr* Ofwythe. The defolated ruin of this Abbey vsas the only refidence thai remained, which alfo de¬ fcended to Matilda j but from its remote and forgotten fituation, together with tiie ftate of its lands, and the idle reports of the furrounding country, it had for more than a century been left deferted; nor did even its former heir, the father of Matilda, remember
remember he had fuch a place j or at leaft if he ever did fo, it was fuppofed to be too much in decay and ruins to make it worthy his attention. I had affumed the name and title of St. Ofwythe from the firft moment pf my arrival in Scotland, after my efcape from the veffel; and the manfion that gave the title to its poffeffor was now the Lft fad. refuge of its haplefs heirefs. Hither then I came; its remote folitudes promifed us fecurity *, and robbed of your lawful inherit* ance, I refolved to do my child fome little juftice for the injuries of her fortunes, in re- ftoring this demefne to a ftate of value fuit* able to its lateft heir. If Here, then, in the Abbey of St* Ofwythe I fecurely refted. In thefe mag¬ nificent ruins, thefe embowered folitary re* ceffes, I at laft found that melancholy feclu* fion fo fuited to the difpofition of my foul, Here,unfeen, I had kifure to refkd on the paft occurrences of my life, and, in the open¬ ing graces of my child, to trace the grow* ing
ingrefembknceof my beloved Matilda.'—As you grew older, the pliable and melting ten* dernefs of your guiltlefs nature, ever lively, ever contented, made you view with won¬ der the conftant and fettled melancholy defpair of your father. Alas 1 my Roialine, how little did you imagine the woes that op¬ preffed him were of a nature that, while he lived, precluded you from his confidence, and I fear will involve you in a fate of myfte¬ rious fuffering 1—Oh God 1 how often, when your betceching eyes were ratted in affitding enquiry to mine—how often has the fatal fecret of my foul trembled on my lips, and been on the point of difclofure—how has my anguUhed heart (ickened for the balmy iuce&fe of filial confidence and commiiera- tion ! But mine was a grief refined in mi* fery, for every alleviation that Nature offered was denied me, and, added to the inflidions of an inhuman barbarian, and the engage¬ ments of my irrevocable oath, was the inward npbratdings for that which 1 had already broken $ but when 1 refkded on the injury 1 had
I had done my child, and thought on die datigcrs to whirh her helplefs youth might be expofed—Oh then how bitter were my agonies, how furpaffmg in mifery (ha ex¬ quisite tortures I endured 1 " Philip, the jailer, to whofe friendly in* terference we had twice owed our efcape from the fear of death, fometimes related in manu* fcript the adions of the detefted Rudolph, who now, triumphing in a brother's de* ftrudion, the blafter of his fortunes, the ac¬ curfed defpoikr of—Oh God I let me not think upon the horrid deed* 1 grow wild ! Ruib upon the monfter in his feat of power, and ftrike the ufurper with a brodier's ven¬ geance ! This Rudolph, whofe name (bunds horrible to repeat, was laft advancing to in¬ creafe of honours, and had taug t the daughter of his brutal lufts to become the hater of myfelf and child, of whom many dark threats were often uttered j but in fpite of his power, hisgreatnefs, and his fplendour, the terrors of a guilty mind at length over¬ took.
took him. His nights, devoted to flccp, were only the (lumbers of horror; and from Philip 1 learned that he had never, of late, refigned himfelf to his golden couches of downy foftnefs but wiih the expedation of being dragged from hi* Lkgal {eat of power by the arrival of his wronged brother, to de-<» mand retribn»i>n and redr^fs. AUs! he might have ftihed hi* feais, had he btitcr known my iuart; my feelings would i'ot t from any tonfideration of injury, hav^ permitted me to defeat what hk tyranny had impofed : the facred oath that I had already difregarded and broken, demanded, during my life, an exemplary pumlhment, great as my offences, to wipe their ftains away. Principle, and the dictates of my re¬ ligion, kept me paffive under the exceflive load of my wrongs, and gave fecurity to the accuiled fratricide; for it was fit that 1, who had fo deeply erred, ihouid expiate, by a felf-wilkd penitence on earth, the fin of my apoftate difobedience; and though fo fierce had bew my injuries, ami fo juft my power of
of feeking redrefi, and deftrudion on the triumphant villain that occafioned them, yet the coi.fcious guilt of my foi mer involuntary condud withheld the uplifted arm of ven¬ geance, till its right ihouid be vefted in my guiltlets child, and 1 therefore (offered the ufurper ftill to revel in my defpoiled inheri¬ tance* * € In the meantime, you, my Matilda* (for that is your real name, Rofaline being only a fidion, affumed to deceive all chance of discovery, and which appellation you muft in t future be known by* when at the bar of Juftice you ftiaU aflfert your claims to the inheritance of your father), grew up in all the youthful plenitude of your angel mother'sfafcinatingperfedions. Ah! with isrhat ftruggUng emotions of anguilhed re- gret and delight I viewed in ber daughter the exad refemblance erf my dear wife, wbofe every look and feature lived again, in you 1 Your foft blue eyes bad all that fparkf ling animation wbkh once irradiated thofe of your mother* foftcned into the melting ex* predions
preflions of a foul of refined fenfibilky.— Ah! how often, in the extreme fenfations of anguilh and regret for her fof>, have I ruflied from you* prefence to avoid the fight of that ftill hving being in yourfelf, whofe fufferings even at this moment diftrad the throne of Reafon to remember, and aroufe my foul to deeds of defperation ! It was only in the gloomy impervious (hades of the Jforeft, or in fome deep-hidden hollow of the ruins of the Abbey, far from the prying fight of mortal ken, that, groaning in tiie agoniz¬ ing tortures of my recoileded wrongs and faf%* I fQuod the power of affuaging for a time ihf bitternefs of my foul-harrowing feelings; ifaeret unfeen, 1 gave thdn free indulgence* md found an interval of returning compo¬ fure, as the defigJts of fuicide gave place to the fofter emotions of pity for the helplefs ftate of my child, and the reftediot* of what would b§ her fate fhould 1, her only protector, defert her in th$ hour of approachipg danger. Thefe fad ideas calmed my raging torments, md to live for your fake, my Matilda, would
would repay the facrifice of an exiftence fo hateful. Convinced, however, that nature in me was neatly exhaufted, and would foon procure me a happy releafe from the infup- purtdblc miferieb l endured, 1 have employed my fcattered thoughts during thofe hours which by the world are dedicated to repofe, to decipher thefe dreadful charaders of my Ovvn and my child*s injuries* May Provi¬ dence guide you to theie fad records, and when they are found, m&y the protecting arm of your heavenly Parent be to your haplefs innocence that guardian prefcrver which your earthly one was deprived of. The fatal, the accurfed oath that enthralled me in filence, and fabmiffioii to the will of an unnatural orother, prevails not in tht graven and m me death of her father, my Matilda will find a fure reward for the injuftice which bis exiftence wouU alfo have prolonged the continuance of. Do you not think it bard, my chikUthat the rights and ties of Nature ftiould b. thus perverted, and that the father dares not openly proted his offspring ? Oh God
*God of I look with mercy on the asiooies I have endured! Oh miv my long and patient fuflerings find forgiv.- nefs j or if ftill there b in (lore incicv.fe of mifery, may it alone fall on iny devoted head, but not on the innocent child that is free fiom the fins of tier ruined parent I Oh Matilda! will you not think it il range that to preferve you from the m)llerious dangers you from me inherited, i, unknown to yourfelf, had entered St. Anna's Tower, to warn you fecraly of evil winch openly I was withheld fr-m. Philip, full anxious for my fafety, though no longer a depen¬ dant of Rudolph, gave me timely inrima- tjon that a find fearch was fet on foot by tho uiurper to difcover our retreat, and a larg$ rcwurd oflered to thofe on the purfuit that fouad us. The ramotc and forgutttji fituation of the Abbey I knew was our iureit protedion; but, anxious for your iutmc fafety, 1 did not oppofe your dciirc of tempt¬ ing the fuppofed dangers o\ St, Anna'* rum: the report of its bcip^ the refort of aghoffc X ,. 1 JLuU
had raifed in you a youthful curiofity to fearch for the truth, and as it was art harmlcfs wiih favourable to my purpofes, I foffeped you paflively to purfue it The hiftory of the unfortunate Nun, which I had found among fome ancient records relating to the Abbey, in the old library, 1 enclos¬ ed in the mantifcript my own hand had traced, the better to fecure your attradion to the envelope, and continue «hat delufion which my fblemn oath forbade the unfolding of. Bound to etetnal filence while living, and bereft of the fad privilege af fecuring you, by my advice, from the foes you had to dread, 1 had no other alternative left me than to alarm your fears, and at leaft excite curiofity to guard you againft their myfte* rfouseffeds; while the peculiar and even awful manner in stitch my defigns werd tranfaded, would, I doubted not, make tb&t laftingimpreflion on your mind, which would for ever keep you on the watch when I no longer (hould bave power over your ae* tionsitoftielferiind pr©t«& yen from the dreaded
dreaded pundits of your fecret bloodthirfty perfecutors ; whi.ft the fortitude and perfe- verance wtth which you fo coura^eoufly v?em tiirough a fctne oi fucu apparent terror, juftified the onlv means, alarming as they were, which enabled me to caution you of the dangers that 1 one day fordaw too forely would fall upon you, **' The papers of inftru&fon that guide you to the repofitory of thefe direful records will, when you per ufe them, inform you how with fecurity to proceed in theinvefti- f ation of jnmr rights, and the proper me¬ thod to be taken for your re*eftabhthment to the inheritance of your anccftors. Re¬ member the wrongs and mi cries your wretched parents have endtned, and they m\\ alone infpire you with courage to avenge them The noble Ruithvina, when you fhall have made known to her the con¬ tents of thefe papers, will aid your pious pur¬ pofes, and guard you from ihe malice of your foes, till juftict (lull have refior«d you to
to the poflcflions of your parents, and de* prived their oppreffors for ever of the power of their ufurped dominion* would fain rob mc cf this laft office of a pa¬ rent's love; but 1 will yet ftruggle with the enervating fenfation, for 1 have more—*- much nso.: to explain cse the fed una fore of my woes be ended: alas! till Death has given mc freedom, till his cold icy hand has foaled my eyes for ever, the oath which keeps nie dumb muft ftill prevail, ftdl leave you in igoorance i f the means of fafety and prefer-* vation; and Heaven and the angel of Fate be thanked, the hour of enlargement I feelis near at hand!—A few months, perhaps weeks, arc all that will remain to mc of life j already oi) wearied foul feels light, and anxi* ou$ for its flight, and my fpirit, hovering round its prifon walls, would fun break through their narrow enclofures to wing it¬ felf to the realms of peace; aheady my pro- phaic heart foretell the near conclufion of all its
Its miferies, and this, perhaps, is the laft time I may ever be petmittcd to enter this dreary chamber-~*thefe the laft lines my fingers may ever trace of the fad mournful records of a ruined parent's legacy to his only child !— Let not this recolledion grieve you, my love; but think how welcome, how more than welcome is the blifsfui ftroke of death- how balmy and peaceful that hand which releafes me from fuffering mortality i Reflect alfo, that for me there was not the flighted glimmer of a hope of happinefs on eauli :— but in the world to come—ah 1 how infi¬ nitely joyful will be the change! nor will any forrow imbitter my latter moments but for my child. The parting pang with my Ma¬ tilda will be dreadful; but ta poignancy will alfo be blunted by the knowledge that my difiblution reftores her again to the World, and to that happinefs which her recovered inheritance will bring with it; whilft in the maternal protedion and friendfliip of Ruithvina, my fears for your fafety wilt be ftilU'gcd, md my child nobly guarded vol* nc Q^ IKUl
from the ill effeds of her orphaned anS deftitute ftate. ** I grow ftii! weaker—my eyefight faik me—I can write no more at prefent; but to-morrow or, perhaps, on the enfuing midnight 1 fliall have gained more ftrength, and thefe racking agonies will bate ceafed* Farewei! — — — ~~~ u The ftranger has left me 5 again 1 re- fume my fad employment:—perhaps, ah! too certainly, for the laft time I addrefs you 1 A wild confufion diftiads my brain; diforder, hope* and horror affail me, and prevent me from knowing what 1 write; my hand trembles-—I am incoherent, and you will not understand what you read*—Oh God I Oh God ! I have furely for the laft time beheld my child! Never fliall 1 return alive to be a witnefs of her seftoracion, or her joyful ecftacy in once more beholding her father. Death's cold hand has grafped his deftined prey; a little* Utile refpite, and I am willingly
willingly thy vidim. Give me, grim king of horrors to the guiitjwgtve me a little (pan of time to perform an aft of juft^ce I Oh Father of Mercies, fufpend the ftroke til I have reftored my child; and though the next moment ftretches me a corpfe, 1 (hall die with fcranfport to have lived till that hour of retribution arrives! t€ You are alarmed* Matilda, at this fud* den journey, and think me unkind to defert you j but 1 go to reftore you to yourfdf. The friendly Philip, ftill mindful of my fkkty, informs me the tyrant is no more: bis death rdeafes me from my vow—'filence and fubmiffion are ended—the hour of re¬ tribution is at length arrived :—Rudolph, remorfelefs and unnatural, has received tte too long delayed fiat of his monftrous crimes, and only a girl remains to oppofe my legal claims. Helen of EdmondvWe is now Paulina of Othin ; but (be mhertts her father's unrelenting nature, and parities ns even with greater rigour than her ruthlcfs lire. o^i u Omnipotent
. €< Omnipotent Fountain of ceieftial good¬ nefs! proted my child? and fliould her only parent no more return alive to guard her helplefs ftate, deign, God of juftice i dejgn to fliield her from her bloodthirfty foer, and preferve her from their implaca¬ ble Mtred and unnatural malice ! <4 To the tribunal of juftice I haften from the Abbey to. prove the wrongs I have endured, and accomplifiY your reftoration to your inheiitance; - but fhould the fpeedier iiieflenger of death arreft my progrefs ere I arrive at the deftinatica of my jour¬ ney, then will thefe papers, with othets of confirming value remaining in the cheft, prove themfelves ample tcftimonies of your undoubted rights.—I cannot fay—heait- breaking word !-•—I cannot fay, Farewel for iver ! though my prophetic foul aflures me that I have enfolded you for the laft time in my paternal embraces, Oh f may Pro¬ vidence proted my child, and guide her in fafety to thefe difmal receffes, the only fecure
fecure places my fears have left me for the fecretion of my recorded wrongs from every other ipfpcdion than my child's***
The agonized Rofaline was proceeding to the end of thefe dreadful papers, when a noife in a diftant corner of the chamber ftar¬ tlcd her, and flie caft her deluged eyes around to fee what had occafioned it; nothing, how- ever, appeared to warrant alarm, which had only been caufed by the wind as it fhook tl^e toUeiing building, and (he again bent her forrowful eyes on the manufcript. Much yet remained to be perufed; bufc almoft unconfcioufly her eyes fell upon the following palfage:— i€ Remember the dignity of your birth, and the illuftrious rank and title of your name, which fiom henceforth is no longer Rota- 0*3 line
line St* OHvythe, but Matilda, Mromfs of Edmondville. Let the woes and injuries of your parents infpire you with noble ven¬ geance ; and refleft that the fhade of your father will hover, diffatisfied and unquiet, over its rcftlels grave, till the wrongs it has endured, during its mortality, are finely re* dreflfcd. Thefe papers are the only proofs of your lawful claims to the inheritance of your forefathers; refpe<Sfc them, and fulfil the mandates of their contents; fo fliall they be enabled to retrieve from oppreflion and ufurpation your long defpoiled rights/* Rofaline had read thefe records with emotions fuch as nature only could have excited and produced :—to fay that fhe had wept tears of anguifli over their fatal contents, would be but faintly to ex> piefs the reality of her inmoft feelings," which were, beyond defcription, poignantly bitter and convulfive* A fpirit of injured aroufed juftice, however, feemed for a mo¬ ment to have animated her foul from the depths
depths of human mifery, to the fenfations of deteftatton and revenge;' (he perufed again the laft fentence, and, without finiih- ing the record, fell fuddenly on her knees, in a tranfport of pity, abhorrence, and indignation, as with uncommon fer¬ vency flie exclaimed aloud^—** Yes, Oh yes 1 my injured fuffering parents, I will re- drefs you !~Oh God ! Oh God! what muft have been the miferies of my diftraded fire I—Barbarous, unnatural, horrinie bro¬ ther—defefted, unrelenting Rudolph 1— Oh Power Supreme, avenger of the guilt¬ lefs I—Grant, Oh ! grant fome fpeedy means of fwift deicendiug retribution i M ——Sue paufed in the remembeied hope'.eflhefs of dcjpdic.— " Alas ! vain effort! impoffible cleiire, never to he gratified ; for am 1 not the deftined vidim of—horrible, horrible thought 1—Gicat God, to whom am 1 —- is flie not—my ---- *' A freezing horror benumbed her fcnf t :; flie was uaable to pumouiivC ihe dreadful 0^4 name i
name $ her thoughts became wild and inco* hercnti ft>e funk on her chair, exhaufted and overcome with the excefs of her emo* tions, as again, with the frenzy of defpair, Ilie repeated aloud— " Remember the dignity of your birth, and the iftuftrious rank and title of your name, which from henceforth is no longer Pvo'aline St, Ofwythe, but Matilda, Baron¬ efs of Edmondville. Let the woes and injuries of your parents infpire you with noble vengeance; and reflect that the fhade of your father will hover, diffatisfied and un¬ quiet, over its reftlefs grave, till the wrongs it has endured, during its mortality, are finally red refted. Thefe papers are the only proofs of your lawful claims to the in¬ heritance of your forefathers; refped them, and fulfil the mandates of their contents; fo (hail they be enabled to retrieve from oppreffton and ufurpation your long de¬ fpoiled rights." " -" ..... —■
la
In pronouncing the laft words, her blood fuddenly forfook her heart, her joints ftiff- «ened in horror, and the coldneis of death ieized her whole frame; for her hand was fuddenly grafped, and the precious records which (lie ftrupgled to retain, were wrefted from her, when a voice, dreadfully familiar to her ear, ejaculated— " There (ink for ever the laft teftimony of your claims!—Perifh in the flames the lying forgery of an impoftor and a mad* man, and be t le rights of Helen fecured beyond difpute!" . Matilda fprung from her feat as, in an- guiih and defpair, ihe fliriekcd aloud------ «< Save them, Oh fpare them !"—and rufh¬ ing towards the hearth, ihe ieized from the before dying embers of the fire (n >w re- illumined hy the facred records already in ablaze) fome that had not yet (bared in the conflagration. Paulina, however, fnacch-
ing them from her, again configned them to deftrudion, whilft, with an unflieathed uplifted dagger, ihe guarded the hearth* from the frantic attempts of Rofaline's approaches, till the whole were entirely confumed. As a being who idly grafps at life (un*- willing to refign it), though the laft heaving ftruggjes of nature are iffuing from his corporeal frame, in convidive affiartnces that there is no repeal from fate; fo, with like defpair, Rofaline viewed the flames of the precious manufcript, till i£ became annihilated, and not a wreck re¬ mained : and thofe lines, the labour of a fuffering parent, as t uy (hone for a moment bright in the crimibn g ! are, expreffed in more illumined vivid charaders their ciytng wrongs for vengeance and retribution i but in a few moments they became invifi- ble, and every remnant oi them funk ta eternal oblivion * not a veftige remained-** not
not a fingle line to prove the now ufehfs claims of the injured orphan was in exift- • encc—who, gafping, defpairing, and fub¬ dued, beheld tie fading embers, as fainter and paler, they dwindled into fparks, that momentarily danced upon their now un- fubftantial furface, and funk to aihy blacknefs: whilft, in their deftrudion, Rofaline beheld alfo the vain efforts of her father's labours to reftore her to her long defpoiled inheritance, vaniih for ever! «*-Btit all! not for her own lois did the wretched Rofaline weep the bitter tear of anguifli and regret; within her pious bofom dwelt no thought of felfifti, woiluly exalta¬ tion; but her fufceptible heart knew and felt, deeply felt, what pain it muft have given to her fuffering parent, to have re¬ traced anew the never-dying uvm.*ry of his wrongs, and the forrows they had occafion¬ ed ; but to foie in fuch a manner the fruits of lis efforts, the lacred relics of his lUeft moments of exillence—to be thus bar- baroufly
baroufly robbed, inhumanly plundered of all, at a time fo fudden, and in a^manner fo uncxpedecl, required a fortitude more than * human to fuftain unmoved. But Rofaline,, or rather Matilda, the injured orphan of a? ruined Houfe, though finking under the agonizing oppreffions of fuch accumulated mifery, difdained to betray* in the prefence of her mercilefs perfecutor, the anguifh of her inmoft feelings, or fwell ihe triumph of her fuccefiful rival with any expreffions of her fufferings ^ who* as foon as the papers. were completely deftroyed, turned round upon her victim with intuiting irony, and hailed her c< Baronefs of Ldmondville$" but,, wiih abhorrence, not to be repelled, Ro¬ faline retreated from her fight* difdaining to, reply.-—" Where is now thy fccuiity, where are the proofs of thy claims ?" (he cruelly continued a «* or who, thinkeft thou, would dare, in thy behalf, to oppofe the powerful Paulina's rights, guarded by t poffeilion, friends innumerable, and wealth immeme ? Vainly hadft thou hoped luccefs, vainly drugged
ftruggled againft thy fate, fince thy life is already in the difpofal of thy enemy, whofe hatred to thee is mortal; and ufelefs is the unavailing figh for the poffeffioa cf that towering fublimity of greatnefs, which Pau¬ lina only was born to inherit and poffefs; but fince thou haft dared to pry into the fecrets that never were intended for thy knowledge, know that, by the power and means-which made me what I an, I will maintain my ftarion at whatever purchafe it may coft me. Thy exiftence alone has de¬ barred me of the love of" Lord Conftan¬ tine, and the hatred, which living, I bore thy father, novv trebly deftends on tht^i .nor (hall the proud triumph of being the fortunate rival of Paulina longer fwell with -exulting infolence thy prcfumptuous hopes; for be afiured that btnond thefe walls thy foot fteps fhall never extend, whilft a deftiny, terrible as certain, ihall overwhelm thee in that deftrudion thy arrogance has provoked.—-Know well thy foe, for fuch ib Helen of Edmondville, or Paulina of Othin; ia
in either or both you behold but one enemy* who now bids thee defpair, nor longer place reliance on a hope where all is loft, and an inevitable doom awaits thee.*' * c My only hope of reliance refts with tny God!" fervently replied the finking Ro* faline, ftaggering towards the couch as Pan* lina fternly approached the door of the prifon : " to whofe almighty wifdom I re* fign myfelf wkh humility and fubmiffion/* Here let us draw a momentary oblivioti t)n the innocent fufterer, whofe miferies, in¬ creafed to their utmoft pitch by the late dif* coveries, feemed arrived at their climax:* and defied the power of defcription to do juftice to. She fell, exhaufted and infenfible, tipon her couch as Paulina clofed the door of her dungeon, and remained alike void of feeling for the paft, or fenfation to the tortures of the prefent moment. END OF VOL. Ill,
