Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Ethelwina: or, The house of Fitz-Auburne: a romance of former times
ar
ETHELWINA.
>e»9£94»
CHAP. I.
JL HE trembling Ethelwina liftened to the approaching founds of footfteps as they drew ftill nearer to the court, and in agonized apprehenfion flie looked through the broken. and parting cornice of the parapet, and faw the frightful form of Ruthmer, the con¬ fidant, and favourite attendant of Leopold, whofe black countenance was the pidure of murder; for'he more properly refembled >a daemon than a humaft creature. Ethelwina had feen him before , but his cadaverous face vol. n. * had
had given her a too well-founded abhorrence of him; fhe never faw him without terror, and now, as he entered the court, flie fhud¬ dered with horror, as, looking^ fiercely round him, with a fufpicious eye, he faid, with a horrid imprecation— " What daring foot has prefumed to en¬ ter this court ?—How came that door open ? I'll fwear I myfelf bolted it but yefterday ;— if I difcover the wretch, he dies upon the inftant."—And then catting his frightful eyes around the court, he walked to the tower. * But what was Ethelwina's amazement, when fhe beheld him take a large key from his belt, and proceed to the fteps ; fhe heard a heavy door unlock and thrown open, but was prefently clofed with noife, and fattened after him. The extraordinary motions of Ruthmer for a while fubdued the fears of Ethelwina. That herfelf was not the object of purfuit was aftonifhing; but no time muft be loft; fhe found fhe muft haften from the court before
before his return, or elfe be expofed to the chance of a difcovery. Starting from her concealment, fhe arrived in fafety at the bot¬ tom of the fteps; and keeping clofe to the fides of the tower, left fhe fhould be ob¬ ferved, fhe gained the paflage, and hurrying on in momentary dread, at laft, after tra- verfing a variety of galleries and intricate paffages and turnings, arrived in fafety and undifcovered at her own chamber. Having thrown herfelf into a chair to re¬ cover her breath, fhe gave a loofe to her forrowful refledions. Her difappointment in the vain hope flie had entertained of her efcape dwelt on her mind, but did not pre¬ vent her from thinking on the ftrange cir¬ cumftances flie had feen and heard. That there were other unfortunate beings confined in Ever, and even more rigoroufly treated than f herfelf, fhe now had not the leaft doubt of. She forgot, for a time, her own mifery in pity and commiferation for the ftill greater fufferer, whom fhe was now well affured was a prifoner in the dreary tower. n She
She recolleded that the voice fhe had heard was foft, gentle, and melancholy ; and the manner in which the words were fung, convinced her" it was no common mufician; it is true fome of the notes, flie remembered, were wild, and betrayed a want of cultiva¬ tion, but were alfo melodious and grandly fimple, nor in the leaft difplayed the harfh rough tones of a mountain peafant. When fhe called to mind the fierce looks of Ruth¬ mer, and the drawn fword which flie re¬ membered to have feen in his hand, flie fighed, and, with tears in- her eyes, ex¬ claimed— " Alas! poor unknown fufferer I this night, perhaps, is doomed to be thy laft !-— The midnight murderer, fecure of his prey, can iearlefs plunge his fword into the heart of unfhielded innocence, and in this den of fhugi'ter can fafely fit and fcorn the claims of juftice or of mercy. Tiie evening clofed, and Ethelwina ftill remained in her chair, where fhe had thrown herfelf, *
>
the back of her feat. Her beaurifol trefies, partiog behind her neck, fell over her fore¬ head, and covered her face and hands, while the filert tears trickled from her eyes; and, abforbcd in reikctions on the happy part of her former hie, contrafted to the mifery of her prefent, fbe was awoke from her medi- ditations by a knocking at the door, aad, upon demanding who was there, ihe *as anfwered by Agatha, who was admitted, and came with lights and the fupper, ac¬ companied by the cup of wine. Ethelwina remembered what fhe had f en in the morning, and refolved to difpo c :f this as flie had done the former. She took. the cup, and putting it to her lips, without fetting it down, defired the watchful A^ itha to procure her a quantity of frefh water, afligning as a reafon for this requefl, that flie was fubjed to extreme thirft in the night, and that by having water in the chamber, fhe fhould be able to fatisfy, and fave herfelf from fever, b 3 Agatha
Agatha left the chamber to obey Ethel- wina*s commands ; aad, on examination, fhe a^am perceived the fcdiments at the bottom. Ethelwina, while fhe dreaded, felt aftonifbeJ, and was unable to account for the caufe of its being fo frequently re¬ peated ,* till it ftnick ber that the deign of Leopold was to adminifter ftnall quantities tl fome dangerous potion in her drink, that might * a time undermine her fenfes, and reduce her to a carelefs indifference, a lan¬ guid torpor of mind, that would render her forgetful of herfelf; and thus tbe'keen- nefs ofher feelings and underftanding weak- * ened and fubdued, would at laft enable him with fuccefs to obtain her by her own con¬ fent, and confequently her fortunes—the unhappy inftruments that excited his avarice, and put Ethelwina in his power. Ethelwina had guefled but too true. Leopold, enraged to find all his plans abor¬ tive, determined to have recourfe to the above expedient, and for that purpofe had given
given directions as to the proper quantities to be mixed with the CountelVs drink; hoping that when her mind and fenfes fhouid be fubdued to the deplorable condi¬ tion he intended, he ihould then have only a paflive machine to encounter with ; and anxioufly as he defired to poffefs her perfon, yet his defires were greater to be the mafter of her rich domains, as well as by this mar¬ riage to fcreen himfelf from the threatened death which his enormities againft the State had provoked. For well he knew the mar¬ riage ceremony that had been performed, was illegal and ufelefs ; nor could he obtain the eftates of the Countefs while there was a doubt entertained of her being really, and by her own confent, his wife. He had, in¬ deed, tried to gain his point by making the world believe that Ethelwina had for years been contraded to him ; but the Minifters of the King had been informed differently, and had peremptorily refufed to cede to him the pofleflion, or right to claim as his own, any of the domains of the Countefs, unlefs b 4 fhe
fhe herfelf appeared to authorize fuch a pro¬ ceeding ; at the fame time hinting, that hb daring oppreflkms, together with his ue&- fonable infolence, on a former occafion, even to the Monarch himfelf, would no longer remain unpunifhed. Thefe threats alarmed him, and the un¬ expected heroic refufal, determined averfion, and even outwardly expreffed hatred of Ethelwina towards himfelf, together with her fubfequent behaviour on the morning of the mock marriage, had haftened him to this his impregnable caftle on the mountain. Here he expected to triumph—here he de¬ fied the power of mortal ftrength, and felt himfelf indeed fecure from the vengeance of infulted laws and injured juftice; here too he exercifed his unlimited authority; his people to "a man were devoted to him , — this was the fcene of his petty tyranny, of many a cruel deed of bloodfhed, perhaps of murder. Ethelwina, he now thought, was indeed his own; fhe could not efcape him;—-terrible was>
was her Ike tf once coefined m Iwm Caik, yet when there, hmr was the boilu^ p«f» fions of his rage excited, when he found that though but a powerlefc, nnprote&ed young female, fhe bad ftrength to endure, and fortitude to refift, the utmoft of his power, though in a place in&cceflible, and which could repel hofts of foes. Though he himfelf was furrounded by numbers of minions who waited but his proud command to fly and obey ; yet ftill this fneodlefs, helplefs creature was indeed herfelf, uncon¬ quered, unfubdued, and firm in virtue, though herfelf the iacrifice. Conftraint, love, mifery, and even violence, had no ef¬ fect ; like the fun, the was unmoved, but more firmly braved the utmoft of h is malice and oppreflions ; nor could he, even when infen¬ fible, iucceed :—an awful power had guard¬ ed her in the moments of helplefs danger*—a power tliat f i.ote his guilty foul with honor and difmay. Confeience fti icken, he had fled to the moft remote parts of the caftle, and there for a time endured all the lion >rs of b 5 reiii , fe.
^«afe* He had lowi •» a ^ce wh«^ lis gaity foul r «rel ksutar bad betm the fceoe of Issrldi crtK^y, M not EKitdcr; tea thon- fibiwi terrific im^kratkKW crowded cm hk iidkemc^ fancy, and conjured ro his mind the groam of the departed, wton las ma* Ece had pcrfectit«d. The fmalleft noife akrmed him ; and turning rouiKl* his fancy again prefeited the avetigiug injured fhade rf his unck* Fixed to the fpot, hk eyes glaring mildly, his hair erect, and every mufde of his face diftortcd by agonizing terrors, he drew his dagger, and raifing the point tfe his breaft— " It is too much," he furioufly ejacu¬ lated, " my tortured foul can bear no more ! —Oh God of Mercy 1 fpsre my aching eyes the horrid fight!—Ah ! fee Low he frowns terribly upon his murderer—*tis Godfred's bleeding form !—It ftill purfues me—it will not go r —mine eyes are horror-ftruck—I'll fee no more, and thfe ftroke fliall free me from the blafting view, though it damns my foul to an eternity of mifery !" The_
The horrible comxk thai tive fpe&e fill folkwtd bios, had drwea Im bnm to mad- n^^; a®d, at the ckrfc rf fc^ WI fe-^eacr^ he had raifed the dagger to give the h»km tli&r. would have freed the mdd from tack a villain, ami tent him to his tmaeiicbtis account, when his arm was fbfribty aneftebV and the da^er wrenched from hk trembhog hand. ** My Lord, my Lord, what rr^uis this new alarm ? what has agitated your Lord- fhip ?** Ruthmer exclaimed.-—Leopold pointed ; and trembling* Li a hollow broken voice, afked— ** Do vou fee nothing; ?" " No, my Lord/* anfwered Ruthmer, amazed, " nothing-—It is a dreadful night j hark how the wind roars I the thunder rolls awful on the liftening ear, whilft the vivid lightnings fkfh acrofs the heavens in ele¬ mental war.— Let me befeech you to fuffer me to conduct your Lordfliip to the inha¬ bited parts of the caftle ;—thefe dreary ruins •will but increafe your malady." b. 6 " Away 1";
** hw^f f* wMy 3KB^s«3^d Leopold j ** no* fer the wealth of worlds irould I aga^i ea#et thofe detefted wait,—FTy! foamon all my train—bid them p«»ep3s$e to quit the caftle Infi&ndy T ** Safe n^, my Lo«i,'^ ^i^ei^d Ruth- irser, ** to condud you to the banquet-room* and then I will obey your Lofdfhip's com¬ mands. *■* Leopold, weak and exhaufted,, no longer refifted 5 and Ruthmer,. raifing tiim from the ground, where, in his paroxyfms, he had thrown himfelf, conduded him to the in¬ terior of the caftle j where, having placed him on a couch, he left bim to fulfil the or- ders he had received. Leopold foon recovered his reafon* and a& foon ftifled the upbraidings of his over¬ charged confeience -, his mind became calm,- and ready to plot frefh mifchiefs, and to find means to put his bafe intentions into effed; yet, fpite of his feeming outward compofure, the vifion he had feen flitted acrofs his brain, nor could all his endeavours filence
i^^ce that inward, never-fubdued monitor which, for a time, influenced and controul- ed his paffions and actions, and filled his foul with gloomy foreboding horrors.—He was pacing, in difturbed thought, the room when Ruthmer entered to announce that all was ready for their departure.—Leopold ftarted, and demanded the meaning of his words; which upon being- explained, he f23&>~~ ** No, Ruthmer, my intentions are al¬ tered ; remand my people to their fta- tions. See you that all the gates are faft ^ clofe every avenue of entrance to the caftle > let the watch be fet j and do you obferve well my orders : Let there conftantly be adminiftered a fma 1 ! quantity of this powder in the drink of Ethelwina, not enough to deftroy her fenfes, but only a fufficient por¬ tion as will, by flow, imperceptible degrees, deaden her feelings, and undermine and weaken her reafon and underftanding,—Go, fet about it inftantly.—Do ,you not under¬ ftand
Hand me, or muft I fpeak more plainly my meaning ?" *« No, my good Lord; I compcthend your intentions, and wiM faithfully perform the tafk affigned me." Leopold then gave him the powder, and with it a purfe, faying— " Succeed, good Ruthmer, but in this my only remaining hope; and doubt not the future gratitude' of thy mafter." Ruthmer bowed low, and left the cham¬ ber to put in pradice his horrible commif¬ fion ; and how faithfully he performed it, we have already feen. Let us now return to our afflicted Ethel¬ wina. We have feen how fortunate fhe had been in the difcovery of Jhe fediments*. and plans of Leopold ; to fome minds, fuch accumulated afni&ions and oppreflions as fhe had endured, would have been enough to have funk, if not fubdued them * but it was otherwife with Ethelwina: fhe rofe above her fufferings, and this laft ftratagem to enthral her mind, as well as her perfon, ferved
ferved but to raife the energies of her feul to fortitude, one of the nobkft and mod ufeful pofleflions. She did not droop under, or aegfeci, by impatient fcnow, the only aieaas in her pomet to fave herfelf from i nipendmg da^er; nor dkl f^ fuller oc^ figh to heave from her indignant heart at the barbarity of her treatment $ on the contrary, flie calmly rofe from her feat, and throwing out the contents of the cup from her window, de¬ termined to go inftantly to the hated St. Iver, and, with all the confcious firmnefs and courageou?dignity of innocence and virtue, charge him with the cruel meannefs of his laft deflgn; and though fhe had no hope of fuccefs, fhe determined to make a demand to be releafed from her unjuft hnprifon- ment. She was rifing from her chair, and with a flufhed cheek of anger> and a too hafty de- cifion of judgment, crofhng the room to execute her determinations, when the caftle clock at that moment ftruck the hour of eleven* Ethelwina now found, as fhe counted
counted the laft firilen ftroke, that, fi^oos the kteoefe of the night, it was impoflible to fulfil her intentions ;—to go at fuch an hour from the fafety of her own chamber was perilous * and, were flic to meet Leopold, might expofe herfelf to frefh infult. She turned back ; and now, for the firft rime, the late hour began to raife involuntary fears in her mind. She was thinking on the occurrences of the night before, when terror again pervaded her; fhe turned her eyes to that part ol* the room whence fhe had feen the fpedre proceed, in chilling expedation of witneffing fome horrid apparition * —even the wind, as it whiftled through the cafements and paf¬ fages, greatly agitated her, and flie took up ^ her taper, determining to pafs the night in the clofet, as it had a much better appear¬ ance, and a more comfortable look than the black gloominefs of her other dreary chamber. She bolted the entrance door to prevent any intrufion, and then proceeded to the clofet.
ddfet* To fii^^rt her agitstip© as well Ss fhe could, fhe refolved to remote fame of the hed-fimskmm to dm jpotnseot*— Setting down her taper, #^ travelled the *arge chamlxr, and took from the bed as many things as flic was able to bear to the clofct, and returning, made an attempt to carry the great bed itfdf* but this flie was unequal to ;—(he faw there was a fmall mat¬ trefs under it, which fhe could move with eafe $ and, after fome little difficulty, fhe rolled both the bed and mattrefs from the couch. She was now battening to draw the nattrefs to the clofet, when accidentally rafting her eyes on the bedftead, fomething bright attraded her fight. Who fhall defcribe her amazement, when fhe beheld a long dagger eaten with ruft; a fcarf, which once appeared to have been of blue fatin, but now disfigured with blood and mildew; feveral pieces of armour laid fcattered about, evidently fpotted and rufted with biood ! A little further, Ethelwina beheld
behekt ibmething bright, and* in amazed teror, fiiatched it up: & mm the picture of a lady (et round wick brilliants. Ethelwina looked at it, ftaggered with tainting emo¬ tions, and was failing on the bed Br fupport, when, as if i ierpeat had ftung her, fir ftarted from it, and was finking on the mat* trefs, which (he caught a fight of, and found that like wife was alio deeply ftained through with thick fpots of blood. " Oh God I Oh God!" fhe exclaimed, ** what new horrors furround me!" She took the lamp, more particularly to obferve the features of the miniature, when fuddenly dropping on htr knees, fhe ex¬ claimed aloud— ** Merciful Powers, my mother V <c It is indeed thy mother's refemblance,*' cried a feeble hollow voice. Ethelwina ftarted from her pofture; Ihe felt infpircd; fear had left her; her foul feemed elevated beyond this world, and all its weaker fenfations; the emanations of con¬ fcious innocence and virtue poflefled her breaft,
breaft, aad, for a time, drove ai female ter¬ rors away. •* Yes !" fhe cried, ** Oh awful Power ! 1 am prepared—the weaknefs of my ftx has kft me—I can meet the trial.—And Oh 1 poor injured fliade, that furely haunts this dreary chamber, fpeak !—Oh teU me if, in my feeble power, I can aid thyi troubled font and give it peace for ever F* A bitter figh convinced her that ber fancy had not mifled her, aad fiowly railing her before downcaft eyes, flie found them fixed on an objed fo terrible, that it demanded all the courage and ftrength of her mind to witnefs fo trying and awful a fight, and ftill retain her fenfes. On the other fide of the bed from that on which fhe ftill kneeled, and diredly op¬ pofite to her, ftood the fpedre fhe had f *en the night before, in filent folemnity, with eyes fixed upon her in anguifli and in for¬ row :—its ghaftly vifage was pale, wan, and flirunk ; its arms were raifed upon its breaft., and folded acrofs each other , whilft from its left-
left-ide, appeareti a terrible wound with the Mood trickling rfowly from it.—As Ethel¬ wina's eyes met thoie of the fpedre, ftie funk again on her knees, and raifing her bands ta ^application— « 0h God r (he cried, ** my foreboding heart foretek a dreadful tale;— thh —this then was the fcene of bloodshed—of mur¬ der.—A lengthened groan now ftruck upoa her ear, and, in a flow and hollow tone, thefe words were uttered— «* 'Twas fo indeed—here was I murder¬ ed !— Follow me /** It was a dreadful moment for Ethelwina * 9 a fcene fo awfully folemn that it required all the fortitude, all the courage flie was mif¬ trefs of, to obey fo tremendous a fummons. She hefitated—her heart leaped againft its prifon walls with beating terror and affright —flie felt a fickening faintnefs overpower her, and catching the bed-hangings for fup¬ port, feebly uttered— « 1 cannot go I"
A deep
A deep and impreflive figh funk on ber ear as fhe fpoke her kft fentence.— Ethelwina* with a kind of fupernatural effort, again caft her eyes in chilling fear upon the apparition, in expectation of fome terrible* punifliment for her diibbedience j but, as ihe looked upon its vifage, its expreflive eyes, full of forrow and melancholy, were fixed upon her with a mild nefs and tendernefs indefcribable; her heart reproached her, and fhe inwardly laid— ** Wherefore fliould 1 fear to follow ?—I have done no wrong—committed no injuf¬ tice !—*tis for the guilty alone to be ap¬ palled at fuch a fcene as this, but innocence fhould be fearlefs.—if Heaven, for fome myfterious end, permits the fpirits of the departed to return again to earth, perhaps to reveal the hidden crimes and mifdeeds of others, fhall I, to whom this tafk belongs, refufe to execute its high commands?— No !** flie cried aloud, " lead on, poor fliade, —I will obey and follow thee !"
A mo
A momentary gleam of forrowful fatis¬ fadion brightened the mournful countenance of the fpedre; the reclining pofture of its arms fuddenly moved to a pointing attitude, and a fmall door, concealed near the bed, flowly opened, and difcovered a deep cavity, but in total darknefs. The fpedre beckoned Ethelwina to fol¬ low. She arofe from her knees, and, trembling, took the lamp to obey the filent fignal.
CHAP.
CHAP. IL It was a calm night, and not a breath of wind difturbed the ftill folemnity that reign¬ ed around; all nature was in a deep repofe— nothing, not even the flight eft noife was Ijeard that might detach the attention of Ethelwina, or decreafe fome part of thofe horrors that were too well grounded by the appalling fight before her. The phantom defcended through the door, fixing its eyes upon, and beckoning Ethel¬ wina, who approached the cavity, to follow. A frightful abyfs of darknefs prefented itfelf: the paflage down it was extremely narrow, and only admitted one perion at a time to defcend its fteps, which were broken and decayed,
decayed, and fome of them o;uite gone, which obliged Ethelwina to cling faft to the wallas flie proceeded down the immenfe depth of ftairs to the bottom. She at laft landed. Ethelwina entered a long paflage; and cow fhe ventured to caft a fearful glance on her awe-infpiring guide :—itsformer forrow* ing countenance was now changed for looks of terrific anger and fiercenefs, and filled the foul of Ethelwina with increafing terror and difmay. Bitterly did fhe repent having ex¬ pofed herfelf to fuch a fcene of tremendous horror. She was now away from all human afliftance; the immenfity of depth fne had, defcended, convinced her fhe muft be in a paflage leading to the vaults of the caftle, which ihe knew, from Rupert, reached to fome parts of the valley below. To call for help would be unavailable; befides, there appeared to be not the fmalleft outlet but that by which fhe had defcended. Her ter¬ rors increafed to fuch violence that flie re¬ folved to return, and with this intention (he turned half way; but at that moment the fpectre
fpedre fixed its eyes in terrifying frowns full upon her ; fhe flopped, for the agony ofher mind needed not this addition, and ihe faintly ejaculated— " IVIy God ! my God ! Oh pity and pro* ted me !" The ftern looks of the fpectre again un¬ derwent a change, and they now aflumed a mild, gentle, and befeeching afpect; and, filently beckoning with its finger, Ethel¬ wina, though fhe felt no abatement of her terrors, no longer refufed to proceed ; and ii wardly committing herfelf to the protection of Heaven, fhe tremblingly followed her ter¬ rifying guide down the palfage, at the end of which was a Gothic arch-door, which opened untouched, and the ghoft defcended a few more fteps;—Ethelwina following,found her¬ felf in fome large vaults of uncouth, heavy architedure; the roof was low and arched, and fupported by rude Gothic pillars of ftone, fome of them decayed and falling to the ground. The feeble light flie bore, ferved but to render " darknefs more vol. ii. c vifible$**
vifible;" the faint gleams, as they fhot acrofs „ the walls of the rock, difplayed but more confpicuoufly the furrounding horrors. Ethelwina followed the fpedre till.herpath was flopped 4iy a large high crofs of curious workmanfliip, and which flood in the middle of the arches : it was of a peculiar ftructure, and though fuffering under the ruinous hand of Time, it had the remains of its former decorations, and rich inlaid fret-work;—at its foot ftood a fmall ftone altar. Ethelwina had no time to examine it minutely; but fhe confidered it would be a fure guide in her return from the vaults— " If," fighed fhe, *' I fhall be permitted ever to return 1" Her thoughts were in a moment checked by the violence of a door as it flew back on its hinges. The fpectre again appeared, and beckoned her ; it entered a fmall nar¬ row vault encJofed on all fides. Ethelwina's horror increafed, when, as fhe followed, the cell filled with ablaze of light, which dying ' away into a fmall lambent flame, difplayed to
to her fight the fpectre, as it ftood at the further end of the vault beneath a raifed arch, bearing in its hand a fword covered with blood, and dropping from its point j the back of the arch appeared to have been filledaip with loofe bricks and ftones with¬ out any cement. As Ethelwina, in horror, gazed upon the dreadful objeds before her, fhe (with a forced, falfe courage, which nothing but madnefs could have given her) wildly cried*— 4< For what—for what, flh myfterious Power 1 am I brought to this fcene of horrors ?" *' To revenge the murder of thy father, whofe fpirit now calls upon thee !** cried a loud and hollow voice. " Of my father 1" faid the fmking.Ethel- wina, hardly articulately, *« Yes r anfwered the fpedre, ** in thy j apartment was thy wretched parent impri¬ foned—-murdered by the unnatural Leopold '—and within thefe walls lie the remains of thy uaburied parent I—To thee, and through c z thy
thy means I look for, and claim the ven¬ geance due to my injured, unquiet fpirit ! The hand of the child muft perform the deed of juftice;—and, as thou hopeft for^ happinefs here and hereafter, fwear to avenge me!" The horror-ftruck Ethelwina had juft power enough left her to anfwer—" I fwear!" when ihe was roufed from the madden¬ ing ftupor that was faft overcoming her, by a loud tremendous noife, and the next mo¬ ment was followed by a louder crafli of heavy falling weight. Ethelwina caft up her eyes to where the found came from,, and obferved the loofe ftones and bricks had fallen from the wall in the arch, and difco¬ vered a fmali recefs behind it, in which flie plainly faw the decayed form and face of a human being.—Nature and fenfation could endure no more; fhe uttered a piercing fliriek, and darting from the appalling fight, flopped not till fhe reached the crofs and altar. But here flie was ftill in view of the horrors
horrors fhe. had quitted ; the back .of the crofs faced diredly oppofite the door of the dreadful cell, which, as fhe caft her eyes i fearfully on it, fhe faw was ftill illuminqd; and thbugh fhe was relieved from the fight of the awiul fpedre, fhe plainly heard its hol¬ low voice as„ it pronounced^— " Remember your oath—the happinefs or mifery of your future life depend upon it!" * Ethelwina, in feeble accents, faid, as fhe funk before the crofs— " Oh reft, moft injured, haplefs fpirit, reft in peace !—Here, at the altar's foot, I fwear, if Heaven fliould give the means, thy daugh¬ ter fliall avenge thee !'* She had fcarcely uttered the laft fentence when fhe fell convulfed and fenfelefs to the earth. In this ftate of temporary forgetful¬ nefs fhe remained for fome hours; at laft fhe awoke from.her fleep of death, and raifing herfelf up, fhuddered to find fhe was ftill in thofe tremendous regions; but ftill more fo, as fhe laid her hand upon the altar to raife
her weak, exhaufted frame from the ground* it grafped fomething cold as ice j*—fhe haftily fnatched it off, and taking the lamp (which fortunately had not gone out) to examine what it was, fhe there found a human foull and crofs bones, the emblematical rem¬ nants of Monkifh fuperftition. At any other time and place this circumftance might have caufed fome terror, but now it was too trifling to engage her attention for a mo¬ ment 5 the preceding horrors dwelt too forcibly on the maddened brain of Ethel¬ wina, to feel an alarm at an appearance fo common. On rifing from the ground, (he perceived fome characters on the front Me of the attar; and, holding the lamp to it, fhe read « The Crofs of Confeffion for the Guilty/ 1 But though Ethelwina mechanically read, fhe was almoft unconfeious that ftie did fo, for fhe forgot every thing but the horrors fhe had feen , and her thoughts dwelt fo intenfcly on the words of the fpe&re, that at times flie Joft her fenfes in wild inanity;
and as fhe wandered, diftraded and un¬ knowing, round the vaults, if a moment's recolledion came acrofs her mind, it ferved to fhew her ftill the horrible dungeons fhe was in -, and, fhrieking with the fight, fhe hurried on, till frightened by the re- founding echo of her voice, as it rung through the numerous caverns, fhe ceafed her cries, and madnefs again refumed its empire over her fenfes. Unknowing what fhe did, fhe traverfed, from vault to vault , the confufion of her brain made her totally forget the way flie had come, and fhe loft herfelf in the many intricate mazes of the caverns. She was wildly proceeding in hafte down a gloomy avenue, when her foot kicked againft fomething; and,ftooping with unconfeious inattention, fhe picked up a large rufty key. She gassed upon it with vacancy, and miftaking it for fomething of dear re¬ membrance, haftily put it in her bofom;' its chili coldnefs made her fancy it to be the clammy hand of the fpedre, and fhrieking to be releafed from fuch agonies, flie darted
along the vaults;—aided by chance, flie at laft reached the arch-door way, which was ftiJl open; flie flew up the fteps, and in a moment was in the paflage ; but the faculty of fenfe again left her, and fhe uttered forne low faint murmurs— " Sure I wander in the regions of the damned !—Shall I never be happy ?— Never !—did it not fay fo ?—neither here, nor hereafter !—Oh! for mercy, for pity's fake, let me fee the light of Heaven once again !—Avaunt, foul daemon ! what haft thou to do with innocence ?—Ah ! fee, at that name it vanifhes—then I am fafe 1—Oh let me fly from thefe daik abodes of mifery and horror!"—So faying, fhe caft a fcru¬ tinizing glance behind her, as if fhe was looking for fomebody.—" 'Tis gone i" fhe added, in a voice that groaned out the an¬ guifli of a difordered mind; then fmiling convulfively, flie hurried as if ftill in fear of fomething that flie fancied purfued her, and by her fpeed fhe foon reached the ftairs: thefe flie flowly, and with great toil, began to
to climb, and after a time, flie reached the top. A fmall glimmering of daylight ftartled her * for it was now the dawn of morning, and in the n^xt moment fhe gained her own apartment. The light of day and the frefh air. aded as an antidote againft the thick noifome va¬ pours of the vaults, and the poor fufferer began to recover her fenfes. She involunta¬ rily moved to the window, and opening the- cafement, the fweetnefs of the morning air refrcfhed her fpirits, and by degrees reftored her to reafon ; but ftill a heayy torpor hung on her mind, and Ihe found if flie attempt¬ ed to reflecl; on the awful terrors of the night, her fenfes would again forfake her. Patiently, therefore, fhe retired from the window, and,-with uneven fteps and weaken¬ ed frame, tottered to the clofet;, where, throwing herfelf down, flie wrapped the bed¬ clothes, fhe had before brought, around her, and funk into a deep and lengthened fleep, That beft friend to the weary and unhappy c.5 held
held its gentle dominion over her reftored fenfes. Perfectly recovered by its balfamic powers, and as the caftle clock ftruck the hour of eight, fhe arofe;—but Ah ! how al¬ tered ; the heavenly gueft had no fooner left her, than fhe became the prey of increafing forrow and affliction; Sleep's healing powers could not adminifler to the awakened fuffer¬ ing mind—-it had no power to lull for ever the remembrance of the laft night's foul-har¬ rowing difcoveries. To exprefs what Ethel¬ wina felt on the dreadful fubject, is beyond the powers of defcription. A calm and fettled dejection ftole gra¬ dually pver her fenfes, which fhe had neither the will nor the wifh to oppofe. A deluge of tears accompanied her reflections as fhe thought on the miferable end of her ill-fated father. Grief, horror, pity, and indigna¬ tion by turns writhed her heart; diftrac- tion and terror alike ajgitated her when fhe remembered the folernh oath and invoca¬ tion made to avenge her noble parent's mur¬ der ; the delicacy ofher truly feminine heart 5 , was
was fhocked at the thought of being herfelf the punifher ofher father's deftroyer, and her own avowed enemy. Yet thefe reflections gave way to others equally ftiocking :—her own pbwerlefs, un¬ friended ftate, fhe fuppofed, muft prevent all poflibility ofher ever fulfilling her folemn engagement; yet whilft her heart fhuddered at the only means that prefented themfelves of obeying the dreadful will of her father's fpirit, it alfo reproached her for not feeling that juft, abhorrent indignation which fhould excite her to revenge the barbarous deed, and fhe inwardly exclaimed— " A parent's injured fliade demands from his child vengeance on his murderer, and fliall any ielfifli thought for fo, poor a wretch as I am, mitigate the horror I feel for the mon¬ fter, who has inhumanly plunged his poniard into the heart of hirn who gave me being ? —No I the weaknefs and delicacy of my fex fliall for a time be forgot; and, if Heaven has doomed me to be the inftrument of pu- rAifhment, I will faithfully perform my facred c 6 promife,
promife, then hide my forrow and my guilt for ever from the world 1** The morning was beautifully fine; fbe caft a glance towards the window ; not a cloud appeared in the heavens, and the glo¬ rious planet of day fhone with undiminiihed luftre, its dazzling beams enlivening the dark fides of the mountains, and their fpiral heights afluming a milder afped while thus- partially illumined. The ftill monotony of the barren rocks was fometimes cheered by the frifking mountain-goat, who fkipping from crag to crag, in a moment was fe r n,. and in the next difappeared among the in¬ tervening precipices , or climbing up the higheft fteeps, was again perceived culling its fcanty food that Nature had provided in thefe inhofpitable regions;—unconfeious of its danger, it gazed around, the uanuied mafter of the fcene, till having contented itfelf with the fmall repaft it had gained, it took a frolickfofne leap, and was out of fight in an inftant.
Ethelwina's
Ethehvina's mind had for a moment been engaged by this fcene, and the romantic de¬ lightful views around, till the difappearance of the wild-goat, for whofe fafety flie had felt anxious, recalled her to a quick remem¬ brance of her own keen afflictions; and fhe left the window, and entered once more her other chamber, which the fun, fhining through its girted heavy cafement 3 had confiderably en-lightened. The bed-clothes lay difordercd on the floor, and Ethelwina felt" the imprudence of fuffering them to remain fo. With fliudder- ing recollections flie haftily approached it, replacing the bloody mattrefs, and exerting all her ftrength, fhe dragged the bed to its place, determining never again to fleep upon it;—flie removed every thing that would be moft ufeful to herfelf to tiie other chamber, and throwing the large dark counte pane over the bed, left it in its former ftztt\ She was proceeding to the other chamber, when flie difcovered the little door wide open as flie had left it 5—with a horror but too well juftified,
juftified, ihe drove it with all her force againft the wall, and in an inftant fhe heard a violent rumbling noife in the vaults be-» low, which feemed like the found of a fall¬ ing wall. Shocked and furprifed, fhe paufed a moment for refpiration, then looking at the pannel, fhe was unable to difcover the fmalleft crevice that could fhew it to be a door ; flie pufhed violently againft it, but it had faftened by a fpring, and refifted her utmoft efforts to fhake or even move it. But to be better fecured, ftie removed the bed- ftead,and by flow degrees placed it clofe againft the fecret entry, as it might, flie thought, be a dangerous place unfaftened as it was within, if known to Leopold, of which there could be no doubt. The bed was immenfely heavy, and when Ethelwina had accompliflied her defign,fhe felt herfelf fecure from the intrufion of mortal power; and that fhe might alfo fliut from her view all fight of fuch a place, fhe let down the high curtains on that fide of the bed.
As
As flie was crofting the room, the fatal dagger laid full in her fight; fhuddering with horror, fhe took it up, and her eyes overflow¬ ing in tears— " This—this," cried fhe, cc was the ac¬ curfed inftrument of------" She could not finifli the afHiding fen¬ tence. The blade of the dagger went with a certain fpring, which accidentally touch¬ ing it, enclofed itfelf in the handle, and was faftened down by a lock. Ethelwina per¬ ceived this, and fhe refolved to preferve it , the fcarf and pidure laid on the floor alfo.. She minutely examined tlie former, and frefh convincing proofs of her father's hor¬ rible fate appeared beyond all fign or power of doubt :-^-as fhe looked at the disfigured fatin, fhe faw it was the very fcarf .which, with her own hands, flie had faftened round her father on the morning of his departure, ten years ago, when, alas ! he left his home never to return, and doomed to perifli by the favage hand of a monfter !
« Oh
r< Oh God !" ihe cried, " tis too true— here—here are the names of Urfuline, God¬ fred, and Ethelwina ; they ftill remain the works of my own hand ; the terrible proofs of a paient's horrible end !—Oh God of Mercy! why didft thou permit the cruel s outrageous deed ?" And then remembering the inutility and even impiety of fuch an exclamation, fhe fixed her eyes on the miniature of her be¬ loved mother , fhe killed it again and again, fighed over it, talked to it, and wept over it, till it was watered with the tears of filial affection. The fight of this picture was too much ; it recalled fo forcibly to hei mind the dear faint it refembled, and the many happy years of profperous eafe fhe had known when bleffed with the protection of a be¬ loved mother; and now how fad was the re- verfe ! Once flie had known not a care, nor a forrow, but fuch as the gentle hand of fbothing maternal affection had foftened, and made the grievance light indeed, when com¬ pared to her prefent evils. Her reflections became
became overwhelming, and bitter beyond en¬ durance ; and fhe courageoufly refolved to conceal the picture, determining to deprive herfelf of the fight of it, till flie had con¬ quered the extreme fufceptibility of her heart, and was able to view it only with a more gentle regret. She now took from her breaft the key, almoft wondering how it had come there; flie looked at it, and found it to be oid and rufty, and the wards and works of curious uncommon conftruction. She became anxious to know to what' it belonged ; but after examining it fome time, flie, in a for¬ getful carelefihefs, put it in her pocket, not thinking how ufelefs and troublefome an appendage it was to her. She next re¬ membered the crofs, and wondered for what purpofe it was placed in fo dreadful a fituation; her furprife increafed when flie recalled to her * ;rj d the rich magnificence of its ftructure, , unlike the rude Gothic architecture of the vaults in which it flood/ She was unable to account for it in any, other
other way than by fuppofing, which was really the cafe, that it muft have been a place of refuge for thofe, whofe crimes had made them amenable to the laws of their country; and in thofe vaults they would find a fure afylum from the purfuit of of* fended juftice. But left chance or treachery fhould difcover their concealment, the be¬ fore mentioned crofs and altar had been erected, which, in thofe fuperftitious days, were deemed a facred protection, and often fheltered even the murderer ; and here, if he flew to this fan&uary, he was fafe : not even the power of Majefty dared, Without the con¬ fent of the Church, to drag forth the guilty offender, as it was facrilege to violate its altars, though they harboured the worft of criminals. Having employed her mind for a moment by thefe refledions, her thoughts again re¬ turned to their afflidive fource, and for fome days her life became burthenfome ; fhe wilhed for death to reieafe her from a fate fo miferable. Her endeavours to conquer the effeda
ETHELWINA. effects of a night fo dreadful, were impof- fible j the quiet calm in which ftie had been, for a few days, fuffered to remain, did but ftrengthen the mifery and torpidity fhe was faft finking into. She became reftiefs and difcontented, bitterly fighing for what there were no hopes of her obtaining. She fpent the pafling days at her window, in com¬ paring her melancholy ftate to v the moun¬ tain wild-goat, who at leaftf enjoyed the blefling of liberty. She thought how much more enviable was its lot, while, uncon- ftrained, it ranged from height to height, carelefs of danger, and defying the power of man to, reach it. Her brain, enervated and unfettled, fhe would fancy herfelf tranf- ported from her prifon by fome of the friendly Fairies (who, from time immemo¬ rial, are faid to frequent thofe mountains) to one of the moft ftupendous precipices; when, looking down on the world below, flie would fmile with indignation and contempt on Leopold, whom her difordered fancy would prefent to her eye as attempting vainly to
to climb the fteep perpendicular fides of the height on which flie ftood, fecurely enjoy¬ ing, with a hectic laugh of triumph, his vain impotent effort to reach her. Yet when this agitating fever of the bram was over, fhe would weep in anguifli to find all was but delufion. She was indeed faft finking into that unhappy ftate her cruel gaoler wiflied to reduce her to; and the emptying the dangerous liquor from the cup untafted, became a cuftom, and was done without intereft, but ftill with that inftinc- tive fecrecy fb much required. From the great chamber her eye turned with horror; and fhe never entered it fmce the night of dreadful difcovery, except to bolt the door at the hour of returning reft.
CHAP.
ti
CHAP. III. ACCORDING to the reports of the at¬ tendant (who attributed Ethelwina's altered appearance to the liquor, and never fufped¬ ed but flie had drank it) 3 Leopold concluded his unhappy captive was in that miferable ftate he fo much defired for the accomplifh- ment of his defigns, agreeable to his com¬ mands; therefore Ruthmer, one morning, prefented himfelf before the Countefs with the ufual repaft. His lowering brow bright¬ ened when he beheld the fad ftate fhe was in; and the tone of his voice, expreffive only of malice, awoke Ethelwina from her deep melancholy, as he thus faid—
My
46" ETHELWINA. " My Lord of St. Iver entreats you, Lady, to meet him early to-morrow morn- * ing at the banquet-room, to celebrate fuch rites'as fliall be deemed proper for your li¬ berty, and his Lordfhip's happinefs." u Liberty I" cried Ethelwina, with a fud¬ den emotion of joy, " how ! is it poflible ? Is my tyrant dead ?" And then in hurried accents, feizing him by the arm, flie went on—?'- The gates are open*—freedom is mine! Come, let us haften to obtain it P* " It is to be obtained only in the arms of St. Iver,*' cried Ruthmer, preventing her from going to the door ; u fay, fliall I con¬ duct you to him ?" " St. Iver P* repeated flie, in horror. The fire of animating hope forfook her counte¬ nance : flie recovered from the lapfe of rea¬ fon, and fixing her penetrating eyes upon Ruthmer, fhe feized his arm, and unfolded the difcoloured fcarft pointing with indigna¬ tion towards the bed. His foul mifgave him, as fhe alternately fixed her earneft looks
looks firft on him, then on the fcarf, while her eyes aflumed a frowning, fcrutinizing afpect, that gave her the appearance of a minifter ing angel of vengeance ; and, dart¬ ing upon the wretch before her glances of angry meaning, his guilty confeience fup¬ plied the purpofe of her filent uncommon animation of g'efture ; his foul flirunk within him, his eyes glared horribly, and every mufcle became agitated* as, with a folemn, impreflive, majeftic accent fhe pronounced— " It is fo \—you was my father's deftroyer. Go! go—begone ! nor dare again prefume to enter this facred chamber !" Ruthmer's face became diftorted, his lips quivered, his hair ftood erect, and every mark of guilt was plainly perceptible in his wild, affrighted eyes; with hafty fteps he quitted the room without uttering a word. Ethelwina ftood a moment wrapped in meditation, when fuddenly fhe exclaimed— ** My father! if the horrors of a re¬ proaching guilty confeience can avenge thee, behold my promife is in part fulfilled." She
She flowly turned from the bed, and, en¬ tered again the leffer chamber. The words of Ruthmer ftruck upon her mind ; they had an aftonifhing effect upon her intellects, and changed her dejection and lethargy to a rational, calm, colie&ed turn of mind; her thoughts became fixed and fettled, and the wanderings of imagination gave way to re¬ turning reafon; her faculties again refumed the powers of action, and her firm, ftrong mind and underftanding, which had enabled her to refift many of the trials flie had en¬ dured, again befriended her. She now felt that, inftead of indulging in unavailing for¬ row, flie muft roufe the fortitude of her foul to courageous refiftance, againft, perhaps, 4>ne of the moft important moments of her life. At firft fhe felt fhocked at appearing before the fuppofed, nay certain, murderer of her father, and anguifli unutterable filled her heart; but this afflictive fenfation foon became fecondary. The crifis appro?ching was dreadful, and flie inwardly prayed that her
her fortitude might not defert her on the trying occafion. The day was paffed in trembling* agita¬ tion ; at rimes fhe felt her heart fickeh at the thought of the coming morrow, till fhe refleded that it f Was, fcarcely poflible* her * gaoler could inflid yet greater tortures! than fhe had endured already.—Was fhe not his prifoner? Had he not' pradifed every art, every ftratagem that .malice or cruelty could invent ? Yet had not herx>wn vigilance and Heaven's protedion, rendered abortive all his diabolical defigns tWWhat new miferies could he contrive- that fhe fhould fear the prefence of him, who, however lotliing he might be to her fight, .was poor and defpi- cable amidft ail .his power, when compared to the innocence tof,her unfullied confciencfc over his guilty one ?—She threw herfelf on her knees, and fpent fome time in pious prayer. The evening began to approach ; the fun was finking behind the weftern hemifphere. Ethelwina* who never faw the glorious magr vol. ii. d niflcence
niflcence of a rifing or fetting fun without indefcribable emotions of gratitude and ad¬ miration, haftened to her window to enjoy the fight of its declining fplendouK Clofe by the thick Gothic workmanfliip of the' window, - Ethelwina had often per¬ ceived a fmall door, but never had been able to open it; flie now tried it again, and exerting all her ftrength, burft it open, for the faftenings were worn and rotten with ruft and age. Some ftone fteps prefented themfelves; fhe afcended the fpiral ftairs, and in a moment found herfelf upon the top of the little tower, which compofed the fides of her leffer chamber; it was fmall and circular, and by confiderably jetting out from the other building and parts of the caftle, commanded a noble and extenfive profped. The tower was very high, and Ethelwina perceived her chambers were at leaft two ftories from the ground; the roof was leaded and even, and the danger of falling over its edges fecured by a high ba- luftrade. On the platform was placed an old
old bench,- on which Ethelwina feated her¬ felf; and though the feeble hope of efcape vanifhed, yet fhe could not remain infen¬ fible to the beauties that furrounded her. From her airy fituation flie had a full view of the fun, through the wide chafm of two immenfe mountains, its bright reflecting rays beaming with dazzling fplendour on the furrounding fcenery. To the left flie faw the wide-fpreading ocean, calm and un- 1 ruffled, its glafly furface reflecting in peace¬ ful ferenity the wondrous canopy of heaven in a foftened glow of picturefque beauty, beyond defcription pleafing to the eye. The fublime height and awful grandeur of the fteeps and pointed precipices, were here and there partially illumined by the fun-beams, and partly enveloped in deep gloom, whilft half-way down the mountains, their fides were rendered imperceptible by a thick vapour, which at times gathered round the middle of thefe ftupendous heights, whofe craggy* varied coloured fides were adorned with riiany a wild-flower, pine, and i> z brufhwood.
brufhwood. Here and there a goat was feen frifking and bafking in the fun upon its dan¬ gerous abodes ; whilft at a greater diftance, and in the lower and more cultivated parts of the mountains were feen the fleecy flieep, whofe white fkihs contrafted to the brown heath on which they fed, the tinkling of their bells, the call of the fhepherd, and the barking of his dog, rendered it a fcene alto¬ gether fo interefting to Ethelwina, who loved and enjoyed fuch wondrous pidures of na¬ ture, as made it impoflible for her not to be delighted by the various beauties that every where met her fight;—and fhe gave way to an involuntary burft of applaufe and adoration where it was moft due. She forgot Leopold, his terrible caftle, and ali the et ceteras of threats and perfecutions j flie now thought on her beloved Auguftine^ and remembered how often they had paced the battlements of Auburne Caftle, as fhe now fadly and alone traverfed thofe of Iver. «« Ah 1" fighed flie, " could he fee- could he know ]iow wretched his Ethelwina
is, what an guifh would fill his heart !—Ah Heavens 1" and fhe wept bitterly, " perhaps he is coloHn his grave I—Ah me ! perhaps he died on that fatal night, which dragged me from his unavailable protection I—Oh noble, gallant youth ! if yet you live, may ,you be happy !—May no forrow opprefs you for the fate of haplefs Ethelwina 1" She could utter no more; for to think on him was adding tortures to the many fhe already had to endure ; and her eyes fwam in tears for him as much as for herfelf The fun at laft funk .behind the moun¬ tains ; the laft cheering ray totally difappear¬ ed ; nothing remained oi its glories but a ftreak of red, which marked the place of former fplendour;—and now the rocks and heights received a deeper tint; their appear¬ ance loft all its pleafing variety, an univerfal gloom furrounded them, and rendered them , bold and terrific to the eye. With the finking of the fun, and the quick change of every thing, vanifhed alfo Etheiwina!s few moments of mental eafe j n 3 for
for now fhe remembered the dangers of her expofed fituation. She arofe, and prepared to leave the battlement, when turning round, her eye for the firft: time caught a fight of the northern tower. She had here a full view of its extenfive fize and vaft enormous height: like the tower flie leaned upon, it jetted out confiderably from the main build¬ ings, and ftood upon a peninfula of the moft projecting fide of the mountain, and was gained by an ifthmus of the rock to the foundations of the caftle. Her eyes ached with ftraining them to reach the top of its hanging battlements j but (lie fhuddered on remarking it was greatly decayed, and was alfo amazingly bent on one fide, which ap¬ peared to lean frowning over the wide yawn¬ ing chafm of the two mountains, threatening to fall with the fkft gale of wind that fliould affail it. The voice, and words of the fong, flie had heard, when vifiting this dreary place, now came to her remembrance, and the thoughts of a human being, imprifoned In fo horribly dangerous
dangerous a place, made her caft a glance of pity on the tower for the poor inmate there confined;—but in the next moment her fears were excited for herfelf j for, in the courts below, fhe perceived Leopold giving directions to fome of his people. Hoping the twilight had concealed ber, ftie haftened to the ftairs, and with fpeed defcended to theclofet; here fhe fat till it was quite dark, and then thinking herfelf perfectly unfeen, flie determined again to enjoy the luxury of the frefh air* The moon had not yet arifen, and fhe fat on the bench calmly viewing the dark fhapes of the mountains, which were ftill perceptible, when her attention was en* gaged by feeing a ftream of light iflue from the middle cafement of the northern tower. Doubt now became certainty, and Ihe was convinced that fhe was not the only captive; but to confine a human creature in a place of fuch dreadful danger, excited a degree of abhorrent indignation in the bofom of Ethel¬ wina, not to be defcribed * it was fuch a wanton difplay of power and barbarity, that n 4 it
it Hlfed her generous mind with anger and de* teftetion^—even tlie very vault, fhe thought, would-be far preferable than the horrors of the *ower. Her mufings were interrupted by the feafrle clock, which ftruck ten~$ and H heavy fhower of rain foon after falling, Obliged her to take refuge id her own apart* nient. * She bolted the outward door, and fo alfo flie did by the inner-chamber; and being now fecure for the night, fhe offered her pious oraifbns to tliat Providence for its protedion, which we are taught to believe, and by experience feel, never entirely deferts tlie good and virtuous. She then refigned herfelf to the arms of Sleep; but could find no repofe, and her thoughts became tu¬ multuous and afflidive;—every objed, either dead or living, crowded on her reftiefs mind, and excited thofe fad fenfations that muft ever be a ftranger to the gentle friend fhe vainly courted. The faft fucceeding mor* row agitated ber with dread, in fpite of her firm refolutions; and if at laft fhe did fink
into forgetfulnefs, it was of no duration-r- fcenes of diftrefs prefented themfelves to het mental fight: at one time fhe fancied her¬ felf confined in the northern tower, and that it fell from its high ftation, overwhelming her in the ponderous ruin. Awaking in agony and tears, fhe clung clofe to the couch, and her imagination " prefented to^ her ears diftant deep-drawn fighs and heavy groans; prefently fhe thought fhe heard a footftep in the other chamber; the powers of refpiration ceafed—fhe liftened attentively,, but did not hear the found re- peatedo At length, worn out by terror and fatigue, fhe funk into a deep flumber, from which fhe awoke not, till roufed by the noife of fome one rapping at the outward door. She foon hurried on her morning clothes; and, opening the doors, Agatha entered,, bearing in her arms a rich and coftly robe, and other ornaments* Agatha prefented the clothes to the Countefs, and informed her they were fent by the Lord de St. Iver as a> bridal prefent to his Lady; begging fhe
would hafte to equip herfelf, as the morning was late, and fhe had been twice before at the door, but could not gain admittance. Ethelwina made her no anfwer; and Agatha difplayed the richnefs of the drefs, which was white fatin and lilac drapery, looped up with pearls and various coloured precious ftones. *' Sec here, my Lady J" cried the officious Agatha, " fee what a rich coronet of dia¬ monds my Lord has fent you; and look at this beautiful folitaire, and this glittering crofs foil of jewels!" Ethelwina fmiled contemptuoufly on the blaze of finery meant to deck and enthral the vidim of power and avarice j—ihe faw plainly this was another ftratagem, and that Leopold now concluded he was fecure of his prey; for if flic bad been in the ftate of in- fenfibUity he expeded, flic might, perhaps, with pleafure, have feized the fparklhg trap¬ pings, and became unknowingly a voluntary facrifice to outward bjandifhmcnts* The Countefs iadigtianily threw the robe and ornaments from her, and going to her
packages, took from thence the black fatin drefs fhe had worn on the morning fhe had received the oath of fealty frorfi her people, and which had been haftily thrown into the cheft by the people of Leopold on the fatal night which faw her forced from the Caftle of Auburne. Ethelwina fattened her waift with the zone of pearls; and inftead of the coronet of diamonds, fhe took that of pearls, which was alfo with, the other parts of the drefs. The fable grandeur of her apparel difplayed the beauty of her majeftic perfon, and fhe looked and moved with that com¬ manding eafe, yet fimplicity of true dignity, which the confeioufnefs ofher high rank and noble birth excited. Agatha had ftood in filent wonder obferv¬ ing, but not daring to oppofe the choice of drefs the Countefs had made. 7 he agita¬ tions ofher mind, as (he was preparing for the intended fcene, had given a falfe fiufli of animation to her countenance ; and though her features were not of the firft ftamp of ^m^lll)?} fo erc was a fweetnefs fo irre-
fiftible in her fine open face, that fhe was more interefting to the penetrating obferver than the moft perfed beauty could be. And now, trembling and agitated, fhe defcended the great-ftairs, accompanied by Agatha, who, perceiving a faintnefs fteal over the countenance of Ethelwina, had offered her afliftance to condud her along the gal¬ leries. The Countefs was roufed by this flight interruption to her fickening thoughts $, fhe recalled to her mind her father's fuffer¬ ings to aid and infpirit her, and the many arguments fhe had raifed to fupport her cou¬ rage; and, laftly, the great defigns fhe had been forming to procure her reieafe: flie again felt re-animated, and her cheeks re¬ covered their bluChing hue *—placidity and determined firmnefs poffefled her heart and features, and now; with a fearlefs, undaunted ftep, fhe approached the banquet-baiL
CHAP. IV. JL HE door flew open, and Leopold ftood to receive her. He ftarted at her appear¬ ance, and looked confufed and fufpicious;, glancing looks of anger on Agatha, who followed with the drefs Ethelwina had re¬ fufed. Leopold, after a moment's thought, conceived that the Countefs had chofen her own apparel from the whim of infanity; for he had not the fmalleft apprehenfion but that fhe was now fubdued ;—but, as he caft his eyes upon her, he felt pleafed, yet dif¬ appointed, to fee no figns of vacant lethargy;. all appeared calm, open, commanding^ and her eyes, but for a foft melancholy tinge„
, which forrow had marked on the lines of her expreffive countenance, never fhone with more fire and brilliancy. Little did he fup¬ pofe the animation in Ethelwina*s eyes pro¬ ceeded from a caufe of fuch a confounding nature to himfelf, and of fuch juft abhor¬ rence in her. But this ferved to heighten her charms; and whilft he viewed her with almoft adoration, he felt aftoniflied how to account for what he fo little expeded ;—the eafy compliance with which fhe had con- fented to this interview deceived him into a belief that fhe was exadly in that ftate of mind he wifhed ; the unconftrained manner in which fhe yielded to his offered hand to condud her up the hall, left him without a fufpicion. With a ferocious triumph^ which he tried in vain to conceal, he viewed her with the gaze of a conqueror; and, ascondu&jng her to the grand chair of ftate, which had been prepared on purpofe for the occafion, he offered her the moft fulfome and over- ftrained compliments of a man well affured of his intended vidim, which Ethelwina heard
heard with determined filence and inward refentment. The banquet-room, or rather hall of ftate, was of an immenfe extenfive fize, and the roof, which was vaulted, was lofty in the extreme, richly carved and fupported by a double row of ponderous heavy marble pil¬ lars, whofe enormous bulk and magnificent architecture refembled more the infide of a Gothic cathedral than a banqueting-room; the floor was curioufly inlaid with variegated marble of the fame materials as the pillars j and at the further end of the hall, on one fide next the windows, Ethelwina beheld a raifed throne canopied with crimfon velvet, and richly fringed with gold ; under the canopy were placed two magnificent ancient chairs of ftate. All the foldiers of St. Iver were already arranged on the fides of the middle aifle, with their arms grounded , and the houfe¬ hold of the caftle were placed in a gallery over the grand entrance. One fide of the hail difplayed a numerous quantity of full length
length portraits, many of which were the refemblances of the former reigning Princes of Wales, who had, like Leopold, once made this caftle a fecure retreat in time of war and danger; and here they once held their gallant Courts. The pillars and arches of the hall were hung with fuits of armour,. and coats of mail, kept in high prefervation;, whilft from the lofty pointed roof and arches hung many a trophy of victory, thfe fpoils of the vanquifhed. At the further end of the hall, and near the throne, was a raifed altar, fplendidly decorated with every emblem of the riches of the altars of thofe dark days;— at the back of the latter rofe the grand win¬ dow, which fronted the door, in one ex-" tended arch of wide magnitude to the ceil¬ ing ; the glafs of the cafements was richly ftained with the arms and victories of the , former Princes and Lords of St. Iver ; the other windows, though not fo large r were alfo painted, and told the hiftories of older times j they looked upon the weftern ter* race,, wfedch was a broad and noble walk, and
fide of the caftle, from whence the eye had a view of the country beyond, which was here and there better cultivated, and more fertile than the towering fteeps of the pro* fpeds that furcounded the caftle. But on this fide of the fabric, the rich fcenes of nature * were indifcriminately mixed with the bold and the terrific; from thefe windows, or the terrace (which was rendered fafe and fecure by a low parapet, built on the edge of the mountain), was beheld the moft delightful view of the valley below, which, on this fide, was diverfified with rivulets, green pafturage, woods, flowering fhrubs, and herds of fheep;, and on the oppofite fide, the fteeps and precipices were feen, as they gra¬ dually rofe one above the other, till the leffer heights were terminated by a tremen¬ dous bold mountain, which towering in awful barren fublimity, feemed to reach be¬ yond the clouds themfelves. The diftant waterfalls were heard foaming down from the rocks, on the northern fide of the caftle, into
into the river which ran between the gulph, with a loud deafening noife, and hafty vio¬ lence that agitated the waters into a conti¬ nual motion. Such was the new fcene that broke upon the Countefs. As fhe was led to the throne by Leopold, fhe viewed the gorgeous dif- play of luxurious fplendour that every where met her eye; but fhe turned from all with difguft, furveying with interefted looks the faces of the numerous affembly, but alas I not one could fhe find that bore the tokens of pity;—all was hardnefs, ferocity, and willing obedience to their Lord's com¬ mands. The moment Ethelwina had entered, a number of concealed muficians ftruck the chords of their inftruments, melodious voices accompanying their harps, and fing¬ ing a marriage anthem;—the fingers alfo were concealed, the better to give effed to the found; their ftrains were fometimes grand, full, and infpiring; fometimes they funk fo low, fo foft, fo exquifltely pathetic, and
and fo thriliingly moving, that Ethelwina would have indeed been loft, had flie been the infenfible that it was fuppofed ftee was. The anthem lafted for a confiderabie time, and then finifhed in one burft of Inxuiious, enervating harmony. "VWn it was ended, Leopold ftarted from his clair, where he had been pouring out his foul in fulfome love and: v»andiflimer.\ts to the ftill determined filence of Ethelwina, and which, as he Cuiild not obtain sn anfwer to his rhapfodies, began to excite his alarm j yet as (he did not betray any outward dif¬ guft, but fat filently attending to the mufic, he difmiffed his fufpicions. Ethelwina once more caft her eyes around the Gothic antiquity of the hall; the dim and kind of half light which entered through the thick-ftained glafs of the windows, pre¬ venting the fun-beams from piercing but partially within, together with the heavy, fplendid, but gloomy decorations that were every where difplayed, gave to the whole a fad and folemn appearance more like a real facrifice.
facrifice, than for the purpofe it was intend¬ ed. As Leopold impetuoufly feized her hand, to lead her to the altar, flie felt her courage defert htr; a thrilling cold fear funk upon her heart—fhe fickened^ and muft have fallen, had not Leopold fup¬ ported her, and kifling her hand; he whif¬ pered— " Now you are indeed my own!" Ethelwina was in a moment recovered by this new infult; fhe releafed herfelf from his arms, but fhe remained fpeechlefs"; and Leopold forcibly led her up the fteps of the altar, where ftood the fame mercenary wretch that had performed the ceremony at Auburne. Ethelwina refted, and even clung to the altar for fupport; but as fhe turned her eyes to difcover the caufe of a noife and commo¬ tion that at this moment interrupted the filence of the fcene, what was her furprife when fhe perceived all the foldiers and people of Leopold face the altar; and, with their eyes fixed on the unhappy Countefs, they drew their fwords, and held them in threatening attitudes
attitudes oppofite the poor helplefs victim, who was now completely furrounded on every fide ! The Countefs funk upon the altar, and inwardly fighed— *' Then hope is fled, and 1 am loft in¬ deed !—Oh God of Mercy ! pity and re¬ lieve me!" And now, with the infulting triumph of fuccefsful villany, Leopold fnatched the fainting Ethelwina in his arms, and holding her in his ftrong grafp, commanded the Prieft to begin. He obeyed, and opening the facred vo¬ lume, began the ceremony, The haplefs Ethelwina, now urged by madnefs and defpair, fuddenly refumed the energies of her courage -, —her father's mur¬ dered fpectre flood before her ; her foul was re-animated to fortitude and refiftance, and, with a ftruggle of uncommon ftrength, fhe fnatched her arms from Leopold, and afluming a firm, commanding, indignant look, releafed herfelf from his ftrong hold; and as the Prieft was proceeding, fhe dafhed
dafhed the book from his hand, haughtily exclaiming aloud, to the aftonifhment of Leopold— " Forbear!—Dare not on your life pro¬ ceed—add not, Oh impious wretch I to your other crimes the fin of facrilege!—Profane no more with your unhallowed breath the facred rites of Heaven's high ordination !—• And thou/* added fhe, fixing her eyes on Leopold, " Oh treacherous St. Iver! liften and tremble 1—Know, cruel man, your arts have failed—Ethelwina Fitz-Auburne is ftill herfelf—her foul cannot be fubdued—fhe towers above you ftill j—and though but a feeble, unprotected woman, and y.our pri- foner, flie dares defy your power, will calmly meet your utmoft fury, and proudly does fhe now tell you, that fhe abjures, defpifes, and abhors you !—Was it not enough that, -with a bold and lawlefs power, you have dared to force me from my home and all that was dear to me; and with a favage, ruffian violence, make me a prifoner— tear me from every relative, from every calm
calm and peaceful hope in life, and with cruel, unjuft malice immure me in this de¬ tefted caftle ? And when your coward foul could find no means to force me to your hated, iothed arms, your execrable heart (formed and incited by the angel of dark¬ nefs) adds to the catalogue of your other crimes that of having fubdued a powerlefs woman by horrible ftupifying potions. . Yet, though powerlefs in her perfon, her will is free ;—her innocence and inborn virtue are alike unconquerable, immoveable I—and that heavenly Guardian that protects the good, has rendered your guilty ftratagems abortive—Ethelwina faw the fnare, nor drank the poifon I" The courage and firmnefs with which Ethelwina had uttered thefe words, together with the commanding majefty of her whole perfon, and the angry, indignant glances that fliot from her eyes, with the unexpected ap¬ peal flic had made, aftoniflied the whole company. The foldiers grounded their arms involuntarily in mute fufpenfe s the Prieft had
had taken up the book, and ftood irrefolute, not daring to proceed, and awed by the majeftic appearance of his injured miftrefs. But it is impoflible to defcribe the confu¬ fion, difmay, fhame, and rage of Leopold. He ftood for fome feconds powerlefs and fpeechlefs, but not long did he remain in- adive; for ftarting forward, he violently feized the hands of Ethelwina, exclaiming— " Rafh, unthinking woman I knowetl thou not how miferable my power can make thee? Tempt me no more, left, in my rage, I heap tenfold wretchednefs upon thee.-— By the powers of heaven and hell, you fliall be mine 1—the foolifli ceremony has been ^ once performed * —mine you are by every binding tie, but your own will ;— to fatisfy your prudifli delicacy, I condefcend again to undergo the form; therefore accept my grace whilft it is offered—pronounce your marriage vows willingly—and be aflured this is the laft time you will ever evade my power. By the God of Battles, 1 fwear, I will no longer
longer be deprived of a hufband's lawful claims I" He was proceeding, when Ethelwina com¬ mand ingly exclaimed-- " Ceafe thy vain and empty threats, and know I will not yield !—never, by my own confent, will I become thy abhorred wife! —Remember, 1 am a free-born Britifli dame, and fubjed to no controul but that of my Royal Protedor!—Remember alfo, that gracious Edward honours me with guardian¬ ftiip and favour, and when he fliall hear the wrongs I have endured, think you he wiil not avenge them?—And you I" added flie, with an affumed courage, addrefling the foldiers, " you who, with miftaken zeal and blind delufion, have foilowed the guilty fervices of a midnight murderer------ ** " Ah! what iaid flie?'* cried Leopold, turning pale as death. " Yes,*' continued (lie, " a murderer! for fuch he is.—Yet, Oh mifguided men !. if pity lives in your fouls—if humanity dwells within your hearts, reieafe me from that
monfter!—Open your gates, and fet me free !—^Refufe any longer to aid a tyrant in his unjuft imprifbnment of a helplefs wo¬ man !—Reftore me to liberty, and you fliall command ' my riches, power, and interefts. -—My intercefllons with the Royal Edward fliall procure you pardon ;—you fhall be the foldiers and defenders of virtue ; and in my domains fliall you all find a fafe and fecure home.-—Reieafe me from hence—condud me , but fareiy from iver to Auburne Caftle, and every tongue there will blefs you —every heart and voice offer the grateful tribute of praife and welcome.—-Think on my words, aud remember the reverie of your own deftinies. Your lives, while you con¬ tinue to ferve a rebel, are forfeited to the State; yet I have power to fave them, and I will fave them!—Behold the daughter of Eail Godfred kneels; the Countefs of Au- burne's large domains condefcehds to fue— ihe bends in fupplicating humility before you, for an ad of mercy and of juftice ;—let compaflion prevail in your breafts—convey her
her free from the power of St. Iver and thefe detefted walls, and life and happinefs await to reward you I" Ethelwina had, with dignified grace, dropped on one knee before the foldiers, and with looks and words of irrefiftible perfuafion, and eloquence, completely fubdued them; many of them had trembled for their future fafety, while continuing in their prefent dan¬ gerous and rebellious purfuits ; and the par¬ don and protedion the Countefs had pro¬ mifed, induced them to conform to the wilhes of Ethelwina. . Ethelwina faw her conqueft, and joy and hope filled once more her heart. This was the great defign (he had formed for her re¬ ieafe, and with renovated fpirit and hope ihe arofe from her bended pofture, and look¬ ing on the countenances of the foldiers, with a face beaming with gratitude and thanks, flie faid to them, as they held out their arms in refpedful readinefs to receive her — * c My gallant protedors, I come !"
e 2 And
She had actually defcended the fteps of the altar before Leopold recovered his amazement fufiiciently to prevent her de¬ figns ; he feized and dragged her forcibly back to the altar, while, with a voice of thunder, he-furioufly exciaimed—■ " Audacious" traitors, mifcreantp, trem¬ ble 1—He that ftirs but at my command, dies!—Remember, cowards as fou are, the den my mercy took you from ; let that teach you obedience, and forget not that the lives of you all are at my free difpofal.—Retire in filence !—begone all of you, nor dare to difobey !" They were but too confcious that their lives were in the power of Leopold, and they dared not difobey his orders. Thofe who had been moft forward in theii offered fervice now caft a glance of pity upon the fallen Countefs— fallen indeed from her fureft hopes ; and all quietly left the hall, not daring to offer the leaft figns of afliftance to Ethelwina.
Leopold
Leopold feized and fupported the Countefs as fhe was fluking defpairing to the ground; but his voice foon recalled her to life and renewed fuftVdngs. " Now, haughty woman I" cried he, " have you yet learned the danger of re¬ fiftance to my will ?—if not, let this teach you; for terribly fhall my vengeance fall upon you.—There are miferies that await you, fuch as will make you fhudder ; horrors you dream not of, fuch torments as will make life a burthen, fuch as fhall force you to grovel at my feet, and beg to be reftored to that favour you have lo audacioufly refufed. Yet, in compaflion to your fex and inexpe¬ rience, I offer you, for the laft time, a chdice of deftiny—decide inftantly :—My wife, " Never!—-no, never! 1 * with a faint re¬ animation of courage; " never will I link my fate with the deftroyer of my father!— Oh moft inhuman, barbarous homicide— accurfed aflaflin ! thou ftandeft revealed the murderer of thy uncle, my wronged un- e 3 happy
happy father !—Thy deeds of darknefs can¬ not be concealed ,—offended Heaven will no longer fuffer thy guilty foul to live un- punifhed—thy power is impotent—thy life is at a fpan.—I ftand the accufer and aven¬ ger of a parent's murderer !'' " Seize, rack, torture her !— let her know all the torments that earth or hell can ex¬ ecute, fo ihe feels but fome part of thofe excruciating pangs flie has infhdted !" cried Leopold j-r-his body writhed in agony, and his eyes and face became convulfed -* pale tremblings feized him, and every fign of guilt marked his whole appearance* Reco¬ vering from a momentary paroxyfm, he ftarted forward, his <eyes glared upon the Countefs, and the horrible fury that dwelt within them, foretold a dreadful meaning : he drew his , fword, and raifing it to the breaft of Ethelwina, cried, with a voice that was ftifled with rage—" No, never fliall you live to tell the world I was your father's murderer I This blow fliall end thee !" So
So faying, he feized her round the waift, as Ethelwina funk on her knees, and extend¬ ing her arms, offered her beauteous bofom to the monfter*s aim. tc Strike !" ihe cried, " I am prepared ! —-My father, I have obeyed thee !—Strike 1" fhe repeated, " the innocent fear not death in any torm—'tis for thee alone to thrink and tremble.—Yet ftay one moment 5" and fhe haftily drew from her pocket the rufty m dagger and fcarf, which the always wore about her as relics of fad remembrance j unlocking the fpring of the poniard, fhe prefented it to Leopold, then added—" Let the fame inftrument which was plunged into the heart of the parent, drink the blood of his child I —Infatiate monfter, ftrike—I am ready !" " Ah ! horror—the earth overwhelms me—what do I fee r" cried the diftracted, Leopold, fnatching the dagger, then burft¬ ing into a convulfive frenzied laugh * ** the daemons are at work," v he wildly added—, " Godfred, thy life is at an end—this night x. 4 thou \
thou dieft I—Ah hell opens!—and fee he comes to curfe me !—Tis his paie, mangled fhade !—See how the blood guflies from his heart—that was a fure blow—I gave it!— How terribly he frowns upon me—his eyes dart lightning on me;—they fcorch, they burn, they confume me!—It approaches ftill nearer!—my hearfs blood is dried within me—my foul is in the flames—my fight is blafled—and I am loft for ever!—Oh injured Godfred, have mercy !^-Oh V'~ and, with a groan that feemed to be his laft, he fell an object of horror on the ground. Ruthmer, and the few guards that always remained with Leopold, raifed him from the floor, and laid him on the couch. Slowly he recovered from his agonizing frenzy, and fixing his eyes on the Countefs in frowning anger and ghaftly palenefs, he, in a low tone of voice, pronounced— " I fpare your life 5 but you have for ever loft your liberty. Now take the fuU force and confequence of my hatred.—I will now poffefs your rich domains by the right of
of my inheritance ; for, though I fuffer you to live, the world fliall believe you are dead. And from this moment your never-ending confinement begins: the higheft turret of the northern tower is your future prifon; the fcanty means of life are all that fliall now remain to you, that I may prolong in mifery the future days of your exiftence, and make you feel but fome of thofe added tor¬ ments you have dared to inflict upon me.—- Entreaties, tears, and fupplications are in vain—your doom is inevitable, and an ever¬ lafting earthly imprifonment awaits you; the vengeance you have provoked, you ihall fuffer the effect of in the extremeft of mifery, —Convey her to the tower !" " Think not* 1 * cried the defpairing Countefs, ** think not, Oh execrable tyrant! the unfubdued foul of Ethelwina will ftoop to fupplicate of thee.—I go; but foon fhall my unincumbered foul take its flight from its den of mifery to thofe regions of imraor* tality, where thou canft never hope to en¬ ter.—I go! and in the realms of blifs fhall b 5 wet
meet my murdered parent—my fainted mother!—Soon fliall my freed foul know happinefs and peace eternal; whilft thou flialt live the flave of guilty, overwhelming confeience, which fliall amply avenge a parent's murder and a daughter's fufferings *—never fliall your heait again know reft on earth !—Poffefs your ill-gotten wealth, riot in luxury ; and though you fliut tHe eyes of all the world againft your enormities, yet fliall the knowledge of your guilt purfue, and be your conftant punifher!—Gloomi¬ nefs, defpondence, and defpair await you-— dreams of horror fhall agitate you in the night, and a never-fleeping confeience be your curfe in the day ;-—a falling leaf fhall make you tremble; a door opening fhall caufe the biood to ftart from your cheeks in affrighted terror ;-—fufpicion> diftruft, dread of difcovery, and every other ill fhall attend you !—- Tremble, for the day of * terrifying retribution is at hand 1 —the murdered and the perkcuied fliall claim redrefs-—their wrongs, wrote in the book of fate, fhall bo a laft-
a lafting witnefs of your cruel deeds, and fink your foul to everlafting perdition V The fpirit of injury had fupported the Countefs during this juft denunciation; but when fhe ceafed fpeaking, fhe felt exhaufted, and- meekly laying her hands acrofs her bo- fbTi, and lifting her eyes to Heaven, fhe in¬ wardly faid— " My God ! I am refigned to the decrees of deftiny;—Oh take me from this world of woe, and end my life at once I" She faintly pronounced fome words which feemed to imply that her father was avenged 1 and then leaning on the guards, who hacl feized her, and follov/ed by Ruthmer, fhe flowly tottered out of the hall. Leopold ftood filently hearing the laft words of the Countefs; his eyes, yet rolling in extended agony and affright, purfued the receding form of his victim as fhe difappear¬ ed ; and, without power or ftrength to fpeak or move, he looked the horror-ftruck image of guilt and defpair. Whilft he had believed his crime of murder was unknown is 6 to
to all the world, he had felt but little of the ftiogi of confeience}—that Ethelwiru fliould he acquainted with it, aftoniflied and confounded htm, as well he knew no crea¬ ture but Ruthmer was witnefs of the deed. The firm, undaunted manner in which fhe had pronounced her knowledge of it, and the furprife and amazement of fo unexpect¬ ed a ftroke, thiew him off his guard; and the frenzy that difcovcrcd guilt had occa¬ sioned in his brain, betrayed him unequivo¬ cally without any other tcftimony. The fear and dread of the confequence*, led him to adopt the only method by wbkh he could efcape condign punishment j—for that Ethel- wifia would ever voluntarily become hb, wat now beyond a hope; and as the horrors of remorfe had already begun, and the fufpen- fsof> of his faculties given him time for thought, he refolved not to increafe bb guilt by defraying the haplefs evidence of his crimes, of whkh (he ftemed to be fo cer¬ tain | but by concealing her for ever, he hoped to pin pefiefSon ofher eftate*, as being the
next and neareft heir to the Auburne do¬ mains.—Such were his various reflections during the latter part of the foregoing fcene* but as Ethelwina pronounced her denuncia¬ tion, he felt the truth of every word fhe uttered, and his foul became Ihe feat of horror—his brain, of madnefs. The prophecy of the injured creature feemed in part ful¬ filled -, he became rather an objeft of pity—* if poflible, more fo than Ethelwina | for the one was an innocent, the other a guilty fuf¬ ferer. Every torturing inward feeling flie had defcribed, he already endured with added violences and infanity confined him to bis couch, and demanded all the attentions of his people to prevent him from committing fuicide on himfelf.
CHAP*
%
CHAP, V. ETHELWINA was conveyed through the dreary fabric, and retained her fenfes till (became to the court of the northern tower; but when (be entered it, flie dropjied on her twets before the guards, and entreated them to be merciful, and ftrike lier dead at once, or hide her io the bowels of the earth, rather than drag lur to the dreadiul tower; but with equal effed might Che iratnly have fued to the mairci of a troubled fet, for thefe were men who knew oot the touch of future or humanity, but whofe hearts delighted in tho fight of human «iifery» and gloried in in- fMbg it with &vagje ymkmt* They tore her from the cattb, and forced ber to the entrance
entrance of the tower; the ponderous door flew back, and Ethelwina caught a fight of the dreary glooms within, and uttering a heart-rending fliriek, fhe fell fenfelefs to the ground. The men rejoiced at her infenfibility, as it prevented all further refiftance, and with¬ out one fpark of pity^they, took her in their arms, and conveyed her to the very topmoft chamber of the battlements, where having kid her on an old couch in her dungeon of horrors, they left her without waiting to fee returning life re-animate her frame, and fe- curing the door, retreated haftily from the place. To depift the horrors of this abode is im- poffible, or to defcribe half the agonies that rent ihe heart of the innocent fufferw, in vain; flie laid on the couch pale, lifelefs, and the filcnl image of death j a faint refpi- ration wasthe only fign of life:—Che remained many hours in this almoft enviable ftate, and to this fuftefulon of mental faculties may be attributed the reftoratbn of her fenfes free
free from infanity; for fuch accumulated miferies might well reduce her to that laft ftate of human wretchednefs. The day was fpent, and night came on. She had remained in this heavy torpor long after the fun lud fet; and when fhe did awake, the difmai glooms of her dungeon were made more vifible by a fmall lamp, which hung from the middle of the ceiling, and by its feeble rays helped to pierce the thick vapours of night, and beftowed fome of its impotent beams on the dreary dark¬ nefs that reigned around. The unfortunate Ethelwina raifed her heavy eyelids, but with a pitiable groan as inftantly clofed them in terror, at the firft view ofher miferable abode ; (lie was fo weakened, that fhe had not ftrength left to cope with the prefent horrors j (he quietly funk on her couch, recommend¬ ed herfelf to her Heavenly Father, and yielded to the influence of nature. Her reftiefs (lumbers continued till day-* light, and the brightnefs of tlie morning fun awoke her. The contraft was powerful: the difmai
difmai glooms of the night were now fue- ceeded by the bright fplendours of a morn¬ ing fun, which fhone in all diredions into her prifon. Ethelwina raifed herfelf from her hard bed, and caft a freezing glance of fear around her; the brightnefs of the day in fome degree enlivened the black walls of the prifon. Ethelwina fat on her couch witfy defpairing looks, and eyes filled with tears, as fhe exclaimed-— " Oh inhuman Leopold ! thy work is now complete—thy threatened tortures are indeed reality—refinement df cruelty could not have chofen a punifliment more mi¬ ferable !—My foul can no longer fupport this heavy deftiny I—Oh that thy favage heart would but relent, and by plunging thy poniard in my bofom, finifli at once my life and wretchednefs 1" She threw her handkerchief over her face, whilft the big, unheeded tears ran down her pallid cheeks. An unconquerable hopelefs defpair feized her heart | fhe fat, leaning her head againft the fide of the couch, and 'never
never once ftirred or nvwed from the pos¬ ture (he had thrown herfelf into; not a wifh but for death remained, and to this laft hope fhe clung as the only remaining onnfort left in view.—-The light of day was hate.ul, for that did but difphv the furrounding dreadful dangers ; the night was equally hatjfuJ, for then tho/e dangers increafed; arid thus flie pafled two days and nights, never once ftir- ring from her feat, or ever tafting the fcanty food V/A was brought her. ' Her guard, who attended her, became alarmed by the fettled defpair fo legibly dif¬ played on her haggard countenance ; he en¬ treated her to take fuftenance, and promifed to make her prifon more comfortable by pro¬ curing fome ufeful conveniences. The man was indeed foftened by the pi¬ tiable appearance of the haplefs Countefs ; his heart tek a touch of compaflion, and he petitioned Ruthmer to allow her a change of prifon j for he declared that if fhe was not fpeedily removed, the wretched Lady would foon fink to her eternal reft. Ruthmer,
ETHELWINA. Ruthmer, the inhuman tool of an impious hiafter, liftened with open triumph to this account, and furlily laid, that fuch was the fate defired, and death was the proper pu¬ nifliment of her daring obftinacy. lie finifhed his words by advifing Bertram, the name of the guard, not to ihew her any weak, foolifh pity * for, on the care he took of the prifoner committed to his charge, depended his own fafety; fliould he betray his truft, his own life would be anfwerable , and with this threat they parted. The guard, who was not deaf to humanity, de¬ termined to apply to Leopold hhiifeif * but, on enquiry, he learned that his Lord was raving with a delirious fever. Nothing, therefore, could be done; but he refolved, as he alone had the care of the Countefs, to procure her fome little comforts by ftealth, which, he hoped, might turn the courfe of her ideas ', as he juftly thought the place fhe was confined in, had fo overcome her with terrors, that flie had neither power or wifh to move or act. The
The man had judged rightly, for the mo¬ ment Ethelwina became fenfible of the dreadful abode to whieh Hie had been re¬ moved (the horrors of which flie had feen fo full a profped of from the battlement of her former prifon), her ioul funk within her; every effort to flop the trembling, chilling terrors of her feelings, was ufelefs, and (lie fat in Ihuddering expectancy of being dafhed from her h;gh ftation to the rocks below, or buried in the unfathomable abyfs of the bot- tomleis gulph, which ran round the north fide of the mountain ; till at laft the excru¬ ciating anguifli ofher fear-ftruck mind was worked to delirium, her fenfes could endure no more, and fhe became alike dead to feel¬ ing and to danger. In this ftate, with her fine form reclining on the couch, did the guard on his return find the object of his benevolence. He en* tered her prifon heavily loaded, but Ethel¬ wina was too infenfible to notice his ap¬ pearance; he approached near her, and viewed her with fomething like pity;— indeed
indeed it was impoflible to do otherwife; even his hard heart was touched with com¬ panion, as he beheld the moving picture of forrow before him. Her countenance dif¬ played figns of the greateft grief 5 whilft the lofs of intellect had reduced the fine ani¬ mated expreflion of her eyes, which were fometimes deluged with tears, but a> fud¬ denly ceafed, an.l a vacant ftare of inanity, more diftrefiing to the beholder than even the former, would fucceed the fliort interval of fenfe and reafon. Her fine long auburn hair had efcaped from its faftenings, and hung loofe and dif¬ ordered about her lace and neck, which gave to her appearance the infanity that dwelt on her mind : one i.rm fupported her aching head, whilft the other reclined on her waift ; her face by turns became pale and red with the burning fever that ran through her veins, and which the want of nourifliment had oc¬ cafioned.
Such ,
Such was the piteous objed that pre¬ fented itfelf.—Ah! how great the reverfe from the once happy, beloved, powerful Ethelwina, Countefs of Auburne, furround¬ ed by every fplendour, every delicacy, bleffed with Royal protedion, with numerous ap¬ proving friends; noble of birth, beautiful, accomplilhed, eminently good and virtuous ; yet, alas! all thefe happy, great endowments could not preferve her from an overruling deftiny. Behold her now, in a fliort fpace of time, reduced from her high ftation in life; rank, riches, and innocence could not preferve her from forrow ; flie is become the prey of an outlaw, a villain, a murderer; and, to aggravate her own diftreffes, he was her father's deftroyer !—expofed to dangers, which not even her ftrong courageous mind can combat, or efcape from, or her fuperior judgment penetrate the many fnares but too well planned and executed, though as yet in vain, for ihe is ftill unfubdued ; and, laft ly, conveyed to a dungeon more tremen- doufly horrible than defcription can paint, or
or heart conceive it poflible that malice itfelf could find a place fo detefted, even for the worlt of criminal-, and fuch as robbed the innocent, haplefs captive of her reafon ; and infanity is the refult of fuch excels of mifery. Stripped of all, flie is left without a pro¬ tedor, friend, or foother to her agonies and difordered mind. Alas, poor injured innocence ! caft thine eyes to Hc:-ven, le.ul up thy pious prayers to the Moft Juft—in him you fliall find a pitying Father !—for your life is blamelefs and inoffenfive—your foul pure and virtu¬ ous.—But remember, your only hope of comfort refts with yourfelf; defert not your own caufe by giving way to excels of grief, left you become inadive, and, lofing the powers of reafon, fail the iad vidim to vice ;—for pity dwells not in the heart of thy tormentor, neither can friendfliip reieafe thee fro ti his power, ftrong as lie is in his in¬ vulnerable caftle, and furrounded as you are by almofl hefts of foes * but be again thyfeif, and thou arc ftill unconquerable. Calm the tempeft
tempeft of thy fevered brain—conquer the turbulence of unavailing grief—betake thee to the friends of fuffering mifery, Religion and Fortitude, and half the burthen of thy afflidions will be alleviated :—the power of thy tyrant will be but half felt, and the force of his malice will be broken, like the billows of the raging fea, when vainly it attempts to force its way through the folid foundations of the rocks, which encompafs and guard the land from its fury I— So fung the pitying, confoiing genius of the fuffering Ethelwina. But now again behold her, though once the kind friend of numbers who had felt the effed of her benevolent heart, re¬ ceiving, from the hands of perhaps a mid¬ night robber, the common neceflary food he brought her; for at the fight of the hard features of the man, as he watched over her, a fudden fpark of recolledion fliot acrois her brain, and produced almoft an inftantaneous effed. Reafon once more began to dawn— (lie fighed deeply, whilft the extreme pain of her frame, from long falling, helped the return
return of her mental faculties, and her de¬ licacy felt fhocked at being attended by aman, and beholding him gaze on her with an in¬ tereft which, though excited by pity, flie felt uneafy to experience. But her fenfes were by no means perfect, and thefe feelings gave way to others equally painful, and to that vacancy of mind which the faint return of fenfe had not chafed from her brow.— The guard, with a foftened, perfuafive voice, . entreated flie would not refufe fuch nourifli- ment as he had brought •* and Ethelwina ading fblely from the all-powerful commands of famiflied nature, eagerly fwallowed what had been procured for her. Bertram was pleafed and gratified, and with greater warmth preiled her to drink fome wine- She looked at him, then at the wine, with a countenance of fufpicion and terror * but the man gueffing her meaning, explained that he had got it by ftealth, and preffed it with fuch friendly eagernefs, that Ethelwina drank fome of it, and declared it had greatly relieved her from the vol. ii. f burning
burning heat and thirft that fhe had long endured 9 but a heavy ftupor came fuddenly over her. She put her hand to her head, complained of a fwimming giddinefs, and in a rnoment funk on the couch quite mo- tionlefs. Bertram, who had ftaid fome time in the room purpofely to watch her, now perceived the drink, in which he had infufed a fleep¬ ing potion, had ,the defired effed. With real tendernefs and delicacy he took the re- fiftlefs Ethelwina in his arms, and gently placed her on the floor, while he moved the couch to a ftronger and more fecure fide of this ruined and fliat tered chamber. He placed it in a fmall recefs oppofite that fide of the walls that looked into the valley below ; he then put a mattrefs and fome bed-furniture on the couch, lighted a tripod-lamp in ad¬ dition to the other, which caft an enlivening air around, and took from the dungeon many of its difmai horrors; and then, for his own fecurity fake, proceeded to the win¬ dows, and faftened the broken fhutters, that the
the light from thence might not be feen by the favage Ruthmer, who had forbid all kinds of comfort to the poor captive. And now he approached, and took Ethelwina again in his arms, who, momentarily coming to herfelf, feebly cried for mercy i <c 1 am in your power," flie added, ftrug- gling to fpeak, " I am dying, a'ict have no ftrength left to refift your will 1—But Oh ! for pity's falce, betray me not, nor take ad¬ vantage of ray horrible fituation !" The terrifying apprehenfion that pollution, if not murder, was his defign, had given her a momentary recolledion, and the man was fhocked at .being the unintentional caufe of her agony, which was ftrongly painted on her countenance, and which his raifing her in his arms had occafioned. But he haftily exclaimed— "Fear me not, Lady; you are fafe and free from all danger, but what your own alarmed fancy excites ;— my intention is but to perform an ad of humanity, arid to offer ^ to
100 ETHELWINA. to you as much fervice as, from my limitted means, Idare. ,: , Pie then laid her foftly on the couch, and, in a fubdued tone of voice, bid her take courage, and repofe in fafety. Taking up his own lamp, he haftened gently out of the chamber, and Ethelwina juft heard the found of the grating bolts as they/were fattened without. It was the laft noife that diiiuibed her; a heavy drowfincfs came over her, and Ihe enjoyed a refrefhing fleep for many hours. She awoke late in the following day ; her reafon perfectly reftored, her mind calmed, and fome of the heav'y glooms of deprefled forrow caft from her thoughts;—flie felt re-animatcd, and, like a perfon unexpect¬ edly* waking from a trance, a weighty load feemed taken from her heart, her fpirits a little revived, and whatever the guard had adminiftered, it had produced the defired effect; and fhe rofe free from pain or fever, except a remaining weaknefs, which illnefs and late uncommon exertion of mind had occafioned.
occafioned.—It was now the fourth morning iince the terrible day of the intended mar¬ riage. Time, the univerial conqueror ot all things, had mollified the remembrance of the miferies of that day j her paiiions be¬ came fubfervient to her reafon, and firxi fhe found there were no hopes of releaic from her prefent horrors, or"of averting the me¬ lancholy deftiny of her unhappy life, fhe re¬ folved patiently to fubmit with fortitude, and meet each frefti calamity with becoming courage and refignation. This peaceful change of mind was occafioned partly by the vifions ofher flumbers, which had the alter¬ nate effect of pleating and diftrefiing her ^— for, in her fleep, fancy led her to the vaults of the caftle, and to the very cell that con¬ tained her father's remains, when looking towards the recefs, the body flowly raifed its ghaftly form, and fixing its hollow eyes full upon her, it uttered—" Do not forget your oath I—the day of retributive vengeance is at hand I—fear it not—Heaven has dele¬ gated, thee the inftrument of puniftiment I f 3 Perform
Perform its high decrees, and happinefs at¬ tend thy days to a peaceful futurity P*— Suddenly fhe found herfelf in her former chamber in the caftle, and fleeping on the bed; flie fancied herfelf awakened by the undrawing of the curtains, when, looking forward, Gie beheld the heavenly form ofher mother, arrayed in a fliining apparel of dazzling white, and filver ftars of blazing radiance. Prefently the vifion opened its lips, and thus pronounced—" My child, fear nothing !—I come a pitying minifter from above, to mitigate thy griefs, and bid thy forrows ceafe !—Be of good faith—-thy trials foon fliall terminate.—There lives a Being who fhall amply avenge our houfe*s wrongs. An important event will foon be unfolded— till that time arrives, refume again the in¬ born virtues of thy foul!—call back thy frighted reafon to thy aid !—No more give way to this confuming defpair; but let thy fortitude re-animate thy virtue to deeds of noble infpifation !—■ Be confident in good—ftudy to defer ve, and thou flialt . . receive
receive the mercy and favour of Heaven !—- Be courageous, and days of future happi¬ nefs await thee !"—The bright angelic fpirit of Urfuline caft on Ethelwina a look of fweet ferenity and pity, then waving its hands over her, it winged its ethereal courfe up to heaven ;—the clouds parted, and my¬ riads of voices floated on the fpheres, fing¬ ing celeftial, foul-ravifhing ftrains of har¬ mony. Again the fcene fhifted, and fhe now found herfelf at Auburne Caftle. The grand hall of ftate was magnificently decorated with fumptuous marriage ornaments, whilft every part was thronged with noble lordly company, in fplendid rich habiliments; all wore the fmiling appearance of mirthful gaiety, and every face difplayed content and happinefs. As flie pafled through the throng, fhe perceived, at the further end of the hall, a youth and a warrior, who bec¬ koned to her to advance; the face of the warrior feemed not unfamiliar to her—it fhone with every manly grace, and his fine tall i ' v *' < '4 figure
figure rofe fuperior in grandeur to any of the other company. The youth appeared extremely handfome, and was more fplen¬ didly clrefled than any one prefent; but he looked not more than fourteen or fifteen years of age. The moment he perceived Ethelwina, he ran up to her, and embracing "her with great affedion in his manner, faid— " Welcome! welcome! you are at laft ar¬ rived ; we have long expeded you; but now let us haften to the altar.—I give you to my friend, the chofen of my heart—he will amply reward you for all your paft af¬ flidions I"—The warrior then approached, and dropping gracefully on his knee, took her hand, and fervently kifling it, entreated, in love-befeeching eloquence, that (lie would blefs him for life, by beftowing upon him her beauteous felf. Half reludant flie found herfelf led to the altar, amidft the admiring looks of numerous fpedators; but in the midft of her confufion ihe fell upon the fteps of the altar with fuch violence, that flie fcreamed with the pain of her fall, and fuddenly
fuddenly awoke from her pleafing delufions of fa.ney. The contraft between the vifionary and the real fcenes that prefented themfelves, had a powerful effect on her mind; as fhe rofe from her flumbers, fhe fighed at the re- verfe* and wiflied ftill to remain in her pleafing ftate of forgetfulnefs. She fat abforbcd in remembrance of her dreams, and though Ihe was not fuperfti¬ tious of them, yet of late fhe hacl received fo many awful confirmations of a fuper- natural agency, that flie felt inclined to pay fome little attention to a vifion fo uncom¬ mon and extraordinary.—The melancholy appearance of her father's fpirit, fhe thought foreboded fome new trial, fome frefh cala¬ mity ; but the foft fweet form of her angelic mother feemed to be an antidote, and an in¬ centive to ftruggle againft the approaching ill; whilft her folemn, mild exhortations, Ethelwina confidered as fent by Providence to recal her mind to firmnefs and virtuous refiftance againft that fad overwhelming F 5 grief,
grief, which threatened a total extindion to every mental fundion. She threw herfelf on her knees, in prayer and thanks to Heaven for the timely relief, and finifhed heroraifons with a pious invoca¬ tion for the peace and happinefs of her la¬ mented parents; the fight of whom, though only in a dream, and particularly her mo¬ ther, had aded like a confoiing draught j— for fhe now felt as if fhe was not quite for¬ faken, even in her dreary tower j and the idea of her mother (though but in delufion) defcending from her celeftial abode to vifit and confoie her in her afflidions, had fome¬ thing fo blifsful, fo pleafingly reviving, that fhe refolved no longer to encourage the de¬ fpair of her heart, but endeavour to re¬ animate her drooping, forrowful fpirits with cheering hope, and a firm reliance on the Father of the helplefs. Tne change in her mind became fudden and aftonifhing; hope and fortitude again poffeffed her foul, and began to chafe away from her grief-clouded brow, the care and wretchednefs that had made
made fuch vifible ravages on her lovely in¬ terefting countenance. Confcious innocence and virtue aided the entire confidence which fhe had in the mercy of a juft, all-powerful Be ,, who, in his own good time, could change her dungeon for liberty and happinefs. But till that blefled hour might arrive, fhe felt that ali weak, if not wicked repinings could be of no avail; and fhe refolved pa¬ tiently to await the time when Ihe hoped and trufted fhe fhould be rewarded with happier days. The latter part of her dream flie paid very little attention to, except the counte* nance of the youth, which was ftrongly im* preffed on her memory, text its great re* ' femblance to fome perfon that fhe had a faint recollection of.
w 6 CHAP*
CHAP. VI. JiiTHELWINA'S mind was now agitated moftly by the dreadful dangers ofher prefent abode ; but this fhe refolved, if poflible, to conquer, by familiarizing herfelf to the ter¬ rors that fhe could not fly from, and w^kh a little time, fhe hoped, would entirely fubdue; and that fhe might put her refolu¬ tions into effed, fbe began to examine her prifon, not a Httle pleafed to find that the old fhutters of the windows were clofed, as* fliould fhe go too near them, and fee the tremendous profped from without, her cou* rage might foil her. The fhutters were fo old and fhattered, thit they admitted i great portion of day¬ light,
%ht, quite fufficient to enlighten the place; and now Che began her examination:—with rifing fear fhe caft her eyes around, and dif¬ covered, for the firft time, that the place was dreadfully decayed, and the walls evi¬ dently bent and leaning. The floor was extremely warped and broken, and the fides of the walls quite bare and black. It was plain the place had never been defigned for a room, but for a ftation where the bdieged might do great damage to the enemy.—The walls had never bee» plaiflered or wainfeoted, but remained in their original ftate ; there were many deep arches or niches in the wails, in which were large cannon loops, which gave a faint, idea of the immenfe thicknefs of the walls, and plainly ihewed that the tower muft have been once very ftrong and irrefiftible % though now, from age and re¬ peated former fieges, it was weakened dan- geroufly, and even threatened to fall, and crufh itfelf by its own enormous bulk and ponderous weight* Some of the loop-holes had been fiUed up, and others enlarged, and
windows of a late date placed in them; as tf the horrors erf fuch a place could oot fuffi- ticntly terrifv the miferable captive, without the incfeife of a fight that prefented nothing to his expedauon hut irremediable deftruc- tion. New horror feiisdl the poor Ethelwina as flie turned her eyes to that ftde of the room which "was fo much bent and lunk $ for there flie beheld a chafm, which reached from the roof to the floor, admitting the air and light of heaven in a wide diredion, that in fome puts ihe might have put her head through. It appealed as if it had been occaf*oned by a thunder-bolt, and which, firom the lofty height of the tower, was very probable f but it was a lid emblem of the weaknefs and tottering rum of iw condition*—Through this cleft, the muds and ftorms of beaten had a free open paflage into the dungeon- —Afary parts of the ioor mm fttewed mtli loofe brkks and (bnes, which' had Mkn fiom the walk i fat thit fide had ro* ceived to much injury in the former times of its
its wars and fieges, that many of Ihe breaches remained; the roof, tike every other part, was decayed ; the beam* thai fupported il, leaned, and threatened to fall to Ihe ground. Ethelwina, who had rilen from her bed, now threw herfelf again on il in the extreme of mifery, and for fome moments remained without the power lo move }—grief, fhame, horror, and indignation alternately poffeffed her, and again raifed a whirlwind of con¬ tending emotion in ber foul. At laft, with a heart flwggtiftg, as if the ftrinp of life would break, with a look of defpair, and a groan of tortured anguifli, that might have pierced Ihe heart of her barbarian, fhe wildly exclaimed—-* " Ah Ciotl! Ah God! this then loo furely is to be my grave !—I now know my doom I—il cannot be averted—and the mon¬ fter here confines me, ihat, from this dm of honors, 1 may receive that death hb dagger dares not execute I" She funk back upon her couch infenfible, for fte could not bear lo think how near flie
W4S
was to a horrible death;—and life, though wretched, wa« ftitl not hateful while hope r^inained* She continued a length of time* in ttm new-excired alHidion^ and it required a ftruggle of al! her fortitude and couragS to prevent her mind fmm agtin returning to its former fid dcfjwndcncy and hojxlefs defpair. One of her principal rdlcdions nas th< hope that tier laft horrible tugpftliOifc'jK,to the regions for whicli foe liad horn c^Sned in fo ryinous a place, was but tt!«ufi*«H*ifc of her own terrors, and tliat the r^! defigns of Leopdkl were but to terrify her?into his puipofcs. This ihougl't fomewhst cdmed ber troubled bean, md flic again tufc from her feat tn finifli her examinations. She proceeded to th.u fide of the room where the door wa* fiicd, but wai furprifed toftndjiat tho^h every other part of the place, was bate of ornament, yet this angle was entirely miiifooted, ihoy#i o'd and black with age, itid extremely ruinou*, yet by no means fo decayed &$ tiie oilier tide of the room*
6
The
The door was of oak, plated with iron of great thicknefs, and ftrongly bolted * fhe tried to open it, but it was too well fecured, and feemed an amazing contraft to the weakened and threatening looks of every other part.—At leaft, thought Ethelwina, this is a fafer fide than any of the others , and fhe drew her chair, rotten with ags, to this angle of the prifon ; —but to the windows no effort of courage had power to ftimulate her to venture; the horrors of the profped within wsre already too much, without an additional increafe of the tremendous views from without.—As fhe peniivdy fat muftng on her chair, her fad forlorn heart racked by a thoufand painful remembrances, fhe thought on the humanity of her guard, and a diftant hope fhot athwart her brain, pre- fenting through him a faint hope of relief. She bad been fenfible to the kindnefs he had (hewn her, and Ihe refolved to try if the promife of ample reward might not tempt him to aid her efcape; but at prefent pru¬ dence forbade, for a time, her making the attempt,
attempt, till fhe had gained upon his ava¬ rice by prefents and offers flie hoped he would not refufe. While revolving thefe intentions in her mind, the bolts of the door unfaftcned, and Bertram, the guard, entered. He caft a fcrutinizing glance upon her, and felt for a moment the pleafing effeds of a good adion in the revived appearance of Ethelwina j but the outward ferocity of his nature was again refumed. He fat down the food he had brought, and was proceeding to the moft dangerous parts of the dungeon to open the fhutters, when the Countefs, who had watched his movements, now entreated, with a voice of foft raildnefs* that he would not hazard his life by ap¬ proaching too near the threatening dangers of the bending fide of the tower; adding, that fhe wilhed him not to rifk his life for her gnmheation, as one window, md that the leaft terrific, was ali that Ihe wilhed to have open.—The man flopped—pity again became predominant in his face, wad was really
really felf in his heart, for the uncommon miferies fhe was fo patiently refigned to. He thanked her for her condefcenfion in being concerned for his fafety, declaring it was what he had no claim to, and fincerely coni- miferating her unhappy deftiny; and fmce it was her defire, he woulcl only open that win¬ dow Ihe had pointed out, which was lefs dangerous in its appearance, ancf had a pro¬ fped over the caftle and its many courts.— He was leaving the place when Ethelwina put a mark of value into his hand, faying— " It is a fmall token of my gratitude for the indulgences you have procured me; and be aflured I fliall not forget them.** The man appeared ftruck, and became quite foftened ; he now promifed to bring her wardrobe, and many other little com¬ forts, fuch as books, that might help to pafs away the dreary hours.—This laft offk was grateful to Ethelwina, particularly as, when night came, he kept his word, and brought with him all he promifed.—She again doubly rewarded him; for now flie would
would be enabled to divert ^reat part of the tedious, mchnchcly hours, and for a time lofe fiVht of the horrors that eneom- com pafied her^ She flept better in the night, and avoke with the lifuig fun, which fhone brightly through the broken fliut ters and open cafe¬ ment. She employed the day in looking over her wardrobe ; and as the books were but few, (he did not dare perufe them with that eagernefs flic defired, left Ihe fliould too foon be deprived of her only refource againft the fadnefs of her grievous reflec¬ tions. Thus feveral da)s paffed, fome parts of her time devoted to prayer, and fortifying her mind againft the prefent evils; fome¬ times, though fparingly, reading ; and fome¬ times conjeduring what her fate was ro be, and when, or if ever, her prefent fufferings would end. But the greater part of her time was devoted to tears, and the aggra¬ vating recolledions of former happinefs and prefent mifery ; weeping over her mother's pidure
pidure (from the fight of which fhe could no longer deprive herfelf, and which became her moft pleafing, though painful, employ¬ ment), and bitterly lamenting the hor¬ rible end of her father, of which (lie enter¬ tained no doubt of the reality of his mur¬ der. But other terrors excited other alarms * for it now became that feafon of the year, when the air and elements were filled with ftorms and tempefts. One evening, after a very fultry day, the air became condenfed, the fun de¬ clined in fiery rednefs, and a folemn ftillnefs feemed to forebode an impending tempeft, The night increafed, and foon after a total darknefs came on. Ethelwina fat for hours wrapt in meditation ; when Ihe was ftartled by a flaih of lightning, which was foon fol¬ lowed by the approaching thunder. The tempeft increafed, the thunders be¬ came more violent, the lightnings more vivid, and which were heard and feen more forcibly in her elevated ftation, which, raifed fo high in the air, feemed to hang fo near the tem¬ peft,
peft, that it added to the awful terrors of the poor captive. The wind blew a perfed hur¬ ricane, rufhing in torrents with the blazes of fulphureous fire through the wide chafm and broken walls of the tower; blowing cold and comfortlcfs upon the finking, fhudder- ine Countefs, who tried in vain to clofe her eyes and ears againft the fury of the ftorm. Never till this dread moment did flie con¬ ceive half the aggravated horrors of her ex¬ pofed fituation : fhe threw herfelf on her knees in the middle of her den, and with eyes and arms caft towards lieaven, awaited, in the agonies of defpair, to receive her final doom,- which not a hope of efcaping from could be entertained. The tremendous peals of thunder filled her with momentary expedations of being crufhed to atoms, and in this ftiffened pofture Ihe remained, re- fip-nins herfelf to a fate inevitable.—In a moment the place became one continued blaze of lightning, which for an inftant not the broadeft glare of funthine could have equalled, and that was followed by a crafli
of thunder, fo long, fo loud that it fhook the tower to its centre; a rumbling noife, as of fomething in the tower falling, made her conclude it was the nodding battlements tumbling down to the gulph below. Slie gave herfelf up for loft, and funk with a faint fliriek extended on the ground. A ftill more vivid flame of fire recalled her again to life. She railed herfelf, and as the unintermitting flalhes enlightened the chamber, (lie plainly faw a fmall dark open¬ ing in the wainfeoted fide of the prifon :— urged by hope and diftraded clefperation, flie feized the lamp, and darted to the ca¬ vity ; it prefented fome deep narrow fteps. Life was to be preferved ; Ihe ran, flie flew down, flie defcended an immenfe number; ihe fickoned, became exhaufted, and faint- * inpj againft the wall, it gave way by the fudden preffure of her weight, and fhe fell with violence ; but her fall foon re- covered her, and opening wildly her eyes, fhe found herfelf in a wide-extended apart - ment, feebly illumined by the rays of a lamp. x\t
A t the further end of the chamber was a couch, near which hung the lamp. An uncommon impulfe urged her on ; fhe approached, and taking the light in her hand—Gracious Heaven! what was her amazement, when holding the taper over the couch, fhe be¬ held a fleeping boy !—beautiful, and the exad refemblance of him that fancy had pic¬ tured to her fight in her vifionary flumbers.
CHAP.
38BSBB
CHAP. VII. EiTHELWINA flood immoveable, fixed to the fpot, gazing aftoniflied on the objed before her, without power to ftir or movel At firft fhe was ready to think ali was but the offspring of a difturbed imagination; fhe hardly credited her eyes and fenfes that what fhe beheld was real, till the continued blazes of fire, accompanied by the terrific rebounding peals of awful thunder, which reverberated in lengthened echoes from mountain to mountain, produced a noife fo tremendous, that it filled the mind with the idea of the laft day's approach, threatening to deftroy the earth, and fhiver its meafure- vol. ii. c left
lefs Immenfity to atoms. Yet, notwith- 1 ftanding the fearful horrors of fuch a night, Ethelwina's whole attention was rivetted on the form before her ; all anxiety for felf was loft in contemplating the ftill fleeping coun¬ tenance of the youth, till feeing no figns of life or animation, Ihe concluded the unfor¬ tunate creature was dead, as fhe thouglit it impoffible that any living being could fleep fo foundly in a night fo full of tempeftuous terrors. The drefs of the youth was fimple. The more Ethelwina looked on him, the ftronger became her curiofity and compaflion; and fhe refolved to convince herfelf if he were really dead, and for this purpofe took his hand, which, though cold, beat againft her touch. * Humanity forbade her leaving him in fuch a fituation, when her care might perhaps recal him to life -, —befides his ex¬ treme youth excited her pity, and fhe was about to wake hirn,, when the increafing fury of the ftorm raged with redoubled violence, * -She
She let fall the hand fhe had taken in her*s, and flood the image of defpair ; the whole tower feemed moved by the laft dread fhock, which had forcibly thrown her feveral paces from the place where flie was ftanding. The appalling thunders ftruck to her heart; '—flie flood leaning, exhaufted, againft the wall. Again furrounded by the terrors of death, the hopes of prefervation made her fly to the pannel, as flie thought the means by which flie had made her firft efcape,, might be fur¬ ther continued, at leaft flie might be fafer could flie defcend lower. Already 1 was her hand upon the open pannel, and one foot placed upon the ftairs, when the poor infen- fibie object flie had4efc to the mercy of the elements, ftruck felf-rep;oach to her heart; ih^aceui&djicrfel^of ielnihnels and cruelty thus to, leave a poor helplefs being, perhaps equally unhappy as herfelr, and flie turned back, inwardly faying—- " No, poor unknown youth, you fliall fliare my fate—-1 will not defert you.—If, g 2 by
by my aid, a life may be preferved, how pleafing will be the reward V* And now, as if the powers of elemental wars "were tired of the tremendous ftrife, and had determined on a ceflation, the tempeft hacl fpent its remaining fury in the laft hor¬ rific, awfully loud peal ofihunder, and was become exhaufted of nearly all its ftrength, except a declining reverberation, which ap¬ peared to be finking into diftance; the light¬ nings loft their vivid fiercenefs, and, like the thunders, became fubmiflive to the rule of Nature, againft whofe mild powers they had lately made f.> vigorous an attack. It was many hours fince the ftorm had begun. Ethelwina, between awe and fear, had remained half in, half out of the pan¬ nel, liftening to ,the receding biafts, which foon after funk into total filence; and after fo dreadful a night, this fucceeding calm was re-animating to her drooping fpirits.— She recalled her aflrightened reafon to her aid, and wondered by what means fhe had entered her prefent ftation, till flie foon re¬ collected
colleded the whole circumftance ; yet while Ihe ftill ftood in the attitude of fufpenfe and recolledion, the ftillnefs that had fucceeded the ftorm was interrupted by the rain, which firft began to defcend gently, and then fell in torrents, increafing the noife of the many warerfalls, whilft their fources being mul¬ tiplied by the rain, and rifing in foaming variety, dafhed headlong down the preci¬ pices, felling fragments of rock, and tum¬ bling with a thundering roar into the abyfs ^ below, with a noife and agitation that fliook even the mountains themfelves, and filled the air above with its rebound. ' Ethelwina had liftened for fome time to the torrents and waterfalls not without fear and dread ; for, exhaufted with the terrors of the night, fhe had feated herfelf on the fteps, unable from weaknefs to reach the oojed of her compaflion, She was 'ftill feated, wtien file was rejoiced by feeing the dawn of day break over the eaftern hills; it was* a cheer- ing fight, and Ethelwina hailed it with glad welcome. She now felt her fainting heart o 3 revive,
revive, and refolved to approach the object of her pity. The light of day foon fhamed the feeble rays of the expiring lamp, and though the rain continued, its violence was much abated. She rofe from her feat, and fur- veyed the room : it was large and gloomy ; the walls, like her own prifon, were hare and dreary, but had at leaft the comfort of being entire; as there were none of thofe dreadful chafixrs here, that had, with fo much rea¬ fon, alarmed and terrified her in her own dungeon ; this place was at leaft fafer, as it did not appear to lean fo much as the higher ftories did. i The windows were fmaller, but fixed a vaft depth in the wall, extremely high from the ground, and grated with crofs iron-bars; it was impoflible to ftand on the flbor and diftinguifh any thing from without, fave the fkies. That angle where the door of entrance was placed, exactly refembled the ruinous place where fhe had flown from, with only this
this difference, that the wainfcot here, though 1 old, was in a tolerable ftate of repair ; the door was arched, and of heavy iron. There were'alfo three fteps indented in the amazing thicknefs of the walls which led* up to. the dungeon ; for iuch in every reiped it really was, and truly refembled the fad refuge; of melancholy and gloomy defpair;—yet, poor Ethelwina thought it a palace when cdrhpared with her own dreadful prifon. She concluded, by ihe ftrength and tin- decayed appearance of the chamber, that it could not be any great diftance from the foundations of the tower; and Ihe was 4 approaching the window to convince herfelf, when in paffing the couch, on which the youth lay, fhe caft her eyes upon his pale, emaciated countenance, and perceived he was moving. She went up to' the couch, and with a look of heaven-beaming pity, gently took his hand. The youth was then waking from his trance ; the fudden unexpeded preffure ftartled him; he raifed himfelf up, and
opened a pair of beautiful blue eyes full on Ethelwina, who inftantly let go his hand, uttering in extreme agitation— " Aftonifhing refemblance P* But, from various emotions, her tongue refufed to aid her thoughts to give them ex* preflSon. The youth, delighted and equally fur¬ prifed, faid, in a foft harmonious voice— M Celeftia! Being, whom, in my flumbers, Fancy 'pictured to my fight, art thou indeed reality ?—Has Heaven, in pity to my mi¬ fery, fent his good angel to reieafe me from this place of woe, and take me. to a bleffed immortality ?—Say, radient Spirit! fliall I at laft be free ?—Oh ! fhall I feel and know the tranfports of liberty?—I am, indeed, weary of this fad world, and long to range in fpace irnmeafureable—in blifs eternal !-— In mercy then reieafe me from this grave of horrors, and take me to the Father of the father3efs-7tothe-Kingof Heaven I" , The foft perfuafive tone of voice—the fi> lemn eagernefs and lieart-infpiriog energy, with
with which this uncommon addrefs was made—the pleading helplefs innocence of the youth, who had dropped on one^nee befpre her, made the aftoniflied Ethelwina wifh fhe had really been the heavenly being that he miftook her for, and delegated with powers to reieafe a creature fo irrefiftibly engaging.—Yet, as fhe ftood irrefolutely gazing on the objed of her inward medi¬ tations,, his aftonifhing refemblance to a dear departed friend fo rivetted her eyes on his countenance, that fhe would have for¬ got the miftake her appearance had caufed, had fhe not feen the eyes of the boy fill with tears, and a fob of grief awakened her from her reverie;—it was cruel to keep him in fufpenfe, and fhe faid— " Alas, poor youth I I am not the happy being you fuppofe ; but, like yourfelf, a wretched prifoner 1" *' A prifoner I'* cried the youth, amazed, and, fomewhat pleafed, yet difappointed; <* is it poflible," added he, "there ihould be a monfter fo cruel as to perfecute fuch g 5 wondrous
wondrous excellence?—Ah me ! then what liaft thou to complain of, loft, unhappy Arthur, if—" ** Oh God of Heaven! Arthur did you fay ?" cried the trembling, agitated Ethel¬ wina. u Yet, alas ! my fancy but bewilders me—there are more Arthurs than one I— Why fhould a name thus agitate me ?**— The whole frame of Ethelwina was in com¬ motion, fhe grew red and pale alternately, and had much to do to prevent herfelf from fainting; yet flie thought it truly improper to fuffer her feelings to overcome her reafon, where perhaps there was no foundation for fuch alarm. She endeavoured to recover compofure; but turning her eyes again on the face of the youth, who was viewing her with looksof wonder, his ftrong likenefs to beings once fo dear to her, filled her heart again with tumultuous emotions j—flic felt an unconquerable impulfe to know more of him, and, with quivering lips and faltering accents, fhe (aid—" You fay—you fay your name
name is Arthur j can you tell—do you know your other name V* " Alas!" faid the youth, " f tis many, many years fince any tongue, within my hearing, has pronounced it, and only then In extreme childhood; yet, if my memory de- ceive me not, 'tis Arthur Fitz-Auburne.** " Great God of Heaven l" cried Ethel¬ wina, flying franticly towards, and linking on her knees befide him* "Oh Merciful Providence !—Yet, if thou art Arthur Fitfc- Auburne, upon thy neck are three well- known fpots." And then, with wild diftracted hafte, fhe tore open that part of his drefs which con¬ cealed the fpots, «' Ah! 'tis he—it is, Oh Omnipotent Providence I—it is my brother I my long loft, poor, unhappy brother !'* In a moment they fell into each other's arms, and the fcene that followed would ren¬ der, defcription vain and impoflible:—tbey were all ecftacy of foul, and the world, and the terrors of their fituation, were forgot, o 6 wet?
were abforbcd in this feaft of happinefs.— Words were unable to exprefs their feelings, and they ufed none;—they remained in this ftate of filent rapture without fpeaking, moving, or even thinking;—wrapped in each other's arms, and ftill on their knees, they thought not on the dangers of a difco¬ very, and the words—" My brother ! My lifter!*' tenderly and emphatically pro¬ nounced, were the only founds that were uttered.—They thought not on, heard not the approach of footfteps which now founded on the ftairs j—they were alive only to the tender affedions of nature j every other emotion had not the leaft power to ad, and became but fecondary to their prefent fen¬ fations, till the undrawfog of a heavy bolt at the door awoke them from their mutual happy trance. Ethelwina ftarted up in terror, and ex¬ claimed aloud— ** Oh God! we are betrayed—they come to tear my new-found brother from me t"
It
It was the delirium of ecftacy that had maddened her brain; and the key, which was in hafte put into the lock, made her fee * the danger of their fituation. She haftily embraced her brother, and darted to the pan¬ nel, which, in her hafte and agitation, flie fliut to with fuch violence that it occafioned a noife very loud, and dangerous to the ne* ceffity of her not being feen or fuppofed to have entered her brother's chamber, as fuch a difcovery might perhaps prove fatal to them both j but when, by ber hafty preci- * pitation, fhe had occafioned fo loud a noife - as muft, fhe feared, betray her as well as Arthur, fhe ftood like a perfon devoted to inftant death, awaiting in agitation and ter¬ ror the moment of execution.
CHAP.
CHAP* VIIL A HEAVY fec^ftq* paarf the chamber; and, as the wainfcot was thin, Ethelwina heard the Isatcful voice of Ruthmer, who angrily exclaimed— ** Whence came that nolle, boy ?—-and wbo has beat in this chamber r" In a trembling voice, fhe heard Arthur reply— * f Indeed, Ruihmcr, I teard no noife.* 1 ** N^; heard i ftm are then grown deaf, boy j for you are not ufuolly fb void of hearing,—Speak inftantly! a noife I beard, and lb did you;—a voice too founded on my car,— Mmt h (mm myftery % the con- 4 fu/ion
fufion on your countenance betrays you 5— 1 will be anfwered !-«Speak f I fay !—Who has been, or (fall is here V 9 And then fhe heard his heavy foot walk¬ ing round the room, as if examining every part of it. The pannel fhe concluded he muft be acquainted with, and fhe funk breathlefs on the fteps, in momentary ex¬ pedation of feeing ii thrown open * 9 but ber agitation did not prevent her hearing her brother's reply, and admiring the prefence of mind he pofTcfled, as he faid— *« Indeed, Ruthmer, nqw I remember, I did hear a noife *, but I fuppofe it was only fome tumbling fragment of the battlements; for you know you have often faid that the tower would fall into the valley 1 for that it was fo high, and fo ruinous, and dangerous that I might exped to be buried under the ruins of its fall.—The teropcft ? laft night, has fliook fome of the ftones from their .cement, and that I fuppofe muft have occa¬ fioned the noife you heard j—ami as for the voice, Ruthmer, if you heard it, it could 3 be
be no other than mines for alas! forme, [ i?ficn complain aloud of tny cruel deftiny. Awl who fhould it be bat mc? im well you kne^r* Ruthmer, you done keep the keyt of my dungeon, and yourst$ the only face 1 hive (em for many and many % long day;—how, therefore, out any one enter tiere but with your knowledge ?" *< Well, 1 knot* that wdl coough," crkd l he fcjxx tous wretch; ** ami you never wil! fee my one but me, for you ate to flay here as long as ycm live. But what was the rea¬ fon of ihe confufion of your free, fo evident of guilt r* « No, Ruthtner t w replied Arthur, lf I have no guilt; for I never did wrong to any hurrua creature;—yet thofe who are them¬ felves guilty, me emr fufpicious of otters* If my &cc betrayed confufion, you know you arc ikmys fo cruel when you come, that I dread to fee you, and that is the caufe," •« , Tiswe^l $ ,, aniwered Ruthmer, "but Ioto to be kft flippant, m you may horn have juft ciuie to tremble; at prefent you c have
have none—But there is your food, which in future I fhal! bring you in the morning inftead of night, as formerly.** Ethelwina then heard bim lock the out¬ ward door, and proceed up the fteps of the tower* Not doubting but that he mm going to her empty prifon, (he tan up the flairs, and entered through the open pannel, which even her utmoft effort could not move to iti Hide* Her terrors increafed, for the footfteps of Ruthmer were heard on the landing * md m the next moment the locks and bolts were tried, as if he doubted whether they were well faftened % the door was not open¬ ed, but the bolts feemed additionally fecured, and foon after flie heard his fteps retreating down the timer. Ethelwina felt like a condemned wretch who receives a pardon at the very moment he expeds to fuffer, and Ibe once more breathed free from (uch continual terrors ; but fearful the pannel migjbt te difcovered in its preient fbte, flie lofe from her feat, where
wlicre flic li^I thrown herfelf to recover from to alarm, and g^ing up w the fectet com- ftiuoiauion, flie again ufel her utmoft ex- crtbnf, of which terror had, in the firft Attempt deprived her j and after much la¬ bour, flic placed it in its former fituation, which the violence of the thunder fliock, on the preceding wigjit, lisd jerkoi from the Hides on which it ran. She clofed it in fecurhy i and now, in fearful expedation, est a glance of eager enquiry round the mam, to difcover what additional damages it fmd fuftatned, but was pleafingly furprifed to find that it had received no frefh injury to iti ruinous ftate by the late tempeft, ex¬ cept tlul here and thene the floor, on the moft decayed and dangerous fideis, wis icattcrcd anew with looic fiones that hsd (alien from the willf, leaving tlieir apertures as frefli proofti of the crumbling ruin* rf the place* EfbdwtiiA, who had cupefted to find one fide entirely deftroyed, was pleafed as flie emit ber eyes around § for flie fefleded, ihat if the tower had been ibte toendiiit a night
ntght of fuch tremendous horrors, there would be a hope that fhe might efcape the terrific death fo much dreaded. And now her kte fears being ended, her mind recurred with tranfported delight to the foregoing event md wonderful difco¬ very ; every care, every forrow were forgot, or if remembered, ferved but to enhance her prefent happinefs:—that her brother ihould live—fliould by herfelf be found by fuch uncommon, unexpeded means, filed ber foul with enthufiaftic rapturous reverence towards that All-feeing Providence who had* by fuch unparalleled goodnefs, brought about the aftonifliing event. She threw herfelf on her knees to the Mdl High; tears of gmtitude and joy mn down in fhowers from her eyes; her otatfons were moft thank* ful; fhe fpent the day in a religious, awful, yet happy ecftacy of prayer; and when the overflowing feelings of her too fufceptible heart were fomewhat calmed, Che rofe from her knees, refolved never again to give way to defpair, or fuffer her fenfes and reafon to be
be abforbcd iu grief and defpondency, well convinced that that All-wife Being, who had, for fome good purpofe, pleafed toaffhd, would never defert her. In how many in- ftances had flie not received proofs of that protedion, which no earthly aid could have afforded her! and if fhe had fuffered mifery, wm fhe not mm amply, doubly rewarded in finding a brother, when every hope of fuch ma event bad for years been dtfearded by bis &mily, who had been torn from them for ever, but for the guiding hand of myike* nom Heaven, which, by bringing her to the manfion of ber enemies, ultimately led to the happinefs of difcovcring htm alive. It feemed as if Heaven had delegated ho* its inftrument of juftice and retri¬ bution. Wnat account could fbe render in return, if, by weakly deferring ber poft, fhe left the great work unfinifhed, in which alfo her own peace and happinefs* as well as her brother's, depended fo much on her own exertions?
« Oh
41 Oh merciful, juft Heaven!" flie cried, *< how wondrous and infcrutable are thy ways !—That which, to my erring judgment, feemed as the ftroke of death, has, by thy unbounded goodnefi, fed to hfe— to happi¬ nefs indefcribable!—Oh ! I have, through thy mercy, found a brother—long loft, and hopelefs of recovery !—What words—- what language, can fpeak the immeafurable gratitude which fills my joyful heart ?—Oh complete thy work, Great Power Divine I aid, by thy heavenly afliftance, the juftice of my wiflies—-and may we, through thee, find liberty and happinefs!" Such were the thanktul breathings of her heart , and now the emotions of wonder and delight took a more fettled ftation, and gave way to other rcik&ions. Was it, indeed, reality Ihe had witnefled, and not a dream * of fidion ? The amazing difcovery feemed incredible and impoflible of belief j and yet it was no delufion, but ahappy exifting cer¬ tainty 1 and flie exclaimed, while her heart again filled with unutterable delight— «• Oh 1
€l Oh yes ! I know, I feel that all is real, undoubted certainty; for I have preffed my brother to my heart ; and thofe three well- known fpots are proof undeniable.— AU is true, and I am happy!" A full tide of tranfcendent joy floated on her foul j flie gave way to the fweet plea¬ fures of the heart, unallayed, unclouded by forrow. A calm, ferene delight, a placid inward ecftacy ftole over her, and this was the firft real peaceful moment fhe had known almoft fmce the late Countefs, her mother, died. But amidft the crowd of thoughts that prcfled on her mind, was one for their efcape *, for ezx ihe had a double ftimula- rivc to obi/u thai or, 1 y blefling left to wifli f }."*, Mic bseai* to feci certain that their fuf- ferings mu'l lorn terminate* and, in the romantic delufions of hei Lncy, totally for¬ got how fecured fhe was from freedom.*- Her pious miftti refted only on the awful means by which the late difcoveries had been unraveled, and her deluded imagina¬ tion
tion depended on the hope, that now flie had found her brother, the time of their im- prifonment muft foon expire. The delicacy of her heart made her not remember the caufe for which fhe had been forced from Auburne to become a prifoner at Iver ; and flie only thought it was permitted that t! e crimes of Leopold might be brought to light, and receive their due puniftiment.— Yet, now and then, a fear would agitate her for this dear brother, whofe life might, ftill be endangered by his mercilef* gaoler -* and in fome degree this thought ftopped the cur¬ rent of her joy * —but her adive and percep¬ tible mind again found ferenity, and her fears were calmed, by refleding that he had lived for more than feven ycan> in the power of his enemy, and was ftill permitted to exift; for flie concluded that the avenger, Con¬ feience, had proved a preicrver or Arthur's life, and as fueh had been the cafe, for (q many years, fhe trufted it would ftill be his fafeguard in the heart of their bittereft foe. In the meantime flie refolved to refled
on every probable means 'to procure their freedom; whilft at prefent their greateft hope refted on the late difcovery remaining a fecret;—for fliould Leopold be informed of their wonderful meeting, it might ferve- as a fuccefsful inftrument for frefh villany. The only profped of efcape remained in the guard, who had before fliewn her fuch proofs of his humanity; but the danger of^ revealing to him her knowledge of her bro¬ ther's exiftence, ftaggered her late excited hopes, and created new alarms and fuggef- tions. At leaft fhe refolved to wait a courfe of time before ftie made any trial upon him, the better to difcover the real difpofition of his heart, and from thence judge whether there was any probability of moving either his avarice or his compaflion to befriend th£m. Yet fuch variety of thoughts, fuch multiplicity of defigns crowded on her mind, that from the fatigue of the laft night, the want of reft, and an exhaufted frame, fhe now felt the intenfe pain of her head fo in¬ creafed, that, fpite of the new-raifed hopes
and joys of her heart, flie found herfelf fo inclined to yield to the reftorer of nature, that, willingly throwing herfelf on her couch, fhe was foon buried in a found repofe, and never fince fhe had been forced from her own dear manfion, enjoyed fo peaceful, fo calm, and refreshing a fleep as that which, after many hours* lafting, (lie was awakened from by the fudden entrance of her guard, who came with her repaft. . She awoke light and eafy, J^er countenance beaming with returning health, and her mind greatly reftored by one happy, thrice happy circumftance, to all its elaftic powers. What an aftonifhing change had the late uncommon revolution occafioned !—That mind and heart, fo lately enfeebled by af¬ fliction, and finking with forrow and defpair, was now the exact reverfe -, and a fmile of hope, a ftruggle between joy and fear, played upon her beauteous face, which had now loft fome of its haggard palenefs, and was a°ain faintly vifited by the bloom of health. vol. 11. h Such
Such a change did not efcape the penetrating glances of the guard, who faid-—■ *' Lady, it rejoices me much to fee this alteration ; yet it excites my wonder that, after fuch a night of horrors as the laft, you fliould •'appear more calm, more refigned than formerly.—The ftorms of the other evening made me fear for your life ; and had my Lord been well, I would have entreated his permiflioii to have removed you to a lefs dangerous abode.** Ethelwina was haftening to reply, when the laft words ftruck alarm to her heart;— that place, which once flie confidered as the tomb of life, and looked upon with horror, even with madnefs, was, now reverfed ; a long refidence had a little familiarized her to the dangers of the tower. But now the late events had left her not a wifh but for the prefent to remain in it; it was the only place that feemed to offer a hope of reieafe, and tha idea of being removed from the dear objed fo lately difcovered, till flie quitted it in happy liberty, made her turn pale with anxious
anxious apprehenfion, while fhe replied to the guard— " Alas! my friend, I thank you for your offered zeal ; but lince it has pleafed Hea¬ ven to preferve me througli the night, I hope I need not fear in future.—I am be¬ come familiar to the horrors of the place, and unlefs the exchange of another were for freedom, have no wifli but to remain in my prefent abode, dreadful as it is. I therefoie pray you not to rifk your Lord's anger on my account. I am grateful for your humanity, but will not fubmit to owe a favour, even the prefervation of life, to the Lord o{ St. Iver. I entreat you to defift from your intended purpofes, as I muft, while choice is left me, decline them. > ' The man looked upon her with fcru¬ tinizing wonder, but faid nothing__ Ethelwina filently put a mark into his hand, and approached the open cafement, whiifl Bertram lighted the lamps, though day was not yet declined.
h 2 CHAP.
CHA n . IX. ETHELWINA, again alone, waited anxioufly for the returning night, that fhe might revifit her brother ; but, impa¬ tient as fhe was, fhe confidered it hazard¬ ous to venture down till near midnight, and as it was yet many hours to that time, flie refolved to take the frefh air from the win¬ dow. The Gothic iron-work of the cafement was rufted, and refilled a firft attempt to open it, but flie foon accompliflied her pur¬ pofe, though all profped from without was prevented by an exuberance of thick ivy, which ran mantling up the fides of the tower, and covered the whole window , but of
of this fhe broke away fufficient to have a full view of the battlements of the caftle, its ftrong bulwarks, and many towers. At a diftance beyond the caftle, were feen the peaks and fpires of mountains rifing their rugged heads in awful barren fublimity, whilft, from their fiflures and clefts, grew many a tall pine, many a variegated wild plant, fhrubs, and thick underwood: many of the fteeps and higher cliffs rofe in com¬ plete barren nakednefs in a ftraight per¬ pendicular line to the utmoft top, defying the powers of man, or even the daring wild- goat, to invade its gloomy folitudes. Turn¬ ing her eyes from profpects that made her fenfes dizzy with the view, a more foft and glowing perfpective prefented itfelf: between two immenfe high mountains was feen the fetting fun enlivening, by its glaring, re¬ fulgent beams, the ftupendous wonders of nature. The tremendous height of the tower gave to Ethelwina an unconftrained view of the extended ocean, and the rays of the faft H 3 finking
finking fun playing on its vaft bofom, in a rich and mellowed glow of golden fire j a fcene fo foft, fo charmingly ferene and beau-> ' tiful, funk on the enraptured heart of Ethel- 1 wina; (he ftood gazing wkh pen five plea¬ fure on the repofing beauties of the fcene, tiiL tears of rapturous enthufiafm filled her heart. Forgetful of the world below, her thoughts took a folemn turn, and hsr eyes eafti up m gazing admiration to the uncloud- * ed vault of the ftarry regions, and fhe re¬ fleded with awe and reverence on the won¬ drous powers of that invifible Being who had- formed fo vaft, fo diverfified a fcene. Her parents were remembered with re¬ verential forrow and regret—Auguftine toa; but there fhe ceafed, not daring to hope, an4 to think on him in uncertainty, was torture; of her brother flie thought with mingled pity and tendernefs ; and perhaps her own future fate finifhed the long catalogue of refledions. Spite of her hopes, her courage, and her fortitude, fhe felt convinced that there muft be other trials in ftore for her ; her
her tyrant, fhe thought, could not really intend to confine her for ever in her prefent terrific abode y new ftratagems, (lie doubted not, would be invented, and fuch as perhaps might call forth all her perfeverance to refift and repel their dangerous tendency. Then again the doubt whether flie might rely on the fidelity of the guard, fliould ihe truft him j for he might (as was but too likely) difcover and betray all her defigns and hopes. This thought refolved her, and flie faw the extreme danger of making him a party concerned. Were there no other naeaqs rWA fudden thought darted acrofs lier jaiino^--liiight not the fecret communi¬ cations lead to the vaults below ? was it not poflible fome outlet might be found?—it was not altogether improbable, and at leaft worth the aUempt^ - This mental furmife had: conjured up a train of ideas; that had infenfibly withdrawn her attention from the doling profpects 5— the fun had long mnk behind the weftern atmoiphere, and the mountains and earth were ; h 4 covered
covered with the mift of darknefs, before flie remembered that fhe was ftill at the window; till the fudden appearance of the pale queen ofn'ght recalled hermiridtothe latenefs of the hour, and that fhe now might proceed to Arthur's chamber in fafety. She clofed the cafement; but the dreary, ruinous, forlorn appearance of her chamber ill repaid the (aerifies; ftrongly as fhe was gifted with coutage, it was impofliule for her to view this terrifying, fluttered dungeon without fhuddering with.fear and horror. She took the leffer lamp, and bolted the only fattening which the door had on the in- fide of her prifon, to prevent the entrance of any one, left, by fo unfortunate an event, her abfence fhouid be difcovered ; the bolt was ftrong, which was on many ac¬ counts pleafing to Ethelwina, as it would at all times fecure her from unwelcome intru- fions. And now, with a palpitating heart, fhe drew back the pannel, and began to de¬ fcend the fmall fpiral ftairs, which (he well examined :
examined : they were old, and covered with green mould, from dampnefs.and decay, which fliewed them to have been many years difc , ufed ; the walls were black, and damp with moifture.—Ethelwina had been defcending fome time, and at laft reached the fmall landing, againft the fide of which flie had, the former night, in her fainting, fell. She was ftartled by the inarticulated found of a complaining voice; the founds guided her to where the pannel was fixed, and perhaps fhe might have been, but for this circumftance, perplexed where to find it; for it was fo artfully concealed, that fhe was obliged to hold the lamp clofe to the^ floor before flie could difcover the fpring, which fhe per¬ ceived faftened in fuch a manner as to pre¬ vent any one on the infide being able to open it if it was locked. Her impatience to en¬ ter was fo great, that fhe did not ftay to prevent its enclofing her in her brother's i ' apartment, and it muft infallibly have fprung to the faftening, had not her drefs fortunate¬ ly caught in the doling^aperture.
,BT«1LWIN Ethehvina, who had caught a fight of Arthur as ,he fat leaning his head, upoa his fcandoiLthe table, *in a melancholy pofture, while his fobs became more audible* was maddened v at the prevention,; hut foon loofehing her drefs, and placing the pannel in a fecure diredion for her return, flie flew with, eagernefs acrofs,the room, and en¬ folded Arthur in her affedionate arms, before he "'had awoke from his affliding contem¬ plations. They remained 1 filent for fome moments; Ethelwina nuxed her tears with- Arthur's; but at the unexpected fight of his fifter, he regained compofure, and joy fparkled in his eyes. 'Vyhen Ethelwina could fpeak, fhe de¬ manded the caufe of his fobs and grief, and Arthur thus replied—r " But that the joy of this fecond meet-* ing has converted grief into happinefs, mi¬ fery has been my portion fince you left me. —Ah my fifter! bleffed as I am by this moft wonderful difcovery, yet can you fup-*
pofe I am infenfible to your injuries ?—Even now I blufli, I grieve to think I have not the means to punifh your oppreffors.—Oh juft Heaven! why am 1 bound in this en¬ thralling bondage r—why, when a brother's arm fhould rife to avenge a fifter's wrongs* am r withheld from performing an aft of duty, and want myfelf the means to do an office of juftice ?—This is the caufe of my grief.— Of myfelf I think not;—but when I fee *and know that you are perhaps expofed to infult, imprifoned, friendiefs, unprotected, my heart indignantly riles againft fuch ty¬ ranny ; and I figh, alas 1 in vain, for that liberty, which fhould procure you your's." Ethelwina was aftoniflied to fee the fpirit and indignant anger which fliot from his eyes as he uttered thefe words. At firft: fne gazed upon him without being able to fpeak , but recovering her amazement, flie faid, in an expreffive and ferious tone of voice— u Arthur! as you regard your fifter, fup- prefs thefe frjitlefe emotions of a too heated
brain.—Remember we are pri(oners, with¬ out the power to punifli or revenge.—Be not ungrateful to that Heaven, who, in commiferation to thy long confinement, has by fuch aftonifliing means permitted us again to meet, when either of us knew not that the other exifted ;—let thy heart and thoughts rife in thankfulnefs, rather than difcontent.—xMy fufferings, my brother, are but few, and thofe temporary , —but with¬ out them, you might ftill have ianguiflied a fad and melancholy life away, or been the object of other dangers that make me fliudder but to fuppofe. But now the profped opens—liberty may yet be ob¬ tained.—Heaven, that never deferts the good, will ftill protect us;—doubt it "not. Therefore, dear Arthur, calm thy troubled mind, and embitter not this happy inter¬ view by ufelefs lamentations ;—but now in¬ form me how thou haft pafled the weary hours of thy long impri{bllment. ,, " Alas, my fifter!" anfwered Arthur, " dreary and melancholy have pafled the days of
of my exiftence ; no change, no variety, all was dull, wearifome, and infipid; and the hiftory of one day is the hiftory of more than feven years of my paft life :—To wake earlv in the morning—to watch the riling fun—to trace its courfe over the worlds above, and fee its laft declining rays fink in the evening behind the weftern mountains— to obferve the pale planet of night fucceed the day—to tell each ftar, far as the eye could discriminate —to liften to the conftant roar of the cataract, or the ftill more tre¬ mendous noife of the awful thunder, as at ftated times it rebounded among the near and diftant mountains—to look upon the accompanying blazes of lightning, t\\\ > by their frequent repetition, my heart grew callous, and I forgot to fear the ftorms that howled around, or only thought of them but as the common attendants of nature— to view thefe flupendous rocks rifing in mock majefty even to lieaven itfelf—and now and then, perhaps, to fee fome human being crofs the wafte, or the harmlefs fhep- herd
herd tend his many folds of (heep;—thefe, and my guard who brings my food, except the fiiiking wild-goat, who jumps and leaps upon the crags and fteeps, are the only living beings my eye has ever behetd fince that unhappy day which faw me carried from my paternal roof—thefe are all the fad amufements which, for many a long year, £ have known.—Beyond this dreary prifon my feet have* never pafled, fave twice.— ' The light of heaven bat dimly appears through yonder narrow cafement, and the reviving fun-beams difdain to fliine upon fo mifera* ble a being as I am!—Alas ! his rays have never pierced beyond thefe iron-bars, which clofe all entrance through the window j— the refrefhing breezes of heaven I am en¬ tirely flmt out from !—Ah! how have I wept my fad and wretched deftiny !—* how oft have wifhed to be the mountain fhep- herd , for then my life had furely been more blefled ;—no bolts nor walls would then en? compafs me—no furly man would bring me fcanty. food by day, and lock me out from heaven's
heaven's light and air I—Had I not been greatly born, the blefling of liberty had been mine—then, free and unconftrained, I Ihould have breathed the pure and whole- fome air, have walked in the fun-beams, and ranged from hill to hill; no cares would then have overcome me; the Ample fufte¬ nance of nature would have been eifily pro¬ cured, and with that and contentment how happy would have pafled my days I—*But, Ah fad reverfe! the fmiling funny day has put forth all its rich luxuriance but to in¬ creafe my wretchednefs.—Sometimes, with impious murmurs, I have acculed high Heaven with cruelty and injuftice, that could give to the birds of the air that li¬ berty it denied to me; and whilft viewing the beauties of the furrounding fcene, have frequently wiflied for death to take me from the fight of what I was doomed never to enjoy. Then cafting myfelf on my hard bed, my eyes would fwim in tears, and quite fpent with weeping, would clofe in blsisful forgetfulnefs, and the hours of
darknefs pafs in healing dumber; but when again I awoke, then, Ah ! then it was that I had to combat bitter recollections—to figh in vain for liberty—and wifti, alas, how fruitleffly 1 to be a man and free, that 1 might punifli infamy, and revenge a pa¬ rent's wrongs.
v*Jr***.*»
CHAP. X. ___ * ETHELWINA had been liftening to this artlefs rhapfody, delivered with fuch uncom* mon feeling and energy, with her fine eyes filled with tears'of fympathy* and beaming foft pity i^pon the moving fpeakerj but his laft words increafed her agitations, and made her haftily exclaim— * f Oh Heavens, my father! baft thou too feen his awful figure ?—Oh fpeak, *€• late the dreadful myftery P* Arthur now fixed his eyes in wonder on the pale, livid countenance of Ethelwina, as he faid— «* Alas, my filler f what mean thefe ftrange emotions ?—Yet tell me, though I dread
dread to aft, how long have you been a prifcfter ¥' ** 'Not tmomonths,** anfwered Ethelwina. ** But fay—eafe mc at once of this torturing fwfpenfe—~fpeak, my brother, knoweft thou aught of our unbappv father P* •* Ah mc! a t*c of fad import lives within my heart," faid Aithur , •' liften, my fifter, but fummon thy utmoft ford* tude to bear the melancholy ftory !•—Oh I why muft I Chock you with the hiftory of a parent's fufiVrngs!—*But let mc not keep you in fufpenfc—1 will begin from that un¬ happy day that the ruffians ftole me from the foreft, and relate, a* briefly as I can, each well-remembered circumftance.—*A!a§! a parent's fate is wrapped in mine, and my young heart, trained up in mifery, may well remember, what in other's early youth, would have fo foon been forgotten. *« It was on a gloomy morning, in the middle of October, near eight )ears ago, that, after having crept up the lap of my mother, and entreated a kifs and a bkffing, I left
I left her for the kft time, never again to fee her!—With the iivdinefs of infancy, I took my companion Rupert by the hmd, md we went alone our accuftomed walk in the foreft.—Ah I my incautious fteps that led me from my fecure home never more to re¬ turn thither !«—Ab I where was my watch* ful genius ! why flepl be when my footfteps wandend to deftrudion!—Wc ftrolkd along the woods, ar,d Rupert had that day forgot to take the accuftomed guard that ever had attended us. Negligent of the latenefs of the hour, I was deaf to all the entreaties of my good attendant to return to the caitte, but, with childifh folly* ft$ purfued a fmall white rabbit, which had fuddenly darted from the thicket down our path, and whofe fleck white &m had attracted my infant joy, and I refolved to poffeft myfelf of the fright¬ ened animal. I ran with fpeed after it, and the good-natured Rupert followed me, in vain warning me of the dangers of the fo¬ reft or the faft*coming night §—I ftill was obftinate, till my little favourite efcaped me.
me, and in a moment difappeared among the brakes and brambles, rendering it im¬ poflible Io {uifae St further, My little limbs grown weary ivhh the chace, I threw my felf on the moffy earth for reft; and cafl- iog my eyes around, was furprifed to fee, through an opening in the foreft, the caftle towers fcarrtiy perceptible, from the great diftance my cliace had ltd me from them. Rupert, half angry, chid me, an J entreated me n®# to return. VcxeJ at the difap¬ pointment of my rabbit, 1 arofe , he took me in his arms, and kindly carried me. Ai we returned towards home, I obferved Rupert feveral times turn round, and to my young remembrance traces of affright mark¬ ed his face, and bis hafte increafed \ but feeing him fo often look behind him, I did fo too, and once caught fight of a tall, frightful looking man, whofe face was quite unknown to mc. He quickly difappeared, and Rupert hurried 011 % —but we bit our well- known track, and were bewildered in the intricate imzes of the woods. My poor Rupert,
burthen he bore, and the vain effort he had made to recover our lofl way, at kft uttered fome complaints, and the words of " Ah I we are loll—the murderers muft foon over¬ take us r ftruck on my mfMU ear. I knew not then their dreadful jWtttit, but burfting into tears, I kiffed his cheek, and begged hun to fet me down, for that I was not urea, and wc fliould fooner get home if I ran befide him. .At that inftant a ftrili horn founded near us and prefcntly the man whom I had before caught a glimpfe of, and now accompanied by another, vvith walks on their faces, and drawn broad-fwords tazed upon my faithful R U p, rl , and point-' tag their weapons to his bread, demanded oi him to deliver me into their hands — " Never will 1 defert my young Lord," cried my poor Rupert; •« had I but arras," alas» he had none, » I would fell thee to the earth!"-" Die, flave!" cried one of the ruffiam, as he plunged his Kvord into my dear unhappy R uper£ . s ^ whj)ft |he other
'other favage fcfecd me from the arms of my finking guardian, whom I fav fall life¬ lefs to the ground !—I Ihrickcd aloud, and called on my Ru]?ert to fave me from the ruffians; but when I faw him quite motion- lefs, and his eyes (hut, I redoubled my cries. But alas! the voice of childhood is feeble, and had there been any paflcngcrs near, it was impoflible tliat my weak calls could have been beard $ aad the favages foon iilcnced me, by binding part of my torn lath acrofs my mouth, and wrapping me in a cloak, hid me from all infpedion. They bore me in their arms for a length of time ; at laft: the movements of a horfe ftruck on my car, and I know not how long we tra¬ velled in this manner, for \ had cried my¬ felf to fleep; and when 1 awoke, I found myfelf fick at heart, and in a place of total darknefs, but yet it feemed to move along with great fwiftnefs, I foon renewed my cries, and the ugly man came to my bed- fide, ami defired mc to hold my tongue. But I refufed, and wtpt the more, cdling on
on my dear mother to come and take me from this frightful place.—" Will you, my mother — my fillers, wil. vou let me lay md die—will you defert your poorliltle Arthur ?—Indeed I have done no \\ rong; but if 1 have deferved punifliment, Oh kiil me with your own dear hands fo you take me from this ugly man !"—Rulhaxr, for it was him who had ftolen me irom my Rupert, knit his brows more angrily at me, and I trembled with fear, as he faid—" Silence your fruitlefs cries —you will never return to the caftle; but it you ceafe this foolifh weeping, you fliall be carried to your fiuher."—The laft words made mc ftart for joy— ** My father!" cried J, ** Oh is my father alive ? I thought he had long fince beer* deixd. Where, where is he ? Shall I indeed tee my father ? Nay then do but take me to him; I promife you, good man, I will cry no more* Oh how I lot.g to lie him t Pray, pray take me to him this inftant I"—.*« Have patience, child," anfwered he, " you will fee him foon;—-in the meantime let me hear no more
more of this ufelefs lamentation, but take your breakfaft, and do as 1 bid you/'— « Oh yes ! ,f I replied, " I will do all, any thing you bid me^—only take me to my dear father, and I will do whatever you com¬ mand me."—*He left mc; and my young heart foon forgot its other griefs.in the pleafing expedation of feeing my father ; and fo pafled great part of the time away, without my knowing where I was till to¬ wards night, when Ruthmer came to me, and taking me in his arms, carried me from my dark bed-room up a ladder of fteps, and prefently I was in the open air, * but encompaflkl by worlds of waters. I could not diftinguifh through the darknefs of the evening* but as the men bore me down the fides of the veffel to a boat, I faw at a diftance the rifing hills, and further off the towers of a caftle, which, as the night rendered my fight imperfed, I miftook for our own j and, as we landed, I leaped from the boat, I fprung from Ruthmcr's arras, and in joyful ecftacy cried out—" Ah ! there
is the caftle ! we are near home, and I fhall foon be in my mother's arms again."—The men flopped to do fomething to their boat, but presently came up with me, and Ruth- mer again took me in his arms, and carried me over many a hill and mountain till we came to one larger than the reft. 1 was furprifed to fee the rock itfelf open, and then a thick iron-door wa; unlocked ; but I was foon convinced tnat this was not the Caftle of Auburne. My tears renewed, and I cried-bitterly ; but the man reminded me that I was &oirg to my fit her, and this again pacified me. They b^rj mc up many fteps, till we came to another iron-dour, which.they unlocked as they had done'ita former. At l.ul we reaclud to the top \ then it was I law the caftle and its cnormou:; great'high towers and gates, as they flood upon the platform. Ruthmer again (bund¬ ed his horn ; the gates opened, and I was conveyed into the caflle.— - ci But where, where,** cried I, <s k my father:"—A frown from Ruthmer frightened me into filence; vol. il. i and
and then he took me through feveral gal¬ leries and dark paffages, and flopped when we came to this tremendous tower, the fight of which thrilled toy young heart with filent terror. The heavy door of the build¬ ing was thrown open, and we went up a number of fteps, till another door, alas I 'twas'this, wasunfaftened, and at a diftance I faw a tall, pale figure leaning, with down- caft eyes and folded arms, againft the wall. " Never fhall I lofe the remembrance of this afflicting fcene. Ruthmer, in a rough voice, faid—" Behold, Earl Fitz- Auburne, the preient my friendly fervices have procured for you ;—let this teach you not to defpife Lord St. Jver's power, or provoke his wrath. He bids me fay, if you will yield to his terms, life may yet be your's, and hereafter liberty ; if you refufe confent, }ou know the confequences," " I flood gazing in childifh wonder, but never moved, except my eyes, which I alter¬ nately caft on Ruthmer, then on my father, (for
(for alas ! it was him), who now, with a bitter figh, and eyes turned in forrow up to heaven, faid—" The work is then complete -^1 am caught in the toils of the hell-hound —they have me now fecurely, and death is all that is left me !—Oh God! Oh God ! this is too much—my mifery is beyond en¬ durance 1—Oh Ruthmer 1 favage and re¬ vengeful as thou haft proved to thy once beloved Lord, yet, if one fpark of pity dwell within you, in mercy take my Arthur from my fight '."—And then, with a groan that went to the bottom of my heart, he added —•" Oh my poor boy ! muft thy innocent hfe be facrificed ?" tc My father!" I cried, while the tears rolled down my cheeks, and my fobs pre¬ vented my utterance, "my father!" again I repeated, when I could fpeak, " Oh ! why will you turn from your poor little child ?— Oh! pray take me to your arms^—1 fhall be fafe there, and this naughty man will no longer terrify me with his harfli words and 1 2 frightful, i
frightful, frowning looks. Pray fpeak to me, father!" *' He caught me in his arms, and preffed me to his heart, while the tears again ftarted in his eyes as he faid to Ruthmer—" Mon¬ fter ! could thy infatiate malice treat with cruelty this helplefs innocent ?—Begone I leave me, execrable wretch 1 and fay to your mafter, my foul diidains his propofals—tell him his menaces are in vain—1 never will yield !—Go, leave me ! thy light is poifon to my eyes." " 'Tis well/' cried the wietch, as he de¬ parted, " I Hull report your haughty lan¬ guage to my Lord—expect his utmoft fury ! In the meanwhile do you, Earl Fitz- Auburne, remember you are yourfelf a pri¬ foner, fubjed now to the power of the de¬ fpifed Ruthmer!—The language of entreaty, rather than command, fliould grace a cap¬ tive's words." " The villain left t;he room ■> —my father then took me on his knee, and with unut¬ terable tendernefs folded me again in his arms,
arms, and fighed and wept bitterly over me. Sometimes I heard him talk to himfelf, and now and then 1 caught a fentence of what he faid, one of which was this—" Oh mife¬ rable, wretched hour !—-Great God 1 am I then doomed to fee my infant murdered ?" and then turning to me, he faid, " Tell me, my child, by what unhappy means were you brought to this place ?"—I ufed every childifh endearment to afluage his forrow; and, to the beft of my abilities, J told him all that had happened ;—but when I related my mother's grief for his fuppofed lofs, he flarted from his feat, put me with hafte upon the ground, and threw himfelf with violence againft the door; but finding it too ftrong to move, or even to ihake it, he caft him¬ felf in madnefs on the floor, and all my en¬ deavours for fome rime could procure me no fort of notice, till his grief fubfided* a little, and then he arofe, took me again on his knee, blefled me, and taught me to raife my little hands to heaven, to fupplicate its mercy and protection. i 3 cc Many
" Many days pafled in this manner, and I would innocently fay to him—" My fa¬ ther, when fhall we leave this difmai place ? Will you not take me^to my mother, to my fifters, and Auguftine ?—Oh ! they will grieve fadly for my lofs and your*s—it will quite break their hearts if we don't return to them.—Befides, here is nothing to play with, and I long to range through the forefts to pluck the wild wood-flower, or vvith my bow and arrow fhoot the mark, and fee the trees and birds, and run in the fun, or chafe the rabbit, with all the delights and many fports that I fo oft have taken.— Oh ! I am weary of this place—it makes me melancholy; and, but that I fee youfo, f could cry from morning till night 1 " Alas! I knew not then what tortures my fooli111 prattle inflicted on my poor fuf¬ fering father :—he would weep over me, but make me no anfwer, till one morning he {aid to me—" My child, you are this day eight years of age; it is time that inftruction fhould enter your mind—Heaven only knows how
liow long I may remain to give it you ! therefore profit by my words, and let them live in your memory when I fliall be torn from you, as perhaps I foon fliall be ;—you will then need that knowledge you will here find none to give you $ and fliould the mur¬ derer fpare your life—" but there he paufed, fixed a look of anguifli on me, and then went on, ** let my counfels fink into your heart, ar*d do not forget the leflbns I fhall give you.—Let virtue and manly firmnefs be your guide; {hun not a threatened dan¬ ger, but- face a foe; but Oh beware 1 and take not to your confidence a once fufpeded faithlefs friend—believe not his profeilions of repentance for the injuries he has done you, till you have fure and certain proofs of his fincenty. Alas ! thy father's ruin is ac¬ celerated by the treachery of a falfe, deceit¬ ful monfter, whom I took unfufpeding to my heart, foftered with my breath, and en¬ riched with, my prodigal bounty -, and now he, ferpent-like, entwines his envenomed body round my heart in deadly hatred, i 4 and
and fucks the life's-blood from my very foul ; till having drained each artery to its fource, the poor remains of all that's kft me muft fhortly fatiate the demon's thirft, whole dagger is already railed to drink my blood 1— Yet thou, my Arthur, mayft efcape the hell-hound—thou mayft live to be a man, if thy fate fhould prove more kind than thy unhappy father's. Let not his man- &Ld body cry in vain for vengeance, but let my wrongs be regiftered in thy heart, and fhed the tear of retribution over my poor remains, and—" but he could fpeak no more ; he had ftruggled with the violence of his emotions, and threw himfelf on the couch, hiding his face with his hands. " I will not tell you, my fifter, (for I fee you are already overwhelmed in grief)—I will not tell you all that paffed, or what I fuffered. But my Father's words, fo awfully, forrowful ly delivered, were ftrongly impreff¬ ed on my mind ; they produced an aftonifli¬ ing change in my young heart, the livelinefs of infancy left me, and I ceafed all childifh com-
complaints: 1 feemed, at this early period, to enter into all my father's fufferings and feelings; and to watch over my words, that no expreflions of my own grief might efcape me, and wound my father, became one of my mod careful occupations. The days paffed away, and my father beguiled the weary hours by teaching me all that was ne¬ ceflary for youth to know : he explained to me the calculation of days, months, and years; and I have ever been able to keep a ftrict account of the pafling time. The ufe of letters, and to read, was one of his prin¬ cipal inflructions; the revolving feafbns, and the heavenly bodies, he alio well informed me of; the hiftories of other nations, as well as my own, he weli acquainted ine with ; and with an oid bow and arrow, he taught me to take my aim with certainty, and thus the practice of war was inftilled into my mind, and its cxercifes rendered familiar to me. A few old books, which had been the pofleflions of fome former prifoner ia this gloomy place, and which had been care. i 5 fully
fully concealed behind fome lumber in yon recefs, helped greatly to a further knowledge of the events of life; among them were two facred volumes, and with thefe and our tears * we dragged on fixteen fad months fince the firft of my entrance here. At about the end of that period we were difturbed by the entrance of Ruthmer and four men, who commanded my father to follow them. He took me by the hand, and rofe to do as he was defired, but without fpeaking ; and, as they made no oppofition, I kept clofe to my father, and we followed our guide down the fteps of the tower. We croffed the courts and galleries that I had before come through, and then entered an extreme large hall, at the upper end of which fat a tall, frowning figure, richly habited. My father ftooped, and whifpered—" There, my child, fits the unnatural wretch, who, con¬ trary to the laws of God or man, has bound thy father and thyfelf in mifery and death." I looked upon the hated man, and could the glances of my indignant heart have killed 6 him,
him, he would have fallen dead at our feet. By the time we had approached him, he, with fomething of fear in his countenance, faid to my father—« c Well, my Lord, have you at laft refolved ? WilLyou now refufe any longer my offered terms I —Remember, Godfred, my will is my law—you are no more the proud Lord of Auburne, but the humbled prifoner of Leopold, in whofe hands dwell hfe and death. I once more condefcend, for your fake, to make thefe laft propofals, which if you confent to, and bind yourfelf by folemn oath, your doom may then be averted. Thefe are my offers : 1 will give you liberty if you fwear to con- . ceal from the world the events that CQncern yourfelf, here aded; if you will alfo fwear to banifli this boy to fome diftarit country, where he may never be heard of after; and, laftly, your folemn, irrevocable promife to beftow on me the Baronefs Ethelwina of Caftie-Acre, for wife as foon as flie is mar¬ riageable ; fwear to this, and—"—*« Never 1'* cried my "father, interrupting him; his i 6 whole
whole face fuelling with fury and paflion, and his eyes darting glances of indignant fire on the monfter—" No, never! ceafe, im- pious wretch, thy vain propofals! My foul difdains to hold converfe with thee—I loth thy fight.—To tell thee of thy monftrous iniquities would but degrade myfelf; but left thy coward dsemon^ heart fliould think J fear to die, know that the good man's foul is always ready, and can meet the king of terrors with none of thofe horrors and thofe fears which await the guilty. Therefore pre¬ pare thy murderous inftrument—plunge at once into this devoted breaft thy aflaflin's dagger j but never will I, for a year of life, 10b my child of his birth-right, or confign my daughter to the aims of a villain, though the next moment fhould kt me free, or days of lengthened life be the accurfed re¬ ward for the unnatural deeds that fhould procure me my liberty. Horrible monfter P* added my father, laying one hand on the arm of the wretch, while with the other, and his eyes caft up to heaven, ,in a folemn awful
awful look that I fhall never forget, as he pointed to the fkies, " horrible monfter! thinkeft thou thy deeds are unfeen ?—Haft thou forgot there is a God above, an aveng¬ ing one of juftice ?— Tremble\ for the day of retribution fliall arrive^ and amply ihali it avenge my wrongs!" " My father then let go his hold on the pale, trembling tyrant, whofe lips quivered with rage. He drew his dagger, and was darting on my clefencelefs father, who had turned indignant from him, not deigning to hold further intercourfe with him, when J, feeing his intent, flew between them, and falling on my knees, loudly cried—" Spare, Oh ! fpare my father 1" who, on hearing my fteble voice, turned round, and fmiling con- temptuoufly on St. Iver, bade him ftrike. But, after a moment's paufe, he fheathed his dagger, and faid—« No, not yet ,— but in the meantime tremble, for all my ven¬ geance ihall fall in endlefs hatred on thee. Convey the Lord Fitz-Auburne to the weftern chambers, and the boy back to the tower
tower from whence he came, till I have re¬ folved what their, fate fhall be.—My Lord, this is the laft .moment you will ever behold your fon V* " Oh, never will that day of horfor quit my remembrance—the fufferings of my in¬ jured parent are engraven on my heart!—» The big- tear of mental anguifhu gufhed, fpite of his effort to reftrain it, from his eyes;, he tried in vain to flop or conceal it ; he preffed me, with indefcribable affection to his grief-worn hearty whilft the ftruggies of tendernefs for me, and indig¬ nant anger for the inhuman St. Iver, raifed a paroxyfm of madnefs in his brain. At one moment he filently walked up to the tyrant, and made a fruitlefs effort evea to kneel at his feet to beg for pity ; but his great foul was unable to fue, and again a fiery glance of indignation marked his countenance. His looks alarmed the wretch, and made him tremble; for my father, by a fudden emotion, fnatched a fword from a guard, and aimed it at the tyrant, but it was quickly torn
torn from him. He caught me again,'and for the laft time, in his arms, and fixed fo defpairing a look of agony upon me, fo foul- moving, fo pitying, that it freezes my biood but to remember it -, and then, in accents which funk deep into my heart, he faid, as the inhuman favages tore me from him— "Farewel, my wretched child, forever!" " I fhrieked aloud, and made the hall re-echo with my cries with the name of father , and the moment my arms and legs were at liberty, I funk at the feet of the tyrant, I bathed them with my fcalding tears, I kifled them, and raifing my eyes to his face, I begged, for God's fake, that he would not kill my father, and that he would fuffer me to go to him,—Alas [ I prayed in vain—he was deaf to pity—his heart, more hard than the rooks that furrounded his caf¬ tle, knew not the feelings of nature !— With favage violence he fpurned mt from him, and I fell from the fteps on which his feat was placed, and,, by the violence of the blow, rolled to the marble pavement with fuch -
fuch force, that the fall ftunned me, and the world was (hut from my view. « But, Oh God! how fliall I fpeak it ?— that look, that agonizing look was the laft; for, from that hour to this, never but once have I feen his living image near me.** — " It is too much I My father! Oh God, my father 1" fobbed out Ethelwina, and funk convulfed on the ground. • It is impoffible to defcribe the heart-rend¬ ing emotions that had attended the unhappy Ethelwina whilft liftening to this tale of woe. Her tender fufceptible feeiings were rent with agonies which flie tried vainly to fupprefs, that fhe might not add to her brother's af¬ flidions * but the latter part of his fad nar¬ rative had wrung her heart-ftrings with grief,- and nature could fupport no more. And whilft the frantic Arthur is vainly trying to reftore her to life, let the faithful recordef of this hiftory relate the fate of the unhappy Fitz-Auburne.
i. -
CHAP*
CHAP. XL IT is almoft ncedlefs to repeat what has before been laid, that Leopold having, by his unbounded prodigality, fpent all his pa¬ trimony except the eftates of Iver, looked around him for fome means to reinftate him¬ felf in his farmer fplendour, and, with a greedy eye, panted for the pofleflions of his uncle. His foul, already callous to na¬ ture, and to God, formed the horrible de* fign of getting the Earl of Auburne and his infant heir into his power 5 and, by a mar¬ riage (even of force, fliould it be neceflary) with Ethelwina, he hoped fafely to obtain pofleflion of what his avaricious foul fo much longed to enjoy. Various
Various were his defigns: at firft his in¬ tentions were to murder his uncle, but, wicked as he was, the thoughts of being the deftroyer of fo near a relation, made him waver, and he refolved that if Godfred would give his free confent to his marriage with Ethelwina, he would (pare hb life, though he determined he fhould never have his li¬ berty; and for Arthui, whofe fate was for a time fufpended, he refolved to fteal him from* his family, and fell, or make away with him, as his intereft required.—To put thefe diabolical defigns into execution, he followed his uncle to France, apologizing in the humbleft manner for his former raihnefs, when he had had the open temerity to demand bis coufin in marriage; expreffed thedeepeft contrition for his condud on the morning of his departure from Auburne; and, by his artful and obfequious repentance, foon work¬ ed himfelf into the returning affedion of the deluded Godfred, who, unfufpicious of the monfter that was concealed from his out¬ ward view, took.to his heart his cruel ne¬ phew.
phew, fupplied him with money, fhared with him his confidence, and fo completely had the artful defigner ingratiated himfelf into his uncle's heart, that he concealed no¬ thing from him; and, among fcther things, he became acquainted with the expedition of the Earl to England with difpatches to the Queen. Here was the opportunity that he had long waited for, to get the Earl into his power. He well knew the warlike genius of Godfred would rather have preferred to remain fighting by the ftde of his Mo¬ narch, than the more ina&ive embafly he was to be fent on;—for this purpofe, he pro¬ pofed to the Earl to take all the trouble of the neceflary preparations for his embark¬ ation on himielf; offering to fecure him a (hip of quicker paflage than thofe that he had before failed in to the coafts of France. The noble Godfred, in perfed friend¬ ftiip with his nephew, and unfufpect- ing that the outward refpe&fui behaviour of
of Leopold was but a cover of rancorous villany, gladly accepted this offer. 1-eopold hired a fmall veffel, in which he engaged fome defperate ruffians, who eafily liftened to his offered bribe*, and were no better than the creatures of his power.—Tliey were firft bound by oath to perform what¬ ever was required of them, and Leopold was foon convinced they were exactly fucli as he intended them to be. The Earl, the night previous to his de¬ parture from the camp, took leave of his Sovereign, intending to fet off at day-break the following morning, with the difpatches that were the occafion of this unwifhed-for voyage. No fooner had he retired to his camp, than Leopold eutered, and in hafte told him that the wind was fair, and that he might not be able to obtain fo good an op¬ portunity for failing, if he deferred it till a change in the weather might take place. It made little difference to Godfred whe¬ ther he failed at night or a few hours after¬ wards, He readily followed Leopold's ad* vice,
vice, and got on board that very night, which, from its darknefs, prevented him from feeing that he had not entered any of the King's fliips; and Leopold, who from his fpies had got intelligence that the French meant to attack the Englifh camp on the enfuing morn, had hurried the Earl into the hired veffel, well knowing that, had his un¬ cle been informed of fuch an event* he would have ftaid en fliore till the flue of the next day*s battle had been over. The Earl embraced his treacherous kinf¬ man, and then retired to his cabin; whilft Leopold gave diredions to his principal agent, Ruthmer, who had once been a fer¬ vant of the Houfe of Aubunx, and followed the Lord Godfred in his youth; but from fome fecret crimes, of too heinous a nature to be paffed by in forgetfulnefs, the Earl had difcharged him. Ruthmer was of a bold, wicked, ungo¬ vernable difpofition, and had often provoked the anger of his indulgent Lord; but his laft offence had been of fuch a dangerous tendency,
tendency, that, had he been in the fervice of any other Lord than Godfred, his life would have paid the forfeit of the attempt he was difcovered in—in robbing the repofitory of the caftle riches. The Earl feverely rebuked him, but inflided no other punifliment on tlie delinquent than by difmifling him from the caftle. But Ruthmcr's heart filled with rage and refentment, and he was incapable of feeling, as he ought, the lenity of his mafter. He was revengeful in the extreme, and hefwore that his future life (hould be devoted to the gratification of his malice on the whole houfe of Auburne -, to whom, with all the nar- rownefs of a mean and little mind, he vowed eternal hatred. He was well acquainted with the paflions and difpofition of Leopold, which were more congenial to his own than his former indulgent Lord's had been. Leopold had, about this time, begun to entertain views relative to his ambitious defigns; and Ruth¬ mer, who offered him bis fervices, was joy- iully
fully accepted ; for in him he fhould find an inftrument ready to enter into all his fcheme?, and his principal care was to keep alive that hatred which might, but for this circum¬ ftance, have died away, or been forgot *, but was now conftantly cherifhed fiy his new mafter. From that hour the traitor became the willing flave of Leopold, and with joy always entered into the defigns of his Lord. He was a man that was capable of any ad, however atrocious -, and, whilft he hacl the fure protedion of St. Iver, he i'et at nought the cries of the injured, but rather took de¬ light in infliding au increafe of mitery.— The joy of hisdiabolical heart knew no bounds when he found the Earl would be at laft in his power -, and though near twelve years had paffed fince the difgrace of his difmiffal from the Caftle of Auburne, yet his refent¬ ment of pretended injury to himfelf was ftrong as ever. He took care to difguife, as much as poffible, the features of his face from the Earl,
Earl, who, however, had no knowledge of who he was till afterwards. The night that the Earl was decoyed into ihe power of bis deadlicft foes, Leopold fliid on beard till he thouglit he was afleep, nnd then entered his cabin, took from his finger the ring before mentioned, and alfo his iword ; and giving his directions to the vil- Lin Rut! mer, he left the fhip, and was rowed hack again to the fliare. On the next day the contending powers renewed t!.e war; and when the battle was oxer, a courier informed the Roial Ed.vaul that t!.c fliij^ wl/.ch by his command had been prepared for the Earl, was ftill in the harbour - f but the E-*ri had ncv.r entcre.1 :t. A fearch was immciuicly mide* but Le was not heard ,t, or even feen. Liop -1*1 entered the R-iyal tent* and in¬ formed the Monarch that he hiuifclf had Kv" the Earl ot Auburn;- on the t'ay of bat- i,c f who, he fotJ, had privately returned irom the fhip, and had entcad with him into the fi.ldtffluighter. From
From this account the Monarch was de¬ ceived into a belief that Godfred had really fallen in the heat of the battle, efpecially as Leopold difguif ed himfelf in a French armour, and rearing the vifor over his face, deliver¬ ed the fword and ring, the fuppofed wit- neffes of th© Earl's death, into the hands of the out-gnards that belonged to the Englifh camp. His defires fo far were accompliflied, 1 and the Earl was in his power. He ftaid in France as long as was neceifary j the Earl was believed really to have fallen in battle s and all his plots were anfwered. Godfred had been conveyed to the neareft coaft in Wales * they entered the harbour in the night % he was bound and blinded -, the only fervant lie had taken with htm was his Stjuire, who was ftabbed in the fhip on the night his mafter entered it, and committed to the hickle.* fecrets of the deep -, whilft the ill-fated Godfred, betrayed, deceived, for* rounded by ruffians, was conveyed to the vol. a. k Caftle
Caftle of Iver, and placed in the northern tower. The aftonifliment of the unfortunate Earl cannot be defcribed : he was foon informed where he was, and as foon was the bare¬ faced ingratitude of his treacherous nephew difplayed to his view. That unnatural man returned in hafte from France, and openly demanded the lun i of Ethehwna, and the diffx>fal of Arthur, upon which conditions only he promifed to fuffer the Earl to live, and reftore him to liberty. The lauer part of his promife he never meant to keep, as the Earl never could be again reftored to tha world, without the total overthrow, if not ruin, of himfelf. But when, by repeated conferences with his injured uncle, he met with nothing but refolute refufals, and in¬ dignant reproofs, his malicious, cruel paf¬ fions were roufed to rage and refentment: he refolved to put his other defigns in ex¬ ecution, and bitterly make the Earl repent his rafh refufals. For this purpofe Arthur was but too fuccefsfully trepanned, and now indeed
indeed Godfred's mifery was complete ; for the daring Leopold threatened the life of Arthur if he any longer refufed to comply with his former demands. Diftraded with fuch accumulated fuffering, the wretched parent begged for time to confider of it; and Leopold being called from Iver upon fome important affairs, left the caftle and the Earl to the ftrid care of Ruthmer. Some months after he returned ; the Earl was again afked for his choice, and he as heroicly refufed the terms offered him. The parent and the child were feparated, that every refinement of torture might wring the heart of the unhappy Godfred, whofe fide was haftened by the followirg circum¬ ftance. The Countefs Urfuline, who, well knowing the treachery of Leopold, haJ, as has been before related, long entertained fufpicions of a dreadful tendency towards the Lord of St. Iver, procured a fearch-warrant, which, as we have before feen, proved ufelefs; and nothing appeared, either of Godfred or k 2 Arthur,
Arthur, to criminate Leopold; who, having had notice of the approach of the Officers of juftice, from a fpy he liad ftationed near the Caftle of Auburne, dared not refufe their admittance. But this did but bring his wavering plans to a final decifion, and he refolved to make fure work of his prey. The night before the arrival of the Officers, himfeif and the deadly Ruth*ner entered the chamber of the devoted vidim, who was calmly Tepofmg on his bed, and heard not the approach of the midnight murderers, or law their dark and fiend-like countenances fwell with the dire purpofes of their black fouls. A fure plunge dyed their daggers in tin; heart of the fleeping vidim ; who, with¬ out fpeaking, or opening his ey s } and only with a faint inward ftruggle of momentary convulfion, yielded his foul to his Maker. As the villains drew their poniardi from his wounds, the blood gufhed upon them, and for a moment they ftood aghaft, view¬ ing the aorrible fcene, and then themfelves; till by mutual confent, though without any other 6
other than a filent fignal and a look of the eye, wrapped the mangled relics in the bed¬ clothes, and opening the fecret door of com¬ munication, they dragged the body down the fteps, and ftopped not till tliey had placed it in the memorable cell, where, having la- boured all night, they threw up a tempo¬ rary wall in the recefs, in fo natural a man¬ ner that it could not eafily be difcovered to be a falfe one.
k 3 CHAP.
CHAP. XII. JL HUS perifhed the once gallant, brave Fitz-Auburne, a fad victim to the curfe of avarice and ambition. Let us caft a veil over his melancholy fate, and return once more to Ethelwina and Arthur, who had in vain tried to recover his fifter ; but for whom Nature did more than his utmoft endeavours, and after fome time flie revived, to the joy of the almoft expiring Arthur. Mutual tears and bitter lamentations flowed from each other, and the fhock Ethelwina had received, though in fome de¬ gree prepared for it, rendered her unfit for • any further converfe; but being anxious not to
to delay the horrid tale by ufelefs procrafc, tination, file endeavoured to refume her for¬ titude, and begged her brother to proceed, who having compofed himfelf, and flopped the current of his tears, renewed his fad ftory. c * On opening my eye?, I found myfelf in this apartment; but I looked in vain for my father—no living creature was to be feen —all was dreary, lifelefs folitude, and gloomy filence. I invoked the name of father, and entreated him to come and fpeak to his wretched child.—Alas! he heard me not— he could not come—1 called in vain ! Yet my young heart, grown frantic with difap¬ pointment and grief, I fhrieked till this wide dungeon echoed my voice, and fent the found back with increafed noife on my frightened ear; till returning filence again refumed its reign, and the horrid vacancy in¬ creafed my anguifli;—again 1 fhrieked more loud than before, till towards night my in¬ human guard entered my prifon, and bade me, with ferocious looks and harfh language, hold my tongue j— and told me, Oh diffract- k 4 ing
ing thought! that my father was loft to me for ever, for that I had feen him for the laft time ! " With tears and fupplications I entreat¬ ed, and on my knees begged him to take me to my father; but prayers and -entrea¬ ties were ufelefs—he flung me from him, and bolted the door upon me. I ran to it-—1 dafhed myfelf againft it, and in childifh grief, tried to burft its ponderous faftenings. Oh how fruitlefs were my efforts!—I flew to the window, I broke a pane of glafs, and putting .my head through it, cried to Hea¬ ven, and begged of it to fend my dear good father back to me. At laft I fixed my eyes upon- a fmall round tower that ftood widely , out from all the others, and, to my young judgment, feemed to be on the weftern fide of the caftle; it was at a great diftance, and ftood full in my view/' «* Alasl" fighed Ethelwina to herfelf, " it was my late prifon, and my father's grave i 1 '
« At
" At oiie Of its higheft windows I caught a glimpfe of a'figure pacing about the room. The cafements were larger than thefe, and when the perfon approached the window, I plainly perceived it was my father. " I now redoubled my cries—I fhouted —but, alas ! we were at too great a diftance to hear each other. I took a part of my fafh from my fhoulders, and waved it through the broken pane. My father faw it , he opened his cafement, and put his head through the iron-bars, as I did mine, and I was again bleffed with his fight. This, in fome meafure, eafed my aching heart, and I ceafed my (houts, though I could not flop my tears. ' We remained at our windows all the day, and never quitted them till it was fo dark that we could fee each other no longer. I then defcended from the cafe¬ ment, which with labour and pains I had , climbed, and laying my head on my pillow, fobbed myfelf to fleep ; but with the fun I awoke, and again fixed myfelf at my cafe¬ ment, and as foots did my father appear. k 5 He
$&e would then caft his eyes and hands up to heaven, in token for me to do the fame, vvhich I did, and prayed to God to take care pf my father, and convey me to him. In this fad manner feveral weel^s paffed away. One jmorning placing myfelf earlier than ufual at the window, I waited and watched a long time for his coming, but in vain ;—I called ,to him, but he heard me not; for the wind fwallowed up the feeble founds. " Soon after my door opened, and Ruth¬ mer took me by the hand, and bade me fol¬ low him. I did fo, for I dared not refufe, and I faintly hoped he might mean to take me to my father * —I told him fo -, but his face changed to deadly palenefs, his eyes rolled fo frightfully that they made me tremble j—he looked furioufly at me, and commanded me never to utter the name of father again. " 1 was terrified, and held my tongue. We defcended a great many fteps till we came to total darknef?, and then Ruth¬ mer lighted his torch ;—^we proceeded down innu-
innumerable quantities of ftairs, and at length reached the bottom; it feemed to my frightened imagination that I was buried under the furface of the earth, whilft no¬ thing could be diftinguiflied but misflia^en rocks, and beyond them eternal darknefs. We proceeded down many paffages, till we came to a (tone altar, on one fide of which Ruthmer unclofed a fecret door, and then forcibly carried me down fome fteps into a fmall deep tomb or vault. " Ruthmer fet me down on a cold marble ftone, and bade me, as I valued my life, to make no noife, nor ftir a ftep till his return. He went up the fteps, and left me in total darknefs; the little ftone door was (hut upon mc, and I heard him lock it. Clofed in this frightful grave, I concluded I was broueht there to ftarve to death, and fobbed moft bitterly. <s I cannot tell you how long I remained there ; but at one time I heard doors open and fliut, and the founds of quick pafling footfteps. I was very near calling out; but k 6 the
the terror that I was in, and the dread of Ruthrnef's anger, made me liften in filence ity the noiff had ceafed, and all was quiet.'* It is here neceflary to explain the caufe of Arthur's removal, as he could not himfelf know it. Leopold had not time to difpofe of him as he had done his father, and the child was removed to the fecret hiding-place in the vaults during the fearch of the Officers ■* and had he known how near he was to li¬ berty, a fingle call would have fet him free, and brought in time to light the deeds of his cruel, unnatural kinfman; as the afto¬ nifhing echo of the vaults would have con¬ veyed the found of his voice to the moft diftant parts of them,------ " Not long after, the door was again unlocked, and Ruthmer entered with his torch;—he filently took my hand, and led me from this den of horrors, and in a fhort time" I was conveyed back to the light of day, and to my former prifon, which, dreary as it was, looked more cheering, in compa- rifon
rifon to the darknefs I had quitted. I went again to the window j there was no one to meet 4 my fight. The day pafifed—the next came—the next, and the following pafled away* but I faw not my dear father. I fpent all my days in tears at the window, till having drained tlieir fources, a deathlike ftu¬ pidity took place of my former emotions, and when my guard entered with my food, I turned from him in fullen filence. I dif* regarded alike his menaces and his entreaties, and refufed even to fpeak to him 5 my heart and thoughts dwelt only on the late fcenes, and on my father. I recalled his every word, his looks, and lived upon his remem¬ brance. I revolved in my mind the mean¬ ing of many of his expreflions, .and became convinced that he was indeed gone, and I Ihould never fee him more! My fad re- fledions renewed my grief—my feelings be¬ came more poignantly lively, and my tears again relieved my heart. Many, many bit¬ ter days were fpent in ufelefs repinings, when one evening, after having fat at my window,
window, and ftrained my eyes till they ached, on the cafement of my father, wifliing—< Ah, how vainly 1—again to behold him, it gre^v quite-dark, and at laft I could diftin- guiih nothing but the rifing peak of the higheft mountain; when Ruthmer entered my prifon, with a countenance more dark, and eyes more frightfully fesocious than I had ever feen them. He approached me with a drawn fword in his hand, and in a hoarfe voice bade me prepare,' for that I muft die that inftant. - " Die !" cried I, fpringing acrofs t^ie room, and eluding his grafp, " Ah me I what crime have 1 committed that it fliould be punifhed with death? Indeed, Ruthmer, I have done no wrong—fpare my life, and do not, in pity do not plunge your fword into my defencelefs breaft I— Indeed I never injured you. I will be your fervant—your (lave—and think no office you can impofe upon rne, too hard to perform; only let me live a little longer.—What have I done to provoke your anger?—I will kneel to mitigate
mitigate your wrath—only fpare me this once, and I will bear, without complaint, every other mifery that you may inflid upon me!" " Your entreaties are in vain," anfwered he, " I have fworn to end your life before to-morrow's dawn; I will keep my oath, and this blow fliall be the proof of my fidelity." 4< Spare me—in mercy fpare me!" fhriek¬ ed I, as he raifed his arm to fell me to the ground; but I avoided the ftroke by throw¬ ing myfelf on my knees, clofely embracing my jailer's legs. The blow he had aimed would have cleft me in twain ; for it de¬ fcended with fuch violence, that as 1 fortu¬ nately efcaped it, the fword ftuck in the flooring of the room, and ftood ered, having fnatched itfelf from its matter's hand, and obliged him to ufe his utmoft ftrength to draw it from its pofition.—" JSehold," add¬ ed I, «the weapon itfelf flies repugnant from your dire defign—it will not fhed the blood of helplefs innocencc^-Oh Ruthtrjer I have
have pity on yourfelf and me, and fave my flfo s—do ah ad of juftice, and preferve the unproteded child of mifery from his de¬ voted deftiny !—Oh ! let pitying mercy pre¬ vail, and, for this fweet ad of charity, thy foul fliall be rewarded with future joys— and wfyatfqever thy crimes may have been, they fhall be all obliterated;—celeftial beings ihall record thy repentance, and all bear tef- timony for thee in the great day of retribu¬ tion.—Look well upon my helplefs youth— cannot its unoffending innocence plead in fny behalf ?—You will not, cannot be. fo cruel as to murder me '!— Oh what dreadful deed have I unknowingly committed, that thus you feek to deprive me of all that T am worth^-to take even my exiftence from me ? M « Your life is troublefome—you difcom-- mode our Lord—you ftand in his way, and prevent the accomplifliment of his withes."■ «■ Ah!.then," interrupted 1, "difmifs me from thefe walls;— believe me, I will never more enter them, if you will but reieafe
Teleafe me from them;—I will go to the furthenlpoft part of the world if you com¬ mand ihe, fo you will but now fpare my life.** " Do not believe it, boy,'* faid he more fiercely, " you will never alive pafs the caftle gates ; your death is figned—I come to ex¬ ecute it, and with joy will perform it.—I have vowed to Heaven to be the curfe of all your race, for the injury your father' has done me—J will keep my vow.—But I wafte time and words. Thy prayers are fruitlefs, no power can fave thee 1" " He feized me by the hair of my head as I was kneeling before him ; he raifed hia fword to my heart—the blow was falling on me—I fhrieked for mercy, " God of Heaven fave me !*' when at that moment a heavy crufh of noife was heard—the prifon-door flew open, and I beheld my father, but pale and bloody j I knew not but it was him¬ felf, ^ 4 " Ruthmer had let go his hold, and as my father,entered, «fell 4o the ground. I i rofe
'* My father! my dear father! are you then come to fave your child ?^~Oh take me along with you ?—Ah ! how I have longed to fee you ! and now you are come at laft, we will never part again."—I ran forward to meet him, expecting he would catch me in his arms * but cafting my eyes up to his face, t was alarmed to fee how ghaftly pale he looked. He did not ftir, but flowly fliook his head, fixed his eyes mournfully upon me, and pointed to the blood that ran from his heart. I cried in agony, and uttered—" Ah my poor. dear father I have they been murdering you too?—But let me bind up your wound—1 will nurfe it, and foon m?ke it well, and then we fliall be fo happy!*' <c I was running up to him, but in a moment he vanifhed from my fight, and I faw no more of him I —I flew to the-open door—I called upon him by his name—I conjured him to return, and protect his poor Arthur ; but he ^nftvered me only with a deep
deep groan, and then I heard no more of him. 1 returned into the room as Ruth- mer was rifing; he looked more pale and wild tha^ even my father. I kicked my foot againft fomething—it was the end of the (word, which had again ftuck in the floor, whilft the other parts lay broken in fplinters, and fcattered round the room.— Ruthmer ftarted at the fight, and uttered fome unconneded words, faying, as he left the room— " I dare not do the bloody deed !"—The door clofed after him, ai*J I heard him bolt it. " J threw myfelf in agony on the bed, and accufed my father of cruelty in not noticing or fpeaking to me -, my full heart gave vent in a torrent of tears, and between ^gter). and fright I funk at laft to fleep.— BH rthe morning my guard returned ; I look- y$eQ upon him with fear and terror, and en* treated him to fpare my life. He raifed me from the ground (for I had fallen at his feet), and with fomething of lefs ferocity in his countenance, bade me eat my meal in peace,
peace, for that he would never again offer to take my life* but that I was to-remain in this dungeon as long as Heaven permit¬ ted me to live. I embraced his knees in thankful nefs ; and he has kept his word, for he has never fince made a fecond attempt. My days fince then have paffed in melan* choly and folitude:—-to liften to the wind ar it moaned through the foliage of the trees $' to view thtf laft rays of the expiring fun; to watch for the rifing of the moon, and fee ft imperfectly refcue the night from darknefs, or to obferve it as it caft its feeble glances upon the black frowning towers of Iver, producing a folemn grandeur of fcene that gave a pleafing ladnefe to my mind, ogly^tf be felt, and impoflible to be defcribJfi %> figh and weep in vain for liberty; to think upon my father; to remember and to ymc* tifc each well-known inftrudion; or to read over the few books that I had been fo fortunate as to conceal from my guaro\ md from which I have, gathered information ^nd utility to my uncultivated underftanding, and
and have retained each fentence engraven on my heart j or to liften to the war of ele¬ ments, to count each day, and to be thank¬ ful that it was paft, has Wfen the only fad occupations of my weary bondage. The tempefts of the night were difregarded j I became fo familiar to them that even their moft tremendous horrors did but more fe¬ curely lull me to oblivion,and I never awoke till morning, when all the terroFsof the ftorm were paffed. Ruthmer has always brought me my daily food and neceflary clothing; we have feldom fpoke, and thus have paffed feven long years and a half away, fince the fad hour that my father was torn from me; and none, from that time, but Ruth* mer have ever entered this dreary prifon till you, by fuch wondrous, providential means, ' my fifter, broke upon my folitude* and made me blefled indeed."
CHAP.
CHAP. XIII,
HERE hnhw finifted his mtM% iftft* ing ii3c of fomwi mud the grkf-ftmcfc £UM«ba cxmkl rtfnin her onmions 00 toger, Thej ftpwucd «A other to thdr bt^ing bofiMiii bwt Ethelwina, for th^ talc «f wm hid ptinted d^gen in her wiy fbul 9 <^aU teir m owe. Tbefooth* ing tt^to^& of Arthur was painful to ber fedifipt and that flie might not afih& fci^hy heroin tom^ emotb^, fte «^ fmn Ikt fiat, bide bim adku»and promifed 10 rrt vm A§ i^rt; n^bt § but Che was fcwrd) able to totter to tte panod*— /ithur &w ba p*lc *^an loob and «•
hauftcd frame; he became alarmed for her health, and entreated htr cither to ftay and <mt2<ote h«ffelf f or fuffer him tu condud her to kr chamber. Such a requeft as Ihe fal¬ ter a link roufed her, ind, with a forced fmik t flie declared the wr was no ntczffity for fuch a proof of bis regard. «• F cwn, my brother, Ihe melancholy nam tion has overcome me a little j but re- # tircment i* neceflary to reftore my riIikI to comjiofure. There fo no occafion far your aid i befides it is now brc^d daylight, and your guard may foon te here i—fliould he difcover your abfence from your armumtnt, the conll«]ucr>ct* ra%ht prove folal lo u$ both.—Indeed 1 ail well | il is only an na* wfoal depreffion of fjiirii^ and the caufe/ and Ihe fighed deeply, •• yoa knm will fuf. fiefcntly juftify it.—Adky t my brother* and do yom endeavour to compofe yom own fpsits* ftrivc to forget what t$ psft, and ttfy m ttejaftic« rf Heaven for the future!—
She
She Aid through ihe pannel, and dragged her enfeebled frame up the ftone fteps.— But it was the laft feint effort of her for* titude r her mind, completely fubdued by the terrible relation of her father's and bro¬ ther's fufferings, could endure no more , and before fhe had reached tlie top of the fteps, her head grew giddy, her fight fwam before her, and fhe funk infenfible on the ftairs. In this diftrefiing fituation fhe remained fome time, and on awaking from her fleep of death, fhe was alarmed by a violent rap¬ ping above her. As fhe faintly raifed her head, fhe difcovered the ftairs ftained with blood, and her drefs coloured in the fame manner -, an excruciating pain in her fore¬ head prefented the caufe of this fight; for, in her fail fhe had received a blow upon the temple, whieh was near proving fatal. The noife increafed, and fhe was con¬ vinced, by the diredion of the found, that it proceeded from her chamber-door, which, by a happy forefight, fhe had bolttd. But dreading that the guard might already have forced
forced the fattening, flie hurried up, fpite of her exhaufted frame, and entering the room, inftantly and filently clofed the pannel, and then unbolted the doorj but "which had been fo mch loofened, that another fecond muft have burft it open. Too much alarmed for the confequences, fhe had not prefence of mind left her to de¬ mand the meaning of fuch violence, and the fcowling brow and hateful form of Ruth¬ mer entered, and did but increafe her ter¬ rors. She turned from him with fhuddering difguft, remembering the late account of his infatiable cruelty •* whilft Ruthmer, as he eyed her with dark fufpicious looks, re¬ peatedly demanded the meaning of her pale and bloody appearance, but which Ethel¬ wina difdained even to frame an excufe for, or fpeak on the fubject to one fo deteftable as the queftioner. She walked to the open cafement, not even feeming to notice he was in the room;' but Ruthmer placed himielf before her, and vol, ii, l foftening
foftening his hard features, begged to be heard, faying that he had a propofal of the ut¬ moft importance to make, that might, were (he not infenfible to her own welfare, reieafe her from confinement. " Reieafe me from confinement !** inter¬ rupted Ethelwina. When turning round, fhe looked fearleffly on the rancorous face of Ruthmer, on which was written fo legibly, " villain,*' that fhe withdrew her eyes, difgufted with the fight, in trembling apprehenfion; for on his face ftie plainly read the dark revengeful paffions of his foul, * At laft ihe faid—■ " In you I place no confidence—your words arc falfe, and to give ear to them is but to expofe myfelf to added delufion and \ illany—iand——" ** Lady, beware I—let not the imprudent fcorn of your words provoke my fury; liften to my propofals, prepare to confent to them, —and, in return, command the fervices of Ruthmer fjr your reward.—Now mark me» there
there is a way that leads to liberty—-'tis this —Exert the authority you poffefs over one lovely being, and, by your confent, give her to my arms. The objed I allude to is your youthful ward, Emma.—Nay ftart not; fup- prefs the vain, fruitlefs indignation of your heart, which your eyes too plainly confefs j let the voice of reafon govern you, and let it inform you how weak would be all efforts, all hopes of liberty, but through my means. Not Leopold, with all his power, commands here more abfolutely than I do.—I love the charming beauty, but flie difdains my of¬ fered vows; and, regardlefs of my vengeance, denies—dares deny my Juit! Your influ¬ ence over her mind is fufficient to overcome all her diflikes,—Now attend to my words: your reieafe is certain, if you give your confent •* and I here folemnly pledge my oath, that, if you will deliver her into my arms, I will this night condud you to li¬ berty and to Auburne Caftle.—The haughty impatience of your looks convinces me I have l % not
not well fucceeded; but again I warn you to beware; reflect well on my propofal, and before I leave you, let me again remind you that I alone have power todiflblve that ever¬ lafting imptifonment which is irrevocable ; but which, by one a<ft of my own power, I can deftroy.—^ will give you till evening to determine on my words/* He was then haftening out of the room, when Ethelwina, with the contending paf¬ fions of anger, indignation, and abhorrence, commandingly faid— «* Stay* and now receive my final, only refolution. To take time to refled on fuch infolent propofals, would be to fill you with hopes j but that all your vain, ambitious profpeds may end at once, know that I dif¬ dain liberty on fuch terms. I may be a fuf¬ ferer and a captive during life, and fo I will remain; for never will I purchafe freedom at the expence of honour and virtue—never will I deliver my innocent Emma to thy detefted arms, though the choice of life, liberty,
liberty, or death, was the reward of my con¬ fent or my refufal.—Begone, execrable wretch! nor again prefume to infult my ears with thy audacious j ropofals !" Ruthmer liftened with kindling rage—his eyes emitted flafhes of fury and revenge; the words of EtheUina ftung his foul with deadly hatred, and though his own life Ihould anfwer it, he refolved to punifii her for her temerity. He drew his dagger, and feizing her arm, prepared to plunge it into her defence- lefs bolbm, when fteps were heard amend¬ ing the landing, and Bertram haftxy en¬ tered with the morning's repaft. Ruthmer, actuated only by the horrible paffions of his nature, heard not the guard's approach till he entered * when he haftily concealed the dagger. Ethelwina had fallen on her knees, prepared to receive irremediable death, when the fortunate entrance of Bertram faved her from impending deftruction,— l 3 Ruthmer's
Ruthmer*s confufion and rage increafed, when, by an expreffive look from the guard, he plainly jicrceived his intentions were not unfufpeded; he let go the Countefs, who fell to the ground, and cafting a demo¬ niac look on Bertram, ftalked out of the room.
CHAP.
juju imumuaif iw ,i ..awiwiWBi
CHAP. XIV. JL HE humane guard was fhocked at be¬ holding the poor object before him ; he al¬ ready, frpm the fight of the blood upon her robes, concluded flie had received the death¬ blow, and that he had come too late effec¬ tually to fave her. He raifed her from the ground, and fprinkled her face with fome fpirits; and great was his joy to fee return¬ ing life revifit her cheeks. Ethelwina had fainted through lofs of blood from the wound ftie had received in her afcent up the fecret paflage ; but (hr, foon recovered, and finding her guard was impreffed with an idea ofher being wounded by Ruthmer, flie did not contradict his JL 4 belief.
belief, as fhe thought it might more power¬ fully excite his companion. And Ihe was right in the conjecture j for the hard heart of the guard would no longer clofe itfelf againft the gentle influence of mild pity. He fuddenly fell on his knees, and vowed that, though, death were the immediate pu- uiflinient of his temerity, he would reieafe her from her horrible fate. " Merciful Powers P' cried Ethelwina, " what do I hear?" and fhe lifted her eyes to heaven. " Am I alive—awake—or do I dream ?—- Oh pronounce that foul-reviving icntence once more if indeed it is reality ?'* " Lady," replied the guard, " I will re¬ ieafe you, or die in the attempt." " And may l," cried Ethelwina, in wild ccftacv, " may I indeed truft you ?*' and then fupprefling her joyful emotions, and fixing a fcrutinizing difappointed glance on him, flie mournfully added—" Go, go ! you mean but to deceive me P* «« Never!** replied Bertram, " never; fo profper me, Heaven f as here I fwear to ufe
ufe every effort for your enlargement.—I blame not your want of confidence, Lady; but your fufferings have touched my heart. 1 am no longer—I will no more be the flave ofVuik !—Alas! misfortune alone has forced me to be the wretch 1 am ;—but difguft and repentance have followed fpeedily, and your uncommon trials have awakened my foul to abhorrence of my paft life. All that 1 now hope or wifli for, is to free you and myfelf from the tyrant's power, and then to devote mv life to amendment and contrition." Again Ethelwina revived, and hope once more began to break in upon her mind ; but yet (he felt a doubt, a terror, which not even the ingenuous offer or the penitent foldier could diveft her of. Might it not, flie thought, be fome frefii plan to get her more into the power of her perfecutor,? % Yet how could ihe be more at his command than (he now ivas.—She again fixed her eyes on the proftrate guard, and tried, if poflible, to pierce into his in moft thoughts, and there difcover his real defigns; but the man met her fearch- ing glances with fuch open, unfhrinking
fteadinefs, that flie no longer hefitated.— There was an air of open honefty in his countenance that engaged her faith, and with compofure flie bade him rife, which he did, and refpectfully bowing, faid, that if flie would venture to truft him, he would conduct her through the vaults of the caftle to a fmall opening in the mountains ; but that fhe muft patiently wait till the next evening before he dared fulfil his promife, as the Lord de St; Iver was recovered from his illnefs, and a banquet was preparing in honour of his amended health ; and during the bufy feftivity of the enfuing night, he could with eafe efcape from his companions. If* therefore, Ihe would truft him, flie might with fafety rely on his faith, and expect him at twelve the following night. Ethelwina, after a few moments' inward thou&ht. anfwered— *' Ii I do truft you, are you willing to be the deliverer of another, as well as my¬ felf?"
" What
«< What mean you, Lady ?" replied the guard, in evident furprife. This, interrogation ftartled the Countefs, and flie involuntarily fhrunk from entrufting him with the precious' fecret. Again fhe was filent, and loft in thought, till again fhe fixed her eyes on the guard, and found him viewing her with looks of curiofity and amazement. " Is it poflible," flic inwardly faid, "that this man is unacquainted with Arthur's im- prifonment r" The evident furprife with which he had received her laft fentence, fhe wed that he was; if not ignorant of the c'rcumftance alluded to, yet he received the demand with unaffected aftonifliment ; and the neceffity of trufting him, in fome meafure overcame her extreme repugnance to do fo ; and flie faid, with irrefolute and doubting accents, that however extraordinary it might appear, yet there was, to her knowledge, another being in the caftle a prifoner, and for whom flie felt the utmoft compaflion, ' and without whom flie never would, by her l 6 own
own confent, voluntarily quit her prifon, unlefs that perfon accompanied her. " If, therefore, your intentions are really honeft and friendly, you muft unhefitatingly fwear to reieafe the other prifoner as well as myfelf. The means, are eafv 5 and, I will-give you my word, may be done without danger to yourfelf; as I alone am informed cf the pri¬ fon of the captive. But you muft on no account feek to know more than I chufe to en truft to you. If, then, your promifes are faithful, give me a folemn oath that you mean not to betray me !—And in that cafe," flie added, " if fate fliould ever conduct me to liberty and fafety, I will amply repay you for the protection and affiftance you will render me/' Bertram's aftonifliment increafed ; but he replied that he had already vowed to aid in her reieafe, and if there was another ob¬ ject of her compaflion whom his help could alfo refcue, he would willingly perform it. He then took the demanded oath.
Ethelwina's
Ethelwina's fears forbade her hemp- ex- plicit ; but offering him a valuable mark, bade him now retire. " But Bertram refped¬ fully refufed it, faying that he had already accepted too many unmeritted rewards ; the next that he did receive, fhould be firfl: de¬ ferved by her enlargement and freedom. Then bowing, he added, that he had brought her refrefhments thus early in the morning from an apprehenfion that mifchief had been intended her by Ruthmer, whom he had feen take a particular fliort dagger from the ar¬ moury, and, with darker looks than ufual, proceed to the tower ; that fearing his defigns were dangerous, he had, under the pretence of bringing her repaft, followed him to her prifon, and through the cre¬ vices of the door, watched his motions^and entered the room as he hoped in time to preferve her. Ethelwina was now in her turn furprifed, and felt that all further miftruft was unge¬ nerous. She thanked him with fervour, called him her prefcrver, and promifed amply to
to repay his care of her if fhe ever obtained her liberty. The man, elated with the praifes of the Countefs, now retired ; his heart light, and rewarded in having it in his power to do a good adion, and the hopes that, when once at liberty himfelf, his future life would atone for his paft mifcondud. And now the crowd of emotions that pof¬ feffed the aftoniflied Ethelwina, left her, for a length of time, in a confufion of thought too various to be explained y the accumu¬ lating events of, the laft few daySj and we may add nights, were fo many, and had followed each other with (uch quicknefs, that they left her without the power to refled difcriminately on any, except the fad melan¬ choly fate of her father. The horrible idea which a few words ofher brother's narration feemed to confirm, that flie was the ulti¬ mate caufe of her parent's murder, poflefTed her fo firmly, that fbe fat the fad image of defpair, her hands croffed upon her neck, and her beauteous eyes ftreaming in tears. She
She could no longer contain her filent grief, and the late flattering hopes of freedom that had before engaged her mind, were totally forgot, and quite fwallowed up in that over¬ whelming tide of forrow and afflidion, which her brother's melancholy, dark tale of woe had occafioned. Suddenly falling on her knees, flie ex¬ claimed— " My God I forgive, if it be poffible, the guilty wretch that proftrate lies before thee I —Oh why, why was not my dangerous thread of life broken in infancy ?—why, juft Heaven, was I fuffered to live, and be the caufe of a parent's murder ?—Ah God ! for me—for hateful me was he enclofed in hor¬ rid dungeons, fliut from the light of day> and imprifoned, murdered ?— Oh Heavens ! what mifery is in that terrific thought! For me was a father murdered! and bitter muft now be every moment of my remain¬ ing exiftence. I am the detefted caufe of a brother's fuiFerings—Oh ! then never muft my heart know peace, or hope for happinefs ! 6 In
In fome fad cell let me drag out my fad re¬ mains of Ufe; for my foul has now no hope, no defire of mixing again with the bufy world •* —and this dungeon fhall be my fe¬ cure home—'tis fit that I ihould expiate the crimes which my fatal birth has caufed J Oh Ruthmer 1 had thy poniard pierced my 'heart, and drank my blood, it had been eafe to what I now endure.—My father! Oh my father! was it for me you fuffered ?—Oh why was I not given to the monfter ?—I had then been happy; for 1 ihould have been innocent of thy horrible death 1 and being the guilty occafion of it* where—where can fo unhappy a creature hope for peace r" Such was the affecting lamentation that flowed from the Hps of the almoft frantic Ethelwina, whofe keen fenfibility, and im¬ petuofity of thought, led her to be fevere to none but herfelf. Her- judgment and rea¬ fon, enveloped in one dreadful idea, had not the power of acting; and without one foothing friend to reconcile her to herfelf, or convince her of the injuftice fhe did to herfelf, flie again
again fell into mifery and increafed defpair; for here, as formerly, flie would not allow helfelfto be an innocent fufferer, madly and erroneoufly fuppofing that had ihe not been born, her parent had lived free and happy. The agonies of her mind increafed, and, without the wifli to refift fueh diftracting emotions, flie fell at laft, exhaufted, on the floor, in a deep fwoon, from which flie gra¬ dually recovered ; but fhe had been fome hours in her ftate of infenfibility, and when fhe awoke, fhe found it was night, and her¬ felf burning with fever, accompanied with an intenfe head-ach. She rofe from the ground, but was fo weak as to be unable to move , for, joined to her mental diftrefs, the wound in her temple, which fhe had received in her fall, had fwelled, and fhe became anguifhed with pain, and weakened from lofs of blood. She flowly moved to her bed, for fhe w ? as too ill to vifit Arthur, where throwing herfelf on it, fhe fell into a ftate of unquiet oblivion.
- Dreams
Dreams of torment purfued her ;* flie ftart- ed from her bed, and looked around the room in wild terror, as if following with her eye fome object; but again fleep overcame her, and then the image of her brother, rn the power of Ruthmer, with a naked fword held over him, made her renew her cries.— At another period, (he beheld herfelf dragged to the top of a tremendous high precipice by Leopold, who, feizing her in his arm's, was preparing to dafh her down the fteep to death, when the form of her father inter¬ vened, and flie was again in her prefent pri¬ fon in comparative fafety; the dungeon door foftly opened, and her father entered, but inftead of the ghaftly countenance and ter¬ rific anger of his features, or the blood pour¬ ing from his heart, ftie beheld him in health and placid looks, arrayed in white, with a pale, but pleafing, countenance, illumined by a fmile of tranfport. : The phantom laid its cold hand on her head, and audibly pronounced a bleffirig on her; exhorted her to forbear all ufelefs re- J % pinings
pinings and defpair, and to ceafe her felf- condemnations* for it had pleafed Heaven to call him, though by a melancholy fate, to an early grave" , that fhe muft not infult the divine majefty of Providence, without whofe confent his death could never have been accompliflied, and in whofe power it was to have freed him in a moment from his early fate, had it not been for wife and infcrutable ends permitted to take place when it did ; that it was her duty to fup- prefs all improper defpondency, and, by her exertions in the hour of diftrefs, be able to fave herfelf and brother, on whofe endea¬ vours alone both their lives depended.— «« The momentous crifis of thy fate, my child, is arrived—be courageous, and fhrink not at approaching danger. In compaflion to thy defpair, I come to abfolve tuee from thy imaginary guilt—4o tell thee my doom* had long been fixed and fealed ere tHou wert born , therefore, my child, live happy— thou art innocent !*' The
The laft words had been pronounced in a loud energetic tone of voice, and, left the impreflion fo ftrongly On her mind, that it awoke her. Ethelwina raifed herfelf on her bed, and loudly exclaimed — , u Stay, heavenly vifion, blefled phantom, ftay I pronounce thy laft words again !—Oh my father," blefs your child with the founds of your forgiving voice !" Ethelwina looked wildly around the room; the moon faintly fhone through the broken cafements, and, by its imperfed light, flie faw, or el r e fhe was not quite awake, and fancy prefented in the darknefs of the nigfft, a confufed view of a fhadow gliding flowly acrofs the room, and in the next moment fhe heard— " My child, be at peace—thou art inno¬ cent r The fecret pannel feemed to open ; the phantom, if fuch it really were,glided through it; and it clofed immediately, without' the, fmalleft
fmalleft noife to difturb the ftillnefs of the night. Ethelwina fat up on her bed, wildly fol¬ lowing with her eyes what fhe had feen, or elfe what her difordered fancy had prefented, uncertain whether it was reality, or ftill a ♦ continuation, of her dream ; yet fhe felt af¬ fured fhe had heard a voice, if not feen a figure, when fhe had firft awoke from her flumbers. With grateful thanks fhe fent up her pious prayers to Heaven, who had, by this lingular and folemn vifion, taken the weight of an infupportable burthen from her mind.— Though flie was not bigotedly fuperftitious, yet a dream of fo extraordinary a nature was not to be pafled iightly over * and the aflurance that it was the over-ruling deftiny ofher father's life* that had caufed his too fad and horrible end, in fome degree eafed her heart of a load of anguifli, and rendered every other evil light in comparifon. The confoiing words flie had heard, whether in vifion or not—" My child, be at peace— thou
thou art innocent!"—h'ad a powerful effeft in reftoring confolation to her airlifted bofom j and fhe fell afleep, compofed and tranquil,' from which the awoke in the morning to new trials, new wonders. -
END OF VOL. IL
