Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The mysterious monk: or, The wizard's tower: an historical romance
THE
MYSTERIOUS MONK.
CHAPTER I.
Out, our, brief candle !
Life's hut a walking shadow, a poor player^ l^hat struts and frets his hour upon the ^tage, And then is heard no more. Macbeth* rwr\ Il HE bleak November blast whistled shrill through the half-decayed turrets of the Castle Caerphilly, and the pale moon, with intermitting ray, cast its fantastic glimmering light through the stained casements of its Gothic gallery, as with light step Ella passed to the cham¬ ber of the lady Gertrude. She advanced with silent caution, and gently undo- vol. l b sing
sing the curtain, beheld with astonish¬ ment the form of a strange monk kneel¬ ing on the opposite side of the bed; his face was buried in the bedclothes, and frequent heavy sobs burst from his agi¬ tated bosom. Ella stood spell-bound, and utterly unconscious of the impropriety of re¬ maining a witness to the singular scene before her. At length the lady Gertrude spoke; her accents were feeble and tremulous. —-" Adolphe" she said, " to your charge I commit Eric and Ella; and, trust me, though I have never acknowledged their affinity to me, yet have I studied to render them amiable as they are lovely. I tried in vain to stifle the feelings of nature within me—vou know not how inestimably dear they are to me.— Swear to me that you will never forsake rhem." The monk half raised his head*—" / swea?*" said he, " by the holy Mother of
of God, to devote myself to their inte¬ rest!* ** Enough," said the lady; * but trust no one unwittingly in this; and above all, beware, Adolphe, beware the crafty Hellena.—Take this casket," she conti¬ nued^—*' Agnes de Clifford is still in the convent of St. Eulalia -----" She stopped. The monk* laid hh hand on the casket -—he looked up—his eye encountered that of Ella, and instantly recalled her to recollection. She blushed deeply, and hastily closing the curtain, retired to the gallery. A feeling of shame at her involuntary infringement of decorum predominated even over the surprise she experienced at the inexplicable purport of lady Gertrude's address to the monk Adolphe—Adolphe! she had never heard the name before: but why was not fa¬ ther Hildegond, lady Gertrude's con¬ fessor, the confidant of her secret .pur¬ pose? and why were Eric and herself fgonsigned, with so much solemnity, to B 2 the
the care of this Adolphe ?—" Agnes de Clifford!" she repeated to herself; H I will reme.nber those names, and the con¬ vent of St. Eulalia." She continued to pace the gallery for some time, deeply musing on the myste¬ rious scene she had witnessed i at length her thoughts recurred to Eric—" And where art thou, dear Eric? where dost thou linger? couid not a cause like this add wings to thy speed ? Would I were a man! I would have traversed half the kingdom ere this, in search of Pem¬ broke, Holy Mary! should lady Ger¬ trude die ere he arrives, her spirit will not rest in peace. But I wrong thee, Eric— thou wilt not loiter on the way." Ella leaned against a central window that overlooked the gateway, indulging a vogue hope of seeing Eric return, and many an anxious glance she cast towards the outward court in vain. At length an indistinct sound caught her ear—she listened—it was the tram¬ pling
pling of horses—they approached—her heart beat quick—'* Eric," she cried, ** dear Eric, is it you T The horn at the gate was blown with violence; sh^ chid the tardy pace of the aged porter, as he slowly descended to unclose the gate. Two men immedi¬ ately entered through the open portal; Ella had only time to observe that they were strangers, and completely armed, when a shriek, which proceeded from the chamber of lady Gertrude, recalled her thither, and hastily drawing her robe around her, she again entered the apartment. It was Alice, the lady's attendant, whose cry had reached Ella, as she bent over her mistress, whose ashj r features and sunken hollow eyes seemed to indi¬ cate that the last struggle was past, and Alice, unable to suppress her terror, had uttered an involuntary scream. Ella approached the bed; she took the listless hand of lady Gertrude; she B S still
still breathed, and after a space she turn¬ ed her eyes on Ella, who thought she read affection there, such as from the lady was unwonted. Her lips moved, but no articulate sound escaped them; and Ella, anxious to catch her last ac¬ cents, bent over her. At that moment Alice again shrieked; she turned to in¬ quire the cause, and shrinking with ter¬ ror, she beheld the two armed men she had seen enter the castle standing beside her. " Lady, yon must go with us,'* said one of the men, addressing Ella. ** In the name of Heaven," she cried, ** what do you intend, and whither would you take me ?" '* From hence, lady, and to a place of better security;" and he bowed lowly. " Security!~~and by whose orders do you act?" asked Ella, with assumed firmness. 66 Our warrant is from the king, and is peremptory." " From
*• From the king!" '* And admits not delay. You will please, lady, to give instant orders for preparation; we will commence our journey with all convenient speed, as the night wears, and we must reach our destination by daylight." In the confusion occasioned by the sudden intrusion of the strangers, Ella had for a moment forgotten even lady Gertrude; she turned to her*-she took her hand (which in her fright she had let fall)-*4t was cold and stiff; the sad conviction flashed across her—lady Ger¬ trude had breathed her last, and she stood by unconscious of what was pass* ing. Ella had been prepared t$ expect her dissolution; but at the moment when it happened—when she felt how much she required a friend to aid and counsel her-^-wheii a strange mandate was about to tear her from her home, the assured loss of her only friend was more than her fortitude could bear, and she sunk B 4 insensible
insensible by the corse of lady Gertrude. Lady Gertrude had supplied the place of a parent to Eric and Ella, and though never kind, she had seldom been severe; if she had not their entire affection, .she was an object of esteem and reve¬ rence, and her death was every way dis¬ tressing to them. Lady Gertrude was scarcely thirty-seven, but an indifferent spectator might have supposed her near fifty; some secret cause had preyed up¬ on her health, and brought on a pre* mature old age, added to the severe pe¬ nances she inflicted on herself. One who had been conversant with the world, would perhaps have surmised that she had been guilty of some hidden crime, which the superstition of the age taught its votaries to imagine expiated by heavy penances and scrupulous self-denial; but it was not unusual for the mistaken de¬ votees to mortify themselves, in the vain hope of atonement in their own persons for the crimes of a dear but im¬ penitent
penitent friend or relative. Lady Ger¬ trude might grieve for the sins of an¬ other rather than her own.
CHAPTER II.
Her form was fresher than the blushing rose When the dew wets its leaves, unstam'd and pure As is the lily or the mountain snow ; The modest virtues mingled in her eyes. Thomson.
------- „___ ----------- 1 \iavc no ambition To see a goodlier man. Shaxe^pkare. With returning sense Ella found her¬ self supported on a litter, that moved slowly onward; the day was beginning to break, and discovered the route her guards had taken. She gazed around in silent anguish—they were crossing a desolate moor, at the extremity of which b 5 the
the sea was visible through frequent openings in the rocks; no house, no hu¬ man being, was near—all without .was desolate, as the then reaved bosom of Ella. She strove to banish reflection, but it was vain—memory would revert to the deathbed of lady Gertrude, to the probable loss of Eric, and her own sad destiny, ail contributed to weigh down her oppressed spirits. Why was the high hand of power stretched forth to wreak its vengeance on her? why was a being so meek, so unoffending, torn from her home, to be immured in a prison? what was her crime? She hid her face in her mantle, and gave way to her overcharged heart—she wept, and felt relieved. The sun at length rose above tbe ho¬ rizon, the hoar-frost sprinkled on the grass sparkled in its beams, and struck a chill sensation through the veins of tlie cheerless wanderer. They were now within a mile of the coast,
coast; when frcmi an adjacent opening in the cliffs it sued a train of horsemen, and unless her guards deviated purposely from their track to avoid, they must of necessity pass near them. Hope whispered the sanguine heart of Ella that in the strangers she might possibly find one willing to befriend her. She had not learned the art of conceal¬ ing her emotions—her countenance was a faithful transcript of her heart; and when she withdrew her eyes from the horsemen, those of her guard were fix- ed on her with a look of suspicion; he guessed her intention, and roughly said -—"You will dowell ? lady, to remember that we have the king's warrant for our proceedings, and not trouble passen¬ gers to interfere, where their temerity would bring down a heavy punishment upon them." Ella answered only with a sigh. The strangers continued to advance; they were in number about twelve; El- b 6 la's
1£ MYSTERIOUS MONK. la's guards consisted of six only, four of whom carried the litter; the other two were armed; she might have been mis¬ taken for a lady whose domestics were escorting on a journey of pleasure or bu¬ siness. Her heart beat quick as the two foremost of the train passed the litter, engaged in earnest conversation; they appeared to be the sons of some baron; the rest who followed as their retinue; all were habited for the chase. But in vain she essayed to idtipfore their aid— her tongue refused its office; she could only cast a supplicating glance towards the last of the train as he passed her. That look was not lost on Godfrey. He struck the spurs into his horse"; she trem¬ bled ; her guarcte moved on in sullen si¬ lence. In an instant the esquire over¬ took his master; she watched him; he listened attentively-—he turned his char¬ ger ; her emotion increased.—He gallpp- ed up to the litter; she stretched forth her
her hand, and instinctively cried—" Save me !*• ," Ay, by St George!" cried he; and he demanded of the guard—" Why they presumed to detain a lady against her will?" *' We act by his majesty's command —pass on!" was the reply. " Not till you give a better account of yourself, sir." « We have a warrant under his ma¬ jesty's hand, and are accountable to no one." " Softly, softly; you reckon without your host there. Do you see my fel¬ lows? they are twice your number, and every soul of them ready to fight in the cause of a fair lady." ' *'* That lady is our prisoner." " Slave, you lie! She was some ten minutes since, but she is free now.— Dispute it at your peril P ** No harm is intended towards the lady,
lady, young sir; our orders simply are, to conduct her to a place of security." " I will save you that trouble," re¬ joined the young stranger. ~*~ " Here, Godfrey, assist me to place the lady on my steed.—He is gentle as a lamb, lady,*' he continued, addressing Ella, " and I will w r alk beside you.-—Give your horse in charge to Walter, Godfrey, and take the bridle." Godfrey obeyed his master with ala¬ crity; Ella's guards offered little oppo¬ sition—it would have been fruitless; and when she was safely mounted, her champion turned, and thus addressed thena.~" Go," said he, " go tell king John it was Philip Fauconbridge who saw a woman sinking under his oppres* sive arm, and boldly^ snatched her from his grasp; and you may add too, that same Philip will protect her still." "Your rash interference, young man/' replied the guard, " will not king re¬ main unpunished." ** Your
** Your master must send some one that has more metal in him than thou hast, when he thinks fit to chastise me," said the laughing Fauconbridge He then ordered his train to return home¬ wards, saying—" Fair lady, I will con¬ duct yon to Fauconbridge, whem you will find my mother, and be a welcome guest" Ella thanked him with timid reserve, Perfectly new to the world, she feared to infringe on the rules of good*-breed- ing. The novelty of her situation alarm¬ ed her-*^alone, among a large party of mm : they w T ere, it is true, kept at a re* speetftil distance by the presence of their master (who walked beside her, while Godfrey carefully led her liorse); but yet when she ventured to raise her eyes from the ground, she perceived those of the train all fixed on her; she scarcely knew if she ought to rejoice at her deliverance or not; but when she met the delighted regards of Faucon¬ bridge,
bridge, her face assumed a deeper blush; his accents were soothing as he tried to reassure her; he guessed the cause of her embarrassment, and desired his retainers to follow at a distance. One of the horsemen dismounting, gave his courser in charge to another, and advanced on foot towards oiir heroine, *' Here is my brother, Robert Faucon¬ bridge, at your service, lady," said Fau¬ conbridge.— "Bid those fellows keep back, Godfrey; Robert will take the bridle; you ride forward to the castle." Godfrey obeyed.—" Courage, lady," he continued, addressing her; ** we are not a mile from Fauconbridge. Do not be alarmed; my people are unused to be¬ hold such transcendant loveliness, and therefore they pressed rudely forward; I entreat you will pardon them—they shall not so offend again." Ella felt un¬ able to reply, and he continued^—** We are all in sooth something unpolished, but we intend well; and by my faith, I would
would give a handsome sum to know with what courtly phrases to grace the offer of my cloak : I fear, lady, you are colcj; forgive me that I practise no bet¬ ter manners;" and he wrapped his cloak around her shivering form. The little ofEces of friendship are so consolatory in affliction, that the kind¬ ness of Philip Fauconbridge could not but be soothing to Ella, even had he been less engaging in his person than manners, and her stolen glances had as¬ sured he was not. In truth, she had never beheld any thing equal to the ani¬ mated, manly beauty of her champion. The glance of his dark eagle eye (though she shrunk beneath it) had penetrated into her very soul, and she felt an ardent inclination to scrutinize his features more attentively; but he still continued to gaze on her, and to encounter his eye again was impossible. Philip Fauconbridge was tall, and finely proportioned, apparently about three*
three-and-twenty; his complexion, some¬ thing imbrowned by the sun and air, con¬ trasted with the white hue of his finely- raised forehead, which owed its cl^rer tint to the friendly shade of his cap \ around it curled his glossy hair in natu¬ ral luxuriance; his eyes were the dark¬ est hazel, and peculiarly brilliant; and his frequent joyous smile disclosed a beautiful, regular set of teeth. Ella had been accustomed to observe the youth¬ ful beauty of her brother Erie, but it bore a different character from that of Fauconbridge, and habit had rendered it familiar to her. Ella kept her seat with the assistance of Fauconbridge, and soon reached the castle in safety. The bridge was lower¬ ed, and Godfrey advanced from the open portal to tender his services; and kneel¬ ing on one knee, requested permission to assist Ella to alight. Philip marshalled her to the saloon, where lady Fauconbridge waited to re- ceive
cei ve her expected visitor. She advanced to meet her; and Ella, though truly grateful for the kind attentions she re¬ ceived, could scarcely articulate her ac¬ knowledgments. The lady perceived her embarrassment, and after pressing her to take some light refreshment, pro¬ posed accompanying her to a chamber, where she could repose herself after her recent fatigue.
CHAP-
CHAPTER III. Gill thou wert my ain lhing, I wad love tbee, I wad love thee— Gin thou uert my am thinj», How dearly I wnd U>\e thee ! Burj.s. Ella awoke from a refreshing nap, her ideas so confused by the singular occur¬ rences of the last night, that she doubt¬ ed if it were not a dream; but the cham¬ ber in which she found herself, and the voice of the attendant who sat beside her bed, convinced her of the reality. Drusilla, with officious care, assisted her to dress; and during that ceremony, took occasion to detail various anecdotes of the Fauconbridge family.— <s Wel| I wot you could have given a shrewd guess who my lady was when you first saw her," said the ancient domestic. "No,
" No, really," replied Ella. ** Why surely, lady, you would have known her for lady Fauconbridge, even if you had met her in a wood ? I am certain I should*" « Very possible; but I having never heard her name------" " Never heard her name! — never heard the name of the beautiful lady Fauconbridge!" cried the astonished Drusilla, " But perhaps you come from foreign parts. And now that you have seen her, is she*not beautiful ?" ** Undoubtedly," replied Ella; " and I conceive amiable as lovely." *' You are quite right, lady; she is al¬ most adored by her vassals, and her own domestics can best bear witness to the ex¬ cellence of her heart. I am old, voung lady, and can remember many instances of her goodness when a child, that enc* .ar- ed her to her family more than her sur¬ passing beauty. She has been a widow twenty yews; notwithstanding we have seen
seen many powerful lords and barons come to Fauconbridge a wooing." "Indeed!" said Ella. ** Yes, lady. She will never marry again for the ; , jng haron's sake. Ah, there is the paragon of young men! To my mind he is as handsome as his mo* ther was. See him ride, lady I He has the air of a prince!------Did you ever see king Richard ?" asked Drusilla, in¬ terrupting herself. ** Certainly not," returned Ella. u Good lack, how I forget myself! I dare say he was dead before you were born; but you may see his picture in the gallery ; he is the very image of our young baron. Ay, I warrant me Philip Fauconbridge may marry with the first and fairest lady of the land." Ella breathed an involuntary sigh: and Drusilla having finished her toilet, conducted her to the presence of lady Fauconbridge, not forgetting by the way to draw her observation to the full-length
full-length portrait of Richard Coeur de JulOU. IU tup Sciiuuii anc again mci Philip, who was sitting with his mother, as if waiting her appearance. Nothing could be more prepossessing than the form and face of Ella, harmo¬ nizing with the elegant simplicity of her dress, composed of the finest lawn, in form resembling a frock, plain and unadorned, save a light tucker of gauze that shaded her bosom; a narrow girdle of black velvet encircled her slender waist, fastened in front by a clasp of rich pearls; her short repose had recalled the truant roses to her cheeks, and she looked, in the eyes of Fauconbridge at least, blooming and lovely as the cup¬ bearer of Jove. I- iy Fauconbridge received her with increasing interest, and Philip having seated her beside his mother, resumed the book he had been reading before her entrance; from time to time he turned over the leaves, but his heart was
was engrossed by the form of the beau¬ tiful stranger alone. ^ Meanwhile our heroine answered the kind inquiries of the lady with graceful timidity, and endeavouring to collect suf¬ ficient firmness to elucidate, as far as in her power, the cause of her mysterious introduction, begged permission to nar¬ rate the incidents of the last night ** I am impatient to hear every thing relative to our fair guest," said the lady, " but the dinner-hour is near, and your interesting tale must suffer no inter r ruption, therefore we will defer it until we have dined; only suffer me to inquire by what name I may address y$u ? M " Ella di Montimar, madam;" and the groom of the chambers at that mo¬ ment announcing dinner, Philip led her to the eating-room. She had beheld the costly decoration of the saloon with surprise, but con¬ cluding it to be the state chamber, that circumstance accounted for its superior elegance.
elegance. The castle of Caerphilly, it is true, hitherto the residence of herself and Eric, was entirely destitute of or¬ nament, and few of its dilapidated apartments habitable ; but had it been otherwise, had she been accustomed to a palace, she might still have beheld the elegance-of Fauconbridge with admi¬ ration. . Her surprise amounted almost to astonishment, at the magnificence dis¬ played at the table of her hostess: the viands were served in plate of massy gold, the servitors clothed in gorgeous liveries, and the panels of the room entirely filled with superb mirrors, that reflected back the busy figures of the attendants, w T ho appeared to Ella a countless throng. The newness of her situation, the strangeness of the scene, and the various regards she fancied were bent upon her, distressed and annoyed her; and she rejoiced to find herself again in the saloon with the lady and vol. i. c her
her son, happily relieved from the ob-, trusive gaze of the domestics* Lady Fauconbridge expressed a wish to become acquainted with all of Ella's history that she thought proper to com¬ municate, and our heroine began her recital in the following words :— * s My simple tale, lady, I fear will possess little to interest you; but I hasten to give you the only proof in my power, of the gratitude your kind¬ ness has inspired." Her voice gathered firmness as she proceeded, and her auditors listened with anxious solicitude. *' In the castle of Caerphilly," con¬ tinued Ella, " passed the days of my childhood; the society of my brother, lady Elinor, and lady Gertrude, were all I ever knew or wished: I have lost much happiness by my seclusion from the world;" and she raised her mild eyes to lady Fauconbridge as she spoke. " My brother is so kind, so tenderly affectfonate
affectionate towards me, and we have loved each other so exclusively, that I fear I wrong his affection, by a wish to share my heart among those, who so generously sheltered me from oppression; but I feel assured he would be equally grateful to lady Fauconbridge for her hospitality, and I hope, after hearing my narrative, she will find no cause to for¬ bid me expressing the esteem I am bound to feel for her." Lady Fauconbridge pressed her hand in silence to her lips, Philip drew his chair insensibly nearer, and Ella again resumed. ** Lady Elinor was so strictly pious, and so scrupulously attended her reli¬ gious duties, that we had no more of her society than lady Gertrude's; but both attended to our education with sedulous care. Father Hildegond, our confessor, perfected my brother in his studies, and lady Gertrude appeared anxious thut I too should profit by his c g instructions.
instructions. I know not if it was in¬ tended that w f e should ever mix with the world; it was described to us as most desirable to be avoided. I am in- dined to imagine some powerful cause had driven lady Gertrude to seclusion; she was invariably melancholy, and never allowed herself the most trifling relax¬ ation. To the kindness of lady Elinor I owe my knowledge of music, though I was never permitted to touch my lute in the presence of lady Gertrude. I re¬ member to have heard her once men¬ tion her fondness for music; but she never indulged in any thing like- plea- sure, invariably sacrificing her inclina¬ tions to the duties of religion, and con* stantly observing the most rigid self- denial " Our time passed peacefully, undis¬ turbed by visitors, and unanuoyed by sickness or sorrow, until the increasing illness of lady Gertrude threatened to terminate her existence; it was then for the
the first time, when extended on the bed of affliction, that she gave way to emotions too powerful for me to de¬ scribe: I believe there were times when her reason sunk beneath the force of excessive feeling. Frequently she im¬ plored lady Elinor to summon earl Pembroke to her presence, solemnly asserting she should not die in peace unless she saw him. ** Old Basle was the only domestic in the castle over whom the influence of lady Elinor extended, save the females, and in this dilemma Eric requested to be the messenger to earl Pembroke, and he was suffered to depart. Six days had elapsed since he left Caerphilly, and lady Elinor, w r orn out with fatigue, de¬ puted me to watch by the pillow of lady Gertrude. I was in the habit of retiring on the entrance of father Hil¬ degond, and when Alice announced the monk, I left the room—after the usual time I returned thither;" and she re- c 3 peated
peated the scene she had witnessed in fee chamber of lady Gertrude, and con¬ cluded her narrative by the events al¬ ready detailed in the preceding pages. Ella was much affected while relating the death of lady Gertrude, and she found it impossible to suppress her tears; her kind hostess sympathized in her distress, and strove to sooth her with proffers of friendship and affection.—.*' I have a happy prognostic," she said *' that I shall hereafter fill the place in your heart, sweet Ella, that your lamented friend held." Ella endeavoured to thank her in suitable terms for her eommiseration, and at length effectually combated her own sorrow to converse with the lady. " You are perfectly unconscious of the cause of your very extraordinary arrest ?" said lady Fauconbridge. " Yes, indeed, madam." " 'Tis strange! And you Iwere left in
in infancy to the charge of lady Ger¬ trude?" " I believe so, madam." ** Are you aware in what degree of relationship you stood to your late pro¬ tectress?" "No, lady." " Airid your parents, my love?" "Lady Gertrude never named them, niadam. Once it happened, during a tempestuous night, part of an old tower was blown down; and some time after, Erie found, among the fallen rubbish, the fragments of a cabinet, and the mi- hiature of a lady, so like me, that Eric said some fairy had sketched it for me. We took it to lady Elinor, who bade us keep it from the sight of lady Ger¬ trude; it would affect her much to look ripon those features, she said, and painfully recall what she once was: and, after a pause, she said—* I will preserve it; and if I can obtain her permission, I c 4 will
will return it to you: it is the image of what your mother was." " Singular!" said the lady; " and pray, my interesting young friend, what was lady Gertrude's name?" ** Di Montimar, madam." " And lady Elinor?" " Lady Elinor, madam!" said Ella, in a tone indicating surprise at the question. " Her name, I presume, was also Di Montimar?" *' Ah! no lady; it is the princess of Bretaigne, the sister of the deceased prince Arthur, of whom I speak." <f Indeed!" said lady Fauconbridge; *' is the daughter of Geoferry and Con¬ stance actually in existence, and so near us too? 5 " In the castle of Caerphilly, madam.** *' May I crave to be the bearer of your wishes to her, fair lady ?" said Philip. " It will be extremely proper to ap¬ prize the princess of her young friend's safety,**
safety," observed lady Fauconbridge, " without delay." " I am ready to bear your greetings, lady." H I am so much your debtor, sir knight, I shame to——" * I am honoured in your commands, dear lady," said he; and lady Faucon¬ bridge suggesting their necessity of dis¬ patch, he retired to prepare for his de¬ parture.
c 5 CHAP-
CHAPTER IV. —■—I have seen the w^lls of Balclutha, but they vyere d^soktfe. The fiie had f^soanded in the fiaJls, an<^ the voice of the pfcdpie is l&afd Jio «»«; Ths thistle shook there iis lonely head, and the moss whistled to the winds. The fox looked out from the windows ; the rank grass of the wall waved round its heacL Ossian. Philip reached Caerphilly as day was declining. He found the castle-gate standing open, and no obstacle present¬ ing itself to arrest his progress, he passed onward, and entering the outward court, his ears were saluted by loud carousals, which seemed to proceed from the an¬ cient hall of the castle, where the guard, composed of a few superannuated sol¬ diers* were assembled. Their noisj mirth bespoke the present object of theh care:
care: one half, already overcome by in¬ ebriety, were lying on the pavement, and the rest, incapable of comprehending or answering his inquiries, could only invite him to join in their debauch. Finding all inquiry useless, he crossed the hall, and entered the interior of the building; pacing its deserted apartments, he cbuld not check his indignation at its miserable appearance — " And . this," said he, '* was deemed a fitting resi- , dence for the princess Elinor!" But other reflections gave place to surprise, at finding no one in the castle but the negligent guard. He traversed every chamber and corridor again and again, but no trace of its late inhabitants re¬ mained—even the corpse of lady Ger¬ trude had been removed. Lost in astonishment, he was endea* voiiring to make his way towards what had been the grand staircase, and it now marked the division of the habitable from the ruined part of the building; c 6 the
the whole northern side appeared to have fallen beneath the ravages of na very recent conflagration, and its few remaining columns, tottering with de¬ cay, presented a dark and melancholy picture of the mutability of human greatness. The approaching twilight added to its sombre appearance, and scarcely sufficed to guide his footsteps. At .length he reached the chamber that he recollected opened into the gal¬ lery at the head of the-stairs; he crossed it, and at the door trod on something that by its crash convinced him he had broken it, He picked it up carefully, and tried, by the dim light of the gal¬ lery window, to ascertain what it might be. It was a mmiature, the frame of which the pressure of his foot had bro¬ ken, but the painting itself remained en¬ tire, and it was an exact resemblance of EPa.-«-* f What a treasure," cried he, " if a man could honestly call it his own! By
By this light, I shall be ashamed to give it to the ladv with its broken frame. A pretty specimen of my adroitness, to have trampled on the only piece of fur¬ niture the room contained!" and, after a long thoughtful pause, he exclaimed —" By Heavens, 'twas sacrilege!" He remained gazing on the beautiful miniature, until the increasing darkness reminded him that it was time to de¬ part. He then placed it in his bosom, and groping his way as he might down the stairs, passed the sleeping guard, and mounting his horse, returned slow- ly back to Fauconbridge, " much mu¬ sing by the way." Robert Fauconbridge returned from the chase, and immediately paid his respects to # their fair visitor. He was not so tall or robust as his brother, but his features were pleasing, and a settled melancholy gave increasing interest to bis manner. He spoke seldom, but the tones of his voice were soft and harmo¬ nious,
nious, and his visible dejection accorded so truly with the feelings of Ella, that she felt a secret regard for him, unmin- gled, however, with any sentiment that could call up a blush on her cheek! Ella met Philip's entrance with an in¬ quiring glance, but when she essayed to speak, her Hp quivered, and a tear sprung unbidden to her eye. " Alas, dear lady !** said he, ls I bring you no tidings of your friends ;*' and he repeated the ill success of his journey, t<f Blessed Mary ! M she cried, rt are all lost to me—every vestige of my s earliest friends swept away in one sad ni^ht? How can I have offended Heaven to de¬ serve this severe chastisement!" ** You cannot have sinned against Heaven, sweet lady," said Philip; *' there are other causes for the strange events that have befallen you." " Yes," she replied, " I comprehend your meaning; 'tis as lady Gertrude
said^ the sins of the parent are visited on the children." " Heaven forbid I should have had such cleaning! Methinks the angel purity of such a daughter would rather atbne for the parents'crimes," said young Faucombridge. " Did lady Gertrude inculcate the re¬ verse?" asked his mother. "Constantly, madam" " Strange!" said the lady; " but do not imagine Providence has forsaken you, my dear youn^ lady; trust me, you have found in us friends who never will, desert you." " Never, by my hopes of Heaven 1" exclaimed Philip; " never, while I breathe: I am devoted to you for ever!" He received her from the bosom of his mother, and pressed her in a fraternal embrace. " You are our sister—our beloved sis- ter froiriiihis hour/ 9 said Robert, as he Imprinted: a chaste Miss on her cheek. "Oh,
** Oh, you are too, too good!" sobbed Ella; " but I dare not trespass on your kindess, for whatever is our fate, that of Eric and Ella must be inseparable." ** We will seek for your brother," said lady Fauconbridge; " only endeavour to be happy here until he can be found." And Philip proposed, it being most probable that Eric, on his return, find¬ ing the castle deserted, would seek at least temporary refuge in the adjacent monastery with father Hildegond, he should again visit Caerphilly, and renew his inquiries at the monastery. Ella was sanguine in her expectation from this arrangement, and even lady Fauconbridge hoped her suspense, as to the fate of her brother, would be ter¬ minated ; and a few days after his first visit Philip sallied forth on his embassy, with their best wishes for his success. During the absence of Philip, a kins¬ man of lady Fauconbridge arrived at the castle on a visit. The person of sir
sir Gervase Osterly was rather prepos* sessing to a casual observer, but a closer scrutiny could not fail to detect the deep cunning depicted in his strongly-marked features. " And where is your son, my lady?" said sir Gervase, missing Philip. " Why, I believe," she replied, gaily, " he is this lady's sworn knight, and she has dispatched him on some high behest. —Is it not so, Ella ? 5> Ella blushed, and articulated some¬ thing, but unfortunately, raising her eyes, she encountered those of sir Ger¬ vase fastened on her, with an intense- ness that entirely disconcerted her. " A lovely dame, by my fay, lady Fauconbridge ! May I ?" and the dark sir Gervase rose to salute her, Ella shrunk back, " You must excuse her, sir Gervase > our interesting young friend is a stran¬ ger to the manners of society;" and lady Fauconbridge drew Ella to another part of
of the room, and darting a repelling glance at sir Gervase, he bit his nether lip, and reseated himself in silent. The supper-hour arrived ere Philip returned, and Ella saw, in his intelli¬ gent countenance, as he entered the a- loon, that his mission had been fruitless. " I need not ask the event of your journey, 3 " she said, falteringly. "Your forebodings are prophetic, dear Ella: I am an unfortunate wight; I begin to fancy myself your evil genius; and yet, so help me God I I would die a thousand deaths to serve you;" thus whispered Philip, as he led her to the supper-table. After supper, lady Fauconbridge re¬ tired to her closet, accompanied by El¬ la; they were soon joined by Philip, who related the events*that befell him on his journey. He found Caerphilly en¬ tirely deserted, and at the monastery of Saint Bernard the monks were, or pre¬ tended to be, ignorant of the fate of the late
late inhabitants of the castle. Father Hildegond was absent on a distant mis¬ sion—where, or for how long a time he might bedetained,Philip could not learn; but he had the solemn assurance of the abbot, that Eric di Montimar had not sought an asylum within their walls. Ella listened in silent anguish to this account, and both her friends were af¬ fected at her grief, Philip at length re¬ tired* leaving her to the care of his mo¬ ther, from whom she received the fond¬ est testimonials of affection; she spoke to her of future happiness, of the resto¬ ration of her brother, and the brighter prospects her own fancy suggested. Ella felt all the kindness her words were meant to convey, and so effectual* ly suppressed her rising sorrow, that when she rose to retire to her own chamber, she bade lady Fauconbridge adieu with tolerable composure. J ur heroine passed through the gd that led to her apartment, a cur¬ rent
rent of air from an open door extinguish¬ ed her lamp, and she suddenly found herself in the arms of a man* There was sufficient moonlight for her to perceive it was sir Gervase who had so rudely intercepted her; and she shrieked, as she struggled to free her¬ self from his grasp. " It wont do, my pretty prudish dam¬ sel/ said he : " if you split your throat with squalling, I have a mind for a civil kiss or two; nothing more, as I am a knight.—Zounds, how shrill her pipe is!" The shrieks of Ella prevented h*s hear¬ ing an approaching footstep,, until he felt the Herculean grasp of Philip Fau¬ conbridge at his throat, who thundered in his ear—" Villain!—release her!" In¬ voluntarily he obeyed, and tbe next mo¬ ment measured his length on the floor. Ella flew to the chamber of lady Fau¬ conbridge, and as soon as she could ar¬ ticulate, implored her to fly to her son, or sir Gervase would murder him, Scarcely
Scarcely able to comprehend her mean¬ ing, the lady returned with her to the scene of her recent terror: the comba¬ tants had withdrawn, and Ella followed at a distance, while she tapped gently at Philip's door. It was instantly opened by him, who answered her inquiries gaily. " Nay, good my mother, I am going to bed in a whole skin, I promise you; but Ella, I fear, is sorely frightened." Lady Fauconbridge soon became ac¬ quainted with the whole affair; and though .she lamented the fracas, she could not blame her son. The family met in the morning, and seemed, by a tacit agreement, to have forgotten the occurrences of the preced¬ ing night. Several weeks passed happily in the society of Fauconbridge, and Ella's me¬ lancholy gradually subsided. Philip was constant in his inquiries for Eric, and she cherished a hope that they would eventually succeed. In
In the mean time, sir Gervase had left Fauconbridge, accompanied by Ro¬ bert ; and Philip, neglecting the chase, devoted himself to the society of our he¬ roine : he had so often forgotten to re¬ turn to her the miniature he found at Caerphilly, that he became daily less in¬ clined to part with it, and less able to form any reasonable excuse for retaining it so long; and he concluded to retain it until he could devise some proper apo¬ logy for his ungallant neglect, Ella had been two months an inmate at Fauconbridge, when, one morning, a stranger requested permission to see Phi¬ lip, and was conducted by Godfrey to the saloon, where he was reading to his mother and our heroine. The stranger hesitated for a moment, but at length said—" I summon you, sir Philip Fau¬ conbridge, and baron of Belgarvon, to appear before the king forthwith, at Lynn, to answer various charges prefer¬ red
red against you;" and he produced his warrant. " This is what I expected," said lady Fauconbridge. " But you, Philip, have a soul superior to the tyrant who ar¬ raigns you. Demand a public trial—he dares not, for his kingdom, bring it to an issue." Observing the distress of Ella, she continued— u You are not to blame, my dearest girl—neither is Philip; he yielded to an impulse, which if he had not felt, I should blush to call him mine. Believe me, you have nothing to apprehend from John; his pusilla¬ nimous soul will shrink into its native nothingness before a freeborn English¬ man. I know him; he has passions, li¬ centious and unbounded as the winds; but he will wreak his vengeance on the weak and defenceless only; for my son I have no fears." Philip Fauconbridge possessed much sensibility, and it was indignant displea¬ sure alone that supported him when he pressed
pressed the hand of Ella.-—" Be happy, lady," said he; " I go to brave the threats of a man I despise, and to proclaim to the world the matchless excellence of the defenceless female he with lawless force tore/rom her home, and sought to dishonour. Oh, believe it, ere I return hither, I will blow such a blast in Bri¬ tain, as shall rouse the war-hounds that sleep so listlessly! and, by St George, we will unkennel the fox ! Ere long, you will hear the name of Philip Fau¬ conbridge coupled with deeds worth naming. But let me not be a vain brag¬ gart. Lady, adieu! adieu !" Ella had unconsciously cherished a se¬ cret affection for young Fauconbridge: he was by far the most amiable man she had ever seen, and he was so assi¬ duously attentive to her, to behold him suffering in her cause—to have incurred the displeasure of a monarch, and ex¬ posed to the ignominy of a public trial, was beyond endurance; she struggled with
with her feelings until he pronounced adieu, and then sunk insensible in the arms of lady Fauconbridge. " Be careful of Ella, my beloved mo¬ ther," were the last words of Philip as he departed from Fauconbridge, accom¬ panied by the king's officers and his faithful attendant Godfrey.
VOL. I.
D
CHAP-
CHAPTER V.
Posso dpe—babta! se ho tacciuto fin' ont, aclefesu noa voglio lacere—-----Sla chcta ! Goldon:. " Oh, lady," said Ella, ** can you for¬ give me?" and she raised her tearful eyes to lady Fauconbridge—" can you forgive a wretch, who has brought this misfortune on your noble son ?" " Say rather, dear Ella, the tyrant who has entailed such misery on us all. You are indeed quite exonerated from any share of blame: neither is it so dire a misfortune as you imagine; Philip's absence will no doubt be short." " But, lady, he talked of war, and deeds of dangerous import." " Philip is impetuous; but, in his cooler
cooler moments, he will not oppose him¬ self to the king." " And what think you, dear lady, will be the result ?" " Probably John may rejoice to get quietly rid of an affair, the mystery of which he will not care to divulge to the world. It was perhaps necessary that my son should receive a reprimand; and the transaction being public, it is proper the reproof should be equally so." " You think then, madam, he will soon return to Fauconbridge ?" " Certainly, my love; and if he is de¬ tained by any accident, he will apprize us of his affairs by frequent messengers." The surprise of Robert and sir Ger¬ vase Osterly, on their arrival at Faucon¬ bridge and learning the arrest of Philip, was extreme; and sir Gervase expressed so much interest in the affair, so much friendly solicitude in the embarrassment it had occasioned lady Fauconbridge, that she could not entirely exclude him d 2 from
from her councils; and on the third day after Philip's departure, he prepared to follow him, charged with letters to her ladyship's friends in the court of king John. Robert too begged permission to accompany sir Gervase, to give his sup¬ port to his brother; and the lady's anxi¬ ety for Philip induced her to accord to his wish, and he therefore departed at the same time with sir Gervase, The arrest of Ella by the king, had ever appeared to lady Fauconbridge as extremely singular; and indeed the whole history of her young friend as very mysterious. Ella was exceedingly beau¬ tiful, and John proverbially libidinous; but then it was evident he had never seen her, and she could assign but one other motive for his conduct towards her—the probability of her being his natural daughter. JeL, was known. to have many; true he never affected concealment in his amours; but the rank and family of lady Gertrude (she believed
believed her to have been the mother of Eric and Ella) in this instance might render secrecy necessary. That he should have placed his forsaken mistress about the person of the princess Elinor, was by no means incompatible with the cha¬ racter of John; both were objects he wished to hide from the eyes of the pub¬ lic, and were both, no doubt, in some measure, state prisoners. It was possi¬ ble the retreat of lady Gertrude had been voluntary, as there was reason to believe she did not continue to correspond with her lover (if he was so), and her singular piety was probably the result of deep re¬ pentance. She had taught Ella to as¬ cribe any misfortune visited on her to the iniquity of her parents, which impli¬ ed their guilt; and again her dying con¬ versation with the monk— ifc She had never acknowledged their affinity to her; yet they were inestimably dear to her." What could be her motive for conduct so extraordinary ?—what but an unna- D 3 tural
tural penance imposed on herself to ex¬ piate the crimes she had committed? She wished to see Pembroke; he was the confidential friend of John, as well as his first minister. Did she wish to implore the protection of the king for her children ? But the monk, who ex¬ pressed so strong an interest in her feel¬ ings—who had promised so solemnly to protect Eric and Ella—was he a rela¬ tive, or a former lover she had been tempted to sacrifice to the illicit em¬ braces of a monarch, or an injured hus¬ band? It was in vain lady Faucon¬ bridge endeavoured to solve any of those difficulties. It seemed not unlikely that Eric had been detained by Pembroke at the command of the king; and also that Ella's guards were conveying her to the coast, there to embark in some vessel destined to convey her to Lynn, where John then held his court, when Philip encountered her on the moor, Reasoning thus, lady Fauconbridge blamed
blamed the rash interference of her son; but she trusted that the matter being explained to the king, and also their sub¬ sequent treatment of Ella, would cer¬ tainly exonerate Philip from intentional crime, and consequently the affair was not of so very serious a nature; never¬ theless, she did not fail to interest her friends in his behalf. Lady Fauconbridge's arguments had little weight with Philip: he saw that Ella w r as lovely—he felt that she was so, and he had heard frequent instances of the vicious propensities of the king; be¬ sides, he was determined to fancy him¬ self the deliverer of Ella from the power of a wicked ravisher, and would there¬ fore not admit the probability of her consanguinity to him, conscious the me¬ rits of his services would be infinitely lessened, if not in their nature changed, should lady Fauconbridge's supposition be founded in truth. He stoutly denied the possibility of the beautiful young d 4 creature
creature he had rescued from the myr¬ midons of John being his daughter— " At least,madam," said he, "you must allow she does not bear the slightest re¬ semblance to him." " Notwithstanding which she may be his daughter." " I will not believe it, however," re¬ joined Philip, " without undisputed proof." £S Why, my dear Philip, John never saw Ella—he never visited Caerphilly— and she never left it until the eventful day that brought her here; how then could he have become enamoured with her ?" " Oh, lady, how I have heard you ad¬ vocate a supposition (that had not half the plausibility this has), when you wished it might be!—how many argu¬ ments you could adduce in support of a favourite hypothesis! For me, I lack much of your discreet penetration ; but it seems to me not so vastly impossible that
that John might have been, in disguise. a secret visitor at Caerphilly." " The limited establishment of the princess is unfavourable to such an idea; a casual intruder could not then have eluded observation: I have questioned Ella, and no such circumstance has oc¬ curred within her recollection." " I wish to Heaven, my dear mother," said Philip, *'you had taken it into your head to imagine her the daughter of any other man," Though lady Fauconbridge's argu¬ ments failed to convince her son, they were incontrovertible in the humble opi¬ nion of dame Drusilla, who had, by dint of eavesdropping, contrived to discover the secret sentiments of her mistress; and after having canvassed them among the domestics until Ella's origin became no longer a matter of doubt, and shrewdly guessing that our heroine was entirely ignorant of what it behoved her so much to know, Drusilla resolved to seize the first favourable opportunity of
initiating her into the mysteries of her birth and royal parentage. Ella's surprise was extreme, as she listened to the narrative of the loquaci¬ ous Drusilla (who took care to embellish her story with divers little minutue of her own invention), setting forth how the king had stolen a lady of high de¬ gree from her father's castle *, and, after the birth of two children, he became de¬ sirous of getting rid of her, and accord¬ ingly he had her cruelly confined in the old castle in Wales; and having many times threatened her life if she attempted to escape to the protection of her family, he had kept her in durance until her death; and the poor lady did, on her deathbed, reveal the whole story to a lover (who had turned monk, on disco¬ vering her amour with the king), and made him swear a terrible oath that he would revenge her disgrace and capti- virv — — ».JW * J *- J 4TJ, S . *
vity on her seducer, by stabbing him to the heart in the midst of his wicked no¬ bles ; and finally, that he should take charge of her children, and convey them to some foreign country, there to be for ever kept in ignorance of their parent¬ age. But the king discovered the plot, through the simplicity of the young man who had delivered the letter to the monk, and forthwith sent messengers to secure the person of his daughter, and to .arrest the monk, who was condemned to expiate his intended crime by a cruel and lingering death; and moreover, the king meaning, now the lady Gertrude was dead, to acknowledge his children, had detained his son Eric in his court,and had promised the hand of his daughter Ella to the baron Osmanville, a rene¬ gade Saracen, and, if possible, a wickeder man than the king himself. It would be impossible to describe the impression this tale made on the artless, unsuspecting Ella, who, new to false- b 6 hood,
hood, did not for a moment question the truth of Drusilla. She had never heard the king mentioned by lady Gertrude but with abhorrence; and the mild, for¬ bearing princess, though ever lenient towards the failings of others, never at¬ tempted to extenuate his crimes. And was this man her father ? Drusilla as¬ sured her, lady Fauconbridge had disco¬ vered the truth.-—" Then it is possible my beloved brother is safe and happy," said she. ** But has he forgotten how anxiously his Ella must feel for his hap¬ piness, that he suffers me to remain in doubt ? Alas! I fear he is not happy in the knowledge of his father: Eric can¬ not esteem the king; it were much bet¬ ter if we had still remained ignorant of our consanguinity to him." Ella wept as she thought on the hard fate of lady Gertrude. She had not al¬ ways been the morose devotee, but young and lovely as herself, the minia¬ ture that the princess had said was like , her
her mother, ah, how unlike the wither¬ ed, sinking form Ella had always re¬ membered in the sickly features of lady Gertrude!—" And was she my mother? ah, I remember her words to the monk Adolphe, * I have never acknowledged their affinity to me." " Pray do not weep so, lady," said Drusilla, alarmed at the distress of Ella, and for the first time reflecting on the dilemma she had involved herself in by retailing the private conversation of her lady, who it was evident did not wish Ella to be informed of her secret sus¬ picions ; besides, the unwarrantable ad¬ ditions she had made to the original story, would subject her to the severe rebuke of lady Fauconbridge: all which considerations had been lost in her zeal to convey this important in¬ formation to Ella; it therefore remained to ensure the secrecy of her credulous auditor, or pay the penalty of her own loquacity. Drusilla
Drusilla easily obtained a promise from Ella, to keep the secret she had confided %o her, and satisfied with that, retired, congratulating herself on her own address. Ella, left to herself, pondered long on the strange destiny that seemed to await her. She remembered too many cir¬ cumstances that served to corroborate the tale of Drusilla. How ardently did she wish for the presence of Eric! to him only could she reveal this impor¬ tant communication; but was he igno¬ rant of the tale of his mother's wrongs ? was he in the court of his father, receiv¬ ing his caresses, and taught, perhaps, to condemn her as the guilty mistress, ra¬ ther than the deluded suffering saint she in reality was ? It might be; 'twas better, perhaps, to be ignorant. Ella felt that the knowledge she had obtained had increased her wretchedness; and she sickened at the prospect of futurity as it
it swam before her imagination, full fraught with coming evil. CHAPTER VI.
Ruffian, let go that rude, uncivil touch, Thou friend of an ill fashion ! Two Gentlemen rf Va-ma* Many days had elapsed, and still no tidings of Philip had been received by lady Fauconbridge, and she sought in vain to conceal her anxiety from the watchful eyes of Ella, who conceiving herself the primary cause of all, became truly wretched. Sir Gervase had promised to forward intelligence to Fauconbridge, yet had he and Robert been equally remiss. This was not extraordinary; but that Philip should be so negligent, was past belief; he had been so uniformly atten» tive,
tive, so tenderly affectionate, that his mother felt this first dereliction the more severely—" This is so unlike Philip !" said she, sighing. " Oh, lady, I fear some cause—-" and Ella checked herself. " Let us talk of something else, Ella." " The improvements in the grounds, lady." " Ay, true, my dear Ella; wrap your cloak about you; we will walk, and try if we cannot fall on some plan to enliven the gloomy appearance of those ave¬ nues " Ella obeyed, and having equipped herself, returned to the room where lady Fauconbridge awaited her. The lady cast a wistful look towards the high road.—" We want Philip sad¬ ly to enliven us," she said. They entered the garden; each strove to talk on indifferent subjects, but both were too deeply interested in one, and involuntarily
involuntarily recurred to the one near¬ est their hearts. At the expiration of five weeks, the arrival of Godfrey (Ph'Mp's esquire) re¬ lieved their apprehensions for his perso¬ nal safety. Godfrey presented a packet to lady Fauconbridge, and turned to an¬ swer the timid inquiries of Ella.—" Sir Philip is well, lady, and commends him to your good favour by me, and farther in his letters." Ella did not reply; and seeing lady Fauconbridge deeply intent on the sub¬ ject of her let! ers (and rightly guessing she too might wish to enjoy her reflec¬ tions alone), sought the privacy of the garden, where she would be least liable to interruption herself. Ella felt relieved from many oppres¬ sive fears that her fancy had engendered, in the assurance of Godfrey, that his master was well; she had never been able to divest herself of the idea, that Philip Fauconbridge had been involved in
in the most dreadful dilemma imaginable for her sake; and that notwithstanding the soothing kindness of lady Faucon¬ bridge, bhe must unavoidably look on her as the cause of her son's disgrace. Ella bounded along the dark avenue (whose firs and laurels gave a gloomy appearance of vegetation to the eye) with the elastic tread of youth and reno¬ vated spirit, entirely unconscious of the distance she had wandered, and wholly absorbed in thought, until the sound of a footstep behind her arrested her at¬ tention; and turning, she encountered sir Gervase Osterly. " I am sent to seek you, fair lady," said he, courteously. *' Suffer me to escort you back to the castle." « Willingly," said Ella, forgetting, in her wish to learn something further of Philip, her dislike to sir Gervase. " You must have rambled far beyond your knowledge in these grounds, I think, lady ?" said he, « Yes,
M Yes, really," replied she, now be* coming sensible of the distance she was from the castle, as she caught a view of the battlements through the leafless elms; *' and lady Fauconbridge will be sur¬ prised at my long absence." " She was ho, and therefore deputed me to seek you this way, while she joined in the search in another direction." " Then let us endeavour to join her." « Very good; she took the way to the temple, whose spire you may distin¬ guish through the trees; the way is in¬ tricate from this, but with my assistance, you will find little difficulty in reaching it; otherwise we must return to the southern avenue." " Oh, do not let us delay a moment! I can readily make my way through this path alone;" and Ella pressed through the underwood that obstructed her way, followed bv sir Gervase. They soon reached the rustic temple; it was a small summerhouse, divided into
into two separate apartments; the door was half open, and Ella entered in some confusion, occasioned by the trouble she had given lady Fauconbridge to seek her. Not finding her in the first room, she proceeded to the second; sud¬ denly she became transfixed with terror; she heard the key of the outer door turn in the wards: lady Fauconbridge was not there, and she was herself a prisoner, at the mercy of sir Gervase Osterly, who stood regarding her with a look of exul¬ tation. " I perceive the artifice by which you b^ve inveigled me, sir knight," said the trembling Ella. " Release me, I con¬ jure you, and receive my eternal grati¬ tude," " Never, so help me Heaven! till you are mine beyond the reach of acci¬ dent. I love you, lady, to adoration; and trust me I am no boy, to be checks ed by maiden coyness: I have sworn to make you mine, and now you are in my
my power, he breathes not that shall tear you from me. Perhaps I lack the whining arts of Philip Fauconbridge to gain a lady's favour; but can he match the prowess of my arm? or can the beggar number lands and wealth with mine ? Lady, I have said I love you, and I would treat you with respect: be but propitious to my suit, and I am your humble slave—<leny me, and the hungry tiger is not more prompt to seize his prey !*' Ella sunk on her knees—" Spare me P 3 she cried-—** release me!—I cannot, in¬ deed I cannot return your love." " Ella, / will not. Shall I repeat how much you are in my power ?" " No, oh no!' cried Ella. " Your champion is far away: this place is at least a mile and a half from the castle. Lady Fauconbridge has not visited it for many years: the only path that leads to it is choked with weeds and brambles, a proof that no one ever passes
passes near it. No person is privy to my plan, and you are here my prisoner— to avoid me is impossible* You will be sought for: for that too I have provided; and I leave you only to facilitate the means of your immediate removal from this to my own castle." Ella clasped her hands in silent agony; sir Gervase turned from her, and care¬ fully securing the outer door, he de¬ parted, leaving her a prey to despair. She had no doubt that he had told her truly, that the place she was in was per¬ fectly secure from casual intruders; she had frequently walked in the grounds adjacent to the castle with lady Faucon¬ bridge, but she had never seen, or even heard her mention this summerhouse; still she hoped that her kind protectress, alarmed at her absence, would send in search of her, and some of the domestics would release tier before the return of sir Gervase. The casements of the win¬ dows were all strongly secured, and she had
had no alternative but to await the ar¬ rival of her tormentor where she was. At length an approaching footstep broke on the silence that surrounded her; she trembled with apprehension: was it sir Gervase, or one of the domes¬ tics? She listened with painful atten¬ tion ; she iieard voices, but they were indistinguishable; she started from the floor—the key was already in the door —she became breathless with expecta¬ tion ; it was the voice of Drusilla, desir¬ ing Gregory to use dispatch. She heard no more, but sunk insensible on the floor. " Saint Mary shield us! My lady," cried Drusilla, as she threw open the door, " here is a dead corpse locked up here !" " It is Ella," said the lady, in a tone of evident surprise, as she assisted Dru¬ silla to raise the fainting girl, whom they soon succeeded in restoring to ani¬ mation; she clung to lady Fauconbridge, and
and wept and uttered joyful exclama¬ tions—-thanked her with unintelligible eagerness, and anxiously besought her to be gone. " Certainly, my love," said the lady.— " Come hither, Drusilla, and take this cabinet;" and she removed a sliding pa¬ nel, where, within a recess, stood the cabinet, which Drusilla took in charge. At the door, lady Fauconbridge de¬ sired Drusilla to deliver the cabinet to Gregory, and assist her to lead the trem¬ bling Ella to the castle, where they ar¬ rived without further interruption. It was long before Ella could make herself understood; and when at last she related, with sufficient coherency, the conduct of sir Gervase, the surprise of lady Fauconbridge was equal to her own. —" But, my dear Ella, you are yet un¬ acquainted with the tenour of my let¬ ters, and must remain so for a short time, until I can enter into some expla¬ nations; suffice it, I have given orders for
for my immediate departure from Fau¬ conbridge ; for it is absolutely necessary that I should repair to Lynn, where the court at present are—and you, my love?"' *' Oh, take me with you, dear lady !" cried Ella, losing, in her terror of sir Gervase, her dread of the king. " That is exactly as I wished: but," continued the lady, " if when we reach Lynn, you should be claimed by a su¬ perior power, I shall wish I had left you behind." " The Virgin prevent it!" sighed Ella; " I would I might live and die with you, lady; but I cannot remain here, for in your absence sir Gervase might not scruple to insult me openly." "True, my dear girl; JT know him too well to doubt it." Lady Fauconbridge hastened the pre¬ parations for her departure, and the se¬ cond day from the receipt of her letter saw them embarked on board a vessel destined from Bristol to Lynn. Con- vol. I. e trary
trary winds detained them long in the Channel, and they continued for some days becalmed off the French coast. It was during this tedious interval that lady Fauconbridge, to beguile the time, entered into a detail of the cause of her present journey, to which Ella listened with deep interest
CHAP-
CHAPTER VII.
My father liv'd beside the Tyne, A wealthy lord was he; Ami all his wealth was raark'd for mine, He had but only rae. Goldsmi i 11.
Our fond friendship is discovered, Weil are known our mutual vows ; All my friends are full of fury. Storms of passion shake the house. Threats^ reproaches, fears, surround me, My stem father breaks my heart ; Alia knows how dear it's cost me, Generous youth, from thee to part. B&AITIE. 4S IMy father, 4 * said lady Fauconbridge, ** the baron Belgarvon, was one of the most faithful adherents to the cause of his monarch, Henry the Second, and constantly blamed with asperity the con- E 2 duct
duct of his rebellious children; and had it been necessary, he would have sacri¬ ficed his wealth and personal service in Henry's behalf; this was, however, far from being the case, for he was loaded with favours and honour by the muni¬ ficent monarch, and stood foremost in the rank of his nobles as his chosen friend. " I had the misfortune to lose my mo¬ ther in my infancy, and being the only child of my father, I became little short of an object of adoration to him: I was supposed to possess a more than com¬ mon share of personal grace, and my partial father regarded me as a prodigy of beauty. He carefully caused me to he instructed in all the accomplishments of the age; and I had scarcely attained my fifteenth year, when he took me with him to the court of Henry: the fa¬ vour the king had always shewn to my father was extended to me, and I be¬ came an object of envy or admiration of the
the whole court. It was known that 1 was undisputed heiress to the immense possessions of my father, and numerous were the offers for my hand my .fond parent rejected. Rich, powerful, and beloved by his sovereign, it was scarcely to be wondered at that he was ambitious: he imagined his daughter worthy to share the throne of England, and he la¬ boured constantly to effect a measure that lay nearest to his heart. The king was entirely ignorant of his designs; but my father had tampered with Prince Henry, and had good hopes of success: but it became necessary for me in the mean time to retire from court, to avoid the importunate addresses of the earl of Cambridge, whose cause was advocated by the king himself. We returned therefore to Belgarvon, on the piea of my father's ill health, who still conti¬ nued to prosecute his ambitious schemes. His hopes were however dissipated, by the fixed declaration of Prince Henry, E 3 who
who offered to espouse me only on con¬ dition of my father joining a conspiracy which was then fomenting against the king. My father's strong sense of right induced him to reject this tempting of¬ fer, though I am persuaded that he did not relinquish all hope of ultimately succeeding, as he carefully continued to seclude me from the world. " At length the rumour of civil war called my father to court, to assist with all his power the cause of his sovereign, and he left me under tbe care of my aunt, lady Fauconbridge, with strict in¬ junctions to seclude me entirely from the sight of all visitors. My father had given me a companion, the daughter of a decayed knight, who preferred be* coming a dependant on him to the al¬ ternative of a convent Una was sen¬ sible, faithful, and attached, and her so¬ ciety compensated in some degree for the loss of all others. My aunt was a devotee, and scarcely eve? condescended to
to join in our recreations. My father constantly corresponded with me, and my time passed happily in peaceful re¬ tirement " The little temple in the wood, where I found you, my dear Ella, imprisoned by sir Gervase, was the favourite retreat of my friend and myself, and thither we constantly retired, to avoid the devout exhortations of my aunt It chanced one day that Una was sitting by the window, and I was intently perusing a mysterious legend, when we were startled by a shrill whistle, and the next instant a young man bounded up the steps of the temple, and hastily threw open the door. On seeing us he hesi¬ tated a moment, and then with inimi¬ table grace he sunk on one knee, and im¬ plored our protection.—* I am pursued,' cried he, * and my enemies are within call; if I am taken, my life is forfeited; though I swear to you, fair ladies, on the honour of a knight, I am innocent E 4 of
of all crime. It is in your power to save me, or to deliver me up to my pur¬ suers. " My hand was already on the sliding panel, from whence you saw me take the cabinet. The knight saw my mean¬ ing—he thanked me with energy; the panel was unclosed, the stranger was concealed in the recess, and we awaited the arrival of those who were in pursuit They came-—were satisfied with our equivocal declarations that he had not passed the temple, and departed to re¬ new their search in another direction. " After the feelings excited by the impulse of the moment had subsided, wc were at a loss how to dispose of our involuntary guest. After cautiously re¬ connoitring, lest the party should return, and being convinced they were entirely gone, we proceeded to liberate our pri¬ soner, who was profuse in his thanks, but lamented the probable fate of his faithful
faithful esquire, whom he had separated from in the forest. As it was evident the stranger was in danger from some inveterate foe, we could not in Christian charity suffer him to depart. After much deliberation, it was unanimously settled that the young stranger should remain concealed for a few days in the temple, until a conve¬ nient opportunity offered for his escape to the coast of France; and we under¬ took to supply him with provisions by stealth, it being considered dangerous to intrust our secret to any domestic of my aunt's- Having concerted our future plan, we left the grateful stranger in quiet possession of his new residence, and bent our way back to the castle. Passing the southern avenue in perfect silence, we were startled by a slight rustle among the trees, and on looking up, we perceived a young man, who had endeavoured to shield himself from ob¬ servation among the clustering boughs e 5 of
of an elm, On finding he was observed, he descended from his exalted station* and entreated us not to be alarmed, im¬ plored our pardon, and declared himself the esquire of our captive knighti We were therefore obliged to return, in order to conduct him to his master, who renewed his acknowledgments for oitr kindness; and we left them perfectly sa¬ tisfied with the arrangements we had made, and we then returned to the castle. " Una's ingenuity supplied the means of subsistence to tlie two inhabitants of the temple; but it became necessary for us to visit them daily, in order to convey it to them. By degrees our visits were insensibly prolonged; the knight's professions of gratitude were inexhaustible, and I could not refuse to listen to them. I was unconscious of my own danger, from a daily intercourse with an accomplished and handsome young man. Leolin, his esquire, inva¬ riably
riably drew the attention of Una; and having procured disguises for both the strangers, they now ventured to accom¬ pany us in our rambles to and from the castle; and though six weeks had passed in this manner, the knight talked not of departing, neither did we ever revert to the subject " Leolin, trusting to his disguise, ventured to the adjacent village; our visits were therefore no longer neces- sary, yet they were continued with strict punctuality; in short, my dear Ella, we were both sufficiently impru¬ dent to receive the addresses of two ad¬ venturers, of whose very names we were ignorant. In Una this was less ex¬ cusable; but for me, for whom my fa¬ ther cherished such high hopes, it was little short of madness. Every consi* deration however sunk before the rhe¬ toric of sir Philip de Clairville, and our intercourse continued uninterrupted foir several, months* E Oi A&
At length my lover received, or pre¬ tended to receive, intelligence that com- pelled him instantly to quit the king¬ dom. He implored me to bestow on him my hand, and after much entreaty, in which he was joined by Una and Leolin, I consented to become his bride. Leolin found a priest, who, for a consi¬ derable bribe, performed the ceremony, and at the same time united the fates of Una and Leolin. The knight still lin¬ gered, and whatever was the nature of the intelligence he had received, he no longer talked of quitting me. "Alas, how dearly did I purchase those few short weeks of bliss I wholly given up to love, we became careless of every thing beside; our steps were watched—my aunt transmitted the in¬ telligence to my father. Oh, Ella! at this distant period I shudder at the'xe- collection of his ungovernable rage; he resolved to Le convinced of the reality of what he called my dishonour. He came
came privately to Fauconbridge, he fol¬ lowed me to the temple, he was con¬ vinced, and my husband was murdered in my arms by the hand of my father! " What followed this scene I know not; for some weeks I continued insen¬ sible alike to joy or sorrow. I was at last aroused from this torpid state by the appearance of my father. He had been informed by my attendant that I was pregnant. His rage was beyond all bounds at this additional calamity, and my aunt endeavoured to sooth him in vain; he accused her neglect as the primary cause of all his misfortunes, and the destruction of his once-adored child. *' Mature reflection suggested the only means of deprecating my father's wrath, and my aunt proposed an imme¬ diate marriage between me and her only son, an imbecile, sickly youth of eigh¬ teen. My father caught at this pro¬ posal; and though a few months before he would have spurned at the idea of such
such a union, he eagerly embraced it now, as the means of concealing my disgrace from the world. " No obstacles were raised by my cousin, and my father dragged me to the altar; the ceremony was witnessed by my aunt and himself alone, and from that hour I never saw him smile; his nature appeared entirely changed; he was no longer the kind, indulgent pa¬ rent he had once been, but the stern tyrant, from whose award there was no appeal Neither did I seek to propitiate his anger; I remembered only that he had murdered my Moved, my adored husband, and almost ceased to consider him as a father. " At the birth of my child, his rage again had nearly overcome my reason; my mmt and* cousin endeayoured to de* precate his wrath, for he had swore to sacrifice my unoffending babe to his re¬ lentless rage. The infant was conveyed away, and intrusted to the charge of Drusilla,
Drusilla, who had recently married one of my aunt's domestics. "My father still cherished the same acrimonious spirit, and even the adjura¬ tions of my aunt, on her deathbed, could not effect a reconciliation between us. I grew careless of his continued anger, and a new interest, in my child, recalled me to the world. " To my cousin I owed much; he bore all my wayward passions with mildness, and submitted to my every caprice, with a gentleness that, opposed to the rigour of my father, could not fail to make an impression on me; and, notwithstanding the habitual meekness of his disposition, he frequently braved the asperity of my father, to shield me from his displeasure. I endeavoured to stifle my regrets for the past, and to repay this generous kindness; his natu¬ rally-weak constitution required much attention, and I scrupulously fulfilled every
every care he had formerly received from his mother. "Two years after my second marriage I became again a mother. My father expressed neither joy nor sorrow, and my husband trembled on the verge of the grave. He did not long survive the birth of his son; and though I had ne¬ ver loved him with the ardour of my first love, yet I wept for him with un¬ feigned sincerity. I lost in him my only friend; for of Una I had never been able to obtain any information, from the eventful night that we sepa¬ rated in the forest, previous to the mur¬ der of my husband; whether she had escaped with Leolin, or had been sacri¬ ficed by my father, I knew not. " Whether my father's hopes revived on the death of my husband (for I was then but nineteen), I cannot tell, for he gradually assumed an appearance of re¬ turning kindness towards: me. What¬ ever those hopes were, he did not live to
to see them realized; and at the age of twenty I became the uncontrolled mis¬ tress of the immense possessions of my father. " Among the various suitors who sought my hand, I rejected the over¬ tures of sir Gervase Osterly, and for which he has never forgiven me; but I had not lost the recollection of my first love, and I determined never to become again the wife of a man to whom I was indifferent I turned all my attention to the care of my children; and nothing of consequence happened to interrupt my peaceful widowhood for nine suc¬ ceeding years. " It was long before I ventured to visit the sad scene of all my subsequent misery; the temple was deserted, and all around bore a sad analogy to my own fate. I knelt on the floor, and endea¬ voured, after a lapse of years, to trace the stains of my beloved husband's blood on the pavement, and while in the act of
of doing so, I heard approaching voices; judge, dear Ella, with what feelings I listened to sounds no time could ever erase from my memory. Was it delu¬ sion, or was it the voice of sir Philip de Clairville ? * It is here, Hillarion,' said he, * that my affections are for ever entombed; and though I have not been able to re* sist the fascinations of the sex, trust me t only loved the beauteous Paulina of Belgarvon; had you seen her, my friend, you would do justice to my choice; and often have I wished, when tangled in the sickening policy of camps and courts, that the blow I received in her arms had indeed been mortal! Poor Paulina!' sighed he. * And what became of her ?* inquired the person he addressed. * She is in heaven with her sister an¬ gels ; Paulina could not survive the sup* posed los;* o^a husband who adored her.' " I remembered the report of my death being spread at the time; and by
my subsequent marriage, Paulina of Bel¬ garvon was lost in lady Fauconbridge. s You wooed the lady under a feigned name, I think,' continued the second speaker. * Yes, Hillarion; she loved me as the fugitive sir Philip de Clairville, not as Richard Coeur de Lion.' " In a moment the sudden conviction flashed on my mind, had my father known his rank, all had been well—all my misery avoided, and I the happy bride of Coeur de Lion; fatal conceal¬ ment ! it had ruined my peace for ever* I uttered an involuntary^ cry, which brought Richard to my side; never shall I forget the look he cast on me; his countenance became pallid, and he lean¬ ed for support on the arm of Hillarion. * Paulina,' at length he murmured. * Philip, dear Philip!* cried I, and ^unk in his arms. " I will not fatigue you with a scene interesting only to ourselves.—Mutual
eclaircissemenfs followed; mine was a tale of sorrow; his too had been suffering and captivity; but I had little to learn; fame had trumpeted the deeds of Coeur de Lion, and I had oft admired and pitied the hero, unconcious of his claims on my affections. " Happiness again seemed within my grasp; my husband's love was undimi¬ nished by time and circumstances, and he joyfully set about the preparations for a public solemnization of our nup¬ tials : Philip was all the fondest parent could desire; to you, dear Ella, I need not repeat his praises; Richard was de¬ lighted with his son, and he continued for some time privately to reside at Fau¬ conbridge. Philip was too young to be trusted with the secret; but he loved and admired his father, without suspect¬ ing his affinity to him. " Richard departed for Winchester, and left me *with a fond assurance of our speedy reunion; alas! (I was doomed to
expiate my early disobedience to my father) I saw him no more! my hero fell by the hand of a vassal, at the siege of the castle of Chalus; and he whose glory had filled the world, perished in the full bloom and vigour of manhood, by the ignoble hand of a hired mercenary; dy¬ ing, he regretted only the impossibility of establishing the legitimacy of his son, and confided to the care of the faithful sir Leolin (the husband of the happy Una) a packet addressed to his mother, the royal Ellinor, which he promised to deliver to me: he fulfilled his tmst, and the kind Una accompanied him, to pour the balm of friendly consolation on my lacerated heart. " I will not attempt to speak of my feelings, Ella; I tried to bear my trials with resignation, and I trust I succeed¬ ed ; but you will no longer be surprised that I am still unmarried. " Sir Jervase Osterly was nearly allied to my aunt Fauconbridge, and, of con-
sequence, could not be entirely excluded from a knowledge of the transactions of my early life; but he knew them only imperfectly; to one thing only he was privy: sir Robert Fauconbridge did, at my earnest request, make a will, entirely precluding Philip from any share of his estate (trifling in comparison with the domain of Belgarvon), though, in deli¬ cacy to my fame, he insisted on his in¬ heriting his title; thus all his possessions, as in justice they ought, devolved on Robert. Sir Gervase was present to wit¬ ness this will, and after the refusal of my hand, he formed the project of stripping Philip (on the plea of illegitimacy) of the estates of his grandfather: he is ig= norant who was the real father of Philip, and that his malice will eventually re¬ coil on himself. Robert is misled by his insidious counsels, and it was at his sug¬ gestion that my son was summoned by John to relinquish his possessions to his younger brother, and not to answer for his
Ms offence in having rescued you, dear Ella, from oppression; and I now go to the throne of England, to demand a higher birthright for my son; the neces¬ sary papers to establish my assertions were deposited in the temple, where in seeking them I liberated you from the insolent attempt of sir Gervase, and hap¬ pily disconcerted another of his nefari¬ ous schemes."
CHAP-
CHAPTER VIII.
*' 1 tremble still with fear; but if there be Yet left in heaven bo small a drop of pity Ab a wren's eye, oh, gods, a part of it! The dieam's here; still even when I wake, it is Without me as ttithin me; not imagin'd—felt." A confused noise on the deck inter¬ rupted the numerous questions Ella was about to propose to lady Fauconbridge, at the conclusion of her eventful history, and they soon distinguished the clash of swords, and the horrid imprecations of the crew, intermingled with loud shouts, and the heavy tread of contending com¬ batants over head. \ " Holy Virgin!" cried lady Faucon¬ bridge, clasping her hands in agony, ** the vessel is attacked, we shall be taken prisoners,
prisoners, and my son will perish under the hands of his savage enemies!" Ella sat in speechless apprehension of the event. Her suspense was not of long duration ; the cabin door was burst open^ th§ conquerors entered, their unsheathed swords still reeking with the warm blood of their opponents. Ella's senses receded, and the whole became a blank. On recovering her recollection, she found that she had been removed from the vessel in which she had originally embarked, on board the deck of another. Her first inquiries on recovering were for lady Fauconbridge; but she was am swered in a language entirely unknown to her: she looked around—no trace of her friend was to be seen; but far on the verge of the horizon, like a speck, ap¬ peared a distant pinnace. Ella knew not that it bore away her reluctant friend from her sight, perhaps fpr ever. The ship in which Ella was now a prisoner continued out at sea for fifteen vol. i. f days,
days, and she felt something like pleasure" at the sight of port, as they anchored beneath the strong walls of a seagirt tower. She had been deprived of all so*- ciety, from the time she had parted from lady Fauconbridge, and closely pent into a confined cabin, in a vessel where no female but herself was on board, and no part of the crew spoke a language she could comprehend; any change therefore was to be hailed as desirable, in prefe¬ rence to the present; yet she could not avoid trembling with anticipation of ill, as the captain of the galley led her up a flight of steps (only visible at low water mark), and through a small postern, from whence they gained the outward rampart of the fort. To EUa's inexperienced mind this ap¬ peared an impregnable fortress, and she gazed with wonder and admiration on the astonishing efforts of art, which had raised a place of such strength on a bar¬ ren
ren rock, surrounded by a trackless de¬ sert and a foaming sea. Having passed a triple range of ram¬ parts, moats, and bastions, Ella's guide conducted her, by a private entrance, to an antiroom, where he left her, motion¬ ing her to sit. Every sentiment of cu¬ riosity now gave way to alarm, and she waited in trembling dismay the return of her conductor: her eye had remained fixed on the door through which he had disappeared, until it opened, and pre¬ sented to her astonished sight a female, entirely black, Ella instinctively shrank back, as the fat negress waddled towards her; she had never seen a black of either sex before, and her terror was indescrib¬ able. " No hurt you, lady,*' said the negress, beckoning Ella to follow her; and Ella arose with difficulty. They passed on to a corridor, and ast uded a staircase of polished marble, from whence they pro¬ ceeded to a magnificent saloon. The air - ^ Q - ^yy^
was impregnated with the perfumes of Arabia, and the choicest exotics adorned the hollow niches, that were placed at stated distances from each other, and aU ternately filled with the rarest produc¬ tions of art avi nature, t The negress still led on, and finally conducted her to a chamber, requesting her, in broken English, to repose on the couch, and she would watch beside her. Ella was eager to dispense with her attendance, and the reluctant slave at last retired. Ella had undergone much fa¬ tigue; and notwithstanding her recent fright and powerful apprehensions^ sfye soon sunk into a deep and refreshing sleep. Light visions flitted over the sleeping fancy of Ella, and she dreamed of tread¬ ing luxuriant meads, where flowers sprung beneath her feet; again she float¬ ed on the glassy bosom of the pell Jcid stream—soared, on elastic pinions, amid amber-coloured clouds—or twined fresh blooming
blooming garlands round the brows of Philip Fauconbridge.—Again the scene was changed. She wandered through a desert; the heavy thunder rolled above her head; barefoot and alone she trod a briery path; a friendly hermit drrw nigh, and lent his aid to guide her way¬ ward feet. She took his offered arm; he tightened his grasp—his cowl fell, and discovered the hateful form of sir Gervase Osterly! She started from her unquiet slumber, and beheld with astonishment, bending over her couch, the monk she had seen by the deathbed of the lady Gertrude—Adolphe! Instinctively she closed her eyes, as if to exclude his figure; again she opened them; the monk was no longer there: she arose from her couch to examine the room; her light step summoned the attentive negress (who had watched in the anti- chamber) to know her commands, Ella inquired—** Who had entered the cham* ber while sbe slept ?" f 8 "No
w No one, lady; I have watched be¬ side the door." ** To whom does this castle belong?*' " The baron Osmanville." " The baron Osmanville!" repeated Ella, It was the baron Osmai> ille to whom Drusilla had assured her king John had promised her hand. But how should the monk Adolphe come in the castle of the baron, who, according to Drusiila's account, must be his enemy ? This was a question she was unable to solve, and therefore followed the offici¬ ous negress through many highly-deco¬ rated apartments, to a small boudoir, fitted up with peculiar elegance. The negress tapped at an inner door, which was opened by a fair young creature, ap¬ parently not more than thirteen; her robe of pale blue silk harmonized with the transparent clearness of her com¬ plexion, and the glossy ringlets of light auburn hair, that flowed in graceful luxu* riance on her fair shoulders, unconfined by
hy the studied hand of art; her seraph eyes of celestial blue bespoke her innate purity of mind, and at no mother time or place could she have appeared more lovely to the admiring Ells, whose eyes, for the last fortnight, had been accustom¬ ed to contemplate ugliness under various forms, in the crew of the vessel that had brought her hither; and lastly, in the person of the short, fat Safie, the negress, who now stood as a foil beside the beau¬ tiful Zerinda. Zerinda advanced with playful kind¬ ness to salute her fair guest.—*' I am happy," said she, ** that my father's ab¬ sence procures me the pleasure of greet¬ ing you, amiable stranger, and most sin¬ cerely I welcome you to Osmanville." Ellen felt cheered by the kindness of her youthful hostess, and the day passed in mutual endeavours to please. No two beings could be better formed for the society of each other than Ella and JZerinda; and it was not till she had retired F 4 to
to her chamber, that Ella begaa to re¬ flect on the strangeness of her situation. Could her father (if John was her father, of which there appeared little doubt) se¬ riously intend her for the wife of Osman¬ ville, the mother of Zerinda? apd yet had he not pursued the vessel in which &he had embarked with lady Faucon¬ bridge, and forcibly tore her from that dear friend, to convey her to the castle of Osmanville ? Ella could only weep; she was powerless. Ella was awoke in the morning by Zerinda, and the day passed like the preceding, with the addition of the little brother of Zerinda, a beautiful iijfent of five years, the very counterpart of his sister, who appeared to doat on him* Safie was the favourite attendant of her mistress; and Ella, once ascustomed to the colour of her skin* soon became sensible of her value. She was faithful, diligent, cheerful, and invariably good- humoured. " My
^iMyfetber-will return hither," said Zerinda, to our heroine* **in a fewdays* I ha^e learnt this netvs by the dili^nce of Safife for I atn yet too young topar- take his confidence; but as it Soften hap¬ pens tliat he does Hot require m# to at¬ tend him^ for many months together, his coming^iH taake little alteration in our present arrangements." EHft wished it might be so; but she recollected with terror that *she was his affianced bride, and that she had not even a negative choice; she hoped indeed that in the multiplicity erf his avocations, which Zerinda had named, that she might be for a time forgotten* Qsmanville's arrival was announced by the clangour of martial music, and an uijitersal bustle throughout the spacious building that owned him as its lord | yet, notwithstanding the fears of EBa, and the hopes of Zerinda, they continued ta enjoy the uninterrupted society of each ?5 othefc
other, and the attentive Safie constantly sought to vary their amusements. Many hours were devoted to the instruction of the little Asim, and Ella soon became the second object of his affection. Ella's fears gradually subsided, and as she really began to cherish a sincere re¬ gard for her new friends, the time pass¬ ed happily, save when her regret at the loss of lady Fauconbridge, and the sad idea that she was destined for the wife of a renegade Saracen, would intrude; she could not help sometimes giving way to surprise, that Osmanville should have been six weeks an inmate in his own dwelling, yet had never been in the apartments of Zerinda, nor conde¬ scended to notice herself. It happened one evening, that Ella and' Zerinda, attended by Safie, walked along the ramparts. Azim frolicked on before, and the friends were conversing with cheerfulness, when a loud exclama¬ tion from Azim diverted their attention. "It
%t It is Yuseph," said Zerinda, as A- zim sprung into the extended arms of an uncouth figure, in whom Ella recog¬ nised the commander of the galley that had brought her to Osmanville; " it is Yuseph; he is much attached to Azim: he will probably take him to my father now; therefore," added she, with a sigh, " as the dew is beginning to fall, we will return." Safie followed, and the party regain¬ ed the saloon in uninterrupted silence. Zerinda was sad, and Ella participated in the grief of this interesting being, who seemed to feel most severely the cruel neglect of her father. Zerinda perceived her sympathy, and, unchecked by the presence of Safie, she gave way to her tears on the bosom of her friend. She C( ntinued to enjoy the luxury of grief. Safie stole away, and the friends were left alone. Suddenly the door was thrown open, and Safie announced the baron. f 6 Zerinda
Zerinda sprung to meet him. He coldly returned her salute,* and address? et Ella*-—" Yuseph was right," said h# ta himself; " she is a perfect houriP He motioned for them to sit, and h$ introduced to them a friend, who ac¬ companied him, as the count Falques* sen. Neither the physiognomy of the ba¬ ron, or the count, were of a nature ta inv|^e confidence. The eyes of Ella sunk beneath the ardent gaze of the latter, and she sat crimsoned with blushes. " Is not Elk very beautiful, my lord ?** said Azim. The baron answered by a simple ak formative, but the count was loud in his encomiums, and begged the indulgence of taking his ^uppei! in Zerinda's apaBtr ments;. Qrie^wejrejmmediatelyisswfd to. prepare the banquet. In vain Ella solicited permission tot retire. The ba^ ion haughtily forbade it, and sbe was compelled
compelled to listen to the fulsome com- pliments of count Volquessen during the tedious banquet. ? At length she was suffered to leave the hatefhl scene, and in her chamber she gave way to her tears; The oppressive and confident manner of the count dis¬ tressed her beyond measure, but tne cold indifference of Osmanville was in¬ explicable. She pondered long on the subject, till overcome by reflection, she at last fell asleep. On awaking Ella found a female at¬ tendant beside her, who directed her attention to a large assortment of rich habits, and a profusion of jewels, that had been sent by Osmanville for her ac¬ ceptance, and the attendant had orders to conduct her to the presence of the baron as soon as she rose. Ella became passive. She suffered herself to be at¬ tired with splendour, and finally to be led into the saloon, where the count alone awaited her arrival. His
His was not the delicate love that re¬ spects the feelings of its object Ella was overpowered by his obtrusive man¬ ners, and it was long ere he would allow her to depart When she did escape from his persecution, she sought sanctu¬ ary in the chamber of Zerinda. " Ah, you are unhappy too, dear Ella,'* said the weeping girl: " I do not entirely comprehend why, but it was thus, I can remember, my beloved mo¬ ther would sigh and weep; she was con¬ tent and happy when the baron was away, just as you were; but when he returned, she too would look thus mise¬ rable : I am sure I wish we were with my good grandfather, for I am always happy there, and so would you too; the baron would let me go, but," she added, with a sigh, w he will not suffer Azim, and I cannot leave my brother." Zerinda had conjured up a sad train of ideas in the breast of Ella, and she con¬ tinued to listen in silence to the simple plaints
plaints of the innocent girl; she too had a beloved brother,—" I have told you, dear Ella, that my mother was a Chris¬ tian, but I fear my father, in spite of outward appearance, is a Mahometan. He has never interfered with my devo¬ tions, or forbid the visits of father Cle¬ ment ; but last night he chid me so se¬ verely, for having taught Azim our creed; and charged me, as I feared his curse, in future to avoid all reference to the subject; but it is so sad, Ella, to think my brother, my beautiful Azim, should become an alien from the true faith. Counsel me, dear Ella, what I shall do: 'tis wicked to disobey my father, but is it not *o to suffer, if in my power to prevent it, my only bro¬ ther to be bred in ignorance of the blessings of Christianity ? Beside, my mother always bade me remember what she taught me, that when she was no more, /might become the instructress of Azim," Ella
Ella had gradually become interested in the converse of her youthful ftiehd, but she was utterly unable to offer com¬ petent advice. She thought father Cle¬ ment should be consulted, and Zerinda avowed her intention of doing so. *' And your grandfather, dear Zerin* da—would not the influence of the ba¬ ron Mounteagle effect th£ purpose you wish, if he were acquainted with this?" " Alas, no, my grandfather is so in* firm, that my father would not regard him, nor will he suffer him to interfere in the concerns of his children. Much of my grief arises from the distress of my grandfather, who doats on Azim; and I know that the certainty of his be¬ ing reared a heretic would break his heart" " But the laws of the country," said Ella. " You must have heard that my fa¬ ther is a favourite with the king; be¬ side, he does not openly profess the Ma¬ hometans
hometan faith; neither would he suffer it to transpire that Azim was other than a Christian." They were interrupted by r the en¬ trance of a domestic, who brought a mandate from the baron for Zerinda to prepare for an immediate departure to Ravensdale, the castle of the lord Mounteagle, her maternal grandfather. The surprise and sorrow of the two friends w r as mutual. Zerinda was dis¬ tressed at parting from Ella, and she had little hope that Azim would be the companion of her journey. To Ella the departure of Zerinda was ominous of every ill. She shuddered with secret apprehensions; but there was no appeal from the will of her father. Safie had orders to attend her mistress, and she wept bitterly, as she contem* plated the parting embrace, often re¬ peated, and the sobbing adieas that broke from each alternately.—** Remem¬ ber
ber me in your prayers, my Ella," sighed Zerinda. M I will, I will; but do not you for¬ get me." " Never, Ella: once more farewell!" and she tore herself away. Ella held out her hand to Safie, who bathed it with her tears, breathing many a wish for her future happiness. It was not until after the departure of Zerinda that Ella felt the extent of the deprivation she had sustained; but as she traversed the empty apartments, she confessed the void. It is true, the in¬ fluence of her young friend was as a drop of water in the ocean; yet to be left alone, wholly alone, in the lawless mansion of Osmanville, was horrible. But was she alone ? At that moment the baron passed beneath the window, and a lady, who seemed in anxious con¬ verse with him.—" I would depart im¬ mediately," said the lady; " but I will $onfess ? the attentions I shewed the son of
of Mounteagle were not so disinterested as you imagine. I had my aim——" The rest of the conversation was lost in the distance; but Ella continued, in listless inactivity, to gaze on the features of the baron and his companion; the exotics in the windows shaded her from their observation as they repassed her. There was something in the person of the lady that impressed itself on the imagination, and once seen, could never be forgotten. Our heartsick heroine was compelled to preside at the table of Osmanville, and to listen to the licentious language of the count: she could only by a power-. ful effort restrain her tears, and com¬ bat the dejection of her spirits, by a determined resolution that no force should reduce her to repeat the same scene. Thrice she rose to retire, and was as often restrained by the stern voice of the baron, and the bold grasp of the count. At length a retainer beg¬ ged
ged an audience df the baron, aiid he re¬ tired without ceretiibny, leaving Ella and the count alone. The domestic^ had been previously dismissed; and she fan¬ cied the retreat of Osmanville a feinl, to place her more entirely in the power of the count. Trembling with apprehen¬ sion, she rose to depart; but she was prevented by the encircling arms Gf her libertine companion: she shrieked; but the fretted roof alone reechoed her cries. In vain he strove to quiet her apprehen¬ sions, but he refused to liberate her; and she continued to struggle witli morfe ihah feminine strength in his rude $ra$p, * f Listen to me,' fair one," said he. But Ella still implored, with unceas¬ ing cries, the aid of Osmanville or his household. <* Lady," cried the count, " this is madness; the baron has given you to my arms; and think you I will forego the happiness of possession ? or that the retainers of Osmanville will dare to rescue
* rescue you from his power qr my plea¬ sure ?" She shrieked with convulsive agony; the count for one moment relaxed his hold, and §he sunk insensible on the pavement Volquesseii hastily summoned the do* mestics, who bore Ella to her chamber, where proper restoratives soon recalled her senses, and the presence of the female attendant in some measure re¬ assured her: the girl regarded her with a look of commiseration. *' Ah, I am very, very wretched," said 1511a, replying to her look; '* can nothing save me ?" ** Nothing on earth, lady " " Ah, mercy, Heaven!" and perceiv¬ ing the girl about to retire, she added— " You will not leave me?" " I will attend your call in the anti- chamber ; but I am certain you will suf¬ fer no further insults from the count Volquessen to-night." Ella
Ella strove to believe her, but never* theless determined not to close her eyes that night. Yet it was not long ere her exhausted frame sunk beneath the op¬ pressive drowsiness that assailed her. She was awoke by a soft murmur of her name; and looking up, her eyes rested on the monk Adolphe.—** Rise, Ella," said he; " time presses." Her alarm had prevented her undress¬ ing, and she instantly obeyed. The monk drew from beneath his cloak a garment similar to his own.— « Wrap yourself in this, my poor child," said he; and his soothing accents pene¬ trated to the inmost soul of Ella. But she was weak and faint: he perceived her situation, and with kindly care as¬ sisted her to shroud her slender form in the thick folding cloak his watchfulness had supplied.
CHAP-
CHAPTER IX.
Lo, Discord enters at the sacred porch, Rage in her frown, and terror on her crest; K'en at the haliow'd lamp she lights her torch, And holds it fluming to each virgin's breast. The Nun, How l have aped among the clergymen, The &uihs I have collected shall express. King John, Adolphe pressed Ella to taste a goblet of wine, which the careful attendant had placed beside her, and she swallowed with difficulty part of its contents. The monk pressed the spring of a concealed entrance; a panel in the wall receded, and disclosed a private outlet, through which he passed, and Ella followed in silence. The passage was so extremely narrow, that Adolphe could not support her
her languid steps—her pace was slow and unsteady. By degrees the passage became wider, and he put his arm through hers, but he continued silent: they descended for some time a gradual declivity, and at last trod a level path; but the way was long and dreary, and the fainting Ella could with difficulty proceed; and when the monk became sensible of her weakness, he caught her in his arms, and continued to press for¬ ward with celerity. A fresh current of air on the cheek of the almost uncon¬ scious Ella, recalled her to a sense of her situation. The monk seated her on the grass;, the night was calm, the bright stars glittered in the firmament, and the distant swell of the ocean w r as sad, but soothing, to the soul of the wanderer. " My poor girl," said the monk, "your rest must be short: a boa* waits us on the beach; it must convey us hence speedily." "loan
** I can walk thither, father," she re¬ plied, rising. The monk extended his arm.—" Lean on me, daughter," he said. They soon reached the beach; the boat was securely moored. He placed Ella in it—he loosened the rope, and seizing the oars, he rowed with unwea¬ ried perseverance until he reached the point of his destination. He sprang on shore;,and having secured the boat, he assisted his grateful charge to land,— " Yonder tower," said the monk, " will afford you at least a temporary asylum, until your health and spirits are recruit¬ ed ;'* and he pointed to a massy pile, seen dimly in the distant landscape; and again, with unceasing solicitude, he sus¬ tained the footsteps of Ella, to whom the promise of a sanctuary, and a prospect of rest, imparted new vigour* As they approached it, Ella perceived the building was a convent. The monk, yol. i. g after
after a long reverie, inquired if she knew him? /* v " I s&w you once, father," she timidly replied. * , * ^ > , , - -* " At the deathbed of lady Gertrude," mid he: " may the Father of Mercy re¬ ceive her penitence as a:reparation, fm her fault ! w and he crossed himself d^ vdutly. - >*..«,.., " And was she so very guilty, father ?" " Erring mortals must not presume rashly to judge each other; she suffered an unhallowed passion to subvert iier reason. You, my dear children,,w'ere tile most injured; and thereison^other —I will not name him,—God of mercy," he continued, meekly, ** enable thy ser¬ vant to do justice to others, however la¬ cerated his own sad heart I am thy creature, dispose of me as thou seest fifcf and he sunk into a deep silence, which Ella feared to interrupt. The signal of Adolphe at the gate of the convent procured them instant ad¬ mission*
mission. The nuns had just finished their midnightdevotions, and they crowd¬ ed rdttrid Ella with anxious curiosity. Afitet a short interview with the lady abbess, and a kind assurance to our he* roine that he would soon see her again, Adolphe departed, leaving her still igi norant of his future intentions. Some weeks were passed by Ella in th0 convent of St. Margaret, without any tidings from Adolphe. The nuns treated *er with kindness, and the lady abbess with respect, for the monk had placed in her hands a weighty purse; she was ignorant of the quality of our heroine, whom Adolphe had enjoined to evade all inquiries on the subject. The monk appeared to have effected her deliverance from the castle of Os« manville at the risk of much danger, and great personal exertion; his behaviour towards her had been affectionate, but the tone of his voice was particularly melancholy, evidently the effect of some g % private
private sorrows; and she could not but believe it connected with the memory of lady Gertrude,—-** My mother has injured him; yet he will not forsake her children;" and Ella felt at that moment both esteem and reverence for the cha¬ racter of Adolphe, Ella had learned, with some surprise, that the monk was an entire stranger to the abbess and the whole sisterhood, and his lengthened absence became a matter of apprehension and distress to her, whei>, at the expiration of three months, no in¬ telligence from him had reached her; the sisterhood began to relax in their atten¬ tions to her, with the exception of a young nun, called Marina, and Rosa Monta¬ gue, a beautiful novice, whose wealth induced her guardians to seclude her from the world, that they might enjoy it. Poor Rosa was an orphan. The tale of Marina was equally interesting, but it was unknown. About this period rumours of ap¬ proaching
preaching troubles reached the secluded abbd& of Ella, and the eager nuns re¬ tailed, with exaggeration, the tales in- troduteed into the convent through the medium of the pensioners. ** I am sure,'* said Rosa Montague, after listening to the account of the sack of a monastery—" I am sure I wish the duke of Monmouth * would come here." "What!" screamed sister Frances, •* the Violator of sanctuaries;—the enemy of our holy religion—-come here ?" "I eare not what he is, so he beat tfowii these walls, and gave me liberty," replied Rosa. "Here is depravity with a witness!" eried Frances, lifting up her hands and eyes. "It is natural enough, however," said Marina; *' and if I were not already pro¬ fessed, I should wish the same." * Ah, dear Marina," said Rosa, " you G 3 are
^reright^ and If Ranees was ap'yo,nn|; and handsome as you, she would tirinjc w too." *'The Yirgin «ave me? 9 cried t^e angry Frances, "would you hav& tfee duke profane these walls, and drive us all before him like a flock of sheep, to wander in the wilderness ?" " Yes, with all my heart," replied ( the novice. « And pray, Frances," rejoined Ma¬ rina, " what shall we be the worse if the earl empties the strong box of the lady abbess ? I am sure we are none the het~ ter for its contents." Frances was completely scandalized by the unreserved comments of her youthful antagonists, and she reared, with a threat that she would report it to the lady abbess. " Let her go," said Marina, drawing a letter from her bosom; " I bavf more certain intelligence than she is aware of; and trust me, Rosa, within three days the
the .gates of St Margaret will be thrown open, and we shall be freed from our prkonL'* * Dear Marina, shew me the letter." "No, Rosa; but I will tell you its import The duke has received infor¬ mation (no matter bow) of ou* riches: it is known there is not a convent in Norfolk that has received so many libe¬ ral benefactions. Monmouth will as- ^«t&€Uy visit us, and the sisterhood, as Frances says, will be driven forth to wander in the wilderness." , , w And what will become of them ?" inquired Ella, " Poor souls! they are unfit for the trials and sufferings of the world;" * The very argument the king holds," said Marina: " your monasteries and eonvents," said he, " render one half of my subjects entirely useless. Let them come forth from their cells and cloisters, and perform their duties to society: Eng¬ land is half depopulated by the folly and g 4 superstition
superstition of the church. I want men and money; the holy church can spare both; and, by God's teeth, she shall furnish my armies, and pay them too!" "Holy Mary!" said Ella; " is the king indeed so very wicked ?" " I know not," replied Marina: " it is on report that he did openly insult the legate of his holiness, and bade hint home, and tell the pope, that no Italian priest should tithe or toll in his do¬ minions F ** God forgive him I" murmured Ella, *' It is at least certain," continued Ma¬ rina, " that St. Margaret's is marked for destruction; therefore do »ot be sur¬ prised when you hear the artillery of Monmouth rattling over your heads." " And who is this earl of Monmouth ?" asked Rosa. " A cousin of the king—a gallant no¬ bleman, and something popular: this present service in which he is engaged will
will raise him higher in the opinion of the people; for they groan beneath the oppressive burthens imposed by the church, and secretly rejoice to see its hoarded treasures brought to light— * The monks preach poverty,' says Mon¬ mouth*—* let them practise it." The abbess too had received, it seem¬ ed, some private intelligence, and she hastily tore the precious ornaments from the shrine of St Margaret, to deposit in the chest that contained the treasures of the convent; and after securing every valuable in her possession, she dispatch¬ ed a lay sister to request the aid of fa¬ ther Peter, and some of the fraternity of St. Thomas's, to assist in placing the gold and relics in a place of security. At a late hour a signal at the outer gate spread instant confusion through-. out the convent, and the nuns gathered around the abbess, impatient to learn the event. It was the dreaded earl who demanded admittance. The terrified fe* g Z males
ber cell, inwardly deploring tfi^lt^fty conduct of Adolphe, #ho had* mittej^er a partieipator in this unfortunate* affair. -i. w And whither shall I go/' shd me&, " when driven fifom hence? Alas*! I know not" Her hopes and wishes pointed towards lady Fauconbridge; but where a ^s that kind friend ? Nearly six> months had passed since she had been foNs^ from her by the hateful Os¬ manville. What might not havk hap¬ pened Jn* that long interval ? Her heart whispered, that within the reaelr of Philip Fauconbridge's protecting a«n f she would be secure from insult 1 But where was he? The mean policy of John had perhaps suggested his ruin- she shuddered at the idea. His mother too, the good, the endearing lady Fau¬ conbridge, might be implicated in the misfortunes of her son. Where now was .Eric?—where was her brother? She could only seek»him 'thioiigfef* the medium
medium of a father she dreaded and de¬ spised. The abbess of SL Margaret endea¬ voured to temporize with the duke, un¬ til she could remove her treasures; but the politic nobleman was not to be out¬ witted : the convent was invested, and he threatened to batter down its walls if she refused him a ready admission: but he failed not to recommend to her a quiet, unconditional surrender, to pre¬ vent bloodshed, and save the lives of the sisterhood. The weeping superior was compelled to yield: the duke and his train entered the convent, and the af¬ frighted nuns secured themselves in the chapel, and wept and prayed till dawn. The soldiers encamped without the walls —suffered no one to pass from, or enter the convent; and in the morning the earl appropriated the treasures of the abbess in the name of his sovereign. A light tap at the door of her oham* ber roused Ella from her reverie: she & 6 rose
rose and admitted the nun Marina.*— " Is our fate determined ?" she inquired. " I have not been able to learn," re¬ plied the nun; " but there is no doubt but the sisterhood will be dispersed: if so, this may be the last time we shall converse together. Will you suffer me to share your bed to-nigbt ?'* '* Willingly, dear Marina." " I would fain hope," continued the nun, i€ that we shall meet again here¬ after; my heart involuntarily claimed affinity with you, dear Ella; I have loved you since the first moment we met, and I cling to the idea of being ber loved by the only being for whom I ever truly felt the affectionate warmth of friendship.—Promise me that you will not forget the unfortunate Marina." "Never, Marina; I will treasure your affection with a miser's care. No, I will never forget you, dear Marina." They were now joined by Rosa Mon¬ tague, and mutually agreed to watch throughout
throughout the night In the morning each retired to her separate cell, to wait the commands of the lady abbess; they separated with expressions of regard and esteem, mingled with sadness, for the fate of each appeared doubtful. A lay sister summoned Ella to attend the superior, and she hastened to obey. As she passed along the cloisters, the very image of despondency, the well-re^ membered voice of Philip Fauconbridge caught her ear.—-" Can it be indeed him!" She darted past an angle of the building; it was in truth the gallant Fauconbridge. He sprung towards her. — " Ella!" he cried, " my Ella! this is beyond my hopes." " Philip, my brother!" whispered Ella. *' Have I found you, dearest ?" conti¬ nued he, as he fondly gazed on her lovely form. " Ah, this is happiness unlooked for! But I am departing an. the in¬ stant
stant. You will accompany me, will you not, dear Ella?" " To lady Fauconbridge ? n ** Assuredly, to my mother. But our affairs brook not delay, therefore 1 will to the abbess, while you prepare for yoiir departure." , , , Ella cheerfully set about the necessary preparations; she sought Marina and Xtosa> but in the general confusion that prevailed, she could not -find either, and the voice of Philip urging dispatch, compelled her to join him without see* ing them before her departure; but she left a message with one of the nuns, charging her to deliver it to hot 1 her friends. Philip had procured a litter for Ella, in which he carefully placed her, and rode beside it, conversing with heron all that had befallen since they parted.— " For my own affairs,* 1 said he, " I am but a novice at telling a tale gracefully, therefore
therefore I leaye it to my good mother to relate." As Ella listened with delighted atten¬ tion to every word that fell from tlie lips of Fauconbridge, an officer rode up to them, and respectfully saluting Philip, said—" Will it please you, my lord, to give orders for the troop to halt at this village? the day is hot, and the soldiers weary." He signified his consent, and turning to Ella, gaily said—** Have you yet to learn that I have forsworn my name and lineage ? w ** Can it be possible 1" cried Ella, in a tone of surprise. " Very possible—very true. In fu¬ ture, you must know me as Richard Piantagenet, earl of Monmouth." "Indeed!" " Therefore you must forget Philip Fauconbridge." " Ah," she replied, •« that I can ne ver do. But lady Fauconbridge ?'* H My
w My mother is become countess of Caerphilly, with the lands and towers thereunto appertaining. But, Ella, you will not love us less for those high- sounding titles." " Those titles cannot heighten my re¬ gard for my kind friends, neither can any circumstance lessen it,** said she. But the fate of Eric was still undecided: Monmouth had not been able to learn aught concerning him; and in the ple¬ nitude of her present happiness, Ella's tears fell fast, as she thought on the doubtful destiny of her beloved brother. Monmouth rode forward to the vil¬ lage, lest his attendants should neglect aught that could contribute to the com¬ fort and pleasure of Ella at their noon¬ tide meal Left alone, our heroine could scarcely credit this sudden transition from ab¬ ject despair to the very pinnacle of her hopes. If she had expected security from the arms of Philip Fauconbridge, the
the name and popularity of Monmouth made " assurance doubly sure." She cherished too a hope Monmouth would plead her cause with the king, and save her from the hateful Osmanville. ** Condescend, my fair sister," said the duke, as he led Ella to a seat, * to do the honours of a soldier's table." Their meal was brief, but sweetened by content and happiness; and our he¬ roine resumed her litter with spirits. It was some hours after sunset ere they ar- rived at the end of their journey. The way was beguiled of its tediousness by the converse of Monmouth; yet Ella was much fatigued; she had watched the preceding night, and this was the longest journey she had ever under¬ taken. The earl lifted her from the litter, and 7 carried her in his arms to the hall of a magnificent building, saying— ** You are welcome, my sister, to the house of your brother.'* Monmouth slowly open¬ ed
ed a door that Ud frdm the hull to the interior.—** Madam—my mother, I am returned to pay my respects to yoit* ? <* Well, come in then," said the lady. " But, lady, I am not alone; I bring you a visitor?" . Lady Fauconbridge advanced to the door; Ella flew into her extended arms, and in her kind embrace tasted all the happiness her most sanguine wishes had anticipated in this meeting with her be* loved protectress.
CHAP-
-— ......-Within the hollow crown That rounds the temple* of a king Keeps Death his court, and there the antic sits, Scoffing his state, and grinning at his pomp-s- Allowing him a breatli—a little scene To monarchise, be feared, and kill with looks, Infusing him witli self aud vain conceit. Shakespeare. A good night's rest recruited the tired spirits of Ella, and she met the countess and her son at breakfast with joyous smiles. The earl regarded her with de¬ lighted admiration; the last six months had (so at least he thought) added much taher surpassing loveliness.—* My lady," said he, *' I have shrewd hopes that EMa di Montimar will be a soldier's wife, so I entreat her to honour the review with her presence to-day." Ludy
Lady Fauconbridge overruled the ob¬ jections of Ella, and promised to attend. Monmouth's.duty prevented him from escorting them himself, and he reluct¬ antly consigned them to the care of God* frey. Ella was mounted on a palfrey be¬ longing to the lady; and as they rode towards the ground, she related all that had befallen her since they parted at sea. She spoke of Osmanville, and the count Volquessen, with abhorrence (in which lady Fauconbridge sincerely par* ticipated)—of Zerinda uid Asdm with tender commiseration, and of the monk Adolphe with a strong feeling of sur¬ prise. Her sentiments were those of her friend, and their converse lasted until they reached the ground, where Godfrey took care to place them in a favourable situation to observe the manoeuvres of the troops. '* Here comes the king, Ella," said lady Fauconbridge; but Ella saw but one
one countenance among the crowd—the count Volquessen.—"There he is, the vile count Volquessen ! * she cried. " Where, my love ? point him out," said the lady, eagerly. " Him in that gorgeous habit, on the grey charger," wliispered Ella, and she tried to rein in her palfrey. ** Impossible, Ella; that is the king.** ** The king!" cried the affrighted girl —" he with the white plume, and that glittering appendage round his neck ?" ** It is indeed the king, my poor Ella. He turns this way; he is coming to¬ wards us." Ella heard her not; she had fallen to the ground but for the attentive care of Godfrey, who succeeded in conveying her through the crowd. ** I could not be mistaken, dear lady Fauconbridge," said Ella, as the lady sat beside her couch ; " the features of that horrid count are engraved in indelible characters on my memory; oh, I never, never
never shall forget him!—And can this man be my father ?" " Ella," replied the lady, who knew not the source from whence he* young friend had ascertained her affinity to the king, " I fear it is too true—I have be¬ thought me; Volquessen is one of the provinces in Normandy which owns the sovereignty of John ; it is not unlikely that he should have adopted the title of count Volquessen, to conceal his rank; but it is hardly probable that any one else would have presumed to do so; be¬ side, Fort Osmanville is known to be the scene of his debaucheries, and the baron a creature devoted to his interest. I also remember the absence of John from the court, at the exact time he must have been at Osmanville." " And can it be possible, lady, that he is such a very monster, to violate the person of his own child? Indeed, in¬ deed, I never can endure to look on him again!" cried the sobbing Ella j w eri- treat
treat for, me, I conjure you, dear lady Fauconbridge, permission to retire into a convent; I can never know peace in the world.—Ah! my unfortunate mo¬ ther, your crime is visited on me! Alas, my poor Eric, where are you? Are you too suffering pnder the retributive justice of Heaven? Even Zerinda's father is less guilty than mine," " Be calm, my dear Ella; I have thought, on an expedient to secure you in future from the tyranny of the king. I will immediately visit the queen dow¬ ager, and if I have your permission, re* late to her every event of your past life. Her interest once secured, and if she will consent to receive you under her protection, whatever other evils you may be subjected to, you will be effec¬ tually' secured from the future machina¬ tions of John. What says my Ella ?" "Use your pleasure, my best friend- dispose of me as you please, only let me not see the king." Lady
Lady Fauconbridge, or rather the countess of Caerphilly, was admitted to the presence of the queen dowager, who received her very graciously, and suffer¬ ed her to relate the history of Ella's life and distresses, without interruption. After some consideration, she said—- *' I opine, my dear countess, that John must be in some sort ignorant of his affinity to your protegee" " Yes, please your highness, so I have always imagined; and yet------" ** Ay, yes; I know what you would say. Well, it is a most singular affair. I will see the child, my lady countess: bring her to me to-night, into my cham¬ ber, ut ten o'clock." The ccuntess returned her acknow¬ ledgments; retired from the presence, satisfied that the person and manners of Ella could not fail to interest Elinor in her favour. At the appointed hour our heroine, accompanied by the countess, entered with
with trembling steps the chamber oi* Elinor. The queen regarded her with atten¬ tion for some minutes; at last, sbe said to the countess—" B) mine honour, lady, it is a beauteous blossom ! Doth not our cousin Richard think so, hey ?" " My son, please your majesty, regards Ella as a sister; further I know not." Ella blushed deeply. " Nay, my lady, we are not prying into your secrets; the child is seemly to look on, and young men have eyes; there is no harm in it." The queen questioned Ella relative to every event of her past life; but, to her infinite surprise, though she frequently recurred to lady Gertrude, she never mentioned the princess Elinor, " We are perfectly satisfied," said she, at last rising from her seat, which was a signal for them to depart. " Bring Ella di Montimar to the palace to-morrow, vol. i. ii and
and we will receive her to attend upon our person." They then paid their obeisance to her majesty and withdrew, " I perceive, my love," said the coun¬ tess, "' the impression her majesty has made on you is not very favourable; but you must endeavour to conceal that; should you become a favourite with her, which is likely, you will soon be sur¬ rounded by specious enemies, who will gladly seize any opportunity your inge¬ nuous nature might afford to ruin you in your royal mistress's favour; there¬ fore be wary, make no confidants among the ladies of the court, and place a con¬ stant guard upon your lips: the man¬ ners of the queen are, I allow, extreme¬ ly haughty, unfeminine, and repulsive; and had your situation been less despe¬ rate, I should never have placed you un¬ der her protection." •* Ah, indeed, my kind friend, she is very unlike you; and though I am sure I can
I can never love her, yet I will impli¬ citly follow your directions. But why did she forbear to speak of tlie princess Elinor?" "Because she has injured her; the princess is, since tbe death of her bro¬ ther, prince Arthur, the rightful heiress to the throne of England, from whence she is excluded by her uncle John : I believe she is not of an aspiring nature, and she has been so long in seclusion, that her claims are partially forgotten." " Is John then an usurper ?" " Undoubtedly; the princess Elinor is the daughter of his elder brother Ge~ offery; but the queen dowager support¬ ed the claims of her son John, who was (such is the blind partiality of parents), the favourite child of Henry the Second, as well as his mother. The queen's in¬ fluence was unbounded, and she esta¬ blished John on the throne of England, after the death Gf Richard Coeur de Lion; though she cannot be ignorant of the h 2 baseness
baseness of his disposition, or that he not only sent Osmanville, a creature who owed his life to the generosity of Coeur de Lion, but actually went over to Germany himself, in order to lengthen out the captivity of his brother Rich¬ ard—-that brother generously forgave him. My son, lo whom Elinor obliged him to do justice, is hound to uphold the fortunes of John; his cause is the cause of England, and Monmouth will firmly support both; in the present state of the country, private pique must yield to the public weal; yet is my son impetuous, and it were therefore better that we conceal from him the cause of your removal to the palace." ** You are punctual, my lady coun¬ tess," said the queen, as lady Faucon¬ bridge introduced Ella the next morn* ing; ** but lady Pembroke is the better courtier, and therefore we consign Ella di Montimar to her charge; she will ini¬ tiate her into her new duties.—You will pay
pay the utmost regard to lady Pem¬ broke, Ella." Ella promised, and thought the man¬ ners and person of lady Pembroke ex¬ ceedingly prepossessing: she saw lady Fauconbridge depart without, with feel¬ ings of regret she had much difficulty to conceal. By order of her majesty, apartments had been allotted her in the palace, and she followed lady Pembroke from the audience chamber with a heavy heart to the lodging appointed for her. " You are quite a stranger to court etiquette ? M said lady Pembroke, as she conducted Ella through the palace. " Entirely so, madam." " Would you prefer the society of my family to the solitude of your own chamber, or the company of the other ladies?" inquired the lady, kindly taking her hand. Ella felt the kindness; and after un¬ dergoing the ceremony of an introduc¬ tion to the other ladies of the bcdcham- h 3 ber,
ber, she accompanied lady Pembroke to her apartments in the palace. " The earl is in attendance on his ma¬ jesty," said her ladyship; " allow me to present to you my daughter Victoria, and William lord Marsham." A pale, interesting youth, apparently about nineteen, and a beautiful young girl of twelve, rose to salute our heroine. ct My daughter Matiida,' ? continued the lady, " is very unfortunate, and she usually keeps her chamber; but I will introduce you to her some day; your gentleness will accord with her drooping health and spirits, though I can never prevail on her to mix in society." Lord Marsham conversed with Ella, the lively Victoria sung a sweet little ballad, and accompanied herself with some taste on her lute; and Ella began to feel comparatively happy, when she was startled by the abrupt entrance of the king; the colour instantly forsook her cheeks—she instinctively sought the door.
door. Lord Marsham observed, and sprung forward to assist her; he led her to an open window—" Try to recover yourself," said he, " and suffer me to escort you to your apartments." Ella thanked him; she ventured to look towards lady Pembroke: the king appeared entirely engrossed by her lady¬ ship; his back was toward her; she hoped he bad not observed her, and she prepared to take advantage of his posi¬ tion to escape unperceived, when a door opened close beside her, and lord Mar¬ sham announced his father, the earl of Pembroke.—* e But you are ill, my dear father!" he exclaimed, and he supported the tottering steps of the earl. Ella took advantage of the general confusion to escape to her chamber. Our heroine had been some days an inmate of tbe palace before she again saw lady Fauconbridge. ** Unkind Ella, I thought you had forsaken us entirely," said Monmouth. h4 Si My
" My mother has exerted all her inge¬ nuity to frame excuses for you, but I don't believe one word of them. Why, my sister, were you so cruel as to leave tis, when I have only a few days to re¬ main in England?" " Are you going to leave us then, my brother ?" <s I am, for France, fair lady. Have 1 your good wishes ?" " Most cordially: be but as happy as I wish you, and-----" " Do you really wish me happy, Ella? Would vou make me so ?** " Indeed I would." " Would you love me, dear Ella ?" " As my own brother." " As your husband, Ella?" Lady Fauconbridge entered.—" Oh, mother, you have broken in unawares. Did you hear the lecture I was giving this truant girl?" "No; but in truth, Monmouth, 1 will not suffer it: Ella is a very good girl.
girl, and acts by my advice, therefore do not——" « (Jry your mercy, lady! I am off; I would not be bethumpt to death with words; but tremble for the fate of your pet, lady; by St. George, I will finish the wholesome counsel I meant for her ear, ay, and make her confess too, when¬ ever she rambles from your watchful guardianship!" and he departed, to at¬ tend to some affairs of importance. Ella, who was anxious to communi¬ cate all her little distresses to the coun¬ tess, did not fail to recount the visit she had paid to the family of lady Pembroke, and her determination to avoid any fu¬ ture rencounter with the king. " You have certainly nothing to appre¬ hend from his majesty now, my dear Ella; but your account of what passed during your visit, confirms what I have already heard whispered. Scandal is busy with the fair name of lady Pembroke, and it is plain not without some reason; the H 5 familiar
familiar visits of John to her private apartments, and the extreme emotion of her lord on finding him there, speaks volumes." - You do not think, then, the illness of earl Pembroke arose from any acek dental cause^fatigue, or the heat of the weather, or some over-exertion?** " It might have been—^1 would not be uncharitable; lady Pembroke is not the friend I should have chosen for my Ella, but she is in high favour with the queen, and you must perforce continue on terms with her. During my residence here, I have been instructed in the areana of court intrigue; I would have you be ex¬ tremely guarded in your behaviour to lady Pembroke; her eldest daughter is very amiable, and lord Marsham (a son of the earl by a former marriage) is also generally beloved; the character of lady Victoria is unformed—the earl himself is an upright minister, an excellent hus¬ band, and an exemplary father." On
Qn Ella's return to the palace, she learned that her majesty was seriously indisposed, and.required her attendance; she therefore hastened to her ebamjber, and continued in waiting during the night* The queen dowager was grown ex* tremely corpulent, and was subject to a spasmodic affection; her temper, always irritable, was insupportable during the painful attacks of her disorder, and Ella was so closely confined to her chamber, that she had the mortification to find, on her emancipation, that the duke of Mon¬ mouth had departed for France; the countess of Caerphilly had made frequent attempts to see her; but the queen would admit no visitors, nor allow Ella to leave her chamber. The situation of the queen dowagers favourite was any thing but enviable; lady Pembroke's family excused her, from the close attendance that devolved on Ella, and who bore the ill-humour h 6 and
and caprices of her mistress with inex¬ haustible patience; and she was repaid by permission to pass a whole week with the qountess of Caerphilly, during which the king departed to join his army in Normandy, destined for the invasion of France, and she returned with less ap¬ prehension to her duties in the palace.
VsJrJl<AJLA *"
CHAPTER XI.
All pi& soffrir uon posso grinsulti giornaheri Padrona troppo cmda sara ch'io mi disperi Vivere non my lascia un sol momenta iu pace Mi batte mi minaccia m'insulta, e mai nou tacc. II Walk re, Ella had been several months in the service of the queen, and her majesty continued to distinguish her from the rest of her ladies. When the court re¬ moved to London, and affairs of conse¬ quence requiring her presence at Fau¬ conbridge, the countess of Caerphilly proposed to depart at the same time, she ventured to request the queen*s permis¬ sion for Ella to accompany her. « My lady of Caerphilly, we shall not part with her, unless she is sufficiently ungrateful as to wish to leave us. Now that
that my mn h abroad, we have need of her services, my lady countess*" " I have not, please your majesty, yet spoken on the subject to Ella. I could not presume to do so till I knew your pleasure." " Ypu did well, my lady; let me hear no more of it." Ella wept bitterly when her friend reported her interview with the queen; but she was obliged to moderate her grief at parting, lest it should be report¬ ed to the queei}, whose irritable temper was a continual spurce of disquietude to her, and s^e chided her with severity for the veriest trifles. Jn the mean time, Ella had fpund an affectionate friend m& intelligent eom- paniop ip) the person of t}ie lady Matil¬ da MarshflPh ths eldest daughter of lady Pembroke, who w$s, though two years younger than herself, a perfect mistress in every science and accom¬ plishment of the age, She was entirely neglected
cumstance of her being deformed), for the more showy }ady Victoria. The gen¬ tle Matilda was yet universally beloved; she did not mix much in society; her ftther and brother were particularly at¬ tentive to her, and passed some hours daily in her apartments. " I think," said she, on one of those occasions to her father, '* you admire the uncommon loveliness of my sweet friend* for I have frequently observed your re¬ gards fixed on her; I neyer yet knew a lady so perfect in mind and person as Ella di Montimar.** " Di Montimar!" exclaimed Pem¬ broke w& his cheek bee^me livid- 4 *** Di Montimar! but it cannot be*" Ella looked at him with astonishment, as he paced the room with hurried step, ** Ave your parents living, yqung lady ?" he inquired; his voice faltered, and he waited her reply in breathless suspense. "My
" My father, my lord; but the lady Gertrude------" " Ha!" he cried, interrupting her— " lady Gertrude!—but I dream—who, what was this lady Gertrude?" " Lady Gertrude di Montimar, ray mother." " Oh God!" cried he, pressing his hand on his forehead, " it is even so—and I am a wretch indeed!" and he rushed out of the room. The senses of lady Matilda seemed suspended during the short dialogue that passed between her father and Ella: r it the words of both were alike incompre* hensible to her. Ella remained fixed with astonish¬ ment. Vacantly gazing on the door through which the earl had so hastily retired, almost doubting the evidence of her senses.—" How strange!" she ex¬ claimed. u Passing strange!" rejoined Matilda. Ella mused deeply for some time; at
at length she addressed Matilda—" This to you, lady Matilda, appears extraordi¬ nary—it is almost equally so to me; but some other time, when I am more col¬ lected, I will relate to you my sad story, though it will not tend much to eluci¬ date the present conduct of lord Pem¬ broke." She was in truth unequal to the task of repeating her own tale; and soon after she left the apartments of lady Ma¬ tilda, to reflect, in the solitude of her own chamber, on the mysterious tenour of earl Pembroke's words. Ella remembered the emotion he had betrayed on first seeing her in the apart¬ ments of lady Pembroke, which the countess of Caerphilly had attributed to his distress on finding the king with his wife. Subsequent events convinced her the countess was mistaken, but she had not, until now, for one instant supposed it originated with herself; it seemed as if
if she recalled the memory of some de¬ parted friend to the earl. Our heroine followed in the train of the queen to London, where she was in constant attendance. Lady Pembroke had retired to a castle of her lord's in Devonshire; the earl himself was on the Continent; and lady Matilda, as a matter of course, attended her mother. It was^the pleasure of the queen that Ella; should, on no occasion, go beyond the purlieus of the palace, and she every evening exacted from her an account of what had passed during the day, which seldom failed to afford subject for a lec¬ ture, to which our persecuted heroine was compelled to listen in uncomplain¬ ing silence, How little was she in rea¬ lity an object of envy! Elinor sometimes received the young queen in her own apartments, but she washed it to be considered a mark of condescension, The princesses and the infant prince Henry were rarely admit¬ ted
ted to visit their grandmother; but Ella frequently met them in the gardens, and she had insensibly become a great fa* vourite with them, particularly the youngest princess, Isabella, a fine girl of twelve years; in truth, Ella was univer* sally esteemed, though the acknowledg¬ ed favourite of the queen dowager* The young queen often condescended to con¬ verse with her, and distinguished her by several handsome presents; and she once obseryed to the princess Jane^—** I wish, my love, in the event of your mar-* riage with Alexander, that Ella di Mon¬ timar might be permitted to go with you to Scotland; she is so near your own age, and her person and manners so perfect, that I should be proud to pro¬ duce her in the Scottish court, as a pat¬ tern of our English ladies; but I fear it will not fall to my lot to select the com* panions of my daughter, and even so, the queen dowager would not be pre* vailed on to part with her favourite." This,
This, and many simila conversations, were repeated to the queen dowager, who cherished a mean jealousy of her daughter-in-law: and though she never could condescend to conciliate her de¬ pendant, yet she was angry that Ella did not love her. She imagined that the many favours she bestowed on her, which she failed not to repeat to her daily, gave her an undoubted claim on her affection, and they would indubi¬ tably have done so, had they been ac¬ companied with kindness. Ella felt her obligations to Elinor, but she could not command her affections; and the es¬ teem, the admiration, and respect, which her haughty mistress demanded, were the involuntary tribute to the virtues of the young queen. " And mark me, Ella," said the queen dowager, winding up her usual evening lecture, " I will have no caballing in the palace during the absence of my son; it is my pleasure that in future you for¬ bear
bear all converse with Isabella of An- gouleme, and that you strictly avoid the company of her daughters." Ella bowed in silence to thi> harsh decree, which precluded her from the partieiption of society she so dearly prized ; and from that time none of the princesses, save Isabella, were suffered to enter the apartment of their grand¬ mother. The young queen was near her ac¬ couchement, and seldom left her cham¬ ber; she generally led a life of seclusion, it was supposed by her own choice; but Elinor could not silence the reports that were circulated, nor the pity and admi¬ ration her mild dignity and virtuous for¬ bearance excited among the people Elinor possessed a masculine genius, and her bold politics had, it is probable, sustained the falling state of England, and propped the throne of her son; but it was never forgotten that she had fo¬ mented the rebellion of her children against
against their father—that to seetire her favourite John on the throne of Eng¬ land* she had connived at the inhuman murder of the innocent young Arthur— or that, with proud, overbearing haugh¬ tiness, she assumed the honours, and maintained the pomp and splendofctr, that were in justice the meed of the gentle, uncomplaining Isabella. The old queen was vain of the pa* tronage she possessed, but her extreme avarice prevented her alleviating the distressed. She was proud of the splen- dour of her court, and rigidly exacted the homage of her dependants; but those whose stipend was drawn from her own private purse, were ill paid, and and worse treated, She had perceived, or fancied she perceived, that of late her influence over the king had diminished, and she sought with avidity to discover to whom he owed the councils that di¬ rected his conduct, which no longer emanated from her; this, and the affile* tions
tions of increasing age, tended to sour her naturally violent temper, which was felt by all, but more particularly by Ella. She had long outlived her personal charms, but her vanity still survived; and who dared tell the queen that she was grown old and ugly ? Yet she was not altogether ignorant of the change in her appearance, and every art was ex¬ hausted, every invention tasked, to sup¬ ply a substitute for her decayed beauty, and happy was it for Ella when her tire¬ women succeeded in the arrangement of her toilet to her satisfaction. The young princess Isabella {the ge¬ neral favourite of her family) did not exactly comprehend the behaviour of her grandmother to the young queen; but she heard frequent hints and innu¬ endoes among the attendants, and she observed the general tenour of her con¬ duct was unkind and overbearing; to Ella she was oppressive and tyrannical, and the princess was often indignant at the
the repeated insults that were heaped upon her; her mother's judicious coun¬ cils, and the universal dread the name of the queen dowager inspired, had hi¬ therto restrained Isabella's dislike to her grandmother within the bounds of de¬ corum ; but she practised every covert act that her imagination could suggest, to annoy and tease the old queen; she would contrive, by accident, to spill her cordials, demolish the apparatus of her toilet, and pinch her favourite spaniel Damon, or tread on the splendid train of her robe; but her pretended sorrow invariably obtained her forgiveness. At length the safe accouchement of the young queen was announced, and the birth of a young prince; and the same day news arrived that John had been victorious over the French before Angers, and that the whole rebellious province of Picardy had been compelled to submit to his successful arms; and, finally, the ambassadors of Alexander the
the Second, king of Scotland, had con- eluded the alliance between their mo- narch and the princess Jane of Eng= land. Yet all this rather displeased than gratified the queen dowager; she was tired of rejoicing at the birth of her grandchildren; John had already an heir to his throne, and the interest the people took in the welfare of the young queen suggested that she was growing into consequence with them, and that she herself was declining* The very advantageous marriage of her eldest granddaughter had been projected by the earl of Pembroke, almost without her sanction; and the astonishing mili¬ tary genius of the young duke of Mon« mouth bore down every obstacle before him; and though she had herself raised him to the rank and high command he now bore, yet she had looked tot have found in him the pliant slave of her will; and now that he stood high in thj vol. i, I affections
affections of the king and people, she could frame no pretext to quarrel with him: yet she secretly cherished a grow¬ ing dislike to him ; she was angry that her voice had no weight in the council; but the affairs of England were con¬ ducted by Pembroke and Monmouth, with firm and decisive policy; the king publicly avowed the success of his arms to be owing to the great military talents of Monmouth, and that the present wise administration originated with the earl of Pembroke: but the queen dowager was no longer at tbo helm, and she view¬ ed every thing through the medium of jealousy and ill-humour. The princess Isabella, happy m the knowledge of all the fortunate events the day had produced, and buoyant with youth and spirits, was admitted to the presence of her grandmother, and, un¬ skilled in her politics, was astonished at her ill-humour, and more than ordinary gloom;she had, however* sagacity enough i / to
to perceive (though she was infinitely surprised at it) that the good news had annoyed her, and her apparently artless questions added to the queen's cha¬ grin. H Is not your majesty very happy at the birth of my little brother?" " I am sick, child.—-Fetch my salts, Ella di Montimar." " And the queen is so charmingly too, madam." " The young queen—you should learn to make proper distinctions, Isabella.— Put the cushions easy at the back of my chair, Ella." "La! I dare say your majesty will be very sorry when the princess Jane sets out for Scotland ?" " Not I.—Read me the tincture for my cough, Ella." " Oh la! let me give it yon, dear grandmother;" and Isabella flew to the cabinet; but her foot caught in the car¬ pet, and she fell. The tincture was i % every
every drop spilt, and it was not only exceedingly expensive, but very difficult to be procured, as it was compounded (or the vendor had assured her majesty so to enhance the price) of various fo¬ reign herbs and spices. Isabella made a thousand apologies, but the queen was not easily appeased; after some time, however, she ventured again to address her.—" Is it the king who gains those great battles, or the earl of Monmouth, please your majesty ?" " The king, certainly.—Close the win¬ dow-curtains, Ella—-don't you see the sun is blinding me?" " Oh, it is really the king himself! Ah, then I suppose he is better advised, for formerly he was always beaten," " Don't talk, child, or I must send you away.—Down, down, Damon !" " Down, down, Damon!" repeated the princess, and she caught up the queen's staff, and struck the favourite spaniel till he whined piteously. V " Isabella?
^Isabella! child! how dare you?" cried she; but Isabella chased the dog round the apartment. ** Take him away from her, some of you ! M shrieked the queen. Just then Isabella eame up with Da¬ mon, and struck him a second blow. His enraged mistress lost all patience— she seized a footstool that stood near her, and hurled it at the princess, whose back was towards her. Ella di Montimar sprung forward, and extended her arm to avert the blow: the heavy stool, thrown with all the force the queen could collect, struck on the delicate arm ofEHa, and broke the bone below the elbow. " Oh God, you have killed herP screamed the princess. ** Her arm is only broken," said lady Oxford. But Ella had fainted, and the princess continued to scream.—" Summon her attendants, 19 said the queen, " and eon- 13 duct
duct the princes! to her mother's apart¬ ments.* 1 w I wont leave her, so I wont,** sobbed the princess; * f you have killed her—you have, you wicked woman; and you de¬ serve to be hanged for it, so yon do, though you are a queen." "* Take her away," cried the enraged queen. *' Touch me if you dare, lady O&fottl, and I will tell what I saw in your bed¬ chamber, when you did not know I was hid behind the curtain/' w Isabella, leave the room*—do yoto remember who I am ?" <f Yes, you are my grandmother, and you would have killed me, if my deai, sweet Ella, had not saved me, as you did my pretty cousin Arthur; and I am sure you wont be a queen in the next world, nor I don't think you will ga fo heaven either." " Turn her out!" screamed tbe queen, almost choked with passion. At
v * At your peril l n cried Isabella; c * my father is king of England, and he bade me not be snubbed by her, and I wont, so I wont." The attendants bore out the still in¬ sensible Ella, and the princess then con¬ descended to leave the room. At the door she turned once more to address the queen; Juliet St. Clair perceived, and endeavoured to thwart her inten¬ tion.—** Keep your hands off me, Juliet &L Clair; you think to please her, by turning me out; but you know you don't like her, no more than any body else ? and I heard you say she was as old and as ugly as sin, when she was stript of her false hair, and her paint and patches—you know you did; and lady Rutland heard you too." The anger of the queen beggared all description, and she became so ill, that her attendants were alarmed for her life; by degrees, however, the violence of her disorder subsided, and she reco- 14 vered,
vered, though but slowly. Her first orders were for the exclusion of the royal family from her presence for ever; she even refused to see the princess Jane before she departed to Scotland; and de¬ sired the nurse who brought the infant prince to her antichamber to be turned out without ceremony. In the mean time Ella had recovered from her fainting fit, and a skilful leech had set the fractured limb, and enter^ tained hopes of her speedy recovery. The princess Isabella was severely tasked by her governess, the countess of Ilches¬ ter; but the health of the young queen rendered it requisite that she should re* main in ignorance of the princess's un* pardonable offence for some time.
V'JO,**.*'^
CHAPTER XII.
<* *Tis now the raven's bleak abode. Perhaps in some lone dreary desert tower That time had sparVi, forth from the window lookt, Ha)f-hitr ir. grass, the solitary fox. Tts the wizard's tower V f 49 1 have stolen to your chamber at last, dear Ella di Montimar," said the prin¬ cess Isabella ; " and don't think it was my fault that I did not come sooner, for it was all through the ill-natured countess of Ilchester; she would not let me see you, to punish me for being rude to the queen dowager; but now I have obtain¬ ed permission to sit with you as long as you will suffer me; so tell me what I shall say, or do, to amuse you." i 5 ** Your
" Your Iiighness is very good," replied Ella. " Oh, I entreat you do not say so, for I am sure I can never be sufficiently grateful td you for Saving ftiy life, and all the pain you suffer now on my ac¬ count ; even my cross governess admits that if that nasty vile stool had hit my head, it would have killed me; only think, Ella, what a shocking thing! but do tell me how I can amuse you, and is your arm very painful?" " No, indeed, the pain is slight; and the happiness of having served your royal highness would reconcile tne to it, if it were infinitely worse*" ** Ah* dear Ella, my mother always said you were the best, as well as the handsomest lady about the court; and she said, a few days ago, she wished the queen dowager would allow her to re¬ ceive you into her service, and she would place you in the suite of the princess Jane. I wish I was a fairy, and I would %
9y away with you, and always keep you to myself; but when I am a queen, you shall certainly be my first lady of ho* nour^will you not?" * Most assuredly, if your royal high¬ ness does not forget me," " Ah, now that is unkind! how can 1 forget that I live, and that I owe my life to Ella di Montimar? no, no, I shall never forget you. But will you promise me that you will accompany rae if I go abroad?" ** As far as I am at liberty to promise* I eertainly will." * f You wont forget?" said the prin¬ cess, archly. ** No, upon my honour." ** Now you are very good; but let me do something to divert you." ** Your royal highness cannot amuse and gratify me more highly, than by speaking of the young prince your bro¬ ther." This was a theme on which the prin- i 6 ces&
cess could be eloquent, and she <#*1tl- nued happily busied by the side of Ella till evening.. , . During the whote time of Ella's com finement,the queen dowager had never sent to inquire for her; but as soon as the ydUng queen heard of the, misfor¬ tune that had befallen her, she sent fre* queritly, and as soon as etiquette would permit, visited her in person, and con¬ descended to thank her for the service she had done to the princess, and pre¬ sented her with a costly suit of pearls, saying she hoped the queen dowager would, after the injury she had borne, suffer her to retire from her service**— " And then,'* she added, " I should find means to testify the sense I have of the obligation we all owe you; but however desirable such an event may be, we must not, my dear young lady, propose such, a measure, as I am persuaded it would. be ineffectual, and only widen the breach between
t>etween us; the proposition must come froqn her majesty, and not from us." Ella felt the truth of the queen's ob¬ servation, and from what she ktiew of Elinor, she was too certain that there was little to hope from her. ** But for fear of irritating the queen dowager," continued her majesty, ** I should have granted the request of Isa¬ bella, and have requested you to become a sponsor for the little prince Richard; yet as I am sure it would be construed into an alfront to her, for your sake, as well as our own, I am reluctantly ob¬ liged to relinquish the idea," Ella returned her acknowledgment to the queen for the high honour intended her, and readily acquiesced in the pro¬ priety of giving it up, on the queen dowager's account. " But Isabella," said the queen, smi¬ ling, ** has obtained your promise of be¬ ing her first lady of honour; and when your engagement with her grandmother is
is terminated, either by her,death* <ot permission tp retii'e, we shall keep yoti to your word." The young queen of Scotland alio visited Ella before she left England, and presented her with a diamond cross of great value, assuring her she should al¬ ways feel happy to have an opportunity of serving her. The princess Elinor, by her mother's permission, begged her acceptance of an extremely valuable ring; and the de¬ lighted Isabella gave to her dear Ella di Montimar a miniature of herself, su<- perbly set with diamonds* ~ " Every time you look at this," said she, u you will have the satisfaction of thinking ' 1 saved the life of this little princess." How gratifying to the susceptible heart of Ella were all these instances of affectionate attention! and she longed to communicate them to her valued friend the countess of Caerphilly. In the mean time, though quite con¬ valescent
vakscent, she received no summons from her royal mistress, and she dared not trnmL to intrude into her presence uncalled. She had sent to lady Oxford, to inform her that she was perfectly re¬ covered from her accident, and was ready to attend the pleasure of the queen. Lady Oxford promised to de¬ liver her message, but no answer had been vouchsafed her, though some days had passed, and she continued in a state of incertitude, from which she was at length relieved by the appearance of the countess of Pembroke, who came to signify the pleasure of the queen dow¬ ager. ** I am here on a flying visit, my dear Ella," said lady Pembroke* " and I am to have the happiness of taking you back with me to Longholm Castle, by the queen's permission." " By the queen's permission, madam ?" " Yes; and surely, my dear girl, you will not be sorry to leave the *court for a short
a short time: your time, God knows, has been fully employed since ypu have been about her majesty; a H|tle relaxa¬ tion is absolutely necessary for.the reco¬ very of your health and spirits." " Does her majesty intend me a little relaxation only then ?" " Certainly, nothing more; so I pray you, fair damsel, do not imagine you are sent into banishment, and that Long¬ holm Castle is to be your prison, and lady Pembroke your gaoler; but use all the dispatch in your power, for early in the morning we shall depart" " But will not the queen dowager admit me into her presence before I go, if this is really not a banishment ? w " Her majesty is indisposed, and will dispense with the ceremony of leave- taking." Ella was persuaded that the queen had sent her into a temporary exile, but her motive for doing so she could not fathom. She immediately set about the necessary
necessary arrangements for her journey, glad to escape for a short time from bondage; but if her choice had been consulted, she would have preferred (not¬ withstanding her friendship for lady Ma¬ tilda Marsham), going to Fauconbridge to visit her earliest friend, the countess of Caerphilly. EPa received permission to pay her respects to the young queen before her departure, and the princesses both em¬ braced her tenderly at pariin^; and lo¬ belia enjoined her to remember, that whenever she was at liberty, she should claim her promise. Lady Pembroke summoned our he¬ roine at an early hour; and every ar¬ rangement being previously settled, Ella mounted her horse, and accompanied by her ladyship, and, a long train of attend¬ ants, she left the court. «* The earl," said lady Pembroke, ** will follow us to Longholm in a few days^
days. I think you were a great fa*. vourite of his ?*' ** The earl did me the honour to no¬ tice me sometimes, madam; and ladv Matilda was extremely kind/* " Ah! I remember I was charged to deliver divers compliments and greetings to you from Matilda; she will rejoice to see you return with me; it will be an unexpected pleasure to her." " Ah! I anticipate much happiness in this visit; but I fear it is an exile from the presence of the queen." *' To confess the truth, Ella, her ma¬ jesty commanded me to court, oq pur* pose to take you to Longhdim, for an indefinite period, but expressly on the plea of care for your health. Do you know how you h^ve offended her?" " No, really, madam." Lady Pembroke repeated the mme that passed in the queen's chamber du¬ ring her insensibility, pf which £11* had hitherto remained ignorant, and she re¬ collected
collected that her frequent interviews with the royal family since her recovery^ and particularly of the incorrigible prin¬ cess Isabella, and the many presents she had received from them, all of which, without doubt, had been reported to the queen dowager, had incensed her mis* tress, and procured her the pleasure of a visit to Longholm Castle; and her re¬ grets at quitting the court were lessened, by the idea that the queen dowager would have again forbid all intercourse with the rest of the royal family, as she had shut them out from her apartments^ and consequently she would have been again an. isolated being, in the midst of her attached friends. A long and fatiguing journey of six dfcys brought the travellers to Longholm Castle, a magnificent pile of Gothic ar- chitecture,whose first appearance bespoke the weajtb of its pwnen it was strong¬ ly fettified, and a bold level plain ex¬ tended along the front to some distance; the
the other sides of the building were adorned with thick spreading forest trees, whose lofty heads vainly strove to o'er- top its massy towers: a little to the left rose the spires of a monastery of Bene¬ dictines, and on the right appeared, among the clustering trees, one solitary tower. The season was far advanced, and the fallen leaf strewed the pathway; but enough of beauty remained to har¬ monize with the ideas of Ella, and shfc hailed thg turrets of Langholm with unfeigned pleasure after her toilsome journey. Lady Matilda welcomed her friend with delight, and Ella returned her em* brace with equal sincerity; Victoria had teen very dull since her mother's depar¬ ture ; she expected some promised gifts from London, and she was therefore happy to see iier return. The first few days of our heroine's visit passed pleasantly: she felt a sincere regard for Matilda, and she enjoyed her society,
society. Lady Pembroke was uniform¬ ly kind to her, and indulged thern in frequent rides and walks, whenever the weather permitted them to leave the castle. But the arrival of the earl interrupted this calm; lord Marsham came with him, and he treated Ella with his usual kindness; none save herself noted the quivering pallid lip of Pembroke when he saluted her, and she secretly resolved to seek a private interview with him, to inquire if he knew aught of Erie, and if, as she suspected, he was allied to lady Gertrude di Montimar; but no favour¬ able opportunity presented itself, and she ut length became convinced that the earl purposely avoided her, or, in an interval of some wteeks, she would cer¬ tainly have met him by accident, even if she had not sedulously watched to catch one moment's audience. So intent was Ella on her project of bringing the earl of Pembroke to an eclaircissement,
eclaircissement, that she did not at first observe the altered manner of the coun¬ tess, nor until repeated instances of her ill humour, amounting almost to insults, obliged her to remark it; her surprise and concern was excessive, and she vainly tried to develop her motives; but even from this her attention was diverted by an occurrence of a singular and interesting nature. It happened that Ella and lady Ma¬ tilda, as was their frequent custom, were walking unaccompanied on the platform of the castle, that overlooked the forest to the right—■*' I have often," said Ella, " remarked that lonely tower; pray tell me, lady Matilda, to whom does it be¬ long ?" " I would willingly gratify your cu T riosity," replied the Jady, " but that I also have made many fruitless inquiries relative to it; all I have been able to collect is, that it is called the Wizard's Tower, and is the only regaining paj& of
of a noble castle, which was destroyed during the troubles in the latter part of the reign of Henry the Second; it is an angular tower, and supposed to be one of many that formed the outward bulwark of a strongly-fortified castle; it is in a wretched dilapidated state, nevertheless it is said to be inhabited or haunted by some unquiet spirit, and frequent lights have been seen in the building. Look, even now a flame plays on the turret!" At that moment something fell at the feet of Ella, and she stooped to pick it up, and perceived an arrow, to which was fastened a small billet.—*' For whom can this be intended?" said Ella, as she untwisted the paper; the shades of evening prevented their deciphering the characters, and the two friends a- greed to return to the chamber of lady Matilda, where Ella cautiously unfolded the mysterious billet. She uttered a cry of joy the moment she saw the well- known characters.—" It is for me! It is V
is mine!'* she cried, and pressed the paper with transport to her lips—*' Oh God! I thank thee for this ;* she added, and the tears flowed plenteousiy down her cheeks. "Happy Ella!" said lady Matilda: " you love, and are beloved; for me, I have no choice but a cloister." " You mistake, dear lady Matilda, the nature of the affection that subsists between me and the beloved writer of this;*'and she presented to her the billet, and lady Matilda read as follows;— " Should the dear being for whom this is meant receive it, she will meet me at the little thicket, near the east postern, to-morrow night, where I will seek her as the moon rises. " Eaic."
Ella read the billet; she dwelt on every
every word, and yet she scarcely dared trust the evidence of her senses; it was the dearest wish of her heart to deve¬ lop the mystery that had involved her beloved brother, but she was obliged to moderate her joy, and attend lady Ma¬ tilda to the saloon, where the family were assembled to their evening repast. *' We have waited for you," said lady Pembroke, sullenly, as they took their seats at the supper-table. The earl eat little, and as was his cus¬ tom, appeared thoughtful; at length he addressed lady Pembroke.—" The lands and estates of your niece, my lady, will, I think, devolve on your children, in the event of her taking the veil?" ** Yes, my lord ; and they are valu¬ able." * s I guessed as much; but are you sure no arguments have been used, no de¬ ceptions practised, to lure a young and blooming female, who is the heiress of vol. i. k such
such wealth, to quit the world? Are you certain, lady, that it is her free, un¬ biased choice ?" " Oil! very certain, my lord." " Mark me, madam. I would not have it whispered, that we had urged Rosa Montague to take the veil against her inclination." " Rosa Montague of St. Margaret's ?" asked Ella. * e * Ay, Ella di Montimar; do you know her ?" said the lady sharply. " Oh yes, lady; and you are much deceived: Rosa will not long survive, if she is forced to take the veil: I have heard her lament with bitterness the se¬ verity of her destiny, and a thousand times declare her death would be the consequence, if she were forced from the world for ever: indeed I speak truth." " I believe it, young lady," said the earl; " and I will myself see Rosa Montague,
Montagqe, ere any farther steps are taken in this business." Xne m(ly ojjOnc nuij uui. uunu^ net speech to the earl, she regarded Ella with a look of malignity; and after the usual salutations of the night had pass¬ ed, each retired to their respective cham¬ bers—Ella to think on Eric, and won¬ der at the strangeness of their fates. Ella had related to Matilda the chief events of her life, but she spoke of the duke of Monmouth only as the son of her dear countess, and no one could trace in the account she gave of hib services more than the effusions of a grateful heart. Yet had that heart often whispered that Monmouth loved her, and if his affection was sanctioned by his mother, she should one day become the happiest of human beings; and the general tenour of her beloved friend's behaviour warranted the cherished dream of blissful futurity.
K 2 CHAP-
CHAPTER XIII.
Strive not, Linconoc, to pry Into the ferret will of fate ; Nor iinpio 1 tragic vainly try To know our It*«t» uncertain date; Whether the indulgent Power divine Hath many seasons yet in store, Or thi-s the latent winter thine, Which breaks its. waves against the shore. Franei$*$ Horace. Matilda's woman had procured a key of the postern: Matilda herself pro¬ mised to excuse Ella from joining the supper-table, and with a palpitating heart our heroine ventured forth unat¬ tended into the forest; no consideration but that which now directed her steps could have induced her to do so; but the dear hope of meeting Eric, her ten¬ derly-beloved brother, the only being on earth
earth with whom she could without a blush claim affinity—the kind play¬ fellow of her infancy, he who had shared with her the affection of lady Gertrude, their mother —could any thing short of positive danger deter her from keeping the appointment he had made? Yet she trembled at every step, and an un¬ defined dread of lady Pembroke haunt¬ ed her imagination; she had perceived the eye of her ladyship fixed on her with a scrutinizing look more than once during the day. Was it possible she knew of her appointment with Eric ? her manner too had been restless and abstracted, particularly after dinner, and Ella even fancied she had watched her features, to discover the latent secret that occupied her thoughts. Such were the reflections of Ella when she reached the thicket; but they were soon forgotten in the embrace of Erie, who waited her arrival, K 3 " My
** My dear sister, my beloved Ella !* he murmured. - " Eric, my brother! my dearest bro¬ ther!" she cried. " This is happiness in¬ deed! this repays the many anxious fearsi I cherished for you." ** Ah l my sister, ours is a wayward fate; bitt'I have much to learn from you, dear Ella;'* and he passed her arm through his, and walked slowly onward. Ella related the strange events that had befallen her since she left Caerphilly, to all of which, save the death of lady Gertrude, and 4he absence of herself from Caerphilly, Eric was an entire stranger* He listened with wrapt at¬ tention to her narrative; he loved lady Fauconbridge for her kind hospitality, and admired the warmth and bravery of *Philip; became mute with surprise as he learned their affinity to lady Ger¬ trude and the king; and wondered at the conduct of the monk Adolphe: Ella concluded by declaring, that she was in some
some sort a state prisoner, under the charge of lady Pembroke. The tale of Eric was less diversified : he had been interrupted in his journey, when he bore the mandate of lady Ger¬ trude to the earl of Pembroke, and was conducted by the banditti, who rifled his person, to their place of resort; and after suffering a confinement of many months, was liberated by a priest, who opened his prison doors, and procured him the means of escape. " There was one circumstance," con¬ tinued Eric, " that tended greatly to soften my captivity. Every day, at a certain hour, I beheld, through the grat¬ ed window of my cell, the sweet vision of a beautiful girl, exceedingly young and fair; the airy lightness of her tread, the seraph smile that played about her lovely mouth, and the heavenly purity of her form, have left me still in doubt if she were mortal or not. Ella, imagination cannot paint any thing so angelic as k 4 that
that soft and lovely girl; I would I knew where on earth she now inhabits, and what she is." The monk who released Eric treated him with singular kindness, he convey¬ ed him to the monastery near Longholm, where the friendly monk fell ill, and Eric watched by his sick couch during a long and protracted affliction; the greater part of the time he was insensi¬ ble to the devoted attention of his young friend; at length he recovered the use of his intellects, and gradually his exhaust¬ ed strength,—" He is now quite well, and purposes journeying to France on business of importance: he has," conti¬ nued Eric, " often enjoined me, under pain of his displeasure, not to approach Longholm Castle; but it chanced one day, in my strolls around the monastery, that I saw you, dear Ella, accompanied by several ladies on horseback, and I dis¬ covered that you were an inhabitant of the
the castle, and 1 devised the means you already know to obtain this interview." Thus ended the tale of Eric, and the youthful pair walked forward, unwitting how the hours passed, in the innocent communion of fraternal affection. < Ella stumbled against a huge stone— t€ Whither have we wandered,*Eric?" she said. " Let us return, Ella; it is the Wi¬ zard's Tower; do you mark the flame that burns on its turret? anon it will disappear, and then again burn brighter; I have often watched it, Let us return." Ella paused to observe it, when Eric whispered— w Let us retire behind yon buttress—some one approaches." Ella obeyed, and they were scarcely concealed when two figures passed them, and the voice of lady Pembroke broke on the as¬ tonished ear of our heroine: she pressed closer to Eric, and scarcely breathed, lest her ladyship should discover her. k 5 "I can
" I can go no further," said lady Pem¬ broke. " The tower," answered a harsh dis¬ cordant voice* " I will not enter it." " Why then came you hither ?" " To learn my fate; I cannot exist under this suspense-—this girl! this Ella! Report has spoken of your power to read futurity; give me proof, by refe¬ rence to the past." " Listen!" said the stranger. " No star shone in the heavens when the heiress of Rayo stole from the couch of her lover, and the surges that lave the foot of the mount have blanched the hemes of her first-born son." " Enough !*' cried lady Pembroke: " speak now of Ella di Montimar." " pi Montimar!" shrieked the sibyl in a tone of wild agony that thrilled to the inmost soul of Ella, and she clung to the arm of her brother in wild dismay. " Go on," said lady Pembroke, after a pause,
pause, her voice less. firm than usual; ** tell me the secret of her fate." " Oh! thou high Power whom I have oft abjured, hear—yet hear me! Pour down on her innocent head the blessing I have forfeited; strew her path with peace! give her the object of her love; and oh, may her departed father's vir¬ tues shield her from his unhappy fate!" •' Why dost thou breathe a prayer foi her?" asked the lady. * Did I pray for her? Then I did well." € * Strange being! But you spoke of her father; where is he ?" " Yonder !" cried the sibyl, pointing upwards; " where thou nor 1 shall ever enter." " He is dead then: sajr what is there in this girl, that can excite even the apathetic Pembroke to a show of feel¬ ing, and melt the obdurate heart of Adolphe?" " Take this seal," said the sibyl, "and k 6 mark
mark the unsteady lip of Pembroke when he looks on this. Ask him, who owned it, and he will tell you the mur¬ dered Di Montimar. Ask yet again, whose hand gave the d^thblow ? Per¬ chance he will not tell, though I well know he could;" and she uttered a hol¬ low laugh. *' Then say thou thus— Hipolita still lives, and vengeance sleeps not! Look on the flame that illumes yon turret top. It doth betoken death to the house of Pembroke /" *' Ah \ to whom ?" cried the lady eager* ly; but the being she addressed was gone.—" Is this real, or do I dream ? Yet I hold the seal, and I will try its poorer to blanch the cheek of Pems broke ;** and thus saying, the lady drew her cloak closely around her, and turned towards Longholm, with slow and mea« sured steps. Eric had sustained the almost fainting Ella on his bosom during the latter part of the preceding dialogue, and after the departure
departure of lady Pembroke, he led her forward, and strove to cheer her. " The secret of our destiny is in the possession of that mysterious being," said Eric, " and this chance lost to elu¬ cidate the mystery of our fate, we may remain in ignorance for years; therefore, I jvili enter the tower, and seek an ex¬ planation of its strange inhabitant." '* Ah! no, dearest Eric, do not ven¬ ture there; surely there is something unholy about that gloomy woman : or, if you will enter the Wizard's Tower, I will, at least, accompany you," * e To-morrow night then, at this hour, we will together seek to solve this strange secret:" and Eric having con¬ ducted his sister safe to the postern, em¬ braced hei 4 , and bade a hasty adieu; and again renewing his assignation of the following night, he departed for the monastery, and Ella reached the cham¬ ber of lady Matilda unobserved. " I have expected you very long, my dear
£06 MYSTERIOUS MONK. dear Ella," said Matilda, " and I am very glad you are come at last, for that forest is a horrid wild place, and the flame has burned constantly on the Wi¬ zard's Tower. Were you hot frighten¬ ed? Ah! you look pale; are you not well? " I am fatigued," said Ella, ** and must beg your indulgence till to-mor¬ row, for my adventures are long to tell. Has my absence been discovered ?" " No; my mother was herself con¬ fined to her chamber with a cold, and your absence was unnoticed. But you look really unwell, my dear Ella, so I entreat you retire;" and the young friends embraced, and separated for the night; Matilda to sleep—Ella to ruminate on all she had heard and seen in the course of this eventful evening. The narrative of Eric was almost ob¬ literated by the succeeding events*: the wonderful inhabitant of the Wizards Tower engrossed the greater portion of her
her thoughts: her words were of strange and astonishing import; the meaning of her first address she could not under¬ stand, but lady Pembroke appeared to comprehend her entirely. She was her¬ self become an object of hatred or jea¬ lousy to her ladyship, yet she was igno¬ rant by what means: and again, she spoke of the monk Adolphe. What couV» he be to lady Pembroke, or lady Pembroke to him ? 'Twas passing strange. The sibyl spoke of Monti¬ mar as her father, and confidently ac¬ cused the earl of Pembroke of his mur* der. This certainly would account for the emotion he had betrayed on first hearing her name, and his subsequent questions: but who would dare to che¬ rish such a suspicion of one of the first noblemen of the realm ? But she de¬ termined to watch his looks, if lady Pembroke gave him the sibyl's seal in her presence. She then thought of the purposed expedition of the next night, and
208 MYSTERIOUS* MONK. and hoped there was little danger to be encountered, as the dark tenant of the Wizard's Tower appeared favourably disposed towards her: she looked up, and beheld the blue flame burning on the turret, and sighed as she thought of the prediction the sibyl had uttered— *' It doth betoken death to the house of Pembroke;" she breathed a prayer for the safety of her friend, lady Matilda; hoped lord Marsham was not the mark¬ ed victim, and,that Pembroke's, life might be lengthened, if he were guilty, to allow him time for penitence—if in¬ nocent, for the sake of his country. The family met at breakfast; and the disturbed air of lady Pembroke did not escape the observation of Ella, who watched, with trembling apprehension, the production of the seal. " Perhaps," thought Ella, " she will not present it in my presence; perhaps, some time hence, or it may be, not at all." At length her expectations were raised to their utmost pitch,
pitch, by the address of her ladyship, who turning to her lord, said—" You are a judge of antiques, my lord—what think you of this ring ?" The earl glanced his eye on the ring, but the instant he saw it, he exclaimed*— " Oh God! it is the signet of the mur¬ dered Di Montimar!" and rushed out of the saloon. Ella gasped for breath, and but for lord Marsham would have fallen from her seat. " What ails you.Ella ?" said lady Pem¬ broke, whose quivering lip bespoke her own agitation. " Why are you thus?— Lead her hence, Matilda; she is ill. Note not the random exclamations of vour father; 'tis an infirmity that sometimes affects him when fie is troubled with state affairs.** The impression this incident made on Ella was not to be thus easily effaced; there was that in the person and man¬ ner of earl Pembroke that had ob¬ tained
tained her involuntary esteem; and she was shocked beyond description, to find her worst conjectures verified by his ex¬ treme agitation, when he looked on the ring. And was that the signet ring of her father ? and was lord Pembroke his murderer? and must she communicate this to Eric? She felt an instinctive reluctance; and distressed and wavering, she remained till the hour of the even¬ ing appointment. She passed the postern, as before; and at the place of appointment she met, not Eric, but a lay brother from the monastery: he presented a note to ex¬ cuse Eric's absence, and Ella put it care¬ fully in her bosom, and again prepared to return to the castle. She had already p**t the key into the lock, when she found herself suddenly seized, and com¬ pletely enveloped in a large heavy cloak, and borne along with rapidity, she knew not whither, nor could imagine by whom.
CHAP-
CHAPTER XIV.
There ti more passing between heaven and earth Than is dreamt of in yo ir philosophy, Horatio. Hamlet, So closely enwrapped was the unfortu¬ nate Ella, that she was nearly suffocated. At length the wretch who bore her stop¬ ped, the cloak was withdrawn, and she distinguished by the pale moonlight, and the blue flame on the turret, the Wizard's Tower. She had no time to reflect on the strangeness of this adven¬ ture, ere the man who held her with Herculean grasp, conveyed her up the winding staircase to a small chamber, rudely furnished, and lighted by a glim¬ mering lamp, whose last ray was ex¬ piring in the socket, and its momentary flashes
flashes gave an indefinable horror to the appearance of the narrow room. " Oh God!" cried Elk, " why am I brought hither?" w Patience, sweet one," said the man, whose figure alone (and that appeared gigantic) the uncertain light permitted her to develop; "don't be impatient;" and he proceeded to fasten the door. The terrified girl sprung towards him, yainly attempting to gain the top of the stairs; but the man prevented her, and at the same time clasped her rudely round the waist. " Oh, for pity's sake, suffer me to de¬ part!" she cried, as she struggled in his strong grasp; " let me go, I conjure you! oh, in mercy do not detain me! indeed, indeed, I must be set at liberty* —Oh, my God! what will become of me? —On my knees I implore your compas¬ sion !** " Be quiet," cried her brutal assailant, " or you will fare worse; all this noise and
and fuss will do no good; you may be sure I did not take the trouble to bring you here for nothing;" and he dragged her towards a broken couch that stood in the corner of the room. Ella resisted with all her might, but her efforts were as nothing compared to the powerful force of the ruffian, who threw her on the couch with the ease he would have done an infant; just then the last faint gleam of the lamp expired, and left them in complete dark¬ ness. Ella sprung from the couch, and tried to elude the pursuit of her tormentor; but to escape was vain, and again she trembled in his grasp, and again she shrieked for aid; but no aid was near: the tower was high, and her cries were lost in air; there was little chance that any daring footstep would wander near its base at that late hour; and the frantic Ella groped around her for some instru¬ ment
ment of death, to save her from the dreadful fate that awaited her. " Come, come," cried the ruffian, " here is enough of this nonsense. You may as well yield quietly—I can pro¬ mise you it will serve your turn all the better." " Oh, kill me rather, and I will call it mercy i" cried the fainting girl.-—'* Hark! I heard a step! some one comes—ah, see the light gleaming beneath the door!" The wretch relaxed his hold, and Ella sunk on her knees—-her existence de¬ pended on the being who approached; and who was that being ? an associate, most probably, and companion in wick¬ edness. But the reprieve of one minute might furnish the means of escape or death, and one last ray of hope glim¬ mered in the torn heart of the perse¬ cuted girl. The intruder tapped at the door, and in a harsh voice called^-" Gio¬ vani !" Ella
Ella clasped her hands in agony; the ruffian advanced to the door; she gasped for breath while he drew back the lock, and her aching eyes rested'on the form of a woman; she uttered a piercing cry, and sunk insensible on the floor. On recovering her senses, she found herself alone with the female: the ruf¬ fian Giovani had retired, and a lamp burned on the table. It was some time before she became perfectly conscious of her situation, when her first effort was to implore the compassion and assistance of the being who, with some show of humanity, supported her. "Who are you?" said the female; and Ella recognised the liarsh voice of the sibyl; ** whence came you ? and why are you here ?" <f I am Ella di Montimar: save me from that horrid man! If you did in¬ deed know my father, for his sake I im¬ plore you save me!" '* If I knew him!" muttered the sibvi;
and after a pause, she said—" But where¬ fore did you come hither?" " Alas! against my will he dragged me here, for some horrid purpose; but will you not protect me?" * s Be at peace—you are safe," u And may I return to Longholm ?" " Are you sufficiently recovered to walk without assistance?" " Oh yes, I am quite strong." '* Then follow me," said the sibyl; and she took the lamp, and preceded Ella down the stairs of the tower. Hurried as had been her entrance into the Wizard's Tower, Ella still retained sufficient recollection to be surprised, on reaching the termination of the winding stairs, to see her conductress stoop, and lift a trap-door, beyond which there ap¬ peared a further descent; and though she doubted, yet she dared not question, or delay to follow the sibyl through the trap-door. At length they came to the bottom of this new descent, and then she
she turned, and addressed Ella—" Will you rest here, or will you on ?" '* I can go on yet," meekly replied Ella; and her conductress led the way. Their way lay through a gloomy sub- terrean, whose damp atmosphere op¬ pressed the already sinking spirits of Ella, and only once she essayed to ad¬ dress her companion, but even then the words died on her lips, and she followed in silence. They proceeded thus for nearly a quarter of a mile (the way was long to our fatigued heroine), when they came to a door; the sibyl drew a key from her vest and unlocked it, and again they ascended. At the top of this staircase a second door presented itself which she opened in a similar manner; and Ella, to her infinite joy and surprise, found herself in the picture-gallery of Long- holm Castle. She turned to thank her conductress, who placed her finger sig* nificantly on her lip, and said—" Secrecy vol. L x. or
or death!" and receded through the door by which they had entered the gallery, ere Ella could speak her acknowledg¬ ments. She gazed on the door with a vacant eye, and thick-coming fancies had nearly overpowered her tottering reason; but withal she felt an assurance of safety excessive fatigue, no longer combated by impending danger, now subdued her, and she sunk into a friendly seat, a re-, cess in the wall afforded, entirely un¬ conscious of ail around, How long Ella continued in this im¬ becile state is uncertain; but she was at last aroused by the mention of her nape, accompanied by the following words, spoken by lady Pembroke—" What is this solicitude for Ella di Montimar, and whence does it arise ? is it. love ? are the affections that were wholly mine transferred to another? can Adolphe love so fondly, so madly again ?" « Why do you torture me with those bitter
bitter recollections, lady ?" said a voice which Ella recognised for that of Adol¬ phe—the faint moonbeams only gave an indistinct outline of two figures. " Stay," cried the lady, *' yet stay, dearest Adolphe; leave me not thus; I cannot bear your scorn. Oh! I adjure you by our former loves, by all the guilt our headlong passions gendered, oh ! do not cast mc thus away! let me live in your heart, if but as one you have loved. Ah, Adolphe, ever beloved, your image still lives in mine." " Hellena, cease to talk thus idly; ex¬ piate thy crimes by penitence and prayer, and remember thy marriage vow to Pembroke. I have suffered, but it is past; and your blandishments no longer have power to move me—you are the wife of another." Ella heard no more, but as soon as she could quit the gallery without being observed, she descended a back staircase, and reached her own chamber, where, l 2 overcome
overcome by fatigue and contending emotion* she hastily undressed, and re¬ tired to bed. The extreme agitation of Ella pre¬ vented her from recurring to the note of Eric; on the following morning she opened it, and read as follows: " DEAREST ELLA, " My absence from the monas¬ tery last night was reported to father Leopold, who is so seriously displeased, and has so peremptorily forbid my leav¬ ing this again without his permission, that I am compelled to send this to my dear sister by a lay brother, to entreat her excuses. " Eric/* Even this note afforded matter for re¬ flection, and Ella was disposed to medi¬ tation, and she thought on the various occurrences
occurrences of the preceding night with equal dread and astonishment. The easy communication between the Wizard's Tower and the castle was the subject that most distressed her, because she was undecided how to act; the parting words of the sibyl implied a threat, if she discovered that there existed such an entrance to Longholm: but ought lord Pembroke to remain ignorant of a circumstance of so much importance? Yet the earl was her enemy—he was the murderer of her lather; the sibyl had proved herself her friend, and by a discovery she would inevitably expose Iierself to her vengeance. These meditations were interrupted by the entrance of Matilda. Ella had often of late observed that some secret preyed on her spirits, and that she was frequently on the eve of unburthening her mind to her, but appeared ever to be held back by some latent cause; but tliis morning her depression was so mark- i. 3 ed,
ed, that our heroine could not forbear offering her condolence. The feelings of Matilda were acute, and the tender tone of Ella struck on the very chord of her heart that had been most severely pressed; she could not resist her kind¬ ness, and after giving way to her tears, until she was in some degree relieved, she prefaced her narrative by several ex¬ cuses for having so long deferred re¬ posing an entire confidence in Ella, the nature of which her story will probably suggest. " It is about ten months since my mother engaged an attendant to wait on me, named Nina, a girl of most insinu¬ ating address and refined manners; in¬ deed so very superior to any domestic we had ever entertained, that 1 found it difficult to treat her as 1 had done the maiden who had heretofore waited on me; there was besides an interesting melancholy in the air of Nina, that prompted me to commiserate her situa¬ tion.
tion. I imagined that she was unhappy by being reduced to servitude, as it ap¬ peared so obvious that she had moved in a superior station, and I tendered her many kindnesses; in short, we were more like friends than any thing else; and at length I learnt in confidence that the chief cause of Nina's sorrows was love. It was long ere she spoke of her love, but once the tale told, it became the constant theme of our conversation, and I insensibly became almost as inte¬ rested in it as Nina. She talked of the object of her love as the most fascina¬ ting of mankind, repeated a thousand times every grace of his person and mind, aud many instances of his genero¬ sity and courage, his manly intrepidity, and the kindness of his heart He had become a favourite at court, nnd every tongue, as well as Nina*s, was loud in his praise. Wonder not therefore, dear Ella, that I listened until 1 became un¬ consciously involved in a passion for L 4 Monmouth;
Monmouth: you have seen him, and from your intimate knowledge of his family, best can tell how truly he de¬ serves to be beloved." Ella's lips moved, but she spoke not, and Matilda continued:—** The death of a relative occasioned the removal of Nina, and I was left without any one to whom I could talk of Monmouth; but he was the constant object of my meditations, and I cherished his idea with tender solicitude; yet I knew not, did not imagine, that I loved; I be¬ lieved that every person entertained the same sentiments, the same unbounded admiration for him; he was spoken of with enthusiasm, and I could not be aware that mine was nothing more than any stranger equally noble would have elicited, How I was aroused from this delusion is so strange, so passing belief that to you alone, dear Ella, I dare ven¬ ture to confide it; you will not doubt my veracity, and subsequent circum¬ stances
stances have convinced me the objects of my terror are not ideal " You remember, Ella, that we left the court soon after the duke of Mon¬ mouth departed for France, and came immediately to Longholm Castle. A few nights after our arrival here, I had retired to bed at my usual hour, and dismissed my woman; how long I had been asleep I am not aware, but I was awoke by a soft low strain of music, un¬ like any I had ever heard, and on opening my eyes, I beheld a female standing by my bedside; her habiliments were black, and her raven locks, that hung in wild profusion about her shoulders, contrasted forcibly the livid paleness of her face and bosom, and her full eye glared on me with an expression never to be for¬ gotten : in her right hand she held a lamp, and with the left, bare to the shoulder, she pointed to the opposite side of the room. My eye involunta¬ rily followed the direction, when I saw h 5 —ok
—oh, Ella, my heart yet chills at the recollection—traced in characters of liv¬ ing fire, these memorable words— *■' Mon¬ mouth loves another, and a fairer maid than Matilda' " I shrunk from the contemplation of this terrific scene, and when, almost wrought up to desperation, I ventured again to look up, all was darkness. I endeavoured to persuade myself it was but a dream, yet it brought the sad conviction to my heart, that I had in¬ deed dared to love; and from that mo¬ ment I tried, by every effort, to erase the impression of his idea from my mind; and I have at least so far suc¬ ceeded, as to form a plan of happiness for him in which I shall hear no part. You, my dearest Ella, are the most perfect being I have ever known, and the only one my partial fancy confesses deserving the affection of Monmouth, and this idea has grown into a sincere wish to see my beloved friend his bride. He will never know
know the affection I have borne him, for to 3/ou alone, and my nocturnal visi¬ tant, is my weakness known; but I have found it hard to be subdued. Other sorrows press heavily upon me, and my first wish is now to retire into a convent. I am conscious that I can never become an object of affection, and no ono shall wed the deformed daughter of earl Pem¬ broke for her dower. Let me only live in your remembrance, my dear Ella, my chosen friend, and promise me that, however fate may divide us, you will always love and think with tenderness on Matilda Marsham." " Readily, dearest Matilda, do I pro¬ mise what my heart so warmly se¬ conds." " Then am I your friend for ever, and you are mine." ** So will I ever deserve this kind en¬ dearing confidence, and the proudest boast of Ella di Montimar shall be the friendship of lady Matilda Marsham f l 6 and
and the youthful pair shed tears of sin¬ cere affection in each other's embrace.
CHAPTER XV.
'* Can storied urn, or imimateti bust, Back to its mansion call tS.e fleetiisg breath r Can Honour's voice provoke the silent dust? Or Flattery sooth the du!! cold ear of death V* «' Whither wouldst thou lead me? speak! V{\ go no further." " The impression of that dreadful night," continued Matilda, " is deeply graven on my memory; but your arrival with my mother, so unexpected and so de¬ sired, afforded me some resource, when again the vision of that night returned —again the ghastly figure stood beside my bed, and again she pointed to a flaming scroll, and I read these horrid words—
words — * Daughter of a murderer, vengeance hovers over thy devoted house? Oh, Ella! I marked your livid cheek and trembling lip when Pembroke spoke of the murdered Di Montimar. There is a secret, but I do not ask you for it; the knowledge would only increase my grief, and judge if that is needful? Last night I waited your return in vain, but after I had retired, Maud brought me word that you were in your cham¬ ber, and I composed myself to sleep. The dreaded sounds of that low music, the usual harbinger of my nocturnal visitant, broke my slumbers, and I awoke to be initiated in fresh miseries. My eye rested on the loathed form beside me, her outstretched finger pointed to the wall; willingly would I have looked from it, but I felt impelled by a secret power to trace the fateful writing- would I had been blind ere I had seen this horrid prediction!^—' The cup of Pembroke's heir was di ugged with cer¬ tainty—*
tainty—Ms death -fire burns upon the Wizard's Tower /'—Can it be lord Mar¬ sham, Ella?" " I hope, I trust not, dearest lady Matilda." " Poison, Ella! only conceive the horrid idea! I will to the earl, happen what may. If there is a hope of life, the skilful father Oswald will restore the shattered frame—what think you, Ella?" " Indeed I know not; it were best, methinks, the earl knew of your last night's vision ; but I would counsel you to speak of it as a portentous dream only, and spare his feelings by suppress¬ ing the former visits of this midnight spectre; or if you fail by this to make a sufficient impression on him, as a final resource reveal the whole." Matilda sought her father: the monk Oswald was summoned, and he confirm¬ ed her worst fears by an assurance that lord Marsham's constitution was com¬ pletely
pletely undermined by a slow, but cer¬ tain, poisonous drug; he had imbibed it perhaps some months, but its effects wer£ so sure, that no earthly power could preserve his life beyond a stated period. The tender father had seen his be¬ loved and only son gradually decline from the perfection of masculine strength and beauty to an emaciated shadow, yet hoped and believed some transient dis¬ ease, which time and change of climate would eradicate, alone caused this alarm* ing change; and he was preparing to re¬ move him to the genial clime of Italy, when the sad fiat of father Oswald over¬ turned all his high hopes and expecta¬ tions, &nd chilled his blood with horror, by the dreadful supposition that his son was poisoned. Lord Marsham vented not his feelings in idle complainings, and his rapid de¬ cline had been partially unobserved; all loved and commiserated his situation, and wished to be cheated into the hope of
of his subsequent restoration to health; no one would be the first to prognosti¬ cate what his looks alone betrayed; but the day following the visit of father Oswald, he was unable to leave his bed. Ella assisted Matilda to administer all the little offices of friendship and affec¬ tion to the amiable invalid. The earl watched beside his bed, and only retired at intervals to indulge, when he could no longer suppress his affliction. Father Oswald administered all that he could devise to alleviate, though nothing could stem the torrent of his disease, no effort could stop the progress of decay; and the unhappy father beheld the son of his affections, the sole heir to a long line of noble ancestry, the amiable youth for whom he had succeeded in negoti¬ ating a marriage with the daughter of his sovereign, sinking to an early grave. Matilda, to whom he was endeared by a thousand tender kindnesses, and to whom his loss comprised more than a brother's
brother's love, wept incessantly, and sought, in the friendship of Ella, the consolation she herself needed. The fiat had gone forth, Death claimed his victim, and lord Marsham lay a cold inanimate corse. The flame on the Wizard's Tower ceased to burn, and the castle of Longholm was filled with the insignia of mortality; sorrow there wore a genuine appearance, every domestic lamented the loss of their young lord with unfeigned sincerity: but who shall speak the grief of his reaved sire, the deep affliction of the fervently-attached Matilda? The countess was labouring under severe indisposition, and had therefore been kept in ignorance of the sad ca¬ tastrophe ; and the earl and Matilda, ac¬ companied by Ella, prepared to attend the interment of the departed youth in the chapel. Our heroine supported Ma¬ tilda while her maidens robed her in the sable habiliments of wo, and then re¬ tired
tired to prepare herself for the solemn ceremony. The shades of evening were gathering fast around, and scarce sufficient light remained to distinguish objects, save when the flaming torches of the attend¬ ants ranged in the court-yard below threw a momentary beam into the chamber of Ella, who, musing on the instability of all sublunary possessions, waited the appointed summons to attend the earl and lady Matilda, A light step arrested her attention, and she turned to receive, not her young friend, but the countess, on whose pale figure the sickly gleams of torchlight cast a ghastly hue: she advanced close to Ella, and softly whispered-—'* Ella, I need your counsel and assistance—follow me." Our heroine rose to obey, and lady Pembroke led the way. They paced the long deserted gallery in silence, and at its extremity the countess pushed open a heavy door, and they entered, by a short
a short passage, an open gallery that runs along the western side of the castle, and overlooked a large quadrangle court, where the retainers were all assembled to assist at the funeral of their lord. Lady Pembroke stopped, and leaned over the bannisters.—" See," she cried," the corpse is coming—we shall be unobserved here.*' * 6 But, madam," said Ella, " I must attend lady Matilda, she expects me." " I have excused you to her. Look, Ella—is it not a fearful sight ? But it were nothing, methinks, to die thus— 'tis the sleep of innocence; but there are that are so clogged with crime, they cannot sleep; and then they stalk about this globe, and fright less guilty souls with horrid visions, and scare them into penitence. See, the black plumes nod at us in derision! Is it you or I they menace ?" " Madam!" said the astonished Ella. * s Ay, so it is, Methinks those men tread
tread heavily, yet they may bear a great¬ er burthen; guilt weighs down soul and body both: above all things, Ella, be¬ ware illicit love. Mark how slowly the train passes. There—there—all are gone —lord William Marsham too is gone: but we remain. Well, it will not always be thus ; truth will out, and hidden crimes be brought to light: but, if they tell you it was infanticide, 'tis false.—* Let us be gone." And lady Pembroke passed on with celerity. Ella trembled with apprehension as she followed her footsteps; she was in a part of * the castle where she had never been before, for what pur¬ pose she could not conjecture; she feared the intellects of lady Pembroke were deranged, and her object in leading her thence she could not divine. She stop¬ ped at length, and requested Ella's as¬ sistance to open a low grated door. Ella obeyed, and they entered a small chapel; a lamp
a lamp burnt before the image of the Virgin, which lady Pembroke took from the shrine, and opened a door on the opposite side; Ella followed: she led along a subterranean passage, till they were stopped by a strong grated door: the lady again entreated her aid, and the door vielded to their united efforts; this passed, the passage became narrow ; but in the dark perspective there was no discerning its termination. Again the lady stopped, and unclosed a small door. —" Enter, Ella," she said; and Ella, he¬ sitatingly, obeyed. The instant she passed the portal, lady Pembroke closed it with violence, and left the deluded girl in perfect darkness; she heard her ladyship turn the key in the lock; she listened to her receding footsteps; she heard the heavy iron door grate on its hinges, and the massy key turned in its lock by the hand of the relentless countess; and deprived of light, of hope, and
and almost of life, she seated herself in gloomy despair on the rocky floor of her dungeon. Long did the hapless Ella brood over the bitterness of Iter fate; cruelly sepa¬ rated from the friends that loved her, and placed by the caprices of the queen in the power of a woman who hated, and wantonly tormented her, and who had betrayed her most likely into the gloom of a dungeon, that she might ex¬ haust her imagination in every species of insult and oppression, secure from observation and interruption : and what could lady Matilda think of her mys¬ terious absence ? How might lady Pem¬ broke misrepresent her forced removal ? And how would she answer to the queen for her sudden disappearance? Was her confinement to be temporary, or was she condemned to pine out the rest of her miserable existence^ the help¬ less victim of lady Pembroke's malign nity,
nity, in all the horrors of darkness and captivity? to pass years in the same uniformity of wretchedness and despair, separated from all that was dear to her on earth, and denied the melancholy consolation of bidding adieu to those so beloved—Eric, Monmouth, lady Fau¬ conbridge, and Matilda; to live, per¬ chance, traduced; and robbed of all she valued, their esteem and friendship: to die at last worn out with suffering and sorrow, without one pitying hand to close her eyes, and her unburied corpse left to moulder on the very spot on which she then sat. Ella shuddered at the thought,—Again, were the senses of lady Pembroke really deranged, and did she act under the influence of insa¬ nity? Twas possible, and she might lose all remembrance of her, and the place to which she had lured her, and leave her to die a lingering death by famine. But there was rationality in her
her actions, though her words were wan¬ dering ; and also an appearance of pre^. concerted measures; the ready lamp burned by the shrine in the chapel, the several keys were carefully noted and applied with exactness, and her myste¬ rious addresses were calculated to in¬ spire dread in the susceptible mind of Ella; yet they were marked with a tone of friendly confidence, similar to her manner when Ella was accustomed to consider her as a friend and guardian; this was evident duplicity, and our he¬ roine could not doubt the real intentions of her insidious enemy. To be left in utter darkness was a refinement of cruelty, and the senses of Ella were almost overcome by the bit¬ terness of reflection, and the deep gloom that surrounded her. Once she thought on the words lady Pembroke addressed to her before she left the court—*' Do not imagine Longholm is to be your prison,
prison, and lady Pembroke your gaoler." Were those words spoken at random, or did they imply the dreadful fate that awaited her? If so, her doom had long been fixed, and there was little hope of escaping it. Many hours were thus passed by our heroine, and she expected the return of the traitorous lady Pembroke, without a hope of ameliorating her unhappy situ¬ ation : a distant glimmering light aroused her, and she rose to examine from whence it proceeded; a grating on one side of the dungeon admitted a faint beam, and Ella strained her eyes to catch the figure that bore it; as she watched its approach, the form became more dis¬ tinct, and she was convinced it was not lady Pembroke: it continued to advance, and hope kindled in her bosom.—** I will implore its aid to liberate me," cried the forlorn girl; " who knows, but Heaven may, in its mercy, have sent vol. i. m hither
hither a benevolent being to rescue me from the machinations of the countess!" She tried to discover the features of her expected deliverer. He raised his torch, and she beheld the loathed countenance of the wretch Giovani!
END OF VOL. I,
Printed by J. Darling, ]>\denhatl-Streei, London.
