Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The mysterious monk: or, The wizard's tower: an historical romance
THE
MYSTERIOUS MONK.
CHAPTER I.
** He left his cell, the pilgrim's staff he bore, ,And ftYd the scallop in liis hat before, And with the rising sua a journey went." ** For I had heard of battles, and I long'd To follow to the field some warlike lord." JlHE morning was fair (though in the month of January) when father Leopold and Eric departed from the monastery of St. Stephen. The way towards the coast was not long, but the father's re¬ cent illness had rendered him so debili¬ tated, that it became absolutely neces- vol. ii. E sary
sary that he should travel on horseback; hence their journey was easy and plea¬ sant, and they suffered no interruption before they reached the port from whence they purposed to embark without delay for Normandy. Father Leopold travelled on a mis¬ sion of great importance; the first point of his destination was the convent of St. Eulalia, within a few miles of Dieppe, on the coast of Normandy; but the ter¬ mination of his negotiation would finally lead him to Rome. The state of Eng¬ land was full of intrigue; the monks were the chief emissaries of both par¬ ties, and they invariably observed the most profound secrecy; perhaps it be¬ comes a habit with the recluse to be guarded and uncommunicative with the inhabitants of the world, whenever he is by circumstances obliged to mix with them; or it may be, the greater propor¬ tion of them have (previous to their seclu¬ sion) suffered from ill-judged confidence and
and misplaced affection, and therefore shrink from the chance of being again involved in the miseries " which flesh is heir to." Father Leopold partook, in a great degree, the usual reserve of the in¬ habitant of a cloister, and Eric did not presume to pry into his secrets; he had, with the father's permission, communi¬ cated to Ella the circumstance of his de¬ parture for Normandy, but further he did not inform her. Leopold and his youthful companion reached the port of Dieppe in safety, and the father, in order to prevent their being observed, secured a lodging in an obscure part of the suburbs of St. Sever; and tbe morning following their arrival he proceeded alone to the convent of St. Eulalia, leaving Eric to amuse him¬ self with a book in his absence. The father's air on his return was dis¬ turbed, and he paced the room, mutter¬ ing frequent short unconnected sen¬ tences, apparently unconscious of the b 2 presence
presence of Eric. At length he threw himself into a seat, and continued for some time quite absorbed in contempla¬ tion, and then suddenly recovering re¬ collection, he addressed Erie—** Young man," said he, " my affairs call me to an immense distance from this, whither it would not be prudent to carry you, vet I am loth to leave you behind." " Dispose of me, father, as you please, I have r.ideed often thought," continued Eric, hesitatingly—* 4 and I trust J, may entertain such an idea without ingrati¬ tude to my benefactor——" " Say on, good youth," said the fa¬ ther. " With your permission then, my kind friend, is it not inglorious and dis¬ honourable in a youth like me to court the safety of a cloister, when all my native country is up in arms, and when I daily hear the valour of my country¬ men trumpeted forth by the breath of fame? is it not pitiful, think you, to shrink
shrink from the contest, where glory may ennoble my unknown lineage, and one day enable the obscure Eric di Monti¬ mar to hold his head among the nobles of the land ? By Heaven, father, I shame to tell my years, and own I never yet encountered England's foes! I would I were the meanest soldier in the ranks, than be the thing 1 am, unhonoured and unknown! I am in Normandy, good father, even within the quarters of our English — let me not sculk away like a craven coward from the front of danger. I feel the mounting blood with¬ in my veins, it proudly vouches for me that I am not vassal born ; I long to rush into the hottest ranks of battle, and snatch the wreath from glory niggard fortune has denied me. Suffer me, good father." *' Eric, thou hast said well, and I ap¬ prove thy spirit.—But, hark! who in¬ trudes upon our privacy ?" The door of their apartment was open¬ ly 3 ed,
ed, and a guard immediately surrounded them.-—" We arrest you in the name of king John, as traitors to the state," said the leader, " and you must go with us. —We are lucky, Hugh," he continued, addressing one of his companions; " by St. George, I'd give the reward to any one! but I covf v the honour of bringing two such arch villains to justice." " Villain !" cried Eric, " we are none. Stand off! by Heaven, I will fell the first who dares to lay a hand on either of os!" "Eric, be advised—there is some mistake in this," said Leopold.—" Lead us to the king, friend; I will engage for the behaviour of this young man.— No danger can accrue to me, Erie, by an interview with the king, and if it does not delay my departure, I shall have cause to rejoice at it on your ac¬ count." Eric obeyed perforce, and the guard escorted them to the citadel, where, after waiting
waiting a short time, they were admit¬ ted, in tbe absence of the king, to the presence of the English general. The general saluted them courteously, and turning to the captain of the guard, he said—" Here is a mistake, Allan— how comes it that these people are brought hither ?" " Indeed, sir," said Allan, " I cannot tell : captain Fleudyer was instructed to secure the persons of two Englishmen, who had recently arrived here, answering the description of those—a monk and a young man ; a reward was offered for their apprehension; and the soldiers, having some intimation that they were persons suspected of a plot upon your life, were so extremely anxious to bring* them to justice, that no less than four¬ teen persons are already in custody." " I must see them all, Allan; and to those who have been injured in any way by their detention, let recompence be made;" and the general turned to our B 4 travellers.—
travellers.—" You have heard from the captain of the guard, my friends," said he, " how this affair originated—is there any thing I can do to repair the incon¬ venience it has occasioned you ?" ** Procure me an immediate interview with the king," said father Leopold. " His majesty is indisposed; you may, if you please, consider me as his repre¬ sentative—name your request/ 1 " This youth pants to become a sol¬ dier," replied father Leopold ; " and I have some hope of interesting his ma¬ jesty in his future fortunes, if I could have obtained a personal interview with him." " Nothing, father, could be more in¬ teresting than his intelligent counte¬ nance ; allow me to take the charge up¬ on myself. What is his name?" u Erie di Montimar," The general sprung from the sofa on which he was reclining, and hastily ex¬ claimed— >" Eric di Montimar! you are right
right welcome; by St. Paul, the men who brought you hither shall share a heavy purse, and drink deep too, for this! Why I have sought you for this last twelve months with un tired perse¬ verance : where, under the cope of hea¬ ven, did you hide yourself?" '* We are still at cross purposes, I think," said Eric. ** No, by my faith; you have a sister, Elladi Montimar?" " I have indeed " w Well then, by the same token I am, or I am to be, your loving brother; they call me Plantagenet duke of Mon* mouth," This fortunate termination of the mat¬ ter was equally agreeable to all parties. Eric had related to father Leopold the adventures of his sister, and he was at no loss to account for Monmouth's friendly reception of his young friend; and to place him under the eare of the English general at this opportune June- R 5 tare
ture was most desirable, as he could now, without further hindrance, prepare for his departure from Dieppe. Erik was prepared to esteem Monmouth froin the recital of Ella, and public report had spoken more largely in his favour; and could any thing be more gratifying to the ardent soul of Di Montimar than the friendship of the first soldier of the age? Monmouth's future attentions to him fully proved the reality of the pro¬ fessions he had made to Ella so long ago. Notwithstanding the zeal of the sol¬ diery, the suspected persons found means to escape, and the innocent prisoners at the citadel were released, with proofs of the general's munificence. Monmouth took care to appoint Erie fo a post near himself, and he readily applied to study the theoretical part of his profession ; the use of arms invari¬ ably formed a part of the education of every youth in those days, and Eric was extremely expert in all the manual ex¬ ercises.
ereises. Monmouth was proud of his pupil, and introduced him to the king, as a most promising young officer, ** We shall need such, cousin/' said his majesty. ** Train him to subordina¬ tion, for I fear me our nobles are most ungovernable spirits; but we must wink at the follies we may sometimes note, lest we mar the purpose of our enter¬ prise. I admire the high bearing of my freeborn people, yet I would they were more temperate, and withal partook a little of the pliancy our boasting enemies yeleped politeness," " No, my liege, no—let us be as we are; we may be rough, and something unpolished; but we have what they lack —sincerity of heart, at least I hope so. St. Paul he thanked, I drew my first breath the other side the Channel; and I came hither not to copy French frivo¬ lity, but to fight them. Gramerey, your majesty, bid us do any thing rather than turn Frenchmen. By Mary! I would B 6 rather
rather turn priest, and that would be sore against my inclination." " You mistake me, Richard," said the king; " I fear that you have a hard task to manage those ungovernable English. I know they cavil at your youth, cou¬ pling it with inexperience." " Let them, sire—I will answer them. Is your majesty dissatisfied?" '* Cousin of Monmouth, 1 have shewn, hy the high trust reposed in you, that I can estimate your value properly. Let nothing come between us to break our present amity. We are satisfied, and entreat your constant services; and while we reign in England, Richard of Mon¬ mouth holds the second place in the state."
CHAP-
CHAPTER IL
Now the storm begins to iow'r, Haste the loom of hell prepare; Iron sleet of arrowy showV liurtles in the darkenM air: Glittering iances are the loom Where the dnsky warp «e strain ; Weaving many a soldier's doom. " Eric," said Monmouth, " dost thou note yon swarthy ill-looking lord ? Anon he will salute us—'tis the renegade Os¬ manvilie. If there be on earth a man my inmost soul abhors, 'tis he." " I am told your grace intends to re¬ move your head-quarters to Pontoise," said Osmanvilie. " I intend an attack on it, my lord; and, God willing, to plant the British standard
standard on its tower. What objec¬ tion?" 44 None in the world, your grace; though I may be allowed to doubt the event." 44 You think the place impregnable?" ss I certainly think, with all due sub¬ mission to your grace, the meditated attempt will end only in the vain sacri¬ fice of lives we can ill spare. The ene¬ my are in great force at Franconville, and wait but the opportunity our rash councils will soon afford to attack and drive us into the sea." " And would you infer, my lord, that because the enemy puts forth a vain boast of driving us into the ocean, that we are thence bound to sit down pati¬ ently here, waiting till the spring afford them the means of advancing on us, without one effort to repel them ?'' " No, sir; I would only suggest that Pontoise is an impregnable fortress " " Lord Osmanvilie, we know that you
you are well acquainted with the value of a strong fortress, and 'tis said you have some skill in such matters, my lord, or you have visited the Austrian towns to little purpose," " What intends your grace?" " That you take your counsels where they are better suited, my lord: cowards may relish them, they sort not with our humour." 44 Methinks 'twere well your grace would condescend to listen to the coun¬ sels of your seniors in years, and in ex¬ perience too." " Osman, do you remember Cceur de Lion's years, when he did beard your highly-vaunted Soliman, and make him quail before him ? I like not vain boast¬ ing, my lord; but I will prove myself the son of Richard, on any one who doubts the prowess of my arm. For my head, 'tis not, God wot, so old as yours, but it is English, Saracen, and will assert its country's rights, even with
with a hazard of its separation from my body. You will do well to be circum¬ spect, lord Osmanvilie, for I do suspect thee most grievously." " A plague on him," said Monmouth, after Osmanvilie had left them; " he provokes me beyond my bearing: I would I had been a little more circum¬ spect; but, by Mary, it yerks me to think upon his past actions! I'll tell thee, Eric, and you shall decide if I have not ample cause to hate him. " When Richard Cceur de Lion was in Palestine, and after he had taken the town of Caesarea from the infidels, he chanced, as was his custom, to walk un¬ attended after dark, to inspect the con¬ duct of the soldiers of the garrison; passing one evening through a dark and unfrequented street, he perceived two men endeavouring to rob and murder a third. The king sprung forward to the assistance of the unarmed and defence¬ less wretch, when a few moments more would
would have sent him to eternity, and rescued him from his enemies; he then conveyed him to his quarters, and on his recovering from the terror and blows he had borne, questioned him concerning his situation. The man, profuse in his ac¬ knowledgments to his generous deliver¬ er, confessed himself a Saracen, and a spy, employed by Saladin; but withal implored the king to grant the life his magnanimity had preserved, and to ac¬ cept in return his most devoted and faithful services. Who knows not, that Richard was as generous as he was brave? He gave him life, and liberty, received into his service, and laboured to convert him to Christianity. The wily Osman abjured the Koran, and took the Cross, in compliance with the wishes of his royal master; but, notwithstanding his conversion, the followers of Richard ill brooked te see his favour lavished on the renegade, and with considerate kind¬ ness he dispatched him on a mission to England,
England. The king suspected the de¬ signs of his brother, earl John, and he deputed Osman to watch his proceed¬ ings, and to transmit to him a faithful account of what was passing in his kingdom during his absence. And how, think you, did he fulfil the behest of this best of masters, to whom he owed his life and fortune ? Why, he deceived lum—leagued with his brother John, and travelled into Germany to intercept the return of Richard; he met him, and with feigned professions of fidelity, he lured the noble unsuspecting monarch into the power of Leopold of Austria, who, dastard-like, seized and bound,when sleeping in fancied security, that Rich¬ ard, whose tremendous name still serves the Syrian mothers to silence their in¬ fants ! he, who among an army of sixty thousand infidels, could not find one that dared singly to encounter the prow¬ ess of his arm. Eric, he rode from right to left, before this army of Turks, hardly
hardly protected by a band of scarce three hundred English bowmen, and dared the Saracens to the combat; yet no one ventured forth to meet his challenge*! " This king, Eric, my father-—this hero, betrayed by the viper he had che¬ rished in his bosom, conquered only by those arts his manly spirit scorned to practise, became a prisoner, was loaded with chains, and incarcerated in a dun¬ geon by a set of craven cowards—may God forgive them ! I never can. Never, so help me, Heaven, in my utmost need, will I know peace while Austria lives ! And Osmanvilie, my lord of Osmanvilie, forsooth — oh, grant me patience ! — proudly bears his ill-earned honours in the face of our nobility. John—but he is the king; vve are the soldiers of Eng¬ land, and she has appointed John our general; therefore, in God's name, be it so; but, Eric, the injuries of Richard rankle
rankle in my soul; and though the king comes not within the reach of my venge¬ ance, for I am no traitor, this Osman¬ vilie shall feel it yet. The post I hold forbids my meeting him on cq?ial terms; but there will come a time; in the in¬ terim, I'll watch this snake in the grass narrowly. These things are known to few, but I can vouch their truth. What think you? Have I not cause of enmity against this Osmanvilie?" " And have not 1, my lord, and every Englishman? Suffer me then, whom no duty forbids, to meet this dastard villain." " No, Eric," interrupted the duke; * 4 he is my foe; my vengeance would be imperfect, if he fell by the hand of ano¬ ther: and I charge you, on your alle¬ giance, and by your lady's love, leave him to me. Ah! Eric, for what was that far-fetched sigh ? In love, hey! Oh! blessed Bridget, is it so ? Come, tell ine, is she fair, or brown, hey ? u beau¬ tiful
tiful little brunette, glossy raven locks, dark sparkling hazel, laughter-loving eyes, ripe blooming checks, and rosy pouting lips, hey? No! Well then, fair as the untracked snow, light auburn tresses, eyes of heavenly blue, and cheeks such as angels wear, lips of coral, teeth of pearl, and then a form like the Me- dicean Venus; have I hit it now?" " Better, my lord; only that all praise falls infinitely short of the original." " Is she like Ella then ?" ** Only more beautiful," replied Eric. ** Whew ! Eric, you are mad." " Ella is my sister,, my lord—no doubt extremely lovely; but her personal beau¬ ty is the least perfection she possesses, and she is, Heaven can witness, dearer to me than the hest blood in my veins; but the fair object of my adoration ——* M 1*1100! Eric, I dare tmy she Is tole¬ rable; but her name?' 9 ** Ah, ray lord! if I knew—" ** You don't know ! St Bridget be my speed f
speed! here's a fellow, in love and never took the pains to ask his lady's name !" Eric related the manner of his con¬ finement by the banditti, and the sin¬ gular appearance of the beautiful girl he had seen during his captivity, from the grated window of his dungeon. ** Courage, good youth," said the duke, ** time, and my lady Fortune, will lead you to your love at last; but I would you knew her name, that we might swear by it. Shall I give her one? Well call her—what ? Angelica!—Come now, by St. Paul, that's a lucky hit! shall it be Angelica ?" 44 With all my heart, my lord ; Ange¬ lica be it." The night after the above conversa¬ tion, a masquerade was given by the king, and all the courtiers and officers took care to he equipped for the occasion; among others, the duke of Monmouth and Eric di Montimar—the former as Hector, the latter Paris '* You
" You will find many Helens here, my brother," said Monmouth, as he en¬ tered the rooms; " but I must seek in vain for an Andromache." 44 The Helen I adore, my lord, is as unlike those as your Andromache." &i By my faith, Eric, our soldiers' wives are rough jewels; but I hear it whispered, that my illustrious grandam, the queen dowager, is about to join us, and the ladies in her train will make us amends for our present deprivations." "Ella, I hope, will accompany her," said Eric. 44 1 live on that hope too: but come on, and I, as the most experienced courtier, will point out to you the leading characters of our court. First on the list, in that black domino, walks the earl of Pembroke; a good sort of man, only something gloomy withal" 44 Probably, my lord, he has some se¬ cret cause for being so," 44 No
" No doubt, my sage brother.—Yon¬ der, dressed as the wise Nestor, goes my lord of Suffolk; entre nous, a cap and bells would be infinitely more in cha¬ racter.—Look at yon beautiful youth, who personates Petrarch; it is sir Philip Courtenay, the most inconstant rake in his amours that England ever produced. —There again is sir Simon Mowbray, a young man who possesses an immense estate, which he lavishes away in every species of extravagance—he is enacting a Jew !—Here comes Diana; the god¬ dess of chastity has thrown aside her veil—it is the lovely countess of Vilk- neuve, a favourite mistress of the king.— That demure-looking monk is the baron Montfort, an amorous old dotard, who never goes sober to bed, nor suffers a girl to pass him without a salute. His character is, you will allow, well chosen; there's point in it, if he has the wit to conceive it—There's my lord Oxford, as Julius Ccesar! Cesar's wife, 'twas said,
said, should not be suspected; but to my certain knowledge, lady Oxford is more than suspected.—Here comes a Cleopa¬ tra, madame Audibert, who has no one pretension to the character, but an ex¬ ceedingly brown complexion.~See the universally-admired lady Clifford; she came to Normandy with her lord, a blooming biide. Oh! she is the very soul of animation—she has taken the mask of Dido!—But hold, here comes the king, by Jupiter! in the costume of the sage Merlin; this is the first time, I'll be sworn, he was ever taken for a conjurer: and that little Savoyard has business with me. Nay, Eric, do not leave me," " Save ye, princes," said the Savoyard. " And you, fair damsel. Whom seek you ?" " The knight of the lion's crest/ ** An I were him, sweet, what would you whisper in my ear ?" vol. ii. e ««Hist,"
44 Hist," said she, in a low voice—"tre- son! conspiracy!" "How? where?" asked Monmouth^ " or do you jest?" " No, by the Holy Virgin, I speak truth! Will you follow where I lead ?" " Certainly; and my friend ?" " May go too.—Pluck that conjurer by the sleeve." " The king ?" said Monmouth. " Ay ? he must make a third; be wary—• I separate from you here, and meet you at the outward door; use dispatch." The Savoyard struck a few notes on her guitar, and disappeared among the company; and Monmouth addressed the king. " May it please your majesty, we have an adventure in hand, in which your presence is required;" and he re¬ peated what the Savoyard had said to him. " God's teeth !" said the king, " this wears
wears a face; I will retire first, and you follow me in a few minutes." The Savoyard stood by the entrance when Monmouth and Eric joined the king. "Herearedominos,"said she, " throw them over you, and follow me in si¬ lence." The trio obeyed, and their conduc¬ tress led them to an obscure street. She stopped at the door of a mean-looking house, and applied a key to the lock with extreme caution: it opened, and again she enjoined them to continue silent. With light step she ascended a staircase, followed hy the friends: at length they found themselves in a large chamber, the extent of which the darkness prevented them from ascertain¬ ing, for no lamp illuminated, nor a ray of light, save from a small lattice, which opened into an adjoining room where lights were burning: to this lattice the Savoyard drew her astonished guests, c % and
and there they saw four men in earnest consultation: for a while the party were mute, but one of them broke the silence by the following address. " I would advise, my lord of Osman¬ vilie. that you do well consider our pro¬ posals. King Philip is proverbially mu¬ nificent, and his performance ever ex¬ ceeds his promises: and it is known, my lord, that John is necessitously poor; he has not wherewith to reward talents like yours, while Pembroke holds so tight a hand over his revenues. You will reflect on our proposals, my lord." 44 Thirty thousand crowns," said Os¬ manvilie, ** and the conditions ------" " Are," rejoined the former speaker, " that you undertake, either by poison, private assassination, or someother means, to take the lives of John, Pembroke, and Monmouth." "But what surety," asked Osmanvilie, " have I for payment of the thirty thou* sand crowns?" 44 You
** You shall have surety, my lord, so you consent to do the deed within the space of fourteen days from this." " On those terms I am yours, count Meulan: you may report it to your king as done already, for ere the tidings of my acquiescence can reach him, the deed shall be consummated." " I take you at your word, my lord, and in token of the same, I here present you with the sum of five thousand crowns, in earnest of the future," King John and Monmouth looked with wondering eyes, and saw the emis¬ sary of Philip present the money to the perfidious Osmanvilie, who eagerly re¬ ceived it; and shortly after the party separated. " Now return we to the mask," said the Savoyard. 44 Holy Mary!" said John, « but this is past belief; what think you, Rich¬ ard?" *' Truly, sire, it doth not exceed my c 3 belief
belief that this $am£ Osraanville is a traitor: I am glad your majesty is con¬ vinced." " Dea,th and furies! Convinced I yes f I am iConvineed with a vengeance 4 but this fair lady, who is our better angel, what reward dps^t thou ask ? Speak your wishes; we, whose lives you have re¬ deemed, are your eternal debtors." " Suffer count Meulan to depart in safety, sire, and your share of the obli¬ gation is quit." " And mine," said Monmouth. " Meet me in the church of St. Sever's to-morrow, at noon." « I will not fiiil.* " Enough. But count Meulan, your majesty ?" " You have my word for his safe departure." *' Then fare ye well, lords;" and the friends being near the king's quarters, the Savoyard disappeared without fur¬ ther ceremony. "To
" To your charge, cousin, I commit the conduct of this affair," said the king. " You will instantly arrest this spotted traitor.—Di Montimar, be silent on the events of this evening.*' ** I shall, your majesty." " That is well; you attend me to the mask, and Monmouth straight about this business." Monmouth was prompt in the exe¬ cution of his majesty's orders, and the traitorous Osmanvilie was that night lodged in security to await his trial; and utterly unprepared to expect such a dis¬ covery, his whole treasonable correspon¬ dence fell into the hands of Monmouth, who secured his papers and effects for the king. " Eric," said Monmouth, *' I received a mysterious billet from our fair Savoyard yesterday morning, and was therefore prepared to meet her at the mask; but what can be the purport of her assig¬ nation of to-day?" c 4 " Ask
44 Ask the king, my lord: I am no conjurer." " You say well r but 'tis near the hour of noon-—wait my return here, Eric. Adieu—St. Bridget be my speed!" and Monmouth repaired to the church of St, Sever's.
CHAP-
CHAPTER III.
" It is night—I am alone, forlorn on the hill of storms The wind is heard on the mountain. The torrent pours down the rock. No hut receives me from the rain; forlorn on the hill of winds. Rise, moon, f r ;m be¬ hind thy clouds. Stars of tiie night, arise!" Without the power to withdraw her eyes, Ella still continued to gaze on the hated form of Giovani: as he approach¬ ed nearer, she perceived that he sup¬ ported a woman. Could it be lady Pem¬ broke ? She strained her eyes to catch a view of her features: it was possible that her ladyship had been bewildered in her path back to the castle, and un¬ able to find her way out of the subter- rean; it was also possible that she had met Giovani by accident, as he na doubt was acquainted with the commu* c 5 nicatioa
nication between Longholm and the Wizard's Tower; for a moment she con¬ ceived the dreadful idea that he had been appointed by lady Pembroke her gaoler. But he was passing tbe grating of her dungeon; and at the instant he raised his torch and shook it, the flame burned brighter and threw a glare of light on the face of a corpse; the glance was momentary, but it was sufficient for conviction, and Ella uttered a pier¬ cing shriek and sunk en her knee; in silent agony she breathed a mental prayer for pity and protection, while tlie hard*- ened Giovani cast a careless glance around, stopped for a moment,,and then passed on bearing the dead body. Ella trembled with dismay as she watched the receding light, and when all became again dark, she stillcontinued to kneel, and still grasped with firmness the grating of her prison; for some time her ideas were so bewildered, she was incapable of reflection, and when she became
became more collected, thought crowded so rapidly on thought, it was long ere she could banish tbe horrid images her fancy engendered; one dreadful idea rose above tlie rest-—that Giovani (who was in some way connected with the sibyl) haddisinterred the body of lord Marsham, $nd was conveying it to the Wizard's Tower, for the horrid purpose of aiding the incantations of the sibyl. Ella had sincerely esteemed the amiable lord Marsham, and she felt the blood curdle in her veins, as she pursued a long train of reflection suggested by the scene she had beheld. She thanked Heaven that Matilda was spared the knowledge of the sacrilege on the remains of her ador¬ ed brother, and that Pembroke was ignorant of the horrid transaction she had witnessed. The body was wrapped in a long dark cloak, which first induced Ella to suppose he supported a woman, wliose loose drapery the cloak resem¬ bled, that entirely screened it from her c 6 view*
view, save the face and one livid hancS which fell over the shoulder of Gio¬ vani. Ella, like most damsels of the age, was an adept in the mystic legends of sorcery, and far more intimate with the supposed science of magic than the real manners of the world: she had read in the lonely castle of Caerphilly many a tale of witchcraft, the truth of which no one attempted to dispute, and those tales made an indelible impression on her youthful imagination, which her after intercourse with mankind was not cal¬ culated to efface. Astrology was the favourite study of the age, and pursued by the most learned men, who either de¬ lighted to impose on their more ignorant acquaintance, or were in truth' not suffi¬ ciently enlightened to demonstrate the fallacy of the doctrine they professed. f It was a received opinion, that certain parts of a dead body were indispensable for the performance of some incantations, Ella
Ella had often read this, but never be¬ fore witnessed the absolute fact: her heart was chilled as she thought on these things.—" Heaven only knows," thought she, ** if my own mangled frame may not serve their diabolical purpose!"— There was anguish in the thought, but it was by no means improbable; and half distracted by the dreadful images of her distempered fancy, Ella grasped more forcibly tbe iron grating before which she still kneeled; the bars, worn with age, insensibly yielded to her pressure; she felt them loosen—she relaxed her hold, and two of them gave way, leaving a space sufficiently large to admit her slender form between them; thus a par¬ tial chance of emancipation appeared to greet her: but could Ella tread the path where Giovani had so lately passed? wrapped in impenetrable darkness, could she avoid danger? Her senses recoiled at the attempt to make her way out of the subterrean. Hours*
Hours, long tedious hours, had p&s$$d, and lady Pembroke returned not: must she die for lack of sustenance ? She felt already faint and exhausted*—a parching thirst assailed her; she essayed to shield her shivering frame from the damps a- round her, but her inmost heart was chilled by desolation. Ill-starred maid¬ en ! where then was Monmouth ? where thy beloved Eric ? where was thy pro¬ tector Adolphe? Oh, had either, sus^ pected thy sad fate, how eagerly bad tney flown to liberate thee! JUlla wept and prayed alternately : at length the conviction that she would be¬ come less able to traverse the subterrean the longer she deferred the attempt, de¬ cided her; she breathed a fervent prayer to the Holy Virgin, and collecting all the firmness she could command* she passed the broken grating, and groped on with slow and cautious steps. She felt assured, though she had not the means of ascertaining minutely, that the iron*
iron grating was on the opposite side of her prison from the door by which she bad entered it, consequently that the passage she now trod was not the same by which lady Pembroke had conducted her. Our heroine had no clue to guide her track—no friendly light to direct her footsteps; all around was dark and silent as the grave; her light tread awakened np echo—no sound burst from her parch¬ ed lips; slowly and sad y she pursued a path which led she knew not whither. The passage was hewn out of the solid rock, and its sides were rough and un¬ even ; Ella, nevertheless, adhered to one of those rugged walls, hoping that its termination would lead to liberty. She had gone a considerable distance, and her exhausted spirits had almost forsakeu her, when her foot struck against some* thing; she stooped to discover what it might be, and her hand rested on the first step of an uncouth staircase; as she raised
raised her head she felt a current of fresh air from above: poor Ella! she uttered an hysteric cry, and then reflecting on her involuntary imprudence, she sat down on the bottom stair, to recruit her fatigued frame, and wait the issue. The voice of Giovani fell like an electric shock on the trembling ear of Ella at the moment she had risen to as¬ cend the stairs. She shrunk back in dismay—** He is surely about to descend into the subterrean, and whither shall I fly ?" and she trembled with affright. She listened—he spoke again—** Will you go?" said he, in a surly tone, "or shall we loiter here for ever?" She heard not the response, though she continued to listen with breathless agitation. At length she could distin¬ guish receding footsteps, and she fancied the trampling of horses; the hoarse ac¬ cents of Giovani were lost in the dis¬ tance, and she began to respire with more freedom. It
It was nearly an hour after the depar¬ ture of Giovani ere Ella ventured to issue forth from the subterrean. No¬ thing obstructed her path; and though the night was dark, she guessed that she was at the foot of the Wizard's Tower —she had emerged from the pas¬ sage through which the sibyl had con¬ ducted her to Longholm. She passed the open portal; the air was piercing chill; she wrapped her mantle about her, and endeavoured to make her way through the forest to the monastery of St. Stephen, as a more secure asylum than Longholm. She cast a look back —there was just sufficient light to dis¬ tinguish the dark outline of the tower— the death-fire no longer burned on its turret. Ella sighed heavily, as she thought on all she had seen and heard connected with this isolated building, and pursued her way slowly in the di¬ rection of St. Stephen's, The night was dark and stormy, and EhYs
Ella's fragile form was ill able to meet its inclemency 5 «he shuddered at every blast. The rain fell at intervals with violence, and her garments were soon entirely drenched. Alone and bewil¬ dered, brushing at every step the heavy drops from the thick foliage of the a«i- derwoocf, treading an unknown and un¬ certain path, her strength and spirits completely exhausted by long abstinence and suffering, Ella still { pur$ued, with faltering steps, the track she hoped would lead her to the monastery. Hope had hitherto supported the wan¬ derer, but hope was nearly extinct; she was perfectly convinced that if she had taken the right direction, she must have reached St. Stephen's with less toil and fatigue. Her tired limbs would support her no further, and she sunk at the foot of a tree, internally resolving to pursue her intricate path when the morning afforded her sufficient light to discern her way, and to rest in the interim where she
she was. She wrapped her dripping mantle tightly round her, and having piously commended herself to the pro¬ tection of Heaven, in defiance of tbe pattering shower and frequent gusts of wind, she slept more serenely under the open canopy of heaven, than lady Pem¬ broke in her curtained bed of down. Elk awoke feverish and languid', the day was far advanced, and she became almost immediately conscious of her si¬ tuation, and essayed to rise, in order to resume her journey towards the monas¬ tery, but in vain—*her limbs could no longer sustain her enervated frame; and hopeless, heartless, and forlorn, the un- happy girl rested her aching bead against the trunk of a tree, and continued in a kind of stupor, that she believed the harbinger of dissolution. Her thoughts still hovered about those who were dear to her^, ^nd she f# that it was sad to die alone spd unpitied, the victim of a cruel aiid arbitrary woman, in
in whose power circumstances beyond her control had placed her; her half-dor¬ mant faculties were, however, aroused by the barking of a dog, and immedU ately afterwards by tbe sounds of ap* proaching voices; the principle of self- preservation, so strongly implanted in our nature, prompted her to seek assist¬ ance from these strangers, whoever they might be; but her feeble accents were lost in the louder gust that whistled through the trees, and in vain she ex¬ hausted her remaining strength in reite¬ rated calls.—" It is too much," she feebly cried, " to be so near assistance, and yet to die without it." The barking of the dog became more remote, and Ella relinquished her last hope. Again she heard approaching foot¬ steps,, and loud halloos, and presently something bounded past—it was a hart; the pursuers followed closely behind— they came near her, but she had lost the
the power of imploring aid : faintly she stretched forth her hand—a heavy pres¬ sure seemed to weigh down her eyelids, hut she was conscious of their approach; her motion had attracted them—thev were beside her—she heard an exclama¬ tion of pity and surprise—she felt her¬ self gently raised from the ground, and all recollection fled.
CHAP-
CHAPTER IV.
" 1 am the child of mystery; from the first hour of my eKistence a cloud lms> enveloped me—would it would dissipate !" With returning consciousness, Ella found herself supported in bed by the caressing arm of the countess of Caer¬ philly. How did her heart dilate with gratitude to Heaven, as she returned the affectionate pressure of her truly beloved friend! with what delight did she gaze on the fine features of the countess, who bent over her with maternal solicitude! how dear to her were the soft accents of the mother of Monmouth, as she spoke!—''Thank Heaven, my dearest Ella, you are at length restored to us; but the fragile delicacy of your health yet
yet requires extreme care, and the leech directs that you refrain from converse until your strength is further recruited; in the mean time, it shall be my care to amuse you with tales of truth and fic¬ tion, and aught else I can devise." Ella begged to be informed how she had been placed under her care, and the countess continued—" You know, my dear Ella, how much I regretted the impossibility of prevailing on your royal mistress to permit your visit to me at Fauconbridge, whither I returned when I left Lynn. Accustomed to the society of Philip, and latterly of yourself, I found the castle gloomy and deserted; some amusement I derived from fre¬ quent visits to Caerphilly, where Philip had given instructions for erecting a noble castle; and my regret was aug¬ mented by reflecting how much pleasure you, my dear girl, would have felt to accompany me in my short journeys from thence to Fauconbridge. " I had
" I had passed some months thus em¬ ploy ed s when I received this letter;'* and the lady drew a letter from her work* hag, and read as follows:— " A sincere and attached, but powerless friend of Ella di Montimar, appeals to the coun¬ tess of Caerphilly to rescue her from im¬ pending misfortune. The sanction of the queen dowager for her immediate removal from the care of lady Pembroke, alone can save her from destruction, and that with secrecy and dispatch." ** Strange as this anonymous epistle appeared, need I say, my Ella, that I did not hesitate a moment to fulfil its injunction? I journeyed as fast as the season would permit to London, and succeeded in obtaining an interview with Elinor. I found some difficulty in per¬ suading her majesty to allow me to take charge of you; hut as she could not urge your attendance on herself as a plea for refusal, and as I was resolved on gaining my purpose, I pressed her so closely,
closely, that at last I wrung from her a reluctant order to the countess of Pem¬ broke to deliver your person into my care. 44 Thus provided, I immediately de¬ parted for Longholm Castle, where, on my arrival, you may guess my astonish¬ ment and dismay on learning that you had suddenly disappeared, no one knew how. I was prepared, not only from the anonymous letter, but my former knowledge of lady Pembroke, to suspect her, though I readily acquitted the earl, who wrung my hand with bitterness, and spoke of you with so much tender¬ ness, that I at first imagined you were an object of jealousy to the countess: I was, however, agreeably undeceived, by liis declaration that you were the daugh¬ ter of his only sister, the lady Gertrude Marsham, who had secretly married a foreigner, of high birth, but destitute of fortune; be appeared so dreadfully agi¬ tated by the mention of this no doubt vol.. ii. i> beloved
beloved sister, that I ceased to press him further, though I was anxious to learn more for your satisfaction. I cannot de¬ scribe <\te poignant affliction of lady Matilda—I could perceive it was aggra¬ vated by the suspicions she entertained of her mother's agency in your myste¬ rious absence. " The countess was confined to her bed by sickness, but my business was urgent, and 1 insisted on being admitted to her chamber* At.first she refused to s#e*«ie, but 1 was~not to be trifled with ~*4 produced the queen's order, and de¬ manded the person of Ella di Montimar, or a sufficient reason for withholding her, from ladv Pembroke herself. I was conducted to her bedside, and I hope I do not wrong herj but 1 most faithfully believe her ladyship suffered nothing but from terror at my appear¬ ance, I had, hi the first instance* sus¬ pected her indisposition a feint, to shield her from the blame attached to your disappearance,
disappe^ance, and wafs therefore pre¬ pared to nleet her. " On eritering her antichamber, the attendants entreated me to refrain from speaking loud* said that their mistress was exceedingly ill, and that her disease was much heightened by her affliction for the recent death of lord Marsham: they did not fail to urge the impropriety of intruding into the presence of the in¬ valid, and cautioned me that she had hitherto remained ignorant of the strange flight of Ella di Montimar. " I heeded them little—my heart was full of my dear, injured girl, and I com¬ manded them to lead the way to their lady.—* Lady Pembroke, 5 said I, 4 it is the pleasure of the queen that Ella di Montimar should return with me to Fauconbridge—v/hy do I not find her among your household T 4i She spoke faintly—' I do not com¬ prehend the nature of your question, my lady of Caerphilly.' d 2 « Ella
* Ella di Montimar, madam,' returned I, ' was consigned to your especial eare hy her majesty, and she now. requires you to relinquish your charge to me. Ella, it is said, is missing, and I demand of you, in the name of the queen, to ac¬ count for her absence.' * How can I be supposed to know the wayward inclinations of the young dam¬ sel you mention, my lady ? or how con¬ trol them, if I knew?' said the countess. * If, as you say, she has left Longholm, she has chosen her time well. I have suspected (I tell it to your ladyship in confidence) that Ella has long cherished a hopeless passion for one who is (I shame to speak it), a member of the church.' . * You wrong her purity, my lady,' said I, for a moment thrown off my guard by lier specious manner; * what¬ ever may be the nature of her connex¬ ion with the monk Adolphe, it certainly is not love.' " I will not tire you, my love, with a fruitless
a fruitless repetition of all that passed; suffice it, I was compelled to accept the hospitality of the earl for one night; and in the morning I departed, my suspi¬ cions of lady Pembroke rather confirm¬ ed than otherwise, and journeyed on to¬ wards Belgarvon, undecided what course to pursue. Our road from LonghoLn lay along by the side of the forest, and I suffered my train to pass on leisurely, and amuse themselves as they might. You remember Godfrey, your humble friend (he is now with my son in Nor¬ mandy)—he was more anxious to develop tlie mystery that surrounded you, than you can imagine; be rode forward at some distance; a few of the attendants were behind, when as I turned an aride of the forest, a monk stood before me. His outstretched arm arrested the course of my horse, and he spoke in accents so melancholy, yet so firm, ?o powerfully energetic, that 1 listened involuntarily, nor sought to avoid him.—' Has lady B 3 Fauconbridge
Fauconhridge deserted the child of her adoption ? Has the countess of Caer¬ philly turned her back on Longholm, while Ella di Montimar perishes in its dungeons ? Where now is Monmouth ? would he thus relinquish her?' ' Ah! father,' said I, ' he would die to save her; and Heaven knows so would L But what can I do?* *■ Return to Longholm ere the earl departs for Normandy. Tell him that Adolphe------ r he stopped short—struck his clenched fist against his forehead, and turning hastily into the forest, was lost to view before my attendants came up. I cannot describe to you my sen- sations at this unexpected rencounter; they were such as determined me, against my cooler judgment, to return to Long¬ holm, and I gave orders accordingly. '* Within the distance of three miie& of Longholm, a hart bounded aeross the path, and it was pursued by Godfrey and Berthold; but how shall I speak my
joy when I beheld them again emerge from the forest, bearing in their arms the beloved form of my own Ella ! " We conveyed you to the nearest coEage, and there administered every thing we esteemed likely to recall sus¬ pended animation ; but for a long time our utmost endeavours were ineffectual, when as I leaned in agony over the couch on which you lay, applying re¬ storatives in vain, an elixir was present¬ ed me; the trembling hand that gave it for one moment attracted my attention; I looked up, and saw the monk Adolphe —' If there is life/ said he, 6 these drops will recall it.* " He spoke truly, for by their aid we succeeded in restoring animation ; witli infinite joy 1 saw you open your eyes, but a faint sickness, the probable effect of extreme agitation, then overcame me, and I in turn v/as conveyed to bed. The monk knelt beside me, and breath¬ ed a fervent prayer, in which he mm- D 4 gled
gled the names of Ella and Paulina of Belgarvon. *' What added to the singularity of the monk's appearance was, that he had not been seen by any individual but myself; whether my attendants were too busily engaged, or too little interested in his person to notice him, I cannot tell, but on my rising I inquired for him, and was assured that no one but me had observed him. " My women had been anxiously at¬ tentive to you in my absence; a skil¬ ful leech had arrived from the adjacent monastery, and he gave hopes of your ultimate restoration, if judiciously ma¬ naged ; we followed his instructions with care, and the result has been all I wish¬ ed." From this time Ella's health conti¬ nued to improve, and was soon so far reestablished as to allow her to journey by easy stages to Belgarvon, where she received the gratifying information that Eric
Eric and Monmouth were friends and fellow-soldiers, enjoying in Normandy the favour of their sovereign, and the confidence of the people; her own hap¬ piness in the society of the accomplished countess scarcely admitted augmenta¬ tion : but when all her greater cares were dissipated, her heart still dwelt on those of less importance—yet those might form the basis of her future destiny: lord Pembroke was her uncle, the brother of lady Gertrude di Montimar, and yet she had strong proof that he had murdered her father—how, or from what provoca¬ tion, it was impossible to discover; that he was ignorant of the marriage of her parents, she gathered from his own words. To question earl Pembroke wa^ impossible, and to hate him equally so. Then her thoughts would recur to Adol- phe, the mysterious monk: his conduct was altogether inexplicable; he was, no doubt, her friend, and he sought occa¬ sion to serve her secretly; but why did i) 5 he
he not openly assert her cause? apd what was the nature of the confidence that lady Gertrude bad reposed in him? Again, what claim had lady Gertrude on his affection? why was he so agi* tated as he knelt by her deathbed ? She had appointed him their guardian. And had not earl Pembroke a nearer claim ? was he not nearly allied to them? or was he indeed the assassin of Di Mon¬ timar? To the countess of Caerphilly, Ella confided every incident of her life; but her ladyship was incompetent to*deeide on what appeared so wrapt in mystery. It was, she observed, surprising tliat lady Gertrude had been invariably silent on every subject conneeted with her birth and lineage; Adolphe alone was in possession of the secret, of whatever nature it might be. But where was the mysterious monk to be found?—" Let us not weary ourselves with vain con¬ jectures," continued the lady; " Heaven will,
will, in its own good time, solve the enigma: it appears to me that lady Ger¬ trude deputed the monk to fulfil some charge of high importance, and that he is secretly employed about it even now." " But, madam," said Ella, " how can we account for his apparent desertion of me, after placing me in the convent of St. Margaret?" *' You might as well, my dear, ask how we are to account for his powerful emotion when he presented the elixir that restored you to life in the cot¬ tage." " But tell me, dear lady, what do you think of the sibvfs accusation ?" " I had rather not think of it at all Lord Pembroke's general character is so excellent, and I am so prepared to es¬ teem him, that I am loth to admit any thing derogatory to his high fame. He is a valuable minister; and notwithstand¬ ing the sibyls allegations, and all the concomitant circumstances* I still think d 6 him
him a deserving and an amiable man ; and I sincerely regret the loss he has suffered in the unthnely death of bis ae- plished son." " Ah, dearest lady," said Ella, as she wept on tjie. bosom of the countess, "how.good you are! how justly you discriminate! I wish you knew more intimately the kind lady Matilda! and oh, how sincerely dw I wish that she were biest with such a mother! I think my heart often whispered my near affi¬ nity to her, though I was denied the happiness of addressing her as my cou- sin. " And did.you experience the same sentiments for lady Victoria?" " Ah no, madam—you smile, and I perceive the fallacy of my remark." " The death of lord Marsham," re¬ sumed the countess, "is strange; but after all I have heard from you of her character, I should feel little hesitation in
in pronouncing lady Pembroke its an thor. I am uncharitable now, Ella ?" Ella answered only with a sigh.
CHAPTER V.
" Si Ton meditare autaul sur ie& suites du crime que »ur la manner de lescotnmettre, que Ton s'epargnerait des retnordib et des tourments." Several happy weeks flew rapidly away, enlivened by frequent tidings from Normandy. The countess proposed re¬ tiring to Fauconbridge, and Ella readily acceded: the day after their arrival they visited the domain of Caerphilly. Our heroine entered the abode of her childhood with sensations difficult to de¬ scribe. It had remained uninhabited since her forced departure, and many additional marks of dilapidation were perceptible
perceptible. Ella beheld, with a sad heart, the rapid progress of deaay; yet she felt relieved by an assurance from the countess, that the ruins of the an¬ cient castle had been considered by Mon¬ mouth as sacred, and he would not per¬ mit the removal of any part of it The former edifice was built in the bosom of the valley, but the one now erecting stood on a gentle acclivity at some dis¬ tance, from the windows of which the old Gothic fabric would form a pictu¬ resque ornament to the grounds, that were receiving, under the tasteful direc¬ tion of the countess, an appearance of high cultivation and beauty. Ella was obliged to acknowledge the great im¬ provement the change had made, yet she sighed as she looked on the altered face of the v Alley, " I percehe, my dear Ella," said the countess, " you are unwilling to leave this ruin, untH you have visited every part of it; therefore I will leave you to the
the uninterrupted enjoyment of your own reflections, while I inspect the pro¬ gress of my workmen on the hill, on condition you will promise not to in¬ dulge in any very melancholy retrospec¬ tions; but remember your health is scarcely reestablished, and that sorrow is the most injurious thing imaginable in your present delicate state. Have I your promise to observe my injunc¬ tions ?" Ella readily promised obedience; and as soon as the countess had left her, she ascended the ancient staircase, and examined, with melancholy pleasure, every well-remembered apartment. One had been the favourite retreat of the princess Elinor; another, the chamber of Eric; and a third, for many years her own. She wept in the never-to-be-for¬ gotten chamber where lady Gertrude (her mother) had breathed her last, and from whence she had been rudely torn by a mandate from the ki$g (the mum of
of which yet remained unexplained); but her grateful heart confessed the in¬ estimable friend that very violence had procured her. From thence she passed to the chapel. In her way thither she was for a mo¬ ment startled by the soft notes of a lute. She listened with astonishment, and held the half-opened door; she was alone in the ruins—an indefinable dread stole over her; it was but momentary—the cause of her alarm stood confessed—in an opposite window stood an iEolian harp; it had been the property of the princess Elinor, and was the last solitary vestige of its former inhabitants, Ella considered it as the legacy of a beloved friend; she kissed the strings with reve¬ rence, and wept over it as a treasure.— 44 Dear, venerated princess," she cried, " wherever you are, my heart is still true to its affection for you; and to the last hour of my existence I will cherish the pious counsels you instilled in
in my earliest years; let this lute be the treasured memento of your past kind¬ ness, and never, never while I live, shall it become the property of ano¬ ther." Ella entered the chapel, where she had first been taught by her mother, or the meek princess, to offer her infant orisons to the Father of Mercy, She knelt at the foot of the altar, and prayed for the re¬ pose of the departed, and peace and happi¬ ness for those who yet lived. Her anxiety for the fate of Eric was long since dissi¬ pated, but she earnestly wished to know where the princess had retired to. Long she continued to pray, and her thoughts dwelt on the strange destiny of lady Gertrude: it was past the comprehen¬ sion of Ella, that she should for sixteen years continue to guard, with scrupu¬ lous care, the knowledge of her affinity from her own children ; on her deathbed she was about to make some disclosure, but was interrupted by the king's mes¬ sengers ;
sengers; no doubt it was tbe fong con¬ cealed secret, and her only hope was* that she had previously confided it to Adolphe. <£ Dear, sainted spirit," said Ella, apo¬ strophising the shade of lady Gertrude, " if thou art permitted to look down upon thy child, bear her prayers, and still continue to watch over her, and guard her! intercede with our Heavenly Father, that thy orphans may be objects of his care! and oh, my mother, breathe into my heart the hoped assurance that Pem¬ broke is not tbe murderer of my father!" She stopped—a slight noise near her interrupted her mental prayer; she raised her head from the altar, and perceived a female, whose features were hid in her veil, standing beside her. She rose to demand the name and purpose of the intruder, who immediatelv threw aside her veil, and, to ihe astonishment of Ella, she beheld lady Pembroke: her countenance was pale and haggard, and there
there was no longer that air of haughty pride which had ever marked her stiU lovely features.—" Elk." she cried, and she knelt upon the pavement, " see the humbled eountess of Pembroke prostrate before you, and hear me swear never to rise from this till you have awarded your forgiveness. I have followed you hither, to obtain what only can restore me to my own esteem. 1 have injured yod, beauteous Ella; but I know the gentle philanthropy of your nature—you will pardon me, you will accept my un¬ feigned contrition, and save me from the agony of doubt and terror that now dis¬ tract me" " What can lady Pembroke have to apprehend from me ?" said Ella. " Not violence, not injuries like those I inflicted on you; but there is some¬ thing I dread beyond bodily suffering —Elk, you must promise oblivion of the past" ** 1 do not, madam, think myself at liberty
liberty to enter into an unconditional engagement without the sanction of the countess of Caerphilly." " Listen to me, Ella—that woman is my aversion, and I will not have my actions canvassed by her. Say, have you repeated to her all that passed while you were an inmate at Longholm ?" " I have, my lady." " Bethink you, Ella—was there no re¬ servation ?" " There was, lady Pembroke, a some¬ thing that touched the honour of earl Pembroke so closely, that I did not dare to give it words, even to my most es¬ teemed friend." ** I comprehend you, dearest Ella, and applaud the delicacy of your conduct.' She hesitated^—" The tale is long to tell, and time presses—and yet——" 44 1 entreat you not to enter into any explanation, lady Pembroke. If you really wish my forgiveness, in Christian diarity I cannot withhold it," 46 1 thank
" I thank you, Ella; will you not promise that the secret you have hither¬ to preserved shall remain inviolable ?" *' I will readily promise that, madam, if that will content you" " You will never couple my name with that of.Adolphe, nor by direct or indirect means allude to any circum¬ stance connected with either; never be¬ tray aught of the scene you witnessed in the picture gallery of Longholm, or whisper the secrets disclosed by the sibyl of the Wizard's Tower?" " Never," replied Ella. " Will you swear before Heaven, at the foot of this altar ?" " I will give you my promise, madam, which I hold sacred." " You must swear, Ella." Ella hesitated for a few minutes, but at length suffered lady Pembroke to dictate the form of her oath; and she knelt by the altar, and repeated after her a solemn vow to preserve an eternal silence
silence oh the subject of her ladyship's dMiohour, imprecating the malediction of Heaven on her own head, if ever she infringed her oath. " And mark me, Ella di Montimar," said the lady, rising, gi if you break this vow, you doom the countess of Caer¬ philly to instant death.*" and she drew a glittering poniard from her vest:—" this is mine, and a learned seer predicted that its trusty blade should drink the life's blood of my fellest fbe—bewave it is not your friend the countess of Caer¬ philly :" and perceiving Ella's alarm, she added—** While you observe your vow^, she is secure-—I swear it by the blessed symbol of our Redeemer!" she pressed the cross to her lips; and after a thought¬ ful pause, she said—-" Where is Adol- phe ?" «« Why do you ask of me, lady ? in truth I know not" ** Is this ignorance real or feigned?" " I repeat.
" I repeat, madam, that I know not the abode of the monk Adolphe." 44 The monk Adolphe! you love him, Ella?" " No, on my soul, lady Pembroke— but as in Christian charity we are re¬ quired to love our fellow-creatures." " What is the nature of his inter¬ course with you ? for what purpose does he seek you ?" " I cannot answer your ladyship;" " He loves you then," " No, madam." '* By Heaven he seeks you with a lover's ardour! and me—-he flies me. This Adolphe, Ella, is my fate—he was the object of my virgin heart; I loved —oh, how I doted on him ! Eighteen years of penitence have thrown over his fine form the tone of premature old age —his eyes, perchance, have lost some of their brilliancy—his features no longer glow with youth and health; but, to my fond heart, he is Adolphe still. Ella, I was
was torn from his love to become the unwilling bride of Pembroke; but think ye I could forget him—oh, never-— never!" " You distress and alarm me, lady," said Ella; " suffer me to leave you, or the countess of Caerphilly may seek me here." ** Go then, Ella di Montimar; and as you value the life of lady Caerphilly, beware how you infringe your vow to me!" The countess then quitted her, and our heroine sat down to recover her spirits before she left the chapel. The friendly voice of kdy Caerphilly recalled her to a recollection of her situation ; she joined her in the hall, and related the manner of her having found the harp of the princess Elinor, and request¬ ed permission to remove it to Faucon¬ hridge. if Assuredly, my love," said the lady, with affectionate kindness; *' but I per¬ ceive
ceive you have neglected my counsels, or why this extreme agitation ?" Ella was unable to reply; her spirits were unequal to the late trial she had undergone, and she sunk on the bosom of her kind protectress, and wept unre¬ servedly. The countess did not chide her, but she mentally resolved not to bring her to Caerphilly again, until her health was more firmly reestablished, and they both returned to Fauconhridge with depressed spirits. But'Ella's health had received a severe shock from her interview with lady Pembroke; the unqualified promise she had given, and the impossibility of con- fiding it to her kind hostess, preyed on her spirits, and counteracted all the ef¬ forts of lady Caerphilly, and would pro¬ bably have terminated seriously, but for the arrival of an order from the queen dowager to attend her to Normandy; and this, by diverting her thoughts into vol. ii, £ a different
a channel, and giving her a sti¬ mulus to action, for a time relieved her from the dreadful depression under which she had laboured. The countess, though she lamented the necessity of her depar¬ ture, yet hoped it would eventually lead to her recovery; and Ella departed from Fauconhridge with less pain, as she hoped to be near her brother and Monmouth, to whom she was charged with many greetings from his mother, who humour ed what she considered the distempered fancy of Ella, by a promise to conceal from the queen the treatment she had borne from lady Pembroke.
CHAP
CHAPTER VI.
Viva la guerra! viva lamour! Che bel contento prova il raio cuore, Quando si trova con gioventii, Quando combatte, tipete tu. Gotvotfi.
By Heaven, the scroyles of Angiers flout you, kings, And stand securely on their battlements, As in a theatre, where they gape and point At your industrious scenes and acts of death. King John* s * Ebic," said the duke of Monmouth, " the preparations for an attack on Fon- toise are complete, and if the snow con¬ tinues on the ground a few days longer, the place will be ours. I go to the king now, to receive his commands, there¬ fore hold yourself in readiness for depar¬ ture. 9 * ** I am ready, my lord; I hope your e 2 lordship
lordship will not be detained by the trial of Osmanvilie. 1 * ** Between ourselves, Eric, I suspect more foul play. But away with such reflections ! I am bent upon the project of my present enterprise. Wait my re¬ turn here; I have summoned Godfrey, Allan, and all the officers who are en¬ gaged in this service; my inter/iew with the king will be short" The expedition under the direction of Monmouth, was planned with such promptness and secrecy that its nature xvm scarcely surmised; but there were many discontented spirits, who did not fail to prognosticate its failure I ^ord Pembroke alone (whose concurrence was necessary) had a strong reliance in the address and enterprise of the duke, and the cool considerate suggestions of age and ex¬ perience did not damp the ardour of the English youth who were to accompany hi in; therefore no obstacles presented to delay iu completion, and Monmouth pressed
pressed forward to the object of his hopes with cautious dispatch. This was to Eric " the first of his fields;" he was eager to march to the post of danger; he was happy too in the confidence of his general, and de¬ termined to gain a name in arms. Thus disposed, it is not to be imagined that Eric doubted the success of their expe¬ dition, and his sentiments were, in some measure, those of his companions. ** I would stake my roan charger," said Allan Riddell, " that the duke will take Pontoise*" ** My life on it," cried Godfrey of Bel¬ garvon ; " Monmouth never fails in what he undertakes. What sa)s your uncle, sir Charles Mowbray ?" ** That we shall be completely cut up by the French." 44 And you believe him ?" u Ay, as I do his plans of living so¬ berly, when he suffers a fit of the gout, if he ever gets well again. 8 * E 3 * € Harkee,
" Harkee, sir Godfrey," said Edmund Shirley, " is it by stratagem we are to take this place? I heard a whisper of the sort." •-1 wot not, truly," replied Godfrey; " the duke faithfully assured Allan and myself that there would be hard fight¬ ing, and that all would depend on the martial spirit of a few." " Content," said Shirley; ** when do we march ?" '* On the instant—we wait but the return of the duke. Our baggage will be heavy, but our horses are good—*we shall reach Pontoise by midnight." " I say, Godfrey," cried young Darn- ley, " how grim the old croakers will look when our dispatches from Pontoise reach them!" The duke entered* accompanied by lord Howard, who smiled as he caught the observation of Darnley; and as the baggage, and every otlier requisite, hpd been previously kept in readiness, the little
little troop were in immediate readiness to commence their journey. A youth who accompanied Mon¬ mouth (as his train surmised a native of France) served for their guide; he exe¬ cuted his trust with fidelity, and led tjiem through the forest of Rouen by a secure and more direct path than the or¬ dinary one pursued by travellers; and under his auspices, the English reached the place of their destination without a single skirmish with the enemy. A body of English troops vere strong¬ ly intrenched ' .fore the town, where £hey remained secure in winter quarters, Tbe French were conscious of the strength cf their fortifications, and laugh¬ ed at the fat-witted islanders below, who dreamed of subduing then. Pontoise was, in fact* impregnable; hence it remained that tbe English must reduce it by famine, if they hoped to get possession of it; exposed in the interim fo the approach of the army ol e 4 Philip,
Philip: the ,r\ost sanguine of the British politicians advised raising the siege, and: this would probably have been adopted, but for the inventive genius of a woman: she who preserved the English mo~ narch's life from the machinations of Osmanvilie, supplied the last scheme^ for the reduction of Pontoise, The night after their arrival before the town, Monmouth called a council of war, consisting of the officers who were to conduct the enterprise, and having communicated his simple plan, they waited but the setting of the moon to put it in execution, and at midnight they advanced in silence on the unsus¬ pecting garrison, The snow still lay on the ground, and Monmouth had secretly prepared a num¬ ber of long white habits for the use of the soldiers; .their scaling-ladders were also painted white; and they passed the outposts in silence and security. They placed their ladders, and mounted the walls,
walls, ere the drowsy sentinels had per¬ ceived their approach. The alarm was instantly spread, but it was too late—-the English assailants threw by their cloaks, ^nd drew forth the arms concealed be¬ neath them. The frighted inhabitants, relying on the well-known strength of the place, were entirely unprovided with the means of defence, and the attack was so judiciously planned, that the English had entered the town at several different quarters at the same moment; the greater part of the garrison were asleep, and their consternation on being awoke by an alarm that the English were in possession of the outposts, and had even entered the town, was beyond description. With infinite difficulty their officers succeeded in forming them in the principal square, where tbey main- tained a short but bloody conflict with the English; the issue was not long doubtful; the assailants received every moment fresh reinforcements—there was e 5 no
no opposing their determined valour md increasing numbers; and theFrenchat last retired to the castle, where having securely intrenched themselves, they left the town to the mercy of the Eng¬ lish ; and the morning sun beheld the British ensigns waving on the towers of Pontotee *.■ %: Monmouth took immediate measures for the reduction of the castje, arid the security and good government ef the town. The garrison were strongly lodg¬ ed, but their improvident security had never suggested the policy of storing the castle with necessary provisions, and they were now reduced to the greatest dis¬ tress for want of food; and at the termi¬ nation of five days they were compelled to accept the terms offered by the Eng¬ lish general, and evacuated the fortress altogether. The triumph of Monmouth was com¬ plete—
plete-—few lives had been iost, and those were among the inferior soldiery; many of his officers were slightly wounded, among whom was Eric, but none so se¬ riously as to prevent their return to head-quarters; and thither Monmouth proceeded, after having consigned the government of Pontoise to lord How¬ ard. The joyous troops departed from the town in high spirits; and many a merry joke was doled out, at the expence of king Philip and his council, and many a gay retort prepared for those who staid in Dieppe, and prophesied their failure. " Lord Walsingham," said Mowbray* " has promised me his favourite grey¬ hound, if I lived to claim it—what think ye, gallants?" " Ay," rejoined Shirley; * and me- thinks our heads become our shoulders better than the walls of Pontoise, spite of his lordship's prognostics." " Peace^ gallants," whispered God- E 6 frey;
frey; '«our general has intelligence of an ambuscade in this forest, therefore be wary; your head, sir Edmund, is hardly so secure as you imagine." " By my faith, but I desire no better than this—it will crown our enterprise with double eclat How many miles have we yet through the forest, sir God¬ frey ?" " The duke's page can best inform ye." " Aj t , but can he speak English ?" " Perfectly." " Save you, youth," said sir Edmund, addressing their guide—" this is the fo¬ rest of Rouen, I think ?" *' You are right, sir knight" " How many miles have we yet to travel in it, I pray ? and, good youth, tell me in plain English, for to confess the truth, I do not understand your French leagues." " About five English miles," returned the page. " Are
" Are you a native of this country ?" asked the knight. " No;" and he rode forward, seemingly to avoid further questions, ** Darnley, I pray thee lend an ear," said Shirley—" I have discovered a se¬ cret" " Ay!" " I will confide it to you; but you will be discreet ?" " Oh, never doubt me, Shirley." " Well then—yonder pretty page is a woman." "How?" 44 Oh, I will swear it, and a lovely one too." ** Ay, the duke is young and hand¬ some, and he has an enterprising mis¬ tress ; it is a good joke, however." The mutual laugh of the young sol¬ diers was interrupted by an arrow that whistled past them, and in an instant was followed by a whole shower. The English quickly formed, and rode up
up jt# the thicket behind which the French bowmen were intrenched; but their horses were entangled in the thick copsewood, and their inferior numbers and exposed situation rendered them by no means a match for their adversaries, who, sheltered by their advantageous post, dealt death through the ranks of this little troop of warriors with impu¬ nity. There jvas no time for hesitation; Monmouth sprung from bis horse, and sword in hand pushed into the thicket: he was followed by the remainder of the band, before whose ardent impetuosity the enemy gave way. The English bore down upon their broken ranks, and the French, after repeated efforts to form anew, threw down their arms, and fle$. On returning to the spot wjhere the attack hfid comrj^enced, to aid their less fortunate companions, Monmouth be¬ held, witli indescribable regret, among the slain, the bodies of Eric di Monti¬ mar
mar and Allan Riddell, and severely wounded on the ground lay §ir Edmund Shirley, yet he endeavoured to support the bleeding form of the page, who had fainted from loss of blood. The English promptly formed a litter* on which they laid the wounded knight and the page; and to the great satisfac¬ tion of the whole party, they perceived, on removing them* some signs of ani¬ mation in the body of JEric di Monti 7 mar. Poor Allan was gone beyond all hope; he wa^s buried by his companions; and Eric being placed beside the other wounded knight, the troops again re¬ sumed their march, and quickly arrived in the city of Rouen, whither they found John had removed his head-quar¬ ters. Monmouth's first care was to obtain immediate accommodations for Eric and Shirley; of the page no mention was made, but it is beyond all doubt that he was equally careful of him; and he then repaired
repaired to the of lord Pembroke. Here the king met him, to whom he related the progress of his attempt and success, and was loaded with praises and thanks, though he disclaimed all merit in the invention of the stratagem, which had terminated so happily for the cause of England; but he had the mortifica¬ tion of learning, that in his absence the traitor Osmanvilie had been acquitted, as his evidence alone could have con¬ victed him; and the infatuated king had sent him back to England, out of the way of further censure. Monmouth was less surprised than vexed at what he had before in part suspected.
CHAP-
CHAPTER VH.
Ob, my gentle brother, have we met thus ? ——You call'd me brother. Cymbeline*
De pweilles fautes n'ont ii pas cte reprochd aux plus tendres amants ? Et pouvait elle oublier que la na¬ ture ayant permis aux homines d'etre infidelie suns cesser d'etre constant, l'amour ne fut jamais chez eux un rampart contre le seduction des sens. Madame Cottin* Eric had received several severe wounds, and the surgeons had not ventured to pronounce on his recovery, when the queen dowager arrived at Rouen, and in her train his sister Ella. The first news our heroine learned was the danger of her beloved brother, and she instantly sought lady Oxford, to ob~ tain the queen's permission for her to attend the conch of the sufferer. The queen
queen not only withheld her permission, but forbid Ella, on pain of her most se¬ rious displeasure, to visit Eric, or on any pretence to leave the palace her majesty inhabited. This was more than the philosophy of our heroine could bear; she felt that it was impossible to obey the queen, and partial disobedience would be as severely reproved as the most independent con¬ duct she could pursue. Eric was dearer, infinitely dearer to her, than the favour of her mistress. She was persuaded it was a duty she owed, not only to him, but tp the memory pf their parents, to attend him, on what she had been as¬ sured was the bed of death; and think¬ ing thus, she did not hesitate a moment after the queen's message was delivered to her, on the course she meant to adopt. It was night, and Ella was a stranger in Rouen ,* beside, it was held indeco¬ rous for a female of rank to venture in* to the streets unattended; but these considerations
considerations were not sufficiently pow T - erful to deter her from her purpose; she quitted the palace unobserved, and after many difficulties and insults, she disco¬ vered the house in which Monmouth had placed Eric. The mistress of the house was a be¬ nevolent character, and she received Ella with kindness; and after listening to her story, she conducted her to the chamber of her brother. Ella drew aside the curtain; the lamp shone full on her face, and Eric was conscious of her approach; he raised his languid eyes in thankfulness to Heaven, and then turned them on her; a faint smile played over his pale features, but he spoke not, Ella seated herself by his bedside, and watched, with tender solicitude, ^very change in his varying countenance; she administered all his medicines, and he received them from her hand with looks that testified the pleasure her presence afforded him, All night she carefully attended
attended to his wants and wishes; she saw that he derived comfort from the idea of her being near him, and she re¬ joiced that she had possessed sufficient firmness to brave the inhuman mandate of the queen.—" My brother will re¬ cover," said she—" he will be restored to me, and I shall be the humble means, through the mercy of Heaven, of raising him from the bed of affliction." The morning came, and Ella was persuaded that Eric was better; he had spoken to her—he had said he was bet¬ ter, and she waited the visit of the sur¬ geon with impatience; yet she ceased not, by every means her imagination could suggest, to beguile the painful moments of her suffering brother. Was he not the first object in the world to her ? was he not her only relative ? and if he were taken from her, would she not be left, as it were, alone in the world? Even the countess of Caer¬ philly could not supply the loss of Eric. Who
Who but Ella knew his noble nature, his generous worth, his fond affection for herself and all the virtues his mo¬ desty'concealed from the whole world beside ? While thus she argued, her hostess entered the chamber, and by a sign re¬ quested her presence. Ella rose", and fol¬ lowed her out. In the adjoining room a guard waited to conduct her back to the palace, and she was immediately put under arrest. She uttered no exclama¬ tion— her cries would liave disturbed Eric; she only implored to be allowed to remain until the surgeon had visited him; but the officer assured her, with infinite reluctance, he did not dare to extend such an indulgence to her; but her kind hostess promised to transmit to her a faithful account of his opinions, and also to calm the apprehensions of Eric relative to her sudden departure; and she was then conducted to the pre¬ sence of her enraged mistress. " Minion,
44 Minion, how dare you brave our royal displeasure?" cried the angry queen between the intervals of her cough; ** how dare you leave the palace in op¬ position to my order? answer me!" Lady Oxford endeavoured to calm the rage of her mistress, but Ella con¬ tinued silent; and after loading her with abuse 3 she ordered her into strict con¬ finement, until she had determined what punishment to inflict on her disobe¬ dience. At the moment the attendants were about to fulfil her commands, the duke of Monmouth was announced. *' How is this, my lord, that you in¬ trude thus abruptly into our presence ?" *' I came, your majesty, to intercede for Ella di Montimar, who has, I learn, unfortunately fallen under your displea¬ sure." ** On what authority, my lord ? what affinity do you bear to Ella di Monti¬ mar ?" " None,
" None* madam; but my mother*—" " Your presence here, my lord," in¬ terrupted the queen, " was unsolicited, and your intercession will be fruitless " " But surely your majesty------ '* " My lord of Monmouth, you must not think to dictate to the queen of England, Ella di Montimar has no re¬ lative here to claim her from me, and to a stranger I will not resign her." " I have! I have!" cried Ella, recol¬ lecting her affinity to him—" the earl of Pembroke, lord Monmouth," " Ha!" ejaculated her majesty. Monmouth opened the door of the antichamber—" Fly, Godfrey," he cried, " fly to the earl of Pembroke, and sum¬ mon him here on the instant" " My lord," said the queen, almost choked with her cough and passion, u I command you hence, and Ella di Mon¬ timar shall be instantly removed." w No, madam—I demand justice only, and
and I will notfguit her till the earl ar¬ rives." : ; : , ; -^TrV^'-:V'-- <-•' *.:■■■■■-■-■ As he spoke, lord Pembroke was an¬ nounced v .0..=; i >:.■. i> ." tff Earl Pembroke," said her majesty, 46 this damsel claims affinity with you— is it so?" .--' ; - ■ ,'■-■■^:; ! Ella trembled—should he deny her, what would be the consequence ? what would the queen and Monmouth think of her ? but he had acknowledged her to the countess of Caerphilly, and Pem¬ broke would not surely retract At last he said—** She is my niece, the daugh¬ ter of lady Gertrude Marshanfeiy^nr majesty." .■ '^"?*'y:^-\ (t Indeed, my lord! but she is my servant; and she has broken her allegi¬ ance, disobeyed my Dtders, and absented herself from my palace foil a whole night without permission----nayt iiv Opposition to my express commands; and as her queen and mistress, I will punish her disobedience.—Lead her away,'* said she to
to the attendants," till I have bethought me of some penance equal to the mag¬ nitude of her offences." rt If your majesty would suffer me " My lord Pembroke," interrupted Elinor, u I will not hear one word in extenuation of her ungrateful conduct.". *' Then I shall appeal to the king." * s Ha! to the king! they rob me of the very semblance of power!" muttered she.—" Well then, earl Pembroke, if 1 condescend to listen, what have you to offer in mitigation of punishment?" " Simply, your majesty," replied the earl, coolly, " that Ella being the daugh¬ ter of my sister and an Italian noble¬ man, herself a native of Italy, is not the subject of England, but of his holi¬ ness." Tbe queen*s mortification was beyond description--she was almost choked with rage; Monmouth clasped his hands in ecstacy; and Juliet St. Clair, who stood vol. ii. f behind
behind her mistress, could not suppress* a titter of exultation. The queen turn¬ ed quickly, and bestowed a heavy box on the ear; its weight, Ella knew by experience, was by no means light; but her fears were at an end for herself; sup¬ ported by the powerful interest of earl Pembroke, she was no.longer the friend-, less, isolated being she had hitherto been s and she stood unabashed in, the presence of Elinor. Before her majesty recovered breath, Monmouth had sufficient time to re-, count to Pembroke the cause of the present scene, and s his way of telling the story irritated her beyond measure*— " Ill-mannered lord, begone/* said she, addressing him, ** nor venture to in¬ trude again into our presence uncalled for!—For you, earl Pembroke, can you substantiate the truth of what you have alleged ?" 44 When and wherever your majesty pleases." 44 Then
44 Then how have I been imposed on by her art! Take her hence, my lord, antf observe, I discharge her from my service as a most ungrateful hypocrite, and I charge you never suffer her to enter my presence again. She was born to be the torment of my life; from the first hour she was received into my establishment, she has been engaged in fomenting plots between me and my family, and I warn you, lord, that you beware her arts: she is a dove in sem¬ blance, but a very serpent in reality." Pembroke hurried Ella from the pa¬ lace, and conducted her to his own house. She however appeared so anxi¬ ous to return to her brother, that the earl could not refuse to gratify her laud¬ able intentions. He spoke to her with. tenderness and solicitude, and assured her of his future protection—told her that lady Pembroke had accounted in a very satisfactory manner for her sudden disappearance from Longholm ; and ask- r2 ed
ed numberless questions relative to,Erie, whom he had never been made ac¬ quainted with. Yet under all this, Ella perceived, or fancied she perceived, a strange and powerful emotion. " I could wish to place you with lady Clifford until your brother is entirely recovered," said he. " It will then be proper, as you are no longer an appen¬ dage to the queen, that you should re¬ turn to England." Ella bowed her acquiescence, and having obtained his permission, she re¬ turned to the chamber of Eric, ere he had experienced any alarm at her ab¬ sence. The hostess, after informing her that the surgeon's report had been favour¬ able, added—" Ah ! mademoiselle^/ I prophecied you would soon return when the duke heard of the affair: he came hither immediately you were forced away, and when I repeated to him what had happened, he was in such a rage— and
&ntl he to release you at the expence of his life! Ah, mademoiselle, I can see." Ella blushed deeply at die insinuation of her hostess, but assured her it was to the interference of her unele, lord Pem¬ broke, and not to the duke of Mon¬ mouth, she owed her liberty. Ella's whole time was now devoted to Eric: Pembroke had taken care to have her comfortably attended and lodged in the house with her brother, until he be- <camj& juaificiently convalescent to be re¬ moved to his own. Eric mended gradually, and Ella lost no opportunity of amusing him. At intervals, she related to him her fright¬ ful rencounter with Giovani, and the subsequent conduct of the sibyl; spoke of the death of lord Marsham, and the extinction of the light on the Wizard's Tower: but on every thing relative to lady Pembroke, she preserved an inva¬ riable silence—but she detailed minutely all the other circumstances of her visit r 3 to
to C^erphifly-^-^ theme as interesting t& Eric as herself, and amused him with the account *of her dismissal from the service of the queen. Eric remarked that Pembroke was certainly well acquainted with the cir¬ cumstances of their birth—-" I wish, dear Ella," he added, " we could discard all suspicions from our minds relative to the fate of our father, I really feel so inclined to love and honour Pembroke, that I tremble to ask au explan^ttoli of his conduct, lest my doubts should be confirmed." " We think alike on this subject, Eric; but do not urge him to a disclo¬ sure that must oblige us to dil>wn hfe friendship. 'Twas strange he suffered us to remain so long unacknowledged." " Twas, Ella; but let us dismiss the subject; the vesper bell is tolling~~gD, my sister, and offer our united prayers to Heaven for its mercy towards me." Ella departed, attended only by her maid.
mmd* A door in the'court at the back of the house opened into a lane imriie- diately opposite to the church of StGe- ihevi^e, and thither she oent her steps. Th5& church wa^s thronged to hear a pcjputer preacher, and a crowd pressed fn>evfery moment; Louisa was separated from her mistress, without a possibility :of fining her again, The service was several "times interrupted by the illness Of females, who were too delicate to sus¬ tain the heat and pressure; and Ella at length found herself affected by a . slight sickness. Fearing a longer stay would inerease it, slie made her way with mxtie difficulty to a side door, and crossing a narrow dark street, she enter- ~ed f0t a few minutes, to recover herself and to avoid the observations of passen- Igers, the ruins of an old house before lier. ■ Screened from observation by the dark shade of the Outward portal, she s$fc on a broken column, reflecting on v 4 the
the best method of gaining the street of St. Quintin, when she heard ap¬ proaching footsteps, and the next mo¬ ment a man entered and placed himself within a few paces of her; she felt a se¬ cret terror—the house might be the haunt of banditti, and the man beside her one of the band who subsisted by rapine and murder. She scarcely dared to breathe—a thousand horrid images rose before her fancy : she looked rounds but feared to rouse the attention of the stranger by an attempt to escape. In the mean time the moon rose, a circum¬ stance rather unfavourable than other¬ wise, as it threatened every instant to expose her to the eye of the man who stood opposite; the moonbeams fell ex¬ actly on the spot, and afforded her a perfect view of his figure. Wrapped in a dark cloak, and a large hat slouched over his face, she could only guess at the contour of his features, but his whole appearance was calculated to in¬ spire
^pire distrust: he continued for some time inactive, but evinced no disposition to depart, and Ella could only implore the protection of Heaven, and vainly wish that she had not entered this suspicious places The moonbeams approached to the column on which she rested, and in a few minutes they would reach her; she dared not stir, and terror had so be¬ numbed her faculties, she was incapable of thinking, when the dead stillness was broken by the sound of a step from the interior: the stranger turned quick¬ ly, and in a gruff half-stifled voice, said— M Is it you, master?" He had evident¬ ly been waiting for somebody—Ella's terror increased, but how was it height¬ ened, when she heard the well remem¬ bered voice of Giovani inquire—*' If Pietro was below!" '* Ay, master," returned the man in the cloak, ** I have waited for you " He was immediately joined by Gio¬ vani, who was habited in a splendid F 5 dress;
dress; a brilliant cro§g hung suspended by a gold chain round his neek* mi the partial opening pf ki$ cloak displayed the richness of his doublet. Ella Ipoked with infinite ^stonisbment " Where is Marco?" asked Giovani. " He waits your lordship's pliers/ said Pietro, and Ella could §wcely cre¬ dit the evidence of her senses. " Where P 1 ' again interrpg^ted Gie* vani. " 41 tbe auberge, in the subnrb# where you met us first." "Curses on him I why did he not come hither: I want tp give particvilar directions in this affair." 4 i Well, 1 ' said Pietro, M here am h**ty what you have a mmd, and I'll bfar your orders to my comrade without mar¬ king any mistakes, I warrant," " But why came he not?" « Why, tp say truth, master, we have been engaged in some matters lately, that make us ppt over dfsirpuj tp fa seen
Is&en' Jrbroad* especially together, for those cursed English k&ep a sharp look¬ out after u^i they Aotft eare to tolerate such harmless felloes as us, seeing as tbey %ht their own battles out, and have no sort of call for a stiletto." Eild trembled with apprehension—the purpose of Giovani stood confessed, and she listened in breathless agitation to the folfowing words:—" Well, honest Pietro, I have deep and irreparable cause df hatred against the English ge¬ neral Monmouth." ** Never mind the cause, master; we never concern ourselves about causes, We look to the effect; you take me—the r^pird." ^* Ay, one hundred crowns." "'Tis little enough; but, as I was saying* the times are bad. Why let me see-^*fifty Crowns apiece—there's some danger in the undertaking too." " Well, harkee* Pietro; do the btisi- f 6 ness*
ness, and dispose of the body, and I will double the sum." '* Dispose of the body—what, convey it away, you mean ?" " True: wbo is your host and what is his name ?" 44 His name is Jaques Blaquet; and he's an honest fellow, as you may guess by our acquaintance with him. 5 ' " Would he, think ye, undertake to secrete the body in his house ?'* " No doubt; but then he must share the reward." ** 111 manage that affair to your satis¬ faction i bring me to speak with your host; the duke goes to the mask at lord Mowbray's to-night—there's ho tipe to dally; as we go I'll instruct you fur¬ ther." And Giovani followed Pietro out of the ruin, and left Ella scarcely conscious of her existence: she rose intuitively to quit the place, and had walked some distance ere she could arrange her ideas sufficiently
sufficiently to decide on the course she should pursue. She knew not the dis¬ tance to the suburb of St. Louis; it might be near—Giovani would possibly return while she deliberated, and the life of Monmouth hung on a single thread. It was now for the.first time she felt that he was dear to h« r; as the son of the countess of Caerphilly, she regarded him as a beloved brother, and hitherto she had imagined that she loved him for his mother's sake; but the danger that threatened him awakened emotions she had till then been a stran- ger to, and she felt that she loved Jiim for his own, and she had many reasons to believe be loved her She knew his mother cherished the same opinion, though she had never expressly said so: probably she wished to spare the deli¬ cacy of Ella, until Monmouth had de¬ clared himself; but she frequently spoke of her as being the future mis¬ tress of Caerphilly, and always coupled wilt-
the names of Ella and Monmouth in to plans of futurity. She remembered too the words he had addressed to her in his mother's saloon, previous to his departure for France; and she believed that he was not a mau to trifle with the feelings of a woman he esteemed. These thoughts passed With the rapi¬ dity of lightning through the mind of JBIla, and after revolving many plans to apprize Monmouth of his danger, she at last adopted what seemed to her the most prompt and effectual—to seek Godfrey of Belgarvon^ and communicate fo bim the murderous designs of Gio¬ vani ; and she believed she should find no diflSculty in discovering the house of the English general, as it must necessa¬ rily be known to the greater part of the inhabitants of Rouen.
CHAP-
* CHAPTER VIII.
The bell of St. Peter's chimed the hour of seven as Ella turned int# the main street; there were but few passengers in it, md after some hesitation she ad¬ dressed a sentinel, and inquired for the general's hotel. 4S This is it," said the soldier, pointing ta the house before which he was on duty. The dqor was open, and our heroine ascended the steps; hut she was about tp retreat, on seeing the hall thronged with a crowd of idle lackeys. A mo* ment's reflection on the cause that brought her there recalled her; she per¬ ceived that she was observed, and there* fore she ventured to address one whose #ppearauc§ wi$ rather Y^neraW0> and re* quested
quested to see, without delay, sir God¬ frey of Belgarvon. Conscious that the attentions of all were bent on her, she declined her head, after having urged her request. The person to whom she spoke saw and pitied her confusion, and with much civility conducted her into an inner room, when he informed her that sir Godfrey was absent from home, but was momentarily expected to attend the duke to the revels at lord Mowbray's. " Rest ye here, fair maiden/' said he; " and when he returns, I will straight conduct him hither." Ella thanked him, and he retired, closing the door after him. The room in which Ella now was opened into an immense saloon, beyond which appeared a smaller one illumi¬ nated ; both doors were half open; and while she sat in trembling expecta¬ tion, to her infinite amazement she heard a female voice, singing a canzonet: for
for a moment curiosity absorbed every other feeling; she rose—she entered the saloon-^she stopped, for the music had ceased: the door was opened by Mon¬ mouth, and she had just time to retreat unobserved. The female followed him* and clung with playful fondness round his neck: Ella held the half-closed door in her hand; she had not power to shut out a sight it was worse than death to look on. ." fon shall not leave me io-nkfat Plantagenet," said the lady; « I can¬ not, will not let jou go. Come, deais est, and see the little banquet I have prepared for you; it is an age, methinks, since Monmouth gave a whole evening to love and his Urbanina," 44 1 have promised, sweet, and cannot now retract," replied Monmouth. ** Ah, then, I fear some of the ladies at lord Mowbray's/* " No, my beloved Urbanina, you wrong my affection: when I forget the obligations
obligations I otvfe y§n, my heart will hdvW ceased to heit for @ver." **! do believe ydts,ldvef«he cried, as, leaning cto his arm, she entelted an du ter apartniernT, *t fhe instant Ella was recalled to recollection by th& Entrance <tf Geffrey. To him she told h^r tale as briefly m possible«^sttppliM Ihe ehie to the retreat of the ^ssassins*^eiijoft©d liim to seeredy, as to her #iare ih the transaction, and untreated him W ag- jptDint some trusty domestic to escort her home immediately, as ste observed, and justly, that the scene she had lately witnessed liad disordered her 4 she would not suflfer him to attend he% but wg^i him to oonsnlt the immedi^e safety of his master. When ^she reached home, after send¬ ing an teKcuse to fecir brother, Ella re- tiirf to her own chamber, to relieve the weight that depressed her anguished heart sHow were all the fond visions of tor faney stwegt away by Ae reality that evening
evening fesd presented *io Jier aching ^ight! Monmouth loved another; she had heard' it from his own lips—4here was no room to doubt; and'she felt that lier happiness bad depended more on his affection than she had even conceived. Alas I faow changed were all her future prospects! the gay dream of bliss was dispelled, and she sickened at the allure¬ ment the World held out to her; the dreadful void in her heart was «iot to te filled by any of these^ and she wept ih agony^t" Dear and ever beloved coun¬ tess," she cried, v nothing uow remains for yoiir adopted daughter, but the re¬ tirement of a cloister." The only consolation that remained for Ella was, that Monmouth was en¬ tirely ignorant of her ill-placed attach¬ ment : but in spite of her utmost efforts to suppress it, she stiU felt an anxious solicitude for his safety.—** Ingrate," said she; «' though for your own sake I disclaim all interest in ymr safety* yet for
for the sake of your beloved mother 1 rejoice in the chance that gave me to be the instrument of your escape from the dagger of the assassin. Alas! I fear me I have cherished your idea too fondly: ah, cruel Monmouth, you first awakened those hopes, and you have crushed them forever!" Ella now remembered that Mon- rnouth's visits to her brother had been <since her constant residence in the same Mouse) Jess frequent, and ^seeding; brief; she bad hitherto attributed this to delicacy towards herself; but now the .cause stood confessed—Monmouth loved .another! She passed the night in tears; and it v/as late ere she ventured to appear be¬ fore her brother: he instantly observed her altered looks, and with eager solici¬ tude inquired the cause. Ella spoke of the crowd at St. Gene¬ vieve—said it had made her ill, and told of bad dreams that disturbed her rest Eric
Erie was satisfied, and far from sus¬ pecting the real cause. He believed, for Monmouth had told him so a thousand times, that he adored his sister; and though, previous to the attack on Pon- toise, he had entertained some suspi¬ cious that he was engaged in an amour of another kind, he still imagined that Ella held the first place in his heart. It is true, Eric felt some surprise at the transient inconstancy of his friend, for his partial fondness exalted his sister above almost every other female in the world; and as far as personal beauty and goodness of heart, Ella certainly stood unrivalled. From lord Pembroke they learned the danger of Monmouth, and his providen¬ tial escape. One of the villains, with their host, had been secured, and had confessed the plot, though both were ignorant 6f the name and rank of their employer, who, with the more daring Pietro, had escaped; strict search had been
been made throughout the city, and es¬ pecially in the old ruin, where the con* spirators had met; but no trace of them remained; and it was finally discovered* that they had sacrificed their companion to a stratagem which favoured their own escape. Eric gained strength very rapidly,, and was so far recovered from his wounds, as to be removed to the hotel of Pem¬ broke, who delayed his departure for England, purposely to present his ne¬ phew to the king. Lady Clifford had accepted the invi¬ tation of lord Pembroke to become an inmate in his mansion while Ella re¬ mained there; and our be ^e found in her a lively and sensible companion; yet an evident and oppressive melan¬ choly still bung over her, and she wish¬ ed for the hour of her departure for Eng¬ land, that she might no longer hazard the chance of meeting Monmouth. Eric was at length quite jpestored t@ health,
health* and was presented by the earl of, Pembroke to his majesty, whf> received' him with mijch affability, and confirmed his patent of nobility, as lord Eric dj, Montimar; he bestowed much deserved panegyric on the young warrior, and raised, him to a higher command under Monmouth, Eric was conscious that he owed part of his good fortune to his ser-. vices, but more to the support of lord Pembroke. Ella declined being introduced to the king; she anxiously avoided every chance of meeting Monmouth, and it was evident he also strove to shun her. —" How qhanged he is*" said Ella, " since the happy days we passed at Fauconhridge together!" and she sighed as she made tb§ reflection. Every preparation being in readiness for the earl's departure for England, Ella, with kss regret than she had before ex* penenccd in separating from Erie, bade him and lady Clifford adieu, and, escort- ed
ed by the earl, took her farewell of Rouen, and proceeded on her way to England, with mixed feelings of regret and satisfaction. To say that Monmouth rejoiced at her departure, would be wrong; but he undoubtedly felt relieved by her ab¬ sence. He had read, in the altered and repulsive manners of Ella, that she was acquainted with his dereliction; and though he still adored her, he could hardly hope to obtain her forgiveness; but it was not till after she had left Rouen that he learned it was to her he owed the preservation of his life, and that she had been for some time beneath his roof: he recalled the events of that even¬ ing, and his feelings may be better ima¬ gined than described. His only hope rested on the influence his mother held over the mind of Ella, and he resolved to transmit to her a faithful account of his errors, and entreat her to sue for his forgiveness; for which purpose he dis-
patched Godfrey to England; and he felt but little sorrow at the sudden dis¬ appearance of Urbanina a few days af¬ terwards.
CHAPTER IX ** (jar cette moitie du monde a qui nature a dit svis homme recut avec la sensiHiit^ un melange d'aoibuioii et de gloire, mais cellr k qui elle dit sots mere .dut etre fortune toate d'araour." Eari^ Pembroke journeyed straight to London, where business of state threat¬ ened to detain him for some time; in * which interval information arrived of the death of the queen dowager. The news excited scarce any feeling among the people, but it ensured the emancipa¬ tion of the royal family, and Ella re¬ ceived an invitation from the queen to visit her. vot. II. o The
The princess Isabella received ber with delight.—" Oh, I am so happy,'* she exclaimed, " that you are at liberty to attend me to Germany, whith.er I am going to complete my education in tlie emperor's court. My suite is now in perfect readiness, and my good mo¬ ther claims for me your promise. I know you will not withhold it, and we have already the sanction of earl Pem¬ broke." Ella was not in a disposition to raise objections, and the princess received ber acquiescence with transport:-—*' Come, dear Ella," said she, " and I will intro* duce you to another young lady* who is to accompany me, and whom I $hall love almost as well as yourself, and also to the countess of llehester.* The princess led tbe way to ber own apartments, where she presented our heroine to the young haronei§ of 0*h manviile; and Ella embraced, with real affection, the interesting Zerinda. "Oh,
44 CMi, then you were known to each other before, ladies!" said Isabella, as Ella inquired for her little friend Azim and Safie; 4S I told the countess of ll¬ ehester that you were formed for friends. —<-Did I not, madam ?" 44 For once I allow* your royal high¬ ness, you were right;* but hasty con¬ clusions are seldom correct" 44 You forget, madam* that the lady Ella has been long known to me." ** No* my dear; I allow the superior merit of both y$ur ladies, but I wish to guard you against the effect of first impressions. Your highness has more discrimination than is expected at your years; but you are too prompt in form¬ ing opinionsjs, generally in favour, I submit, but sometimes to the prejudice of very deserving people, a course quite as injurious to yourself as them." H My governess's praise is always qualified*" said tbe princess with a smile Zerinda informed Ella that she bn4 g 2 the
the happiness of leaving her little bro¬ ther under the care of her grandfather, the baron Mounteasrle; and that Safie was, with the princess's permission, to abt/cuvi iici duiuau! About three weeks after, every thing was in readiness for the departure of the princess, who it was understood was destined to become tbe bride of prince Frederic (afterwards Frederic the Se¬ cond) ; but in this interval Ella had the pleasure of again bidding adieu to Eric, who came to England with dispatches, and the society of the countess of Caer¬ philly. * - . * The countess had, with some diffi¬ cult), been enabled to obtain informa¬ tion relative to t^e conduct of her youngest son, that palliated tbe part he had taken against Monmouth, ^nd she came to court immediately op the death of the queen dowager, to interest Isa¬ bella in his behalf, and to procure a re¬ version of the sentence of outlawry that had
had been pronounced against him, for his attempt to bastardize his brother, at the instigation of the queen dowager, when Monmouth was in the heyday of her favour, and she chose to consider him as a part of the royal family. It appeared that Robert Fauconbridge had throughout been instigated by the malice of sir Gervase Osterly, who con* stantly laboured to instil into his mind a hatred of his brother, and exaggerated the supposed injury he received from the culpable conduct of his mother, and having in some measure rendered Ito- bert unworthy her affection, represented with acrimony the unjust distinction she made between her children; aud as he could not be always near to pour the poison into his credulous ear, he placed a creature of his own about hiin; and Arnold received instructions to foment the seeds of discord he liad implanted in the mind of Robert. Robert Fauconbridge had no know* G 3 ledge
ledge of any cause that could operate so as to have engendered the malice of sir Gervase; he was, of course, ignorant of his rejection by lady Fauconbridge, a circumstance that rankled in his dark bosom, and he had sworn never to for¬ give ; and therefore readily believed that a friendly interest in his welfare alone actuated the conduct of his relative. Lady Fauconbridge clid not suspect the motive of sir Gervase, in pressing the frequent visits of Kobert to his cas¬ tle; she hoped he bad forgotten the mortification of her refusal, and that he really felt the preference he expressed for Robert; far from Imagining he drew her son from home to plot i?r ^inst the peace and honour of his mr^er. His appeal to the king in behalf of Robert at once opened ber eyes to the long-* practised deceit, and the dark malignity of sir Gervpe Osterly. The confession of Arnold bad re¬ moved part of the blame hitherto at¬ tached
tached to Robert, and his mother was truly rejoiced to find him less criminal than she had been led to suppose; and as tbe death of Elinor removed one ob¬ stacle to her wishes, she lost no time in repairing to London, to solicit his recall from exile. She had great hopes of in¬ teresting the queen in his behalf, and the acknowledged mildness of Isabella warranted her expectation. To lord Pembroke the countess first applied for a reversion of the decree ex¬ isting against her son, and her favourable opinion ©f tbe earl was net diminished hy bis conduct in thk affair; he took occasion to thank her for her attentions to Elk, and exf ressed his happiness in being serviceable to her in return; and bo asealously did be undertake tbe charge cf the whole affair, that lady Caerphilly had the satisfaction of obtaining a prompt pardon for Robert, and a resti¬ tution of his right to inherit the estates of Fauconbridge on her demise. The Q 4 sentence
sentence of banishment however re¬ mained in full force against sir Gervase Osterly, whose estates had long been confiscated to the crown. It only re¬ mained to cdnyey the information to Robert; but the countess was entirely ignorant of his retreat He had not even applied to her for the means of transporting himself to the Continent, and a thousand fears for him, under the auspices of the desperate sir Gervase, presented themselves to her maternal bosom. * Ella, it may be supposed, shared the feelings of her beloved friend; she had entertained a partiality for Robert; he was the son of the countess of Caer¬ philly, and she therefore rejoiced at his exculpation from the crimes alleged against him. For the incendiary, sir Gervase, she felt an increased abhor¬ rence, though her pure mind could scarcely comprehend the possibility of his detestable malice. Our
• Our heroine had now the happiness of introducing her brother and her friend to each other, and the impression both received from their first interview was highly-favourable, and exactly an¬ swered the expectations of Ella.-—" I see," said she to Eric, " you do justice to the many amiable qualities of the charming countess." w Indeed I do," replied he; " I think I hardly ever conversed with any wo¬ man so every way engaging. I am al¬ most tempted to doubt the possibility of her being the mother of Monmouth, she looks yet so apparently young and fascinatingly lovely." ; *' I will present you, Eric, to another friend of mine, whose beauty, though of another kind, is almost beyond de- seriptidn." Eric sighed, and Ella reechoed it back; both were i?nconsciotis of having done «o. Perchance Eric thought of a 5 his
unknown, and Ella recalled the dereliction of Monmouth. The following day #crind» visited our heroine^ and during her stay Eric returned from his morning's ride, and BUa, with secret triumph, led him to- wards jhcr beautiful friend. ~** The youag bnpeoneas Qsm^nville, my dear brother," said she. The colour forgepk for a moment the clieek of JEric, and thm returned with violence; he bad same difficulty in pay¬ ing his compliments to Zermda; mid as mm m he couM, without infringing on tbe rules of good-breeding, he retired. Elk remembered the d£te$tptwi#be had heard Eric express for Oemanville when speaking of bis treason in Normandy; but &he wns sorry to see bim carry tm prejudice so far as to treat the lovely Kerinda with indifference; she had hoped that tiie romantic passion Erie di$rished for an unknown ftmalc f would have
have yielded to the exquisite beauty of tbe baroness Osmanvilie, After the departure iof Zerinda, Ella sought her brother* she had observed his agitation on being presented to her friend, b$t was unprepared for the in¬ telligence that Eric had discovered the unknown object of his fervent adoration in tbe person of the baroness Osmanvilie. 44 Would to Heaven she were not the daughter of Osmanvilie!" cried he, " I wi$h rfie were not, Eric; but she has another claim on your consideration," returned ElkH~" Zerinda is the niece of your good frieijd, father Leopold." w Mighty God !** cried Eric, " were w# both at the same timo prisoners in the power #f a Ikentiou^banditti! Per- chance, ff$ lbe search after Zeruwia, father Leopold was acd&entally sent to my deliverance," Eric was obliged, by the mil of ho* nour, to rejoin the army in Normandy, after taking an affectfoute leave of his & 6 sister
sister and the countess of Caerphilly: Pembroke had many commissions for the king, and the last hour of Eric's stay in London was devoted to the commands of the earl. The countess, whose suit had termi¬ nated so happily, only waited the depar¬ ture of Ella, ere she returned to Faucon¬ bridge. Their parting was that of ah af¬ fectionate daughter and beloved parent; and after having repeated a thousand adieus, the countess broke from the embrace of Ella (who was compelled to join the princess), and set out on her way to Fauconbridge, having obtained the promise of earl Pembroke to allow lady Matilda Marsham to visit her du¬ ring tlie summer; and on her arrival, she found Godfrey waiting her with dis¬ patches from his master.
CHAP-
CHAPTER X.
The princess Isabella and her suite (con¬ sisting of her governess, the countess of llehester, the ladies Ella and Zerinda, with their attendants, father Adrian her confessor, and a page, named Theodore Mandeville, with some inferior domes¬ tics), embarked at Sandwich, in a yacht, provfded for the purpose of conveying them along the llhine to Spires, where the English envoy at the court of Vi¬ enna was to meet her. They crossed the Channel in safety; and after recovering from a slight incon¬ venience occasioned by seasickness, pur¬ sued their course without meeting with any thing to impede their progress, and beguiled the tedious navigation of the Rhine
Rhine by each relating in turn some amusing tale, " After all this fiction," observed the princess one day, " I should like a little reality. Let every one relate the his¬ tory c^ their own life. Lady Ella di Montimar has been through a series of adventures that will furnish us with sufficient amusement for to-day, and to¬ morrow the baroness Qsrnanvjlte and Theodore shall relate theirs. So now, dearest Ella* begin." Ella obeyed the princess without be* sitation, who suffered her to conclude before she asked any questions; she then said—" Really, Ella, you have disclosed more of the secrets of my family than I ever heard before. And so the princess Elinor, the daughter of Geofrey and Constance, really exists in some obscun part of Uie kingdom ? I do not believe my mother is aware of tbe fact. Well, now do describe her to me ; I long to hear what die is like/' "The
44 The princess Elinor/ replied Ella, " is the most amiable being you can possibly conceive; but though there is much dignity in her miea, your royal highness has more the air of majesty than the meek Elinor. She is, in form and features, a perfect Madona, and her countenance is a faithful transcript of her heart. Bending over her harp, she might be mistaken for the St Cecilia, or kneeling before the altar, for the holy St. Margaret herself, but never for the queen of England. I have often heard ber express a wish to end her life in the peaceful shades of a convent, and I have no doubt that she is at present an inha¬ bitant of osie." ** Indeed! But is it not surprising that we never hear a mention of her name? What can be the reason think ye, EUa ? My father cannot surely be afraid she should takeaway his crown," " I am not, your faigfa»ess f competent to
to answer your interrogations," replied Ella, 44 I suppose not; I should Hke, how¬ ever, to see this princess; but there is no chance of my returning to England for some time." Agreeable to the desire of th^ prin¬ cess, Zerinda repeated all she e^uld re¬ collect of her life that possessed any in¬ terest ; and having concluded, Theodore was next summoned, and the blushing youth, after many indistinct apologies, began the following narrative. 44 1 was not so fortunate as to be born a subject of England, though I entertain the greatest affection for the country (whicii has long been my home), and a most profound respect for your royal highness. - w The first events that were impressed on my fancy, was the kind attention and endearing solicitude of a widowed mo¬ ther. ,' Alas! f this happiness was of short duration. I lost my indulgent parent in
in my fifth year, and was immediately consigned to the care of an uncle. For some years he continued to treat me with tolerable attention, but his subse¬ quent marriage with the marchesa di Montimar- -----" " Who ?" asked Ella, and the prin¬ cess at once. 44 1 was going to caution lady di Mon¬ timar that her broach is unclasped," said Theodore. " But to resume my story. After the marriage of my uncle with the marchesa del Nouva, I perceived a visible alteration in his conduct towards me, and was neither distressed or sur¬ prised at being told he wished me to leave his house, in order to complete my studies. A monastery, at some considerable distance from his castle, offered, he said, the best accommodations and instruction of any in the province, and thither I was conveyed. The gloom of a monastery was altogether repug¬ nant to my feelings, and I soon became melancholy
melancholy and dej^ted, and this dis¬ position was increased by the intimation that it was Ihe will of my uncle I should become a monk. Young as I was> I was perfectly aware that he had not the power to compel me, against my inclina¬ tion, to abjure the world ; but I had no friend to assist me, and the whole fra¬ ternity among whom he had placed me, were devoted* by large bribes, to his "The property of which I wa^ the. heir was beyond calculation: various estates in different climes, and sums of money to an immense amount, deposit¬ ed in the hands of different bankers^ feiiown only to my uncle, which would become his own, instigated him to the projict of forcing me from the world. His measures were taken with so much address, that I was entirely cut off frt>m ail communication wit*i the very few people I had known, and rigorously con** fined within the walls of the monastery. At
At first I was treated with gentleness, and persuasion and entreaty were adopt¬ ed to gain me to their purpose; but when those means failed, the most se¬ vere measures were pursued, and I was alternately cajoled and threatened; but nothing made the desired impression. The fraternity to whom I was consign¬ ed were rigid in the extreme; their laws did not permit them to leave the monastery, even to receive confession, and few visiters were admitted within their walls. <s Hot far from th monastery, in a retired cell, dwelt a hermit, who also led an austere life; but he was charitable to the poor, and never refused an asy¬ lum to the weary traveller who jour¬ neyed near his retreat. To this man my youthful hopes pointed as the means of my deliverance. He had sometimes oc¬ casion to see the superior on behdf of the oppressed tenants belonging to the monastic lands, and on one of those ac¬ cidental
cidental visits, J presented, to him un¬ observed a written account of my situa¬ tion J had prepared beforehand, .- "' Some weeks passed, the persecutions of the brotherhood continued unabated, and I heard no more from the hermit; when, to my infinite joy and surprise, an brder arrived from his holiness to set me at liberty. I cannot describe the joy I felt at being allowed to return to the abode of my infancy. My uncle re¬ ceived me with seeming kindness, and the marchesa was all condescension. They were on the eve of their departure on a tour, which they assured me it was their previous intention I should partake, and they were actually about to dispatch a messenger to bring me from the mo¬ nastery. My uncle disavowed all inten¬ tion, of secluding me from the world, and,threw all the blame on the monks themselves. Youth is unsuspicious, and easily beguiled by outward appearances. I entertained no doubt of my * uncle's sincerity;
sincerity ; he affected the most outrage¬ ous passion with the holy brotherhood, and I was perfectly satisfied and happy. " The manners of the marchesa were conciliating in the extreme, and I ac¬ companied them in their tour. After a journey of some months, we reached England, where my uncle said he had been drawn by some of the affairs con¬ nected with my property, and thither, as a matter of course, we came; and not to tire your highness by a long recita¬ tion of the same scenes, I will pass to what is more material. if On our journey towards St, Albans (the place of our destination), we rested, as was usual, at a monastery. I slept longer than my custom in the morning, and on my rising I received the petrify¬ ing intelligence, that my uncle and the marchesa had departed, and left me be¬ hind, with instructions to treat me with unqualified severity. " When I recovered from the stupor occasioned
occasioned by the sudden shock this dreadful information conveyed, it fortu* nately happened that the English Ian* guag$ had formed a part of my studies, and I quickly perceived that my perfi¬ dious uncle had, by some unaccountable mistake, induced them to believe that I had already taken the monastic vows. I determined to humour the cheat, and to oppose deceit with its own weapons. I feigned a sincere penitence for my past offences, and strictly conformed to &Ii the regulations of the order; a short time served to lull suspicion, and I was allowed comparative liberty, but beyond the walls I had no means of communi¬ cation. *' I revolved a thousand plans % my emancipation, but all were impraeti-* cable: I had no pecuniary resources, and in the kingdom I had not a single fmndv " In this forlorn situation I $till chs* rished hope, when one night three of my own country^^n claimed the rights of
of hospitality from the superior. The youngest of these, whom I will call Urban, prompted by curiosity, mingled among the brotherhood. I sought a moment's conversation with him, painted the misery of my situation, and implored him to convey a packet to father Igna¬ tius, the hermit of Mount Stillica. He listened immediately to my request. And let me do justice to the generosity of bis disposition: his conduct since that period has drawn down on him the loud¬ est censures, and I even cannot but blame him; but to me his conduct was generous in the extreme; he faithfully conveyed my letter to the hermit, sup¬ plied me with money, and transmitted to me, from time to time, all the infor¬ mation that could be of service to me. Yet were the strict rules of the monas¬ tery an insuperable bar to my escape, and I still lingered in captivity, waiting the ev^nt of my packet to father Igna¬ tius; the promptness of his assistance formerly,
formerly, rendered me sanguine now; and yet there was a possibility my pac¬ ket would not reach his hand, but hope sustained me. " From Urban at length 1 learnt that my uncle and aunt had perished at sea in a storm, on their return home; but at the same time he communicated the intelligence that an English adventurer, who had traced his descent from the founder of our family, had laid claim to my titles and estates, and (my non¬ appearance confirming the tale my uncle had propagated of my death) had ac¬ quired peaceful possession of them. This was an unexpected turn in my affairs; but my thoughts were diverted from it by the news' of duke Richard of Mon¬ mouth's approach, with the purpose to sack the monastery." Theodore looked at Ella—she blushed deeply, wondered how he could know the connexion be¬ tween her and Monmouth, and he con¬ tinued his story without interruption— " Our
** Our superior made a slight resistance; but at length the gates were thrown open, and the duke admitted; I took advantage of the confusion, and depart¬ ed from the monastery disguised, aniong the train of Monmouth. * e The kindness of Urban secured me a comfortable retreat, and thither I di¬ rected my steps. I found a home, and the treatment of a parent, from the friend to whom Urban recommended me, and for his sake I love and revere the English nation. From the time of my escape from the monastery, I heard no more from Urban, save from public report. Many months passed, and I despaired hearing from Ignatius, and during this time Urban's family disco¬ vered the correspondence that had taken place between us. Circumstances had also recently occurred, which made it the interest of that family to ruin me. The good friend who still protected me was privately informed of the schemes vol. ii. h in
in agitation against me, just in time to preserve my life from the assassin's dag* ger. To save me from destruction, he published a feigned story of my death, and bv that means foiled the raachina* tions of my enemy. A favourable op¬ portunity offering for me to leave the kingdom, under the auspices of your royal highness, through the medium of earl Pembroke I was placed in the train of the lady I have now the honour.to serve;" and Theodore bowed to the prin.. cess as he concluded his narrative. " Well, yours is a singular story* Theodore," said the attentive Isabella ; 44 yet I think you have some reseryat. tions; and though 1 love dearly to come at the bottom of every thing mysterious, I would not have you expose your per¬ sonal safety to gratify my childish curi*. osity. I think you deserve my confi¬ dence, and in that hope I promise you my future protection." Theodore bowed on her hand, and she felt
felt a tear fall upon it The princess was affected, and to hide her emotion, she turned to Elk, aftd gaily said*-*- " This i$ what my governess, I dare sayi would call yielding to first impres¬ sions." Ella had involuntarily made the same observation on the story of Theodore that the princess had so openly express¬ ed—nay more, she was persuaded that somewhere she had seen him before, though where she could not conjecture; the turn of his features was familiar to her remembrance, and the tone of his voice was particularly so: where she could have seen so beautiful a youth, and yet have forgotten, Ella could not imagine; but when at evening he hung over the water, and sung the evening hymn to the Virgin, she was certain she had heard that hymn chanted by the same melodious voice before; but in vain she tasked her memory to recall the scene where it had happened. Theo- h 2 dore
dore appeared unhappy-—the circum¬ stances of his story, if true (and Ella doubted its truth), might be supposed to render him so; at all events, he was highly interesting in his manners and appearance, and she determined to bury her suspicions in her own breast.
v/Jrl-iVJir-
CHAPTER XL
4i Lady, throw back thy raven hair, Lay thy white brow in the moonlight bare, I will look on the stars* and look on thee, And read the page of thy destiny. " Mark yon star—it shone at thy birth." The whole party arrived at Spires in health and spirits. The princess was re¬ ceived with marked respect by the au¬ thorities of the town, and the English envoy waited to escort her to Vienna; and after a short stay at Spires, the prin¬ cess pursued her way to Ratisbon by land. . The second day of their journey the party took their noontide repast beneath the shelter of the tall forest trees; the princess was delighted with the manner h 3 of
of their rural repast, and ere it was end¬ ed, they were saluted by a troop of gip¬ sies. The idea of learning the future des¬ tiny of herself and train amused Isabella, and after some slight objections, she ob¬ tained permission from the countess of llehester to have her fortune told by these tawny sibyls.-—" I will not be the first," said she to Ella, " that they may not suspect my rank—do you take pre¬ cedence of me." Our heroine obeyed, and presented her hand to an old hag, wbo stepped from the group on learning their fdsh: she continued to gaze on the delicate palm for some time; at length she said, and shook her head—" Lady, you have lent your aid to weave a band that circles you now as lightly as a silken cord, but there will come a time that it will gird you as a chain of adamant. You have sworn a rash vow. A dark cloud black¬ ens in the perspective, but a bright co¬ ronet
ronet glimmers through the darkness, and there is hope." « 4 And now me," said the princess, extending her hand. The gipsy regarded it for a moment, and then letting it fall, she dropped on her knee, and cried aloud—'* Sovereign of Germany, all hai{!' Her words were caught and repeated by the troop, and the princess's own at¬ tendants joined in the salutation—" So¬ vereign of Germany, all hail!" The prediction seemed to fill every heart, with delight, save only the youth¬ ful princess herself; she heaved a deep sigh, and sickening at the loud acclama¬ tion, turned away. Zerinda's turn came next, and to her the sibyl addressed the following words —*" Fair fortune greets you, lady, sole remnant of a noble house; thine inhe¬ ritance shall be lost and won when you become a bride." B4 " Strange!"
" Strange!" murmured the young baroness. Ella was musing on the mystic tenour of her own destiny. The princess first resumed her self-possession, and ob¬ served the absence of Theodore.—** Let him be found," said she; " I am deter¬ mined to hear the future fortunes of the mysterious page." - The attendants instantly commenced their search, and the reluctant page was compelled to obey the summons of his mistress. " Why did you absent yourself, The¬ odore ?" said Isabella in a peevish tone. " Come hither; it is my pleasure that you submit to learn your destiny from these." The page blushed deeply, and his hand trembled as he held it to the an¬ cient sibyl.—" Fear not, seeming page,'* said she; " the stars smile on your un¬ dertaking. When seated at the mouth of a cave in another land, where the loud
loud mountain-torrent descends at your feet, and the thunder spends its force above your head, look to the southern hemisphere, and thou shalt behold one single star emerge from the clouded fir¬ mament; it is the star of thy nativity, and that hour is full fraught with des¬ tiny, Confide to her who sits beside thee then the secret of thy fate. Thou shalt liVe to triumph; a larger inheri¬ tance than your father's shall be thine, so thou preserve thy secret to the ap¬ pointed hour." The princess was pleased with this last prediction, and resumed her usual good-humour. The rest of the journey passed pleasantly, and at Lintz the train embarked on '* "* Danube, and from thence they arrived in safety at Vienna, where the princess was received with every demonstration of respect and at¬ tention. The princess and her suite were lodg¬ ed in a palace belonging to count An- H 5 halt
halt^ on^ af the chaaaherteins:; and soon afto h^r atviv«l, sh^ visited tib& r^yal family. Prince Frederic, her de#^n.fd hnsban4 was then for th^ 6ra| t«$*& presented to her* After aha retained ffdm the palace, Isabella retired to the privacy ©f her chamber, from whkih she excluded every one; hut when she ap¬ peared at the suppei^tahle, she had evi¬ dently been weeping. Several months passed in Vknna, during which the English princess eon*. tinued to prosecute her studies^ and she soon acquired a perfect knowledge of the German language, its history* cus¬ toms, and manners, Tha emperor's court was esteemed tlie most polished in Europe; it maintained a happyuse. dium between the dissolute manners,of Rome, and the less refined habits of the English of that day. Prince Frederic had travelled, and was allowed to be ? an accomplished prince, but too yonng to be a deeided character. His sisters were
were kind and attentive to Isabella; and whenever the princess appeared in pub- Ite; she Was greeted by the loud accla¬ mations of the multitude as their des¬ tined empress. Isabella was tali of her age> and a certain air of majesty in her person gave an appearance of more maturity to her whole figure; her eyes were blue, full, and commanding; her hair a light au¬ burn* and the contour of her features strictly Grecian; and notwithstanding th& extreme loveliness of her t\^o at¬ tendants, she certainly appeared to be a very beautiful and elegant young woman. The merits of her future spouse failed to impress the princess of England with any sentiment in his favour, and not¬ withstanding his polite assiduities, she continued to regard him with apathetic coldness. This* considering her extreme youth* was considered of little conse¬ quence. About five months after her first resi- h 6 dence
dence at Vienna, the health of Isabella began visibly to decline, and change of air was recommended. At first she ex¬ pressed some reluctance, but at last con¬ sented to try the baths of Wisbadeti. But her disorder appeared rather tojn- crease than otherwise, and she returned to Vienna a very shadow of her former self. She affected retirement, and avoid¬ ed company, became peevish, and sel¬ dom appeared in public, and then only at the urgent request of lady llehester, By two persons only was the nature of the princess's disorder suspected. For a length of time Ella had not surmised it; an accident, trifling in itself, first awakened her doubts, and she was soon fully convinced that the princess had imbibed a passion for tbe handsome page. Ella observed the conduct of Theodore with strict attention, and the result was, a confirmation of her fears. She saw that he suspected, and avoided, the tenderness of his youthful mistress, and
and a thousand times wished he had never been received into the service of the princess; yet she acknowledged that there was nothing in his conduct to blame, except the mystery he still af¬ fected, and which had first interested the youthful fancy of Isabella. Ella's affectionate regard for Zerinda was increased by a constant residence in the same house with her, and she con¬ templated, with delight, the probability of her becoming the wife of Eric; but though she did justice to the prudence .of her friend, she confined her suspicions of Isabella's ill-placed affection to her own bosom. She possessed a large share of the princess's confidence, and she ex¬ pected, with dread, the moment when she should confide the fatal secret to her. As our heroine one evening pondered on this theme, she received a summons from the princess, and met her at the bottom of the staircase, in her veil.— " Your
H Your highness k not going out at this hour ?^ asked she. -1 am," snid the princess in a deeided tone ; ** and you will attend nm" Elk feow^d h«r snbmfestonv thww ber own veil over her figure^ and pre¬ pared to follow her mistress. Through a small door in the garden the princess and her lady emerged into the public streets of Vienna. It was dusk; but entirely envdoped in their veils, they passed uninterruptedly along. The princess led the way. She stopped at, length* after many turnings, in a re. tired street; they were on the shaded side of the street, and Isabella appeared to hesitate. She paced backwards and for^. wards se vwai times, seemingly irresolute, when Elk saw, with surprise, Theodore on the opposite side. At first she suspect¬ ed an assignation between him and the princess; but he did not observe them* and 1 knocked at a door, before which they now stood. It was immediately opened,
opened, and the page entered without further ceremony. * *Tis as I suspected," said tha prin¬ cess ; * hat I came hither ter unravel the mystery of my fairly-seeding page, and I will fathom it, at all hazards, ere I sleep." Ella offered no eorament on the ex¬ traordinary conduct of her mistress, but followed her in silence. She crossed the street, and, without hesitation, knocked at th© house where Theodore had en- teted. The door was opened by a fe- m$te domestic.—'* I would speak with your mistress,'* said the princess, and she pushed aside the servant and as* eended the staircase. There was n® light to direct lier, yet Isabella passed on to a door on the right, at the top, and, without scruple, opened it. Ella was infinitely more surprised than the princess* who came prepared for* the seene before them. Theodore supported on his bosom a young and lovely
lovely female. But if Ella was sur¬ prised at the situation of the heretofore modest, unassuming page, how was her astonishment increased when she beheld, in the woman before her, the never-to- be-forgotten features of the mistress of Monmouth—the lady she had seen in his hotel at Rouen, and to whom she had heard him declare his affection! she sickened at the recollection this incident recalled, and the princess appeared for a moment disconcerted. Theodore rose to attend her. The lady seemed quickly to comprehend the situation of the page, and an arch smile played round her lovely mouth.—" Insolent 1" muttered the princess, as, without further notice, she turned to leave the room. < Ella and tbe page followed, and after retracing the same path by which they came, regained the private door of the palace. Not a word was spoken by either, until the princess, at the entrance of
of her own apartments, dismissed both her attendants for the night. Ella retired to her chamber, and there reflected at leisure on the strange events of the evening. The only circumstance that afforded her any satisfaction was, the evident falsehood of the mistress of Monmouth; but she was shocked when she thought on the violence of Isabella's passion, which could induce her so far to forget the respect she owed herself and family, as to seek her page at night in a strange house, and most probably the residence of a courtezan. She trem¬ bled to image to herself the next step the princess would adopt, and she re¬ volved the propriety of consulting the countess of llehester, or father Adrian, on the desperate conduct of her royal highness. She was persuaded that the princess had some other confidant, who had traced the haunts of Theodore, or it was impossible she could have pro¬ ceeded with so much certainty; who that
that confidant was she ^ould not sur¬ mise. She could hardly guess the lengths Isabella would go, if the countess kne^v, and were to adopt harsh niea- stfr&s touards her, which Ella feamd W<luld be the case; she therefore deter¬ mined to complain to the governess of sotttte irregularities in the page's con- chtet, and request his dismission from the ^service of the princess, without any allusion to the real cause for her reqnest Ella certainly felt some surprise and indignation at the duplicity of Theodore; the purity of his conduct during his residence with the princess had elicited her admiration and respect, and she was shocked at the positive proof of his de¬ pravity she had witnessed. If his affec¬ tions had been devoted to a modest fe¬ male, she would rather have rejoiced in the circumstance; but that one so young, and seemingly so irreproachable in his morals, should devote his evenings in secret to a woman, who, as the mistress of
of Monmouth, was at least an equivocal character, was almost beyond belief: yet she had seen the woman who hang with fondness on Monmouth, reclining with an appearance of equal tenderness on the bosom of another, and that other the seemingly virtuous Theodore. Our heroine was not summoned as usual to attend the princess during the following day, and she sought the oppor¬ tunity of urging her request to the countess of llehester to dismiss the page, but she avoided any reference to the princess; and the governess pro¬ mised to attend to her desire. The next day the princess sent early to her chamber, and Ella followed the messenger into her presence. Isabella was alone, and having dismissed the attendant, she accused her of betraying her confidence, and spoke of the com¬ munication she had made to the coun¬ tess of llehester with angry petulance; and ended by an assurance of taking some
some desperate step if Theodore were removed from her service, Ella could only lament the infatua¬ tion of her mistress; she was too well acquainted with her character to hope that opposition would effect any good; and yet she felt the heavy responsibility that had devolved on her. Thus it was that she determined at all hazards to watch the conduct of Isabella closely. She had few opportunities of seeing Theodore, who purposely avoided her. A few evenings after Ella had decided on the most judicious method of pro¬ ceeding with her, she missed the prin¬ cess from her apartment, and having sought her all over the palace, she im¬ mediately concluded that she had again followed Theodore: under this impres¬ sion, she wrapt herself in her veil, and issued forth in search of her. Our heroine had not noted so accu¬ rately as Isabella the different turnings that led to the street where Theodore's mistress
mistress lived, and she soon lost all clue to it: she therefore gave up the idea, and endeavoured to find her way back to the palace. After some diffi¬ culty, she had nearly reached it, when turning the angle of the garden wall, she suddenly encountered two men; they were, however, so intently bent on some purpose cf their own, that they suffered her to pass unmolested; but she lost the power of proceeding, and leant for support against the wall, when she recognised, in the harsh accent of the men, the dreaded voices of Giovani and Pietro. The darkness sheltered her from their observation, and she gained the palace as fast as her agitation would permit. As she closed the garden door, she saw by the partial moonbeams the princess walking unattended in the garden. " So, lady Ella di Montimar," she said, « I perceive you have assumed the pri¬ vilege of watching my actions; but I caution
caution you to beware of what you do; I am not to be offended with impunity/* Ella's recent terror deprived her of the power to reply, and the princess on perceiving her situation immediately resumed her former kindness, and anx* iously inquired—** If she was unwell ? w Ella was glad to avail herself of this plea to escape to her own chamber* where she gave way to her tears with* out restraint. The name of Gkvani was coupled with every thing mosfrab* horrent to her feelings—murder! sacri¬ lege I sorcery! and violence! and be seemed to stick to her like her evil genius; or how could she aeceunt for having met him in England, in Nor* mandyt, and lastly in Gennany? and what was his present purpose she trem¬ bled to think; and so completely had her meeting with him unnerved her; that she passed a sleepless night* The princess sent to inquire after her health, and Zerinda came with the in* tention
tention of passing the day in the apart¬ ment of our heroine; her spirits began gradually to recover their accustomed tone, and she listened to the affectionate conversation of the young baroness with tolerable composure, who, after some time, suddenly exclaimed—" By the bye, Ella, I have some news that will surprise you." Ella, trembled to ask the nature of her intelligence, and Zerinda w^nt on*— " I am sure you would ne er guess what I. have to tell you; but as I hate to be kept in suspense n^self, I will tell you at once. Now, could you ber lieve it possible that the amiable The¬ odore should have been accused of sa* crilege?" " Qf sacrilege! impossible, Zerinda I you surely are misinformed?" "No, indeed," replied the baroness; 44 the thing is proved beyond a doubt; he has stolen a nun from the convent of St. Theresa." " Holy
" Holy Mary!" exclaimed our he¬ roine—" can Theodore be really so lost to virtue ?" « Why, I could hardly credit it my¬ self," said Zerinda; " but the countess of llehester is quite enraged at the interest the princess takes in his behalf, as he is proved to be so utterly undeserving her condescension; and she herself assured me it was a fact; and the princess is gone privately to court, to intercede with the empress in his favour." Ella's astonishment was beyond con¬ ception. That Isabella, af er this addi¬ tional proof of his depravity, should even condescend to interest the empress in his behalf—that Theodore, a youth scarce eighteen, could be so finished a hypocrite, was wonderful! She thought of the tale of his former life he had re¬ counted, and felt more than ever inclin¬ ed to believe it all a fiction of his own invention; she had hardly patience to reflect on the many instances of delicacy and
and purity his manners had daily evinc¬ ed, .and she wished, for the happiness of the princess, he had never been admitted into her suite.
CHAPTER XII.
*Tis not meet for a little foot page, Who runs through mud and rnire, And takes his supper upon his knee, Should be iov'd by a lady fair. Old Ballad. The crime of Theodore was publicly spoken of hy, the household of the prin¬ cess, and it was considered as a matter of course that her highness should exert herself to obtain the pardon of her ser¬ vant. The page was a general favourite in the palace, and more than one of the female domestics aspired to the conquest of the handsome Theodore. The crime VOL. II. i of
of fiberating a young creature from her prison, was more venial in their eyes, tfas& in the severe penance ®f the church. He had been arrested by the ag^nfs of the metropolitan bishop, and every one of her higbness's establishment saw his departure with regret. Isabella returned from the empress's palace with an assurance that the bishop should receive an intimation to overlook the fault of Theodore; but it was hint¬ ed that he must depart from Vienna forthwith. The princess, in her eager¬ ness tp obtain his pardon, acceded to the terms proposed; but it was far from her intentions to dismiss the page from her service, Ella saw, with feelings or regret and surprise, the return of Theodore The instant he entered the palace,, tlie; prin- cess sent for him, and her kindness and assurances of protection were so un* guardedly warm, that the countess of llehester felt alarmed: she looked at Elk
Elte, and seemed at once to develop the cause of her wish for Theodore*s dis* mission. The recent order for his de¬ parture from Vienna relieved her from the greater part of her apprehensions, and she concluded it better to suf¬ fer Isabella to remain in ignorance of her suspicions. But love is eagle-eyed: the princess became immediately aware of the imprudence she had betrayed, and she therefore coolly desired Theodore to retire, and to bear in mind that he was to leave Vienna in a few days. Ella saw the finesse of the princess, and had her doubts if she would suffer the page to leave her; she was astonish¬ ed at her forbearance, for this last act of atrocity, instead of alienating her affec¬ tions from him, seemed to have added strength to her passion. The next day her highness was indis¬ posed, nnd her illness continued to in¬ crease daily; several physicians were of opinion that change of climate only 1 2 would
would restore her; they were unanimour in their recommendation of the air of Sicily; and the countess of llehester,, alarmed for the life of her royal pupil, set about immediate arrangements for, conveying her thither. The princess had desired to dismiss Theodore herself; and as it was impos¬ sible to admit him to her chamber, he received instructions to wait her reco¬ very ; however, when it was concluded that she should travel, she observed there no longer existed a necessity for his leaving her. It was in vain that the countess urged the disgrace that would attend the cha¬ racter of the page; the princess insisted, and her health was too delicate to bear opposition. The good governess secretly determined to separate ber from the page the first convenient opportunity, and she communicated her sentiments and fears to father Adrian. It was the latter end of autumn when the
the English princess and ber suite de¬ parted from Vienna. The weather was -remarkably fine for the season, and her highness seemed resolved to do justice to the opinions of the physicians, for she gathered health and spirits in proportion to the distance she travelled from the capital of Germany. The countess assi¬ duously strove to separate Isabella from •the dangerous Theodore, and Ella cordi¬ ally seconded her endeavours. The princess affected not to notice their at¬ tempts, and seemed careless about the •affair; she often suffered him to loiter -behind with her two ladies, or dispatch¬ ed him forward to order relays of horses, but betrayed no solicitude to detain him near her. This conduct succeeded with the coufttess, but Ella's suspicions re¬ mained undiminished. Thus passed their journey until they reached the Alps, where the rough and broken paths frequently separated the party from each other's sight; and I 3 Ella
Ella determined ta take an opportunity the road afforded to ask an explanation of Theodore* ^id to urge him to a vo¬ luntary banishment from the princess: he had of late attached himself invari¬ ably to her, though she constantly treat¬ ed him with the reserve he so justly merited. She bad sometimes fancied that she saw a tear steal down his cheek, and often he seemed on the eve of ad¬ dressing ber; and, half inclined to pity him, she resolved to favour the next at¬ tempt he made. In this disposition she forbore to urge her mule forward to keep up with the princess, and Theo¬ dore, as was his practice, slackened his pace to attend her. " This scenery k beautiful," said he at length, # " You have crossed the Alps before, I think, Theodore?'* siddElla, " Ah* kdy Elk, I hate indeed, and under very different circumstances." "Tthm
** Th^n we are really to believe your romantic history ? n tt ¥es^ Mdy; I,did not exaggerate tbe difficulties I have encountered, nor ihe mortifications I have suffered, one of the heaviest erf which is the loss of kdy Ella di Montimar's esteem. I am innocent of crime." u But, Theodore, it is at all times in your poweis to regain it, if you redly are mnocent, thougb that to me appears a paradox." v ** If I dared name the friend in Fug- land t© whom I owe my safety* and whose unalloyed confidence I possess, ytott would no longer doubt me." 44 Is that friend known to me ?* asked Elk. 44 And beloved by you, kdy.** Ella thought on Monmouth, and ceased to press the page furfeher on the subjeei*-**-" But* Theodora/* she conti¬ nued, after a pause of some length, '* your cannot be ignorant that it is the 14 wish
wisli of the princess's friends that you should leave her service." 1 " Believe me, lady, I should rejoice in any chance that would separate me from her; but I have more heed of her protection than you are aware of." They were now descending Into a hollow dell, luxuriantly adorned with mountain shrubs ; the party of the prin¬ cess was entirely out of sight, when Theodore suddenly reined in his mule, listgned for a moment, and then seizing the bridle of Ella, he, in an Agitated tone, bade her dismount. She hesitated. " I conjure you," cried he, ** if you value your own safety!" and he instant¬ ly turned his mule loose. "Ella knew not what to think, Theodore pressed her, and at length she reluctantly dis¬ mounted ; he hastily slipped the bridle from her mule, and implored her to fol¬ low him. Ella seemed as if under the magic of a spell; she obeyed', and he im¬ mediately struck out of the beaten track; and
and having made his way through the -thick clustering shrubs, he passed be¬ tween the open chasms of the jutting rocks; and having satisfied himself that Ella followed him, and that he was se¬ curely shielded by the trees from the road, he stopped to recover breath, and Ella demanded an explanation of his extra¬ ordinary behaviour. " Listen!" he cried. " In a few mi¬ nutes you will hear them." " Whom ?" demanded she. At that moment she heard a loud shout " Mer¬ ciful God!" she cried, " what does it portend ?" , " The princess and her party are at¬ tacked by banditti," replied he, * w Oh Heaven 1" cried Ella, " what will become of them ?—• and how know you this?" f v As we descended the dell, I heard the bark of a dog, peculiar to this coun¬ try, and trained by the robbers of the mountains to announce the appearance 15 of
of passengers: the band, on hearing the signal from the poor, unconscious ani¬ mal, sally forth to sme their prey; who seldomescape. * * ^ s " Alas! the princess md my dear i&* rhada will fall into their poWtr! perhaps be murdered by tbemf* and Ella shud¬ dered at the idea. " It must be our care to preY^it thatx Let us ^deavour to reach the nearest town \or village, ^id dispatch the ttiili* tary to their aid.^ With this intention th^youthfiilpalf were about to proaeei, when the sound of passengers approached, ahS both stopped for a moment to listen. " Perhaps it is in our p©w0r," s^id Eha, " to save those travellers frona the hands of the banditti; ors*^**I < Misr the trampling of mules-^the piarty may be stiongenou^i to resene the princess." ** Hist!" whispered Theodore^ " itis probably a deiaehed party of the ban* difcti returning to their hmunts." The
Th$ Objects of their solicitude ad* vaneed briskly. They conversed at in* tervals; £nd ^s they came nedr # Ella recognised tbe hated voice of Gio¬ vani. Theodore caught his accents at the same moment; the colour instantly for¬ sook his cheek, and his pallid lip quiver¬ ed as he exclaimed, in a low, agitated tone—" Holy Mary! it is Giovani di Montimar!" Those words were not lost on Ella, though her terror prevented her making any observation on them at the time, and she followed Theodore, who eagerly forced his way through the low bushy shrubs that lined the mountain's side. They were soon at a considerable dis¬ tance from the place where they left their mules, and continued to descend; the path was dreadfully rugged, and the fre¬ quent jutting points of rocks that inter¬ vened, prevented their seeing if they were near to any place of refuge, or when 16 they
they caught- a partial view of the de¬ scent, it was appalling; and as our,fa¬ tigued heroine cast a fearful glance be¬ hind, the tremendous precipices above seemed every moment in danger of fall¬ ing to crush them beneath its horrid base. K This is an unfrequented track, Theo¬ dore?" said Elk. " It is indeed," was the reply. What then were the feelings of Ella when' she suffered herself to reflect on her desperate situation! Alone in the bosom of the mountains, with the strangely mysterious page—the youth who was the companion of a courtezan \ —who had violated the sanctity of a convent, and who was known to the desperado Giovani! Sometimes she meditated turning aside into some of the many chasms of the cliffs, that form¬ ed a broken pathway around the shelv¬ ing sides of the mountains ;* but her heart recoiled from absolute solitude in this
this frightful wild, where there was no vestige of, humanity—na appearance of animation, save where the gristly moun¬ tain goat looked down upon her from the summit of the nodding precipice; and she was constrained, by ber fears, from leaving Theodore, though she fol¬ lowed him with trembling steps. Hope urged the fainting travellers forward, and the possibility of reaching some asylum to shelter them during the night, forbade them to relax their exer¬ tions. The sun had set, and the heavy clouds portended an approaching storm. Still they pressed forward; neither of them spoke, and the solitary silence, was at length interrupted by the distant peals of thunder, Ella shuddered with dis¬ may ; there was no friendly shelter near, and they must abide tbe pitiless pelt¬ ing of the storm in their present exposed situation, AU at once the path became less rug- gech but the storm approached with ra- i\ - pidity,
pidity, and both were on thd point of giving up the attempt to proceed* fii^ ther, when they suddenly emerged from the deep ravine into an open and ex¬ tended prospect. They were not more than fifty fathoms from the foot of the mountain; but to descend the perpen¬ dicular height was beyond the power of haman footstep, and at its base rolled a foaming chasm. The poor bewildered wanderers east a look of anguish at each other, and stood irresolute on the edge of the gulf. At length Theodore eried —~" See, the path that runs along the brow of the precipice is frequented; the trodden grass confirms it; and hark! I hear a sheep-b^ll. Courage lady! we are near the habitations of manV* But the rain began to descend in torrents, and tbey were fain to shelter themselves within the mouth of a gloomy fcavem» that distended its immense* jaw^ beside the pathway. Overcome with fatigue, the two tra*, vellers
vellers sat at the mouth of the cave, and Ella contemplated with affi-ight the pros* pect around. Theodore was beside her; if he cherished any enmity against her* he might, with hardly an effort, precis pitate her into the roaring surge below. He Spoke not, but appeared to be bu¬ ried in deep thought She breathed a fervent prayer fo the Virgin; and she had scarcely concluded it, when she was startled by a sudden exclamation of Theodore.-—" Do you see that lonely star, lady EUa? M and he pointed to the horizon. 44 1 do/*, she faintly answered. " Do you hear the thunder above our heads, and the mountain torrent be¬ low?" M I da" " And you remember the gipsy's prophecy ? It is the star of my nati¬ vity. Every thing confirms the predic¬ tion ; and I am now permitted to con¬ fide
fide to her who sits beside me# the se¬ cret of my destiny." , The face of the page brightened with animation, and Ella regarded him with trembling surprise,—." Have you no re-* Collection of my features, Elk?'* said he. " I have often thought so; but I am not certain that I ever saw you before you were attached to the suite of the princess." " You have, Ella; and I thank the Virgin that I can now confide to you my sad fate. You remember the nun Marina, of St. Margaret's?" ** Perfectly. Mother of Qpd! you cannot be------" . '* I am indeed that very Marina, but not a nun. The story I related to the princess on the Rhine was literally my own, save the variation of sex; and the kind,friend who protected me, after my flight from* St. Margaret's, was lady Matilda Marsham. She procured me, through the medium of her father, the means
means of leaving England, and bade rrie, for her sake, to love the lady Ella di Montimar. You will now confess that I could have no design on the princess, whom I pity from my heart. The lady with whom you surprised rae was the Italian who assisted to liberate me from my convent, and introduced me to the knowledge of lady Matilda Marsham ; she was confined subsequently in a con¬ vent near Vienn id I effected her de¬ liverance from thence, and was, as you afterwards know, accused of sacrilege." *' But how," inquired Ella, w could this Italian be on terms of intimacy with lady Matilda? And how came you known to the wretch Giovani ? and is it possible he can bear my name ? M " I will explain all this to you here¬ after; but my fatigue must be my ex¬ cuse for the present." " I cannot conceive how it could all happen," said Ella. " But pray by what
what name shall I address you lit future, Theodore, or Marina?" es Neither ; for I shall' n&ver rejoin the train of the princess again, though it may be necessary for me to wear these boy's habiliments until I can claim in person the protection of tbe Cclonna femily, or of th© pope himself My own Christian appellation fa Virginia."
CHAP-
CHAPTER XIII.
" Non de*tare it csa che dorme." The storm bad in some degree subsided during the recital of Theodore, or, as we ^hall in future call the quondam page, Virginia, and tlie eart of the tra¬ vellers were greeted by th& welcomfe sound of a shepherd's pipe from the vat ley below; their reiterated calls were answered by the boy, who was tending his flock to the fold; and he directed them to descend by a securer route, about half a mile from the spot where he m- formed them they would find a bridge over the river. Thm intelligence infused fresh spirits into the youthful pair; and Ella pro* ceeded with a light stef^ now that she was
was divested of her fears of the page, and Virginia felt relieved from a load that had long oppressed her, and happy in the confidence and society of one of her own sex, she scarce heeded the length of the way. At last they reached the place described by the shepherd, and descended with ease to the valley below, "crossed the bridge, and were once nlore within sight of the habitations of men; and here they stopped, to deliberate on the course they were to pursue. To the left lay {as they conjectured by the many glimmering lights that were scat¬ tered in the distance) a hamlet; and nearer on the left, one singleiignt seemed to warrant the cell of a hermit, or a soli¬ tary cottage, and thither the friends •mutually decided to take their way. ' The shades of evening deepened around rthe way was shaded by tall trees, that grew in natural luxuriant clumps, at rliort distances along the valley; the body of one that had been recently felled extended
extended aeross the path the fugitives had taken, and Ella unwittingly stum* bled, and fell over it; in her fall she un¬ fortunately sprained her ancle. They were now reduced to a new dilemma, for the excessive agony of her foot pre¬ vented her walking, and Virginia strove in vain to support her. The light was at a short distance, and Virginia was compelled to leave Ella sitting on the tree, and seek assistance from the inhabitant of the place, who¬ ever it might be. Virginia bounded along the plain, and reached the beacon that had attracted her steps, when to her surprise and re¬ gret she perceived that it issued from a little window in the gateway of some large fabric. It had been the wish of the young friends to avoid publicity, as far as with regard to the purposed ap¬ peal to the magistracy in behalf of the princess they conveniently could. But what was to be done ? Ella's situation demanded
demanded immediate aid, and Virginia determined to implore the only assist¬ ance within her reach; she was about to sound the bugle, when the noise of ap¬ proaching horsemen prevented her, and she waited their momentary arrival. The foremost, as he advanced, demanded her business; and conceiving him to be the lord of the mansion before her, she recapitulated her tale, and with prompt attention he commanded his train to go m search of Ella. Poor Ella had fainted from fatigue and pain, and in that state was convey¬ ed to the castle, accompanied by Virgi¬ nia, where every possible attention was paid her; but the excessive fatigue she had so recently undergone, and the pain inflicted by her sprained ancle, brought on a fever, and for some days her life was in imminent danger. The first perceptions of our heroine, on returning to recollection, was the strangeness of the chamber: she remem¬ bered
bered foiling over the tree, and that Vir¬ ginia bad left her to procure assistance, hut she remembered no more; $nd ahe drew aside the curtain, to see tf any one waited: but she was alone. Several tapers burned in different parts of the room; but the furniture, and every part of it, was unknown to her. Several pic¬ tures adorned the walls, but their habits were different from all she had hitherto seen, and she conjectured that she was lodged in some house in the dominions of his lioliness. As she lay musing on this subject, the curtain was gently drawn aside, and she beheld, not the expected form of Vir¬ ginia, but the well-remembered coun¬ tenance of the sibyl of the Wizard's Tower. She uttered an involuntary cry, and bid herself beneath the bed¬ clothes. E|la was persuaded that what she had seen was the effect of her disordered reason; and therefore when the atten¬ dant
dant returned soon after to her bedside, she did not recur to the circumstance. Virginia had frequently visited her, but had not, since the restoration of her senses, found an opportunity of speak¬ ing to her: at length she seized the op¬ portunity of the attendant withdrawing, to communicate to her the intelligence that she was in the castle of the eonte Ostorius, who usurped the possession of her estates; but that her person being entirely unknown to him, and favoured by her disguise, she hoped to escape from thence (till she could claim the in¬ terference of the pope), as soon as Ella was sufficiently recovered to travel- told her that she had received an assu¬ rance of the princess Isabella's escape from the banditti-—and begged Ella to suffer her to pass for her brother while she remained in the castle; adding—" I have much more to tell; but the^very walls in this castle have ears." Ella determined, for the sake of her friend,
friend, to hasten her departure as soon as she was able to leave her room; and therefore sent to inform the eonte, that with his permission she would pay her acknowledgments to him (as she was informed the contessa was indisposed), as soon as it became convenient for him to receive her. An immediate answer informed her the eonte waited the honour of her pre¬ sence in the saloon. Virginia assisted her friend to descend to the saloon, and Ella entered, to express her grateful thanks for the conte's hospi¬ tality. But what were her sensations, at discovering in the person of the eonte sir Gervase Osterly ! In a moment the truth flashed across her mind, Virginia had said, an English adventurer had traced his origin to the founder of her family; and sir Gervase Osterly had succeeded in proving liimself a descend¬ ant of the Properfeet Ostorius, who was known to have long resided in Bri- vol. ii. k tain:
tain: his name had been corrupted by the idiom of the English language, but he had convinced the council of the Lateral! that he was a genuine branch of the family, and was now beyond all question the eonte Ostorius. The wealth of the late eonte, the fa¬ ther of Virginia (for her uncle also usurped the title), was beyond calcula¬ tion ; but the sordid soul of sir Ger¬ vase took alarm when a niece of the marchesa started up from obscurity, and claimed the property of her aunt, He was loth to part with any portion of his newly,acquired wealth, and to secure the possession of it, he married the de¬ scendant of the marchesa, not, it may he surmised, from motives of affection. Ella was carried fainting from his pre¬ sence, and when she recovered and con- tided to Virginia the cause of her fright, she was doomed to receive additional cause of sorrow. ** Are you, dear Ella, sufficiently firm to
to converse on any subject of your past life?" said Virginia. 44 1 believe so," she replied. " Well then, may I ask how it is pos¬ sible, that knowing Giovani di Monti¬ mar, you were ignorant of his name?" Ella explained. " You have then to learn, that my uncle, the late eonte Ostorius, married the marchesa di Montimar, who was the aunt of Enrico di Montimar, your father, and the present contessa after her death claimed the estates of Di Montimar, to the prejudice of your brother, asserting herself the lawful heir, Giovani being illegitimate. In con¬ sequence of this arrangement, the eonte, as the husband of Ipollita di Montimar, is become the natural guardian of your¬ self, and the young man I foolishly re¬ solved to represent, before I knew who was the lord of this castle, and it is now too late to retract, as my doing so would certainly excite injurious suspicions. k 2 Tiie
The contessa I once saw, but I trust under my disguise, she would not recog¬ nise me." Virginia poured into the astonished ear of Ella this detail * but she forbore to suggest the worst that arose before her in idea, that those wbo sought to assassi¬ nate Virginia to possess her inheritance, would not scruple to do the same,to Ella and her brother. Several days passed, during which the eonte sent regularly to make inqui¬ ries after the health of the lady Ella. The interviews between her and Vir¬ ginia were necessarily unfrequent, and constrained; the presence of the atten¬ dants prevented any confidential con¬ verse ; and as there did not remain any longer an excuse for secluding herself, our heroine was compelled, however re¬ luctantly, to appear in the saloon, after reiterated requests from the eonte. Having fortified her mind, by earnest prayer, to meet the man she had many reasons to dislike, and dread as the hus¬ band
band of her aunt, Ella descended to the breakfast-table. She was supported by the presence of Virginia, who had been so iSlfj accustomed to her disguise, that she felt infinitely less uneasy in the pre¬ sence of the otber sex, than our consci¬ ous heroine now did for her. The eonte alone waited them in the saloon. He ^ppear^d to suffer no embarrassment from his present situation and past con¬ duct to Ella; complimented her on her improved beauty; spoke of lady Caer- tphilly with unconcern; and gaily asked if she was to become hereafter duchess of Monmouth. This question over¬ turned the composure she had assumed, and cheeked the inquiries that had risen to her lip of the fate of Robert Faucon¬ bridge. He then reverted to what he chose to denominate his frolic, in lock¬ ing her into the summerhouse at Fau¬ conbridge ; adding—** I took care, how¬ ever, to send lady Fauconbridge to your assistance." She was aware of the false- K S hood
hood of his last assertion, but it was impolitic to refute it; and she endea¬ voured to change the conversation by an inquiry for the contessa. W* u Ah! very true," said he, " Eric has informed you of our affinity to you, and I entreat you in future to look ,on me as your uncle. The almbst constant in¬ disposition of the contessa will prevent her exercising the authority of your na¬ tural guardian; it therefore devolves on me, and assure yourselves, that I have your interest so sincerely at heart, l ; sh&ll lose no opportunity of exerting myself in your behalf." Virginia betrayed very little emotion, but Ella's acknowledgments w^re almost inarticulate: she at length ^quested permission to pay her respects to the contessa. " Eric has made the same request*" mid the eonte, " but I fear I mdst deny it for tbe eontessa, during her illness, never admits her own family, and stran¬ gers
gers as you are at present, I can hardly venture to promise you an introduction to her." Ella lamented this more particular¬ ly, she observed, as she was cornpelled, by the duty she owed the princess Isa¬ bella, to join Jier immediately. ** By> no means," replied the eonte; " I have the pleasure to inform you, that the princess escaped from the ban¬ ditti, through the fortunate arrival of other travellers, whose assistance, with the stout resistance of her highness's at¬ tendants, effectually overpowered the robbers: I am sorry to add, some lives were lost on both sides; but I saw the princess afterwarda at Turin, and ob¬ tained, her permission to detain you as a visitor, until you receive her orders to join her either at Naples, or on her re¬ turn to Germany. » Erie, not being part of her suite, but merely travelling for amusement, can have no excuse to take him hence for a few months; but I beg K 4 you
you will consider yourselves at liberty to depart when you please, though I cannot but suggest, the length of your stay will be considered a compliment to us—I answer for the contessa." • Tbe friends could oppose nothing to this moderate language, from a man in whose power they felt themselves; and on their rising to withdraw, he promis¬ ed to send a message to the contessa, with their joint request, and detained Erie with him the rest of the morning. At dinner the party met again, with the addition of Giovani; Ella had been prepared for this, and therefore felt the less embarrassed. Giovani did not even appear to recognise her, and on conside> ration she was not surprised at this; he had never seen her but once, at night, in the Wizard's Tower, and for a short time only; it was therefore extremely likely he might have no recollection of her. She had learned from Virginia the cause of her frequent rencounters with him
bim since, and that they had no refe¬ rence to herself; yet she shuddered every time his voice sounded in her ear, and felt relieved when the meal was concluded. " The contessa will receive you this evening," said the eonte, addressing Ella and Virginia; "you will therefore attend her summons." Ella thanked him for his prompt at¬ tention to their wishes, and she cour- tesied to him and Giovani as she with¬ drew. Virginia bowed gracefully and retired, also glad to escape the entreaties of the eonte and Giovani to join the evening's debauch. 44 This Eric di Montimar is a pretty milksop," said Giovani; " fitter to wear a petticoat and spin among his sister's maids than to mix with hearty fellows. But she! don't you think, eonte, she is bewitchingly lovely ?" " She is beautiful, no doubt," replied the eonte; "but I have seen lovelier girls often in Britain." K 5 « Well,
n Well, truly, I n#ter did," rijoinet Giovani.
CHAPTER XIV.
« ^-,—-^.Safety dwells Remote fi'oxti multitude. The world's a schdoV Ol *rong j «£nd What prf>fi^ients swarm around! We mubt or imitate or disapprove; Muse hhi as their accomplices or foes; That stains 0V"' innocente—this wounds our'peace.*' The contessa Ostorius had surnmoned her daughter, the lady Urbanina, : to her presence before she admitted Ella and her supposed brother, and the follow¬ ing conversation passed betweeri them: but it may" be better to preface it by some account of the Di Montimar fa¬ mily. Ernulpho and Albert were the only sons of the marchese di Montimar— their
their dispositions were as opposite as their fortunes. Ernulpho was the presumptive heir to the titles and large possessions of his father; at the age of twenty-two he married a daughter of the house o^' Modina, and at his father's death be¬ came marchese di Montimar. Albert was originally intended for the church, but having imprudently united himself in marriage with an indigent branch of the DeL Castro family, he disappointed the high expectations of his father, who never could be induced to pardon him his twofold disobedience; and he retired i»t» obscurity, on a slender pittance al¬ lowed him by th^raarchesa. His be¬ loved Ipollita supplied to him the loss of every other tie, and only for her sake he lamented the implacability of his father. In less than a twelvemonth after his union with her, Albert was deprived of his lovely bride; she died in giving birth to twins* and his afflictioh was so k 6 powerful^
powerful, and so deeply rooted, that he never recovered its effects, but in a few months afterwards he followed the being he had so fondly loved to an early tomb. The two orphans, Enrico and Ipollita, were reared in obscurity by Ernulpho, now marchese di Montimar; and at a proper age Ipollito was destined to take the veil, and Enrico was educated to fill some inferior post under the government. When Enrico was eighteen, a distant relative of his mother introduced him to the notice of lord Charles Marsham, then ambassador from Richard the First of England to his holiness. The man¬ ners of Enrico were prepossessing in a high degree, and lord Charles promptly pledged himself to take the charge of his future fortunes on himself; and he instantly appointed him to the vacant post of his secretary. Left alone in the world, and neglected by their proud relations, the orphans of Albert felt a more than common affec¬ tion
tion for each other: from her earliest in¬ fancy Enrico had been the fondest ob- ject of Ipollita's love, and his affections centred iri Ipollita. Lord Charles Mar- sham was an amiable and romantic young man; he listened to the warm commen¬ dations of Enrico on his sister's beauty, accompanied him to visit her at the grate of her convent, and insensibly became enamoured with the lovely novice. Ipol¬ lita returned his passion, but Enrico was of consequence kept in ignorance of the sentiments of both, and their frequent meetings were carefully concealed from him. At length, when the passion of the lovers bad reached its height, lord Charles found a pretext to dispatch his secretary to England, Ipollita eloped from her convent, and during his stay in Rome lived privately in the house of lord Charles. The death of his father called lord Charles (who was now become earl of Pembroke) to England, and thither he repaired,
repaired, accompanied by Ipollita. , It was easy to conceal her from the unsus¬ pecting Enrico, who neither doubted the purity of his sister, or the probity of his friend. Pembroke, though he would not wed her, bad sworn eternal constancy to the credulous Italian, and she would not suffer herself to suspect the possible de¬ crease in his affection; and the news of his marriage with a daughter of the baron Monteagle,fell like a thunderbolt on her astonished senses; for a time she doubtai the truth of the report, but a confirma¬ tion of her fears wrought her to an agony. , The earl sent to her a confidential do¬ mestic, with large offers of remunera¬ tion, and rich presents; but Ipollita spurned at both; her passions «were wound up to the highest pitch by his desertion, and regardless of the feelings of his new-made bride, or the chance of meeting Enrico, she forced herself into his presence. Pembroke wa$ terrified by her frantic threats; he strove tk> sooth her—
Jber—talked of the king's commands for bim to wed the dai filter of a British noble-r~said his love for her was undi¬ minished—and implored her to return to her own house—promised to visit her often, and to continue his protection to¬ wards her. Ipollito loved, and therefore was ea¬ sily deceived; she left Pembroke in a state of mind hard to be described, and returned home to wait his arrival. Pembroke loved and admired his beautiful countess, but he was obliged to conceal his affection for her from his vindictive mistress, who swore to sacri¬ fice her as a victim to her slighted pas¬ sion; and though he every day disco¬ vered new charms in the manners and person of the countess, and the passion he bad once experienced for Ipollita was quite extinct, yet fear kept him a slave to her will, while he execrated her in his heart. Many months passed, and Pembroke's hopes
hopes of an heir were doomed to be dis¬ appointed. Ipollita rejoiced in a cir¬ cumstance that was calculated to lessen his regard for the countess; she was her¬ self pregnant, and she still cherished hopes of one day becoming the wife of Pembroke; the subsequent birth of Giovani in a great measure reestablished her former power oyer the heart of her inconstant lover; and the physicians having recommended change of climate for the health of the countess, she went abroad, accompanied by the earl's sister, lady Gertrude Marsham and Enrico di Montimar, leaving Pembroke within the magic influence of Ipollita; and du¬ ring the absence of lady Pembroke she bore him a second child, a daughter, afterwards named Urbanina. But the spell was broken by the re¬ turn of the countess with renovated health and beauty; all the earl's former tenderness returned, though he strove to guard his altered sentiments from the Argus*
Argus-eyed Ipollita; but when his long- delayed hope of an heir was gratified by the pregnancy of the countess, and birth of lord William Marsham, he secretly resolved no longer to keep terms with his mistress; and to secure the safety of the countess and her infant, he obtained an order from the king, and caused Ipollita to be privately seized, and con¬ fined in a convent, in a distant part of the kingdom. During this interval the earl was dispatched on an embassy to the court of Scotland, to insist on the homage of the Scottish monarch to the king of England. Ipollita was carefully disposed of, and Enrico accompanied his patron, but the countess remained behind. Enrico was now twenty-one, and possessing a large share of manly beauty, while on the Continent he had frequent opportunities of seeing the lady Gertrude; a mutual passion was the natural consequence of this unguarded intercourse; the countess became
became their confidant, and the youth¬ ful pair were united without the sanc¬ tion of earl Pembroke. The degree of familiarity that, in con¬ sequence of her knowledge of his mar¬ riage with the earl's sister, existed* be¬ tween Enrico and the countess, ^excited the suspicions of Pembroke si short time after the birth of his son; and during his stay in the court of David, an acci¬ dental circumstance confirmed his ^vorst fears*-.a letter from lady Gertrude to her husband, directed in the well-known characters of the countess. Enrico was absent when the courier delivered the letter into the hands of the earl, and he waited his return with impatience. In the mean time Ipollito escaped from her confinement, and followed the earl and her brother to Scotland. She saw, and related to the astonished En¬ rico, the tale of her seductiott by Pem¬ broke, and urged him to revenge her dishonour. Enrico received his still-be¬ loved
Ipollito with tenderness; but he was the husband of lady Gertrude, and perhaps he regarded the behaviour of Pembroke in too venial a light, and he could not be blind to the culpable con* duct of his sister. The se^l of a letter was sacred in the eyes qf Pembroke though it covered his dishonour; he resolved to elicit the truth from Enrico himself, and to wipe out his c&sgEaee in the blood of the pre¬ sumptuous Italian. With the hasty decision of a mad¬ man, Pembroke sought Enrico on hk return; he found him with the open letter in his hand; tbe precious epistle had obliterated from his mind his recent interview with his sister, and as Pem¬ broke entered unseen by him, he pressed the dear paper to his lips in a transport of delight This was confirmation to the frantic earl—he»rushed on the un¬ armed youth, and buried his dagger in his bosom. The unhappy Enrico fell at his
his feet, weltering in his blood J Pern-* broke left the bleeding body, and flew to dispatch a courier to his confidential servant, with orders to sacrifice the coun¬ tess also. The order was scarcely given, ere he encountered the frantic Ipollito, her arms and face besmeared with the life- blood of her brother. Kneeling, she obstructed the path of the earl only while she poured into his ear ber frightful denunciations of vengeance; the attend* ^ant-dra^ed4ier Jaintingfrom hfe sight, and a brain fever for some days promised to relieve the wretched Ipollita from her hated existence. The earl returned to the room where he had left the body of Enrico, to se¬ cure the letter; he found, read it, and was fatally convinced of his mistake. With the speed of lightning he flew to countermand his order for the murder pf his innocent countess*, and with heart¬ felt
felt contrition he gave directions for the interment of the unfortunate Enrico. The instant Ipollita was fit to be re¬ moved, he caused her, with her chil¬ dren, to be conveyed back to Rome, and supplied the means for paying her ex- pences at a convent, where, under the immediate jurisdiction of the marchese di Montimar, she would be securely dis¬ posed of. But the punishment of the earl fol¬ lowed promptly on his crime: his first courier reached his destination—the se¬ cond was slain by the moss-troopers on the borders, and Aubrey received the order of his lord to murder the countess. But the prudent Aubrey suspected that the earl was kbouring under some mis¬ apprehension, and he cautiously com¬ municated the affair to his mistress, coun¬ selling her to withdraw for a while to an estate of her lord's in Normandy, Thither she went, accompanied by the indignant lady Gertrude, and the faith¬ ful
ful Aubrey. As they coasted along the shores of Normandy, a hurricane arose, and the whole crew perished in the storm, with the exception of lady Ger¬ trude, who was picked up by some ven* turous fishermen, before animation t was too far suspended to be recalled; she was restored to learn the fatal intelli¬ gence that Hr beloved husband had fallen by the dagger of her brother. A casket of jewels, picked up from the wreck, was her only resource; and by this removed above want, she for ever abjured the mention of her brother; she passed some years in Italy, and after¬ wards returned privately to Caerphilly; but she concealed her existepce from Pembroke until a few hours before her death. After an interval of fifteen years, Ipollita, whom no power could force to become a nun, was liberated from con¬ finement, and restored to the society of her children, by the death of the mar¬ chese
chese di Montimar, and the lenUy of his widow. The marchess had suffered long under the tyranny <>f her husband (his naturally bad temper more imhit- tered by the gradual loss of his four sons, who all fell victims to consump¬ tion), and the first acts of her widow¬ hood were in direct opposition to his ex¬ pressed desire. She liberated Ipollita, restored her children, and presented her a valuable douceur; and six months after his death became the bride of the eonte Ostorius. Giovani had been entirely neglected by the marchese, and consigned over to the care of a petty retainer on a distant estate, a man of illiterate character and depraved habits. Urbanina's infant beauty had attracted the notice of an Italian lady of high rank, who took her under her protection. The manners of the Roman ladies of that day were li¬ centious in the extreme, consequently, though
though the person of Urbanina was lovely, her morals were depraved. Ipollita, united to her children, re¬ lated to them the wrongs she had re¬ ceived from Pembroke, and incited Giovani to revenge the injuries of his mother; and with this purpose she pro¬ posed to visit England, exulting in the completion of her long-proposed schemes. A circumstance to be explained here¬ after gave to Ipollita a knowledge of earl Pembroke's second marriage, and the secret history of his countess, the heiress of Rayo, She learned too the union of her brother with lady Ger¬ trude; but she was detained for some months, when she had obtained this in¬ formation. At length she prepared to seek earl Pembroke in his castle, and in her way thither, she stopped at the convent of St. Margaret's, where Urbanina met with Virginia, and ultimately aided her es¬ cape. Ipollita found Pembroke in Lon« don;
don; but she was^ diverted from her vengeance for a time, by information that her aunt, the marchesa, had pe¬ rished in a storm at sea, and Ipollita was now the sole heiress of the family of Di Montimar, as, at that period, she was ignorant of the existence of Eric and Ella; she therefore returned to Italy without delay. Previous to her departure, Urbanina eloped from her care, and every search proving ineffectual, she left Giovani to prosecute the search after his sister, and departed alone for Rome, There she learned sir Gervase Osterly had claimed the estates of the eonte Ostorius, and was also in possession of the Di Monti¬ mar property, as no claimant appeared to dispute his right, as heir of Ostorius, to the property of the marchesa his wife. Ipollita lost no time in preparing a suit against the eonte for a restituUwii of her aunt's property; and the eonte, being averse to law, fond of wealth, and vol, II. h Ipollita
Ipollita only thirty^seven, with a tole¬ rable person, and pleasing address, he preferred settling the dispute by a mar¬ riage with the heiress, to litigating the affair any further* Ipollita consented to become his wife, on condition he would bequeath to her children, at his death, the joint estates of Ostorius and Di Montimar. Having terminated the business so amicably, she again returned to England. Urbanina had imbibed a strong pas¬ sion for Monmouth on his first appear¬ ance at the English court, and when her mother left England, she had suc¬ ceeded in introducing herself to the fa¬ mily of Pembroke, where ? under the name of Nina, as a humble attendant on lady Matilda Marsham, she eluded the vigilance of her mother, and remained near Monmouth. After a time, she withdrew herself from the service of lady Matilda, and followed Monmouth to Normandy; there she was taken pri¬ soner,
soner, and captivated the count Meulan, through whose means she learned the conspiracy against her lover, her father, and the king of England. She disco¬ vered the plot, and required the heart of Monmouth, and the safe conduct of count Meulan, in return. She remained the mistress of Mo: mouth, suggested the scheme, and accompanied her lover to the attack; but was subsequently discovered by Giovani, who swore to destroy Monmouth for the seduction of his sister.. His scheme for the duke's assassination was disconcerted, as has been seen, by Ella. The fickle Urbanina, soon tired of her lover, left him, and attached herself to a young German noble, over whom she obtained such an unbounded influ¬ ence, that his family took alarm, and caused her to be shut up in a convent, from whence Virginia assisted her to es¬ cape. Giovani had traced her to Vi¬ enna, and she consented to accompany i> 2 him
him to Italy, arid arrived at the chateau Ostorius on the day our heroine met Giovani at the dinner-table. In the mean time the contessa Ipollita arrived in England, and having inform¬ ed her son of all that she had effected, she found, with chagrin, that a,j2laimant on the estate of Ostorius existed in the person of Virginia. Giovani at once suggested her removal by assassination, and, through the correspondence of Ur¬ banina, they traced her to Longholm, where she was secretly protected by lady Matilda Marsham. A report of her death satisfied them for tbe present, and having arranged the other affairs that brought her to England, she re¬ turned to the castle of the eonte at the foot of the Alps. At the time Ella ar¬ rived, she was confined to her apart¬ ments by sickness; but being informed as to who were her guests, she revolved for a long time the different plans that agitated her; she at last hit on one that would
would concentrate all their different in¬ terests, and reconcile her duty and in¬ clinations. The only really amiable quality Ipol* lita possessed was an unallayed affection for the memory of her brother, and this sentiment endeared his children to her; and, that she might not sacrifice the in¬ terest of her own, she resolved to unite them by marriage—Giovani aud Ella, md Eric and Urbanina, and she sum¬ moned her daughter, to consult with her on the subject,
L 3 CHAP.
CHAPTER XV.
" Bid me leap, rather than marrf Paris, From off the battlements of yonder tower,** " My dear Urbanina," said the contessa Ipollita, " I wish to sperfk seriously to you, on a subject that lies near my heart." Urbanina seated herself in a careless listening posture, and her mother conti¬ nued as follows—" I have taken great pains to explain to you the very preca¬ rious situation of our family, and the probability that a descendant of the for¬ mer contes of Ostorkis exists, and may speedily lay claim to the wealth of the present possessors of theserich and wide- extended domains; but you have yet to learn, that the property of my late aunt is
is held by a yet slighter tenure; until my last journey to England, I did not myself suspect that my title to her in¬ heritance could be disputed. Unfortu¬ nately I find it so; my brother Enrico left two children, of whose existence I was entirely ignorant until then. They are, my child, both amiable young creatures, both, I have learned, equally lovely in person and mind. You have heard me dwell on the inestimable cha¬ racter of my sainted Enrico, and you cannot suppose me capable of injuring his orphans; neither would I be unjust to the interest of my own children. I have thought long and deeply on the subject, and I sent for you now to im¬ part to you the result of my reflections." She paused for a few minutes, and Urbanina remaining silent, again pro¬ ceeded to address her daughter.—** I will not chide your late follies, for I am aware they are the results of an impro¬ per education; but I hope, in return L 4 for
for my forbearance, you will repair them by the only possible means, name¬ ly, a strict adherence to the line of con¬ duct I have marked out for you." *' Only be brief, dear madam," said Urbanina; " for long prosing harangues infallibly send me to sleep, I should be sorry to offend by so decided a proof of ill manners, and therefore crave your indulgence." " Have you any objection to mar¬ riage ?" *' Name the man you intend for my husband, and I can answer you." ** Your cousin, Eric di Montimar." '* La! my dear mother, do you think you can persuade him to marry me? recollect he is English." " I am aware; but he is a perfect stranger to your former habits," " And will it be fair to deceive him ?" 44 Certainly not, if you intend to re¬ new your disgraceful follies." ** I cannot answer for myself. I la¬ ment,
ment, as well as you, madam, that my education prevents me from appreciating some virtues as highly as they, no doubt, deserve; but I am not, I cannot be, a hypocrite." "Reflect, Urbanina, on what you have at stake; if the eonte loses his pro¬ perty, and the Di Montimars are rein¬ stated in their own rights (the latter must happen), we are beggars; we have no earthly resource but the misery of a cloister: could you submit to that ?" ** No, madam, no power shall force me into a convent." ** You perceive the alternative; Eric and Ella are both within these walls. Go then, reflect on what I have said. Do not decide hastily; recollect your own interest, the interest of your fa¬ mily, your own happiness, and, if that has any weight with you, the happiness of your mother, are all involved in your deliberation" After a few further exhortations from i, 5 ber
her mother on the same subject, Urba¬ nina retired. Passing on to her cham¬ ber, she mused on the strange eircunv stance of her cousins being at Ostorius and the stranger project of the contessa for uniting her to Eric, and Giovani to Ella.—" It will not do," said she, and she raised her eyes; they fell en the dis* tant forms of the supposed Eric and Ella, whom a domestic was conducting to the apartments of the contessa. The contessa reclined on a couch to receive the children of her once fondly- cherished brother. Her manner evinced much kindness, and she certainly felt all the emotion that was legible in her countenance. That Ella experienced less is scarcely possible, as she traced, in the lineaments of her aunt, the never- to-be forgotten features of the mhyl qf ihe Wizard's Tower, and she paid her compliments with difficulty. Virginia too felt infinite embarrass¬ ment at her situation; she scarcely feared
feared the contessa should recognise ter ftom casual recollection at St. Marga* ret's; but her person had been subse¬ quently so accurately described, in order to trace her after her flight from that convent, when the interest of sir Ger¬ vase Osterly bad become identified with Ipollita, by her marriage with him, and she in consequence the profesied enemy of the innocent being whose rights he usurped. Virginia trembled for the event of this interview; it passed how¬ ever without any appearance of distrust as to her assumed character, and she found it impossible to throw aside her disguise; an eckircisement would ifcfal* libly doom her to instant destruction. Both felt extremely happy when they received the contessa's permission to retire. It would have been premature to hint the plans she had formed for their future destiny, and they left her without a suspicion of her designs. There was a something in the manner of
of the contessa Ipollita repulsive and dissonant to the hearts of her constrained visitors, though veiled beneath an ap¬ pearance of kindness that would have been obvious to them, had they not pre¬ viously known her strange (not to say depraved) character. Ella could not but feel her frequent recurrence to the memory of her father in the most im¬ passioned language; but Virginia of course partook not in this sentiment; she was predisposed to judge hardly of the contessa, and to doubt the sincerity of her motives towards her, even in her assumed character; she neither felt, nor fancied she felt, any thing like respect. Ella left her apartments, not quite de¬ cided in her estimate of her real charac¬ ter, but certainly with a disposition to love and admire her, whenever she would put it into her power to do so. That the sibyl of the Wizard's Tower should be the mother of Giovani, was infinitely less surprising than that the mother of Giovani
Giovani should be the contessa of Os¬ torius. The visit of our young friends was short, but it occupied a longer period than the deliberation of Urbanina, and she sought her mother's chamber again, resolved not to keep her in suspense as to the result she was so anxious to learn. In the gallery that led from her own apartment to the contessa's, she encoun¬ tered Ella and Virginia. Urbanina had learned by chance that Ulila di Montimar was the chosei! obtect of Monmouth's affection, and she felt a certain curiosity to see the vaunted beautiful niece of earl Pembroke. The youthful heroism of Eric too had been much talked of, but owing to his severe wounds at the affair of Pontoise, and the extreme caution of her lover, she had seen but very little of him. She advanced to meet them.—" My cousins di Montimar, I presume," her first glance directed to Ella. " I am so hap- py !
py! Mighty God! Virgin^ hdwmme you hither ? M Urbaniiifc," said Virginia, i# I am still to be your debtor. I wilt not doubt the benevolence of your heart towards the wemy of your family, but can I ask you to deceive your mother for my sake? She knows me for Eric di Montimar; accident, rather than design, and these habiliments, induced me to assume the character of a brother to my companion, at a time I was ignorant to whom this rfmtefiu befo^ged ? and hpw fur my de¬ ception would necessarily extend" *' First, Virginia, let me assure you, 1 ' replied Urbanina, ** that your secret is safe with me, and then suffer me to wonder at the strange caprice of fortune in bringing you hither, and of all cha¬ racters in that of Eric di Montimar." Virginia entered into a long recital of her past fortunes; she touched lightly on the passion she had inspired in the bosom of the princess Isabella; but the bare
bare id^ of such a drcumstance afforded infinite mirth to the careless Urbanina. Virginia proceeded in her narration, and brought her tale to a conclusion by the extraordinary coincidence that had made her an inhabitant of the castle of her an¬ cestors. " My dear Virginia,** said Urbanina, " your tale is vastly surprising; but I can imagine the denouement mil be equally so; I must therefore communi¬ cate to you my mother's designa on you, which only wait my concurrence," " Indeed! and what are they ? n ** None that will be inimical to your peace, but may ultimately be the means of our emancipation, for I, alas! am as strictly a prisoner as yourselves." Urbanina then detailed her last con¬ versation with her mother. She smiled at the terror Ella expressed at the men¬ tion of her marriage with Giovani, as¬ sured her there were many means of avoiding it, and gaily said—" I hope, dear
dear Eric, you will not refuse the prof¬ fered hand of Urbanina?" "Alas! Urbanina," she replied, "this is no jest." " Well now, I think it is, and an ex¬ ceedingly good jest too. Only conceive you shall marry me; I shall be liberated (for you know, Virginia, I am a wild bird, and therefore I am now caged); you will also escape. We will tra¬ vel to Rome, You shall put yourself under the immediate protection of his fulness; and your fair sister may be allowed to accompany us; or, if that fail, the pope will claim her at the hands of the eonte, and this terrible affair will end happily at last. But the jest will be, that my politic mother will be over¬ reached by her simple, uninformed daughter.^ " I entreat you not to jest, Urbanina," said Virginia. " Think of the danger if we are overheard; there may be spies upon our conduct already," w Bless
** Bless me, child, you terrify me with your apprehensions! I declare it is ex* tremely probable. I wish you could in¬ fuse some of your caution into me, for I unfortunately forget the contessa's pro¬ pensity to intrigue, though I have often seen her stoop to the meanest arts to as¬ certain any point connected with her plans or wishes. For me," continued Virginia, " since I have been an inmate here, I have received proof that we are closely observed, and I entreat you to forbear naming me other than Erie di Montimar." "I will observe," replied Urbanina; *'and having seen ray cousin Eric, I will not now, as 1 had intended, visit the con¬ tessa again this evening; but in the morning she shall find me most duti¬ fully inclined. Fare you well; our kind friends will make us frequent opportu¬ nities to talk further of this." She kiss¬ ed her hand gracefully, and retired. *' Poor Urbanina 3 ,, said Virginia, " how
** how sincerely I do pity her I and what do you think of lier, Ella ?" 44 1 really cannot comprehend the cliaracter of any of the family," replied Ella; ** I scarcely think Urbanina more estimable than Giovani;" she thought of tlie scene she had witnessed at Rouen. 44 Her manners are loose in the extreme; she does not affect even common de¬ cency ; and it is evident she has no na¬ tural affection for her parent or brother." " In justice, Ella, do they deserve it?" " I am afraid not."
END OF VOL. II*
Printed by J. Darling, Leadenlmlt-street
