Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The mysterious monk: or, The wizard's tower: an historical romance
THE
MYSTERIOUS MONK.
CHAPTER I. JlT may be inferred that Giovani offer¬ ed no objection to his mother's plan for his union with Ella; he was also perfect¬ ly satisfied with the arrangement made for his sister's marriage with Eric; but he wished to accelerate matters as much as possible; for Giovani had traced, by means of his emissaries, the route of Vir¬ ginia di Ostorius as far as Germany. The manners of Virginia had excited suspicion in an attendant of the princess. This man was disgraced by his mistress, and after a series of adventures, he join- vol. in. b ed
ed a banditti, and in the course of af¬ fairs he became known to Pietro, the faithful satellite of Giovani, He asked the German if the forest of Spires did not contain a set of sibyls, who had dealings with the devil. The man re¬ plied in the affirmative, and instanced the adventure of the princess Isabella, to which he added some remarks on the supposititious Theodore, that attracted the attention of Pietro, and in the event led to the discovery that Theodore and Virginia were the same. By mere acci¬ dent, Giovani had not heard ? that Ella was in the service of Isabella; and as Virginia no longer bore the name of Theodore, and as much as possible avoid¬ ed his society, he had* not formed? any suspicion of the truth; fortunately for Virginia, the lynx-eyed Pietro was not in the castle, and no one doubted the identity of Eric di Montimar. Matters being in this train, Giovani proposed that his marriage with Ella should
should be ai t mnged immediately, subse- qtlent to which, he wouii depart for Si¬ cily, to pursue the clue Pfetro had sup¬ plied to Mm of the supposititious Theo¬ dore. Giovani was not in the habit of being very explicit in communicating Ms p*ansi,,even to his mother,, though as- su*e$ his present enterprise was in per- fec$ consonance with fa$r wkhes: it w^ not his nature to^ boast of his intentions, nor to reckon on the absolute certainty of fitly adventurer because he wished or determined it; and in the present in- sIMid^ perhaps he wished her to be igno*. i^lit till she should applaud the deed; he therefore merely said, am indispensa¬ ble business required hi£ presence in the kingdom of Sieilyv and »o one presumed to question him on the nature of his affairs. The contessa was not entirely secure of the concurrence of EUa; she was be¬ side prepared to expect much delay, from what #e termed the prejudices of edu- B ^ cation.
cation. The English ladies were at this period remarkable for their chaste and modest demeanour. A lover was oblig¬ ed, by a long series of attendance, to prove the sincerity of his passion, ere he was fortunate enough to be accepted. A sudden match (unless brought about for political purposes—a term then, as now, affording a sanction for many Otherwise unjustifiable actions) was con¬ sidered disgraceful. The contessa knew enough of English manners to be aware of this fact, but she had some difficulty in making Giovani comprehend the ne¬ cessity of conforming to the habits of his intended bride. He was extremely loth to leave Ostorius, without at a cer¬ tainty of being accepted on his return, and urged his mother to open the affair to Ella, and pave the way for an inter- view with him. This the contessa pro¬ mised, and with this for the present he remained content, In the mean, time Ella expected, with internal
internal terror, an interview with her aunt, immediateiv after the late confe- rence with Giovani. The contessa's n ^ man requested her to attend the com¬ mands of her mistress in her apartments. With trembling,steps Eila followed the attendant, fearfully anticipating the pur¬ port of her visit, and predetermined in what manner to meet any overtures that were intended to be made her. The contessa received her with increased kindness—anxiously inquired after her health, hoped it had not suffered from confinement—advised frequent walks in the gardens—noticed, with apparent soli¬ citude, her close seclusion from the so¬ ciety the chateau afforded^—and pressed her to be on friendly terms with her cousin Urbanina, of whom she chose to speak highly ; and from thence digress¬ ed to Giovani and his offers. She was not sparing in her observations on the advantages of this family union, which would, she said, afford her so much hap- b S piness
piness in the constant society of her amiable niece; she detailed the iriches of the conte, which would devolve on her son; and ended bv a long encomium on hts meiits, his benevolence, his piety, the docility of his temper, his modesty, and a long &c, to which EUa listened with the patience of a stoic; and when at length the contessa paused, as if she expected a reply, she spoke in a voice of tolerable firmness—" I am gsorry," she said, w that I am obliged to reject the honour you intend me; but I cannot with propriety receive any offer, how advantageous soever, without the sanc¬ tion of my Englisfi friends, even though the kindness of the contessa Ostorius has marked me as an object of particular favour—you will excuse me, madam," " No, I will not," said the contessa; ht this is maiden coyness only, and I cannot suffer you to trifle with the hap¬ piness of Giovani; but," she added, * he will best plead hi* own cause, and I therefore
therefore will conduct you to my closet, where he now anxiously waits you." " No, madam—I cannot, will not, enter into any conference with Giovani on this subject." " And why not, my love ?" asked the contessa. " I entreat, madam," said Ella, " that you will press me no further; the tastes and habits of Giovani and myself differ so essentially, it is impossible we can ever assimilate." " Indeed! perhaps your affections are already engaged ?" " No, madam," said Ella; but the conscious blush that mantled on her cheek told a different tale to the pene¬ trating contessa; " and I beg you will spare me the pain of any future recur¬ rence to this subject." a Well, my love," said the politic lady, " I will not urge you further now, but leave to time, and the assiduities of my son, to achieve your favour; for the b 4 present
present he is compelled to leave home for some time ; he is anxious to receive an assurance that hi,*? suit is not utterly and unconditionally rejected; you will allow me to say he may live in hope?" "Not fbr the world!" cried Ella— " Giovani is—-" she stopped. * s What is he, my love?—your cousin, and heir of Ostorius." " Yes, madam." " And therefore, my love, a very eli¬ gible match for 3 T ou." u For me!—Holy Virgin! can she for¬ get that night-—that horrid night!" cried Ella. " My sweet love, what ails you ?" and the contessa hastily summoned her wo¬ man."—** Julianna," she said, ** attend my niece to her chamber—I fear she is indisposed." Ella had found it impossible to enter- lain any sentiment of affection for Ur¬ banina, and the young Italian took no pains to ingratiate herself into the fa¬ vour
vour of her cousin. Virginia's supposed sex prevented their meeting frequently, and Ella, desolate and oppressed, conti¬ nued to seclude herself in her chamber, until her health suffered materially. Urbanina's visits were short and cere monious, and she almost entirely en¬ grossed the society of Virginia; this mode of conduct afforded much gratifi¬ cation to the contessa, who reckoned on this part of her plan being secured. She had contrived to sooth the boisterous passions of her son, by promises of ma¬ naging Ella so adroitly during his ab* senc% as to remove all the difficulties that now, in appearance only, she said, intervened to prevent his projected union. And it was her intention strictly to abide by her promise. Ella, as an indi¬ vidual, was perfectly indifferent to her; as the orphan of Enrico, she had certain* ly spme claim on her affections; but Giovani was the being in the world most dear to her heart ? and to afford b 5 him
him gratification, thctre is UttJe AquH but she would have consented to jninio- late her innoepn^ nieee. %t EHa'» health deeljwds ^wl it wm essential to th^ happiness of Giov^nj that it should m restored. Urb»nin^ was deswd to ^mus§ her, mi Erie to exert his influence tp d^w h^r from her chamber; the contee^a sought every Qp^ poitunity of conciligting her niece, and scrupulously forbore any allusion to Gio^ vani. Fr^qpent w&lks in |liip gatim P *m®l* p^ipied by Virginia, to yrhqm $hn$ ^he collie without; re§erv^, converse of th^ iiphpppy destiny thfit ^ppe^red to ^wait l^r, contributed more tbap thp atte«T tipns of Ippojit^i and b^r d^Mghter to rp^prp hpr drooping fprni. Urban^a seldom accompanied theni; indeed ther? mw$d a tacH agreement between hfr and our heroine, tp avpid #}e society qf each other, when it wm pwiblp tp do ^o without infringing (t|0 fnje^ of gpc4« breeding;
Ceding; ith#efore the young friends passed their walks in endeavours to console each other, and talking ovet the most feasible plans for their emancipa- tion. M Urbanina," said Virginia, on one of those occasions, " is quite as anxious to leave Del Raimattdo as we, Whose Very lives depend on our escape, and speaks of the means of deliverance as easy. Tell me, dear Ella, can you think her plan justifiable ? I confess I shrink from the trial." * Oh, Virginia," she replied, " it is impious—it is too, too daring! I do not dare to reflect on it. You cannot surely mean to trifle with a holy sacrament, even if every other means fail; trust me, if liberty depended on my concurrence, dearly as 1 must prise the boon, 1 would not stand by and witness you mocking the marriage rites by a sham tinion With Urbanina. 1 would rather, Virginia, tenderly as 1 love you, declare the truth B 6 at
at once, than, by a mean forbearance,, suffer you to barter your soul's salvation for the deliverance of your body from earthly peril, and which, after all, may fail, as Heaven sure would not permit such impiety to prosper." " I know and feel that you are right," rejoined Virginia; " but, Ella, life is dear, and if I remain until a discovery takes place, there is no hope for me; my spi¬ rits sink before the ordeal, and in the visions of the night I am perpetually haunted by the ready dagger of Giovani, or the poisoned chalice of Ipollita. And see you not, my dear friend, that if I venture to oppose the hopes of Urba 7 nina, she, in the first transports of her anger, will betray me to the contessa ? Can you not counsel me, Ella? it is hard to die so young. If they would spare me, I would gladly compound for a moiety of all my father's wealth; but that Giovani is an untamed savage, more fierce and cruel than the fell hy*ena~~ nothing
nothing but my death will satisfy him." She wept on the bosom of Ella, who attempted to offer consolation, but her own desperate situation paralyzed her efforts, and she wept in unison with her friend. In the evening of the same day Vir¬ ginia sent to request admission to the chamber of our heroine. Ella trem¬ blingly awaited her coming, inwardly foreboding the approach of some fresh calamity. The pallid cheek and quiver¬ ing lip of Virginia confirmed her fears; she spoke not, but put into her hand a small slip of parchment, on which was written the following words:— " Giovani has discovered that Theodore and Virginia are one; he is now on his return from Sicily—let Eric di Montimar profit by this advice, from " A Friend."
What
« What say you, Ella?" faintly de* manded the unhappy girl. u Do not despair, Virginia; you de¬ serve the protection of Heaven, and it will be extended towards you. See you not the finger of Providence in this ? did you imagine that one being in this castle would interest themselves to save you? Their power perhaps does not extend beyond this friendly warning, but that assures you that you have a friend" <« Ah, Ella, does not it assure me that I am known—betrayed ?" S( Known, not betrayed," replied Ella* " Let us be cautious, Virginia. I fear your visit here should be observed, and excite suspicions. After the contessa and Urbanina have retired for the night, we will descend to the garden, where we may confer without fear of being overheard: go ? then, and let us both de¬ vote the interim to contrive some mode of deliverance." The
The windows of Virginia's chamber opened on a terrace which vm along the whole western front of th# castle, and terminated in a flight of stepi at #ach end, and from thence the two friends, arm in urm t descended to 4be garden, The castle clock tolled eleven as they turned into a long dark avenue, whose tall trees shaded the southern windows from the noontide sun; here,unobserved, they continued to pace backward and forward, wholly wrapt in deep conver¬ sation. EUa proposed that Virginia, being an ^spert hprsewoman, and also, having been accustomed to ride in the tmin of the princess, quite capable of managing i\ horse, and moreover, Giovani being absent, should request the conte's per-* mission to accompany him in the chase, an4 seize the first favourble opportunity to escape. This was a bold plan, but the only one th$t bore an appearance of success. —" But,
—" But, dear Virginia," said Ella, " how shall I be assured of your safety ? I shall feel a thousand fears, lest the conte should discover your sex; and if I could know that you had escaped his wiles and Giovani*s, I should be comparatively happy." Virginia, after a few minutes reflec¬ tion, said—'* You have observed, from the turret top, to the north, a solitary mound; the two lonely pines that crown its summit you once likened to us, as, alone and unprotected, they bent before the storm; when I am beyond the reach of Giovani's malice, I will dispatch one on whom I can rely, to plant a white flag between those trees: it shall be a token of my safety, and a pledge of your own speedy emancipation. May the Virgin grant me success!" '* Amen!" responded Ella: '* but, hark, Virginia!" she whispered; *' did you hear nothing ?" ** No," said she; " and yet listen." A strain
A strain of melody, so soft, so wild and melancholy, broke on the stillness of night, that the friends involuntarily lost all apprehension of danger, and lis¬ tened attentively to the following words, in English:— ** Ah ! say, is there on earth a blessing. To every Briton's heart £0 dear As»Hberty, that boon possessing, His weary pilgrimage to cheer ? ** For this he fights, for this he FaJJ$<— He falls! but 'tis enshrin'd in glory; Conscious his generous deeds shall live Reuown'd in future story." * " This is wonderful," said Virginia, " as I have ascertained that there is not a single English domestic in the castle." " The voice was not Urbanina's, nor the contessa's, neither was it the conte*s," observed Ella: " but see^—a light passes along the gallery above; look, it ascends the tower—at yonder angle you may perceive it wind along the staircase—we had
had better retire;" and she passed her arm through Virginia's. The dock at the same moment tolled twelve, and was instantly Mbwed by a Joud and piercing cry of nmrder! they clung to each other for support; again the cry was repeated, though less vio¬ lently. They hurried onward to gain the terrace, when a tb' v d shriek, termina¬ ting in a stifled agonizing groan, struck fresh horror into the bosoms of the in¬ nocent beings, who fled along the ter¬ race, and gained the chamber of Vir- ginp breathless with fright. Virginia prevailed on Ella to pass the night with her, and at an early hour she rose and departed, to prevent suspicion, to her own chamber. The second day from that on which this plan had been formed, the conte prepared for the chase, and Virginia found a& opportunity, unobserved* by Urbanina, to solicit permission to make one of the party; and no objection arising
arising from the conte, Ella watched her departure from the window, with min¬ gled feelings of delight and apprehen¬ sion. " So," said Urbanina, " Eric has join¬ ed the chase this morning." " He does right," observed the con¬ tessa; " I meant to have suggested it to him, for I should be unwilling to accuse him of effeminacy; he is so young too— but I think he fought uiader Mon¬ mouth." "Oh yes," said Uribanina; w Mon¬ mouth was much attached to Mm too." * e What is his age?" asked the con- tessa. " Nineteen, madam," replied Ella. «' Ah! I remember," said Ipollita— * my beloved Enrico has been dead near¬ ly twenty years; and yet," she added, " his memory is as dear to me as if we had been separated but a day. The loss you sustained in a father was irreparable, my dear Ella, and you can never sufficient-
ly hate the author of that dire misfor¬ tune," t <* The author, madam ?" said Ella, a sensation of dread pervading her whole frame. a Ay, Ella; Pembroke!—-the proud ear) Pembroke was his murderer!" " Mother," said Urbanina, " do name a day for our union; Eric is so modest, he will not ask it of you." The contessa took no notice of her question, but Ella turned on her a look of reproach; Urbanina was quick at translating the glance of an eye, but for once she misconstrued that of Ella, and she said with marked emphasis—" Did you advise Eric to hunt to-day ?" " Yes, madam," returned Ella, coldly: and the party continued silent until they separated for the rest of the day; Ella to wait with anxiety the return of the conte, and Urbanina to arrange pro¬ per dresses for the approaching cere¬ mony. The
* The sound of the conte's hunting- horn war heard at a distance, and Ella strained her eyes to distinguish, if pos¬ sible, whether the party had sustained any diminution. She watched their ap¬ proach with anxiety—she opened her casement, and shut it again, lest she should excite observation—she fancied they advanced with less speed than usual, and while the distance precluded the chance of her determining the figures of the hunters, she strove to count their number, and then blamed herself for neglecting to ascertain, when they de¬ parted, of how many the party consisted. At length they entered the avenue, and Ella's eyes rested on the light form of Virginia, as she rode beside the conte; crossing the drawbridge, she raised her eyes to the window where Ella stood ; a melancholy smile played on her countenance, and Ella thought she had never appeared so interesting.— 4 * I do not wonder," said she, mentally, " that
" that the princess Isabella became, ena¬ moured with* her beautiful page,, for his manners were equally fascinating as- his person."
CHAP-
■14
CHAPTER II. « ------------$| je j s gone ! we have met, ^nd meet perlu»pb never again.'* T$m family met at dinner, with the ex¬ ception of the eontessa, who was indis¬ posed ;, but, no opportunity offered* for am interchange of one word, without exmtin^ the observation of Urbanina' or the conte. After Ella had retired for the night, she was, aroused, by a light tap. on the door;, she rose and admitted Virginia. t-** We are, watched," whispered she, "therefore I have stolen hither in the darkta make one request to you : should any thing occur to prevent our commu¬ nicating together during the day, do not ML to meet me on the terrace, at the same
same hour we met before, to-morrow night; I have something of much im¬ portance to impart to you—now I dare not stop longer;" she embraced Ella with affection—" you will not fail to come, let what will hannen ?" J. JL " You may depend on my punctu¬ ality," said Ella, returning her embrace. Again Virginia pressed her to her bosom, and then retired, leaving Ella little disposed to sleep; she passed the greater part of the night in ruminating on the strangeness of her destiny, and when morning dawned, she sunk into a disturbed slumber. She was awoke by the voice of Urbanina talking in a loud tone to Julianna, her mother's woman. On perceiving Ella was awake, she addressed her; a bitter smile curled her upper lip, as she said—" Where is your brother, young lady ? where is Eric ?" *' Is not Eric in his chamber ?" de¬ manded Ella. " No," said Julianna; u but I saw him groping
groping his way along the gallery last night, and if I live, I saw him through the crevice of the door talking to the lady Ella; and when I came to report it to your ladyship, and hastened back again, the lady Ella's chamber was in darkness, and I listened a long time, but I did not hear a word more." " Is this true, lady ?" asked Urbanina. 9 Ella was confounded at the boldness of Julianna; the conduct of Urbanina was also inexplicable, and she hesitated to answer her question. " St. Mary, save us!" cried Julianna, " you frighten lady Eila; don't you see she is scarcely awake ? Besides, I dare say after all, the seignor Eric is gone a hunting with the conte again to-day, in spite of what old Darn's says." *' Well," said Urbanina, peevishly, •* the lady knows if he was here last night; and perhaps he communicated his intention of hunting to-day." ** He was here, madam," replied Ella, vol, in. c " and
** and said, there was a chance that he could not see me during the day, but that he would be more explicit when we met to-night." <e There," said Julianna, ** you hear." " Did Eric sleep in your chamber last night, lady Ella ?" said Urbanina. Ella felt offended at this question in the presence of Julianna, and she said, with some hauteur—" Madam, I repeat I saw him but for a few minutes; he certainly did not pass the night in this chamber." " Neither did he in his own." " Is it possible!" cried Ella; *' then there is some treachery on foot; the se¬ cret is discovered, and poor Virginia is lost.—-Believe me, lady Urbanina, I am quite ignorant of the whole affair; and I am sure Eric had no intention of with¬ drawing from the Castle del Raimando kst night: suffer Julianna to retire for a few minutes," she continued; w I wish to speak with you in private." Julianna
Julianna! withdrew with a very bad grace, and Ella again addressed Urba¬ nina*—" Is Giovani returned, lady ?" "No," returned Urbanina; "but he is expected to-night." Ella then informed her that Virginia had ascertained his having discovered her as Theodore, and she dreaded that the innocent girl had fallen a victim to the avarice of the conte. After some consideration, Urbanina $aid~r«" I fear your conjectures are too well founded; Julianna has observed a strange-looking man among the domes¬ tics for several days, and she has gather¬ ed that he has frequent private inter¬ views with the conte; I suspect him as the cause of Virginia's disappearance: forgive me, Ella," she added, extending her hand, ** I have been insufferably rude to you; but I was vexed, and fan¬ cied myself deluded by you and Virgi¬ nia; you know how anxious I am to leave Del Raimando." c % Ella
Ella took her offered hand, and they went together to the chamber of Virgi¬ nia; but no trace of the fair fugitive remained,, Sometimes Ella indulged a hope that Virginia had escaped^—sometimes, that she was concealed in tLe castle, through the means of the friend who had ap. prized her of her danger; and this hope she cherished without communicating it to Urbanina, resolving at all hazards to visit the terrace at the appointed hour; she fancied that Virginia would have explained, but feared to be over¬ heard, a something which would have elucidated this strange transaction. The evening was closing in as the conte returned from the chase, and from her window Ella perceived he was ac¬ companied by a train of cavaliers, among whom she distinguished, with sorrow, the person of Giovani. The company crossed the drawbridge, and entered the castle. EUa
EUa sat at her casement, contempla¬ ting the lengthened shadows of the ad¬ jacent mountains, until the accustomed hour of evening repast, when she de¬ scended to join Urbanina in the saloon. As she passed along the gallery, she heard the loud carousals of the company assembled in the hall, and on reaching the eating-room, learned, with surprise, that Urbanina presided at the noisy feast below. She was glad to enjoy her own reflections, and after a light meal, she retired to her chamber, to wait the hour of her appointment with Vir¬ ginia, in reality with little hope of meeting her friend; but she had pro¬ mised, let what would happen, to keep her appointment, and she trimmed her lamp in readiness. It was late; but the boisterous mirth of the company in the banqueting-hall forbade the hope that they would retire for some hours; and resolved to learn the fate of Virginia, she left her room c 3 with
with cautious step. In passing along the gallery, she concealed her lamp be- neath her robe, to avoid observation, if any domestics passed that way, and reached, without interruption, the cham¬ ber of Virginia. As she laid her hand on the lock of the door, her arm was rudely seized, and in the endeavour to extricate herself, the lamp fell to the ground, and extinguished itself. A slight effort sufficed to shake off the unsteady grasp of the inebriated Giovani; he staggered beneath the effect of the copious libations of wine he had swallowed, and fell at his length across the doorway. Ella turned with disgust from a scene of brutality so shocking to her sense of propriety, and crossing the chamber of Virginia, paced the terrace for some time, in the vain hope of see¬ ing Virginia. She listened attentively to every sound, and at length the voice of Giovani calling on her name chilled her with dismay; she flew towards the opposite
opposite end of the terrace, hastily de¬ scended the steps, and concealing her- self behind a tree, waited, w 7 ith palpita¬ ting heart, the issue of this adventure. Ella's terror prevented her computing the length of time she had remained hid, when she saw two persons approaching; one of them w T as speaking—his voice was familiar to her ear; he was con¬ versing in Italian, with the accent of a foreigner. She strove to eall to her re¬ membrance who it might be, and lis¬ tened with eagerness as he approached. ~* f I think," said he, continuing the conversation with his companion— 4 * I think you act right; these people are not to be dealt with as with honourable men. Your eaution is commendable, and I have no scruple in yielding this affair entirely to your judicious direc¬ tion. I feel much interested in this matter, it so nearly concerns the happi¬ ness of a very worthy lady, to whom I c 4 owe
owe an infinitude of obligations; I would not for the work! it should fail." " I pledge my life on its success," re¬ plied the other. " Farewell, then; I commend you to the holy keeping of Heaven ;" and the first speaker turned from his companion. The moon shone full on his face, and Ella beheld the benevolent features of the monk Adolphe. At the moment she was springing forward towards him, the voice of Giovani, in indistinct ex¬ clamations, arrested her action. The monk turned down another path, and was lost in thj gloom of the avenue. Giovani, v. "h an effort, reached the spot where she stood; she had forgotten that, in emerging from the shade of the tree, she had become exposed to his view. He clasped her rudely in his arms, and the terrified girl, uttering a faint scream, fainted in his embrace. When Ella recovered, she found her¬ self surrounded by domestics in her own chamber,
chamber, who, in answer to her in¬ quiries, informed her that three nights before she had been found by Giovani in the garden, and that since that she had continued quite delirious; and she found herself so weak when she at¬ tempted to rise, that she could not doubt the truth of their assertion. A few days however restored her to health; and she learned, with a feeling of pleasure, that Giovani had left the castle again, the morning after her ad¬ venture in the garden; and, in answer to her inquiries, they informed her that all the company had departed on the following day, and also that Urbanina had interested one of the strangers in her behalf; and as the countess conti¬ nued indisposed, she had, by his as¬ sistance, effected her escape from Del Raimando. Ella was not sorry to hear that Urba¬ nina was gone; but all her inquiries re¬ lative to Virginia were productive of no c 5 information*
information, and for Adolphe even less; still the sight of the monk afforded her ground for hope, though, from the little she had heard, she could not collect if she were the object of his visit to Del Raimando or not.
CHAP-
V/Jtl^cVJr JL J1*.tv 111.
•9+*+04ut++*'twrm-+
-In the name of truth,
Are you fantastical, or that indeed Which outwardly you shew ? Macbeth. Ella, left to the care of a simple at¬ tendant and the absolute solitude of her chamber, indulged a hope that she was become less the object of Giovani's affections and the contessa's solicitude. Alas! Giovani was so intent on the pursuit and destruction of Virginia, that he had scarcely a thought for any other earthly object; the conte was too politic to betray the anxiety he experi¬ enced for her recovery; and his lady, from the twofold causes of sickness and vexation at the conduct of Urbanina, kept her chamber. c 6 The
The fourth evening of her convales¬ cence, our heroine desired Florence to accompany her to the ramparts.—" I think," said she, smiling, " I am strong enough to make the tour of the cha¬ teau." She passed the halls almost unnoticed by the domestics, and was preparing to cross the first bridge, when she was respectfully informed by the sentinel, that the conte had that moni- ing given orders to prevent the egress of the ladies of his family beyond the courts of the castle. It was useless to contend: the conte was absent on a hunting party, and she must wait his return, to demand why she was included in this strange prohi¬ bition. She therefore returned to her chamber, and as soon as she entered, Florence having secured the door, she begged permission to repeat a something she had accidentally overheard, and which she verily believed had reference to our heroine. Eila nodded assent, and Flo¬ rence
rence began.—" Does the signora know Ulric?" '* No, I believe not," said she. " Well then, signora, I will certainly shew you him. Oh, he is a strange fear¬ ful man ! I always tremble when I meet him : he has such large black eyebrows, and such an immense bushy beard ? and he is so tall and so thin! and his complexion ! oh, I never saw any thing like it F <f But what has he to do with your story ?" demanded Ella. " Oh, every thing, signora!" and Flo- rence, after some hesitation and with much circumlocution, informed her, that a youth named Cesario, the grandson of the porter, was her lover; and that walking one evening after dark on the garden terrace with him, they were sur¬ prised by the conte and Ulric; that in order to avoid a reprimand, they had concealed themselves behind a group of statuary, and had overheard the converse of
of the conte and his satellite. The first words she caught were those of Ulric, %vho said— ( I would advise you, signor, to confine her to the castle; I will throw myself in her way, and offer her the means of escaping; then, if I succeed in getting her under my protection, I will, assisted by your connivance, convey her away in the night, with an appearance of mystery that will baffle the pursuit of Giovani, and take off all suspicion from you ; and by the beard of saint Peter, once in my power, she shall not escape me!' Those were his very words, signora; I declare I was all over in a tremble," said Florence, " especially when the conte told him to put his scheme in execution as soon as possible. The distance prevented me from hear¬ ing more, but a few minutes afterwards the conte passed the place of our con¬ cealment again, still in conversation with Uirie, to whom he said—' Ulric, you are the strangest villain I ever met with; however,
however, take the key of his prison; but do not extend your friendship for Mon¬ mouth beyond this act, and I consent." w Heavens, Florence, surely you mis¬ took the name!" " Oh no, signora! because I knew there was a prisoner confined on the south side of the castle; and I had a great curiosity to know his name*. I have heard him sing so sweetly and so melancholy (though I could never catch one word he said), that I have been fain to weep his hard fate many a time." '* And was that all?" asked Ella. " All that we heard, signora; and nei¬ ther Cesario nor 1 could guess who the conte meant; I never dreamt it could be you, until the refusal of the sentinel to let you pass the drawbridge this evening put it into my head." ** And you are sure the conte named Monmouth ? w *' Sure, signora; and Cesario heard it also, if the signora pleased to question him;
him; for Cesario is very amiable and very handsome, though only a vassal. If it had pleased the Virgin that the contessa Virginia had lived, it would have been very different, for he was her foster- u And was he much attached to her?" asked Ella. " Oh, signora, hear him talk of her! she was a sweet young creature, and her mother, Antoine says, was an angel of goodness; many is the time she has taken Cesario on her lap, for his father was slain in the feuds between the Raiman- dos and the Ostorius', and his mother died when he was but two years old, and the good contessa was very kind to him while she lived. Antoine says there was foul play, but the late conte did not live to enjoy his riches; he married the marchese di Montimar, but they were both drowned coming from somewhere beyond the sea, and after a time the present conte came here." "And
" And^what became of the contessa Virginia ?" said Ella. " Ah, signora, that is what Antoine says;" and Florence drew closer to Ella, and lowering her voice, continued— " some people say she is alive still, though nobody knows where." Ella remained musing on the strange¬ ness of this story, and the possibility of Monmouth (to whom the conte was certainly a most determined enemy) being, as well as herself, a prisoner in Del Raimando, until the shades of evening were closing, when she received an in¬ vitation from the contessa to see her in her apartments, and she followed the messenger immediately thither. The contessa looked extremely ill, her features wore a deathlike paleness, and her piercing eye had lost much of its fire; she was supported in bed with pillows, and after having answered the first inquiries of Ella, she appeared wholly unable to sustain the conversa¬ tion ;
tion ; at length, after a long puse, she said-—" I would speak with you, Ella, on a subject that will not brook delay; but I am weak, and at this moment I feel a disposition to sleep; probably when I awake I may be better able to talk to you ; will you remain beside me during my short slumber? for trust me, I am so anxious to confide a secret to your keep¬ ing, that I cannot suffer you to leave me in ignorance of what equally con¬ cerns us both." Eila promised, and having dismissed her women, the contessa soon fell into a profound sleep, which had lasted nearly two hours, and the fatigued girl, ex¬ hausted by watching, sat in weary si¬ lence beside the bed, when a slight noise on the opposite side of the chamber startled her; she looked up, and recog¬ nised (for it was impossible, after the description of Florence, to mistake) the ruffian Ulric. She uttered a faint scream and fled towards the antichamber, where the
the careful Florence had long waited her. * Ah, dear signora! you have sat up too late after your severe illness," said she. " Blessed Mary! you are as pale as a sheet; do lean on me, I entreat you; I am so sorry I did not remind you how late it is;" and Florence led her to her chamber, not at all surprised by her extreme agitation, which she attributed to weakness and fatigue. And Ella was really fatigued, for she was yet an invalid; but her terror, occa¬ sioned by the sudden appearance of Ulric in the chamber of the contessa, was so powerful, that it was long after she was in bed before she could sleep, and when at last sunk into a troubled slumber, her dreams were appalling. She fancied herself a prisoner in the topmost chamber of an exceeding high tower, vainly endeavouring to escape some concealed and approaching danger; there
there were no doors to her prison; she looked from the windows; her head grew dizzy at the distance between her and the earth ; the height was dreadful. Suddenly the contessa appeared at the foot of the tower; in her right hand she held a flaming torch, with the other she pointed to a ladder—*' Choose," she cried, " liberty or death ! wilt thou wed Giovani?"—" Neverr cried Ella; and the infuriated contessa tossed the torch into the lower windows of the tower. She saw the volumes of smoke ascend; she felt the flames approach; she essayed to shriek—her efforts were powerless; already the floor beneath her crackled with the heat. Almost suffocated with the thick fumes that surrounded her, she struggled to sustain herself but for one little moment, when the floor gave way, and she was sinking into the burn¬ ing chasm beneath—then suddenly she felt herself seized, and looking up, be¬ held a winged seraph, who bore the perfect
perfect form and features of Virginia; and sustained by her, Ella fancied her¬ self borne on the wings of the wind, far removed from the burning tower, and soaring beyond the regions of mortality. The transition was too powerful, and she awoke with a sensation border¬ ing on delirium. *
CHAP-
CHAPTER IV.
" Nou venitqufc perpurlar degli aftari di vostro fratelto/' tK He U fit for treasons, stratagems, and spoils; The motions of his soul are black us Erebus, And his affections dark as night." The next day Ella received a message from the conte, requesting her presence at dinner; and though her fears on his account were awakened by the narrative of Florence, yet she did not venture to refuse his invitation, resolved to take that opportunity of demanding why she was confined within the walls. The conte alone waited her in the saloon; he advanced to meet her, saying — w How truly I rejoice to see you again, beautiful Ella! but, by my faith, I scarcely know how to regret your late indisposition,
indisposition, it has added so much to your native loveliness." Ella shrunk from the sudden famili¬ arity of his manners, and retiring to her seat, she said—" My lord, I cannot trust your professions of amity, whilst I am taught to consider myself a prisoner by your order, in Del Kaimando." " Oh !" cried he eagerly, " I will ex¬ plain what does not apply to you exclu¬ sively, dear Ella : you must understand, the walls of this cursed old castle are in an almost ruinous state, and I am threatened with hostilities by the baron de Castro; I have therefore employed all the retainers in hasty repairs, but until they are completed, I do not con¬ sider that we are sufficiently secure to venture the ladies of my family beyond the interior." Ella had not forgotten that, in the ab¬ sence of Urbanina and the illness of the contessa, the prohibition was entirely for her. ** I was
" I was ignorant of the state of the outworks," continued the conte, " until Ulric pointed them out to me; 'tis a vile dog-hole, this Del Raimando—by the bye, as full of burrows as a rabbit- warren." After dinner, on presenting her some fruit, he very coolly asked her if she had forgotten their last meeting at Fau¬ conbridge. " My lord," she replied with spirit, " I would willingly forget the vices of sir Gervase Osterly, the husband of my aunt, and it is his fault alone, if he, in reviving the past, teaches me that I have reason to complain of his conduct;" and she rose to retire. " This is mighty fine, young lady," said he, detaining her; " but suffer me to talk further on this subject. Do you know whether I alluded to this circum¬ stance only in order to apologize for the indiscretion I then committed? Cer¬ tainly you do not. However, for the present,
present, enough. I would speak to you of your brother. Pray tell me, what was his whim for leaving us so abruptly, and without deigning us one adieu? surely our hospitality might have chal¬ lenged so trifling a mark of courtesy." " Is it not me who should rather ask of you, my lord, the cause of his so strange removal ?" *• Come, come, lady, be a little less reserved. Why was Eric with you here ?" " You should question him, my lord." " You sav true; but he no doubt was prepared to answer me. One thing more before you go. The apartments you have hitherto occupied are on the most exposed side of the castle, if we have to sustain a siege; I have there¬ fore, in your absence, arranged for your removal toothers, more secure, exten¬ sive, and commodious?' and he bowed on her hand as he led her towards the door. vol. ni. d Ella
Ella was glad to have escaped further persecution, and was congratulating herself on the subject, when a door opened opposite to her, and she encoun¬ tered Ulric.—** Lady," said he, ** I crave one moment's audience." " I cannot listen to you now," she cried. 6t Say when you will then ?" ** Indeed I cannot;" and she quick¬ ened her pace. Ulric still followed—" Lady, you know not the importance of my suit; it is to warn you of approaching peril." She sprung up the grand staircase, without deigning him an answer; Flo¬ rence waited her at the top, and led the way to the apartments, whither her wardrobe had been removed. They were the same once occupied by Vir¬ ginia; but a communication had been opened with a dining-room and library, beyond the dressing-room, that opened on to the terrace; and she was obliged to
to confess the conte had really studied her comfort and convenience in the change. ** This is much better than your other chamber, signora," said Florence," much pleasanter, and opens directly into the garden; there is only one thing that I do not like, and that is, that the door of this chamber was bolted on the inside, when the signor Eric disappeared so strangely,*' w Indeed!" said Ella. " Is it possible the signora was igno¬ rant of that circumstance ?" "-Until this moment," replied our heroine. * e Well then, I assure you, signora, it was absolutely fastened within side ; and the signora Urbanina caused it to be broken open. However, there are new and strong fastenings on both doors at present." In spite of her efforts to the contrary, the remark of her attendant awakened b2 a sensa-
a sensation of alarm in the bosom of Ella; and she waited with impatience the summons of the contessa, for she imagined the secret she had to commu¬ nicate had some reference to the conte'sr designs upon her; at length, wearied with suspense, she dispatched Florence to the apartments of her aunt, with inquiries after her health. It was almost dark when Florence returned*-—** I have been a long time, signora," said she, " but I was forced to wait a long time before I could deliver your message, and then Cesario has been telling me—the Virgin save us! that* we are going to be besieged by the baron de Castro, and that was the reason you were not permitted to pass the draw¬ bridge ; and the conte has ordered all the fortifications to be repaired, and that is the reason too that ytur apart¬ ments were changed." " Well, but the contessa?" said Ella. " Oh, signora, the contessa is better, and
and Maria promised to deliver your in¬ quiries, because she has given orders not to admit any of the household into her apartments." ** I have been thinking, in your ab¬ sence," said Ella, " that I should feel more secure in my new lodging, if you were to sleep with me to-night, good Florence." " Certainly, signora;" and the willing girl immediately set about making the necessary arrangements. The following morning, after break¬ fast, our heroine again sent Florence to the contessa, but she returned with the same answer, and Ella could not sup¬ press her surprise at the inconsistency of her aunt, who had two evenings be¬ fore appeared so exceedingly anxious to speak to her, and now entirely excluded her from her presence. Nothing seemed to have transpired relative to the strange intrusion of Ulric, though she was per- d 3 fectly
fectly certain of his actual appearance in the contessa's chamber. The day was remarkably fine, and Florence persuaded her to walk on the terrace. She felt much benefited by inhaling the pure air, and returned with increased appetite to dinner, and sent her excuses to the conte for dining in her own chamber. In the evening, Florence, who had gained a budget of information among the domestics, ventured to repeat part of it to our heroine.—" Why, signora, would you believe it, the contessa is ac¬ tually confined in her chamber, and it is no fault of hers that she does not see you." fi But who confines her, Florence ?" « Why the conte, to be sure, signora; and Antoine says this talk of a siege is all a sham, for the baron de Castro is quietly hunting in the forest of Talmu- zo. But that is not all, signora; I met Ulric as I crossed the great hal!, and he gave
gave me this paper for you—Holy Vir¬ gin, how I trembled when he came near me!—but I hope you wont read it, signora, or, if you do, pray do not be¬ lieve what is written " Ella took it. The paper contained two lines, written with a pencil, signed by Ulric, entreating her to speak with him in the gallery at dusk. She grati¬ fied Florence by communicating its pur¬ port, and faithfully promising her not to accede to his request. " You cannot imagine, signora, what a horrible being he is. The conte told Claudio he was his familiar, and no- mdy doubts it." She looked fearfully round.—*' Do you know, signora, he lives without eating or drinking, and nobody knows where either, for certain he never goes to bed, but prowls about while other people sleep. He is sure to be always where one least expects to meet him, and it seems as if he started out of the floor or the walls, he comes I) 4 upon
upon one so suddenly;" (Ella thought of his abrupt appearance in the chamber of the contessa;) " and he never speaks to the domestics, but stalks about like Sa¬ tan himself. Marco says his steps pro¬ duce no sound, but I am always so frightened when I chance to meet him, that I forget to listen to his foot-falls. Only think, signora, it was just three days after he first appeared here, that the signor Eric disappeared so strange¬ ly." The observations of Florence alarmed Ella s and to avoid any further disclo¬ sure, she opened the windows of the dressing-room, and walked on the ter¬ race, until almost fatigued with the ex¬ ercise, she sat down on the base of a statue representing Ceres, and gave a loose to meditation : her thoughts un¬ consciously wandered to Monmouth; he was connected with her every idea, and the frequent object of her day¬ dreams. She vainly thought the pain¬ ful
ftil pleasure his idea engendered was not the offspring of affection; for, was he not inconstant ?—did he deserve her love? She thought of his tenderness as what might have been—what might have made her happy, and sighed that the illusion had passed away. Her sigh was reechoed, and she start¬ ed from her seat in dismay; but seeing no one, she gained courage to reseat her¬ self, and had scarcely done so, when her name was repeated in a low tone. " Who speaks ?" said she. " A friend," replied the same voice, and she caught a view of Ulric, his tall figure resting against the statue. She started from her seat, and with the lightness of a frightened fawn, she fled along the terrace.—.** I am ill and weary," said she, to the inquiry of Flo¬ rence ; " the night-air is exceedingly damp; close the windows, and secure them carefully, my good Florence." ** A lamp burned in the inner eham- d 5 ber*
ber 9 and thither she immediately re¬ tired. Restless dreams disturbed the slumbers of Ella, and she arose in the morning feverish and unreireshed. As usual, she dispatched Florence to the apartments of the contessa, and again she returned with the same message—^ *' The contessa could not admit any one, but her women would deliver the mes¬ sage." Ella began to feel anxious for the safety of her aunt, and resolved to de¬ scend to dinner, in order to request the conte's permission to visit the contessa. She could hardly believe he would re¬ fuse her, and if he did, it would confirm the assertions of Florence. The report¬ ed hostility of De Castro she had from the first considered as a feint to cover his purpose, and she dreaded the arrival of the moment when he would no long¬ er find it necessary to throw a veil over his intentions. The day was extremely fair, and tak¬ ing Florence -frith her, she descended in¬ to
to the garden. The air soon restored her fatigued spirits, and induced her to lengthen her walk. At the extremity of the gardens there were the remains of an observatory, and she had often felt a wish to ascend it, in order to ascertain the situation of Del Raimando, and if she could discover a possible chance of escaping thence; this day she felt herself able to encounter the fatigue, and re¬ solved to mount it. Ella had proceeded some way up the broken staircase before she was aware of the danger of her enterprise, but at length she felt the precarious tenure of her situ¬ ation. Light as was her fragile form, the spiral staircase trembled beneath her weight; for a moment she stood irreso¬ lute. She was far from the bottom; it was difficult to descend; to advance would have been madness. She turned, and in that action, losing her balance, the tottering stair gave way. She ut¬ tered a faint despairing cry—she felt B 6 herself
herself suddenly sustained—she raised" her eyes—'twas Ulric who held her! The added terror of his vicinity over¬ powered her, and she fainted. On recovering, she found herself be¬ side a fountain, and Florence, assisted by a youth, endeavouring to restore her.—'* Do not be alarmed, signora," said Florence; " it is only Cesario, who luckily happened to be in the garden." ** For Heaven's sake! how came I hither ?" she exclaimed. " Ah, signora, I wish you had not gone up those stairs." " What of the stairs?" ** They are fallen, signora—fallen to atoms!" *' But how came I hither ?" again de¬ manded Ella. " Don't alarm yourself signora; you are perfectly safe now." " But did I fall that dreadful height?" ** Signora," said Cesario, respectfully, 4i you were brought hither by Ulric." A slight
A slight shiver convulsed the frame of our heroine, and thanking Cesario for his attentions, she took the arm of Flo¬ rence, and slowly returned to the castle. At that moment she felt disposed to be¬ lieve Ulric a supernatural being; how otherwise could he have borne her from the height she had ascended unhurt? he was not above her, she was convinced, and equally certain he was not below her. Would the stair that trembled be¬ neath her weight support that of Ulric ? Impossible! She remembered to have seen him before she lost her senses, and Cesario had said Ulric brought her to the fountain.
CHAP-
CHAPTER V. ft Trcth, sirs, he's an uncanny body; I'd be muckle Joth to trust him mysei, hut yc'U mi be owre particu¬ lar maybe: ye ciiima weel be worse than ye arc."
Be Mercury; set feathers to thy heels. And fty like thought from them to ujo again. King John, The conte sent his compliments of con¬ dolence to Ella on her accident, and she dined in her chamber as usual. Towards the evening, she ventured to the win¬ dows of the dressing-room. Every thing- wore the appearance of quiet, and she soon obtained a degree of composure. Florence fetched her a book from the library, and she then dispatched her to the apartments of the contessa. The book selected by Florence was a marvellous legend, but sufficiently inte¬ resting
resting to fix her undivided attention, so that she did not perceive the approach of the conte till he stood before her on the terrace. A single glance convinced her he was inebriated, and she rose to avoid him; but the licentious conte, ex¬ hilarated by copious draughts of wine, mocked at the rules of decorum that had hitherto restrained him; he rudely seized the terrified supplicating girl, and clasped her to his bosom. With an ef¬ fort she freed herself from his embrace, and flew towards the door that opened into the gallery. The conte pursued her, and as she reached it, caught her arm. At the same moment, a blow from an unseen hand levelled him on the floor. Ella turned not to regard her defen¬ der, but unclosing with a trembling hand the door, she hastily gained the extremity of the gallery, and descending the stairs, fled towards the chapel, where she believed herself in safety. Kneeling at
at the shrine of the Virgin, Ella sup¬ plicated her favour and protection. She felt relieved by a confidence in the good¬ ness of Providence, and continued long and devoutly to pour out the effusions of her heart before the throne of mercy. As she rose from her knees, she heard her name repeated, and starting with dismay, she looked wildly round, but no one appeared, and hoping she had been deceived, she paid her salutation to the Virgin, and was retiring, when some one gently seized her arm, and the dim light revealed the tall form of Ulric.— ** Oh, EUa*" said he, his voice modu¬ lated to the softest cadence, ** if you knew the deep interest I take in your welfare." ** Leave me, leave me, I implore you," faltered she. ** No, Ella; I only have the power to save you from the dangers that surround you; put yourself under my protection, and I will liberate you this night. You still
still tremble under the pressure of recent violence, and can you hesitate? Retire to your chamber, dismiss your atten¬ dant, and her absence shall be the signal of my approach." Before Ella could reply, he had left her, and she slowly returned to her chamber, where, as she expected, Flo¬ rence was already waiting.—*' Ah, sig¬ nora," said she, " I am so glad you are come, for I began to be quite frightened I Marco says there are shocking doings in the castle: the contessa's apartments are kept close shut, and nobody but her women are allowed to enter: they are cautious enough, to be sure, but truth will out" '* And what truth do you allude to?'' asked Ella, " Why they say for certain, signora, the contessa is not there;" and drawing nearer to her mistress, she added, in a lower tone, '* and that she is either con¬ veyed away or murdered!" " Impossible,
" Impossible, Florence !" exclaimed our heroine; " you must not listen to such idle tales: I cannot allow you to repeat them in my presence." " Well, signora, if I must be silent 1 must, but I cannot shut my ears, and the domestics talk of nothing else." Succeeding reflection confirmed Ella in her design to retain Florence with her during the night. The manners of Ulric were insidious, and it appeared to her, notwithstanding his proposition to the conte, which Florence and Cesario had overheard, that he had a separate interest in his designs upon her, for it was impossible she could be more in the power of the conte than circumstances at present bespoke her. The return of Giovani could hardly militate against him, for surely it was at his option to admit him into the castle; and if the contessa was confined to her apartments, or disposed of *with so much facility by other means, who could thwart the in¬ tentions,
tentions of the conte ? Only Ulric, and she had no doubt that the blow the conte had received in her chamber was from him. It proved his hostility to his employer, and at the same time awakened an indefinite idea, that the dark Ulric himself harboured a passion for her. At all events, she determined to retain Florence constantly with her, as her only safeguard against the at¬ tempts of both. At length, wearied with the exertions of the day, she fell asleep: how long it continued she was unable to determine, when she was awoke by a sligbt noise in her chamber, She started up in wild surprise—the glance she had was mo¬ mentary, for the lamp that burned on the hearth was instantly extinguished; but even that transient view assured her there were two men in the room. She had felt in waking warm kisses from the one who yet bent over her, the other, whose figure resembled Ulric, stood by the
the lamp.-—** Florence, Florence," she cried, u wake! there are two persons in the chamber! Speak!" she continu¬ ed, in beseeching accents, ** who are you, and what is the cause of your in¬ trusion ?" but all continued silent as the grave. Florence, hid beneath the bedclothes, lay trembling with affright. With wrapt attention, Ella listened to catch the sound of the intruders' re¬ treat, or to ascertain by their breathing if they were still there; but not the slightest sound broke on the profound stillness of the night, until the bell tolled the third hour of the morning. As soon as it was light, she rose and ascertained that the doors remained perfectly secured; the windows were equally so, and she almost doubted the evidence of her senses. " It must have been a dream, signo¬ ra !" said Florence. *' I begin to think so," she replied, willing
willing to encourage her idea; " I have had sad dreams of late." Ella was unable to decide whether the warning that Virginia had received came from a friend or an enemy—from Cesario or Ulric; and her increasing anxiety for her friend induced her to wish to talk with Cesario on the sub¬ ject. Without therefore communicat¬ ing her intention to Florence, she de- scended after breakfast into the garden. She found the youth busied arranging the choice collection of plants belonging to the contessa. She thanked him for his attention to her the day before, and requested him to select her a bouquet. " Alas, signora, I lament that my services are so limited, but if you will make me the messenger to any of your friends, I will hasten to apprize them of the danger of your situation." " The danger of my situation, Cesa¬ rio!" " Signora." said the youth, bowing respectfully,
respectfully, " I entreat your pardon— but it is whispered that there are ill de¬ signs intended against you here, and if 1 could serve you, I should rejoice most truly." ** Cesario," she replied, " I thank you for your zeal, but, alas! I have not a single friend in Italy." He hesitated for a few minutes. At length he said-—" I think, signora, if I have your permission to apply to the public authorities in Venice, I could in¬ terest them in your behalf; but it is some distance thither, and it is necessa¬ ry to decide promptly." Ella gratefully accepted his proposal, and he assured her he would depart for Venice at nightfall. She then ventured to inquire if he knew aught of the fate of Virginia. " Holy Mary, no !" exclaimed he; " and yet I have cause to think she has been recently an inmate of this very castle." " What
" What cause?" asked Ella, " Signora," he replied, " I will deal ingenuously with you, for you are too amiable to be the enemy of goodness like your own, My hopes are slight, and amount only to this. On the night you were brought here, my grandfather, who is porter of the castle, was taken ill, and frequently during his sickness* he de¬ clared he had that night admitted the contessa Virginia. I was disposed to treat his assertions as the effect of deli¬ rium, nevertheless I resolved to be con¬ vinced. It is several years since I saw the signora Virginia, but the remem¬ brance of her features will never be erased from my memory; even in in¬ fancy, she strongly resembled the late contessa, and as she increased in years, the likeness strengthened; I could have pointed her out at the first glance among a thousand. I learned among the domestics, that a young signora, a niece of the present contessa, had cer¬ tainly
tainly arrived at the castle on the very evening mentioned by Antoine, I ob¬ tained a sight of you, signora, and was convinced the contessa Virginia is ex¬ ceedingly beautiful, but less fair than the signora Ella. " A courier one day left a packet at the gate, desiring it to be delivered to the conte immediately, and Antoine sent me in with it; I had given it into the hand of my master, and was retiring, when my eye was caught by a youth, who sat at table with him and the sig¬ nor Giovani, He was the living image of the deceased contessa. The conte, rising to quit the room, obliged me to retire; I ascertained that the signor was your brother, yet a suspicion 1 could not repress hovered in my mind, and I re* solved to be satisfied; but that same night the signor Eric disappeared from the castle; I own this only served to strengthen my previous doubts, but I had no means of learning the truth, and even
even now,* that you, signora, have con¬ descended to listen to me, I tremble to find my suspicions verified, for if they are true, what is the fate of the wrong¬ ed, persecuted Virginia!" Ella, without a scruple, briefly inform¬ ed Cesario of what she knew of the fate of Virginia, concluding with a hope that she was safe beyond the reach of her enemies, f * No, signora, no," said the youth, mournfully. " That villain Ulric is the destroyer of Virginia; but let him be¬ ware, for when next I meet him, 1*11* beard him, through the arch-fiend stands beside him!" While he yet spoke, Ulric was at his elbow.—" Ha, traitor! are you there?" cried Cesario. Ella did not hear the an¬ swer of Ulric; she fled with precipita¬ tion, followed by Florence, and entering her chamber, secured herself within it. As Florence was obliged to descend to the offices in search of some one to vol, m. e take
take the necessary provisions to her mis¬ tress, Ella, too timid to remain alone, accompanied her to the corridor that led to the hall occupied by the servitors, desiring her to use the utmost dispatch in the execution of her commission. Florence promptly returned, accom¬ panied by Rosalie, and both followed Ella to her apartments. In crossing the great hall, she encountered Giovani. He saluted her with eagerness—** I am this moment returned from a long and fa¬ tiguing journey," said he; " how happy I am to have met you! suffer me to con¬ duct you to the contessa, my mother." ** Have you seen the contessa since your return, signor ?" " Not yet, sweet Ella; but I am going to her apartments this instant;" and he took her hand, which she hastily with¬ drew, saying—** The contessa is indis¬ posed, signor, and has refused me ad¬ mittance;" and she passed on without waiting his reply. Ella
Ella scarcely knew whether the re¬ turn of Giovani was a favourable cir¬ cumstance or not; she could not estimate the weight his influence might have over Ostorius; and her abhorrence of him was so rooted, that she could not immediately resolve to throw herself on his protection, to avoid even the conte. The bell of the castle tolled seven, when a light tap on the door of Ella's chamber announced a visitor. Florence opened it, and received from the hand of a lackey a folded paper: the man im¬ mediately retired, and Florence closing the door, presented it to her mistress, who, regarding the writing, said—** This is intended for you, Florence, and con¬ tains a request from Cesario to speak with you in the porter's lodge, before his departure." * " The Virgin be praised !" cried Flo* rence—." he has escaped from that devil Ulric, and most likely, signora, it is E ^ something
something about his journey to Venice that he wishes to speak to me." ** Probably; but, Florence, do not linger a moment longer than is neces- sary; I shall wait your return with anx¬ iety." Florence tripped lightly along the passages to the outer court, and passed the drawbridge without being observed by the sentinel, and soon reached the porter's lodge. Antoine received her as usual with 3 kindness, but no Cesario awaited her; neither hud his grandfather seen him since the morning. Florence still held the billet in her hand, but too illiterate to read it, she could only repeat what Ella had said was the contents. ** 'Tis all a trick, Florence, some of the idle vassals have played thee; get thee back again, or the inner gate will be shut. By Mary, the bell tolls eight! you are too late already." " What
*' What shall I do, and what will the signora say ? n cried she—" and then where can Cesario be ?" " Safe enough in the castle, I trow," said Antoine. " I would thou wert there too, for 'tis like I shall be scandi- lized in my old age, having a pretty young damsel like thee sleeping in my lodge." " How can yon be so stupid, Antoine," sobbed Florence, " to talk such non¬ sense wheti I am in such trouble, and poor dear Cesario perhaps flown away with by the devil!" * c What, because Cesario has played you a trick, and Rosalie sent you a wild- goosechase, must the devil fly away with him ? ha! ha! damsel, if all the young men that play false were con¬ signed to the devil, the world would be half unpeopled forsooth; go along to the gate, and try if thou canst persuade the sentinel to let you pass." Florence perceived that the old man e 3 had
had not heard of his grandson's rencoun¬ ter with the terrific Ulric, from which her prolific imagination foreboded the most frightful consequences, and loth to a0iict the good old man, she forbore to communicate the terrible event " I will take your advice, Antoine," said she, " Do so, my good girl," replied he; and Florence returned to the gate, but she knocked and called in vain, until her patience became exhausted, and she returned weeping to Antoine. A tall figure passed her as she entered the lodge, and whoever he was, she found the porter no longer ignorant of the fate of Cesario*
CHAP.
The peace of Heaven is theirs who lift their swords l& such a just and charitable war. Shakbspeap.k.
lire the ruddy sun is set Pikes must shiver, javelins sing; Blade with clattering buckler meet, Jiaubert crash, and helmet ring. Weave the criuisom web of war; Let us go, and tec us %, Where our friends the conllict share, Where they triumph—where they die ! Gray. Monmouth was employed besieging the chateau of Roulboise, between Rouen and Paris, when sir Godfrey re¬ turned from England, ** I bring you, my lord," said the youth, " greetings from the 0>untess, and divers letters from the earl of Pern* broke; but the lady Ella -----" E 4 #l Ah !
" Ah ! my good fellow, what of the lady Ella?" interrupted Monmouth. w She had left England, my lord, be¬ fore I reached Caerphilly." - Curses on your tardiness!—but why, and whither is she gone?" " With the princess Isabella, to Ger¬ many." ** Left England!—gone to Germany P muttered the duke as he paced his tent: " and Eric di Montimar ?" " I passed him between this and llouen, my lord*" Monmouth returned no answer, but continued to traverse his tent with hasty strides, muttering indistinctly to him¬ self, until the voice of Eric without an¬ nounced his arrival.—" Eric, my bro¬ ther,*' said he, ** by this embrace you are right welcome! What is your news ? —Stands England where it did ?—Are the priesthood quiet, or do,they want us among them ?—I pray thee, Godfrey, bid them spread the board.—We will drink
drink deep, Eric, and let our toast be— * England freed from the tyranny of fo¬ reign and domestic churchmen.' Me- thinks, if I were king of her—though, God save the mark, my brows would ill beseem a royaldiadem—I would shew the world what stuff my soldiers were made of, ere I would truckle to the antichrist of Rome. Here we are within a bowshot of Meulan, and if a single flight of arrows would level its walls, we must not draw a bow till a synod of priests, forsooth, have decided on which of the two kings they shall saddle their curse!" " Can this be?" said Eric. ** Harkee, Eric; I shall shortly shoot at the moon for pastime. Faith, I grow splenetic; I could rail at my dog for sleeping. By my head, he is the faith¬ ful emblem of England! she sleeps ; and I cannot rouse her" " And who can hope to do it, if Mon¬ mouth fails ?" said Eric. " Eric," continued the duke, " the E 5 aspect
aspect of affairs is miserably changed here. Pembroke's absence leaves the king exposed to the intrigues of a fac¬ tion, who seek not England's weal. Elinor's polities expired with her.—Oh England! how unhappily are thy sons degenerated, when we are reduced to lament the martial spirit of a woman! It was not so in Biehard's days." The entrance of sir Edmund Shirley and young De Lancy interrupted the further remarks of Monmouth; but a spi¬ rit of indignation and discontent at the dastardly inactivity of the king per¬ vaded all ranks of the army. ** I pray thee, my lord," said Shirley, M dismiss me from the service; I am heartily sick on't: or if we must stop here, don*t let us be idle: sure lady Ox¬ ford will have the charity to teach us to spin; or, in God's name, let us knit hose for the troops, for methinks our poor fellows are dreadfully out at the heels. 1 * M Ay, truly r " cried De Laney, ,e and at
at elbows too, and are like to be while the supplies pass through the hands of my lord of Oxford." " Hist, De Lancy," said Shirley, " 'tis treason to talk irreverently of lord Ox- ford, or, by my faith, of his right beau¬ teous gentle dame." " Lady Oxford!" said Eric—" why lady Oxford is more than fifty !" " Treason again, Di Montimar! she is young enough to make a fool of the king." " No," said Monmouth, bitterly; " he was born pne." M Most eloquent conclusion!—Well, my lord, I am a messenger from the lord Howard, who is sick in his tent, and craves to see you." " I will come to him, Shirley; and trust me, I grieve to hear so worthy a a lord is sick, for his own sake; for ours, 'tis not much odds—his counsels are as little regarded as the advice of Pem¬ broke." e 8 u The
" The Oxford faction carry all before them," said De Lancy, " and that arch- villain Osmanville is leagued with them; methinks, my lord, you were ill used in his affair." Monmouth turned away—his spirit was chafed. He had sworn enmity a- gainst Osmanville, and Leopold of Aus¬ tria ; he had sworn to revenge the wrongs of Cceur de Lion on this dastard duke, who lay encamped before him in the army, and mocked his threats. Both his enemies were protected by the in¬ fatuated policy of John, who Jiad forbid any aggression on the part of his sol¬ diery ; but he suppressed his indigna¬ tion, and followed Shirley to the quar¬ ters of lord Howard. Eric listened with astonishment—the change indeed was obvious; when he left the army at Rouen to depart for England, Monmouth was all in all with the king; now he scarcely admitted him to his council. The
The morning after his arrival, Eric received a message from Monmouth, and repaired without delay to his gene¬ ral's tent, where most of the officers were assembled. " You are a damned lucky fellow, Di Montimar s " said Shirley, as he entered, *' to come in the very nick of time. The thing is settled, and we have at last ob¬ tained leave to thrash those vaunting scoundrels yonder. You and I, my lad, were once before united in the same ex¬ pedition, and fared pretty equally; how¬ ever, we weathered the storm, and, by Mary, I desire no better fare this time, so we drub*the rascals soundly!" Monmouth detained Eric after the council until all the rest had retired, and then he spoke of Ella.-*-** If we never meet again," said he—** and God wot 1 care little what fate betides me this day— bear to your adored sister my last fond wiShes; say the last sigh that passes my lips will tear her from my heart—that living,
living, I loved—and dying, I adored her." The bustle of preparation prevailed through the camp as Eric hastened to his charge, Shirley, ever on the alert, led on his bowmen.—" We are in excel¬ lent order, Di Montimar," cried he, " and we march to victory!" •* The duke leads the van in person," said De Lancy; " lord Mowbray the right; and the left is under the com¬ mand of that approved warrior, the earl of Salisbury; the reserve is headed by his majesty." '* And where are the Oxfords?" asked Godfrey of Belgarvon. " They are cabinet ministers," said Shirley, with a sneer. The drum interrupted further parley, and each, at the signal, repaired to his post. The British army had remained so long inactive, that the enemy were in some measure unprepared for an attack; there h no doubt but they had informa¬ tion
tion of what was going on; but the truth was, John's determination to give them battle was too sudden and unex¬ pected for them to obtain intelligence of their intention, till they perceived the British lines form in order of battle. Their measures were then prompt—the piquets were called in—the drums beat an alarm, and the whole mass was speed¬ ily in motion. Lewis the dauphin headed the troops, while Philip yet lingered in his tent with Chatillon, the legate from the pope, who clearly proved to him that the war with John was not only glori¬ ous, but a laudable and acceptable ser¬ vice in the eyes of God—that the blood spilt that day would pave his way to the throne of mercy; and that the long list of licenced murders on which the newly-risen sun must set would infalli¬ bly purchase his salvation. John was a rebellious son of the church of Rome, and the thunders of the Vatican were fulminated
fulminated against him. Philip, like the other monarchs of his time, was no match for the artifices of his spiritual mother; nor had he sufficient address to perceive that he was only a tool in the hands of Inocent and his legate. On the other hand, John, actuated by his ambition, indulged in visionary pro¬ jects for the subjugation of France, and his pride prompted him to maintain, single-handed, a contest with the Ro¬ man pontiff. But there were other more mean and contemptible passions work¬ ing in the bosom of the king of Eng¬ land ; he however rested the justice of his cause on the aggressions of Philip, who had besieged and taken several of the towns that owed fealty to John, and notoriously provoked the commence¬ ment of hostilities. At six o'clock the battle commenced by a discharge of arrows from the Eng¬ lish bowmen, which was returned in to¬ lerable order by the hastily-formed lines of
t>f the French; but when the swords¬ men met, it seemed as if the battle only then began. The long-smothered ha¬ tred on both sides then found vent, and many a bitter taunt gave vigour to many a bitter blow. " No quarter F was the cry on both sides; and never was the task of dealing death more readily fulfilled. The troops had stolen a march of courage on their leaders (if John and Philip were such), and made, with mu¬ tual eagerness, the quarrel all their own. How pitiless was then the soldier, who, but the night before, had wept at a well- feigned tale of wo ! — how, with ruf¬ fian hand, dll he drag the supplicating female from the pillaged tent, and deaf as adamant to her cries, consummate on her the vengeance he had sworn against her countrymen ! A soldier is more or less than man in the field; and whether rapine or glory is his pursuit, he is equally indifferent to the carnage that surrounds him. In
In the thickest close of battle, Mon¬ mouth, like the genius of England, stemmed the torrent, his white plumes towered on high, the well-known rally¬ ing point of every British soldier. For hours his high-bred charger pressed his warlike front to meet the martial foe, until an arrow, sent with unerring aim, pierced his generous side, and poor Bay¬ ard fell; even in the heat ,of battle his master gave a sigh to his fate, as he turned to mount the steed of Godfrey. " The right wing gives way, my lord," cried De Lancy; " the dauphin bears hard upon lord Mowbray." Monmouth raised himsilf in his stir* nips—the right was in evident disorder. While at this juncture the French under Austria repelled his attack with feeble* ness, he felt that victory in the centre was almost certain, and he dispatched a body of the reserve to lord Mowbray's assistance, whilst he pursued the advan* tage he had gained. The rout of the centre
centre was complete; and though Phi¬ lip led up a strong reinforcement, they were unable to sustain the fortune of the day. Monmouth bore down upon them with an impetuosity they wanted energy to resist; the king had delayed too long —the scale was poised to a hair, and the English, flushed with the partial victory they had achieved, fought like tigers to secure it. The temporary success of the dau¬ phin yielded to the general confusion of the French army; and when the fate of the day was decided, Monmouth, covered with dust, and sweating at every pore, still sought among the fly¬ ing the duke of Austria. At length they met-—few words sufficed—" Vil¬ lain, I am the son of Cceur de Lion!" cried Monmouth: " turn, if thou darest, and meet my deep-sworn vengeance F Leopold answered to the charge— they fought—the conflict was not long doubtful—Austria fell; and at the same moment
moment an unseen foe plunged a dagger in the side of Monmouth—he sunk up¬ on the ground, and his blood mingled with that of his dying enemy!
CHAP-
CHAPTER VII. *•*■*■#»■!■**■*■*+**■*■*■*■
* »,-----------------------Can such things be, And o\ercome us like a summer's cloud, Without our special wonder?'* Ella closed the door that opened into the gallery, and seated herself, to wait in trembling silence the return of Flo¬ rence; but when hour succeeded hour, and she appeared not, her apprehensions became too painful to bear. The night had already closed in; she had no light, and dared not venture to go in search of one; she felt too the appalling consci¬ ousness that her chamber was by no means a secure asylum; and every in¬ stant added strength to her terrors. A suspicion that Florence had been sepa¬ rated from her by what, to her cooler judgment, appeared a stratagem, pre¬ pared
pared her to expect something inimical to her peace. Terrified at the thought, she half determined to descend to Gio¬ vani, and implore him to protect her from the conte; but her habitual aver¬ sion to him overcame her 'ears, and she resolved to watch through uie night in silence and darkness, if Florence did not return. She remembered to have put her mantle on the window-seat, and with a palpitating heart she rose to seek it: just sufficient light gleamed through the trees to guide her to the window; she found her mantle, and wrapping it a- round her, sat down in the most retired corner of the room: she felt no inclina¬ tion to sleep, and she trusted to the pos¬ sibility of seeing, and by that means eluding, the designs of the conte. She had not continued long in this situation, ere a soft whisper announced the proximity of some one. The first words were inaudible, either from her terror,
terror, or the caution of the person who addressed her, who continued, in an im¬ ploring accent, to enjoin silence.—" Trust me," said the unknown, in a whisper, " I am a friend—a sincere and devoted friend. If I were to tell the claim I have to your confidence, surrounded as you are by artifices, you would doubt my simple assertions. I swear to you, Ella, by the Blessed Virgin, your life is infinitely more dear to me than my own P* " Telfme then who you are?" faltered Ella. " I am one that has long been num¬ bered with the dead." " Then you were never known to me?" said Ella, inquiringly. " Never for what I am." ** But otherwise you have.' 5 * ; Yes, Ella, I am like you, the ob¬ ject of* the conte^s treachery ; he sought to assassinate me—I had the good for¬ tune to escape, owing to the courage of a faithful
a faithful domestic. One of the bravos we secured, the other died of his wounds. From the survivor I learned a tale too black for credence. In order to coun¬ teract it, I opposed treachery to trea¬ chery—it was the most prompt and ef¬ fectual means: my person was unknown to the conte-—I assumed the name, and in some measure the appearance, of the bravo employed to murder me; I even received his promised gratification, and* obeyed without reluctance the order of the conte, to wait here to assist his fu¬ ture plans." ** You are then the dreaded Ulric?" " As such I am known to you." ** I dare not trust you," said she de¬ spondingly. " Wherefore?" demanded he. " If my appearance has prejudiced you against me, it was only necessary to divest my¬ self of some part of my disguise,* to re¬ move it." " No," rejoined Ella; " it was not solely
solely your appearance—there were other and more powerful reasons to sanction my distrust." w Name them then," said the supposed Ulric. " By what means did you rescue me from the falling tower?'* " I saw you ascend—I knew the di¬ lapidated state of the building, and raised a ladder to one of the windows, and ascending it, caught you as you fell." " Where then is Cesario ?" ** On his way to Rome." " With whom, and for what pur¬ pose ?" asked Ella. " With his mistress." " Is it possible! and have you pre¬ served Virginia?" " Twice—when I dwelt in a hermit¬ age at the foot of Mount Pausilippo, I released her from a convent where she was confined by her uncle; and here I vol. hi. f found
found her again, just in time to save her life." " Do you know the fate of the con¬ tessa ?" " I do—it was on her account I sub¬ mitted to the disguise I assumed. Nei¬ ther you nor Virginia were mcluded in my scheme—I knew not of your resi¬ dence here until 1 recognised Virginia, and learnt your history from her." ** And where was she concealed before her departure for Rome ?" M There are subterranean chambers be¬ neath the castle, replete with every con¬ venience; I placed her in one of those, where she waited for you to bear her company hence, until the return of Gio¬ vani, who possessing a correct clue to the vaults, rendered it dangerous for her to remain any longer; I then placed her under the care of one on whom I could rely, and Cesario, and thus accompanied she departed for Rome." " Without seeing me, or giving me one
one token of her safety! this was unlike my sweet, affectionate Virginia," said Elk. 4* V/\I1 £*MfW% **#**"* *** »^\i *» f 1A l^% MU A h A Vt fl VIVA lull Can SCarcCi^ uumpicucuu mc dangers that environ her; but even thus she came hither with me, during the nights-she w£pt over you^—pressed her lips to yours to take a parting kiss, and in doing so awaked you. Your excla* mations, and the presence of your at¬ tendant, obliged us to retire; I extin¬ guished the lamp, lest our appearance should heighten your alarm." " It is very surprising," observed Ella; " btit there is one thing more;" and she repeated the conversation Florence and Cesario had evcrheard between him and the conte. ** And this then," said he, " was the cause of your distress—hence the ex¬ treme caution which baffled all my at¬ tempts to secure even one moment's confidence. I must confess you had ground for your suspicions; but if there f£ is
is faith in man, I seek not to deceive you,—Oh, Blessed Mary! that I should thus hardly gain the confidence of Ger¬ trude's daughter!" " Did you know my mother?" asked she. " And your father too, Ella—but of this another time," replied he. " My conversation with Ostorius was report¬ ed faithfully: it was a part of the cha¬ racter I had assumed to appear a villain, and I did wish to get you into my power. My motives were pure and holy. I swore by St. Peter you should not es¬ cape me; but I swore to preserve you from the conte. You are known to the family of Monmouth, to whom Osto¬ rius is related: he brought hither with him Robert Fauconbridge, with whom he shortly after found occasion to quar¬ rel, and with unexampled barbarity he incarcerated the youth, who had dared to dispute his will, in a dungeon beneath the castle. It was this Robert Faucon¬ bridge
bridge I sought to liberate, moved there to by the entreaties of an English monk, for then I knew not the obligations you owed the countess of Caerphilly." ** But the monk—you conversed with him in the gardens the night after Vir¬ ginia's disappearance ?" " I did, but he was a stranger to me; he came hither with Nicholas Arezzo, to whom I am known." " He was the friend of my mother," said Ella, ** and received her dying con¬ fession." ** Stranger observed the unknown; ** probably he knew not that you were here. But we linger—will you put yourself under my protection ?" " I feel a hope that you will not de¬ ceive me," said she; " but methinks if I knew your name, I should be more assured, particularly if I have ever heard it before." M You have heard it before, and when F 3 you
you descend the vaults, you shall know it-^-decide promptly." ** I commit myself to your cure—may the Holy Virgin preserve me from evil! 1 fly from positive misery, and the fate I encounter is doubtful, but I am ready to follow you;" and Ella's tears fell fast as she spoke. " Suffer me to sustain you," said the supposititious Ulric, as he passed his arm around he; " we are in darkness, but I know the way with certainty; anort We shall descend, but fear not—there is no danger in the path we tread." Yet Ella trembled violently*—his mo¬ dulated accents had stolen on her confi¬ dence, but the strong arm that encircled her waist immediately recalled fo her imagination the dark towering form of Ulric, and all her termors, all her suspi¬ cions, returned; but it was too late to hesitate. After having advanced a few steps, she found herself descending a staircase; its proximity convinced her that
that the secret opening to her chamber must have been in the floor. Having reached the bottom of the steps, her conductor opened a door on the right hand, and led Ella into a small but neatly-arranged apartment, lighted by a lamp suspended in the centre. On a table, at one side of the room, were placed various refreshments, consisting of dried fruits and wines. He pressed her to partake of them—" You have suffered much anxiety to-night," said he, ** and have yet much fatigue to encoun¬ ter." , Ella took the offered goblet, and rais¬ ed, her eyes as she did so—her surprise was extreme at the altered appearance of her companion, now divested of his immense black eyebrows* mustaches, and hair; his dark eyes had lost almost entirely their piercing regards, his head was slightly silvered by the hand of time, and a smile of benevolence played round his mouth; Ella would have f 4 thought
thought him formed to inspire confi¬ dence, but for the resemblance she per¬ ceived, at the first glance, he bore to Giovani. Her curiosity increased every succeeding moment, and at length she said — " The interest you have taken in my fate, as well as that of the con¬ tessa, warrants the belief that you are related to the family of Di Montimar." " I am," replied he. " You have promised," continued Ella, " to seal the confidence I have placed in you, by instructing me by what name to address my deliverer." " Ella," said he, ** I have said I was one long numbered with the dead; I have almost myself forgotten my natural appellation: as the hermit of Pausilippo I have been known for eighteen years, and beneath that title have nearly lost all recollection of what I once was— 2" am Enrico di Montimar" " Holy Mary » M cried Ella, * fi my fa¬ ther!" " Daughter
*< Daughter of Gertrude," said he, in a stifled voice, " it is even thus." Ella sunk on her knees; she no longer harboured any doubts of his in¬ tentions. His long restrained emotions burst forth—he wept the tears of un¬ feigned joy—he raised her in his arms —he pressed her with fondness to his bosom; but no word passed his lips— the powerful emotions legible in his fea¬ tures spoke a language she could not mistake. —"My God, I thank thee!" at length broke from him; " I am a fa¬ ther—be all the misery I have endured forgotten!" Ella rejoiced, most truly rejoiced, at this fortunate discovery; but hers was not a selfish joy—she felt how dear to her was the happiness of her beloved brother—■ she felt her present felicity doubled by the share he would take in it, and in the delightful certainty that earl Pembroke, the brother of lady Ger¬ trude, was not a murderer.—" Yes," said f 5 she*
she, mentally, " hereafter he will receive me with tenderness—he will no longer imagine my presence a tacit reproach— he will receive too with transport my father resuscitated from death—he 1 Will love us all, and we, without a single doubt, may return his affection—oh, we shall be happy P* But Mortmouth'g in¬ constancy darkened her dream of feli¬ city, and she sighed on the bosom of Di Mqntimar. Her heavy sigh roused Di Montimar from an equally delightful reverie, to a recollection of the dangers that sur¬ rounded them.—" I have done #rong," said he, " to retard our departure so long—this was not the place for such an eclaircissement as this; but it is done- nature claimed a few minutes, the rest must pass till we reach a place of secu¬ rity." Ella rose without speaking—her heart was surcharged with various feelings; she wrapped her mantle closely about her,
her, and over it Di Montimar threw a large cloak, and passing her arm through his, led her in silence through the vaults. ^\TVl^*Ti ll«* !*£»£f»l*£n"! +Yt£ik ^ttfrljaf Iio ovtiii. guished the lamp, and cast it into a chasm by the way: at his signal a man appeared with two horses; on one of them he placed his daughter, and mount¬ ing the other himself, he spoke to the jman—*' Speed thee, my faithful Gaston, to the cardinal Arezzo; bear this letter to him, and answer any question he may propose—-thou knowest the route I pur- pose to take." The man took the letter, promised to use dispatch, and instantly disappeared. The morning was beginning to dawn, and our travellers pursued their way without encountering any obstacle, and soon lost sight of Del Raimando. It was yet early when they entered the town of Verzone, where the servant of Di Montimar had secured relays of horses; and after a hasty meal, they f 6 Qt d^ n
again pursued their journey. Nothing material occurred to interrupt their pro¬ gress, and they reached the shores of the Adriatic in safetv. The caution and dispatch of our tra¬ vellers precluded much conversation on the road. Ella understood that they were on their way to Rome, where she conjectured her father meant to assert his rights, as marchese di Mdntimar; but further she had not presumed to in¬ quire. He appeared to undergo an in¬ ternal conflict, probably relative to Ipol¬ lita, and frequently started from fits of deep abstraction, to address a few indif¬ ferent words to her. Di Montimar purposed to embark at Venice, and pass along the shores of the Adriatic, as far as Ancona, and from thence proceed direct to Rome; but the fatigue of their hasty journey, or rather flight, from Del Raimando, rendered a few hours rest absolutely necessary for both ; and immediately after their arri¬ val
val at Venice, lie counselled Ella to re¬ tire to a chamber, to take some repose. When our heroine rose, she received a message from her father, and followed the messenger to his bedside. M Sit down, my dear Ella," said he, after the domestic had retired; " I sent for you to say, I have suffered more from fatigue than I had first imagined; and I feared you would be alarmed at hearing I was unable to rise. A few hours will, I hope, quite recruit me; and as we are here perfectly secure from danger, I wish to hear from your own lips the eventful tale of your life; there are many things I wish to hear explain¬ ed, that the contessa Virginia was but imperfectly acquainted with. The pre¬ sent is a favourable opportunity, if you are sufficiently rested to accede to my request." Ella instantly complied with the wish of her father, who appeared sensibly af¬ fected at different periods of her recital. He
He afterwards spoke of his own fate, subsequent to the blow he received from the hand of Pembroke: his servant, who was strongly attached to him, re¬ moved his supposed dead body, but ob¬ serving some signs of animation remain¬ ing, he carefully dressed his wound, and as carefully concealed the knowledge of his resuscitation from the world; for he knew not the cause of Pembroke's en¬ mity, but he was well acquainted with the extent of his power, and he trem¬ bled for the fate of his master. When Di Montimar became convalescent, he learned the supposed death of lady Ger¬ trude, and lost in that knowledge every wish to seek an explanation with Pem¬ broke ; he left Scotland for his native country, and retiring to Mount Pausi¬ lippo, he secluded himself entirely from the world. He learned, by mere acci¬ dent, the death of the marchese di Mon¬ timar and the marcbesa, and that his sister Ipollita was wedded to the sup¬ posed
posed heir of Ostorius; his remaining affection fbr his sister drew him from his retreat, and he heard with sorrow, from the cardinal, that the character of the conte was more than equivocal; he was destined to prove this in his own per¬ son, for the conte having ascertained the certainty of his existence, immediately decided to take him off by assassination ; and Ella* notwithstanding her know¬ ledge of Giovani's principles, found that he was not only privy to, but abetted the designs of the conte. All this he had collected from the dying bravo, as well as a complete clue to the subterra¬ nean vaults of Del Raimando, and an intimation that Inollita was also likely to become the victim of her husband's treachery; he succeeded in accomplish¬ ing the object for which he adopted the name of Ulric, he placed the contessa beyond his reach, and after facilitating the flight of Virginia, ultimately re* leased Ella from her perilous situation. CHAP-
CHAPTER VIII ------ ——Oh, but man—proud man, DressM in a little brief authority, Most ignorant of what he's most assured, Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven, As makes the angels weep ! Measure for Meamre. Conteaky to the sanguine hopes of Ella, the marchese every hour grew worse, and at length she prevailed on him to call in a physician, who declared his patient in imminent danger, and the following day verified his predictions; Di Montimar was seized with delirium, and our hapless heroine was left in this trying dilemma, without a single being to direct her. She expressed a wish to the physician to remain in the strictest privacy, and to avoid all questions as to the
the rank and name of her father; and when he advised her to take the air, lest the too close confinement became inju¬ rious to her health, she excused herself on the plea of attention to the marchese. Thus passed several days, and Ella, weak and dejected, sat by the bed of Di Montimar, and listened to his ravings, in which her name was min¬ gled with Ipollita's and the conte, until she almost partook in his delirium. Overpowered by the horrors of her dis¬ torted imagination, she rose, and opened the window, vaguely hoping that the fresh air would dispel the violent pain in her head. The window opened into the street, and she gazed on the mo¬ ving scene below, almost unconscious of his existence, until a loud exclamation apprized her that she was observed, and a glance alone told by whom—it was Giovani! Trembling with dismay, she cast a look on the unconscious marchese; she tried
tried to shake off the heavy oppression that hung over her, and to collect her scattered thoughts. Giovani had, seen her; he was known in Venice^ and she was an isolated stranger. But the mar* chese—what would become,of her fa¬ ther?— " Surely," she thought, u Gio* vani dares not lift his hand against him thus publicly!" At that moment she recollected his person was unknown to him, as well as the conte; but before she could arrange her half concerted scheme, Giovani ab¬ ruptly entered the room.—" Ella, my beautiful cousin," said he, advancing to her, M how fortunate I am to find you! but why did you fly from Del Rat- mando ? why are you here ? and who is that old man?" t . ; " The tale is long to tell," said Ella, gasping for breath, (< and I am ill, very, very ill—sick at heart" *' Well, only tell me then why you left Del Raimando?" "To
" To avoid the persecutions of the conte." " Indeed P ^aid he; " but I had my suspicions—with whom did you fly ?" * With Ulric," replied she. ** The villain Ulric! and where is he ?" " Dead," said Ella, : " Dead! when ?—where ?" ** He encountered the esquire of an Italian nobleman whom he murdered but a few weeks since; they fought, and the faithful servant revenged the death of his master—-Ulric was killed " " Ah F exclaimed Giovani, *' then the villain lied—he swore he had dis¬ patched both!" Then recollecting him¬ self, he asked—" Did the name of that nobleman transpire?" ** I held no converse with the es¬ quire," said Ella; " he did not name his master in my hearing." *' But who is that old man yonder?" demanded he. " Speak
** Speak low," said she; w he sleeps- do not wake him, I conjure you," " Why not ? who is he ?" ** A holy hermit, one to whom I owe my life. After the death of Ulric, he listened to my story, took me under his protection, and journeyed hither, when he fell sick, occasioned, as I believe, by the fatigue he encountered in conduct* ing me to a place of safety." ** But why, my lovely cousin, did you not r&ther seek my protection than that of Ulric?" 4i I believed the conte's will omnipo¬ tent in Del Raimando." w Enough—I am satisfied; but you must leave this place immediately." " I will not leave my protector in sickness and affliction." *' I will cause him to be carefully at¬ tended. Suffer me to conduct you hence." \ " Giovani," said she, " that poor in¬ valid
valid has succoured me in my distress, and / will not desert him in his need." ** You are warm, my sweet Ella; I would not thwart your wishes. Reflect that this is an improper place for you, now 1 am fortunately able to offer you my protection." At that instant Di Montimar awoke from his troubled slumber; he cast a wishful glance around, and then, in a low, but perfectly distinct tone, said— " Giovani, beware the dagger of Osto¬ rius !" Giovani started. ** It is delirium," said Ella, trembling with apprehension; ** he has listened to my tale of the sufferings I endured from the conte, and his disordered imagina¬ tion dwells constantly upon it.—Holy father," she continued, addressing Di Montimar, " do you know me ?" . ** Yes, yes," said he with quickness, ** you are Enningarde.—And you too, I remember you now—you are the mes¬ senger
senger from Pembroke—I forgive him." " He raves," said Giovani; " you can¬ not remain here with safety; he may offer mischief towards you; at least re¬ tire to another chamber." * * s Villain, unhand her," cried Di Montimar, " or, by the host of heaven, I will annihilate you !" " Good father," said she, " I will not leave you; be tranquil, I will sit beside you while you sleep.—Leave us, Gio* vani, I entreat you." " Who calls Giovani?" cried he, starting up.—" Ah, Ipollita, was it your voice? I have heard it for the last time; the grave will shortly close over us both. Farewell! farewell! Hasten, for you will be pursued. If they overtake ye, tell them yon are Ulric's sister.«~r Guard her, young Fauconbridge.—So, so, I understand the language of your eyes —I loved once----- " and his voice sunk into a low murmur; once Ella distin¬ guished the name of lady Gertrude, and soon
soon after he appeared to sleep more calmly than he had done for some days. " Would I could prevail on you to retire, lovely Ella 1" said Giovani; " I admire the humanity that prompts you to remain, but I fear the consequences." *• Do not," she replied, " entertain any apprehensions on my account; no ill can possibly result from my perse¬ verance in a line of conduct dictated by gratitude, and which nothing shall tempt me to swerve from. Leave me therefore to the melancholy duty I have imposed on myself; perhaps a few hours will decide his fate—and mine," she added mentally; her voice faltered, and she hid her face in her handkerchief Giovani appeared affected; he took her hand respectfully, and said— 6i You shall be obeyed; henceforth your wishes shall be my law;" and he retired, to the great relief of Ella, who was scarcely able to conceal her terror and aversion. Di Montimar continued to sleep pro¬ foundly,
foundly, and the physician, on his coming, declared the crisis of his disor¬ der was approaching. Ella's anxiety increased; but as it was probable her father might sleep for several hours, she yielded to the entreaties of a Jemnte de chambre, whom Giovani had desired to attend her constantly, and retired to a temporary bed, to take the repose she so greatly needed. The crisis of the marchese's fever was favourable; he awoke perfectly sensible, but exceedingly weak* Ella's distress was extreme; the arrival of Giovani had placed her in a cruel dilemma. To con¬ ceal this circumstance from her father was impossible, and to apprize him of it, in his present weak state, extremely dangerous; and, to add to her vexation, she found that the attendant Giovani had placed with her received instruc¬ tions from him never to leave her for one moment alone with the invalid. At length, trusting to the possibility that
that Di Montimar had not forgotten the English, she addressed him in that language, find, with infinite caution, she made him comprehend their situa¬ tion, and the means she had used to impose on Giovani. She bad scarcely concluded, when a messenger from Giovani begged her permission to visit her, and, without waiting her response, he entered the room; Ella, affecting to believe the hermit quite an indifferent person to him, closed the curtains of his bed, and retired to the opposite end of the cham¬ ber, to converse with Giovani. Our heroine quickly perceived that the femme de chambre was a spy upon her actions, and she suspected had re¬ ported to Giovani her conversation with the marchese in a language she did not understand; and the following day an accident convinced her she was in face a prisoner, and guarded with vigilance, vot. m. g under
under the plea of attention to her com¬ fort. When Giovani requested to know what plan she had formed, as the reco¬ very of her friend was no longer doubt¬ ful, she replied, that she had not yet* consulted him, and that, persuaded his advice would be judicious and disin¬ terested, she would strictly abide by it Giovani by no means relished this proceeding, and acquiescing with a bad grace, advanced to the bedside of Di Montimar. w Answer me one question, young man," said the marchese—" where is the conte Ostorius at this time ?*' *' In Rome," replied Giovani; '* he obtained, by threats and imprecations, intelligence from Florence, that it was the intention of lady Ella to go to Rome to obtain the protection of his holiness, and thither he hastened, whilst I con¬ fined my researches to the more immedi¬ ate neighbourhood of Del Raimando." ** I counsel
* I counsel you, then, to depart for Del Raimando, my child," said Di Montimar. "The protection of the contessa Ostorius is the most proper you can seek, and the signor Giovani can then arrange with his mother, in the absence of the conte, to hasten his union with you, and thus place an effec¬ tual bar to any future attempts of Osto¬ rius. I feel already almost convales¬ cent, and should accompany you with pleasure, fully persuaded that you will find yourself perfectly safe there at pre¬ sent. Perhaps the signor will have the complaisance to wait a few days, until I am sufficiently restored to travel with you. M ** With pleasure, holy father," said Giovani, delighted with the arrange¬ ment of Di Montimar; while Ella was too much astonished to offer a single remark: that it was policy to con* eiliate Giovani she confessed, but if her father was serious in his propo- g % sitions,
sitions, she was shocked at the extent of his complaisance; and he talked of the contessa Ipollita as if still at Rai¬ mando. Was she then still there ? or was Giovani ignorant of her absence ? She resolved to hazard one question, and therefore inquired after jthe health of the contessa. " She was in one of her odd humours when I quitted Del Raimando," said Giovani, " and refused to admit me; I owe her little for her courtesy, but her maids said she was sick, and must be humoured." " Then," thought EUa, «« my father has no intention of going thither; his object is obviously to deceive Giovani and gain time." But she was herself deceived: Giovani watched her with lynx-eyed jealousy, and at the end of a few days, without having obtained one moment's private conversation with the marchese, she prepared to return to Del Raimando. Her father went with her, and
and that circumstance, with the reflec¬ tion that he was perfectly acquainted with the private communications be¬ tween the castle and the vaults beneath it, inspired a faint hope of ultimate escape from Giovani. With a heavy heart, Ella departed from Venice^ where she had felt herself in temporary security. Her dread of Giovani was equal to her fears of the conte: he wore, 'tis true, the outward appearance of a wish to please, but she knew it was an assumed character, and that his customary habits were brutal in the extreme; and there were moments when she dreaded that her father would, for Ipollita's sake, consent to her union with him—and then again she would reject the probability of such an idea. Yet she saw the marchese tranquil, and apparently well pleased to return to Del Raimando. She knew indeed that he had great command over his feelings; still she clung to the hope, that he was a B prepared
prepared with a dernier resource, and that hope alone sustained her. The party travelled slowly, on the marcbese's account, and did not reach Del Raimando until towards the close of the second day. The drawbridge was lowered at the signal of Gioyani, and Ella crossed it with an aching heart She,cast a look towards her father:, he still wore a placid smile; nothing like doubt or apprehension appeared in his countenance, and she felt a latent hope that something would yet occur to save her from a fate too dreadful to contem¬ plate- The aged Antoine bowed low as they passed. Giovani continued close to her side, but turning to observe if the mar¬ chese really followed her, she saw him exchange a few words with the porter, and when be joined them, she fancied she perceived that his cheerfulnes waa increased. The interior of the chateau seemed almost
almost deserted: a few domestics ap¬ peared, but they moved about in omi¬ nous silence. Giovani led the way to the supper-room, loudly calling for lights. In the passage Di Montimar pressed his daughter's hand, and whis¬ pered w All is well." ** Why are we kept in darkness so long?" said Giovani, after waiting some time, '* The lights will come soon enough, signor," said Di Montimar. The peculiar tone of his voice startled XSiovani; he was about to demand an explanation, when he recollected that -there was nothing extraordinary in the words, and he continued silent. At length this constrained silence was broken on by the sound of approaching footsteps. The folding-doors of the sa¬ loon were thrown wide on their hinges, 3md two men, habited in black, each bearing a torch in his left hand, appear¬ ed. The glare of the torches shewed a 4 in
in the obscfirity of the passage many Others, habited exactly in the same man* ner. To Ella, this appearance was a perfect mystery, but Giovani instantly compre¬ hended its meaning.-^" Villain !* he cried to Di Montimar, ** the lights are come! You have decoyed me hither into the power of the Inquisition F and he would have buried his stiletto in his bosom, but that he was instantly seized by the officers of the Inquisition, one of whom spoke a few words in a low tone to the marchese, which he answer ed in the same key, and they retired in profound silence, taking with them Gi¬ ovani, and leaving Ella in indescribable astonishment " All constraint is at an end, my be¬ loved child," said Di Montimar, em¬ bracing his daughter. " I was aware when I proposed coming hither, that the chateau had been some days in the possession of the officers of the Inqui¬ sition,
sition* and consequently that we should be perfectly secure under their prdtee- tion: for the vest, we will defer all fur¬ ther conference until to^fnoiTdw," ^ But should Giovani escape, my f^ th^i hia vengeimce would be terrible.' 1 "Fear not, my dear Ella, the priso¬ ners of the Inquisition never escape." Thfe m^te ^ttendaiits now Spread the supper-table, and after a slight repast, Di Montimar and his daughter retired torest^. : >' : .:' Early in the morning, Giovani was sent under a strong guard to Rome; and after a few days rest, Di Montimar aud bis daughter also put themselves under the escort of the officers of the Inquisition, and commenced their jour¬ ney thither once more*. No accident occurred to obstruct the travellers in their way, and they, on G 5 reaching
reaching the capital, were lodged in the Vatican, and both father and daughter retired to rest, after the fatigues of their journey; but Ella heard with regret, the next morning, that, as two-of the principal witnesses in the approaching trial of Ostorius am! Giovani, they were interdicted from holding any communi¬ cation with their friends in the city of Rome; but her inquiries relative to Vir¬ ginia were satisfactorily answered. She was in Rome, attending the trial of Ostorius, who had been apprehended for attempting the murder of Di Mon¬ timar, and the usurpation of the titles and estates of Virginia: some other crimes were laid to his charge, but those were the principal. Giovani was deeply implicated, and both %vere in confine¬ ment. Notwithstanding EUa possessed the society of her father, and the privilege of reading in the magnificent library of h» holiness, shs felt the time hang hea- vily
*vily on her hands; yet when at last it was announced to her that the trial would commence the next day, she shrunk from the idea of appearing to give her evidence against the prisoners. Her repugnance increased every hour; and though she ardently longed to see Virginia, yet she wished the trial had been deferred. Di Montimar perceived that it preyed on her spirits, and he strove to reassure her; but his attempts were unsuccessful; she complained of a violent headach, a nervous lassitude took possession of her whole frame; a prophetic sensation of approaching evil seemed to haunt her imagination, and when she parted with her father, she wept as if she was taking leave of him for ever; her indisposition increased eve¬ ry instant, and she retired to her couch, nearly overpowered by the poignancy of her feelings: she slept, but her dreams were troubled and heavy. Di Montimar retired too, depressed G 6 perhaps
perhaps# th§ de s pQnd^n«gy of his daugh¬ ter—or did he fed $ presenj&n?nt that h^ had^«een her for^the ten% tim£?<~iSlftp» virtwous Enrico; thy §oul i^ unsrtwfd with crime; ^pd thougli.thy trials here ^re bitter, and hard to bear,r^nifmbertb€a?e is ftnather m& a tetter wori4 white tbt ^vfek^d mm® fmm troubling, and wh?re th? weary are at rest; Yesuis, m& th^ ^teem of the good and virtuQu^ m$y Ioften th# lot of Di Mpn timm wh% like mmf of the mpst deserving ^mong mankind? ^nly possessed l^ppine^ for # moment—only lQng ^nowgb tofc&jtbm bitterness of -H$ los% mi to wish b^ had l^ver tilted the cup of feJMty* Wh^n our heroine fir^l ^wo^ke frani her troubled slumber, her fhpughts w§i^ confused #nd indistinct; ( but soon re¬ turning eonseiwsness assured heii *hat during h#r sltep §he fed been feniQved fmm %h$$mmhm ^he usnally slept in; and she demanded the reason M this m? traprdinary change from m attendant, who
¥fho offered her a sateer of refreshments; bmk tbt girl returned no answer, mid en¬ deavoured t^ convey to her by signs that §be was dumb, at the same time motioning for her to drink the contents ofa small phial Ella took it, and felt much refreshed by it: she observed the apartment ; it was equally elegant as the one she oc¬ cupied, and was probably another in the Vatican; but the change she could not account for* She felt extremely weak, and unable to rise from her bed, and from time to time the attendant, who never left her, presented 3her with some light refreshments. For six days Ella saw no one but her dumb attendant, and her surprise was beyond description at the strangeness of her adventure: the suit of apartments which she occupied consisted of two he* side her bedroom, and beyond this the doors were strongly secured—she was actually a prisoner. Her provisions (with which
which she was plentifully supplied), were conveyed with so much secrecy, that she watched in vain for the hour at which she supposed her attendant must receive them at the door. During the six days, though she passed two entirely sleepless nights, she never hearf the door unclose. On the seventh day she received a visit from a monk, to whom she applied for a solu¬ tion of the mystery that surrounded her. He inquired if her health was tho¬ roughly reestablished, and receiving an assurance in the affirmative, he informed her he was commissioned to detail to her the cause of her present detention, the substance ,of which was to the fol¬ lowing effect: that a potion of a pecu¬ liar nature had been administered to her, which had given her the appear¬ ance of death, that she had been inter¬ red, that her father actually believed her dead, and that she would continue m
so to the world for ever, if she refused the conditions that were offered to her. "And what are those conditions?" she demanded in faltering accents. " Your uncommon loveliness,*' said the monk, with an unblushing counte¬ nance, H has captivated the regards of his holiness, who offers you, through me, his heart, with the possession of unlimited power and riches." 1 « Tell him I despise both them and him," she replied. " Do not be rash," said the monk— ** the alternative is perpetual imprison¬ ment" ** I embrace it with pleasure," said she eagerly. w I repeat, do not act rashly *, you have never seen his holiness. Inocent the Third is not an aged priest; never has the triple crown graced so young a brow. He cannot wed you, lady; but whatever else the world can give, he offers you.** <€ And
« And I reject them all." " Remember, lady, he is not to be offended with impunity ; who is there can shield you from his power? All the kings of the earth bow before him ^ and were you an empress, dare not urge your cause against him. And this man* possessing youth and beauty almost equal to your own, than whom never did man hold such unlimited power* offers you his love, supplicates you to share his greatness, and to become mis¬ tress of him and the whole worid." w Leave me," said Ella, rising from her seat— u leave me, and do not imult me further. I see my fate, and am prepared to meet it, but never to yield to the base proposals of the pope." ** If your conscience revolts at the crime, lady," said the incorrigible priest, " we are prepared to grant you absolu¬ tion before the sin is committed." . Ella disdained to answer, but waving her hand for him to depart, she retired to
to her closet, and closed the door after her; there, when alone, she gave a loose to her tears, hapless, hopeless, shut from the world and all her friends for ever.-** u Oh* Monmouth," sighed she, "' not even thou couldst snatch me from my perilous fate! I have then seen you for the last time. Farewell the memory of happiness-—farewell, beloved coun¬ tess, brother, father—all, farewell! Ano* ther will bear to Pembroke the happy tidings that Di Montimar lives. Surely Pembroke will give one tear to my me. mory, when he is told I died at Rome; and my loved countess—ob, how she will weep my early death! Monmouth too-—>" A few hours after Ella received a visit from his holiness; she knew at a glance that it was Inocent. He was richly dressed, and had a youthful, and rather handsome set of features* Ella rose to salute him. His manners were polish¬ ed, and specious to a degree; he la¬ mented
mented the abrupt and ill-conducted be¬ haviour of his messenger, and strove to soften his proposals to her ear. He might have talked to the stones, for she was deaf to his eloquence; his threats failed to make anv impression, and he left her in rage. . Ere night the monk who had visited her before returned, but she refused to listen to him; and when he left, she began to reflect if there was not a pos¬ sibility of avoiding these guilty propo¬ sals by her own hand; she shuddered at self-murder, she knew it was dreadful, but so was her condition. The following day Inocent twice entered her apartments; he sighed— knelt—nay, wept, to gain his purpose; but Ella was inexorable. Wearied with fatigue and vexation, she retired to her couch without un¬ dressing, determined to watch through the night. Towards the morning, how* ever, she fell into a light slumber. A noise
noise in the chamber startled her^—she started up—it was Inocent! He clasp¬ ed her in his arms; she shrieked for aid —alas, how futile! In the interval be¬ tween her cries she distinguished the tingling of a bell; he immediately re¬ leased her, and retired. Elk sunk on her knees to thank the Supreme Being for having saved her from destruction. A low distant noise again aroused her. She listened; the sound was scarcely perceptible, but S ^e fancied it was the footstep of some one who trod cautiously. Her eye was in¬ tently fixed on that p^irt of the chamber from whence it proceeded; it was a re¬ cess, in which stood an altar. While she looked, she perceived it move, and the figure of a man rose behind it
CHAP.
CHAPTER IX.
" Well hast thou ear'n'd my daughter's lovc t " Her father kindly said; *' And she shall nuTSe thee in her t>ower, And she shall be thy bride." All pale, extended on his shield, And weltering in his gore, Lord Percy's knights their bleeding friend To Walk's fair castle bore. p£ficy* f< Edmund Shirley," said lord Salisbury, as the young man lay extended on his couch—" Edmund Shirley, my daugh¬ ter is yours; you have deserved her, and old Salisbury glories in her choice. Get well then, my son, and Rosamond shall be the reward of your valour." Poor Shirley pressed his hand in re¬ ply, and the kind-hearted lord having, as be rightly conjectured, poured the balm
balm of consolation into his bosom, left the wounded youth to the care of the surgeon, while he sought tidings of the brave Monmouth, who had disappeared after the battle. Hugh De Lancy, and Godfrey of Belgarvon, at the head of a troop of bowmen, sought in vain the track their general had taken; and while they passed along the borders of a wood, in silent solicitude, their ears were sud-* denly saluted by the piercing cries of a female, apparently proceeding from the adjacent thicket. To fly to her assist¬ ance was the resolve of an instant; God¬ frey and De Lancy sprung into the wood. A beautiful young creature, struggling with two ruffians, implored, with piteous accents, their assistance. Never had either rejected the prayer of beauty in distress, or turned their backs upon a foe; and almost with the celerity of thought, the ruffians licked the dust, and the lady was free. '* Noble,
<e Noble, generous strangers!" said she, * your work is incomplete; I have a friend who is also in the power of the flying French, They parted us but a few minutes before you came to my as* sistance, and dragged her off in the op¬ posite direction. Fly, I implore you, to her assistance; it may not yet be too late," Both readily acceded to her prayer* and leaving a party of archers to guard her, followed the track she pointed out They sought her in vain for some time* and were at length on the point of giv¬ ing up all further search, when, resting for a few minutes in a state of indeci¬ sion, and consequent silence, they dis¬ tinguished the tread of some one approaching, and suddenly two men emerged from a thicket, bearing the inanimate form of a female. — " By Mary," cried Godfrey, " the villains have murdered heri" <( Then
** Then give them their reward," said De Lancy. " She is not dead, but has fainted," said the men, as they secured her ra- vishers* who offered no resistance, ** God of mercy," cried De Lancy, *' it is my sister—it is Mary De Lancy F and the beauteous girl, as if recalled to life by the beloved voice of her brother, opened her eyes; " blessed be the Vir¬ gin, she lives!" Supported by her brother, and assured of her safety, she soon recovered suffi¬ cient strength to walk, with the assist¬ ance of the youthful knights; and in their way to the place where they had left her friend, she informed them, that during the day the castle of the baron De Lancy had been unexpectedly at¬ tacked by the French, who had forced the gates, and pillaged it of every por¬ table thing of value, and leaving the baron and his consort, as well as the few domestics they had spared, in confine¬ ment,
ment, had carried off herself and her cousin, whom they had fortunately res¬ cued. " And that fair lady then is Rosa Montague?" " Yes, alas!" said Mary, '* Rosa has been but two days an inmate in the cas¬ tle of De Lancy, and already assailed by this rude shock." " How interestingly beautiful!" said Godfrey mentally; ** methinks she re¬ sembles strongly the lady Ella di Mon¬ timar." Hugh was delighted at the fortunate rescue of his sister, but he felt an in¬ creasing desire to rejoin his fair cousin; what then was his consternation, on ar¬ riving at the border of the wood, to find her no longer there! " Perhaps," said the gentle Mary, in a tone of anxious solicitude, " it is pos¬ sible that you have mistaken the spot." *' Oh no," cried De Lancy, ** we left her
her sitting at the foot of that tree, and six sturdy bowmen to guard her." ** The French fugitives would not at¬ tack them surely!" said Godfrey. " Ah, no, Godfrey; and yet your bowmen would not have deserted the post you assigned them." " I will answer for every man of them," replied Godfrey; " and yet, if they had been attacked, we should have found some trace of the conflict; the re¬ tainers of Fauconbridge and Belgarvon are no dastards." " What is to be done, my friend ?" thoughtfully inquired De Lancy. " Return to the camp," said Godfrey, * 4 and after placing this iaar lady in safety, return hither, and the chances are two to one that we shall find one of the objects of our solicitude." The sage advice of Godfrey was ap¬ proved, and Mary was conducted into the English camp. At the very commencement of the vol. in. h battle,
battle, Eric di Montimar received a wound in the cheek from an arrow, and almost immediately afterwards a second in the swordarm; which entirely dis¬ abled him ; he was therefore obliged to retire from the field: he suffered much from loss of blood; but his wounds be¬ ing carefully dressed, and having rested some hours, though weak, he was* able to leave his bed towards evening. The fir§t news he heard was the disappear¬ ance of Monmouth, and he turned his footsteps despondingly to the corse- strewn field. He passed Rosa Mon¬ tague and her guard (after a long and fruitless search); he was saluted by them as the friend of their general; but he was scarcely conscious of their loca« lity, and plunged into the wood to hide the sorrow of his heart for the loss of his friend. He had hardly advanced ten paces, when the voice of Osmanville roused him from the torpor of despair; he stopped instinctively, and caught the following
following words—" Why accuse my delay, Zuseph; you know it is difficult to elude the observations of the friends of Monmouth, Is he dispatched ?" " Behold his body; I have brought it hither, to convince you I have earned my reward." Eric was alone and defenceless, never¬ theless, urged by his indignation, he would have sprung upon the traitors, but for the sudden recollection of the guard left with Rosa Montague; with the rapidity of thought he retraced his steps, leaving the vile Osmanville count¬ ing the price of crime to Zuseph. ** Follow me," cried Eric to the ar¬ chers of Godfrey, " and revenge your murdered general!" The men instantly obeyed, and poor Rosa, left alone, terrified at the danger of her unguarded situation, mechani¬ cally rose to follow them. They found Zuseph on the spot where Eric had left him; but the wary Os- h 2 manviile
manviile was already gone. The body of Monmouth lay extended on the grass. The mercenary hireling of the false¬ hearted Saracen was instantly secured^ and his gold became the booty of ho- nester men. n Is life extinct?" cried Eric, as he carefully examined the corse of his friend. " Is there no possibility of sav¬ ing him? See, the blood yet flows from this deadly gash in his side! Your veil, lady—your kerchief, to stanch the wound," Rosa, with alacrity, gave all the as¬ sistance in her power (and the ladies of those days were able auxiliaries in such affairs), while the retainers of Fau¬ conbridge raised the body of their mas¬ ter, and tended their aid in breathless silence. Eric and Rosa having carefully bound up his wounds, a litter of branches was instantly constructed, and the body placed on it was raised on the shoulders of
of four of the bowmen; the other two took charge of Zuseph, and Eric gave his left arm to Rosa; in this order the eavalcade moved towards the English camp; and long before they reached it, eager crowds of attached soldiers, in¬ creasing at every step, formed a strong rampart round the litter of their general, and many a whispered inquiry, many a bitter curse against his dastard enemy, marked the deep solicitude felt by all for the resuscitation of the soldier's friend. It was dark when Eric saw his friend secure in his own tent; he flew to sum¬ mon the aid of the most experienced surgeons of the army. It was im¬ mediately known through the camp, that Monmouth was brought in mor¬ tally wounded, and all ranks crowded round his tent, to learn his fate with certainty. Things were in this state when God¬ frey arrived: the young warrior of Bel¬ li 3 garvon
garvon was jealous that another should have rendered that service to his general which he had so anxiously sought; and for a few minutes the beautiful Mary de Lancy was forgotten. For some days the life of Monmouth was doubtful y but when the surgeons at length pronounced his recovery certain, a general burst of enthusiasm spoke the spontaneous feeling of the English army, John, with his usual petty jea¬ lousy, beheld the conduct of the sol¬ diery, and their universal esteem for Monmouth, with discontent; and he doubted (with some reason) whether they would have manifested the same solicitude on his account: nevertheless he regularly visited his tent, and was loud in his congratulations on the favour¬ able decision of the surgeons. Zuseph, after confessing that he was employed by Osmanville, to whom he had been long an useful agent-^for the insatiable renegade, not content with the riches
riches heaped on him by John, enter¬ tained a band of pirates, of whom Zu- seph was the captain, and committed many depredations on the sea (it was in one of these unlicenced excursions that Ella was taken, and conveyed to fort Osmanville; the letters lady Fau¬ conbridge carried for queen Elinor pre¬ served her from the same fate) — Was publicly executed, amid the exe¬ crations of the indignant soldiers.-— Osmanville had previously gone over to the enemy. During this time, John, according to his accustomed policy, failed to follow up the brilliant success of the last battle; the French profited by his inaction, to recruit their scattered forces; and in¬ stead of marching on Paris, and dicta¬ ting to them in their own capital, the imbecile monarch was threatened with a fresh attack in his camp, t%m\ actually gave orders for a retreat on Rouen. At this juncture, the baron de Lancy press- h 4 ed
ed Monmouth to accept the hospitals ty of his castle; and too ill to follow the movements of the army, he em¬ braced the offer of this friend of his fa¬ ther (the baron de Lancy was formerly sir Leolin, the husband of Una), and was removed by easy stages to De Lan¬ cy, where the united attentions of the baroness, her niece, and daughter, soon reestablished his former health, but not before he had the mortification to learn the double defeat of the English on the twenty-fifth of July, in the battle of Bouvines (where the imbecility of their leader gave the victory to the enemy, by suffering them to manoeuvre so as to put the sun directly in the eyes of the British army # ); and on the same day John was defeated by the dauphin in Poitou, from whence Eric escaped, al¬ most unwounded, and shortly after joined his friend at De Lancy; there also, at the end of this unfortunate cam* paign* * Vide Anquetii's- Hittohe de France,
paign, came Godfrey of Belgarvon, to pass his winter quarters near his master and Mary de Lancy.
H 5 CHAP-
CHAPTER X. As Elia*s eyes rested on the figure that slowly rose from behind the altar, she scarcely dared to breathe, and fearfully raising hef^lf, she obtained a clearer view of his features; she then recognised in the stranger with surprise and delight the monk Adolphe. She uttered a faint cry of joy, and in¬ stantly fainted. When she recovered, she perceived that she was borne in the arms of a monk; the lamp he carried faintly illuminated the passages through which he passed, and when he entered the body of a church, he extinguished it; he placed her then on the step of an altar, in a small chapel dedicated to the Virgin, and perceiving she was recover¬ ed, he whispered softly—*' Have cou¬ rage,
rage, my poor persecuted girl; exert a little self-command, and we are secure; the monks are performing the midnight service—we must endeavour to quit the cathedral with them;" he then threw a cloak about her, and covering her face with the cowl, he bade her follow him. Ella knew it was the voice of Adolphe, and she believed she was safe. The monk crossed the church, stopping to pay his devotions to St. Benedict, and then, followed by his trembling compa¬ nion, he mingled with the friars and passed the door. In the street, beneath the canopy of heaven, Ella imagined herself already free; she believed Adolphe would pro¬ tect her from every danger; she knew his will to do so, and would not doubt his power. Perhaps her sanguine hopes were well founded; Rome was the cen¬ tre of intrigue; the monks active a~ gents, for and against all parties; skill¬ ed in artifices, they were too often more h 6 than
than a match for wiser and honester men than themselves; and where secre¬ cy was requisite, where whatever was obtained was obtained by intrigue alone, a monk was certainly the most judici¬ ous, and perhaps the most powerful protector that could have been selected. After several turnings, the fugitives arrived at the monastery of St. John: Adolphe taking a key from beneath his vest, unlocked a small side door, and Ella entering with him, he led her through the cloisters to his cell. *' Not a moment is to be lost," said he, presenting her with the habit of a young Frenchman ; '* equip yourself in these, taking care to wash your skin with this liquid:" and putting into her hand a small bottle, filled with a dark liquor, Adolphe retired, leaving her to arrange her toilet alone, Ella speedily changed her dress; she had no mirror, but aware that the liquid was intended to discolour her complex¬ ion,
ion, she applied it plentifully. She had scarcely finished ere Adolphe demanded admission—she opened the door; the monk on his entrance surveyed her some minutes with attention, and then said— " It is well you are secure; speak sel¬ dom, my child, and affect, if possible, a roughness in your accent. The name you assumed with that habit is Edmund de Lancy; beware that you forget it not. It is the name of a youth who died a few days since; his death is only known to those who will not disclose it Give me," he added, " your late habiliments ; they must be instantly disposed of." Ella obeyed, and having finished her toilet, she shrouded her form in the cloak Adolphe had given her in the ca¬ thedral; and sitting down on the lowly pallet of the monk, she waited his re¬ turn with a palpitating heart When the father returned, he unlock¬ ed a small cabinet, and taking thence a bundle
bundle of papers, and holding them in his hand, he seated himself beside her. '* Child of many sorrows," said he, *' the time is not yet arrived when I can become explicit with you: perhaps I might securely trust to your discretion, if my lips could utter the fateful tale; but my promise to the dying Gertrude impels me to guard the secret until the appointed time. Take," he continued, " those papers; but give me your sacred word never to break the seal, but on the certain assurance of my death." Ella promised. " Here also is a passport," he said, u for you, in the name of Edmund de Lancy. Beware that you support your assumed character with address. Hugh de Lancy, the brother of the deceased youth, will depart from Rome to-mor¬ row before daylight, and you must ac¬ company him. He is aware of your sex, and will protect you from insult; he has received instructions to conduct you
you in safety to the lord Mounteagle, to whom you must present this;" and he put a sealed letter into her hand. " And may the Almighty preserve you from further evil until we meet again!" '* But, my father," demanded Ella, " where is the marchese di Montimar ?" *' I had almost forgotten that circum¬ stance," rejoined the monk, " Listen then to a tale:—During the residence of Di Montirhar in his hermitage, a tra¬ veller was attacked by robbers near mount Pausilippo; his attendant was murdered, and himself left for dead; in this situation he was found by Di Mon¬ timar, who took him to his cell, dressed his wounds; and eventually restored him to health. This traveller was the cardi¬ nal Arezzo, uncle to the pope, and the relative of Di Montimar's mother, who had in his early life recommended him to the protection of earl Pembroke. They recognised each other, and the cardinal succeeded in drawing him from his
his retreat: you know the rest until your supposed death, when the cardinal, who honours me with his confidence, sent for me and intimated his suspicions that you were still living. He related your story to me, and I learned that you were in Rome, with astonishment; for I believed you were in Saxony with the princess Isabella. Ella, my poor wrong¬ ed girl, you are not the daughter of the marchese—you have no claim to the name of Di Montimar." " Holy Father!" cried Ella in asto¬ nishment, *' you would not deceive me ?" " No, Ella; I swear by the Eternal! —no; your sudden removal from Caer¬ philly, so immediately after the death of lady Gertrude, prevented the schemes I had formed for you; a severe illness confined me to my bed for some months, from which I was scarcely convalescent, when I led you from fort Osmanville; the trifling exertions of that night occa¬ sioned me a relapse, and it was there¬ fore
fore that you were suffered to remain so long at the convent of St. Margaret; but enough for the present, time presses, and 1 would explain the means of your deliverance from this." " Tell me, at least, father, why the king removed me from Caerphilly ?" " The jealous policy of John had taken alarm at some trifle, and he has¬ tened to remove the princess Elinor from Caerphilly to Bristol Castle, a place of greater strength, and you were mis¬ taken by the officers employed for the damsel of Bretagne*. From this you are released by the interference of the cardinal Arezzo: I have confided to him the interest I have in you, and we judged it better that Di Montimar should for a time remain ignorant of yourexistence; he laments yourdeath,my dear child, most sincerely; only those who have
have been bereaved can judge the strength of his feelings." Ella sighed deeply—she feared that Di Montimar had sometimes imagined her ungrateful; for she was convinced she had never felt towards him that ar¬ dent affection he had expressed for her on all occasions, and she relinquished the idea of being acknowledged by a father, with regret. w Come, my child," said the monk, rising; ** we must hasten—the morning already begins to dawn, and we must join the young De Lancy at the mo¬ nastery of St. Mark; by the way we may hold further converse " Ella rose from her seat, and wrapping the monk's cloak about her, slowly fol¬ lowed him along the cloisters. He did not address her until they had gained the street, when he gave her many in¬ structions as to her journey, and after¬ wards adverted to her brother. " Put, holy father," observed Ella, « Eric
** Eric has never had the happiness of being known to you." " How!" said the monk, in a tone of surprise; " has he never spoken to you of father Leopold ?" "Often, father—very often; but I was not aware- -----" she hesitated; " I heard lady Gertrude address you as Adolphe." * s You did, daughter; it was my bap* tismal name; when I took the vows, 1 took also, as is customary, the name of my patron saint." As father Leopold pronounced the last words, they arrived at the monastery of St Mark, and found Hugh de Lancy waiting for them. Ella, trembling and confused, was confided to his care, with many pious and careful exhortations by the good father, who wept at parting, " I shall see you at Ravensdale, fa¬ ther," said Ella, with emotion. ** If I live," replied he. " And soon, holy father." 4i I shall
" I shall possibly be there to wait your coming," said the monk. " In that hope I leave you; farewell, tfwrtrtrt -fofriQ*. 4-ltii Klz4oc<£iH V'tf./v^tt Ti!<i!Vl you!" " Adieu, adieu !'* Father Leopold could not trust his voice to give his parting benediction ; he pressed her to his heart, his tears fell on her cheek, and at that moment Ella found that her heart claimed kin¬ dred with that of Adolphe, and a vague hope rose in her mind that the monk was her father. Ella passed the gates of Rome in safety. She left behind her two dearly valued friends, father Leopold and the contessa Virginia; and as she gave a last look at this noble city, she breathed a mental prayer for those two so beloved, to whose names she united that of Di Montimar. Hugh de Lancy was all that father Leopold had described him: he watched her
her with a brother's care, and guarded carefully the secret of her sex from his attendants: his manners were interest¬ ing, irresistibly inviting confidence; and for Ella he possessed an infallible recom¬ mendation—he had fought under and enjoyed the friendship of Monmouth. De Lancy was enthusiastically attached to him, and the various achievements of his general afforded an infinite fund of conversation, to which our heroine lis¬ tened with delighted attention. The travellers reached Civita Vecchia, from whence they embarked for Mar¬ seilles, and having reached that port m perfect safety, they journeyed on to the chateau of the baron de Lancy, where Ella was received with much kindness by the baroness, of whom she had heard lady Fauconbridge speak as her esteem¬ ed companion Una (Cour de Lion had be¬ stowed on his friend sir Leolin the feef- dom of De Lancy); and Ella, with in- creased pleasure, met also here with Rosa
Rosa Montague, the novice of St. Mar¬ garet's: finding so many inducements to remain, she consented with pleasure to remain a visitor at De Lancy for a few days; and then, having already changed her boy's habiliments for those of her own sex, she bade adieu to her kind friends, and still accompanied by Hugh, she embarked for England, and after a short and prosperous voyage, she once more reached it in safety.
CHAP-
CHAPTER XI.
In duel fell two lovers—one run mad; Her foes their honest execrations pour, Her lowers only bhouid detest her more. Youno. It was in the month of February that Ella returned to England; the season was frigid, and strongly contrasted the milder clime of Italy; yet it was the country she had learned to consider as her own, the residence or birthplace of all her dearest friends, with the single exception of Virginia (and even her, Ella had first known and loved in Eng¬ land) : there were too so many pleasing recollections associated with its memory* that her heart beat with unfeigned de¬ light, as she set her foot on its shore.— iS But was this England ? w a thousand tinjes
times during her short journey to Ra¬ vensdale, Ella asked herself this ques¬ tion. It was Sunday, and the fete of St, Blaise; yet the doors of the churches were closed—not a single bell was heard —■a general hue of desolation seemed to cover the land; the cleanly cottager had disappeared, and a sickly slovenliness was the predominant feature in the ha¬ bits and persons of all she met. The women had forsworn all ornament—the neatly plaited coif was rejected—and the long flowing hair, that was wont to fall in ringlets on their shoulders, hung in matted folds, or was concealed with care beneath a cap of dingy black, In the men the change was not less remark¬ able; each had suffered his beard to grow, and an universal abstinence from animal food gave a sallow, unaccustom¬ ed meagreness to their features, that for¬ cibly struck the inquiring eye of our heroine. No one saluted his dear friend or neighbour, but each passed on his way
way in sullen silence, regardless of all around him. In the garden of a cottage a group of those miserable beings were assembled; they were the first that Ella had seen who appeared to sympathize with each other: on her nearer approach she perceived their melancholy occupa¬ tion : they were consigning a dead body to its native earth. In this unhallowed place no priest officiated at this sorrow¬ ful scene; no funeral prayer was read over the grave; but the sighs and bitter tears of those who lowered the rough- hewn coffin to its place of rest, bore wit¬ ness to the worth of the being whose re¬ mains it contained.^-" It was my mo¬ ther, an please ye," said a young man, striving to subdue his emotion, in an¬ swer to a question of De Lancy__ *< a better Christian never lived, and it grieves me to the heart to see her bu¬ ried thus like a dog." " 'Tis hard," said a woman, who stood by his side, " that poor Dorcas, who vol. in. % never
never nii^e4 a m%$$ f when the duifch; dopr^ were ope^r, should^ have, nejer a ; prayer said pyp her grave^'^ " .Go«|.-r^t - - Jber spul 1" a^ded an oM man, '* she had the s^me Igpk. a§ her t betters.: tlie Iqrid of Mp^vU1^ ? ^ho died; last week? was buried in the^ w^rreir hard by : his daughter oflfered fi^ huur dred marks in gold to haye him belied; in the churchTyard, bujti it ,vm, m nse^; apd they say her fij^ef woul$ l|avg given tiivice the money to have seen her married to, sir; Archibald de Vej^e before his, death, but the mpnk^ ^efuse^ to ■ perform the ceremony," " The Lord have me^cy;o$ them who. die in this miserable time J" observed another—" the Lord h^ve mercy on their unshriyen soqls!" %%y I, "for man has none;. though they say father Au¬ stin ventured to give ab^olutipn to the lord of Morville before he died, hqt ; np? body knpws the truth on*t, except liis daughter, ■ .■ > • -
daughter, and I warrant me she wont betray the priest if he did*" The feelings of Ella were exquisitely painful, as she listened to these simple comments, and all this misery originat¬ ed with him who ought to have been the father of his people. The obstinacy and extravagance of the king, and the astonishing superstition of the times, bad heaped this curse on the land. The kingdom was under an interdict.* It was late when Ella and her pro¬ tector arrived at Ravensdale, and the venerable lord Mounteagle had retired to rest; our heroine was therefore re¬ ceived by dame Rebecca, the superinten- dant of the castle, who, having conduct* ed her to a chamber, she seized this op¬ portunity of writing to the countess of Caerphilly, Hugh de Lancy intending to depart for Fauconbridge on the mor- 12 row,
it
row, after paying his respects to lord Mounteagle.—*' The time is almost come, my beloved friend," she wrote, ** when I shall have the happiness to embrace you. Adolphe has entered into some explanations, and I attend his coming hither to elucidate the mystery of my fate; and then, whatever claims there may be on my affections, I will fly to the best—the dearest of friends* and whether joy or sorrow be my lot,: share it with her." Ella forwarded at the same time a letter from Robert Fauconbridge which she had received from Adojphe; and Hugh de Lancy, after presenting his letters to lord Mounteagle, took an af¬ fectionate leave of our heroine, and com¬ menced his journey to Fauconbridge. Dame Rebecca was commissioned by the baron to introduce our heroine to his presence: he had previously, agree¬ able to the request of Adolphe, read the letters delivered by young De Lancy. Ella
Ella was prepossessed in favour of the lord Mounteagle, and her veneration was increased by his kindness, and the urbanity with which he received her. The baron was probably near seventy. The few locks Time had spared to him were white as snow; his figure, sunk by age, retained much of pristine nobility, and a kind of chastened sorrow gave in terest to his placid features. He half rose from his ancient arm-chair as Ella entered his chamber; a smile of benicr- nity brightened his aged countenance She was touched by his manner, and obeying an involuntary impuls^ she knelt at his feet: he extended his hands over her; the few words he uttered were unintelligible, but Ella felt that he had bestowed a benediction on her. Lord Mounteagle entered into a long conversation with our heroine, chiefly as to the events of her early life, and her subsequent intercourse with Adolphe. He listened attentively to her answers. I 3 When
When 4m first nam&d ErH he seemed fcr$njspojrted with delight; hie askeid a thou^nd questions concerning him, and Erie lost nothing by the representations ^f hw partW sister. At length fche toron, with apparent regret, consigned his visitor to the care of da$&e Rebecca, with instructiona to procure some amusement. «< St. Anne knows what I am to do to #muse yoq, lady," said the dame, as she conducted her along the gallery; " for in this tisne of t ro !il2 ths ^p?r k forbid to play under pain of excommu¬ nication ; the gardens are quite neglect¬ ed too; and if you had a mind fbr a row on the river, I do believe the boat is rotten; I know there was a hole in the bottom long ago, and the oars, Lord help us, the oars are lost to a certainty. Then, there's father Joseph—time has been he would have told you mimy a funny tale, but now he walks about like a ghost, and never speaks to any body. So
-So what you WiH do to amusfc yourself St Anne alone em UK n c '* Is there a library in the castle ?" asked our heroine. "Ay^ sure enough, so there Is; but the books will soil your fingers, lady, for my lord has no eyes for reading; and* except father Joseph, not a soul beside in the 6astle are learned enough to read; but if your ladyship don't mind the dust, I wot you will find some old stories there;" and dame Rebecca led &he way to the library ; and as she pass¬ ed the door, recollecting the picture- mm $ she invited Ella to enter it.— " Well," sfcid the dame, M I thought last night I had seen sdinebedy like your ladyship, and certainly it must have been this picture. By our holy St. Anne, I would have sworn it was drawn for you, but that, to my knowledge, it has hung there these fifteen years!" ** And who was it drawn fbr?" de- 14 manded
manded Ella, fixing her eyes on the ex> act resemblance of herself* " Lack-a-day! I have forgotten the lady's name." "Was it lady Gertrude?" asked our heroine. "Lady Gertrude—Gertrude—• no—» no, that was not the name; I have a sad memory. But here, lady, look at those two knights in the picture that has the curtain before it; I can tell you all about them. They were the twin sons of my lord; they both fell in love with the same lady, and they fought for her, and killed each other, so ever since this cur¬ tain has hung over their picture. They were called sir Herbert and sir Henry. It was a sad pity, lady, for they were two handsome knights. But here is one, to my mind, much handsomer. This is the lord Adolphe." ** Ah!" said Ella, eagerly; " and is he dead too ?" " St. Anne forbid! the baron bade me have
have his chambers in order, for he is expected at the castle every hour." ** And is he a son of lord Mountagle ?'» " Yes, lady. Alas the day that the only son of such a good baron should be a monk! But they say he has been to Rome to get a dispensation from his monkl/i vows. My lord had another son; he is somewhere among those pic¬ tures, but I cannot tell which it is; he went*to the holy wars, and died there." Ella, still anxious to ascertain who was the lady that so strongly resembled her (and who was, she believed, the ori¬ ginal of the miniature Eric had found at Caerphilly), paid little attention to the re¬ marks of the dame, who taxed her me¬ mory in vain to recall the name and history of this lady. After leaving the picture-room, Eila passed the greater part of the day in the library, and towards the evening she wrapped herself up, and ventured into the garden. After several turns, she en- 15 tered
tered a very retired shrubbeiy, where a well trodden path induced a Supposition that it led to some favourite spot She advanced with light step, and found that the path terminated in a hollow copse, in the centre of which sloud an urn of the purest white marble, embraced by 6 kneeling figure, whose head reclined on the pedestal, Ella imagined it a monu* mental erection, and as she stood re¬ garding it attentively, she observed the figure, she had hitherto believed the work of the sculptor, move; she started with apprehension* and was precipitately retreating, when she heard herself called by the baron. It was him wfaokndt by the monument. She instantly re¬ turned. ** You have found me, lady," said he, ** paying my last sad tribute to him 1 have, until this day, imagined the de¬ ceased km of Ravensdale and Mountr eagle; he was young and beautiful* and fit for the bosom of his Maker; but I relinquished
retteiqi^shed him witb regret: short» sighted mortal that I wm, the events of this day have reconciled me to his lose; for he could never have named his fa¬ ther but with a blush. The boy that Adolphe bids me hope for (and Adolphe never deceived the hope of man) will have no cause to blush for the crimes of his sire. My poor Asfim sleeps not in consecrated ground, but far from the prying eye of vulgar curiosity; his spi¬ rit rests in heaven." The baron leaned on the offered arm of Ella, and together they entered the castle. She perceived that he wished to retain her with him, and she fetched a manuscript tale from the library, and during the rest of the evening continued to read to the happy lord Mounteagle. As Ella closed the manuscript, the bugle at the gate announced a visitor: the hope that it was Adolphe detained her beside the baron. It was Adolphe: 16 his
his presence diffused a gleam of pleasure through the heretofore gloomy halls of Ravensdale.
CHAP-
v^.txAJr JLHiJK' JSk.il.
Mermione —You gods, look down, And from your sacred vials pour your graces Upon ray daughter's head.—Tell me, mine own, Where hast thou been preserved ?—-where lived ? —where found? Shakespeare. *' Oh Providence ! voila donc'lcs creatures qui tu chftties, tandis que les tnechants prospere 1" The night after the arrival of Adolphe, .Ella was awoke by a knocking at her chamber door, and imagining the possi¬ bility that he might have something to communicate to her in private, she rose hastily, and wrapping her travelling- cloak around her, she opened the door: her surprise was extreme on seeing, not Adolphe, but lady Pembroke—their as¬ tonishment was mutual— ^ Ella ! w said the lady; and after a pause, she added, « I did
*< I did not mean to disturb you ;" and she turned away. Perplexed and uneasy, our heroine retired again to her bed$ but for some time she was unable to sleep, and when at last she sunk into a troubled slumber, she was awoke by a second knocking; for some minutes she continued irreso¬ lute, but the knocking being repeated, she rose, and admitted dame Rebecca. " St. Anne save us!' f said thf dame; " I am sorry to disturb you so early, but it seems you must prepare to depart forthwith from Ravensdale; it grieves me to the heart that you should leitvfe us," she continued*" but the lord Adolphe said you would perhaps return again; and I trust you will, if it please the Virgin,'* Ella, hardly conscious of what she was doing, accepted the proffered offers of the datne, and was speedily. d^#^d; and after n short 6dieu from lord Moiint* eagle*
eagle, she left Rav#nsdsle, under the escort of Adolphe. All this had passed so rapidly, th&t Ella almost believed it the offspring of a feverish dream; the Voice of Adolphe convinced her of the reality, yet she could not comprehend the cause of her sudden departure from Ravensdale, an event which she was persuaded was not in contemplation the night before, for though Adolphe talked of a joutney* he spoke of it as not an immediate aiftir. Adolphe had quitted his monkish habit, and Ella conjectured that he had obtained a dispensation from his vows: the English dress he wore was nobly becoming to his figure, yet, perhaps from an association of ideas, she regret* ted the change; he rode near her litter, accompanied by a Dominican friar, with whom he conversed the greater part of the way, at intervals only exchanging a few words with bis proUgie. It was scarcely daylight when, after a journey
journey of more than three hours, the little party entered the city of Lynn. The nobles of John's court were accus¬ tomed to breakfast at six o'clock in the morning, and therefore, though early; the inhabitants of the town were allin motion, and they obtained ready admit- ance to the mansion Adolphe pointed out to the attendants. Ella gave her hand to Adolphe on descending the litter, wondering what would be the event of this mysterious journey. He led her into the first open apartment he found; he begged her to wait his return there, adding, that he would not detain her long. His voice trembled as he spoke ; his agitation was even beyond any thing she had ever be¬ fore observed: he seemed to wi$b to say more, but wanted the power, and hastily quitted the room, Our heroine's surprise increased with the extraordinary behaviour of Adolphe; she dreaded the arrival of some fresh calamity,
calamity, ahd in a state of anxiety and dismay she waited his return. After an absence of near half an-hour he entered by another door; she rose from her seat, almost unconscious of what she was doing. ** Sit down, my child," said he, placing a chair beside her; " I would speak to you on the cause that brought us here; I would enter into a long elucidation of the events that have kept you in igno¬ rance of the authors of your existence, but I am unequal to the task: perhaps at some future period I may possess more firmness; but there are so many bitter reflections mingled with the tale, that I would willingly bury the whole in oblivion ; but I owe it to the memory of the dead; and some time, but not now, you shall know the whole; for the present it suffices, that I have fulfilled my promise to the dying lady Gertrude di Montimar—I have sought the proofs of your identity in Normandy and in Rome;
Rome; I am prepared to feslabUsk your rights, not only to the satisfaction of your own family, but beyond a tlimbt with all England: thus m I hum sue- ceeded--4 am liberated from my pro^ mise of secrecy to lady Gertrude; slnd you are in the mansion of yc« fatiber." " Holy Pary!" cried Ella; * you are then my father!" &ni she knelt before lord Adolphe. " N<v Ella," said h& mournfiiliy, " I am not a latner. jme pressed ftu himi ^i Ms forehead, EUa stiM k«elt. A9m a pause of some minutes he rai^d her. * I will lead you to him*" he said. She felt oppressed, almost to suffocation; and leaning on his arm, they passed in siilence the adjoining chambers. Their approaching footsteps had caught the ear x>f the anxious expecting parent; his hand was on the lock of the door, when BU$* trembling with the uncer¬ tainty df whom she wa^ about to call her feth% entered the saloon, and. was clasped
clasped to tike throbbing heart of ©art Pembroke. Had the whole world been at her choice, lord Pembroke was the man of all others with whom die would have wished to claim affinity; the fearful doubts she had once harboured of his honour were long since dissipated; and often after Adolphe had assured her she was not the daughter of lady Gertrude, she had bitterly lamented the dissolution of the kindred tie between her and lord Pembroke. If Ella was thus happy, what was the heartfelt joy of the earl, to whom the secret of her fate was unknown until that morning! long, very long he had mourn¬ ed the loss of lord Marsham, the heir of his titles and his honours, cut off in the full bloom of manhood, and with him had expired his hope of an heir to the house of Pembroke; what then was his happiness at beholding this once idolized son resuscitated again, in the person of the
the young and gallant Eric di "Monti¬ mar ! The feelings of both were be¬ yond description, and almost in the same moment Pembroke had learned the fate of Di Montimar, so intimately connected with the fate of his children, that even this happiness was not without alloy, the tidings had just reached England that Monmouth had been made prisoner with several other young officers, among whom was Eric di Montimar, or, as he must be called in future, Eric lord Mar¬ sham. Suspicions of treachery in^thte affair had fallen on Osmanville, who had been long obnoxious to the English no- . bility; and earl Pembroke was on the point of departing for Normandy, to in¬ vestigate the truth of the rumours that had reached him, when the disclosures of Adolphe, and his increased interest in Eric, heightened his impatience to de¬ part; he therefore, after a long consulta¬ tion on the subject, acquiesced in the propriety of not publishing the claims of
of Erie and Ella until he could effect the liberation of the former; and as lady Pembroke was the only person who had any interest in opposing their claims, it was judged most proper to keep her some time longer in ignorance of their existence; and that Ella should return with lord Adolphe again to Ravensdale, there to remain until the earl's return from France. Early in life earl Pembroke, as has been said, married, to the exclusion of Ipollita's hopes, the daughter of an Eng¬ lish nobleman; this lady was the twin sister of Adolphe, the lady Enningarde Mounteagle. The subsequent jealousy of the earl has been already detailed, and also the flight of lady Enningarde, ac¬ companied by lady Gertrude di Monti¬ mar; the vessel in which they sailed was wrecked, but four of the passengers were saved—the two ladies, Everhard, the secretary of lord Pembroke, and Agnes de Clifford, the attached servant of
of tady> Pembroke; the horrors of shipv wreck, and the antecedent fatigues, brought on premature labour, and the lady expired in giving birth to Eric and : Ella, who were taken by lady Gertrude* with the hidden determination of con* ceding them from her brother, to re¬ venge theffiurder of her husband. Ag¬ nes de Clifford, ignorant of her design; saw the helpless babes consigned to the care of the sister of their father with pleasure; and fondly attached to the memory of lady Pembroke, she took the veil, in the convent of St* Eulalia, where lady Gertrude caused a superb monument to be ereeted over the re¬ mains of the young and beautiful coun¬ tess. Everhard, shocked at the sad ca¬ tastrophe of a flight he had advised, and not daring to appear again before the eart> also entered an adjoining monastery. It has been seen how Gertrude reared the children of her brother in ignorance of their origin; sb^was co»gd<iug other injustice
injiistice towards them,.a)tid tbenee^ose th^ bitter reipors^ she constan%sufferw ed; b^t still she eh£|i§bed# unabated, her enniity tpwards Pembroke, whom she no longer considered as her brother, but the murderer of her idolised Enrico- Her tardy deathbed repents© was in¬ sufficient to repair the wrongs she had, under the influence of her dark passion % revenge* heaped on Eric and Ella. Her mandate to the earl of Pembroke never reached him. Adolphe, the bro¬ ther of lady Enningarde, obeyed her call, and, a$ has been said, she confided the children of his sister to his care* with instructions for obtaining the proofs of their identity; she directed him to the ecp vents of Agnes de Clifford and Ever- Iwd. Adolphe found the first in her peaceful retreat; but Everhard was in Rome, and thither Adolpbe followed him. He was detained some time in R«*nj^ for it was the desire of lord Mwnfeagle ths»t h^ should obtain a dis* pensation
pensation from his monastic vows. He was known to the cardinal Arezzo, and, as has been seen, through the cardinal's means, released EUa from her prison in the Vatican; he subsequently returned to England, accompanied by the proofs he had journeyed so far to procure; and it was the monk Everhard that Ella had seen in her sudden journey from Ra¬ vensdale to Lynn, riding beside her lit¬ ter with Adolphe. Many were the fond anxious ques- tions of earl Pembroke to his daughter, after Adolphe had retired. How did his heart bound with exultation, as he gazed on the matchless loveliness of his child! report had spoken of her vir¬ tues : she had been tried in the bitter school of adversity, and had emerged more bright, more pure, from the ordeal of persecution. The last hour that the earl could snatch from his public duties was wise- crated to his daughter, and at feis de¬ parture
parture he consigned Her io the charge of Adolphe, sayhig—" Ella, yotr ex¬ cellent uncle wiH supply my place until my return. J need not bid you look tip to hitn *vith reverence and affection; you have a heart capable of appreciating all he has done for you, and wHl love hit\i as he deserves of you." This was to be a day of happiness for Ella. She learned that the countess of Caerphii!y was in Lynn, and she had the pleasure of en^bradiig her before she returned to Ravensdale; tnd after a few days dedicated to her grandfather, our heroine obtained per miss on from lord Adolphe to fix her residence wjjfc the countess in Lynn, where thut ladly remained to ^ ,j »*t tire issue of earl Pern broken mission for the liberation of her Save the anxious fears each breathed for the emancipation of the prisoners in France, each other wish of their hearts was satisfied. The countess heard with vol. in. k delight
.delight from JEUa ijhe safety of Itobert .Fauconbridge. The hope of his,return, and the recpnciliation of her sons, iwas a source pf .heartfelt joy to her., She kn^ewjthe noble natu/eqf both; Robert wa$ young; he Jbt^i suffered himself |to be warped by the i\^far|pvi^ cpuns^ls of sir Gervase Osterly,. but his heart was good; he wa§ returning in penitence, ^nd Monmouth shp knew would receive him with redoubled affection. The long series of adventures, Ella had encountered afforded an infinite fund for conversation, and endless cpm- , men ts and ^surmises on the characters and designs of various persons who figure in her tale. One day, when it happened that the conversation turned on the subject of earl Pembroke, and the countess had paid a warm tribute to the virtues of lady Matilda s arsham, she suddenly stopped abort—*' Ella," at length she resumed, 14 1 fear you will have much to encoun¬ ter
ter from lady Pembroke: we have not forgotten how she incarcerated you in a dungeon without any apparent imqtpre; and were you not aware from that cir¬ cumstance of her ill will towards vou, I shopld hesitate to say what I am about to confide to you. I have learned same details of her early life from Rosa Mon¬ tague, which, as they serve to mark her character, and to put you on your guard against her machinations, I will repeat to you. Lady Pembroke, then lady Helena Murry, and heiress of tie house of Rayo, was left an orphan at the age of fifteen to the guardianship of lord Mounteagle, who wished to unite her to his eldest son. Lady Helena was ambitious; lord Mounteagle had at that period four sons, and the establish¬ ment of lord Eustace was not so splen¬ did as she looked up to; she therefore rejected his suit, but she was a coquette; 1 -nejed not say she was beautiful The two second sons of her guardian became k & enamoured
enamoured of her at the same time, Helena, perhaps without reflection, en-* couraged the hopes of both; the event was fatal—the brothers fought, and both fell. This unhappy occurrence occa¬ sioned the removal of the lady from Ra¬ vensdale : she retired to Scotland, and some time after, in the privacy of her parental domain, it was whispered that the heiress of Rayo gave birth to an il¬ legitimate child, the offspring of some private amour. The infant disappeared, but some days after the body of a new¬ born child was washed on the sands at the foot of the rock on which stood the castle of Rayo. The lady was rich and powerful, and though suspicions were excited, they never reached her ear. It was at this period that earl Pembroke was engaged in an embassy to the Scot¬ tish court. Helena appeared then in all the fascinations of beauty. Pem¬ broke became her passionate admirer. He was wealthy, powerful, and th# fa~ vourite
vourite minister of king John. She ac¬ cepted his offer with avidity: the recent death of the earl's first wife rendered a private marriage necessary: to this she consented, and six months afterwards he espoused her publicly. ** Who was the secret lover of the lady, never transpired. It is probable he was some person of inferior rank, or that he is no longer in existence; but those are events, my dear Ella, of which earl Pembroke is ignorant: we will, at least, suppose that he knew not that the tragic end of lord Mounteagle's sons, the brothers of the former lady Pembroke, were the effects of lady Helena's co¬ quetry." To Ella it immediately occurred that Adolphe was the concealed lover of lady Pembroke, but not even to the countess of Caerphilly would she breathe her sus¬ picions. Those were some of the happiest days of Ella's life that intervened between k 3 the
the departure of Pembroke for Norman¬ dy and Ms return^ which was something protracted teyond her expec^tions^ Du¬ ring this period* the countess of Caer¬ philly received fresh communications from Robert Fauconbridge: he had been the partner of Virginia's flight from Del Raimando, and he still continued in Rome, unwilling to quit the beauti¬ ful young contessa, and the chief pur¬ port of his letters to his mother contain¬ ed a request for her sanction to th6 offer of Ms hand, which he contemplate making to Virginia. Ella warmly seconded his wishes with her friend. She warmly praised the tir- tues of the lovely contessa, anil lady Caerphilly was already prepared* to love her, for the share she had borne in the sufferings of Ella. The return of Pembroke was announ¬ ced to our heroine by lord Adolphe, $nd after an affectionate parting with her friend the countess, she departed for
for Longholm with Adolphe. The earl had succeeded in negotiating the ex¬ change of Eric, but Monmouth still con¬ tinued a prisoner; and Eric, notwith¬ standing the entreaties of his father, re¬ fused to be liberated while his general remiined in confinement.—.** I have hopes," said Pembroke, " of succeeding at last, for the count of Alencon, the king's brother, was taken by the Eng¬ lish a few days ago, and I have sent to king Philip, to offer him in exchange for-Monmouth." When Ella arrived at Longholm, lady Pembroke was absent, and Adolphe, who always appeared to avoid her, re¬ mained there two days. This was a happy meeting for Ella and Matilda, and the earl and Adolphe partook in their pleasure. Adolphe embraced both With affectionate tenderness at his de¬ parture; and Ella felt her regard for him augmented, by the opportunity this K 4 short
short visit gave her of observing him more nearly. Our heroine answered all the fond in¬ quiries of Matilda for Virginia* and learnt with surprise that Urbanina di Montimar had (though certainly with¬ out the knowledge of Pembroke) been a domestic in his family, under the name of Nina, and had then contrived to in¬ terest lady Matilda in the fate of Vir¬ ginia. The night after Adolphe left Long- holm, Ella felt particularly restless and unhappy; she attributed it to his de¬ parture, and tried to shake off her de¬ pression, but in vain: she parted from kdy Matilda at a late hour, and retired to her own room. After she was in bed she found it impossible to sleep, and lay ruminating on the many strange inci¬ dents that had befallen her. After some time she heard her chamber-door open, and raising herself, she saw lady Few * broke enter with a lamp in her hand: she
she drew aside the curtain, and seating herself on the bed, held a long and earnest conversation with Ella, the re¬ sult of which was a most solemn and impressive renewal of her vow to pre¬ serve an inviolable secrecy, not only with Pembroke, but all the world, on every thing that could injure or de¬ velop the character of her ladyship; and having effected this, she retired, leaving Ella as little disposed to sleep as before her entrance. The next morning Ella expected to meet lady Pembroke at breakfast, and heard with astonishment both the earl and Matilda assert, that she was still absent from Longholm, but would pro¬ bably return in a few days. During the day the countess of Caer¬ philly arrived at Longholm: she had formed the resolution to attempt per¬ sonally the liberation of her son, and for that purpose was departing for France, her chief hope resting on the friendship k 5 of
of the princess Blanche, the wife 6f the dauphin, \vho was formerly niut*h at¬ tached to her,—" But t c6uld not 1&V& fingiand," said she; " without ag^in see¬ ing my dear Ella, to bear hei^ greetings to our friends abroad, more p&rticufarrfy, as I purpose, if I succeed in my embassy, to seek my repentant prodigal in Rome." " Ah, 1 r^bice in your determination to see Virginia," said Ella; * you will find her So interesting, so beautiful! But beware, my dear countess, that she does not obliterate me from your re¬ membrance/' " Yours is the prior and the strongest claim, my love," replied the countess, kissing her cheek.—* 8 But what sa^s my lord to my wild plan ?" i6 1 have an interest," said he, smiling, " in your success, and I hope you will prove the better diplomatist: in truth, I have a saving faith in the ingenuity and eloquence so peculiarly the attri¬ butes of your se^, and which the coun¬ tess
tess of Caerphilly so eminently pos¬ sesses." ■ ^ Still a flatterer, my lord!" " In good faith, no, my lady * Many ayfearhas intervened since every cour¬ tier paid (and I among the rest) nn- fcfignfed homage to the charms of Pau- IlttsT of Belgarvon; and the world says, that time has matured, not impaired, the 1#it ahd beauty of the fair countess of Caerphilly." & The world has said with more truth that lord Pembroke is still the most gal- latnt courtier of the age! 1 * and the lady Ihen addressed herself more particularly td Ella, who charged her with repeated greetings to Eric, Monmouth, and Vir¬ ginia, and also affectionate good wishes for Robert Fauconbridge. The coun¬ tess, at the repeated instances of the earl and the request of Ella, partook their hospitable noontide dinner, at which lady Matilda, in the absence of her mo¬ ther, presided, and almost immediately K 6 after
after departed, followed by the good wishes and regrets of the whole party. The spirits of our heroine were affect¬ ed by the departure of her earliest friend. Poor Matilda appeared un¬ usually depressed, and the rest of the day passed heavily, In the evening, with the earl's permission, Ella confided the secret of their consanguinity.—" Ah, my sweet sister," said Matilda, " you know not the happiness this disclosure affords me; and, alas! you know not how greatly 1 stand in need of comfort and consolation, I too have my secret: unfortunately, its disclosure will cover not only me, but others with-opprobri¬ um." " Matilda, my beloved Matilda, you wrong yourself," said EUa. ** You are deceived, Ella; I am not speaking o l i Monmouth; another and a more painful secret depresses me; if it were my own, I would gladly confide it to you; but as it is, I date not." Deeply
Deeply engaged m conversation, the amiable sisters were unconscious of the time that had passed, until the increas¬ ing twilight had darkened the surround- ing objects, and reminded them that the hour of supper was near, and that the earl probably waited for them. Ella was leaving the room, when Ma- tilda, who followed her, accidentally turn¬ ed her head—her eyes encountered an object of terror and dismay; she uttered a piercing shriek, and fell, deprived of sense, by the side of our astonished he¬ roine. The cries of Ella brought the attend¬ ants of lady Matilda, and after some dif¬ ficulty, they succeeded in restoring her, and subsequently conveyed her to her bed: father Oswald was hastily sum¬ moned by the earl, but having assured him she was in no danger, he was suffer¬ ed to depart, with an injunction to visit the invalid early in the morning. After some time, Matilda requested, with
With a feeble voiceiifto be left alone with Ella; and when th^ a' tendants t^ere g©n^» she said—-" This is all an enighia for you, my sister; but draw asidfe the curtains of the window, and the enigma MO OUlTVUi Our heroine instantly obeved.a^d saw* witn a terror almost beyond description ^■tke Hne flame burning m the Wi~ zards Tower. '* It doth betoken death to the house of Pembroke" murmured Matilda.*— w Who is the next victim ? Is it my father ? or you, my sister ?" " Do not be alarmed," faltered Ella; ** perhaps it may be prevented." s * Never, Ella. Our house is pursued by an angry God, who will not be ap¬ peased till all are exterminated, save me, and I am doomed to live, to weep the loss of all." ** Matilda!" " Oh, it is too true^—therefore be pre¬ pared. Two nights ago that stranger being
Mhg stood again beSde nie; 1 law not indeed the mysterious tvrlting m fot- tUe'tly, btit she g^Ve into iny ^h^ud a manuscript. I have r^d it, Eflk. Oh, %hat a dark tissue of crtee !«^-if it is ti'M-i-the Crimes of my father! df my bother F ** Matilda, my best love," said fella, 49 do not thus afflict yourself: your rea¬ son has been imposed on—-your senses deceived by an illusion; the danger may be averted." "But how, Ella? Who has the power ? n " I have," cried our heroine; awd af¬ ter a pause, she added—" I must See the earl immediately : suffer me, my sister, to recall your attendants. I leave you for af short time; but rest tratiquil; be assured I possess the means to avert the danger ; I have sworn secrecy, but when the life of Pembroke is at stake, can I hesitate ?" Ella found the earl in his chamber. He
* He attributed her paleness to the inte¬ rest she felt for Matilda; and drawing her a chair beside him, he inquired how she had left her patient. Our heroine felt the difficulty of her situation; it was absolutely necessary, in order to make her father clearly com¬ prehend the danger that threatened him, to apprize him of her knowledge of his connexion with Ipollita; and it was some time before she could conquer her repugnance to commence the tale. With all the circumspection in her power, she adverted to the youthful fol¬ lies of her father—painted forcibly the character of Ipollita, and detailed her former residence in the Wizard's Tower with Giovani at the mournful period of lord William Marsham's death—her sus¬ picions that it was her hand that direct¬ ed the blow, and also her nightly visits to M,a*ilda—*the burning of the flame on the Wizard's Tower—and lastly, the eommuni-
communication between the castle and that tower. The astonished earl listened in silence to the varied scenes depicted by his daughter, and promised to use immedi¬ ately every preventative in his power against the malice of his secret enemy; and after embracing Ella, and charging her with an affectionate messf|ge for Ma¬ tilda, he counselled her to retire. Ella, though she succeeded in calming Matilda, passed herself a sleepless night, and early in the morning she sought her father. He answered her anxious and reiterated questions as to his health; she dreaded that he had already im¬ bibed the poison; but his answers to her minute inquiries in some measure re¬ lieved her, and the day, and the follow¬ ing, passed without any event. Matil¬ da continued indisposed, for the blue flame still burnt on the Wi«ard*s Tower. On the evening of the third day a servitor arrived, who announced, for the
the ne&t day> the arrival of lady Pem^ broke; and Ella retired to rest witkia h$avy heart* for she dreaded the aifival of her ladyship as the commencement o| a ffesh series of persecutions^ She rose^rly^ and hasted to the chamber of Matilda, who was dressing. They con- ve^^^a%fbrsbmeminutesi when they were suddenly interrupted by the en* trance of Maud, one of lady Pembroke women; pale, breathless, she sunk upon & chair, crying---^ The earth deadr '* He was found dead in his bed f and Matid wept bitterly. Matilda, pale and motionless^ w^ sustained by her mai& ens ; wink Ella, as if gathering energy from despair, flew to the chamber of her Mhe* :--& pa|e inanimate cor|>ie was dl that remained of the nobl^ Peni- teoke. She kissed Ms cold %s--^she chafed his stiffened hand, in the vain hope^ that sensation was only suspended ***she pressed her hand upon his heart; all
all wa$&ill! Sh^ could not we^p, her heart! was surjcha^ed with an intolerable weight j her h£ad, ^ddy with contend¬ ing emotions was unabte to sustain the conflict^ and she lost recollection. Ella tva** cony^yeiA to her cbam&er by the attendants, who came to perform the last melancholy duties to the body 0f their deceased master. Fever and delirium succeeded each other; and it was many weeks ere she was Sufficiently convalescent to leave her bed* In all tMs long interval, neither lady rem* broke nor Matilda had visited her sick couch: alarmed for the health of her sis¬ ter, she made repeated inquiries after lier, and at length learned that both ladies had left Longholm. Ella felt the cruelty of her situation* and wept in si¬ lence. At length lady Pembroke returned to the castle, and immediately afterwards summoned Ella to appear before her. Weak and exhausted l)¥ Vkfremnt ill- ness*
ness, the trembling girl was obliged to lean for support on the arm of the do¬ mestic, as she descended to the saloon. Several persons were standing near lady Pembroke when she entered the room. Her ladyship regarded her with a stern frown as she motioned her to sit. Our heroine obeyed; and after a si¬ lence of some moments, during which a man, in the habit of the secular clergy, continued to write, her ladyship rose, and addressing herself to one who ap- pGared the principal of the group/ she said—" I deliver into your charge the accused—-let her ,be removed immedi¬ ately." Two men advanced towards her.— ** What do they mean ? * cried she, pass¬ ing her hand over her forehead—** who accuses me ?" ** I do," said the lady :—** take her away." ** Of what am I accused ?" demanded the terrified girl. ** Young
rt Young woman," said the man she had observed writing, " you are accused of sorcery and murder—the murders of lord William Marsham and William earl of Pembroke—of having bewitched the lady Matilda Marsham." What an accusation! what a horrible combination of crime! — parricide, fra¬ tricide, and sorcery! Yet the hereto¬ fore weak and trembling Ella betrayed no emotion, uttered no complaint, but resigned herself into the custody of the officers of justice without a struggle— without a murmur. Was it the strength of conscious innocence that sustained her? or is the hapless victim sunk in the inanity of despair? She was con¬ veyed to London with the utmost dis¬ patch by those who had her in charge, and immediately committed to close confinement.
V/I^UnLl -
CHAPTER XIII.
Bring me to my trial when you will; Died he not in hss bed ? Can I m.ike men live W hether they will or no ? Sii\ kfsquare. Theee solitary days were spent by our dejected heroine without seeing any one but the gaoler, who regularly brought the portion of coarse food allowed to the most miserable in this abode of <ir|me; but he spoke not to the wretched prisoner, and for three days sh% lan¬ guished in misery, and deprivation of every comfort, without hearing the sound of the human voice; the oriine of which she was accused was sofeprrible, so terrific, that even the gaoler scorned to hold converse with her. How short a time since she revelled in
in the sunshine of fortune, and looked forward to a bright futurity, rich in friends und resources, and an object worthy of envy and of universal es¬ teem I plas, how changed [ where^were now those rich and powerful friends? The counter of Caerphilly probably on her ^vay toJtaly—JSric still a prisoner*— and Monmouth—alas! could Monmouth —could the countess of Caerphilly* or her brother, save her from the machi¬ nations of the vindictive lady Pem¬ broke? Yet there wqs .one who had saved her from dangers almost m insur¬ mountable as this; but even he came not. Was it possible that Adplphe doubted her innocence? The crime of sorcery was so firmly accredited, so uni¬ versally abominated, that perhaps even Adolphe partook the common belief— perhaps he had fqrsaken foer. On the fourth morning she heard the goaler approach ^t an earlier hour than usual, and an indefinite idea that they were
were searching for her, to bring her to her trial, roused her from the state of apathy in which she was sunken; she half raised herself on her straw pallet, and in the next moment she felt herself pressed to the bosom of Adolphe: he spoke the words of comfort and conso¬ lation to her heart; she felt she had still a friend left, and her tears fell for the first time since her accusation. After her feelings had in some mea¬ sure subsided, lord Adolphe questioned her relative to the knowledge she pos¬ sessed of lord Marsham's death, and why she had foreseen the death of her father. Ella repeated what she had formerly con¬ fided to Pembroke, relative to Ipollita and Giovani, and their concealment in the Wizard's Tower. " You have only confirmed my pre¬ vious suspicions, dear Ella," said he, ** and the accidental information I ob¬ tained when in Rome. I am persuaded that Giovani is, if not implicated, at least privy
privy to the affair; and I have reason to believe that Ipollita is in England at this moment; therefore there is no time to be lost 1 must leave you, my child, for a short time^—probably in a few hours I shall see you again;" and Adol¬ phe departed, leaving his protegee re¬ lieved from one-half of the dismay that had hitherto oppressed her. At noon Adolphe returned, accom¬ panied by a monk, and bearing an order for her removal to a more commodious part of the prison, whither* supported between him and the monk, Ella pro¬ ceeded with a trembling step* " Ella, my child," said Adolphe, « I have brought the pious father Sfc Austin, to supply my place near you, during an absence that is unavoidable. Confide in him, my child—rely on his counsels, and consider him the representative of myself; he deserves your respect and esteem by his exemplary piety, as well YOI-* in* h m
as by his faithful attachment to your de¬ ceased mother, lady Enningarde." " Ah," said she, " it is the excellent Everhard." Adolphe answered in the affirmative, and added—" I have seen the king this morning, and have obtained from him that your trial shall be deferred six weeks; in this interval?I will seek Gio¬ vani—he was corideumefl to perpetual imprisonment for his share of sir Ger¬ vase Osterly*s offences; and I ttust, through the medium of the cardinal Aresizo, to obtain a mitigation of his punishment, if he will make confession of the crimes of Ipollita. No feelings of nature, I am assured, will prevent Giovani sacrificing his mother to his own convenience: but as this is an af¬ fair of much importance, I will not trust to another its execution, and therefore I shall depart on the instant for Home/' Adolphe then took an affectionate leave of his niece/ and with ma»y ten- der
der injunctions committed her to the spiritual guidance of St, Austin, in whom Ella found an excellent substitute for the kind friend whose departure shcr be¬ held with a mixture of hope and appre^ hension. Five weeks passed, in the constant observance of her rpligious duties? the kind consolations of St. Austin, and a perfect consciousness of her innocence, had prepared Ella to meet her approach* ing trial with some degree of firmness, and she now looked for the daily return of Adolphe* The monk was regular in his visits to her, and she was therefore sur* prised one evening, when she was pre¬ paring to retire to her bed, at his unex¬ pected appearance at so late an hour, but how was her surprise augmented, when throwing back the cowl, she be*. held, under this disguise, the miserable Ipollita! "Ella," said she, after our heroine's surprise had subsided, ** I am the au¬ la 2 thor
thor of the crimes laid to your charge; and I am ready to deliver myself up to justice, and clear you from a shadow of suspicion, on condition that you wiH wed Giovani." Ella was thunderstruck, but she quick¬ ly perceived that Ipollita still believed her the daughter of^Di Montimar; how¬ ever, her agitation prevented her reply¬ ing immediately, and Ipollita continued to urge her to embrace her proposal, as¬ suring her that no earthly means could save her life, if she rejected it.—" I have been told," she added, 4t of your childish partiality for Monmouth—trust me, belli requites it, for he is on the point of marriage with the princess Mar¬ garet, sister to the king of Navarre." Ella sickened at the thought of Mon¬ mouth's former inconstancy, and;but too readily credited the testimony of ( lpol- lita, who continued with pers'everanpe to combat the resolves of th€Mtm&8nk victim. At length she rose to departs - Think
"*! Think of all I have said, and at the hour of trial I will be near you;" and having pronounced these words in an emphatic tone, she retired. The following day, Ella was scarcely less surprised by a visit from lady Pem¬ broke, who came to offer her the means of emancipation, if she would for ever Telinquish all intercourse with Adolphe, and, trusting to the clemency of her -ladyship, confide her future guidance to her care, and consent to pay implicit obedience to, her pleasure. Their:interview was long and painful, «nd Ella saw her retire with pleasure, . The rest,of the week passed, without #ny other incident; but Adolphe came not. The Sunday was passfd in con¬ stant prayer by Ella, and her good con¬ fessor, who trembled at the protracted absence of Adolphe, even when he en¬ deavoured to infuse hope into the heart iof his lovely charge The day of trial at length arrived $ h$ Ella
Ella was innocent, even ih thought^* her * bitterest enemies believed ; her m% her unsullied vi^tue^ her transcendawt loveliness, were her only crimes in ibeir? eyes: she was sustained by the secret convictioiij that Providence would not forsake her, because she felt she deserve ed its support; and she ap^areiin the hall bf Justice with a calm resignation^ that astonished lady Pembroke, whose; feelings at that moment were certainly the most painful. The trial by jury, one of the blessings- England still enjoys, had been recently wrested from king John; and EUa,; though accused of heinous crimes, could not be denied its benefit* ^ Several #f the domestics from Long« holm bore testimony to the eristen^e of the blue Jlame on the J¥kar$$ Towmr f and that it burned only during the res!*: deuce of Ella at the castle; and ids© that lord William Marshani, as well as ih# earl, enjoyed perfect health pre??0ti§ to her
her arrival; that at the funeral of the former she prepared to attend, but that, apparently stricken with remorse at the universal distress of the household, she had fled secretly from Longholm—that at the demise of the earl she betrayed no surprise at the event, but entered his chamber, and took pains to ascertain if he had really ceased to exist—that she was seen by several of the attendants to enter the chamber of the earl two nights after his decease, and that those em¬ ployed to watch beside the corpse were lulled to sleep (supposed by the power of witchcraft), and that in the morning the coffin was found empty : no doubt but the body was conveyed away for the purpose of aiding the incantations of the sorceress* . Father Martin, the jaonfessor of Jady Matilda, detailed the means made use of to intimidate her ladyship, and the mysterious writing displayed on the walls of her chamber, the first having h 4 reference
reference to Monmouth, with whom Ella was enamoured; the second throw¬ ing a dreadful stigma on the name of the deceased earl, and the las£ foretell¬ ing the death of lord William. Poor lady Matilda, forced by her in¬ exorable mother to depose against Ella, admitted that she had confessed she knew the nature of the plot against earl Pembroke, and asserted that she had the power to saye him. Bertha, lady Pembroke's favourite woman, asserted that she had seen Ella enter a concealed door in the picture gallery (a secret never before known to the possessors of Longholm)* and which p opened into a subterrean that communis cated with the Wizard's Tower. Lady Pembroke alluded to the past transactions of Ella, and mentioned the ignominy with which she had been dis¬ charged by queen Elinor; and that her majesty had more than once been heard to say, before lady Oxford, that she firmly
firmly believed Elk di Montimar had bewitched the young queen and the princesses; but that the family of Pem¬ broke, from whom she had ret jived many kindnesses, had been particularly the butt of her ill will; that, added to the other crimes charged against her, her ladyship verily believed she had also secretly^dministerednoison to her; but that she had happily, by skilful treat- ment, recovered, after a severe illness, at the very period of lord Marsham's decease; and that at this very moment the beautiful lady Victoria Marsham wm grievously ili, with that most malignant of all disorders, the smallpox, beyond all doubt the result of Ella's witchcraft. Many minor facts were adduced, all of trifling importance in themselves, but tending strongly to corroborate the prin¬ cipal charges, and the current of popular opinion was decidedly against the fair prisoner. It was at the close of the day that h$ the
and her justification was adjoiirtsfed un^ til the next, when, afc she pre^red *to l^ave the court, some one dose be^e her whispered distinctly-—" WtltJkau &ed Giovani ? " It was the , voice >$f Ipollita, but there was no female near our heroine; it was impossible todistin* guish the Italian among the crowd, and she retired as soon as possible, under the friendly escort of St. Adstin, " Perhaps," sighM Ella, ** by, to* morrow my uncle Adolphe may return, and therefore I rejoice in the respite of a few hours.*' Alas! this last hope fail* ed her: the morning came, but no lord Adolphe; and again she was conducted to the court,*—'* Holy father," said she mildly, u the prejudice of my judges is so strong against me, that if in my de¬ fence I urge my near affinity to Pem¬ broke, it will be considered an idle tale; unsupported by the testimony of Adolphe, it will, in their eyes, be add-
ing another to my alleged crimes; we wilktfot urge it." Her r'r was pensive as she entered the court; and when the judge demanded if she had no proof of her innocence to produce, she calmly replied—'* None; but I declare before God that I am innocent" ** Have you no witnesses to bear tes¬ timony in your behalf ?" " None, my lord; yet I am innocent." At that moment the voice of Ipollita murmured—" J am here" €l She is beside me!" cried Ella. " Who?" demanded the judge. *< The guilty author of all the crimes laid to my charge; but, alas! she is in¬ visible." The exclamations of Ella only heigh¬ tened the prejudice against her; and as she again declared she had no proof of her innocence to adduce* the judge ap¬ pealed to the jury, and demanded if a doubt remained on their minds as to her guilt ? h 6 A silence
A silence of a few minutes ensued, during which some one handed a sealed paper to the judge; the crowd parted behind Ella, and an elderly man, simply clad, made his way towards her, and wMle the judge perused the paper he h&ld in his hand, the stranger placed himself beside her. ** This prisoner is accused of sorcery," said the judge; ** who will authen¬ ticate this writing ?" and he gave it into the hands of the jury, " I will" said the stranger, who stood at Ella's right hand. The judge rose from his seat, and bowing low, said—" That is sufficient; and I am bound to declare, in the pre¬ sence of ail here assembled, that Ella di Montimar is innocent of the charges laid against her; that she is at liberty to re¬ tire wheresoever she pleases ; and 1 cau¬ tion all to refrain from insulting her, in thought, word, or deed, as they would avoid the pains and penalties of excom¬ munication.
munication, and the displeasure of our most holy father in God, pope Inocent the Third, who extends his especial pro¬ tection towards her, messing tuose tnat bless, and cursing those that curse her." " His holiness," said the stranger, *' has delivered up one of, the actually guilty persons to your discretion, the other is this moment arrested, and their crimes will be established beyond con¬ troversy." The astonishment of Ella was supe¬ rior, if possible, to that of the rest of the assembly. Lady Pembroke gasped for breath, while the judge addressed the court, and before he had well finish¬ ed, she fainted in the arms of her atter? dants. The curiosity of the crowd had in* creased by the recent events, and sup¬ ported by the stranger and father Aus¬ tin, it was some time ere Ella reached the outer gates of the court; at the mme instant, lady Pembroke, leaning on
on the arm of her chaniberlain, and supported by her maids, passed the gat#s: she stopped—« Ella,*' said she, with bit* terness, " I would curse ye, if Inoddnt stood beside." The stranger lifted his eyes in abhorrence, and kdy Pembroke recognised in him, the pious Stephen Langton, archbishop of Canterbury; for a moment she felt abashed,* and retired to let them pass. Ella's ideas were confused; she could not comprehend how she could oWe $ier liberation to Inocent, and scarcely be¬ lieving herself free, she found herself With astonishment, in the archiepisco^at palace, where her doubts were only fe^ moved on finding herself surrounded by, and alternately pressed to the bosom of Adolphe, Eric, the countess of Caer¬ philly, and not the least delighted, or the less beloved Monmouth—and was he faithful? her present happiness as¬ sured her he was. Ella could not find words to express her
her feelings; she gazed with silent de¬ light on all around, and at length im¬ plored an explanation of the sudden change, which she no doubt owed to Adolphe. " No, my beloved child, it is not to me you are indebted for your escape frofti the perfidy that had nearly de¬ stroyed you; 'tis to another, and a zea¬ lous friend who claims a right to elu¬ cidate, ail this mystery; I leave you, love, to conduct this friend to your arms, and I counsel you, in my* absence to repose yourself:" and Adolphe again embraced her, and resigned her to the care of the countess. '* My sister, my beloved injured sis¬ ter!*' cried Eric, embracing her; and Monmouth, his eyes sparkling with pleasure, repeated his words, as he re¬ ceived her from the arms of her brother. " Wild inconsiderate boys, you fa¬ tigue and oppress her," said the coun¬ tess; and she obliged them to retire, and entreated
entreated Ella to repose awhile tintii the return of Adolphe. It was some time before she could profit by the kind¬ ness of her friend, but at last her tired and exhausted spirits found relief in sleep; the countess watched beside her, and she rested several hours. ** How is my Ella?" inquired she, perceiving her awake; !* sufficiently strong to meet her other friends ?'* " Ah!" said Ella, " if my spirits were not overcome at meeting those I found here, dear countess, surely I can support any thing else." The door opened hastily, and Virginia clasped her to her bosom.—"It is I, dear Ella, it is I that bring you happiness; aided by the friendship of Urbanina, and the confessions of Giovani, I have suc¬ ceeded in counteracting the machina¬ tions of Ipollita, and I give you back, for from my hand you shall receive him, a—father!" ** Heavens, Virginia! earl Pembroke !* "He
** He lives* dear EUa." « Where ?" cried she. " Be calm, Ella, and recollect the health of Pembroke is yet delicate; do not agitate him; he is here." Ella advanced to the antichamber; it was really Pembroke who leant against one of the marble pillars; she sprung towards him, and kneeling, she cried— 44 He lives to bless his happy daughter," Eric too knelt beside her, and the earl blessed his children together. Virginia however did not suffer them to remain, but passing her arm around the waist of Ella, and claiming the support of Eric, she. led the way to the saloon, where Monmouth, his mother, and Ro¬ bert Fauconbridge, waited them. Pem¬ broke neither strove to detain or follow them; Adolphe did not appear, and Vir¬ ginia promising to account for his ab¬ sence, requested the attention of her auditors to her long tale of how she had graved Ella, and found Pembroke, The
The tale of Virginia was diffuse, mid frequently interrupted; the chi^f im¬ port of it was this:—The beautiful, but less scrupulous, Urbanina, after the dis¬ appearance of Ella, becaoie the willing mistress of Inocent the Third; and on the arrival of Adolphe in Rome, Vir~ ginia immediately applied to her (who with all her faults was extremely good.- natured) in behalf of Ella. Inocent listened with interest to the tale; and convinced of the integrity of Ella, and the honour of Adolphe, he did not scru¬ ple to Issue a bull in her favour; actu- atedtoo by a sense of justice, he deliver¬ ed Giovani into the hands of Adolphe. The <*ounte&s of Caerphilly was in Rome, and she instantly prepared to return to England. Virginia had been some days the wife of Robert Faucon¬ bridge; and she readily consented^ accompany her mother and Adolphe, In their Ivay thither, she obtained a sort of half confidence from Giovani, and learned
learned that it was not the intention of Ipollita to murder Pembroke, but to administer, to him a draught whidi would give him the aj>pearanfce of death, and afterwards convey him to the vault¬ ed passage, where, Ella had been former¬ ly confined, in order to. revenge herself by the torments she.could there inflict on him. Aided by this knowledge, Virginia actually rescued Pembroke from his captivity. f Adolphe, after seeing Ella safe in the bishop's palace, returned to the house of lady Pembroke (where Virginia, with¬ out communicating Pembroke's exist¬ ence, had enjoined him ta meet her): there a scene of a different nature awaited him; lady Pembroke, frantic at the defeat of her conspiracy against Ella, gave a loose to her passions; her ruling one, her love for Adolphe, was still pre¬ dominant; she wept, she knelt to him, and ultimately threatened her existence, if he refused her offered hand; she ac* tually
tually drew the charmed dagger from* her girdle, with beseeching accents im¬ ploring him to pronounce her doom; and while yet the uplifted dagger rested in her hand—while yet she knelt at the feet of Adolphe, the door opened, and Pembroke and Virginia entered; with¬ out a moment's hesitation she buried the dagger in her bosom, faintly crying —** It is done! my felhstfoe is fallen /" 'This catastrophe accounted,for the.ab¬ sence of Adolphe, and the melancholy ^of Pembroke, and shed a slight tincture of grie£over the otherwise happy society; but :the cloud soon passed; the trials of Mia were finished, The excellent) archbishop assisted to calm the distress of Pembrqke, and with liberal hospitality contributed to the comfort and pleasure of his guests. After a few days, Pembroke returned to his own mansion, accompanied by his children, and poured consolation into the bosom of the virtuous though dis, tressed
tressed Matilda. Lady Victoria reco¬ vered from the smallpox, and ^reserved her beauty; time taught her to appre¬ ciate the virtues of her sisters, and ren¬ dered her worthy of them. A short time was given to the mourn¬ ing for lady Pembroke, and at its ex¬ piration, Ella became the happy bride of Monmouth. Pembroke's laudable ambition once more aroused by the worth and accom¬ plishments of Eric, succeeded in form¬ ing for him the match intended for his less fortunate brother. Eric wedded the princess Elinor, second daughter of king John. Virginia, whose dearest ties, whose dearest friends were-English, relinquish¬ ed her.country, to reside constantly with them: and lady Matilda, equally be¬ loved by Ella and Virgin ; a, divided her time almost entirely between them ; for earl Pembroke finally prevailed on the countess of Caerphilly to become lady Pembroke,
Pembroke, and in her society, and the prosperity of his children, every wish of his heart was gratified. Adolphe, beloved and respected by all, continued to reside with his aged father; but he never entirely surmount¬ ed the melancholy, caused by an early ill-placed and unfortunate passion. Zerinda married in Germany, and continued attached to the princess Isa¬ bella, after her union with the emperor Frederic: for Osmanville, as well as Ipollita and Giovani, paid the forfeit of their crimes : all perished miserably. Godfrey of Belgarvon became the husband of Mary de Lancy, and Rosa Montague gave her hand and fortune to her amiable brother. Father Austin continued the spiritual director of Ella, who, established in the splendid castle of Caerphilly, sees every thing smile around her-^JE^- land, after the death of John, nsing from
from her abject state, becoming the envy and admiration of more polished na¬ tions ; and its prosperity, the work of earl Pembroke, and the long after famed Philip Fauconbridge, known to our readers as Richard Plantagenet, both of which names he really bore.
FINIS.
Printed by J. Darling, LeadenhaU-Strect, London.
