Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
A winter's tale
WIN T E R' > T A L E. * i t * J J % 'IS i I i. ' ' tft*
^\' ,.i - .^ -t U " t" ^r c'.»; t/^ e ;uc- v .- v 1 c e r* j' a~m>, -t, 1 t the g w .i_rcl ti r.j ! a t dp* ***2 v ttwt i ^..xd v-rou h- * ^ , '^ %, B l /w .VMrcf 1* i t* e m )tt, ' 'a i i ki iJ wc cive i o\ thw j ^^J Km.: L< 3i :rd *b fc T K : l, and i"s arruabic t ■>»"!- h:., Vh^-c ri^c ^e^r -------, ar.d to.it,- u r/iv between tie twoc.'ebraun batt.es * <f Crtify vind !Metiers, a tcununent wis 1 Ad at Windlor, fucceeded by a .magnificent I V. \0l, I, B Of
nor : f „..'= v. T " ' • n! hl *'? 1 ui ] . I, s
l rt
M
• Ui ^ '- „ '<' H nr- \Ji| -
thcu-'i
* -ft % -t , r " m 3 - :■>, v/i,"^ *" /* / * * » » v* -"*d ,.,.1, <^.. d *au ^ . u . . * *w i . ? * * **
i . i_ „ i.i *,lt^ \ w. * t. -. <■ *J^* T V - - i ' r ," T 5 1 > " ' *■* t' 7 1 . - w ' f r . L c*- - "*. ^^r- 4 r \ \:t i ', < Tj K" ' i * > vi * *- -^ ...... \ . c r f , . i ! v . - ^ c ..n , • ♦ . . *, J , * a' i ? i ' i n v, I 1** * s i t ,^ c iu , t ,,^ j ':, r v r h: v^ '• ic i cin- < *.\' • o ; s. % i * m_ future 5 , h . » -v i
if ! > *
A K » * - tr ■ t tT u'u'd a c' -^a** :. • -t a s ' - r ^' - T - '> the fi;ft 1 *ue ^v;. ir L"..—.^'. iittJC dj.^ctnee . s i thc O «c_:i, ^ i, * .t h u« v s -.i or,7 wh \u eat* cjnttmJvT : r i ,; } \-\„*i A\A * jur '->h »te a|pKu>iuuu he tuute pccu.ia !y VKi.h d t-
*\ * i "^ * i jr ,; th, 'f n> , iv
t'
Wuh ' at b' • jr ^ T T ~, ' W v I * J ' , U ' ■» - ' v " I r ' J
Li j. n
i ;
^, ^ i ». * - i,v ;. V. m - v /-J j* 3 t 1 v i ui l'.- * vd, J t f'. v ^ ^<- k'. '. , J w f > ' 1 I V ' H <-■> Qaan. A r ^ther^ u^u^ b*. a in cr near! a« iLv ufud her arm tc a^ard h.rn ihe
I I *u*. if .o u t ^ . (<■ { (Ol ^ ->«» * t , rr f r A*tu - K ^ » ^ pi-* x, >> .) I * , , -r ^ i . , T i i, ''v^Mz-ro'*- s. S ( k ,.J O, < . C* / "> ' rfl ^ , t * * j , i ' i ! > J^^ . •*. > uC * ol , * »f fit "1 (Hi ^! J * I a » * ' t i "i Tj. ti * r
f; ^ ; ■*, .rp'*u, the c 5 *: ^* t, v^ »* i w ! t •* s * i % l * ** * t „ ~ ( r a' 1 -i t ** J Lit ^^ , f , >™*1*'^''. *" - , * ,\ T , "1,*", 1 k !' f i i vi ■<: . ^ '- f^ ^ t j ^'1 it 1 . i "i: - J J \ . ' - .a , . j t£ Bt,* 1 )v it, fjtttl itranje:—■: ii t,.c hs. L ot beauty rrAaru aj.' bu uu-wo.y pr/.: us,** s 3 1 h-
Tbi. ImV ftianpcr no.v pcrctivtd ho*v r>n \YTvJJ\**v:h" *he wt. r iituated ; her !.:ir ?" (,-. k '^aj Cv'Vfred vith a bhiih, ler hp tren.Hcf', her hard fhook a$ fhe cflF^cd to Jifi jf-— -f*>e rr.ft her eyes to the gni^nd, and ?o',d irrclolutch'. 7 ; - ? Q v r ^ 11 rn - r r r^a*!v f 1 " re f < hed out her 3 ." ^ *"■",*!. id^ j. i 1 ! tncf>urs'if-? accent^— " Be not timid, fc.r g'rl—■female fmilcs arc ihz boon of chivalry. Stoop* Edw&rd s ml receive from the ha&ds ti this fweet maid t!. ^.rlauid that prowefs has m&&& vour due.** The Prince bowed, and the trembling ftrangtr placed an his brow the token c£ approvance and applaufe* On riling, he took her hand, and preffed it to his lips— *< H'Tv^ much am I indebted/* faid he, ** to accident \ hew happy am I in receiv¬ ing
}n& the favour of thc dav from fach fair 1 ,M>r As he fpoke, he freed Lis eyes on hec face^ and ochcld thi re inch -ir affected fw^etne/s, f xOi e.^pfCiTvc 1^trie'"a. ^r t^e-tuty, as made; htm ^az? with aimir.Uton and dehght unutterable, A t»ouur» 1 thought* da;ted acjos tu mind, bat tK-t a w^rd occurred to cxyi'tls than in, His eyes made ample amends for this filence, while thofe of the fair ftranger were caft on thc ground in fafcinating dihidence. His lips at length moved, and the word u Permit ------" fell from them in a faltering accent ^ bjt at that inftant the Queen arofe. Pier rite was figmrkd by the found of attendant trumpets; and at the moment of their founding, a clamorous peal iffued from thc band of warlike inftruments ftation ed within the hfts. The Queen defcended from tiie pavilion, and left the lifts, followed by her ladles, while a troop of the younger Nobles b 4. and
and Knights furrounded the Prince, and bore him in triumph to the King, his father. Edward turned : his eyes to where they had Beheld the faireft form that ever graced a Court, The laft of the Queen's attendants was juft leaving the lifts. In an inftant, (lie was rx longer perceptible. A fenfation, to whirh. he hzd hitherto been a ftranger, pailed acrofs hi> bofom ; and as it pafled, he involuntarily heaved a figh. I le looked' on the pavilion: the fpot on which he had received the laurel, was vacant.— " Ah i" faid he to himfelf, " fhe is there no more 1 Faireft, fweeteft of women! this firft, tranfient interview is perhaps the laft ! Happinefs attend you,- and love pro¬ tect your beauties!" Plis imagination ran over her various charms—her winning modefty, her ;timid innocence, hcr lovely features, her-attractive grace. He was awakened from his reverie by
by bdng told the King was returning to thc palace. He fprang on his horfe, and putting fpurs to its fides, gallopped from the field, attended by ail the partakers of ths day's feft ivi ties. In the palace a royal banquet was ferved, to which every perfon of diftinction was invited. Thc affability of ihe King fpread cheerfulnefs round every board at which he prcfided. The Prince, alone, was relieved and theudnTul. In van thc brhrtminff £d>- let was gaJly puflicd around ; in vain tlxc choral fotie; founded iVom the orcheftra, Thefe no lenyu had r o-v^r to uivut his mind, and he thought tiaue n:ovecl wuh ieavien flow nefs Jo the evening, when he hoped attain to iee the f.,e.et being, who, xuxLr tiiC favour 01 chance, hud graced him with tiiat wreuth of victory which he held as ihe duireftjewel in his pofleflion. The hour named for the commencement of the bdl, at length arrived. For this part b ; of
of the day'? entertainment, the Queen had mzde unufual preparation. The room allotted to the dancers, was the moft fpa¬ cious in the palace, and its ernbellifhments truly fuperb. At the end was erected a throne, covered with purple velvet, richly embroidered with gold, and over-fhadowed by a magnificent canopy, parts of which were gHtteringly gilt, and, on its face, vvere alter¬ nate emblems of fearlefs warfare, and en¬ twined branches of palm—the tranquil lymbol of the bleftings of peace. Round the room were richly-decorated armorial bearings, relieved by fantaftic wreaths of artificial flowers. The numerous tapers threw their brilliant beams from coftly glaf?, and refrefhments of the moft delicious forts were fpread on fide-boards In fplendid fervices of plate. The entrance of the l ^ueen was the fignal for the muficians ftriking their inftruments. In the moment of her approach, a bold note filled the vaft room with a loud and joyous 3 peal,
peal, to which fucceeded the fofteft fotmds of gentle hautboys, whofe paufe gave place to the harmonious murmur of the lute 5 in which period the Queen afcended th?. throne, and the train of ladies ranged themfelves oa each fide of it. Then the murk's fulleft: flow again echoed from the lofty ceiling, and ftopped only for hcr Majefty topixy the con'pliment of welcome, and name thole choices cf pannes in the dance, which flio thought proper to intereft hertelf in. * The Prince had entered the ball-room long before the Que\*n 5 and iud waited her arrival with the moft tormenting fufpenld His eager eye exam>no!, with trenufous hope, the ladies of the Queen's party; every countenance feemed to court his attention— but he perceived not thc object ofhisrefearch* A gloom inftantly overfpread his heart;— ** She is not here, then !" thought he j " fhe is not meant to be here j and I fhall never, never view that lovely form again !" b 6 Lord
Lord John Chandos, who had arrived too late to be prefent at the tournament, no;v approached the Prince, and wiflied him joy of the day's fuccefs. He fighed, and thanked him; and, to avoid/the converfation into which hk Lordfhip feemed defirous of enter¬ ing, removed from where he ftood to the left hand of the Queen. Some ladies who were placed fo near to the throne as to be hidden from his former fituation, now ought his attention. He caft a lapid glance toward them as he bowed recognition, and his glance met the features of the iair object of its enquiry. .Joy ghftcncd in his eye^ and beat in his heart. His look was rivetted to the fivect form that ftood before him, and he thou^bt it more beautiful even than in the fervent moment in which he had dwelt on it in imagination. He fancied the eyes of the & Wired girl had be-.i directed toward him itWe&firfi he perceived her, and his ecftacy, *:* * while
while he indulged fuch a thought, is inde* icribable. Selina was not above eighteen. Kcr perfbn was as tafl as it poffibly could be to avoid being above the general height ;—her form as finely turned and graceful in mo- tion as thc niceft ftatuary couid model, or the moft exact hue of beauty require -, —hcr complexion as delicate as the morning rofe, and her blufh fweet er than the p. neb's bloom j—her e"es, blue, foft, af.d i.uda- gent; and when fhe caft thsm on the per¬ fon fhe adclreiled, there was an iro-^crin^ timidity, an exprdlion of gem due's vi heart in them, that was altogether iriwiiibfr ible ;—her lips never moved but with lb fascinating a fmile, that you were tempted to forget their lovelinefs, to coniempkuethe fweetnefs of temper their CApicffion indi¬ cated;—hcr neck was infinitely too charm¬ ing for any pen to defcribe; Nature, a beholder would imagine when he grzed on its parhm whiteneL, had there done hcr
tstmoft; but the bln(h of modefty fprang irom Sclina's heart, and a finer tint of beauty was found to exift in the vermilion ilufh that fuffufed her bofom. Though there was that in her perfon that affured you (lie was born to nobility, (he had no¬ thing of command. A painter might have gathered from her face athoufand charms to deck a Venus with, but not a fingle hint to improve a reprefentation of Juno. Her drcfs was, unlike the fafhion of the day, fimplc ; it confifted only in a robe of white filk, the ftillnefs of which was relieved by a fafh of delicate pink. The filken treffes of her hajx were reftramed from wandering in ioofe luxuriance only by a thin and partially- dilpofecl netting, from which one ringlet ftole, and falling over hcr fhoulder, repofed on the budding beauties of her bofom. In a chivalric age, and in the full bloom of all the foft affections of the heart, to look with indifference on fuch an object was impoffible. Every prepoffeffion of thc , Prince,
Prince, on firft feeing Selina, was confirmed and heightened by this fecond view of her. He, unable to " conceal his pain,*' « GazVf on the fair Who causM his care. And tighM and loofc'd, figWd and Joak'd, SighM and look'di and figh'd again," From the retired fituation in which Selina ftood, the Prince found it impoffible to ap¬ proach her, to exprefs that admiration with which his heart was replete,, and be fenfible of fupreme pleafure in hearing her voice, and Iiftening to her words. In every frefh glance he took, a new beauty, or new fweet- ncfs of manner, became perceptible, and a new tranfport took pofleflion of his bofom* He was infenfible to what paffed around him ; he gazed on Selina, as if fearful hcr leaft motion (hoold efcape him; and, though he treuiuloufty vviihed for a nearer approach, and communication of mind, he feemed anxious left the blifs he enjoyed in the con¬ templation
temptation of her charms, fliould be fnatch¬ ed trom him by intenuption. He burned tokrow the nime, the family of the rfcinating ftranger, but he afked the peribns who were near lum in vam ; and the ladies vvith whom flie appeared con¬ ceded, he did not remember to have feen before. Thc dance being named by a lady who ftood clofe to the Prince, fiift brought to his recolledion that dancing was the def¬ tined amufement of "the evening. The blood rufhed to his cheeks in tumultuous rapture, as it occurred that the ftvea STra might be his \ artner. Lcft.tcks ufe with the thought— « It Hull be/' he articulated; "yes, I niil kno v a i hour of happinefs." While his fpirits flowed vivacioivfly in antk ,; p,vUon, Lord Henry Beauclerc came* to
to inform him that the Queen defired his prcfence. He ftepped haftily to the throne, determined to atone far his neceffary abfenee from the lovely object of his admiration, by requefting her Majefty's permiflion to make her his partner for the evening. As he was about to fignify this wifli, the Queen, taking his hand, faid— " Permit me, Edward, to join to your's thi hand of Lady Catherine / ubrey ; wills fo fair a companion, you can but acquit vourfelf as well in the dance as you did in the tilt. When you lay your well-earned laurel at her Ladyfhip's feet, let me once more have an^inftance that you unite the grace of the courtier to the valour of the foldier." As her Majefty concluded, (he put the hand of Lady Catherine into that of the? Piince, and nodding a bow to the curtfey oi
of her Ladyfhip, looked with fati faction on the fekction fhe had made for her fon. Thc Prince was hardly confeious of thc laft woj ds cf thc Queen. The blood flowed delpondingly from Ids cheek. His voice filurul utdnteliigibly when he would have fpok en, and he fuffered the lady, win.fe hand he held, to make her compli- nieiUaiy uliuaiiou u.ianftvered. His con¬ fufion, and the gloom that overipread his features, could not efcape the obfervation of the Queen. She perceived flie had not accorded with his wifh in the nomination of his partner, but it was too late to repair the error; flie therefore again flightly bowed, and fmilingly waved her hand, fo as ta exprefs her defire that he would lead his Lady to head the dance. The Prince, fcarcely knowing whither he went, rather followed Lady Catherine than led her to ihe fpot he was to occupy.
His
His agitation increafed in each minute ; he, periiaps, had now loft the only oppor¬ tunity he might ever enjoy of becoming familiar with the lovely maid of his wifhes 1 His command might lead him far away, to fcenes of warfare and death—poffibly, 'twas true, to fcenes of triumph and glory ; v but Prince Edward, in thefe minutes, thought thc only joy that victory could afford him, would be the approvance and gratulationsof the fair Sdina. Her coming to Court again, yielded a very dubious poffibility of the gratification of his defire. He feared, from the party fhe was with being unknown to him, her rank could not be very elevated : 'twas poflible, at leaft, her family was reclufe ; if fo, fhe might depart without his being able to gain knowledge of her name, and flie might vifit the Court no more, till flie was pre¬ fented as a bride 1 He looked difconfolately to the place in which he had left her—-flie was there ftill. Hcr
Her eyes—he could not be miftaken-—her eyes were fixed on his Lice, and forrow, and a kind of dejected hopeleffncfs, were expreffed in them.—Ecftacy fwclled in his- bofom. " She thinks of pic !" lie cried ; *' Hea¬ vens ! peihaps (lie thinks of me without t Indifference 1 -ihe blufhes as I look ;—Oh, " it may be (he thinks of mc with fondnefs 1" He had no attention for the obtrufive many who furrounded him-rnq eyes : for any- objed but Sdina. While he bent his admiring gaze on her, ftie, on account of the ladies who ftood before her having mixed with the dance, was brought to the front rev of feats. ' The young Earl of Roxborough, one of the moft elegant men . of King Edward's Court, advanced and bowed to her. He then addreffed fome woids to the lady under whofe protedion flic appeared to be; the lady gave a fmiling, and apparently approving anfwer/ The
The Earl then again bowed to Pelina 3 and taking her hand, led hcr* moft evidently us his partner, from her fext. Thc Prince's blood boiled in Ins veins, and he felt willing to crufli the unknowing Earl for his prc- fum prion. His exes followed them to thc dance. The Earl ftill held Sclina's hand. The Prince trembled with indignation at thc fight. The Earl feemed difcourfing with emphafis, and repeatedly put hh hand on his heart. As the Prince obferved the adion, a threatening frown clouded his brow, and for a moment he felt inclined to rufli from his fituation, and thatch the* fair maid to himfelf. He was relieved from the torture of fuch obfervance by thc fudden burft of the mufic; he ftarted, and with confufion re- membcied he was to begin the dance. The exquifite finencfs of his form, and the noble crrace that fwam.in all his motions, had hitherto
hitherto made the Prince no lefs confpicu¬ ous in the foft practices of the ball-room, than in the more mafculine ones of the camp; but, in this inftance, he failed to acquit - himfelf with his ufual perfedion. His thoughts were very far irom his noble partner, and the amufement he was engaged in;—they were fixed, alas! where they, in every pafling moment, imbibed new fubjed for what 'twas barely poflible might pro¬ duce future happinefs, but what 'twas too probable would many a day of future mifery. The native elegance of Selina's manner could be hidden by no circumftance; but, to fome opinions, it might be confiderably leffened by theembarraflment of her inex¬ perience in this her firft appearance amid fo fj lendid ar.d : ^arge a circle. -To the Prince's imagination her timidity added new force to her attradions; in every little error, he faw the captivating charm of fecluded modefty; ia every blufh, the effufion
effufion of artlefs innocence ; once, and but once, in obedience to the figure of the dance, the Prince joined his hands with hci's, and kd her, to the meafure of thQ mufic, through the ring of dancers. Selina's cheek was at firft fubjeet to a blufh ; but afterwards it became pale, and the hand that the Prince preffed within his, trembled perceptibly. Prince Edward's heart beat gaily in his bofom, but its delight was mouentary; nearly ere he was fenfible of his fituation, his fteps had mcafurcd out thc due proportion, and he refigned Selina to feveral hands who preffed forward, accord¬ ing to the evolution of the dance, and who, forming a circle, carried her away with them to themerrieft meafure of thc tunc. Lady Catherine, the Prince's partner, felt with fome feverity his neglect of her. Her perfon was fine, her rank illuftrious; of both which particulars flie was herfelf fully fen¬ fible, and imagined they both exifted in % fufficiently high degree to claim the utmoft or
of the Prince's attcnOn. She grew fallen and offended, and at length, pleading flight indifpofition, begged him to hand her to her feat, and excufe her dancing more for the evening. Though the Prince rejoiced at her exprefTion of futh a wifh, it reminded him that he had been guilty of a total want of gallantry. He faltered an apology, as he complied with her Ladyfhip's deiire by attending her from the dance, in which he ftrove to attribute his abftractednefs to a fudden and violent pain in the head. Lady Catherine appeared ill-fatisfied with the apology, and feating herfelf where the Prince kd her, looked vvith a haughty and dis¬ contented air after the fteps he took on, quitting her. Prince Edward would have pafled the throne, but the Queen waved for him to approach. She enquired the caufe of his ceafing to dance, and on 1>eing informed, fent two ladies who waited her pleafure, to pay their tendereft attentions to Lady Catherine.
Catherine. The Prince fnatched the firft moment of her Majefty's permiffion to re¬ turn to the gay throng he had left. He threw himfelf on a feat, from whence, for & time, unobferved, he fondly contemplated the fweet countenance of Selina, and watch¬ ed her every motion. While his mind was thu?, dangeroufty for his peace, employed, the dances concluded, and the companypromifcuouily paraded the room, or difcourfed in parties. The pre¬ fence of Lord Roxborough, Selina's part¬ ner, was at this period requefted in a diftant part of the room. The ladies, under whofe proteaion Selina was, were aifb abfent for the purpofe of paying obeifiince to the. Queen, and (he thus became alone in the midft of many. In a penfive and flow ftep, Ihe walked along that fide of the room that was leaft incommoded by the prefs of com¬ pany. She feemed Joft in thought; her countenance was overfpread with fadnefs, vol. 1. c and
and once fhe put her hand to her forehead— then took it away, and fighed. The Prince, whofe attention had never been abient from her, rofe from his feat, as he beheld her not Ihut iiom his approach by the presence of the hated, though un- confeious, Lord Roxbuiou^n. HL heart was fubjeet to a palpitation ue\er feit be¬ fore, and his lip trembled with delight. He followed the fte|s of Selina, S e bent them to the place the company had quitted ; to the t]:ot on v»hich, had her artlefs heart known the want of privacy, it fhould pre- cifely have fought it. In the mofl ictircd part of this fituation, the Piince drew nigh to her. Her eyes met his as he approached ; a bluih rofe at the meeting, and fhe trem¬ blingly withdrew, and caft them towards the ground. The Prince bowed :—
« I had
« I had hoped,'* faid he, in the fofteft tone of voice, " to have the pleafure of that hand, for at leaft one fhort evening, that made me happy by beftowing on me the trophy of the morning." Sclina's agitation, for fome time, forbade an anfwer. She at length curtfied :— " Your Highnefs does me too much honour," flie articulated : u the lady who was awarded to you,Jgas far more fitting." " Never! never V% cried he; "one fo fweet, fo amiable, fo lovely as'vou, can never be excelled, cj*n never be beftowed on an equal I" As he fpoke this with all the fervor of romantic youth, a tranfient ghnce ftole from Selina's eye, and met in anfwer one of thc moft expreffive that newly-born affec¬ tion could dictate. Her lip faltered, but fhe uttered not a fyllable.-
c 2 « Might
" Might 1 not know," faid the Prince, taking with a tender grace her trembling, but unrdudant hand, " whofe image I am to ponder over with delight? might I not knoA- the name of hcr, in whom every grace appears fo fweet!y V * 4 Alas ! my Lord," replied Selina, " you tlfink not for who r e lake you intereft your¬ felf! I am a poor, and nearly friendlcfs girl;"—a tear ftole down hcr cheek;—" I have no father, no mother I I am un¬ thought of and dilregardcd ! I pray your Highnefs to leave me to my forrows, and be happy/' The nobieft feeling that ever Prince Edward's foul was fuficcptible of, glowed in his bofom at this inftant. The generofity of his heart turned indignantly from the felfifti confederations that aduate narrow minds; he preffed Selina's hand to his bofom, and in that moment firft fully loved hcr.
In
In the enthufiafm of his tendernefs and pity, he would have imparted the generous feelings of his breaft; but Selina was fenfible of the impropriety of her fituation, and, gently ftriving to withdraw her hand, moved as quickly as her trembling frame would fufFer, toward the fpot on which the larger part of the company was aflembled. " Oh ! will you leave me fo?" cried the Prince; (< will you leave me without a fmgle c.xpicffton of kindnefs to treafure in my memory ? leave me—never perhaps to meet me again I" " Alas 1 wherefore fhould I ftay ?" re¬ turned Selina : " your Highnefs cannot, furely, {loop even to wifh it ! Give not an hopelefs girl's mifery a new lhape, my Lord—Oh, fuffer me to return to Lady Iiford !" She withdrew the hand he had juft lifted to his lips, and had fcarcely done fo before the Prince was routed to recollection by c 3 the
thc return of Loid Roxborough, imciei wliofe L-mporary protcdion ihe wai placed by the order of the evening. The guflekfs Selina's face was covend with bluflies at ihe intcrpofition of his Loid'hip, and, with an aveited head, flic begeed, in confuted accents, to be coi.duded ti» Lady Ilford. Me b'j-wed acquiefeence. Thc Prince bo>ved too» and Ins eyes fpoke fuch an adieu, as conveyed a thoufand tender fentiments to Selina's heart. Lady Ilford was foon found, and the envied Lord Roxborough reftored to her his lovely charge, while the Prince flung himfelf on a feat, burled in medi¬ tation. He, however, foon rofe, and paced the room in an uncertain and hafty ftep. His arms were folded on his bofom, and his ejes were fixed on the ground— " Yes," faid he, and fighed, <( it muft be fo I Farewel, then, faireft, fweeteft of thy fex!" He fighed again; "yes, fare¬ wel
v.cl h*r ever!— That I cj.iA bvc you— that i couid adore you, wirneU the pang that t'.cn now r- t-.h- my hcvt.—That 1 do bve you better than myfelf, I wiil prove — aui hi-lantly prnc—by relinquilhiug the junhit Line ojII end oidy in your for- iejt of every iiope of happinefs, though in the g.atiiicatio.1 of my dearoft wifhes. Thi:, then, this momentary contemplation of thy charAib, anc—and—1 will think of thee no more 1" L; conformance to this generous refolu¬ tion, he directed his eyes to where Selina fat. She was fitting by tlie fide of Lady Pford, and holding one of her Ladyfhip's hands between both of her own, while her eyes were caft up to her face with the fiveet- eft expreffion of uncomplaining grief. The wariH'b of tlie room, together with the agitation fhe had juft experienced, threw a faint and delicate fiufh over her cheek. Pier gloves were taken off, and her robe was fuch as (hewed the beauty of her finely- c i turned
Mrncd arm.s io Ur above the 4-lhow. In »iancmg, fome lock*, of her hair ha-1 broker* tiom the netting intended to confine them, ;md they jilaycd in negligent waves on her bright forehead. " The laft!" fighed the Prince; "is tiiis the laft—laft look ? And fhall I never lee that face again ?—never exprefs the fondnefs of my heart ?—Ah no I for ever, then, farewel. Though loft to me, I may ftill conduce to thy happinefs—yes, I may guard thy fate—may fecure to thee wealth, and—give thee to another 1" At in noble minds, heroifm of principle will, for a time, triumph over and (mother the fiiggeftions of the deareft natural feel¬ ings, Prince Edward, with fomething like compofure, turned his lingering look from Selina, and walked towards the Queen, who was in converfation with fome ladies. As he approached, he perceived one of them to be Lady Catherine Aubrey. He wiftied to talk
talk to her Majefty; but the contraftthat Ladv Catherine prefented in his mmd to the lovely Sclinn, prevented his joining a party, in which he muft be under the necef¬ fity of paying exclulive attentions to her. Pie turned his fteps to another direction. A feat among fome perfons of quality for whom he had friendftiip, was offered to him. He accepted it, and ftrove to enter with accuftomed cheerfulnefs into their difcourfe; but his patience and vivacity were cxhaufted in a very few minutes, and he found it im¬ poffible to refrain from indulging himfelf in the obfervance of Selina, for the fliort fpace in which that prejudicial pleafure would be attainable. To the party which Selina was with, he perceived the Earl of Ilford approach, and fpeak with fuch familiarity, as argued near relationship. He then recollected hcr hav¬ ing named a Lady, of the fame title, as her protectrefs, and reflection convinced him that that Lady was the wife of thc Earl,
and that Selina, in all probability, formed a pait of his family. A momentary joy rofe in his bofom at this difcovery of Sdina s friends; but he checked it by afk ing himfelf, of what confequence it was to /dm f Alas ! the anfwer was eafy, of none! Pie was aroufed from his dream of con¬ templation by a meffage from the Queen. Her Majefty informed him (lie was about to leave the ball-room, and defired his attendance on Lady Catherine. The Prince, though it was what he fat in momentary expedation of, was petrified by this intel¬ ligence. Now, then, he was indeed to take a laft farewel of Selina ! At length, the unavoidable minute of feparation was arri¬ ved I A ray of greater fondnefs than he had yet f^lt* dilated his bofom as he glanced toward the fweet maid he was on thc point of foi faking; and a pang of anguifh diffi- parcd the heroifm he had fancied hirnfdf cajabU; of ading with.
The
TheOueen aro'e ; he forced himfelf to I ady CaTherine. They followed the fteps of the Queen. They paffed Selina, whofe e-es were fixed on the floor. The Prince threw toward her a laft glance of tendernefs, of pain, of low. He bowed his head, and would have fpoken if he could; but the fentence he ftrove to utter, died in a mur¬ mur on his lip. He had not time to attempt a more diftinct delivery. He ftill fought another view,—but Selina was loft in th/increafing buftie of the ball-room. As foon as he was relcafed from the trouble of paying languid attentions to Lady Aubrey, he retired to his chamber, to pon¬ der, in a waking dream, over a retrofpect of the day's events, and to heighten the inquie¬ tude he was already fubjeet to, by bringing to remembrance every look and every * er¬ ection of Selina.
c 6
CHAP.
—^»»©«>J<3©>I§®«>».
CHAP. ii.
xt r
ove js not to be reafonM down, or loft " In high ambition, and a thii ft of greatnefs j " *Th ihcoud life, it grows into the foot, " Warms every vein, and beals in every pulfe.- CATO, 1 O the epoch of htftory, fome of whofe events I am defcribing, every Englishman muft look with pleafure and pride. Never, indeed, did this ifland witnefs welfare more general. Under the guidance of one of the wifeft and bcft of Kings, war profpercd, and obtained foreign dread and fubmiffion, while commerce, fecurely protected, pro¬ vided internal plenty, even to abundance. The Scots whofe incurfions during pre¬ ceding
ceding and fucceeding reigns, were conti¬ nually .harafling the country, and defolating its produce, were, if not entirely fubjugated, fufficiently weakened to have their enmity rendered inconfequential, and their King- was held a prilbner by the Englifh Edward. The French were humbled beyond the molt fanguine expectations of the Britifh, nation. On the plains of Crdffy the prime of their Nobility were ftrewed, conquered, and life¬ lefs. All their provinces trembled at the apprehenfion of the Englifh fword, and feveral confeffed its fuperiorky, and became tributary to its fway. The fame of the Britifh arms was blazoned throughout all Europe, Every Court beheld their fuccefs with admiration, mingled with fear; and one oflered its chair of fupremacy to the Monarch who directed their efforts* The applauding nation looked with gra¬ titude to its King as the object to whofe prudence and valour it was to attribute its brilliant glory 5 while Edward, though he glowed
glowed with the moft ardent love of fame, knew greater pleafure in conducing to the happinefs of his people, than in adding fplendour to the reputation of his ou n name. The Noblemen who compo'cd his Court, were well worthy to be the afliftants of fuch a Sovereign. Military celebrity was not held more neceffary to their character, than domeftic virtues and habitual morality. In an age of chivalry we muft look for the exiftence of the nobieft heroifm. To con- ftitute a true Knight, valour was not more effential than piety and honour; on the practice of which will ever wait temperance, mi Id nefs, and affability. Happy on every fide, this period may indeed be denominated tne jubilee of Eng¬ land, in the contemplation of the latter of its paft adions, it beheld one fcene of tri¬ umphant fucceft. For the prefent moment it enjoyed a general truce, in the expiration of which its raifed imagination anticipated new conqueft and new glory. The dtared
of all its hopes was centered in the-Prince of Wales. Iu his godlike perfon, it has often been remarked, feemed comprifed the fortune of his country. In him it rofe from lethargic incrtion, in him it flourifhed be¬ yond the common boundary of national profperity; and in his fword the age main¬ tained its unrivalled fupremacy over every other in the annals of hiftory. No pen can be too lavifh in Prince Edward's praife. To the enthufiaftic emulation of the youth, he added the cool, determinate valour of tho veteran j and, luftrous as were his, military achievements, they were excelled by the invincible modefty of his nature, by his heroic forbearance, his noble humanity, his elevated fortitude in adverfity, his tran- ouil temperance in fuccefs. Who, without rapturous applaufe, could behold thc victor of fixteen kneel to his exulting father, and difclaim all perfonal merit ? Who, without aftoniihment and veneration, could behold the conqueror of 6 a King
a King refign to hi n his feat of honour— comfort him by mention of Fortune's infta¬ bility, and it rive to raife his dejedion by the.performance of every foothing office? Alexander wept, 'tis true, when he beheld the defolated fplendour ofDarius; but Prince Edward ftrove to conceal the glorioufnefs of his own condud, and to give luftre to that of his fallen adverfary. It required a degree more than the elevation of an Alexander to do this. Prince Edward did not fhine more in vi ar than in peace; and was tender in the obfervance of every natural tie, as he was ambitious to obtain, what was "with fo much juftice beftowed on him, the appellation of hero. Noble in mind, and beauteous in perfon, he was beloved, even to adoration? by all ranks of the people whofe government was his birth-right; and the good- of every rank was ftudied by him with fond zealouf¬ nefs ia return..
The
The impreffion made by Selina on the heart of the Prince, was not of a nature to foe eafily eradicated. On retiring from the ball-room, he had thrown himfelf on his bed, but fleep vifited not his eyes. Tiic figure of the fweet ftranger was perpetually prefent to his fancy. He faw a tear, an unheeded tear, ftealing down her lovely cheek. He viewed her as adefolate orphan, » unthought of, difregnrded !" He com¬ pared her to thofe on whom accident had beftowed rank and affluence; they were far beneath her in fweet nefs, in merit, but ob- fequioufnefs waited on every lip that ad¬ dreffed them ; their wants were ftudied, their few perfedions were praifed even to flattery, and a tender home fondled their youth : while (he, pofleffed, his warm imagi¬ nation was perfuaded, of even/ virtue that can adorn the mind, and of every charm that perfed lovelinefs can boaft, knew not the endearments of parental affedion, pafled a negleaed childhood, and fighed away the bloflbming of her beauties in painful obfeu-
rity, with no eye to adm'nc their expanfion, no friend to fouth tier forrows, no bofom to fet ftorc by hcr gentle affedions:—the pidure fuch a contud afforded, was irre¬ fiftible. The daughter of an Earl, fur¬ rounded by adoring friends, snd attended by tlx fplendour ofaflluei.ee, he could per¬ haps h we forgotten, though perfed in beauty as S^l.'na; but the "unvalued maid," the " negleded orphan/* had a claim on his remembrance that he found it impoflible to evade or overcome. He flew to the perpetual buftie of the gayeft circles of the Court. Fie mixed in every party whofe objed was pleafure; but, what formerly was amufement, .vas now fuch no longer. In every party he looked for Seiina; and every objed of elevated rank and general admiration that he be¬ held, he compared to her, and fighed to think equal fuperiority of ftation was not her fate. The refolution he had formed of ceafing to purfue where fcif-gtatifica- tioa
tion could but convey frefh mifery to thc object of his defires, made him exert the utmoft of his fortitude and perftverance ; but die more he endeavoured to forget, thc nearer to remembrance Sdina came; to\d the more fully he was convinced there was a-neceffity for never feeing her again, the more eager his wiih became to expe¬ rience that pleafure. Pie would fometimes afk himfelf, why he alone of all mankind fliould be pre¬ vented indulging his deareft affedions ? Why he fliould be forbid lifting Selina to the throne (he would fo gracefully adorn ? But, alas ! t Princes, he refleded, live not for themfelves. Born for the purpofe of con¬ ducing to the welfare of fociety at Urges they are to facrifice to its interefts the firft wiflies of the heart; in recompence for which they receive gaudy pageantry, and oppreflive ceremony. Full frequently he wiflied he had been born only to the undiftinguiihed exercife of arms j through that
that medium he might have attained fame, nnd no wide and painful difference would have exifted to prevent his laying his laurel at Selina's fcet, prefling her to his bofom, and devoting his life to her happinefs. At times, the paffion that had taken fuch deep root in his breaft, prevailed over every other fuggefiion, and he felt determined to gratify his wifh of becoming more Inti¬ mately acquainted with Selina, at the ex- pence even of every other hope of happi¬ nefs. After he had in fome meafure cooled on fuch a determination, the heroifm of his heart made him fhuddcr at the probable confequence of fuch a courfe of conduct. Could he, his conference afked him, be cruel enough to ftrive depriving defencelcfs love- linefs of its only poffeffion, the only little* comfort of its misfortunes—peace of mind ? Could lie be fo ungenerous as to endanger Sdina's tranquillity, merely that he might for a fliort period have the gratification of her fociety ? It did not require much deli¬ beration
beration to negative thefe queries. Rea¬ fon, indeed, unexceptionably commanded him to forbear teeking farther knowledge of the dangerous object of his meditati ^n : but, as paffion is too frequently reafon's fuperior, he very feidom felt inclined to comply vvith this command. While his bofom was fubjeet to fuch conflicts, the Kail of Ilford, with whofe fa'vilv Selina was w r hen the Prince taw her, attended Court on bufinefs relative vo the poft he held in the Army. The accidental prefcnce of the Nobleman in whole houfe Selina lived, and who, with the utmoft joy, would embrace the leaft hint of his wifhing to vifit his feat, and by that means accom¬ plifh the introduction that he imagined would afford him fuch delight, was a trial of the Prince's fortitude to which he, with juftice, feared himfelf inadequate. With¬ out being confeious of it, he treated the Earl with fingular diftinction. Lord Ilford, who could not avoid noticing it, felt him¬ felf
ft If flattered, and redoubled his attentions iu return. The Prince appeared pleafed by them, and, as a mark of the fincere refpect and gratitude the Earl felt, he requefted tiie honour of his Highuefs's company for a few weeks at Ilford Caftle. Let thofe who have loved, figure to their hcaruhe Prince's lleiingsj they were, fuch as few could have refilled ; he was not one of thofe few, and prepaiatious were accordingly made for the royal vifit. Thc Pr.n:c eujoyed all thc pleafure that we are fenfible oi oa breaking through a painful reftrainf ; bin, aftei a time, he alio felt that remorie we are fubjeet to when the icflraint vve have defpifed is impofed by the piece| u of recntudc. " What," refl..ctLd he, » have I done^ Alas! have i uo. acted in apportion to tbofe refolution, that even love's ielf prompted me to adhere tori have confented to vifit the fpot, which concern for the happinefs of
of her I love, fhould have prevented my approaching." Love i f s however, ferti'e in excufes for felf-indulgence. He ftrove to perfuade him'elf that he miftermed the fentiments of his breaft, and [\.VsC affection the name of frier.dfhip. He e..daa\omed to believe that he acted laudably in feeking Selina — " She," th.ou ; :ht he, "has fe.v friends ; flie deierves many; I add mjlelf toihe number fhe poffefles, and with lafuy to herfelf and me, 1 may impart io her the ciicuTi of toy hea- t;—afic in what way 'tis poffible I cau foflen the fbnows of her deftinv, and make my lieart happy by Iiftening to the artlefs effuiions oi her bofbrn." Tranlparent fophiftry is folid enoudi for love The Piince really iin::;>incd he might impart to Selina the fentiments of what he termed fwudftip, without endangering the further
further lofs of his own heart, and without endeavouring to win the affection of her's. At intervals he would reproach himfelf with weaknefs of refolve ; but as his fnatching the indulgence he had forbidden himfelf, was rendered early unavoidable by the promife he had given Lord Ilford, he hufhed every remon ft ranee of prudence, and fought only for arguments to juftify what he was about to do. In conformance to his promife, the Prince, on an appointed day, left Court with a fuitable retinue for the purpofe of vihting Ilford Caftle. Some fecret hopes, whofe actual exiftence in lus bofom he would icarcely allow himfelf to believe, raifed his fpirits co the gaiety of anticipation, la every object on the road he difcovered fomething interefting; and though he had never known a journey pioductive of fuch pleafurable fenfations, he imagined it to be of much more than Its real extent. The park gates of Ilford Caftle at length vvere announced,
announced, and the Princr's pulfo beat tu- inultuoufly at the thought of his being on the fpot frequented by Selina, As his eye caught, through any break in the trees, a burft of profpcot unufually beautiful, htf contemplated it with peculiar delight, from reflecting that Selina's e\e was accuftoired to note its charms; and a romantic path that led from the edge of the road to fome more remote part of the park, he pcriuaded himfelf was her chofen walk, and he pictured lo his fancy the blifs of ftrolling through iis receffes in her company. At the diftance of half a mile from the caftle, the road, formed by a double row of trees, ended ; and the caftle was ap¬ proached by one cut in the velvet fiward of the park. From this fpot, the houfe firft became fully perceptible, and prefented fuch an object as even exceeded the expectation formed by the fingular beauty and extent of the park. It was built on a trifling eminence, and as in thofe days largvnefs of vol. 1. d feite
fcitc was accounted the firft principle in magi iticent architecture, thc ground its tow^is rolled tlrir prodigious ba\s over, was immenfe. 71;e two chief Lees were coiupi <~d oi thiec iquare towers, frowning in mr. ( Ji\c ftqeiioiity on the old od;e:i ttee^, uho'c utmoft tops the ir fum.uits Jool.cd over; between wnich, ro!e piles of huildipg dhided into mere rooms of ftate th t .u it would feem pof! ble oe.^ L:. ily, on 1 o^c^cr noble a foundation, cou.d fmd r.vecifiiv iew At the back of the court- ^at^i, loimtd by the i^u-ve oioer of the dalle, f.O( d the Lmily cL'p^l j the auguft rnd foi cr fc'ioafnefi o^ who^c form to£>e- t\i*.r wiih its itch ami \c 5crabie \ane, addtd ti t 1 '^ j;ent - il dl .■ ^f tiic *w'ho!e. Round the f v .ic:ie d tne b.ulehig vr.s aii cm- br.Lihvl, ..: d kwiii. \Jy invuiLcrable wall, ii ; ach ^L t Je oi vMii^h \,a; * 1*-.C'd a w itch tower, 1octiur"t ! as to ln\^ m times of ddv<y i eo!) consumption \ uh the keep. A i"- '- had oh t in. Ii) i, f d^ed a.\th, c\v.n to ihe cutv.: v ...., neatly iti.[Oid.lej but, in
in the rdgn of Ed.vard the Firft, the thea Earl of Ilford had occafioned it to be drain¬ ed dry, and the drawbridge removed, and a permanent road fubftituted, as a token of the entire reftoration of domefbe peace and fecurity. The whole appearance of the caftle was magnificent as th^ li 113ft taftc of the age it owed it* be ng to } coulJ rear. From a diftance, the immenio Ipace it occu¬ pied, 2ml die number of apparently trpi- rate edifices it contained, made th; traveller imagine he beheld a fortified town ; but, on a nearer approach, its grandeur of ftrudure and evident iymmetry of parts, convinced him it could be intended only for one noble habitation, and he was left to wonder at the powerful wealth of ihe family that main¬ tained fo vaft a palace. As the Prince drew near io thc caftle gates, his bofom throbbed in delightful expectation; he looked back to the agony his heart had fnftained while he Imagined U probable he fhould never fee Sdina more; » 2 he
lie counted over every fhapc his melancholy had then taken ; and, in rontraft, drew in fancy the blufhing Selina forming one of the welcoming group that would receive him at the portal. He imagintd the timid faule of her lip, her downed! eves, her beauties heightened by modefty. He anti¬ cipated thc fliare flie would take in the pleafures that were to compliment his pre¬ fcnce at thc caftle. Pie prepared a thou¬ fand httle f|leeches to make to her; and, vvith the tcitilii) peculiar to a lover*s medi¬ tation, predicted what would be her anivvcrs. The caftle gates were thrown open on the approach of the Prince, and the Earl's family r] pcaicd in readinefs to pay honour to the arrivft of their illuftrious m Liter. Lord Ilford rcc.bed him with the hv adieu: affu- ra-cc of wvlc^rat, and the C amtefs curt- j; d her th, nks for tl e favotirdouc her and h v r family o\ the notice of fo riiftinguifhed a pe;J.,::age. Thc Prince bowed a return t; i'. 'e ,ai-.taiion^, a.id expi^iL-d thc par¬ ticular
ttcuiar pleafure he felt in this performance of his promifed \ifit. For every individual of the family he had a fmile; for the heart¬ felt welcome of each, a kind anfwer; but his eyes were eagcriy feeking for the chief object of his vifit—for Selina; and ah ! tluy fought in vain j her fweet fice was not feen to add grace to the hofpitality of h;s rereption ; no murmur from her lip realized the enchanting images of his day-dreams ! With the keen quicknefs of affection, he examined thi ough every part of the cattle family i and, when fully convinced of Selina's abfenee, found a want amidft (he numerous profefhons of joy and refpect that greeted his arrival, and became fubjeet to fome apprehenfions that lefiened the joy he had known in the moments of his entrance. Thc Earl's domeftics were ranged fo in the hall, as to form an avenue to the door through which the r6yal vifner w?s to pais ; and a band of martial inftruments was ftationed in a convenient part, which, on a v 3 lignal
tale, fignnl froai the F.u'l, plnyed, in its bold eft ftrain, the nmiic of a long cxpreflivc of King Edward^ wars, and the Prince's valour. Nothing could exceed the demonfirations of joy vlfihle in every individual of the raftle famil/. Each fcrving-man had a new drefs, and each ferving-woman expended the little favings of her itt vice in the pur- cha r c of finery, to chfp'ay in the picferxe of the mighty Prince, to whofe wonderful actions ihe had liftened with reverential aftoniihment, when fhe had not the fmalleft hope of ever beholding him. Different tables were appointed for the different de¬ grees of perfons who compofed the Prince's retinue. Thofe of rank were admitted to the fame table with their Royal Mafter; others had the beft of viands ferved in a room appropriated exclufively to their ufe ; while thofe ot the lower order of all, were configned to the hall in which the caftic fervants dined, who were determined to do honour to their Lord's ccn cquence, by dedicating the period of the Prince's viiit to
to perpetual feafting, which they were well able to do amidft the abundance and in¬ evitable irregularity that preva.lcd thruugh the houfe. Tn the room to which the Pnnce was con- djJced on his arrival, was a fidebxud covered with hams, loins of beef, and fuch light beverages, together with wines of many fort-, intended to furnifli tempotary re* frethment after the fatigue of traveling ; as thc dinner, on account of the uncertainty of hts Highncfs's arrival, required fome time to be got in readinefs. The Prince looked impatiently to the minute ol repairing to the dinner* table, at which he hoped Selina would at Laft join the reft of the famil v. He thouehl each itflbnl an age, in which he was beneath thq fame roof vv.th the fvvcet object of his con- ftVt rued- m ton, and yet debarred the pled tire offering and fpcaking to her.
D 4
The
Thc banquet was ferved, and wa^ the moft fplendid that hofpitality could pro¬ duce. The Prince's anxious eye wandered round the table in purfuit cf her, whom he found, with pain of heart, was not intended to be prefent at ir. His clifap- po: n t mc r.t was cxceffive ; c 11 agri n clou d ed hb features; defpondency threw a melan¬ choly gloom over his manner. He had no appetite, fcarcely fpirits fufficient to pay the lady of the feaft thofe trifling atten¬ tions that ordinary politenefs require?. The Eail could not but perceive the abftracted- refs of his Illuftrious gueft, and the dejec* tion of hi? mind 5 he, however, forbore to make enquiries of the caufe, but, fenfible that it could not exift in any deficiency of refped on his part, ftrove, by gay conver¬ fation, and the moft attentive obfervance, to divert the one, and remove the other. The banquet ended, thc Countefs re¬ tired, but not till after the Earl had lilted a brimming gobht to his lip, and once
once UtOie affured the Prince of the friend- hrjefa oi his difpofition toward him, and the hea'rinds of the welcome he bade him. Loid Idord took care to keep the wine in conflant circulation ; but it was neither in thc poaer oi that, nor the cheerful converts that tuiiounded him, to remove the anxiety of thc Prince : }Ct ftiU he hoped fome fuc¬ ceeding cnargc of entertainment might quiet his appiehcniions by introducing Selina. Toward evening, Loid Ilford's party jdned the ladies in the withdrawing-room oi the Countefs, Thia was the point to which the Prince had looked forward as ready his laft hope. PLrc, he imagined Selina, though for fome caufc (poffibly, alas I that ot being in the Eail's cftimation too i'leoniequcntial) (he had not been admitted to the firft, and therefore more formal dinner, would appear at leaft as the afliftiiig friend of Lady lltord. But his imagination bitterly decehed him. On adjourning to this room, he found all thc jj 5 ladies,
ladies who had been present at dinner/ feve¬ ral of whom were un que (1 ion ably very lovely, but he fjund no addition to the party,- he met not the fweet, the cxpreflivc eye of Seiina on bowing rout.d the room. A fenfation, veiy near defpair, chilled lus 1 cart, when the hope he had Indulged as a fdace for his firft difappotnt-i ent, fled. At one time, he feared Selina might not actually form a part ot the EailS family, in which cafe flie might be very far diftant ; and while he thought himfelf tra\ellin<v to meet happinefs in bung with hcr Lr a iew fhort thus, he mmht be leavimr tiic fpot where he flood the grcatefl chance cf feeing hei. But this fuimiie he abandoned, when he recollected her having afllrtecl her¬ felf pearly fricndleN, by veiy few regard¬ ed, and dcPhute of j a rental flielter. He ua a convinced t! at the Earl was her oiVy pic -lector, ar.d could but allow Lhe impio- Labihty of his iff rding her protection in any other fliape than as one of his family. The vv.akncfs of that ap[ rehenfion proved, he
he :*r'u.'d on the poffibility of her having on io \c occafion left the caftic previous to his airivin" at it. Then, he feared har h.ahh had filled ; perh ips, fo much fo, a, to reader h r unable to quit her cha n- ber. Thc nicdt agonizing fufpenfe tore his b-)fini as thi-* latter tear prevailed, Some- ti ue^ lie felt inclined to afic after her, but j.oiitic caiiTioiifucfi, the inevitable confe- q .er.ee ot thc paffion he was fubjed to, mule himtcfian to do what might give lyi/iv Utoid cduic to futpect, iu the flightcft decree, his attachment to Seiina. He once thoupht (f making hcr Lidyfrrip ids con- fidante, and begging her affifiai ce and (riendlhip; but he afked, of what he was io nuke hcr confidante ? —Not of a fervent paffion, not of an aident affection— for thefe he d:t\ n^t hlmtlt' acknowledge to ha\c influence over his bolcni ; and the cool and temperate friendfhip that he had determined alone to exercife toward Salina, requi'td no privacy, and might be prac¬ tiied without fuch afliftance. D 6 The
The painful apprehenfions his bolbm experienced, had more effed on account of thiir Ix-ing irexfecled. Ho; e, how- evtt, leielom entirely forlake? the victim ol n.i*.iortune, ;md lives to the laft beat of exigence, in t K e lover's breail :— fo the Prince fuind ibn.c rays of coniol ition In looking to the monow, and hoping the evolutions of a new day might difpel \\h anxieties, and give him, all that he fancied he wifhed for*, the aifur/nce that Selina was in ;he ca.Te, and in health.. A: he found the fupport of converfation,. while his mind was pert cubed aud apprc- henftve, o])prtffive to him, he lignitied a w.ih, at an tarly hour of the night, tc* rctiic. The* Karl, with true politenefs imm;d".arely bowed obedience to his incli- i.ahn; and, on the Piincc's riling, pre- pr.r.d to attend him to the iumptuous tha'iibcr intended tor hia ule.
5
Two
Two fervants, bearing wax tapers, pre¬ ceded the attentive Earl and his noble gueft along the vvide gallery that ficcd the ranoe tf principal bed-rooms. Tint def¬ tined for the Prince, was at the upper end of the gallery, and was as well worthy oi its royal tenant as zealous endeavours and baronial wealth could render it. It was entered through an antique chamber with beds for two of his Highnefs's chief at¬ tendants. Us bed was of crimfon velvet, ed->cd with gold ; the cornice richly gilt, and fupporting, on each fide, three large clliich Luthcis, with ICH DIES on a Libel, in letteis compoied of peail The room, magnificently fpacious, was hung with tapdlry, whole figures*, rcprdentug the Liftoiy of Alexander the Gteat, had thdr liidits worked in gold, and their ihadows in fiik. Over the chimney was the only bieak in the hiftory the tape (try ex- piefled, and there were pidurcd the glories of the rifing fun. The chairs were crimfon, laced
laced vvith go'd; and the embroidery that edged the window curtains, beautifully fine, and rendered more eftimabie by being the work of thc Counter's own hand. The Prince expreffed, in the moft flatter¬ ing terms, his admiration ot the munifi¬ cence, and approbation ot the hofpitality of the Etil ; who hiving conducted him to the chamber door, bo.ved, and vriihed him " a night of lefrelhing reft." *« Ah! my Loid," faid thc P.ince, fmiling through a figh, " vou and 1 have flept for many an hour in a had camp- bed, on Ficnch plains j it would be won- deiful indeed if I (hcukl not be able to repofe on one io foU and inviting as this." However wonderful it might appear, fuch was, however, the cafe—it was, in fact, long before thc Pnnce endeavoured to
to obtain that fweet " reftorer of nature, balmy flcep," though he had di unified from attendance on him the two Efquires of honour, who were appointed to wait his wifhes, and fleep in the room that guarded his. When he fell into a fhort ft urn her, the uneafy ftate of his mind produced confufed and poinllefs dreams, from which he flatted to equally per- tuibed meditation.
\
CHAP*
—roce^l^l^asot*—
CHAP. III. * f What horrible fancy's ttiib f SHAKESPhARE. J. HE Prince arofe at an early hour of the next morning. The fun caft, through thc opening bct\ een the window curtains, a gay and exhilarating ray. Thc Prince drew afide the curtain, and opened thc cabment of the* window, to be fully per¬ ceptible of thc fweets of the morning. The fcene he beheld was enchanting to the extreme. His window commanded a view of thc moft picturefque part of the exten¬ five and beautiful park that furrounded Ilford Caftle, The invigorating beams of thc
thc early fun invited every animal of day to commence its thoughtlefs round of gam¬ bol, called every chirping bird to wing its way in fearlefs joy. The iky was cloud- lefs. Nought difturbed the univerfal tran¬ quillity but the morning breeze, that fwept, in tremulous murmurs, the tall tree-tops, the fong of the diftant labourer, and the low of the herds far-off. The caftle fer¬ vants were juft rifing; at intervals, the noife made by their opening the heavy doors, broke on the ferenity of the fcenc ; aud then the echo along the caftle-walls, of inftru&ions given by the tafk-mafters to the lower ferving-men, or the gay whiftle of the menial, happy in ignorance of pain. To the true lover, fcenes of beauty in which Nature's felf appears, are unavoidably grateful. The Prince liftened in penfive pleafure to the foft founds that (warn on the bofom of the morning, and contem¬ plated the peaceful objects that furrounded
hi;n vvith delight, whofe fulnefs lie had never knoAn before. " What ecftacy," thought he, « fhould I enjoy in beholding fuch a fcene as this with Selina ! What joy to po'nt out to her the thoufand charms that burft on the figat with the opening of day ! to liften to herremaiks! to catch the fentence cf intelligence from her lips! to hear the vv-oids, to fee the look of fondnefs, of love, breaking fearleffiy from her heart! Oh joy, too great to be realized I—joy, never to be known by me !" A long fieric; of mournful reftedions fuc¬ ceeded this ideal view of happinefs, At length he ftarted up, and gave vent to a deep and heavy figh. As the attendants on his perfon remained perfedly quiet, he fup¬ pofed they were not yet awake ; and, as he preferred loiitude to th^ iociuy they could affoid, he determined to leave thc length of their Rpo.e to the wiflies of Nature. Oa tho
the fide of the room oppofitc to the aiti* chamber in which they flept, was a do'ier, in which the Earl had informed him he would find every rcquifite to the performance of the morning's avocations. He now entered it. It was fpafious, and elegantly furnilhed. Thofe articles that were necef¬ fary to a dreffing-room, were abundantly ferved, and in uniform readinefs. The ex¬ treme ncatnefs of every thing about it, made thc Prince conceive an inftant attachment to this room. A beautiful defk, made of the fineft wood, and ev.ry material for writing, ftood by its window, and many books,were on flielves covered with velvet, Thewindow-cuitain correfponded with that of thc bed-room, but the hangings were different. They were compofed of needle* work, fo exquifitcly fhadowed, as implied the artift either having made much pro¬ ficiency in drawing, or being poffefled of much natural genius and delicacy of tafte. The iubject was, on thc piincipal fide, Mars being- disarmed by a fmiling train of little Cupids,
Cupids, fome of whom were unlacing his ponderous fword, fome conveying away and admiring his plumed helmet, and others ftripping off his armlets, while one was bufy in removing his breaft-plate, to give fair play to an arch companion, who ftoxl with his bow ready drawn to take aim at thc vanquished victor's heart. The other fides \vere chiefly flowers, but thrown together with more eafe and elegance of judgment than was cuftomary to the defign of the age. It ftruck the Prince's imagination, that no hand could have wrought this fo taftefuliybutSdina's. He gazed on it till he perfuaded liimfelf it could be no other- wife, and then the room became fo much endeared to him, that it feemed a little paradife, while the more magnificent one adjoining appeared cold and comfortlefs. He was aroufed from the depth of rerlec* tion into which he had fallen, by the en¬ trance of the gentlemen who waited on his perfon. He dcchncd being a.liilcd by them
them in any preparations'for the day, but liftened with apparent pleafure to their praifes of the feat he had chofen to vifit. Lord Iiferd ihortly came to pay ihi>, compliments of the new day, and enquire after his gueft's health, and manner of paffing the night. The Prince profeffed- ha\hn* flept well, and, with a fmiling coun- tenance, accompanied his entertainer to the hie^Lfiifting-room. The Ccuntefs was there in rcadinels to receive him, and breakfaft was fpread in an unexcelled il\ le of fplendour. The tabic was nearly the length of the room, a*id was covered with a profufion of tongues, cold chicken, taltcd iilh, hung beef, brawn, eggs, butter, and every fort of fruit s fpread in a maffivc and highly- wrought fervice of plate; together with ale, beer, wines, and clotted cream in huge goblets of ftlvcr, each boring tlie arms and device of the houfe of Ilford. Twenty fcrving-men attended the breakfaft table, clad in rich attire, and mufic was placed in different
diflcrent patts of the park, to call the echoes froiii the neighbouring >allies, that nothing might be wanting to complete the character of the icene. Tlie Prince was feated at the rightdiand of thc Countefs, and ocry thin^ that fubfervient iricndihip cou'd deviie to ' render h.m ialisfadion, was out in pradicc by her. He was far from infenfible to thefe kind efforts of his amiable hoftefs, and added lo that ingenuous politenefs of de¬ meanor that was natural to him, a diftin- guifiring, yet refpedful familiarity in his bdiawour to her. When breakfaft was concluded, the Earl propofed fnewing to the Prince what he cftecmui moft worthy of ids notice in the caftle and park; to which proportion the Prince afleuted with much picafurc. Such a mode of employing the day was indeed thc only one in which hL mind could lie at all interefted. In the cour'e of the furvey, he trufted fomething would occur to unfold to hitn the fituation of Selina, concerning whofe
whole abfenee his apprehenfions became houily more tormenting. 13/e.akfift had pafled without hcr appearance. The jwly for the p-uk v/as fo-:nd ; and flie was not of it. His anxkny to know win ther fhc was, in fad, in thecdlk, and withheld from his fight, or ab'eni fio 11 it on tome vifit de- ftrudhe of his ui(he% was ncariv iniup- portab'e ; and ihould this f.'iy pffs without giving cciljmty to his conjecture^ cr bring¬ ing Sehna to his p'-efence, he determined to wave all caution, and make ionic enquiries concerning her, ether of Lady fiord hcr- (eh, or i'ldlrcdly of one or other of the inferior inhabiuu Is of the catba. I-Ij:.eo were prepa-ed for thc Prince, the Eari, and t 1 cir attendants. The CVuntds and htr party of ladies, proceeded on their circuit of the park in newly-built carriages, which, thougu hcadly conftrudtd, were always ufed by her when flie made that excurfion. IIIokI Paik had received from Nature eveiy advantage that flic can beftow, to
to which were added ali thc hlandiihrncnts that art can invent, and liberality put in execution. Cut from the level of a vaft fpace of fertile ground, its defigner had his choice of natural charms, and fo many perfections made to his hand, that he could not fail of acquiring reputation by his per¬ formance. Awhi^it fpread itsfatin bofom over a level fpace, mtedperfed with clumps of pine-trees, fo artfully difpofed as to produce a powerful effect, without feeming even io conduce to one ; then rofe in gentle undulations to a protecting ridge of hills over which was planted a maze of various and beautiful fhrubs, concealing the vel- vctty v erdurc, except where a wide and binding foot-path led to their fummit. At the foot of thefe hills was a large, tranlparent fhcet of water, which ended as their ex¬ treme fank to the level of the plain. On another fide, the view from the park, after reaching a certain point, was bound- lefs j and this part the Earl had chofen to make
make plantations in, which afforded an ornamental objed from the caftle-windows, furnilhed faplings for the purpofe of re¬ pairing the devaftations of time in the park fhrubberies, and of making any addition ta their form that fancy might dictate. The Knights left their horfes, and the ladies thdr carriages, to i\fcend a fmall hill, to the *top of which a foot-path wound through a rich covering of.fhrubs, among which the mcuT fragrant flowers were trained, diffuling, as their luxuriant folds expanded, a ftream of delicious odours. On thc fa,:> ink, when gained, a rural temple prefented iifdf, on a table in which the provident Karl had caufed to be fpread fruits and otiicr light refrethments. From the open windows of the temple, a profped roman- tidy fweet courted thc attention. Ou each fide, the eye beheld fo many beauties, that it knew not where to reft and fix its warmeft admiration. At one point the caftic, towering in fublime grandeur above
the lurrounding face of Nature, was dif¬ covered i its Gothic face, enlivened by the cheerful light of morning, and its giltvams glittering in the fun-lxams. At another, a group of verdant and majeflx lull?, on whofe fides fometimes appeared the rugged front of an artificial cave : then a tirck mantle u( tall and embowering trees whicli fhehul off on each fide, to admit the im- pt.tuous courfe cf a weighty fill of water, whofe fparkling defcent formed a delightful object to the eye, and whofe noiie, on attaining the ftream of the val ] ey, fottcned hy dillancc, an enchanting one to the car. Between theie hills, the eye caught a parthd view of the amazing ftrereh of landfcape that their obtrufive rife fiiut fiom general light; and on the moflconfpicuous part of each was placed a little wooden fpire, or artificial clump of ruins, to add to the romance of the fcenc, and afford the raifed imagination a fubjeet of poetical thought.
Tn
In the temple, fo fweetly fituated, the hidies took fruit and weakened wine; while thc Prince, and confequently the other fCnights, infifted on waiting their pleafure, and fcrving their wifhes. Little oceafional gallantries pafled, and the higheft mirth and good humour prevailed ; but every pleafure in which Selina did not participate, gave new caufe for the Prince to make painful relledi jus, " What happinefs," he mournfully thought, il would it be to lean overS.lhi.fi chair, as he then did over that of the Coun¬ tefs ; to whifper lhe foft fentiments of hi* heart; to fee her fmile, and to know flie had not a with unregarded 1 To how many points of the fpot they took rdidhmeni on, could he lead hcr, and remark to hoi the romantic beauties it commanded a pro¬ fpect of! Flow much couid he f\y, and how fondly could he attend to hcr aiU'wei-s^
£ Z
\\ Ink-
While his mind was occupied by fuch reflcdions, the cheerfulnefs he had before for an inftant been fubjed to, fled irom his heart ; and the depreffion of fpirits that fucceeded, faddened every exprefiive feature of his face. The Countefs, ever alive to the wiflies of her gueft, with much concern remarked to him his apparent uneafinefs. The Prince was embarraffed by the obfer¬ vation, and perceived the neceffity there was for his at leaft preferving the counte¬ nance of eafe ai,d fatisfadion. The flight repaft concluded, the party left thc temple, and paffing through a plant¬ ation at the fouthern extreme of the park, regained, much pleafed with their fmall excurfion, and the ftrangeTs furprifed and charmed by the extent and beauty of the Earl's park, the caftle, whofe portals were thrown open, at their approach, to receive them.
Lord
Lord Ilford now, attended by the prin¬ cipal officers of his houfehold, prepared to conduct his illuftrious gueft round the chief parts of his caftle. On gaining the top of the great flairs, was entered the fuite of ftate rooms, which occupied all thc tier of building between the north and fouth lowers. The roon.s were fpacious even to ufelefthefs ; their ceilings lofty in pro¬ portion. The wa'hifcotiag was ol the firmeft oak, varnilhcd to reflective bright¬ nefs. A voice, at one end of the principal room, could Icarcely be heard at the other; and the heavy afpect of the oake# wainfcot, gave to it fo much gloom of grandeur, that the light, received at the arched windows, which, though large, were leffened in utility by the numerous ftone curves that ornamented them, was fcarcely fufficient to render an object dis¬ cernible at the room's oppofite fide. This latler particular would have been a material inconvenience as evening approached, had not the Ivarl, when he entertained a party e 3 fufficiently
fufficiently large to occafion his ufing the principal room, (but out, without ceremony, the light of day as foon as it began to dccrcafe 3 and feveral large chandeliers fufpended from the ceiling, and many fiber iconces faftened to the wainfcot, formed a powerful, if not an ample fubftitute for thc finking beams of the fun. At each end was a tire-place fufficiently vvide, had it been ot another conftruction, to roatl an ox, v.hich had not undergone thc cfctnony of disjunction. In thefe receffes were kept* at Chriftmas-tide, one continual blr/ic ; ior*. ever fince the caftle had been htrU, it had been cuftomary with its Lord tctfkeop at that chill feafon, open houfe ; and ali per¬ fons of diftinction in its vicinity, each of whom was inferior in confequence to the Earl of Ilford, made a practice of dedicating one or other of the days of annual feftivity to the purpofe of joining the caftle merri¬ ment. On thefe, and indeed all other occa¬ sions, in which a large company was prefent, A circular table (the which were fafhionablc at
a£ that day, in confequence of King Edward having caufed one to be fixed at Windfor) was placed in the centre of the room, round which thc feftive perfons aflembled, and knew every pleafure that hofpitable abun¬ dance could afford. The Prince was aftonifhed at the vaft magnitude of the rooms on this floor, aid expreffed thc higheft admiration of the fuitablenefs and elegance of the furniture. Every part of it, indeed, was made to accord with the mafculine noblenefs of the building. The chairs were maffive walnut, richly wrought; the feats of them embroi¬ dery of variegated colours, executed in the Countcfs's o.vn family; and one, higher in thc back, and more curioufly carved than the others, was intended for the head of the table, and had accordingly the arms of Iiford introduced in the carving. In each corner of the room was a tripod ftand, bearing a branch of lights. In thc panneU of the wainfc / ng were crofted lances, bound e 4 together
together by a wreath of laurel, and various other chivalric devices; and flout oaken fide-boards groaned beneath the heavy fer¬ vice of family plate. On leaving this, another fuitc of rooms was entered, fecondarjr in confequence, but very trillingly inferior either in fu.c ,or elegance. The rooms on this floor were hung with tapeftry, well executed, and re- picfenting the ftory of Jofeph and his Ikethren, the pre fumed appearance of the world on the firft day, and feveral parts of the hiftory of Sifera, as it ftands in Judges. After paffing through thefe, and moft of the bed-rooms, none of which, though all were fpacious, and richly furnilhed, could be compared to that appropriated to the ufe of the Prince; the Earl led to the northern tower, the two firft floors of which he ufed as an armory. Helmets, brcaft- plates, armlets, gauntlets, and every other pari; of armour neceflary to complete coats cf
of mail, were ranged in claffes on the walls, and enough offenfive arms to equip fifteen hundred men. The Prince was delighted to enthufiafm by the unexpedcd appearance of thefe rooms. He unfheathed a fword, and his eyes fparkled vivacioufly as the fun- bcams glittered along the blade, on his flightly waving it before he returned it to the fcabbard. He took down the fhieid belonging to it; its device was a blooming rofe, proteded from every adverfe biaft by the enfolding branches of a thorny fhrub ; f he motto— <( With Gwi' 1 ! good jrrace, this fword nnd arm *' Shall £iiard. itb love fiom cv sy hsrtn." " Ah," faid thc Prince to himfelf, " all, all but I, may boaft the attachment of their heart, and glory in aflcrting thc caufe of its objed. I, alone, muft let the paflion of my bofom wear away rny youth in fecret. I, only, who am born to command the lives of millions, muft be denied thc little pri- e 5 vilegc
vilegc of folding to my breaft thc ftveet maid of my affection, and imparting the fond fenfations that rife tumultuoufty to meet her touch ! Oh ! would to Heaven I had been born the fon of one of thofe I am deftined to rule over! Then might I have boafted myfelf this dear maid's Knight I then might I have charged my foes with her name for thc word of onfqt. For hcr might I have conquered; at hcr fcet have lain the trophies of victory, and been blcffcd I" * From the upper and lower armories, thc Prince was conducted to a watch-room, which occupied the top floor of thc tower. As this room ftood higher than any other in the caftle, the Earl wiflied his Highnefs to take from thence a general view of the furrounding country. The profpect on every fide was in truth moft charming. ( ;ne> was perceived all the beauties ol the park, backed by high hills, whofe fum- mils, dreffed in plumes of the richer! trees, i were
were loft in the grey clouds of the lower fky. Th.rough the break of a thick copfc on the right, was perceptible a large vil¬ lage, dependant on the owner of the caftle; and, to the left, the eye wandered over an immeafurable tract, whofe view was limited only by the horizon, burying its diftar.t ' parts in confufed obfcurity. The day was ferene; the fun fhonc brightly ; many a bird warbled its cheering for g amid the blcflings tlut Nature impar¬ tially fhed. The Prince felt a pleafmg melancholy ftcal over his foul. His mind was expanded by the fcene, and he was fufceptible of a penfive foftnefs of temper, that he knew not then to afcribe to newly- felt love. He endeavoured to trace the particular beauties of the plain he conteni- platcci; but his thinking powers were ab¬ forbcd in the exceflive tendernefs of feeling he was fubjeft to; and though he inhaled the fweeteft pleafure fiom thc objeets tliaL furrounded him, he ga/.cd fcarcely con- k 6 fuous
fcious of their exiftence. Pie would wil¬ lingly have remained where he was through¬ out the " live-long clay." Society feemed a trouble to him. He was enamoured of his own refttaions : though they were ftr- rowful, ftill they were fweet—for Sdina was the objea they dwelt on. His feelings were in that raifed ftate that inevitably, in a lover's bofom, produces poetry; but he was prevented profiting by fuch a tendency by the watchful interference of the Earl, who begged his notice of an Abbey fpirc that burft from a clump of trees, at a con¬ fiderable diftance. When once his reflec¬ tions were broken on, they became painful to him, and he rejoiced on the Earl motion¬ ing to the door. On defcend ing from the tower, they pro¬ ceeded to the piaure gallery, which the Karl (hewed laft, as being the greater! curiofity. If the Prince were aftonifhed at the magnitude of many of the rooms, he was no lefs fo at thc furprifing iengtii of this
this gallery; it extended from one extreme tower to the other, by that means poflefling, in length, the whole width of the caftle front. Hie pidures were numerous and rare ; many of them family portraits, but a confiderable number on ancient, poetical, and hiftorical fubjeds. Thc Earl pointed out to his royal vifiter thofe pieces that he ' imagined moft worthy of his obfervation. Thc natural tafte of the Prince rendered fuch afliftance nearly unneceffary : though he was not pofTeffed of improved fkill, his quick difcernment rarely committed an en or of judgment. After examining the pieces on foreign fubjeds, the Kail named thc moft eftimabie of the fami'/ pld.res. lhe Piince paid the ncccftarv compliment of attending ve- Ijjedfully to the account of them, and when he perceived thc portrait cf the King, his father, placed in the moft confpicuous part, as being confeffedly the fource and protector of the family's honours, he cxprcflcd in warm
warm terms his approbation of the Earl's attachment. At thz upper end of the gallery were fome full-length portraits, to thc examination of which the party next moved. Many of them were warriors of Edward thc FirftN time, with whofe names the Prince was familiar, and whole refem-- blance he beheld with reverence and emu¬ lation. Tn the lower tier of pictures were thofe cf tA'o ladies:—in one of them the Prince recognized his amiable hoftefs; and while he acknowledged the juftnefs of the delineation; he paid her thofe praifes that he was fenfible were her due. His eye w r as attracted by the foftneis of drapery, and neat elegance of drefs vifible in the other female portrait. There was fomething inte¬ refting to his feelings in* the picture, though he knew not what. He looked more atten¬ tively on its face. His eye was rivetted to the features. They were lovelinefs itfelf. « Affurediy/' &W be, « I recollect."
Ar
At that inftant a frefh glance explained to him hh emotion ;—he was looking on the very features of Seiina! Thc blood thrilled in his veins as the conviction became clear to his mind, and his lip trembled with an inexpreffible fenfation. He gazed on thc object of his emotion with thc fondnefs of ido'atiy. It feemed a proof of the vicinity of Sehna, that eafed his heart, and delighted hh imagination. The portrait did indeed bear to Selina a ftrong affinity of countenance, but there was an air of gaynefs and vivacity through¬ out the features that ihe did not poffefs. Cheerfulnefs and happinefs feemed to have occupied thc bofom of the fair origi¬ nal. A fmile played on her lip, joy dwelt in thc bright glance of hcr eye, health fparklcd in her cheek, and her whole form appeared animated by contented fprightlinefs of heart. In thefe particulars alone, except that of being fome years older, did (he differ in appcaiance from Se'ina,
Selina, in whofe foft blue eyes was fixed mild and iilent fonow, and on whofe cheek the eariy blufh of health was lowered by continual grief. After the firft fenfations of pleafure he e.oericnced in contemplating the likenefs of that ftveet form that had fo often vifited his dream?, it ftruck him that this was the only moment to gain information concern¬ ing Seiina, without appearing diredly to feek it. He afked the Earl " whofe portrait he beheld r" Lord Ilford feemed fomewhat embar* railed at the queftion. ** That/' replied he, " that your High- neb is looking on, h the portrait of a for* mer Countefs of Ilford. Your Highnefs remembers, I doubt not—moft men do rer member—the calamities that befel a certain bianch that once bore the title of Ilford ?— I will not icmind you o( them. In fome inftances,
inftances, forgetfulnefs is kindnefs. 'Tis a pity, a wondrous pity! There's beauty there I" The Earl fighed. " Your Highnefs has feidom feen a more lovely face, I may affnm, than that r" " Never 1" exclaimed thc Prince, with warmth, " except------" He recollected himfelf, and paufed. The Earl waited his fiaifhing the fentence— «' Except," faid he, " when I beheld tlie amiable figure that* graces thc companion to this choice piece—tlie refemblance of her who I hope will long bear the title of Lady Ilford." Thc Prince had perceive 1 her Ladyfhip advancing, and, as he ceafsd to (peak, he turned and bowed on her hand. Tlie Counted fmiled for a moment at thc com¬ pliment,
pliment, but looked mournfully to tiic portrait that gave rife to it. The tendereib grief fwam in her eye. "Ahl" faid fhe, ' f your HighncG would give me much more pleafure in exprefling the fincere fentiment of your opinion. I beg you to believe that I am not weak enough to imagine tny few merits capable of compare with the ineftimable ones long,. long ago poffefled by thc dear faint whole image that is. Praife, my Lord, thc angel virtues that fhine through thofe features, and learn to find by admiration the way to my heart." The Prince had fo infeparably linked Selina's concerns with hts own, and both with thofe of this picture, that he felt wa.inly grateful for this effufion of regret and affection. " The fair being," faid he, " who in¬ deed appears to be of a fuperior race of mortals,
mortals, did not, ever, I ara taught to- underftand, retain that fmile of peaceful¬ nefs. Alas ! even her lovelinefs did not exempt her from misfortune and diftrefs 1" "Ah, no!'* returned the Countefs, wiping away a tear, " indeed it did not I — She was, of all earthly angels, the moft un¬ fortunate—the moft bitterly fo I" The Prince's bofom heaved with various emotiono. He burnt to kno^v every parti¬ cular of her fate j yet with that wary cauti- oufnefs that love had taught him, he dreaded awakening the Earl's fufpicion of the probable intercft he took in what con¬ cerned hcr; for he felt frefh reafon, from what he had juft heard, to believe that her misfortunes gave caufe to thofe of his orphan Selina. Thc Countefs would, pof¬ fibly, have fatisfied moft of his wiflies to obtain information on this head, as fhe be¬ gan to fpeak in an explanatory way, when Lord Ilford interrupted her by faying— « rt
i( It is, indeed, a di final tale; 'tis to be lamented that Vengeance cannot be taken on the guilty, without cruthir.g thc fortunes of the inn. cent. However, vvith his High¬ nefs *s l'-ave, we will wave a topic that can be produdive only of painful fenfations, and repair eirher to the gardens, or the collation that is to i recede dinner." Thc apprehenfivenefs of the Prince pre¬ vented his fignify ing a wiih to the contrary, and he led, with reluctant fteps, the Count¬ efs from the gallery. He caft his eyes back before he entirely quitted it, and took ano¬ ther view of the pidure. He feemed part¬ ing from the only objed that fpoke of what was neareft to his heait, and held the neigh¬ bourhood of it in fuch veneration, that there he fancied he could in fome fhape folace himicif for the want of Selina's prefence, or, almoft imagine he was holding converfe with her, while in the midft of what he was perfuaded flie was herfelf clofely attached Thc
The caftle hall was of fuch dimenfions, that a modern houfe might, with much facility, be put within its compaft. Over the chimney was placed the trophy of fome hardly-earned day's fport, a branching pair of (tag's horns. In the corner, and on fuitable parts of the fide 5 , were many of the rough, but bloodily-effective weapons ufed by the Ancient Britons; and benches were placed by fide-tables, running to the whole length of the hnIL Here, on days of feftivity, thc Earl's vafials had their feaft fpread ; and frequently, in the height of fummer, the Earl himfelf, his family, and guefts, preferred, on account of the r- frefil¬ ing coolnefs arilhig from the fpaeiojfncfs of ■its conftruction, and thti ciiiU'icfi of its Mofaic paving, the hall to any otherdiuner- room in thc caftle. Here a cold collation was fpread, in con¬ formity to thc cuftom of the time ; but thc Prince excufed himfelf trom partatdng of it, and embraced the Earl's offer cf walking away
away the period intervening between that and dinner, in the gardens. After paffing through the court-yard* -and an arched avenue in the fouthern fide of the caftle, the pleafure-garclen and fhrub- bery were entered through-an enriched gateway. The garden was furrounded by a ftone wall, of fo long ftanding, that the ivy wound its way along its fides, and the mois cncrufted its top. Tall and thick trees protected it from any unkind winter's wind, and the afpect of its principal parts was fuch as rendered it liable to all the alum¬ ina fun of furnmer. Thc Prince was loft in thought, but endeavoured to talk with the appearance of eafe and gaiety, and to pafs thofe little gallantries that give life and elegance to parties in which ladies bear a Iharc. The Earl and Countels vvere inde¬ fatigable in their attentions to him. No¬ thing could exceed the zealoufnefs of their efforts to afford him pleafure. The Prince paid every refpect to their hofpitality, and found
found lefs difficulty in doing fo y as his affections were really interefted by their attempts to give him fatisfadion. For Lady Ilford, he felt more than a common attachment, as he was perfuaded ftie muft; be the friend—perhaps the only friend-— of Selina; and for the Earl, who had ferved *under him during his firft and glorious campaign in France, he was fenfible of ■fmcere friendfhip. Both his entertainers, indeed, merited his approbation. Lady Ilford was one of the moft amiable of women. Defcended from a long line of noble anceftors, fhc in¬ herited every virtue that primitive Nobility may be fuppofed to have pefteffed. Kind, fond, endearing, good, fhe was at once the delight of her family, and thc idol of the dependant and abject peafantry ; tender in friendfhip, fteady in virtue, and uniform in piety.
The
The Earl was a man to whom fociety was confiderably indebted. His blood was noble, though, on account of his being a younger fon, he was born to the pofleflion of fmall fortune, and no title but that of unitained progeniture. He acquitted him¬ felf with fuch honour in the early part of the illuftrious Edward's reign, that his King, in proof of his high affection and approbation, beftowed on him the Earldom of Ilford, which had lately returned to the crowm. This gift was the more eftimabie, on account of the lady whom he had mar¬ ried fome years before, having brought him a fon, in whom he viewed the traniinittor of his name to pofterity, and pleafed his imagination over the thought of being the founder of a houfe. He acceded to his title with the efteem and praile of many. The public voice fpoke well of him, and his friends were as numerous as thofe of a man of rifing for¬ tune generally are. In friendftiip, he was warm
warm to exccfs; in enmity, the fame. He, indeed 5 ever aded rather in obedience to the impulfe of feeling, than to an uniform fyftem of reditude-; but, as thc feelings his bofom beat with were generally good, the tenor of his conclud was fuch as benefited fociety, and procured efteem and applaufe for himfelf. No man had a greater love of virtue than he, and no man's boiom was fubjed to more grateful emotions on the performance of a virtuous adion. He had married the Countefs, in confequence of the moft violent love. That violent paffions cannot flow regularly, is known to an adage; but though the Countefs loft, by the fatisfadion of the" Eirl's'deiires, that warmth of attachment with which he had firft woo'd, flie maintained a confequence in his bofom by the charms of her demea¬ nor ; and the Earl's natural fenfc of honour forbade his conduding hirnfdf toward hei in any other way, than that prelcribed by the real efteem he had for hcr charader. The forrows of the tributary many, who vol. 1. f lived
lived in the vicinity of his caftle, were never prefented to him in vain; for his heart could feel with acutenefs, though, to fay truth, he was fonder of the theory of feeling than the practice* and could even wipe away a tear over a poetical account of mifery, while, though he relieved its wretch¬ ednefs, becaufe it would have given him pain to do otherwife, he could behold it, in its real ftate without experiencing the like emotion. Plis valour was tried, and his prudence (et fome (lore by ; though the impetuofity of his dif ofition often got the better of the coolnefs this dictated. He poflfeffed much pride, but an artificial fua¬ vity of manners made it very rarely per¬ ceptible. His temper was eafily varied, but naturally good. The greatnefs of his power within the immediate precinct of his Earldom, rendered his will partially defpotic 5 but he was, in very few inftances, known to exercife it prejudicially, and his company was courted by thofe on whom his power had no influence. Lord
Lord Defmond, the only fon of the Eirl of Ilford, was not more than two-and-twenty years old. He inherited his father's Aanml: of affections, without a wifli to reflraiu their dictates $ and his pride, without any of his politenefs to conceal it. But, though haughty to inferiority, Lord Defmond couid bow and fmile to thofe fuperiors from who:u he expected advantage j and as the Princ : ftood precifely in that fituation, he paid the moft affiduous court to him. Though the heart of the Prince was open as day, his difcernment was quick, and his penetration ftrong. It may be, that in the inftance of this young Lord, an unacknow¬ ledged jealoufy induced him to decide, rather than the conviction of judgment; but, be it how it would, he could not bring his mind to look with friendfhip on htm. When he considered how many op¬ portunities Lord Defmond had poffibly enjoyed, of ftriving to gain the heart of Selina, he feared it could be no otherwif F W tha .
than that he had been too fuccefsfuh He looked on his perfon; it was indubitably fine; but his foul fickened to allow it fo. He once ftooped to a comparifon ; but ail the Prince rofe in his bofom, and he turned indignantly from thc felf-degradation. He then reflected on the folly of hi? conduct, and afked himfelf, for what more he could wiih, than thc fight of Selina's happinefs ? and ftrove to welcome Defmond to his heart as a friend, and the future huiband ot Selina. But it would not do ; even the exalted Edward could not fo far overcome nature as to facrifice the deareft feelings of his own bofom, and be contented, in their ftead, to fee the full indulgence of another's. With Lord Ilford's family he could have been moft happy, had not the want of Selina rendered every pleafure taftelefs to him. But his anxiety on not feeing her, now that nearly the fecond day of his vifit hadclaplcd, added new force to his wiflies to
to behold her again ; and when he allowed himfelf fully to confider on the probability there was of her being abfent from the caftle, his fufpenfe became infupportable, and he nearly determined to break through all thofe bounds of caution that he had hitherto preferved, and put a period to uncertain apprehenfions at leaft, by openly demanding whom, and where, ftie was. He gradually, in thefe moments of fuf¬ penfe, forgot the fyftem of cool friend* (hip he had determined on reftraining him¬ felf to the fole exercife of, and defired a fecond introduction to Selina with all the eagernefs of a lover who meets his miftrefs to pour forth fervent proteftations of affec¬ tion. Dinner, to which a very large party was invited, in order to do every poflible honour to the Prince, was ferved in greater mag¬ nificence than on the preceding day. The decorations of the tables were rich and elegant, and the viands and wines the moft f 3 coftly
coftly and delicious that could be procured. As the Prince was known to be fond of mufic, the P>rl had caufed a temporary orcheftra to be fixed, from whence iffued founds of harmony and bold nefs, that fearch¬ ed every recefs of the vaft old caftle, and fpent their laft murmurs on the plains of the furrounding park. Joy and merriment prevailed. Every bofom, fave one, itemed contented and happy. The fong of the minftrcl, at intervals, called for attention, and awakened, by turns, every grateful paflion of the breaft; and then feftive and gay difcourfe ran round the board, feafoned and heightened by liberal application of the flowing goblets that were pufhed quickly about, whofe lips were never preffed but to the health and welfare of fome fair lady or valiant warrior. This fcene had now no charms for the Prince, and the counterfeiting of eafe he found more painful than would have been the indulgence of defpondency. By fome of
of the airs chanted by the minftrcls, he, however, w r as foothed and pleafed. The fire kindled in his veins, as the ftrain they fang told of the achievements of war, the glory of arms; but he felt his foul unftrung, and bent even to the tendernefs of melan¬ choly, as the gentleft voice warbled the powers and pleafures of love. I le folded his arms, a languid foftnefs robbed hh eyes of their wonted fire, and now and then a figh ftole from lus bofom. His foul was all Selina's. He lifted the wine to his lip., and her image was before his eyes as he drank to the health that was circulated. Imagination, ever bufy, pictured to him how fad was her probable fituation, even if his hopes were true to the utmoft, and fhe was ftill in the caftle. He faw her, in fancy, fitting folitary and melancholy, unheeded by all I iiftening to the notes that found their way, weakened and leffened, to the diftant apartment (lie was allowed to call her's, thinking of the pleafures that others, more fortunate, freely partook of, while, haply, f 4 A' e
flic wiped the tear from her cheek that was flied over the remembrance of happier days. He fickened over the picture, and would, at that moment, have forfeited all right of empire, all hope of future glory, every gol¬ den advantage indeed, that concerned him¬ felf alone, to be permitted the bleffing of killing thc falling tear from off her cheek, and checking hcr rifing figh by words of love. The day paffed, and brought no Selina. On repairing to the withdrawing-room, he fancied he perceived her among the ladies that furrounded the Countefs; but the illu- fion was momentary, and, like the dream of felicity to the victim of many woes, did but m*?ke the pains of his actual fituation more poignant. The noble vifiters of the caftle were fo fcdulous in their court and attentions to the Prince, that, in fpite of his reftleffnefs, a late hour arrived before he was fenfible of its
its approach. The caftle bell tolled twelve before he even thought of retiring, and he was not then fuffered to go without reluct¬ ance. All the vifiters of the Earl were accommodated with beds in the caftle, and every perfon was conducted to his apart¬ ment when the Prince left the drawing- room. The Prince's attendant Efquues preffed their iervices on him with refpedful affec¬ tion. Every one, engaged about his pei- fon, ferved him in love as well as duty, for his complacency was univerfal and regular. He, however, declined receiving any affift¬ ance from them, and waving his hand, kindly bade them the farewel of the night. When alone, he retired to his favourite dreffing-clofet, and putting a taper on the table, fat down and fixed his eyes on the hangings he had imagined the work of Selina, Thc figures feemed to gain new intereft from the obfcurity they were wrap- •ped in, by the uncertain light of his fmgle v 5 taper \
taper; he admired anew the (kill of the artift who had fo well difpofed their (hades. As he lifted the taper to examine a part of them more clofely, he firft perceived a crack that ran to a certain height, and fprang from the furbafe of the partition. He traced its progrefs, and found it to bear every mark of being occafioned by a fecret door. Curiofity, fo ftrong a principle in every bofom, induced him to profecute this feemingly trifling difcovery farther. He ran his hand down the upright rent in the hangings, but at firft found no projec¬ tion that bore the appearance of a faften¬ ing. On a more minute inveftigation, be, however, found one of the flowers on a Tprig of rofe-tree, to be worked over fome fubftance that rendered it much more bulky than the others. He attempted to turn it, firft one way, and then the other, but ineffec¬ tually in both inftances. He then preffed it, and it fank before his touch. He preff¬ ed more forcibly, and the door opened.
He
He was ftruck with aftonifhment when he found it opened into the picture gallery that ran between the eaft and weftern towers. He, ftood for fome moments loft: in furprife. The beams of the moon illu¬ mined the gallery. After a minute's re¬ flection, he determined to take advantage of his difcovery, and enjoy the pleafure of night's fcrenity in the vifible gloom of the gallery, one of whofe filent tenants had arrefted his attention fo forcibly in the morning. He placed his taper on the table, and ftepped forward, gently (hutting after him, though not fo as to fecure its faftening, thc fmall door cut in the clofet tapeftiy. A filence, the moft perfect and folemn, prevailed. The fmalleft found of his footfteps echoed through the long and vaulted gallery. p?he pale light of the moon (hone on thc fufpended pictures, and the natural awful nefs of the feafon gave their dubious vifibility ft confequence you would fmile at thinking their attribute in the elearnefs of day, f 6 Thc
The Prince was peculiarly interefted* There was fomewhat in the ftill folemnity of the fcene that was congenial to the ftate of his feelings. He walked along the gal¬ lery. He went toward one of the arched windows, and contemplated the pure fere¬ nity of the Iky. The moon (Warn through the vaft expanfe of blue ether in folemn, but pleating majefly ; while the innumerable hofts of attendant ftars twinkled in excefs of brightnefs. The window from which he looked, was toward the court-yard of the caftle ; the embattled towers, and length¬ ened range of buildings difcoverable on that fide, rofe in profound ftillnefs to the eye, (haped in foft lines on the faintly-enlightened (ky. They exhibited a (bene of gloomy, but interefting grandeur; the turret tops caught the full force of the moon, and their gilt vanes glittered amid its beams; the chapel, from its central fituation, received the tranfient light on both its fides; and through thofe of its windows that the Prince looked' on, were difcoverable fome of the facred
facred objects that its infide contained—the pale ftatue on a marble monument, the vales and fculptured cenotaph of the fide- aifles, and the fufpended cover of the con<* fecrated font : while many parts of the court-yard were loft in an obfeure con- fufednefs that prevented the judgment ex¬ plaining what the imagination thought they prefented. 'Twas a fcene altogether new to thc Prince ; and, though a chill fenfation paffed through his mind, his better fenfe was delighted by it. He croffed the gallery, and looked from an oppofite window, whofe fight commanded the larger part of the park. Thc fame tranquil ftillnefs pre¬ vailed as on the caftle-fide, and, to the face of nature, thc feafon appeared more congenial. The light was fufficient to give the eye a view of a long track of the ad¬ jacent landfcape. The leafy cloathing of the hills gathered frefli richnefs from the ftill light they now appeared by. The valleys,
valleys, half perceptible, gained a new caft of beauty from the indiftinanefs with which they were viewed. On the furface of the lake, the moon-beams glittered in midnight merriment; and the level (ward of the park feemed juft fuch as fairies are faid to hold their nighty gambols on. While the Prince traced thefe particulars, a fcreech-owl, from a diftant copfe, hooted his ominous fong,. and its echo rang through the courts of the caftle. 'Twas precifely what was wanted to complete the effea of the whole, and the Prince was fully fenfible of all the melancholy pleafures the hour could pro¬ duce. Much fuch an idea paffed acrofs his mind, as Shakefpeare afterwards expreffed ia n ' l"is now the very witching time of niglit, ^ When church-yaids yawn, and liell itfelf breathes out " Contagion to this wotldj" and he could not help thinking that if ihe fpirits of the departed were permitted to
to revifit earth, this was the feafon at which their ghaftly vifitation muft be ex* peaed. To Selina wandered his fondeft fancies. She, he trufted, now lay free from care, in all the peacefulnefs of innocence. He fighed, and wiflied that peacefulnefs might never be broken on; and that, fince it was not given to him to flielter hcr on his bofom, (lie might be proteded by one more deferving, and as fond. The piaure that he, in the morning, had reafon to beheve was in fome way conneded with her, then occurred to him, and he determined to feek it out, if the moon dif¬ penfed fufficient light to enable him to dif¬ tinguifh it. As he nearly knew the fpot it was fixed on, he, without much difficulty, difcovered it. He felt a fordble return of the veneration he had before beheld it with. A ray of the moon fhonc di redly on ac face, and the pidure's fpcaking eye feemed to 3 dart
dart expreffion into his own. The vivid- nefs of the colours was diminifhed by the dimnefs of the light that partially diiplaycd them, but it only had thc effect of render¬ ing the figure's appearance more natural j the lips feemed projective, though like the clay-cold ones of a corpfc; and one arm, that the limner had portrayed in a raifed fituation, wore the appearance of fuch a " marrowlefs" one, as a fpectre may be fuppofed to rear. The Prince's fenfations were of no com¬ mon kind. He caught a faint glimpfe of that depictured vivacity that was fo con- fpicuous in a clearer light. Long fince, he had been told, had that vivacity fallen be¬ fore peculiar and heavy forrows;. and long ago had the fair perfon of her that had once known fuch gay happinefs, been lain in the filent and cheerlefs tomb. He was affected to fadnefs, and looked, with fuch pity in his eye, oa the face of the paft victim.
victim, as he would have done on the like calamities of Selina. He remained, loft in contemplation, for many minutes; then fighed, and bent his fteps toward thc oppoiite end of the gal¬ lery. Pie ftopped for a minute at that window that overlooked the caftle battle¬ ments. A do .id, of fmall magnitude, ob¬ jured, for a few inftants, the moon, and a gentle breath of wind ruftled ,among the turrets and chapel's tops; then died away, and left the fcene to perfeft quiet. Thc moon again ftione in all her fober luftre, and diffufed her pale beams through the aules and chantry of the chapel. The Prince walked flowly on. A picture near the gallery's end attracted his momentary no¬ tice; he ftopped to examine it. As he ftrove to trace the more minute parts of its fubjea, he fancied he heard a flight noife at the farther end of the gallery. He liften¬ ed, but all was ftill. He purfued his in- veftigation, but after a few moments* paufe, thought
thought he heard faint and flow footfteps. Pie ftarted round, and perceived, ftealing amid ft the obfcurity of that part of the gal¬ lery at which ftood the portrait of the deceafed Countefs, a figure in white. " Gracious Heaven 1" cried he, " h this the delufion of mine eyes ?" But his voice w r as hollow and low, and could not be heard at the diftance cf nuny yards. His blood flowed through his veins in perturbation; but he very fhortly recol¬ leded himfelf, and put his hand on his fword. Still he ftood motionlefs, The form glided acrofs the gallery; the fall of its feet founded on the Prince's ear as it flitted along. By this time he was all himfelf, and" unflieathing his fword with one hand, and eroding himfelf with the other, he ftepped forward, prepared alike for communication with
with a good angel, and oppofition to a bad one. He trod in a flow and regular pace; but, ere he could reach the centre of the gallery, the dubious appearance vanifhed from his fight. He quickened his pace, and pre¬ fently ftood before the pidure of the dead and haplefs Countefs. Nothing but ordi¬ nary objeds could be perceived. He bent his fword to thc ground, and paffed his left hand acrofs his bro v, to wipe away the weaknefs of Nature in her nobieft work. In a few moments he coolly thought on the feeming wonder he had witneffed. During the effeds of his mind's firft im¬ preffion, he doubted not that fome troubled or ominous fpirit had been fuffeied, in thc unworldly night-hour, either to vifit its former refidence, or to appear to him for fome eipecial purpofe. if the former con- jedure were juft, he felt zealous wifhes to do all within his compafs to procure tha difturbed
difturbed foul reft 5 and if the latter, and his own perfon only implicated, he felt all that indifference that the majefly of virtue infpires. Once, he thought of remaining where he was through the remainder of the nkht; but was fenfible how unnccefljiry was fucli a ftep, when he remembered that all places are acceflibk to the tranflated and free. foul. h The ftrength of his reafon then fug¬ gefted it being poffible that the ftrange appearance was merely natural. On which, he lifted his fword, and walked with care round the gallery, but met nothing to confirm that belief. " Where, indeed," he afked himfelf; " couid a human creature poflibly enter at ?" There was no door at the part at which the figure had appeared; and that it had not paffed
- 'paffed him, to efcape at the main entrances, he was certain. The more he reflected, the more con¬ fufed his imagination became, and he at length retired, loft in conjecture, to his chamber. He entered the room in which his Efquires lay. They were both locked in flccp. He returned to his own. The door leading to the gallery was ajar. He made it fecure, arul threw himfelf into his enriched bed. But the agitated ftate of his mind would not fuffer the approach of fleep. He chang¬ ed his portion an hundred times in reftlefs uneafinefs, the caufe of which was rather thc nearly complete dcftrudion of 'his hopes refpecting Selina, than the flrange inc'.dent that had occurcd in the piofecu- tlon of hi 1 ! midmght difcovery. He counted every hourly toll of the caftic bell through the long feafon of darknefs, and morning broke
broke through the grey clouds of the eaftern horizon, without his feeling the leaft tendency to repofe.
*©«>®l<3£S<I<a»»*«-"
CHAP. IV. " Ancient fables tell, « That flitting fpirits, from their prilbns broke, « By moon-light glide along the dufky vales, *« The fokmn ctitjrch-yavd, or the dreary grove; 4 * Fond to revifit their once-lov'd abodes, 11 And vitw each friendly fcene of paft delight." WEARIED by bodily inertion, and mental inquietude, the Prince left his bed at the dawn of the new day. Far and wide thofe red ftreaks of morning, that " lace the fevering clouds of the eaft," on the fun's rife, were fpread, when he looked from
from the caftle window on the fcarcely dif- tinguifliable beauties of the park. His hopes of fome frefh family arrange¬ ment introducing to him Selina were now almoft diffipaled, and he refolved to take fuch fteps as would at leaft make him ac¬ quainted with her actual fituation -, that if fhe were in the caftle, he might in fome way or other gain ,the blifs of again beholding her; or, that if fhe were abfent from it, and under the protection of another family, he might have the dear fatisfaction of con- ducing to the probable happinefs of her life. The only way that" appeared likely to produce this effect, without making a direct application to Lord or Lady Ilford, (which fome reafons, whofe nature he would not allow even himfelf to recognize, made him ftrive to avoid doing) was that of riding, unattended, round the vicinity of the caftle, and by mingling with the peafan-
try, gain the \vi(hed-for information; or, that of commiflioning one of thofe who waited on his perfon, to make enquiries of the-caftle ftrvants, which latter, on many accounts, he would feel reludant at putting in praclice. The former method appeared one likely to be productive of all he wifbed, and he refolved to adopt it. No time could fo well fuit the execution cf fuch a fcheme, as fhe prefent. He determined on embracing the opportunity, and, without waking his attendants, procuring a horfe as foon as any of the Earl's domeltics arofe. He liftened from the window, but could hear no found to authorize his concluding any perfon was up. He left open the cafc- ment, and paced the chamber/ loft in thought and imagination. The balmy breath of morn filled the room, and the harmlefs matin of the little feathered tribe difpenfed checrfulnefs to ali but the Prince. 1 He
He long waited with impatience for the uprifing of the Earl's menials. Oppreffed by the fupcrfluitics of the preceding night, they exceeded far their ufual hour of com¬ mencing the bufinefs of thc day. At length, howevci, the Prince heard the fall of Ihe weighty chains that fecured ihe principal entrance, and then the ponderous door itfelf turned on' its time-worn hinges. Voices founded from a diftant part of the caftle, and then the hollow echo of fome perfon's footfteps, who pafled beneath the window of his chamber. On thefe proofs of the fervants having entered on thc morn¬ ing's avocations, the Prince left his room, and proceeded to the range of (tables that was without thc caftle walls. The panic-flricken grooms immediately prepared for him the ileetcft horfe in the ftud, and with obfequious warmth requefted permiflion for two of their number to attend his excurfion ; but he forbade them, and vaulting on the feat of his equipped V0L ' u G courier,
conifer, was imperceptible from the caftle front in a very few minutes. After attaining the Ikirt of the park, he Slackened hU pace, to take a tranfient view of the natural charms that were before him, and to examine what fpot feemed the moft likely to produce the witticd-for in¬ formation. Thc fun had now climbed to a gay height, and its rays glittered on the dew-drops that covered every fhrub he beheld. The lark's loft warbling note call¬ ed for the refponfe of many an airy fongftcr in the neighbouring woodlands. From the cottage chimnies that peeped through dif¬ ferent parts of the wide landicape^ httle volumes of fmoke rofe, in bufy ferenity. The coi.traft, afforded by this fcene of elearnefs and light, was not w.thout us charm after the ftrange incident of the nioht The Piince's mind, however, was in tot abftracied a ftate to fuffer him to be U,,., n.terefteJ by any external object. As lusV'Um muiL, he trulted, be unknown
to the hufbandmen whom he fliould con¬ verfe w r ith, he might, without referve, inter¬ rogate them concerning Selina; and his impatience to hear whether (lie was then refident at Lord Ilford's, increafed in every minute of fufpenfe. At fome fmall diftance, he perceived a man riving, by flow degrees, a ftem of oak. Pie rode up to, and accofted him. The carle, without turning his head, repeated the Prince's falutation in a mut¬ tering and furly manner. Thc Prince at firft felt indignation at the unprovoked inci¬ vility, but prefently fmiled to think how falfely we appreciate, when we judge of men's hearts by their manners; the boor, bred to no fociety but that of his own coarfened reflections, contracts a four feve¬ rity of demeanor, poffibly without poflefling an ungentle heart; the courtier, born to have every expreffion (haped by rules of art, acquires a (oft and foothing manner of g 2 addrefs,
addrefs, even in contradidion to the fenti¬ ment of his bofom; Nature has little to do with the (uperficial of either:—the effeds of cuftom we view, when we contemplate their manners; for the intrinfic bent of the feelings, we muft look to their adions. The Prince, therefore, was not difcou- raoed by the unpromifing appearance of the peafant. « That," faid he, motioning with his hand toward Lord Ilford's, "is Ilford Caftle, is it not ?" Thc boor put down his axe, and (tared full in the face of the Prince. » In the name of all the Saints," ex¬ claimed he, " who are you ?" « Who am I, friend r" repeated the Prince ; " why, a ftranger to thefe parts, who afked you that queftion fox informa¬ tion/* " A ftranger I"
" A ftranger 1" cried the countryman ; « e egollies, I think fo I Why, you muft be one of they French brutes, or fome'at of that kind, if you dont know my Lord's caftle ; 1 have known it ever fince I was fcven years old." « Have you fo ?" replied the Prince; Cl then doubtlefs you wdi know the family who occupy it. Pray, is not one of them a young lady, a handfome, a very handfome young lady ?" " Yes, there's feveral of 'era .that are handfome young ladies. There's Sarah who manages the ftill room; Margaret, the buttery; and Catherine, who fees to laun¬ dry, are all of them handfome young ladies, very handfome young ladies!" The Prince blufhed at the feeming infig- nificance of the parley, yet was unwilling to lofe communication with a man, who ap¬ peared familiar with Lord Ilford's con¬ cerns, 03 « But
" But arc there not," faid he, " omcf perfons of that defcription ? Is not there one of rank in thc family ? a Lady of degree ?" " Yes," replied the pcafant, <e there is one, it's true, who is handfome, and of high degree ; (lie has a monftrous pretty colour in her cheeks; long knots of hair; a ■thin beautiful neck, and very ------" ** The fame 1" interrupted the Prince j " whom is (he ?" " Why (he," faid the man, 4< (lie is my Lord's Lady." The Prince barely avoided an expletive, «« Do you not," cried he, « know any perfon in the caftle who is ftill younger, and ftill more beautiful than (he?" « No, 1 don't indeed," he anfwered. " A good morning to you then," and the Prince gave his fteed the rein, and icarched for more fatisfactory intelligence.
At
At the edge of a green lane that ran along a part of the park wall, ftood a Angularly neat little cottage. On each fide of it were branching and ancient trees. Behind it was a fmall, but well-cultivated garden. Before it a plot of the fame foft grafs as the fward of the park. Up the front a grape¬ vine grew. On each fide of the cottage door was a fort of chair, made of the hoi- wed flump of a bulky tree. Tne Prince v^as pleafed with the cottage's appearance, and leapiug from his horfe, tied the bridle to a iapling, and entered the opened door. He was no lefs ftruck vvith the appearance of its inhabitant. The cottager was a man far advanced in years. Faithfulnefs, honefty, and fimplicity were written on his brovv. His hair was dwindled to a few white locks, which vainly ftrove to conceal the wrinkles of his forehead. FIc feemed born to ferve, but to ferve in an exemplary way. He was fitting on the entrance of thc Prince, but lie inftantly arofe, and bade him the wel- g 4 come
come of thc morning. The Prince re¬ turned the falutation with frank compla¬ cency, * s This is a fine and cheering dawn, friend," (aid he; " I was paffing your cot¬ tage-door, and was tempted, by its charm¬ ing ncatnefs, to trouble you with this intrufion." " Do not give your vifit fuch a name, good Knight,'* anfwered the old man, " for fuch, by your gallant bearing, I take you to be j my roof is low, but it never yet fhekered a gueft whom 1 did not wel¬ come with all my heart." The Prince bowed, and the old man con¬ tinued— " Yes, this is, as you fay, in truth, a pleafant morn. I have rifen now thefe two hours. 1 have long fince paid my daily fervice to the faints, and was juft going to take
take my little breakfaft. You will not, I fuppofe, Sir, (bare vvith me in it ?" " Indeed I will," faid the Prince, " if you will fo far indulge me. The free air of thefe open lands has given me an appe¬ tite, and I feel much indebted, my good friend, to your hofpitable offer." The old man was pleafed by the frank- nefs of his unknown vifiter, and placed his beft chair for him by the fide of the table. He fat himfelf oppofite, and Rachel his wife placed on the breakfaft table bread and butter and milk pottage. Old Ofborne preffed the beft of hb board on his gueft. The Prince cut him a notch of the brown loaf, and took a cup of milk. ,c You are fweetly fituated," faid he; " I cannot enough admire the fcene round your cottage. Thole old trees, I dare fay, are every one, on the fcore of old acquaint¬ ance, endeared to you ?*' 05' ". There
u There is not one of them," replied Ofborne, c * that I did not know when I was an infant. You may think my old age childifli, but really I fhould weep with for¬ row over thc fall of either of them," u Ah no!" cried the Prince, and fighed ; ** I am well convinced how involuntary and dear our attachments are. 1 re r peet the weakneis you think frivolous; 1 value it much. Thofe trees, I fji'uy, muft lather obfeure to you the fplendid caftic that is fituated in the paik 3our voltage bordeis on ? 'Tis a fine building, my old fric.nl 1 u verv fine building! probabl) )ou hold v.ur firtlc rights cf its [ .< : d ? ' «* ( do ? Sir," returned thc old man; lt and he is, it muft be owned, a very worthy Nobleman. My Lady is dehrvin^ her good fortune; (he is really a kind gentlewoman j I cannot help likmg hcr tuuen. *' Y' u r eem well acqua'ntcd with your Lord's tamsh ?'* laid the Piince.
« Ah,
" Ah, Sir," replied Ofborne, " you know wt how well. 1 fetved in the caftle once." " Indeed," cried the Prince, with fpark¬ ling e}cs> " you muft then, certainly, know intimitely all its inhabitants. Pray, has not his r^rdfhip a fon ?" *« Yes" " And what think you of him ?" The old man ihook his head :■—" He is rj'it fuch an one as will get the good name ot vaffal;., be alibied," replied he; "he has not much refpcct to thofe beneath huu. However, he is young, and may, perhaps, mend ; but I would not advife any body to get into a quarrel with him; he is not cafih foot bed. Indeed, my Lord himfelf muft be kept in good humour, or there is no dealing with him." 4£ My Lady has no daughter, I believe?" ciied the Piince. The old man's face was inftantly over- fpre ad vvith fadnefs, o 6 « None/ 5 '
** None," he anfwered. " Is there not, then," demanded the Prince, " is there not a young lady at the calllc, who is lovely as the morning that now cheers us to gladnefs—whofe motion is elegance itfelf-—whole fmile exprciles all of love that vve can imagine—antl who is tender as the trembling dew that hangs on that budding thorn ?-*-! lure feen fuch an one, and furely, my worthy friend, you mull know her ?" " I do!" cried Ofborne, whofe eyes expreiTecl the brighten, joy ; " 'tis Selina, my Lady Solinxi that you mean. I love her dearer than my own child! Ki.ow her? I knew her before ihe could lifp her own name!'* The Prince's heart beat vvith rapture. " Tis the fame, I doubt not," faid he -* " tell me, my bef. friend, is Hie, is Lady Sclii^ ftiil in thu Earl's caitic ?"
" Yes,
" Yes, to be fivre," replied Ofborne, " where elfe fliould ftie be ?" 6< A thoufand thanks for your informa¬ tion," cried the Prince, thrown wholly off Ins guard ; " but arc you quite, quite cer¬ tain fhc is ftill there ? Are you convinced flic has not been removed within thefe few days ?" ct Heaven forbid flie fliould be carried clfewhere I" ejaculated thc old man. " But why do 1 alarm m)ficlf? I am fure fhe is not/' " Heaven forbid that flie fliould, in¬ deed," exclaimed his wife, whofe counte¬ nance bore evident marks of the intereft flic took in the difcourfe. <c Pardon me, young Knight," relumed Ofborne, *' if I afk on what account vou are fo much concerned in what has befallen my Lndy Sdina? Your eyes tell no com¬ mon feelings—}ou cannot be related to her—perhaps you Ijvc her?"
The
The Prince was reftored to recollection by this (peech. " No, not fo, my worthy old friend," faid he, " I admire much the beauty of this fweet lady, but my admiration does not amount to love. 1 thank you truly for the intelligence you have given me. You have ferved, you faid, at the caftic ; pray, did you ilrve the prefent Lord ?" The old cottager caft a look on the Prince, in which was exprelfed all thc grief of painful remembrance. His lip quivered, and he wiped a foft chop from his eye. " No," replied he, (t thofe whom I ferved in the caftle, I fpent my bcft years in the fervice of. Blefs 'em ! they deferved better than I had to give cm, The days in which 1 toiled for them, were the happieft 1 have ever known—were too happy to be lafting 1"
5
The
The Prince liftened with much more than curiofity. Worthy Rachel, too, feemed aftcded by her hufband's difcourfe, and re- fponded to all his affertions with much warmth of feeling, and heavincfs of heart. She, however, was more alive to the duties of hofpitality, and preffed, with refpedful good-nature, the contents of her breakfaft board on the unknown Prince. He declined eating more, and Rachel removed her Am¬ ple equipage. " Oh Sir I" continued Ofoorne, " you know not how dear to me is the remem¬ brance of thofe times I You cannot form a thought of what a Lord I earned my happy living beneath. I was young then, young and gay ! and my Lord—Oh, he was the kindeft, beft, bravelt of Knights! Our fields had not fuch a warrior. He was the life of thc battle, and his wifdom was greater than his valour! No man's wrong went unrcdrclled, while his authority was good. No yeoman on his eftate was trampled on by
by Efquires, as they too often are mow-a- clays. Blefled St. Peter I how happy wc all were then ! Such merriment at Chriftmas- tide ! fo many comforts for the cold, long winter, and fo fair a prufped tor the coming fpring! Oh, furdy, fuch days will never come again !" " Never," refponded Rachel, who had applied a handkerchief to her t) es ; "you fay truly, never fhall we fee fuch days again 1" The Prince felt for the grief of thefe honeft fouls, and liftened with an anxiety for the old cottager continuing his tale, the motives of which he did not think proper to explain to him. After Ofborne had recovered power of fpeaking, of which he had been for an inter¬ val bereft by the emotion he had expe¬ rienced, he turned to his wife—
" Rachel,"
" Rachel," laid he, " what my Lady was, you can beft witnefs. Was lii^ not, R-ichel, a thoufand times more engaging than heart can conceive, or tongue dcfcribe ?" " She uas, lhe was 1" fobbed Ravhd. " Brave Knight/' continued he, addrciT- ing the Prince, " you have feen, I doubt not, many fair and courtly ladies, but fuch an one as flie, you never faw i She was paft all compare 1 fo kind to thofe who had nothing but their hearts to give her; fo careful over their wants; fo fmilingly con- defcending; fo good-humoured and gay, withal 1 How often have I wifhed a blefting on her, as I faw the fweet fmile on her lips! and as often have I faid to myfelf, none but my Lord could be deferving of her, and none but hcr deferving of him. But there I flie was too good for this world, and the Bleffed Virgin has given her a better \" " Has ihc been long dead ?" afked the Prince. " To my thinking, many an age," anfwered Ofborne, " but to that of others, not
not very long. If you ever were at the caftle, there ftands at thc end of the great itone pafiage that leads from the marble portal-—" Juft then thc noife of many horfes met his ear; and in the next inftant, a horn founded clofe to thc cottage-fide. The door opened, and Lore; Defmond appeared, in a riding-drefs, with his horfe's bridle in his hand. " A moft happy morrow to your High¬ nefs," cried he;." we meet in an u lexpeded place. My people informed me of your early excurfion, and I immediately fet out in purfuit of you, accompanied by thefe merry lads of falconers; fo that, if agreeable, we will fport a hawk before we return." " With all my heart," returned the Prince, "I have will and fpirits for any thing. Let me tell you, I have the ad¬ vantage of you; my worthy hoft here his admitted me to a (hare of a very pleasant breakfaft.
breakfaft. My honeft old friend, 1 give you my beft thanks, and aflure you I never ate with greater fatisfadion." Poor Ofborne, who now perceived the rank of his miftaken gueft, bowed to the ground in anfwer to the Prince's acknow¬ ledgment. " My dread Lord," cried he, " do not opprefs, by thanks, a humble creature, whofe all you might command. I beg your Highnefs to pardon me if I have unwit¬ tingly offended. I am rude in manners and in fpeech. I beg you to excufe, my Lord, the unthinking prattle of a weak old man!" « Lord have mercy upon mc!" joined his wife, " what have I been doing—fo familiar as I was too! Heaven and your Highnefs forgive me for it!" " My worthy Rachel," replied the Prince, fmilingly, " believe me, your familiarity ha> in no (hapeoffended me. Your houfewifery deierves much praife; a palace, though more
more fplendid, is not preferved in nicer order than your cottage." To thc very floor did Rachel drop her beft curtfey, and this fpeech of the Prince was hmded down from daughter to daughter, till the time of Oliver Cromwell, when the family rofe to much eminence, and was afham d to own that any part of it had once inhabited a cottage. The Prince had never felt a greater flow of fpirits. Rejoiced to be affured of Selina's ufual refidence at the caftle, and of her actually being then there, though hitherto unfeen by hitn, vivacious good humour dilated his bofom, and he even thought the fociety of Lord Defmond tolerable. The morning appeared fraught with a thou¬ fand new charms; in eveiy budding bufli he difcovered a beauty. He fondly re¬ peated the name of Selina. The ibund was new to him, and every fenfe vi¬ brated with delight as he uttcrut it. Thc
Tiie hawk dew well ; every thing went rightly ; aud he and Lord Defmond were fo well pleafed with their method of amufe¬ ment, that the ufual hour of breakfaft had fome time paffed before they determined on returning to the caftle. As they paffed along the outer wall, the Prince lepked on thc high towers with frefh intereft. At length he was certain they cnclofed Selina, whole forrows he was to have the pkafing office of foftening! His anxious eye ran over every window of thofe parts of the caftle they pafled. It was pof¬ fible (lie, attracted by the found of their horn, might be at one of them; but he looked for hcr in vain. On account of their peculiar fhape, he diftinguifhed the windows of the picture gallery. The incident of the night darted into his mind as he looked on them, now glittering gaily in the morning fun-beams; and he could not refrain from combining thc
the unufual appearance he had witneffed, with the confuted idea he had of the former inhabitants of the caftle. The Earl met his fon and the Prince at the outer gate;, and with plcafant warmth reproached the latter with want of friend¬ ftiip in ftriving to keep from each of his entertainers the pleafure of accompanying him in an early ride. The Prince apolo¬ gized with that frank good humour that he never wanted. Breakfaft was ferved with accuftomed liberality, aud appeared to the Prince the pkaianleft refrcihment he had taken fince his ftay at Ilford. Gay conver¬ fation paffed round thc board. The Prince's cxhilaiation feemed to eive a new zeft to eat.fi of Lord Ilfoid's numerous vifiters, and tlie utmoft harmony prevailed. For the amufement of the day, a tourna¬ ment, though neceffarily on a fmall fcale, wasdefigned. At it, all the younger Knights uf thc party aflifted, and thc ladies, dreffed in
in all the bewitching negligence of art, animated by their preiencc the contenders for the day's honours to exert their utmoft (kill. The laurel of this tilt appeared to tht Prince valuclefs; he compared it to that he had ftruggled for on a former day—- to that which Selina's hand had bellowed on him. 'Twas the firft day he had ever feen htr —as yet, the only'day. Pie recollected tlie timid blufh of her cheek as flie ex¬ tended her arm to crown him with the c nap let. Tne fentiment it conveyed, was engraven on his heart, and engraven, never to be era fed ! The remembrance of the fenfations produced by that day's events robbed thofe of this of all their conlequenccj but the difcovery of the morning gave to him fo much cheerfulncfs, that he was capable of finding pleafure, in fome degree, in the moft trifling objects, and pafled through the occupation of the hour vvith iatis fact ion.
On
On returning to the caftle, the party fw)d a banquet ready in the great hall. Thi-: entertainment wore the character moft adapted to the Prince's inclination. The choral (train of the minftrels lilted his foul to the auiour of cnthufiafm, while e\ery object around heightened thc heroic fervor of his feeling. Above, the Gothic arches of the fpLxious hall j on one fide, inter- fpcried aur.ient ar.iis, an 1 on another fitted coats of ma'<h Co'ifdoufnefs of thc charms of glory fuelled in his bofo n. At every varying note of the mufic, the big purpolcs of chivahy rofe in h : s heart. He burnt for frefh fields to conquer, and frefh oppor¬ tunities of exerdfiug generofity, and extend¬ ing mercy. He feit calm and contented in the aflu- rance of Selina being near him; and, though his imagination fometimes affigncd fuch caulcs to her ieclufion from the family tjarties as pioduccd frefh llnfations of pain, ftill he was knifed with the information he had
ha-.I received refoeding her, and doubted not, if accident fliould fail to bring about a meeting with her, he could, in the courfe of his ftay (the length of which totally depended on his own pleafure) devife fuch means as would effed that dearly defired event, As day drew towards a clofe, the ftrange circumftance of thc laft night returned to his thoughts. It was a circumftance of whofe nature he knew not what to conclude. The curency of ftories, attri¬ buting to fucli myfterious incider.ts a fupematural caufe, was hmdioned by the opinions of fome of the moft exalted, if not moft enlightened, men of thc age. Ths underftanding of thc i rince had hitherto faltered at giving credit to fuch chimerical dodrines; but when he refleded on thc feeming impoflibility of any other than an aerial and preternatural beinp rifino- to thc fight, where no apparent means of natu¬ ral acccls exifted, and then vanifhing from vol, 1. 11 \ t
it in the fame ftrange way, his reafon was ftaggered, and he believed that he had beheld an apparition. The Prince knew full well the courage of a Knight, and he knew more—he knew the courage of virtue. The admittance, there¬ fore, of the probability of the night's ap¬ pearance being the wandering foul of fome departed fellow-creature, gave to him no other concern than that created by wonder and pity. The tenets that the rc'igious of the age maintained, held the difembodied return of a fpirit to be ever on account of felf-inquietude, or in prefage of fome im¬ pending mortal harm. In either inftance, he felt eagerly defirous to proftcute the adven¬ ture faithcr; and, af er a very little delibe¬ ration, determined on repairing to the picture gallery at the fame hour he vifited u on the preceding nighr. and placing him¬ felf near the fpot on which the concluded ipectre had arrefted his attention.
The
The evening pafled with the fame merri¬ ment as before. The hall was illumined by numerous branches of lights. The wine was pledged in deep draughts to every fair maid's health that memory prefented, and love chofe to name. Wit, made fportive by the indulgence of fancy, called for the laugh of jocularity in a thoufand fantaftic fhapes ^ and, ever and anon, the chant of the attendant fongftcr awakened frefh paf- fions, and called forth frefh burfts of feeling. The Prince rofe to retire before the hour of twelve. The purpofe of fcftivity was loft when he left thc board, and, in a very faw minutes after his retirement, the Earl had parted with each of his guefts for the night. The Prince, on finding that fome time muft elapfe before the period recurred at which he intended being in the gallery, permitted the attendance of his Efquires. h 2 1-le
He ftrove to mix in difcourfe with them, but was unable ; his mind was too deeply occupied by the unufual bufinefs he lad in hand. They fpoke, but he knew not what they faid. He addreffed them, but loft the purport of what he would fay, ere he had given utterance to one fentence. The caftle bell, at length,, tolled twelve ; its hollow groan echoed round the old buildings, and died in the arched avenues that led through them. The Prince, at its firft beat, difmifled his attendants, and made^aft the door that ftood between their room and his own. He then entered the clofet, and there flopped a few moments to indulge meditation. His taper glim¬ mered faintly on the table; its fluctuating light rev.aied, in but an imperfed manner, the railed figures of the clofet hangings and the heavy drapery uf thc chamber he hia left, which ibmetimes waved in funeral- like gloom beneath the impulfe of thc flight wind
wind that found its way into the fpacious room. The hour of midnight is ever ftill and- folemn; but this feemed, to the Prince's fancy, tq be unufually fo. In darknefs every trifling noife engages the attention. The Prince heard fomewhat like a murmur- *' ing groan, precifely in that ■ part of th**' clofet on which he ftood. He looked round him i but could not perceive from whence it was likely to iftue. It founded again, and, on examination, he found it to be fimply occafioned by the eddy of air that entered a fiflure in the window-frame bein:* intercepted by a loofe part of the hang¬ ings. Voices in the anti-chamber then caught his tar. Pie attended to them. One gentleman laughed at what the other faid, then bade him farewel for the night. The faiewel was repeated, a'id ali was filent again.
h 3
The
The Prince then traced thc. faftening of the fecret door. He found it without dif¬ ficulty, and pufhing it before him, the gal¬ lery became open to his view. The night was fine, but not fo perfedly ferene as the preceding one. Frequent heavy clouds obfeured the moon, and wrapped all beneath in entire darknefs. The wind, at intervals, blew, though not forcibly ; but ftill there was a feafonable mildnefs in the air, that rendered the night refrefiling and inviting. The Prince clofed the clofet door, and ftepped on. The moon, at that time, ftione vvith all her power; and the vifible faces of the Earl's progenitors, which hung on the walls, feemed to fix their livid and enquiring eyes on his footfteps. Without interruption he reached the diftant end of the gallery, and found it buried in the fame undifturbed quiet with every other part. He walked round its edge, but could perceive no door, or other poflible
poflible way ofegrefs or admittance. He ftopped for a moment to contemplate the features of the dead Countefs $ and with fo much of nature did they feem fraught, that he almoft expected to behold the lip mo¬ tion, and the foot fluke off its inanimate incumbrance, and ftep toward him. Somewhere about the fpot her relic occu¬ pied, he determined to ftation himfelf, and await what new wonders the night might produce. Hard-by was a maffive and pro¬ jective chimney-piece. On looking nearly at it, the Prince thought it a convenient place to fix himfelf at for obfervation. It jutted many feet from the level of the room's fide. One end adjoined a large window, the other was toward^ the place where were ranged the family pictures of the Earlj the fecrecy and fhelter afforded by the latter part, he chofe for his ftation. There, fhrouded from every poflibility of difcovery, he could fee with eafe whatever was done in that end of the gallery; for h 4 even
even yet fome fufpicions remained in his bofom of the fmcied fpedre being no other than an hu:r an inhabitant of the caftle. In this recefs he accordingly polled him¬ felf, and looked with coolnefs, though not without impatience, on the fpace before' him. The moon was now loft in a lurid cloud. The wind feemed to gain influence throvgh her feccflion; it rufiled by the gallery window, and murmured round the turrets of the left wing. The darknefs con¬ tinued mere than a minute. The moon then fhook off the enveloping cloud, and her filent beams gradually difphyed the interior parts of the gallerv.—It was no deception: ftanding but a few paces from the figure of the Countefs, was a form, clad in light robes, as on the night before. The Prince involuntarily ftarted. His eyes were bent on the apparition with a ferious gaze. His heart beat two throbs, and
and then regained the cool temperance of courage. The form, at firft, feemed inclined to advance to the part in which he ftood. It ftepped fome paces toward him, but then turned, and walked fljwly back, it ap¬ proached the piciure of the Countefs. It knelt, and its face feemed bent to the ground. Then it arofe, and appeared to prefs its lips to thofe figured on the board, with fucn an ecftacy, that it would feem to mingle beings with the form depidured there." After paying that rapturous duty, it drew toward the painted window that was diredly oppo- fite to the concealed Prince. The room received the moon-beams from its other fide ; but the mift in which its darker part was immerfed, was not fufii- cient to obfeure totally its objeds from him. The form appeared to be ftooping over the projective parts of the window feat. It railed its hand once, and then feemed to h 5 drop
drop it in dejection. The Prince doubted whether he fliould fee more, or ftep for¬ ward at this, and demand thc nature of this ftrange vifitation. While he pondered, a ftrain of the fweeteft melody rofe to his ear, and flowed through the vaulted chan¬ nel of the gallery. It feemed a fymphony to the fong of an angel. He liftened in reverential pleafure. The mufic paufed- Its undulated harmony was then renewed, and a voice, inexpreffibly fweet, warbled thefe words:— " Alb fay, foft whifners of the night, «* Where reftlefs woe may lay its head ! tf Oh IeaJ it through thii dubious H^ht, <* To where no tears deride the bed ! " Theie, let it hide its fading cheek, (( And eafe the tumuli of its breaft ; « There, blefl. in peace, fecurely feck ** Itb little folace of foft veft. <' And fliould fome fpirit, waruTiing nigh, " Hang o'er its lhin.bers, watch its fmile j «< Then, note the gently-rifing ligh, " And feel a kindied pang the while ; « O ki
«' Oli let h ftwetly *>& the breath, «< Whofe tremblingfondnefs yet would ftay; " And ltave the form to painlels death, « And bear the flitting life away !" The Prince was loft in furprife and de¬ light. He fcarcely credited the evidence of his fenfes. « Sure, fure," thought he, "'tis a fpirit from heaven !—But yet——" He had not time for more. Darknefs fpread itfelf. Objects became confufed to the eye, and he could but juft perceive the form gliding toward the centre of the gallery. It feemed flitting from his fight. He hefitated no longer, but moved after its footfteps. He gained on its flow pro- grefsv He was clofe to its lobe, when the wainfcot of the gallery feemed to open, and the form was before him no more. The increafed darknefs prevented his perceiving what part of the wainfcot the clialin was u 6 in.
in. He extended his hands, but they were oppofed by what feemed the fubftance of the wall. He determined to remain in his prefent fituation till the moon fliould ap¬ pear -, but he waited till he tie!paired of the darknefs being again dilpclled. He un¬ fheathed his 1wok\ uid marked with its point afemicircle about the fpot he ftood on, and then walked to thc window where the figure had paufed, and diffufed Iuch charming founds. It was entirely \ *,occupied. He went to the window facing, to fee whether, from the appearance of the fky, it was probable the moon would mine more during the ri'^wt. The thick clouds had collected fo as to ibrbid hopes of the night fpecdily denting. The wind had rifen to feme degree of vidc:ice, and a guft of It groaned through the courts of the caftle as he looked. He lingered yet a little before he forfook the fcene of his aftonifhment. The ni'>ht increafed iii gloominefs.
gloominefs. Many ftrange noifes rang round the walls of the old caftle, but within doors all remained in profound quiet. His mortification at being eluded by the myfterious figure, was exceflive; and it was not without the greateft reluctance, that he concluded to return to his chamber. His conjectures were bewildering and tor¬ menting. Twice he paced the length of the gallery, in hope of a farther difcovery ; but the low found of his own footfteps was all that he heard. He then relinquiflied hopes of obtaining fatisfadion at that time, and repaired to hh chamber, where he flung himfelf on the bed, antl fought to atone for his total want of reft on the pre¬ ceding night, by the enjoyment of a few hours' repole.
CHAP.
CHAP. V. *' Al,li, lhal love, wliofe \icw is muflkd ftill, * ( SuyiiKl^uitiiout e)C!>, fa'ptl)-w.i)bto l)i« will P* SlIAtiCSVEAlM.* IT had been fettled on the paft day, for thc morning of this to be fpent in hawk¬ ing; in conformance to which agreement, a fliort time nfter day-dawn, Lord Def- mond's horn founded beneath the Prince's window, while himfelf beat the fummons of the morning at his chamber door. The Prince had fallen into a deep (lum¬ ber, I le inftantly arofe. His Efquires, who had not thc fame reafon for long fleep, were
were already- attired. He accepted their attendance, and was very fhortly equipped for the fport of the day. Lord Defmond waited him in the hall. The falconers were ready, and the horfes faddled. The Prince mounted; the horns founded, and the party fet forward in joyous fpirits. The fun was rifing in full glory. His increafing fplendour decked,, by degrees, the park in innumerable beauties, while the frefh air of morning encouraged exercife, and gave vivacity. Lord Defmond rode clofe to the Prince, joining with him in converfation, while the otner young N oblemcn and Knights practiied feats of horfemanfhip, or tried, in friendly contention, the fleet nefs of their refpeclive Heeds. The Prince ptaifed, in warm t mis, the fituation of the caftle, and the charms of its neighbourhood. Lord Defmond ex- c preffed
prcflcd pleafure at what his family poffeiTed being able to ailord fausfaction to his Hi^hn.fs. « Indeed, my Lord," faid the Prince, * c your poffeffKMis have more delights for mc than you can readily imagine. I ad¬ mire the tafte your gardens are formed by. This park is beautiful—moft picturefquely fo, Tlie calile itfelf is, in truth, one of the nobk-ft ftruclures 1 ever beheld. The rooms fo magnificent—their furniture fo well adapted and riJi 1— How truly admirable is thc picture gallery, and how valuable and txcxhent the paintings it contains I I was much gratified by feting there a portrait of Sir Wilbam Mai (Ion, who gained fuch re- putat'on in the Scotch wais of my anceftor, the biit Edvvcrd. His is an illuftrious memory. I was alfo pleafed by another ftmily picture: I think my Lord of ilford told me it was that of a former Conntefs of his title. She muft have been a charm- in-i woman, if the painter were too honeft to
to flatter her. You remember the picture, I doubt not ?" " Yes, very well," returned Lord Def¬ mond ; " fhe bore our tit'e once, and muft have been, indeed, beautiful. I would not advife your Highnefs," continued he, faintly fmiling, " to frequent that gallery much/' « No I" faid the Prince, «* why not ?" " There prevails an unfounded report," anfwered he, " of its being haunted. Our fervants depofe havingtieard ftrange nodes there, and not one of tlTem but believes it to be the refort of fome troubled fpirit." The Prince bent his eye, with eager earneftnefs, on Lord Defmond. " For my part," continued his Lord (hip, " I rrive little credit to fuch ftories when thev originate among the very low claffes of fociety. Fear often makes iuch heartless wretches as mci:ials fee beings that exift only in their own fancy. Though fpirits, it is affirmed, have communication with us, it
it appears improbable that they Ihould ap¬ pear for the fun pie purpofe of terrifying the weak-minded." " Very true," faid thc Prince; " but what circumftances are faid to attend this preternatural appearance that your fervants' imagination paints ?" " In truth, I fcarcely know," replied Defmond ; " a murder of an uncommon and dreadful nature was committed in that part of the caftle that the ghoft is faid to vifit. Our domeftics have collected fome confufed account of it, and thence, I fup¬ pofe, their apprehenfions have arifen." * w Poffibly fo," faid the Prince; " w f as it a man or a woman that fell beneath the murderer's hand ?" " A man j but his own arm bereft him of life." The Prince was buried in reflection for fome minutes. His eyes were caft to the ground, and his whole foul feemed wrapped in contemplation. He then fhook off the rcflloa
oppreffion of thought, an# f ^gain joined in converfation with Lord Defmond. " Ey my honour, my Lord," faid he, <f you have many fine women in the vici¬ nity of your cattle. Lady Mortlake is as graceful a female as I ever faw. Lady Mary Monfon poffeflb a thoufand charms, and Lady Jane is an angel. Pofitively, Def¬ mond, you are an enviable man 1 Your heart, long before this, has acknovvledgcd the fovereignty of one or other of thefe , fweet maids. Pray, if 1 may take the liberty of a friend, to whofe fair eye-bro*v have you fvvoin yourfelf a flavc ?" " Oh," replied Lord Defmond/laughing, " my bofom is impregnable to all the charms your Highnefs has beheld. Gieat as is, confeffedly, thc beauty of thofe ladies you mention, I affure you, by my Knight¬ hood, they exact but cold tribute irom me." " Indeed?" faid the Prince; "your affection, then, muft needs be engaged to fome
fotne maid whofe lovelinefs is matchlefs. S.veet, very f\\eet muft flie be, who can win the heart fuch ladic^ ftrive unfuccefs- fully for I Methoughr, as 1 looked on them, our Court was not g::u:ed by more perfec¬ tions. I wifh nor, my Lord, to break a hu.ee vvith you in fupport of either of their excellencies againft thofe of your choice maiden ; but really, I know not, in the habit of the whole Court, where to felcct a beauty deferving of pre-eminence over them." " It is very pofliLle," anfwered Lord Defmond, ct that your Fighnefs honours tho:e ladies in fo thinking, with accuftomed juagme:,t. I, indeed, myfelf, do not re¬ collect feeing mptjior beauty even amklft the graces oi the C^urt." " Youdo net r" Ciicd the P-i ,ce; tl Oli, then, this incompaiably fa.r on. oiolioms in the obiturity of let.rement ? Though love : y and noble, fome vil'age (hade con¬ fines her to ILclufiou j her 1 eauties ripen only for you; c\ cry charm blofibms, but to be
be culled, u nth ought of, by your hapd ; unknowing, and unknown to all the wor <\ fave you, thc coral of her lip rifcs only to meet your happy and uncontefted kif>.'* " N .y, nay, my Lord, you draw your conclufions too quickly, 0 returned D-T- moiifl -, " what if 1 have- not yet dedicated my fword ? 1 may, perchance, be difficult; and 1 am, tis certain, young in Knight¬ hood. Your t lighnefs, now, received your (purs on the fame day that I' was honoured wiih mine, and 1 liave not yet heard cf your layirg your laurels at the feet of beauty. Why fhould I, who folhw your Ilit?hncfs at fo humble a du'laice in the field of battle, prcfume to precede you in thc hut, of love?" " Ohl I," faid the Prince,and ftrove to difguile a figh, " muft not argue on that matter at prefent." By this time thc fpot was attained on which the morning's fport was intended to commence, and Lcid Defmond left the Prince,
Prince, to give fome directions to the falcon¬ ers'. Very fhortly, the well-trained hawks afcended, and the company rode in obe¬ dience to the track that the objed of their amufement fliaped for them. After riding for fome time with the party, the Prince found himfelf at the edge of a thick wood. Solitude was fuddenly become his delight. He turned his horfe, and ftruck into the depth of the rccefs. Thc morning had now rifen high* and the fun had gained power to difpenfe a foft and comforting warmth; but the dew- drops ftill hung on the leaves of this fhade, and the untrodden grafs yet retained the wet covering of night. The fragrant fcents of morn were wafted in every breathing of the wind. The little feathered world, gay in the fecurity of the covert, winged their way from tree to tree, warbling fimplc ftrains of harmony as they flew.
The
The Prince was more pleafed with the fpot he had accidentally become acquainted with, the farther he proceeded on it. In one part was cut through it a path, footed with the fineft grafs, into which broke feve¬ ral fmaller avenues, from one of whofe ends was feen the fwceteft landicape that the uplands of the park commanded, bright and joyous beneath the charming influence of early day; and from another, the majeftic towers of the caftle, from whofe indignant walls the fhades of night feemed fcarcely to have retreated. Through the thickeft meanders of this grove, that feemed folely for " love and contemplation made," the Prince wandered, in a ftate of penfive placidity that is, in fome inftances, of all others the moft plea- fing: he fell into deep meditation, to the indulgence of which every iurroui. "ng ob- jecr. conduced. The trees were, toward the part he had ftrayed to, fo thickly matted, that they were nearly impervious to the bright
bright beams of the fun. All was hufhed, except thc faint ruftling of the leaves under the impulfe of the paffing breeze that caught the tree-tops, and thc echo, through the neighbouring valleys of the fportfm.in's horn. Some thoughts of real, and fome of fictitious mourufulnds aiofe to him, and he was inlcnfiblc of whither his flow fteps led him. By a fudden turn of the path, he found hi in id f before a iweer and romantic bower: it was compoied of the lower branches of feveral lord! trees, met in their ddcent by fome L.II fhruhs, whofe tops mingled with theu, and formed a clofe ar.d protecting fhadc. Inter.\oven with the ever green mantle, were varied fantaftic flowers, whofe numbcrkfs hues delimited the eye, and thc fulnefs of whole blofibms difpenfed a wide fragiance. Within its covert was a feat, fupported by the poliihed forks of a laige tree root; and, in its centre, ftood a table of thc iame fimplc conftruction. Thc
The Prince was charmed with the fob- m tary htuation of this retreat: he looked round, and became more lo. The trees it ftood among, were large and fhadowy 5 their broad tops met, and Ihaded from the fum¬ mer fun the path that led to the bower ; but, here and there, through a break m them, could be caught a partial view of the vaft fcene that the rifing ground of the wood rendered dilcernible : fometimes, an abbey-fpire, ftanding with fullen haughti- riefs in the midft of a cultivated fpace And fometimes Nature's fdf alone, but in her choiceft drefs of foft, yet magnificent hills and glens, decked with every tint of foliage that fertility can produce. Thc Prince tied his horfe, which he had hitherto led, to the branch of a tree, and entered the inviting bower. He leant on the rural table, and enjoyed the fcenc he contemplated. He examined thc nature of the arbour's form, and admired anew the tafte vvith which il was wrought. As his VOL,' I. T 1 eye
c\e ran round the windings of its fimplc tcAtine, he perceived lomcwhat gl'tt.'* 1 * on the ground, lie ftoopcd, ar.d discovered lav m<> tlicre. a necklace of beads 1 le fork it vp, arx], on rifing, fit ft faw a ] :.; tr uuh characKi> on it, 1/c v.. folded on the io.it. ] ie Lxauiii"icd thofe charac^rh, and fcuiA them to t\\ lefs, in thib manner, the inelan- choh of tlie w ntcr : <( Oli wooal.pt' HVLCt. witUi'i ^i'cic i iiiy bcv.iip, t£ J"\ )l l i ii Jul. the J.(J7C TL I'llOJli;, }*> i> i\ f <: ' 7 i.'^t ., i't'ii n-j ilriow tlit cj" ireioi.., 1 f.^hoLi^j * f Thud lu . ii i .f kiis wi li \\hk!i £ u/iik n«y v n> ! (( T ! .y k.Vwi-, K ft ihu'iii ^ in (lie j ailn^ wlr.J, *' Ii.tr:' l foist! Kij. jije« ly my <"u<[i.t: : ti^h j « f In t;:'^ ua.i Jtw.t',!(,}j c.iii nu . n'c\ li-. I (t A t.-u 1'ke tit i 'vhii_!i ^-iOiti-> in r.iis *' tyr, ^ ( An.l .0. ' tlie v.'ntei's i '?c, t'u l.ukj: i ..f, «' n.o c.n kti'i! ii'jv.cf, ihe (.Vi i ,U"t ; -ccn, " VVtii itnf tin ))• i>dd'> '.vj; :u a; t: > ^.t f, " V/)n.ic u<N<I J>kx>nt, :m cf ;,!k:c ! ivtEi mc ken! " uN i;i\ ! will ij'tii'f, *■'<■! -' '■ 'i upii^'.y wi ? i( ijluii I, iiKt; \cti, Miotiiu lu'imut kitj. 1 . t 1 "
The
The Prince looked with wonder on thc beads, and again read the veiics. Their tenor, their fituation, the ioftnef., of fenti¬ ment they expreffed, a 1 ] pcrfiuded him they could have belonged to nobody but Selina, He bdidd them with rapture. He preffed the necklace, that had knoA-n the bliu of her bofom, to the warm kifs of his lip. [ f 0 read the vcrles again and again; th:u fokkd them to his heart, and repeated with, fond¬ nefs their moft cxprc/five line■„ As he reflected, his imagination became more convinced that his conjectures could not be wrong—that Selina had written the fonnet, had worn thc beads. This fimplc and fad bower, then, was her favoured fpot I Here flie retired, wheu op. preffed by dejection, to fhed the unibfte:ied tear of forrow aud rcgra ! The Pri-ice fdt new fondnefs rife in his bofom. He threw himieifon the feat where live was accuftomed to fit. PL marked the pro-reb of the 1 - 11 JVC'S
vftawcrs her hand, perhaps, had difpoicd. He was alive io fenfations of \ leafure ho knew not before. Every feelinsr of tender- nefs was called into exercife, and his en¬ chanted fancy painted the happinWs of fitting, remote from all the worlcj, in fuch a fhadc as this, robbing the hours of length by Iiftening to Selina. Every trifle oi* the fcenc had a claim on his affeclion ; for not a liiile but fpoke connection vvith Selina, and was probably held dear by her. He had not known the pleafure of his fue^eftions lona, when the fhrill found of ] .ord D:.uv.ond*s horn, thrown in echoes iiom the hills it was blown a.rongrt, met his car -* and then repeated fhould, whole object, he doubted not, was the difcovery ol himfelf. To thefe, however, he forbore to make anv reply j and though while he liften- cJ, the iliouts came nigher to his ear, he determined to remain where he was till compelled by their vicinity to join the I aity that fo clamoroufly fought imn. It
It appcaivd poffible, on confideration, that Sdina had recently quitted the arbour when lie entered it. \f her vifit had not been a late one, flie would probably have returned for what (he had accidentally left there. Indeed, how likely was it that the very noife he made in approaching, had occafioned hcr flying precipitately from its retreat ! for to furprife, alone, could be attributed her leaving there two articles, though of fmall confequence. A thoufand times he lamented the bltter- nefs of his fate, that had forbidden the long- anticipated meeting; and as often did he regret not having darted forward, in the inftant of Ins difcovery, to ftrive the refto¬ ration of what he had found. It afforded him permanent (arisLctnn to reflect on the iiope there exifted ot Selina's vifit not being lingular. Ouen, he trufted, when the coolneL of evening Succeeded tlie in¬ temperate heat of mid-day, did Ihe wander hither, to know the Li tie comfort of 1 3 uninterrupted
uninterrupted refection. At fuch a feafon would i:e watch in obftutiiy; then prelnt himfelf before her, and olilr hcr the folace of fond friend (bio. In hope ef her not e\<n yet having left the woodhi.d, he ioifook the bower, and trod with ouickncfa through the wiricus intricacies ihe thick trees formed, by thc winding of one of them, he arrived at the fkirt of the coven. While he hefitated whieh way to take, a horn fuddenly blew clofe to him, and in the next minute, Lord Defmond, with many attendants, appeared at the end of the path. The Prince curfed thc interruption, but was obliged to join the intrufive party. He ]eft his purfuit of the poffible footfteps of Selina with the moft painful reluctance, and mixed, without the leaft chance of being aniufed by it, in the fport of the paik.
At
At a late hour of thc morning, Lord Defmond led the way back to the caftic, where, in addition to the large party be¬ fore affeuihlcd, the Prince found many Noblemen, whole feats lay at no great dif¬ tance fro n Eari Ilford's, with whom he was in the habit of perlbnal intimacy. Thc fef¬ tivity of this day was equal to that of the former, and the Prince brought to it a heart not ill-difpofcd for merriment. On his fmile waited thc laugh of all, and gene¬ ral fariffadion prevailed* At length, however, he returned to thofe thoughts that had of late bereft all his focial hours of light merriment. By habi¬ tuating his mind to dwell perpetually on the image of Schna, (lie became infeparably conneded with every wifti of lus heart; though while he imagined it impoffible to live wuhout her, he re It that prudence dr: I-/ 'iiii the indulgence of her loctcty. Nh>" I'!-, is More eafy than to deceive thc reaioiij where the inclinations favour thc 1 4 deccpuon ;
deception; fo that he feidom failed, when confcience obtruded fuch a conviction, to gain his defired point, by perfuading him¬ felf that pure friendfhip was the only object of which he fought thc gratification. The mytuious occurrences of she two laft nights afforded him matter for much thought and conjecture. The repeated ap¬ pearance of the form proved that his ima¬ gination had not mifled him in the firft inftance. That any perfon fliould wander in the gallery at the hour of midnight, feemed perfectly improbable ; but for any human creature fo fituated to efcape from the hold, where no chafm exifted, was cer¬ tainly impoffible. The rumour mentioned by Lord Defmond, of the precife fpot on which he had been fo ftrangely encountered, being frequented by an uneafy fpirit, was fume fort of a corroboration to his belief of the appearance beingpretcrnatural, though he hefitated at admitting it to be fuch. Be it how it would, his mind was peculiarly intcrefted,
intcrefted, and he looked to a developement of what occafioned hL furprife, with fenfa¬ tions of a much deeper nature than thofe of curiofity. His anxiety to trace farther fuch an un¬ common adventure, made him folicitous fco gain an opportunity of leaving the com¬ pany, in order to examine into the prefent ftate of the picture gallery, and to take advantage of thofe obfervations that lie had made at the time of its occurrence. Watched with the zealoufnefs of complai- fant hofpitality, it was long before fuch an opportunity could be perceived by him. At length, on the party agreeing to court the reviving coolnefs of the evening breeze in thc pleafure gardens, he begged half an hour's excufe, aud repaired to his own chamber. He difmifled his attendants, and then walked brifkly along thofe paffages that he knew led s through its main entrance, to the gallery j for he was unwilling to hazard difcovering his knowledge of a fecret door 1 5 in
m the tapeftry, where the ufe of it was needlefs. The folding doors of the pidure gallery were open, and no perfon was there. The fun, juft- finking into thc weftern horizon, threw its laft enfeebled rays, in partial (breaks, through the Gothic windows; the peafant*s fong, as he trod his earelefs way acrofs the park, in his return from the day's labour, the lowing of diftant herds, and the faint found of the jocular converfe of the Earl's, party in the garden, only inter¬ rupted the flat ftillnefs of the feafon. The Prince's mind w r as wound to much romantic ardour. Thc lonely gallery, and the mellow charms of ebfeuring evening, feemed to in¬ vite thc exchange of tender vows, and all thc endearing converfe of love. He felt expedation of an unknown nature big within his bofom; enthufiaftic thoughts dilated his heart. He looked for Seiina to exprefs them to; he fought her hand to breathe thc tender wifhes of fondnefs on : but
but Selina was not to be found. Still he eould not perfuade himfelf but this hour would bring her to his fight. If (lie were, indeed, in the caftle (and that (he was, the affurances of the old cot¬ tager gave him reafon to believe), it was more than poffible that, though denied the privilege of mixing with the vifiters, (lie might, at a time when it was moft likely to be unoccupied, enjoy the little pleafure of walking in the gallery, which the cool air and fine profpeds rendered a delicious refort. Plis imagination mantled at thc thought of meeting her. Words of delight were ready on his lip. He caft his eye to¬ ward the folding doors, but no Selina ap¬ peared entering at them. He looked, with fomewhat of reverence and refped, on the fpot where the vifionary form had appeared in the dead of night. Curiofity then took place of every other feeling, and he haftily fearched for thc mark 1 6 he
he had made with his fword. He was fen- iibie it was near the centre of the room's end. He looked in that direction firft. He prefently found it. Gracious Heaven ! what was his furprife, when, on turning his eyes to the wainfcot, he perceived he had exactly defcribed a line round the picture of the dead Countefs ! Aftonifliment abforbed every faculty. He gazed on the unknow¬ ing painting, and thought he faw r a thou¬ fand wonders in every colouring of the figure it expreffed* It was fome moments before he perfectly collected himfelf. He then folded his arms, and walked quickly backward and forward, buried in thought. What was he to be¬ lieve ? That the delineated form had for- faken its nature, and moved vvith aerial life ? His found fenfe inought the fuppo¬ fition prepofterous. Was it then to be concluded, that the fpiiit of the Countefs had appeared ? that between that and the lively reprefentation of vvhat it had been when
when cloathed with animal life, there was fo powerful a fympathy, that they ftrangely intermingled beings? His judgment thought the conclufion too much like the unwarrant¬ able romance of imagination. Yet, he fcarcely knew any other way of accounting for what he had witneffed. By one of the irrehflible impulfes of raifed aftonithment and curiofity, he moved his hand along the furface of the piciure. The ftyle was bold, and the paint, in the folds of drapery, put thickly on ; in one \ art par¬ ticularly io. Figured were lcvcral diamonds, and their (hading fo well difpofed, that they appeared projective. It was with no fmall wonder that he found one to be really fo. In the inftant of that difcoven, the fatten¬ ing of the fecret door in his clofet d trtcd into his mind ; and the probability of the picture poflefling a fimilar one, and being in itfelf the mere covering of a do^r-way, was immediately prefent to nim. His fancy figured a thoufand confequent pofiibilitks, and
and his reafon was delighted at the profped of a natural and fimplc fiolution of what had feeTiicd accountable for only by ad¬ mitting preternatural agency. Pie prcfled the diamond, and the pidure, without the affiftance of his hand, (lid afide, fb as to make an opening fufficiently wide to admit a human form. His pleafure alone exceeded his aftoniihment. Pie made one ftep on the opened way. He looked forward, and perceived, through the dim¬ nefs of thc narrow channel, a defcent of ftone ftairs. The few rays of light, admitted by the fpacc the pidure had covered, were all the fecret paffage had (hed on its dark¬ nefs, and their trifling influence only be¬ ftowed a dubious and limited twilight. The Prince, in vain, with this feeble help, endeavoured to difcover what objeds were at the aid of the ftone ftahcafe. He paufed for fotne moment?, and then refolved to dare the defcent.
Before
Before he returned to its fituation the fallacious pidure, he examined what faften¬ ing was on its inner fide, and found a ftud produdive of the fame efted with that of the outer. Pie was on the point of pro¬ ceeding, when he heard a foot ftep without the gallery. He had fcarcely time to clofe the pidure before a domeftic appeared. Thc man bowed, in fome confufion, on per¬ ceiving whom he had accidentally intruded on, and inftantly withdrew. The Prince, however, was convinced, by the interruption, how unfit the hour was for tlie purpofe he was engaged in, and forfook the immediate gratification of his curiofity, though not without extreme unvvillingnds. The nearer approach of niglit was percep¬ tible as he flowly crofl'ed the gallery. The lingering beams of the fun had fallen below the large windows, and thc mellow light tluy had diffufed, was fucceeded by the giey mift of twilight. Thc half illumined towers of thc caftic acquired new heavinels b_/
by the weakened rays that difclofed then-, and evening's cheering f unds were finking apace to night's fullen filence. On entering the lower rooms, the Prince found lhat the ladies had joined Lord Ilford's party in the garden. Tuither he went; and when the laft light of day fell behind the high weftern hills, he accompa¬ nied his friends to the Conntefs's with¬ draw ing-room, where the hours vvere pafled in feftive and gaiiant difcoarle. To his own chamber the Prince retired, as fliort ly as he, with propriety, could freely to indulge reflection. To his mind, fo fituated, returned the apparition of the two forcgomg nights. However he had been led to imagine, on its fecond appearance, that it was in fict the fpirit of tiie dead, he iioa could fcaicely believe io longer. The ftrongeft argument for the unknown form being of more than e mortal
mortal make, was the feemingly fupema¬ tural power it had exerted in its retreat; but that argument was now entirely over¬ come by the pidure being proved to be a mere door-way. If mortal, what then was the caufe of fo unfeafonable and dreary a periodica! viiit ? and why was fuch com¬ plicated privacy ufed in putting it in prac¬ tice ? Who could find it neceflary to flea!, in the darknefs of night, through a fecreted paffage, to the harmlcfs indulgence ol a lone vifit to the pidure gallery ? He was entirely unable to anfwer thefe felf-interrogations ; n a fatisfactory way, and could form none but bewildering conjectures of whither the hidden ftairs led to, and what occafioned the contriving or preferving of fuch a gloomy channel in the caftle of a true Baron, The air of myftery that hung round the whole occurrence excited his wiih of deveiopement in no fmall degree. There were fome wanderings of his imagination that opened to thought a poflibility creative of
ijred he d^:ermined to ir,!/..^ the ii:-' htting iV')meni (or tlie ;ui[;wie oi t\pl"i! >, llio Lt'.flSC a\eliUC. lie n^<! KCU >.• lUi.Ui!, iu the fuil n<::Hite- ui iu Cif^o.e.y, t..at during the clav he woued >)■: p-./pctually fubiect to i.:truiion i what li r.e, then, u> m lined for proi ceding en i/'e ct<teiptife? I\o.;e, with pcriect iecuriiy, !>ut luca an hour as the prefcut. Me hcttaic i f;rf)iue mo.nents, t'nen fiarttd up, aid rei'-lvcd, m fpite of the diincuities that darl'.ncC mtgnt involve him in, to pi ove his conjectures in this iacred tea on. When lie cooled on fuch a dcteiminati-m, the obvious i.Konveuicnces and hazards that would ncveifanly attend a nocturnal re fearch of lucii a nature, occurred to him i but an irrefiftible impulte hurried him on, and he treated the difficulties with unconcern, and the dangers with difdain. He buckled on his fword, antl drew it from hi Ihcath. He hiicd hi^ taper from when
where it ftood, mk\ entered the clofet. Juft !,il:i a tioile CvVUghL his car. He httened, and heard feveral voices bciovv the witidow. >>.-y fpoke loudly as if in contcni:io.i; but iac iound L>rew weaker as he liftened, a.id at !u\>h w.i Iwfl in faint murmur , malted a!on^ the caftle vv.di> o*i\) by the tra.ilient breadung of tne wind. He re-entered thc cl fit, <u;d placed hb taper on the table. As his glance caught the hangings that he was perfuaded Seiina had wrought, he imagined the figure of Mars was in motion. He ftarted round, and found it to be rcallv fb. On more attentively looking, he perceived its agitation to be occafioned by the loofe- nefs of the drapery, between which and the wainfcot, the wind of the large chamber had forced its way. He accounted every moment of inter¬ ruption a lofs; and, haftily preffing the friendly faftening, left his room.
The
The gallery was ftill as death. The loA'cr ik\ \\:.t> rcf»ulajlv thu Ic, H\ the vapours there collected, the moon's brilliancy was loft, but ftill her fiihiefs diffufed fbmewhat of light through every impediment. The Prince, in an even ftep, walked unmolefted- \y to thc picture of the Counters. He prelkd the diimond, and the panned flowly withdrew. He did not he (it ate for an in¬ ftant, but returned the picture, and ftepped forward. Darkuef,, the moft total and gloomy, overwhelmed all around him. Si.t nee w:i biokcn on only by his foot¬ fteps and lus breathing. \V lie e he trod was ftone. Tlie paffigc was f< narrow, that he touched the wall on each fide of him with his extended hand. He pre- fciitly reached the ftairs he had beheld when he firft looked on the opening. With a cautious ftep he defcended them, and, ere long, reached level ground at their foot. With the fame care he proceeded. The path v\ati fbll ftone, and the channel equally nanow. Suddenly it wound round, and became
became ftiil narrower. He extended his arm to fhiekl him from any fudden pro¬ jection, and .carried hi3 fvod, unfheathed, in his difengaged hand. Tne paffage was long, and the fides rugged like the furface of unhewn ftone. Thc dew of vapours hung thickly on "thtm, and thc air was warm in iiagnation. Thc Prince, at length, reached the end of this ionr channel, where was another ffioht of ftouc ftairs He defcended, and found at their foot a fpace fo much wider than he had yet met, that he could not, with his extended fword, touch either fide. He paufed, and looked around for fome ray , of hajit, however diftant; but all was dark and comfortlefs. He heard a flint noife as he ftood ; 'twas a flight burft of wind that groaned through thc difmai pafl^gc, and brufhed by him in a melancholy murmur. It reftored, in fome meafure, the elafticity of the confined and unwholcfomc air. Its freihncistjavc him a freedom of breath that he
had wanted, and at the fame lime convinced him that communication with fome apart¬ ments or open place, muft be near at hand. He, however, yet pauful before he went farther. He meditated on the iliangene's of a human bung wandering, through iuch a gh'cmy reeds as tub, to pay any midnight duty to the picture gallery, and almoft again imagined the form he had feen was out of natme. That idea, produced by his un- utual fituation, he foon dbearded ; and all the feelings he had before known, returned to his boiom, and ftmmlatcd him to go on. Still there were tome points, to defpife which would be iefb than courage and prudence. I low poffible was it that, by fome fudden and Inevitably unforefeen defcent, he might lofe his footfteps, and plunge he knew not whither? In many caftles was contrived a tremendoufly deep dungeon, for the purpofe of puniihing impropriety, and terrifying into confeffion, fufpected criminality. To the verge of fuch a gulph he might now be (baying, and an inftant more might preci¬ pitate
pi!ate him down its fide*. Allowing no fuch impediment, the paffage might open to apartments leading to that of the Karl, whole off.-nce at fuch liberty of eximination bei:i£ taken with his caftle, th.-u^h proba¬ bly iilcnt, would 'iceds I e -•■y r. The juft- nefs i-f theie rL-monftrat.tx^ no couid but admit; ftill vuu he fo fo.cmiy j)iomptcd to pieced, tiiat every iuggeftion to thc coniraiy \va: 3 overruled by thc iliength of lib incdmuion. AVith (low fieps then, he proceed.d ; but had nor trade many pace::, when he was convinced there were more openings before him than one. lie proceeded, indit runi- nately, in ^aiktiCii and in iiletice. ^^ hce he trod, theAi were frequent windii%, aud once a trifling dvfcvnt Thc feting he, with fome ihrprife, ohierved no longer to be of ftone, but or moiil day. Lor this he knew not in what uay to account, except that of his ha* mg reached the ba e of thc building, and where he walked being fub- tciTW-wan
terranean and folid. He had not time to argue on the juftnefs of fuch a conclufion, when his hand was encountered by the maffive grating of a wooden door. His imagination was no longer fubfervient to reafon. The nightly viiifant of the gallery, and the nature of her appearance, alone vvere prefent to his thoughts. Here might, perhaps, be fome foiution of his conjecture j that poflibility was fufficient. Fie applied his ftrength to tlie door, where appeared no glimmering of light, and ftep- ped on as it /lowly fhraiik from his preffure. When he had proceeded on his entrance for a few yards, a twinkling of weakened light was vifible, feemingly admitted by a fmall window. He made toward it, but ftumblcd over fomething on the ground. As he fpread his arms in preventing an entire fall, he flruck his hand againft what he imagined a ftone pillar. On recovering himfelf, he continued to hold on the fup¬ pofed column. He examined it, and found it
it to be the uppermoft of feveral coffins. His furprife fubjccted him to a momentary ftiuddcr. He groped round, and found himfelf to be in the dreary and remote burial vault within the caftle chapel. This, then, this gloomy receptacle for the mouldering bodies of the dead, was the cavern from whence the ftrange form iffued in darknefs! Yes, forth from the inefficient coffin that held its rotting body, at dead and folemn midnight thc unquiet fpirit ftole to hover for a few r moments over the fcene of former happinefs—perhaps of for¬ mer guilt 1 The Prince, at that time, could believe no otherwife. Plideous death fur¬ rounded him. Wherever he turned was an cnclofed corfe. The air was noifome as ftagnant. Within, all was loath fome gloom; without, all was dubious horror. While feeling, in the want of light, for the door* way at which he entered, a fudden, but diftant.found, met his ear. He held before him his unfheathed fword. The fmall echo vol. 1. k of
of thc unacknowledged noife from the vaulted termination of the paffage, gradually fank to nothing, and the ftill nefs of death again wrapped itici round every object of the difinal rccefs. The Prince's hand, at length, was oppofed by the grating of an arched door. He thought it probably was the fame at which he hud entered, though clofed by its own weight, and f uthtd till it retreated be- iore him. He had not gone far when his erior was ptoved, by the paffage he trod in fpread ing at its c\\t\ to a wide arflc oi the chapel. From a difcoveiy promifing, however feebly, extrication from thc gloom of the vault, he received lati&fuctipn. Through the large, though Gothic win¬ dows of the chapel, thc little light that the night potfeffed, was admitted. By this fmall help he reached the centre aiflc, where he looked to the fituation of the building, in order to afcertain thc parts of the cafile he
he had pafled through; thence to judge if there vvere any probable continuation of the fecreted paffage. One end of the chapel was attached to the principal fide of the caftle. At that end was the vault through which thc Prince nnd entered; 't vas poflible, therefore, for ano¬ ther paffage to commence in a fimilar way. Aided by the fteady, though trilling light, he examined what objeets were favourable to fuch a conjecture. Nothing bearing refemblance to a door-way could be de¬ cerned. Niches were cut in the wall, in which were monumental figures, fome kneel¬ ing, as in prayer, fome extended, as dead. In the centre was a large tomb, on which flood the ered reprefentation of him whofe afhes it enclofed. He returned to the vault: he fhut after him the heavy do.^rs, and once more found himfelf in the path leading from the chape 1 . He afcended thv firft ftairs, aud knew by the remembered K 2 ibotinj,,
footing, that he was retreading thc paffages he had entered by. On thc deareft point of his furmifes he was ftiil unfinished, and when he reached that larger fpace, where nc had been con¬ vinced feveral openings centered, he ftopped to deliberate before he proceeded. He had not paufed an inftant, when, at but a fmall diftance fv^rr* him, fuch melody as had lwam round the fpirit in thc gallery, arrefted every fenfe. It feemed fpread by the felf- fame ce'euid hand. 'Twas equally wild, penfive, ard beautiful; but the note was lower, and the voice warbled only by (hatches. / non, thc tones were varied, and the voice u ;nled, to folemn meafure, what feemed the I \d ftanza of a vefper hymn. The Prin i bent eagerly forward to catch the ftrain. a paufed, and he ftepped to that part of thc ftone paffage from which it had appealed to come. The paffage was vacant, and die diftant ruthing of thc wind
wind from the chapel chancels, founded alone, But while the Prince gazed around, he perceived light through a filfure of what he imagined the wall. On put Ling thither his hand, he however found it to be wood. On near examination he fancied he could trace a door. A feci ing that he could not controul, urged him to purfuc farther that fuppofition. His hand met fomething like a loofe piece of tapeftry, whieh he dripped clown. That removal opened to his view the infide of a room. It was an anti- chamber of a fimilar nature, though fmaller, to that of his own. A table flood at the end nearer! to the Prince, fitting before which his enraptured eyes beheld—Selina | The lovely girl had on a loofe gown of white. She wore no cap j the fillet that restrained her hair flie had now loofened, and the wanton treifes rambled over her face and neck. She at flrfr fupported her head with her hand, then raifed herfelf, leant back in her chair, and removed a daring k j ringlet
ringlet that had ftolen to her bofom, Her beauties, thus fimply clad, were more cap¬ tivating than even in the ornamental drefs of the bill-room. The fiveetnefs of her featmes -\as i-vn in a ne.v fhape t ! .rough tlie partial veil of her h-iir; the fofi expref¬ fion of her blue eves fpoive, in innocent fecuiity, mild encouragement to the love they infpired. Tie Prince, with delight inexpreffible, wandered trom charm to charm. He for¬ got every obftade to the indulgence of his affection, and confidered himfelf only as the lover of the fwect being he contemplated. In the firft inftants of joy, the dictates of prudence could not be attended to; he made fuch a noife at the door as he thought likely to engage Selina's attention. She ftarted, and turned toward it. Pie repeated the found ; his hand leant againft the door; by accident it preffed on a fpring fattening, and the door flew open.
At
At the appearance of a hurar, fiouw, S-lina threw herlelf into a chair, overcome. by terror. The Prince flew toward her, bent on «* knee at her fet, fcpportcd her feinting fo im on his boibrn,^! murmured , .-- „ «f 1,-,-r • ii'n ail ii ranees ot fond expressions oi lov-, a.iu fafety. In fo"ie nVinutes (lie recovered; die would have iVwunk fiom him, but be held her hand between his, and befought her to pardon and hear him. «« Stay, my Selina," cried he, in an im- paffioned tone ; « long, very long, have I looked to this meeting as the deareft mo¬ ment of my life* Oh match not from me, jn the inftant of attainment, what » to be the folace of many an abient hour I Let me thus kneeling, let me tell you I love you, Selina, more fondly, infinitely more fondly, than 1 do life !"' k + Ttrrot
Terror and apprehenfion were not yet r^vM from the breaft of Sdina. Her ' " - u '-' "mV, hcr countenance wild with ■ lllJ i- She ftiuggled to difengage her hfuuf.
^ Oh leave me," flie cried, "for Hea- veiA idee, my Lord, have pity on a defo- ] a^e £rl* I am alone, and deftitute of prottction : do not, my Lord, defcend to triumph over me !" " Triumph overyou, Selina! 11 ejaculated the Prince. « Sweeteft, deareft of girls ! think not fo poorly of my love. I adore you, my angelic friend; / am your pro. tection ; from every harm / will guard you. Think not the heart devoted to you alone, can forfake its nature, and injure your lido' Jcflhcfs." * The blood now returned to Selina's cheek, her hand trembled, and her bofom throbbed. She averted her face, but at¬ tempted not to withdraw; and, unconfeious of
of its fituation, fuffered her hand to be preffed to the beating heart of the Prince. Hts eyes were lifted with a trembling ray of fond nefs and hope to her face, Hcr's met them, but fhe blufhed, and (hunned the communication. Faintnefs agnin came over her. Her lips trembled, and loft their colour; her hand was languid, lifelefs; hcr eyes clofed ; and flie would have fallen to the ground, had not the Prince, who watched her emotion, caught her in his arms, and fhiclded her on his breaft. Life, for a time, totally forfook her, Thc Prince's agitation wa* extreme. He hum* over hcr with maddening tondnefs. He prcfled his lips to her's, and at length inhaled the fweet breath of life. On opening hcr eyes, fhc looked around with a confuted air, and drew a deep and heavy figh. During liiceilhets, her arm had fallen over the fhoulder of the Prince, and «n his bofom her form now retted, k 5 though
though in the firft impulfe of animation, Ihe had lifted her face from his. Timid and trembling, (lie fnatched away her arm, and raifed herfelf from the fupport of his bofom. A chair ftood near her; (he fell, bardy fenfible, on it, and the Prince threw himfelf befide her, and caught one of her drooping hands. " Oh 1 quit me, my Lord," (he cried, e< if you have pity for me—if—Oh Heaven ! ify\,u (ove me, quit me, and leave me the little fclacc of weeping in fecurity !" " Never, my Selina," returned the Prince, " will 1 leave you thus. I do pity, I do love you, and no power fliall prevent my foothing the forrows of your heart in tender afledion. I adoieyou, fweeteft of friends, and glory in boafting fo. Every word, every look, infbl a new fentiment of fond¬ nefs. I wifli but your approvance, to be bleffed. 'Tis that alone can n ake me happy: deny it me, and fee me a forlorn and foli¬ tary wretch. Let me but know I have not the
the agony of fuing, too late, for your heart, and lift me to the happinefs of Heaven ! Sty, deareft, lovelieft of maids! may J hope? May I, Selina?" Selina firft blufhed, then turned pale. « Your Lordfhip ft.rely mocks me," ftie at length articulated in a faltering voice; " I am humble ! beneath, veiy much be¬ neath, the notice of your High nefs. I am bosn to dependance and forrow ; you to be a King! Fcrfake me, then, nor itoop to take the heart that is unworthy ot you." « Unworthy of me !" cried the Prhice; « s Sehna, it would be condefcenfion in you to prize me. Rank, eftates, hopes, all, every thing 1 fxrifice, let me but call you mine! Through every hour your Lrm has been before my fancy, and fometimes brought me happinefs, but oftener mifery. For you alone 1 became an inrrute of this Lord's Caftle. The hope of feeing you, of dwelling on vour charms, as I now do, gave k 6 me,
me, for a time, the fweeteft of all felicity. But ah! in vain my anxious eyes fearched around—in vain I liftened for that foft voice, whofe flighteft whifper would have fpoke a bleffing ! You were (hut from me, fhut even from my fond enquiries. But now, in full fecurity I offer you my vows. Accept them, dear maid, and make me happy," Selina here caft toward him her eyes. A faint languor pervaded them. Then fome painful remembrance rofe in her bofom, and die turned afide her head, and wept in filent pain. The Prince hung over her in all the tendernefs of exceflive loiidnefs, " Speak to me," he cried, " Oh fpeak, Sdina ! tell me you love not another, and I will be content. You anfwer not !—You do, you do ! and you are loft to me, and I am wretched and contemptible !"
« Alas!
" Alas! my Lord/ 1 replied Selina faintly, " what would you have me fay ? I have been hitherto neglected or defpifed— never, till now, did I hear the language of affection; never before was my regard deemed meriting felicitation.** « Ecftacy and blifs!" exclaimed the Prince; lt I then, and I alone, may ftill poffefs that heart which knows no equal. Oh Sehna! may I hope you will yet fay more ? may I, and not offend the fweet bofom I adore, hope to hear you whifper that my fond affection may, haply, meet return ? May t ever hope to hear you fay you love me ?*' Selina's tears yet fell down her cheek ; the palenefs of agitation fupplanted her wonted bloom. The Prince continued to lean over her, and, in the foft tone ot fym- pathetic triendfhip, he fpoke little fentences of comfort and folicitude. Where the voice of fondnefs is new, how powerful is its effect! Selina's tender heart was over¬ come 4
come by his endearments Her head fell on his bofom, and flic fuffered htm, unno¬ ticed, to remove the long trelies of her hair, and wipe away her te.rj a c they fell. An hundred gentle ipeeches ft le from i is lips. He repeated atiu ances ot his ervent affeclion. He called her, with pride, his fweet fiiend. He talked of her forrow, .md called it his alfo; then defciib^d the feli¬ city of guarding over her fate, and fecuring to her lip the mule of happinefs. Selina could not refift his tcrdemelfc LLr ejes told, through her rears, a ni-.eh fofter fenti¬ ment than indiffereuce. Thc Prince caught thc moment of their communicating fuch expreffion, to throw himfelf at her feet, and renew his fuit with the warmth of paffion* Selina was no longer entire miftrefs of her mind. She hid her face on the arm lie fupported hcr with :— " Alas!" cried flie, "you prefs me too far. Do not delpite me, my Lord—1 am a poor
r
poor weak girl, artlefs and inexperienced ! I know not how to hide the feelings of my heart. But------" Her voice failed, and what (he would have faid, died in a murmur on her lip. " But," (he at length faltered, « I never knew ail the miferies of dependance and obfcurity till the day in which I firft (aw you I" Thc Prince's tranfports will not admit of defcription. He caught her to his bofom, and breathed his foul in filence; then re¬ membered thc refped due to her fituation, relinquiflied the delight of enfolding her, and only preffed hcr hand to the rifing rapture of his heart. All that the interchange of affection could give, he knew. PIc gazed on the timid beaut-cs of her face, and rupturocfly red ct- ed that thev were his alone. He liftened to the
the trembling cadence of her voice, and experienced a lenfaiion truly exquifite while remembering that, when it exprelfed love, he aione was ihe objed it addreffed. But, after thc fyft flow of tranfport had given p'ace to the moie temperate courfe of chattcned delight, the urgings of reaion would not altojjett.er be huthed. Where, alas! was that noble and neceffary forbear¬ ance he was to pr die ? Were thefc burfts of joy, thefe erl'utions of love, hke tiie mild friendfli«p that he *as to tend in the ful¬ nefs of efteem and cornpaflbn to the poor, the orphan Selina ? Ah, no \ not her good was he contuking in thefe flights of fond¬ nefs, but his OAii gratifivauon. What he did, would not take irom an aching "heart the bittertiefs of one figh, but would add to its fufferings the weight of many a tear, Selina v*as abjed in eftate, though fwect in virtues i the uas fheltcred only m com¬ miferation j ihe was the child of grief, though of innocence, lie was the fon of a King* iate forbade their union* in the very
very knowledge of which, he had won her heart, to rob it of its peace, and leave it in folitude to fade and die. All thefe truths paffed through his altered foul. The vivacity of joy fank from his countenance, and a gloomy fadnefs col¬ lected there in its ftead. He was loft in reflection. His eyes were caft to the ground. He ftill held Selina's hand, but his own was cold, and had loft all power of preffure. He bit his agitated lip, and de¬ fpair fixed itfelf, in hollow apathy, in his eye. At length he ftarted up, and flaking his forehead with his hand, exclaimed—- <e Oh Selina ! I am the worft of traitors, the moft miferable of men ! Can you for¬ give me ? Can you companionate the weak, the unworthy heart that would cruelly folicit what it could not with juflice accept? Oh my Selina, my friend, my love! thoughtlefs
thoughtlefs paffion has torn from me what I intended fhould die, uncommunicated, in my bofom. Whither have I ftrayed ! To be your huiband, is to he rich in merit, but unburthened with painful and exclulive rank. To watch the figh that gathers in your heart; co cultivate the fmile that betrays you to forgetfulnefs ; to impart the feeling of affecticn ; to m^et the kifs of love - 3 to live but for you -, to d > thefe, is to be the fon of a Keight, the heir of his honours. But I, alas! am a Piince 1" He threw himfelf into a chair, and cJafped together his hands, while one tear, the pure cffence of fympathy, tendernefs, and pity, roiled down his cheek— " Yes," he fud lenly exclaimed, " it muft be io. We muft part, Selina—part to meet no more ! Honour, duty enjoin it, and 1 will not falter. But for you, Oh Sehna ! how fliall j pray you to pardon the impetuous error of my nature ? Speak to
to me, my Selina, tell me you will forget me, and 1 will cancel my folly in the an¬ guifh of my farewel.' 1 Life hung tremblingly on Selina's lip. Her faint voice fcarcely uttered, diftin- guilhably— " What duty prcfcribes, teach me, my Lord, to obey." Her half-filmed eyes vvere turned on him as fhe fpoke ; in them was an exprefTion of diftrefs the moft poignant, but of reproach there was nothing. He rofe from his ieat. He took her hand, and preffed it to his ftps, and wetted it with tears. Selina rofe alfo. Her loofe hair flowed over her neck— her neck whiter than the early fnow-drop, lovelv in pure fimplicity ! Fler lip eflayed not to move, bat her heart fpoke through her eyes, and told a tale oi dejected diftrefs and hopeleffnels that bereft the Prince of ali his gathering fortitude. He fixed his look
look on hcr fweet face. His bofom heaved vvith uncontroulablc emotions, and he clafp- ed hcr to him in fpeechlefs agony. Of a fudden he ftarted from her innocent arms. Tie motioned toward the door. " Farewel !" he cried, in a broken voice ; « forget me, Selina—think of me no more ! But 1 muft ever think of you !— think of you when another, when a fubjeet dares to talk to you of love I prefumes to ftrive the winning of your heart! Perhaps, when he is your hufband, when he knows to imprefs his kifs on your cheek, to fold you to his bofom, to make the wifhes of your heart fubfervient to his inclinations!" His voice was (lifted in paffion. He put one hand over his eyes, his other fell by his fide. He remained fome momente filent.
<( Difgraceful
" Difgraceful weaknefs!" he at length exclaimed. " But 1 will forget myfelf no more. Selina, farewel!" He (tapped toward the door. " Farewel, my Lord," refponded thc faint voice of Selina. The Prince placed one foot on the open door-way. His face was ftill toward Selina's. He ftopped to bid farewel again, but his laft farewel met no anfwer. Seiina dropped on a chair, and her head fell, drooping, on its back. The Piince flew to her. Plis arm upheld her form, his cheek her head. The flow tears fell down her face, and her utterance was loft in fighs. His refolution was for¬ gotten. All the world, fave her, was again abient from his recollection. Pie whifpered words of tendernefs, and thought only of love. • Whe/
When perfed remembrance was reftored to Selina, flie gently withdrew herfelf from his fupport, and waved hcr hand for him to leave and forcrct her; but to do cither was to him impoflible. He recolleded that fyflcm of friend fhip, whofe anticipation had afforded him fucli pure pleafure, Pie wondered that he had forgotten to ad other- wife than in conformance to its dictates. To fuch intercourfe Juftice and Compaffion, he fancied, oppofed no barrier. In the fweet deliaht cf conflant communication with Selina, he could not only footh her mind, but learn his own, by prefenting to its contemplation onl) her virtues, friend Ih ipun- tinctured with love. By confultingonly her happinefs, he could wean his heart from every felflm wifh, and learn it to felecl for her a noble and dclerving hufband. Yes, by proper'.y cultivating cool and tranquil affection, he could affo:d to the gentle, the amiable girl, a prefent folace and a iuturc comfort.
On
On fuch fallacies his deluded imagina¬ tion pondered. His e } es brightened at the profpect. Me communicated his thoughts to Selina : he communicated them with the full confidence of their giving her equal fatisfadion with himfelf. But though flie was inexperienced as youth, innocence, and feclufon could render her, nature taught her to avoid the dangers of fuch a connec¬ tion. The Prince attributed her rcludtancs to a total want of affeclion, and upbraid¬ ed her with cruelty. Selina's heart was too deeply cngigcd to be unmoved by fuch a reproach. She wept at the iecm- inp- unkindncfs of thc accufaticn, and com- mitted her inexpeiience to his caie. "While thc Prince vo.^ed the purity of his withes, he gained her confent to his re i cat mo this ajcturn.il \1f1t to her anti-chamber for the comparan\c.y iew opportunities that his ftay at Ilf>id would atfoid. Sedna, torn by vaiy.n^ wiflicr, tumbled ai> ihe he^rd the pio^ohuon; but
but dreaded exciting again the Prince's defpair, if flic refufed to grant her ap¬ probation. When he left her, thc day was dawn¬ ing in the eaft. Delight, anguifh, con¬ tentment, folicitude alternately governed his bofom; while Selina, no lefs agitated, repofed her burning cheek on her pillow; but fleep came not to calm the emotions of her breaft.
CHAP
CHAP. VI. << Of them who, wrapt in earth fo coki, " No more the fmiling clay fliall view, " Should many a tent ler tale be toki.'* tf • # # LANGHOfeNE. A HE Prince arofe fo early on the fuc¬ ceeding morning, that when he entered the large room in which breakfaft was ufed to be ferved, he found it deftitute both of Lord and Lady Ilford. The moft agreeable method of paffing the time till they appear¬ ed, was that of walking in the gardens or park. He accepted the attendance of the two Efquires who waited on his perfon, and ft rolled into the latter* vol, 1. l By
By chance he wandered to thc verge of that wood, in which was thc bower he ima¬ gined Selina's favourite refort. He was delighted with thc accident, and entered the fhade with his two attendants. With rapmre of heart, he reflected on what had occurred iincc his firft vifit to this lonely, but fwect fpot. Then, he was the fubjeet of a thoufand anxieties: then, it appeared more than poflible that he would never fee the object of his firft affedion more. Now, he had breathed at her feet thc fondnefs he felt for her, had heard hcr fav fhc loved none bet-tcr than himicif, and had fliapcd in her fociety his paffion, fo that it might be indulged without injuftk'c. At thc end of ar.oxl-path he was fur- 1'iifod by the appearance of Ofborne. Thc worthy old man bint l.h knee on beholding tne miftaken vifit cr of hib cottage ; but the Prince raifed him, and with a complacent air, made him thc ialuiation oi the morn- ii.< v , and afked alter the health of Im wife Rachel,
Rachel. The delighted old man anfwered to thefe courtefics with that garrulity tint is the prerogative of many years. The Prince was pleafed with the fimplicity of his difcourfe, and looked on him with more than common regard, when he remembered the tender refpect he had profeffed feeling for Seiina. To her he now wifhed to direct the dif¬ courfe, but was re ft rained by the prefence of his attendants. Pie was on the point of difmiffmg them, when he arrived at. the arbour. He turned to enter it, but ftarted on perceiving Lord Defmond fitting there, with his head reclined on the tabic, and holding in his hand a fmall picture, on whicli he was gazing intently. On the unexpected entrance of the Prince, he haftily fecrcted the object of his medita¬ tion, but not tiil he had fhewn it to be the portrait of a lady, young and beautiful. Tlie Prince felt a thoufand pangs of jealoufy t- 1 in
in the inftant. He believed the pidure to be no other than that of Selina. His hp trembled vvith indignation. Before he could not perfuade himlelf to like Lord Defmond, now he hated him. He ftiove to hide his emotion, and to addrefs his imagined rival with terenity. <{ You arc an early rambler this morning, my Lord," faid he; " I was far from expeding to meet you here." *' I may with truth make the fame fpeech," returned Defmond; " but your I lighneb, latterly, will fcaicely fuffer the tun to commence his courfe fnft. You have chofen a plcafant part of thc park to walk in, my Lord." '» Yes," laid the Prince, « I think thib fpot moft charming. I difcovered it yefter¬ day by accident entirety. Are you in the habit ot frequenting this fweet retreat?" " Yes—no," replied Lord Defmond, l( not much. I fometimes flroil here, to avoid
avoid thc heat of a fummer's day. The branches of thefe fore It trees are fo thick, they afford a grateful flielter, and the fra¬ grance of this alcove's flowers is truly de¬ lightful." 44 Moil exquiiuely fo," faid the Prince, iii observance ,uf the latter remark; " I wonder you did not (hew mc this little temple of rural folitude as one of the beauties of your domain. The difpofition of the flowers round this fupporter, is tafte- ful in the extreme. Am I deceived, or is Lady Ilford herfelf the trainer of them ?" ** No," Lord Defmond anfwered, " (lie hardly ever vifited the wood, and never, he believed, thought of attending to one of the flowers that grew in its recedes." He then changed the fubjecl:, and afked Ofborne, with fome furprife, and even dif¬ pleafure in his manner, on what account he had approached the retirement of his Prince. The old man explained the accidental way ia which he had done fo, Defmond was t, 3 filent
filent for a minute, then ordered Ofborne to wait his will at thc caftle, and turning to thc Prince, begged leave to lead him to fome pleafant points of the higher lands. The Prince's mind was far fiom a ftate of tranquillity. The flighteft trifle will afford fond affedion caufe for alarm and melancholy. The picture he had furprifed Lord Defmond contemplating, he concluded, without examining on what ground, to be that of Selina; and he beheld him, in con¬ fequence, with enmity and indignation. He blufhed at firft to acknowledge a fubjea for a rival; then fhuddered to think how powerful an one he poffibly might prove. But fuddenly he ftarted, and recolleded that he himfelf pretended not to Selina's heart; that he did not allow hirnfdf a wifli for being alone pofleffed of it, and that to fee her happy in another's love, was all he was to require, Thefe fads he could not deny; but he felt that that other muft not be Lord Defmond. Any man but him, he thought.
thought, he could embrace as a friend, though the hufband of Selina. Such felf-deccptionis indubitably a weak- nefs; but 'tis a weaknefs that the nobieft are liable to, when their hearts are foftened to the feelings of love. He, however, attempted to conceal his fentiments from his companion, and talked on indifferent fubjects with feeming uncon¬ cern ; in the courfe of which, his Lordfhip mentioning the pidure gallery of the caftle, the Prince renewed his enquiries on the circumftance of it being the fuppofed theatre of a ghoft's operations. « The title, your Highnefs knows," faid Lord Defmond, " was not always in our family. One of its former poffeffors was a melancholy man, and indeed fufpected to be infirm of mind. Without any apparent caufe for fuch an act, he plunged Isis poniard in his boiom, and was found weltering in
his b xl, in the agonies of death. Such a circr.r > ance awakened the fears of menials, and K ml fwore to having ft-en the fpirit ot the o i Baron walking in a blood-boltcr- ed Ah dt midnight. Such a fuppofition (for u, . cannot help believing it) received new ftrength when thc infane Lord's armour, that hung in the chamber adjoining the gallery in which he had murdered himfelf, was discovered, one morning, unjointed, and ftrewed about the room. Frefh ghofh were then feen, with ftill more terrific circum¬ ftances. The ftory has become traditional, and not one of our fcrving-men but would rather face half an hundred enemies' pikes, than venture to the fufpeded part ot tha caftie in darknefs." The Prince fmiled flightly at this ac¬ count. « It was fome time ago, then," laid he, " that the Baron deftroy ed himfelf?" " About
« About three Earls back, I believe," replied Lord Defmond. « And his race is poffibly now extinct ?" (aid the Prince. Lord Defmond hefitated an inftant, and then replied-— " Not wholly fo." The Prince was about to propofe fome other queftion, when Lord Defmond afked his opinion of an alteration intended in the part of the park they were in. His Lord¬ fhip fo contrived to lead the converfation, that the Prince was unable to turn it to the fubjea he wiflied, before they vvere in the immediate vicinity of the caftie. They were joined by many of the Earl's gay vifiters, and morning compliments and trifling converfe occupied them till they were received by their courteous entertainers.
L 5
Though
Though thc Prince's fears of Lord Def¬ mond were kindled to fome degree of in¬ quietude, his own bofom had never before been fenfible of fuch grateful emotions as it now experienced. The affedion he enter¬ tained for Selina, was of the moft tender and delicate kind. He imagined himfelf well contented with the aflurance of her return¬ ing the fentiments of friendfhip he bore toward her. He had not yet time to exa¬ mine into the precife fituation of his heart. To the nature of his wiflies, he was, indeed, wilfully blind. He perfuaded himfelf that nothing was more remote from his defires than the perfon of Selina. He drew, in his imagination, all thc pleafures of culti¬ vating a purely mental and reciprocal at¬ tachment. He would not allow the exift¬ ence of danger in fuch indulgence of lus inclination, and believed that he ftudied Selina's benefit more than his own grati¬ fication.
He
He anticipated the tranquil joys the even¬ ing was to produce. He burned to meet Selina as his deareft friend. Her health, after the agitation (he had known, he trem¬ bled to think might be deranged. He thought the hours of endlefs length ; he pidured every turn of her countenance, but imagined memory incapable of por¬ traying, with juftice, hcr rifing beauties. At length, he faw the clofe of the long day, and his palpitating heart viewed itfelf on the point of being reftored to its ftolen commu. nication with that of Sdina. Soon as the caftle was buried in thc ftill¬ nefs of advanced night, with careful fteps he fought her obfeure apartment. Pie liftened if all were quiet within, then, in a whifpering voice, fignified his being there to requeft admittance. After a few mo¬ ments, the door was flowly opened, and Selina, pale and trembling, appeared. The delighted Prince preffed her hand—
h 6 " A good
u A good evening to my Selina !" cried he; u I take the carlieft advantage, you find, of our fii end fhip; yet have I thought it an age fince I laft fiuv you. I have had a thoufand fears for your health. Are you well, Selina?" Her agitation prevented hcr utterance. Her eyes were caft on the ground. Diffi¬ dence took place of every other apprehen¬ fion, and lhe felt faint in confufion. The Prince knew her embarraffment, and ftrove to remove it by tender refpect ful nefs of demeanor. He led hcr to a chair, faL him¬ icif befide her, and talked with the fond familiarity of eftablithed friendfhip. SJiua's timidity, however, would not be eafily overcome. In her \ery fears the Prince difcovcred virtues j and, while he endeavoured to fubftitute for painful referye ?* ink fi rating confidence, he law frefh reafon i i )ve the mind he W'iflied to unfold. Py cVprets, thc dif lance he preferved, and the foothing
foothing tendernefs of his attentions, in fome meafure re-aflured her; and her imagi¬ nation then was alive to all the dangers attendant on their interview. The Prince perfuaded her that her fears were ground¬ less. From the fecret paffage, he argued, it was highly improbable any thing ihould advance to moleft them. Only one door opened into Sclina's chamber, and that, he underftood, led to a long range of rooms, thc ncarcft of which was at prefent vacant, and the moft diftant occupied only by the female part of Lord Ilford's vifiters, with whom Selina was now profcrlbcJ commu¬ nication. " You are too apprehenfive, my fwect friend," fail he; "thc little pleafure cf this hour's meeting is envied us by no one. In full fecurity we may here exchange the fentiments of our hearts. 'Tis the only folace we have left, my Selina, and think not Fate can be cruel enough to wreft our laft hope from us." " Ah,
" Ah, my Lord," rephed Selina, " tri¬ umph and happinefs only have marked your days, and you know not to look with a fearful heart to poffible evils, I am the child of forrow, the haplefs daughter of worth and misfortune. To mc, the future cv.er feems fraught with frefh calamity; for though young in years, I have to contem¬ plate, in a thoufuid ihapes, the fallacy of every hope of earthly happinefs." The fond Prince liftened, with anguifh, to words of fo fad a tenor. All the kind feelings of his breaft were intcrefted ; and, while he heaved ajigh over the mention of what forrows flie had hitherto known, with tender friendfhip he bade her wipe the memory of them from her mind, and truft to his affection for an infurance of future felicity. Sclina's timid eye ftole a look of J oft gratitude as he fpoke : his anfwered to it in one of fympathy, of love. She drop¬ ped her glance to the ground, and a blufh covered her neck and face. After
After fome of thofe filent moments, that in communications of affeaion are fo truly fweet, thc Prince fpoke of Lady Ilford. He praitcd the feeming tendernefs of her nature, and aiked if he nrght be .allowed to value her as Sclina's friend ? Selina accorded with all the Prince faid in approbation ot hcr— « She W (aid fhe, <( kind, affectionate, attentive to mc She is almoft a mother ; but only almoft 1 a true, a fond, protecting mother, never, never muft I know I" She covered her eyes with her hands. The Prince leant over the back of her chair, and fpoke comfort to her. At length fhe withdrew her hand, and wiped the drops of recollection from hcr cheek* « Excufe me," (he cried, « I obtrude my grids. 1 think only of myfelf, and 'tis , poffible
poffible I think with too much defpondency. Perhaps I am in fome meafurj guilty of ingratitude; for in f/ord Ilford I have found a paternal friend. Though his fervices are evidently at the inftance of his Lady, (till I am very much indebted to them." " You delight me by this," faid the Prince ; " I feared the friendfhip of your protector was diftant and cold. But how could I imagine Selina in thc habit of inti¬ macy with aught but admiration and affec¬ tion ? To fee that face, to watch the ex¬ preffion of thofe eyes, to hear that foft, ftveet voice—Oh Selina, is to love, is to adore ! 'Tis inevitably to do thefe ; and ah I deareft of friends! others enjoy thofe heavenly pri- v vileges than fuch as feci parental efteem in confequence of them. Yes, Defmond, the happy, the enviable Defmond now does, and long has enjoyed them. He loves you ; >ou can but accept his love, and I muft ftand diftracted to behold your union."
In
In vain Selina's trembling voice affured him Lord Defmond had never made thew of any other affection than fuch as a brother does to a After; that though the playmate of her infant years, he had not been the companion of her htter ones. He pcrti- nacioufly perfifted in believing it impoflible, efpecially after the circumftance of the miniature picture, and many indirect fpecdics of Lord Defmond, for it to be any othcrwife than that he loved, and was bent on gaining her. After venting the agitated fuggeftions of his heart, he upbraided himfelf with adding to Selina's inquietude and diftrefs; then re¬ flected on the cruelty of oppofing the indul¬ gence of Lord Defmond's prefumed paffion, as its gratification feemed a probable mean of procuring Seiina all the happinefs fate would permit her to know. The gentle voice of his fweet companion, as thefe various feelings arofe in his bofom, alone
alone had power to footh and tranquillize him. Again, he foraot what aiTedecl him- felf only, and meditated on her intercft. He looked on her lovely countenance— <s Alas ! M thought he, " is that a face to be faddened by continual forrow ? Oh where can be the guardian fpirit whofe fweet province it is to hover over fuch beauties, fuch virtues P* A fudden fmile that expanded her lip* brought to his mind that port:ait in the pidure gallery, which bore to her fo ftrong a refemblance—the portrait whofe fallacious pannel faced the fecret door-way, and before which the myfterious midnight form had knelt and paid the duties of reverence. The more he looked on Selina, the more he was aftonifhed at the clofenefs of the likenels. One mould feemed to have fhaped both. When Selina fmiled, fhe appeared the very original of the pidure. Her eye wanted in vivacity, but it poffefled ftill more foftnefs. He
He was interefted in the refemblance. The picture's original had once been miftrefs of the caftle, and the title of its owner. Much misfortune had carried her to an early grave I Of misfortune, Selina was the daughter. Perhaps with the iir-fated Countefs Ihe was mod clofely conuectud. He joined the probabilities, and was perfuaded he was not miftaken. His wifhes to be familiar with whatever concerned her, urged him to mention to Selina the fimilitude he had difcovered, and the anxiety he felt to know of what nature had been the calamities of the lamented Countefs. Selina ftarted as he fpoke. Her cheeks loft their colour; her eyes were fuffufed in tears. « Alas!" cried (he, (i and do you not then know ? Oh, you know not all the pains that I am born to I You have not been told the miferies of my houfe I Per* haps, when you are, you will hate me." ^ " Gracious
" Gracious God 1 my Selina," faid the Prince, " hate you ! nothing can ever make me do fo, for nothmg can ever make you worthy of leproach. Your houiVs mife¬ ries are mine. Should it be in my power to leffen them, with what rapture would I blefs the rank that enabled me to do it l" * f You leffen them ?" cried fhe 5 " Oh my Lord, of all the world you are the laft to whom it could apply for ftiendfliip! What mail I fay ? You, you, who pity, who love me, it has ftrove to injure in the deepeft way. Leave mc, my Lord, in mercy do; for I am unworthy of your notice." Her head fell over the back of her chair, and her bofom heaved in diftrefs. The Prince, with more of generous pity than even of love, threw himfelf at her fctt, and befought her to explain what equally amazed and pained him.
When
When thc violence of her emotion fub- ^ ftded, (lie leant on her hand, and wept. The Prince hung over her with fearful fondnefs— « Think not of vvhat I faid," he cried, » think of nothing, my fweet friend, that will give you pain. Let us difcourfe as before. We will avoid the mention of what is indifferent to me, fave in the inftance of its affecting you, and talk of nothing but the Tulle happinefs we enjoy in each other's friendfhip." « Your Highnefs," laid Selina, iC is too good. Your Highnefs------" ° « Nay, my Selina," interrupted the Prince, " diftrefs me not by fo formal an appellation. In affection, difference of rank is forgotten. Precedence, the/e, exifts only in fuperiority of tendernefs." " You overcome me with kindnefs," articulated Selina, faintly ; " would to I lea¬ ven I were deferving of your fentiments! But no, my—my dear Lord, we will not ceaie
ceafe to fpeak of what you have fuggcfted. ? Tis fit you fliould know mc for what I am, before you repeat vows of never-ending friendfhip. You liave hitherto thought mc unfortunate; perhaps you may hence think me involved in my family's guilt. You may look back to my parents with difguft, and on me with coolnefs or diflike." « You diffract me," cried he, " by fuch apprehenfions. I love you to my heart, and ever fliall. You are the friend of my bofom. Sooner could I ceafe to live, than to hold you in that dear light/* Re-affured by fuch exccffivc tendernefs, Selina conquered her agitation, and rcprcfT- cd her tears— « I will tell you then," faid flic, " if I am able, what particulars of my fate I myfelf know. 1 wronged your noblenefs when I imagined you would not pity the evils that have befallen me; but even ftill 1 fear your defpifmg thofe, whofe memory tis
'tis my only folace to treafure in regret and love. My father was once Lord of this caftic, and its vaft annexed eftate: then was he happy, for he was good as great. Pie was married to his equal in birth, in riches, and in virtues. Bleffed are the mo¬ ments in which imagination carries me to a view of thofe days I My parents,, peaceful, gay, contented, each loving the other with the moft anxious fondnefs, difpenfmg to their poor dependants a thoufand com¬ forts, receiving in return a thoufand prayers and grateful and zealous fervices ? Oh that I had ever witneffed fuch blifs I That I had ever beheld my parents happy! Methinks, could I but fee them as they then were, I could, without a figh of regret, retire and die. But ah ! fliort-lived was their tran¬ quillity, and what a world of woe was it fucceeded by! My father—how fliall I fpeak ?—The King—I know not what I f ay | __Alas ! my Lord, pardon the feelings of a daughter—thofe filial feelings that fi.\cll with fondnefs in my bofom, and forbid my
my accufing a loft, unhappy father of act¬ ing otherwife than rightly !" " Forgive! my Selina/' cried the Prince, " 1 revere the virtue that gives them birth. Your father, my friend, your father could not do what is wrong. I grieve over his memory with you, and lament the day that bereft him of his hopes.'* " Stop, ftop," flie cried, " have mercy on yourfelf and me! Fatal errors tempted him to forget his allegiance. He was in the intercft of the Queen-Mother*. He unfheathed his fword ag inft the King, your father. He would have wrefted the crown from his head—yes, he would have hurled deftruction on the glorious parent of his child's fond friend !" The Prince ftarted as flie fpoke; aftonifh¬ ment prevented his making inftant reply. Selina mifcon ftrued his filence. Her eyes were caft imploringly up to his, and her
lieart
heart beat in as faint pulfations, as if on his next words depended her laft hope of life. " You abjure your friendfhip 1" (he at length uttered, in a tremulous and weak voice. " You loathe the recolledion of my father; you repent you of your fond¬ nefs for me I" She clafped together her hands, then hid her face, and gave loofe to tears. The Prince put his arm round her waift as (he leaned forward, and with his other hand took her's that hung by her fide. " And do you think me capable, Selina," faid he, " of hating your father, and of abandoning you f No, my dear, rny moft beloved friend, you wrong me if you do. 'Your father's errors, long fince expiated* ought now by all to be forgotten. By me* they are thought of only with compaffion. But you. Oh! you arc rendered doubly vol. i. m dear,
dear, by partaking of that ruin that you could neither help nor avoid.'* By this tender generofity, the fenfib'e heart of Selina was wholly overcome. She could not reply to it in words, but Ihe for¬ got every reftraint, and threw herfelf, in a tranfport of gratitude and affection, on the bofom of thc Prince, He kifled the check that preffed in harmkfs fondnefs againft his, and (trained her to his heart in love and delight. On recolledmg herfelf, fhe withdrew fiom his endearment?, and continued to fpeak. " My father's fatal m:(lakes/' Lid (he, " were followed by the ruin of himfelf, and all who lived in his protection, Po*ve:ful friends averted that horrible completion of hU mifery that hung fearfully over him. I k was fuffered to live ; but ah I was not fuffered to live for happincK He was condemned
condemned to perpetual banifhment—a fate that he franticly called lels kind than death. What words can defcribe the fitua¬ tion of my angel mother ? She was long loft to life and fenfe. Her calamities burft on her with accumulated force, for flie knew not of the dreadful fchemes my father's mind was torn by, till the fad moment in which their confequence, his endlefs exile, was announced to her. When flie, for inter¬ vals, recovered confcioufnefs, flie plucked from off her head her hair in diftracted defperation. Her agony, at length, arofe to actual delirium, and in that fad ftate my banifhed father left her. I have had repeated to me his exclamations ; I have had defcribed to me the horror of hh coun¬ tenance, as he looked on her lovely, but fevered face for, poffibly, the laft time ! la my dreams, that wretched hour has been pictured, a thoufand times, by my difturbed fancy; and Oh I how bitter have been the orphan tears which 1 unconfeioufly have then fhed! My father, in every other fcenc, m % poffefled
pollefied cahnnefs and fortitude; but here he wanted both. He curfed the hour that gave him birth, and execrated himlelf for involving in his deep wretchednefs, the fweeteft and beft of women. Partly by foree, he was feparated from her, and his fteps directed to the fhip dellined .to bear him from her, and every hope of felicity. ] was then an infant, expecled to be the comfort, but proving to be thc care of my once noble parents. My mother, with mvfeif, was left in a wide defert, for fuch ihc now found fociety to be to her. The family, however, to which the King gave my father's forfeited title, was diftantly re¬ lated to us in blood, and, in affection, very nearly fo. Between the new Lady Ilford and my mother, there had ever exifted the tendereft communication. My parent, thu-efoie, found an afylum where fhe had been accullomcd to be acknowledged mil- trefs. In very taint degrees, flie recovered fome manner of ferenity : the ceafelefs and moft affedionate amduities of Lady Ilford
Ilford contributed to reftore her femblance of tranquillity. She looked alfo on me, her helpiefs iittlc fellow-fufferer, and remem¬ bering that on her alone I depended, ftrove to :;ve, vvere it but to beftow life on me. « She threw fome ligrt on her long days of forrow, by anticipating the hour that would bring letters of comfort and condo¬ lence from my wandering father ; and fre¬ quently cheered her heart while fhe wept over my unconfeious fmiles, by looking to the period that would reftore her to his fond arms, though in obfcurity, and a fir diftant land. But, ah! even that little foothcr of her wounded heart was denied to herl The firft accounts received of my father, informed us that the veflel he had embarked in, was wrecked on a foreign coaft! One mariner, alone, returned to tell the tale. He had feen the fhip fal¬ lowed in the vaft gulph that furrounded it 5 he had heard the dying cries of her fmking crew, and doubtlefs, among them m 3 was
was my dear, my wretched father 1 My mother could ftruggle with hcr troubles no longer. With clafped hands, and aching eyes, tearlefs in excefs of mifery, would ftie gaze on me as I lay fleeping in her lap. Sometimes flie would feem to fancy my loft father fitting with her, and would point to the charms of my infancy with a fond mother's love; then would fhe ftart to all the horrors of recolledion, rife quickly, and clafp me to her bofom; fly with me round the apartment, as if from the grafp of a purfuer, and cry, in broken accents, * No, no, infatiate wretches, you fliall not have this poor, orphaned darling! My hufband, my fweet hufband, he may fuffice I You have hts precious life, and the wide fea has his beauteous form; leave me this very wretched, little comfort; leave me my child, to fhed one pitying tear over my gravel* ** At length fhe fank to utter dejedion. Every lingering ray of fortitude fled. She hunfr
hung hcr head in filent defpair, and only prayed her few friends to fmooth for her a death-bed, and to give (helter to her poor little Selina. « Oh my mother 1 deareft, moft angelic of women 1 why was I not fenfible of what you fuffered? Why was I not permitted to nurfe your forrows, to beguile you of your pain ? I would have whifpered peace to you when you were troubled; I would have hovered round you with an hundred fond duties, till I learned you to forget! Excufe, my dear Lord, the weaknefs of my nature : pardon me my tears; they come from the heart, and are (lied to the memory of an haplefs parent!" The Prince was loft in tendernefs and commiferation. His eyes were fuffufed in tears; he preffed Selina's hand to his bofom— M 4 " l 4dore
" J adore every frefh fentiment you breathe," he cried ; <f my heart weeps with your's; but, while it weeps, it would con- fole r She thanked him not with her lips, but the hand that was enfolded in his, motioned a gentle preffure, and that preffure applied fo exquifitcly to his feelings, that words of more than mortal eloquence would after- v.-ards have been taftelefls. " In that tomb,'* continued Selina, i( where reft many of my noble anceftors, were placed the hallowed afhes of my mo¬ ther. Round that fpot, full many a time, have I lingered for hours. I feemed in the prefence, beneath the immediate eye of her fainted fpirit. There, have I wept over her urn, uninterruptedly. I have found melan¬ choly pleafure in unfolding every wifli of my heart. It has been infinitely foothing for me to imagine my blefled mother ap¬ proving the thoughts of her child. I have fometimes
fometimes fancied foft notes of mufic ftole on the folemn ftill nefs of the aides: then have I feit a fudden and inexpreffible exalt¬ ation of my fpirits: my whole foul would be dilated in ecftacy : I believed my mo¬ ther's fpirit mingling with mine, and I longed for the minute in which no earthly obftacle would bar me from winging my. way to that heaven (lie partook of. The portrait in the gallery, concerning which you have now enquired, is that of my mo¬ ther. How happy you make me by faying my features referable her's 1 I (hall learn, through that medium, to fet fome value on myfelf. Before that picture I have paffed many feafbns of penfive pleafure. I am never tired of gating on it; I prefs to it my lips, and fancy I receive a mother's kifs. 'Tis only lately I knew how wonder¬ ful a paffage it concealed. By chance I difcovcred a door in this anti-chamber. Curiofity, or fome more powerful motive, impelled me to explore the vaulted way it opened to. Judge of my aftonifnment M 5 when
when I perceived the painting that Tfo idol¬ ized, at its termination! The picture gallery was ever a favourite place with me. On evenings when the moon (hines with full power, I have ventured to truft the fecurity of the hour, and ftray thither with my Jute. The faint notes I breathed from it, gave to me, fo folemnly fituated, a foothing placidnefs. I caught the feeming glance of my mother's eye as the moon-beams fell on hcr imaged face, and ceafed to feel pain in the commu¬ nication. My thoughts were lifted to worlds far away, and I anticipated the blifs of being reftored to her in a land of fpirits. " The extreme tendernefs of Lady Ilford has alone rendered being fupportable to me. With fondnefs undeviating, has flie trained me from childhood. She has ftrove to make me forget the lofs her lip only made me acquainted with; or when (lie has furprifed the tearj> falling down my face, ftie has 5 talked
A talked to me of my mother, and wept with me over her recollection." « Dear woman!" cried the Pnnce, I efteem and revere her ; I feel for her the love of a fon." <« Lord Ilford," faid Selina, « has be¬ haved with no lefs kindnefs, though latterly I have fancied his behaviour frequently un¬ accountable. Lord Defmond—" The Prince bent forward; his brow con- traded, and his eye fixed on Selina's. « Lord Defmond," continued fhe, " has treated me with the utmoft friendfhip. In our very young days we were much toge¬ ther ; lately, the wars have taken him frotn the caftle, and our communication has been trifling. I have feidom feen him, and he appears to have forgotten the interchanges of our childhood." « 'Tis better foi" exclaimed the Prince •* « I like not Defmond ; I may wrong him, but I cannot think he has a noble heart." m 6 " The
" The admittance I received,*' returned flie, " into all the friendfliips of the caftle, made me much amends for the contempt I frequently underwent from thofe, who, wffibly, would have courted my attention, had not thc hopes of my infancy been de- ftroyed. Within the few laft months, Lord llford's temper has materially changed. Though his expreffions of affection for me have been as warm as ever, he has frequent¬ ly betrayed uneafinefs in my prefence. Repeatedly, when I have met him in any of the caftle rooms alone, he has ftarted from his feat, after fitting with me for a few minutes, and abruptly left the room. When the vifit of your Highnefs was talked of, he infifted on my remaining, during your ftay, in my own chamber. Lady Ilford remonftrated, but in vain j and in this foli¬ tary feclufion I am doomed to pafs tny long hours. Many of them have paffed in pain; but, if I have your efteem, I can learn to be contented,"
The
A WINTER'S TALE. 253 The Prince forbore to notice the affec¬ tionate expreffions of her heart.— " I grieve," faid he, ff to be the caufe of any forrow where I would only occafion the pureft happinefs. But why fhut you from me ? Why alone prevent your being feen when there is a poffibility of my teeing you ?» " I know not, indeed," replied fhe; " 'tis cruel, methinks, to deny me the comfort of fuch friendfhip. But, alas ! I talk unthinkingly. I am a ftrange, weak girl. Perhaps 'tis improper for me to liften to the tendernefs of your Highnefs; and, if lis wrong for me to do fo in the fociety of Lady Ilford, Oh { what is it for me to liften to it, where none overhear us, where all is ftillnefs and night r" Thefe rifing apprehenfions the Prince fondly termed reproaches.
« Do
" Do you then repent, my fweet friend," faid he, " the confidence you have placed in my honour ? And do you believe fuch affection as mine could perfuade you to what it intended for your prejudice ? Oh no, beft of all good girls ; though obfeured from the world's eyes, ftill are you fecure in the guard of your own innocence. That guard never can f iii; but if it could, the very dictates of my paffion fliould fhieid you from trial and danger." In this firft interview, Selina's fortitude, however, was very imperfect. She was fubjeet to a thoufand different alarms. At firft, hcr agitation on finding the Prince ftill unacquainted with her melancholy ftory, nearly overcame her. Great as flie believed his virtues and generofity to be, flie imagined it probable he would reject her friendftiip when he knew of what nature had been her father's conduct. That fear removed, and joy and gratitude placed in her heart in its flead, flie became confeious
confeious of the hazards of their fituation. Though every part of the vaft old caftle^ was buried in the deathlike gloom of night, fhe fancied fhe heard unufual noifes founding from a diftance, To her imagi¬ nation, thc flapping againft her window of the night-bird, was a fummons at her chamber for admittance; and the cafual growl of watch-dogs in the court-yard below, thc terrific murmurs of impending obfervation. For hcr inquietude the Prince felt un¬ eafinefs ; and on her account, though he fancied they met in certain fecurity, he was fubjed to fome apprehenfions. He, how- t ver, appeared at perfed eafe, and talked to Selina tiil he almoft beguiled her of hcr fears, and made her inlcnfiblc to the nature of hcr fituauon. By the recital of her famil)'s miftakes and misfortunes, he found his tellings more peculiaily interefted than while he was ignorant of them. He now fancied his pitying fondnefs for Selina wore the
tlie face of a virtue. He thought it noble¬ nefs to cherifh in his heart, aud draw from neglected ebfeurity, the daughter of him from whom he had indirediiy received a bitter injuiy. This delufion was moft de¬ lightful to him, as frequently, before he knew it, fcruples had arifen in his bofom, which took from thc pleafures of his fecret intercourfe half their fwect nefs. Now, he ftrove not to rcftrain within himfelf the glossing beats of Ids paffion. He even fet ftorc by them as me its,, and encouraged his regarding Selina with love, under the appearance of laudable compaffion. In thefe dangerous minutes, every look ihe beftowed on him ftole more fubtly to his heart; and every fentence that her timid lip gave utterance to, increafed his admiration for ' thc beauties of her mind. That he loved, he felt; but confeious of the rectitude of his intentions, he feared not being able to rcftrain his wifhes within the boundaries of prudence.
Many
Many hours of night wore away ere he believed that one could have paffed. Selina was no better judge of Time's progrefs than himfelf. Concern for her health at length urged him to leave hcr to repofe. After fome attempts, he conquered his reluctance to cy Ittiiig her/ Twice he bade her adieu before he acted in conformity to the word's import. He then preffed to his lips her hand, and tore himfelf from her apartment. He looked back, after walking a few paces: the door was (hut, and all was dark and unfriendly. He fighed at the thought of her being hidden there, for all thofe hours in which fhe might be made happy by fociety; then reverted to felf, and reflected that he ought not to complain while there exifted fuch a channel of communication as he had now profited by. In ftillnefs, he gained the picture gal¬ lery. When he arrived in its centre, he heard a fudden noife at the end he was approaching : it was like the fhutting of a heavy
tale. Wy door. He paufed i„ a, arm . The found he had heard, fwam through the Wpuagc. that the folding door^of the g Ikry opcncd t0> am , was ]Qft . n tvZT m l T - At firft ' hc f-red W P7 on his a a.ons had occafioned it, by '-mgtheipothehad been ftationed on, on co!r7 h ? rCJeded that fu PP<> M °° on confidenng the improbability of any per fon fufpedhng, i„ the moft ^ "J knowledge of Selina's chamber and the ftrange paffage that led' to it. On reflec¬ tion, he perfuaded himfelf that it was merely the mo.,on of the door, beneath the i m . pulfe of confined air; and retired to abandon h.mfelf to vifionary fcenes of pfefure with fier whofe ,mage was never abfent from hia mind. *
CHAP.
CHAP. VIL < »i im " At once th* wincts arife, The thunders roll, the forked lightning fiiet. # # # 9 ** The temjifft, unforcfcep, prevents their care. DRYCEH* RED in retirement, Selina was, at the age of eighteen, as much unacquainted vvith the world's manners, as fhe was in infancy. Born to heavy and uncommon forrows, her mind had foftened to tendernefs and me¬ lancholy. Nature had given to her that quicknefs of fenfibility, thar., while it renders the heart liable to 'tnany pleafures of the fweeteft caft, renders it alfo fubjeet to fre¬ quent
B
qucnt pain and depreffion. So foft a tem¬ per was ill-fuited to the feverity of her deftiny. Soon as her opening re 1 ,fon made her fenfible of what funounded her, fhe difcovered that fhe was a very haplefs little girl, born to affliction, and whofe tafk it was to learn to fuffer. Her vivacity was thus nipped ia the bud. Her heart told her flie had affedions that wanted a refting place. In vain ihe fought to exprefs them. She loved Lady Ilford, but ftill her heart was unfatbfied. It was not tiil after fhe had attained her twelfth year, that flie had related to her the misfortunes of hcr family : fince which lhe had wept, in filent dejec¬ tion, over the memory of her mother. She had ftrayed round the retired walks of the caflle grounds—thofe grounds that had once been her father's. She would chufe the fwecieft and moft obfeure fpots to fit on, and would fancy that her mother had fat there before her. Over the wide profpeds (lie would look with penfive pleafure; would note the objeds in them that
that flie imagined had once been admired by that eye which never was to open again. She returned to the caftle: there was affem- bied a party gay and hap ;y. AH was feftive and cheerful, while (he was a folitary being, noticed by none but her immediate pro¬ tectors 5 and while her mother, whofe right it was to rule over that manfion in whieh fne wandered difregarded, lay, in a tomb of grief, forgotten by all but her. ' Lady Ilford felt an affection for her, warm as if maternal. - She had a tender heart, and beheld Selina as wtll with pity as efteem. In confequence of her wifhes, though in oppofition to thofe of her Lord, it was that Selina vifited Court at that juncture in which accident introduced her to the notice of the Piince. It is but truth to fay, that the Prince excited as much admiration as he felt. His fine form, crowned with victory, and the object of univerfal applaufe, was not indeed to be looked on with indif¬ ference. His countenance was beautiful, expanded;
expanded ; his manners graceful and ele¬ gant ; the world rang with his fame, and his virtues were even more celebrated than the triumphs of his fword. Selina was ftruck with his appearance.^ Through her heart ran a fenfation Ihe knew not before. She longed to hear him fpeak ; then thought his words were fweeter even than his looks. He touched her hand, md the blood rufhed to her cheeks, while every nerve trembled in pleafure. But fhe recolleded her hope¬ lefs dependance, and ftified the fentiments that were colleding in her bofom. It was deftined, however, for her fortitude to be expofed to other trials than its firft. In the ball-room of the evening flie again met the Prince, and he behaved to her fo as to perfuade her that he beheld her with prediledion. Pleafure and pain ftrove for rnaftery In hcr breaft while fhe heard fen¬ tences of attachment fill from his lips; but the latter at length prevailed. She confidered herfelf at fo great a diftance from his
his approbation, that no poffibility exifted of her profiting by his efteem. Probably, ihe thought, when he knew who flie was, he would difdain farther notice of her j and fomething near to pride bade her refrain to feek affection where its indul¬ gence would be imagined degrading. This lift feeling, however, was of fliort life; but before ihe was fufceptible of a more tender, (he had left the prefence of the Prince, never perhaps to be in it again. With Ladyjlford flie returned to the country, and to retirement, with a heart fubjeet to more pain than wdien fhe left them. The natural dignity of her mind aided her in ftruggling againft the paffion that had ftolen to her bofom; but grief had given fo much of tendernefs to her affections, that hcr ftruggles were not ahvays fuccefsfuL While ihe maintained this unequal con- teft with herfelf, thc intended vifit of the Prince
Prince was announced. She could fcarceltr flatter herfelf that (he had, in any fll [ •n/k.e.,ccd his intentions, but fl le fdt plea- fure of the -Aareft kind at the p ro f pea of agatn feeing hi in . of that pleafure Lord Ilford was de^rous to debar her ; but acci¬ dent effeded what he ftrove to prevent. The 1 nnce-that Prince uhofe imnge w ,s treafured in her recolleftion, whofe every word and aelion fte had recalled with de¬ light, threw himfelf before her, and pro¬ filed lovin 8 hcr to ^oration ; though at the fame time, he, with noblenefs that few bchde could pradife, confeffed the impof- fiMity of gratifying his love with honour to kerteif, and a/ked to be confidered only as the- protector of her h appinefs Mt} ^ fondeft friend. To clandefline meetings the natural dehcacy of her rectitude made, in the firft inflance, < )p ,»fition; but love naturally ' begets confidence, and her innocent and guilelefs heart fhuddered not to refign itfelf to
to thc honour of the Prince. Under the garb of friendftiip (lie hid her love. She felt how fwect to her was his fociety ; fhe confidered him as the youthful conqueror of the world ; to all mankind he was an awful hero, and was approached only with reverence and fubmiffion : to her alone was he otherwife, and to hcr he was tender, fond, affedionate, fiympathctic. She could not deny herfelf thc delight of his com¬ pany ; and though flic law him only in fear and apprehenfion, would more wil¬ lingly have refigned exiftence than the folace of her nocturnal meetings with him. The Prince, meantime, felt in eveiy paffing hour his fondnefs and admiration increafe. To tins, the difficulties attending his paffion contributed iu no fmall degree. What is deniedto us, 'tis unreceffary to fay, we ever feck after with avidity. But, with¬ out fuch a ftimulative, his affedion for Schna was fufficiently warm. Ho looked on her as deferted by all the world ; as an vol. i. " n • eaily
early rofe bloflcming among fo many thorns, that no hand deemed it worth its while to nurture and train its beauties. From the gloomy ihade chance had thrown it in, 'twas hi- delightful tafk to train its growth j and this lie fancied he could well pufoun, without being feduced, by what few of its fvvcetv he was permitted io t .tie, to pluck it to his bofom, where k muft wither and periih. I hippy as he was in p^ift-flbiT a few Ikui^ of tne night in which he might, without fear of interruption, enjoy the fo* cicty of S.iinn, lie found ihe long ftial^n of fepaiatvm pafs fo flowly, that he began io think of means to prucure daily meetings with her. So many obftaclcs to inch an indu'gcnce, however, a^cie on reflection, that he, tor the proftut, a'oandoned all thoughts of it, cont.nting himfelf with haftening to her as early in the evening as he with lafcty co«rid, and lengthening his ftay as much as cordidciation for her would let him.
It
lit was cuftomary wiih Lord Ilford to give, on certain days, an annual feaft to his vaffal tenantry. This day was not yet arrived, but another was named in its ftead, in order for the feaft, winch was at the caftie an event of much c infequcrlce and joyfulnefs, to be held in thc preiencc of the Prince. For this important celebration, every ienvnt of ihe caftle, and peafant in its wciuiiy, was gvulv employed. 'Twas a kudii of general feftiviry. The c.-ftlc hall was decorated with fymbols of harveft, a:vd turn:fhed with tables cracking beneath the hurt; en of fljfli a'd nib. A lawn befide thc gar-Jens, Muni wlmfe ed.ie were icgukr row, of anci^r: tree.;, was fitted to the purpolc of i ; yniiiiftic ip-orts; and the mmph:;, for whole ftui'^s the rival (wains contended, ha.\ ai'p.ico fa apart fo: dancing, where, ou the trjjd-ranchei ilut ihaded their rural b l!-r>om, were hung garlands ci at the ft.^.v-is of luuimer.
n %
The
lie Pilate, whofe heut was ncvei fo v,A\ uiL-fj.d as when ali was happinefs t i in u h.iiS IlIi n\el} pi ifuic in 1 ehold- " k t - . i) f tes cfLoiu ll\ idS domeftics, o i *! i ti t u gi n ! < .\. lit n,(. imng no b v iiiuu ' I 1 ii tl i t : j » tio s foi tlie h I 1 ii u. i u- }» i»n c . ii tL '' v hi/ 1 e t o c\iA, o t r> l t J uv», I tie 'om, 1 i i ni t h i^ h uiiuJ, Tl 1 h'i ih u \ \, '- t ^s t v 1 j ,
i t .<s 1 IO '. i d ( \v t' v w * Ol\ l <• *
[ '1 (- 1 j J.ils , (1 !' I i S fi Ann j' M id , M.U ih\ ' 0 \ . i J e
! u t i l e t. I t se ; ih t 1 i l laUa 1 i i f k 111 '!]. " ^. i .i ! . , 11 o i " u ', w 's III , i t. ( J , fh t t .kuiljOlt a\ j * < ^ ' ii I' e d' [\ eh atu g ot t k m ^ bt h\ rne uu 1 ; j ii^s that t (i»i o ■ t u count tif tin. i'nijt c'3 pie- U, , t 1 i \ ii > ut iiic day weie of a i 1 • i 1 oi i ;n i'imI, uhjj each ! . a ^ in j }, to ke and 'oc Len
feen by the hero of his country, and his future King. The young men, each bound with rib¬ bons, whofe colour furnificd the miftreis he boafted, and was fuited to her fancy, were employed during the morning in tilting, wretling, and cudgeling; while the nymphs, dreffed to the utmoft of their fimplc finery, were interefted and anxious ipectators. Happy wa ; . he who bore a^vay the palm: little did hv reck battered head or broken fhins ! for what were thefe, when their folace was receiving from the hand of a blufhing, delighted, dearly-priced fair-one, a crown of laurel interwoven with myrtle ? Soon as the amufements of the morning were ended, the whole party motioned to¬ ward the h.ill, where was fpread fuch a ft-aft as JLiiogabalus mig' t have fat down to with pleal'u e. i^ the centre of the principal tatlo vas an ok at fifil length, ihioking in vaft bulkinefs, which wa^ in- k ^ tended
tended to appear as a fymbol of the plenty that reigned at tlie banquet, and of the 1 earty welcome it uas ferved with. The pivfence of their Earl, the Prince, and thc many Noblemen who attended them, could fcarcely keep within bounds the merriment cf the rejoicing tenants. Lord Ilford, with tiue generofity, never, on this day, remind¬ ed them of tlie refpcct due to him, but 1 offered the loud joke to pafs, and the loud \ itigh to anf.ser it. After the bancuct, one of the elder men mole, and approaching thc feparate table, ac which fat his Lord and the caftle guefts, he made a fpeech, cxpreflivc of the happi¬ nefs he and his fellow-vaffals enjoyed under fo generous an Earl, and their thanks for the noble entertainment he now afforded ihem. He then turned to the Prince, and with tlie fimplicity of his years and humble manners, returned him reverence for conde¬ scending to join in their merriment ; bleffed him as the gloiy of his countrymen ; prayed that
that fuccefs and honour might ever attend him, and that he might be happy as he was great and good. On the old man ceafing to fpeak, the whole party of vaffdry arofe, andihoutcd—* " Long life to the noble Lord of Ilford, and the g.ulant Prince of Wales 1" The mufic s loudeft peal anfvered to thdr flioi.u,a d each man ntted to his ftps the &i;blu thai fioud before hiai, and diank to his wifti a copious draught of the bcft: liquor. After revelry had reigned for a time, the houfe-fteward of the cattle led hh band of mtrry-makers to the decorated lawn. Lord Isold's part) remained ; for fome prepara¬ tion was neceflary, on their pait, before they mixed again in the general plealures.
n 4
It
It had been fuggefted by fome of the party, that to forget, for a feafon, all dif¬ ference of rank, and, attired like the pea¬ fants of thc day, join the dance indifcrimi- nately, would at leaft have the charm of novelty to recommend it, and might be found productive of mirth and fatbfactiori. This idea was, with the confent of the Pri-iiV, inftantly adopted by Lord and Lady JIfbid, with tlie addition of each perfon wearing a mafk, and occafioning the real peafants to do the fame, Drefles vvere prepared, and to array them¬ felves for thc whi.i.ileal amufement, the noble party now difperfed, A fhort time was fufficient to throw afule the appendages of rank, and fubftitute thofe of obfcurity. Each perfon fingly left the caftle, when attired. Every countenance was rmfkul, and Lord and ferving-man, Lady and Lady's maid, vvere prefently blended infe- paiabJy.
Thc
The Prince was not thc laft on the field $ but when he arrived, the mufic had begun, and one dance was formed. He fmiled at the ftrangenefs of the fcenc, and in vain endeavoured to difcover, amidft the pro- mifcuous herd, any of his noble friends. While he looked around, a brother pcafant approached, and fliaking him very cordially by the hand, faid— " What, friend Jean! you thinks I don't know you? Aye, dam un, vou was ahvays a fly un ! What, I fuppofe you don't remember Sukc of the mill? You ha quite forgot her, han't you ?" ' f Whv, really,'* returned thc Prince, " fhe is not, at this minute, prefent to my recollection." " She is'ut ? then let me whifper you, Jeanny, that the Parfon and the Bailiff will very Ihortly bring her to your mind." So faying, he diiappeared, and left the Prince to go whither his imagination led him. n ^ A new
A new row of dancers was now collect¬ ing. The Prince had no wifli to dance, and determined to walk round the party, and enjoy that clofe view of nature that his difguife permitted him. As he faw the gay tribe bounding to the cheering tune acrofs the turf, his fpirits, however, could not but participate in the fcene. His heart beat to the mufic, and, with a light flep, he preffed into the midft of the throng. He looked with envy on the happy fwains, many of whom very plainly proved, by their actions and words, that they knew and loved the lafs they had feleded for a partner. As his eye ran over a long fpace that was between the two rows of dancers, he of a fudden faw coming down it the fweeteft looking (hepherdefs he ever beheld. She wore no head-drefs but a wreath of natural flowers, which was woven into the luxuriant locks of hcr hair. She had no neck-kerchief to take from hcr beauties, though her nuir- ray-
ra} r -colourcd gown was made high, but not fufficiently fo to detract one particular from the fweetnefs of her fmely*turned neck. Her gown was tied in f„ftoons, at each point of which was a bow of pale pink ribbon. Beneath it was a fingle white petticoat, made fo fhort for the purpofe of dancing, that it difcovcred an ancle as exquifitely turned as that of the Medicean Venus. Her mafk hid her face; but if a fhape and an air might be relied on, her face muft be lovely as that of an angel. She trod in a light and grace¬ ful ftep. Hcr feet moved to the meafure of the mufic, and in her extended hands was a wreath of garden flowers. Thc Prince was ftruck with her appear¬ ance, lie ftood an inftant to obferve her. She addreiLd no perfon. A feeming peafant advanced to her; he fpoke; fhe liftened, then waved her hand as it to fumify a nega¬ tive, and tripped on. She drew toward tlie fpot on which thc Prince had paufed. n 6 Though
TALE. Though I, e could not ] 0 v* h„ , , , 1'dp admiring hcr. ' C C ° UM " 0t " Surely," thought he « tr„ ■ .. dace. S..• - ' CVtT j ° incd * j 7 S "° im . ! ' 1 b '- ^ "obfe raining, but ^u.^ fL IjIford>sguu fo tive a mai J as this. 1 '' The graceful ^cphorclef, was now withJn a few paces of hj m . Siie „ ,. . , wl ™ n but he fle P1 ,cd to h,r, aa J took , :c . hand J " Am I," r aid ilC) „ f0 , nymph, as to fi.,d you .di ; en g a,. ( i > hZ 5ou„ot a partner? Can ,.y fdio^i^fJ cn be fo dull as to have ceafed .ill they gained your hand ?" 3 b'""ta " Perhaps," a „f; vcrcd a ft . nough ft,;, a foft one, .. „,,,, , ^ have (ounda partner, butl .'o not dance/' Not dance!" echoed (!.. p rlnce . M " fwBrt hr '. "ha, th, fcoddcf, Natn « niaflcrcd
mattered herfelf by forming you, flic meant you, believe me, to ftiine more particularly in the merry-making dance. Let me per¬ fuade you to alter your determination 1 I thought not of oancing mvirif, but I can retain that iniention no longer when I can hope for you as a partner/' The fafcinating ft. anger would have re¬ plied; but aheady had th:: Piince gently difenc/^ied from one of her hard-, one e*id of the "wreath (he caubd. That end lie bore hii.ielf. The dancers {i-nounded them. The ftranger had no ahcrnative, and picf:t.tly found herfelfneo'-flititcd to vp through thc lon^eil iiguro of the tim^ij dance with her unknown partner. Shortly they became confp'.cuo-is, accord- inn to the 1 order ol the figuie, by dancing in the midft of their corn} anions, while ev 4 y other perfon waited their finilhing the evo¬ lution. \V;irmul by the ga.^ty that fur¬ rounded them, then fpirits rofe to exhilara¬ tion.
tion, and the grace of each was exerted to the utmoft. Motion, perhaps, could not be fo difpofed as to be more attractive.. The fine perfon of each was difplayed io the moft alluring advantage by the oceafional refinements they threw on the figure they danced in. The general approbation could not be'concealedj the very ruftics were fen¬ fible to the beauty of the forms they be¬ held, and the elegance with which thofe forms moved. Univerfal applaufe followed the comple¬ tion of their talk, and all, while they pro¬ feffed their admiration, expreffed curiofity to know wru-m it was that occafioned it. To obtain that knowledge, however, was impoffule. ; and as each was in'.cat un him¬ felf appearing to advantage, and each occu¬ pied in fchemes of his own, the admirable couple were foon forgotten, and loll in the unequil crov.d, whofe mirth fjcmed height¬ ened in every minute, 6 Mean time»
Meantime, the Prince was much oleafed by his enchanting partner. She fpok^ little, but the Prince was not difpofed to the fame referve. Thc fcene unavoidably amufxl his fancy, and cheered his fpirits, th >ugh his heart was little occupied in the day's charms. Plis heart was with Sdina, and he often thought how happy he could be to ileal an half hour with her, in the tranquil recefs (he was then immured in. Some rimes he imagined he could with fafet}, while fuch general fefiivity prevailed, gain her chamber through thc fecret door-way; but the hazards of difcovery that would exift, deter¬ red him from attempting it. Thc charms of his partner were only half feen till the dance unfolded them. Not a grace was then laft; every exquhite pro¬ portion of her form was difplayed through the thinnefs of her attire, and every motion was inch as excited the Pimco's defire, in no iuiall degree, to fee her face. To ali his rcquefts on that point, flie, h:wevcr, wis
was deaf; and though he did not refign ho;-e- oi *ra fication, he abandoned them to lout ,o.e fitting opportunity. That opj i/umty at length arrived When the loiig dance v\ .s concluded, the company r^ patiecl to mol^-ba .k feats, and what arti¬ ficial ones were provided, for the purpofe of ukin-' rclr:lhments. Tl h. theiefore, was the feafon for gallan¬ try. Fach h r.in, while affifting hi^ chofen maiden with 'ruits and wines, rnd fome foft fpLC. h t) ranke, or perchance, fome foft fav ur to btg. The Pnnce bad juft fuc- CwCd o in biirv'.ing Lib fair coupa^ion to coivu *.atii,n. Tho dancing-place vva> on the fkiit cf a uood : thither, while gaily d:fec vA'.rc* ch nee ltd thrir ft.ps. Thc PnnCi *_!*tLred* thc rece's; his con^aidon fee *.d ftanely con'cious of whither he too he/. They advanced to fome diftance fi m trx co.u]'any. Th.cy weie in a broad \va\, i > *e\ vsMii g^i's :-nd fliaped by tall ^:d riciiiy-cl'id lives. From the fpot t,hey vvere
were on, they had a di'linct view of the party they had left ; but what was fpoken on either fide, was not overheard by the other, Hardby was a feat; twas formed from a mound of earth, whofe fuiface was covered \iith vehxtty grafs; 'twas fhadowed by entwined ihrubs. No place could form a more agreeable con t raft to that they had left. To the fun-beams its coveilet was nearly impervious. At a fmall diftance ran a narrow ftream, which at once cooled the air, and lent its loft murmur to the har¬ mony of what inflruments were playing on the lawn. The Prince preffed his partner to enjoy the tranquillity of this rcfting-place after the flight fatigue fhe had undergone. She hefitated for a fc^v momenta, then fat down. " You do not know," faid the Prince, " the pleafure I have received from the honour of your hand. Ah, Madam, very lucklefs
ucklefb is the Ihephcrd to whom you grant uch a favour/* <* I/uehlefs my—iuckkfi, Sir ?" repeated lis piruicr; " in what way? 1 ' iC And urn vuu afk," cried he, '* with hat bcv/.Lcinng a;r, t!i..t diviiie (hape, that oft vokc ? Ah, you cannot be ignorant hat few hearts arc capable of withftanding uch a.tracti i nb 1" " I am giad, however," returned the hcpheidtfs, * s that you are one of that cw. I am happy I h.:ve not to reckon you anong thofe lucKleisor.es whom the trifling .harms ot my perlon undo/* She (]^oke this in a faltering accent ; ,nd, though (lie wore a mafk, her face was nrned to the ground as if to hide a blufh. " Yoa form conclufions very quickly," ;ried the Prince, gaily; " you cannot ima¬ gine me ungallant enough to tell you I am tblc to look with no more than admiration ou
on your grace:. But, rccohect, that allow¬ ing my hc\ut to be unnoted, your charms have not jet iho- 1 -: ou it in full force. I have not }ct f:j;i y ui f.:\" t( Ak !"' Mi- 1 ih-, ^ I d > :: t think thc f\o)\i of my f.**o~x*.. w~ud! md.., huy alter¬ ation in your ahediwn; I beheve it would not." " Your modefty is more bvely," cried he, " than even your face can he. Really, fair ftrmp^r, i '">^^m tofe^.1 i >:you—idend- ftiip." " Friendflftp I" rep.-atLcl the fair peafant, " how cold a f -itiine.it is that for a fair lady to iu\ x he ! Su,dy, Sir, it ill accords wdth Lhe gallantry of a Knight to offer at the ftirine oi feniiile charms no more than friendfuip ?" " Nay," uwd the Prince, " you have not yet authority to upbraid me. Whatever homage I may, or can offer, I firft muft behold the flirias at which I am to oiler it.'*
As
As he faid this, he efL}vd to remove 1 mafk, which flie, however, prevented 1 doing. u Firft," cried flie, " tell me what effe. thofe, of what you term my perfedions, thi you have already feen, have had ; accordin to what you declare, I fhall ad in refpc<! to thofe that are yet concealed." The Prince fighed, while the flranffci leaned forward with fome earneftnefs. ** Alas! my fair unknown," faid he, "I fhall only, I fear, offend you by my dee la- rat ion. I have looked on you with admira¬ tion, nay, with delight. Every of your movements is graceful, is enchanting I Your air is elegance itfelf! Your form is bu.aut.ful, your mind, by what I can judge, (and I readily sjive vou credit for what I have not had opportunity to difcover) is modeft, fen¬ fible, and pure. Yet, acknowledging all thefe excellencies, I look not on you with one
1 one wifli of love. I loved before I fiuv you.—Loved, Lid I ? I adored ! and that fo fweet, fo precious a maid, that even your¬ felf could not but approve my paflion. Oh, - flie is more lovely than words can picture, and in mind fhe is more engaging than even your amiable heart can conceive I She h ------" (Here the ftranger flowly removed her mafk). " She is------ But what do I fee!—Ecfticy and delight! My Selina ? It is 1 It is!" And Selina in truth it was! Lady Ilford, whofe fond heart, though prevented excrciiing all the tendernefs it felly never ceafed to think of the happinefs of its unfortunate adopted daughter, had fignified her approbation of the method ol mdking, merely to give hcr an oppor¬ tunity, in the difgui c that cuftom afforded, of mixing in thofe pleafuies that ihc would willingly have had her never abfent from. Selina could not rcfift the opportunity of being near the Prince, and among the party that
TALE.
JS fttLcC ^-'^^fl« placed
Accident rave fcr to ^ p ■ ftough fto immcJutdy knew 1^1 '^ anient, with much warmth. . n t hc r « uw Sdiiu ,, ceiml . n ^ oc^ thoo,„ more tmilc]ui , ras a time, remai.xc. Hp-p t',-. u - - ° ne.c tne l J nnce, after l-eaiure he had fo Jon ■■ , 0 ,,. :cd for _ , I>.cafurc of Arajin.2, fl,ut fro.» every cy.- in ^ipa»d i : J „.: n eft wi(hhib& 4 a . J, S o he loece o„ the ftcphcrd's habit vvl lldl | ie r^.»nd.«vo n ScIi„.',lH« u ,if u l forinthe fan . homely drels, he atmofl bc)icm] j]e herd'sfaie, and her. ' p The
The day now drew to a clofe. As they wandered through the pleafant paths of the wood, thc fun-beams gradually retreated irom over them. The day had been fultry ; toward the clufe, many thick and vridely- fpivad clouds colleded. Thc (lar of even- ii g appeared ,<bove thc tree-tops, lon^ be¬ fore th? P i.:ce expected its appearance. Yet \w fet unwiiiing to ixfi^ji thc luppinefs he enjoyed ; a- d* as thc fioumk of rejoicing, and t!»e fbd lor.rl r founds of the corre- ipor.d ot mufic, biulhed through the giovc on tl.c lludur.ting bi\e/e of evening, he lin^ red for another half hour before he iuffercd Sdina, whofe feir^ began, though faintly, to be awakened, to jcin the party, whe c hi 3 attent ons to hcr would be. cir- cumfi ribed. At length, on the mufic paufing for a confiderable time, he acknowledged the juftice of her alarm, left thc dancing fhould ceafe, and tlie dancers fiparate. With re- ludant Hep he led her back. Another dance
dance was yet begun. While it lafted, he fat by her fide, and convcrled as on cafual topics. He bep;gcd her to permit his repating to her room at the ufual hour, or earlier, if he could fo foon leave Lord Ilford : then blamed his want of confideration, in for¬ getting what fatigues Hie had experienced during the day. SeiLi.' 1 , in a voice fcarcely diftinguilhable, removed, however, that objection, by faying her fatigue was not fufficient to prevent her feemg him. The enraptured Prince would have pre/Ted her hand to his heart, had he dared -, but, fituat¬ ed as he was, words were his only anfwer. The laft dance concluded, Selina glided into the mid ft of the females. She knew by what to difcover Lady Ijfcul : fhe foon found her, and together they returned to the caftle.' The Prince reined, well pleafed with the daj's amufement, to his apartment, where he
he refumed the habit that nature intended him to wear. His delighted fancy recurred to all Selina's actions. Even while unknown- to him, he felt for her more than common intereft; 'twas a proof of her beauty's power that tranfported him. He recollected the fweet grace of hcr attitudes, and won¬ dered at his dulnefs in not difcovering that to her alone fuch an air couid belong. He leant on- the window frame, and caft. his eyes toward the fpot on which he had. been fo happy. Few remains of feftivity were left. Men were employed in- remo* ving the feats, and others in ftiipping down the wreaths of flowers. Twilight already buried the diftance in obfcurity, but about the park he perceived fcattered parties of the returning peafantry. Thefe, chd in their holiday doaths, gave pleafant life to the picturefque face of the park. From fomeknots-of them came notes of fimplc mufic, with which they cheered their way back to their cottages; and others, equally V0L - *• o' difpofed
difpofed to extend the day of merriment, danced in gay frolic along their path. The iky no longer retained that pure beauty it had worn during the morning. It grew thick and gloomy, and had that heavy afpect which,, after exceftive heat, is portentous of thunder and ftorms. A loud wind bent the tall trees of the neighbour¬ ing woodlands, and rolled before it from the iouth-eafl vaft and threatening clouds. While the Prince lingered at the window, thefe fymptoms of foul weather increafed. The fcattered peafants haften ed to their homes; every other living part of nature, feemingly fenfible of the impending tempeft, fought the (helter of the covert. There was a drearinefs in thc fcene that, after the lively pleafures of the day, was moft chilling. It gave to the Prince's feel¬ ings a greater pang than feemed its due; fcr he imagined that it reminded man of the littlenefs of his felicity, and was a trope of
of the inftability of his deareft joys. He left the window penfive and thoughtful. His depreffion however wore off when he returned to the merriment of the friends he had quitted, and to the contemplation of that little fcene of happinefs that the tem¬ per! without doors would in vain ftrive to wreft from him—the happinefs of fpending one of the approaching night-hours with, Selina. The merriment that prevailed throughout the caftle, could not conceal from the eai' the loud lull of the yet diftant thunder, or the wild ftveep of the increafing wind. Theie founds, however, did but make Lord Ilford redouble his endeavours. His guefb were not dull to his hofpitality •* and what wine and mirth could do to leffen the terrors of thc fearful ftorm that was collecting round, was effected by them. The Prince was anxious to leave a fcena in whofe trifling pleafures ho could not o % participate,
participate, to repair to one that alone contained what was capable of affording him, at prefent, delight. He withed to haften his meeting with Selina, on her account more eagerly than on his own; for he was tortured by confidering on the lone terrors of her fituation. Voluntarily at this time (hut from all connection with the female part of the cattle, fhe w r ould count every minute as it hung heavily over her head, and fhudder to think that very many muft yet pafs before fhe could hear the cheering voice of any fellow-creature; and in thofe fad and tedious minutes, the ftorm would break on her with frefh hor¬ rors. The thunder would roll round her, and no friend would footh her alarm; the lightning play before her eyes, and no bofbrn would ftiield her from its dangers. He, with difficulty, hid his uneafinefs. No fooner had the bell told the hour to be eleven, than he arofe, and begged permiflion to retire. . 3 Lord
Lord Ilford would fain have perfuaded him to pafs another hour or two in revelry; his attempts were feconded by thofe of ail the party j but the Prince was callous to every folicitation, and haftily repaired to his chamber. His attendants were more than ufually officious. PTe could fcarcely, without fig- nifying actual difpleafure, difmifs them from attentions to his perfon, When he heard them fecure in thdr room, he un¬ locked the tapeftry door, and entered the pidure gallery.
END OF VOL, I.
IAKSj MJHERVA r»£SS, LKAB2KU AJ.I.-5T R£IT.
