Sir Bertrand. A Fragment. Sir Bertrand turned his Meed
towards the woulds, hoping to crofs thefe dreary moors befo, e the curfew. Eut ere he had proceeded half his journey, he was bewildered by the different tracks; and not being able, as far as the eye could reach, to efpy any object but the brown heach furrounding him, he was at length quite uncertain which way he fliould direct his courfe. Night overtook him in this fituation. It was one of thofe nights when the moon gives a faint glimmering of light through the thick black clouds of a low¬ ering Sky. Now and *-hen ihe fuddenly emerged in full fplendour from her veil, and then inftantly retired behind it; hav¬ ing juft ferved to give the forlorn Sir Ber¬ trand a wide extended profpeft over the defolate wafte. Hope and native courage awhile urged him to puih foi wards, but at length the increafing darknefs and fatigue of body and mind overcame him; he dreaded moving from the ground he ftood on, for fear of unknown pits and bogs, and alighting fiom hishorfeindefpair, he threw himfelf on the ground. He had not long continued in that pofture, when the fijllen toll of a diftant bell ftruck his ears—he Started up, and taming towards the found, difcerned a dim twinkling light, Inftantly he feized his horie's bridle, and with cau¬ tious fteps advanced towards it. After a painful march, he was (lopped by a moaied ditch, furrounding the place from whence the light proceeded; and by a momentary glimpfe of moon-light he had a full view ofa large antique manfion, with turrets at the corners, and. an ample porch in the centre, Thc injuries of time were flrongly marked on every thing about i" The roof in vaiious places was fallen in, the battle¬ ments were half demolished, and the win¬ dows broken and difmanited, A draw¬ bridge, with a ruinous gats-way at each end, led to the court before the building— He entered, and inftantly ths light, which proceeded from a window in one of thc turrets, glided along and vanifhed; at the
fame momenj^he moon funk beneath a black cloud,\and the night v as da.ket' than ever. All whs filent—Sir Bertrand faf¬ tened his fteed under a Shed, and appi oach- ing the houfe, traverfed its whole front vrith light and Slow footfteps—AH was Still as death—He looked in at the lower win¬ dows, but could not distinguish a fingle cbjeft through the impenetrable gloom. After a fhort pai ley with himfelf, he en¬ tered the porch,_ and fe-.ring a maffy bon knocker at the gate, lifted it up, anet he¬ sitating, at lei'gth ft, uck a loud Stroke—the noiferefoanded through the whole manfion with hollow echoes. All was ftill again—. he repeated the Strokes more boldly and louder—another interval of fi'ence enfued —A, third time he knocked, and a third tmie all was fti 1 ]. He then fell back to fome diftance, that he might difcern whe¬ ther any light could be feen in the whole front—It again appeared'in the fame place, and quickly glided away as before—at the fame inftant a deep fullen toll founded from the turret. Sir Bertrand's heart made a fearful Hop—he was a while motionlefs; then terror impelled him to make fome hafty fteps towards his fteed—but fhame ftopt his flight; and ui ged by honour, and a refiftlefs defire of finishing the adventure, he returned to the porch ; aud working up his foul to a full fteadinefs of refolution, he drew foith Ms fword with one hand, and with the other lifted up the latch of the gate. The heavy door creeking upon its hinges reluftarttly yielded to his hand—he applied his fhoulder to it, and forced it open—he quitted it, and Slept forward— the door inftantly (hut with a thundering clap. Sir Bertrand's blood was chilled- he turned back to find the door, and it was long ere his trembling hands could feize it —bitt his ntmoft Strength could not open it again. After feveral ineffectual attempts, he looked behind him, and beheld, acrofs a hall, upon a large (lair-cafe, a pale bluiSh. fiame, which caft a difmal gleam of light aiound. He again fummoned forth, his courage, and advanced towards it—it re¬ tired. He came to the foot of the flairs, and after a moment's deliberation afcend¬ ed. He went Slowly up, the fiame retiring before him, tilt he came to a wide gallery —The flame proceeded' along it, and he foHoived in filent horror, treading lightly, for the echoes ofhis foot-fteps flat tied him. It led him to the foot of another ftair-cafe, and then vanifhed—At the fame inftant another toll founded from tlie turret—Sir Bcrtrand
,798 iScii-rand felt it Alike upon his heart He v/a; now in total darknefs, and with his arii,-, cue*.Jed, began to afcend the fe¬ ci,.id flair caie. A dead-cold hand met hi;, left h..r,d, and firmly grafped it, draw¬ ing him f'inribly ibrward'—ilieendeavoured rodifcng-ig"; himfelf, but could not,—lie made a fuiious blow with his fword, and inllantlva !<ju,I Shiiek pierced his ears, and ihe dead hand w-,r. left powerlefs- with his "—He diopt it, and rufhed forward:, vvith a dv'f pei ate valour. Tlie Stairs were narrow and winding, and interrupted by frequent breaches, and Joofe fragments of Stone, The fr-tii-cafe grew nano.verand narrower,and at length terminated in a low iron grate. Sir Beitrand pufhed it open—it led to an intiitate winding pad; ge, jult largccnough to admit a perfon upon his hands and knees. A faint glimmering of light ferved to Shew the natuie of thv.' place—nil* Bcrtrand en. tered—A deep hollow groin refounded from a diftance through the vault—He went forwards, and proceeding beyo.id the firft turnii,^, he d'dcerhed thc fame blue flame which had before conducted him— He fallowed it. The vault, at length, fud- dcrdy opersn into a lefty gallery, iu the midft of uhidi a figure appeared, ccm- jpleatly armed, thru li ing forwards the bloody flump of an arm, with a terrible frown and menacing gellurc, and b. au¬ diting a fword ia hh hand. .Sir Bertvsnd und unitedly fpntng forwards; and aiming a fierce blow at the figure, it inftantly va- niflied, letting fail a mafly iron key. The fl une now relied upon a pair of ample folding doors at the end of the gallery, Sir Bcrtrand went up to it, and applied the key to a bnuen lock—v/ith difficulty he turned the bolt—inftantly the doors (lew open, and difcovered a large aprartrnent, r-.t the end of which was a coffin rolled upon ii bier, with a taper burning on each fide of it. Aluiifj the room, on both fides, were gigantic Statues of bUck marble, at¬ tired m vhc MoorHh habit, and holding enoimous fab re-i in their right hands, Each rif them r.ared hh arm, and advanced one leg forwards, as the knight entered; at the fanu- momciit the lid ofthe coffin Hew open and thc bril tolled. Thc llame Hill glided forwaids, and Sir Bcvtiand rcfolatcly fol¬ lowed, till he arrived within fix paces of the coffin. Saddenly a lady iu A fliroud and black veil rofc up in it, and ftretched tint her arms towards him—-n ih« fame time the Siauics dallied their fabrcs and advanced. Sir Berti-and flew to thc l.uly,
and clafpcd her in his arms—fhe threw lip her veil, and killed his lips; and Inftantly the whole building fhook as with an earth¬ quake, and fell afimder with a horrible crafh. Sir Bertrand was thrown into a fudden trance, and on recovering found himfelf feated on a velvet fofa, in the moft magnificent room he had ever feen, lighted with innumerable tapers, in luftrcs of pure cryllal. A fumptuous banquet was Set in the middle. The doors opening to foft mufic, a lady cf incomparable beauty, attired with amaring fplendour, entered, furrounded by a troop of gay nymphs more fair than the Graces—She advanced to the knight, and falling on her knees, thanked him as her deliverer. The nymphs placed a garland of laurel upon Iiis head, and the lady led him by the hand to the- banquet, and fat befide him, The nymphs placed them¬ felves at the table, and a numerous train of fervants entering, ferved up the feaft ; delicious mufic playing ait the time. Sir Bertrand could not fpeak for aftoniShment —he could only return their honours by couiteous looks and gcltures. After the banquet was finifhed, all retired but the lady, who leading back the knight to tbe fofa, addi effed him in thefe words: —
Ailin's Mifeel