Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Bungay castle: a novel
UNGAY CASTLE.
Ktt&&&&ft£MM
CHAP. I.
THOUGH every means had been nr\fe ufe of to render the ball ghcn at ti j caftle pleafant and agreeable tuall :!>. pari*- f they did not fuccecd fo well a> we could wifh. There were feveral of the company, as it is to this day found but loo cufto:vary on all fuch important and interefting occa¬ fions, diftreffed, mortified, end diicoutentcd, who returned to their habitarions wirii more VoL - "• B u;res
ca r c^ than they had carried out, more pangs dun th^y well knew how to bear, or than tlic pleanuY, if unalloyed, could have re¬ paid. One or two young ladies had adually laintcd at feting others better drelied and more noi iced than themielves. Another vvab wretched, and out of humour at obferv- iih; the Adonis, for whom flie had long che¬ rished the moft romantic affection, pay his whole attention to the beautiful Edeliza, who was rendered wild by the gaiety, no¬ velty, and fplendour cf the fcene, while her little head was nearly turned by tlie fine things laid to her, and the admiration flie excited. Echvin fecretly repined that, as foon as the evening clofed, Madeline would be a-ain for an age, in the calculation of a lover's caluidar, iurludul from his fight, and compelled to aunt her beads in the cheerlefs and foi it Try cell of a nunnery, from whxh he knew not whether it would be in the power of art or ftratagem to deliver her,
■and how dreadful would be the confequence, both to himlelf and the woman he loved far better than himfelf, (hould the projed, which he bad long cheriflicd in his enter- prizing and enamoured heart, be difcovered ! Thefe diftrefllng thoughts thrc.v a cloud of defpondency over every furrounding fcene, and in fome degree deprived him of that vivacity which hacl endeared him to his friends, and rendered his fociety both plea¬ fant and entertaining, white the caufe ot this unaccountable re\ohition was fufpeded but by few. De Willows had never before felt himfelf fo forcibly ftruck with the charms of tho fond, and artlefs Edcliza, which bhzed upon him with unufual iuftre, from the llileand manner in which flic had ado-ned and heightened her modeft beauties by the ar- tillcv of a chefs admirably chofen fo cap¬ tivate; and fo well did fhe fuccecd, aided by the little blind god, under whole banncis die had ventured to enlift, that a change B 2 took
took place in the heart of her favourite, againft whom alone her defigns were levelled, as fudden as it was to himfelf furprifmg. Madeline was almoft forgotten, and as little regarded as his grandmother would have been. Every thought, every wifli now refted with Edeliza,— the little girl whom he had fo long confidered and treated as a mere playful child. He even felt himfelf angry with every gentleman who paid her any attention, or appeared as well pleafed vvith her as himfelf, and his bofom adually throbbed with jealous indignation while he obferved her animated look and fparkling eye at the various compliments addreffed to her; but when Ihe beftowed her fmiles on another it was agony.—Thofe enchanting fmiles thofe engaging looks, till this ill- fated evening, had been wholly engroffed by himfelf, nor, till he knew the value of what he might lofe, did he think he had anything to fear ;■—-the delufion was ended, and he felt himfelf engaged in a new paf¬ fion
fion at the moment he was difengaged from an old one, which, having never been che- rilhed by hope, was the more eafily fub- dued. He obferved (for love, though laid to be blind, is at times amazingly clear righted) that De Clavering, the infenfible, the faf- tidious De Clavering, appeared like himfelf, particularly attentive to Edeliza, conde- lcended to fay fome civil tilings, hovered as near to her as poflible, and followed her with an approving eye, as (lie gracefully ex¬ hibited her light and elegant figure in the dance, which, in his opinion, by no means proved him fo indifferent to her charms as he had pretended to be in fome of their un- referved and confidential converfations. — He had declared to De Huntingfield, as fhe glided paft them, that (lie had a mine of harmony in her head, a troop of Cupids lying in ambufh round her eyes and mouth, and an army of virtues encamped for life within her bofom.—De Willows heard him, B 3 and
and was convinced De Clavering had de¬ figns againft his peace, and was as much in love as himfelf. The fame charms which had fo much influence on him might have made a captive of his friend. Thus ferioufly in love, thus tortured by the hidden imnulto of jealoufy, De Wil¬ lows fuilenly curfed tho fully of ^'yinii balls, execrated the mifery of being obliged to mix with a crowd, and the unpardonable levity of permitting; voun? women of deli- ency and fafhion to exhibit their beautiful perfons and fine attitudes in the dance, to amuie a parcel of unmeaning and defigning fools, and wound thofe who loved them,— while Hi c h robu ft amufements we re only fit for Indian girls or Hottentots. He almoft determined never to go to another ball, and to perfuade Edeliza to form the fame re¬ folution. Thus, with doubts, fears, and jealoufies, was marked the beginning of a paffion in the
the mind of De Willows, which ended but vvith life, and which every fucceeding day, month, and year, ferved to ftrengthen and confirm. The tragical tale of two lovers, who had been prefent at the ball, and who feemed the happieil of the part}', appeared to make a deep impreflion on all who heard it, and had fo much influence on De Willows, that he determined no part of his condud ihould ever give a moment's pain to the fufceptible heart of Edeliza, if he Ihould prove fo fortunate as to be entrufted with the precious depofit, and obtain the confent of Sir Philip and Lady de Morney to blefs him with the hand cf their lovely daughter. The tale we have alluded to, though me¬ lancholy, being a real iad, we hope it will not be unacceptable to our readers.
B 4
MR*
T\ ^R. and Mrs. Blandeville were the re- -k^Jk fpedacle parents of a numerous fa¬ il ily, whom they educated from the pro¬ duce cf a well eftabli flied and profitable bufinefs. They had feveral daughters; the deleft, who was both lively and handfome, was unfortunately admiied by a young gentleman of the name of Narford. The attachment had been cherifhed by both panics fruin the time they went to fchool, a »d io marked were the attentions which, cinat tliat early age, they had (hewn to each ether, thr.t it had often excited thp lohes and ridicule of their young compa¬ nions, who were in the habit of frequently addrefling the timid and blufhing Lucy by the name of Mrs. Narford. I ler lover had the irreparable misfortune to lofe both his parents before any plan had been formed for his future cftabliihiiicnt.— He
He was likewife, unhappily for his intereft, left to the care of inexperienced and carelefs guardians, who permitted him, as his for¬ tune was genteel, to follow the bent of his own inclinations, His difpofition being lively in the extreme, led him into innu¬ merable eccentricities, and his juvenile in- difcretions wafted a part of that fortune which fhould have been kept for his matu¬ rer age. When his clerk fhip was juft expired, (for he was articled to an attorney,) he made application to the parents of Lucy for leave to addrefs their daughter. Mr. Blandeviiio was no ftranger to fome part of the vices and follies of which he had been guilty, but, as he likewife knew that enough of his fortune ftill remained to fecure his daugh¬ ter as comfortable an eftablifhment as flie had any right to exped, he promifed, if his future condud was irreproachable, that, when he was fixed in life, and able to pro¬ vide for a family, he would give him the B 5 hand
band of his daughter, and from that pe¬ riod he had perm idiom to vifit Lucy as a lover, and was received at Mr. Blandeville's houfe as one of the family. Lovers, it is too well known, will fay and promife any thing. This obfervation was unhappily verified in the giddy and erring Narford, who, though he fincerely loved the daughter of Mr. Blandeville, and could not be ignorant that on his part he was equally beloved, very foon broke his word, and ran into fome glaring exoeffes, which could not be long concealed from thofe whom it moft materially concerned. The gentle Lucy often ventured to reproach her lover, but his repentance and promifcs of amend¬ ment very foon procured his forgivenefs.— Not fo eafily was the lather to be foft ened* After repeatedly hearing of his intemperance and confe^uent ri^ts, he forbade him his houfe, and pr,hibiud his dauglner from holding any furiher intercourfe with one ib unworthy < f her r^.ird, who had given fuch c frequent
frequent proofs of his libertine difpofition, had already wafted part of his property, and was in a way to iquander the whole. Unfortunately the prudent prohibition of the father was difregarded by the daughter, whofe attachment to the unthinking Nar¬ ford neither his vices nor follies had been able to conquer. She lamented his fail¬ ings, but (lie could not fubdue that attach¬ ment which had from fo early a period of her life been implanted in her heart. From him only (lie had heard the tale of love, and he alone had obtained any intereft in her affeclions, Love had bound her in his (ilken fetters, and (lie had not power to diake them od. Many ftolen interviews did the profcribed Narford obtain with his believing and in¬ experienced miftrefs by means of that all- prevailing traitor, gokU whofe influence few of the needy children of dependence can long withftand ; nor could all the reproaches B 6 of
of a duteous and uncorrupted heart prevent Lucy from liftening to the beguiling flat¬ terer. At the time they met at the Caftle they had not been able to ice each other for fome weeks, and the pleafure was as great as it was unexpected. Their prefent fituation and pail forrows were forgotten in their mu¬ tual joy, and the young lady eafily prevailed upon to accept the hand of her lover for the evening, as flie ftill hoped it was the hand deftined to guide her through life— Too happy in enjoying the fociety for which ihe languifhed to recoiled the caufes which had pre\ented their more frequent intcr- eourfe,—her fpirits exhilirated by the gay end cheerful party, and the enlivening founds of mufic, flic liflened to his vows with be¬ lieving tenderneis, and in a fond conceding moniuit unrcluctantly agreed to his propo- iai of a private marriage :— the day was fixed, and the hour for eicaoe appointed. The
The plan once determined, they indulged themfelves in all that innocent fondnefs the profped of being fpeedily united feemed to claim and authorife, but their happinefs was as unliable and vifionary as their plan. Some one that was prefent, either acluated by friendfhip to tiie parents, or envious at feeing the exulting tranfports which fparklcd in the eyes of the lovers, and excited a fufpicion of their defign, obtained fufficient intelligence from fome broken fentences (conveyed in rather loud whifpers from the lips of Nariord, who was too much intoxi¬ cated vvith his unexpeded fuccefs to be guarded by prudence) a* to betray their in¬ tention. The next day a letter was fent to Mr. Blandeville, to inform him of the plan, that he might take fuch Heps a^ would prevent the threatening mifehief. In confequence of this unpleafing intelligence, the young lady was fo ftridly confined and ciofely watched, that it was impoffible fhe could either
either receive or fend any letters without being difcovered, and Mr. Blandeville was too much enraged at finding the difobedient trick hi*, daughter would have played him, to relax one moment in his rigour or care to prevent her eloping. Narford, in the mean time, not able either to fee Lucy, or convey any letter or mef¬ fage to her, became madly defperate, and ran into innumerable excefles, which, in the opinion of the prudent and thinking part of the world, juftified the condud of the lady's father, who commanded her not to fee him, nor attempt to leave her own apartment till die could prevail upon herfelf to give him a folemn promife never again to hold intercourfe, by word or letter, wiih that bate, defigning, and vile fcoun¬ drel, Nariord. Tiie mother and lifters were equally of¬ fended with the unfortunate lover, whofe conduct, previous to the time he hacl been forbidden
forbidden the houfe of Mr. Blandeville, had in too many refpeds been highly blameabie; but, as is frequently the cafe, what in his behaviour was worthy of praife had been concealed, while every deviation from pru* dence and reditude was bafely and mali- cioufly exaggerated, Narford not having the happy art of concealing his frailties, or ma¬ king himfelf friends, by that bewitching foftnefs of manners which, in our more po- lifhed days, will recommend the moft liber¬ tine charaders, and procure them a favour¬ able and cordial recepcion in polite and even virtuous circles. After trying, by every art and ftratagem to bribe, or elude, the vigilance of Lucy's attendants, and making many attempts to foften the difpleafure of her parents, Nar¬ ford, in a fit of defpair and int'l.ricarion, obtained by force an entrance into the In,ufe, and, tailing on his knees, in the moil hu¬ miliating manner, and moft intelligible lan¬ guage lie could command, begged they would
would permit him to fee and converfe one hour with his beloved Lucy, who he had heard was ill, and confined to her bed. Though Mr. Blandeville fortunately was not at home, his requeft was peremptorily denied; but Mrs. Blandeville, fomewhat foftened by his agony, which, in fpite of her anger, fhe could not help commiferating, promifed, that, as foon as her daughter was in a ftate of convaiefcence, he fliould be indulged with feeing her in the prefence of herfelf and one of her daughter ; at the fame time fhe coukl not help gently reproaching him for the inconfiftency and unpardonable levity of his condud, which not only com¬ pelled Mr. Blande\ille to adopt thefe fevere meafure?, but had involved her whole family in diftrefs, as well as the unfortunate girl he pretended to love, and had attempted to draw afide from the paths of duty. With great difficulty he was prevailed upon to leave the houfe, but not before the found
found of his voice had caught the ear of the unhappy Lucy. She raifed herfelf in the bed, and infilled on being informed what had occurred to bring poor Narford, and why (lie had not feen him.—It was now too late, (fhe added,) to run away ; the danger of that was over ; therefore iurely (he might be allowed to fpeak peace to hib mind, and once more fee him whom (lie had fo long and (o fondly loved, before the hand of death fliould clofe her eyes for ever, and in that fad moment fhut out every bright ray of hope from his earthly profpeds* On being made acquainted with what had paffed, and told the manner in which her lover forced liis way into the houfe, die burft into tears, and exclaimed, flie fliould never fee him more in this world ; " but he will not furvive me long, (die continued.) I know he cannot five in peace when I am gone, and therefore we fhall foon meet in a better, and I hope a happier, world."
Thefe
Theie conflids brought on a return of fever, which a frame fo emaciated and weak as her's could not long fuftain : it was fuc¬ ceeded by a delirium. The grief lhe had long cherifhed had pi eyed upon a conftitu¬ tion, always delicate, wiih fo much vio¬ lence as to render her flrenith uncouai to the conteft. In a few days her life wis pio- nounccd in the utmoft clanger, and hope wa 3 almoft precluded. No fooner was this fentence made known, than it was recommended to Mr. Blande¬ ville to fend for the lover of his daughter. Ar length he yielded fomewhat reludantly to the propofal. Narfoid came, and was admitted into the darkened apartment of the dying Lucy, who laid totally infenfible of what paffed around her. He heard her call upon his name, yet could not prevail upon, her either to look at or lpeak to him.-— Her eyes, glazed and obfeured by the fb .des of death, and robbed of their former Iuftre, were no longer able to diftinguifh the beloved objed
objed for whom they fhed fo many tears, but, fixed on vacancy, feemed ftill bent in fearch of fomething they wifhed to behold. Her lips moved, and flie appeared as if hold¬ ing converfation vvith fome one her difor¬ dered imagination fancied near her. The unhappy young man wa> fo much fhocKed, that it was with the mmoft difficulty he could confine his a^pniznti feelings from breaking forth into feud lamentations.— Somewhat recovering i;o:u tiie firft ftroke of feeing the ruins which g< icf had made on her with whom he had refted all his hopes, in whom were centered all his willies, he knelt by her bedfide, and, tendeny clafping be¬ tween his own the burning hand of iris almoft dying miftrefs, he foftly beg s ed flic would once more fpeak to her diftraded Narford. The voice feemed to be underftood ; flie fuddenly turned her face towards him, and feebly prefling his hand, in broken and hurried fentences faid fomethi ig to him.— Only the words, " Dear Narford, we muft parr*
part, and part for ever !" were underftood; and, after making a feeble effort to draw him clofer to her fide, as if afraid he fliould leave her, fhe was feized with convulfions, which obliged the terrified lover to quit the room* He ruflied out of the houfe in a ftate little lefs alarming than that in vvhkh he had left the fair caufe of his diilrcls. The whole night he wandered before the habitation of the dyi-g Lucy,—for that flie was, dying the horrid fcene he had witneffed, the countenances of thofe around her, and his own feelings,, too well informed him. During the long and gloomy night, in which he remained expofed to and unfheltered from the wind and ftorm, he frequently ftopped to liften at the door. All within was filent and cheerlefs as the grave, and in every found that reached his ear from without, he imagined he could diftin¬ guifh groans and fighs. Every object he could fee brought to his tortured imagina¬ tion the diftreffing, the convulfed figure Qf the
the once-animated and lovely Lucy, whofe diftorted features and painful druggies were ever before his mental fight, there to remain fixed as long as his exiftence fliould endure; for was it poflible he could ever forget or wifli to lofe the remembrance of that perfe¬ cted and innocent fufferer, who died for the unworthy, the unfortunate Narford ? At length the day broke. The fun arofe with its ufual fplcndor, but appeared to him dark as Erebus. All nature wore one univerfal gloom, and had all nature been at that moment annihilated, \as were his hopes,) the change had been fcarcely perceived ; for Lucy, who gave to life its brighteft tints, and to all things animate or inanimate, grace, beauty, and value, was ieen no more !—No longer the foft tones of her voice vibrated on his ear to lull his foul to peace, or, if feen, ihe had loft all recolledion of the poor forlorn wanderer, who now felt ten-fold every fang die fuffered.
Late
Late in the morning Narford few a fe¬ male fervant flowly open the door. He ran, or rather flew, to make his trembling inqui¬ ries. She was in tears, and totally unable to tell him that all was over,—that the love* lied of women, the favourite child of na¬ ture, was no longer the vidim of pain and forrow, and that her freed fpirit now (bared beyond the reach of perfecution, " the mor¬ tal having put on immortality /' but her emphaticai hlence unfolded the fad tale.—A freezing chilncfs ran thrilling to his heart, and with agtoanof defpair he funk upon his parent earth. In that happy date of in¬ fenfibility he was conveyed to his lodgings by fome [cople who were pafling by, where we will for the prefent leave him to the caie of bis fympathizing friends. This unfortunate young man, notwith- ftaiiding his unguarded condud and nume¬ rous eccentricities, was beloved by many for his generous difpofition, cheerfulnefs, and unceafing good humour.
In the houfe of Mr. and Mis. Blandeville all was diftradion, defpair, and felf-re¬ proach. The illnefs and fubfequent death of a beloved and amiable child laid heavy at their hearts, and overwhelmed them like the fudden burfting of a torrent; for, though prudence forbade them to unite their daughter to a ma, whofe condud threatened her with many forrows, at the moment they wiflied to put an end to fo ainpromifing an union, they had no idea that any fatal confequences would have attended the feparation, and they too late regretted not having granted Narford's re- <]ueft of being permitted to fee their daugh¬ ter at a more early ftage of her iilnefs.— Mr. Blandeville drooped under his own painful refledions, his wife felt more than fhe either could or wiflied to exprefi>, and the younger part of the family were for a .time inconioiable. The tale fpread rapidly abroad, and in all its various fhapes excited the compaifion of
of thofe who heard it. Lucy had been as generally beloved as admired, and Narford, who had once appeared deferring of con¬ tempt, was now the objed of pity. Such are the rapid changes which take place in the human mind. Mrs. Blandeville, unknown to the reft of the family, fent feveral times to make inquiries after the unhappy Narford. The accounts (he received were as various as the melancholy changes which fucceeded each other. He was fometimes in a ftate of adual diftradion,—at others in a fad and filent defpondency the moft determined and alarming, refufing to take his food, or to hold converfation with any one. At length the day for tho interment of Lucy arrived. The proceffion, fad and dow, was followed by almoft every inhabi¬ tant of the town and adjoining villages. A folemn dirge was fung as they went along, and a number of young maidens joined in the
th z chorus. Flowers were 1 brown iito and aiound the grave, as emblematical of the charming flower that like themfelves was tm- timely cut down, and doomed like them to wither and to die. The fervice began 5—the coffin was care¬ fully let down into the grave, and, juft as the earth was thrown upon it, and the pried: pronounced that awful and humiliating ieo- tence, — " Earth to earth, alht: to allies, duft to duft," a figure, with (lifnevelled hair, and a face pale as that oi* the vidim juft depot!ted in her laft iad reding place, ruffled paft them all, and quick cs light¬ ning, before anv one could fufped or think of preventing ivs defign, threw himfelf with the utmoft \ ioience into the grr.ve, and, clinging with agonizing frenzy to the coffin, cried out, " I have found her now, and no one fhall ever again tear her from me, for fhe was mine,— mice by herown con- fen t ! Proceed, (added he, in a ill rill and vol. 11. C diftraded
diftraded tone, for the furprife and confu¬ fion that this fcene occafioned had pre¬ vented the fervice going on,)—be quick, and hide i ie in the friendly earth !—-1 come to fleep ivith Lucy : — this is our bridal bed !—Why do you hefitate ?-—herel fhall find reft for ever ;—this is my home, and here fliall be my heaven !" The prieft endeavoured to perfuade him to quit the grave, and let the ceremony be concluded, telling him, time and patience would, he hoped, reconcile him to the will of heaven, and convince him that all things were oi dered for the beft and the wifeft purpofe?. u Avaunt, deceiver ! (cried the enraged maniac.)—I tell you that Lucy was un¬ fairly robbed of life,—ftolen from my arms, and forced into this place* where I will watch by her and proted her from farther violence ;— .aereforc fay no more, left my daring hvnd ihould attempt to pluck the
fun from his orbit, or call upon the ftars to fail upon your head, and mine for per¬ mitting a ftar more brifliant than them¬ felves to fall.------Go on, I fay,—bury nie deep and fure !—I wifli to become a worm, that I may crawl to the fide of JLucy. —- She will own he* poor diftraded Narford, even in that noft loathfome and degraded form." It is impoflible to defcribe the fcene that followed. Many attempts were made before the poor young man could be dragged from the grave of hts lamented miftrefs, —* At length, he was forcibly taken out,—- guarded, and carried home by fome of the weeping fpedators. It w-as many months before any hopes of his recovery coukl be cherifhed. His rea¬ fon was ftill more endangered, and, from that period to the end of his unfortunate life, he was deranged at times, and by his condud appealed as much a lunatic in his C 2 intervals
intervals oi reafon. He very foon finan¬ ciered a'l that remained of his fortune, and became a wanderer upon the earth, never having a fettled home, and feldom going into a bed. He was frequently abfent fo long, that his friends concluded he was no more.— He would then return to thofe fcenes which never failed to brine; on a renewal of his unfortunate malady, and would lay whole nights by the fide of Lucy's grave, talking to her vvith the fame ardour and enthufiaftic afledion as if flie had been living. At length Mr. Elanoeville, whom lie would, as frequently as he aiw him in his fits of infinity, attack with the moft pointed ariCi virulerrt abufe, took compaflion on his fufteri.igs, and fettled a fum of money upon him, to be paid quarterly, lufiiciently com¬ petent to procure him the neceffaries and many of the comforts of life ; placing him ir. a family who had been long attached to
to him, and wlio continued to take the utmoft care of him to the end of hk wretched exiftence, and by every tender at¬ tention foftened, as much as it was In hu¬ man power, thofe forrows which could.only terminate in death.
*tt
4V*
C 3 CHAP..
EWH*
CHAP. II.
A Tale fo fad and interefting as that we have recited fooi, found its way to the inhabitants of the caftl particularly as De Clavering bad been ca! .!'. a to the affiftance of the dying Lucy.
The melancholy fcei may imagine, made i mpreflion upon a hea ceptible as hts, and Ik fuch comments upon i have fome weight on t
/itneffed, as we and forcible , Jer and fuf- i.f 1 to make [■ed would i thofe to whom
whom they were addreffed ; but he did not. fucceed in his defign ; for, whatever Sir Philip de Morney might think, he chofe, and took care to keep to himfelf, and the Baron not even condefcending to make any obfervations on a fubjed in which he did not appear to feel the leaft interefled, and which he confidered as being too romantic and childifli to merit the attention ot a perfon in his high ftation. Lady de Morney and the young people wept for the fate of Narford and Lucy, while the latter wondered any parents could be fo cruel as to feparate fuch fond and faithful lovers. Notwithftanding the utmoft pains had been taken to conceal the caufe of the Ba¬ ron's fudden indifpofition, it had in part tranfpired, owing, as we may prefume, to the irrefiftible propenfity, and reftlefs curio* fity, the Baron's fervant felt to know all his mafter's fecrets, and his great eagernefs to C 4 impart
impart them when known. Some words, which had dropped from the Baron to his fsinid Sir Philip, the evening of the alarm, juft as Pedro was ordered out of the room, unfortunately caught his ear, which was in- ftantaneouily applied to the key-hole of the door to obtain farther intelligence; and, though he coukl not fo exadly underftand the ftory r^ to conned it with accuracy, he picked up cncu.di of it to make him defirous cf knowing the whole ; and, having heard ihc word ghoft utter d mire than once with great emphafis, it gave him fbme fufpicion that l/r> mafter's illnefs originated from a fright, and the more than ufiud earneftnet^ with whicli lie afferted the truth of what he had been faying, confirmed Pedro in this opinion. Thus the half-formed tale was whifpered under the moft folemn promifes of fecrefy from one to another, till every fervant in the family had gleaned up fomething, with¬ out any one of them knowing what it meant. A few
A few nights after, as Pedro was attend¬ ing his mafter, when he was going to bed, he determined to make one effort to difco¬ ver the whole ftory, and try whether he could not prevail on the Baron to entruft him with a fecret he would have given fome part of his wages to find out. He opened this important bufinefs as follows. " I (hall be heartily glad, my lord, when we get from this caftle, and return to your own." " Why fo ? (inquired his mafter :)—my friend, Sir Philip, is very hofpitable, and his family infinitely charming." " Yes, yes, I dare fay, my lord, in your opinion the young ladies are charming creatures, and I fancy they are not a whit lefs pleafed with your Iordfhip/' " Do you think fo, Pedro? (faid the Baron, in one of his moft harmonious tones 3 his pride and felf-love being gratified by his fervant's obfervation,)—Why, indeed, I had C 5 never
never much reafon to complain of the la¬ dies' coolnefs." " It would certainly be furprifing if you had, my lord. A man of your rank, for¬ tune, and figure, is not very likely to meet with coldnefs; it is only fuch a poor ugly dog as I am that muft exped to be frowned upon by the women." " Oh ! then, Pedro, (faid the Baron fmi¬ ling,) a difappointment in love makes you wifli to quit this place." " No, my lord. I complain of nothing in the day ; ihat generally paffes off very well; but, in the night, there are fo many curfed ghofts clattering about, with fuch confounded noifes at their heels, both within and without doors,, that a man can neither fleep nor move with comfort or fecurity." " Pilia ! (replied the Baron,) let me hear of no fuch idle and improbable tales.—I did not fuppofe you fo great a fool or fo daf- tardly a coward as to mind the nonfenfe of womea and children.." "As
*< As to that, (faid Pedro, nettled by the contemptuous manner of the Baron, and the epithet of coward,) I have as much courage as moft men among men ; but, when I am forced to mix with ghofts and evil fpirits, I want a little fpice of that courage with which your Iordfhip is fo bountifully en¬ dowed. I dare fay, my lord, you never faw a ghoft, and were never frighted either by the living or the dead." " What fhould 1 be frightened at ? (cried the Baron impatiently ;) let me hear no more fuch impertinent nonfenfe." " I hope (muttered Pedro) the next time they come, they will pay you another vifit. It is an honour due to your dignity, and we fervants can very weil difpenfe with theie company ;" but this was faid in fo low a voice, as he fhut the door, that it was im¬ poffible to be underftood. by the imperious mafter to whom it was addreffed. " A* much a coward as 1 am, (continued he, as he went along,) I was never frightened into C 6 a fit
a fit as fome folks have been with all their boafted courage and great knowledge." NotvvUhflandinrr the Baron was fo much alarmed by the appearance of his Ifabella,. that he could fcarcely fhake it from his mind a moment, and remained in a ftate of anxiety and terror, yet it was impoflible he ihould be any longer blind to the dejedion of Rofeline, or mien fible of her cold indif¬ ference. If flie met him with a fmile, it was vifibly the fmile of anguifh. She fome* times appeared to avoid him, and more than once had made an effort to leave him at the very inftant 1 e was addrefling her in one of his fondefl and moft impaffioned fpeeches.— Sir Philip was his friend; on him he had conferred many favours ; it was both his in¬ tereft and inclination to bring about an u- nion between him and his daughter. It wai poflible he might have deceived him as to the real fituation of her heart; — the thought was too alarming to his feelings and his pride to be eafily got rid of. Rofeline was
was often abfent, and that for feveral hours together : it looked fufpicions. He would no longer truft either the father or the daughter ; but, with the afliftance of his man Pedro, who was a ftirewd fellow at finding out a fecref, he w r ould endeavour to difcover whether he was not right in his conjedure of having a rival. Sir Philip had certainly promifed more for his daughter than he fuppofed him authorifed to cfo, or than the young lady herfelf was able cr wil¬ ling to ratify : he determined therefore to get rid of his doubts as foon as poflible, and either obtain the prize he had in view, or withdraw himfelf for ever from the caftle. Audrey, who had in the mean while picked up a vague unconncded account of what had happened in refped to the ghoft, was eager to tell the wonderful tale to Ro¬ feline, who, though incredulous as fhe had ever appeared to all the marvellous tales Ihe had imparted to her, ought to be informed of this, (lie thought, as it was ib conncded with
with the hiftory of her intended hufband- She luckily met her young lady on the ftairs, put her finger on her lips to impofe filence, and, with much folemnity in her look and manner, beckoned her to follow her into the gallery, when, ftepping into the firft room flie came to, flie thus eagerly began. " Well, mifs, it w r as as I faid; the Baron is no better than he fhould be. I have waited fuccefsfully thefe three days to tell you fo; but you are grown fo preferved and fo fliy, a body can feldom catch a moment to fpeak to you." " What is the matter, my good Audrey ?" " Matter enough on my confcience, if one believes all one hears! Only think, mifs, of a ghoft, that ihould have been minding its bufinefs at the Baron's own eaftle, having taken the trouble of following him to this upon fome fpecial bufinefs it had to municate. However, travelling three or four hundred miles is nothing to a ghoft, that
that can, as I have heard, go at the rate of a thoufand miles in a minute, either by land, fea, or water, it matters not to them ; but we could have expenced with fuch vifitors, God help us ! for we have enow fuch that go with the caftle, and, 'tis faid> muft do fo till the day of judgment/* Rofeline, who paid but little attention to Audrey's tales,, fmiled at this, and gave her a fly look of incredulity, which con¬ vinced her of her unbelief. This was a kind of claim upon her to confirm it more ftrongly. " Well, you may think-as you pleafe, Mils Rofeline, the Baron was adilly feared into a fit of arpaplexy at feeing his own wife, all in white, the very moral of herfelf when alive i and, what is more, die held a knife and a lighted candle in her hand, and (hewed bim the wound in her bofom which cafioned her death ; and (be fneered at him, (baked her ghoftly head, grinned, and, as he was found
found upon the floor, 'tis fuppofed flie knocked him down, and then went away in a fky-rocket, or a fquib, or fome fuch thing, as belong to thofe fort of hanimals; for the noife flie made at going off was fo great and amendous, it broke the drum of Pedro's ear, and left the Baron in a ftate of fenfibility." <k I would advife you, Audrey, (faid Ro¬ feline,) not to give credit to fuch impro¬ bable tales, and never *gain to repeat this which you have been telling me." " 'Tis gcnevin, mifs, I affure you. I had. it from Pedro's own mouth ; fo, if you are determined to marry a man haunted by the ghoft of another wife, you muft abide by the incifion. She was certainly fent out of the world unfairly, or why fliould ihe not reft in her grave as quietly as other folks ?" Rofeline, much as fbedifliked the Baron as a lover, had too much refped for her father's friend to permit her fervant to fpeak of
of liim fo freely, and to lay fo dreadful a crime to his charge, which flie concluded, like the ftory of the ghoft, w r as merely the invention of evil-minded people. — She therefore reproved Audrey with a feriouf- nefs that alarmed her, and auured her, if flie ever again prefumed to mention Baron Fitzofbourne in terms fo difrefpedfui and degrading- lh e would inftanrlv recjueft her fath- to fend her from the caftle. The prating Aligail, finding her young lady really difpleafed, chofe to alter her tone.— To be fure flie might have been wrong informed ; the world was a wicked place, and fome people were fiidly entreated in it ; — the Baron w r as a gentleman,— a powerful fine gentleman it was fucceflively hard to be belied ;—no one could expence with that :—he was a lord into the bargain, and, notwithftanding his methodical nefs, had fome good qualities, and, for certain, was as fine a pice of Yiquity as any that hung up in the great hall, and looked as antic as. the
the old walls covered with ivory.— Rofeline made no anfwer to this curious eulogium, and Audrey very foon took herfelf away. The Baron was not long in determining how to proceed* He became refolute to fatisfy his doubts refpeding his having a rival. It was neither improbable, nor un¬ likely, that fome of the young officers, ftationed in or about the caftie, might have defigns inimical to his. The lady herfelf might have favoured their pretences unknown to her father ; and, if fo, he fhould run fome rifk in making her his wife.—^The thought was too painful and degrading to be fupported, and the critical fituation of affairs would not admit of longer delibera¬ tion. The month was on the very eve of termi¬ nating, at the expiration of which Sir Philip had promifed him the hand of his daughter; yet the young lady was not more concilia¬ ting, or lefs coy arid diftant in her behaviour to
to him, than flie had been the firft day of their meeting, Pedro was fummoned, and for fome time was clofetecl with his mafter. He w T as promifed a liberal reward if he could get into the good graces of the female fervants, and make himfelf mafter of the young lady's fecrets; luckily for our he¬ roine, flie had not made a confidant of any one of them. This Pedro undertook, as he had already began to make love to Audrey, who, in her moments of conceding tendernefs, had told him all fhe knew, making fome additions of her own ; but the whole amounted to but little more than— her young lady was ftrangely altered : it might be, her love for the Baron had produced this change; but, for her part, fhe could not think it pofli¬ ble for any one to like fuch an-old trampled figure. The Baron next propofed that Pedro fhould accompany him, in taking a ramble about
about the caftle, after the family had retired to reft, to reconnoitre the premifes, and learn, if poflible, from what quarter they were moft expofed to danger. He determined to explore all the fecret \ -adages, for he could not help cherifhing fufpicions that lovers- might be admitted, and intrigues carried on, unknown to the moft watchful and careful parent; and to what but the pre¬ vailing influence of a fiuourcd rival could he impute the uncommon and increafing eoldneis of Rofeline ? It was not to be wondered at that the Baron was alaimed, for the condud of his. daughter had not efcaped the eyes of Sir Philip, who, chiefly difpleafed with what he termed her obftinacy and caprice, in or¬ der to compel her to his purpofe, had* notwithftanding he promifed to drop tiie fubjed for a month, found it neceflary to caution her to be more guarded and refped- ful in her behaviour, at the fame time afliii ig her he would not furvive the difappointment of
of his hopes, in feeing her united to his friend; adding another horrid threat, that, if die betrayed his defign, in that moment (he would terminate her father's exiftence. This dreadful fentence at once determi¬ ned the fate of the unhappy Rofeline, and, having no alternative left, flie inftantly promifed to give her hand to the Baron, and facrifice her own happinefs to preferve the life of her father, on which (lie knew that of her mother depended. Her brothers and lifters too ! how coukl flie fupport the thought of depriving them of a father's pro¬ ted ion, and become hei.elf a parricide !— Her own fufferings would be but fhort ; — their's might be continued through a long and weary pilgrimage. Her father, fatihfied with her promife, retired, and left her to recover herfelf. Thea it was fhe recoikded her engagement, and thought of the prifoner. Her refolution faltered, and reafon tottered on its throne. The
The dreadful fate fhe was preparing fbr him,—the diftrefs her lofs and inconftancy would inflid on the interefting objed, dearer to her than life, or ten thoufand worlds, tortured her to diftradion, and fliook her whole frame : the blood of life receded from her heart for a few moments, and fhe fell to the earth. Soon however flie recovered to a more perfed fenfe of her miferies: flie wrung het hands;—fhe would fee her Walter;—fhe would continue to do fo till flie became the property of him whom fhe detefted, and could never love, and who, fhe fervently prayed, might be deprived of claiming the rights of a hufband, by her being fnatched from his embraces by the friendly hand of death, a rival, which, if he did not fear, he could neither injure nor fubdue 5 and fhe fhould have the delightful, the foul-confoling fa¬ tisfadion of defcending to the gravea^pot*' lefs vidim to her love of Walter. Her fpirit would perhaps be permitted to guard him
him from danger, and watch his footfteps, while he remained on earth, and in heaven flie could meet and claim him as her own. Thefe thoughts, romantic as they appear in the eye of reafon and experience, had a wonderful effed upon her mind, and reftored it in fome degree to its ufual tone and com¬ pofure. She became more refigned to her fate, and to the above-mentioned determi¬ nations added another, namely, that, before fhe became a wife, flie would write to her unfortunate lover, and explain the motives that had induced her to break her enoacre- ment with him, fufficiently to exculpate her From blame, prevent his execrating and ha¬ ting the name of Rofeline, and if poflible ftill to preferve his efteem. Edwin fhould be the meffenger fhe would entruft with her letter. Thefe weighty matters fettled m the only manner thdt Could make them conformable to the prefent ftate of her F-elings, fhe refolved filently and without complain'ng to yield to a fentence from which, 2
which, however unjuft and arbitrary, flie knew there could be appeal, no chance of a reprieve. Her determination and unconditional confent were foon made known to the Baron by his delighted and exulting friend, who now ventuied a few gentle reproaches for the little confidence that had been placed in his word, and the injuftice which had been flievvn to his zeah The Baron received this intelligence with unaffected pleafure,— apologized for his lover-like doubts, which had originated from the fuperior merits of the beloved oljtd, and the difparity of years, which ibme ladies might have confidered as an object ton to an union taking place. Superb dreffes were to be ordered for the bride, new carriages built, and the lawyers fet to work with all poflible expedition; for, as Rofeline had ltipulated for no cer¬ tain time being allowed her, to prepare for the awful change which was to take place
in her fituation, her father, eager to put it beyond the power of any earthly contingency to difappoint his wiflies, availed himfelf of the omiflion, and determined to hurry matters as much as poflible. In fad, the horror of lier lather's vow had impreffed it¬ felf fo deeply on the mind of Rofeline, and introduced fuch a train of diftrading imag.s, asleffened the apprehenfion of what might happen to herfelf. It was now publicly faid, that the im¬ portant event was very foon to take place, and the joyoub buftle which fucceeded plainly fhewed, the report was not without foundation. The furprife and conflernation of Edwin are not tobe defcribed : he fouaht and obtained an interview with his filler, who, without abfolutely betraying lier pro¬ mife to her father, or explaining how her confent had been extorted, faid enough U convince him that compulfion, in fome fhape or other, had been made ufe of to force her into meafures fo entirely repugnant to he vol. ii. D feelings
feelings, that he feared would involve her in irretrievable wretcheclnefs, and he took his refolutions accordingly. The enamoured lover, after hearing fuch unexpedcd and pleafant intelligence from his friend, requefted an audience with the lovely arbitrefs of his fate. He was accord¬ ingly admitted. Rofeline made no attempt to deny having given her confent to become his wife; but the freezing coldnefs of her manner, and the continued dejedion ftill vifible on her artlefs and expreilive countenance, ferved to increafe his doubts; and, fo far was it from exciting his compaflion, it awakened his pride, confirmed his fufpicions, and roufed them into adion : but, as he had no clue to guide him, and could make no difcovery fufficiently conclufive to fix his jealoufy on any particular objed, he was under the ne- ceffity of trufting to chance, and his own unremitting endeavours, to unravel the myf- tery
tery he fufpeded. Aduated by a fullen kind of refentment, he determined at all events to avail himfelf of the power thrown into his hands to obtain his defires, refol¬ ving, if ever he difcovered die loved any man in preference to himfelf, to facrifice the detefted objed of her regard to the juft vengeance of an injured hufband. A few nights after, a favourable opportu¬ nity prefenting itfelf, the reftlefs Baron, ac¬ companied by his man Pedro, who had un¬ dertaken to condud him about thofe parts of the caftle contrived to defeat the defigns of men when they came with any hoftile intentions, but which might be favourable to thofe of an artful lover, began his filent perambulation. After defcending from the battlements which he had cautioudy paced over, look¬ ing into every place he thought likely to conceal the rival he expefted to find, he re¬ turned by a different route, and accident- D 2 allv
ally went down the winding flairs of the South tower. Tlie door, leading to the prifoner's apartment, he paffed in filence, fuppofing it a lodging-room belonging to the guards, or fbme of the domeftics. — When, hcwever, he came to the bottom of the ftairs; turning to look under a kind of arch-way that teemed to con municate with fome other apartments, he was ftartled, and his doubts received farther confirmation from feeing a door, which led to the dun¬ geon, ftanding open,-—a circumftance that ferved to convince the Baron all was not right, as thofe places were in general kept well fecured, not only to guard againft clan¬ ger, but to prevent their being feen, as it often happened the fafety of the cafife depended entirely upon the fecret contri¬ vances for their : nternal defence being un¬ known to all but the governor. It happened unfortunately, that Albert, who, after he knew the family were in bed, had defcended from his own room in order 2 to
to fetch fomething which hi^ mafter wanted from his former habitation, not fuppofing he was in danger of being followed by any one, had incautioufly negledsd to fhut this door after him. The Baron, not doubting but he was on the eve of making fome im¬ portant difcovery, ordered his man to guird the door, to prevent any one efcaping while- he proceeded in his fearch. Albert, luckily hearing fome one enter the paflage after him, had likewife his fuf¬ picions, though of a very different nature. He concluded no one could come to that place with any good defign, and trembled left fome difcovery had been made refped¬ ing the removal of his mafter, which might expofe him to farther perfecutions, and bring on a renewal of his former miferies. Who¬ ever it might be, he determined, if poffible, to find out tlieir intention. Edwin had acquainted him with every circumftance he knew in regard to the dif- 1} 3 treifing
trcflmg fituation of his filler, and they had agreed not to inform the unfortunate Wal¬ ter of the impending ftorm which threatened him with the deprivation of a treafuie far dca-cr to him than his own exiftence, and whicli they concluded would at one fatal blow rob him not only of every hope that he had fo long and fondly cheriflicd, but t ven of life itfelf. Albert was foon convinced that the per- i >'i who had followed him was no other than tiie haughty imperious Baron, the rival of his beio\ed mafter, and the deftroyer of that tabnc on which he had refted his fecurity ic <* happinefs. Fie c Fried a lighted candle m one hand, and a drawn fword in the other, ind appeared wendroufly curious about K-mething which Albert, not in the humour co put the moft favourable conftrudion on hb ad ions, concluded muft be mil chief.— Hm* put upon his guard, he cautioufly locked the door which led to his mailer's former apartments, and, as he was well ac¬ quainted
quainted with every avenue, crch turning and winding in the curious labyri .ths cf thefe cheerlefs regions, he had no fear > for his own fafety, knowing that it was cah to elude thi fearch of one who was a ftranger to them ; but, as he did not fuppofe the Baron (let the bufinefs wliich brought him there be what it might) came entirely unattended, it behoved him to ad with the utmoft cir- curnfpedion. In a little time he obferved the Baron had entered the damp unwholfome fquare that was fiirrounded by the ftill more gloomy and unfriendly habitations contrived to ren¬ der life a worfe punifliment than the moft cruel death. He looked carefully into every one of them, and, coming to that in which ftood the coffin before mentioned in this narrative, and feeing the black cloth, by which it had once been covered, now bans> mg ir 4 mouldering and tattered fragments around it, a filent memento of that deftroy- ms; hand wliich fparcs neither the dead nor D 4 the
the living, urged, as we may fuppofe, by one of thofe fudden and irrefiftiblc impulfes which we are often aduated fo obey againft the chelate? of fobcr reafon, he ftept in, and in an attitude of thoughtful n^uUrioti, ftruck vvith tiie horrid fcenes which till now his eyes had never encountered, unknowing what he did, he placed one foot on the top of the fed rectptacfe, on which his looks were bent in ferious refledion, when, awful and dreadful to relate, a deep groan iflucd trom the e< fiin, and a voice exclaimed,*— " Eoibear, you huit me!—you will crufli my Lon^s to ponder !" The Baron flaitcd, and flew back fo vio¬ lently, Unt he ftruck his head againft the o t| klte wall.-—A moment's refledion, how* ver, feived to nJpirc him with more idolutfoa, a::ci to c^'ivinc* him that tliis cou'u -\>a la lval ;—it muft be the wild ef- USa oi \a± own chile mi a. red imaj.rinarion ;— (! v.d,\u were jicverlKard to fpeak, and why .l voice Horn the g/ave fliould be fent to him hv
he could not comprehend. I-fe determined therefor ^ not to be alarmed, nor driven f;om his purpofe ; when, in the next inftant, the fiimi voice, as it it knew the thoughts which floated in his mind, addrelfed him a fecond time in a rather louder and moiv authonta- tivetcnj fiom another part of the du.igeon, and warned him not to interrupt the peace¬ ful llumbers of ti e dead. Again called upon, it could not be delufion. Some one,—a lover perhaps, was conceaLd in tlut (N^i.n, from which he was to be frightened hke a fchool-boy. In an inftant, witli one violent blow, he cruiliecl the moLilciring abode of its infenfible inhabitant to pieces, and a heap of bones were then prefented to his fight, which had once belonged to a creature hke himfelf, endowed perhaps with feJings more generous and humane than thofe which dwelt in the bofom of the man who had thus intuited its humble remains. " Caufe my bones to be ciecentlv put in the ^ave! v (aid the voice a fecon ! lime ^ 5 troiu
from the coffin,) and froi ^ but tremble for yourfelf! ' r.d defperate by terror^ and . ic- coliedion of the fcene h antered,- the Baron eagerly wifhe get from a- fituation fo calculated to mftill every kind of fear into the mind, if unaccompanied by the ftill greater horrors which had fo won¬ derfully occurred to increafe them; but, well knowing, if he were difcovered in fuch. a fituation, it muft fubjed him to various fufpicions, among which thofe of a treafona- ble nature might probably be numbered.— He determined to brave it out, and retire without making any alarm, not doubting but an explanation would equally expofe him to cenfure and ridicule. As a laft effort, however, he muftered courage enough to inquire in a tremulous tone, " What is it I hear ?—If a man, let him come forth, and declare his wrongs; I will undertake to defend and right them."
" Can
« Can the man (replied his myfterious companion, who now appeared to be clofe to him) exped being believed when he of¬ fers to revenge wrongs of which he never heard a complaint ? Can he who opprefles others, and is deaf to the fufferings of in¬ nocence, think to purchafe pardon by the appearance of mercy ?— Mend your own heart:—leave this caftle :—then the living and the dead will fleep in peace." The Baron now fhook with terror, and called for nb-farther explanation, but, as quickly as his trembling legs could carry him, began to explore the fame way back by which., he had gained admittance. Juft as he reached the bottom of thofe ftairs which Edwin and his fair companions had fo often defcended to make their benevolent vifits to the prifoner, his ear was again ar¬ refted by the fame invifible monitor, * c Rab not this caftle of its treafure :—fearch to find one more dear, whom you may render D 6 happy,
ha; py, who long has fuflercd itnprifonment and wrongs." Again he flopped. The words vibrated 0.1 his ear, and then all was filent. At length he proceeded in his miferable pro¬ grefs, and diftinguifhed the diftant found of foot fteps, which he concluded were the centinels on guard, and was foon afterwards revived by hearing the watch proclaim the hour of night. He now eagerly rufhed on. wards, and found, though Pedro had not deferted his poll, he was faft locked in the amis of fleep, and fnoring as foundry as if his vvearv ilmbs hacl refted on a bed of down. He was awakened by a hearty fliake from his mafter, and ordered to lead the way to his chamber. Pedro, glad to be releafed from an em¬ ployment for which he had no great relifh, rejoiced at hearing the welcome mandate, and humbly inquired if he had made any difcovery. The anfver he rcCviyed was,—- that
that all was fafe and quiet in the caftle, and that he believed his fears and fufpicions had been haftily formed, and had no foundation. The Baron, however, was not exadly in that ftate of ferenity and compofure of which he endeavoured to aflume the appearance.-— That voice 1— what could it mean ?—from whom, and from what quarter could it come ?—It might be the echo of fome one confined in a cell over his head, or beneath his feet. It could not allude to him, or it might be a contrivance to alarm him from his purpofe; }et, if he mentioned it to his friend, he would treat it as the delufion of a diftempered fancy. All he could determine upon doing was to haften the preparations for his marriage, and, if Rofeline ihould be over-ruled by her father, and give him her hand with re¬ ludance, the fault would bring its punifli¬ ment upon their own heads ; but he ftill hoped that, when one fhe became hib wife, and
and faw herfelf furrounded with fplendor, her coy airs would be done away : flie would fet a proper value on his love and generofity, a. id is Baronefs Fitzofbourne be the hap- pic ft of her fex. —With fuch confoling and fallacious hopes he endeavoured to banifh his doubts, and compofe himfelf to reft, and, icon forgetting Ifabella, and the warning voice of his invifible monitor, he funk into me arms of fteep.
mmtmm
GHAP.
CHAP. Ill,
TVTOT fo foon, nor fo eafily, did the ark ^^ lefs, the devoted Rofeline lofe the re¬ membrance of her hear, -felt forrows. Every hour, every moment, as it fled, brought with it an increafe of anguifh to her agita¬ ted mind. The moft diftant idea of ^ u - nion with the Baron was fcarcely to be borne, as the certainty of it no longer admitted of a doubt, flie flirunk from her own reflec¬ tions as flie would have done from the ftroke of death. To oc forever torn from Walter —to fee hi:n no more,—no nure to con*
verfe with and foothe riie forrows of that oppreded and folitary fufferer,—was by far a more infupportable trial than that flie was doomed to endure in her own mind and perfon. From the world and its unfathfadory pleafures (lie could expect no refource :— friends ihe had none whofe power could re¬ move her diftredes : her only hope thcre- * fore refted on death to releafe her from per¬ fection, and the rededion moft torment¬ ing to the giddy and happy children of profperity, who confider life as tlieir great eft treafure, and over whofe minds a thought of its termination will throw a gloom in the midft of their gayeft moments, proved to our heroine her only confolation. She now confidered the fhortnefs and uncer¬ tainty of life as its great eft blefling, and feared that time, of whom fhe had often complained f r being fo rapid and unmarked in its flight, would now torture her by mo¬ ving in a dow and fluggaixl pace to tlie clofe 0 ot;
of her days. She continued, as ufual, to make her ftolen vifits to the prifoner as op¬ portunities prefented themfelves j but thefe vifits were no longer attended with pleafure or fatisfadion. In her own mind die formed a refolution, even if ihe confequence fhould prove fatal to herfelf, to attempt obtaining the freedom of the prifoner as foon as flic hacl loft her own. This flie confidered merely as an ad of humanity and juftice, and would have thought no facrifice too great, could iho have reftored that peace of which fhe knew her lofs would deprive him. Walter, nohvithftanding much pains were taken to prevent his making any difcovery of what paffed in the caftle, obferved fo a- larming an alteration in the manners, coun¬ tenance, and fpirits, of Rofeline, as led him to puzzle himfelf with various conjedures refpeding the caufe; but, as he had been often told by Albert many tilings occurred in the world to harafs and give unealinefs to thofe who were engaged iu its bufy fcenes, of
of which he could form no idea, being a ftranger to their nature, it was impoflible for htm to judge of their effed, 1 Ie there¬ fore determined not to enter on a topic which might wound the feelings c f Rofe¬ line, and could not fail proporrionably ta diftrefs himfelf; and as lie would, had it been in his power, have prevented her know¬ ing the flighteft pang of forrow, to her he refolutely remained filent on a fubjed in which his heart was fo much interefled, as feldom to allow his thinking on any other. To Albert, indeed, he ventured to make known his tormenting apprehenfions ; but, as Albert was now guided by the diredion of Edwin, he only returned fuch evafive anfwers to his queftions and complaints, as juft ferved to keep hope from finking into abfolute defpondency. Edwin had repofed an unbounded confi¬ dence in De Clavering, De Willows, a,*d Hugh Camelford, in regard to his fifter, and without referve informed them of his own
own engagements with Madeline, who had received the pofitivc commands of her fa* ther to enter on the year of her noviciate. His fituation was now become defperate - y the crifis had arrived which admitted of no alternative. He muft cither give up the connexion, or make fome effort to lecure the prize he had taken fuch unwearied pains to obtain. His friends promifed fecrefy and affiftance in whatever way he fliould find it convenient to put their fincerity to the teft He had likewife feparately introduced thenr into the apartment of the prifoner, and if, before they faw him, they found themfelves difpofed to pity and refped him, they were now aduated by the perfonal regard they could not help feeling in his behalf, which his manners and underftanding foiled not to infpire in fuch liberal minds. Hugh Ca¬ melford declared himfelf ready to tie in his d fence, and to encounter a hoft of tevils to procure his freedom.
Preparations
Preparations were now began, and tlie day fixed for the wedding. The marriage ceremony was to be performed in the cha¬ pel of the nunnery by father Anfelm, and, as Rofeline made no effort to flop or poft¬ pone the proceedings, none but the parties moft intimately concerned had an idea that flic felt any reludance to become a bride. Edcliza and Bertha were half wild with joy : they were to be met at the altar by the abbefs, Madeline, and Agnes de Clifford; the two latter intended to officiate as bride- maids with the Mifs de Morneys. — To defcribe the various feelings of the parties would fill a volume. Suffice it then to fay, that Lady de Morney, far from engaging in the reccflhry arrangements with pleafure and alacrity, never looked at the dejeded coun tenance of her daughter without feeling a fevere reproof from the filent monitor which ihc, like every other mortal, carried in her bofom. Sir Philip exulted in having ma¬ naged matters fo cle\edy as to carry his point
point (a point to whicli the neceflity of his cireumft nces reduced him) wish lefs diffi¬ culty thin he expected, and the Baron, refting fati. fled f hat no woman in her fenfes could diflike him, or be infenfible to the advantages tint an union with a man of his rank and chaiadcr vvouid procure her, determined no longer to encourage either doubts or fears as to her fliynels and reluc¬ tant compliance. It mh-ht, as her father bad afferted, proceed from her inexperience, her iove for her parents, and her ignorance of the world. In this delufion we muft for the prefent leave him, in order to return to thofe for whofe happinefs we confefs our¬ felves more interefled. Rofeline, who was obliged to confine her conflids chiefly to her own bofom, faw the preparations going fo rwarc ] - vV ; t h that fet¬ tled and filent defpair, which, at the mo¬ ment it evinced her fortitude, vvouid have fliewn to thofe acquainted'with the nature of
of her feelings that every hope was preclu¬ ded. Edeliza and Bertha were aftonifhed that their fifter could fee the rich clothes, and all the paraphernalia of her bridal drefs, with fuch indifference. The former fecretly thought fhe fliould not be able to fhew fo much compofure if flie were as foon to give her hand to her favourite De Willows. The paflion, which this young beauty had cherifhed in her innocent bofom, had " grown with her growth, and ftrengthened vvith her ftrength," and, lately encouraged to hope meeting an equal return from the increafing attention of the beloved objed, it remained no longer in her power to con¬ ceal her part'a ity, and Dc Willows, attached and grateful for being fo flatteringly diftin¬ guifhed, only waited till the marriage of her fifter had taken place to make known his inclinations to Sir Philip, not lefs anxious than his lovely enflaver to have his preten- fions
>fions authorifed by the approbation and con¬ fent of her father ; but he was not without his fears that the ambition, which had of late taken fuch full poffeflion of the gover¬ nor's mind, might difapprove his aipiring to unite himfelf with a defcendant of the Dc Morneys. The day before the marriage was to take place, Rofeline made feveral attempts to enter the prifoner's apartment without being able to accomplifli her purpofe. At length flie fent to fpeak with her brother Edwin in her chamber, and begged of liim never to forfake the dear, the unhappy Walter, when fhe fliould be far diftant, She then gave him a letter to deliver to her unfortunate lover as foon as flie had left the caftle. Of Ma¬ deline fhe propofed taking leave in perfon. On her brother's affairs fhe dared not truft herfelf to converfe, confeffing that her own diftrefles rendered her unable to talk, or even think, of his being as wretched as herfelf.
Edwin
Edwin in reply faid but little ; his mind feemed agitated and employed on fomething he did not appear inclined fo communicate. He readily a*:reed to comply with her re- cmefi to accompany her for the laft time to the araitment of Walter. Tlu\ found the folitary fufferer more compoicd and more cheerful than they had feen him for fome time ; Albert too ap¬ peared live 1 y and adive. Rofeline was wel¬ comed b) her lover in a language far more expreffive than words, and as peifedly un- deriood : his eyes refted on her pallid and death-like countenance, with a fond, yet chailened delight, which flie thought flie had never obferved in them before ; he took her hand, prefled it to his lips, and looked up to her vvith that kind of adoration which he vvouid have felt in the prefence of an angel. He did not feem to notice the dejedion which Rofeline every moment ex¬ peded would have occafioned fome tender inquiries. Edwin began to converfe on in¬ different
•different fubjeds; but the filent anguifli he faw his filler vainly endeavouring to conceal rendered him very unfit for the office he had undertaken. Tiie lovers were never lefs inclined to talk. Tlie prifoner had ta¬ ken the hand of Rofeline on her.firft en¬ trance, and retained the willing captive without its making one ftruggle to regain its freedom, till flic was ftaitled by a tear that fell upon it. Nature, how powerful, how all-fubduing, is thy fimple but prevailing influence ! The tendereft fpeech could not have faid half fo much as this precious and expreilive tear.— Till this moment our heroine had preferved the appearance of fortitude ; but now the mafk fell tothe ground, and lhe could no longer keep up the charader of heroifm fhe had affumed. dy a kind of convulfive pref¬ fure of his hand, he perceived fhe noticed his filent agitations, and it aded with the rapidity of eledricity on feelings which he found could no longer be reftraiaed. vol. ii. E '«Mv
" My dear Walter, (faid Rofeline, giving him a look that penetrated to his heart,) why will you thus diftrefs yourfelf and me ? You know not, you can never know, how dear you are to the ill-fated Rofeline de Morney, whom ere long you will perhaps execrate, and wifh you had never feeu ; but forbear, in pity forbear to load me with a curfe, that would indeed deftroy me." Sud¬ denly recolieding herfelf, flie added,— <€ Walter will not be fo unjuft !— He will pity, pardon, and refped, her, who will not he able to forgive herfelf if fhe make him wretched." « Wretched ! (exclaimed the agitated lover,)—Can I ever be wretched while you thus kindly condefcend to footh my for- r0WSj —thus generoufly confefs that I am dear to you, and poffeffed of your heart ? —Can it be in the power of fate to make me otherwife than bleft ?" It was too much. Rofeline funk on the bofom of her lover, and at that moment 2 fecretly
fecretly wiflied to breathe her laft figh, and yield up her fpotlefs life, in thofe anus which now perhaps for the laft time encir¬ cled her. The fituation of Rofeline caufed a gene¬ ral alarm. Walter, frantic with terror, clafped her tenderly to his heart, and called upon her to fpeak. It w r as fome time be¬ fore fhe recovered, and Edwin, who faw the neceflity of putting an end to an in¬ terview fo dangerous and painful, in a voice between jeft and earneft, exclaimed, " In¬ deed, my good fiiends, I have no relifli for feeing fuch fcenes as thefe performed, par¬ ticularly when they do fo iittle credit to the performers. Thefe high-wrought feelings may be very fine, but excufe me for faying they are very filly. Recoiled, my dear Walter, that our Rofefine advances but flowly in her progrefs towards convalefence ; therefore, in her prefent ftate of weaknefs, an interview like this muft prove very pre¬ judicial to her recovery." E 2 « Take
« c Take her away, (cried Walter.) that I may not become a murderer; only before we part, let me hear my pardon pronoun¬ ced." He threw himlelf at the feet of his weep¬ ing miftrefs, who, giving him her hand, faid, with a convulfive fob, " There coukl be no doubt of pardon where no offence had been commit tech" Edwin availed himfelf of this moment as the moft favourable to withdraw. He took the reludant hand of his fifter, and with a gentle compulfion drew her away, faying, he would not tax his feelings by flaying any longer. Rofeline, again, and almoft unknowing what flie did, grafped the hand of her lover, and, in a voice too low to be perfedly un¬ derftood, murmured fome tender admoni¬ tions, which wc doubt not were intelligible to the ear of loye, but, to an indifferent perfon,
perfon, they might as well have been ex¬ preffed in Arabic. Till the door fhut Walter from her fight, her eyes were fixed immoveably upon his face, with fuch a look of anguifh, as may be eafier imagined than defcribed ; and, when flie could fee him no longer, fhe thought the deprivation of life would have been the greateft blefling heaven could beftow en one fo hopelefs, and, had it not been for her father's dreadful threat of deftroying him¬ felf, fhe would have thrown herfelf at the Baron's feet, and informed him how little flie deferved to be his wife who had beftowed her love upon another. Edwin accompanied his fifter to her apart¬ ment, but had too much confideration, too much refped for her forrows, to break in upon moments fad but precious. Hap¬ pily however for this amiable unfortunate, flie was not long permitted to indulge her heart-breaking refledions in folitude.— E 3 Her
Her mother and fifters requefted her pre¬ fence to confult her tafte, and hear her opi¬ nion on fome of the preparations going for¬ wards. Sir Philip, from the time he had extorted her unwilling confent, had carefully avoided another private interview, but had taken every opportunity of carefling her in the prefence of her friends, frequently making ufe of various pretences to get the intended bridegroom out, in order to draw off his at¬ tention from Rofeline, conftantly trem¬ bling left fhe fhould appeal to his genero* fity, or difguft him with her coldnefs. Prohibited by her father's cruel vow from applying to any one, fhe had no alterna¬ tive but to yield to her deftiny, and com¬ bat her forrows, unconfoled and unfup- ported, except by her diftraded brother, who was unfortunately nearly as hopelefs as herfelf. Thus environed with mifery, thus entangled in the fubtle toils of cruelty and oppreflion*
oppreflion, fhe was at times led to think flie fhould be lefs wretched if her fate were determined, concluding, from the torturing fenfation of her prefent feelings, flie could not long fupport them. The buftle, hurry, and confufion, whicli pervaded every department of the caftle, afforded none of its inhabitants much time for refledion or converfation. Lady de Morney wiflied to queftion her daughter, but was afraid of making the attempt.— She found it difficult however to obey the mandate of her hufband, which, though unnatural and unreafonable, was 'ifolute ; therefore, aftei fome few conflids with her¬ felf, flie thoug.it It better not to contend a point of fo much confequence. She faw the internal wretchednefs of her daughter with the tendereft regret, and fliuddered whenever flie remarked her cold and freezing manner as foon as the Baron E 4 approached
approached to pay her thofe attentions clue trv in a lover. She cook every opportunity of giving her approbation of her condud, and b) a thoufand nameleb proofs of ten¬ dernefs ihe wed a conimiferating ftmpathy, which did nor pafs unobserved by Rofeline, who, though flie received thefe marks ol" affedion in filence, determined to avail her¬ felf of her mother's tendernefs by endea¬ vouring to intereft her in favour of the man to whom flie had given her heart. The dreaded morning came, but ^ came enveloped in a gloom which exadly corre¬ fponded with the feelings, fpirits, and prof- peds, of the mourning bride. The fon a- vofe invifible to mortal fight, as if unwilling to witnefs a deed his brighteft rays could not enliven. Dark lowering clouds threat¬ ened to touch the turrets of the caftle. The lain defcended in torrents, lt appeared to the difconfolate Rofeline that the very hea¬ vens wept in pity to her forrows ; the thought
thought was romantic, but it was confo¬ ling. Melancholy, and even mad nefs itfelf, are faid to have their pleafures, and the molt wretched fometimes fteai comfort from the delufions of imagination. Happy is it that fuch rcfourccs are found to fweeten the bitter draught fo many are compelled to drink ! — Rofeline fubmitted to be dreffed as the tafte of her attendants chofe to dired. She was filent and paflive, "and made no remarks on the elegance of her attire, or the bril- iia xy of the ornaments vvith which lhe was decorated. When fummoned to breakfaft ihe attempted no delay, and on her entrance was met by tlie Baron, who addrefled her in a very tender and reipedful fpeech, as he gaTantly led her to her fea.t. She would have affumed a fmile had ihe been able to command her features. She would have faid fomething, but fpeech was denied. In¬ deed, none of the company appeared in a E 5 humour
humour to converfe. Lady de Morney was fad and fick at heart, and Sir Philip him¬ felf, in the very moment he faw the gra¬ tification of his wifhes in fo fair a train- to be realized, felt neither fatisfied nor happy.
CHAP.
CHAP. IV.
A MESSAGE arrived from father An¬ felm to fay he was ready, and waiting their pleafure in the chapel of the nunnery. The carriages were inftantly ordered to the door. Rofeline, more dead than alive, was handed into the firft, and followed by her mother and two fifters. The Baron was ac¬ companied by Sir Philip and Edwin in the fecond. They foon arrived at the chapel, and were met there by the abbefs, Made¬ line, and Agnes de Cliftbrd. Several of the friars and monks alfo attended. After E 6 flopping i
flopping a few moments to pay and receive the proper compliments, the Baron took the trembling hand of his intended bride, and fed her to the altar. Father Anfelm opened his book, and began the awful ceremony, when the whole party were thrown into the utmoft conflernation by the door, which led from the fubterranean paffage to the caftle, being fuddenly burft open, and Walter, with a drawn fword in his hand, his eyes flafliing fire, followed by Albert, inftantly ruflicd up to the altar, and, calling to father Anfelm in a tone of frenzy, bade him defift, or proceed at his peril. " The hand of Rofeline (he cried) is mine, and mine only ! I come to claim my af¬ fianced bride, and accurfed be the wretch who fliall attempt to wreft her from me 1" The Baron funk down, exclaiming,— " Again that dreadful fpedre !—Save me, fave me j from it!" The.
i
The book di •'^ed from the hands of the venerable prieft, and the terrified and afto¬ nifhed Rofeline fainted in the arms of her mother, while the countenance of every one affembled was marked with furprife and conflernation , but the attitude, the ex¬ preffive face of Walter, as he ftood gazing on the party, caught every eye, and excited univerfal admiration. His drefs was fcarlet, richly laced : in his hat he wore a plume of white feathers, faftened by a clafp of dia¬ monds, his tall elegant form and fine-turned limbs prefenting a fubjed for the ftatuary, which few could copy in a ftile that would have done juftice to the original. Rofeline for fome minutes remained in a ftate of total infenfibility, but the Baron foon recovered fufficient recollection to look around him; his eyes were again fixed on the prifoner with a look rather of tendernefs than difpleafure.
" Teli
" Tell me, youth, (he cried,) whence comeft thou ?—to whom doft thou belong ? Thofe features are as familiar to my aftonifh¬ ed fight as they were once deeply engraved on my heart. Hadft thou worn any other countenance but that of my once-loved Ifabella, my fword ere now Ihould have taught thee to refped thofe facred rites thou haft fo rudely interrupted ; but that is the diield which ftill proteds thee, and by fome invifible influence withholds my arm from puniftiing thy daring intrufion." « Then hefitate no longer, my lord, to execute your purpofed vengeance I— (faid Walter, gracefully bending one knee to the around, and baring his bofom, as if to re- ceive the uplifted fword of the Baron.;— Rofeline is mine, and were there ten thou- iand fwords ready to pierce my bofom, I would thus publicly proclaim my right." « How !—what is the meaning of all this ? (faid the Baron, looking with indignation at the aftonifhed Sir Philip s)—truth appears to dwell
dwell on the tongue of this youthful ftran¬ ger.—But why have I been thus grofsly de¬ ceived ?—why brought into this facred place to be made a fool of by a boy and girl r" " You muft inquire of that fame boy, (re¬ plied his friend,) of whofe very honourable pretentions I never heard till this moment. Why do you hefitate, my lord ?—why vent your rage on nie, w ? hen it would be more juftly and properly employed in punidiinga madman who has dared to difpute your claim to the hand of my daughter ?" " His countenance ftill proteds him,. (faid the Baron.)—Order fome of your peo¬ ple to take the youth into fafe cuftody till this matter can be inveftigated." Father Anfelm now inquired if he might go on with the ceremony. " Not till I have been heard, (cried Wal¬ ter,) though you tear me piecermeal, diall you proceed !"
Rofeline
Rofeline had recovered, but fhe was ftill furrounded by her female friends. The voice of Walter operated like a charm. She gently raifed her eyes to his face, and beg¬ ged he would be patient: then, addrefling her father, entreated he would not permit any one to hurt him : " I, and I alone, (faid the generous maid,) ought to fuffer. — My dear Walter, (cried fhe,) contend no longer for me : think not of rifking a life which is too precious to be fo madly thrown away. Let every circumftance which led to the painful occurrences cf this morning be openly and candidly explained, and let us reft our caufe on the juftice and humanity of the Baron, father Anfelm, and Sir Philip de Morney. I wifh not to make my appeal before any other tribunal." The Baron, who now for the firft time dif¬ covered Albert among the crowd, (for the conteft had brought all the inhabitants of the nunnery into the chapel,) ftarted as if he had feen a fpedre. He became more agitated
agiiated than before, and requefted they might return to the caftle, that an invefti¬ gation of this ftrange bufinefs might in¬ ftantly take place, for his o,vn heart in¬ formed him there was fome awful my fiery to be explained. Albert approached him : " My lord, (faid he,) till this moment I have fuppofed you cruel, unjuft, and unfeeling : my heart re¬ proaches me for my injuftice. I begin to fee through the cloud which has too long enveloped me. I fufped we have been e- qually deceived,—alike the dupes of artifice and guilt." " Art thou not Albert ? (exclaimed the Baron,)— the confidential fervant of the Lady Blanch, and the favourite of her bro¬ ther ?" " I am the fame unfortunate perfon, my lord, (replied Albert;) and am not only ready to account for my being here, but to give you all the intelligence in my power re¬ fpeding fome very interefting circumftances with
with which till this moment I never fuppofed you unacquainted. My dear fir, (faid he, turning to his agitated mafter,) endeavour to be more compofed :" for the countenance of Walter was too faithful an index to his mind to enable him to conceal the conflid- ing paffions which tortured his bofom, and, while his attention was divided in obferving fhe Baron and Rofeline, he feemed finking beneath his own agonizing emotions. Father Anfelm, the lady abbefs, and two bride-maids, were requefted to return with the party to the caftle. A guard was or¬ dered to take charge of Walter and his fer¬ vant, but he informed them tlie order might be countermanded; for, being a prifoner, he had requefted three gentlemen from the caftle to attend him, left he fliould fubjed himfelf to the fufpicion of defigning to ef¬ cape. De Clavering,, De Willows, and Camel¬ ford, were now fummoned from the paffage, where
where they had impatiently waited to fee how this ftrange and unaccountable bufinefs would terminate. This occafioned further furprife to Sir Philip, who reftrained his ri¬ fing difpleafure with only defiring them to take charge of the gentleman they had cho¬ fen to eficort, and to be ready to appear when called upon. Before Walter left the chapel, he ap¬ proached the Baron, and prefented him his fword. «* To you, my lord, (faid he,) I am impelled to yield a Weapon which never yet was ftained with human blood, and at this moment I fed a grateful joy that it was not aimed againft your life. Moft ardently do I defire to prove myfelf deferving of your iHeridfhlp, and Worthy of your efteem.'* The Baron returned his fword, and re¬ quefted him to wear it. " You have already obtained your wifli, (faid he, fmiling,) and that 1 muft confefs againft my inclination j but there is fomething about you fpeaks a language
language I find difficult to explain, and can¬ not comprehend." Every countenance was brightened up with hope and expedarion at* tliis reply of the Baron, except that of Sir Philip de Mor¬ ney. Even the cold and frigid father An¬ felm, who, in his long feclufion from the world, had, as it may naturally be fuppofed, loft many ot thofe generous and tender feel¬ ings which a more unreflrained intercourfe with his fellow-creatures would have helped to cherifh, feemed animated and enlivened. It was agreed that Walter and his friends, ac¬ companied by Edwin, fliould return the fame way as they had entered, and the reft of the party be conveyed in the carriages.— After proper apologies being made to father Anfelm, and fome of his brethren, for the unneceffary trouble they had fo undeflgnedly occafioned, they returned to the caftle,—■ with what different feelings than thofe they carried with them to,the chapel I muft leave my readers to imagine. Na
No fooner w r ere the party affembled in the drawing-room, than the Baron requefted that the young man and his fervant might be fummoned to give fome account of them¬ felves, and explain their motive for their da¬ ring and unprecedented proceedings ; at the fame time, obferving in the countenance of Sir Philip de Morney indignation, refent¬ ment, and difappointment, he addrefled him in the following words. " I fhould not, Sir Philip, prefume to take the liberty I have now done, did I not, from the nature of our intended connexion, confider myfelf as authorifed to ad in thib .caftle as if I were in my own. I am afraid fbme very dark tranfadions have been car¬ ried on which it is neceffary fhould be in¬ veftigated, and be brought to light. A ■myfterious cloud hangs oyer us, which I am impatient to difperfe. Woe be to that man who has aflifted to deceive me 1" " If you doubt my honour in what has paffed between us, (retorted Sir Philip,) you do
do me injuftice, and I fliall, at any time and in any place, be ready to meet you upon whatever terms you pleafe. If my daughter has deceived me,—if fhe has dared to en¬ courage the hopes of an adventurer,—a ma¬ niac,—a traitor,—let her remember that her crime will not be her only punifliment, nor will the facrifice of her father's life be a fuf¬ ficient atonement for [the difgrace and dif- honour fhe has entailed on the na&e of De Morney." Rofeline burft into tears, in which fhe was joined by every one of her female com¬ panions, who trembled left fome dreadful cataftrophe ihould clofe the heart-rending fcenes of this eventful morning. 44 It may be happy for us both, (faid the no longer haughty Baron, whofe complicated feelings had produced an inftantaneous revo¬ lution among his contending paflions,) that at this moment I do nor. find myfelf inclined to engage in any farther hoftilities, till I am better
better fatisfied the affront and difappoint¬ ment were intended for me. If I have been meanly and wilfully deceived, my fword fliall revenge me upon thofe, and thofe only, who are found guilty, and dearly fhall they atone for the injuftice they have pradifed ; therefore, till matters are cleared up, I am content to be filent on a fubjed which, I hefitate not to declare, appears to me inex¬ plicable." Rofeline, who would have given the world to have obtained permiflion to retire during the awful inveftigation which was going to take place, dared not make an attempt to withdraw, as fhe faw by the eyes of her father his rage and indignation were only kept from breaking out by the deter¬ mined manner and authoritative tone of the Baron, who did not appear in a humour, notwithftanding his language fpoke the fpirit of peace and candour, to put up with any con- tradidiom Again he expreffed the moft reftlefs impatience to be confronted with the parties,
parties, who had io unaccountably deprived him of his young bride, by flopping the p larriaoc-ccremonv. In a few moments the painful fufpenfe was ended by the eager and intrepid entrance of \\ alter, tlie three companions of his en- terprife, and his humble friend.: they were deli red to be feated. Walter and Albert, liowcvcr, continued (landing, requefling tiK-v mip-ht be permitted to do fo, till they fhould be acquitted or condemned. The Baron inftantly called upon Albert to per¬ form his promife, and, if he were really the honeft man he pretended to be, to ftep for¬ wards, and without tear or prevarication, before the [.relent party, inform them who ir was he acknowledged as his mafter, and prove the juftice of thofe claims which he had made to the hand ot his elcded bride, v.wd what were his inducements for pre- \enting a marriage, fandioned by the ladj's owu content, and the unequivocal approba¬ tion of her parents." " I
« I am happy, my lord, (replied Albeit, in a firm, manly, and unetnbarraffed, tone of voice,) to be thus generoufly and pub¬ licly called upon. Unpradifed in either guilt or deceit, and having nothing to fear from my own felf-reproaches, I hail this moment* awful as I own it appears, as by far the hap- pieft of my life. But, before wc proceed any farther in this important bufinefs I muft entreat your iordfhip to perform an ad of tender and atoning juftice, for which I truft you wiil find an approving advocate ia your own heart, and require little farther teflimo¬ ny than the receipt carried in a countenance which you have already confeffed has damped its validity upon every tender feeling of your fouk " My dear, dear fir, (continued he, ad¬ drefling himfelf to the trembling Waiter,) throw yourfelf at the feet of the noble Ba¬ ron ; for, as fure as you now live to claim that diftinguifhed honour, you are his fon, his only lawful heir !—the darling offspring vol. ii. , h of as
of the Lady Ifabella Fitzofbourne, who, to give you life, yielded up her own." Walter in an inftant was at the feet of the Baron, and in another the interefled and a- ftonifhed party faw them locked in each other's arms, at the fame moment the agi¬ tated Rofeline funk into thofe of her mother. In a little time every one became more compofed, and the Baron, rcfolutely ftrug¬ gling to acquire a greater degree of firmnefs in order to obtain farther information, ex¬ claimed, in a tone of voice that evinced the nature of his feelings, " You are, you muft be my fon !—Nature, at firft fight of you, afferted her juft, her powerful claims : yes, you are the precious gift of my fainted Ifa¬ bella,— the only pledge of a love that was pure and gentle as her own heart and mind I but how, where, by what cruel policy and unfeeling hand have you thus long been concealed from my fight ?—how prevented from enjoying the advantages of your birth-
right, while I was tortured with the belict that death had robbed me of my fon ?" " Of all thefe matters, my lord, Albert can fully inform you, (faid Walter.) He is much better able to explain them than I can poflibly be, who till this hour did not know I fliould ever be folded in a father's arms ; yet to me Albert has been a father, a friend, and a guardian. For my fake he bas voluntarily buried himfelf for years in the gloomy and narrow confines of a dungeon ; for my fake fuffered the punifliment of the moft atrocious offender without being guifty of a fingle crime. If you therefore conde- fcend to iove and acknowledge me for a fon, you will feel for him the affedion of a bro¬ ther. To you, my lord, I am indebted for life,—to this, rny fecond rather, I owe its prefervation." " Generous man ! (cried the enraptured Baron, who was charmed at hearing the no¬ ble fentiments of his fon,) come to my arms, and command my power to ferve you !" F 2 Albeit
Albert would have knelt at his feet, but was prevented by a warm embrace from put¬ ting his defign in execution. Walter w r as now feated by the fide of his happy father, who, obferving that his eye wandered in fearch of fomething, with anxious tendernefs, foon gucfled the caufe, and, inftantly rifing from his chair, took his hand, and led him to the weeping Rofeline, who, fmiling through her tears, inftantly proved how warmly die par¬ ticipated in his happinefs. Walter, though the acknowledged fon of Baron Fitzofbourne, was ftill the fon of nature : he funk at her feet, and in the unadulterated language of rapture and affedion, exclaimed,— " For a moment like this, who is there would not fuffer years of anguifh ! Look down, my gentle friend, my benefadrefs and proteding angel,—my firft, my laft, and only love, and let me in your fmiles find a confirmation of my blifs! Let them convince me that all I fee and hear is real ; for I am almoft tempted to think it muft be the effeds of enchant¬ ment, or the delufions of a diftempered ima¬ gination." _ ,.,. D Rofeline,
I
BUNGAY CASTLE. 101 Rofeline, no longer awed by the prefence of her father, no longer able to conceal the joy which revelled in her bofom, gave him her hand, which he inftantly conveyed to his lips. Albert, who carefully watched every change in the countenance of his beloved mafter, trembled for the confequence of fuch new and high-wrought feelings, left they fhould be attended with danger to a mind which had fo recently been funk in a ftate of the loweft dejedion. With the approbation of the party, who faw the neceflity of the de¬ fign, he prevailed upon him to retire for a few minutes, in order to acquire fufficient fortitude to hear his own ftory recited with compofuve. This requeft being feconded by his father and Rofeline, he immediately complied, leaving the company fo much charmed with the whole of his behaviour, through the interefting fcene we have de¬ fcribed, and fo captivated with his figure, good fenfe, and fweetnefs of manners, that furprife was loft in admiration. As foon as the two friends had withdrawn, (for, if ever
any one deferved the name of friend, that title belonged to the worthy Albert,) Sir Philip de Morney approached the Baron, and with fome little embarraffment congratulated him on the wonderful difcovery which had fo recently and unexpededly taken place..— He then entered on his own defence, with the candour and eafe of one, who, if he had erred, it proceeded from ignorance. ** That I have undeflgnedly been made an agent in the diabolical injuftice pradifed a- gainft your fon, by keeping him confined, in this caftle, I beg your lordfliip's pardon, and entreat you would ufe your influence to procure the forgivenefs of him whom I have innocently injured. He was brought to this place under a fiditious name, and, with the fake pretence of being at times deranged in his intelleds, I was told he was the^illegiti- mate offspring of a perfon inimical to the plans of government, and eafily wrought upon by his affociates to enter into any fcheme which the enemies of his country might
might throw in his way \ at the fame time it was afferted that he was particularly difli- ked by a great perfon high in office. AU that was required of me was to keep him and his fervant in clofe confinement,—to fuffer no one to fee or converfe with theny, and to convey no letters nor meffages beyond the walls of the caftle. This requeft came from one with whom I had lived in habits of in* timacy,and whom I looked uponag a refped¬ able charader. He had previoufly obtained permiflion of the noble ow r ner of the caftle for the ufe of its dungeons, but who, as well as myfelf, muft have been led into the pradice of fo glaring a piece of tyranny by the defigns and milreprefentations of thofe whofe interefl led them to keep your Iordfhip in ignorance of your fon's being alive. Injuftice I ought to inform you, that I was ordered to fupply them liberally with every neceffary accom¬ modation the nature of their fituation would admit, and was not reftrided, if I ^ md them quiet and fubmiflive, from allowing them fome occafional indulgences* J taka *" 4 fhame-
fliame to myfelf when I own>^that, after I had feen them fafely lodged in their dun¬ geon, and had forbidden any one attempting to go near or hold converfation with them* I never vifited them more than once, conclu¬ ding they were tw r o dangerous and Worthlefs people, who were receiving the reward of their bafe adions, and contenting myfelf with only making fuch inquiries as the duties of my fituation irnpofed. Indeed I- thought very little about them, and waited witj^com- pofure for the farther explanation promifed by my friend, when we met to fettle the accounts for their board, &c. How the youthful prifoner became acquainted with my daughter, or by what means he obtained an introdudion to her, I am to this moment totally ignorant." " If it can be as- well accounted for (faid fatlier Anfelm) who for fome time had remained filent with furprife,) as you have accounted for the part you were prevailed Upon to ad, I think the moft rigid judge will find but little to condemn." "I
" I have no fears- (replied the Baron) bi. tiieir adions will ftand quite as clear; the fparkling eyes of my affianced bride are at this moment telling tales of their own be¬ guiling influence, and teftifying by their in¬ telligent language that I am right in my eonjeclures. No wonder, as flie conquered the father, fhe fhould have-wounded, and rendered the fon doubly a captive : but here comes the fortunate cu^ at.. Let us hear his defence before we venture to pronounce whether he is entitled to forgivenefs and an honourable acquittal, or merits- condemna¬ tion for daring to fall in love while feutenced to languifh in.a dungeon." Rofeline; having now fhaken off that lan¬ guor and defpondency which for fo many days had depreffed the generous and adive feelings of the gentlcft of human minds, im¬ pelled by juftice and the unbounded affedion fhe had long felt for Walter, exclaimed, " If every virtue merits reward, if every good and engaging quality be entitled to happi- F 5 nefs
nefs, your fon, my lord, will be thehappreff ot men ; for, to the long lift of virtues he inherits from his noble anceftors, you will find added all the bounteous gifts which na¬ ture could beftow onlier moft diftinguifhed^ favourite.!' This artlefs eulogium was not made with¬ out a blufli, and the rofe which bloflbmed on her cheek gave to her face an expreflion which, in the eyes of the Baron, exceeded rhat of the moft perfed beauty, Walter; followed by Albert,, now returned into,the room. " Come here, young man, (faid his father,, in a tone of gratified affedion,) come and- prove yourfelf worthy of the charader I havs heard giveaof you by a very lovely hiftorian*-. Sit down by rae, and endeavour to keep your mind free from agitation, and your fpirits compofed, while our friend Albert gives us the promifed narration, which is to eftablifh your claim, to my name as firmly as youx merits
merits and condud have already done to my regard; for, though you played me ally and mortifying trick before I had the happinefs of knowing you, I find in myfelf iittle incli¬ nation to refent it^ Take notice, however, that perhaps I- fhall not be quite fo favour¬ ably inclined to excufe any deviations in fu¬ ture, fhould. a certain young lady be in the cafe." This was fpoken in-a tone that pro¬ ved the Baron was far from being diflatified at having found.a-rival, foiong as he had re¬ gained a fon.- General congratulations now took place, and the merry, good-humoured Hugh Ca¬ melford, after jumping up and cutting a few capers in the true ftile of Cambrian hilarity, declared he could dance a fandango with his cranmother; or the todor, round the top- moft pattlements of Pungay Caftle, for he never lifed a happier- moment fince he was porn. Every eye fpoke the fame language, and 7 DeClaveringfiaid, though he-dreaded the oyfter-flieh devilifications of a woman's F 6 miad,
mind, he had a pretty widow in his eye,, whom" 1 he mould entreat, to take care, of him for lite.- Sir Philip, -with a fmile, whifpered Lady de Morney, telling her, he thought after all wo¬ men catered the beft for themfelves in the choice of their hufbands : for, prejudice out of the queftion,,the Baron's fon was certainly the fineft young man, he had ever feen.—As all the party were impatient to hear the tale Albert Kad to communicate, he was re¬ quefted to begin, which he did in the fol¬ lowing manner.
$^f%
Ctrl AL.
mmmmmmmmmmmaammmmmmm^mmmam^
CHAP. V..
w "^TOU cannot but recolfed, my lord, J*, (addrefling himfelf to the Baron,) that, when you married, the Lady Blanch, I came into your family. T had been hrought up in her father's houfe,. and from a boy was appointed to attend her perfon, no one being allowed to command or em¬ ploy me without her permiflion.. When, all preliminaries were fettled for your marriage with my lady, L was informed that I was ftill to have the honour of attending her ; a fa¬ vour fo great, and voluntarily conferred, rendered
rendered me not a little vain. You foon after married, and I became a refident in your family : my lady ftill diftinguilhing me with her approbation, made me grateful andl happy, and, though I was frequently re¬ proached by my feliow-fervants, with ill-hu¬ mour and acrimony, for being fo great a fa¬ vourite, I endeavoured all in my power to- convince them, I wifhed not to deprive them ot any advantages they had enjoyed before L came among them, and this in a little time made ihem more reconciled and obliging. My dear young mafter was then in his in¬ fancy, and my place not being one of the bufiefl, 1 had many hours of leifure, which I was allowed to difpofeof as fuited my in* clination : thefe hours I-chicfly fpent in the nurfery, and, being remarkably fond of chii- dien, Ifoon became fo ftronHy attached to the young lord,- that' I often regretted the neceflity of leaving him, which I was fome¬ times obliged to do for weeks and months together, either whenyourdordihip took- my
lady to town, paid vifits to your friends, or went to any other, of your eftates ; and once, if you recoiled/you. were abfent a long time, when you carried my lady to Montpellier, whofe declining health led you to adopt this plan for her recovery, which the phyficians faid would perfedly reftore that bloom a How and nervous fever had ftolen from her, and alarmed every friend who few the rava¬ ges ficknefs had made in a countenance formed to captivate.—Ah ! that unfortu¬ nate excurfion !—I have wifhed with an ach¬ ing heart a thoufand and a thoufand times it had never been made; During our abfence my lady loft her fever* and gave birth to a. fon, who very foon en¬ groffed fo much of her time and affedion, that your lordfliip had juft leafon to jm- plain of the change it produced. There was another k diange which you. did not fo foon difcover. During our refidence among a parcel of jabbering foreigners, my lady learned to de¬ fpife
fpife the bleffed manners and cuftoms of her native country, and all thofe feelings which once made her fo charming. We muft eat, drink, deep, drefs, and do every thing after the French fafhion. I was often reproved for retaining more than any of my fellow-fer- vants my clumfy Englifh manners. She frequently exprefled her fatisfadion that her fon firft faw the light on the Gallic fhore, where, if fhe could have perfuaded your Iordfhip, ihe would' have continued to re- fide. After an abfence of eighteen months, which appeared to me the length of as many years, we returned to England, and" found my young lord juft recovered from the fmall- pox, of a very bad fort, which had fo much altered him, that my lady believed, or rather. affeded to believe, that your fon had been changed during our abfence, or that he* might have died, and fome defigning artful people had irnpofed their ov\n offspring upon vou, to ufurp his rights, and rob her little darling
darling of his title and eftate. The boy flie found in your caftle could not be the fweet creature fhe left t— he was beautiful and finely formed ;— this was ugly to a de¬ gree, robuft, clumfy, and half an ideot. I know not what arts were ufed to make your lordfliip give any credit to fo fallacious and improbable a tale ; but I obferved, with unfeigned regret, from that time your affec¬ tion was continually decreafing, till at laft your fon was feldom admitted to your pre¬ fence, and never indulged with thofe fond careffes wiiich, previous to your departure frcm England, were frequently and tenderly repeated. He was generally difmilled vvith the epithets of beggar's bra-t, foundling, and ideot." " I feel deep contrition for yielding be¬ lief to fuch infernal tales, (faid the Baron,)—• for being fo long the dupe and tool of a de¬ figning malicious woman, and negleding the fon of the moft amiable and beft of wives. Ah!
Ah ! my Ifabella! if you are permitted to look down on this lower world,—if you are acquainted with the condud of him to whom you entrufted your virgin-heart, and made the chofen lord of your deftiny* how muft you defpife and deteft the mean, the for¬ getful wretch, who deferted the facred, the precious charge you fo tenderly committed to his care I May my future penitence a- tone for the cruelty of my paft condud, and my fainted Ifabella intercede with her Crea¬ tor for pardon and forgivenefs 1 Then may Fitzofbourne hope her fpirit will in the grave find a place of reft. No wonder my crimes have robbed her even of that afylum/*' The tears of remorfeftole down theBaron's cheeks, and he gave Walter a look of tender regret, that faid as much as volumes could have done. " I know to what your Iordfhip alludes^ (faid Walter,) and I am happy that it is in my powxr to remove a tormentingdelufioa fioxa
from your mind, which, all circumftances confidered, I cannot be furprifed, made fo forcible an impreffion on it. The ftriking Iikenefs which I bear to my ever-regretted mother had often been remarked to me by Albert, and was undoubtedly defigned to be the means of reftoring me a father." Every one being impatient to hear the re¬ mainder of the prifoner's ftory, the explana¬ tion was deferred, and Albert went on. " Before my young lord had recovered his former complexion, or hi* features began to reaffume fome traits of what they had been, till attacked and difguifed by that baneful diftemper, fo often the grave of beauty,—* the enemy of love, I was one day fummoned into my lady's dreffing-room. After defi¬ ring me to fhut the door, and take care our converfation was not overheard, ihe bade me fit down ; I obeyed reludantly, as I ne¬ ver before had been allowed the honour of fitting in her prefence. She then inquired if I werer
I were in reality as much attached to her as I had frequently pretended to be, and whe* ther, if (he fhould have occafion to place a confidence in me, and require my affiftance, die might truft to my fidelity ? " I affured her flie might command my fervices to the utmoft of my power, as I muft be the moft infenfible and ungrateful of men not to be ready to yield my life, if neceffary, for fo generous and kind a benefadiefs/* " As to your life, my good Albert, (cried her ladyfhip, riling, and putting her purfe and pidureinto my hand, which fhe compelled me to take,) I hope that will long be preferved to do me fervice. The requeft I fhall make will neither involve you in difficulties nor danger $ and if you faithfully perform what will be afked of you, rely upon my word, it will not only free you from labour and fer- vitude, but be a certain means of procuring you a comfortable independence for the reft of your life,—an incoaie that will enable you-
you to marry the woman you love, with whom you may live to fee yourfelf furround¬ ed with a numerous offspring. (The pidure was drawn in the moft flattering colours,— the back ground was not quite fo pleafing.)— But you muft, to obtain my good opinion, and fecure to yourfelf thofe enviable com¬ forts, (continued her ladyfhip,) uncondi¬ tionally and without knowing the nature of the fervice required of you, take a folemn and facred oath never to betray, by thought, word, or deed, the confidence repofed in you. I will give you three days to confider of my propofal, and at the end of that time fliall exped your anfwer." li I was now ordered to withdraw, which I immediately did, in a ftate of mind not to be imagined. What could my lady mean ?—what was the bufinefs in which I was to be employed that demanded the fo¬ lemn prelude of an oath ? Oaths were fa¬ cred things; they were not to be trifled with, and were thought neceflary only on the moft important
^
important occafions. I next recoUeded that I had known my lady from a child : fhe had ever been my friend, had frequently given me good advice, and was religious, generous, and charitable. It could not therefore be any wicked or unjuft adion fhe wanted nie to accomplifli ; ihat was contrary to her nature. What then had I to fear from ta¬ king an oath which could do no one any harm, and might make my fortune ? In¬ dependence was promifed mc. I was young, fanguine, and afpiring, yet I had never dared to hope being placed in a fituation above that I at prefent enjoyed. The lure was thrown out by a hand I could not refift, and I was caught by the tempting bait, which I fwallowed to the deftrudion of my own peace." " But, by your fortunately having done fo, (exclaimed Walter,) my life was repeat¬ edly preferved to enjoy the prefent moment of exquifite happinefs and foul-enlivening hope."—He fixed bis eyes tenderly on the blufliing
blufliing Rofeline, as he uttered this affed- ing exclamation. " When the appointed time was expired, (continued Albert,) I was admitted to a fecond conference with my lady, and with¬ out making any terms, being, as I thought, well affured I might fafely rely on her virtue and reditude as truft to her generofity, I took the oath, which was tended to me by father Paul, her confeffor and domeflic chap¬ lain, to obey fuch orders as were given me with fecrefy and fidelity, for which I was to receive in quarterly payments eighty pounds a year, and to have clothes, board, and every other neceffary, allowed me.— Father Paul bore the charader of a juft and pious man; therefore, had I retained any reludance, receiving the oath from fo facred and important a perfonage would have ren¬ dered any doubts an unpardonable offence a- gainft our holy church. In compliance with my earneft requeft to be informed what was expeded to be done by me, and when I was to
to enter on my tafk, father Paul himfelf, af¬ ter fome little hefitation, opened the bufi¬ nefs. « Her ladyfhip (he faid) was convinced, and he was of the fame opinion, that the child, (meaning my young lord,) which paffed for the fon of the worthy and unfuf¬ picious Baron, was in all probability the fpurious offspring of fome low-born peafant, the fruit of an illicit and illegal amour, irn¬ pofed upon the noble family, for bafe and artful purpofes, by fome defigning wretch, after the death of the lawful heir, which, by fome very wonderful means, has fo far been brought to light as to confirm the fad. This child was fo totally different from that left Ln England, it could not poflibly be the fame. He was beautiful, fenfible, lively, and adive ; this was an ugly brat, dull, and ftupid, and as much the child of King So¬ lomon as of the Baron.—It was become ne¬ ceflary for the honour and comfort of the family to fend it away : it was to be removed
into fome diftant and healthy county for change of air, and placed with a country¬ woman to be nurfed. After he had been ab- fent a few months, I was to withdraw myfelf from the Baron's fervice, take the boy from his ignorant r.urfe, and accompany him to whatever place I fhould be direded. Till he came to a certain age, I was to have the occafional afliftance of a female in rearing him up, and was defirec to do all I could for the poor ftupid creature, who, to be fure, in. the eyes of impartial juftice, had not yet . been guilty of a crime; but, to prevent his being fo, by monopolizing the rights of another, this plan was adopted. " I was next commanded never to prefume to giv- the moft diftant hint either to himfelf or any one elfe, that he had ever been fuf¬ peded, or even thought of confequence,— never to mention the name of Fitzofbourne to him, or to lay that he or myfelf had re¬ sided in the family. When he arrived at the age of fifteen, I might, if 1 were io incli- vol. ii. G ned,
ned, give up my tafk, and fliould have pro¬ per fecurity for receiving my falary during the reft of my life, even if the boy fliould luckily die before the age fixed upon to re- leaie mc from my engagements. If I chofe the trouble, I might teach him to read and write ; hut it was a matter of little confe¬ quence :-— the lefs fuch people knew, the better .—ignorance tc them was happinefs, and knowledge only a burthen, of which it was better not to be poffeffed. " I had been unwarily drawn into the fnare from which I now wanted judgment, courape, and refolution, to difcntang:e my¬ felf. The influence and unbounded \ ower my lady ever held over me, — her confe¬ quence, and my humble ftation, arofe to my terrified imagination, and I dared not venture to expoftulate againft a plan func¬ tioned by the Lady Blanch, and approved by fatha Paul, wiih whom it was equally dangerous to contend* « Of
" Of the identity of the young lord I never cherifhed a doubt ; and, if I had, tlie .reftoration of his fweet features to their former beauty and expreflion, whicli was now beginning to take place, would have baniflied them as foon as they arofe ; yet the fear of offending kept me filent : the oath I had ta¬ ken hung over me with terror ;—it was a heavy weight upon my fpirits ;—every ftrug¬ gle I mad j with confcience was over-ruled by worldly motives. I would not be per¬ jured, but I confented to be ten times worfe. Alas ! I little fufpeded, when I took that facred, yet unhallowed oath, that I was fen- tencing myfelf and a helplefs innocent to years of hopelefs imprifbnment,—to a kind ot living death, and burthcning my con¬ fcience with the heavy crime of being the vile agent m^ffifttng to rob the beft, the moft amiable of all God's creatures of his title, a noble eftate, and even of that free¬ dom which the pooreft of his father's vaffals Ciijoyed."
G z
" Dear
" Dear Albert, (cried Walter,) do not abufe yourfelf fo unjuftfy : reprefent not your ad ions in colours that do not belong to them. If 1 fuffered, you did the fame ; the barbarous hands which robbed me of li¬ bel ty, and the all-cheering light of heaven, deprived you alio of your's. Had it not been for \i ur unremitting and watchful care, your more than parental tenderneis, I had long ere now been numbeied with the dead, and my exiftence and injuries loft in eternal oblivion." " My noble boy, (exclaimed the Baron,) there fpoke the foul of your angelic mother! Juft fo would flic have lliewn her grateful fenfe of benefits received.—Go on, my friend, regard not the feelings you excite ; they are due to the fufferings of this injured youth, and to the virtues of his generous guardian and protedor." Albert proceeded.—" A plan fo deeply laid and artfully contrived, fupported by fuch authoriiA and power, fucceeded but too well. 1 was,
I was, in due time, form, and order, dif¬ miffed from your lordfhip's caftle, and very foon the precious charge was delivered into the hands of the villain who had been aid¬ ing and abetting his ruin ; but the degra¬ ding, felf-reproving feelings, the horrid con¬ flids I endured, in the moment when the innocent victim ran joyfully into the arms of the Judas who had betrayed him, (hoot¬ ing, jumping, and /kipping with pleafure, to think I was come to live with him, and be his nurfe, were fuch as 1 would not have encountered for ten thoufand worlds, could I have foretold the fcorpion ftings ..ith which I found them armed at all points. It was judged neceflary that we fliould fpeeclily re¬ move fiom the houfe of the poor, ignorant woman to whom my young lord had been entrufted, and under whofe foftcring and maternal care he had entirely rea -ercd his looks, and found more happtne r s than in the habitation of great nefs. I took care ihe fhould not go unrewarded for her kindnefs, G 3 and
and received at the expeded time my in¬ ductions for our removal. " After a long and tirefome journey, we arrived at an old ruinated caftle, on the borders of------, and there I found a woman, who was appointed to affift me in the care of my important charge. We had a fmall, gloomy, and inconvenient apartment ap¬ propriated to our ufe ; our table was tolera¬ bly well fupplied : we had plenty of what the country afforded, were never denied any addition I requefted fliould be made to cur wardrobe, and at times books and toys were fent unfolicited ; my falary was likewife pundually remitted me. " Here we lingered away fome time, ard were afterwards removed to two places be¬ fore we were brought hither, owing I fuppofe to fome circumftance that rendered our re¬ moval neceflary, for the better fecret ing of our perfons. Long before the time expired inwhkh my engagement was to end, and I fliould
fhould be authorifed to demand my freedom and continued reward, I found myfelf fo ftrongly attached to my young lord, felt fuch pity for his fi* lation, and fuch corroding regret at having lent my afliftance to his cruel perfecutors, I could not fupport the moft diftant idea of forfaking him, and would have fuffered torture rather than have left him in a ftate fo defolate and unproteded. " I hinted in my letters, that, if any at¬ tempts were made to feparate me from my beloved charge, I fliould confider the oath which had hitherto kept me faithful to their fecret as no longer binding. I heard by chance of the death of Lady Blanch, but never till very lately that fhe had loft her fon. I for fome months cherifhed hopes that her death would procure our liberty, and releafe me from my oath, but I was foon given to underftand, that to her brother ihe had dif¬ covered the fecret; that, in future, our re¬ mittances were to be fent by his order, and we were to be guided by his direction. G 4 *« Finding
" Finding things thus fettled and arranged, after we had lived fo many years in confine¬ ment, I concluded that the whole plan had been contrived and executed with your lordlhip's confent, and no longer doubted but it was your wifli that the fon of the Lady Blanch fliould inherit )our titles and eftates." " Good God ! (exclaimed the Baron y ) how awful and myfleiious are thy dealings with us erring mortals ! I was told 9 and fuppofed the tale was true, that my poor boy died fuddenly, in a few months after he was fent from the caftle, on the pretence that change of atr was neceffary. I gave orders for his interment in our family- vault, went into mourning, and knew not till this ever bleffed day that a fon of mine exifted.— Unhappy, miftaken, guilty Blanch !— the untimely fate of thy darling boy is now fully and folemnly accounted for ! It was doubt- Jefs the juft judgment of heaven for thy unpardonable crimes in depriving the fon of my
my Ifabella firft of bis father's love, and then of his protedion. ' The agonies of thy dying morucnts are now explained : they were the direful effeds of unavailing contri¬ tion ; for, when thou vvouid ft have relieved thy mind of its heavy burthen, fpeech was denied thee : I hope thy anguifli, in thofe moments of terror, have in part atoned for thy unheard of cruelty. "* Father Paul has found a fhelter in the grave from my rtfentment ; but ihe man, I will not call him brother, who muft have been tempted to take an adive part in this iniquitous bufinefs, in the hopes ot obtain¬ ing fome of my foi tune for his children, ftill lives to feci my anger. What could iu* duce one of his exalted rank to perfecute and rob the innocent, if from his fufferings and feclufion he had not expedwd to reap confiderable benefit 1" ** Perhaps the fear of punifliment and expofure might prompt them to continue the deception, (faid Alb:rt;) what ocv i- G 5 fiui;d
fioned our removal to this caftle I could never learn ; it was fudden, and conduded with fecrefy and caution, for we were guarded as. if we had been prifoners of ftate, owing, I prefume, to fome attack being made, or me¬ ditated, againft the caftle we left; but, whatever was the caufe, we had reafon tob^ thankful for the change it produced, as we had more liberty, and better accommodation^ than we had experienced in any other pri¬ fon." " I fliall ever reproach myfelf, (faid Sir Philip,) for ha\in^ been led into an ad of fuch unpardonable oppreflion, for which I can never ftand excufed to my own heart. I trufted too implicitly tothe account which was given me, not doubting the honour or veracity of the parties concerned. I muft now entreat, the worthy narrator would pro¬ ceed with his ftory, for I own I am very im¬ patient to know how the fon of my (riend obtained aa> introdudion to my daughter/*
«i
" I truft, my father and indulgent friends will excufe my abfence, (faid Rofeline,) du¬ ring a recital, that, in my prefent agitated ftate of mind, would be too much for me to fupport." ** No, no, no 1" was echoed from every part of the room. Walter, rifing, and feat- jng himfelf by the fide of Rofeline, whif¬ pered fomething in her ear that inftantly reconciled her to a compliance with the general requeft of the company. Albert then proceeded, and gave an ac¬ count of their firft interefting interview, and of the dangerous ftate to which long con¬ finement and a flow r fever had reduced Ids mafter. He dwelt with delight on the ten¬ der attentions of the charming Rofeline to the poor, forlorn, helplefs, and dying pri¬ foner ; clef bribed her unremitting care, and mentioned with what joy he marked their growing affedion, which was foon vifible to all the parties but thofe moft interefted.— G 6 The
The friendship of Edwin was not forgotten, nor were the polite and fifterly attentions of the gentle Madeline paffed over in filence. Nothing was omitted in the narrative but the Baron's fright in the fubterranean f>af- iage, and that for reafons which will hereafter a] {ear, he dared not venture to explain. " Your alarm, my lord, (continued Al¬ bert,) on the night the ball was given by Sir Philip de Morney, and which occafioned fo much buftle and confufion, originated from a caufe more natural than you, miffed by terror, could fuppofe. To explain things in their proper order, we muft go back to the day previous to that of the ball. " Mifs De Morney and her brother had' -informed my mafter of what was intended ; in confequence of this intelligence, he be¬ came more-reftlefs and wretched than I-had ever feen him, and felt the miferies of his,. fituation fo feverely, that I trembled for the confequence fo irritable a ftate of mind might produce
pgpiHuce on a conftitution fufficiently injured already by the unfparing rigours of oppref¬ lion and confinement. I therefore, without givmg yBjg^i hint of my intention, formed a plan in my own mind to relieve his fuffer¬ ings, little fufpeding the furprifing and happy effects of which it would be prod u dive, or once fuppofing, that, in his fuccefsful rival, I fhould fee Baron Fitzofbourne.— Never was I fo puzzled as in the moment I made that difcovery, to conceal the feelings by which it was attended, from giving my alarm to thofe which had already hurailed and half deftroyed my dear mafter. Without much difficulty I prevailed on Mr. Dc Morney to procure me two female dreffes, telling Hm for what purpofe they were intended. He was at firft aftonifhed at the Angularity of my rt queft ; but, find-. ing no ill confequences likely to attend it, readily complied, and with the afliftance of his fifter the matter was eafily accomplifhed.
" We
" We helped each other in putting on female attire as well as we could, and took as much care as poffible to make fuch an appearance as was not likely to attrad at¬ tention. At the time appointed we fallied forth in our female habiliments, flipped through fome of the forfaken apartments, aad joined without any fufpicion a vaft number of people who had obtained per¬ miflion to wit nefs the feftival, and fee the company dance. " The eyes of my young lord were feafted by beholding the beloved objed who en- croffed his every thought, and conftituted his every wifli, exhibit her elegant perfon in the mazy windings of the dance, which till now he had never feen. With a kind of faddened delight, he was foon con¬ vinced, that, though her perfon was engaged* her heart appeared to have no fhare in the pleafure which was legibly depided on the countenance of her youthful companions j but, on that which his eyes alone delighted to
to mark, he faw a filent uncomplaining fadncfi, which, at the time it wounded, cheered and revived his foul with tlie fweet hope that, had he been prefent, had he been her envied partner, no fadncfs had clouded her brow,—no regret found entrance to her bofom. ** Siie frequently withdrew her ey r es from the company to fix them on the humble crowd, in which flic concluded her lover was numbered. He likewife felt his fpirits relieved by the coldnefs and indifference with which he faw flie received every flattering attention that was paid her.-— When he had fufficiently fatisfied his curi¬ ofity, and I obferved he was weary of be'uw incommoded by the number of people which continued to increafe, I whifpered him that I thought it time to retire, while the coaft was clear, and we could Ileal away undifco¬ vered. " He defired me to go firft, faying he would follow me in a few moments. I in¬ ftantly
ftantly obeyed. My mafter, by taking a wrong turn, was paffing through your lord- fhip's bedchamber as you entered it. He faw it was his rival, and, in the inftantaneous indignation of the moment, forgot every thing but the refentment which was rank¬ ling in liis bofom.—You perceived him,-— lcoked alarmed, and trembled : he frowned, and ihook his head, while the face on which you gazed with terror was. flufhed with paf¬ fion. ^ On feeing you fell, unable to account for the caufe, and fearful of being difcovered, he hurried out of the room, and haftened to inform me of what had happened. — Hearing a vaft buftle, I inftantly diiro- bed my mafter of his female attire, having already gotten rid of my own difguife ? — I was next day informed by Mr. De Morney that your lore!(hip had been alarmed by fomething in your own room, and w ? as much indifpofed, I foon colleded fufficient proof to be aflured that it was the appearance of your fon
fon which had occafioned this confufion, and imparted enough of my fentiments to make r>\ felf underftood. From that mo¬ ment, having no alternative, no other me¬ thod to adopt, in order to bring about a difcovery, we agreed to enter the chop 1, and thefe gentlemen, at the requeft of their friend, hefitated not to be of the party." To confirm more fully, and to remove every doubt from the mind of the Baron, Albert produced many of the clothes and trinkets which had been fent by the Lady Blanch. The mark of a bunch of currants on the arm of Waiter, with which he was born, and which had been occafioned by one of nature's ftrongeft freaks, was per¬ fedly recoUeded by the Baron, and was a fad not to be controverted. So many corroborating and convincing teftimonies of his identity would have ba¬ niflied doubt, had any doubt remained ; but truth and nature Were too prevailing to be dilputed ; the countenance of Walter was, un fupported
unsupported with farther evidence, fufficient to prove him the fon of the Lady Ifabella. This narrative contained fo many inte¬ refting circumftances, com and unfeeling muft have been the heart which could have heard it with difbelief or indifference: no fuch heart was enflirined in the bofom of the delighted audience ; every eye readily paid the tribute of a tear. The condud of Rofeline and her brother was generally ap¬ plauded and admired ; all were eager v to praife, and De Clavering flily obferved, that, if any young lady fhould fall in his way who had a mind to ftudy the ufe of herbs, he fhould conclude flie had fomething more in her head than a wifh to learn phyfic or bo¬ tany . " Perhaps 'tis a fign of luf, (faid Camel¬ ford,) when people pegin to ftudy potany, and that is the reafon De Willows thinks fo much apout it himfelf ; for I heard him in his fleep call out, that he muft die, unlefs fome
fome palm could be tifcovered to heal the wound in his heart, which was as pig as a parn door." De Willows called him an incorrigible mifcreant for betraying the fecrets he pilfered from his frwnd, and vowed to be revenged in his own way. This little fally gave an enlivening turn to the converfation, but it was not poflible that a party, circumftanced as the prefent, fliould be able to converfe on any fubjed but that in which every heart was interefled : it had even bereaved father Anfelm and the abbefs of many tears. Sir Philip de Morney avowed that the gentle and benevolent virtues of his children made him blufli at the failure of them in himfelf, The Baron ftill flied tears, but they were tears more calculated to provoke envy than excite compaflion. He embra¬ ced his fon again and again, led him to Rofeline, and entreated flie would make the youth her captive for life, and beftow on him the
the only treafure wliich could reward him for his long confinement and uncomplaining for¬ titude. He called upon Sir Philip to accept him for a bi other inftead of a fon, faying, as he fhould now certainly never think of marrying again, the fettiernents, with a few alterations, might ftand as they did. This propofal was too agreeable to meet with any oppofition. Upon Albert the Baron propofed fettling an annuity that would ena¬ ble Him to live in a ftile equal to that of the moft refpedable countty gentleman ; but this good man inftantly declined accepting the generous offer, declaring, that if they compelled him to leave his dear young lord, and deprived him of the pleafure of attend¬ ing him, life would lofe its value, and he fhould pine away the remainder of his days in difcontent and mifery, though he were poffeffed of the moft unbounded afflu¬ ence. " And I, (faid Walter,) though bleffed with my gentle and lovely Rofeline, fliould appear
appear defpicable in her eyes, and contemp¬ tible in my own, could I ever confent that my preferver, friend, and preceptor, fliould live under any roof but mine. 1 hope and truft he will permit nie to repay to bis de¬ clining age the mighty debt I owe him fbr his tender care, his unceafing attentions to my helplefs and perfecuted youth," Albert burft into tears, and, fuddenly throwing himfelf at the feet of Walter, found, in the eager and cordial embrace with which he raifed him, an ample reward for his long tried fidelity. Edeliza, Bertha, and their youthful com¬ panions, were no longer able to confine their joy in filence. Bertha crept to the file ■of Walter, and looked at him vvith an ex¬ preflion of countenance fo good humoiiied and arch, that he took her on his knee, and inquired if fne would give him leave to ot¬ her brother.
« Thai
" That I will! (faid (lie.)—You are fo tall and handfome, and by feeing you I have found why my fifter Rofeline (bed fo many tears, had fo many fainting fits, and went about without finging the pretty fongs (lie ufed to do ;—it was all owing to you ;—*. therefore you muft be very good, and very entertaining, to make her love you better than ihe does Edeliza, brother Edwin, or myiur. Lady de Morney, father Anfelm, the ab- bef-, Madeline, and Agnes de Clifford, were feverahy introduced. The abbets, as ihc c.:;'Tcfied lier approbation of her' niece's lover, told her lifter that the faw in his ani¬ mated and expreffive countenance a iikenefs of herre-p-etted Henry. De Clavering and rher.il weic not filent. Never can there be found a happier party than were at that time affembled in Bungay-caftle. The gloom, whicli had fo long enveloped them, difappeared with every threatening cloud, and was fucceeded by the brighteft funfhine. Various
Various reports were in rapid circulation re¬ fpeding the circumftances which had fo wonderfully concurred to promote and fe¬ cure the happinefs of Walter and Rofe¬ line; and, wiiile feme were pitying, others blaming the bride that fliould have been, the parties themfelves were congratulating each other on account of that very difap¬ pointment which had been produdive of joy as great as it was unexpeded. Rofeline, eager to difrobe herfelf of her bridal ornaments, which, in fpite of herfelf, carried her refledions back to the agonizing conflids flie had endured when putting them on, retired with her young friends, and then in the fulnefs of heart, as flie em¬ braced them with delight, unmixed with felf-rcproach or doubt, informed them of her long and tender attachment to the poor, helplefs, und unknown prifoner. Edeliza declared he wa> almoft as hand- fome as De Willows. « But not half fo merry
merry and good humoured as Mr. Camel¬ ford, (faid Bertha ;) but I will tiy to make him romp vvith me, and then perhaps I fliall hke him as well." Rofeline fmiled with complacency at her filler's artlefs obfervations, in wliich flie read the fentiments of hearts which had not yet learned the art of concealing what they felt, and which already yielded to the influence of the fame blind god who had conduded her through fuch varying fcenes of hope, defpair, and mifery, to a profped of the moft enviable happinefs. The whole company were invited to fpend the remainder of the day at the Caftie, not- witl.ftinding the purpofe for which they came liad been defeated. Faihcr Anfelm, who, though a very pious and rigid Catho- lie, had no objedion to good living, very 3eadhy accepted the invitation. The doors of the Caftle were ordered to be thrown «,ivn ; everv one that chofe was permitted to
to partake of the hofpitality and good cheer, and, though the company were difappointed of being at a wedding, it would have been impoflible for an indifferent fpedator to imagine any matter of fuch confequence could have happened, as mirth, pleafure, and fatisfadion, revelled in every eye, and every countenance was dreft in the ferene and placid fmiles of joy and contentment. Rofefine was clofeted half an hour with her mother and aunt; fhe received their congratulations and careffes with that pure delight which ever attends the heart when duty and affedion are united. Lady de Morney could not withhold her praifes ; yet once or twice gently adverted to the dangers which might have arifen frcm the duplicity of her condud in concealing nn attachment of fo much importance to her future peace, had not the holy virgin con¬ defcended to watch and guard her. The abbefs beftowed her moft pious benediction on her lovely niece, who, flie pronounced, vol. 11. H had
had aded under the induence of her guar¬ dian faint, and was entitled to the ample rew r ard which appeared to wait her accept¬ ance.
CHAP
CHAP. VI.
WHEN the party met at dinner, the fimple elegance of Rofeline's en¬ gaging figure, diveded of thole orna¬ ments which a few hours before had been fo lavifhly put on by the fingers of tafte, appeared far more captivating : her eyes were illumined with an expreflion of joy and fatisfadion to which they had long been ftrangers ; the change conveyed a train of the moft enchanting fenfations to the heart of her admiring lover, and did not pafs unobferved by her friends. To Sir Phihp H z the
they carried a filent reproach for having fo long robbed them of their Iuftre. Rofeline was feated between the Baron and his fon, and, though this was the firft time Walter had ever dined with fo large a party, or witneffed the comforts of a plen¬ tiful table, laden with the rarities of art and nature, he was neither awkward nor embar- raffed ; for his friend Albert, to fill up the heavy hours as they flowly crept away during their long and tedious imprifbnment, had defcribed to him the manners and cuftoms of the world, among all ranks of people, with the utmoft accuracy an J care, and by thefe means prepared him for fcenes which muft otherwife have aftonifhed, and in many inftances alarmed, him. The good Albert was placed between De Clavering and De Willows, who took this opportunity of fhewing him their moft flat¬ tering attention, and, in confequence, he was encouraged to hold a very refpedable part in
in the converfation. As he had before given undeniable proofs of the goodnefs of his heart, he now unfolded to the company the excellence of his underftanding, and con¬ vinced them, that, if the prifoner had been educated amidft the buftle of the world, he could not have found a better preceptor as to found judgment and ufeful knowledge. —> Thushonouied and happy, he found in part a reward for the integrity and humanity of his condud, while the approving eye of his grateful mafter fpoke a language which conveyed a joy to his heart that is rarely felt r and cannot be defined* Edwin and De Willows paid every atten¬ tion to their fair enflavers, no longer fearing the penetrating eyes of the governor, who was too much taken up with the eclaircifle- ment of the morning to fufped any otheT lovers were prefent. After the company rofe from table, at the Baron's particular requeft, they went to look 1* 3* into
nto thofe dreary apart ments to which the prifoner had been configned at his firft coming to the caftle. Edwin produced the key of the trap-door, and conduded them down the fame ftairs which he and his trem¬ bling companions had defcended when they were alarmed by the unufual noifes they heard in the lower pail of the caftle. Every minute circumftance was interefting to the company j but to the Baron they were con¬ nected with a tale that awakened every feel¬ ing of his heart. Few therefore can be at a. lofs to guefs his fenfr tions when he entered the cold, gloomy, and unwhoiefome dun¬ geon in which this darling fon, the child of his Ifabella, had lingered fo many months, and was told by Albert, that it was far more comfortable and commodious than the one he liad been inclofed in many long and te¬ dious years. The Baron fliuddered with horror, fat down on the humble and uneafy couch which had been Walter's only bed, during a long and
and dangerous indifpofition, and again called upon Albert to defcribe his firft interview with Rofeline ; the tale was again repeated, and loft none of its effed by repetition.— Walter, the tear trembling in hts eye as it was fondly bent on Rofeline, grafped her hand, and poured out the warm effufions oi his grateful and enamoured heart. To trace the progrefs of nature, un vi¬ tiated by falfe tafte, and uncorrupted by guilt, is, in my opinion, (faid De Clavering,) the moft entertaining and inftrudive hif¬ tory we can read, and far more ufeful is the language it contains than all the crabbed and unfeeling documents of the moll ftu- dious philofopher, who iofes the gentle pro- penfities of his nature by fnuffing up the duft of ancient libraries, till the fpiders have woven their cobweb-looms in his head, and left no fpace for nature to creep in, and fhew her unadulterated face ; but, in my opinion, the chief happinefs, both of man and woman, H 4 confifts
confifts in tlie knowledge and praftice of all the focial affcdions." The Baron, ftruck with thefe obferva¬ tions, held out his hand to De Clavering* requefting to be better acquainted with him, and apologizing for his former negled, which was chiefly owing to the Angularity of his fituation, which made him behold every man younger than himfelf with envy and fufpicion; " but now (added he) I have re* figned all my pretentions to the prior claims of my fon, wifhing to atone for my paft errors, and to prote myfelf worthy the efteem of all thofe to whom he owes an obliga¬ tion." u To me, my lord, (replied De Claver~ ing,) your fon owes nothing : till a few days back I knew not of his refidence in the caftle ; to my refped and efteem I confi¬ dered him as having a juft claim. From the firft hour I had th; honour of being in¬ troduced to him, 1 felt a defire to ferve him 5 but all I ever did was to accompany him from
from the caftle to the Chapel, for which I never expeded to be pardoned by your Iord¬ fhip." " But, as his Iordfhip offers you his friendfhip, (faid the giddy and fpirited Hugh Camelford,) you had petter accept it now he is in the humour. Lorts are not always in the mind to be coot friends withteath and; the todor." This effay of elocution obtained the Ba» ron*s notice, and, by making every one fmile, fucceeded to his wifh. Camelford,- thus encouraged, gave way to the unbounded cheerfulnefs of his difpofition^ by again re¬ newing his attack upon his friend De Cla¬ vering, telling him it was high time for him to be prufhing away the Cobwebs of old patchelorfliip, and pecome a man of the. world, otherwife no laty, maid, or witow,. would 1 undertake the care of his old pones, and the pones of" thofe he had pought out of their craves. De Clavering,. who feldom felt himfelf in the humour to be difpleafed H 5 with
with his young friend,, owned that he was as fingular in his fentiments as the ladies, he was afraid, might think him in his manners and appearance " You muft endeavour to become more modern, and like one of us,, (faid De Wil¬ lows.) To be better known cannot fail to fecure you a mod favourable reception," " A piece of advice I have often given him myfelf, (faid Sir Philip.) To make our progrefs through life with credit and advantage to ourfelves, we muft fo far be* come men of the world, as to feek for thofe favours it is not willing to bellow un- fought or unfolicited." 1 " But, for a man to be able to get through it with uninterrupted fuccefs,, (replied De Clavering, I have fometimes thought he muft be brought up a rafcal from the firfL I own I fhould find fo many places that would* tempt me to halt in my nay t -that I fhould certainly be prevented reaching the: envied and conteded goal j for, before I would:
would fubmit to have my houfe crowded with a fucceflion of what might be called good company, I would take an inn, and, in the charader of mine hoft, play a fafer, and as pleafant a game. I fliould not then be under the neceflity of facrificing my fen¬ timents, or more of my time, than I found anfwered the purpofe Ol keeping houfe to accommodate all comers and goers." ** What ! (faid Camelford,) would you be peat py a prother todor, becaufe ^ t ou would not apply a ftrengthening plaifter of goot and fmooth worts to make it flick clofe ? would you not gif the laties a healing cordial of compliments ro reconcile them to their lofs of peauty, their lap-dog, or their lofer > Fie, man* they would not fuffer you to> todor their cat 1" c< What I might be tempted to do^ or how far I might relax from my fyftem, to pleafe the ladies r (replied De Clavering,) I cannot tell till I become more a man of ihe world, and feel myfelf more attached to H 6 many
many of its cuftoms: but this I do know, there are a fet of patients to whom I could not facrifice my own fentiments to obtain the command of their purfes. For inftance, —can the man, who has wafted his youth in vice and debauchery, juftly complain qf a premature old age ? or ought he to excite the pity of any one who knew the fource whence his miferies, originated ? Can we fympathize with the man of bufinefs, who has brought upon himfelf the torturing pa- roxyfm&of a fever by the difappointment of fome monopolizing plan, the fuccefs of which' muft have been produdive of diftrefe and mifeiy to many hundreds of their fellow- creatures. Can the voluptuary and the. drunkard think themfelves entitled either to* flattery or compaflion, when their fufferings have been occafioned by eating till they gained a forfeit, or by drinking fo hard as to make a kind of turnpike-road from their ftomachs to their bowels." « € ' All in the way of bufinefs, (faid Edwin.) Laftead of quarrelling with the caufe, you have
have nothing more to do, my good friend, but to turn their follies to your own account, and do as thoufands have done before you— make them contribute in fome way or other to the good of the community." " If we were difpofed to quarrel with vice and folly every time we encounter them, (faid Camelford,) we fhould be engaged in a per* petual conteft,. and fhould only ket proken pones and the plifter of contention for our pains." " True, (replied the venerable father An¬ felm,, who till now had obferved a placid filence as he liflened to the above converfa* tion,) we fliould all agree to make the fame allowance for the failings and frailties of others as we are inclined to do when we fit injudgment upon our own, and rather ftrive to find excufes than caufes to condemn ;- like the bleffed mafter we all unite to ferve, whofe precepts and pradice were calculated fcr the good and happinefs of all man* kind." " Juft
** Juft fo would mine be, my dear father, (faid De Clavering,) fo far as an erring' mor¬ tal can be fuppofed to copy a divine original!; but I would not flatter people with a belief that I could feel for the miferies entailed by vice as I would for thofe which originated from any other caufe. There are moments when I fee the patient and virtuous fufferer looking up to me for health and life, that I would compound with pleafure to be any thing rather than what I am." " Rather (faid Sir Philip) endeavour to reft fatisfied with being what you are,—the true Samaritan, the friendly phyfician, who afiumes the appearance of mifanthropy, without having a grain of it in his compo^ fition." " In order to conceal feelings diat do ho- honour to his profeflion and to human na*- ture." The Baron, having looked at every tiling,. and afked innumerable queftions, the party next vifited the rooms where Edwin, and Rofeline-
Rofeline rifked fo much in daring to remove Walter, and in which he had fo long re¬ mained undifcovered by the family. Here Walter himfelf defcribed, in his own artlefs manner, the delight he felt when he, for the firft time, faw the rifing fun, and contem¬ plated the brilliant fcene which the moon and ftars prefented to his aftonifhed fight ; he mentioned likewife his rapture when firft convinced that the fair Rofeline felt for him a mutual paffion. He then defcribed the conflids he endured on the morning when he knew fhe was really gone to give ker hand to another, and owned the miferies of that moment furpaffed thofe of his whole life, and, if thrown into a fcale againft them, would have weighed down all. He then ad¬ verted to his feefings when he approached the altar, and to the awe and refped he kit at fight of the Barom In the evening it was propofed to take at ramble through the gardens belonging to the caftfe, now profufejy decorated with all the
the variegated beauties of the foul-enlivening, fpring, which were on theeveof givingplace to tiie fucceeding charms of fummer. Here it was that the happy* the grateful Walter met fuch a fuxceflion of wonders and delight as rendered the fcene doubly pleafing to thofe who partook in his raptures. Every flower, plant, and" (hrub, every tree, leaf, and vegetable, excited his admi¬ ration and gratitude.. The diftant fields,— the rifing hills^-tbe water,—the aumber- lefs houfes,—all,- all were admired in turn, and became the theme of his praife;—It was a charming world,—it - was the paradife of which he had read,—the very garden of Eden, fuch as.our firft parents pofieiTed, and' Rofeline the magnet which gave fuch fweet attradion to all he faw, and all he mould. enjoy in it. So much was he delighted with the fcene,., it was not till the (hades of evening began to approach, and throw ;v gloom over the face
face of nature, that even the gentle ad¬ monitions of Rofeline could prevail up¬ on him to return to the caftle. Like a- noth^r Cymon, he found liberty too great a blefling, too pleafing to be willing to part with it when once he had tafted its foul-re^ viving influence. Many of the following days were fpent in making excurfions round the country, and in (hewing him every thing worthy ot no¬ tice. He vifited the neighbouring towns and villages, looked into the churches, faw the fea, and was conveyed on board a fhip, whofe wonderful conftrudion, and the vaft world of waters on which it fo majeftically floated, awakened every fenfation of afto¬ nifhment. He was next indulged by failing on the river Waveney in an open boat, rowed by fome of our old Englifli failors, whofe rough and cheerful humour gratified and en¬ tertained him. A horfe was likewife procured for him : he foon learned to ride, and became fo fond of
of the exercife, that few days paffed with¬ out his going fome miles about the country. His fine figure, expreffive countenance, and conciliating manners, his gentlenefs, and un¬ ceafing good humour, made him an univerfal favourite, and all the inhabitants of Bungay welcomed his appearance among thern with every teflimony of icfped, joy, and fatisfadion. The Baron and his friend, Sir Philip, had many confuitations refpeding the intended marriage of their children, whofe youth and total ignorance of the world, of which Walter could fcarcely be called an inhabi* tant, rendered it abfolutely neceffary that he fhould be properly introduced at court, in order to have his birth made known, and his rights and titles afcertained. It was e- quafiy neceffary that he fliould become more converfant with the cuftoms and manners of that world, on whofe ftage he was now to make fodiftinguiflied a figure ; and, as he had been pre\ ented feeing foreign countries, it was a duty
duty the Baron thought incumbent upon him to take care he fhould be well acquainted with hisown, and inftruded in thevalueof its juft and equitable laws, which, he had caufe to lament, were fometimes abufed by the de¬ figns of artful and wicked men, though the envy of every other nation in the worid. When thefe defigns were made known to Walter, the diftrefs it produced is not to be defcribed. Tobe feparatcd from Rofeline 1— the thought was agony;—without feeing her every day, without being in the fame place with her, it was not to be borne. He fhould never be able to acquire any know¬ ledge unlefs the gentle maid, to whom he was indebted for life, was near, and by her foul-enlivening prefence animated his endea¬ vours, while in her fmiles he fhould find a bright reward for the unwearied pains lie fhould not fhrink from encountering for heir fake.
Rofeline
Rofeline was not at all better reconciled to the plan, nor more at eafe tha himfelf. She was apprehenfive he might in the great worid fee fome one he liked better than her¬ felf. She had heard men were inconftant and prone to change. The heart fhe had gained in the dungeon of Bungay-caftle might oerchance, when engaged in the great world, furrounded by pleafure, and befieged by the bright eyes of beauty, ftray from her bofom tc that of a more lovely and accom- pliflied miftrefs 5— to a more fond and faith¬ ful one it could net be entrufted; but, as no one, fhe fuppofed, could refufe the atten¬ tions of Walter, fhe trembled at the idea o£ being feparated* Thefe timid fears were not kept from the ear of her lover, who, in fome degree, qui¬ eted them with that perfuafive eloquence which love never fails to beftow on its faith¬ ful votaries* Pie inquired if fhe thought it poflible he could H fo great a villain as to prefer the beauties of a court to the lovely Rofeline-
Rofeline of Bungay-Caftlc,—the gentle be¬ ing who not only preferved his life, but taught him to enjoy it, whofe unwearied attentions fmoothed the bed of ficknefs, re¬ moved the veil of ignorance, and gave to liis unfortunate life the firft bright moment it had ever known. He vowed, if he thought any thing he might find in the world could tempt him to forget her, or love her ieis than he did at that moment, he would volunta¬ rily return to his dungeon, and never leave it more ; he earneftly and pathetically pe¬ titioned his father and Sir Philip de Mor¬ ney not to compel him to leave his adored Rofeline till he was bleft with calling her his own. With this requeft, however, they could not with prudence comply: it was not only right, but abfolutely neceffary he fliould be publicly acknowledged as the Baron*s fon before his marriage took place, to prevent the eftablifhment of his rights being fubjed to fufpicion or litigation. Againft reafons fo
%
/O weighty and juft there was no contending, and therefore they were obliged to fubmit, though thefe untaught children of fimple nature yielded very reludantly to a plan which was to fecure in their poffeffion all thofe fafcinating enjoyments which the in¬ habitants of our bufy world are continually purfuing, and to obtain which, without any neccfiity or compulflon, they often make more important facrifices. Albert was no longer confidered or treated as a fervant. The Baron generoufly deter¬ mined, as foon as he reached town, to give fuch orders to his attorney as fhould fecure him a genteel independency ; and, as he was no longer diftre'Icd with the apprehenfion of being feparatcd from his beloved mafter, he enjoyed all the comforts, with a grateful heart which the liberality of his benefadors beftowed, and met with that unfeigned re- fped, from every one who knew the worth and integrity of his charader, to which he was fojuftly entitled. As
As Audrey was attending her young lady, in her apartment, after (he had been at the chapel to be married, and returned from thence without becoming a bride, fhe, as it may be fuppofed, was too full of the occur¬ rences of the day to be filent on a fubjed every one was talking about, but which die did not, on her part, by any means approve, knowing what her own feelings would have been on a fimilar occaiion. '« Well, to be fure and certain, mifs, (cried die,) the like of this was never heard fince the mencement of the world ; for to <*o to church to be married, to take the bride's groom in your hand, as a body may fay, and then to come back as you went, without being married at all ! As I have a vartuous and Chriftian foul to be faved, if I had been volved in fuch a quandrary, I would never have left the chapel without a hufband, young or old, let what would have been the confequence.—People deer and jeer fo about mifventures of this kind, and afks one for bride's
bride's cake, and talks fo indelloxcatly on this fubjed % however, don't fret, mifs; it feeins you may be married ftill, but, for my part, I likes it beft as it is." « I think in this inftance as you do, Au¬ drey, (replied Rofeline, with difficulty keep¬ ing herfelf from offending the honeft-hearted Abigail, by burfting into a violent fit of laughter,) yet the Baron is certainly a fine- looking old gentleman." <« Fine feathers make fine birds, (faid Au¬ drey,) but as to his being finedooking, Chrift jefus, mifs, to be fure mafter JCuford, the blind god of love, has made you blinder than himfelf." Rofeline could no longer preferve her gravity. « Blind or not blind, (faid fhe,) I affure you, Audrey, I thought the Baron looked and talked like an angel after we returned from the chapel i and, what is more, ugly as you thmk him, I lov* him dearly, and ; cannot
cannot help looking at him with pleafure and delight." " To be fure, (faid Audrey afide,) the difappointment has turned her head, and arranged all her interleds.------As fure as God is true, mifs, (faid flie.) you have ta¬ ken ftrange vaggaries into your head : it was but yefterday I thought you were going into a vapid recline, as I have heard you men¬ tion, and now I verily thinks Bedlam will be )*our potion inftead of a hufband." " As far as I know I am now in my pro¬ per fenfes, (cried Rofeline, laughing,; not¬ withftanding your prognoftics, and taking fo much pains to convince me of the con- traiy." " Well, well, it may be fo, mifs, (replied the mortified damfel ;) I know but little of noftics ; but this I do know, there is no recounting for the humour of quality peo¬ ple. The young Baron however, it muft be faid, if poor folks can fee and judge, k to the full as good as his father. Hand- vol. in I fome
fomeasyou think him, and though he cannot fpeak to make himfelf underftood, and do not know his right hand from hh left, or the moon from u green cneefe or young gofling, he may foon be taught to know what's what. He was monftroufly frighted when he faw his father, and took him for a negromancer it feems." " You have been ftrangely mifinformed, Audrey, (interrupted Rofeline,) the young lord h neither fo ignorant nor lo foon a- larmed as }ou have been taught to believe. I have known him long, and therefore, if you will rely upon my word, I affure you he is one of the moft amiable and beft of human beings." " Weil, mifs, (again continued Audrey,) I muft think that your brain is cracked, or that love has overfet your underftanding ; for I am told by Pedro, who knows every thing about every body, that, till this very bleffed day, the f a eet young gentleman have been chained down in a dungeon, and never looked
looked upon the face of man, woman, or child, not even the mother who bore him. It was tirely on his account, we all thinks, that the buftle, fufs, and difturbations in the caftle riginated, and I dare lay if the old Baron had refufed to own him for a fon, we fhould every one of us have been witched into the Red Sea, and drowned as the Gyp- tens were. I hope now, however, the fpells will be taken away, and we fliall fee only men and women, made of flefli and blood like ourfelves, for I hate ghofts." "Amen! (cried Rofeline;) I truft wc fliall be very quiet and happy, and that nei¬ ther witches nor evil fpirits will have any thing to do with us." " I fay amen again, (replied Audrey,) for I always likes to pray whenever I fee any one elfe fet about it. Thank God you ef¬ caped the claws of the Baron : I verily thinks 1 could not have found courage enuf to have married him myfelf."
I z
Rofeline
Rofeline rejoiced when her prating at¬ tendant bade her good night, and flie hoped foon to forget in the arms of fleep both the painful and pleafant events of the day; but flie now found joy as great an enemy to re¬ pofe as grief had been the preceding night. To find her lover, the acknowledged fon of her intended hufband ; yet to have his con¬ fent,—the confent of her parents to love Walter, and be bcioved by him,—to know he was reftored to liberty, rank, and fortune, to the protedion of a father, and herfelf releafed from an engagement to which fhe never had confented,—it was fuch a fudden, fuch an unexpeded reverfe of fortune, as lhe could fcarcely prevail upon herfelf to believe real. She had been affured too fhe fhould one day be the wife of Walter,—be permit¬ ted to live with him,—fee him always, and without fear or controul be allowed to ftudy and contribute to his happinefs;—it was rapture* it was felicity far beyond her hopes.
Having
Having once entered on a train of think¬ ing, fo delightful to a fond imagination, it effed ually precluded fleep from fhedding its poppies over her pillow; befides, to have flept would have been for ibme hours to have loft the pleafure of thinking of Walter. No fooner did flic fee the god of day break forth in all his glory from the portals of the Eaft, than fhe quitted her bed. Never be¬ fore had flie obferved the fun fo brilliant,— never before had the face of nature looked fo charming: every tree which fhe faw wave its branches had acquired new beauties, and even the fturdy and impenetrable walls of the caftle feemed to be Wonderfully im¬ proved. With fpirits harmonized by love and ex¬ pedarion, and a mind enlivened by hope, fire bent her knee in humble gratitude to that God who faid, " Let there be light, and it was fo," With a heart truly fenfible of the bleffmgs flie enjoyed, and thankful I 3 for
for thofe flie was permitted to behold at a diftance, flie fervently prayed that neither Walter nor herfeff might be tempted, in the midft of profperity to forget the ufeful leflbns they had learned in the fchool of ad¬ verfity.
CHAP.
CHAP. VII.
AS the dreaded day of feparation drew near, the dejedion which appeared on the countenance of the lovers was too vifible to efcape the obfervation of their friends.— The Baron felt himfelf particularly hurt: his fon had already endured fo much mifery by his negled and unpardonable compliance with tiie wiflies of an artful and defigning mother-in-law, that, to inflid any farther mortifications or fufferings on him, w f as in re¬ ality to inflid them more feverely upon him¬ felf : he therefore promifed to return within I 4 fix
fix week?, or two months, to unite the young people. This period of time, reckoned in the ufual way, was not long ; but lovers are not guided by the fame rules, nor can bring themfelves to calculate hours and days, weeks and months, hke other people. To repeat the tender adieus, the fears, tears, cautions, and promifes, of everlafting truth, would per¬ haps be tire fome to fome of our readers, as it would be merely a repetition of the fame fine and tender things which have been faid by ten thoufand fond lovers, upon ten thou¬ fand interefting ©ccafions i fuffice it then to fay, the Baron and his fon departed from the caftle at the appointed time, and left the difconfolate Rofeline in a ftate none could envy, and all weie inclined to pity * % and fo much was the heart of her lover af- flided at being the caufe of diftrefling her, he could not be prevailed upon to join in any converfation, and fcarcely looked up till be entered the great and bufy city of Lon¬ don,
don, the noife and buftle of which drew him in fbme meafure from his reverie, which had been nearly as painful to his friends as to himfelf, and the Baron, eager to difperfe the gloom from the countenance of his fon, pointed out fome of the moft ftriking ob"* jeds to engage his attention, as they were whirled along to a very noble houfe ia------ fquare, where we muft leave him for the prefent, in order to return to the caftle. From the moment of Walter's departure f he difconfolate Rofeline funk into fo abfo¬ lute a ftate of dejedion, as not only dif¬ treffed but alarmed her friends. She fhunned fociety, feldom joined in converfation, and, if left a few moments by herfelf, fled to the apartments once inhabited by her lover ;.-- there, and there only, did fhe aflume the appearance of cheerfulnefs ; every place iu which fhe had feen him was endeared to hei remembrance. The chairs on which he had refted, the table on which Ik* hed writ¬ ten, the window at which he had flood to I ^ hnen
liften for her coming,—all were interefting objeds, and loved by her for his fake ; and, in being deprived of feeing him, of hearing no longer the found of a voice fo long en¬ deared to her fond imagination, die felt fo total a deprivation of all that ferved to render life or fortune of real value, that (he deter¬ mined in her own mind, if this regretted lover fliould prove forgetful or inconftant, if he fhould return no more to the caftle, to end her days in his forfaken apartments ; for what would be the world to Rofeline de Morney, if (he fliould fee Walter Fitz¬ ofbourne no more ? Pompcy, the little dog, wliich (he had feen the fecond time of going to the dun¬ geons, and which had been the favourite and faithful companion of her lover during fome vears of his confinement, (be would fcarcely permit to be out of her fight : to him die talked of his mafter, and in carefling the grateful little animal felt pleafure and, confo¬ lation.
Sir Philip and Lady de Morney were dif¬ treffed beyond meafure at feeing the defpon¬ dency of their daughter, which they feared would put an end to all their flattering hopes. They endeavoured by every foothing and tender attention to reconcile her to this tem¬ porary feparation, and in a fhort time fuc¬ ceeded fo far as to prevail upon her to re- fume her ufual employments. They advifed her to diflipate her fears, and try to regain her fpirits for the fake of the lover whofe ab¬ fence fhe lamented, reminding her how much it would harals and diftrefs him, if, at his return to the caftle, he found (lie had brought upon herfelf an indifpofiton which might ftill preclude him from enjoying her fociety. But their cares and anxieties were foon increafed, and their minds occupied and thrown into the utmoft confirmation, from a circumftance more unaccountable, inex¬ plicable, and alarming, than any thing they had ever encountered. I 6 Madeline
Madeline had efcaped from the nunnery,, and Edwin had left the caftle. No one could tell what was become of them, but all fuppofed they were gone off together.— A general confufion took place ; meflengers were fent in purfuit of the fugitives, and a very confiderable reward was offered to any who would bring tidings of Madeline. Sir Philip de Morney joined in the fearch, and fent out large parties of his men, in hopes they would be able to difcover the' place o£ their concealment, Rofeline, though lefs furprifed, was ex" tremely fhocked at the dangerous ftep her brother and friend had ventured to take.— The abbefs was angry, the fathers enraged, and the youthful offenders threatened with the utmoft feverity the laws could inflid, fhould they be found out. Lady de Mor¬ ney was wretched beyond defcription, and Rofeline, who almoft loft the remembrance of her own forrows at feeing the agonies of her mother, and in fears for her brother, was alarmed
alarmed at the return of every meffenger.— Thefe affedionate relatives trembled left they fhould bring tidings of the unfortunate bvers, A week however elapfed, and no difcovery being made, Rofeline fecretly che¬ rifhed hopes that they would be able to ef¬ cape their purfuers. She accompanied Sir Philip and Lady de Morney to the nunnery : they foon r-moved Lie difpleafure of the abbefs, and difperfed the gloom, which had long hung upon her brow, at their firft entrance : they likewife foftened the afperity of father Anfelm, and the reft of his brethren, who had written to inform the father of Madeline of the occur¬ rence which had taken place, and had re¬ ceived an anfwer didated by the fpirit of malice and revenge,, vowing to renounce her for ever, unlefs flie returned to tlie nunnery, and inftantly took the veil - y at the fame time adding every thing that paflion could fuggeft to roufe the vengeance of the fathers for the indignity offered to their facred order by
by the flight of a wretch he never again would acknowledge as a daughter. This cruel and unfeeling letter operated diredly contrary to what it was intended,. and awakened feelings in the bofoms of men who had long been ftrangers to the world, and unpradifed in the habits of focial life,— too unpleafant to be encouraged. They felt a kind of trembling horror at the denun¬ ciations of a parent againft a daughter, whofe interefting features, fweetnefs of difpofition,. and gentleneis of temper, had endeared her to every one in the nunnery. Nearly a fortnight had now elapfed, and no tidings being heard of the fugitives, Lady de Morney began to revive, and (lie cherifhed the foul-reviving hope that her beloved Edwin would efcape, and remain undifca- vered till a pardon could be procured for him and his fair companion, for the crime they had committed in robbing their holy church of a votaiy defignecl for its fervice ;
and (lie lingered with impatient fondnefs to ciafp her fon and the lovely Madeline to her maternal bofom. Sir Philip was much hurt by this affair; and, though he faid very little on the fubjed, it was very vifible to every one that his mind was very deeply wounded. It may now be neceflary that we fhould give fome account of the means made vife of to efcape, and the caufe which drove the young people to take fo defperate a ftep. The abbefs, who felt an almoft maternal regard for Madeline, had obferved with af» fedionate regret that there was fomething which preyed deeply upon her fpirits, but had not the leaft fufpicion of the affcdion which /lie cherifhed for her nephew ; and, being too much bigottcd to her religion, too much attached to the habits of a monadic life, to iuppofe any one could long remain unhappy after haying given up a world which (he had voluntarily quitted and never 5 regretted,
legretted, die confined her obfervations to her own bofom, and, in drawing her con- clufions, forgot the melancholy and diftref- fing caufe which had determined her feclu- fion from the world. Time had likewife in fome degree blunted thofe tender feelings which would otherwife have taught her to- make more indulgent allowances for the feelings and conflids of nineteen, when fen- tenced by an arbitrary parent to the unfo- cial and rigid rules of an order that pre¬ cluded the foul-enlivening,, the enchanting influence of love. The abbefs, on receiving a letter from the father of M-adeline, with a peremptory command for her inftantly taking the veil^ fummoned her into the prefence ot father Anfelm and herfelf, and the letter was put into her hand, without any kind of preface that could difcover or foften its contents,— The effed this horrid mandate had on the mind of their youthful charge could not be concealed : flie was inftantly obliged to be conveyed
conveyed to her cell, and remained for fome hours in a ftate that threatened deftradion. The alarming fituation of Madeline dif¬ treffed both the good father and the fympa- thizing abbefs ; but, circumftanced as they were, they could only pity - f for they would have confidered it as a crime of the moft facrilegious Hitture to have aflifted in depri¬ ving their holy inftitution of a votary fo likely to be an ornament and acquifition to it; and, as the father of Madeline was de¬ termined, fhe fhould embrace a monaftic life, they had neither any right nor inclination to contend againft a deciflon which operated fo much in their favour, and would add fo lovely a fifter to their fociety : they agreed therefore that it would be better to take no notice, unlefs (he herfelf fhould voluntarily impart the caufe of her diftrefs. It is now become abfolutely neceffary to inform our readers that Edwin had for fome weeks conquered the fears of Madeline, and prevailed
prevailed on her to grant him frequent in¬ terviews in the chapel. He had alfo ex¬ torted a promife from her, when matters came to the Lift extremity, to fly with liim, if her efcape from the nunnery could be ef¬ fected, in order to avoid a fate which her love had taught her to think of all others the moft miferable, and to accept his vows in¬ ftead of taking thofe which would feparate them forever. On the one hand, happinefs ftood pour- trayed in its moft captivating colours;— on the other, wretchednefs, folitary wretch¬ ednefs grinned with ghaftly horror and mea« gre afped. At her age, I am inclined to think, few young ladies would have hefitated how to choofe, particularly if* like the art¬ lefs and gentle Madeline, they had given a- way their heart to an amiable and impaf¬ fioned lover. Edwin, in his ftolen vifits to the chapel, had ufually been accompanied by his trufty friend
friend Albert, and once or twice Walter had been of the party. On the promifes and intrepid firmnefs of Albert they refted their fecurity of not being difcov cod. Madeline's fituation was like .rife become fo alarming and diftreffnp, fhe no longer yielded to thofe timid fea s which *,ad formerly deterred her from meeting her lover S..e found herfelf fo encompaifed with dangers, that it required both refolution and ipirit to difengage herfelf from the fate which threat¬ ened her; and, as no farther time could be given either to deliberation or doubt, and no alternative remained but to efcape from the nunnery or take the veil, (he hefitated no longer, but met, feanefsly met her lover, in order to fettle a proper plan to fecure the fuccefs of their defign, which, as it drew near being put in pradice, appeared both hazardous and dangerous. Their meetings in the chapd were fre¬ quently interrupted by the friars or nuns, who had generally fome facred duty to per¬ form
form either for the living or the dead, in the execution of which fome of the fathers had been extremely alarmed, and it was whifpered throughout tlie facred walls, and by fome means the report crept into the world, that the chapel of the nunnery was. difturbed by an invifible agent, which was confidered as a miracle in favour of its holy inftitution, It was an age of bigotry and fuperftition* when every plan was adopted to imprefs on the minds of the people that reverence and awe which would prevent their finding out the various arts made ufe of to impofe on their belief. Hence that reverence and en« thufiafm for relics fliewn in almoft every church and chapel, and applied to fbr aid on all important occafions. Yet it fometimes happened that impofi- tions were difcovered, but the power and influence of the priefts prevented, as much as poflible, reports fo dangerous gaining any credit*
credit, and the minds of the common peo¬ ple ua.: ken io much in awe by fear, and fo huod-\i':/.Ai by fuperftition, that thou- fand.s reibried daily to one repofitory or ano¬ ther, in yrder to feait their eyes with its fa¬ cred treaiures. " At Reading they (hewed an angel's wing, that brought over the fpear's point which pierced our Saviour's iide, and as many pieces of the crofs were found as joined together would have made a big croft. The rood of g-ace, at Boxley, in Kent, had been much cftecmed, and drawn many pil¬ grims to it. It was obferved to bow and roll its eyes, and look at times well pleafed or angry, wliich the credulous multitude, and even <bme of the inferior priefts, impu¬ ted to a divine power; but all this was af¬ terwards difcovered to be a cheat, and it was brought up to St. Paul's crofs, and all the fprings were openly (hewed which governed its feveral motions.
s< At
■« At Hales, in Gloucefterfliire, the blood of Chrift was fhewn in a phial, and it was be¬ lieved that none could fee it who were in mortal fin ; and fo, after good prefents were made, the deluded pilgrims went away well fatisfied if they had feen it. This was the blood of a duck, renewed every week, put in a phial, very thick on one fide, as thin on the other ; and either fide turned towards the pilgrims as the priefts were fa¬ tisfied with their oblations. — Other relics were fliewn as follows :— God's coat, our Lady's fmock, part of God's fupper, our Lady's girdle of Bruton; red filke, a fo- lemne relic feut to women in travail; the parings of St. Edmund's nails, relics for rain, for avoiding the weeds growing in corn, kc. &c."—* It happened one night, when our young lovers were deeply engaged in a moft important*and interefting converfation, in
in which they did not recoiled there were any other beings but themfelves in the world, they v\ere terribly alarmed, and veiy near being difejvered by the abrupt and fudden entrance of father Anfelm, and one of the monks, into the chapel. They haf¬ tily approached the altar, being fummoned to attend a dying monk, and to peiforrn the ceremonies which the neceflity of the cafe required. They were however informed by a voice, which appeared to rife from the earth on wliich they ftood, that they might return in peace to their cells, for the foul of their dying brother was in no danger of being loft, their prayers and pious oraifons having already had a falutary effed. It fo happened, that the monk, having conquered the crifis of his diftemper, w.s funk into a profound ileep at their return, which promifed a happy change in his favour. The whole fociety were fummoned into the chapel the next morning, and informed of this miraculous communication. All the proper
proper ceremonies were oftentatioufly per* formed which fuch an honourable attefta- tion of their fincerc piety required, and the fick monk confidered as worthy of ca¬ nonization. A few nights after, a monk, who had for* <rotten to place one of the confecrated veffels on Lhe high altar, which fatlier Anfelm had particularly requefted fliould be left there a- oainft the following day, on which the facni- ment was to be adminiftercd with the ut¬ moft folemnity, on recolieding the omiflion, rofe from his bed, and ftole foftly into the chapel to obey the orders he had received. This unfortunately was a night on which the lovers had agreed to meet. Before he had reached the altar, he was fomewhat flaided at feeing one of the oldeft and moft auilere of the nuns kneeling by the grave of a father lately deceated,and with uplifted hands praying that pardon and peace might be extended to his foul.
a
The
The monk, when he came to the altar, inftantly dropped on his knees before it, un¬ willing the old nun fliould fuppofe he came upon a lefs pious errand than herfelf; but he was foon frightened from his devotions by a foft voice, which feemed to defcend from behind a very fine painting of the cruci¬ fixion.—He was defired to return to his cell, no longer to ad the hypocrite, and in future to perform more punctually the duties of his office. The monk no fooner heard this alarmin^ addrefs, than he hurried out of the chapel as fed as his gouty lee,s and the numerous infirmities of age would permit him ; but the nun, who was at too great a diftance from the monk to hear the caufe of liis terror, went on with thofe devotional rights wiiich a particular regard for the departed father rendered fo gratifying to the feelings of her pious and affedionate heart, that flie was in no hurry to conclude them ; when the lame myfterious agent, whofe voice appeared Vol, ii. K to
to rife from the grave of her deceafed fa¬ vourite, near which flie was fo devoutly kneeling, fhivering with age and cold, roughly warned her to have done, advifing hor to go to reft and deep in peace* as he did, who no longer could be difturbed by her tongue or benefited by her prayers. The poor frightened nun ftampered off as faft as fhe could, muttering fomething a- gainft the ingratitude of man, who, dead or aiive, was unworthy the attentions of her pious fex. Yet, as ihe eroded herfelf, (lie fecretly rejoiced at having, as fhe thought, obtained leave of heaven and father John to abftain from fuch great and unreasona¬ ble demands upon her oraifons in future.— She took care, however, the next morning to inform the monk, with feeming exulta¬ tion, of her being fo highly favoured as to hear a voice from heaven, which excufed her from praying at thofe hours appointed for mortals to be at reft. 2 This
This was a night calculated to alarm the lovers; for no fooner had the nun left the chapel, than another entered to fetch a fo¬ lemn relic, to fend to a woman who was in travail, from the cheft near which they were feated. As (lie was looking for the precious treafure, they were trembling at the danger they were in of being difcovered ; for there was but juft time to ftep into the tomb which led to the fubterraneous paffage, when they were thus the third time difturbed.— The nun, as die clofed the cheft, was ad¬ dreffed in the following words. " Wear Mary Magdalene's girdle twice a week :—place the fcullofSt. Lawrence at the Eaft corner of your cell, and five on bread and water every fifth day ; or neither you, nor your rather-confeflor will efcape purgatory." Down dropped the relic, and away ran the nun to repeat to her cher ami the warn¬ ing which had been given her; but, whe- K 2 ther
ther he was as much terrified as herfelf we do not know, as the lovers very foon efleded their efcape, and the voice was heard no more. No longer to puzzle our readers, excite their fears, or keep them in fufpenfe, refped¬ ing this miraculous voice, which had a- larmed the Baron in his vifit to the cells, and had likewife been the occafion of much furprife, and fome exultation, to the pious inhabitants of the nunnery, it is neceffary to inform them that it proceeded from Albert, who was himfelf a ventriloquift, or perfon poffeffed of the power of ufing a kind of artificial hollow voice, in fuch a manner, as to make the found appear to come from any part of the room, when¬ ever he happened to be, or from any ani¬ mal that was prefent in it. This uncommon power, rarely known in that age, Albert had frequently exer- cifed
cifed to amufe and entertain the folitary hours of his mafter, in his long and painful (eclufion from the world, and afterwards to ferve him and his friend. It may not perhaps in this place y be improper to mention, that, a tew years fince, a perfon came to St. Edmund's Bury, in Suffolk, whofe uncommon and wonderful powers of throwing his voice to any diftance, and into whatever place he chofe, alarmed fome, and furprifed all who witneded this ftrange and almoft unaccountable phe¬ nomenon of nature; therefore, in an age fo much more prone to indulge the idle chi¬ meras of fuperftition, fo much under the didatorial bigotry of prieftcraft, it is not to bew r ondered that a circumftance fo uncom¬ mon fliould be confidered as miraculous, par* ticularly among a fet of men who had re¬ course to fuch various arts, and took fuch w r onderful pains to inftili into the minds of the people a firm and unfhaken belief that K 3 miracles
miracles were (hewn on fome important oc¬ cafions, in order to confirm the truth of the religion they profeffed.
CHAP.
CHAP. VIII.
Y following the cautious diredions of Al¬ bert, Madeline efcaped from the nunnery undifcovered, and, accompanied by her lover, loft, in the happinefs of the prefent moment, all remembrance of the trials flie had fuf¬ tained, and all apprehenfions of what flie might encounter in future. Edwin, from a principle of honour, did not inform his friends, De 'Willows, De Clavering, and Ca¬ melford, of his intention; the only tax he levied on their friendfhip was to borrow a fmall fum of money of them to fupply pre¬ fent exigencies, and procure fuch accom¬ modations on the road as would be moft a- K 4 Rreeable
grceable and convenient to his fair compa¬ nion. About midnight he led the trembling a- gitated maid, unattended by any one but himfelf, to the entrance of the fubterranean paffage. With difficulty and danger they made their way through this fcene of defe¬ ction and terror. Having opened the door which led them through the fame gloomy paths Edwin had formerly traced, they nar¬ rowly efcaped being difcovered by the cert- tinels who guarded Mettingham-Caftie.— Alarmed at their danger, they made not a moment's delay, but hurried on till they came to a retired and almoft unfrequented road, where they found a man and horfes* waiting their arrival. Thefe horfes had been hired of a countryman, who agreed to fend for them the next morning to a neighbour¬ ing town. Though money was undoubtedly very fcarce in the age in which the charaders lived
lived that furnifhed us with thefe memoirs? yet the neceffaries of life were all fo cheap, and the people in general fo extremely hof- pitable, that it required but a moderate fum to procure accommodations for a journey to the moft diftant part of the kingdom, and, as there was then no marriage-ad in force, the road to the temple of Hymen was more frequented, becaufe it was neither found fo difficult nor fo thorny as it has been to too- many of the prefent age. As to tlie vulgar and old-fafliioned habits of eating and drinking, they are matters in general but little thought of in expeditions under the directions of a god who is too fublime to be fatisfied with common fuocL Our lovers felt fb little inconvenience from either hunger or thirft, that they determined to make no delays on their journey, but fuch as were abfolutely neceflary. They were epicures only in love, and, till they arrived in London, were perfedly fatisfied with fuch repafts as were to be procured from- K 5 anv
any of the humble cottages on the road, by which prudent precaution they efcaped undifcovered, notwithftanding the clamour their elopement had occafioned. The morning after their arrival in Lon¬ don, a prieft joined their hands in marriage, and rendered indiffoluble thofe tender, ties which had long united their hearts in love's moft pleafing fetters. Too happy for re¬ dedion to interrupt their nuptial joys, too inexperienced to look forward to the con¬ fequences of an union thus inaufpicioudy commenced, and too fanguine to think the fond delufions of love could end but with life, they lived for many days in what might be called the delirium of the fenfes i in each other they faw and pofiefled all that confli¬ cted their ideas of pleafure. Madeline was the wife of the enamoured Edwin, and he was bleft.—Edwin was become the hufband and protedor of Madeline, what then could flic have to fear, for Edwin was the world to* her ? Alas!
Alas ! what a pity that fo few, fo fcarce, and fo fliort, are the hours of mortal hap¬ pinefs ! and that the fallacious foundation on which we reft fuch innumerable pleafing hopes, which prefent to our deluded imagi¬ nations the moft lovely and inviting prof¬ peds, ihould fo foon fall to rhe ground, and humble our air-built cxpedarions in the duft 1 As long as their little fund of worldly wealth held out, our new married lovers never recoUeded it muft come to an end, or beftowed a thought on what fteps were tobe taken to fecure the continuance of that felicity they had gone fuch daring lengths to obtain ; but an empty purfe foon com¬ pelled them to r. coifed, that two people, however tender their attachment, or fuper- lative tlieir abilities,—however lovely their perfons, or captivating tlieir manners, require more fubftantial food than the god of love will condefcend to furnifli them with.
K 6 Accuftomed
Accuftomed to affluence, and not know¬ ing what it was to be deprived even of the luxuries of life, they (bucklered at the po¬ verty which flared them in the face, and threatened them with abfolute ftarvation : they blufhed too at their own inability to procure for themfelves the common neceffa¬ ries of life, and felt fome very uncomfort¬ able fenfations at being in a ftranger's houfe without the means of paying for their lodg¬ ing or accommodations. To declare their poverty they were afhamed, and to make themfelves and fituation known was to run the rifk of being feparated for ever, as Edwin had no doubt but Madeline would be torn from him* and compelled to a monaftic life, if difcovered before his friends were recon¬ ciled, and would ufe their intereft to procure his pardon. Luckily, Madeline, amidft her new born fears, recoUeded it would be no difficult matter to find fo great a man as Baron Fitzof¬ bourne, and accordingly Edwin, wrapped up and
and difguifed as much as poflible, fat off to find his refidence, and to obtain an interview with his two friends, Walter and Albert. He fortunately found the latter at home, and in a few hours was by him fecretly admitted to Walter, who ilew to embrace and wel¬ come him to his father's manfion, making a number of tender inquiries after Rofeline and the reft of his friends at the caftle. He was both fhocked and aftonifhed when in¬ formed of Edwin's diftreffed and perilous fituation, gently reproached him for not applying to him before, and for not having given him the flighteft information of his intention before he married, Edwin made the beft excufes he could for his referve. Vague and uiifubftanrial as they were, the generous Waiter was foon recon¬ ciled to his friend, put his purfe into his hand, and infifled upon being immediately introduced to his lovely bride. They re¬ turned with Edwin to his lodgings, and found Madeline in a ftate of the moft pain¬ ful
ful and reftlefs fufpenfe, which their pre¬ fence inftantly difperfed. After the com¬ pliments and congratulations were over, they fat down to confider ferioufly what could be done, and what fteps were moft proper to be taken to fecure the perfons of the new-married couple. Albert ftrenoufly advifed them not to attempt feeing the Ka¬ ron in their prefent fituation, but to wait patiently till fome plan could be adopted for their farther fafety. Walter promifed in the mean time to fupply them with money for all neceffary expences. The meeting of thefe friends was cordial and tender, and more cheerful than could have been fuppofed. Walter repeatedly protefted, notwithftanding the dlificulty and dangers with which they were furrounded, that he envied more than he pitied them,— complained of his own fituation, as being more diftrefling and uncomfortable than their's, and declared himfelf unable to fup¬ port a much longer feparation from Rofeline, without
without the deprivation of reafon being ad¬ ded to that of ail his other enjoyments. On refledion, it was thought better that Walter fliould make the fituation of the young couple known to the Baron without farther delay ; this he readily undertook - y for, as the danger was great, rewards having been offered for the perfon of Madeline, procrafli nation vvouid have only ferved to increafe the difficulties they had to encoun¬ ter. Walter fucceeded In lfu embaffy beyond his hopes, and foon prevailed upon his father to comply with a plan they had thought of for the better fecurity of Madeline; name¬ ly, retiring fecretly for the prefent to the environs of one of the Baron's caftles, at a great diftance from the metropolis, and con¬ cealing their real names and perfons under the habits of peafants. To this feheme the Baron readily agreed, and promifed not only to exert his utn^)ft intereft to procure a pardon
pardon for them both, but inftantly to write to Sir Philip and Lady de Morney to inform them of their fafety and fituation, and in¬ tercede in their behalf. He likewife called upon them the following day, prefented them with a fupply of cadi for prefent exit gencies, and fent them in one of his own carriages to the place of their concealment, where we will for a (hurt time leave them, only obferving they were as happy as our firft parents before their fall: they fome¬ times indeed recoUeded the danger of being. difcovered, and trembled at the thought ;, but fo much did they depend on the friend¬ fhip and power of the Baron to proted them, fhould tlie dreadful misfortune ever befall them, that they determined not to fet uncertain apprehenfions of what might happen in future prevent their enjoying that portion of happinefs which was now in their power, and the author would wifh- every one who perufes thefe pages to adopt and en¬ courage the fame ufeful philofophy.
Walter,
Walter, from the time of his arrival in London, till a few days previous to his fee¬ ing Edwin, had been reftlefs and uncom¬ fortable. The firft mafters of the ase had been procured to inftrud him. He was prefented to his fovereign, and his introduc¬ tion was attended with the moft marked and diftinguifhed honours. Many fair ladies in the higher circles were lavifli of their fmiles, and many parents would gladly have feen him added to the train of their daughters' admirers, and, to lure him to their purpofe, folicited his friend* fhip, and fent him repeated invitations to. their houfes. Pleafure courted him in a thoufand va- t Tying forms, but he beheld her moft fedu- cing blandifhments with difguft and ftoical indifference. Neither the novelty of the fcenes with which he was furrounded, the flattering attentions of beauty, or the va¬ riety of amufements, of which he was in a manner
manner compelled to partake, could for one moment detach his mind from the fafcina¬ ting Rofefine. With her dwelt every with, —on her unfhaken tendernefs refted his every hope of permanent felicity ; for her fo¬ ciety he pined and languifhed ; and, to have heard the found of her enchanting voice, he would voluntarily have bidden adieu to London, and all its pleafures. — If he attended to the inftrudions of his maf¬ ters, he was aduated by the fame motives, and he wifhed to be as wife as Plato, that he might be more worthy to poflefs a treafure he eftimated beyond the wealth of worlds. —Noble young man !— would love operate on all youthful minds as it did on thine, it would be entitled to univerfal praife, and might juftly be called the guardian-friend of innocence, the patron of every virtue. At length, both the Baron and Albeit were not only furprifed, but alarmed at the vifible alteration they obferved in Walter, who often abfented himfelf, and when quef- tioned
tioned where he had been, and how he had been amufing himfelf, hefitated in his an- fwers, and appeared at a lofs what to fay. One evening the Baron particularly re¬ quefted he would accompany him to fome public place; but he pleaded a prior en¬ gagement, and, on being afked the nature of it, gave fo trifling and unfatisfadory an anfwer, that the Baron was ferioufly difplea¬ fed, and left the room, telling him he did not like to be treated with referve, recom¬ mended him to recoiled how much he had already been made a dupe to myfterious tranfadions, and not to forget that he had likewife been nearly a vidim to artifice be¬ fore he knew guile in his own h-irt or per¬ fon. As foon as he left the room, Albert ap¬ proached his beloved mafter, and, w^ith a tear trembling in each eye, told him he was io blame, and begged he would follow his father,
father, and do away his difpleafure, by going as he requefted. " My dear fellow, (cried Walter,) my father's anger I could bear unmo/ed, becaufe 1 do not feel myfelf deferving of it, but your gentle reproof has in a moment found its way to my heart. Perhaps I may be to blame, but furely, Albert, it is a little hard upon me to be compelled to ftay in this place without being fometimes allowed to amufe myfelf according to my own inclina¬ tion !" " What on earth (faid Albert, with a figh,) can on a fudden have made this change in you, who fo lately had an invincible ob¬ jedion to going among ftrangers, left you fhould fall into the fnares that are fo fre¬ quently fpread to entangle the unwary !—I thought——" " Allons, my dear fellow, (replied the impatient Walter,) don't juft now attempt to think ;—you are a good creature :—but I can ftay no longer to liften to you j I will hear
"hear you as early as you pleafe in the morn¬ ing. Would to God my fweet Rofeline had accompanied her brother to London !" « Would to heaven fhe had ! (fighed Albert :) Here is fomething wrong go¬ ing forwards. I muft be on my guard how I proceed, or my young mafter will be drawn into fome ferape that may lead to mifchief, while the fair maid of the caftle may be left to wear the willow.—Now, or never, muft be the moment of adion.—A thought has ftruck me ;—it muft be fo." Away went Albert, and I hope none of my readers will have any objedion to ac* company him in his friendly expedition. He inftantly hurried out of the houfe, attended by a flout and faithful fervant.— They were fo quick in their proceedings, that they very foon perceived the objed of their purfuit walking before them. After following him through many ftreets, they faw him flop at a very good-looking houfe, the door of which was opened by a fervant
in
in a rich livery. Albert hefitated for a mo¬ ment what to do :—to follow him would have been both daring and imprudent, and, inftead of fetting matters to rights, might have brought on greater difficulties ; he therefore ftepped into a jeweller's fhop nearly oppofite the houfe into which the young Fitzofbourne had entered, defiring his fer¬ vant to keep a watchful eye. He fpent a few fliiUings, and then carefefsly inquired of the fhopkeeper who it was inhabited the handfome houfe in which he faw fo many lights. The man fmiled, looked at him very ear¬ neftly, and then replied, " If I did not think you were a ftranger, fir, I fhould have fuppofed you were joking with me, by afk¬ ing that queftion, for I thought all the world had known the Jezebel who lives there." " You haye raifed my curiofity to a higher phxh, (faid Albert.) I have fo long been ab¬ fent from this city, that I know but little of
of what has been doing in it, and would thank you to anfwer my queftion with fin- centy, while I am looking over the things I want to purchafe." " No man (replied the complaifant (hop- keeper) is happier to pleafe his cuftoniers than I am, or more grateful for favours re¬ ceived ; but, as one perfon's money is as good as another's, and as I take a pretty round fum every year from the fair inhabi¬ tants of that houfe, I have no bufinefs to be telling of their frailties : however, if I can oblige you, fir, and you will promife me to be fecret, and not bring my name in qaeftion."------ Albert now became more and more eager to obtain the wiflied-for intelligence, and not only promifed all that he had requefted, but to reward him for his trouble, by recom¬ mending his (hop to fome friends who had it greatly in their power to ferve him. This at once put an end to tlie honeft jeweller's referve -, for, though he would not volunta¬ rily
rily have told a feandaldus tale of any one, yet he faw no objedion to fpeaking the truth when be could ferve himfelf by fo doing. " Pleafe your honour, (he began, for he took it into his head at that moment that Albert was a great man,) in that houfe lives the noted Mrs. C------, who keeps fo many fine young women, that all the fine young men of the age are fond of obtaining admittance, though for that indulgence they often facrifice health, fortune, and even life itfelf. Ah ! God knows, I have feen fad doings, and many a one have I wifhed might efcape the plans laid for their deftrudion j but, if the devil himfelf were to fall into her clutches, I think he would be puzzled to eftfed his efcape." " Has flie many vifitors juft now ?" in¬ terrupted Albert. « As to their number, that is impoffible for me to afcertain; but of this I am pofitive, flie is never without fome, and at this very time I think there is fomething extraordinary going
going on, for one of her nymphs came this morning to purchafe a wedding-ring, and, on my joking her a little on the fubjed, fhe faid it was not for herfelf but Mifs C------ -, daughter to the old hag, who is a very lovely girl, and well known upon the town. On my expreffing myfelf happy to hear fhe was going to marry, and become an honeft wo¬ man, the girl burft into a violent fit of laughter, and called me a puritanical hypo¬ crite." i( Let Catharine once become a wife, (faid fhe,) and then we fliall fee who will dare to call her virtue in queftion. She will, I hope, before to-morrow night be married to the only fon of one of the weal- thieft barons in the kingdom,—a young nobleman who knows fo little of the world, that it is abfolutely neceflary he fliould have a wife who can inftrud him, and I know no one better able to undertake the tafk than the daughter of Mrs. C------ %"
VOL. II.
L
Albert
Albert with difficulty concealed his agita¬ tion at hearing this alarming tale. Reco¬ vering himfelf, however, he inquired of his informer if he recoUeded the name of the young gentleman.— After a moments de¬ flation, the jewelkr replied, " the name was twice repeated, but it ran fo glibly off the lady's tongue, that I have fince forgot¬ ten it." " Should you know it again r" afked Albert; who,onthejeweller'sanfw r eringthat he thought he fhould, mentioned feveral, to all of which a negative was given. At length Fitzof¬ bourne was introduced.—" The very perfon, (cried the jeweller :)—the Baton has but one fon; and him, as this girl told me, he has but lately found: but he is fuch an ideot, and fo eafily irnpofed on, that, upon my foul, were I his father, I fhould think him better loft than found/' The jeweller might have gone on with bis obfervations as long as he pleafed, had not his diftreffed auditor recoUeded the danger in which,
which, perhaps, his beloved young mafter was at that moment involved. He ftarted Up, and, catching hold of his companion's hand, told him, he muft that moment go with him. The man drew back : Albeit perceived the folly of his abruptnefs, and, making fome apologies, informed the afto- niflied jeweller, that the bufinefs on which he was going would admit of no delay,— that if he would accompany him^ lenu his affiftance, and procure two or three fpirited young men to be of the party, he ihould be well rewarded for his trouble, and would have reafon to blefs the day chance direded him to his fhop. This promife w-as a fufficient temptation to a tradefman who had a large family, little money, and few friends. He fiumaioned fome of his men from an adjoining workfhop, and, thus attended, Albert tallied into the ftreet. His fervant, who was in waiting, informed his mafter a prieft had been juft ad¬ mitted into the houfe he was watching, and L 2 that
that he had feen the young lord at the win¬ dow with a beautiful woman hanging on his arm, who appeared to be in tears. This intelligence made them hurry on.— Albert rapped at the door, requefting the others to keep out of fight till he was fecure of obtaining admittance. A fervant foon appeared i Albert inquired if his miftrefs were at home. The fellow replied that his lady was then particu'arly engaged, and could not be fpoken to, adding, he might call again in the morning. " The morning will not do, my friend ; I muft fee your miftrefs this evening, (laid Albert j) my bufinefs is quite as particular, I believe, as that in which flie may be en¬ gaged, therefore make way, and let me come in/' The fellow attempted to (but the door, but thepoffe in waiting, on being bcckened by Albert, came to his affiftance, and they ail rufhed into the houfe. Albert, the jew¬ eller,
eller, and the reft of the party, except one, who was left to guard the fellow at the door, went as gently as poflible up a fpacious flair- Cafe. They heard voices at a diftance, and were direded by the found to the door of the apartment winch contained the party, who appeared to be engaged in a warm dif¬ pute. At times they could diftinguifh female voices, and very foon Albert heard that of his beloved mafter exalted to its higheft pitch. This at once determined him to open the door, but he found it faftened within fide i he then loudly demanded admittance; a female fcream was all the anfwer he re¬ ceived. Again he called : fome one then afked what was wanted, adding, whoever it was that intruded on them fo rudely muft wait till another opportunity. " Wait no longer, (cried Walter,) but force the door ; I know not but my life may be endangered," L ; The
The door was inftantly burft open. What a fcene prefented itfelf i Walter, with a %:e pale as allies, and apparently in the ut¬ moft confufion, was endeavouring to difen- gage himfelf from the embraces of a young woman, who had fallen at his feet, and clafped her arms around him. The prieft held a prayer-book in his hand, which was opened at the matrimonial fervice.—A fierce looking man in the naval uniform, tlie old procurefs, and another of her nymphs, completed the group. The inftant Walter faw his friend enter the apartment, by a defperate effort he difi. engaged himfelf from thefyren who had held him captive, dew to Albert, and brandifh- jng his fword, called upon the wretch who had endeavoured to inveigle him into a for¬ ced marriage to draw, and receive the re¬ ward of his treachery ; but Albert ordered the culprit to be fecurcd, and requefted Walter not to ftain the purity of his fword with the blood of fuch a villain.— During
During this conteft, the women and the prieft fneaked out of the room unobferved, and, though the ftrideft fearch was m^de throughout the houfe, not a creature could be found in it that belonged to the family, but the fervant who admitted them, and who had been prevented following the reft by the perfon left to guard him. Albert infifVd, before he left the houfe, on fending for proper officers to take the prifoners into cuftody ; but Walter, who wiflied this affair to be kept as fecret as pof¬ fible, entreated, with fo much earneftnefs, on the villains making a promife of amend¬ ment, and leaving the kingdom, to have him liberated, that his friend, after a little hefitation, complied, on condition that the two fellows fliould be left bound in different apartments till the vile miftrefs of the houfe, or fome of her aflbciates, fliould venture to return. The honeft jeweller was entreated to be fecret, and promifed an ample recompenfe. L 4 His
His people were liberally paid, and Alberts with an exulting heart, attended home his agitated friend, who, after recovering his fpirits in fome degree, gave him the follow¬ ing account of the circumftances which had drawn him into a fituation that might have been as fatal to his peace as they would have been difgraceful to his charader, had not his guardian-frknd arrived in time to pre¬ vent the threatened danger, the whole of which he was now convinced had been planned for the purpofe of drawing him into marriage, refting their hopes of fuccefs on his ignorance of the world. " I take fhame to myfelf, dear Albert, (faid the grateful Walter,) for not informing vou this evening of my engagement, which you, who know the ftrength of my attach¬ ment to the charming Rofeline, will not fuppofe was meant to be of the nature ir proved. I knew not that the worthlefs woman, whofe daughter it has been my ill luck frequently to meet at feveral public places,
places, was of fo defpicable a charader.— Chance, or, as I now fufped, defign, has likewife frequently thrown her in my way in my morning rambles: but what induced me to vifit at her mother's houfe, was the having found her one evening in the paffage of the play-houfe, waiting the arrival of her carriage, in the greateft diftrefs ; and what ferved to add to it was the behaviour of two or three young men, who faid fome very rude tilings to her in my hearing, for which 1 chaftifed them with my cane, and tiie frightened fair one fainted in my arms as icon as I had driven them away. I fup¬ pofed they had been led to infult her by having made too free with the bottle ; but they doubtlefs knew her well enough to dif¬ cover her defigns againft me. " When flie recovered from the fit into which I imagined they had terrified her, I could do no lefs than fee her home; and, when I called the next morning, 1 was in¬ troduced to her mother, whofe unbounded L 5 gratitude
gratitude and flattering acknowledgments, for the trifling fervice I had rendered her fweet and amiable daughter, overwhelmed me with confufion, and convinced her I was a fool exadly fuited to her purpofe. Being a* vays received with the utmoft po¬ litenefs, and feeing nothing in the condud or behaviour of either mother or daughter to excite fufpicion, I continued to call upon them whenever I chanced to pafs that way* and was in the humour to wifh for conver¬ fation. They boafted of being of an an¬ cient family in the North of England, ap¬ peared to live in credit and affluence, treated me with the utmoft hofpitality, and preffed me fo warmly to make them frequent viHts, that I promifed to comply with their requeft^ becaufe I fuppofed by fo doing I was remo¬ ving a weight of obligation from their minds which feemed to give them pain. Once or twice it happened when I called, that the young lady had walked out, and the
the mother faid a good deal about the mor- -tification it would be to her to be told at ,her return I had called upon them in her ab¬ fence ; but this, till about two days ago, I confidered as being the effufions of gratitude* « And how (inquired Albert) w r ere you at length undeceived r" " By her mother," continued Walter, who, after fome little helitation, with an ap¬ peal to my honour and humanity, to excufe the weak nefs of a fond parent, informed me of the paflion I unfortunately, and as (lie feared undeflgnedly, had mfpired in the bofom of her daughter, a paffion fhe much doubted ihe would never be able to iubdue, adding, that, juft before my arrival, flie liad "by mere force compelled her to walk out for air, as (hefew vvith heart-felt diftrefs the ravages defpair had made in the conftitutioa. of her ineftimable child. I lamented the confequences of my intro* trodudion, and added, I would no more L 6 venture
venture into a family whofe peace I had difturbed, acknowledged a prior engage¬ ment, and was about to quit the houfe, when the old lady entreated me earneftly not to adopt a meafure fo cruel and unjuft : I therefore promifed to call again; and, receiv¬ ing an invitation fbr this evening, accepted it, but did not fuppofe them the kind of people they have proved. «« Had you no fufpicion of their charac¬ ter ?" afked Albert. " None, by heaven ! (replied Walter.)__ I never faw the leaft appearance of inde¬ cency, or even levity, and heard no conver¬ fation that would have offended the nice ear of a Rofeline de Morney/' " The fcheme was deeply laid,, (faid Al¬ bert.)—Pray proceed ; I am impatient to know how you were received this evening." " Firft by the mother, (continued Wal¬ ter, who appeared in the greateft diftrefs.-— On my inquiring the caufe, die faid fhe had informed Catharine of what had paffed be¬ tween
tween us; that, on being told I was engaged, fhe fainted feveral times, and, before fhe re¬ covered, her nephew, who was juft returned from abroad, called at the houfe. This young man, flie faid, had been long paflion- ately attached to her; that, on feeing the fituation of his coufin, he was neceffarily in¬ formed of the caufe,—was now with her, and had fo earneftly entreated to have the honour of being introduced to me, that fhe could not find refolution to deny his re¬ queft.— " I will confefs to you, my dear Albert, I now began to fufped fome defign was formed againft me; but of what nature I was ftill at a lofs to conjedure. I luckily had put on my fword, and I determined, if fhey attempted to confine or ill treat me, to fell my life as dearly as I could. How ever, it was not my life they wanted ; they had a more ambitious and lefs dano-erous fcheme in view. In a little time, the*lady, drowned in tears, and with well-aded dif¬ trefs,
trefs, entered the room, accompanied by her coufin, as the mother had called him. The gentleman chofe to put on a fierce and threatening look, and fwore I fhould do juftice to his charming coufin, whom he loved more than life, or that moment fettle the matter with him as a gentleman ought to do. I laid my hand on my fword : Catharine flew ro me, fell at my feet, and begged I would not terrify her to death by expofing a life fo dear to the rifk of fighting with her coufin. She then lamented her weaknefs, and entreated me to conipaffionate the for¬ rows in which I had involved her. 1 loudly demanded what all this meant,— declared I had no defign againft her heart, nor any defire to be favoured with her hand, my own having been long engaged to the beft and faireft of her fex, and to whom alone all my wiflies were confined. The gentleman again approached me; the lady 2 chofe
chofe to fall into a fit, and was fupported by her female accomplices. A prieft at that moment entered the room. " You are come in good time, (faid the pretended coufin,) to aflift us in performing an ad of juftice." The young ludy at that inftant recovered, and, feeing her coming to me, I flew to the window, with an intention of opening it to call for afliftance, and, on finding it faft- ened, had no longer any doubts of their premeditated defigns againft my peace. I therefore fhook off the fair fyren, (who had clafped her hands around my arm, and, with tears, and all the blandifhments of artful beauty, befbught mc to have com¬ paflion on her fufferings,) and made an ef¬ fort to get out at the door ; that was like- wife faftened. I then eagerly inquired for what bafe purpofe I was thus forcibly de¬ tained, and what it was they wanted with me. ** Juftice,
" Juftice, (replied the bully; — juftice only !— Reverend father, (faid he, addref- fing himfelf to the prieft,) this fair damfel has been robbed of her peace : her virgin fame muft be loft in confequence, unlefs that youth (pointing to me) will make her reparation, by giving her his hand in mar¬ riage. It is to join them in holy wedlock we fent for you." u I was now enraged too much, (con¬ tinued Walter,) to have longer any com¬ mand over my paffion. — I drew my (word, and vowed to facrifice any one who Ihould dare to prevent my leaving the infamous houfe into which I had been fo artfully and bafely trepanned. The women now clung about me, while their bully endeavoured, but in vain, to wreft my fword from me. He then com¬ manded the prieft to do his office, and I know not, at that moment, what ad of defeneration I might not have committed, had
had not you, my guardian friend and pre- fervcr, luckily burft into the room, and prevented my ending that life in a brothel which you proteded fo many years in a dungeon." Albert embraced his young lord with tears of gratified affedion. " Long, very long, (cried he,) may } r our life be guarded from every danger, and never experience a fate fo difgraceful 1 I will inform the Baron of what has paffed : he will very foon bring thefe wretches to the fhame and punifliment they fo juftly deferve*" u Not for world?, my good Albert, would I have the ftory tranfpire 1 (faid Walter.)— I already know enough of hu¬ man nature to be fatisfied that the recital of it would not only bring my father's dif¬ pleafure upon me, but likewife the ridicule of the world. Be affured of this, I will never
never again run the rifk of being drawn into danger by forming an acquaintance with people, however fpecious their ap¬ pearance, without their being well known to my father or yourfelf. All I beg of you is, to join with me in interceding with the Baron for permiflion to return to Bungay- caftle. I will there wait his pleafure, with¬ out murmur or complaint, for the accom- pliihment of all my wiflies. With Ro¬ feline de Morney I cannot be unhappy; — without her my foul can know no peace." Albert promifed to do what he could with the Baron, but requefted his young lord not to be too fanguine in his hopes of prevailing on him to confent to his leaving London, till the time was expired that he had fixed for his ftay, and on his promifing not to offend hiin by diiputing his will as to the length of his continuance in town, he agreed to conceal this unplea¬ fant adventure from the Baron, ftrongly recommending
recommending him to be more guarded in future, and never to let his own unfufped¬ ing; nature lead htm to conclude that the people he mixed with were as good and as artlefs as himfelf,
CHAP.
JLi-J!LiL^-__L, 1 .IX
CHAP, IX.
FROM this time Walter became more and more diffatisfied with his. 15tuation* He no longer contended with the Baron re¬ fpeding the length of his ftay, or refufed to accompany him whenever he was requeu¬ ed to any public amufement or private party* But he became fo reftlefs and internally wretched, that it became impoflible to con¬ ceal entirely how much he was diftreffed.— He wrote many letters to Rofeline. The following is a copy of that which he fent a few days after his being fo fortunately faved by
by Albert from the diabolical plan laid to render him miferable during life, and at the fame time would have made the innocent Rofeline as unhappy as himfelf. My ever dear and charming Rofeline, I CANNOT live much longer in this deteftable place, where the women are artful, tlie men bafe and dcfigning. I am pointed at as being a fit dupe for vice to enfnare : my ignorance often leach me into error, and my own unfufpeding difpofition expofes me to ridicule. If I muft learn to , be like the people with whom I often aflfo¬ ciate here, I fhall grow in a little time ib weary of exiftence, that I fhall only wiih it preferved on your account. The immenfe diftance between this place and the caftle you inhabit renders it doubly deteftable. It is a fcene of buftle, confu¬ fion, and d^fign : its amufements are all fri¬ volous and trifling; its pleafures are joylefs, unibcial,
unfocial, and unfatisfadory, and 1 a mcfe cypher, dull and alone, amidft a crowd of beings, for whom I feel neither refped nor friendfhip. In fad, I am never more alone than when I am furrounded by hundreds of people, not one of whom cares for my hap¬ pinefs. I had rather be with you in one of the gloornieft dungeons of Bungay-caftle than in the palace of our king, unlefs ycu were by my fide. I have feen a great many young ladies that are called beauties ; but I think none of them half fo beautiful as my gentle Rofe¬ line ; neither do they appear fo good hu¬ moured, nor is their drefs fo becoming, though they wear as many diamonds as you did on the fortunate morning you went to be married to my father. And would you think it ?—one of them adually endeavoured to draw me in to marry her ; though I re¬ peatedly told her I could love no woman but you. I have
I have neither fpirits nor appetite ; I can neither laugh nor fing, and, if the Baron have a mind to make me polite,-—if he wifli me to acquire knowledge,—-if he be defirous I fliould become what he calls an ufeful member of fociety, he muft no longer keep us feparare. It is your company only that could give a charm to that of other people, and, if I could fee you, I fhould love tiie world for your fiikc. I fhall die, dear Rofe¬ line, unlefs they permit me to come to you. Madeline, though fhe w ? ept, was happy, and looked handfomer than ever ; and Ed¬ win,—ah i how I envied your I rother Edwin ! He may be thankful he was not the fon of a Baron, compelled like me to go through the tirefbme drudgery of unmeaning ceremo¬ nies, ar.d all the difgufting and nonfenfical forms which they tell me belong to rank.—I am fure rank would be more valuable and happier without them, and dignity far more pleafant to its pofleflbrs, tf they could diveft themfelves of pride. Commend
Commend me cordially to your parents.—* Tell your fifters I love them as a brother, and make my refpeds to De Clavering, De Willows, and the honeft Cambrian, to whom I hope one day to be of fervice. Sweet Rofeline, think of me, dream of me, and love no one but me. My father is very kind, very indulgent, and Albert very good, for he will hear me talk of you for hours together ; but neither the Baron nor Albert can guefs at the fufferings they inflid on me by this tedious abfence from you, to whom I am indebted for life, hope, and hap¬ pinefs* Your's forever, WALTER FITZOSBOURNE. When the above mentioned letter reached the hands of the dejeded Rofeline, it a- larmed and diftreffed her. It was however accompanied by one from the Baron to Sir Philip
Philip had no longer any fears but his friend would fucceed in procuring a pardon for the fugitives. Again the family of De Morney were reftored to their accuftomed cheerful¬ nefs, and their friends admitted as ufual; and, though Rofeline fhed fome tears over the fond impaffioned letter of Walter, they were tears of grateful tendernefs, and fhe took care that her fighs and unceafing regret for the abfence of her lover fhould be con¬ cealed from thofe to whom they would have given pain. Edeliza too was no longer under the unpleafant neceflity of concealing her love for the worthy De Willows. The heart of Sir Philip was foftened by the trials he had encountered, and all the parent was awa¬ kened in his foul. He therefore confented to the union of his fecond daughter taking place as foon as her lover could command an income fufficient to maintain a wife and family; and, as he had many friends in power, every one cherifhed hopes of his foon obtaining fome diftinguifhed preferment. vol. ii* M Audrey,
Audrey, who was ftill a great favourite with her young lady, was now folely re¬ tained to attend her perfon, and wholly at her command. She confidered herfelf there¬ fore of fome confequence, and gave herfelf airs accordingly. She did not choofe to mix with the common clafs of fervants,—truly a lady's maid's place was a place of too much extindion to permit any familiarity with in- feerors.—-No fooner did Audrey fee the fa¬ mily reftored to their ufual good humour, than die herfelf became more lively and chatty than ever, and all her fears ofghods and hobgoblins were loft in her own felf-im- portance -and newly-acquired dignity. She afforded high entertainment not only to her feliow-fervants, but to all the reft of the family* and, to make her charader appear more ridiculous, her drefs was as abfurd as her fentiments. Whenever chance threw Mrs. Audrey in tlieir way, it was become a matter of courfe to
to enter into converfation with her, and the vain Abigail was too proud of this flattering diftindion not to make the moft of it. De Clavering, who was fond of the hu¬ mourous, laughed at the abfurdities of Au¬ drey, and took every opportunity of (hewing her off. One day, while he was fitting with Rofeline in the apartment to which Walter had been removed, when releafed from his dungeon, Audrey came abruptly into the room, bringing in her arms the little dog frequently mentioned in the foregoing pages. She laid him on the lap of his fond miftrefs, and exclaimed, " There, madam, take the little wandering rafcal. I have been in a fine quandrary about him, and have had a bleffed rambulation to find him, and drag him from his low-bred wulgar companions. To my thinks, he is as great a rake as the king himfelf, God blefs his majefty ; but the young Baron ought to have given him a better eddication than to keep company with his infeerors." M 2 « 1
" I am fure, Audrey, (laid De Claver¬ ing,) you are much indebted to the young rafcal, as you call him ; for the rambula- tion you complain of has given fo fine a glow to your complexion, fo much anima¬ tion to each expreilive feature, that may I die if I did not take you at firft for a painted lady, and, had I met you in the paflage, am afraid I mould have been tempted to fee whether thole rofes (b falcinating and fb blooming were borrowed or natural/' " Don't talk to me of hannimation or fanfenation, (cried Audrey, indignantly drawing herfelf up feveral inches higher;) I can affure you, Mr. Dodor, I don't choofe to be confulted. I neither buys, borrows, nor covets, rofes; I neither wants to tempt or be tempted by any one ; but if I was by chance to captify a fweetheart, I dares to lay I fliould foon become pale enough; for I thinks love is as bad as a 'potticary's fliop/* ^ I hope I have not offended you, Mrs. Audrey, (faid De Clavering, laughing,) I only meant to be civil, and pay the tribute due
due to the bloom I obferved upon your countenance." " Fended or not, (replied Audrey,) it little matters. Servants, fome folks thinks, muft not look like other people, and their blooms muft be fufpeded truly. However, as father Anfelm often fays, God made us aiL^—-You might as well have been filent as to the matter of my looks. I don't want or wifli gentlemen 'poricarys to ax me quef¬ tions, or trouble their heads about me." " You would not have been half fo an¬ gry with Camelford, (faid De Clavering,) had he faid ten times as much to you as I have done, or had he kiifed you. as often as I once faw him, when you ran to him under the mulberry tree." " I don't think (lie would, (faid Rofeline, finding,) for I know our friend Hugh is a great favourit~ with every female in the fa¬ mily." " Wery veil, mifs, (replied Audrey, blufh¬ ing as red as fcarlet at the ftory of the mul¬ berry-tree,) you have a mind I fee to join M 3 with
with the malicious dodor to dafh and con¬ found me ; but I defy his fatarical talons, and can afhure you, mifs, though Mr. Ca- melfor is fo cetious and merry, he never proffered to kifs me more than half a dozen times in his life." " Take care how you reckon, Audrey, ^cried De Clavering, humouroufly,) remem¬ ber I faw you under th* mulberry-tree." " Well, what it you did ?—You might as well have laid nothing about it, (replied Audrey.)—I was frightened almoft into bighfterricks by an ugly black cat jumping from a lylac bufh, and I ran to Mr. Ca- melfor without knowing what I did, and be was fo civil and perlite, God blefs his good- humoured hearf, one muft have been a fa- vage to quarrel with him for a civil kifs or two : he does not fleer or jeer people about their looks, or tells what he fees them doing," Neither Rofeline nor De Clavering could any longer refrain from iaughing, and Ca¬ melford
melfcrd that moment entering the room, Audrey was fa much ditpkafed, and ia io great a hurry to be gone, that, in runnang ?o the door, flae almoft beat dow& her fa¬ vourite. " Fat, in the name of Cot, (cried Hugh,) is the matter with the girl ? She has as many freaks and fancies in her head as a mountain coat, and is as frolickfom^ too*" " You had better follow her, and make your inquiries, (faid De Clavering;) I am fatisfied the damfel would tell you what brought on her prefent diforder footer than any body elfe." " I am no todor, (faid Camelford,) there¬ fore don't be playing tricks upon me, by fending me after the tamfel, and pringing little Pertha's anger upon me, which, may I tie in a titch, if 1 know how to bear/* *' Oh ! if you are enlifted under petticoat government, (replied De Clavering,) I give you up as incurable,—a defert er from the M 4 thorny
thorny paths of glory, and forefee the fword will be changed into a diftaff or a plough- fliare." " Luf (cried Camelford) muft not be apu' fed ; it is the beft ftimulus to crate and noble adions, the parent of pold atchieve- ments ^ but of that fame luf you know no¬ thing : there is no heart in your pody, and you are mortified to think you cannot find a noflrum to cure the difeafe in others ; you muft therefore be caught in luf *s fnarcs, in order to learn tlie nature of thofe treadful tribulations it brings upon a man. May I go to the tevil in a high wind, it I had not as lief face a canon's mouih as meet the hre of Pertha's pright eyes, when they look indignantly upon me 1" " Don't talk fo much of the devil, Hugh, (interrupted De Clavering,) but requeft him to do you the favour of kicking about your brains a little, till they return to a more ufeful ftation in )our pericranium : in my opinion^ you are in a fair way of be¬ coming
coming fit for the government under which you think yourfelf enlifted." " May the vengeance of all womankind fall upon you ! (cried Camelford :)—may you be tragged apout like a tancing pear, to make fport 1—may you lead affes in the tark regions of Peelzebub, for your plafphemies againft woman ! and may------" But all his farther denunciations and wiflies for vengeance on De Clavering were now interrupted by a loud fcreaming. Soon the door was thrown open, and in bounced Audrey, her cap on one fide, and her face as pale as afhes. " I have feen him, (flic exclaimed,) with my own dear eyes!—his ghoft,,or happori- tion !" u Whofe coft ? (cried Camelford ;) where ift it ?—I will teach a coft to frighten a pretty Girl, and trive her tiftraded."
M. 5
The
The manner and appearance of Audrey were fuch as ferved to confirm the fufpicion in the mind of Rofeline, and even De Cla¬ vering, till, offended by the fuppofition of her being infane, flie called out in her ufual peculiar ftile, " Thank God ! fome folks are no more a lunatic than other folks. I have all my feven fenfes as perfed as ever I had in my life ;—but, Chrifl Jafus, thefe are fad times, when one is not allowed to believe their own precious eyes.—Down dropped his horfe, poor beaft, all in a foam, and down tumbled the young Baron arter him, as dead as my dear great grandmo¬ ther." " Who are you talking of ? (cried Rofe¬ line, rifing with the utmoft emotion.)—Is the Baron ?—is Walter ?—is he dead ?" " He only died for a few minutes, (anfwer¬ ed Audrey, and then he came to himfelf—" She had time for no more. Rofeline heard the well known ftep of her lover.-— Walter ruflied into the room, threw himfelf 6 at
at her feet, and the next inftant caught her in his arms. " This moment (cried he) is that for which my heart has languifhed ! this is a reward for all my fatigue, all my fears and anxieties 1— Look up, fmile upon me, and fay, my fweet Rofeline, that my return gives to you an "almoft equal pleafure as myfelf; but, firft, kt me inform you that I have left London without the knowledge and permiflion of my father." That Rofeline rejoiced to fee Iier lover her eyes informed him, but for a few minutes furprife and agitation kept her filent. Sir Philip, Lady de Morney, and the whole family, were foon affembled in the apartment to which Walter had been direded by Au¬ drey. The young Baron, it may be fuppofed, found a cordial reception, and it is not to be doubted but that he met with from the fair M 6 objed
objed of his affedion w r as fuch as amply re¬ paid him for his fatigue, and in his own mind even, for the rifk he had hazarded of difobliging his father. Tliis ftep, however, was- owing to a hint dropped by the Baron, that it would be agreeable and convenient, to himfelf, and neceffary for many reafons to his fon, that they fhould prolong their ftay in town- fome weeks beyond what had been propofed, or intended, on their depar¬ ture from the caftle* Cjg this plan being oppofed by Walter,, the Baron not only appeared difpleafed, but refolute to carry his-point. A circumftance fo diftrefling to his fon rendered him equally determined not to fubmit to fuch arbitrary, and, in h:s opinion, cruel authority ? there¬ fore, early the next morning he fat off, without being attended by a fervant, or in¬ forming any one to what part of the globe he meant to go, and the next day reached Bungay caftle in the manner before defcribed. 5 Sir
Sir Philip de Morney, on learning thefe alarming circumftances from his daughter, immediately fent off an exprefs to inform the Baron of his fon's unexpeded arrival, and of his apprehenfions that the ftep he had fo unguardedly taken would bring his difpleafure upon himfelf and family, whom he ferioufly affured him knew nothing of his intention. Walter, in his converfations with Rofe¬ line, told her, he found himfelf fo difgufted with the cuftoms and manners of the world, and met with fo few people in it to whom he could attach himfelf, or for whom he felt either refped or affedion, that he de¬ termined no longer to be detained from her in whofe care his happinefs was in trufted, and with whom alone he was fatisfied it coukl reft fecure. " And, as you condefcended, (he conti¬ nued,) to love and attend to me when im¬ mured in a dungeon,—kindly fmiled on me, and
and endeavoured to inftrud me when en¬ veloped in ignorance, and was my friend when I appeared to have no claims,—a foli¬ tary outcaft from fociety, I thought you would not be very much difpleafed if I for- fook the world for you, who gave up more, much more, for me, and quitted its gayeft and moft cheerful fcenes for the folitary gloom of a prifon* " Whatever I may ftill want of polifi% addrefs, and what fafliionable people (life politenefs, love and my gentle Rofeline can eafily teach mc. From a world that I neither like nor approve, I could learn but little, while the chofen miftrefs of my heart may at her pleafure make me any tiling die wiflies. With her, and for her amufement,, I may be fometimes tempted to. live in a crowd ; without her, the world itfelf is only a wide extended dungeon." Rofeline, at hearing this impaffioned ' language from lips whidi^flie was fatisfied,.. knew
knew no guile, was too much gratified to exprefs all fhe felt. She fmiled on him through her tears, and, in the foft eft Ian- guage affedion could didate, gently chid him for being fo impetuous as to run tl e riik of difobliging his father on her account, expreffing a few timid apprehenfions that ti e Baron might be offended with lier as beirg the innocent caufe of his fon's proving re- fradory to his wiflies ; yet fhe could not help fecretly rejoicing in the ftrength of his attachment, on which all hei happi¬ nefs depended. Every thing was done by the family to give this amiable and fingular lover a re¬ ception not only fuitable to his elevated rank, but fatisfadory to his feelings,—fuch an one as the fincerity of his regard for Ro¬ feline demanded and deferved, while the joy which appeared upon the animated coun¬ tenances of the lovers convinced every one who faw them, that they had fixed their hopes of felicity on a bafis which the hand of
of death only could fhake from its founda¬ tions* Walter, in his moments of unreferve, ex¬ preffed his furprife, diflike, and contempt, of many things,, perfons, and cuftoms, which he met with in the high circles to which he had been introduced, and concluded with wifhing that the Baron could be prevailed upon to excufe his farther attendance, ad¬ ding, it was his determined plan, fo far as it met the approbation* of his beloved Ro¬ feline, to fpend as much of his time as the nature of his fituation would permit in the placid bofom of retirement, in which he hoped to make himfelf as ufeful and worthy a member of the commonwealth as he Ihould be if engaged in more buftling and bufy fcenes* " One would think (faid De Clavering, who happened to be prefent when this con¬ verfation occurred) that the young Baron had been educated by fome of out wife and ancient
ancient philofophers, and, taught by their precepts, was convinced by them that hap¬ pinefs was too timid and modeft to be found in the confines of a court, or the fpiendors of a ball-room. It reminds me of Enthy¬ menes, who, fpeaking of the pleafuies of folitude to a man of the world, makes the following obfervations. " You are compelled to a continual re- " ftraint in your drefs, demeanour, adions, " and words :—your feftivais are lo magni- " ficent, and our's fo mirthful !—your plea- u fures fo fuperficial and fo tranfient, and ** our's fo real and fo conftant i Have you " ever in your rich apartments breathed an " air fo frelh as that which we refpire in " this verdant arbour ? — or can your en- " tertainments, fometimes fo fumptuous, " compare with the bowls of milk which u we have juft drawn, or thofe delicious w fruits we have gathered with our hands I
" Aht
" Ah ! if happinefs be only the health of " the foul, muft it not be found in thofe " places, where a juft proportion ever reigns 44 between our wants and our defires> where " motion is conftantly followed by reft, and " where our affedions are always accompa- " panied by tranquillity, breathe a free air* " and enjoy the fplendor of heaven.—From " thefe kind of comparifons we may judge 4 * which are the true riches that nature de- " figned for men." ** Such were the opinions and fentiments of Enthymenes, and fuch I find are thofe of De Clavering, (replied Walter,) or he would not have retained and repeated them with fo much facility and fatisfadion. — Were my fete united with that of Mifs de Morney, and had I two fuch friends as De Clavering and Albert, to dired my condud and enlarge the fmali portion of knowledge I have yet been able to acquire, I fhould think myfelf the moft fortunate as well as the happieft of mankind, having already experienced
experienced a long feries of oppreflion from the baneful arts and ftratagenis of ambition, I have learned to defpife it, and, in the gloomy and trying hours of adverfity, have been taught, that fortitude, with humility and untainted honour, can harmonize, but can never degrade the moft exalted ftations, and, while they are the brighteft jewels that could adorn a crown, they enrich and enno¬ ble the loweft peafant/' In a few days, the Baron, accompanied by Albert, arrived at the caftle. The frown which appeared upon his brow, at his firft entrance, was inftantly difperfed when the trembling Rofeline funk at his feet, and en¬ treated him to pardon the eccentric flight of her lover, of which, as (lie was the caufe, if his difpleafure continued, it would indict emal diftrefs upon herfelf as upon his fon. To refift fo fair a fupplicant was not in the Baron's power. He tenderly raifed her from
from the ground, and the next morning embraced her lover. The utmoft harmo¬ ny and a general cheerfulnefs foon prevailed, and, before the parties feparated for the night, the Baron candidly and generoufly acknowledged, that, at the fame age, and under the fame circumftances as Lis fon, he believed he fliould have acted as he had done. " And upon the whole, (faid he,) I w r as not very forry when the obftinate figli- ing boy took himfelf away ; for I wab grown weary of having to introduce, and make fuch frequent apologies" for fo abfent, life¬ lefs, and refradory a being." What ferved to reconcile matters the fooner was, that Albert, after the fudden difappearance of his young lord, had in¬ formed his father of Mrs, C------ -'s infamous ftratagem to draw him into a marriage with her ariful and abandoned daughter. He was fo much enraged at hearing the lengths to which thefe wretches had dared to go, that
that ftrid fearch w f as made after them, but without effed. Walter, too, told Rofeline of the defigns which had been formed to entrap him, and, while (lie looked at him with increafed delight, flie fecretly rejoiced that he had left a place wiiich harboured a fet of peo¬ ple who gloried to deftroy the peace of their fellow-creatures. To make the happinefs of the friendly party more perfedly complete, the Baron informed Sir Philip and Lady de Morney that he hoped very foon to procure a pardon for Edwin and Madeline, and to be able to reftore them to their protedion. Preparations for the marriage very foon began, the Baron humouroufly obferving, that, till his fon was again deprived ot his freedom, there would be no knowing how to fecure, or what to do with him, and
and declaring he fliould be very glad to delegate the care of him to one whom he had no doubt would fupply his place much to the advantage of the charge he w f as ready and willing to give up. Every appendage, that wealth could purchafe, — rank require, — or youth and ambition with to poffefs, — was liberally provided to grace the nuptials of Walter Fitzofbourne and the happy Rofeline de Morney. Ah ! how different were the feeling?,— how delightful the profpeds of the in¬ tended bride, on this occafion, to what they had been on a former one, when fhe prepared with fuch agonizing terrors to give her hand to the Baron I— yet, though ihe could now think of approaching the altar without reludance, ihe could not en¬ tirely diveft herfelf of thofe timid fears which every gentle and virtuous femak muft experience when fhe recoUeds the number
number of new duties upon which fhe is going to enter, and that, from the mo* ment (he becomes a wife, her happinefs, no longer dependent on herfelf or parents, refts only on the man to whom die has given her hand. Walter feemed to tread on air; he was all vivacity and joy, and appeared to have affumed a new charader. The world, and every thing belonging to it, wore a different afped :— all, all was charming. He won¬ dered how he could ever have felt difguft, or cherifhed dilcontent. To his father he was attentive and affedionate,— to his friends cordial and complacent,-— to his Rofeline all that an affedionate lover could or ought to be. Albert was almoft as happy and joyous as j mafter. The Baron, ferene, grate¬ ful, and contented, while Sir Philip and Lady de Morney, who tound their own confequence and comforts fo much in¬ creafed
creafed by this fortunate and fplendid al¬ liance, united in blefling the hour which fent their intended fcn-in-law a prifoner to Bungay-caftle.
CHAP.
BUNGAY CASTLE* 26$
0m jw* i iw/JiL±!iuw m !3 Mm^em*mm vmmjmx raB*mamm
CHAP. X.
AT length the happy day arrived which was appointed for the celebration of thefe long expeded nuptials. We prefume t;hat the morning, to the world in general, was exadly like what other mornings had been, and that the fun flione without any perceptible brilliancy being added to its rays, except in the eyes of the now happy lovers. The company affembled in the breakfaft- room, and for fome time waited for Rofe¬ line. She foon made her appearance, Jed vol. ii. N bv
by her beloved Walter, who had ftolen un¬ obferved to the chamber-door of his mif¬ trefs, to chide her for io long delaying his happinefs. On this occafion he was fplen- didly attired, and the bride, elegantly but fimply dreffed, wanted not the borrowed aid of ornament, but, arrayed in maiden bafh- fulnefs and artlefs purity, appeared all na¬ tive lovelinefs. As (he received the congratulations of her friendsy a tear, which floie from her expreffive eye as it trembled to efcape, ap¬ peared the fpotlefs harbinger of gratified affedion, ftruggling to conquer the becoming fears of unaffeded modefty. As foon as breakfaft was over, they were accompanied to the chapel of the nunnery by a numerous train of friends and depen¬ dents. On their arrival, they were met by the Lady Ab' efs, the venerable and worthy Father Anfelm, and almoft all the inhabi¬ tants ot tiie nunnery, who were allowed to affemble
affemble in the chapel on this joyous occa¬ fion, while every face wore the appearanqe- cf cheerfulnefs. A feled party went back with them to the caftle, where all who chofe were permit¬ ted to partake of the happinefs, and iba:e in the focial fatisfadion which univerfaUy prevailed. Mutual congratulations and good wifhes were exchanged. Sir Philip and Lady de Morney, happy as they were in the com- ' pletion of their ambition, could not reftrain the figh of heart-felt regret at the thoughts of foon being feparated from their beloved daughter. Rofeline was fome time before flie reco¬ vered her ufual ferenity, till Edeliza, oa obferving her flied a tear as fhe looked at her mother, faid to her, in a whifper,— " I cannot imagine, my dear fifter, why you fhould weep. I d j not think 1 ihould N 2 ^c
be fo dejeded if I were married to De Willows,— though he never faid half fo many fine things to me as the young Baron has done to you." • Rofeline, fmiling, preded the hand of her fifter, and, returning her whifper, affured her fhe was indeed the moft enviable of her fex :—but (added (he) it requires more for¬ titude than I poffefs to fupport fuch happi¬ nefs as mine ,ith equanimity and compo- iure; and the natural regret I cannot help feeling at leaving this place, and foon being feparated from the beft and tendered of mothers, convinces me that Providence never intended we (hould enjoy blifs with¬ out alloy." The next day the party fat off ia new and fplendid carriages, attended by a nu¬ merous retinue of fervants, for the Baron's caftle in the North of England Their grand cavalcade brought a number of peo¬ ple to take a farewell look of the lovely bride,
bride, whofe departure was generally re¬ gretted ; and flie was followed by the good wiflies of all who ever had the pleafure of enjoying her fociety. Sir Philip and Lady de Morney, her two fifters, De Willows, De Clavering, and Hugh Camelford accompanied her. Au¬ drey had likewife the honour of attending her lady as fille de chambre, and never felt herfelf of fuch infinite confequence as fhe did when handed into the travelling car¬ riage by the Baron's gentleman, who did her the honour to affift in packing her up to the chin amidft the boxes and luggage en¬ trufted to her care. The party travelled flowly and pleafantly, flopping to fee every thing on their route that was worthy obfervation; and, as they were now in the humour to be eafily pleafed, they were confequently amufed and grati¬ fied with almoft every thing they faw.—It is a kind of humour fo extremely conve- N 3 nient,
nient, that I hope we fhall be excufed for recommending the adoption of it to travel¬ lers of all countries and denominations,— good humour, and ferenity of mind, being the beft companions at home, are equally eligible to carry with us when we go abroad. On their arrival at Fitzofbourne-caftle, they received a confiderable increafe to their happinefs by meeting Edwin and Made* line in perfed health and good fpiriti.— Sir Philip and Lady de Morney's cup of joy was filled to the brim, when they found themfelves folded in the arms of their long abfent children, for whofe lives they had fo often, and indeed at this very moment in¬ wardly trembled. The happy bride of tfie exulting Walter felt fuch a torrent of added felicity, on being folded in the arms of her brother and Madeline, that (he was very near faint* ing.
ing. Obferving this, the Baron, to call off their attention, defired them to permit him to come in for fome fhare of their embraces, and in his turn to welcome them to Fitz¬ ofbourne-caftle. This had the effed it was defigned to produce, and the cordial wel¬ come every one received from the Baron gave additional fatisfadion to the hours thus marked with joy, happinefs, and love. After they had taken fome refrefhment, Edwin furprifed them all by approaching the Baron, and in the moft fubmiffive manner begging him to pardon the liberty he had taken in introducing a gueft to the caftle, whom, as yet, he knew not of being there,~a gueft old and weak, but who was, he hoped, flowly recovering from an attack of illnefs fo fevere, as to have threatened his life, and which, in ail probability, would have terminated his mortal exiftence, but for the unremitting attention he received ftom the Baron's domeftics. N 4 « No
" No apology is neceffary upon fuch an Occafion, (faid the Baron.) Had my people been wanting in care to any one who re¬ quired their affiftance, I fliould have in* ftantly difmiffed them.—When may I be introduced to your friend ? (added he.)—I am impatient to affure him that this houfe* and all that it contains, are much at his fer¬ vice." " Pray, my dear Edwin, (faid Lady de Morney,) who is die perfon for whom you have ventured to tax the Baron's hofpitality thus largely, and fbr whom you appear fd much interefled ?" " The fatlier of this lady, (replied he, taking the hand of Madeline, and leading her to his mother.)—To her I wiil refer you for an account of our meeting, and the re¬ volution it has fortunately produced in our favour. Madeline was inftantly called upon ta gratify the curiofity of the company, and,. without
'without any delay, informed them, that Edwin and herfelf having one day agreed to take a ramble, they told the people with whom they lodged that they fhould not ■return till the evening. Difguifing themfelves more than ufual, fo as to avoid the poffibility of being dif¬ covered, they fat off; and, being tempted by the extreme finenefs of the day, wan¬ dered till they came to the great road which led to a large town, not fi\ r e miles diftant.. " In fad, (fiid the blufhing narrator,) my dear Edwin, was grown weary of foli¬ tude, and wifhed perhaps to fee more faces than thofe which he met in the obfeure; little cottage to which we were confined." Every one fmiled,—Edwin looked con-* fufed,—-and Madeline thus proceeded, " We had not walked more than half a mile in the great road > before the number N 5 of
of people we met, and the curiofity our ftrange appearance excited, determined us to choofe a more private, walk ; but, juft as we were going to turn into a lane which led to a neighbouring village, our attention was caught, and our defign prevented by a carriage being overturned within a hun¬ dred paces of us* " The horfes, proving reftive, had drawn it up a high bank, which occafioned the aecklent. One of the fervants, feeing Ed¬ win, beckened him, and begged him to aflift in lifting it up, and liberating his mafter from his perilous fituation. He immediately ran. off, telling me to fit down on the bank till his return. « Thinking, however, that 1 might poflibly be of fome fervice, I walked flowly forwards ; but guefs my terror, when; juft as we arrivedat the carriage, they were drag¬ ging from it a man to all appearance dead.,
" I inftantly dew to lend my affiftance - 9 but no fooner did I diftinguifti his perfon, than I was nearly as lifelefs as himfelf.—It was my father,—my father dying on the road ! The fight j however terrifying to my fears and torturing to my feelings, gave me ftrength, and infpired me with forti¬ tude to help in preferving the life of the author of my being. " I took an opportunity to inform my dear Edwin who it was that claimed our care and attention. After chafing his tern* pies, and rubbing bis emaciated hands*. fome faint figns of life reanimated our en¬ deavours. ** We found, by the converfation of the fervants, that their mafter had been recom¬ mended to try what change of air and travelling might do, as medicine had failed in removing a difeafe which had long preyed upon Jiis conftitution, and which had been increafed by fome dc meftic forrow. N 6 "Alas!;
** Alas! of that forrow I knew myfelf to be the caufe, and the tears which I flied upon his almoft lifelefs hand, as 1 faw him extended at my feet, atoned I hope, in fome meafure, for the grief I hadinflided. f4 When life was more perfedly reftored, we moved him upon a grafs plat, till the carriage and horfes could be got ready.— He took no notice of any one, and ap¬ peared to be totally infenfible of the ac¬ cident, and of every thing around him.-— This at once determined us to intrude on the Baron's goodnefs, and convey him to this caitfe. " Having difpatched a meffenger for the- beft advice we coukl procure, one of his attendants and myfelf accompanied him in the carnage. His head refted on my bo¬ fom, but he knew me not, nor once at¬ tempted to fpeak. On our arrival here, we found every thing prepared for our re¬ ception, Edwin having taken one of the horfea
norfes, and rode full (peed to inform the Baron's fervants a fick gentleman was coming, for whom he requefted their care. and affiftance, " My father was taken from the carriage, and inftantly put to bed. Two medical gentlemen very foon arrived, who, on ex¬ amining the ftate of their patient, from the violence of the contufion and the total deprivation of fcnfe in which they found him, feemed to think there was a concuf- fion of the brain. They aflured us,, how¬ ever, that his life would not be endangered by the accident, but (aid,- they faw he was far advanced in a decline, from which they apprehended more fatal confequences. *' We continued our difguife, and, as our real names were totally unknown in this neighbourhood, having pafied for a Mr. and Mrs. Danbury, we were under no ap¬ prehenfions of being difcovered, fhould my father recover his fenfes. After remaining 5 m
in the moft painful ftate of fufpenfe many days, he began to take notice of thofe who attended him, but made no inquiries after his own fervants > how he came into a ftrange place, or the accident which had befallen him. One day, as I was fitting by him, and holding his head, which 1 had been rubbing with vinegar, he looked ear- neftly at me. « If I did not think, if I did not know it was impoffible, (faid he* in hurried ac¬ cents, looking firft at me, and then at Edwin, who was, ftanding at the foot of the bed,) I (hould almoft be tempted to be¬ lieve that the hand which has fo gently given me relief was the hand of Madeline de Glanville, and that face the face I once fondly doated upon ; but it cannot be !— I am a poor, wandering, old man, whofe eyes muft be clofed by ftrangers, and I de- ferve it fhould be fo. I once had a daugh*- ter, but I banifhed her my fight:—I had a
fon*. but he perhaps is no longer an inhabi¬ tant of this world." Here he flopped, and burft into a vio¬ lent flood of tears. By a fign from Ed- win I underftood he wiflied me to take this favourable opportunity of making the difcovery, for which he knew I languiflied. Falling therefore, on my knees, in the moft fupplicating attitude, and prefling his hand to my lips, I exclaimed : « I am your daughter,—your Madeline, and there is the amiable, the beloved huf¬ band for whom 1 dared to difobey my fether, and for whom at this moment I ftand a trembling vidim to the juft laws ©f my country and my religion !" The fcene which followed it is not m my power to defcribe. Suffice k to fay, that, from that interefting period, my father has not only been reconciled, but renovated with health and ftrength. He frequently laments
, 4 laments the obftinacy which reduced us to the neceflity of taking fuch fteps to pre¬ vent our feparation. He has written let¬ ters to every one he knows that has any in¬ tereft with the higher powers of the church,. but his hopes of foccefs are refted upoa Lord Fitzofbourne, to whom he is impa¬ tient to pay his refpeds." " This moment I am ready to attend; him, (faid the Baron :) the fadier of Ma¬ deline is entitled to every attention that has, or can be fliewn hiin." After his lordfhip's vifit had been paid,. the reft of the party followed of courfe, and a general harmony prevailed. Mr. de Glanville- was inftantly placed wholly under the care of De Clavering, and foon ob¬ tained as pei fed a ftate of convaiefcence as the nature of his conftitutional habits would admit.
Now
Now again hofpitality and feftivity took their turn to reign, and the happy and diftiriguifhed Walter, after languiihing fo many years in mifery and confinement, found himfelf in the fituation for which nature had deiigned him. Reftored to his rank in the bofom of af¬ fluence, and furrouncled by tender and ad* miring friends, he foon loft that timid fbynefs which had once rendered him averfe to fociety, and difcontented with the world. United to the only woman he had ever loved, and porTefTed of domains more ex> tenfive and fertile than thofe of many a petty prince, with a mind calculated to promote the happinefs of his fellow-crea¬ tures, he was beloved by all, and envied by many. In a few months a full and free par¬ don was procured for Edwin and Ma¬ deline, and Mr. de Glanvillc, having re- ' 4 * ■ . covered,
covered, contrary to the expedarion of every one, f;om the indifpofition which threatened him with death at the time his daughter efcaped from the Bungay nun¬ nery, on being convinced die had made fo refpedable and worthy a choice, gave her a confiderable portion, and afterwards, hav¬ ing the fears of his fon's death realized, fhe inherited his whole eftate. Edwin alfo rofe to high rank in the army, and was an honour to his country. Edeliza was happily married in due time to her beloved De Willows, and, about fix years after,, the worthy Hugh Camel¬ ford led the blooming and unreludant Bertha to the altar. — To thefe young men the Baron uniformly remained a boun¬ tiful and fteady patron, and Sir Philip and Lady de Morney lived many years to be grateful and happy fpedators of the felicity and profperity of their children.
The
The Baron and his fon became fo fin¬ cerely attached to De Clavering during his vifit at Fitzofboarne-caftle, that, in compli¬ ance with their urgent and repeated en¬ treaties, he confented to remain in their neighbourhood. He very foon afterwards married a lady of refpedability and fortune, and his prac¬ tice became fo extenfive, and fo much efleemed, that his fuperior knowledge pro¬ ved a general blefling, of which many hundreds of his fellow-creatures in a few years experienced the benefit. The Baron was highly delighted with the fociety of De Clavering, and it was with the utmoft reludance he ever con¬ fented to his being a day abfent from the neighbourhood. It was the intention of the Baron, after he had feen his fon fixed, and his houfhoid properly
properly eftablifhed, to have refided in ano¬ ther of his caftles, about twenty miles diftant, but neither Walter nor Rofeline would confent to the propofal. They reminded the Baron of the long and cruel feparation which had divided him from his fon in the early part of his life, and fo earneftly entreated him not to interrupt their happinefs, by withdrawing himfelf from their fociety, and refufing to refide with theni, that, pleated and grati¬ fied by the tendernefs with which the requeft was mutually urged, he yielded to their jierfuafions, and a proper liiite of rooms, with a large retjnue of fervants,, were fet apart for the immediate ufe of the Baron. He continued to live with them many- years, without any interruption to his hap* pinefs i and* in feeing the harmony and felicity
felicity they enjoyed, furrounded by a number of lovely and healthy grand-chil¬ dren, he found, amidft the increafing in¬ firmities of old age, fufficient attractions in life to make it pleafant and defirable, while the cordial affedion and exemplary condud of his fon, joined to the en¬ dearing attentions of the gentle and be¬ loved Rofefine, made him remember with joy and gratitude the day in which he faw their hands united. Albert never left his beloved mafter, but was as faithfully attached to his children as he had been to himfelf. He had a- partments appropriated to his ufe, a fer¬ vant to attend him, and met, in the kind and unceafing attentions of his grateful friends, the juft reward of his long tried fidelity. Often, in the dreary winter evenings, having drawn all the younger part of the family around him, he would recite the incidents
incidents of his life from the period of liis confinement with Walter. To the young Fitzofbournes it was a high treat to hear Albert tell the tale of their beloved father's life. Sometimes he would excite their wonder, and entertain them with the furprifing ef¬ fed of his double voice ; and, when he became a very old man, he was as much beloved for what he had been, as he was refpeded for his age, grey hairs, and un!* verfal philanthropy. Though many overtures were made by the worth!efs brother of the Lady Ifabella to bring about a reconciliation, neither the Baron nor his fon could ever be prevailed upon to fee him, and it was with fome difficulty the former was perfuaded to give up bringing him to juftice for the crime he had committed.
The
The good abbefs and the venerable father Anfelm had the pleafure of feeing their favourite Madeline as happy in the arms of her worthy hufband, as they had hoped die would have been in the bofom of their church. Walter and his Rofeline paid them mariy vifits before they were removed from their exemplary calling on earth to receive the reward of their purity and vir¬ tue in the regions of immortality. The hero and heroine of our tale retained the virtues of their youth, the gentlenefs of their manners, and the fweetnefs of their difpofitions to the end of their lives; and, what may be thought more rare and fingular, they never loft their humility, tendernefs, and unbounded affedion for each other ; but when age, that grave of beauty, htdio'ibcl them of thofe outward graces, which nature with an unfparing hand bad beftowed upon their youth, love maintained its empire in their faithful bo¬ foms, and furviwd every change, till death fummoned
fummoned them to meet the bright and unfailing recompenfe of a life fpent in the pradiccof religion, juftice, and virtue.
FINIS.
