Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Bungay castle: a novel
reared and cherifhed ; when every caftle was kept in a ftate of the moft guarded defence, left it fliould be wrefted from its owner by the ambition and enmity of his neighbour: —then it was that Bungay Caftle reared its prcud towers and battlements aloft; while its maffy walls ftood in gloomy and ma¬ jeflic grandeur, as if they could bid defiance to every defign formed againft them by man, and to the more certain influence of all-conquering time; fo perfediy ftupen- dous and ftrong was this once-fpacious edifice, it wastiot only an objed of defire to the proud and afpiring barons, but, it has been faid, even*to contending kings. The noble and loyal lord of this caftle, being called upon to fill fome important of¬ fice in the fervice of the ftate, appointed Sir Philip de Morney to be governor during his abfence, and never had he fhewn the good¬ nefs of his heart and the excellence of his judgment more than in the delegation of his power and authority over fo numerous a train
train of vaflals and dependents to this bk bofom friend. Sir Philip de Morney was a bold and hardy veteran : he was groivn grey in the fervice of his king and country s brave in the field, juft, merciful, and benevolent, in his deal¬ ings with ail his fellow-creatures,—pofleffed of an abundant fortune, he accepted this important truft to oblige his friend, and promote the happinefs of thofe to whom he knew he was attached ;—L id of an adive and ufeful life, he wiflied not to fink into indolence or obfeurity, till the infirmities of age fhould render him incapable of taking his fliare in the bufy fcenes of that impor¬ tant period, in which, though the perni¬ cious dodrine of equality did not influence the minds of the vulgar againft their lawful fovereign, or the rights of the fubjed, the ambition of the nobility, and the feuds and diftradion of the contending parties, pro¬ duced fcenes of mifery equally diftrefling, but happily not fo extenfive in their effeds. B 2 Into
Into Bungay Caftle he removed with his whole family, and there for fome years found that happinefs he had vainly fought in more enlivening fcenes ; and there he tailed thofe ferene and contented pleafures he had been unable to procure in the world; though formed to make a brilliant fismre on its great flage, he had every endowment of the mind for the true enjoyment of domeftic life, uniting with the moft unfhaken cou¬ rage the gentleft philanthropy. He had married at the age of thirty-fire a lady much younger than himfelf, by whom he had fe¬ veral children, and looked forward with the hope of being the parent of a more nume¬ rous offspring, wdiiie, like the patriarchs of old, he lived refpeded and revered in the- bofom of his family. Ah ! little did he fuf* peer the revolution ambition would one day make in his mind. Lady de Morney was yet in the pride of life ; her beauty unfacied, her fpirits livefo, and her mind in its full vigour ; her perfon was lovely, her difpofition amiable: fweet¬ nefs, modefty, truth, and fortitude, were the
the inmates of her bofom.* and gave addi¬ tional graces to the eafe rnd elegance of her manners: ftridly exemplary in performing the important duties of wife and mother, no complaints were heard where ihe prefided; no looks of difcontent were feen on the countenance of her dependents : time was neither abufed nor found a burden ; her whole ftudy and attention were employed to promote the happinefs of her hufband, and to fuperintend the education of her chil¬ dren ; for the latter employment no one was more adequate than herfelf,—her own example ferving more than precept to enforce the lefibns of truth on the dudile mind of youth ; her own gentlenefs made them happy, while her conduct convinced them of the value and dignity of virtue. She confidered youth and innocence as the moft valuable of earthly treafures, and flie was not more anxious to preferve the one in all its native piuity, than to teach them how to enjoy tiie other with cheerfulnefs and B 3 gratitude ;
gratitude : having flored their minds with virtuous precepts, beft calculated to chain the attention, and which Ihe hoped would lay the moft folid foundation for fecuring their future happinefs, flic lived with her children in habits of the moft foothing and perfed friendftiip, and very feldom was un¬ der the unpleafant neceflity of affuming the ftern authority of a dictatorial parent. But, as no charader on earth can be found without having fome of the weaknefs and frailty of erring mortality annexed to it, the author does not mean to prefent Lady de Morney to their view as a being entirely fault lefs. She was vain of her high birth, being allied to nobility 5 and fo partial to her eldeft fon* that fhe could fcarcely fuffer him to be out of her fight ; yet her partial¬ ity originated from a circumftance fo inte¬ refting and affeding to all wdio knew it, that, though it might by fome be confidered as a weaknefs, it was by none but herfelf condemned as a fault. When her fon was in
in his infancy, fhe was feized with a fever of fo malignant a nature, as deprived her for fome weeks of her fenfes : during this diftrefling period of her delirium, and in the abfence of her nurfe, fhe one day fnatched the infant from the arms of a young woman, his attendant, and, before any one was a- ware of her defign, ran out of the houfe, and with almoft incredible fwift nefs dowai along gravel walk to the bottom of the gar¬ den, and threw him into a lake, by which it was bounded. By the fortunate and timely affiftance of an old and faithful fervant, who was luckily at w r ork near the fpot, and who had haftened to it on feeing his lady fo unexpededly make her appearance, the fa¬ mily were alarmed, and the child providen¬ tially, but with difficulty, faved. This incident, of which flie was unguard¬ edly informed, made fo forcible an impref- fion on the mind of this fufceptible and af¬ fedionate parent, as flie could not ftiake oft : it created an additional claim upon her B 4 heart
heart for eveiy tender indulgence, and gave to every juvenile adion and good quality redoubled value. I le had in a manner been raikd from death, refcued from a watery gi avc, into which her own, a mother's, hand had hurled hini ; and yet he loved her, as her fond and plaintive partiality led her often to imagine, better than the reft of her children. She would fometimes em¬ brace this darling fon, and, with all the en- tkufiafin of maternal tendernefs, tremble at the horrid remembrance of having fo nearly deprived him of an exiftence that added fo much to the happinefs of her own. To ail her children Lady de Morney was an indul¬ gent parent; but for Edwin fhe felt that in- defcribable fondnefs which not only threw a veil over his failings, but robbed her of that fortitude and energy with whicii fhe aded on all other occafions. So far from at¬ tempting to deny any requeue he made, it was her ftudy to prevent his wifhes. She would at times apologize to the reft of her children for the extreme affedion nature had
had implanted, and wdiich flie could not help cherifhing for their brother, but which flie regretted as a weaknefs ftie was uuable to conquer. This condud ferved to recon¬ cile the young people to a partiality which originated from fo fingular and awful an in¬ cident, and, fo far from fhewing either envy or regret, it feemed to endear their mother's fa vou* vie to their youthful and guilelefs hearts. Another circumftance, wduch e- qually helped to reconcile them, was the fweetnefs of Edvun's difpofition, who as often availed himfelf of his mother's indul¬ gence to gratify and make them happy, as he did to obtain any uf her favours for him¬ felf In a fituaticn from which thoufands of her fex and ao-e woukl have ihrunk d» uited and affrighted, Lady de Morney was cheer¬ ful and contented. The rooms were Gothic and gloomy, but her hufband and children enlivened every place they inhabited. She was at times furrounded by and e\q oied to B 5 dangers ;
dangers; but her beloved De Morney and his faithful people were ever near to protect and guard her. She was the wife of a no¬ ble foldier, and flie had acquired a fortitude almoft equal to his from the knowledge of his unfailing courage, which gained energy from danger, and redoubled ardour frotii difliculty. The caftle itfelf couid boaft few internal beauties, but her children, whom flie faw. playful as youthful fawns, and happy asr health, innocence, and unbroken fpirits,* could make them, were treafures inexhaufti¬ ble : they beheld the rough implements of war without terror or difmay, inftruded by^ their father to confider them as the only or¬ naments fitted for a foldier. The young De Morneys were taught the ufe of arms- as foon as they had learned fo walk. Seldom were the Gothic gates ofthe caftle- unbarred to admit the focial friend or gay companion to the feftive board 3 feldom did the
the voice of mirth and jollity echo through the lofty rooms and vaulted pafiages; but a fweet ferenity fopplied their place, which, having loft during the abfence of her huf¬ band, at an early period of her marriage, Lady cle Morney now felt the full value of poffefling; and, though fecluded from the gaudy pleafures of a court, fhe felt herfelf a gainer by the exchange in the balance of happinefs.------Lady de Morney had a fifter, who was placed by the Lady Gundreda as fuperior in the nunnery of Bungay ; with her fhe fpent many of her leifure hours: be¬ tween them the tendereft friendfliip ftrength- ened the endearing ties in which they were united by nature. The abbefs was a pious, but yet fhe was a young and interefting woman, of a bene¬ volent and placid difpofition ; and, though ftie had voluntarily fecluded herfelf from the world, flie was not fo much difgufted with its pleafures as flie felt herfelf wounded by the feverity of its difappointments.— R 6 Early
Early in hfe, death had deprived her of a lover who had engaged her moft animated and ardent affedion, and with whom flie had indulged the fond hope of being united in the indiffoluble bands of Hymen -* but adverfe fate had ordained it otherwife, and thofe virtues and good qualities which had made him inexprcflibly dear to her, rendered his lofs the more exquifitely painful. With him the world loft all its power to charm,. and ihe refolutely determined to fly that vvorld for ever, and never to permit another lover to difplaee the fainted Henry from her heart ; fhe therefore unreludantly with* drew from the varying and bufy fcenes of life,—not to avoid temptation, but to be able to indulge, in the gloomy fhades of a nunnery, the memory of a man, to whofe worth and conftancy flie deemed no facri¬ fice too great. Time ferved to convince her of the wifdom of her choice ; and, giving way to all the luxury of a pure but romantic imagination, flie encouraged the confoling hope, that, if her regretted Henry were permitted
permitted to know what was acting in this lower world, his fpirit would be gratified by the purity of her choice, and his heart con-* vinced of the unabating ftrength of her af¬ fection. She often flattered herfelf that her Henry was deputed to watch her con¬ duct, and would be the firft to convey her to the bright regions of immortality ; yet, though thus feverely tried in the lefions of affliction, fhe ticubled no one with a repe- tion of her forrows ; and, though ihe often wept in ail the bitternels of anguiih, her tears fell when no otic obferved them, and only to the ear of her fympathizing filler did fhe venture to mention a name fb dear and fo beloved. Young Edwin cle Morney, whom we have already mentioned, was at this period in his feventcenrh year ; and, notwithftanding the unbounded indulgence of his mother, he had made a rapid proficiency hi every part of his education. Nature had been equally liberal oi her favours to his mind and perfon: his
his temper was good,—his manners and coir* verfation thofe of the gentleman and the fcholar, and, with all the interefting gaiety and natural cheerfulnefs of youth, he united a benevolent and fufceptible heart. His eldeft fifter, Rofeline, was only one year younger than himfelf ; her form was fmall, but fymmetry itfelf, every limb fo nicely turned, it would have been chofen by a flatuary for the model of a Venus r her face was beautiful in the extreme ; her eyes expreflive and fparkling, and the fmile which fliewed itfelf was of that irrefiftible kind as caught the attention and won the heart > and it would have been difficult for a con- noiffeur in beauty to point out which fea¬ ture it was that had the greateft claim to admiration, while the unfading and fafcina- tino- beauties of her polifhed mind, which was ftored with all the graces the beft edu¬ cation could beftow, or the moft lively ge¬ nius acquire, rendered her converfation a3 delightful as her manners were captivating.
She played on the lute, and warbled her artlefs fong in flrains fo fweet, as would have rivalled the daughters of Italy. Her heart, unwounded by the barbed thorn of afflidion, and free from the entanglements of love, was like one of the firft days of infant-fpring, which, enlivened by the bright rays of an unclouded and all-cheering fun-, ferves not only to revive, but to embellifh the whole face of inanimate nature, juft burfting into life, and rendering all it3 fweetly modeft beauties of redoubled value to thofe who had lingered through a dreary winter, in eager expedation of its approach. Lively as the birds which hovered round the turrets of the caftle, fhe entered gaily into all the youthful fports of her brothers and fifters. To the little blooming Edeliza (he was particularly attached ; and, though flie faw her as beautiful as herfelf, felt neither envy nor regret in the reflcdion. No mo¬ difli complaints filled her with imaginary terrors, and, as flie had known no forrows, flie thought it not only incumbent on her to fliew
fliew her gratitude to heaven and her pa* rents, but to foften, by every benevolent attention in herpower, the miferies and mif* foi tunes of others. In thofe days, the education of young women was completed at a more early period than in tlie j)refent ; and, if the manners were not altogether fo highly flnifhed, or the mind fo profufely decorated, or rather fettered* with innumerable, and, to too many, ufelefs accomplifhments, the time was undoubtedly more rationally employed, and the fair fex lefs expofed to the allure¬ ments of flattery and the dangers of tempta¬ tion : though more retired in their habits, and referved in their manners, they were neither lefs fufceptible of the tender paf¬ fions, nor lefs fervent or fincere in their at¬ tachments. Rofeline had formed an early friendfhip with a young lady educated in the Bungay nunnery, of which her aunt, fortunately for the
the young people, was the fuperior. This fweet victim of ambition was defigned by a proud and haughty father for the monaftic life, in order to enable him to provide more liberally for the reft of his children. She had not yet however entered.on the year of her novitiate j but it was foon to com¬ mence, and, at its awful clofe, flie was to bid a final adieu to that worid, to which her heart had of late become too tenderly and anxioufly attached. As it approached, time feemed to wing his flight wuh redoubled rapidity, and ihe felt a trembling dread that her fortitude, like a falie friend, would forfake her in the hour of trial, and a trem¬ bling prefentiment that the moment, whicii ihut her from the fociety at the caftle, would exclude her from every profpeci of happinefs ; yet this repugnance to obey the will of her parents was new to her mind :— fhe dared not inveftigate the caufe too nicely, left the fliould find a fubject for felf- condemnation. She found, with painful regret, a troublefome gueft was admitted to her
her bofom, and fhe wrs afraid, in attempt¬ ing to become more intimately acquainted with its prevailing influence, ihe fhould permit the ftranger to gain greater afcen- dancy. The youthful Madeline, on her firft en¬ trance into the nunnery, had neither felt nor fhewn any difcontent : fhe had affumed the formal an i unbecoming habit without a figh, and yielded to the rigid rules pre¬ ferred with uncomplaining rcfignation; but, as time crept on with folemn aud leaden pace, unrelieved by any of the innocent a- mufements of focial life, only to repeat and bring forward the fame dull round of gloomy and mortifying fcenes, not only repugnant to the feelings of nature, but difgufting to the fenfes, flie began to think and to com¬ plain to the bofom of friendfhip, that thofe fetters, put on by the rigid will of unfeel¬ ing parents, to be finally clofed by the iron law r s of bigotry and fuperftition, were unjuft and galling, and the free-born foul of inno¬ cence^
ccnce and virtue drooped and pined beneath the facred walls by which it was inclofed j—* how cruel to make religion a pretext for fuch pcrfecution and mifery, and to coun¬ terad the deiigns of the Creator, who never formed his creatures for feclufion from that world in which he had profufely ftrewn fo many bleflings for the enjoyment of rational and focial beings ! Rofeline, by the urgency of her entrea¬ ties, frequently obtained leave of the abbefs for Madeline de Glanviile to vifit at the caftle. This favour was the more readily granted, from her having obferved with real regret that fome fecret grief preyed on the mind of her young charge, which, though ftie could not help commiferating, ihe did not hoofe to mention. Thole days, which the iair Madeline fpent at the caftle, were the happieft ihe had ever known ; while there, ftie was gay and cheerful as the youthful companions who ftudied to amufe and en¬ tertain her. The fong, the dance, the lute, drove
drove from her remembrance the gloomy nunnery in which fhe was condemned to wafte and linger out her future life. Sir Philip and Lady de Morney treated her with the tendernefs and indulgence of parents 5 the friendfliip and aifcdion between her and Rofeline was mutual and fincere -, for Edwin fhe felt, as flie innocentl) fuppo¬ fed, the fond regard of a fifter. All the younger branches of the De Morney family rejoiced to fee her, and gladly afliiled in ren- dering her happy j and wdien the hour ar¬ rived for the unfortunate Madeline to re¬ turn to the nunnery, whilft fhe obferved with fecret gratitude the gloom it threw on the countenances of her friends, it gave addi¬ tional pangs to the feelings of her own heart; herijirit, inftantly deferted her, and tears of unfeigned regret marked the fad moment ci departure. When the re-entered her fo- iitary cell, ihc would fink into a defpondency vhich tlie auftcre ruleL of the order was not likely to conquer. Ths
The inhabitants of the caftle and its en¬ virons were in themfelves a httle common¬ wealth, which contained a vaft variety of charaders. Men of different nation^ were met together, and, by the unaccountable effeds of accident, ambition, or neceflity, brought into the fame habits, and lived cor¬ dially together, ferving one mafter - s and.> united by one caufe and intereft, the utmoft harmony prewrLd among them ; for Sir Philip de Morney was a juft mid adive go¬ vernor ; gentle as the lamb, and forgiving u« mercy to tlie virtuous or injured,—but a tciror and a ftcrn mafter to the traitor or oppreffor, whether friend or foe : he knew the importance of his fituation, and how much the happinefs of others depended on the careful and faithful difcharge of thofe duties belonging to his high ftation, and intrufted tu him b\ his noble frie.id the Earl of Norfolk ; he therefore wifely and juftly determined not to be biaffed nor milled, either by the partiality or defigns of otiiers
other men, nor to fuffer any prejudice to gain afcendancy over his mind in the re¬ wards he beftowed, or the punifhments which guilt would fometimes compel him to inflid.
CHAP.
CHAP. II.
TN the middle of a cold and inclement -"■ winter's night, when tlie wind blew with uncontrolabie force, and the ihow, rain, and hail beat with fury againft the window*, every inftant breaking fome of the few panes whkh admitted a fcanty light into the in¬ ferior apartments, and threatened to demo¬ lish thofe of the ftate-rooms, while nature appeared to fliudder at this unufual warring of the elements, the centinels on guard were alarmed by a loud rapping at the weft¬ ern gate, and the rumbling of a carriage, with
with the clattering of horfes' hoofs was difo tincldy heard. For feme moments the people ftood irrefolute ; at length one of the foldiers roughly inquired who it was wanted admittance 4 at fo unfeafonable an hour, when only treafon or treachery could be fufpected. A voice replied, " We are no traitors ; we come with no hoftile intentions, but have brought difoatches ofthe utmoft importance to the governor, and muft beg tj be im¬ mediately I'dmitted, as we are in danger of perilhing from fatigue and the feverity of the weather," This anfwer caufed a general buftle j the governor w^as fummoned, and the troops, lodged within the interior parts of the caftle, ordered to arms before the gate was thrown open j. nor were the ftran¬ gers permitted to enter till their number was afcertained, and the foldiers prepared to oppofe them, fliould they have any bad defigns to accomplifti by this ftrange and fufpicious vifit -, but the alarm foon fubfi* ded, and the foldiers almoft tempted to t laugh
laugh at their own fears, when they faw a carriage dra.v up to tie gate, guarded by about twenty men, out of which hey took a perfon who appeared quhe pafilve, and was fo mu filed up, that, in the hurry which was m.ide ufe of to convey him int> the governor's apartment, it was impoflihle to difcover either his age or peifon. The go¬ vernor, after reading the difbatches, wrh- drew with the prifoner and two of the peo¬ ple, wdio appeared to have the command and dirtdion of this rmfterious expedi¬ tion.— Refrefh ments were ordered for the travel¬ lers, and beds ma !e up for theni in the bar¬ racks ; but the p jvcrnor had a lono confe- ranee with the gentlemen before they fepa¬ rated. In the middle of the following nio-fit they departed from the caftie with a*, ^uch fecrecy, and as little ceremonv asir.yhad entered it, no one appearing cieinuus tv) de¬ velop the caufe which brougr.r them, or daring to afk any queftions of tA c governor, vol.i. C in
in whofe power alone it refted to fatisfy their inouirics, as at this time civil commotions and private feuds between the contending nobles were continually arifing to difturb the peace of fociety, and involve the nation in accumulating diftreffes ; this ftrange vifit was not onh filently obferved, but in a few w-eks fcarcely recolleded, even by thofe who had witneffed it; and the guards, with only filent fhrugs and fignificant looks, thought it fiifeft, wifeft, and beft, to per¬ form^ ith exad attention the difcharge of their refped ive duties. At this period of our tale, ihe joyous fef¬ tival of Chriftmas was approaching,—a fef¬ tival which our old-fafhioned forefathers wel¬ comed with every mark of grateiul and be¬ nevolent hofpitality ; and its arrival was be¬ held with as much complacent and cordial hilarity by the rich and great, as it was wilh delight and impatience by the poor and needy. While the holly and miflletoe de¬ corated the kitchens, and the innocent joke aen
went round, as the blufliing maidens re¬ ceived the compliments and gocd wifhes. of the feafon, the loaded tables ierved ftill more to exhilirate their fpirits, and even the ftranger and the beggar were invited to tafte the good things they enjoyed. The youthful inhabitants of the caftle be^au to reckon witli ea< er and hfoh-raiied opedation the da)s, the huuis, and even the minute^ which muft pafi> a a ay kJore the lovely Madeline, who had obtained per¬ miflion of the abbefs to fpend the Chrift¬ mas holidays at the caftie, could join their party. Various plans of pleafure were for¬ med, which they hoped would be produdive ot fuch amuiements as wouid ampiy gratify their ov/n wifhes, and thole of their expected viiitors; for Agnes de Cliflbrd, who was a boarder in the nunnery, was to accompany Madeline, by whom and Roieline Ihc was much beloved She was a lively intcreftir > giil, about Mifsde MorncVs age, and, next C 2 Madeline
Madeline, held the higheft place in her re¬ gard. In reality, the young people at the caftle were as much confined as thofe in the nun¬ nery from any intercourfe wdth the world, Sir Philip de Morney having a decided aver¬ fion to the introducing young people early into life ; but by the urgent entreaties of his lady, he was now prevailed upon to relax from the ftridnefs he had obferved refped¬ ing his elder children, four of whom felt a wifh for a more enlarged fociety ; and, as their father had no defign of placing any of them in a religious retirement, it began to be time for them to know fomething of that world in which, in all probability, they muft take an adive part. The holidays were fpent in the utmoft harmony ; the feftivry whicii reigned in ever}' part of the caftle feemed to have ba- niihed forrow from its walls. The furgeon, captains, and lieutenants, were all of their % parties,
parties, and the evenings generally conclu¬ ded with a dance : their dependents were fometimes permitted to join the fct, and the good prieft, Father An(el:i, u] ;J ;l t. tended the caftle, would gladlc liave be* n a partaker in their innocent amujenwm--., laid not the rigid wlb of hb facred order for¬ bidden fuch relaxation*. A few days before the young ladies were to return to the nunnery, Madeline was ta¬ ken ill, and her diforder increafed fo rapidly, it was not only thought dangerous, but found impracticable to remove her wdth fafety. For fome weeks her life was de¬ fpaired of, and, when immediate danger was over, fhe was left in fo weak and languid a ftate, that air and exercife were pronounced abfolutely neceffary to effect a perfect reco¬ very. This fentence was heard with fecret delight by the fuffering Madeline, as ftie was certain it wouid procure leave for her longer continuance at the caftle, and the permiflion, when obtained, had more eiii- ^ 3 cacy
cacy in reftoring her, than all the medicines flie had taken during her illnefs. Edwin and Roieline, much as they had fuffered from the alaiming indifpofition of their loved companion, rejoiced that it had been produdive of an indulgence they had almoft defpaired of gaining. As the progrefs of her recovery was fl ^w and ptecarfous, many fymptoms of a decline being vifible, every one was eager and anxious toamuie the fair invalid, and none appeared mo e earned in *their euieivour> than Hubeitde Widows, captain ofthe guard, a young man, whofe wit, vfoaciiv, and un- f<\afiii</pocd humour, had fo ftrong'y reccm- mended him to the favour and t r,Aedion of tlie governor, as had obtained him a con¬ ftant fo\itrtion to his (able. With a lively imagination, he had a turn for fatire, fo pointed, fhat, while it rendered him a moft entertaining companion, kept many of his enemies in awe, and he had the merit of nevei fhewi g Lis talents at the expence of a iriend,
a friend, nor any worthy character ; but he confidered uce and folly as fair giaie, againft which he levelled his attacks. Arthur de Clavering, the acting futveon, was allowed both judgment and Lir:nii ty. The pradice of phyfic and forgery was then but obfcurely known, compared with the more enlightened pradioners of thefe days. De Clavering, however, patched up many a broken conftitution. People lived as lon<^, and had feaer difeafcs, than his been the lot of foccecdinn; generations, but, whether this is owing to chance or folly, I leave wher heads to determine. Arthur de Clavering was rather an extra¬ ordinary charader ; his peifon was neither tall nor fliort ; of a thin habit * had a coun¬ tenance fo pleafing, and eyes fo penetrating, it was impoffible not to be ftruck witli him, as fomething 1 e^ond the common ra;e ef mortals. He had been abioad, had read much, was acquainted with both men and C 4 manners,
manners, had a plain and rather awkward addrefs, was fingular in his expreflions, and formed his opinions with a juftnefs and ra¬ pidity that aftonifhed thofe with whom he affjeiated ; told a number of good anec¬ dotes uith a delicacy and humour peculiar to himfelf ; public places and geneial fociety he avoided fo cautioufly, that he was con¬ fidered as a mifanthro} e by thofe wdio did not know him intimately. Lieutenant de Htn.tingfield was a hu¬ mourous bachelor of fort}- : he profeflcd himfelf an admiier of the ladies, and pre¬ tended to I mient that the ftate cf his finances would no! |einjr Lhn to tal^ a wife to hii bofom, and in'Tealc the ancient family of the De Huntf glields, which, he appie- hended, if fortune proved avcife to his ac- complifhin^^ would become extinct. Amor,ir the reft of the officers was a Cnm- bnan youth, wdio was a general favourite in the cable. Hugh Caindfoid was gay, high i] iri ted,
rplrited, thoughtlefs, and extravagant ; but with all fo generous and good humoured, it was impoffible not to be pieaied even with liis eccentricities; he rode good horfes, gave good dinners and was always in good fpirits. De Ciaveringand Hugh Camciiord were the beft friends in the world. The dodor, as he was generally calied, had once, during fome indifpofition, advifed him to be bled ; but the fiery youth would neither fohow his ad¬ vice nor iubmit to his entreaties : he was then threatened with death for his obftinacy. " In Cot\ cood time 1 am ready to die, (laid the invalid 0 but, if ever 1 loie one drop of my Welch Moot, put in the fervke of mv country, mny my cool name be plalLd with the title- of poh.oonand coward !'"— He frncd his Wcl.h b!-x»d, and recovered, andDeCiaver'.ng, tho .igh at iinl wnuAhat difpleafed, treruet him x- a iViend and bro¬ ther ever afterward-.. Th'-re wasaillil m-T^ f n;;;ul\r eh.ir;^ r i "• »n iheeaille than ai-v;,;: dekrib.d. — A\-\ i ^-'i L : AA .i..
EU\n. lie was placed tiiere as a fchool io: impr nxinent in tadics and all the rela¬ tive duties ot a foldier: he had good con- Lcxion% and a genteel allowance, but was a miier at twenty, ThL fordid humour made him the butt ol the gurifon, and De Willows, wi:h the reft ot the oilicers, vowed to laugh hhn out cf a habit asdifpuflina as it was un- natural and uniivceiliiry. In a few Weeks M .defme wa^ to far reco¬ vered, as to be removed into one of the date* apartments fcr the benefit of air ; an adjoin¬ ing room wa- likevvife fitted up for Rofe¬ line, to fleep near her fiiend during her con¬ finement. Tiiey generally parted, from their attendants as foon as the reft of the fami'v retired. Being one night earneftly chatting over fome occurence that had afforded them pleafure, they were alarmed by foot fteps under their apartment, z\nd a low murmur¬ ing found of voices indifvndly reached their ears. Madeline .vas a ^oud deal frightened, but Roieline, who Lai fTear prefence <f t ~ ", - i li.hjCs,
nvnd, and more coura\e, made, or raiher appeared to make, very light cd the matter, telling; her friend the rooib thev O'.cupied were, flie knew, conneded with fome pai- fages and offices lielonmns; to the caftle, and ihe doubted not but the noife proceeded from the people on duty. This, in fome degree, abated the fears of Madeline, till, after a profound filence of half an hour, they heard a deep grxui, iuiiowed bv the rattling of chains ; at the fame inftant one of the windows flew open w'.th the great.ft ■* iolence, and as inftantlv doled aoam, whicii was followed by the beh at the corner oi the room i infon-a* \ iolentlv, Madeline gave a faint foreani ; R^ r J*n e jumped out of be !, and ran for iome ^ater, fuppofing ihe would have a fainting fit •. but fl c gently put it afide, and with wdd af¬ fright inquired what was Aoc ma*ter, ml what coukl occafion the unaccountable noii.s the) liad heard. " Tne .vi.aI, a.id tlie peo¬ ple in io.ae of the lo v \cr a r aitments, ao
doubt, (replied her friend ;) therefore 1 bej \ .11 would not diuompofe yourfelt ; ii }ou do? \uu will compel me to diihub the ta¬ in ih", and that I am afraid wouid difpleaie my father3 and, in all probability, Edwin would ridicule our childifli fears, and tie reft of the gentlemen would laugh at us." This iilencecl Madeline, and Rofeline continued . " 1 am totally unacquainted with many parts of this caftle, I have two or three times wiihed to explore its fecret pafiages, look at the dungeons, and vifit all its fubtcrranean contrivances but have been forbidden by my father. Edwin did once promife to iliew nie how well we were fecu¬ red from outward danger by the iinnicnfe ftrength of the fortifications, and equally fecure of a retreat, fhould the caftle be attacked; but he cautioned me not to give a hint of his defign, cither to my father or mother, nor to drop a word of his inten- tentions before my brother or fifters. Eager tz I was to have my curiofity fathhul, >our ilineis.
rlinefs, my dear girl, and the pleafure we counted of partaking during your vifit, drove it from my mind ; but 1 will take rhe earlieft opportunity of claiming my brother's promife." 44 Defer your defign of doing fo till I am fufficiently recovered to accompany you, (faid Madeline faintly,) and pardon tlie trouble my follv and weaknefs ha^e ccca- fioned you : this illnefs, 1 am forry to fmd, has had as much inliucnce on my mental feelings as on rny bodily frame ; but, if }0ti will comply with rny reyueft, I will endea¬ vour to be more courageous, and act well as faft as I can/' " Agreed, (cried Rofedne ;} you and I. my dear Madeline, fave vet fcen too little of life to be wearv of it, and I truft cur hearts are both too suiltlcfs to liave any feais oi o J tS )fe fupemaiu-al appearances, en which U> perftition and ignorance give luch improba¬ ble accounts/' " Yet
44 Yet I h ive hcvd ftrange tales of this caMde being haunted, even in the retired recefs to which my adverfe fate has in all pro¬ bability doomed me to fpend niy haplefs days, aad------" fi You are too much inclined to believe theni, (interrupted her friend ;) but, my dear Madeline, be allured of this,—if we had notliing more to fear from tlie lh ing than we have to apprehend from the dcaJ, we fhou'd be perfediy fecure, and our lives would pafs away in a more ferene i\nd placid manner than the turbulent vrids of our follow-mon als will ail -w. Idar'v! I am lu e 1 hear the foft and diftant found of a lute. I never yet knew a ghoft that had a tafte for mortal harmony/' " I certainly hear muiic, (fighed Made- foie ;} from what place can it proceed ?— Surely it muft be------" " The amufement, no d<m'.>t, of fome one either on the ramparts or in the cell ; for you have fluttered my fpi.it> fomuch, I caunut
cannot determine from wh-it part of the caftle the found can reach us : let us, how¬ ever, reft fatbfied, that no ghofts would trouble themfelves to play a midniifot fe¬ re nade in order to terrify thole who could never have injured them. Let u^ w;di till you are quite recovered before we mention a word of ihe occurences of this ni dtt ; fov. were my father to Lear of our alarm, we ihould be iniLmtly lemoved info other apartments, aixi ihould not then be able to accomplish our ]AirpoIe cf exploring the in¬ tricate leceffoi of tidh caft'e. frood ifo-ht Madeline; I hope the muifoian \m!1 not ceafe hi> harmony till he has hailed m to repofe." She then jumped into her own bed ; but her ipirits were not altogether in that eom¬ pofed and courageous ihite Ihe wiflied hrr friend to i nagine. Slie had heard ilrango ftories of lights being iecn, of ghofts gliding along the ramparts, of nolfos beiig heard j -but, as ihe hue! not been told of a ghoftly mufician,
mufician, flie was inclined to hope it would, by fome means or other, be explained to her fatisfadion. Till the rifing fun, however, peeped over the hills whicii bounded the \icw from her windows, the could not reft ; fhe then funk into repofe, and flept fo foundlv, that it was wilh difficulty her fifter, Edeliza, could com iuce her that the family waited break¬ faft till (lie ihould be in the humour to join them. Madeline took heris in bed. Rofe- ILe hurried en hei clothes, and Lady de Mo.ney tended} inquired if indifpoiition had } revenud her rifing at he 1 " ulual hour, Cornel fo..";; of nnt ha\ing fkpt till late fat; .fo<! ai ] curies, and, alter a gentle re- yrov\ i:( m ^ir lfofiip, i\^d a juke isoni Ed¬ win tor hngj'-.g her j iliow io fong, the fubjed wab d, ipped. The next day wa^ fixul f 1 Madeline to j, in ike famih at dinner, !o- C e full time iaivC ker fo'^ and alariii'r:g i ; luds. De Claverine y
Clavering, De Willows, and Hugh Camel¬ ford, were invited to be of the party on this joyous occafion, and it was with the utmoft difficulty that Edwin de Morney could conceal the rapture ho felt in his bufom at the thought of feein:; the fair nun once more among them, He h id ventured, with the confent of Roieline, to make her feveral ftolen vifits, and in thofe moments of rapturous delight had difcovered that Madeline de Glanviile reigned fole miftrefs of his heart. Too young for the pradice of deceit, too fanguine and inexperienced to think of the confequence of loving one devoted to the fervice of her God, he flat¬ tered himfelf the partial indulgence of his mother woukl enable him to conquer any difficulties thrown in his way, either by his father, or the designs Madeline's parents had formed for her future deftination. He likewife cherifhed the fweet hope that Ma¬ deline would not be averfe to accept him as a lover. His own heart had taught him to
to read the language of the eyes, and in her's he faw, or thought he faw, joy fparkle at his approach, and a foft fadnefs overcloud than at his departure. The party met at dinner. Madeline en¬ tered the room, leaning on the tupporting arm of Edwin, and followed by Rofeline. Never, i:i the full bloom of youth and health, had the fair invalid looked ib inex- preflibly lovely. A faint bluih tinged her cheek upon receiving the congratulations of the company on her recovery. The dodor humouroufly decknd he was entitled to their thanks for the refurrcdioa of their friend. " A rcfurreclion, methinks, it is in re¬ ality, (faid de Willows ;) * for the mortal feems to have } ut on immoitdhty,' and to have hr:r<7';t do ah from heaven the beauty *u,d form of an angel.' J 44 1-Iey dav ! (c ied Sir Philip ;) why, good people, you all f-em to be taking vaft pains to maLe my fweet nun believe a language you
you yourfelves do not feem perfectly to un¬ derftand. That we are aii glad to fee her reftored to us 1 hope and truft ihe believes; but our congratulations muft convince her, notwithftanding your high-flown compli¬ ments, that ihe is a m^re mortal, like the reft of her fex.*' 44 Not e&adly like fome of them, (faid the dodor ;) f»r, if foe were, De Willows would not look at her as if he had a mind to feize the precious morfel from mother- church." This {ally produced a hearty laugh from all but Edwin and Lady de Morney, who, feeing the converfation was become diftref- fing to her young friend, fummoned them to fit down to dinner. " In Cot's ntme, (cried Camelford,) let us obey orders, for I feel myfelf all mortal at fight of Sir-loin, who L as coot and en¬ tertaining a knight as any on this fide the "Welch mountains." " Excellent, faith ! (exefofov ! Dc Cia- vericgi) and }ou look at Lim whh as much pleafure
pleafure as a goat would at a field of young grafs, or as Edwin at his fifter Rofe¬ line." Edwin at this moment w <* ^izing at Madeline wifh an earneftnefs that ftruck the doctor, and he took this method of with¬ drawing his attention from an object which he confidered might prove dange¬ rous to the peace of his young iriend, to whom he was moft fincerely and affection- atelv attached* The day was fpent with all that ferene harmony whicii attends the fociety of friends. Madeline's return to the focial party was like that cf one having been fo long abfent, that little hope was entertained of ever meeting again. She retired to her room at an early hour, accompanied by Rofeline ^ and the progrefs of her recovery, though flow, was fo viiibie, as in a few clays to re¬ move all anxious fears from every heart but that of the impaffioned Edwin, that no fur¬ ther danger was to be apprehended from the effects of the fever.
For more than a week the voungr ladies heard nothing to difturb them. They were lodged at a great diftance from the reft of the family, and Rofeline, having infurmed her brother of Madeline's fears, he \yyd re¬ quefted his mother to let him fleep in that wing of the caftle, left Madeline ihould be taken ill in the night, and his filter under the neceflity of leaving her to call afliftance. His requeft was granted, at the fame time he received his mother's commendations and thanks for this prudent precaution.
o
CHAP.
MHHaanaBH«»a«MMBanauHMB«««MW
CHAR III
ENURING the time that De Willows * was chcrifliing an increafing affedion for Madeline, the youthful Edeliza, now in her fixteenth year, was in a fituation more diftreflinJT. She had long been, accuftomed to confider De Willows in the light of a playfellows and to be gratified by his almoft undivided attention, while to him her's was wholly,confined. With Camelford flie would fometimes romp, if De Willows were abfent, but, as foon as he returned, flie 'would fly to him, and complain of theyoung lieutenant's
lieutenant's having wearied her by pkt}fog too roughly. Love even with the inexperienced is ge¬ nerally quick-fighted. Edeliza had ob¬ ferved, with a kind of trembling apprehen¬ fion, and a fear fhe knew not how to account for, the attentions De Willows paid to Ma¬ deline. She was angry,—(lie was fhacked, —thought her not half fo handfome as foe once had been, and wondered wdiat the gentlemen could fee to admire in fo ghoftly a figure > her brother, De Clavering, Hugh Camelford, and Elwyn, might make as much fufs cs they plea'.ed about the beauti¬ ful nun, as they chofe to caii her, but that De Willows fliould be fo blind, fo provo¬ king, flie could not bear to recoiled - 9 how¬ ever, as fhe would foon be obliged to re¬ turn to the nunnery, fhe hoped De Willows wouid then forget fhe had ever hft a* and recover his fenfes. Thus was the little blind god* ^-^ has been the delight and the toirncwt of ail
all va ' V cro ^ s purpofes at the caftle, L . e , i ia at *ows at hearts too innocent t - . \ncSt or repel their attacks. De Y/vc.o Pad ever admired Edeliza as a beautiful . nd mterefting child ; he had been in the habit of feeing her, from the time flie. was ten years old, ev ry day ; therefore her progrefs towards womanhood had paffed in a manner unpeicched, and he had indulged himfelf and his little fa¬ vourite in the fame fond and playful en¬ dearments as had taken place from the firft of their meeting, and that without forminGr an id *a of there being either danger or im¬ propriety in fo doing. Had any one in¬ formed De Willows that Edeliza was che¬ rifhing a growing aifcdion for him, which, if unicturned, would endanger her future peace, he would have treated it as the alle chimera of their own whimfical brain; but, had he once ferioufly ftij poled he was de¬ ftroying her happinefs, arid plant!? ^ the thorn of anguilh in her innocent bo, <■•, his heart was fo much the feat of true . ■•.. ir, j.e
he would have ftabbed in his own breaft ra¬ ther than have aded unjufty by the daugh¬ ter of his friend. It happened about this period that Sir Philip de Morney was obliged to go to London in order to fettle a law-fuit which had been long depending, anel which had haraftec! hi- mind wry much. De Hun- tingfiek! was to t.Xe the command of tlie caftle during his al .fince, being the oldeft offiicr in the ' i hice, De Willows, though of h'ohcr rank, was too you 112* to be entrufted with a change cf fo much importance, and gladly yielded the honour to one fo much Ids fupernr in years. Sir Philip departed with reludance, took leave of his family with tendernefs, and piomifed to return the firft moment after the affair was fettled.— Lady de Morney was reconciled to the temponuy abfence of her hufband by the important bufinefs which had called him away. % 7 ol. I. D the
The young friends, having flept for fe* vera! nhdus undifturbed, nac ^ almoft loft all rememb'Mnce of their fears before the de¬ part uie of Sir Philip, whofe abfence happen¬ ed very oppc lunely to gratify their curio¬ fity in vifiting every part of the caftle, Ed¬ win furring pi omifed to procure the keys., audi accompany them. Two nights after Sir Philip's departure, having fpent a cheertul evening, they reti¬ red to reft in unufual good fpirits, but were awakened about midnight by a war of the elements, and wdiat made tiie fcene more terrific, though it was in the depth of win¬ ter, the thunder rolled in tremendous peals over their heads, the fturdy walls of the caftle appeared to ihake from their centre to the battlements and the lightning fiafhed upon the wad', and gleamed along the vaulted paffages, ;\- if to make horror vifible. The \oung ladus divifed themfelves, and Edwin tapped at the door with a light, in- vitin° them to po down into one of the lower
'lower rooms, to which he would accompany them. Cheered and revived by the found o( his voice, they readily agreed to his propofal, and in a few minute* opened the door to admit their conductor. They made as little noife as poffible, fearful of difturbing Lady de M> rncv, if fhe was not rd readv alarmed by die ten peft ; and, to prevent the poffi- bility of diy j v fo, they agreed to go down a winding ft.dtrafe that led thro;igh one of the toweis, ?.nd which ,vas ie'd »m uied by the family. They crept flowiy along, when, in one part of it, which was* rather wider than the reft, they palled four fteps, whicii led to a door in the wall, and wdiich ap* peared fo well lecured bv locks and bars, as if it never was intended to be opened. X 44 For heaven's fake, (whifpered Rofeline,; to what room does that door lead ? I never faw it before." D 2 4i I
" I entreat you (faid the trembling Ma¬ deline) not to flop in this horrid place to afk queftions, (for the humid and unwhol- fome dews of night and noxious vapours hung on the walls.) Though I am not afraid now Edwin is with us, yet I may take cold by ftaying here/' Edwin preffed the hand which was refting r>n his arm to ljis throbbing bofom, and hur¬ ried them into the room.the family had left, and they were all truly rejoiced to find an excellent fire ftill .blazing on the wide-ex¬ tended hearth, round which they feated themfelves, and neither Madeline nor Ed¬ win uttered a fingle complaint at having been fo unfeafonably difturbed. The tempeft having fpent its fury, fubfo ded by degrees into a calm, and the party, entering into converfation, almoft forgot it had ever been. Rofeline however repeated her queftion refpeding the door they had feen in their way down the ftaircafe. Edwin * affured
affured her he knew no more than her felf to what place it belonged : he had heard that the reftlefs ghoft of fome one had been bound in the apartments to which it led, and that orders had been given for it never to be opened. He had once made fome in¬ quiries of his father, but was dcniwd b} him never to afk any queftions till he came to years of maturity, nor to explore any of the fecret pafiages or entrances to the caftle. 41 Then, furely, (foid Madeline,) it would be extremely wrong to difobey the com¬ mands of Sir Philip, merely to fatisfy an idle and perhaps blamable curiofity." " At the moment (interrupted Edwin) that I admire the complying fweetnefs of the gentle Madeline, I muft beg pardon for retaining my own refolution of feeing thofe parts of the caftle from which I have been fo long fecluded, I am now arrived at an age that furely deferves to be trufted, or I muft be unfit to live in a fituation like thk. My father's reafons for the fecrefy he
has obferved fo long, I am unacquainted with ; but I will moft affuredly avail my- elt of his abfence to gratify my curiofity. I know where the keys are depofited, and in a night or two will begin rny nodurnal fearch. Ifyou and Rofeline are in the hu¬ mour to accompany me, it is well j if not, 1 fliall certainly go by ni} felf.*' " As that might be dangerous, (faid Rofe¬ line, who rejoiced to find him fo refolute,)- you muft promife to take me along withr you." To this he aflented, and Madeline agreed,, with fome little contufior., to be of the partv, concluding, Sir Philip muft be wrong in i ot granting his Ion's requeft. This* matter fett'ed, they retired for the reft of the n>p;ht, to forget, in the arms of fleep, not only the caftle and the nunnery, but the whole world. The next night they were furprifed by an unufual noife, that feemed to be imme¬ diately
diately under them. It appeared fomething like the rattling of a carriage over ftones. Groans too they thought they heard -. and, after drefling themfelves, Rofeline calkd Iier brother, to convince him their aLrnu were not tiie efilets of imagination, he heard the fame founds, and, in footing round their apartment, and into an adjoin¬ ing clofet, he difcovered a trap-door, that was very curioufly concealed under a board, whicii Aided over it. He attempted to lift it up, but found it was fecured bv a lock which was hid in a fmall projection of the walk Finding it impoffible to obtain a paffage, they determined to defer their fearch till the fucceeding night, when Edwin promifed to fecure the keys. He flayed with them till daylight diffipated their fears; they then retired to repofe •* but fieep deferted their pillows. A thoufand vague conjectures oc¬ cupied their minds, and Madeline, for the firft time iu her life, wiihed herfelf abfent D 4 from
from the caftle « that there was fomething to difcover appeared beyond a doubt ; but, r whether the difcovery wotdd ferve to re¬ lieve or increafe their anxiety, was as ha¬ zardous as it was uncertain ; however, as Rofeline and Kg win were refolute to make the attempt, fhe determined not to oppofe them. Edwin revolved in his mind how he might be able to find fome clue to guide him, and refolved to apply to an old foldier, whofe whole life had been fpent in the caftle, to give him fome account refpeding it. He was fond of retracing paft fcenes, and, when once he began talking, knew not when to flop. From him Edwin learned all he wanted to be informed - 5 by him he was told the ufe of the keys, and received every ne* ceffary direction. The old man, confider¬ ing himfelf honoured by holding converfe with the governor's fon, told him every cir¬ cumftance he knew or could recollect. The next day was fpent in the fame manner as - ufual.
ufual. Dc Clavering was uncommonly fa¬ cetious, De Willows particularly cheerful, Hugh Camelford entertaining, and De Himtingfield bufy in the adive duties of his important office. The afternoon being remarkably clear, mild, and ferene, the wdiole party agreed to afcend to the top of the caftle, and walk oa the ramparts, for the benefit of aii ttnd ex¬ ercife. Edeliza would not quit the arm of De Willows, therefore Madeline was left un¬ interrupted to the care of Edwin. • The air was reviving, the prolpcd piftu- refque and interefting j for, notwithftanding the feafon, nature had ftill beauties to catch the inquiringc\e, and awaken the gratitude of innocent and cheerful hearts. A few evergreens, fcattered here and there among the leaflefs trees, afforded flielter to innu¬ merable birds. The red breaft warbled his artlefs fong, furrounded by a number of chirphig fparro.v^ who feemed gaily to flutter i) 5 around,
around, making a moft uncommon buftle,-. wdiich was occafioned by a fliower that hacl- latcly fallen. " Confound thefe impertinent noify little' devils ! (faid De Clavering,) I wifli I had my gun, and I would moft affuredly put an • end to fome of this clatter." " For fhame, todor, (cried Camelford ;) wdiat ! woukl you teft roy fuch pretty harm¬ lefs creatures as thefe ? Rather fave youn ammunition for the enemies of your king,— that would be coot fport indeed !■—then^ my man of mettle, wejhoukl be petter em- ployed , but let the iparrow-family lif, and enjoy their prating. ,r *' I believe you are nearly allied to that: fame family, (leplied the dodor,) and there¬ fore I do not wonder at your being anxious to preferve your relations."' " Petter not provoke me, todor. I am¬ in a valiant humour jufl now, and, as Cot fliall plefs me, I will.not pocket an affront- from any one." " Rack.
4i Pack it up in your knapfaek, (rcp'kd the doctor diiiy,) and fay, as t ur Saviour did, when tempted, " Get thee behind me, Satan !"—for reJdy, Hugh, I often think the devil has jumped into your fkull, and, bv kicking about \our biains, has made ynu fo hot headed/' 44 Then the beft thing I can do (rrpiic 1 CanTelford) would be to put rm felf uiv'er your tirection to lay this fame tcvil, rnd by tiie time you had trained rne cd ail my Welch ploot, he would k etc iuy litcLls c\f- cafe to be polled for your imps overrent ; but avaunt, thou cataplafm ot cataphuiu.s ! -« I defy thy incantations, pliilers, and p!eed- ings." " I believe the voiuiq; d^\ wiM i : ve ri e longer, (cried the doctor, addrc.'h.ig i^e Willows^ but who amino ih will d.nvcr dv.fy th.e fwe.t i r :!i'ie:iee ot thefe iilus an J rofes thiU are now b'oommG; around u ." " I do not pretend to anv fuch phuo o- phic apathy," rep'h' 1 D<- Vv Ldo.vb. i) 6 ct if
" Ifyou -did, your looks would betray you<, (retorted Edwin.) To deny the united in¬ fluence of love and beauty is not the pro¬ vince of a foldier." " Do all foldiers admire beauty, and fall in love ?*' inquired the artlefs Edeliza, look¬ ing earneftly at De Willows. " I believe fo, my fweet little girl, (he anfwered ;) love and death are alike inevi¬ table." 44 But not equally dangerous, ((aid the laughing Rofeline -.) for I never heard of any one dying of the wounds given by the little blind god, though thoufands fall vidims to the more certain arrows fent from the fur-r nacc of war." " By the crate Cot, (faid Camelford,) I had rather tie by the wounds of a pair of pright eyes tban.by thofe of a cannon, loaded by the hands ef an ugly tog, who like a putcher delights in ploot." " More fool you, (replied De Clavering;) ihe death in the one cafe would be glorious and
and inftantaneous,—in the other, foolifh and lingering,------" "Unlefs I applied to a todor to put me out of my mifery, and then I fhould get rid of k in a trice." " A truce with your compliments, good folks, (faid Rofeline;) fuppofe we endea¬ vour to reconcile ourfelves to the world, and all its ftrange vagaries, by a dance in the great hall. This propofal met with general approbation j to the great hall they defcen¬ ded, and, furrounded by the ruftv armour of their hardy forefathers, they enjoyed in the mazy windings of the lively dance, a pleafure as innocent as it was amufing, Ladv de Morney herfelf being a gratified fpecta- tor of the fcene, This hall was decorated, if wc may ufc ths term, with a vaft number of fuits of ar¬ mour, belonging to the family of Norfolk One, more light and higher finifhed than the reft, appeared to have belonged to a youth of Edwin's fize, He was prevailed on
Ti t: K (" A Y C a S-T L E ,- onto fit it; and, armed cap-a-pie, ftrnttod about in bold ckfiance, and threw down lus gauntlet, aring any one to finale C(Miibat who Ihould deny the jmhn of bjauty being due to the lady he fhould name. ci Suppofe I throw down ray glove," faid de Willows." '* You would foon take it up again, (re¬ plied Ed.vin, iomewhat fcornhdiv,) as [• fancy our tafte in beauty to be tlu fame." De Wi'lows Coloured, — Madeline ap-* peared uncaiy,— and Edeliza declared ar¬ mour was f-iie moft frightful dreis ihc ever fnv, while the younger part of the family jumped round their brother, and witn ea¬ gernefs made many inquiries concerning the u'e of every part of his dreft, and re¬ quested their mother to let them wear fome of tlie nodding plumes which hung in loity ftate aiound them.. in tlie cou ife of the evening, Edwin gase Madeline a hint to retire eariy to her chamber^
chamber, having obtained poffeflion of the keys, and gained fuch diredions as could not foil to fatisfy their curiofity and guide them in their refcarches. Madeline filently acquiefeed, and imparted, with trembling impatience, the tidings to her friend. SI13 was thoupjitful and abfent the reft of the evening, and availed herfelf of the earlieft opportunity of withdrawing to her chamber. Roieline very foon followed her, and, as foon as the faniily had retired to reft, Edwin ftole gently to their apartment. They had anxi- oufly expeded his arrival and therefore gave him immediate admittance. Rofeline rejoiced at feeing her brother,. and eagerly inquired if he was fure that he had the keys that would enable them to proceed. He then produced a moft enor¬ mous bunch, vvith a dark lantern, which was to guide theni through the intricate la¬ byrinths of the caftie, and advifed Made¬ line and his fifter to guard againft the damps of the paffages they had to go through, and to
to ami themielves with their whole 1 ock of refolution, left their terrors fhould betray him. Rofeline affured liim her fears were con¬ quered by her ftrong defire to explore the fecrets of their habitation, and Madeline promifed not to let her apprehenfions impede their progreis. Edwin lighted his candle, and with fome difficulty unfaftened the trap¬ door he had difcovered in their clofet ; but, on opening it, a kind of noxious vapour aicended, that almcft tempted them to give up their ddign. A flight of broken brick fteps, of amazing depth, carried them into a narrow winding paffage, in which it was impofiible for more than one perfon to move forward at once. Mask-line caught hold of Edwin's coat, and Rofeline followed her with a lighted candle in her hand. For fome time they groped along, frequently ftumbling over the ftones which had falkn from the mouldering walls,
walls, and trembling left this paflage fliould lead them into danger. Edwin frequently flop¬ ped to encourrgc them to go on, afturing them they had nothing to apprehend. By degrees the path widened, and, on fuddenly turning, they entered a kind of fquare, round wdiich were feveral doors, but fo iow r , they did not feem made to admit men but dwarfs. Going up to one of them, Edwm pufhed it open with his foot, and he was convinced they were the dungeons in which prifoners of war were conffoed. Some con¬ tained only bedfteads, iron rings, and fet¬ ters -, hi <~ne of them they faw a human flcull; iu another was a coffin, which appeared to have ftood there for aacs, and with its filent inhabitant was falling to decay. They proceeded till they came to a door which was fo thickly ftudded over with nails, bolts, bars, and locks, that it impeded their farther progrefs. Edwm would fain have attempted to open it, but was pre¬ vented by his fhivering and terrified compa¬ nions. " Brother, *
u Srorher, (cried Rofeline,) we have feetf- quite enough to fatisfy us for one night." 44 Another time, Edwin, (added Made¬ line, ) I fhall feel lei^ repugnance to proceed.' Bar how do you know that door does not lead to fame aj artment where tiie reftlefs fpirit of another diicontented ghoft may bz confined, by fome potent fpell, till releafed by the intrufion of beings wdio now wander amid the gloomy fcenes of life as he once did r 44 No fuch thing, (replied the intrepid and refolute Edwin ;) that cloor is an en¬ trance to a fubterraneous paffage, wdiich leads from this caftle toMettingham, merely to give entrance to troops in any cafe of e- mergency, or to cover the retreat of otheis that may want to efcaped' " But, as it has not been ufed, either for the one purpofe or the other, fince my hither reiided here, (faid Rofeline,) it miy now be a fhelter for thieves and traitors ; therefoie, for heaven's fake, let us now re¬ turn to our apartment." Edwin,
Edwin, whofe difpofition was as amiable as his manners and perfon were captivating. no longer contended with their wilhes, but led the way for them as he had done betore, and, as he was a fine tall youth, was obliged to ftoop as he went along. Juft as they came near the foot of the fteps which led to their apartment, they faw, or thought they faw, a faint light gleam a- crofs a paflage which led to another part of thefe gloomy habitations, and they imigined they perceived the figure of fome one dii¬ appear at their approach. This alarmed the whole group, and they hurried up the ftairs as haftily as their fears would let them. Having cautioufly faftened the trap door, they fat down to recover themielves, and recolleded with a degree of horror and dif- guft the gloom} fcenes they liad \ifired; but the light, and the figure they had alL caught a tranfient view of, dwelt moft for¬ cibly on their minds. Madeline declared flie fliould never have fufficient refolution io re-vift
re-vifit thefe abodes of terror, contrived by the item hands of defpotiim and ambi¬ tion. " When we think, as we furely may, (faid h\e,} with fome degree of certainty,- how nuuiy poor fouls have languifhed out a life of mifery in theft gloomy cells, can we wonder if they are haunted by all they have entombed ? Shut out not only from the world, but h >m u'ep r ^mfort, nature too recoils and fh udders at the cruelties that may have been piactifed on the poor vidims thus buried in the bowels of the earth." " Ai) this may be very true, my fweet Madeline, (interrupted Edwin,) but I am determined to re-vifit them. Perhaps fome poor fufferers may ftill remain in the caftle; iffo, it would be delightful to foften the rigours of their fate." " True, my dear brother, (cried Rofeline, her eves illumined with the foft beams of genuine benevolence and philanthropy,) l J mil certainly attend }0u." "To
**< To quiet the fears of our lovey friend, tff'f J Edwin,) I will requeft old iiertrand, •a . > has lived in this caftle from the time w r e came,.. »\ r » accompany and dired us in our fee ah uter miiery. I ^m told too, (he .added.) tiiere is a paffage which leads from this caftle into the chapel of your nunnery, •Ifl can find it out, I fhall certainly pay you a vifit, and fteal you from your cell ; for, my dear Madeline, whatever may be the .truth and the virtues of our holy religion, it is doubtlefs one of its abufes to fhut from the world thofe lovely works of the crea¬ tion beft; calculated to enliven and adorn it* Can it be deemed a greater crime to doom a worthlefs, or, fuppofe I fay, an innocent, man, to languifh in a dungeon, than it is to compel an unfortunate female to wafte her days in the auftere walls cf a nunnery, —kneel to the unfeeling image of a faint,— watch the midnight lamp,—feclude herfelf from all focial enjoyments,— and linger through life in folitary fadnefs, without a friend,
a friend, or a lover, to cheer her on hei way r 44 Hufh, for heaven'^ fake ! (faid the frightened Madeline;) if Father Anfelm heard you talk thus iightlv and profanely of our holy religion, 1 ihould be for ever de¬ barred • feeing you and Rofeline again, for life Ihut out Irom the world, and compelled to take the veil." " Never, by heaven ! (cried Edwin, thrown entirely off his guard by the tender confufion and agitation of Madeline :) you ihall take no vows but fuch as love and nature dictate. I would perifh a thoufand times—foic a thouiand lives to preferve \ou irom a fate that woukl not o: ly make vou wretched, but me forever miferable.-— Roieline has long known that yea are dear to mv heart. Sav,—eafe me of the tortur¬ ing fufpenfe I this moment feel,— do you not find an advocate in your bofom that will plead my caufe V Madeline trembled violently 3 her eyes were bent to the ground: flic would have fallen,
lallen, had not Rifelinc flown to fuppon 'her. She attempted to fpeak, but the words died away inartu u'ately. " I fee how it n, {'cried Eclo/in impa.Tion- attly;) the happy De Willows ha^ c^ihicd by his attentions what I have loft by chl- gLifting you wdth mine : jou hate, you cl> fpife me. I will foficit my father to iet m- join the army: I will forever ,"inu\c t - detefted object from your hght, and that the portion of happmeb 1 have iuft ,\ be redoubled t< i \oud* Madeline, alarmed by the energy a this fpeech, was inftant*. loaded no. a i ,c languor into which fhe h id funk. 44 I hate no one, [fed h f^ft'v ;; ' it Edwin, you forget it wmd be a cr m me to love. Il, indeed, th u hid not b„_. the cafe,—if I v\eic at lib rty-—~" " You would bleis tiie lup^y be Willo t with your hand." "Never!— De Willows 1 rcgaul a* a friend : as any thing more I ntvvr did, — nev eT
never could think of him. I am'you know banifh ed from all intercourfe with the w r orld; —my fentence has been long pronounced ; from that fentence there can be no appeal. Would to heaven 1 had fubmit ted to it-, and never quitted the retreat to which pa¬ rental authority configned me 1 At this pain¬ ful moment my own feelings inflid my pu¬ nifh ment." *" Then you elo not hate me? (cried Edwin, taking her hand.)—Only fay I am not quite indifferent to you, and I will en¬ deavour to reft fatisfied, and afk no more ; trufting that time may do much in my fa¬ vour ; but, if you attempt to deprive me of all hope,—if you deny me this innocent gratification, I will go to the wars." 44 Ah ! why will you prefs me to difcover what it would be better to conceal ?—why will you tempt me to fwerve from my, duty to my God and my parents, and make me a perjured, an unworthy facrifice ? — You have, 1 fear, taught my heart a leffon it
it ought never to have learned ; but u mufe be the hard talk of mv future life to atone for the crime I have committed rin having fuffered a mortal to rival that God, who alone fliould have occupied all my thoughts and wifhes.** Edwin threw himfelf at the feet of Ma¬ deline. His raptures were no v as unboun¬ ded as the coiflid had her \ kvrv; a:i 1 not till flie fun!; fiurufog into the ar.>o .m her friend, could lie be pcrfiui/hri t > qui? their apartment. Happy was it for the party thai Roieline had not only a greater ihare of prudence aud underftanding than moft of her fov, but likewife more fortitude t Inn ri uiuailv t; en- portion. She foon recovered, her iriei. { toothed her into fome deQ-iee of onu-^foiv, and endeavoured tn in fpi re her with l.opv-v that fome plan might be adopted which would remove thofe difficulties that threat¬ ened to divide two hearts love had unit,.!. and which appeared formed by n.mn to vol. i. K nrfov.
make each other happy. Rofeline well knew her father would not only be difplea¬ fed, but ihocked, it he difcovered this un¬ fortunate attachment, and fhe blamed her¬ felf for having been the innocent caufe of involving two people fo clear to her in fuch a hopelefs fcene of complicated diftrefs. Notwithftanding the agonizing conflids which had attended the eclairciflement, the lovers felt a heavy burthen removed from their hearts. C invinccd of being mutually beloved, all other forrows, all other trials appeared light and trivial : they funk into a more fweet and peaceful ftumber than they had long enjoyed,—dreamed of each other, and arofe the next morning with re¬ novated fpirits and revived hopes. Madeline wifticd the hour was arrived they were to renew their midnight ramble, and thought, if flic ftiould meet a thoufand ghoft?, ftie fhould not fear them, while Ed¬ win, who loved her fo tenderly and fincerely, was
was near to guard her. She was eager too, but fcarcely durft acknowledge to herfelf fhe wijfod the paffage might be found which led to the chapel in her nunnary.
E &
CHAP.
CHA P. IV.
TF there be any fo faftidious and unfeeling -"- as to condemn and deprecate the roman¬ tic hopes and flattering \ifions cheriihed in the buo}ant bofom of nineteen, 1 am lorry for them, and here avow, 1 wiih never en¬ tirely to forget ihe fafcinating pleafure of fuch air-built hopes. Should they be fome¬ times attended with danger to the weak and frail, they are likewife accompanied with their advantages to the good and virtuous, and often enable us to encounter trials with a refolution and fortitude, which, at a more advanced
advanced period of our livey when time has weakened our bodily frame, and expe¬ rience deprived us of thofe gay iliufions, we find it difficult and painful to acquire.— The philofophy of nineteen, though not abftrufe, is flattering and conclufive; fo much the more valuable > for, after ail the refearches of philofophy, what are we taught to know, but that man is born to trouble as the fparks fly upwards ?—that we are merely the pilgrims and paffengers of a day,—tliat our refting place muft be fount 1 in a better, an unknown world,—that we muft encoun¬ ter innumerable trials on our journey, and at laft die and be forgotten, even by thofe for whom we have toiled, and to whom wc are moft tenderly attached ?—Surely then we may be allowed totnatch, or fWI, a few of thofe innocent enjoyments juft thrown in our way, to encourage our fortitude, and clear our path from fome of the briars and thorns with which it is fo profufely planted. E 3 Happy
Happy is it for thofe in the common walks ot lite, that all their ftock of philofophy is comprifed in few word?, acquired without ftudy, and retained without taxing their time or burthening their memory,-—" it was my fate,—I could not run from it,—it was to be." Thefe trite fentences reconcile them to many diflreffmg events, and fometimes are their excu.e for the frailties of their condud. When the parties met at break foft the next morniiip;, anv caieful obicrvcr might have difcovered, by the confufion viiibie on the countenance of Madeline,--thecon- flraint in her manner of addreffing Edwin, —his more than ufual vivacity, and the pale cheeks and fwelled eyes of Rofeline, that fomething had occurred to produce the change; but, fufpicion not being a frequent gueft at the caftle, no foch difcovery was made: every one employed themfelves as mfual, and in a few hours univerfal cheer¬ fulnefs feemed to prevail. The
Itie only obfervations made by Lady de Morney were, that her clear Edwin looked remarkably well, was in charming fpirit.s and had dreifcd himfelf better and more becomingly than utual. Madeline coloured, and thought the fame. Rofeline imiied, and Edwin whifpered fomething iu the car of Madeline that prevented the rofes fading on her cheek. The drefs of Madeline/though to her particularly becoming, would to thoufands have been totally the reverie. It was tlie drefs of tlie order of Benedictmes, to which ftie be.owrcd, confiftin<>- of a flack rebe, with a fcapulary of the fame. Under the robe, nuiib, when pre feffed, were a tunic of white undyed wool, and, when they went to the choir, they had a cow I like that worn by the monks ; but the boarders, who were in what we may call a ftate of probation, were allowed to wear a tunic oi muflin or cambrick, and covered their head^ with a white veil. This drtfs, little fuited to pleafe E 4 t!»e
the v.hfoifoal talle ofthe prefent time, \va^ fh;mpe ,s it may ;•; pear, fimpii and be- com up-, ;i',d })i*os' d the truth ot the poet's ob'.crvaifoii, that —----------LcvJhefs Needs not thefoieign aid of omament, But h. when unadcrn'd, aJorn'd the moft', Madeline, in the habit of her order, was fo captivating a figure, that no one ever thought any alteration or change in it could have added a charrn to thofe beftowed on her by the partial hand of nature. She was tall, and elegantly formed ; the expref¬ fion cf her countenance, blended with foft¬ nefs and dignity, conveying an idea of fu¬ perior virtue being united to fuperior love¬ linefs, Juft before dinner, the Doclor obferved that Madeline looked pale : having felt her pulfe, lie inquired what had given them caufe to beat fo much out of time. 44 I muft examine into this matter, (faid hcarchh.) They are gallopping along at a ftrange
ftrange rate ; either the head or the heart muft occafion this revolution in the fvftem of my patient's ufual habit. If it be the difeafe of the heart, I muft refign my place to a more able practitioner.—Do not blufh, my fair nun, but tell me whom you would have cvlled in." " 1 am perfectly fatisfied with your ad¬ vice, my good dodor, and at this time be¬ lieve I want a cook more than a phyfician, therefore excufe me if I fay you entirely mifunderftand my cafe." 44 Dont be too poiitive (faid De Cla¬ vering) of my ignorance. You may lately truft me with all your complaints,—-even with thofe of the heart ; for 1 feel myfelf extremely interefled that you ihould not return to the nunnery with any additional one added to thofe you fo unfortunately brought away." " Ah ! (faid Madeline,) mentally, advice is now too late. I fhall carry back with rne a more corroding, a more painful cumplaint E 5 than
than any I ever knew before ; yet, ftrange' as it is, I would not be cured forthe world, as my being fo would wound Edwin dc Morney. Only Camelfoi.l was prefent when this little badinage paffed between the Doclor and his patient. He advifed the former to lay afide his wig, and take up the cowl, as the moft certain method of difcovering the truth j " for, though the laties, (he added,) will not tell all they think to you or L they will not attempt to receive their Cot." " If I thought putting on a cowl would transform me to a god, (laid Dc Clavering,) I would foon hazard the transformation, and then I would place a fhield before the heart cf every fair daughter of Britain, that ihould have the property of a talifman, to warn them againft the deiigns and iniidious attentions of young men, fix feet high, with black loarkline» eves auburn hair, teeth of ivorv, handfome let's, and wdiite Madeline
Madeline knew the portrait, and, riftng to conceal her biufhes, ran haftily out ot the room. Hugh Camelford burft into a violent fit of laughter, and told tb? Dodor, " fo" far from being thought a Cot, the young laty certainly took him for the tifel, having dif¬ covered his fpells and clofen foot, or perhaps for Tafy ap Jones,, who, after tying for lof, was thrown into the Red Sea, and had haunted all lof-iick maidens ever fince, poor difcontented tifel !" " And that wall be your fate, Hugh, (re¬ torted the Dodor,) unlefs you fend home the Welch lafs whom you betrayed, and then left to ftarve with your fon, a fat chubby boy, very like his father." •* As I hope to efcape the toclor and tamnation, (faid the indignant Hugh,) I never petrayeri a lafs in my whole life ; therefore, vou cataplafm, }ou plifter, you cauftic of foe, pring no fuch fcandals on the coot name of Camelford, left I take a E 6 little.
little of your carnivorous plood, and make you drink it 1" The Dodor ftole off laugdfincr, and Ca- mclford foon recovered his p:ooci humour. A dance was propofed for the evening, and readily agreed to by the young people, who determined to make the time pafs as cheerfully as poffible during the abfence of Sir Philip and tiie vifit of Madeline. In thofe days dancing was the favourite amufement of the youth of both fexes: rich and poor, young and old, one with a- nothcr, n<ked in the animal ing dance :—• complaints <t wearinefi> and fatigue were feldom heard. This exercife was not only iavouiabie to health, but the rofes it pro¬ duced on the glowing cheek of youth ren¬ dered all application to the borrowed ones ui ;>rt totally unneceflary. Rouge was then \iiikno.\n, and no Werren exifted to abolifh vld women, by giving the furrowed features
of age an unfading bloom. The plain jacket, with a fmall quantity of ribbon bound round a cambric cap, were then thought becoming, and few ornaments were worn but on very important and particular occa¬ fions; yet beauty was equally admired : the fame homage was paid to it, anel it held in bondage as many captives, without the adventitious aiel of deception and extrava¬ gance. Another prefervativc of youth and health was their keeping better, that is, earlier hours. Night was night, and dedicated to its original purpofe. Day wr.H properly di¬ vided, and found of fufficient le igthtor all the ufeful employments of life. Few young- ladies but had feen the fun rife in all its glory, and found their heart, expanded by the grand and a a ful fight ; and, while they welcomed its reviving rays from the por¬ tals of the Eait, it tended to raife their minds to that Cod who made the fun, and who-
who alone could number the ftars by which it was furrounded. A fine moon-light evening feldom pafled unnoticed by thefe afpiring worthies, eager after knowdedge ; for, having happily fewer amufements, they had more time to attend to the inftrudive beauties of nature, the ftudy of which affords an inexhauftible fource of pleafure and furprife. Fearlefs of their complexions, they not only rambled but worked in their gardens. Each had a little fpot of ground marked out, and k foon produced the defired effed •* every one was emulous to outfhinc the other in its cultivation, and Sir Philip or Lady de Morney were often called upon as arbitrators t$ decide the fuperior beauty of a rofe, the fize of a carnation, or the fnowy tints of a lilv. De Clavering had told them, that, under their feet, they often trampled on plants, in the careful ftudy of which might be found a cure-
a cure for every difeafe incident to the cli¬ mate they inhabited, and that in other cli¬ mates the earth produced her treafures for the fame benevolent purpofe ; but the carelefs inattention of mankr.J to this ufe¬ ful knowledge had rendered the pxofefhon of phyfic abfolutely neceffary, and given men of learning and genius an opportunity of difplaying their talents in preferving the liui of their fellow creatures. In confequence of thefe hints, all kinch ot herbs were planted, and their virtues put to the teft by being applied to relieve the difeafes of their poor neighbours ; and never did a high-bred town belle, at making a conqueft, or a hero, after obtaining a iignal vidory, exult more, or feel greater delight than the having effeded a cure produced in the minds of thefe young praditioncrs. Do Clavering was gratified in giving them aU the intelligence they requefted, very often inquired when they went their rounds to vifit
their patients, and offered them his phyfical wig to give them confequence. In thofe days people lived much longer in the fame number of years ; to rife between five and fix o'clock, and breakfaft at feven, was their ufual cuftom, the time of taking their meals differing as much as their an¬ tique habits. Dinner was conftantly on the table between eleven and twelve, and fupper regularly fined at feven ; tea was then but little uled. Whether the introdudion of that bewitching beverage has been followed by the long catalogue of evils laid to its tharce, I am not able to determine $ but, as 1 have known many weak conftitutions who have never felt any iil effeds from ta¬ king it, I am inclined to think it has not fuch dangerous properties as are alledged a- gainft ii by valetudinarians and their medical. advifers. But what wouid the antediluvian fouls, who compofe my dramatis perfona?, fay to the
the innovations made upon time in thefe days of delicate and faihioiiablerefimemen: ? They would fuppofe the world turned top¬ fy-turvy, and be puzzled to know why tl e afternoon ihould be difcarded, and what part of the twenty-four hours to call night. The periodical times of taking refrefh* ment are quite different to what they for¬ merly were, and contradidory to the prac¬ tice of our anceftors, wdio hoarded th en- time, and confidered it as a treafure of fome value. Wc may now literally be faid to turn day into night, and night into day, while the want of time is the fource of ge¬ neral complaint. Our people of fafhion, and many of no falhion at all, breakfaft at three in the afternoon, dine at feven, fip their tea at ePven o'clock at night, and fup at four in the morning \ whereas Queen Eli¬ zabeth breakfafted at five or fix in the morn¬ ing, and dined at eleven in the forenoon.— She and all her court went to bed with the
fun in fummer, and at eight or nine o'clock in wdiiter. The parliament, in the reign of Charles the Firft, went to prayers at five or fix in the morning, and the king dined at twelve ; nay, in the licentious reign of that merry monarch, his fon, dinner at two was thought a very late hour; for all public diverfions were at an end by fix in the evening, and the ladies, after feeing a play, went in their car- riages to Hyde-Park. Whether it would not be greatly to the advantage of people in general to revive fome old cuftoms, and return to the prudent habits of our progenitors, will not admit of much diipute. Private families, in thefe expenfive times, would undoubtedly be be- nefited. Morning would again become a theme for the poet, and poor day-light be brought into faihion. Our parliament too would find more time to tran fact the impor¬ tant bufinefs of the nation, on which tliey fo
Jo eloquently harangue. Poflibly a good dinner would add weight to their arguments, and the not being hungry would prevent their eagernefs to adjourn. But one of its greateft evils, after that above mentioned, is felt by fervants, parti¬ cularly the unhappy cook. She feldom fees the face of day,—never enjoys the enliven¬ ing rays of the fun, and can fcarcely find time even to change her clotlies vM the night is too far advanced to render the change neceffary. It was formerly the cuftom for people to walk after tea, and by doing fo acquire a redoubled relifh for the variega¬ ted beauties of nature ; but now the table makes its appearance at fo unfeafonable an hour, and fafliionable etiquette, with the love of good cheer, detains them fo long, that in fad it appears the chief bufinefs of life to ftudy every art and contrivance how to deftroy and fquander, not how to im¬ prove our time $ and, inftead of people's eating
eating that they may live, they now live only to cat and drink, that the fenfes, I prefume, may be diflibled from torturing them with reproaches.—But to return to our tale. In the evening, as Eddiza was going down the dance, her eyes, with thofe of Madeline, were attraded by the fame ob¬ jed,—a plume of white feathers, placed on a fuit of armour, nodded, and the armour moved. This had fuch an effed, Madeline fcreamed, and Edeliza, throwing herfelf into the arms of De Willows, begged he would proted her from the ghoft. The dancing flopped, the whole party was alarmed, and Lady de Morney very much furprifed ; but, on being informed what had occafioned this buftle, Hugh Camelford flew to difcover its caufe, and, jumping upon a long table, which was placed by the fide of the room for the accommodation of large parties on any particular occafion, he without much ceremony caught hold of the haunted ar¬ mour*
.niour, when, to the aftoniih ment of the wdiole company there inftantly appeared,— gentle reader, be not alarmed!—not the ffhoft of a murdered hero, nor forfaken maid, —but the youngeft daughter of Sir Philip cle Morney, who, fkipping from her con¬ cealment upon the table, and from thence to the floor, fhook her head, decorated with a profufion of flaxen hair, wdiich curled in natural ringlets, and laughed heartily at the fright fhe had occafioned. " Of all the chofts I ever {aw, (faid the delighted Hugh, catching her up in his arms,) this is by much the prettieft and moft entertaining. I ihould like to be haunted by fuch an one all tlie lays of mv life." Lady de Morney called the little culprit, and, having feverely reproved her, ordeied her to bed, to which flie had been fent be¬ fore the party had began dancing, for iome fault fhe had committed, but had perfuaded one
one of the fervants to place her as before defcribed, that ftie might be a fpedator, though (lie was not permitted to be a par¬ taker in the amufement. Ladyde Morney reprimanded the fervant; and, had it not been for the general interceflions of the company, poor Birtha would have been a pri¬ foner in her own apartment fome days. This incident, fimple in itfelf, happened very unfortunately for the two ladies, who had agreed to accompany Edwin in his fub- terranean tour. They lingered till the laft moment, and then withdrew with vifible reludance ; but determined, as foon as they reached their own room, not to fay a word to Edwin of their fears, as they knew it would expofe them to ridicule, if not to cenfure, and there was net in the catalogue of human ills or evils any circumftance Madeline would fo much have dreaded as being thought meanly of by Edwin de Morney, Within
Within little more than an hour after the family had withdrawn, and all the fervants retired to reft, they were joined by the fan¬ guine and fpirited Edwin, accompanied by the ancient veteran, who, though loaded with the heavy burthen of fourfcore years, was frill adive and hearty, his fenfes unim¬ paired, and his fturdy limbs ftill able to carry with firmnefs their accuftomed load. His grey locks hung with filvered dignity upon his aged fhoulders, and his eyes re¬ tained fome of their former expreflion. He made a profound obeifance to the ladies on his entrance, and was received with that condefcending affability which his years and long-tried faithfulnefs demanded. Edwin's manner of introducing him, flattered the old man's remaining ftock of vanity, and revived, in full force, the re¬ membrance of his former exploits, which, though they had not procured him prefer¬ ment, fecured him attention and refped.
" This
44 This is my friend Bertrand, (faid Edwin, addrefling Madeline particularly on his en¬ trance ;) though you had fome fears with only fuch a ftripling as myfelf for a leader, vou can have none with fo experienced and biavea guide." The old man liftened with delighted at¬ tention to this eulogium from the lips of his dear young mafter, whom he had fo ■often dandled on his knee, whom he had been fo fortumitc as to fnatch from a watery grave, and for whom he retained a ftronger affedion than for any other being on earth, Sir Philip had long maintained him in eafe and comfort, and excufed him from every employment, but fuch as tended to the prefervation of his health. Both ladies held out their hands, which he refpedfully kiffed, and piayed that heaven might blefs and reward them for their kindnefs to their old but grateful fervant. " Now the ceremony of introducing you into tlie bed-chamber of thefe fair ladies is over
over, ^tis time for us to thiiik of proceeding, tny old friend, (faid Edwin.) Ifyou will affift me iti urifaftening the trap-door, we will procure lights, and, putting ourfelves under your diredion, follow wherever you are difpofed to lead us.
vol. i. F CHAF
mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmnmmmtmmmmJii
CHAP. V.
IT was the intention of Bertrand to open the door of the fubtcrranean paffage, which communicated with Mettingham- caftle ; but, before they proceeded far, fomething rufhed paft them feveral times : it was rapid, and their candle threw fo fee¬ ble a light on the walls which furrounded them, that they could not difcover what it was. They hurried on till tfyey came to the fquare leading to the dungeons, when their attention
attention was arrefted, and their fears in- creafed by the barking of a dog. They he¬ fitated, looked wkh aftoniihmeot at each other, and ftoppcd, as if irrefolute whether to return or proceed. In the mean while, the little animal made its appearance, jumped and capered about, as if it rejoiced at feeing them in its dreary habitation, at¬ tached itfelf particularly to RofeIine r and feemed to recognize an old and beloved friend. Rofeline took it up in her arms, kifTtel and careffed it ; but how to account for meeting with fo beautiful, fond, and gentle a creature was not only matter of furprife but wonder. 44 Are you fure, fifter, (faid Edwin, Ally glancingalook at the pale face and trembling lips of the terrified Madeline,)— are you fure it is a real dog ?—May it not be one of the ghofts, who, in fuch various fhapes, are did to haunt thefe gloomy regions, and F 2 difturb
difturb the peaceful llumbers of young maidens, born perhaps two hundred years after they had left the worid ?" This gentle reproof reftored the rofes to the fair cheek from which fear had driven them, while Rofeline declared it was really and truly the prettieft dog ihe had ever feen. Bertrand had looked thoughtful, agita¬ ted, and confufed, from the moment it ap¬ peared* " This dog muft have a mafter, (faid Edwin,) and that mafter muft be fomewhere near thefe cells." m Perhaps (faid Sertrand) fome daring villain may have found entrance here, either with the hopes of plunder, or to accomplifli defigns againft the caftle -* let: us therefore, for the prefent, give up attempting to ex* plore the paffage i it might be dangerous to unfaften a door Which is now our fecu- rity." "Had
4t Had we not better call for help ?" faid the again-terrified Madeline. " Not for the world ! (interrupted Ed¬ win j)—^how fhould we be able to account to my mother for being in this place, with¬ out burthefting her mind with ten thoufand fufpicions ? while, telling her our reafons would m-jft affuredly expofe our venerable companion to the certain difpleafure of mv father.—Do vou (laid he, addrefling S, ?- trand) know if there i^ any one a p;:louof at this time r" The old man hefitated.— 44 1 know but little—I apprehend it may be fo y — but I —I hope you will excufe my talking on a fubjed that—that.—~" 44 It muft affuredly be fo, (faid Rofeline foftly to her brother,) and from that caufe proceeded the noifes which fo repeatedly alarmed us." Again every one ftood for a moment ir- ifcfolute. Edwin, however, fearful of bringing F 3 liis
his father's anger On Bertrand, and fcorning to tempt the old man to betray any truft re- pofed in him, or any fecret belonging to another, inftantly formed his refolution to ad with the utmoft caution. He propofed to his fifter and Madeline to return to their apartment as foon as Bertrand had pointed out the paffage which led to the nunnery.— On being fhewn the door which might onp day enable him to meet his Madeline, and open to give him a gleam of happinefs, Rofeline fnatched up the little dog, preffed him to her bofom, and vowed to releafe him from captivity. As foon as they had reached their own apartment, Bertrand, after promifing eternal fecrecy, took a refpedful leave. Edwin accompanied him to his room, then returned |o his fifter's, and propofed inftantly re¬ newing their fearch. 44 This is doing nothing, ffaid he ;) all is ftill left to conjccf ure and uncertainty." «If
" If you mean to go again, (faid Made¬ line,) why did you fuffer Bertrand to leave us?" 44 From refped to my father and regard to the old man, (he replied;) for iPodJ we, my dear Madeline, make any difcovery of confequence, with us the fecret will reft fe¬ cure, and, fhould we be found out, on our¬ felves alone will fail the difpleafure of Sir Philip ; but, by this procedure, we em¬ power no one either to betraj his fecrets or our own* We will, however, carry back with us this little ftranger, (continued he, pointing to the dog, who was fleeping on a cufhion which Rofeline had placed for him before the fire,) and, when we fet him down, we will follow wherever he may choofe to lead us : if he be attached to any mifera¬ ble being confined in one of the cells or dungeons, we may depend upon his return¬ ing to his ufual habitation." Once more the tfap-door was lifted up > once more the party defcended into regions F 4 like
like thofe of the grave, while the moulder¬ ing walls, glittering with the dewsof night, and rendered humid with the unwholfomc damps of the fituation, hung loofe and dif- jointed over their heads, as if to threaten inftant deftrudion. Turning into a paffage which led to a. contrary diredion to that diey had before entered, and which was fomewhat wider and lefs difmal than the other, Rofeline fat down the dog, who ran nimbly away, as if well acquainted with the path. They fol¬ lowed with the utmoft caution, obferving a profound filence. The dog went before them the whole length of the paffage, then turned fuddenly down a* few fteps, at the bottom of whicii a door ftood half-open : he rufhed in, and appeared to them to flop at fome diftance. Inftantly they heard him %rowl and bark, and this determined them to proceed. They paffed through two fmall apart¬ ments decently furnilhed, and, juft as they reached
reached an inner door, at wdiich the dog had demanded admittance, they faw it flowdy open, and a faint voice appeared to chide the guiitiefs wanderer for his long, long ab¬ fence, and then to carefs him with fondneis Edwin, knowing, if he hefitated to pro¬ ceed, the fears of his companions would in- creafc by tlie delay, gently tapped at the door. For a minute all was filent ; he then gave fome louder raps. The fame perfon very foon opened the door, of whom rfo\ had caught a tranfient glimpfe when he had granted admittance to ihe dog. He w v evidently alarmed, and in tremulous a:fo terrified accents inquired who was the:e t — what was the matter,—and what eirmi brought them ? at the fame time brandish¬ ing a fword, wdiich he had haftily fnatched from a chair which ftood near him, " Whoever v;u are 'continued he) thr.: have found a way to thL den of in it ery, you may iafely enter, unlefs \ua cumc to arid F z ifofoet
farther oppreffions, and inflid additional woes on the head of an injured and guiitiefs fufferer. If you come with fuch diabolical intentions, be affured of this,— I will no fonger be a paffive or Blent fpedator of fuch unheard of barbarity, but give up a life in his defence which cruelty has rendered a worthlefs facrifice. Forego then your de* figns, and know he will not long be either a burthen or reproach to his unnatural pa¬ rent and fordid oppreffors." ** We come with no defign to injure ot opprefs, (faid Edwin,} We inhabit this caftle, and were led by the curiofity inci¬ dental to youth into thefe horrid regions.—* Chance concluded us into thefe apartments, without knowing, they were inhabited,*-* We wifh not to alarm or interrupt any one, but of this be affured, if you will inform us how we can ferve you, or render your fi* iuation more comfortable, we wilt gladly contribute all in our power to do fo.. Your countenance does not appear ftamped with guilt,
guilt, and your determination to proted the injured fpeaks a noble mind/ 1 The fword was inftantly laid down,—the door flew open,—and they were requefted to enter by one, who told them his life and courage were only valuable fo long as they would enable him to watch and proted the beft and moft beloved of matters. Reader, guefs, if it be poffible, the fur¬ prife and aftonifhment of our trembling and compaffionate adventurers, when they be¬ held an elegant young man, whofe counte* nance was as prepoffeffuig as his fituation was interefting, wrapped in a ftuped-fatin morn¬ ing-gown, which reached to his feet,, with his hair hanging m graceful ringlets, and nearly concealing a face pale as death, h ing on a kind of couch, and to all appearance in the laft ftage of a confumption. On the entrance of Edwin, he took but little notice, but, on feeing Rofeline and her F 6 friend
friend advance, he looked up, and attempted^ to rife, but was not equal to the effort, and inftantly funk down in a ftate of apparent infenfibility. Rofeline, more agitated and terrified by the whole of this unaccountable and affeding fcene than flie w r ould have been at the fight of the ghoft flie had almoft ex¬ peded to meet, flew to fupport him. She was aflifted by Edwin and Madeline, and their united endeavours foon reftored the poor fufferer to hfe and an imperfed fenfe of his fituation. Having nowr no longer any fears; he fixed* his large blue eyes on the ftrangers,— won¬ dered from whence they came,—how all this could happen,—and to what blefled chance it was owing that he faw himfelf attended and confoled by two celeftial beings, for as fuch he adually confidered them ; while the pure drops of genuine and the gentleft pity fell foftly on his emaciated hand, he raited the precious gems of compaflion to his lips, fighed deeply, then, looking ear¬ neftly
neftly in the face of Rofeline, with a fmile of doubt and anguifli once more funk down in a ftate of infenfibility, unable to bear the weight of his own agitated and^ contend¬ ing feelings... The attendant,- who had ftridly obferved the whole of this extraordinary fcene, now approached to aflift in recovering his mafter. Edwin haftened to his fitter's apartment to procure proper reftoratives y they were ap r plied with their ufual fuecefs, and the change they produced gave new life and fpirits to all around,, particularly Rofeline, who conclu¬ ded they arrived merely to witnefs his dying moments, and hear him breathe his laft. She was M\ fupportfog hfe languid head on her knee; his hand reflect on her arm, his eyes were fixed upon her face, his lips moved, and the words " kind, confoling angel" were« alb they could, underftand.
" What
" What can this mean? (faid Edwin ;f Who is your mafter }"—who brought him here ? and of what crime has he been guilty $mt he is fenfcenced to fuch- a place as this?"— 44 I am bound (replied the fervant) by the moft folemn oath to filence-and fecrefy. By complying with thefe conditions I obtained leave to attend him. Were I at liberty to fpeak, I could a tale unfold would tempt you to curfe the world, and even deteft thofe daims which bind man to man. You. would be ready to forego the ties of nature, and fhuri fociety.— Time will, it muft de¬ velop the whole of this myftery/ 1 " But my father t" faid Edwin. « your father, fir, like my dear unhappy mafter, is blamelefs and innocent: he has been deceived like many others/' «* But why (cried Rofeline) are you thus Shut out from the world, and banifhed "fo- ciety-?—why, if innocent* is not this poor fufferer placed in a fituation more likely to, reftore
reftore him to health?—why thus cruelly deprived not only of liberty, light, and air, but of every other neceffary comfort ?" ** A higher power has willed it fhould be fo," faid the ftranger, whofe unreferved manner, fuperior language* honeft and open, countenance, found an: inftant paffport to their hearts, confirmed their belief, and ba¬ nifhed every fufpicious doubt of his fince¬ rity. " Are you involved in the crirnes of which this gentleman is fufpected ?" inquired Ma¬ deline. ** No, madam j my only crime is my attachment to him* I am here by my own voluntary choice, and were they to convey him a thoufand fathoms deepe \ die earth* I would not, unlefs I were compelled, ever leave him till his noble and guiitiefs foul was fummoned to appear before a more juft and merciful tribunal than he has found on earth/*
" A,
< e A thoufand bleflings on you! (cried Rofeline, a tear trembling in each expref¬ live eye,) for fhewing this care and god like compaflion to one fo helplefs and oppreifed. —Brother, furely we may, without deferving reproach, unite our endeavours with thofe of this friendly ftranger, to foften the pangs of mifery and death, be they inflided by whom they may." 44 You ought to do fo, (cried the lovely Madeline, whofe gentle fpirit was awakened into adion by the fcene before her.)—As fellow-creatures, and the childrer of the fame Almighty Parent, it is our duty to affift each other ; .but we fhould do more, nor remain coldly indifferent to fufferings which, if we cannot entirely remove, we may in fome feature alleviate." " And we will do" fo 1 (cried the gene¬ rous and animated Edwin,)—You too, my honeft fellow, (turning to the fervant,) ihall ftare in our kind offices. You deferve the thanks of every good Chriftian, and to be immortalized •
immortalized for your faithful attachment to one fo helplefs and unable to reward you.—But how is this V 9 obferving the in¬ valid had funk into a gentle and quiet fleep, like the peaceful" ftumber o£an infant. " This has been the cafe for fome weeks. His fpirits depreifed by the corroding, an¬ guifli which preys upon his mind, his body lias become a vidian to the conflid, and the foul of my mafter will foon, by quitting this earthly tenement, efcape the farther perfecution of his enemies. Much, much as I love him, I fhould rejoice at his re¬ leafe.*" The words trembled on his tongue, and the tear of manly compaflion rolled down his cheek. " Has he no one to attend him ? (faid Rofeline, looking at him with eyes that beamed with all the heavenly animation which at that moment throbbed around her heart ;) has he no advice ?" 4 Only
" Only fuch as I can give him, madam* Poor and ignorant as I am* he has never been allowed any other phyfician, or better tutor than myfelf; but I truft, if the Al¬ mighty would again reftore him to healthy he would now meet with thofe who would affift in performing a taik for which I was never calculated.'* *• Has he no bed to fleep on ?" cried Rofeline, gently removing his languid head upon a cufhion that laid on a couch, with¬ out awakening him. " There is one in the inner apartment, but this being the moft comfortable and airy room, he will not leave it." " I will fetch fome pillows." She did fo ; they were inftantly placed under his head. Still he flept as if he were never to awake again. * f In the morning, (faid Rofeline,) at the foot of the ftairs, which you will find by turning to the left, at the end of this paf¬ fage, I will leave fome few trifles and com¬ fortable
fortable cordials, which I hope will be of fervice. " And to-morrow night, at about this time, you may exped us again, (faid Edwin.) I hope your mafter will then have fhaken off this death-like ftumber, and be able to con¬ verfe with us," ** Perhaps he may, (replied Albert, the name of this faithful fervant ^) but he never talks much. I had taught him to read, but they took away our books, and fmcc that time I am afraid he has loft the remem¬ brance of the little knowledge he had of reading. He has lately learned to play a few fimple tunes on the lute,—that fome¬ times amufes him." " We will bring you fome books, (faid Rofeline,) and furely, Edwin, you and I can aflift Albert in the delightful taik of refto- ring by friendftiip what has been loft by cru¬ elty." Albert informed them they were regularly ferved with their meais, but never faw the perfon
perfon who brought them, all interccurfe with any one being forbidden, to prevent the poflibility of difcovery or efcape j but*. he faid, they had better food and more in¬ dulgences than had been allowed them in their former prifon, which confifted only of one room. The party now retired with the utmoft caution, left they fticuld difturb the appa¬ rently-peaceful flumbers of the prifoner, and deprive him of his only refuge from mifery. Before they parted, Rofeline and Iier bro¬ ther, aduated by the fame generous feelings in behalf of this unfortunate young man, and his equally unfortunate companion, fa¬ tisfied, ihould there be found any thing in their condud to condemn, (which they eould not bring themfelves to think,) in their prefent fituation 'there was much to gity, refolved to unite in their endeavours of. relieving their miferies, and fofteningthe rigours
idjours of a confinement, of whicii they knew not ,the caufe ; but they were told, the objed who had moft excited their com¬ paflion was innocent, and therefore they determined to think him fo till his own con¬ dud, or an explanation from any other quar¬ ter, proved him otherwife. It is true, they had nothing on which to found their belief but the word of a ftranger, and him they found in the humble capacity of a fervant; but, though a ftranger, he had, by his fimple, modeft, and unaffeded language, given ample proofs in .their opinion of his fincerity. They now left the cells, and retired in¬ ftantly to bed,—dreamed of the prifoner, and fometimes imagined they could diftin¬ guifh his groans; in fad, they thought and talked of him, and him only. Early in the morning, Rofeline carried every little nicety fhe could procure, and left them
them at the foot of the flairs*—then hur¬ ried back to her room, not daring to flop and make inquiries, left the perfon who fupplied the objed of her pity with his daily* food fliould difcover and betray her bene¬ volent defigns. Madeline was new making a rapid pro¬ grefs in her recovery, and was every hour in fear of receiving a fummons from the abbefs to return to the nunnery. Edwin participated in all her fears, and lamented, in the language of tender affedion, the cruel neceflity which compelled her to leave the caftle, protefting neither walls nor vows fhould long divide them, and fwearing to releafe her from a fituation, which, though fandioned by religion, only bigotry, fuper¬ ftition, and prieftcraft, could juftifyj which he knew would not only deftroy all his profpeds of happinefs, but, as he could not difbeiieve the fafcinating hopes he had not abfolutely been forbidden to cherifh, the happinefs alfo of abefovedobjed, dearer to
to him than life, without whom fortune, honour, profperity, and youth a would be robbed of all their value. The next day, accompanied by Bertrand, Edwin ftole by another entrance into the lower receffes of the caftle, not mentioning a word of the prifoner, and carefully avoid¬ ing that quarter in which he was confined. They firft explored the fubterraneous paffa¬ ge, leading to the nunnery, and found fewer impediments in their way than they ex¬ peded. They eafily gained an entrance into the chapel, having fixed upon an hour when they knew all the fathers and nuns would be engaged in their cells. They found the opening under the organ, and in that part of the chapel appropriated to the ufe of the nuns, the door being concealed from obfervation by a very curious tomb, belonging to the ancient family of De G—. They entered next the paffage leading to Mettingham-caftle, and determined to 2 fee
fee the whole of it. Here they met with many difficulties: in fome places huge ftones had fallen from the wails,—in others the arch-way was fo low they were almoft obliged to crawl,—while toads, fnakes, and various kinds of reptiles impeded their pro¬ grefs. j when, at length, they reached the end of this wonderful labyrinth, the pro- dudion of labour and art, they found themfelves clofe to the baliium of Met- tingham-caftle, and under a ftrong ma- chiolated and embattled gate. They now difcovered another fliort paf¬ fage, which was terminated by a door that opened to the outer baliium, and through which the cavalry could felly in any cafe of emergency. They ventured cautioufly to look around them. Edwin's mind, however, was chiefly occupied by one dear objed:, and he fecretly rejoiced at baring found the means of efcaping with Madeline, fhould the obftinacy of her parents, or the ambition
ambition of his own, leave him no otlier re- fource. He likewife, in the courfe cf the day. but unaccompanied by any one, opened tlie door on the ftair-cafe kidu-g to ihe South tower. He felt a kind of repugnance r.c taking this ftep, but determined, a Let¬ ters were now circumfbuuvd, to go thiough the wdiole of this unj/eif. t ..t foifinefs ac once, that nothins; mit:ft-: I e icit to con- jedure. He alfo recollected tn.U it w^uld not only put an end to that reft Lis aui *':iy which had long dv\elt upon his mmd, hi t enable him t> judge whether il would le poflible to remove the d\in£ prifone: ii.io a more airy ai.d convenient room, without the hazard oi a difcoveiy. This wing of the caftie he k:;e\v a.v tO' tafy unoccupied, as in his bc\ifh da\slc had frecucntlv, and at all timer* pone tti i way to the ramparts to lodge fob p.avthinrs in a fecret aparanent in one oi the h -1 eft v L* i. G towe n
towers, and never in his peregrination had met with a human being. On attempting firft to open the door, he was a good deal ftartled at the noife it occafioned, and was almoft buried beneath the heap of cobwebs and dirt which fell and enveloped him in a cloud of duft.— Some birds too, that had here found a fafe afvlum, flew in tenor around him. Not willing to difturb them more than was ne¬ ceffary, he unfaftened a narrow cafement, to give thofe an opportunity of efcaping who wiflied to obtain their liberty. He then ftole foftly and cautioufly acrofs the room to an oppofite door, which opened without any difficulty, and he entered a fecond apartment, much larger and more commodious than the firft. It was hung with ancient tapeftiy, on wdiich time and moth had made many depredations ; but, in fome parts of it, the full-length figures remained perfed, and the colours retained fome
fome of their beautiful fhades. He foon difcovered that it reprefented the moit ftriking and interefting fcenes in the well- known hiftory of Hero and Leander, from his firft feeing her, in the temple of Venus, at Seftos, in Thrace, till the laft cloiing fcene of their unfortunate loves. The figures of the lovers were fine, and in excellent prefeivation, and the tapeftry was of fo fuperior a kind, that it gave as full ibrce and expreffion to the faces and drapery as the hn-Al painting could have conveyed. The temple, the palace, the turret, and the Hellefpont, upon whofe waves the rifing and letting fun were alter¬ nately refleded, with the downy fwan, in fnowy dignity, which was feen laving on its bofom were admirably depided* The nurfe, or attendant of the faithful Hero flood at full length on the edge of the water, which gently undulated near the Walls of the palace, pointing to the waves, G 2 an d
and as if ii the ad of telling her fond, im* patient miftrefs her lover was coming* while flie, with modeft^iweetnefs, feemed fearful of ftealing a look at the element which contained a treafure dearer to her foul than the whole of her ambitious father's dominions. In another part, he faw the lifelefs body of Leander, and the defpairing Hero in the ad of throwing herfelf into the Hcllefpont, which had unfortunately proved the grave of her lover. Edwin ftood a long time-, filently admi¬ ring this pathetic tale ; it had an inftanta¬ neous effed: upon his feelings ; it ferved to remind him of the difficulties he ihould have to encounter in his attachment to Madeline, and he could ha«.e Lifted the fenfriefs portrait of die eld Egyptian woman for her kind and faithful attentions to tlie perfecuted lovers. In
In the middle of the room flood a fquare table, on wdiich were carelefs!/ fpread a number of paper?. Four mail/ filver candlefticks -were haewife placed upon it, each of whicii contained a wax candk\ that had never heen lighted, and an old writing to which was annexed a vaft many feais, laid folded up un Ie** them. This he conchi led wa* the m}ftic bm 1 which held in captnity the iciuci^ !} 1 .t it was fuppofed to confine. Echvin opened and attempted to read it. In fome parts the writing was defaced, and the whole oi the language fo unintelligible, he very foon replaced it in its former fituation, imagining that, if the ghoft was not to regain its liberty till the bond could be read, it would reft in peace for ever, and fuffer others to do tne fame. In the chimney ftood an antique grate, that had once been bright, and ftill fheivcd fome of its brilliant features through die G 3 rufb
raft by whicii it was enveloped. A few chairs were ftanding here and there, but they were filling to decay. He then o- ptned another door, which led hini into a vaulted chamber, in which were placed the tattered remaius- of a bed, that had been handfome, and could be repaired. A book of devotion was king upon it. The win¬ dows were high and nairow, admitting but little light, notwithftanding wdiich they were fecured by iron bars of immenfe thicknefs, fo flrongly, that, had they been lower, it would have been impoffible for the arm of the ftrongeft man to remove or ftiake them. This led him to conclude il was origi¬ nally defigned for the fecurity of prifoners of rank, its diftance from the ground pre¬ cluding any communication with the people on guard -, and he thud dered as he recol¬ leded how many, like the poor prifoner in the cells, might have lingered away their wretched
wretched exiftence in this very apartment, in the hopelefs expectation of meeting with a releafe. He next carefully fearched in every part of the room, to difcover if there was not a more fecret entrance, but found none.— He put the key into his pocket, as he had before done that of tlie tiap-door, and in the morning, unobferved by Bertrand, had the pfe^aution not to lock the door of the fubterraneoBs paffage, leaving it well fecured by the bolts and bars which were on the infide. He now haftened to replace all the reft ofthe keys in the lepoiitory from whence he had taken them, and was fatisfied thofe he retained in his own poffeffion wouid not be miffed by his father or any one elfe 4 . After this he returned to join the family, and faid not a word of what he had feen, G 4 nor
nor the plans which floated in his own nund, m confequence of the morning pc- regriaatiorjs he had taken.
CHAP.
gMMBBBaeHjeagM UL-MjiaiuiMi ' ' 2 ijt*m a=^~^r.s"^ninr^m
GHAP. VI.
TN the courfe of tlie da-, llcV'.^e r^c A i . A . -h- a thoufand queftions, with .q^ utent in¬ difference, of De Gaverinrr, refpxclino tec nature of confumptive cafes, their f\mp- toms, progrefs, kc* and how pcop'e ought te manage themfelves in rcgird to diet, who were confined in the damp Rgbrrs cf a dungeon, or immured in the nvrov pre- ciads of a prifo:i ; 'to a!! \vhi:h ih. received fu. h ])k i i 3 d ; nxc, "aid experienced anlVcrs- aajhe cherilhed 1 o t es wo dd cnabh her, with the apprcl).vtion of lieavcn, to be the G 5 humble
humble means of reftoring to health, orai more promifing degree of convalcfcence, the interefting object whofe fecret fuflei ings had ftimulated hei to make thefe unufual in¬ quiries ; and what gave new life and added. energy to her benevolent hopes was the ar¬ rival of a letter from Sir Philip to Ladyde Morney, in whieh he was reludantly obliged to inform her that his flay in London was unfortunately prolonged, and he was forry to find his abfence from the caftle was likely fo be protraded a confiderable length of time from the llow f progrefs of the law, and the difficulties thrown in ths way by his opponents. This account would have. given her pain a few da>s before ; it was now, a fource of pleafure, which produced the moft fanguine expedations of pseferving, under. Providence, tne hie of a fellow-crea¬ ture, or, at leaft, of rendering its doling fcene lefs hopelefs and more comfortable. A fenfibility, like that which was lodged in tlie bofom, of the artlefs and innocent Rofeline,
Rofeline, 1 would wifh all my fex to poflefs. So fai from tempting her to run from mi~^ fery, it led her in fearch of it, and, wdien found, it awakened every gentle paffion of the mind into immediate and refolute ac¬ tion °, while the fictitious feeling, the af¬ feded fenfibility oft. modern mifs is confined to kicking, fainting, or fqualling at fight of a wretched obied, and the iittle thev may really have will evaporate in the trou¬ ble of ading their part fo as to impofe on the minds of otiiers an unjuft fcn(c of theii own delicate and extreme compaflion. How much might men as well as women add to the dignity of nature by never at¬ tempting to deftroy her 1 In the formation of man, God lent his own imaee; how would it aftoniih, how would it excite the indignation of the almoft unenlightened lavage,- if he met with any one fo foolifh as to fuppofe they could improve that ima^e by the ridiculous diftortions and grimaces of affectation 1 and how would he be di- G ( "> verted,
verted, could he fee the devoted flaves of falhion fo difguife the human form, that the head ri frequently increafed to twice its original fize,—-the waift fometimes dwin« died to a fpan, at others entirely loft ; then again reftored with fuch protuberances as c\en to render the charader fufpeded;— and at times our modern beaux and belles are feen fo completely in mafqueiade, that it is a matter of fome difliculty to diftin- guifh one fex from the other,—a circum¬ ftance that might be attended with ludi* cherous, if not dangerous, confequences. As the fpirits of Lady de Morney were much depieffed by the receipt of Sir Philip's letter, every one exerted themfelves to a- mufe her. They fung, they danced, and the tale went merrilv louach De Willows and De Clave 1 ing appeared unufually ani¬ mated, and Hugh Camelford fx':cd the worfe for their exertions They rou ed the fiery blood of the brave Cambrian, and then cooled it again by a well-turned compliment. Tiiey
They likewife fo pow o fully aff tiled Eiwyn to give a dinner he had long promifed them, that the following day was fixed for the treat, and his apartments were prepared for the ladies, the gentlemen with one voice agreeing not to go without them. Ihey alfo entered into a confederacy to drink till they had emptied the mifer's laft bottle, de¬ termining to have one good frolic, a& they defpaired of ever obtaining a kcond at Ifo expence. Madeline received a fow lines from -\jvc;> de Cliflbrd, to inform her, tliat, bv what ftie could learn f om on^ of the old nuns the abbefs expeded htr i\tu.n to the nun- neiy the following week, ,i r > lat c. Anieuji had fignified his difapprobation oi her longer abfence. Tliis nw\e Pivat coia^ra lo the young people, which dfd not pds ur.ob- fVrved by Lady dc Moinev, \ hi gentlv blamed them, adding, as thev li.JKvn io Ions; InduWri vith i' e covpin' ^f their i-'und,
fiiend, they ought to fubmit to the will of the father without repining or reludance* After a day which appeared to Rofeline the longcft flie had ever lived, the hour ar¬ rived in which they were to revifit the dark abode of mifery and oppreflion. They found Albert impatiently waiting for them in the paflage, near the foot of the ftairs, almoft defpairing of their return. Every one carried fomething for the ufe and gra¬ tification of the prifoner. Edwin was loaded' with books - ? Madeline with fweetmeats, wine, and cakes ; Rofeline with fome white meats and foup. She had likewife prepared a reviving mixture from a recipe of De Cia- wring's, cxtraded from a variety of heal¬ ing herbs, admirably calculated to reftore health and fpirits to the ft agile frame of the, languid fufferer. Albert informed them that his mafter* confidered the whole of what had palled the preceding evening as a dream ;—had repeat¬ edly-,
etlly mentioned the good and confoling an¬ gels, who had condefccnded to vint the couch of a wretch who,, almoft from his birth, had been an out caft from fodety >. and, notwithftanding he affured him he would fee them again, he could obtain no credit to his affertion, nor divert his mind from the idea that it was a warning: from heaven, merely to prepare him for a fum¬ mons before its awful tribunal. " Haften, my good friend, (faid Rofe¬ line,) and undeceive hini, by letting him know we wait, here to convince him, if he will receive us, tliat we arc mere mortals like himfelf." Albert did not flop for a fecond com¬ mand to execute a commiflion he eagerlv wifhed. They followed him; the iittle dog ran out, and greeted their arrival with- every teftimony of joy it was in its nature to exprefs, and they were requefted to walk iu the. moment tL^y a ached the door of, tne
the apartment. They were not only fur¬ prifed, but highly gratified at obferving the, vifible change for the better which a few liours had made 111 the countenance of their new friend, whole dependence on their good- offices, for many of the ncceflary comforts of life, and total feclufion from the world* made very forcible claims on their hearts. He arofe on their entrance. Edwin flew to embrace him. Madeline held out her hand, which he gently prefled between his; but, obferving that Rofeline'? was likewife extended, he dropped the hand, of hei: friend, and eagerly caught her's, as if he were afraid it ftiould be wrefted from him. , " I would fain tell 3011 whaM feel at-this moment, (faid he, faintly and fearfully ;} but 1 do not know a language to-make my¬ fell undeiftood.—This I know, that yefter¬ day I wiihed to die, :uvd be forgot ten even by Alb:rc ; but now I think, ii I could have ycu alwayt wiih me, (fleating a look at
%■ Rofeline,) hear you talk, and fee you fmile, I could be content to live for ever, even in this fad place. If all other women are like you, how charming mull be the world, in whicii Albert fays there are a vaft many 1 I have often told him, and he knows why, that I. never ihould like, a woman ; (here he fmiled cxpreffively oa Albert.) I thought they were all very cruel and very ugly creatures, therefore I conclu¬ ded, when I fii ft faw you, that you were angels, or kind and celeftial fpirits, who came down from heaven to receive my foul, and carry it to a place of reft." 44 Indeed, my good fir, (faid Rofeline,) you were never more miftaken. We are like the generality of our fex, but much inferior to many. We broke in upon you unexpectedly, and you judged merely from feelings too highly railed, which originated from furprife, and weie in part confirmed by the effect they had on the fufceptibihty of your nature and the feclufion of your fituation.
fituation.—I muft now entreat you to take a few fpoonfuls of a mixture I have brought you. I am afraid it is not very pleafant to the tafte, but I hope and truft it will be conducive to your recovery." She poured fome into a tea-cup, and pre¬ fented it to him ; he drank it immediately. They then produced the more grateful treat they had brought with theni \ he ate a little cake, and fome fweetmeats, with an avidity and grcedinefs that fhocked them, — faid they were very fine, and much better than the liquor. Edwin next gave him fome books, which he opened with eagernefs, feemed vaftly de¬ lighted with the prints, but fliook ms head on finding himfeff unable to read their con¬ tents. He turned over a few of the leaves, and feemed a good deal chagrined. Edwin explained their titles, and gave him a few outlines of the works. " Albert can read them," faid he. 44 I
" I hope you will foon be able to read them yourfelf, (replied Edwin :) we wiU 1 vin with Albert in inftruding you." " Ah ! (cried he, fhaking his head,.) you wiil foon grow weary of one fo ignorant, fo dull as I am ; (his eye glanced at Rofe¬ line.)—I belong to no one,—I have no friend but poor Albert •* he will not leave me to die alone in fuch a place as this.*' " My dear fir, ((aid Albert,) talk not of dying the very firft hour you are beginning to live, I yet truft we fhall fee many happy years.*' He looked melancholy, whifpered fome¬ thing they couid not perfediy underftand, and appeared wholly loft in his own painful refledions. Edwin again addreffed him.— At hearing his voice he ftaited, and gazed on him with a wild and vacant ftare, as if he had never feen him before, looked at his drefs, then at his own,— feemed ftruck by the conhaft, and a faint fmile came over his
his features, best it was the fmile of internal f^dncis. It will not be thought fupcrfluous, per¬ haps, if we flop a few. moments,, in order to defcribe, as well as * r e are able, the face, perlon, and drefs, of this unfortunate young man. His complexion, irom never having been expofed to cither air or fun, .was whiter and more delicate than that of Madeline : his large blue eyes were fhaded by deeply- fringed eye dailies, and arched with eye¬ brows which the niceft pencil of the painter could not have improved. Flis face was oval, his nofe aquiline, and his mouth fo exquifitely formed, as to give grace and expreflion to ail the other features : he was much thinner, but fome inches taller than Edwin ; yet the whole of his appearance fliewed that confinement and ill health had ftolen, in their thievifli and deftroying pro¬ grefs, many of the natural graces from his face and perfon : his hair waved in carelefs ringlets over his forehead, and hung down fome
fome lengtii on his fhoulders; he was ftill wrapped in a loofe m rning gown, wore flippers, and his linen was of the fineft tex¬ ture. With fome difficulty, but not without the affiftance of Albert, they drew him by degrees into fomething like converlhtion ; hut he did not appear perk&ly to undc.ftaLd all they laid ; aud y when they mentioned the days beginning to lengthen, the increa¬ fing and reviving influence of the fun, the beauty of tlie mom and ftars, he fighed,— wiihed he could lee and admire them as other men did, and inquired if they thought any but himfelf and Albert were denied fo many of the bleffings whicii he had been told God had given for the ufe and benefit of all his creatures. Edwin replied, pain¬ ful as it was to recollect, he had no doubl but at that moment thoufands of his fellow- mortals fuftained even greater hardfhips and deprivations than himfelf.
14 Muft
* 4 Muft you and thefe fweet creatures ever do the fame ?" He hoped not, but fortune was fo fickle in the favours flie beftowed, and every thing fo uncertain, it was impoffible to tell what might or might not happen in the courfe ut a few years. 44 It is furely very ftrange, (faid the pii foner,) and I think thofe people, whofe hard hearts and hands contrived and made prifons, are the moft proper, indeed the only perfons who ftiould be forced to in¬ habit them/* This obfervation produced a general fmile, which they hoped would pafs unno¬ ticed, but it did not efcape him, and he faid, while a faint colour flu ihed his cheek 3 he knew he was very ignorant; but he begged they would not defpife him for fo great a misfortune. After this he only ven¬ tured to afk a few queftions, but at the moment of doing fo feemed to fhrink into himfelf,
%
himfelf, and to be aftonifhed at hib own temerity. This fhynefs -and referve they trufted would wear off, as he became fami¬ liarized to their vifits and converfation; they therefore took no notice of his abfence or timidity, but endeavoured by everv at¬ tention to draw him from his own painful and humiliating lefleclions, and by a few well-timed praifes ftrove to give him felf- confidence. After ftaying as long as time and the nature of their vifit would permit, and giving proper diredions to Albert in re¬ gard to the medicines and nourifhing refto¬ ratives they had brought with them, they reluctantly arofe to depart. Obferving their defign, he held his hands before his eyes to prevent his feeing them go, and exclaimed, " Don't, don't leave me !—I cannot bear it, I never never fliall fee you again :— you will forget me, you will leave me for ever 1"
His
His extreme agitation alarmed and af¬ feded them all. They knew not how to go, and yet to ftay longer might rifk a dilco¬ very. . « Speak, Rofeline, ifaid Edwin,) and if poffible quiec thefe diftrefling apprehen- fionb." "Rifeline, as foon as ihe coukl fufficiently command the tone or her voice, took hold of hi, trembling hand, which was cold as death, and gently intreated him to hear her with compofme. He looked at her with paffive acquiefcence, and fhe proceeded to allure him that it wan their united and determined intention to repeat their vifits as often as their own and his fituation would permit: but that, for his fake par¬ ticularly, they were under the neceflity of ading with caution, \nd carefully guard¬ ing againft the poflibility of a difcovery.— If he were fo much affeded when they kft him, they muft vifit him lefs frequently than they wiihed. 44 Ahi
** Ah 1 no, no;— do not think of me, or what I may feel : that is of no confe¬ quence, only fay you will come again and again." " On my honour we will, and continue to do fo while you remain an involuntary refident in this caftle," " I am fatisfied, (faid he, fighing in¬ wardly as he fpoke ; then, fixing his eyes on Rofeline,)—if you would come every day,—talk to mc, and look at me thus gently,—if you would continue to pity my weaknefs and pardon my ignorance, I fhould not think this a prifon but a para- due, and could be content to end my ufelefs days in this dungeon," This pathetic addrefs Rofeline could not acquire fufficient refolution to anfwer, and, while her heart felt intolerably oppreffod, the filent tears, which ftole foftly down her check, explained the nature of iier feelings. Madeline, finding the fcene was become too painful, rofe, and bade him good night. vol. i. H " Roieline
Rofeline gently withdrew the hand which ftir iome moments had been clafped in his, and Edwin, feeing the neceflity of imme¬ diately retiring, tenderly bade him fare¬ well.— Finding they were refolute to depart, he dropped on his knees by the couch, and concealed his face in the pillow. They infifted on Albert's not leaving his maf¬ ter, and hurried back to their own apart¬ ment in a ftate of mind difficult to be de¬ fcribed, carrying with them a variety of feelings, which, though new and painful, they wiflied fhould be regained in their re¬ membrance. As it was noW r two hours beyond their ufual time of going io bed, the great clock having ftruck the aweful hour of twelve, Ed a in, withe-tit flopping io make any com¬ ments on the fcene that had fo recently tcan red, inftantly took his leave. Made¬ line put on her night-clothes, and, after talking
talking a few minutes, funk into the lethean arms of fleep. Not fo her friend ; fleep deferted her pillow : in vain fhe fought and wiflied for its approach, to obliterate new and uncomfortable fenfations. It w r as ex¬ tremely odd that the image of the prifoner haunted her imagination with fuch perfc- Vering obftinacy, that, notwithftanding fhe clofed her eyes, flie could not exclude him from her mental fight; and, wdiat was ftill more ftrange and unaccountable, though fhe faw lie was lefs poliihed than thofe with whom ftie w r as accuftomed to affociate, without education, and entirely ignorant of the worid,—a prifoner for fhe knew not what, yet ftill flie thought, and was extremely angry wdth herfelf for fo doing, that he wa* the handfomeft man, and had the moft prepoflefling and elegant form fhe had ever fern* His manners too 1—could any thing be more captivating than the manners of this uninformed fon of nature, whom cru¬ elty and injuftice had immured in the dun¬ geons oi' her father's caftle ! H 2 A few
A few hours fleep might, and flie trufted would, reftore her to a more juft and ra- tiuiul way of thinking; if not, he who cauied her judgment to miilead her vvould perhaps be the means of its returning to its proper ftation. We will now therefo* * leave her to try an experiment, wdiich has often produced as powerful an effed, and, ftealing the mind by a temporary oblivion from the objeds of its fudden partiality, has likewife ftolen, by the dawn of the fucceeding morning, all recolledion of woes, which, in a mo¬ ment of unguarded fufceptibihty, had found a paffage to the heart. Whether it had this convenient foporific, and be¬ numbing property on the mind of Rofe¬ line, we are not now at liberty to declare ; but, if it fhould not, we hope fome of our readers will make allowance for the un- fafliionable tafte of a young lady, who lived fo many ages before themfelves; who was
was unhacknied fo the devious paths of life* with a mind unvitiatcd by pride or the pangs of envy, and who had feen little oc nothing of the world bevond the nrecinCU uf the caftle ihe inhabited,
M 3 CHAP,
CHAP. VIL
THE next day every one prepared with high glee for Ehvyn's promifed treat, and puzzled themfelves vvith various con¬ jedures as to what kind of feaft the mifer would fet before them. B^nha and Hugh Cameiford were very bufy after fomething which thofe who faw them concluded would be produdive cf mirth or mifchief, no two difpofitions being more likely to fucceed in a caufe for which their hu¬ mourous taleats were calculated ; while poor Elwyn, in fecret but unavailing regret, lamented*
lamented too late his yielding folly, in having been prevailed on to comply with wdiat he termed a very foolifli and unreafonable re¬ queft, viz. for fo main- people to dine at his e>pence: but this he wiiely kept to himfelf, well knowing,, if the party under¬ ftood his fentiments, it would expofe him to their whole artillery of wit and ridicule; he therefore made all the preparations for an excellent dinner, but his caution, bufy looks, anxiety, and diftrefs, promhed a much higher entertainment than his repafl could afford. The company affembled at the proper time, and were ieated in due form and order, Lady de Morney at the head, and Elwyn at the bottom of the tahle ; when, having helped moil of the part), Camelford re¬ quefted him io ii:nd him a ilice of a large rai'ed pie, which made a diilmguifhed figure. Bertha cried cut with wclhaffeded terror, w Don't touch it; 1 am fure 'tis enchanted ; h 1 4 1 faw
I fwv the cruft move," "Child, (cried Ladyde Morney,) wdua do you mean ?" " Wiiat I fay, madam, for inneed it was lifted up." 44 Take care what you are apout, Elwyn, (faid Camelford,) or, py Cot, }ou may cut off the head of a conjurer, who has jumped into the pie in honour of your feaft." " Suppofe we let De Clavering diffect him, (faid De Willows $) he is undoubtedly the beft hand at cutting up his own fpecies." De Clavering, who fufpeded fome joke-, cautioufly raifed up one fide of the cruft, when, to the aftonifhment of the party, out jumped a fquirrel. Happy in having re¬ gained its liberty, it (prang acrofs the table, and immediately made its way into Ede« lira's pocket, where it was accuftomed to run for fhelter. She was fhocked at the danger from which her favourite had efcaped, rarefied the little ftranger, and rejoiced at feeing it unhurt. Every
Every one was furprifed and alarmed at the unexpeded appearance of poor Pug, while the terror of the mafter of the cere¬ monies was fomewhat increafed, when he faw a diih of blanc mange, which one of the ladies was beginning to help, fall, and a variety of the moft beautiful fhapes ditfolve into water. This produced a general and hearty laugh. " Fine teccptions thefe ! (faid Camel¬ ford.)—I fuppole we fliall find in the reft of the pies life cats and togs, and lee little Pcrtha turned into a pillar of faU." As to Pug, he declared by Cot* Tavy Jones, and the tifel, he never faw a coat run fwifter oa his belofed Welch mountains, and he woukl pet fife hundred kineas he would not be peat if put in podily fear. The diih es were removed, and thole ori¬ ginally ordered now brought on to fill their place?, wdiich, if not altogether pro¬ dudive of fo much mirth, ierved to gratify H j a mote
a more craving and importunate fenfe.— Elwyn however was highly provoked and mortified at the tricks whicii had been played him, and fwore, if he could difcover the perpetrator, he would infift on an apo¬ logy, or compel him to take a little cold, iron. 44 That (faid De Clavering) would be Tendering your hofpitality too prof ufe. It would not only produce matter for conver¬ fation, but in all probability furnifh me with a job that might puzzle or improve me m the art of forgery -. and, as nature has entailed fo many difeafes on us poor mor¬ tals, methinks no reafonable man would wdfh to increafe themd* " But, were it not for the unreafonable, (faid De Willows,) you gentlemen of the lancet and gallipot would not find fufficient opportunities to employ your genius, and give fuch proofs cf yourchirurgical ikill and abilities." *' On
44 On my poor poty (fuel Hugh Camel¬ ford) I hope their apihties never will be tried. Petter to ear fquirrels, as Lhvyn would have tempted us to do, than be cutting up one another for pies and paf* ties !" De Huntinofieid unfortunately whifpered to Rofeline that he never faw her fo unu¬ fually ferious, adding, he fuppofed fhe was thinking ot matrimony, and advifed her to begin her attacks againft Elwyn, while the generous and hofpitabie fit was upon hira ; for, if ilie permitted it toe\apo;ate, Platus, in all probability would again render every avenue to his heart inacceflibie to the power of love. This remark brought the rofes hco her checks. She however denied having formed any deiigns on one whole p:wd<.minant paf¬ fion fet every other ar defiance, and decla¬ red herfelf perfectly guiklcfs of al! fuch h if- tiie intentions. The hint however was iuf- II (> fiviciit
ft ient to put her upon her guard, and flic exerted hei felf to prevent any further obier- \ ations of the like tort. Madeline, now fatisfied that the heart ot Edwin was as much the flave of the tender paflion as hu- own, and beat refpon- iive toher eveiy wifli, would have relifhcd the cheertul fcene, had ihe not, in the very moment of enjoyment, recollected it was rhe hift time, for perhaps a long long tire- fame period, that ihe ihould make one of the happy partv, Edwm, who careffed the nature of her fe/ing;, iv mpathized too much with her to be more at caie. De Clavering, wdio ob- fei ved them both, gave a humourous dif- fertation on the powers of fympathy, and execrated its effeds. The day however paffed plcafintK and the evening conclu¬ ded vvith a dance, iu whkh the lively Ber¬ tha was peimiued to join, and had her fa- veurite Hugh Cameiiorel lot a part ner.— Edwin
fkhvin widi 'rcvv vvith the ladieo at an early hour. Ihe reft of the gentlemen returned vvith EhAyn to hi apartment, much againit his inclination, an 1 did not leave him till they had literally fulfilled their agreement of emptying the mifer's laft bottle - 3 then y configning him to the care ofhis feL\ant, with difficulty found their way to their own rooms. Neither Edwin nor his fifter however haei* foi gotten their unfortunate friends. The former had ftolen an oppoitunity of con¬ veying a few nice things to the dungeon. Lad delivered them to Albert, and fpent half an hour with his miller, pro ui fing to renew his vifit in the evening, accompanied by the ladies. This threw a gleam of juy overthe countenance of the prifoner, who aflured him he would not ajah riiltrd 1 them by flic v. ing fo muJi reludance ;,i pairing. \!be"t v as p h d ! v Ed'M 1 t i'V -ce the neec!]'i\ \f Li i.n'^fj v !e.v« \v\ .j? to
to recover all that he had loft of his reading, and by that means acquire a proper and ufeful knowledge of the cuftoms and man¬ ners of the world, which would be abfo¬ lutely effential to the rendering it pleafant, fliould he ever obtain Ids freedom, and be¬ come an adive member of fociety. 44 I fliall find but little trouble, fir, (re¬ plied this excellent fervant,) in doing that which my poor mafter has himfelf been fo- anxious to accomplifti ever fince he faw you- and the fweet ladies, who have made cur fituation in companion comfortable. Na¬ ture has kindly done much for him, educa¬ tion fcarcely any thing. Now I forefee all will be right ; he is roufed from his lethargy of deiponding mifery, and laments his own ignorance in lancui'&e, that fhew him truly fenfible of it. He has infilled on being bet¬ ter dreffed againft the evening, and the book lias not been five minutes out of his hand- fince you left him*"
u I will give you all tlie afliftance in my power, (laid Edwin,) and fortunately at this time my father's ablence rende's tho defign lefs hazardous. I have likewife ano¬ ther plan in rny head, which i hope wiil not only greatly contribute to hi.- cemfou, bui do much towards the more period re- eftablifhment of his health, wdiich I now begin to think is not quite in the hopdeft ftate the alarming fitualfon in wdiich I hi it faw him led me to imafouefo Edwin next inquired of Albert hew Ifo mafter's wardrobe was fumifhed. £v I re¬ coiled (faid lu} }ou mentioned his defire ox changing Ids drefs. 1 can fupply hini with any thing he wranfo' " In that reipefr, fir. my mailer has no a - wfion to tax your bcunty. T03 s and line clothes were never denied, :\rd lor a lory time they had tl\eir influence, and U\\\d to amufe hiird* ** Good Gcri ! t'feid bccAinj rictt fhk myflciy c.uid ]y v >:■ W ■ d v
Albert fl;ook his head, and immediately withdrew. In the evening, Edwin, his fifter, and Madeline, vifited the prifoner ; but, if they were furprifed before at the happy altera¬ tion a few hours had produced in his looks, how much more fo were they now at ob¬ ferving the ftill greater progrefs in the im¬ provement both of his health and fpirits.— He was dreft in the moft fafliionable ftile of the times, with an elegance and neat neis that aftonifhed them : every part of his drefs was fuch as was only worn by perfons ofthe higheft rank,— his clothes richly trimmed, his ftockings filk, and his Ihoes faftened with gold clafps. At the approach of Rofeline and her friend, his eyes fparkled with delight, In fad, he appeared like one raifed from the grave by a miracle,—new fafhioned- and created. It was viiibie to all the party that his chief at¬ tention was direded to Rofeline. lie watched her everv look, and fhe language ot
oi »ps artleh (oui wai eafily read in every expreiilvo and animated feature, They were now tolerably enteric!, His Cc\r, refejve, rjid timid itv, b« .-an cr;cl i- ally to wear oflf. He e\"en ventured to uc- drefs a queftion io iVladei ne, arid to ga^e with tender earneftneis on her lriend. Ed¬ win, with an arch (mile, lemiaded them it would be time to retire, when Rofeline had given proper dircdions lefpefting her pa¬ tient, from whofe raj" id recovery he for .Hold the would reap fuch honours as would (irmly eftablith her reputation, as the firft female phyfician in the world, 46 And as the beft, the moft gentle of her fex," added the prifoner, biufhing deeply as he ventured to exprefs his gratitude.—. " I owe her more than life,—more than—" " A truce with your thanks, my good friend, {cried Roieline, now blulhing in her turn,) and prove, you value our endeavours to render you more comfoitable bv taking tllC
the utmoft care of yourfelf, raid by not permitting your mind to dwell on any cir¬ cumftance likelv to amtate and diiticfs you." He promifed to be direded by his friends, and to follow' ftridly all their injunftions. Again thev could not prevail on themfelves to leave mm, till the night was pretty far advanced. On receiving a promife from Edwin to vifit him again the next mornings and (mc from the ladies to be with him in ihc eventrp-, he faw them depart without any violent ${\ cation ; yet a viiibie gloom caul reluctance pervaded his features, not to be co.\ce;Jid by one who never had formed an i 'ca that it was eh>cr n^ceilary or poili- ble to cli.guifc the ft clings, or thfavo.v the fentimcLls ui the heart. Happy ftate oi unspotted iu'fu r pedh-g intefuii v ! wJiv u no panrs ot euiit harafb and corrode the m.nd with unceaiin?; an^uiih! We can ftarcely paw ail upon ourfelves (whea we
-'••* rt .oiled its incoiruptible advantages) to dnnk fijrii an enviable portion of internal peace clearly purchafed even with the lofs oi wtyj for, amidft all his fuftlring-, our atleis prifon:r could not recall one adion that hu"ghea» r y on his 'fond, cr that aaa- k.necl the fcorpion firing of a reprcaching confei'-nce. His hfe mi^it juftly be com¬ pared to the fpot lefs pagvS of a book, whole leaves no blot had yet defiled, but wluch jcmai ned properly prepaicd to receive the hdreft and moft Lifting impicffioas. The expected fummons for Madeline's return to the nunnery airived. However reiudant to obey to un.velcome a mandate, foe was oblfocd to comply. The parting betvvcen the lover.; w,;s attended wit a many uiccr '^rtable aiidi nnnleafimt feeling.— Mcku.v.noly pi\kcannc/ ts were encuiraged, which increa'cd rhe diilr.iifo of the mo¬ ment. She ctuld not fon e t tt e prifiner irithout Ilieddd i , m;nv (e if-. Slie even en- "vied his fault ion, ard wlien the comtai\ri a
it wdth her own, it did not appear fo hope¬ lefs and folitary. He ftill retained one faith- ful friend, and hed iate'y met wdth others, who, if not fo lon5 known, were equal!} attached o hira : he wo Id likewife fee Ed¬ win every day, while ihe, immured in tiie horrid > al o. a nunnery, as inimical to Lu feiicty as tho'e by wdiich he was fu;rounded had till then prov d to his, would be denied even the foothing influence of hope;—that ignis fat 1 us of the mind had deferted its poft 5 a d left it open to the fad encroach¬ ments of fruitle s and unavailing regret.— Moft feverely did flie now condemn herfelf for ever having quitted ihe holy afylum, in which, if fhe had not found happinefs, (lie had never felt fuch conflids as thofe fhe now endured. Lady de Morney and Rofeline accompa¬ nied her to the nunnery, and delivered het up to the maternal care of the abbefs, and the protedion of father Anudm. They both appealed pieaied and fatisfied with hei ready
ready compliance with their commands, and rejoiced to iee her look fo well. They had luffered .great anxiety on her account, and the father, who had vifited her frequently during her indifpofition, and had cherifhed but few hopes of her recovery, now toid her he trufted fhe would no more wi h to forfake their holy fanduary, -^ I e doubted not her illnefs was a penance inflicted by Providt nee for leaving it at a feafon fo j artiaila 1. ap* propriated to tiie facred duties of the clm re h. Rofeline, before [he left the nunnery, ac¬ companied Madeline to her cell, iiu abbefs having granted her this indulgence- Heie they unobferved gave way to the fad luxury of tears, Tliey wept on each other's Lof m, and the fobbing; Madeline, dedf to the* loathing confol;\;;ons cf h r fympathizirg friend, refuelled her to pret nt Ed a in with her grateful acknowledgments for his many kind attentions, aid wi ith in the moment ui parting flie was unable to e^preis. Stic hl'S'C'l I.
hoped he would not forget her, and begge i his fifter to affure him, that, if fhe were com¬ pelled to take the veil, ihe fhould retain hn image in her heart, though her life were de¬ dicated to the fervice of her God. She like a ife cautioned Rofeline to beware, and guard againft the fly and dangerous intru- fions of love, which brought with them in- Humeruble forrows and never to encourage hopes, as ftie had done, whicii ftie feared v/ould cad in difappointment and mifery. Rofeline knew thefe hints alluded to Ihc prifoner: the bluih wdiich tinged hei cheek convinced her friend ihe was perfectly underftood. Indeed, fhe had before ventn« led to tell her, that, in her attentions to relieve tlie miferies fhe commiferated, fhe might become too tenderly a fharer in them. and, in freeing the captive from his fetters. niight herfelf be enflaved. Rofeline thanked her friend, but denied the caution being nc¬ ceflary, and inftantly took her leave, in ordei to put an end to a converfation which no*v bec«*nK*
became unpleafant, and gave her more pain than fhe chofe to acknowledge. The evening, as may be fuppofed, pafled ilowly and heavily at the caftle. Roieline felt unfeigned regret at the departure of hor fiiend, and Edwin found in her abfence the deprivati n of happinefs > yet, as it was unavoidable, he dc termined a> much as poffible to conceal his diftreb from the pry¬ ing eye of fufj'icion, and lo employ every hour he could command, in the fervice of the unfortunate priloner, to whom he felt himfelf irrefiftibly and unaTouatab'y at¬ tached ; but Edwin, amidft his family at the caftle, was not lefs internally wretched than poor Madeline, counting her beads in her filent and folitary cell. At the ufual time PvOfeline and her brt - ther revi fit ed the interef ing objed of her compaflion. He expreffed Inch raptu/e at feeing them, and made fo many acknow¬ ledgments for their fiiendfLip, that their minds
minds became in fenfibly harmonized, and their attention engaged. Edwin now for the firft time propofed re¬ moving his friend from the dungeon to the haunted chamber, whicii no one dared to approach,, and whkh we before mentioned as havins: an entrance from the South tower. Rofeline obtained permiflion of her mother to keep poffeffion of the apartment into wdiich (lie had accompanied Madeline; there¬ fore they thought his removal could be eafily accompliflied without any rifk of a difco¬ very. It was agreed that Albert ftiould at¬ tend the cells in order to take away the pro¬ vifion regularly carried there. All thefe matters fettled, the following evening was appointed for the accomplishment of their purpofe, at the fame time Edwin cherifhed the moft fanguine hopes that, with the af¬ fiftance of Albert, and by means of the fub- terraneous paflage, he might fometimes ob¬ tain a ftolen interview with Madeline.
The
The next night Edwin, his fifter, and Albert, accompanied the prifoner to his deftined apartment; but to defcribe his gra¬ titude and joy, at finding himfelf in a fitu¬ ation fo comfortable and airy, would be im¬ pofiible. Every thing was new and delight - ful, and in the morning, when the light (which but dimly enlivened his chamber on his arrival) broke in upon his aftonifhed fight, his raptures were alarming, and his faithful attendant, with the utmoft difficulty, pre¬ vailed on him to confine them within the bounds of moderation, and cautiously to indulge himfelf in looking at objects fo fur¬ prifing, but to other people fo familiar, that they feldom could ipare a moment to contemplate them. When he viewed the fun, from one ofthe windows cf his room, rifing in its utmoft fplendor, had not Albert prevented him, he had lallen on his knees, and woxihipped the brilliant luminary.— He obferved the birds with ecftacy, as they lightly fkimmed vol. i. I through
through the boundlefs regions of the air, and liftened with a kind of throbbing agi¬ tation as the lark warbled forth her morn¬ ing oraifons, and, not till he had ihed tears, could he reduce his feelings to any degree of compofure. He admired the trees > his eyes refted on fome of the diftant hiho, and he toid Albert he did not think the world had been fo large and fine a place. He next amufed himfelf with looking round his apartment, and at every little interval gave way to the ciiuiions of genuine tranfport. Can it be wondered that fo helplefs a be¬ ing fliuuld feel, on experiencing fuch a change, more than mere language could ex- pre-ls 1 Liberated from mifery by the be¬ nevolence of ftrangers,—a thoufand comforts bellowed wdiich he had defpaired of ever tailing, his gratitude w T as as unlimited as his joy, and I am fure all my readers will pardon him for ftill continuing to think his bene- fadors more than mortal ; yet at times he would recoiled, with a figh of trembling regret,
regret, the dangers to which they expofed themfelves in order to make him happy,— Their parents, too, niight fhut them in a dungeon for their difobedience. Thefe re¬ fledions fortunately abated the fervour of his high wrought feelings, or in all probabi¬ lity he would have brought on a return of thofe complaints which had fo much inte¬ refled his you no; friends in his behalf.—In a few hours he became more eompofed, and endeavoured to remark every thing around him with ferenity. As he was now fituated, Edwin and his filler could fee him feveral times a day without inconvenience or dan¬ ger, and, to guard againft: any furprife, they had taken care to lock the door at the foot of the ftairs, flrongly faftened it within-fide, and concealed the key, that none of the fa¬ mily might wander that way. In the evening, a new fcene prefen* ed it¬ felf to the fight of the prifoner. The moon and ftars were pointed out to him by Edwin, At firft he mifteok the moon for another I 1 fun.
fun, lcfj brilliant, but as beautiful. The ftars he called little funs, and attempted to count their number ; and, while his eyes were railed in filent rapture to the fpangled firmament, he Inquired why fo much more prins had been taken to decorate the hea¬ vens for the night, when mortals flept, than for the day, when all nature was awake to wonder and adore. So delighted was he vvith the fombrc beauties of this all afto- rifiring fcene, that it was with the utmoft difficulty, after Edwin left him, that Albert could prevail upon him to think of retiring to reft. No fooner however was he con¬ vinced that his faithful attendant had loft in the arms of fleep all remembrance of thofe fcenes which kept him waking, than he foftly ftole to the window, where he re- mained till the dews of night and the cold blafts of an eafterly wind chovc him again to his bed. Tlie few neceffary articles which had been allowed him in his former abode were now removed
removed to his preft nt one, and fuch added as would tend to his comfort and convc- vience. As his food in the dungeon had been conveyed to him by means: of a turn¬ ing cupboard, his having vacated it couid not be known fo long as Albert attended at the pioper times to rccehe it j and, Ed¬ win h avine, fhe\n him another feci et wa}, which kd from under the ftairs in the South tower to his old habitation, he woukl be able to go as often as he pieaied, with¬ out any danger of being difcovered. It was now two months after th- 4 prifon* er's removal before Su* Philip -' Jorney was able to fix a time for his return. A letter then arrived, in wdiich he mentioned, that, by the end of another fort night, he hoped to reach the caftle. He informed Ladyde Mor¬ ney that he fhould brincra friend with hiai for whom he had the higheft rcgi ri, and he trufted ihe wouid make fuch ncceflary pre¬ parations for his reception, as would ferve I 3 not
not only to prove the fincerity of his at¬ tachment, but the high refped and efteem in which he was held by the reft ofthe fa¬ mily ; telling her it was no lefs a perfonage than Bason Fitzofbourne, whofe friend¬ fliip had done him much honour, and in whofe fociety he found pleafure. Lady de Mornev, who perfediy under¬ ftood b} her hulbancfs letter, how anxious he was that his friend ihould be received wich the utmoft fplendour and hofpitality, gave fuch orders as fhe hoped would pleafe the one and gratify the other. In the mean while, the prifoner made fuch rapid improvements, as aftonifhed and de¬ lighted his youthful inftruclors. He was indefatigable in ftortng his mind with all the knowledge the beft authors could im¬ part. With returning health Ins memory regained its former power, and all the na¬ tural and brilliant faculties of Iu\ mind re¬ covered their ufual ftrength, and proved he was
was endowed wdth more than common capa¬ city and genius. His elegant form, anima¬ ted features,—the ferene, enfnaring gentle¬ nefs of his manners, and the mild fweetnefs of his difpofition, unfolded themfelves by degrees, and endeared him beyond expreflion to his friends. As a curious and rare plant, guarded by the adive hand, and watched by the careful eye of the gardener, raifes or depreiles his hopes at firft putting forth its tender blof¬ foms, till a kind and congenial feafon brines it to maturity, and its beautLo, fuddenly burfting on the fight, prove an ample reward for his foftcring care,—fo did the heart of Rofeline expand and rejoice at every proof the prifoner gave of the goodnefs of his difpofition, and the fuperior excellence of his underftanding. It was clearly vifible to Edwin and to Albert that a mutual paffion united the prifoner and Rofeline, while every fleeting I 4 hour
hour ferved more and more to endear riictn to each other. Edwin, already entangled in the toils of hopelefs love, and enduring all the pangs of defpair ai^l apprehenfion, trembled for the fate of a fifter for whom lie felt an uncommon degree of fraternal affedion, but to whom he could not p"cvail on himfelf to mention a fubjed fo driicate and difi re fling. The prifone* made no at¬ tempt to conceal his ardent iove fo,* Rofe¬ line :— it was an effort as far beyond his cc-mprehenfion as his power, and, though he made no formal declaration, every word, look, and adion, betrayed the fituation of liis heart. Ofthe world he was totally ig¬ norant j of marriage he had not even thought,—that being a fubjed on whicii they had never converted, and his own fi¬ tuation, defperate and hopelefs as it was, novv fcMom engaged his attention. Rofe¬ line, and Rofeline alone, engrailed his every idea : while he fow her fmile, and heard the found of her voice, he vvas contented and happy, and, when fhe was abfent, the wifh>
wifli, of rendering 1 imfelf more worthy and bcttci .fole to converfe with li^r, ftimu¬ lated him to pay unremitting attention to* Ins own improvement, and the inftrudions- he received ; but, had he been aflured he fhould fee her no more, he would have funk into the fame apathy and indiffaence for life and its enj wax« its from wdiich her kind* nefs had drawn him. After Madeline had left the caftle, and before the return of Sir Philip, Cclwin, at the utmoft riik of a difcovery, which would have involved him and the objed of his re¬ gard in danger and difiicukies, prevailed upon her to grant him feveral interviews in the chapel of the nunnery, One night, Albert, having agreed to accompany him through the fuoierranean pafiitg \ rhe t -ena¬ bling nun met them at their entrance, and feated near the touib which concealed t ie door, liftened to the vows of her lover.— Equally reluct mt to part, they fit iot,g*r than ufual, and heard luotilepsia tlu t ! \q)ei. I 5 JMadolixiei
Madeline rightly concluded it was one of the friars come to fay mafis for the foul of a nun lately death When the ceremony was ended he departed, and, as the door clofed after him, the refolution of Madeline revi* \ ed. She knew if tliey had been difcovered, even the hie of Edwin would not be fecure, and that ihc ftiould inftantly be compelled to take thofe \o\vs ftom which there was no ft leafe but deatii. Pier own inrprudeiuc, and the danger to which her iovtrwaj evpo.'ed, ftruck fo for¬ cibly upon Iier mind, that alter he left her ihe could ficaiceb acquhe courage to return to the nunnery ; and, as ihe jailed the aweful and filent receptacles of the dead; fine was almoft led to thmk ihe heard a friendb \o. _e warn lur never again to be *uilltv of io iitcrileoi )i • a crime. She glided omckh bv the pravc of the niur who had been intencd but a icw days and even ima¬ gined ihe could percehe the earth move.™ bhe li-d no fooner reached the ceil, (into which
which flic hurried wdthout daring to look to the right or to the left, left flic fliould iee the frowning fpirit of fome departed fifter,) than ihe fell on her knees, and earneftly in- treated lorgivenefs of the holy viigin. The next morning, far from finding her terror* abate, thev gained ftill greater afcendrncy over her mind, b\ hearing that father Anfelm had been making Inquiries about fome foot- fteps he had obferved in the chapel when he went to early prayers. Recclleding the ungu-irded warmth of Edwin's temper, and the ea^er tendernefs with which in an hour of yielding foftnefs he prevailed upon her to indulge him with theie tlokn interview, fhe was fearlul of acquainting him tiutt it was her determination to grant no mote.— She wrote to her friend Rofeline, and en¬ treated her to perfuade her brother not to make any attempts in future to iee her iu the chapel; but to them ihe kit the power of procuring as many opportunities a? pof¬ fible of meeting without duiper. She fin¬ cerely lamented being obliged to d.ofivc I 6 forielf
herfelf of tlie company of a lover to whom ihe was tenderly attached, and for whofe fake fhe was become an unwilling votary in the fervice of her God. Tliis letter was inftantly communicated to Edwin by his fifter. He could not at firft be eafily reconci l ed to a meafure fo re¬ pugnant to his feelings ; but Rofeline ad- dine her intreaties to thofe of Madeline, and pointing cut the neceflity of it, he be¬ came more willing to obferve the greateft caution, and to pradife the moft rigid pre¬ fent felf-denial, in order to fecure his future happinefs. She reminded him that it was now four months before Madeline would enter on her year of probation,, previous to which fomething might happen favourable* to their wifhes ■. obferving, that their mo¬ ther could at any time prevail upon the abbefs to grant MadcJjn^ leave for vifiting t\iK caftle. Thefe arguments had fo much eff, t, that Edwin promifed his fifter to make no farther clandeftine attempts to fee her
her friend, till all other means were rendered impradicable. It happened about this time that Rofe¬ line w r as prevented, by a flight indifpofi¬ tion, from vifiting the prifoner for four or five days. At firft his alarm and diftrefs were unfpcakable. It was fcarcely pot fi ble to convince him that it was owing to iil health he did not fee her, and his rcftleis impa¬ tience would have now betrayed the fecret of his heart, had it not before been diico- vered. He neither ate nor flept ; all his fpirits forfook him : the fon was no longer admired, the moon and ftars were deprived of their luftre. He wiflied to fhun the light, and, had all nature been loft in uni- Verfal chaos, it had been a matter of in¬ difference now he faw not Rofeline: he wondered wdiat he coukl have found to ad¬ mire in any thing with which flie was not conneded. Albert obferved his mafter was very bufy with his pen, and, in removing a port- 6 folio
folio from his writing table, papers contain- ing the following fonnets dropped on the floor. He read and copied them, and gave them to Edwin the next time he faw him. Though they were written by one who had never drank at the Parnaflian fount, love had given fuch pathos to the language of tafte and nature, that he was charmed, and- could not prevail on himfelf to with¬ hold fuch a treafure from his fifter, to whom in juftice they belonged, and wdio Hke ano¬ ther Iphigenia had in a manner raifed a phcenix iivm the fame inanimate materials of which a Cymon had been formed. Rofeline, as (he read the interfiling proofs oi genius and affedion, which ihe wanted not to convince her (lie was fincerely be¬ loved, ihrunk from the agitated and tiem- blins feelings of her own heart, which too well informed her he had nothing to fear from not meeting an equal return of re¬ gard. Abfence had been as painful to her as
as it had proved to the prifoner, wdiom love had taught a leffon equally charming and delightful.
m*mm$mmmHf^f
SONNETS TO ROSELINE,
SONNET THE EJRST. All! what to me are birds or flowYs, The fun's mcft rad Lint li^ht ' I pioi away the ling'nng hours, And fiy\h for endLfs night. Tome, Roieline, lV.-ect maid, on rofes borne, Sweet as thjfeif,—uugiuuded by a ti.orn t
SONNtT THE SECOND. Fair Rofeline, why did ft thou chafe the gloom Which late euve.op'd my ben.glued mind ! Why didit tiiou fnatch mc trom a living tomb To figh my hoj>eidt> forrows to the wind ! Why
Why was 1 caught in love's btw;rching fnare,—- Bciiev'd thee gentle, tender, kind, and fair ! Now thou art abfent, tny defponding foul Has loft its wonted pow'rs in fad dfipaJr j Reafon no more my paflion can controul j Joy flies \\ ith thee, and nought remains but care, The hieifmgs thou haft giv'n no more have charms, And my rackVl mind U toin with wdd alarms. With foothing words thou didft my cares beguile, Taught mc the page of leirning to explore,. BaiiihVd defpoTidaice with a gentle fmile,— Then left me foi trary, CA, 3nd poor. Would'il thou return, and to my pray'r incline, M thiiiks a dungeon's glocm wou'.d be divine i If I no more thy beauties mufl behold, Death foon w.ll free me from this painful fmart j If a proud rival win thee by h ! ' yold, Soon will defpair and angui/h break my heart. But, though all cares, aii forrows fhould be mine, Heaven fhower its blighted gifts on Koieline I
SONNET
SONNET THK THIRD. No more for liberty I pine, '•^j more for freedom crave; M;- heait, dear Rofeline, is thine,-— T'r.y fond, thy faithful flave. Fii if tr.tigbt by thee I owAd 3o%e's pnw*r, AaA ysLt.'kd to njy chviiu , Sigh tinough ca.h fid ana chectk-fs how, Yet blefs thi; pi caft no rain. Sweet Koffline, my hen is tluiie, It beats alone fur thee \ In pity to my vows incline, Or fet the captive free. I ike a po^r bird, in his lone cage, J puv and flutter round, Suilt.i ;md fad, in fruitlefs rage, Vet ftill in fetters bound.
CH
WW>n>M««WBWaaM*pMMNMWWM>
CHAT. VIII.
THUS flood matters at the caftle, when Sir Philip de Morney returned, ac¬ companied by his friend, Baron Fitzofbourne, who was highly gratified by the cordial and refpe&ful reception he met with. Every one vying with each other in their endea¬ vours to amufc him, he affumed the molt conciliating manners, appeared pleafed and good humoured, paid the moil flattering attention to the young ladies, and bellowed the warmeft encomiums on their beauty and accompliihments -, at the fame time ad¬ miring,
miring, or pretending to admire, the ma- turcr graces of the mother, who had given to the world a race of women fairer than the firft daughters of creation, and, to ren- der the gift complete, had ftored their minds with a fund of knowledge that could put philofophy to the blufli at its own ig¬ norance, Sir Philip affiduoufly courted the Baron, feemed to watch his looks, and to make it his whole ftudy to oblige him,—thought as he thought, and, whatever he recommended, was fure to approve. Lady de Morney, feeing her hufband fo anxious to pleafe, fol¬ lowed his example, not doubting but he had good and fufficient reafons for what he did. She requefted her children ftridly to ob¬ ferve the fame condud, wdth which requeft they all at firft readily complied, and exert¬ ed themfelves to entertain their noble gueft. Edwin was honoured with particular marks of his favour and approbation : he promifed his beft intereft to obtain him promotion in
intiiearmv, when he found that was the profeflion for wliich he was defigned. The Baron was nearly as old as his friend Sir Philip. In £icl, they had received the fuft rudiments of the!'* education at the fame fchool, and under the fame matters j and, though their puifuits uere alike, they had bcAi thrown into very different fitua- tiens, but ever retained a pleafed remem¬ brance of their boyiih friendftiip, and took every opp^rtmrty of keeping it alive, and ferving each other* The Baron, though large and robuft, was neither clumfy nor forbidding in his appearance. His eyes were penetrating 3 he looked the warrior, and feemed formed to command and be obeyed* He was ta^l, and had an air of grandeur about him that befpoke the man of fafhion : his voice was not unpleafingj but he waa rigid and aiftere with his fervants and de¬ pendants ; and, though upon the whole they found him a generous nirftcr, as he had no¬ thing conciliating in his manner to them,. they
they took every opportunity of abufing him; for, though they durft not venture to fpeak before him, they made thcmlolves amends wdien tiiey joined their companions in the kitchen, by giving inch trails of his cha¬ rader, as not only fhocked them, but made them feci with redoubled gratitude the happy difliience of their own fituation. Rofeline, while me was compelled to treat her father's vhlior with attention raid refped, felt an im.':■!» ible dilguft whenever he addreifed her, aiid attempted to give fpecimens of his gallantry, which was often the cafe ; but, if he took hold of her hand, fhe flirunk from his touch as fhe would from that of a fnake, and trembled, ihe knew not why, if fhe law him looking earneftly at her fice. Edeliza laughed at a*;d detefted him. She flily compared him with De Willo.vs, and wondered how 7 nature could have contrived to form two creatures fo different from each other. Bertha wifhed to pull oiF his ugly
oreat wio- and to have it ftuck "mon one of the towers, obferving, that, if hii frightful face were iecn from another, no enemy wouid ever come near them. I low were they ail iliuck with forrow when they found he was to fpend the wdiole fummer at the caftle. Roieline, with more carneftnefs than ufual, queftioned her mother as to the truth of lii'S report, but received only an evafive an-scr, that tlie length oi the Baron's ftay depended on a circumftance not jet deter¬ mined. iC I fincerely hope, rny dear madam, what¬ ever it may be, that it will at leaft prove unfavourable to hib continuance here. My f itlier mav, and I dare fay has, juft reafons for efteeming him, though no one but him¬ felf can difcover them. Every one elfe dif- likcshim,andl Ihall moft truly rejoice when lie takes himfelf away." " My dear girl, (faid Lady de Morney,) confider the Baron's rank, and the dignity of Lis character." "I 4
44 I do confider them (fhe replied) as the greateft misfortunes that coukl happen to anyone, unlefs accompanied with good hu¬ mour and humility ; but 1 think it par¬ ticularly hard that other muft fuffer fo many mortifications becaufe the Baron is a great man." Again fiie was requefted by her mother, who could fcarcely forbear fmiliner at the fe- rioufnefs of her manner, to recoiled that men oi his confequence could not brm^ themfelves to ad as if they were upon a ieve with their imcrior^. 44 Tlie more is the pity, (faid Rofeline ;) therefore, my good mother, it would be un¬ neceflary for me to confider sny thing about the Baron's impo:tance, fmcc he thinks fo much and (o highly o" ir himfelf: but ldo not fee, tor my part, why rank aad fortune fhould tempi their poffeifors to aftume fo much on merely accidental advantages ; or vriiy people, diftinguilhed as their favourites, fhould have a gieater right to think and ad as
as they pleafe than thofe lefs fortunate. We were much happier and more cheerful before he came among us, and my father more in¬ dulgent." " Your fiither (faid Lady de Morney, with the utmoft earneftnefs) is, I have no doubt, perfediy fatisfied that he is ading right, and therefore you, Rofeline, muft be blameable in prcfuming to call his condud in queftion. I infift, as you value his and my favour, that you never again addrefs rne on this fubjed 5 and let mc advife you, if you wifh to be happy, to fliew no difguft to the Baron, but receive his attentions with politenefs and good humour." On faying this, flie withdrew, and left Rofeline, ftruck dumb with furprife, to form what conclufions flie pleafed. She knew not what to think from this unufually ftrange and unpleafant converfation, and could not comprehend either her father's or mother's reafons for being fo much at¬ tached to any one, whatever might be his rank,
ranks, who was fo little formed to excite any feelings but thofe of difguft in the minds of thofe unfortunate people with whom he condefcendcd to affociate. She faw and la¬ mented that, fince the Baron's arrival, nei¬ ther De Clavering, De Willows, nor El ugh Camelford, came wdthout a formal invitation from her father, while the referve which pre¬ vailed in their parties banifhed all that en¬ livening converfation that once rendered them fo pleafant. Her fifters too, the dear Edeliza, and the fweet Bertha, were kept under fo much reftraint before this great perfonage, they feemed almoft afraid to fpeak. Rofeline, to fhake off for a time thefe un¬ comfortable refledions, ftole into the prifo- ner*s room, in which flie feldom failed to find her brother: there ihe loft all remembrance ofthe Baron ; and, in converfing with friends fo dear to her heart, progreflively recovered that native cheerfulnefs which was one ofthe moft engaging features of her charader.— vol. 1. K The
The fonnets, which her brother had fo re¬ cently given her, not only ferved to raife her fpirits, but had made an indelible impreflion on her mind. She fmiled wdth fomething more than even her ufual complacency on this love-taught poet. Of his tendernefs and fincerity flie could cherifh no doubt. His honour and worth it was equally impofiible to iuipecl. No one knew them better,—no one eftimated them fo highly as herfelf. To fuppofe he could be lefs amiable, lefs de¬ ferving of her attachment, would have ap¬ peared to her a crime of the moft enormous magnitude. Thus did the fond effufions of love throw a veil over the eyes of their art¬ lefs votary, in order to give a fair colouring, and to reconcile her to a conduct which, in another, her prudence would have taught her to condemn •* but thus it is with too many erring moitals : wdien once they be¬ come the hood-winked flaves of any pre¬ dominant paffion, they are not only legard- tefs of the world's opinion, but infenfible to the fecret admonitions of that filent monitor, which
which they carry in their bofom. RofelLe at firft aded merely from the generous im¬ pulfe of pity and univcrial benevolence ; but, in io doing, flic admitlcd a gucft to difpute with them a phue m her breaft, wldch nei¬ ther time, reafon, nor prudence, could ba¬ nifh thence. Our art led s heroine was unfortunately the darling child of fenfibiliiy, and her mind fo iuicepiihleot ihe miferies and misfortunes of others, that, from the moment fhe dif¬ covered them, they became her own. Wdiat then mud be the poignancy of her feeling-, when fhe refleded on the dependent, help¬ lefs, and unprovided ftate of a kver, dearer to her than lift !—wlio dared not difclofj even hi> name,— whoic birmelefs conduct proved to her i):;nial judgment that lie fuf¬ fered unjuftly, and v.! ofe viitues could alo:;c reconcile her to herielf lor bavin.; rilked fo much on hir, account, and e mm tied her heart to the kee]rifig of one wh-ne ntuatioii precluded hope,—who had declared he be- K 2 Lny>:d
longed to no one,—a prifoner, a ftranger, without fortune or friends : yet, think as flie would, thefe cruel circumftances, after the ftrideft inveftigation, aded as a talifman in favour of her lover. The life, which flie fancied, under Provi¬ dence, flie had been the humble means of preferving, ihe concluded it was now her duty to render happy ; therefore, to deprive it of its value, by afteding an indifference ihc did not feel, was as far from her power as her inclination $ yet there were moments when flie recolleded, with the fevereft an¬ guifli, how much her brother, as well as her¬ felf, was ading in oppofition to the defigns and will of her parents. To deceive fuch parents was a thought which, in her moft itnpaflioned moments, fhe could not dwell upon, but love and fenfibility had woven their webs fo clofe around her heart, that ftie ftruggled in vain to difentangie herfelf from the bewitching fnare.
Senfibility
Senfibility I have long thought, nine times out of ten, proves a fource of mifery to the generous and benevolent, and as often is merely the boaft of the ignorant, wdio pre¬ tend to be overftocked with the milk of hu¬ man kindnefs, and whofe feelings are equally excited by the death of a hufband or a lap- dog. I am fatisfied there is no blefling more earneftly to be wifhed for than a calm and eompofed rcfignation to the events cf this life, and ail its complicated concerns.— It appears rather an Irifhifm, that to be happy we muft become indirfeicnt,—but fo it is. Real fenfibility is of all burthens the hea- vieft to bear. Long experience and careful obfervation have convinced me too pain¬ fully of this truth. A thoufand and a thou¬ fand times t have flied torrents of tears, and felt the moft tormenting anxiety for thofe who would have iecn me with the moft fto- ical apathy begging through the ftreets for bread. The pleafures attending high-raifed K 3 icnfibilitv
Lniibility are fo much over-balanced by the pnnful cfleds they produce, that I proteft I had raiher be an oak, or a cabbage, than a- live to fuch ever-varying and corrofive feel- inr% which nd: upon the human mind as fljw peifon would upon the body. When Rofeline was going to bed, the Servant wdio attended her, and who, from having lived fome ) ears in the family, was indulged in the habit of converfing fami¬ liarly with theyoung ladies, determined to get rid of a kind of confidential fecret, wdiich had been entrufted to her by one of her icl- lov 'ervants. " Laws, Mifs Rofeline, (faid flie,) what think >ou that frightful old Baron corned here for?—As I live I fliould not have dreamed of any thing fo ludicurft !"— " Came for ? (replied Rofeline,)— why he came to fee my father to be fure ;—what elfe could be his inducement for vifiting this flupid place ?" " Ha,
" Ha, ha ! I thought I ftiould poze you, mifs, (cried Audrey, drawing herfelf up, and giggling at her own confequence,)—why, as fure as you be borned and chriftcncd, he corned here to pick up a wife, if he can meet with one to pleafe his own fuperannu- ated meagrims ; and his man, Pedro, thinks as how a perfon I could name would iuit him to a tee, but I thinks otherwife.—Such an old frumpifh piece of crazy furniture, fays J, will not fuit any of the ladies that belongs to the noble ge niters of Bungay Caftle and its henvirons. ' You may be miftaken, dame, laid the fancy fellow;;—if they fuit my mafter, my mafter may fuit them fure, for he is as rich,— as rich as Cratus." " For heaven's fake, ((aid Rofeline,) what nonfenfe have you picked up ? You muft not prefume, Audrey, to fpeak of the Baron in fo difrefpedful a manner. If my father and mother heard you, I am not fure that you would be permitted to ftay another night in the caftle." K 4 "It
.. ** It would be a good ftory, indeed, (re- fumed the talkative Abigail J to turn away a fervant for fuch an offence ! As I have a foul, which, by the goodnefs of father An¬ felm, I hope to get faved, my heart bleeds for you, mifs, and I coukl claw out his ugly, flaring eyes for to go for to think that you, who be fo iweet tempered, and kind, and affabel, to your unfeerors > fhould have tonurfe his crazy old carcafe.—'Tis vexing
Rofeline had ftarted up in her bed as foon as fhe found herfelf fo ftrangely introduced with the Karon, and feeing that Audrey had taken up the candle in order to leave the room, gently called her back, and begged iome explanation of what fhe had heard, which Ihc declared herfelf unable to comprehend. " Mayhap you are ;—fo much the better, (faid Audrey.)—Lefs faid is fooneft mended, as I have gone to the end of my line ; —I may be turned away if 1 aftume to fpeak of the
the beautiful old Baron y — things will all come out in time ;—I can be fpedful to my betters :—they that like an old hufband let them have him ;—'tis no bread and butter of mine.—Good night, mifs ;— the Baron is a fine old Gracian, andwill make his lady marvelly happy." Saying this> fhe left the room, and Rofe¬ line was too much difpleafed to call her back a fecond time, but determined to queftion her ftill farther the firft opportunity. " The Baron came to the caftle for a wife!"—It was too ridiculous to be believed ; but, if he did, he could not poflibly think of uni¬ ting himfelf with her ! Servants were ever prying into the fecrets of their betters, or forming fuch ftories as only very ignorant people could think of inventing. She now went to fleep, forgot the Baron, and dreamed ofthe prifoner, whom her fancy reprefented as being releafed from confine¬ ment, and eager, with the confent of Sir K 5. Philip,
Philip, to lead her in triumph to the altar of Hymen. To the delufive excurfions of the foul we will for the prefent confign her - y but, before we take leave of the inha¬ bitants of the caftle for the night, we will juft take a peep into the kitchen, where,, around a blazing fire, fpread on a hearth four yards wide, were feated feveral of the domeftics, earneftly engaged in talking over the affairs of the family, each of them draw¬ ing the charader of their mafter or miftrefs, as the humour of the moment didated, and giving their opinions of adions, the motives of whicii they knew fo little, that they were juft as able to pronounce fentence on them as a judge without a fair and candid exa¬ mination. Sir Philip, it w r as faid, was become quite proud and penurious,— the young ladies troublefome,—and Lady De Morney crofs, whimfical, and fufpicious. Suddenly the . door burft open, and a young man, wdio had been for fome time an affiftant in the ftables, tumbled
tumbled into the kitchen, and, with terror depicted on his countenance, exclaimed, " I f aw i t> _I faw it!—I faw the light with my own eyes 1—- The ghoft followed me up to the door, and then vanilhed in a flafli of fire !— Shut the door, or it may get in !" This in a moment alarmed the whole iet ; they all crowded round the terrified man, and with one voice eagerly inquired what ghoft, what lights he meant ? a'id when and where he had feen them ? After drinking a copious draught of ale, he became able to fatisfy the curiofity he had excited, and told them, as he was coming from the ftables, juft as he pafled the gate of the inner bal¬ iium, and was within forty yards ofthe South tower* he law a light as plain as ever he had feen one in hh life, through one of the gra¬ ted windows, and, after it had difappeared a few feconds, it appeared again at a much lower window, fiafhed upon the wall, and fmili like fulphur. At the moment it va¬ nifhed the fecond time, he faw fomething K 6 ail
ad in wdiite, wdiich he thought glided paft him, but, on looking behind him, it w r as there alio, and it had adually followed him till he fell into the kitchen, " Then, as fure as we are alive, (faid one of the grooms,) Thomas lias feen the ghoft of the lady wdio died for love of the young officer that was put to death in the dun¬ geons. I have heard my grandfather fay a thoufand times he muft have died innocent, for he was as bold as a lion till his laft gafp." 44 Well, (faid one cf the women-fervants,) 1 ihall be afraid to ftir out after dark, if thefe confounded ghofts aie again found taking their nightly rambles, and prying into every thing that is going forwards." ** I always knew (faid another) tliis caftle was difturbed ever fince the great clock ftruck twelve twice in one night ; for what on earth ecifri touch it at that time, if it had not been a fpirit r" ; t4 Ah >
" Ah ! (laid a third,) no doubt there have been fad doings in the caftle." " Not fince we came to it, (replied an old grey-headed footman.) My mafter has pradifed no deeds of darknefs that would bring the dead frotn their graves. As to what was done before our time, that can be no bufinefs of ours, and I don't fee how any ghoft can have a right to frighten and interrupt, either by day or night, thofe who were never acquainted with it." 44 Chrift Jefus preferve us! (cried one of the maids,) I verily thinks 1 law fomething glide paft that door ! Surely fothcr Anfelni ihould be lent for to give them abfokuion.— There ! did um not hear that ruftline; ?" u 1 lee and hear notliing, (fold the before mentioned old fervant,) but what 1 widi nei¬ ther to lee nor hear \ ou are ail :\ parcel of iuperJhtiou^ ignorant i'ooh, a; h if mv mailer ihould once find out what e -waido \ou all aie, he would ioon compel \ou te^ give pkue to a bolder lit. Corn\ come let
us go to bed, and leave the ghofts to do the fame." The old man led the way with a candle in his hand ; the left followed, clinging to each other like a flight o^* bees, not one of them daring to be left behind ; and the groom, who had really fccn a light from the tower inhabited by the prifoner, was fo convinced he had C^n a ghoft, that neither father Anfelm, nor all the fathers in Chriitendom, could have perfuaded him to think the contrary ; and fo much had it alarmed him, that his terrified imi^Ination had miftaken his own fhadowfor tlie ghoft foil owing clofe at his heels, and it was with fome difliculty he could be prevailed upon by his fellow-fervants to go to bed, left he fliould fee it again. The next morning, when Audrey went to call her young lady, Rofeline requefted ihe would forgive her for Laving ipoken fo an¬ grily the j receding evening, and w th the moft winning ioftnefs begged to be informed \s hat
what flie meant by coupling her name with that of the Baron. Audrey, who had never before feen Rofe¬ line fo mudi out of humour, and hael neither forgotten nor forthen the affront of being prevented from difcletmg a ilcret which fhe had for feveral clays found very troublefome to keep, replied, " 1 couples no one ; matches are made in heaven, or in the church, or nt wakes ; but 1 think, for my part, fome are made in a much worfcr place, and io flic will think too who is tacked in hollybands with the old Baron." " But wdio do you think, my good Audrey, will ever 1 .e fo unfortunate r" " Whv w ill vou ax me, mils ? 1 muft not fpeak mv ten- terments; we poor iervants never kno i ^ nothing; but this ldo know for certain, u ever I marrks, it fhall be to a \oung man, a prett v -looking m m,— gooei humoured ones I loves,—iomething like Mr. Camd- ior 5—nut to an old crab, fiowrer than vine¬ gar,
gar, who would not fuffer me to fee wdth my ow n dear eyes, nor believe wdth my own natural fenfes,—a crotchcd faced toad, who would fhut me up for life, mayhap, if I liked a better or a younger man than him¬ felf,—an accident I think that niight hap* pen." 44 But how fliould the Baron find out what you thought ?" " By going to a negromancer. Such old cattle are to the full as cunning as their black mafter, and might ftrike one dumb/' 44 That, to be fure, (replied Rofeline,) would be a heavy misfortune to thofe who were fond of hearing the found of their own voice in preference to that of any other pcrlon/* i4 For my part, (laid Audrey,) voice or no voice, 1 verily thinks fomething mendufly bad alter ail uill happen to thi c crazy caftle, for Tlnuiwu foft night law hghts in the M»uthru\er, and the ghoft f-r a young wo- man folio.%cd Mm in fuch a hurry, that, if he lud i.et ran as> laft a* a hound, it woukl hav r e
have ftamped upon his heels. It went away like a fky rocket, and the fmell of fulphur almoft ftfficattd the poor fellow, who will certainly have a parhtic ftroke." Ladyde Morney's bell now ringing, Au¬ drey left the room, without having faid half fb much as flic intended to do about the ghoft, or unburthening her mind of a fecret fhe heartily wiflied to reveal.
CHAP.
| ! < UJlWLaU M WM«J!Jigj^W»»li<UUa l | i J^W «»g
C I-I A V. IX,
VI ^HEN the family met at breakfaft, ^ the Baron appeared unufually affa¬ ble, and Sir Philip in high fpirits. A walk was propofed to take a view of the town, nunnery, and environs of the caftle. Rofe¬ line and her fifters were requefted to be of the party, and they were very foon joined by De Clavering, De Willows, and Hugh Camelford. This little promenade was fo pleafant, that it feemed to harmonize every mind, and to produce a redoubled and grateful relifh for the early beauties of the infant fpring. 1 ° «Already
* c Alien ly now the fnow-iliop dar\l appear, (< Tlie Hi il pale blolT'jm of th*uiui<KnM jeu - , l( As Flora's b<citb, hy {"ometran^tbnning po-.\ V, ff licit! clia i^'d an ictc'.c into a flow b . " Its name aiifU.UL (he icentk^ plant rct"iiis, ** And Winter lingers in its icy vt-inj." The Baron, who had politely offered the afliftance of his arm to Rofeline, (which her father bade her accept,) whifpered feme very fine things in her ear in praife of her fliape, beauty, and underftanding, — told her it was a reproach on the tafte and judg¬ ment of his fex that fo charming a female had not put on hymeneal fetters 3—it was a pofitive proof of the blindnefs of the god of love. 44 Surely you forget, my lord, (replied the blufliing Rofeline,) that I havefcaicely left off my leading firings and am but juft libe¬ rated from the confinement of the fchool/* Age, he told her, ought not to be reck¬ oned by the number of years, but by ac- complifhnants and good qualities. " That
44 That kind of calculation (faid De Cla¬ vering) would make your age, Mifs de Mor¬ ney, more upon a par with the Baron's." " More upon a par, you mean, (added De Willows,) with our firft parent Adam." " What of Atam ? (cried Hugh Camel¬ ford, fkipping to the fide of Rofeline, and eagerly handing her over a little run of water they were obliged to crofs,)—■ what were you faying about our crate crandfather Atam r I have often wiflied to fee the old poy, and trink a pottle of pure water with him from the pond in die carten of Eden/* « Why fo, fir ?" faid the ftately and mortified Baron, who felt and feemed to fhrink from the contraft between the adive and lively gallantry of the giddy Cambrian and the flow and cautious efforts of his own. "•Why? — why? pecaufe he muft be a prave fellow to venture matrimony with the hift woman he faw/ 8 " How
^ How the devil fhould he do otherwife than take the firft, when there was no other to choofe 1" laid De Clavering. " The tevil however was even with him after all, (replied the unthinking Camel¬ ford ;)— the old poy had petter have peen quiet.'* fc * I do not fee that, (faid De Willows ;) and, as the mifchief was produdive of fome good, furely we have no right to criricife with feverity that condud wdiich was for¬ given by a Being fo much more perfed than the creature he had created." 44 That is as much as to fay, (rejoined Camelford,) that, when we choofe to play the fool, cofet our neighbour's wife or taughter, we have only to plame our own imperfed nature, repent, and be forcifen." " That would be to truft our hopes of forgivenefs upon a very fandy foundation in¬ deed, (laid Sir Philip,) as determined £ruib\ or a continuance in error, can have but little chance of immortal happinefs." " And
" And for our mortal ihare of that fame commodity, (replied the lively Hugh,) we muft not truft to matrimony, I fear, as I never heaid married people found their hap- pinels puilt upon a rock." This fpeech produced a general laugh, but Sir Philip, who was by no means pleafed with the fubjed, laid witii a fmile to the Baron, " Thefe young men think they know more than their forefathers." " By which means, (replied he,) they will moft affuredly entail upon themfelves the mortification of knowing lefs/* The converfation, during; the reft of the walk, was confined to foch objeds as occa- fionally prefented themielves to obfervation. The inhabitants of the town came to their doors to catch a look at the party from the caftle. To as mony as were known by the governor he fpoke familiarly, as did the other gentlemen, and thev concluded the Baron muft be fome very great man, perhaps the 3 kin g
kins; himfelf in difouife, becaufe he did not once condefcend to addrefs them. Rofeline chatted with fome younc: scirls who came out to make their beft curtelies, while the Baron thotrdit all thefe attentions paid to fuch plebeian fouls woaderfully troubletome. At dinner he fcarcely ipoke five words, ind Dc Willows wa. fo difouftcd with his forbidding haughtincb, that the next day he prefenred to De Clavering the following iat ire on pride, faying it was a tribute juftly due to tlie Baron for his fu¬ preme excellency in the difplay of that de¬ teftable feature in his character. Hell's firtl born exlukt.'on lure isprSuV ! Who, villi iti> i!(k., envy, woukl divide The various b'.dlbigs to per mortals gUen, By ihe kind bounty of in.'ulgent h-uven. What at the Lift liave kings 'o irnke them proud ! A gilded coffin and a Gtin Ihr^ud. The ioidly woim on tlicle will quickly j rey j For worms, like kir.^s, in turn will luve theii ihv, Wlut
What then ii man who boafts his form and make ? A reptile's meal,—a worm's high-flavourM fteak. The epicure, who caters like a flave, Is but a pamper'd morfel for the grave. Envy's a canker of fuch fahtle power, It fteals all pleafure from the gayeft hjcmr. It is the deadly nightfliade of the mind j With fecret poifon all its arts refin'd ; And, when attended by its vile relation, Would fpread a plague deltrucVrve to a nation. Then fend thefe hags hack to their native hell, With fiends and evil fpiiits formed to dwell. No more on worth let man look down with fcorn, And frown on thofe not quite fo highly born ; Nor, as the coaches rattle from his door, Boaft, like proud Haman, of not being poor ! Earth's doom'd to earth, all folly there muft end,—» Then lead, and own the fatirift aii lend. Madeline had been invited, and obtained permiffion of the abbefs to fpend the follow¬ ing day at the caftie. This gave additional vivacity to the lively fpirits of Edwin, who, with
with his fifter, fpent as much time with the prifoner as they could fteal, without exci¬ ting curiofity or fufpicion. Rofeline gave them with fome humour the ghoft-ftory, as imparted to her by Audrey, and cautioned Albert againft having any lights feen from the wdndows, left it ihould be produdive of fuch inquiries as might lead to a dilcovery of the rooms being inhabited ; but, not¬ withftanding all her attempts to fly irom herfelf, and conceal from the obferving eve of love her own internal conflicts, fhe was almoft tempted to throw afide the mafk, and at once confefs all her apprehenfions. How were thefe apprehenfions heightened, when, in the afternoon, her father to'd her in a whifper he wifhed to fee her in hk ftudy before the familv affembled at breakfaft, having fome intelligence-of the moft agree¬ able nature to impart, wdiich lie hoped and believed would make her one of the hap¬ pieft, as it could not fail to render her one c f he moft envied, of her fex. L Roieline
Rofeline trembled, turned pale, and took the earlieft opportunity of withdrawing, not daring to truft Edwin with her fears, or rifk feeing the prifoner for fome hours, left her agitation fhould betray fufpicions of fhe knew not what, but in which her terrified imagination confirmed all the hints her maid had given her.—Marry the Baron !—it was a thought fo unnatural, fo repugnant to every wiih, every feeling of her heart,—fo inimical to the ideas fhe had formed of hap¬ pinefs, that it was not to be endured.—She wept, wrung her hands, recolleded herfelf, and again funk into defpondency; but at all events refolved to acquire refolution to go through the interview with her father, and give him fuch anfwers as fliould convince him an union with his friend (if fuch was the painful fubied he had to communicate) wou'd make her the verieft wretch tfh earth. Her heau was no longer in hef own poffef¬ fion, but that fhe muft not dare to avow; all therefore that flie could determine was, to refufe
refufe the Baron, and to love the prifoner* and him only, to the end of her life. Thefe important jioints fettled for the prefent, gave to her perturbed fpirits mo¬ mentary relief, and enabled her to join the family without creating any fufpicion that they were unufually deprefled ; when, how¬ ever, fhe followed her brother into the pri- foner's room, it was with the utmoft diffi¬ culty fhe maintained any command over her feelings ; but, unwilling to alarm or diftrefs her unfortunate lover, till neceflity compelled her to acquaint him vvith her forrows, the only difference her painful ftruggles produ¬ ced was an addition of gentle tendernefs to her manner; and, though flie had often thought her affedion could admit of no in- creafe, yet, at this moment, he war, if pofli¬ ble, ftill more beloved, ftill more endeared by the ten thoufand uncommon tics which had fo wonderfully tended to unite hearts that appeared to be under the direding wdi of Providence. The next morning, pre- L % vioufly
previoufly to feeing her father, Rofeline once nore ventured to queftion Audrey, and fo ai neftly begged flic would explain all flie yueant by the hints flie had given refpeding the Baron, that poor Audrey, foftened almoft to tears by feeing her young lady really dif¬ treffed, no longer remembered her former pe¬ tulance, but readily complied with her re¬ queft, though, in fad, all fhe knew amounted to little more than fhe had already told \ — namely, that the Baron came to look for a wife io carry home, and ihut up in his old caftle ;—that the Baron's fervant had infor¬ med her he was in love wdth her young lady; —that Sir Philip liked him for a fon-in-law, and they were focn to be married :—r" But, Chrift Jefus, mifs ! he is fuch an infamy man, he would no more mind ordering one of his vaflals to be thrown into a fiery fur¬ nace than my mafter would killing a pig; and Pedro fays, he ought to have been put into the fpettacle court fifty and fifty times, for his entregens and fornications j for, be¬ fore his firft wife died------" " What
" What then ? ^exclaimed Rofeline,} has the Baron been married more than once P" " Blefs your heart, mifs, he has killed two wives already, and the Lord in his mercy fhorten his days, that a third may never fall into the clutches of fuch a manufador !— Mifs, I would not fortify my word even to gain a gentleman for a hufband ; and, as I have a Chriftian foul, which I hope father Anfelm will keep out of purgatory, 1 have told the truth, and only the truth ; you muft demonftrate with your father, but don't go for to get me turned out of my place for wifhing to prelerve you from being led< to the haltar by fuch an old imperial tafk-mafter." Rofeline, too much alarmed to be as u- fual amufed with the fingular oratoiy of her fimple but well-meaning attendant, thanked her for her good wifhes, and promifed never to mention the information fhe had commu¬ nicated. L 3 « W 7 elt
M Well, then, blefs your fweet face ! I'll be crucified but Fil municate to you all I can pick up. Pedro is marvelly keen and clever, yet he appears as innocent as the babe unborn, and for all he gets pretty gleanings and pickings out of hss old mafter* hehites him as heartily as I hates faft-days and confeffions ; for you fee, mifs, one does not like to tell tales of onefelf, and, in my opinion, fome of our monks and fiither con- foffors don't find in their hearts any ejection to us pretty girls." Rofeline, having difmiffed her loquacious attendant, endeavoured to acquire fufficient fortitude to meet lie. father with compo¬ fure, and to arm herfelf,with refolution to withftand any attempts he might make to compel her into meafures from which every feeling of her heart recoiled. She too well knew the warmth and obftinacy of her fa¬ ther's temper, when he met with oppofitioa in a favourite plan, not to dread the conteft. She now concluded, from many preceding circumftances*
circumftances, that the Baron was brought to the caftle for the horrid purpofe of be¬ coming her hufband, and unfortunately at this moment recolleded with redoubled ten¬ dernefs the very great difference between him and the man whom, by a chain of the moft fingular and interefting circumftances, fhe had been led to regard with a degree of af¬ fedion fhe fcarcely dared^ to inveftigate, and of which fhe knew not the full force. Her brother, her dear Edwin, too, had formed an attachment equally repugnant to the wiil and ambition of his father. The painful recolledion awakened her warmeft fympathy, and increafed her own forrows. ** Ah ! (fhe exclaimed,) how darkly over¬ clouded is the profped which a few months back feemed fo bright ! Well, let the tempeft come, let the thunder burft on my defencelefs head, 1 will-—-" Here flie was interrupted by a fummons to attend her father, which flie inftantly arofe L 4 to
to obey; but her trembling limbs were fcarcely able to fupport her, and fhe was obliged to reft feveral times before fhe could fufficiently recover herfelf to appear in his pieferxe, withoLt difcovering the long and few e e conflids fhe had vainly endeavoured to conquer. b.r Philip, on her entering the room, ea¬ gerly arofe to meet her, and either did not, or. w hat is more probable, would not feem to i o.icc her confufion. He tenderly took her hand, and led her to a chair; then, fearing himfelf by her, obferved with a fmile, that he doubted not her curiofity had been excited, and told her he would have a kifs before he would difclofe the fecret; " for the bufinefs (he continued) which I have to negotiate with my fweet girl demands fecrefy." Rofeline, afraid of trufting her voice, bowed in filence, but her manner fhewed fhe was all attention. u jyfy
" My dear girl, (faid Sir Philip,) why all this apparent tremor ? I hope you are, and ever have been convinced that my firft, my moft anxious wifhes are to fee my children happy."— (Then, thought Rofeline, you will not furely fo much miftake the road to happinefs as to propofe your friend to me for a huf¬ band.) " Baron Fitzofbourne has folicited me to intercede with you in his behalf. Notwitb- ftanding the greatnefs of his pretentions, he has even condescended, to entreat I would intercede with my dear Rofeline, that fhe will in due time permit him to lead her to the altar." Rofeline, extremely agitated, made an attempt to fpeak, which Sir Philip obferving, faid, " Attend to me a few moments longer, my dear ; I will then give you leave to ex¬ prefs your joyful furprife at the good fortune which awaits you,—My noble friend, from L 5 the
the very firft moment of feeing you* loved, &ad wiflied to make you his own ;. he^like a man of honour, inquired if your heart was difcngaged ; I affured him it was, for iknew you too well, my dear girl, to fuppofe you. would ever difpofe of it without a father's fandion. Eager to poffefs a treafure which had never ftrayed from its own fpotlefs man* fion, he then requefted my permiffioa to become a candidate for your favour. I rea¬ dily and freely gave jt, and encouraged him to hope he would meet neither with caprice nor oppofition ^ at the fame time I candidly told him, that, though my fortune was upon the whole confiderable, yet, as my family was large and ftiU might increafe, niy daughter's portions could be but fmall, —fo very fmall, that I feared it would prove an impediment to your union. He gcnerouily overlooked this objedion, and wifhes only to gain your heart and hand , wliile the fhare you would be entitled to have of your father's property he requefts may be given among the reft of my family, and
and He will make an equal fettlement upon you, as if you brought ■ him a large fortune. Indeed, fo noble and difinterefted were his propofals, that they both gratified and afto¬ nifhed me : they are fuch as no parent couid receive with indifference,—no young woman refufe. The Baron has not only a princely fortune, but a princely fpirit> and fuch un¬ bounded dntereft, that my Rofeline will not only fecure rank and fplendor to herfelf, but,will prove the fortunate means of ob¬ taining them for her brothers and fifters, and of making the laft clofing fcenes of her pa¬ rents' days happier and freer, from care than they have ever been." Ah ! tiiought Rofeline* and her own ir¬ retrievably wretched ; for, among all the treafures to be purchafed by this unnatural union, happinefs is *not included. She fighed deeply, and, without looking up, remained filent. Sir Philip, ratherr alarmed at< the altera* tion in her, countenance, which changed- L 6 fromu
from being extremely fluthed to the mod deadly palenefs ; and, obferving a tear fteal¬ ing down her cheeks, ftill appeared deter¬ mined to think he fhould find no difficulty in overruling ^any little objedion f flie might venture to n\ake»» He put one hand into her's^ and the other ropnd her waift, and again addieffing her, faid,, " He did not wonder that an offer fo fplendid and no¬ ble fhould affed and overpower a, fpirit humble and unafluming as her's % I always knew the ineftimable value of the Baron'' friendfhip, and am equally fenfible of tht rich prize I poffefs in a daughter ; but 1 never dared to cherifh the grateful hope that I ihould live to fee two perfons on whom I depended for fo large a portion of my hap^ pinefs united, or that a child of De Morney's was to repay the noble Baron for his gene¬ rofity to her father.*' " For heaven^ fake ! my dear dear fa¬ ther, (cried the almoft fainting Rofeline,) do not thus ieem to mifunderftand the nature of
t of feelings entitled to your tendereft pity.— I never, never can love the Baron !" Sir Philip haftily arofe ^ futy fiafhed from his eyes ; every feature was beginning to be convuifed with paffion, but he ftruggled a- gainft the rage he wifhed to fubdue, while flie continued,—" Confider my extreme youth ; contraft it with tlie. age of your friend ;—can I be a fit or eligible wife for a man older than my father ?—Without feel¬ ing any affection on my part, would it be juft or right to give him my hand ?— Would not that be to punifh moft. feverely # the man for whom you profefs a friendfhip, whom you call both generous and noble - 3 but for whom, fo far from loving, I have ever felt an invincible diflike, which fome¬ times, I have tiiought, if he flayed much longer at tlie caftle, would increafe to aver¬ fion," Sir Philip, wdio had neither expected to meet nor was prepared to encounter an oppofi¬ tion
tion fo determined, was no longer able to keep his paflion within bounds. 44 Rofeline, (criedhe, ftriking his clenched fid on the table, and looking with the wild* nefs of a maniac,) dare not prefume to che¬ rifh, or to avow, a diflike which will not only plunge a dagger in your mothers heart, but rob you of a father. What bufinefs can a girl of your age have to like or diflike but as your parents fliali dired ? — Give them up for ever, or accept the Baron !— How will you reconcile yourfelf to become an alien to your family ?—how relifh fpend* ing your days in a nunnery,, inftead of en¬ joying liberty and every pleafure in the gay funfhine of a court, glittering with dia¬ monds, furrounded by admirers, equal in- rank and fuperior in fortune to many of our moft ancient nobility ?—Confider * well before you determine. To. enable, you to conquer your diffidence, or caprice, one month I will give you ;—one month I will allow to the ftruggles of maiden bafhfulnefs, or
or the wayward humour of your fex. Yet hear at once my final refolution. % du¬ ring that period, you either alarm or difguft the Baron by your folly or ignorance* fo as to make him repent the noble overtures he has made to fecure an alliance with my fa¬ mily,—or if you attempt to damp the. ar¬ dour of his paffion. by your coldnefs,—tf at the end of that period you do not, with¬ out any vifible reludance, accept him as a lover, and promife to give him your hand, I will inftantly fend you into a convent of the fevereft order, and compel you to take the to1. j » Rofeline, overpowered' by his manner, fell on the iloor in a ftate of infenfibility.— Her father now faw he had gorra too far j he was alarmed ^ but, much as he felt, himfelf diftreffed, he too well knew what he was about* to call for affiftance;. he therefore, by the ufual methods, endearoured to recover her as well as he could, and, as foon as he faw her revive, fooUied her hurried fpirits with
with qyqyj fond attention, addreffed her by the tendereft appellations, and begged hex to have pity on him and on herielf. Rofeline, too much terrified to contend farther at that time, heard him with filent defpondency, and hoped the cruel conteft would be ended by her death; for, as fhe never before had fainted, flie imagined it was a prelude to her diffolution. Sir Philip, to reconcile her, if poflible, to his ambi¬ tious views, argued the matter with that fouhiftiy and art which in aU ages have been pradifed wdth too much fuecefs-; affured her of every flattering indulgence that a youthful heart could defire,— painted her future profpeds in colours moft likely to captivate the attention and enfnare the fen¬ fes ; and even went fo far as to promife, till the end of the month, he would not mention the Baron's name to her again, but infifted on her receiving his attentions with complacent y, and defired her not to make a confidant of any one in a mafter of fo mudi
much importance : he likewife informed her, he had foi bidden her mother's talking to her on the iubjed, and concluded this painful interview with telling her, he trufted her gentlenefs, duty, and affection, vvould determine her to oblige ai d gratify her anxious and tender father in the firft and molt prevailing wilhes of his ht art. Here- commended her to retire to Ikc own room, and promiOd to find a proper excuie for her abfence. After leading her to the door of his aparauent, he embraced and left her. Sir Philip de Morney, though in many refpeds a kind father and a good hufband, was proud and afpiring. Thefe paflions, as he advanced in years, gained additional af- cendancv over his mind, and as he faw his children approaching that period when it became neceffary to think of an eftablilh- ment for them, he was more and more anxious to fee them placed among the great. His lady, equally attadied to the fafcina¬ ting influence of birth and fplendor, had neither
neither inclination nor power to counterad his defigns, nor to difpute with him on a point to which her own wiflhcs tended. She was too partial, too fond of her children not to think they were calculated to uSinc in the moft exalted htuations, and that they deferved every bieifing, every indul¬ gence whicii rank or fortune could beftow. She had married a man much older than herfelf, and was happy ; therefore fhe law no reafonable objection in the difference of age between her daughter and the Baron, \vhofe birth carried an irrefiftible paiiport to her heart. Sir Philip had talked the matter over with her, and, with that prevailing influence he had ever retained, brought her not only to confent to any meafures he fhould find neceifary to adopt in order to carry his point, but obtained a folemn promife from her to conceal from Edwin, and every one elfe, the fanguine hopes they entertained for the 4>leadid eftabliflunent af their daughter.— The
The fad was, Sir Philip had at different periods of his life received many favours, md fome of a pecuniary nature, from the Baron, which had never been fettled, and had it not been for the affiftance of the Baron's purfe, he muft have deeply mort¬ gaged his eftates to carry on tiie law-hut, which, without the intereft of his friend, would at laft have terminated agunfi him. It was in confequence of tlieir unexpeded meeting in town that he prevailed upon him, with fome difficulty, to return with him to the caftle* What enfued was fo much beyond the moft flattering expedations he had ever dared to chcrilh, that the feelings of the parent were facrificed to ambition, and he inftantly determined to carry his point, let the confequence be what it would j and* though he had obferved, in the whole of Rofeline*s behaviour to his friend, con vin* ting proofs of that dillike which fhe had
in htr inftniew with him avowed, yet !t did not defpair of gaining his purpofe : hi was aware that he nifohi find fome link oppofition to his uflht*, and therefore, i> guard as cautiuufly a^ ] offibie againft dfo appointmem c , he fi^cl more than once re- prefented u> the Baron the youth, inexpe¬ rience, and c\tieme timidti{\, of his daugh¬ ter, and tho t--»roi ihe would led at being fe paratcd lion a nfiner trom whom fhe had ncvti be. 1 abiwiit. By luch wary precautions as thefe he had prevailed upon ius friend to poftpone making any propofals to Rofeline, till he had paved the way tor a welcome reception* To fuch a plan a lover could not make any reafonable objedion, particularly one who wifhed to have as httle trouble as poffible in the gratification of his defires.— Too proud^ haughty, and faftidious, to pay his court, or make any facrifice to the wayward humours of a young beauty, he fecretly rejoiced that her father would take tiie
the whole upon hmift-lf; and, knowing how agreeable the ottered alliance was to lum, he had no fears but as ioon as the young lady's confent was aflted, ihe wjukt be happy to comply ; he therefore looked for¬ wards with lefs impatience than he would have done, had any doubts refted upon his mmd.
CHAP.
CHAP. X.
NO fooner had Rofeline reached her own apartment, and faftened the door, than fhe funk on her knees, and having for fome minutes given way to the feverity of her feelings by tears and lamentations, fhe re¬ covered fufficient refolution tofupplicate her Maker to fupport and dired her in this try¬ ing hour of diftrefs. By degrees fhe became more eompofed, and fat down to refied on her fituation with lefs agitation and terror. Her father had promifed her, and flie knew his promife would be held facred, that (lie fliould
fhould be indulged with one whole month to determine whether flie would or would not accept the Baron: flie was already de¬ termined, but (he would avail herfelf of the few weeks allowed her to ftruggle with her feelings, and preferve the peace and tran¬ quillity of her family ; befide?, it was pla¬ cing the dreaded evil at fome diftance, and that to one fo wretched was obtaining a great deal. After the month was expired, (but to that dreadful moment fhe had hot yet ac¬ quired fortitude to look,) fhe fhould ftill per- flft in her refolution; till then (he would oblige her father all ihe could by quietly receiving the Baron's attentions; but fhe was refolved not to deceive him by appearing to receive them with pleafure. Madeline came fo fpend the day as had been ptopofed. Edwin found many oppor¬ tunities of renewing his vows, and of ma¬ king fome tender repra.ches for her not feeing him fo often as he wiflied by the fub- terranean paflage, for which ihe athgned 5 fuch
fuch prudent reafons, as ferved in fome de¬ gree to quiet his apprehenfions, which, how¬ ever, were rather increafed than abated by obferving the marked and particular atten¬ tion which was paid her by De Willows, who, it was but too vifible, cherifhed a growing paffion in his bofom, which equally tortured Rdeliza, Edwin, Madeline, and himlelf Rofeline generously determined not to interrupt the few hours of happinefs and tranquillity which her friends feemed to enjoy, by giving them the moft diftant hint of her own internal mifery. They took an opportunity of vifiting the priloner. Madeline was received by him with the cordial affedion of a brother, fori ihe was the adopted fifter of his beloved Rofeline,—the chofen friend of her heart. With him they partook that foft intercourfe of foul wliich gives to the human mind its higheft and moft perfect enjoyment. With¬ out fear or reftraint they addreffed each other in the pure and unadulterated lan¬ guage
guage of genuine tendernefs, mdu'^im ut the innocent and fond endearments wirch the fincerity of virtuous love wiil claim, a-d with which its puretl votaries might comply without a blufli. But how fliort and tranfitory appeared thefe fleeting moments (on which (he thought old time had bellowed an additional pair of wings) to the agonized mind of the Lali- diftraded Rofeline ! who, notwithftanding her father's proliibirion, determined in the courfe of the month to inform her mother and brother of evcy circumftance that had occurred. She dread v. d, more than flie wouid the ftvoke of death, imparting to th? unfortunate Waiter (flie had prevailed oa Albert to tell her his Chriftian name) that lie had a rivrri, who, authoriftd by her father, would endeavour to feparate them for ever ; and more, much more than for herielf, fh? trembled for that haplefs, perfecuted, un- proteded lover, at whofe bofom fate had already aimed fome of its moft j o.nied vol. i. M airows,
arrows, whofe life would be endangered, ihould her partiality be difcovered—that life on whicii her own feemed to depend : his happinefs, which was dearer to her than her own, refted with her only to preferve; if they muft be parted, the conteft could not be extended beyond the confines of the grave, and in the friendly grave they fliould both iind (heiter. The viiibie change, wliich appeared the next morning in the countenance and man- neis of Rofeline, was fuch as thofe only who dc termined not to fee could have a- voiced ohferving. Edwin, who met her as ihe was going to enter the breakhift-pcrlour, eagerly cried out, " For heaven's fake, my dear filer, what, in the name of ill-luck, has ha[p:Tied to you ?■—how long have you b:cn ill ?" With tender earneftnefs flie begged him not to mention her altered looks, promifing to acquaint him with the cuafe the firft con¬ venient
venlent opportunity. He agreed to com¬ ply with her requeft, and neither Sir Philip nor Lady de Morney took any notice ; and, when the Baron joined the brcakfaft-party, every thing palled as ufoal. He was very attentive to his fair enflaver, who, feeing her father's eye ftcrnly fixed upon her from the moment the Baron entered the room, dared not to repel his odious gallantry with the coldnefs and contempt fhe knew not how to fupprefs; but flie thought it better to yield fubmiflively to the mortifications of the prefent hour, in order to fecure to her¬ felf the fliort refpite from certain mifery, which upon fuch painful conditions had been allowed her. As foon as breakfaft was ended, the Baron and Sir Philip ordered their hories, and rode out to fpend the day at fome diftance from the caftle. Lady de Morney withdrew to give diredions refpeding fome domeftic ar¬ rangements, and the younger part of the family retired to go on with their ufual em- M 2 ployments.
j fo) ments. Edwin followed his fifter to her own apartment, and eagerly requefted her inftantly to relieve his mind from the anxiety he could not help feeling on her account, as he was certain fomething un- pkafant muft have happened. Gnlified by this proof of his tendernefs and attention to her happinefs, Rofeline, alter a few painful ftruggles to fupprefs her agitation, and having obtained a folemn j roinlic from her brother, thai, however pro¬ ve' fo, or whatever indignation he might kd when re became acquainted with her u.ta.,alai.d hopelefs mifery, hewould not b -t ay by the moil diftant hint that flie had onobcyed the pofime injuctions of her fa¬ ther, informed him, with many tears, of the Baron^ views in coming to the caftle. Edwin had long fufpeded fomething would arife from the frequent conferences of the Baron and his fiither, and the unufual referve of ids mother. He had likewife ob¬ ferved,
ferved, with fome degree of furprife, the very flattering and uncommon attentions paid to thrir noble vifit or ± he therefore was not fo much aftonifhed as ids fifter expeded lie would have been. He careful'v avoided filling her mind with unneceifary alarms at the moment he felt a thoufand fears on her account, and could not reftrain his indig¬ nation at hearing a tale confirmed v.hvh appeared too abfurd almoil to be believe;]. He tenderly embraced, and vowed to pro¬ tect her from fuch cruelty and opprenion, fhould his father continue obftinately to in- fid on her giving her hand to a man fhe dif] iked. He had long known her extreme partial] fv for the prifoner, which, though he could not approve, his own clandeftine engage¬ ments with Madeline prevented his attempt¬ ing to condemn. They hai innocently and mutually aflifted in bringing each other iuto fituations which threatened them with miny forrows ; they muft n«*>w in this trying mo* M 3 ment
ment as refolutely determine to extricate themfelves, and thofe they loved, from dii- treiils which otherwife would in all probabi¬ lity overwhelm and deftroy them. Edwin, at RoIciSik's earncft requeft, was. to inform Walter o( the dangers which en- conrpaffed them, and of the formidable rival \,\ho had appeared to interrupt their happinefs ; but flie infilled on his concealing from liim the name of that rival, beogina: him not to give a hint of his fortune or coniequence. Eager to fave her lover from feeling fuch pangs as fhe herfelf had endured, fhe entreated he would foften the fad tidings he convened, by af fui ing him he had no thiirj; iu fear from herfelf, as her affedion was equally tender and fincere. When Edwin had imparted the unwel¬ come news to the prifoner, though he ob-r ierved the ftrideft caution, and worded the heart-wounding communication in language beft calculated to footh and quiet thofe tor¬ menting ur
rnenting apprehenfions, to which it woukl unavoidably give birth, the effect it had on the unhappy fufferer was dreadful. His a- gonies difclofed to the aftonifhed Edwin the ftrength of an affection which, while it a- farmed him, demanded the utmoft pity ; and, at that moment, had he pofleffed the power of difpoiing ofthe hand ofhis fifter, hewould fooner have prefented it to his un¬ fortunate friend than to the greateft monarch upon earth. Rofeline dared not venture to fee him for feveral fucceeding hours, and no fooner were his watchful and impatient eyes gratified by her entrance into his folitary apartment, than he haftily arofe ; and, throwing him¬ felf at her feet, almoft inarticulately entreated her to pronounce his doom. " Tell mc, (cried he,) ifyou, my only earthly treafure, muft be wrefted from me for ever ? — if I muft no longer hear the foft found of that gentle voice, tweeter and more melodious than celeftial muiic ? 1 can M 4 die
die without reproaching, but I cannot exift without feeing you ; and I will never, never live one hour after you have given your hand to another.—Madnefs and torture are uni¬ ted in that thought 1— Let us fly,—let us leave this horrid caftle !— The world is all before us : love fhall be our guide. Surely we can find one little facred fpot that will flielter us from perfecution and tyranny; if not, we can wander, beg, and at laft die, together." " flave patience, my generous, my belo¬ ved Walter, (cried the weeping Rofeline ;)— I yet truft we fhall not be reduced to the hard, the degrading neceflity of taking fuch defperate and improper fteps to preferve out faith unbroken. Be aflured of this, and endeavour to reft fatisfied with ^ a promife I will ever hold facred,—that, while you continue the unrivalled poffeffor of my heart, only actual force Ihall compel me to give my hand to your rival; and I think I may ven¬ ture to fay, if I know any thing of my fa¬ ther's
ther's difpofition, unkind as it appears at prefent, he will never go to fuch unwarrant¬ able and unnatural lergths to gratify an am¬ bition I never fufpeded had found place in his mind." " Ah ! (fitid the prifoner) you little know, you cannot fufped to what lengths pride and ambition will cany unfeeling peopie. I am their victim, and if I thought you weie to fuffor as I have done ------" " Attempt not to think about :tfo inter¬ rupted Rofeline. " Confent then to efcape this very night. If we flop to deliberate we aie !oft,--wc a.e feparated for ever! Y^u know not what fuch foveas mine, when called into action, and bleft with liberty, woukl enable me to do^ to preferve a treafure fo dear and efti- mablc. Albert would go wiih u-, : with his diredion and aihihnce, furely we oaald pro¬ cure fufficient fiom the boweU 01 the earth to fur port you ui eafe and plenty, if not ia affluence." M z The
Tl e entrance of Albert luckily put an end to a converfation which was become too tender and painful for Rofeline any longer to have kept up that appearance of compofure whicii was abfolutely neceffary to quiet the tormenting apprehenfions of her lover ; fhe therefore immediately availed herfelf ot the opportunity to quit his apaitment, and re¬ tired to der own. Within rather lefs than a week after Rofe- tme's interview with her father, the altera¬ tion wliich took place in her was fuch as c *ukl not pafs unobferved, but it was wholly imputed to indifpofition. She became much t;.imier j the rofe of health was iled from a cujntenmce no longer marked with anima¬ tion. She had no fpirits, and was fcldoin focn to fmile; even the ph) ful fondnefs of her idler Bertha c.aicl to intereft or enter- t .in her. Lady de Mornev, who was a tender mo- rhc:\ bet ame alarnud, and imparted, her fears to
to Sir Philip, who endeavoured to laugh her out of them. " The poor child (laid he) is only a itth mother-fick. She is pining, I fuppole, ct the thoughts cf lea\ing; mamma : you mull therefore take no notice, lor I fo well knew the foftnefs of your difpofition, that a Ly tears will mould you to hv.r own way \,uri purpofe -5 , and deprive you oi all you: refo¬ lution. The unfortunate : r /-ri will, to fe fure, be fadly hurt at becoming a bar-^.c. , and being placed in a fitu-tion to which eve.i the proudeft arnbirion < f her parent-, a u'd not have afpired. We, therefore, have . nl ; to remain filent fpedators f;r a ti:ue, and leave the natural vanity of her fo\, uait.d wdth tlie fanguine wiihes t>f vndh, ty: ope¬ rate for themfelves. We w ift in/iL; lm.-:'»- pany to the caftle ; I mean to giw a b .11 hi compliment to the Baron :—R< .e'iiic will reign queen of the ceremony ; aikcLd by flattery, foftened by mufic. exhiurared ! / exercife, flic will forget to f\ n h in che rcif.d:
of gaiety, and ceafe to difapprove the Baron, when flie begins to feel that confe¬ quence which the being noticed by a man of liis rank will give to her." "Let us then try the experiment as foon as poffible, (replied Lady de Morney ;) for I cannot help thinking, unlefs fome change takes p'ace fur the better, our fweet Rofe¬ hne, inftead of bridal finery, will want only a winding flicct, and that flie will be remo¬ ved. fi\.m the caftle to her grave." Sir 1 hilip was difpleafed; he inftantly left the roan in order to avoid returning an anfwer which he well knew would have been fucceeded by ,\n altercation with his wife.—■ She law he was angry, and therefore, though ftie wa.-* extremely anxious on her daughter's account, flie determined for fome time to remain a pa {five obferver, let what would ic the confequence ; but flie did not ex¬ perience that ferenity of mind at forming this ivfedution which flie had done on fome former occafion?, when flie had facrificed her
her own will to that of her hufband ; for, afpiring as fhe was by nature, and much as fhe was always attached to the gaudy trap¬ pings of grandeur and the alluring founds of title, flie felt the life of her daughter, wdien put in competition with them, or even the throne itfelf, was of infinitely more. importance. De Huntingficld was at this time abfent from the caftle. Elwyn very feldom mixed with his brother oilicers; therefore De Cia. vering, De Willows, and Hugh Camelford, were often left to mefs by themfelves, the Baron not appearing to like being much m their fociety. They were too young aud too pleafing in his opinion, and, as he could not help fometimes making comparifons not much to his own advantage, it was natural for him to think the young ladies might do the fame. As the three gentlemen were re¬ turning from a walk, they faw the Baron, Sir Philip, his fon, and daughters, aoino-out for one. Obferving the ap.parcnt reiudant ftep
ftep and pale countenance of Rofeline, as Ihe walked by the tide of her itately and venerable lover, and having picked up fome hints which had been dropped at different times of the projeded alliance, De Cover¬ ing, with fome little indignation, exclaimed., " It will never do ;—1 fee it will never do ; —the girl's fpirits are too low, her uncor¬ rupted mind too pure, and her ftomach too we^k, to digeft fo much pride and acid as that eld fellow has in his compofition. His love feems to have operated on her feelings as being lo nearly allied to mifery, that the has already caught the infedion, and I wiih in the end it may not prove an incurable difeafe. Upon my foul I do not wonder at it, 'for he ads upon my nerves like a torpedo, or rather as the Greek fire did upon. our armies, exciting both fear and indig¬ nation." " By heaven ! (faid De Willows,) the folly and ambition of parents, in refped to their children, are, in my opinion, the moft unaccountable of human abfurdities. They
They form plans from their own paflions and feelings and then exped that young people can adopt them at their command, without making any allowance for the ma¬ terial difference between the fentiments, opi¬ nions, and inclinations, of nineteen and fixty." « Suppofe we all talk to the covernor, and tofs the Paron into the rifer. A coot tucking might trive all the flames and darts of luf out ot his pody, and reftore the poor cirl from the crave, to wdiich the toe- tor is for fending her like a tog, without giving time for Chriftian burial !" " To argue, or contend with fuch cha¬ raders (laid De Clavering) would be like oppofing a fiddle againft thunder, or a ibuirt againft a catarad in Switzetland." " Then, on my foul, (replied Camel¬ ford,) you muft take the Parorfts pody under your own tircdion. With your re¬ gimen, and a few of your teviiifh experi¬ ments, you will, Cot walling, foon difpatch him and his luf into another world." « That,
<( That, indeed, Hugh, woukl prove an cftedual cure ; but, in refped to the Baron, it would not be quite fo eafily accom¬ pliflied ; for I look upon him ftill to pof¬ lefs a conftitution that woukl fet phyfic and even the dodor himfelf at defiance.— He feems formed to wreftie ftu.dily with death b:fore he will be vanquilhed, or yield the conteft." " If you can once lay hold of him, and kif him fome of your pills and potions, he would foon be clad to gif up the coaft." « What, then, (faid De Clavering) you think me more dangerous than love ?—That little, fubtle, and revengeful god will one day bring you upon ycur knee^ before his flume for the affront put upon his all fub- duing influence." « He had petter let me alone, (replied the Cambrian ;) I am not fo plind as his tivinc highnefs, and will neler worfhip any cot put the crate Cot of heaven. Eteliza has taught you petter, De Willows: that 6 girl's.
girl's tell-tale eyes petray that luf has been pufy with more than one perfon." De Havering 1 uehed at thk unexpeded attack upon his friend, who felt a painful confcioufnefs that Camelford had more reafon for his obfervation th .11 le wiflied, the partiality of the artlefs Edeliza being too vifible to be longer miftaken. On his own part, he had, from the firft feeing Ma¬ deline, cherifhed an increafing affedion for her, while her uniform and unaffeded cold¬ nefs, with the preference flie had fhewn to another, too well convinced him he had no¬ thing to hope ; neither could he any longer affed to be blind to the mutual attachment which fubfifted between her and his friend Edwin, the latter having made no attempt to deny it ; but, being fatisfied of the ho¬ nour of De Willows, had in part entrufted him with the withes he determined to en¬ courage, notwithftanding the infurmount- able obftacles that appeared to preclude the moft diftant ray of hope. " That
c< That fame love, of which you are think¬ ing and talking, (faid De Clavering,) has fo many deviiifications in its train, I am de¬ termined to have nothing to do with it, till it becomes more rational, and can be reduced into a regular fyftem, by which we poor fhort-lightcd mortals may find direc¬ tions how to ad, without cxpofing ourfelves to ridicule or difappointment. I am incli¬ ned to think I fh ill one day or other be tempted to marry, but it fliall be to a woman who will take care to keep fuch ear-wig fort of "fellows as you at a proper diftance.— You tell fine tales are all fmoothnefs and deceit,— like a fnail can give a glofs to the path you ciawl over, and then leave fuch traces of your deceptive and invidious pro¬ grefs as cannot be concealed. Let the fub¬ jed or your next fatire, De Willows, be the male flirt,-—an animal more dangerous than a tyger." " Why 'fo ? M afked De Willows, deter¬ mined not to apply the hint whicii he well knew was defigned for hini. (i Can
" Can there (faid De Clavering) be found a charader more deferving fatire ?—a thing that boriows the form of man to difgrace the name,— an adept in mean ftratagcms and mifchievous devices,—infenfible to the admonitions of confeience,— well verfed in all the practices of refined crueltv,—work- ing like a mole in the dark, in order more effectually to enfnare the youthful heart of unfufpecting innocence, and that merely to gratify the vicious vanity ofthe moment; and*, after he has facrificed the health, hap¬ pinefs, and perhaps the life, of a young wo¬ man, wdio, by her tender nature, he has be¬ guiled of peace, he laughs at her credulous folly, and boldly declares he had never arty thought of making her his wife. That there are fuch men, who, under the facted fem- blance of honour, can ad thus defpicablw 1 have, in the form of one once dear to me as life, unhappily experienced, and from that moment I became the friend and cham¬ pion of the fex, and dn bold defiance to all fuch deceivers, I throw down my gauntlet." u Plow,
xi FLw, in the name of Cot, came you to be fo va h il, (cried Camelford^ ys to t link of tightii g tue ] s ilr other \ eop.e's paank- r" lw lLcauft ip my <d the ii.ir f-x are too ^i\0e to vhyyy^A tlu'ireiv^ s, tooartlefs for h:fpic : o , an 1 t ^ bvel\ (o fail a facrifice, witiiout r i y\ the hand of com. re to a- venpe ihrir i.rmt, ; f »• I riiink the man, who can tr lie w.u, ux peace of a ft How- crea¬ tuie, rji" be jtntiy compared to one of the cxha'uti ,ijs of heil, feni to deftroy and lay wafh the fmall portion of happinefs allotted to our moital pilgrimaged' <s Yi u aie waim, (faid De Willows, con- fiifed!) ;) pcrhaj ^ I have undcfignedly given j\ u pa ; n, wnhout knowing I interfered with the with s or prctenfions of any one. On irv hcLv^ur, 1 never had any; but, on a f il ket fo im] oitant, I cannot fpenk coolly, or canvafs it wiih indifference. I will be frank, and c wn I a hmire Edeliza ■* and, were her heart a c much in my power as I fear it is in
in your's, no man with impui.ity fliould wreft k from mc." " V/ell laid, mv prav? todor, ;c:ied Ca¬ me-ford ;) htt'e tan Cu; it rami ne\t take care ot himfelf, or v ai will be after tiffocting his cotlhip ; and, though the ^x>r cot h as plind as a pcctie, y^u will be for couchirg his eyo^, till he can ,ee as dear .s \ourieh.' 1 A fervant came to in \ lie ihem to J up vvith the governor and kisj.rtv, vd.ich luckilv put an end to a comw it :tfon that was be¬ come unpleaiant. It m?*dc Dc n iiiows ra¬ ther uncomfortable and fmd; in hi^ own opi ■ nion, and eompeiLd Lira to i\/ied more ll- riouflv on the fubied tl an he had ever done *# j before. Ol' Madeline it was tolly to think any longer. If Edwin, uiw uab beloved, dared not hope being bleft witii her hand, without the interference of a miracle, what chance coukl there be of liki fucceeding, for whom Ihe felt only the coldeft iifoiileience ? He determined to take his 1 crt leverely to tafk, and to—but it was iiiipoiiible for him at
at that moment to tell how he ihould difpofe of a heart which had received fo many wounch, that it fcarcely retained any of its native unniutilated form ; but, on a more ferious exaniination, he found a fomething lurkino in it that made him feel very reluc¬ tant to give up his pleafant and interefting inteicourfe with the tender and artlefs Ede¬ liza, which long habit had rendered more nc- ceilarv to his happinefs than he was aware of
&
PJ&&:
es
tr *-v
CHAP.
C H A P. XI.
npHR defign of Sir Philip, j a g [ v ing a -^ ball, was this evening made inoan, and the next day meflages were fent out to invite the company fcr that day week. Pre¬ parations were inftantly begun, and new dreffes ordered. Madeline and Agnes tie Cliflbrd obtained leave to be oi the party, and ieveral of the inhabitants of iiunpay were highly pieaied by receiving invitations. Rofeline, on whofe account, as much as the Baron's, it was given, wus tlie leaft gratified. An) ficei.e of cheerful r.eib to her was become a 'cene
a Irene of misery. Ikr fpirits deprefled, hei Wihi}* itftlfa chaos uf contending paf- 1: «:; , io\i'-i r. -t a hi.h a f:r:ie rav of hope ^r vo:iu»'rt tt> ^ ca'.e aaa\ t t x gi *um wdiich liiviv pr-wa'de*:. She no longer telt either pteafiue of confolation in her iloien inter- \iew> with her beloved Waker, which once .'tflhrdvd Iier fuch indefciibablc latisiadion. The; now 1a*v each ether with a ten¬ der djl^ ^ncience, wlficii ierved to deprive tlurn uf that refolution whic'i could atone iu,-:-ort tiicm in thofe trta'^ whicii no longer a: paired at a diftance, and Rofeline, finking under the burthen ot her own forrows, felt h:\ r :iJf totally unab.e to ihare in thofe wdiich equally overpowered her unfortunate lover, ir-jni whole prifon fhe never went, but he oucludcd it was tlie laft titne he fhould be indulged with ieemg her. Walter lizard of the ball, which was to be given in compliment to his rival, with that kind of contempt and tiembling indig_ nation
nation whfon a brave e;ficer feels at feeing o fome upftart ftripling ftepping over his head to preiermenr, and, by dint of mere ad¬ ventitious events, obtaining authority to lead thole whom he dared not have fol¬ lowed. It has always been faid that the fmcereft love could not exift without hope* In thi- inftance, however, the aifertion did not hold good j for, though hope was loft, love maintained its empire, and, environed with defpair, loft none of that tender energy which had united two hearts under circumftances the moft extraordinary, and in a fituation the moft alarming and dif* trefling. The condud of Sir Philip de Morney furprifed all thofe who were let into the fecret of the projected alliance. The Ba¬ ron's pride appeared to have infeded him with a mania of the fame kind ; and the unpleafant change it produced was not more inimical to the happinefs of others than he foon found it proved to his own. He was VOL. I, N T now
now feldom greeted with the fmile of af¬ fedion : he faw looks of diftrefs, and heard the figh of difcontent vibrate on his ear; and, whilft he condemned the obftinacy of others, determined refolutely to perfevere in his own. How much is it to be lamented, that, with all the knowledge he acquires, man knows fo little of himfelf ! How aftonifh¬ ing that a fudden and unexpected change in his profpects, or fituation, ftiould in- ftantaneoufiy work fo unaccountable a re¬ volution in his feelings, that he fcarcely retains any recollection of his former dif¬ pofitions !— and, ftill more ftrange it ap¬ pears, that, wdiile adverfity ferves to exalt the mind and purify the heart, profperity ihould harden and debafe them. About forty of thofe who had been invi¬ ted to the ball returned anfwers that they w r ould do themfelves the honour of accept¬ ing the invitation, Rofeline became fo much
much changed in her looks, appearance, and manner, that at length the alteration ftruck the Baron, and he mentioned it to Sir Philip. This produced a fecond warm altercation between him and Rofeline, wdiich ended as the former had done, namely, in the want of refolution, ftrength, and fpirits, on her part, to contend longer on a fubjed fo painful to her feelings, and fo inimical to all her hopes of happinefs ; for Sir Philip now infifted, and that with a degree of un¬ feeling ferocity, that flie fliould give her hand to the Baron within ten days after the month was expired which he had fo foolifhly allowed to her perverfe folly and caprice. Of this interview Rofeline faid nothing to her brother or the prifoner, but felt that her fortitude deferted her as time ftole away, and, with the deprivation of health and fpirits, threatened to leave her an un- contending and helplefs yidim to the au¬ thority fhe began to doubt having power N z to
to refill. Still ftie determined, if dragged by force to the altar, flie would refolutely and openly, before its facred front, declare not only her unwillingnefs to become the wife of the Baron, but her repugnance and averfion to the monaftic life. At length the anxioufly-expeded, the long-wifhed for evening arrived, and pro¬ duced an affemblage of as much elegance, grace, wit, and beauty, as had ever been colled ed together in io confined a circle.— From the focial town of Bungay fome very lovely young women made their firft ap¬ pearance at the caftle, decorated to the utmoft advantage, and juftly entitled to difpute the paun of beauty with many found in the hisrher ranks. On this occafion, it is not to be doubted but they cherifhed hopes that their charms would conquer fome of the young officers appointed to guard the fortrefs, on which the
the fafety of themfelves and the town de¬ pended. From the earlieft ages of the world, the old adage prevailed,—" None but the brave deferve the fair, 1 ' while the military drefs, fhining fword, and becoming cockade, were ever found ufeful auxiliaries in aflifting their wearer to find eafy accefs to the female heart* When the dancing was ordered to begin, the Baron, arrayed moft fuperbly, took out Rofeline, and led her to the upper end of the room. De Willows followed, leading Edeliza, who was dreft in the moft be¬ coming and captivating ftile, and looked fo enchantingly beautiful, that he wondered he had ever beheld her with indifference, or preferred another. Her expreflive eyes told a tale fo correfpondent to the feel¬ ings of his own heart, as completed its con¬ queft, and the captivity was found o plea¬ fing and eafy, it never afterwards wiihed N 3 to
to regain its freedom. Edwin danced with the gentle Madeline ; Hugh Camelford with Bertha, and the reft of the party dif¬ pofed of themfelves as their vanity or in¬ clination prompted. The dancing w r as begun with avidity and fpi it, whieh fome very excellent muik ferved t3 heighten and keep up. The Baron not unz/avefury exhibited his well- drefftd virion, -and this great perfonage had theVathfidijii of ieung that the eyes of the company w.re chiefly fixed upon him who had procured them this unex¬ peded indulgence, —a circumftance unufual in aa age when cxpeniive pleafures were confi icd to the higher ranks of life, and by that means lefs coveted by thofe in in¬ ferior ftations, whieh certainly tended to the good of fociety in general, as it ferved to render all parties contented wkh their lot. We now often fee, with pity and regret* if young people are thrown by chance into
into a walk of fife fome degrees higher than their habitual one, they feldom know how to return ti their former humble path without difcontent and regret, which will too often lead them to facrifice virtue, and every real good, for the frivolous non¬ fenfe of drefs and the parade of ceremony, while, to obtain the enjoyment of plea¬ fures deftrudive to time and real happi¬ nefs, they will give up their peace of mind, nor repent the poor bargain they Lave made fo long as they can live in ftile. Some few pitied, but a far greater num¬ ber envied Roieline for having made fo important a conqueft, and weie furprifed to fee how little fhe was animated amidft the exhiiirating fcene of gaiety and fplen¬ dor, wholly occupying the attention of one of the firft barons in the kingdom,. whofe fmile by moft people would be reckoned an honour, and whofe frown a- mong many was deftrudion from wdiich there was often no appeal. N 4 Every
frwry rarity that could be procured was (et hciore the party. Hofpitality and fef¬ tivity went hand in hand, and, to a care¬ lefs and uninterefted fpedator, it would have feemed that univcrial happinefs pre¬ vailed -, but it was far otherwife. Hap¬ pinefs is feldom found amidft a crowd. In, the moie retired fcenes of ferene unambi¬ tious enjoyment, we have a much better chance of finding that rant avis, and of re¬ taining it in our poffeffion, if poffible to be found. Sir Philip de Morney was tormented with fears that the obftinacy of his daugh¬ ter would difappoint his ambition, while the tenderneis of her mother had fo far fub- dued the influence of her pride, that, to fee her daughter reftored to her former health and fpirits, flie would gladly have yielded up the honour of an alliance with the Baron The
The artlefs unafpiring Rofeline, before ftie was brought into not ice by the proud attentions of her noble admirer, was a far happier being than ftie found herfelf at the moment ihe was looked up to as an objed of envy ; but the fimple drefs flie had been accuftomed to wear was more con¬ formable to her own unadulterated tafte than the fplendid habilimenrs with which ftie was now loaded, and whicii the pride, or do* f\gn, ot her father had procured to throw a veil over her fenfes, and tempt her to pur¬ chafe thofe ftill more brilliant at the ex- pence of her peace ; yet, notwithftanding all the fafcinating allurements with wdiich fhe faw herfelf furrounded, the court, adu¬ lation, and refped, paid to her, the eager¬ nefs of the company to obtain a (hare in her notice, her heart remained with Waiter* the unknown ftranger, who belonged to no onCj—who was without fortune, and depri¬ ved of that (reedom which is the birth* right ofthe pooreft peafant 3 ncverthelefs N 5 Walter,
Walter, in a gloomy imd I'olitary prifon, was an object more captivating and far more va¬ luable in her eyes than the lordly Baron in a ftately caftle. When they had danced about half an hour after fupper, the Baron apologized to Roieline for withdrawing to make fome al¬ teration in his drefs, which he found un¬ pleafant. She felt herfelf gratified by this temporary abfence, and took the opportu¬ nity of chatting with fome of her young companions. Deeply engaged in converikr tion with Madeline raid Agnes de Clifford, fhe did not obferve tliat her father was fuddenly called out of the room, and re¬ quefted by the fervaut in a whifper to haften with the utmoft fpeed to the apart¬ ment of his iri end. Too much furprifed to inquire the caufe, he inftantly obejed the fummons. On his entrance, I will leave my readers to guefs how much he muft have been alarmed and fhocked
ihocked at feeing that friend extended on the floor, wdth every appearance of death on his countenance. After trying various methods to recover him without effect, he ordered one of his people to call De Cla¬ vering to his afliftance, wdio, by fome pow¬ erful and proper applications, foon produced' figns of life, but it was near an hour before^ any of fenfe returned. He neither feemed- to know where he was, nor why he faw fo many people about him. At length, however, he recovered his recollection,— faid he had been very ill, but found him¬ felf better, and requefted to be left a few minutes in private with Sir Philip de Mor¬ ney, whom he beckoned to fit down by the fide of the bed on wdiich he was laid. The room being cleared, and the door faftened, to prevent interruption, the Baron grafped the hand of his friend, and in a. hurried tone, at the fame time looking a- round him with terror, informed him that he had feen a fpirit. " It ftood there !" pointing
pointing with his finger to a particular part of theroou Sir Philip appeared incredu¬ lous, and his looks were not mifundei* flood. " Believe me, (continued the Baron,) it was no delufion of the fenfes. I adually faw the ghoft of my firft wife as furely as 1 now r fee you, and as perfediy as ever 1 faw her when alive. She glided out of the a- partment the moment I entered it to change my chefs, which I found too heavy for dancing. She looked difpleafed, frowned flernly upon me, and fliook her head as flie difappeared. Her countenance was as bloom¬ ing," and retained the fame beauty and ex¬ preflion as when I led her in triumph to the altar twenty years ago." "Surely, my lord, (faid Sir Philip,) this fuppofed vifionary appearance muft be the effects of the diforder which attacked you fo violently, that it led De Clavering, as well as myfelf, to tremble for your life." " Say
« Say rather, (replied the Baron,) and then you will fay right, the diforder was oc¬ cafioned by the terror, which, in that mo¬ ment, indeed deprived me of my fenfes.— If I fee vou at this time, 1 then beheld the face, form, and features, of my once- loved habella, of whom I was deprived by death in the infancy of my happinefs, fix months after fhe had given birth to a for, of whom the fame inexorable tyrant robbed me in the fourth year of my fecond mar* page." Sir Philip found it was ufelefs to contend with his friend on a fubjed in whicii he fo obftinately pes fevered; and* though he was fatisfied that the fright was merely the effed of difeafe, he thought it wifeft to confine his difbelief to his own bofom, and drop the converfation as foon as poflible. He infifted on remaining with htm the reft of the night, and cherifhed hopes that by the morning this unaccountable vagary would be forgotten, or only remembered as a fiud- deu
den delirium, occafioned perhaps by heat, and the unufual exercife in whicii he had been engaged. His offer of fitting up was cordially accepted, and the two gentlemen agreed it would be right and prudent to fay as little about the ghoft as poflible, Sir Philip fecretly trembling left the Baron'* unfortunate whim Ihould operate fo pow¬ erfully upon his feelings as to prevent his - fulfilling at engagements with Roieline. This ftrange circumftance occafioned fo much confufion and hurry in the caftle, that the party feparated much earlier than they wiihed, and every one accounted, as their own humour dictated, for the fudden indif¬ pofition of the Baron. One or two, mor¬ tified by their pleafure being fo unieafona- bly curtailed, faid the old man had better have gone to bed at eight o'clock, or not have attempted dancing in a ball-room when he was dancing ou the verge of the
Sir Philip, with two fervants, fat with the Baron during the night, and in the morn¬ ing De Clavering found him fo much re¬ covered, that he advifed him to get into the air, as that, with moderate exercife, he ven¬ tured to pronounce wouid perfed his re- cove/y, and he would have nothing to fear from a relapfc, if he kept himfelf eompo¬ fed ; but tlut fame compofure the Baron did not find quite fo eafy to acquire as De Clavering imagined. The awful appearance he had fcen was not one moment from his remembrance : it ftill flitted before his mental fight, and iiis tor¬ tured mind prefented only Ifabella to his view. She had frowned upon him, ihaken her head, and vanifhed with a look of anger and contempt ; with this regretted and be¬ loved wife he had pafled by far the hap¬ pieft moments of his life. She wat> the firft, and indeed the only, woman he had really loved, notwithftanding the world had un¬ juftly branded him with being an unkind and
and morofo hufband. It had in that refpeft dealt by him with the fame injuftice it had done by a thoufand others. The delicate frame of Ifabella was wafting in a rapid decline, from the moment fhe became a mother. He had adored her, and watched her as his richeft treafure during the few months flie had lingered wdth him, after having prefented him wdth a fon : fhe ex¬ pired m his arms, and the fevereft pang ihe felt was being torn from them for ever. Why fhe fhould rife from the grave, why fhe fhould frown upon him, who had loved her fo fincerely, he could neither compre* hend nor reconcile to his feelings. With his fecond wife he had lived feveral years ; but all the happinefs he had found in the courfe of them was not to be com"" pared with that whicii he had c. joyed with his gentle Ifabella, in the fliort time he had been indulged with tl^e pleafure of calling her his own. By
By the fecond lady, he had feveral chil¬ dren, and it was the death of an only fur- vivingfon, at the age of fixteen, on whom flie had doated wdth an almoft unpardonable fondnefs, wdiich had occafioned her own. Having thus been deprived of two wives, and bereaved of his children, without hav¬ ing any near relations for wdiom h; felt thofe prevailing and powerful affedions which could lead him to pradife fell-de¬ nial on their account, he juftly confidered himfelf at liberty to endeavour t© find happinefs in the way to wdiich his ideas of it were annexed, and therefore made choice of the daughter of his friend, Sir Philip, to fliare his fortune, and inherit fuch a part of it as he fhould find her worthy to poffefs, if fhe did not bring him thofe who would have a more rightful claim to it. He had no * fooner recovered the fhock and terror which he had fo awfully and 6 unaccountably
unaccountably experienced, than he de¬ termined to perfevere, and accelerate all the neceffary preparations for the comple¬ tion of his marriage. He was now eager to quit Bungay- Caftle, and to return with the moft con¬ venient fpeed to his own, as he could not entirely diveft himfelf of apprehenfion, that he might receive another unpleafant vifit from his ifabella, whom, much as he had fincerely loved and admired when living, he did not now wifli fhould leave her giave to interrupt thofe pleafures whicii he an¬ ticipated from the nature of his prefent engagements. Sir Philip, who from the firft had fuf¬ peded the Baron's alarm and fubfequent terror to have originated from a more na¬ tural (however unaccountable) caufe than that to which he fo obftinately imputed it, made all the inquiries he dared rifk, with¬ out giving his reafons for fo doing ; but, notwithftanding
notwithftanding his moft artful endeavours, the myftery remained unexplained, and he was obliged to leave it to time, or chance, to develope.
END OF VOL. I.
