Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Clarentine: a novel
CLARENTINE.
CHAPTER VIII. THE entire and unexpefted acquittal that terminated Lady Delmington s letter, afflicting as was its general tenour, proved to Clarentine a fource of alleviation the moft cheating, and the moft grateful. Her heart, lightened of the heavy weight that had opprefled and funk it, whilft la¬ bouring beneath unmerited obloquy, now glowed with fenfations of affection and delight; and aflured that wheiever flie went, the efteem and good wiíhes of her friends would follow her, flie fnmmoned all her réfolution to her aid, in order to accomplifh the tafle affigncd her, with cbearfulnefs and re Agnation. vol. п. В Un
lïer letter to Kir. Lenham was natural unci reípeftfufi She began by apologiz¬ ing, after fo many years abfence, after fo long and mutual a filence, for venturing io recall to bis memory an objeft that muft be fo nearly obliterated fron) it ; and ■then, as a ftill further excufe for the li¬ berty Ihe was taking, made ufe of the i.ame of Mr. Someifet, and related in fim¬ ple and plain terms the flattering encou¬ ragement he had given her to apply ю Mr. Lenham for protection and counte - nance, fliould any unforciecn €vcnt ever lay her under the neeeffity of quitting Delmington Houfe» Such an event, ihe added, had now occurred; and it was the wifh of Lady Delmington herfelf, that fhe fliould hazard the application with which ilie was about to trouble him. Proceeding after this ίο ftate the na¬ ture of that application more at large« flie hinted next, as delicately as flie could, the ferms upon which, alone, Lady Del¬ mington had emboldened her to make fuch a requeft; and concluded by en¬ li eating, f nat whenever he favoured her vith an anfwer, he would be as clear and explicit upon that article as poffible. 3 Having
Having directed and fent off this letter, ihe would by the fame poft have written again to Sophia : but apprehenfive that Lady Deimingion might difapprove her taking too frequent advantage of the per¬ miffion ihe had granted her to continue the correfpondcnce, ilie compelled herfelf to remain filent till nie heard from Mr. Lenham, anxious as ihe was to piove, how liitie reality there was, in the idea her Lady İli ip feemed to entertain of her having conceived a ftronger degree of affection for Sir Edgar, than ilie had hitherto avowed. Nothing, in truth, could be more ill- grounded than this charge. That Cla¬ rentine loved him, in remembrance of .the early friendihip of their childhood, was fully fenfible of the goodnefs of his heart, and did ample juftice to his talents and his converfation, ihe wifhed not to difown : but that fhe now felt, or ever had experienced for him, that fpecies of preference Lady Delmington, m one pai t of her letter, imputed to her, fhe found herfelf ready, in the face of heaven, to «deny! Nor did flie think there was any meritin having thus withftood hım; fince ^ 2 Ed ga t ,
Edgar, warmly as he bad lately fhewn himfelf attached to her, had never before given her any reafon to believe him fo partial : but on the contrary, by his ex¬ treme verfatility, and inexplicable încon- iiftencies, had often led her to fufpect he was actually playing a part for his own private amufement, whenever he fliewed himfelf more attentive to her than ufual. Above all difguife herfelf, inexperienced, and diffident of her own powers of attrac¬ tion, it bad not once occurred to her that it was poflîble any human being could enduic a ftate of fuch perpetual anxiety, and undergo fo long and irkfome areftraint, merely from motives of concealed affec¬ tion for her, As he had now 3 however, entered upon her juftification, and made fo honourable a report in her favour, fhe hoped, fhould the fubject be again reviv¬ ed, he would likewifc undeceive his fa¬ mily with regard to her knowledge of, or participation in his fentiments. Whilft thefe reflections occupied her mind, as fhe fat near the window at which fbe had been writing, a fcene caught her attention from the road, which effectually banifhed every remembrance of her own concerns,
concerns, and left her only fenfible to emotions of compaffion and terror. A lady and gentleman, driving paft in a curricle, and followed by a fervant and a child on horfeback, had been flopped, at the moment of Clarcntine's looking up, by the cries of their little companion, whofe horfe trotting unguardedly on, had ftumbled within twenty yards of the farm houfe, and wdth fome violence thrown her to the ground. She was inftantly raifed, and carried to a bank by the fide of the road, where the lady, who had already alighted, was fup- porting and foothing her, when Claren¬ tine, Jbrcathlefs with eagernefs, ran om to offer her fervices, and to entreat the little fufferer might be carried into the houfe, till it was known whether fhe had not re¬ ceived any injury that required immedi¬ ate attention. The lady, ftruck by her appearance, and the benevolent earneftncfs with which ľne fpoke, looked up at her wdth ex¬ treme furprife, and after a moment's he¬ fitation, thanked her for the offer, and rifing with the child in her arms, prepared, as well as the gentleman who liad driven В 3 her,
her, to follow whither fhe chofe to- lead» On their entrance into the houfe they weie met by Madame d'Arzele, who írom ber own window, which was juft over that of Clarentine, having likewife be¬ held the wdiole tranfaftion, was now on the point of milling 'out with the fame friendly i mentions. Sh-~ hurried them all into the pai lour; ?nd then, finding for her maid, an expe¬ rienced ία tendant upon children, rccourfe vas had to the common application made ufe of upon fuch occafions; and in a fhort time the little girl, being but very flightly Lurt, fmiled upon her new friends with •ajhilionaíe gladneb, and ^iih far more ieitfibility than could have been expected from her age, gsatefully repeated to them fbe thanks and apologies the lady dic¬ tated to her. As tbc two fl rangers both fpoke French vtry fluently, and feemed particularly charmed by the manners and converfa¬ tion of Madame d'Ai zele, to whom Cla* remine willingly refigned the taik of en¬ tertaining them, it was with evident re- iikiancc they at length rofe to depart*
Af the door, whither Ciarentine attended them, they entreated permiífion to call again; and the lady informing her of ber name and abode, added, that before íhe and her friend left Sidmouth, (lie ihould likewife hope for tbe honour of feeing them at her own lodging. Clarentine curtfying in filence, took ihe direction that was offered her, and the next minate, tbe curricle being brought to the door, they lifted the intèrcíting lit¬ tle girl into it, and placing themfclves on each fide her, drove her away. ** Eh bien," cried Madame d'Arzele, when Clarentine went back to ber, <é com¬ ment trouvez-vous notre inconnue? EUe aun petit minois de fan t ai/i e qui me piait beaucoup; et en converfation, pi- quante et enjouée me paroit remplie d'efprit et d'agrément."* Clarentine fmiled, and anfwered, 4S If I honeiììy confefs, that I was more ftruck by the expreffion of iincerity and good¬ nefs that marked the countenance of the gentleman, than by the fparkling vivacity
В 4 of
oí his brilliant companion, what will you hy to me r'* 46 That your tafte is more folid than my own· and that in ail probability you are perfectly right: but ihe w me their caid." Clai entine did fo, and Madame d'Ar¬ zelc read aloud the names of Admiral Compton, and Mrs. Henry Hertford. «* Admiral!" repeated ilie, u then, pi thaus, Clai entine, he knows your friend Captain Somerfet î ' CI trentine fliook her head with a look of incredulity, and the tears ftarted into her eyes, which Madame d'Aizele ob- for ing, inftantly changed the fubjeftj and foon after they were called to din¬ ner. In the evening, Clarentine, who had not been out for fome days, and was anxious, as much as poffible, to difi fipatc her mind, and drive away the me¬ lancholy ideas that perpetually obtruded them fel ves, obtained Madame d'Arzele's permiífion to take Pauline with her, and fet out on a walk towards the fea fide. Upon their arrival at the beash, not finding any company there, Clarentine fea te d
feated herfelf upon the edge of a fmall boat, which had lately been drawn out of the water to undergo fome repairs, whilft her little friend wandering about in fcarch of fheils and weeds, found a fpecies of intereft and amufement in attending to the occupation of a party of poor fiiher- men, who, immediately oppofite to the italioti fhe had chofen, were b u fil y employed in dragging up their nets ; and whofe diftant voices, as they were occa- fionally raifed or depreffed, taught bet- how to judge of their fuccefs, or how to pity their difappointment, Whilft engaged in this contemplation, time infenfibly itole on, and the fun had already been fet fome minutes before Clarentine recollected the hour,or thought of returning; rifing at length, however, and looking round for her young com™ panion, what was her furprife to fee her advancing with a gentleman who held her hand, and whom, as they drew nearer, ftie difeovered to be Mr. Ekham. Haftening forward the moment he caught her "eye, and gaily addreflmg her—" Oh, that Ì were a poet/' ex¬ claimed he <6 to celebrate, as it deferves, Б £ this
this romantic fcene, and die lovefy fea> nymph that contributes fo much to em- bellifh it ! Clarentine, to whom, fince fhe waa grown hopelefs of ever revifiung Dek mington herfelf, the fight of any one fhe had formerly known there afforded a fort of melancholy gratification, now beheld Mr. Ehlfam with inore pleafure than Ihe had ever before experienced, and fmiling at the flightinefs with which he began the converiation, rallied him upon his un- fafliionable gallantry, and exprcffed her wonder at feeing him thus unexpectedly at Sidmouth. Delighted at a reception that partook fo little of the frigid folemnity that had hitherto marked her conduct towards him, and conftruing this change into a favour¬ able omen, Eltham, in high good hu¬ mours as they proceeded towards the farm* houfe, at which Clarentine tended^ began an account of his journey, and of the mo« lives that had prompted him to undertake it; the principle one of which, he very ferioufly averred, was ill-healths and the great defire he had to try ica-bathing, and change of air I Clarentine«
Clarentine, half tempted to laugh at an affertion, his looks and whole appearance fo direftlv contradifted, yet judging it beft not to betray her incredulity, com¬ pelled herfelf to exprefs fome degree of concern upon the occafion; and then, giving a different turn to the converfa¬ tion, afked him how long it was fince he had fecn any of the family at Delming¬ ton. u I was there yefterday," anfwered he, " and had the pleafure of a fhort lête-à-tête with Mrs. Harrington, by whom I was received." u Did you fee no one elfe ? neither Lady Julia, nor Sophia r" u Oh yes; they both came down before 1 went away. The latter had been fitting with her bro¬ ther, wdio is now fufficicntly recovered to bear reading aloud, and, I believe, begins to walk about his room. í was not admitted to him of courfc : but I bear he looks extremely iff and is lowdprhed to a degree that render him abfolutely nervous " Clarentine fighed at this melancholy information, and for fome minutes, there was a mutual and total filence· Ehham, « a о at
at length, however, addrefling her agam f faid— 4fe Have you formed any acquaintance^ Mifs Delmington, fince you came here? Do you go out at all Г 3 64 No, fcarceiy ever, unlefs it is to walk with the children/* 44 You know none of the people then in this neighbourhood ?" u Yes, one lady there is, whom acci¬ dent introduced to us. Her name is Hertford; fhe is a married woman, and was accompanied by a gentleman who being much older than herfelf, is proba¬ bly either her uncle, or her father/* 4 * And this gentleman/' cried Elthlâm, with fome earneftncfs, u what is he called?" u Compton !" anfwered Clarentine.— 44 A ílmi ral Compton î? —- u The very wo¬ man !" exclaimed Eltham, with a wicked, though half fuppreflcd laugh.— 44 Poor Harry Hertford's widow! And fo, Mifs Delmington/' continued he, a you tell me this lady is at Sidmouth? Pray, how often have you feen her ?" 44 Only once/' anfwered Clarentine. u But pray tell me likewife, what you know
know about her, and why you laughed, when I fpoke of her?" ^ Aye," cried he. " Firft, however, iet me aik, did you like her ? " That is nothing to the purpofe," an¬ fwered Clarentine; " if I fay I did, it will probably prevent your giving me the ¿¿count I folicit ; and if i fay I did not 9 it might lead you to be more fevere than you would otherwife think right.·— Excufe my fpeaking oi her, therefore, at ан. u I do affure you/' cried he, after a moment's rcflečlion, refuming a graver look, α thefe ferupies are very unnc¬ ceffary. I know nothing of the lady that ought to be ferioufly conftrued to her difadvantage ; and if you could tell me where flie lodges, I woukl go and pay my reipects to her and the Admiral to¬ morrow." 46 I have no right then/' cried Claren¬ tine, " to enquire further, nor do î mean it. Only this, Mr. Eltham, let mc fay ; if you believe, or have any juft reafon to fufpect Mrs. Hertford is not in every re¬ fpečt a proper acquaintance for Madame d'Arzele 9 you do very wrong to deny it; fillCCj
fince, without any injury m the lady's re* putation, you might put her on her guard ãgainft contracting an intimacy, which, at fome future period, ihe may have reafon to repent ; as for те ъ I fhall not long be in any danger of meeting her; nor, if 1 were, do î think the world would be fb fevere upon me, as upon a defencekfs young foreigner in Madame d'Arzek's fituation, deÜitute as ihe is of advocates, and Mtterly unknown as are her princi' ples and chara8er. Tell me therefore honeftly, Mr. Ehham, without entering into any detail, is Mrs. Hertford fuch a woman as, had you a ftfter, you would introduce to that fitter's acquaintance ľ* Kltham panted a moment ; looked irre- folate, and embarraffed ; but at lengik frankly anfwered—** She is mt Γ '* Enough/' cried Clarentine grate¬ fully, u you may rely upon my difcre¬ tion, and reft a f fu red that fo far from feeking to know more, 1 will never men¬ tion her name to you attain." fe * You will oblige mr," returned El·· tham; " now therefore kt us drop the fubjea/' Then
Then advening to what ilie had faid concerning her fpeedy removal from Sid-* mouth, he enquired how ikon (he pur- pofed going ? 44 I wait/' anfwered Clarentine, ίς for letters from town, without which 1 can decide nothing." feé Da you think then of fixing in Londonr" ¿i i will be plain with you, Mr. El¬ tham," replied Clarentine, with a good- humouied İmik; ^ there is one fubject upou which I have prom t fed not to quef¬ tion you, and it would oblige mc parti¬ cularly, were you, upon this, not to quef¬ tion me" 4u I am filenccd!" cried Ekham— 16 Pardon a curiofity fo unliccnccd, and aflure yourfelf, I will fu fíe r it to diftrefs you no more." ** Then all is well," faid Clarentine, H and as we are bound to mutual for¬ bearance upon thefe two articles, let us endeavour to outvie each other in ihe ftrictnefs with which we perform our en¬ gagements. ** " Remember, however/'cried Eltham, laughing, ** that fair as this compact ieemS|
feemsş mine is, by much, the harde ft part; fince you cannot poffibly be fo muc lì in- terefted upon the fu bje 6; of Mrs. Hert» ford 5 as every man muit be upon that of Mifs Delmington." "If this were indeed the cafe," re¬ turned Ckrentine, " itili, 1 can fee no¬ thing in it, that' would not be perfecììy jufL Upon every occafion the moft dif¬ ficult talk has always been affigned to the man ; and were you now to be exempted from this general ra!e 3 where would be the merit of adhering ίο your agreement ?" They had by this time reached the houfe, and Madame d'Arzele coming out to meet them 9 Eliham was prevented from making any reply« That Iady ? though furprifed as much as Clarentinc had been by his unexpected appearance, received him with great po- litcnefs, and looked^ as (he really felt, extremely glad to fee him. The anima¬ tion, and originality of his character, had rendered him, even upon fo fhort an ac«. quaintance, a confidérable favourite with her; and the extraordinary good breeding with which he conducted himfelf towards her, joined to a very fafcinating and ele¬ gant
gant addrefs, all confpired to make her more partial to him, than to any of the other men fhe had fecn, fince her refidence m England. It is true, flie had admired the diftinguifhed deportment of Sir Ed¬ gar, and been ftruck by the intelligence and expreffion that characterized his countenance ; but ignorant as fhe was of its caufe, tbe referve which frequently caft a gloom over his features, and the cold gravity, that whilft it kerned intende d to reprefs cbearfulnefs in otlieis, appeared likewife to denote an unfocial and con¬ temptuous difpofition in himfelf, had often difpleafcd her extremely, and led her, very naturally, to fufpeft him of a degree of arrogance and pride, which at every period of life would have been offenfive, but in fo young a man, was peculiarly dif- gufting. She was not aware, that what fhe miftook for fupercilioufnefs, was merely the effe ft of inquietude ; and that, had his heart been at eafe, and all his painful diftrufts at an end, the native fweetnefs of bib temper would have flione forth with luftre, and converted into un¬ qualified admirers, the very perfons who now ihrunk at his approach, and dreaded the
the apprehended feverity of his critkifrø mn] his obfervation. It being ahnoft dark wdien Clarentine and Ehham entered, Madame d Arzele immediately railed for candies and then, having obtained bio promile to ipend the remainderof the evening with thcm,apolo-* gi /.cd for leaving the room, and went up, as war* her conftant practice, ίο fee her children put to bed. Clai entine, as foon as flic was gone t placed herfelf at the table, and began woiking; whilft Eltham, converftng upori indifferent fubjefts, walked up and down the room, occasionally flopping to lock at the books that lay fcattered in different parts of it, and then again proceeding forward. After fame time, however. Cla· rentine finding that his perambulation had ceafed f and that he flood quite ftill near the chimney, raifed her eyes, and faw him, with the moft arch and expreffive faule, holding Mrs. Hertford's card in his hand, and attentively examining it. Thi* over, without being confeious he had ex¬ cited obfervation, he carclekly replaced it, and refumcd his walk, ftill wearing the lame look of malicious fignifìcaacy. For
For the contempt thus plainly 'ïnaiii- fefted, and the fìngularity of El tham's whole behaviour with regard to this lady, it is now time to account. The lafl year of his being at Weft -dri¬ fter fchool, having contracted a pea acu¬ lar intimacy with one of the fcholars named Godfrey, a ward of 'Admiial Comptons, he ufed frequently with this young man to be invited to that gentle¬ man*» houfe, and there to fpend fevei Л days fu сее ifi ve-ly. Previous to his be¬ coming acquainted with the family, Charles Godfrey, his friend, who was two „or three years older than himfelf, had con¬ ceived a violent paffion for the Admiral's niece, Mils Compton, who, at that time, was about twenty, and who had long clan». deftinely encouraged his love, and moft anxioufly " fought to heighten and en- creafe it. On the firft introduction how¬ ever of young Eltham, whether captiva¬ ted by the fuperior elegance of his per¬ fon, or the itili greater fuperiority of his fortune, is unknown; but, certain it is, flic inftantly changed her plan, levelled all her powers of attraction againft hun, and by the fiattering attention ihe paid him·
him, and the condefcending fweetnefs of her manners, very foon fuccceded in making him the fecret rival of poor God¬ frey. Thus far, powerfully affifted by her own beauty, and yet more, by the vanity and inexperience of her deluded lover, Ihe found it no very difficult talk to per¬ fuade him to an elopement, and accord¬ ingly, one fine moon light night, *' Wnen the (wect winds did gently kits the trees, l( And i hey did make no noife,"' taking advantage of the abfence of her uncle, whom fbe was afraid to truft pre¬ maturely, but whofe pardon fíiQ had no doubt of obtaining on her return, they fat off together for Scotland, and travel¬ led fome miles with uninterrupted fpeed and facility ! Halfway on their journey, however, unhappily for this enterprizing lady, El¬ tham's good genius, in the perfon of one of his truftees, purfued, and overtook them ; in confequence of which, Mifs Compton and her maid were fent back to town in the fame chaifc that had con¬ veyed them from it, and the defpairing Mr. Eltham, with his providential delk verer.
verer, took the direct road to Oxford, where he was immediately entered, and left under the care of a very .rigid tutor. During the two firft years that he fpent at the univerfity s he heard very little, either of Mifs Compton, or her uncle. Charles Godfrey, he learnt, was gone abroad, after every art had been uniuc» cefsfully tried by his quondam miftrefs, in order to regain her empire over him, and to extenuate her own conduct. Since íhen, ihe had failed in feveral other at¬ tempts to enfure new conquefts ; and laft ofall, he was told, ftie had retired with a diftant relation to a fmall houíe, belong¬ ing to the Admiral, near Portfmouth. Here ilie became acquainted with Mr e Hertford, the elder 'brother of a young Lieutenant in the navy, whom he had left Oxford to pay a v ¿fit to, whilft he lay at Spithead. Eltham, who was in the fame college, knew him well : but little fuf- peeling what would be the event of his journey, and unwilling to expofe either Mifs Compton, or himfelf, he had never mentioned her to him, and faw him no more till he was actually married î Admiral
Admiral Compton. indulgent as his niece had fuppofed him, and deficient as he had certainly been in early attention to her conduci, was not only extremely in- cenicd againft her, on account of her elopement \vh\\ Eltham, but alfo, ирой occafion of her marriage with Mr. Hert¬ ford This young man, who was not yet of age, he knew to be the eldcft fon of a large family, which had been left at his father's death nearly unprovided for, and extremely dependant upon his future kindnefs. His citate was fmall, though report had, to his coft, probably made it much greater; and when ir. camedntohis poffeffion, the unbounded extravagance of his wife, joined to his owti indolence of difpofition, compkated his ruin at the end of two years They were now obliged to feek a re¬ fuge abroad, till their affairs could, in fome mea fure, bc arranged. The placc they fixed upon for their refidence was Switzerland; and here, in his twenty J third year, Mr. Hertford died. Ehharø, who was then on his travels, happening to he at Laufanne when his friend was lake« ill, went to fee him ; and after he was
was no more, though he did not continue yifiting his widow, affifted her in a pecu¬ niary way to а large amount, and then cancelling the bonds ftie had given him, and enclofiug them to her with a very polite note, he purfued his journey into Italy. Eight months now elapfed, during which he heard nothing more of her. At the end ofthat time, being one night ata ball given by the fing l i ih Ambaffador at Naples, he unexpectedly faw her again, accompanied by a lady, who proved to be the fame perfon fhe had fpent fo many months with, previous to her marriage. Lefs apprehenfive of his own credulity, however ipecious might be her artifices, and therefore lefs inclined to avoid her, than whilft he fufpcčied fhe retained any power over his heart, he boldly ftepped up to her, the moment fhe had taken a feat? and concluding from her appearance in f о gay a fcene, it would be i upe ril uo us to addrefs her in tbc language of coudoie¬ ment, or folemnity, be begin with great gallantry, by reproaching her for fufler* ing one hour to clapfe after her arrival at Naples, without fending to inform him w here *
where he might have the honour of wait¬ ing upon her; and then enquiring what Hay Ihe purpofed making, without wait¬ ing for an anfwer, he protefted in the fane breath, he had never feen her look fo handfome in her life, and fliould be utterly iiîcoîifolabie unlefs flie flood up and danced with him immediately. Such a debuts fo eafy, fo familiar, and unceremonious, Mrs Hertford found ex» tremely difconcerting. Hitherto, accuf- tomed only to view Ekham in the light of ao ardent and fubmiffive lover, or of a generous, and refpeftful friend, (fuch as he had fhewn himfelf upon the death of her hufband,) flie was totally unprepared for fo fudden a change, and completely at a lofs how to treat him. Concluding, however, the wifeft policy would be to adopt his own deportment, and manners, and changing as he changed, to accom¬ modate herfelf to the humour of the mo¬ ment, her countenance brightened in an inftant, and fmiling upon him with the moft facinating fweetnefs, on his urging her again to ftand up, fhe gave him her hand s and readily confented to follow him, Mrs.
Mrs. Hertford, employing with won¬ derful ingenuity every art fhe was mif¬ trefs of in order to pleafe, animate, and entertain her too-prcfuming partner, fuc¬ cceded, once again, before the evening was over, in completely turning his head ; he forgot the unfavourable opinion he had lately harboured of her—forgot every impropriety of her paft conduci; and fen¬ fible only to her allurements, her beauty, the falhes of her wit, and the vivacity of her converfation, he went home fully perfuaded he had cruelly injured her, and more pafliotiately in love than ever* Early the following morning, he re¬ paired to her houfe; flie reí ufed feeing him till evening; but to foften this feve¬ rity, lent Mrs. Caftlcton, the lady who lived with her, down to him, to fay, that nothing bui indifpofition, the coufequent e of her lafl night's fatigue, fhould have pie vented her admitting him, the moment hk jiame was announced. Thus irritating hk impatience to fee her, by delay ; and at the fame time ålänn¬ ing him, by a falfe ìepoit of ber ilinek, Eltham took libs leave, determined, when the evening came, to give up even other С engagement,
engagement, and dedicate it wholly to her. Accordingly, at ťhe appointed hour, he again prefented himfelf at her door, and with more parade and ceremony than his impetuofity led him to approve* was condu8 ed through a long fuite of apartments on the ground floor, into a very elegant faloon, where furrounded by a numerous circle, chiefly compofed of gentlemen, he found Mrs. Hertford, con verfing indifcriminately, with equal eafe and gaiety, with every individual of her little court, and fixing as irrififtabiy the attention, as ihe commanded the ho¬ mage of the whole room. At once confounded and amazed at the fight of ίο brilliant an affembly, after flie pathetic defcription he had heard in the morning of her languor and indifpo- ftuon, Ekham, with fome indignation, flopped irrefohite at the enti ance of the room, debating within himfelf whether he ilio aid proceed or not Whilft thus undetermined, however, a nod of falutation from Mrs. Hertford, accompanied by a moft gracious fmik, and a motion oí th· hand that invited him to
vo approach, put an immediate end to his deliberations, and induced him haftily to advance. As there happened at that moment to be a vacant feat next her, he took poffef¬ fion of it, and as foon as the firft compli¬ ments were over, inftead of joining in the general converfation, employed himfelf very deliberately in furvcying the diffe¬ rent figures that compofed the moti ý groupe around him, endeavouring by their exterior appearance to form fome judg¬ ment of their characters and difpofitions. This review, during a fhort time, af¬ forded him much amufement: but not haying any one near him to whom he could communicate his remarks, and find- ing, though there was much to ridicule, there was but little to intereft, he foon grew wear\ of the cynical part he had chofen, and was turning to begin fome trifling conveifatiou with Mrs. Caftleton, whilft her friend was talking to a lady near her, when the door unexpectedly opuied with great prei ipitation, and the fervant announcing a new vifitor, whofe name however EUham could not diftinOly hear, a young man of a xery elegant de- С 2 ponnien*
portment, made "his appearance, and haftening up to Mrs. Hertford, paid his refpcfts to her, with infinite good-breed- ing, and then, ftill addrefling her in Italian, which ieemed to be his native language, apologized for not having obeyed her fummons in the morning. « I was unavoidably detained/* con» tinued he, " by a perfon who came to mc upon bufinefs, and whom I found it im- pofiìble todifmifs, till after the hour you had done me the honour to appoint. To-morrow 7 , however/' added he, u I hope to be at your orders the whole day." This fpceeh, though it was uttered in a low voice, and evidently defigned for the ears of Mrs. Hertford only, Eltham, as he fat next her, loft not one word of, Rcfentment and mortification at firft kept him motionlefs and filem ; but re¬ collecting the various inftances he. had al¬ ready known of the habitual duplicity of ber character, the temporary illufion he had indulged vanifhed in a moment, and fbe appealed to him, once moie, fuch as flie red! y wa c ; an unfeeling and led tie- five coquette- made up of infincenty and deceit - aiming continually at univerial uduibatioii
admiration and conqucft; and as un¬ worthy of exciting, as fhe was incapable of experiencing, a ferious or lafting at¬ tachment. Thefe reflections, which darted acrofik his mind with the rapidity of lightning» left him not an inftant in doubt, concern¬ ing the réfolution he ihould take. With- out feeking any explanation-—without making tbe flighteft apology—or betray* ing the leaft emotion, he rofe with an air of perfect indifference, and wiihing Mrs. Hertford good evening, made a general bow to the reft, of the party, and walked calmly out of the room ; firmly deter¬ mined never to truft himfelf within her doors again, nor ever, but as a cafual and common acquaintance, to addrefs her hereafter, fliould chance again throw him in her way. His refidence at Naples, after this ufe¬ fui little leifon, was too fhort to allow him an opportunity of breaking the wife réfolution he had formed, lie faw Mrs. Hertford no more : hut enquiring among his friends, heard with a mixture of con¬ cern and indignation, that the piefent obje d of her attention, the young man be C j bad
had feen at her houfe, was already en¬ gaged to another lady, a very amiable and lovely woman, whom, fince his ac¬ quaintance with Mrs. Hertford, he had neglected in the cruclleft manner, and it was generally believed, would end by de- krting entirely. The event, however, did not juftify tbs prediüion. From what caufe her plan luikt!. Filham never learnt, but that it pieveJ wholly uufurcefidul, and that flie • „d left the p blue, w ль the firft intelli¬ gence he received after he quitted Naples, Since that period, till his arrivai at Sid¬ mouth, he had not even heard her name mentioned, and had almoft forgotten her exiftence; the moment, however, that Clarentine recalled her to his memory, and convinced him beyond a poffibility of doubt, that (he was actually a rcfldent in the vicinity, a fpecies of curiofity took polieflion of his mind, which he could neither account for, nor fupprefs; and which led hnn immediately to embrace the réfolution of feeking her out, and re¬ newing an acquaintance that had been fo long inu rrupted. Yet, though determined upon thk plan for himfelf, the natural fen í с
fenfe of propriety, which, notwithftand- ing ail his flightinefs, ftill remained un* cxtinguiflied at the bottom of his heart, pointed out to him ftrongly the neeeffity of preierving the young and inexperienced Clarentine from forming a connection which might, hereafter, prove fo extremely prejudicial to her. It is true, Mrs. Hert¬ ford was ftill vi fi ted, and ftill received by rr»r*ny eftimable people; her chai acter had never been publickiy attacked, and her fituation in the world wa¿> fuch as to place her in the beft fociety : but by thofe who knew her real hi ftory—who might have heard of her conduct towards Charles Godfrey—her fubfequent elopement— ber many fruitlefs attempts to enfure an advantageous eftardiiiiment— her diffipa¬ tion and extravagance after flie married; and finally, the total ruin to which ihe reduced her luiiband, by perlons well acquainted with all theie tranfaciiops, what might not be the coiulufio:» drawn, írom feiing a young woman tome for¬ ward, on lier firft letting out in life, under fuch aufpices? Eliham, who really ad¬ mired and refpected Clarentinc moie than any one he knew·, who adoied the С 4 ingenuous
ingenuous fimplicity of her manners, ané the angelic purity of her mind; Ehham fli udde re d at the bare idea of her being expofed to the illiberal farcafms of a cen- iorious and mif-judging world, which, guided in its décifion by partial appear¬ ances, without inveftigation and without humanity, would, in all probability, in¬ clude her in every reflection thrown out againft Mrs, Hertford, and afe ribe to her, hreproachabic as flie was, the fame levity of charaftcr, which with fo much more juftice might be attributed to that lady. Uninfluenced, therefore, by any unge« nerous or vindictive motives, but folely* inftigated by an honourable defire of be* ing ufefui to an interefting, and now a!- rrioft unprotected young female, Eltham afted the part that has already been de¬ fcribed, and gave the timely caution Cla¬ rentine fo gratefully received.
CHAP.
CHAP. IX. iT was late in the evening before Eltham thought of taking leave, or knew how to tear himfelf from fociety which he found, every moment, more and more captivat- ing* In Clarentine, particularly, fince the referve and diítance that had formerly repulfed him had given way to greater eafe and complacency, he difeovered fo many attaching qualities, fuch a noble franknefs of difpofition, foftcned by a delicacy fo confiderete, and a fweetnefs of temper fo truly fafcinating, that, al¬ though fhe was at times heavily depreffed, and incapable of joining in the converfa¬ tion, fhe made a deeper impreflion upon him, and rendered hinr a more fincere convert to her merit, than he had ever been before. At his requeft, on feeing a harp ftanding in a diftant part of the room, fhe fung and played to him feveral of die moit beautiful little airs ihc could fekk), and did it all with an unaffected diffi¬ dence, an unpretending modefty, that gave additional charms to the touching fofmefs of her voice and expreffion, С 5 " Upoa
a Upon my honour/* exclaimed he, at length, after ftie had ceafed playing, and once more had quietly refumed her work, " you are the molt extraordinary creature î ever met with! Brought up in fuch pro» found retirement; living in a place from whence ail profelfional excellence was fo far removed,and where, confequeiitly,you had as few means of improvement, as in¬ citements to emulation—how, ï befeech you—how did you acquire talents (o be¬ witching, and manners fo irrefutable ? Am Ï, at laft, to believe in all İ have heard re¬ ported of innate and intuitive endow¬ ments ì Am f to fuppofe you were born with all thefe advantages ?" " You cannot expect a ferious anfwer, Mr. Ekham/' replied Clarentine, laugh¬ ing, u to a queflion fo extravagant, and therefore, if you pleafe, we will talk of fomething rather more rational." She then turned the converfation upon the fubjeü of her fnend Sophia, and after warmly praifingthe goodnefs of her heart, and the fportive gaiety of her difpofition, afked Ekham what he thought of her? u Such an enquiry/' replied he, a com¬ ing from a perfon who is avowedly fo ρ ar tkl
rial to her, is hardly fair; however, ï will anfwer you with iincerity and truth ; and this I can the more readily do, as my opinion exactly coincides with your own. From the little I faw of her, flie appeared to me a very lively, animated, and pleaf- ing girl—totally devoid of cither guile 9 or aifeftation. Her beauty/' continued. he, u is not confpicuous enough to ren¬ der her, upon a fhort acquaintance, an. objeft of great attraftion ; but, í fliould. fuppofe, ihe is one of thofe, who gaining upon the heart by imperceptible grada¬ tions, from having begun by entertaining^ would very probably end 9 by ferioufly attaching" Clarentine, much pleafed with ibis an^ fwer, repeated its fub (latice in French to Madame d'Arzele, who, whilft he was fpeaking, had been finiihing a letter at another table. " Ah, vous avez bien raifon," cried fhe, addrefling Eltham, " Sophia, avec «* Afle z d'efprit pour favoir cire ainubl«*, *· Et pas affl-z pour Čfre infupportable.· montre tant de zele quand il s'agit de fervir fes amis, a un naturel fi heureux s Florian. С 6 tant
fant de fraiichife s et de droiture, qui! elî impoffible de ne pas l'aimer, du moment qu'elle le fait connoître."* u I fancy, my dear madam," faid El¬ tham archjy, " Monfieur le Chevalier waa very much of the fame way of think¬ ing. Mademoifelle Sophia appeared to be a great favourite of his." " And confequcntly/* returned Ma¬ dame d'Arzelc reproachfully, " you fuf¬ peft him of being in love with her? Have л little more candour, however, Mr. El¬ tiiam; and be alfured, it is very poffible for a man of honour to find great charms iu the fociety and converfation of an agreeable young woman, without having formed any plan ie orde? to ingratiate himfelf in her favour ; or, (under cireum¬ flances fo disadvantageous as the Cheva¬ lier's) without being in the leaft influenced by an undue fpirit of gallantry/' Eltham, extremely aihamed of having given caule for fuch a reproof, received it, however, with great humility, and ear-
neftly
fieftly apologized for the freedom and impertinence that bad called it forth. The fubjecl was then dropped, and a different converfation ftarted. When he, at length, had departed, and the two friends were left together, Cla» reotine related to Madame d'Arzelc all that had pa ffed upon the fubject of Mrs· Hertford, and ended by entreating her to take the moft effectual means, in order to prevent her ever being admitted again. u Wbaiever appearance," continued Ihe, 44 fuch a denial may have, it is fuf¬ fieient that we know her to be a woman of an equivocal character, to render it abfolutely neceffary we fliould avoid alî farther intcrcourfe with her* I am no pruder added the fmiling, 44 nor in the leaft apprehenfive of being hurt myfelf by the fociety of fuch a perfon : but I begin already to be afraid of the world, to think of its uncharitable cenfurcs with terror, and to dread nothing fo much as the danger of falling under its fafh. Be¬ fides, what opinion could Mr. Ekham him¬ felf have of us, if, after the half-extorted caution i obtained from him, we were Bili«." «< My
" My deareft Clarentine," interrupted Madame d 'Arzele, u can you imagine any additional arguments are neceiTary to convince me οι the propriety of all you have fakir Be afiurcd, I have not the final left defire ever to fee Mrs. Hertford' more; anďíhall give the ftricieft charge to my own woman, as well as to the peo¬ ple of the houfe, pofitively to deny us both, fliould curiofity or idleneb bring her to this place again." Clarentinc was perfectly fatisfied by fuch an aífu ranee; and foon after they retired for the night. Three days now palfed, during which they were totally immoleftcd by their ap« prehended vifitor; £ltham was, however, in that interval, almoft a conftant gueft j feldom quitting them, except at the hour of their meals, or for a fhort time in an evening, whilft Madame d'Arzelc was up itairs with her children, and Clarentine taking her ufual walk in the orchard at the back of the houfe. Towards the clofc of the fourth day s whilft thus purfuing her foiitary ramble, and perplexing herfelf with frui t lefs con« jeciurcs relative to the diftreíiing fdence obicrved
obferved by Mr, Lenham, Eltham unex¬ pectedly joined her, and putting into her hand a packet of letters—" I am juft re¬ turned," cried he, 44 from the poft-houfe, where, after receiving my own difpatches, 1 enquired whether there were any for you, and was entrufted wdth thefe. At fini/ 9 continued he, 44 I felt half tempted not to deliver them till juft at the moment of taking leave> left the bufinefs of reading them fliould employ fo much of your time that I might be deprived of the in¬ dulgence you have hitherto granted me, and get no mufic to night; but, upon fécond thoughtSj I perfuaded myfelf you would have more confcience than to re¬ ward me fo ill for my civility." 44 Certainly," replied Clarentine, fmi¬ ling, 44 let me, till now, have required what preffing í would, upon iuch an oc¬ cafion as this, at leaft, I am bound to fing at the firft word." So faying, ihe haftened towards the houfe, and on entering the parlour, put¬ ting a book into Ehham's hand, pro¬ ceeded impatiently to the examinaiion of her feveral lettets. The
The firft lite opened was one from Mr e Lenham, written in terms fo friendly and benevolent, that it brought tears into her eyes. lie began by informing her, that having loft his wife forne months pre» isous to the receipt of her letter, he had lately prevailed upon a female relation of his, and her daughter, to fix their reft« deuce with him, and to undertake the en¬ tire fupenntendancc of his family. Thefe ladies, he added, though they had not the honour of being acquainted with Mifs Delmington, woulcke&gkčt no means in their power, he was perfuaded, to render her abode beneath his roof as comfort* able as poffible; and he therefore flat« tered himfelf, the knowledge of their being his inmates would neither make any alteration in her platí, por be the oc¬ cafion of her deferring a journey he looked forward to with fo much plea- furc. In compliance with her injuiicìions, be next, though with evident reluctance, fpoke of the conditions upon which fhe had fo pofitivcly declared lier réfolution of alon becoming 1\ь boarder, and fixing them at ebe moll moderate rate, con¬ cluded
eluded by exprefling his earneft wiíhes for her fafe and fpeedy arrivai» " Ail then is now fettled!" thought Clarentine, with a figli ; " my departure is inevitable, and every thing concurs to haften and facilitate it î Ah, would î could think of it with the tame indiffer¬ ence that thofe will, who firft-—*' She ftopped, and checking the too ready murmurs that were unconlciouily cfcaping her, turned to the yet unopened letters that lay upon the table, and taking them up, fought by their peru fal to di¬ vert the painful ideas that had involun¬ tarily obtruded themfelves* Meanwhile Ekham, who had for fome time thrown afide his book, and placed immediately oppofite to her, fat with his eyes intently riveted upon her facc^ un- fufpeftedly obferving her as flie read, fuddenly beheld every mufele in her countenance relax, and the tears flea ling flowly down her cheeks, fall in large drops upon the paper that flie held. ínexprcffibly affected by fuch a fight, yet, relpefting too much the filent for¬ row it betrayed, to difturb her, at that moment, with untimely queftions, he waited
waited anxioufly tili flic had ceafed read¬ ing, before he ventured to approach, or interrogate her. Softened by the companionate gentle- nefs of his looks and voice, unufed to difguife, and open-hearted as a child, Clarentine, without allowing herfelf time for reflection/pointed m the letter ihe had juft thrown down, and mournfully anfwered— " Ah! were you lo read that, Mr, El¬ iham, you would no longer wonder at my emotion, it comes from Sir Edgar Del¬ mington, and though calculated upon the whole to give me the bighe ft pleafure, yet in many places it is fuch as almoft to break my heart/* Thunderftruck by this fpeech, and far better qualified to comprehend its full meaning thxn Clarentine was aware, or indeed, hail fhe been aware, ihe v/as at that inftant Iufficiently collected to guard agallili, î' kbam changed colour, and lofing all command over himfelf/indignantly ex* claimed— " And is it poffible then, Mifs Dek mingtom that the whining complaints, or the inlbleni icproaches of a man who has aüed
afted by you fuch a part, can have any effect upon a mind like yours ! CkjodGod ! Why read his contemptible letters ? Why honour them with fo much notice ?" He was proceeding—when ftruck by the inconceivable amazement he faw de¬ picted in Clarentine's countenance, his own aftumed a calmer expreffion, and with more compofure he added-— u But I beg your pardon— ï ought not to declare my fentiments fo freely, and fcarceiy know how to excufe the liberty I have taken." 4 Ex с u/e ii !" repeated Clarentine, re¬ covering by degrees from úit extreme aftoniihment fhe had been thrown into-— 46 That 1 believe would indeed be diffi¬ cult ! But at leaft a icon nt for it, Mr. Ek tham—explain your meaning — and tell me, I befeech you, how Sir Edgar Del¬ mington can have given rife to this ex¬ cels of enmity—of mjuftice !" " I fee," replied Eltham, proudly, "I fee plainly, that prejudiced as you are, Mifs Delmington, all í can fay, (and I acknowledge î have nothing nevo to 1 tell you—nothing which your own iiiiryruv would not have taught you to condemn, but
but for the fatal partiality which has mif- guided you) will be of no further avail than to heighten your refcntmcnt againft me 9 without lcflcning your good opinion of him. I have gone too far, however, io iccede ; and therefore, as briefly as í can, ï will now give you the explanation you demand/* Clarentine, every inftant more and more furprifed, yet fummoncd fuffieient jourage to liften to him with compofure, ind he thus began—» H Amongft all the various faults that ixiay juftiy be afcribed to me, that of mean curiofity has never been of the number* You will consequently, Mifs Delmington, readily believe me, I hope, when î pofi¬ tively aflure you the information by which. ï was enabled to judge of Sir Edgar's cha¬ racter and conduct was not of my own feeking. He is certainly no favourite of mine, but I knew he was deftined to re¬ ceive the hand of Lady Julia, and neither fufpceled, nor wifhed to know more. The day that pieccded my arrival at Sidmouth, however, calling, as I had the honour to acquaint y^u, at Delmington Houfe, I was introduced into a parlour where alone*
slone, and apparently in no very placid difpofition of mind, i found Mrs, Har¬ rington. Extremely at a lofs how to keep up, or e\ en begin any converfation, and hoping every inftant to be relieved by die entrance of fome other member of the family, 1 wandered about the room, anxioufiy feeking, either in the profpeft, the furniture or the drawings that hung round it, fre fh fubjefts for remark, and new objects to difcourfe upon. At length my attention was caught by a very beautiful little fkctch, rcprefenting a groupe of children at play. I took it dowi, tc ex¬ amine it more nearly, prai fed it extreme¬ ly, and aíked Mrs. Harrington by whom it had been defigned P This was a fu iii· cient ugnai for her to begin! She told me, wuth much acrimony, it was by you ; and then, with a virulence that defeated its own purpofe, began fo furious, and to me incomprehenfible, a declamation againft you, that I liftened to her with equal wonder and difguft í To be brief— fhe concluded this malignant and inde¬ cent harangue, by a minute account of every circumftance attending your late nocturnal interview with Sir Edgar; and 6 fummed
fummed up the wdiole, as flie grew coolei by reflection, with an earneft requeft to nie, never to make known what I had taken fo little pains to karn/' Horror-ftruck by this cruel, and almoft incredible proof of Mrs. Harrington's implacability, Claientinc was fome time before flic could command her indigna- lion fufficicntly to be able to fpeak with any degree of calmnefs. At length, how- ever, ftarting as if from a fearful dream— " And what purpofe, good Heaven!" exclaimed fhe, " could the relation of fuch a tale anfwer ? Why publifh it at all ? and efpccially, why publifh it to you i" u Certainly/' replied Eltham, drily, 44 not to gratify wy feelings; and ftill ìcù^ to heighten my opinion of her own prin¬ ciples ! The chief object ihe propofed to herfelf was the indulgence of that deter¬ mined and inexplicable hatred fhe feems to have conceived againft you—a hatred, which not even the danger fhe incurred of fuining her favourite icheme, (by making me the confidant of fecrets, which, if re¬ peated to Lord Welwyn, might have in¬ duced him, at once to withdraw his word), could prevent her giving utterance to. But
But enough of this intemperate fury—my defign was not fo much to fpeak of her, as to exculpate myfelf from the charge of injuflue towards Sir Edgar, and to—" i4 Oh, fay no more/' interrupted Cla¬ rentine, impatiently, w fay no more, Mr. Ekham, î befeech you í After the ac¬ count that has been given you, I wonder not at any opinion you may have imbibed, either of Sir Edgar, or of me. Spare yourfelf, therefore, the need lefs trouble of adding another fy liable in your own juftification—and fatisfied with the bittei mortification you have made me undergo, have fuffieient mercy, at leaft, not to prolong a converfation fo infupportably humiliating!" Eltham, extremely hurt by this fpeech, and yet more by the indignant feverity with which it was uttered, now with great carne ft nefs exclaimed— u You wrong me cruelly, Mifs Del¬ mington ! you wilfully and utterly mif- reprefent all I have faid ! Can you indeed believe, that if the rancorous accufations alledged againft you by my officious in¬ formant had appeared to me ckher cre¬ dible or jull j I Ihould have been fo wholly
wholly loft to fenfo and feeling, as to have deliberately felefted you as the propercfl, perfon to Uutn to their repetition ?" €{ Such a fuppofition/' replied Claren¬ tine, α may have been erroneous: but allowing it was fo—allowing, in reality, you had no defign to fliock and afflict me —ftill, let me afk, why did you enter into a detail, which at leaft, you muft be fenfible, was fo unneceflary and fo im¬ proper ?" « Unneceflary !" repeated Elťham.~ € * What ! when acquainted with every particular of Sir Edgar's unmanly con¬ duct-—when fo fully convinced of his worthïcffnefs and perfidy — and when w irne fling the ilkdeferved forrow that his letter coft you—-was I then to be filent ? could I then fupp refs the indignation I felt awakened againft him ? You cannot yourfelf imagine it was poflîble ! Difdain and contempt might, indeed, have kept me for ever filent, could I have been per¬ fuaded you regarded him with all ihe in*» ■difference he merits : buí when I found his artifices had fo well fuccceded ; when in addition to the unpardonable infolt he bas offered the unfufpcčting Julia, Ì dif¬ eovered
covered alfo that he had undermined year peace, won your heart, and made himfelf fuch an intereft there, as neither the con» VÌ8Ì011 of his duplicity, nor the difgraee he has brought upon you, can couiucrad; î forgot the rigid caution 1 had f worn to obferve, and, at the hazard of incurring your everlafling difpleafure, gave way to the almoft irrefiflible impulfc that urged me to lay before you my fentiments and opinion : that tither will be of any avail, I have not, as I faid before, the piefump- tion to imagine : but remember, Mifs Delmington, that if even among unthink¬ ing young men of his own age, whofe moral principles, like my own, are far from being at ail times ftricily r<>n- fonant to propriety, his late conduci ap¬ pears fodiihonourable; among the gravel¬ and more refkeiing part of mankind, it will feem too defpicable to leave you any excufe for ftill harbouring an attachment fo every way unworthy of you !" * s And what ground have you to be¬ lieve, Sir," faid Clarentine, quite iicken- ed at the ftrange infatuation which led every body to conclude her heart was fo deeply engaged, " that the attachment VOL, 11. D S nu
you impute to mc really exifts? You have hitherto heard but one üde of the queflion; be pleafed, now, to read Sir Edgar's own letter, and then judge whether its contents arc fuch as would be addreffed to a very partial of a very ten¬ der miftrefs/' Eltham, furprifed beyond ail meafurc at this unexpecied truft, fcarceiy knew whether to accept it or not; obferving, however, that Clarentine was ferious in her propofai, he, at length, though not without fome eonfufion, took the letter from her, and read as follows; TO MISS DELMINGTON. Delmingion-Houfe, July —-, « Once more then, my beloved, my much injured Clarentine! once more ï am permitted to addrefs you! Saved-— almoft miraculou fly faved, from the jaws of death, by what aft more pleafmg to Heaven can i teftify my gratitude for this unhoped for prefervation, than hy humbling myfelf before her whom I have fo cruelly wronged, and by feeking to obtain forgivenefs from a being fo up¬ right, and fo purej « Stan
€ζ Start not then, my gentle friend, at fight of this, I fear, unwelcome hand; think not again that ΐ will fliock you by profe ilions I know you hold in fuch ab¬ horrence ! Alas ! though my heart is unchanged, my rcafon now tells me, İ have forfeited, and muit renounce for ever all right, henceforward, to renew them ! 1 have expofed you, if not to ruin, at leafl to banifhment and indignity; 'the part ï have performed, artificial as it was—contrary to my own fen le of right, my own principles and judgment-—that diíTcmbliiig and difgraceful part, bring¬ ing with it its own puniíhmcnt, has in¬ volved me in a depth of mifery, of felf- reproach, from which no time, perhaps, will ever rcfcue me! Oh, Clarentinc! condemn me as you will-— think of me with what feverity you may ; but, at leali, when anger gives place to milder fenti¬ ments, when your ürít re fentment is ap¬ pealed, pity and companionate me Í— ^ You % I hope, may yet be happy ; for you arc tortured by no internal condemnation; you are exempted írom all regret, and have neither ihame nor love to contend with. Ah ! may you never experience 1) 2 inch
fuch love as mine has been—and may fliame, as now, be for ever a ftranger to your blamclefs and ingenuous mind. €( But why, inflexible, and indignant as you, no doubt, ftill remain—why do I thus wander from the original purpofe of this letter^ and trefpafs fo long upon your patience? Am I now writing to the par¬ tial friend of my childhood—the indul¬ gent companion of my earlieft years? Am I now at liberty, as in happier times, to pour forth every fecret of my heart«-» to expcft you will participate in my feelings — fhare in, or foften my af¬ flictions? No; í am addrefling an in¬ exorable judge, one whofe laft words ftill vibrate in my ears ; who bade me renounce mtd forget her \ who cruelly and fternly told me, that, u were I openly privi- ledgcd to offer her my hand ; were all other obftacles to our union removed, her own repugnance to it could never be furmounted !" " Oh Clarentine ! Sweet partaker of ail my infant happinefs—- fole objeft upon whom, for fo many years^ have refted all my hopes of future felicity—lifter of my hearts difpofer of my fate ! is it thus then, we
we are at length to part? Is it thus my fai t cft profpects are to be blafted ? my life, my whole remaining life to be em¬ bittered ? Ah ! tell me ; to what is it you facrifice me ? to a miftaken notion of honour ? a falfe principle of rectitude ? or is b, as í have but too often, with fhuddeiing apprehenfion, dreaded, is it that in reality fome fearful antipathy, fome unconquerable averfion impelis you to a deed of fo much inhumanity, and krrefi ft- ibly drives you from me ? Your anger, your bittereit reproaches 1 may have de¬ ferved; but your hatred, Clarentine! Good God î can í have merited that ? The idea is terrible î Oh deign, at leaft, to mitigate its horror by one line of comfort, one foftenjng, one alleviating lenience, and I will fubmit to any thing, even to the rigour of a repulfe fo firm, and fo deci- fi ve ! sc Again, however, am ï deviating from the plain path I had prefcribed to myfelf* My defign, deareft Clarentinc, was fimply to have fupplicated your pardon ; not to have renewed my offences ; and briefly to have acquainted you with the final refuît of the painful deliberatiou to which fo D 3 many
many hours of my long and melancholy confinement has been dedicated. u The very inftant I am emancipated from the irk fom e reflraint under which it is ftill thought neceffary to detain mc,'i fliall haften from this houfe, and return toOxford. My heart however ftrongly urges me, previous to that journey, to undertake another—to vifit Sidmouth, and bid a long farewel to all it moft va¬ lues, moft prizes upon earth ! yet this un- fpcakable gratification— this lait and pre¬ cious indulgence I muft forego. The con- fequrnces to myfelf would be too perilous; fince, were î ; gain to fee you, all my re¬ solution might foriakc mc—all mv im« praHicable and viíionary projefts might revive, and upon being, as they infallibly muft, fu с сее ded by freih difappointment, might leave me with even lefs fortitude, if pòfìible, than now to fuftain it, a prey ίο ftill greater anguifti than any 1 have yet experienced* iu Hear then, deareft Clarentine, my fixed and latéit determination» Con« fcious that Ì no longer poflefs a right to aftf or myfelf, that by my own indiferé¬ tion î have jutterly forfeited every claim to this
this ineftimable privilege, I purpofe imme¬ diately writing io kord Welwyn; and, if not as a reparation for my ingratitude, at leaft as a proof of my repentance, faithfully lavina before him an exari account of the j Cr actual ftate of my heart, and of the tu* multuous pa ilions by which it has been mifguided. Let him then decide for him¬ felf. if I appear to him wholly undeferv- ing of pardon ; if the duplicity which, in circumftances id trying, I reluctantly per¬ mitted myfelf to ufe, feems too grofsly offenfive, and revolts too ftrongly againft his principles and feelings—if, in fhoit, he concludes me utterly unworthy of the honour he once intended me, I fhall at leaft have conducted myfelf, upon this occafion, as became mc, and have made one ftep towards reconciling myfelf to my own confcience, and effacing the ftain, but too juftiy, affixed to my character. My debts likewife, and all that bears any reference to the pecuniary cmbarraifi- ments in which, by my own folly, f have been involved, fhall with equal franknefs bc acknowledged ; I can bear—I will fubmit to no further concealments; and Ihould even the fevereft receptie:* be D 4 give»
given to an avowal f о unexpected, fliould the moftdifdainful rejection of me. fc r<wr¡ he the confequence—certain, however, that the worft к known, and that all dif¬ guife may be finally ibi own off, î fhall once more be able to look up in the face of day, grieved for tbc paft, but fea rie í s of the future— and exult in the confeiouf¬ nefs of having nothing more to appre¬ hend* or conceal ! 44 Far from imagining, however, that this taidy difclofure will be fuffieient, in¬ ftantly, to blot out ail my errors, and to give mc* an immediate right to afpire to a dbrindion I have hitheito fo flightly prized, ï fully expect, nay wijh Lord Welwyn fliould make trial of my iincerity, fhould give mc time before he comes to any final icfolution, to render myfelf more deferving of his favour, and to ob¬ literate the remembrance of the indignity I have fo unworthily offered his amiable daughter. Oh! may her diftruft never bc awakened by knowing with what in¬ difference, not to fay repugnance, I have fill now looked forward to an union, which either reípečtfully, J ought at firft 10 have declined—or joyfully, to have at
at once accepted !—My heart tells ine, indeed, that to love her as I have ar« dcntly, fervently adored Clarentine· will never be in my power: but gratitude, honour, juftice, all urge rne to declare, that if now. or ever, fate fhould make her mine, the chief ftudy of my life will be how beft to promote her happinefs, and juftify her confidence. Steadily, dili¬ gently, to this end, muft 1 however fly j ou ! What ferenity could I hope to re¬ gain—-what réfolution expect to preiei \ e, were the paffion—-the yet unexiinguifhed paffion it would then be my duty to era¬ dicate, daily—hourly fed. by feeing, by converting with its object! No; rather let me baniib myfelf from your préfence eternally—renounce your fociety, fhun your fight as my greateit bane; fince, far eafier fhall I find it, to fupport with rcfignation a total abfence. than whh im¬ punity to permit myfelf the dangerous indulgence of a few occafional meetings, calculated only to enfeeble and deitroy me. 44 And now, my Clarentine, what re¬ mains for mc to add? Shall í call for your congratulations that, at lengths I have D 5 gained
gained courage to form fuch plans ? 0£ lhaii I again fue for your pity§ that what feems fo cruel—fo contrary to all my better hopet-— fhould thus unavoidably be neceffuy? Oh tell me, at icaft, that you approve my purpofe—that, if fcru- puloufly puiíucd, it will re fiore те to your cfteem—and doubt not for one in¬ ftant my firinnefb, my perfevemnce ! €i 1 dare take of you no leave, but with a heart overflowing with the ten¬ dereit wiíhes for your welfare and hap pinefsj fubfcribe myfelf fmcerely yours, íS Edgar Dílmingtow.'* » Well, Sir," faid Clarentine, when EUham had read, and returned to her, ihis letter, « what is your opinion of Sir Edgar now ť i flatter myfelf you will think with me, that he has fixed upon the nobleft, and moft effectual method of atoning for the pafl, and of enfuring that forgivenefs from Lord Welwyn he is fo anxious to obtain. Oh, then, deny him not any longer* Mr. EUham, the etteem to which he has fo juftiy entitled himfelf i and if, hitherto, you have thought of him with
with unkindnefsj prove your own can¬ dour, by a generous recantation !" <δ My deareft Mifs Delmington/ 9 rc^ plied Eltham with* warmth, " I needed not fuch an admonition to ftimulatc me to repent every offenfive expreffion í may have ufed—.every indelicate accuiation ί may have brought forward, in the courier of this converfation. I fee/' continued be, ft that you are an angel! Your firm- nefs I admire, your conduct I reveié; and for nothi ns; more ftron^lv do 1 liku- wife (permit me to fay it) love you, than for the unmerited gentlenefs with which you have this inftant addreffed mc. Аз for Sir Edgar, I equally pity and applaud him; and, 1 aflure you, give him credit for far greater feif command, nay, even heroifm^ than almoft any other young man, attached to fuch an object, and in fuck a fituation of mind, could have dif- phi)cdd 66 By proportioning his merit to the fuppofed difficulty he may have found in. refigning wi/' faul Ck.reiKme knifing, H you take from me all power to pur fye the fubjeü; elfe, delighted as i am w hk the general teneur of lus letter, with the D 6 opeiinekj
opcnnefs, the fpirit, that breathes in it al- mofl throughout, 1 could have dwelt upon his praifes for ever!'* 4t And do you not fear/' cried Ekham, " that if fo warm in his commendation, I fhall again relapfc into incredulity and fufpicion? again diferedit your pretended impartiality, and accufc you of coquetifli artifice ?" " O, no/' replied Clarentine, gaily 9 ^ feconded by this incontrovertible, ihougb filent voucher/* pointing to Sir Edgar's letter, " I can fear nothing, and may fafely defy your utmoft malice/* Here the entrance of Madame d'Ar¬ zele put an end to the converfation ; and Clarentine, her mind lightened of half its cares, more chearful and more eafy than for a iìngìe moment fhe had hitherto felt fince her arrival at Sidmouth, foon after complied with the preffing entreaties of Ekham, and accepting his offer of bring¬ ing to her her harp, which flood, as ufual, at the further end of the room, played over to him all his favourite airs, and al¬ ternately fingingş or converting, evinced^ during die remainder of the evening, a degree
degree of animation, as new to him as it was enchanting. Once whilit flie was employed in tun* ing the inftrument, and at the fame time gaily talking to Madame d'Arzele, who bad been rallying her upon the happy power fhe feemed, exclufively, to poftefs, of rendering Mr, Eltham attentive and quiet, he fuddenly approached her, and, with that, (almoft ßartiing) energy which was fo common to him when any thing occafioned his being particularly earneft, abruptly exclaimed— 44 Shall í never know, Mifs Delming¬ ton, wdiat moit to guard againft when in your préfence ? One moment, beholding you deprefľedandunhappy,though grieved you fliould have caufe, I itili perfuade myfelf that in any other fituation of mind you would be lefs fafcinating, lefs danger¬ ous; yet, the next inftant, if your natural vivacity returns, far from finding this the cafe, you feem to acquire with it freih powers of feduftion!" Clarentine, not more aftonifhed than offended at this ' extraordinary fpeech, blufhed extremely, and turning from him with undiflTcmbled vexation, anfwered— ** Upon
и Upon my word, Mn Eltham, fuer* language is too ridiculous ! Every ftrange flight that comes into your head you per¬ mit yourfelf indi ferira i natel y to utter, and perle ell y indifferent whether you give pleafure or pain, often occafion real^ though 1 hope unintentional diftrefs ta your auditors/" " Nay, do not," cried Eltham, attempt¬ ing, but ineffectually, to take her ha*nd s t& do not be ferioufly difpleafcd. Muft we always be at variance ? perpetually at war ?" α That, Sir," replied Clarentine gravely, ** depends wholly upon yourfelf Be afiurcd, however, that î will never liften lo fuch exaggerated compliments without taking the liberty, very freely, to exprefs my difapprobation of them/' Eltham would ftill have rallied her into fentiments of greater indulgence : but though calm, ilie was firm in keeping to what íhc had faid ; and the matter, to her infinite relief, was foon dropt. It being late when this little dialogue ended, and Eltham knowing Madame d'Arzelc commonly retired early, ihortly after took leavc ? and repaired to his owa
BOOK III. CHAPTER L HAVING communicated to Madame d'Arzelc the preceding night the con¬ tents, as well of Mr. Lenham's, as of Sir Edgar's letter, Clarentine ihut herfelf up the next morning, to give Lady Del¬ mington, through the medium of Sophia, a general account of both, to folicit her directions concerning the fittéit time, and propereft method of undertaking her ap¬ proaching journey, and to affure Sir Ed¬ gar, though not in an anfwer immediately addreffed to himfelf, of the cordial and fincere approbation with which fhe had read the detail of his laudable and excel¬ lent plan. Scarcely was this tafk completed, when, Mr. Eltham, who regularly called every clay about an hour after breakfaft, cither to attend Claremine and her friend, if they
they walked—to fit and read to them if their domeftie engagements kept them in the houfe; or, if he could do neither, to romp and amufe himfelf with the chil¬ dren; fent one of them up to reproach Ciarentine for flaying at home when the weather was fo fine, and to pre fs her ear¬ neftly to put on her cloak, and haften down immediately. With this requeft, unwilling herfelf to lofe fuch a delightful morning, Claren» tine readily complied; and taking the two little girls with her, as their mother juft then wiflied to be excufed going, gaily rallied forth. They had not however proceeded far 5 though the children, active and fearlef% were already out of fight, when, at the very moment, Clarentine partly laughed, and partly teized into compliance, had accepted Eltham's arm, they were met by Mrs. Hertford, and the little ftranger who had before accompanied her. She knew, and inftantly accofted them; enquired of Clarentine how her charming friend did f apologized for not having fooncr called upon them to repeat her thanks for their civility ; and then added s « I left
δί I left home this morning, however, merely with that defign : bul as 1 would not on any account, Mifs Delmington, be the occafion of fhortening, or retarding your walk, and am not fenfible of the leaft fatigue, I will make half my vifit to you while you ftay out, and half aftei you return home/* By no means delighted at this intima¬ tion, and amazed that any one whom fhe was confeious of having received fo cold¬ ly fhould condefcend thus ftrangely to force herfelf upon her, Clarentine only bowed, and foon after they all moved on; Eltham by his countenance and filence betraying his vexation; Mrs. Hertford by her fcrutinizir.g obfervation teftifying her curiofity; and Clarentine by her bkifhes and hefitation evincing her con¬ fa fi on. After а fliort and extremely irk fome walk, fenfible that the longer fhe pro¬ tracted her return, the longer flie fliould be expofed to the embarra fling looks of her unwelcome companion, Clarentine propofed going home, and, ftill clofely followed by Mrs. Hertford, the next mi¬ nute direftcd her fteps towards th« houfe. The
The furprife of Madame d'Arzele, on feeing her come back fo foon, and come back in fuch fociery, was evident and ex- ti erne. She looked by turns at each of tbe party for an explanation; feemed as if ihc fcarceiy knew what to fay, and, in a very fhort time, funk into fuch total filence, that Clarentine, ill difpofed as ihe felt for fuch a tafk, was obliged to take upon herfelf the whole weight of the converfation; Ehham not chufing to bear any part in it, and Mrs. Hertford hcrfeif appearing to think that as the ν fit or ^ not the vifitedi fhe likewife might be ex¬ empted from making any effort to fupport it. The entrance of the children at length afforded Ciarentine fome relief. Uncon¬ feious of their own power, how often in fimilar circumftances—-when converfation fails—the miftrefs of the houfe is languid, and her guefts completely wearied, do thefe innocent and happy little beings bring unexpected comfort ; reanimate the mother's face ; diffipate the ftranger's gloom ; and, by diverting their attention from each other, reftore a whole party to cbearfulnefs and eafe» Such
Such now, in fome meafurc, happily proved the ca¿e. Mrs. Hertford, though íhc fcarceiy noticed the children them- felves, fmikd at, and commented on the pains Eltham took to make them riotous ; and Madame d'Arzele and Clarentine, in their endeavours to keep them quiet, found, if not an agreeable, at leaft a laft¬ ing fource of occupation. The divcrfion, however, thus gladly em¬ braced, though it tended to beguile, foon loft its power to charm away the the time ; and Clarentine, who from the momc nt of her entrance had never ceafed wondering what could detain her, fearce ever expe¬ rienced more fatksfaction than when at length Mrs, Hertford rofe to depart. She was attended to the door by El¬ tham, whom ilie there kept a confidér¬ able time in converfation, and to whom Clarentinc, as ilie was returning to the parlour, heard her fay— " And how long, Sir, have you been acquainted with thefe ladies r" Si Really/ 1 anfwered Eltham, ζί I can« not be very accurate as to the exact time: but why do you enquire V' 46 Becaufe/*
" Becaufe," replied flic, " it appears rather extraordinary you fliould never have mentioned them during the frequent vi fits va-A have paid at our houfe lince your a nival." 6i Why, my dear madam," cried Ehham, gaily, α do you think me ib fuperktively dull, ihat I can find nothing better to en- tei tain one pretty woman with, than en¬ comiums upon another 'ľ' u 1 am to infer then/* faid Mrs, Hert¬ ford, with qiuckncfs, "that to /peak of Mifs Delmington, and ίο pra i/'e her, is 3 with you, the fame thing ? ,s α Infer, my deareft creature," an¬ fwered he, carelefsly, *' what you pleafe, but ailc me no more queftions, I imreat; lince (pardon me for faying it) I know you too well to fuppofe they can either be the re fult of chance^ or entirely the ef¬ fect of benevt/lence Γ Frightened at this daring fpeech, and dreading to hear its anfwer, Clarentine now haitily threw open the garden door, aed ran into it to avoid, while they con¬ tinued talking fo near the parlour, the poffibility of catching another word. «< Good
δ « Good God 1 what muft the woman be, " thought ihe, u to whom Eltham permits himfelf to hold fuch language ? What could be her reafon, with fo little to fay, for making us fo long a vi fit ? Or why, finding us fo rcmifs in attention to her, vifit us at all? 1 do not uiideritand it; but I much fear, if Ekham talks to her in the fame (train much longer, he will make hei the irreconcilable enemy of us both! 1 ' Then recollecting her fituation wliCii met by Mrs. Hertford—leaning upou Ehham's arm —the children, as if pur¬ pofely, detached from them—and he her only companion; fhe blamed herfelf fe¬ verely for ever having walked out with him unaccompanied by Madame d'Ar¬ zelc, and trembled at the opinion fuch a ftory, if malicioufly reported, might give rife to at Delmington. It now alio for the firft time occurred to her, that it was wrong to perni it Ekham fuch free and continual accefs into their houfe. Though by his own unde fi gni ng behaviour, his cafe, and good humour, flie had been taught almoft to forget how lately he had Ыеп introduced to her, it was yet kut too true
true that he was itili only the acquaint¬ ance of a day—had no family connection, no rektion fli ip with her whatever—and that neither his age, or the profligacy im¬ puted to his character, rendered hima fit intimate for a young woman in cireum¬ flances fuch as her's. Had not Mrs. Har¬ rington already, with the moft envenomed rancour, afpcifed and vilified her? and would fhe not, happy in fuch an oppor¬ tunity, feize with avidity every freih occafion of pouring upon her abufe and odium ì ^ Alas ľ' cried flie, u I forgot, or ra¬ ther till this minute I never was aware, that independent of thofe evils brought on by our own mifconduft, there are others, almoft equally dreadful, which are folely the refuît of our inexperience and want of forefight. Ekhan/s conver¬ fation, whilft confined as it hitherto has been to vague and general fubjefts, was pteafant to me, and I fancied alfo, alloc¬ able. Polifhed without affectation, enter¬ taining without farcafm, and eafy without impertinence, ï (latter myfelf, both being free from ail dcfign, that we might fafely, whilit refiding in the fame vicinity, affi> с iate
ciate with each other. Too late, how¬ ever, I have difeovered my error; and fatal, if this Mrs. Hertford к as illiberal as ilie is myfterious, fatal may it prove to me !" Terrified by this apprehenfion, and angry with Ehham for having fb much contributed to expofe her to conjecture, by unneceflarily keeping fecret his know¬ ledge of her, although, as was now ap¬ parent, a conftant vifitor at Mrs. Hert¬ ford's, fhe determined in futu t e to keep out of his way as much as poffible ; to cheek his aifiduities by every means ia her power; and above all, earueftly to at« tempt limiting the number of his vifits, and the length of their duration. Whilft yet occupied in framing plans fuch as thefe, Eltham himfelf joined her, and as he advanced, anxioufly called out— 65 What, my deareft Mifs Delmington, makes you look fo thoughtful and fo grave ? ' Clarentine, unwilling at firft to con- feis to him the caule, looked embarraffed, ша heíkatcd fo long what to anfwer, that concluding
concluding hcr ferioufnefs was the mere ι fleet of accident, he forbore making any further enquiries, and taking hcr hand 3 faid— " Come, you want a little diflipation ; fuppofe therefore, we now re fume our walk ?" " No indeed !" cried Clarentine haftily, u I will neither go out with you again to-day, nor, if I can help it, any other day/" " No ?" exclaimed he, much furprifed, « 6 And why ?" u I would tell you/' anfwered flie, more calmly, " but that I fear your íe- prefentations, although determined not to fuffe r myfelf to be influenced by them/' *' Vain indeed fliould ï be," refumed Eltham, evidently picqued by this decla¬ ration, 4 ~ if, after hearing a determination fo candid, you hazarded any of the expostu¬ lations you fo caufelefsiy apprehend. Ex¬ plain yourfelf freely, theiefore, Mifs Del¬ mington/* H I will," faid Claientinc, afTefìing not to feem confeious of his difpleafure, you 3 ша У
may remember, Sir, that when I parted from my friends at Dclmingion, and firft came to this place, our acquaintance was fcarceiy of a week's ftanding,andinitfelf of fo flight a nature, and fo accidentally began that no one could have wondered, had it Hopped there, fliould we mutually have dií cla 'med any thing beyond the mere knowledge ofeach other's names and faces. This being the cafe, what would Lady Delmington, what would Mrs. Ilairingtou conclude, were they to hear, that ihe, who fo lately was ahnoft an entire ftran- ger to you, nov/ authorized } our daily aitcndance ai all hours ; wandered about lhe tommy with you without any oihei companion; received you earlv, and de¬ tained you late; ixwd was nc^r icen hut m yom íoeieíyľ I mì^ht ía\ , very fah'lw linn your vifits are not moie meant for me than for Madame d'Ari* eîe : but •Hill, knowing as î do, how feldom ihe is able, or willing to be of our continual ex- curfions, how much when you are below, ¡be fits above, and how frequently we have been icen without ber, 1 íhould lind ıhı·;, ï fear, a wry infufîieient plea, and be extremely ill prepared to anl\>\ r all tl·. e voi .u. E obj t tiions
objections that might be made to it. My requeft to you, therefore, is. Sir, that for the few days I remain here, you will either make your vifits fhorter and lefs confiant, or, without being offended, and imagining i mean to fli e w you any /er/i^/dddrefpeft, that you will permit me, when you call, to walk out, as formerly by m\ feif, or to lit quietly up ftaiis in my own room, and leave to Madame d'Arzele the ceremony of receiving you/' Never was aftoniihment equal to that which reftrained Eltham from interrupting this fi ink. and, to bum. e\traoidinary ipceeh. lie looked м ber for fome time ;n» if doubting the и ably oí' what he had head« and war prepaung to anfwer her -iridi guai irait ıbjlıty, w! en recollecting ıheıe v* i)ïi be as much oí bidden fear as of efl ibliíhed difiiké in what Ilie had faid, he inftantly changed his puipofc, and Loping to make fome ad .'antage of the confie nvido fbe bad been thrown into, cag'-rh e x claimed— ςς 1 wdl confent to any thing, renounce yeery thü44 proVkkd } OU Will but рГО- ìli fe, on \ our jiiivd! in town, to take off thk
this ficai fut interdiction, and permit me to foe, and to v ifit you there, as if it had never paffe d î" €6 1 will make/' cried Clarentine, of¬ fended and amazed in her turn, ct no fuchpromife! you cannot have any right, Mr. Eltham, to exact it ; nor to fuppofe, that in the hope of enfuring a temporary good, I ihould voluntarily bring upon myfelf a lafting evil !" é * Why, what an arbitrary little defpot you are!" cried be, endeavouring under a femblancc of gaiety to difguife the mor¬ tification and anger a icfufal fo itcady had given rile to; " difdaining all compio- mife, ι ejecting all conditions, what a very t\ rant you are become !" 4 * Ì am ione. Sii/' faid Claremine, with greater mildnek, c · you compelled me to it; as we 1::.o\n t ach otheris ienii- ments. however, поч', the re ели be no fuithvu neeeííiiv (k r my flay, and th.eie- fare I fhall wilh \-m i\o'id morning." t; Why v. lu t lier are you then going:'* "Toiiivowii ro. >m, Sir. J have a letter io fiıiıüı before the pnfl goes out, and no tunc- I bukve, to lofe." E 2 She
She then haftily left him, while yet too much confounded to have power to flop her, and ran up ftairs. CHAP, II. WlIEN Clarentine and Madame d'Ar» zele met at dinner, the former, with her accuftomed finccrity, related all that had pafíed in lier own mi. I previous to her conference with Ekham, as well as the particulars and refult of that conference itfcif. When fhe had ended her account, « f ma] r , perhaps/' added fhe, " have been rather too plain wdth him: but it is impoffible to recollect the ftrange en¬ gagement into which he would have per¬ fuaded me to enter, without wondering he ihould not bimielf have forfcen.thc re¬ tort it muft occafion/' 6< From any one clfe, my dear Claren* line/' laid Madame d'Arzele, he would luve forefecn it: but you and I have treated him with -too much indulgence, 6 have
have literally fpoiit hini. I am glad, therefore, with all my heart you have had the courage toput a little check upon hira; and by no means forry to find the wearifome length of his never-ending vifits is likely tobe fomewhat moderated; though as the more often fi ble mifirejs of the houfe ι I could never have permitted myfelf to give him fuch a hint, without running the ri fk of offending him for life." Then recurring to what Clarentine had faid relating to her fears, left the mifrc- prefentations, Mrs. Hertford's prying cu¬ riofity fliewed her fo fully prepared to make, fliould reach Delmington, and gain credit there, Madame d'Arzele be¬ fought her to explain her reafons for hav¬ ing, as íhe fuppofed, invited her in; and gave the moft ludicrous account of the confternation and difmay with which fhe faw her enter. Clarentine readily fatisfied her as to the fhare fhe had borne in that tranUriion, and briefly informed her of every parti¬ cular that had attended their meeting; after which, by mutual confent, a dii - ferent fubject was ftarted, and both fought, as much as it was iti their power, to duve E j the
the unpleafant occunences of the morn¬ ing from their thoughts. The wdiolc afternoon and evening pat- fed, and Ehham never appeared; tbe iutcecdmg dav elapfed, and fidi hisab- íi nee cu umu d. Clarcntme then begin to be ingbvvvL am! half wiflied—deft m l!\ingtt» avert v>:e evd five hati brought upon ki lelf α ι:? 't»*, and made him an t чипу who had before been а friend— ihe had either fpokon more cautioufly, 01 wholly foreborn fpeaking at all, con¬ tenting herfelf with avoiding bam without aflivning any reaíon for it. Yet thi>, im- pratiicable, and leif-wiibd a- be w4h, ihe belie v ed would bave Ыеп a I moil imp iihbk ; fince gowkibv ihe would» unleís formally ptobibitcd, he would have infiitcd ир')п following her, and deny îvm a « often a^ fbe j levied, he would ! ive Cubed v;v4 the nt \t hour. Dïl- CctidÍ4L4 tvuefiu , i-d tiíViek rcpiniîigs, and íOii\eiLvi ,n Ь/.т t»wn mind, th il Ноле, v i n * r die. w! at de hui done \,ач .-.t I i'd. c,:. l:d und bond!* flie at- cputted iierkli of any w io. g intentions hivd dwnnncd q-jictly to await the C\C4t. A bv ι
A letter from .Sophia „ vh«oi'wd i > ioih>wm:vuo r tiH*^, ívmtnbut* dm ue ϊ! <*п ever to tonfirmhíi m die fe PnlimĽit*, md to leütve hi ι he *» ail leuiaiiíin^ u* 4 - t;afineí> b íptUUi^ \\\\л\ had paf 1 » d. That a fl v ítiun.tte, and exet Ilı nt un P besan ш i afiy Diiiiii-LUijfa «*·> w t ην her оч η π ime, b ; thanking 1ч r ш .. warmly Ьл the eonhdence and kir.dtv.- with w huh fh<_ had av.kľto*»vkdg<d toilaili ber receipt of Sn Edgir s kiur; and b>i the unreleiveü and fatisfactory aao;;.t ihe had e.vui of it> íontent^. i 1er rn )- ibcr, Ил* addc î. fisc» iS t<»*r;mu..»ť«ii ^i no клц ι « . ρ -ίι f í. tbc ¿*m * \ ^ man » ..d her doti'oi4 batníh. d. »dl í, r .ila: n t d*- Inkd; a d in e κ q * ' i, íh «*a 4 i íuv audiob/. i Γπμ,α i-, », u u ¡i !.j, tl^.: heneti г*\ачк l\cí ; oü^ctií'U ľ ι iiv.1 writing * f >it lv avi up. л» v t í tbc wh«>.^ fami! v , ami tO Lady j u.,a u*»^^ V.,o fv'ï ever at an end, SpedLne, uchí uí hi. r brothel. íLt fa. d he V, ^3 tu ivî euî loi 4„)\íuieÍL: v fo.luVíh.e; week, I α\*ης u лели thv. lait f>ur οι tive davi a.nui.vti ίο i,ipa:h. dui 11 vai n ì longiî dj-i: t ed iicc*:íai ; to J*.lay L,, joui m y.
• * »* Ί lhe· " a. hf i*/ i vu he would, fe · , ne* î \·- h,A «. * »рд *·:»- i î drìibt nat : t ä ·; t- ι ,: . ^bfci^ece «**nii Lord "*» -'" ( i h. "ч d. who kr dv t alit Л ι» t 1 . **·■'.- ^t ri с î.-rorruï*^ to стерт*? tv Г.'ПаГг .Л к г hi»:'. Хк'лс n >î ì,jard /. ρ '»ϊηί/'-λτ- of what paíkd between te «ν * hu? ri I rru;* диаде by my brother's r v »ui fp .ri t * "ïîicî bf bis Lordíhip's ivi; cordialità al paıtmg, they were only ej.h лъ to give u j» ali fatisfaftion and ** a U Lde^ ϊ Ζ.;ιγ 4 v,hu u fed fo fedulous- lv ?r ¿.\ud I ad\ ]uiv, пг*\* fei zes every í ]i f rMîi.ı% ci :hií.íWi«-ç himfelf, vilhout aft. tía t 'г ч п. ?:ì 1ч ï wav , a ís d for bim, really ï\l^ a very ahVibvjb courtier; a change Ici í ^d\ ftnp j.jpejisb} no means either ¿ .... d ч) 4KÎiv.r iníi kble to ! ?> • ; lUiî :/* '·^ ι î ri Juin, mv dnr í rireriHít, í. 1 : í í vp. ns much of your de; í;:, r el Luv v rve! Urros extremely bun f n- í î. Tïv^ write to ber very foon. She know?* of vour iir.pt nai ng journey, and Ълъ bon told :«. ï v/ vou are to live тач:Ь, and why you lea\ e us, which, (ac- coiding to cur account) is becaufe-—let mc
me kc , i » ал с airee »it fi г д»н ην 1ч ff» i f —O-bwauit Mr Lanham hindou LÍiivl il; ani Mı i t riisui *, ел tin ела* Ь ч ud of the late M»*. Samcih u and nn\ thv rc - fo r e к dirUabk b l hipped» d to k 1 ь e t Ilikre 1 ! d éh 411 bel кг olii Л i li»v.e^ . * * tarh /n-'v. . ** ν >w lein^mber уча d»> n'»t f pc / th» pren v floiv, bv telbijg mo»e. ι b-n \* 5 ought t·» do' I a "b í e \^u ΐϊ colt . ; much trouble and pain* ю nu ^ nt. ** Ľa* úo\ —befure 1 p''4(. 4 d í ¡ nì *, let me ac, u r * ". ι ' 'ih 4 r. « t g » » İ new·', λΙικμ huí, 1 к ua, ι » *v » ... Edili ' i ad iIO*k«í 4d а>1 1 (ku T s , İıc lievi ./л iiih/i.iivd \o * \ * i - Ut L;, , (though uti ρνιπν tij. íoMí.tj i )U i- ; upon * / latqctt iii » ) «I |< * .1 i U.l t > mv mtUtíCi jíid πκ ч u *uÀ\ * » kuvl WcIavh, but îti [-u u, f 4 ,4id 'he. ne; mt he r; v odi íiil¡¿ a^ madu ил M* , Ла!- ring; uu diat nu ompuheníibfi pk . j.* a fit оч u tnt eledin!*., 'uuinhe η· , ш « dertook io diivhariìt ihvn ttii.»u, b .- fel f, a*· a teftimoiiy ai tht higlì α^·, v . *. lion with which fhe honouis 1 * ι - \^ì< t conduci. Now till mc, if vou dw, tí- it miracles aie over f E 5 " W uh
Vui '- regard, my love, to the dircv- ΐί,ΛΡ:; >*'·>ΐΐ aik concerning your journey, чч' nejíner v oi opnuois yon ought by no "■'■ ü1r; - Vì travd ίο lar akne, and Las kevvic devil·.·«! w v iU î hope, you will *: ."i mî u л verv vvdiitahie method oí ob- ^ ijtütg че> d'-Iictdtv", " й Our gOí>d and worthy old houfe- Keeper. Mrs. Xewfiham, ba* а daughter in London w horn fbe bas long been very ;vw.is to sifiu Mv moîhcr knowing div, anei ai the fame time being thoroughly nilgai Ibe could noi entruft vou to a ρ: operer pta son, bai commifhorŕcd me to ч v voe. tka if, on Monday next* voy can proceed e> far dò Kxeter with Madame ď rivelc'b woman« Mrs. Ncwnb.am fhall meet you there, at the principal inn, and Чечч] on with you the reí!, oí the way* Write therefore immediately to Mr. Len¬ ham to inform him of this arrangement¬ er} arrangement which, however you тел-, and, 1 flauer myfelf, icvï/ approve—it grieves ¡η·> to be obliged, with fuch me¬ thodical ¡апч -f''oìd. to write about. u I read to Edgar the friendly little indlage you fent to him. and he feemed much gratified and aflec'tcd by it; yet, like
, like a true cncroachcr, сл -iiíd тгл bijp confťíľing fır fhoutfi h.avc b t c n líHi í>cíU:í pteaíťd had it been v rute n шнгкоьлк rv ίο t:-mú-í. So, Lov ;ľ\c!\, v, ŕ ;uVí /■;:./ ïî-,v îllOthvr; dľid iherefure Ц ï..î qu.l;..: Γ.ί l'vli as π ΐϋ. 44 But mv dearcít Clarci-.tiïH - I ľru.n* now bid \-f)u Га rt- w t-L I ťhíiíi v. vitt- ί.· = you again ν:τ\" Ι,'· ни and ΐνφν íw )л. «ir from you as cailv as νοα ¡».¿π after ч^оо' arrivai m ï..ondon. 44 IK-avcîi blcí.s vnd pf. ír-rve vou— « gram vt.» и a lah; ¿;- 5 d pSi-^i'-íor ΐ'.-,η'ί,νι — â с : i î^İia 1 ìxll PU-.OI — μ^'..κί ¡mí,?·- /,:.■/. good iuodlh . 44 Adm , and bíoťvt: vu 4 v.- t :h о*: uu eit and vai mc И aíKjt i ľ- >ν*. k * Υ Oii! л V Ve Г, % ' S. Ι) . :..«.- ,Ο,ΐί ■-. P. S. " О« tili ï Lad J.::.::\ï Ua S' ·\ ' lî İS K'pOîtcd hero» bv OH «-f' !;■; i.c -,ντ, men. »AİiOîn he İaicly leni i-:; f * '^ W-d wyu I*ark. tbot the lai» e*, the τιΐί -tifír. tL»: humble Μι Kîthaîïb Las t.ikto* a Ь>;:д - ing, at Sidmouîhj ¿,i._,d и yo.·-.'— tiíat iu- valk.s out [¿¿¿-α tťhľ w uh vou f ve ri o.oc — -t Isat in an evening vou ipvnd wiuiir hours íinging dná l>Ljy¡n¿ iu 1;о»а— :iml Ь 6 í'iiuüy.
i 1
W 4 * P t t, a.t %our h » u ív. '
f % ^M«,lK % ' », 1*5 V *-. ««* l l jf t A j
i n O s
" с т w *ir t ; uta-
v i * 1 ^ n ,jirid [ f ' M 4 —C í í tO V ä j O * I ** d ii í J fff? tO g M b um , I r
? o o. 'P' * M í ] â ' i c L v ^
í î
' I m r * í oo .1 L ! η ¡ í ti e K. A * Oí O J v ŕ >al 1оппд i *!,. ч ruiUüid ! 4 v f u: Oj OîlCÎl! ¿ , ^ ÜÜJCCt * í fio á ν*Γ^ίί* He
II Ό? P e z Ί ^ » î 1 ~~ ! ? i * o i í ^ * ! i M í í dr L no * tli"'. î ítá! О V^ UP— f í f ä 'm tt T * í ♦ * <* *** İ N- İ t * l ? ^ с* " л г * iti ~· - ît i „ " ι *'tb» * l hií ' . ч « ·« * ' n * * w i ίρ^ιΠί, η Uj * f * i a t* t I О ^î l * r . l i m í f ^ ι f ìli Hip ч r í í| f f ^ O i ., ( í d . í ^ ι » íflí ^ ♦ % O, U m » ^ ч V e lu, « loie, , ! í
*" í».t > ií p İÎ I offe ь л í » ti m i i i bred, I a * L u , 1 t * i íonsj indJ^ t n Lo \ .4.Uİ i
i \ 4 i \,
t , 'v
"O VVU ti
Í.A il-il«. '
c -...
her O -i s
i ;. í îi ; i á L C w 1 i ^ · <rL.o v. teed I not ; OO O'c; Mo' V COÌC' '.' s "Víi ■!'■;! OCO, OÍ b пне O T
Ί ΓΟΟ Ш ПЛЦ l u "i t..
■ - - ■■■> 'О. . ■ «■■„■, î - .' ΐ 1 J"í Λ ΐ S ï l· TL '' . *" . f "4 í.-J rl. Ü,.l:.Ct' ' ! . s iUÍäyl :ì, MO ■ ; š á.\ e i m. о рлт'Л nao v t C'' ! " *'·■ *·." j '*. ί ! C : '" О С t ] C j i.O'í C -
C O M o oo.
ţ c ■ : ?'■;. 1. 'i ,4 ... *i ; ι ' * ·' 'CM O !ľä t-C'0.,:Í .. ;■ ■■ aec-:>uïit L. o ; Oií ail' -'л' ?¡e ί -. O- ι '* ί 'Ό ^v ϊ · "'■' í . д.» ^ ľc,' i · f , ! C ' í * M г- M , í- : ' 0 ■■ ■С · ί i İl t- ¿ · ·· ; ? S ! * l· ' » 4i » e а vi с '--' î
t
-* ** a u I v. * 1 «j ti O í \utii piikit f i S i C i f H (i , ДЦ ι ' 4 i(l í «inii л t ' »í *' H \ t I t ч д л 'i, d nuoti j. 4 * ií i j ι ГИ ι .,, J 4 ,'/,κ C f láľ s r it > f i «v^o in tl· dit ι n \%hiíh .uM^luh u. jj ^ Ltr ídii \ii,í, r ' f d ui г ti Λϊ -ŕ i u. .ht ь «ddctlţ h uh- ti л t ч ĺ. t ţ U*î oí âti Hvi ϊ« f "i tu L ч s dt* « Mih Did- *' s * v i it. »4 , n İn poi 41 f í * cO í í 4 * nn k If 5 v * , luHlíV I I í > u л h(w \oa \ i i * i * . « ;i<í .í í," t a would u „ * v * *- * я| i(s .¡n [ U 0*^t bi рту „ . ¡p ' ч ,сл) muler* a ' * ι u jr t\ t ynexpcittc! ** «dai ί< ií oidOí a fídrt ílov- * » OÍ i ä í "K .4 1 ill" r л ¡ Ш hu * 4 /í .i t n tt .% ť 4 n î ub «t ( да\е rde ¿ ¿ü¡f ю .1 d iì t bjppu * eik cl apiari ím ι ir* k\A ioítamh cidíspaling e^eiv u.vc ui that j; ììiiiul ibìbarr^ilmcBi under which
which fhe had, tbe moment before, lo feyereh laboured, revived and reanimated ber íuihtKiiiíy, to enable ber, tbe next !iiOiU!ev»*Hbo4i! paule (»г heíkition, fa m ly, but* rr ih·"* Lune time, with extreme good breevit? ï<# aniìArr— ϊβ VoL r olîeî4 щ,1<кт, doc« ne infinue hoîiiui. -агд. ! ihould have accepted H wirb ;ıuî ι ha' ae, bad î not tl. г vu \ îuorn- гл^ г ч ev id a letter from Dchmn'ton, contar une; tite fulkft dircdioiv*, a well <uuccrnHig the и ne ai wfurh î am to bet Ovit, as tbe котрлыоп with u horn I am to tría el, and the e\aSt .от τ we arc to uke, ' *- An«i when, ihen. ma* I ak/ ! cued Elth tfn, abruptly tuv av τ* und, h * ύο \ OU f Ľ, out CI armisi'·* bv reí rvi"<¡ апхю.ь ^· anlver tl '- erepiív, aîtımpui t o vu ι ч ofl w ?h a i ¡ее/ч and e ι» к î er b 1 d-— 6fe \ ou aed ! Кг к с n 'p ar, ¡ - 1 tms mí*rnjuj4 \ <* . kn \ ч Mr. I !ľ í.* vi thev í n,. ín а ьчк j u.nih**' t i »i v n CU! í »kry * î lhaîl td e .id e л 4v< il tv» not having uî >" at î 'în 'c d Lke c .ul¬ dre. ï hi th«: !д т пе * ιιναν 1 mc, -*:.<<: '*ι, and ílÍuíc to aní л cr \ou. ŕ cl Arı
** An admirable expedient î'* cried Le t * £c ï give you infurile credit for it* inge. nuit\ ? 1 his к what may tru'y be calkd ťrnvií é? euer, el to ξ: c d ла'олпг. Pi ay where did you learn thk politic art r" ςί XectJÙ' , I bi ppo k, tand t it me/ eriíwered Clarentinc landtung, * : ioi it is not oue of dude qualification I fliould be willim* to a feri b e to Nat 'îte," ùi Car/ider then, lio w much you are imkbted to me, as the prime agent of this all mfpiring neceflìty» for calling forth fut h talents ľ' fe * Atxuit as much/' relumed Claren¬ tine w uli quidmek, 4í a> an\ other per» L.U4 d bvA:i.z i>, to die tormentor that ih mu kites iu exertions by brit awakening it. ťeard." ** I may then really triumph in the ccr~ шпп oí having nude you afraid of me ?" ·· Not abíoiuiely; ünce I can yet only- id* vou the honour to acknowledge that \ou arc the f j- , but by no means the v ? i)f m с feaj4 d Then obkrvmg that Mrs. Hertford fái ìdeui.ig to a\\ that pa fled \\ith the moil vài *e <; 'Чогаоп, ihe kit anxious to give ч '4! i,i.: turn to die converiation; and
лпп foi that purpofe addreffinç herfelf io her, without giving I' i^ii tunc to pui» bie the fuh]< 't. fh ч Ч ь d — w vki t I c. ke tío lib'*ï*v, « ìdc t \ oí aflving bow гоч fiift ht iifi ţ f ¡ч * be< e^ d removí ƒ I fhould be ■ dtv to kn*«w who it ι , that in tii 1 } la <- tlun\s fo in- figriihuu.f tt b« д , ! am oí fuflunnt confequtiH'4 to tak íj. e Mouhd oi cin quiiiìig àpio a'U oí 4,1 a i^-ïv éö M/ iíitdng'-nce./' aîîl-ertd Mv. Ilertfoıd. iv w.". ľ.í#* i rocurc d heie, but came immc !i..tdv ft<»m ! oudon, in л fit» ter f \ "1 '' \ r-ccp-vl fom \'п> Biir·» clay, th»: v n* , î ď*. ^ ho. w rh í*ei vo·» ther, ПОЧ f, ! - ei M>' I *ť ä .en d A*· i. ¡I ίο Ьп l hv: ì ' d ly qu une* 1 with п«ече> fîıe bad /ла\^ lo euiefdiV avoi i d í 5 - ntiOfUn^. f 1ЧЧ Г b^íoie hei ol Ekha.n. Claierio·»'. unubh '^ смгччиьо lier fîï íl C'iiíbl )U. Ì IL.i Lu'a.Plal- 6 * (»o i 1 í.o-1 f T h n.a^ íu/nn i lv r, ' lb ting lur'dd, with. 'Poi e tompofiuc* a .í d. ** Vo i .ue well aeqmumai wnh М'1*>1к.и1а\ then, mad йп r I s flie а ее. s dc 44 кеч, v Vívlak ,' ani v e-f,, d M. j. Ilendvl.
** And pray/" refumcd Clarentine, be¬ aming and fearful, yet anxious, before fhe herfelf became a member of it, tc* know exactly upon what footing Mrs. Hertford was in Mr, Lenham's family; u Fray, madam, may I without imper¬ tinence enquire, whether you have been it ui mate long with this young lady, and whether you are a!fo acquainted with the excellent Mr. Lenham Γ u With the latter/* anfwered Mrs· Hertford, 44 but very flightly. Mrs. Caftleton, a particular friend of mine, has a boy, the brother of that little girl you have fecn with me here, under his care, and when ftie has called to fee the child, í have occafionaliy accompanied her, and by that means obtained a trifling know¬ ledge of him. With Mifs Barclay, how¬ ever, I have been in habit* of confidence» arai in conftant correfpondence thefe four or-five years." This anfwer. circumftantlal as it was, frill but impei fectiy ktkfied Clarentine. Theie were yet a thoufand queftions ihe wiflied to a!k, a thoufand doubts fhe lunged to have explained, which, how¬ ever, her delicacy and fear of offending withheld
withheld her from uttering. That a wo¬ man, whom Eltham allowed himfelf to exciie fuch fuipicions of, to whom he ventured to fpeak fo cavalierly, and who to Clarentinc herfelf appeared fo ilkformed to excite a lafting frieudftitp ; th u fuch a woman fhould be lhe c holen inmate of fo near a relation of the refpeckihk Mr, Lenham's, feemed incomprehenfible! Much, however, did the circumrtarice, extraordinary as it v/a*, tend to eradicate, or at leaft diminifh, the prejudice flie had hitherto harboured againft her; and natu¬ rally candid, difpofed to fee e\ v \ /eng in the moit favourable b ;ht ; and. .o all ingenuous rrinds aie* averle tu crcebïieg the icùff in л doultyul < av* ¡he p< rl laued herfelf to believe, that bdha n fiad vid, τ been grófid ν mifmformed. οι die mihi· enced by private pnpie »π all that be bad infinuated. When theiefore, akt r a vifit. like both her former one>, of confinici able length, Mrs. Hertford rofe to take kave; Cla¬ rentinc, whok feeling and exe lient heart reproached her for her paft coldnefs, and urged her to make reparation for it, went up to her, and with infinite fwcetnefs re¬ newing
ne dng her thanks for the obliging offer that had brought her, apologized foi never having waned upon her during the time íhc had been at Sidmouth, and cx- pre fled gieat concern that it would now, owing to the ihortnefs of her ftay, be w holíy mit of her power. * ¿ I hope then/' fitid Mrs. Hertford, v jib a look that flicucd her much pleafed, ** you will make me ameiuk when you get to town : " Sã findig, nie тгае fomething bc- î\,ecii a ' ľ and a * ur t by to Ekham, fi , / ч Lib.l· v dì Chticutine, left her е и·. ' u, .t- í ί M.iuauľ d Arzuic, and v tí , ei Λ.ι o, eVvfi n iiiiÍJi \.y ieity, haf- í . - s fb \ a vue. ľkh im, 'V 4 ' ( v , \.iHiid íiave pt-uiedunon C'.' í . ' 4ur*nt oí" qmítiOl.«, ll(»t 'd ' u« '\'d with upi« adies for a le- 4í)íi L^ Ίπ.. ft ď. i > muvh ícícntcd. hid l'a' iiihrvtd hun oj/poiıuîjiîy ; but л^ are еЛ b.·, vb K vu an I t qu.dl·" avcı fe to îe «ung v¡/ f n one* οι iin other, fix t ivď'bod\ w d "λιί; kınam fatis- {, .io.v i'Joiu; iie-n. .ı:ıd ¡ought by fo ΐΐ,.-ι, . Ltk д. t Uw io ek; le lio inteuoga- toik>,
* tories, and gr e the co?i\< riauon а gau ral turn, that although he could not agam, wuh any appearance of ivkon, complain of her, as fiu: nuihti o ihfnd any pecu¬ li vr diwi îi to t b ipe fruì hnn, οι an} degree of uí\ rve that ош' I iu t инч, >»i fenfe ofknd lu iî. be ven bvu 1 id гМ ¡ α- nence, αη i dei, ınnucd *q on q^niing 1 », lo kek elfewhere tb it jpîcÎIj^v '.u * wvvi evt ry ınitaııt enei.aie : 1.. di ine oí di. tainiug. As í oon as he had kft bev ЬеАеччч^ up to Mídame d' Ar/eie to confidi w rdi hcr abavi the ¡ lm m * w. I b, > ^ ' v. retamelo Iti patru *· lo ,- 1 , , , hud uvacei ι е че, f ч the n M rv» u . d n, ч îl λ» 1 ed ŕ kv Ì u ^ ο ι с i '«Liv ν Cppl'i u'U '.. ей itv. » ti/ ¡ I χ л к) I f ül e ii \ ? ì]
t ^ tl * t
ми
nugbt e ь α b i. \ . ' i л u ι » к - ι aas e, b о \ ч . ι ν ' ilik.,..! b'L ч ;! о , î ι', u. 1 - ι, , íiibp ιΐ ч nji · ι ·[ - .d Vi а*. I \ · Vih> ι v talU ι » i ι I »· ,, (J f .enli ! ,: lì «d ' ' V ri í l , ЬГиЧ : ι ' tiV h 1 . ι· ' » ν , ^ íl\ s till(t f ι t . Κ nd C f , J.. tu., ν kirue* e » 1 , * i t )
1 a
Lady Julia, till after her arrival in Lon«« don ; when for the one fhe would have more leifurc, and for the other more ma¬ terials.
С II A P. III. TlIE morniiïg at length arrived, fo much dreaded by Madame d'Arzele, and fo de¬ jectedly anticipated by Clarentinc, which, aber a refidence together that had been produrihe of fo much comfort to both ; that had fo clofc ly united them to each other, and cflabliihed a habit of confi¬ dence between them fo grateful to their hearts, was deftined to fieparate and di¬ vide them. They parted with tears on both fides; and with the fincereft expref¬ fions of attachment, rarneilly renewed their mutual promifes of wriiing with punctuality and diligence. At ExetCr, whither Clarentinc was con¬ veyed in lefs than three hours, flic found the good Mrs. Newnham, w "no had flept there the preceding night, in rcadinefs, at the
the Inn door, to receive and welcome her. They repaired together into the houfe* where, after taking forne rcfiefli- ment, Clarentine haftily wiotc a few lines to thank Madame d'Arzelc for the attend¬ ance of her woman; whom, fending for into the parlour, flic very generouíly re¬ warded for her trouble, and tiu n dif- røiffed, with a thoufand kind meffages to her miftrefs, and a thoufand affectionate remembrances to the children. When this bufinefs was concluded, fbe turned to Airs. Newnham, and telling her fhe was ready to fct out, aíked how they were to travel, 4 ' My Lady's opinion ma'am/' <m~ fye re d M v. New uhani, u was, that yom fafe ft method, as you have no man fer¬ vant to attend you, would be, to \\« 4 .r here till the Plymouth ilage arnv< v and ú theie is loom, to piocccd the reft <d the way, or at leaft as far a* Salifbury iu that; there, if you find yourfelf fakgued, we may fleep to-night, and continue our journey in the coach that fets out fiom thence, to-morrow/* Clarentinc immediately agreed to thk plan; and on enquiry, fiudmg ihe ftage voi .v. F v. ;i
was cxpcftcd in every minute, held her¬ felf in readitiefs to get mío ¡^ and dcfired the waiters would let her know as foon as it arrived, Whilft this was pairing, Kirs. Newn¬ ham had been giving orders in the pafta ge concerning the baggage ihe had brought \rith her; and was ftanding to fee it all conveyed down ftairs out of her own room, whither fhe had inlifted upon its being depofited the night before; when Clarentine, drawn to the door by the noife and buftîe of this removal, flared with amazement at the number of trunks and Ь'Ч\еь ihe beheld, and haitily exclaimed—» i4 Whv, mv dear Mrs. Newnham, you have made prepat ation* foi a very long abdın e ! W bat fky do you purpofe to make m London ? * ** kkk vou, ma*m!" cried die good vornan, í% thefe things arc not a quarter of them mine; the) chiefly belong to *> уоц, " To me ľ' thought Clarentine, figh- big, "Ah! then, I am an outcafi m- deul 1 / 1 # Slie die w nearer to the place where they flood; however, and examining the uirec-
directions, faw, with increafed concern, as a proof of the long exile to which fhe was doomed, that they were aftua'uy al¬ moft all addreffed to her, in Lady Del- mington*sown hand, at the Rev. Mr. Len¬ ham's, and by their fide and number Ieemed to contain not only her books, the repeated gifts of Mr. Somerfet, but every thing elfe of any value fhe had left behind her. The fight, from the croud of d i ft reí f- ing reflections to which it gave birth, made her melancholy, and turning away with an aching heart, fhe went back into the room, where, perceiving a newfpaper lying upon the window feat, flie took it \ψ till the coach arnved, and fat down to lookit over. One of the firft articles that caught her attention was the following :—· ť< A few days ago died, at bis feat m Northamptonfhire, Thomas Somer¬ iet, Efq, Member of Parliament for f ligham Ferrers, and one of the w T ealthieft private gentlemen ita the county. His fon, a very gallant and diftinguifhed young officer in the navy, and fole heir to all hk father s property^ is ihortly ex- E 2 pc ftcd
ïpefîed iti England, after a long ftati^ri in the WefUlödres/' Though*it-is-.not to be fuppofed the news ol a man's death by whom flie had been fo cruelly ne glefiled, whofe general charaftcr was io unamiablc, and who had long keen fuch a ftranger to her fight f could ve*4 deeply aifett her, yet, as ail expected intelligence of mortality ufually docs, at the firft moment, it fliocked, if it did not grieve her, and led to fuch a ι rai n of mournful reflections upon the iubjeft of all the infantine connections fhe had thus early loft, that, depreffed as ihe was before, the tears ftarted into her eyes, and ihe laid the paper down unable to proceed. Tbe entrance into the inn yard of the coach fhe bad been expecting now 7 , how¬ ever, afforded her fome relief, and by directing her attention to the more imme¬ diale concerns of the moment, contri¬ buted to diffipate the fadnefs with which fhe was opprefled. Mrs. Newnham in¬ ftantly haftened out to ipeak to the driver, and to endeavour to fecure the two va¬ cant places Аде required; which hav Leg happily effected^ Ilie prciently returned to
ΙΟ announce her fuccefs to her young fellow traveller ; with whom* in a ihort time aftei wards, flie a fcended tbc cai nage, and drove away. Loaded as it was with outfide pa fle ri¬ gers, fortunately for Claientinc, it con¬ tained but one in the infide, except herfelf and Mrs. Newnham. That one, m ap¬ pearance fcarceiy fuperior to a common failor, coarfe, rough and it urdy, was уеЦ to his prefent companions, ?t leaft, perfectly ino fíen five ; feeming far moie inclined to fleep than to intrude upon them his converfation ; and* after the firft full ft are with which (not without betray¬ ing fome indications of furprife and com placcncy) he favoured С larentine, evinc¬ ing no further inclination to obferve or rnoleft her. Becoming, therefore, ihortly familiar¬ ized to his uncouth afpečt, which, on hci firft entrance, had ftartled and almoft ter¬ rified her, Clarentine, whofe thoughts now again involuntarily reverted to the intelligence rcfpcUing Mr. Somerfet fhe had fo accidentally met with, communi¬ cated it in a low voice to Mrs. Newnham, and exprcfled the deepeft concern for tbe I' 3 me la iv
meîanvholy íuiprife, that, on his rctvr/n« after fo long an abfence, awaited his foni a ion, fin added* who, however unlike iv huhei, would bill, flic was peifuadcd, i eel the fincere ft borrow ata death fo fud¬ dcn mid ίο unexpefted. To this, Mrs. Newnham, although a good and a well-principled woman, found fome difficulty 10 agree·; not thinking it poffible, nay, even natural, that the beit of fons fliould experience any real grieÇ at the lois of fuch a father. 46 You know not, my dear Mifs Cla¬ rentine/' continued flie, u you know not what (hocking accounts ï have heard of his felfifhnefs, his illiberality, and hk total want of affeftion; nor how T often 1 have been aflured that, but for hk pay as be¬ ing in the navy, Captain Somerfet«—" At the mention of Somerfet's name, the Iailor who fat oppofite to Clarentine, and who for fome time had been loung¬ ing back in the coach, his eyes entirely clofed, his aims folded, and his head re¬ clined upon his breaft, as if funk in a heavv flu por, fuddenly bent forward with a look oí mingled incredulity and amaze¬ ment,
ment, and earueftly fixing Mrs. Newn¬ ham, bluntly exclaimed— *< What's that—-what's all that tiu к: yoube ία\ ing? Do you know Capt, So¬ me r fiit r" ** Ves/' anfwered fhe, half finihng, ^ I do know one Capt. Somerfet, but per¬ haps not the fame you mean." " Was his name William :'* enquired the failoi, " was he Commander of the —■— man of war r" " He was,** replied Mrs Newnham, ' л Why then, by jingo!" refumcd he 9 rubbing his barıda with an air of infinite glee, "I've got into right good fort of company ! Captain Somerfet's was the firft fli i p í ever went on board of, and a plaguy time î thought I fliould have о n't, for I was no younker even then, but a great lubberly lout that knew no more cd' the matter than an infant, and expected a cako'-nine-tails acrois my back even in¬ ftant. NVerihelefs, he bore with ire: kindly and patiently ; gave me time to learn my bufi nek, and encouragement to do my duty—and has made me take fiudi a liking to a ieaman's life, that as long as I 4 4, there s
there's a fliip afloat, ΠΙ neer turn my mind to any other/' Clarentine, much pleafed with the honeft hanknefs ¡he began to dik over in her new acquaintance, and happy to embrace fuch an opportunity of learning a few of the particulars of Somerfet's profcflionaî conduft, now joined in the converfation, and without discovering her near affinity to him, obtained from her communicative companion an account, that affected as much as it delighted htr. The charaftcr he gave of his late Commander, (for he began by faying he was no longer in Capt, Somejrfets fhip,) w f as that of a man equally remarkable for humanity and for courage ; one who in the midft of danger was daunt* lefs and colleftcd ; in the hour of fuccefs, placable and generous; and in the day of fecurity, mild, patient, and confederate. Praife fuch as this—fo zealous, yet fo difmterefted : drew 7 tears from Ciaremine's eyes; encrcafed, if poffible, the elkem, admiration, and affection flie had always fek for its objeft ; and made her proud of acknowledging her connection with a man whofe virtues^ ihc thought, reflefted fuch
fach honour upon all who were allied to him. The fiift inftant ihe fpoke, confeffed herfelf to be fo well acquainted with So¬ merfet, fo nearly related to hi in, the voice, demeanor, and whole countenance of the pleafed, yet aftonifhed iailor, un¬ derwent a total revolution. Refpečt and deference took the place of his former roughnefs and familiarity ; he kerned from that moment to look upon her with a fpecies of benevolent affection, and never afterwards addreffed he t bvu with the humbleft civility and gcntlent ís. At M ----—, where they ftopped to dinc^ and where alfo their fellow-traveller ?ook leave of them, Clarentine and Mrs Xewn- ham had fcarceiy alighted and advanctd three fteps towards the room that was ai lotted to them, when, from above, m ¿ut accent equally well known to boilu a man's voice was heard impatienth calhng out— "Waiter? fend my fervam up to mr, J have been ringing for Imn this h dt hoor.* 44 О, Good God!" foftly exclaimed Clarentine, precipitating her pace as ihe У 5 fp оке,
fpokcj and mechanically feizing hold of Mrs. NewnhanVs arm, w Mr. Eltham is here! For the wo ri d I would not have him fee mc !" The cvil^ however, was already done«. Ehham, -whilft leaning over the ban· nifters, had caught atranfientview of her, and flying impetuoufly down the ftairs^ reached the room Use meant to take re¬ fuge in almoft at the fame inftant fhe en^ tt eed il he ríe I к ce So, my dear Mifs Delmington/' n ieel he, triumphantly addrefling her t â accident has for once been my friend, and, notwithftanding your barbarous re- fia ve upon the fubject of your journey the Iaft time f had the honour of feeing you, hasigiven me the opportunity î fi> much wiflied for, of offering you my fer- \ ices upon the road, and of attending you, (at a diftancc, however humble,) up to town i" u I am furry/' faid Clarentine coldly, ^ that Mr. Eltham, w ho, no doubt, fo well knows ihe value of every obligation he eonfeis, fliould, upon this occafion, have made choice of one, fo ill difpofed to ac¬ cept
^ept his offers, or even to thank him for his intentions, as I am/* £ ť The mortifying ungracioufhek of this reply/' cried Eltham, attempting to laugh, yet evidently much piqued, ** might have fuccceded much better inme¬ lime ago; but of late, Mifs Delmington, you have accuftomed me fo often to the fame kind of feverity, that î begin to feci hardened, and fhall very ihortly become callous to all reproof whatever." ss That/' faid Ciarentine," I cancafii/ believe; and only wifh it were in my power, with equal facility, to Ьсчоше callous to unprovoked — Impertinence fhe would have added, buf checking herfelf ín time, left the fentem r unfiniíhed, and turned to the window half angry at her own petulance, and halt terrified at the effect it might produce. Before Ekham could fpeak to her again, however* the fervant he had been eia quiring formade nonappearance, and foon after they both left the room. " Thank heaven i'* faid Clarentinc, when they were gone, " í now begin to breathe! But, my dear Mrs. Newnham, if you have any-pity, endeavour to haiku I' б our
our dinner as much as you can, that %¥e may, if poffible, gel away before Mr. Ek tham returns/' Mrs, Newnham, though it was evident Ihe longed to make a thoufand obferva¬ tions, and, no doubt alfo, to afk a thou¬ fand queftions, immediately obeyed; and as ой her re-entrance Ike was accompanied by a waiter who ftaid in the room the whole time they were at table, fhe found к abfolutely impoffible to utter øne direct enquiry; andali others Clarentine eafily e vadede Their hafty meal was fcarceiy over^ when notice was brought that the coach was ready» Clatentine, eager to be gone, inftantly arofe, and having difcharged the reckon¬ ing, huiried out with the utmoft expedi¬ tion, internally congratulating herfelf upon her good fortune in thus cfcaping a fécond interview with Eltham. At the coach door, however, what was lier turpi ize and chagrin again to behold hun ! u Here ftill?" cried ftie ? with undif* kinbltd vexation, 44 Yes,"
u Yes/' replied he, fmiling asîıe handed her in, èc here ftill !" Theo, likewife affifting Mrs. Newn¬ ham to mount the fteep ladder that ferved inftead of fteps, the next moment he ak cended after her, and bade the coachman drive on. €C Drive о** ?" repeated Clarentine, ζζ No, no, impoffible ! you do not mean to go with us, Mr. Ekham ?" i£ I do indeed/' returned he, enjoying her confternation, cc my man could pro¬ cure me no poft -horfes, and I am in hafte to get to towmd Clarentine every inftant more difgufted at his dauntiefs aflurance, and firmly per¬ fuaded his ftation at that inn on her ar¬ rival was the effeft of a concerted plan, (formed in confequence of his having, by fome unknown means, difeovered the day on which fhe meant to quit Sidmouth, and ihe conveyance by which fhe was to travel) now determined, in order to prove to him, at leaft, the ferioufnefs 4 of her rc¬ fentment, to obferve the fleadİeft filence fhe could the whole way, '<md refolntely to avoid giving hina any further excufe to provoke, or reproach her. EUbarrij
Eltham, however, was not of a difpo¬ fition long to fufFer her to maintain her purpofe. Anxious to learn the caufe of ihc late, and inexplicable change in her behaviour towards him, he began by com¬ plaining in the ftrongeft terms of the manifeft injuftice with which fhe had treated him—protefting that he was wholly unconfeious, when her referve firft began r of having in the flighteft degree merited her difpleafure ; and could no otherwife account for it, than by fuppofing,-ihe had been prejudiced againft him by the family at Delmington, and taught by them to af· fume that coldnefs and diftruft he fo deeply lamented. To this, though by no means pleafed at his haibouring fuch a fufpicion, Claren- tiue, firm to her firft intention, made no reply—and Ekham, after vainly waiting fome time foran anfwer, thus went on— sc As my flay in London will be very fliort, and I have promifed to return to Welwyn park as foon as the fhooting ieafon commences, my firft bufinefs will be, on my arrival there, to get this mat« 1er fatisfaciorily cleared up. Sir Edgar^ it h truc/' added hc s i% will not at that time
tíme bc with his family, but fliould every other member of it deny the charge, my conjectures will know where to reft, and the affair may eafily be decided by means of writing to him to beg he will appoint fome convenient place where we can díf- cufs it." Shocked and amazed at this alarming threat, yet unwilling to believe it could have any ferious meaning, Claremine now found herfelf compelled to fpeak, and with great earneft nefs faid-™» 4 Can you then, Mr. Eltham, after the converfation that fo lately paflcd between us on this fubjecì,— when I frankly com« rminicatcd to you my reafons for requcft- ¿ng you to difcontinue your vifits at Madame d'Arzele's—can you ftill be un- reafonable enough to require a further vindication? to diferedit all I faid ? and to entertain fuipicions fo unwoithy, and fo ill grounded r" δ4 Had Mifi» Delmington/* replied he coolly, u condefcended, after that con« verfation, ίο account for tbc very extra¬ ordinary behaviour that followed it—had fhe informed mc what were her motives, en my next vilit; for fo abruptly Ifting my
my préfence the inftant I entered fhe houfe —had ilie, in Ihort, uniformly treated mc with candour and opcnnefs, thofe doubts, thofe fufpicions, had never been excited. As it is— fince by perfuafion and entreaty ï have fo ill fuccceded, í muft either apply clfewheie, or determine to perfe- cute and haunt her, till, in /elf defence. flie is compelled to anfwer me." Then obferving that poor Mrs. Neiyn- ham 9 notwithstanding the eager curiofity with which fhe had attended to the open» ing of this dialogue, had now, however, ovea powered by fatigue, fallen into а profound fleep, he lowered his voice, and thus, with a figniiicant fmiie, con¬ tinued— 44 Were î permitted to adyifc in fuch a t afe, I would caution my clear Mifs Ikhnington not to perfevcre too long in h( r prtíeiit plan, left, driving me to ex- irvakkv ihe fliould urge me to declare open war againft her, and at once to pro* chum myfelf her lover and her perfe« color! Aye/'continued he, feeing her iìdì t and turn pale, a yon may look frightened, but fuch î proteft to you will be the cafe, I cannot ? I will nút be to you
yoti as a common acquaintance! Either then accept me for your friend— reflore me to that degree of confidence wah which you honoured mc during the early period of your refidence at Sidmouth, or, ?л I faid before, make me a paffionate s but a felfiih—a defigning lover !" During this fpeech, Claremine, aghaft and difmayed, flared with unutterable aftoniihment at the infulting fpeaker, who, fatisfied with havim; fo unequivocally explained himfelf, very compofedly fold¬ ed his arms the inftant he paufed, and threw himfelf back İn his feat, cxultingly contemplating the confternation he had occafioned. She recollected, with trem¬ bling apprehenfion, how totally, for the prefent at leaft, flic was in his power; and dreading ftill further to irritate him by reproaches, made a faint attempt, though filled with the utmoft indignation, to foften and appeaie him. The words, however, died on her lips; fhe itam- mered— hefitated—and the next moment burft into tears. Eltham at this fight anxioufly leaned forward—-fixed bis eyes on her face with an expreffion of concern and furp r ize, and
ζιΐιά iban feizing beer hand, puffionaieív exclaimed— ίζ Dear, km ly Cia i entine! it is vet time to retract! Tell me but that you will forgive mc—allow me but to hope my repentance may be followed by your returning frendihip, and I here for ever abjure all the curfed menaces I fo madly lâ t te red !" Clarentine, revived by this afľurance* iiow ventured to look up, and fmiling ih rough her tears, faid-— * fi Were ƒ, Mr, Ekham, as vindictive as you have fhewn yourfelf, I fliould not fo readily pardon the terror and amazement into which you have thrown me. To prove to you, however, the difference there is between us, I accept your terms^ and agree to an immediate peace." ^ This generous forgivenefs/' cried. Eltham, kifling her hand, " is ; í acknow¬ ledge, very ill deferved—but fince it not only proves your placability, but en fures my warme ft gratitude, let it be as perma*» nent as I hope it is fincere/* ·· You diftruft its finccrity, I perceive/ 9 faid Clarentine, " and wbth fome reafon, alter ail the ftrange things you have ut¬ tered;
tcicd; be afiurcd, hrìwewr, that upon one only condition, you mav kcanly rely иры1 the good í t uh v uh \%hi«. h í mean to c/nfei ve om ticaty." *" I dare not/' replied Lltham, α after the mercy you have exerufed towards me, refufe İubfcribing to that condition, whatever it may be; and vet I aliuoii dread to licar it/' £i Believe me," faid Clarentine, " you» have no caule. It is fimply this—that ktimediaicly on our arrival at Saliibun> you will order a poit-chaife to be ready to-morrow morning to convey you fepa- rately the reft of the way to London; and afterwards excufe my feeing you again till í am fixed at Mr. Lenham's. Do not/* added ihe, feeing he hefitated» €< do not, I be fece h you, deny mc fo trifling a favour, left you oblige me to queftion y our fi n ceri ty, as you appear to have que fii on ed wine" After a fhort internal deliberation, El¬ iham, at length, acceded to this comp ro¬ mi fe, and during the remainder of tlfeu mute together, the moil uninterrupted harmony fubiiitcd between them,
Yet Clarentinc, notwithftanding the temporizing mecknefs with which fhe had been reduced to fubmit : ì his unparkin- able prefumption, was not of а difpofi¬ tion to think of it lightly, or lightly to folget it. Retired as had been her paft life, fhe flill was iufficiently acquainted wdth the rules and cuftoms of fociety, to know how to eftirnale his conduct; and f at once to perceive and feel its impro¬ priety. That her unprotected ftate fhould be fuch as to expofe her fo peculiarly tó¬ fű fle r by if, flie deeply lamented ; and fhrunk wdth timid defpondency from a world, in which it was likely her poverty and dependance might lead to a repeti¬ tion of fuch humiliating treatment. Still however, flie meant punctually to fulfil her promifc, and, as fhe had agreed, oc- cafionallv to receive him after her arrival in town; bm never when-alone, or when unfupported b\ tbe prcfence of forne per¬ lon whofe age, or fituation, would enfure deference and command refpect.
CHAP.
С ff А P. IV. If was fo late when the coach drove into the city of Salifbury, that Claren» tine, wearied and difpiritcd by die reluc¬ tant exertions ihe had made to appear eafy and chearful during the latter part of the evening, felt anxious to retire for the night the inftant ihe alighted; being told, however, that it would take fome time to prepare a room for her reception, fhe fubmitted to neeeffity with the beft grace fhe could; and whilft Mis. Newnham went up ftaus with the chambermaid, to fee that every thing was properly arranged, confented, at Elihan/s recommendation, to order tea in preference to the more fubftantial repaît that had been fct before them : but which ihe had declined par¬ taking. Drawing a chair to the fide-table on width the tea equipage had been placed, and feating bimielf oppofite to her, El¬ tham, as foon as the waiter left the room, faid·-* u Pray,
a Pray· Mifs Delmington, when is Captain Somerfet expected in England ?" " Would I could tell!- anfwered Cl&~ Tentine with carneftncfs 9 u You fpeak feelingly upon the fub¬ ject/* returned Eltham gravely, 6i and yet, you were fo young when he iaft em¬ barked, that y^ou cannot retain much re¬ collection of him Ì™ * ζ Oh, do not think fo!" refumed ftie, with quicknefs ; « he left an impreflion upon røy memory never to be erafed. Xìood, noble, and benevolent as he is, who that has once known, can ccafe to re« member, or ceafe to honour him P'' Eltham, inexpreffibly ftruck by the energy and warmth wdth which this was uttered, remained thoughtful and filent for fome minutes after fhe paufed, atten¬ tively regarding her; then re fuming all his wonted impetuofity, he abruptly cried out— " With a heart fo alive to fentiments of gratitude and admiration, why—oh, -why, cruel Clarentine! are you thusinac- cefliblc to love ! Tell mc/'added he, lean- ing forward > and fixing her yet more in· 6 tently,
tenűy, ζξ tell me, why fhould you drive me from you ? Why fhould we ever part r" €ς Mr. Eltham/' replied Clarentine, greatly alarmed at this returning vehe¬ mence, <f is it generous, is it w manly, to take advantage of the defence ^efs fitua¬ tion in which I am now placed, thus to harrafs and opprefs me ? Oh, do not force me to hate you 1 do not oblige me to recall that pardon you feemed fo anxious to obtain ι and inftead of the friend you taught me to expeft, compel me to look upon you as the røoft cruel of enemies V 9 €t By heaven/' exclaimed he, with fer¬ vour, * 6 you do me wrong î Friendihip— nay, even love i t feif, were too coki a name by which to exprefs the fentiment I feel for you ! I o fler you my heart ; I dedicate to you my fortune and my life ! You arc the moft facinating, the moil lovely of human beings, and whilft I have breath, I will protect, cherifh, and adore you '—-Deareft, gentleft Claremine î do not repulfe—do not drive mc to de Itera¬ tion !" Struggling to withdraw her hand, which during this fpeech, he had fei /.ed, and foicibly
forcibly detained, Clarentine, unable to refrain from tears, dejectedly faid— « In pity, in humanity, fpare me, Mr. Eltham ! I am not in fpirits to fupport alt this ι you know not how you wound; how you diftrefs me !—Oh! had you the feel¬ ing heart of that generous, con fide rate Somerfet, you juft heard røe commemo¬ rate* never would you have tortured me by treatment fuch as thk ľ* « Cold-hearted, inhuman girl ľ' cried be, colouring .with refentrnene^ and in¬ ftantly releaiing her, " What a reproach was that! Was it thus you anfwered Del¬ mington s ardent proteftations? Was it thus you upbraided, fcorned, rejeûed Hm?*— No; you heard him with com- paffionating fcnfibility, wept over his romantic letters, defended him wdth zeal, and confoicd him with kindnefs ! This, all this you could do for a boy, a fool, who betrayed himfelf,and you, whilft Ι¬ Ι, who would facrifice my life to obtain one fmiie, to gratify the Oigliteft of your wiíhes— Ь who love you even to diftrac- kon, am contemned, flighted and dif- darned! Oh ! Clarentine/' added he, pak fioiiately linking his forchead f and ab* ruptly
Aptly rifing, u take care, take care you try me not too much !" Clarentine now more alarmed than flie bad yet been, by the outrageous violence of this intemperate madman, afraid of be¬ traying her rcfentment, and equally afraid ofiexafperating him by her filence, clafped her hands fervently together, and looking after him with a fupplicating afpeft, called out in an agony of diftrefs— 6ê Mr. Ekham, for heaven's fake, for mercy's fake, leave me till you are more compofed—leave me for to-night! You will kill me if you ftay and thus perfid vere in terrifying me fo cruelly !" Eltham, however, incapable of attend¬ ing to, or of anfwering her, was walking with hurried fteps about the room in an agitation of mind too great to be de- fcribed. His countenance by turns ex» preffive of fieiccnefs, gloom, or difap¬ pointment, had loft all tiaccs ofthat ечпе- lefinek and good-humour, by which it was ufiully diftinguifhed. Afhatncd of him* iclf, and angry with Clarentine, he knew not how to defcend to ihe neeeffity of making an apology, with an grace , how hí curb his own impetuofity, or how to Vol. 11. G attempt
aí tempt retrieving the confidence again thus wantonly forfeited. Approaching her at length with rather more compofure, his voice, however, yet betraying the ftrongeft fymptoms of emo¬ tion— éS I have gone/* cried he, " too far to recede; you cannot^ a fécond time, fin« cerely pardon me ; then why fhould I be fo much my own enemy, as to renounce, from a chimerical notion of honour, a falfe principle of rectitude, which even you expeä røe not now to be guided by, the only chance of happinefs I have yet in view, the happinefs of confirming your dependance upon me, though I cannot facure your heart ! s? " A-id ^vould tbat 9 " cried Clarentine* dartİTig at him an indignant and con¬ temptuous glance, u would that roake you happy ?" « Good God!" exclaimed he, α what a look was there f —Oh! fpeak to me again, dear Clarentine—foften to me the rigour of that reproachful glance, and f will do any thing, every thing you command ! Say you forgive, and though you blame, alfo pity me, and ihe conflict fhali be at an ends
end, I will tear myfelf from you ; for in your préfence 1 can neither aft uniformly right, or %vith impunity wrong ľ* Clarentine, completely exháufted by the long conteft fhe had fuftained, pale, fpiritlefs, and harraffed, held out her hand almoft mechanically, and leaning her bead upon the back of a chair, feemed equally avérfe either to fpeaking or looking ar him* He received the cold and paflive hand fhe extended, with rapture, tempered by concern at the evident diftrefs he had oc¬ cafioned; and holding it between both his as he fpoke, faid in a tone of anxiety and tenderne ís— u My dear Mifs Delmington, why this total, this fiolemn filence ? Are you ill ? Tell me, I befeech you !" Clarentine fliook her head, motioned with her hand for bum to leave her, but ftill did not fpeak; and Ekham after re¬ maining fome minutes longer, iirefo- lately and fearfully gazdng at her, upon her making another fignal to him to go, reluctantly obeyed. It was long ere Clarentine, humbled and depreffed by this extraoidinaiy fee ne, С 2 tetuid
could conquer the agitation ίο which it had given rife, or recover any tolerable degree of ferenity. The contrition and regret Ekham had evinced at his depar¬ ture led her, however, to hope flie might efcape the next day without further mo« Icitation ; and calmed by this dependence, flie fought as much as poffible, before the return of Mrs. Newnham, to diflipate all remaining traces of chagrin and vexation. In a very fhort time, that good woman appeared. Unfüfpicious of what had paifed, her queftions, though numerous, were fach as Clarentinc found it eafy to anfwer; who having itaid with her whilft fhe fupped, gladly con fented the moment, fhe had fini ih cd, to follow her lothe room that was allotted her. Having given orders to be called, by die earliefl break of day, flie arofe the next morning, and purfued her journey. Nothing remarkable occurred during the remainder of the way. Ekham ap¬ peared no more ; and the travellers who now occupied the coach were of that non defcript order of beings, c>f whom little is thought, and neither good or bad cao be faid. CHAP.
с H Л P. V· AT the inn in London where the ftage put up, Mr. Lenham himfelf was waiting to receive and welcome his expected gueft» The mild, placid, and venerable afpeS of that excellent man, prepared Claren¬ tine, the inftant fhe beheld him, to re» verence and love him as a father. He addreffed her with fuch foothing kind¬ nefs, and regarded her with fuch unaf¬ fected benevolence, that ihe could almoft have wept her thanks for a cordiality fo cheating, and fo confulatory. When the firft hurry of a meeting, which to Clarentine at leaft had been io unexpected, was over, Mr. Lenham, who had kept a hackney coach in waiting, pro¬ pofed having it called up, and attending her in it to H am pftead. To this fhe rea¬ dily confented ; and after taking a friendly leave of Mrs. Newnham, whofe daughter refided in that neighbourhood, flie chear- fully followed her reverend conductor. О 3 Their
1 heir converfation, uviıirıg the ride, utrne d chiefly upon the fubject of Mr. Somei fet's fudden death, and the unex¬ pected arrival of his fon. The firft of thefe was an event, which, although he aŕfeíted not deeply to lament, Mr, Len» ham acknowledged he had been extremely furprized at, having, but a fliort time be¬ foie, feen Mr. Somerfet in town in perfect health and unufual good fpirits. 4f Had he lived, my dear young lady/ 8 added the worthy man, a till you were become an in b a bitant of my houfe, I have great reafon to believe you would have found in him a zealous and fincere friend e ilis beau with regard to you ieemed to¬ tally changed; and the kindnefs with which be repeatedly fpoke of you filled ше with the moft cheating expectations/' ** But to what, dear Sir," faid Claren¬ tine, extremely f irprifcd, u could fuch a change be owing? Many years have elapfed fince he laft faw me, and he can fcarceiy have heard me mentioned fince his foks departure/' 44 We all, my young friend/' replied Mr. Lenham, u require fomething to love, fomc one on whom to beftow that place
pľace in our hearts, which the abfence of thofe we moft fondly chcriih has left vacant and unoccupied. Such/' continued he, 4i was the cafe with your deceafed uncle. He never approved his foks choice of a pro- feifton which fo wholly counteracted his own views, and fo long removed him from his fight; and, till lately, fpent every in¬ terval between that fon's departure and bis return, in folitude and repining, By degrees, however, this cbearlefs retire¬ ment became iikfome to him; he came oftener to town; mixed more in fociety; and as the fpecies of mifanthropy he had indulged wore off, looked round with anxiety for fbme objeft on whom, in his declining days, he could beftow his aftec» lion, and reft his hopes of domeftie com» fort. At that time уощ Mifs Delmington» were brought to his remembrance. I an¬ nounced to him your intended removal to town; and from the very inftant he heard of it, he feemed to be revolving in his own mind the means of obtaining in you that companion he had elfewhere fo vainly fought/* Clarentine, as much aftecìed ag flie was aftonifhed at thk account, could not but G 4 fmcerely
fmcerely regret, that, at die very time he feemed moft favourably difpoied towards her, ihe ihould thus have been deprived of a relation, whom it would have given her fuch unfpeakablc fatislaftion to have known, to have loved, and to have been permitted to attend. She reproached her¬ leif feverely for every harfli схргеПкш fhe might ever have uttered concerning lıım ; and forgetting hb long negle8, to think only of his intended kindnefs, funk, In he ι gratitude for what was defipted) йж remembrance of what had been omitted* ι Whilit thefe reikäions ftill occupied her mind, and idled it with the trueft eoa- cern, ihe carriage ftopped at Mr. Leo- ham 1 $ gate* and lhe coachman having rung, a maid fer van t ran out with a can¬ dle in her hand to light them into the houfe. Clarentinc's heart failed her as fhe moment drew near that was deftined to introduce her to the ftrangers ilie was benteforward to rcfide with; and linger« шд purpofely as fhe ero fled the little court before the door, ihe ftopped at the bot* tom of the fteps, and faid with a half fimle-— €4 {f
^ It is very foolifh, but indeed Mr. Lenham I am almoft afraid of venturing farther," Mr. Lenham laughed at her apprehen¬ fions, yet with great kindnefs faid— ** Shall I go in firft then, and announce your arrival ľ 1 Glad of any rcpriwe, fhe eagerly ac¬ cepted the propofai, and (truggSing to gain courage during his abfence, was able when he returned to accompany him into tbe room with tolerable compofure. The party to which fhe was now pre* lenied, confi fte d of Mrs» Barclay, the aciuai fupcriotendant of the houfe, her daughter, a neighbouring lady of the name of Denbigh, and а very fine boy of about fourteen, a pupil of Mr. Lenham's, and the eîdeft of the three he had then under his care. The ufual formalities attending a firft introducing being over, Clarentine, when they w T ere aH feated, ventured to са it а timid eye around her, and to take a more minute fuïvcy, than on her immediate entrance fhe had алгеа hazard, of the fe¬ veral individuals before her. G 5 The
The firft who by any fìngularity difiin» guifhcd herfelf, was Mifs Barclay. This young lady, who feemed to be about fìve-and-twenty, and unhappily for her, had fome pretentions to beauty, ihougb not öf the moft feminine kind, looked at once vulgar, blunt and fami!iar e To a complexion naturally florid rather than bril* liants fbe added a pair of large black eyes, which in attempting to render ex¬ preffive, fhe had made fierce, and in try¬ ing to give archneís tOj had utterly de* privée øf alt diffidence or foftiiefs. Her drcù f the laborious re fu It of indefati¬ gable pains and trouble, was at leaft as far as fhe knew how lo make к fo, faihkm« able even to extravagance; and betrayed fuch a total want of taite, and an affecta«» tion of negligence fo evidently ftudied r that, to Clarentine, who, novice as fhe was, had never before beheld fo extraor¬ dinary a figure, üm appeared more like a monftrous caricature, intended to еж - cite ridicule and furprife, than any other thing fne could compare her to* "With regard to her mother, Mrs. Bai¬ clay, l" l l c ^ n ^efpeE to her exterior, ai ieaä, could be faid. Her face was игь commonty
commonly plain indeed, but there was nothing ftrikingly remarkable either in her perion or drefs. Confined during the greateit part of her life to lhe country, and compelled whilft there, from the ilender circumftances of her deccafed hufband, to undergo all the rural drud¬ gery of a farmer's wife, ihe had neither had time, or inclination, to attend to the forms of cultivated fociety—to enjoy a rational converfation-- or to participate in the pleafurcs of domeftie tranquility» Her mind, when at home, had regularly been in one continual economical /ermeni; when abroad, cafting all care behind her, fhe thought only of indemnifying herfelf, by jùllity and frolic^ for the ume flic liad loft, and the fatiguing round of houfe« hold occupations to which, at other fea- fons, ihe had been obliged to fubmit. lier long fccluiion from the world had con» tracked her idea»; given a fpecies of boifkrorø noughnefs to her language and manners; ákl initiated her into ail thai idle love of goffip, fo nfual' in a remote village, where the chief recreation of the inhabitants confiais in an evening ramble irata one neighbour to -mother, to enquire C G imo
comment upon, and exaggerate every circum&ance as it m related. Mrs. Denbigh, their viitor, was a quiets grave, elderly woman, very umple in her manners and extremely welkbred m liet converfation. Clarentine, however, noil- withflandingţhe apparent gentlenefs which feemed to charatìerize her, fancied flie could difcern in the caft of her eyes m latent propenfity to fatire ? which made her fhrink from their inveftigation, ana innocent as was her heart, dread becom¬ ing the objeâ of their penetrating fern· nny* The youth, whofe name was Bîandford, was the ion of a wealthy Eaft Indian. He had been in England qjbout four years» and on his firft arrival had been put into a public fchool ; from whence, however» chufing ihortly afterwards to run away 9 he had ünce been placed by his friends under the care of his piefent tutor; with whom he had now lived îiear four years m peried difcipiine and order. Such was the party which Clareniine f on her arrival, found aflembted. Re* vived ? and comforted by the attentive kindnefs
kindnefs of Mr. Lenham —amufed by the wove! appearance of Mifs Barclay—and rejoiced once more to find herielf in. a place of fecurity, flie very foon forgot her fatigue, and infenfibly affumed fuch an air of cbearfulnefs and ferenity, that her friendly hoft beheld the change with delight, and felt more than ever difpofecf to intereft himfelf in her fate—to love« and to protect her« Tbe latenefs of the hour at which the íair traveller arrived, naturally precluded alt poffibility of entering into any very regular converfation before fupper; and whilft they were yet at table, Mrs. Den¬ bigh's fervant being announced, in a few minutes fhe took leave, and the whole party ffaorriy afterwards retired for the night. The room that had been appropriated to Clarentine, though not very large, fhe found on waking the next morning, was light, chearful, and airy 4 . Its windows looked into the garden; beyond which, only feparated from it by α iunk-fence, was a meadow, encircled by α gravel walk, and fecurely flickered, as well from obfervation as from cold, by a high and impenetrable
impenetrable hedge. At the back of this room was a large ciofet, with a bow window, that reached the floor, and opened like a folding door into an old- faihioned balcony, fup ported by the fame pillars that formed a fort of portico before the entrance of ihe houle. In this ciofet, which had a fire-placc f and a door, (in addition to the one thai feparated it from her bed room, which Icď into the parlagé, Clarentine, looking round her with delight, anticipated the many happy hours flie fhould fpend, when having placed her drawing materials and her books in order, fhe might wifli to efcape either from the buftlc or reftrainfe which vifitors impofe. Whilft yet indulging herfelf in forming plans fuch as thefe, fhe heard fomebody enter the next room, and, turning rounds beheld Mifs Barclay-— ** Well," cried that young lady, feating herfelf as flie fpoke, and drawing the d ref* fing-glafs to the fide of the table to reform fome error in the fct of her cap, ** how aid you fleep ?■—-I'm dying for my break- fail»— a'iťt you?'* Clarentine!
Clarentine, a little furprized at this eafy debnt b fmikd, and faid—- cc í have ÏG&rctiy had time to think oî it yd - f I am butjuft dreifed." 6fe O, nor I neither : but then, you know, when one has been worried upfo, it's hor¬ rid to be kept waiting. 1 dare fay, how¬ ever, my uncle won't be ready this half hour f for he's packing up fuch a load of things!' 1 ** Packing up ? where is he going then Г u Lord, don't you know? A letter came here this morning, before any of us were awake, from fome of the people who were preferii at the opening of Mr. Somerfet's will, to fay my uncle muft go down there direeiy, for it was found he had been ap¬ pointed one of the executors, and no bu¬ fínefs could go on without him." i4 1 am afraid then/' faid Clarentine, H we fhaìì riot fee him again for forne time. Will he brcakkft with usi" ** O, yes-—it's on his account the break- fatt is fo delayed/' 6ť Ί hen |>гау/* re fumed Clarentine, u let us go,down; í ihould wifh to fee all I can of him before he fets out/ 1 « Lord/'
^ Lord/' fáid Mifs Barclay, indolently riling, and Itili lingering before the glaís> ** one would think he ..was your lover, by the anxiety you exprefs about him/' a i hope/* faid Clarentine, moving towards the door, < 6 to find in him a friend* and that perhaps may be better than a lover" « i am fare/ 1 cried Mifs Barclay—" I fliould not think fo!" And with thefe words» flie followed Clarentine out, and leaving the room* door wide open f brufbed paft her upon tbe ftairs, and ran forward to fee if her uncle was come down. This mixture in the manners of her new companion of the rudenefs of an unformed romp, and the freedom of a pert coquette, atonie aftonifhed and offended Claremine fo much, that fhe determined henceforward, however civil and acquieicent fhe might be when they met below, to difcourage, as well by the coldnefs of her looks, as the whole te nour of her behaviour, the forwardnefs that led her thus to intrude into her private apartment. 4 " And this/' thought flie, ** ss much foi her own fake as mim P fmm 1,greatly fcar 9
fear, İ fliould never have philofophy fuf¬ fieient to endure her continually in my fight without being fome t i mes in danger of affronting her. At the parlour door, fhe was met by Mr. Lenham — u My dear young lad}/' faid he, taking her hand, u Lucy has probably ac^ quainted you with the hafty fummons I have received, it hurts me, fo imme¬ diately upon your arrival, to be under the neeeffity of leaving home ; but the bufi¬ ne fs 1 go upon is of a nature, I traft, to plead with you my excufe/' 4 O, Sir," faid Clarentine, ' f if in ad¬ dition to the thou fand other cares that muft occupy y our mind at fuch a moment, you were to fuffe r yourfelf to be difturbed by one thought relative to me, 1 fhould be inconfolable« All I have to wifh is, that your abfence may be fhort, and that you may return to us in health and fpirits.'* 6fc Thank you, my. young friend/' faid he—" the wifh is like the fpcaker—be· nevolení and kind. Mrs. Barclay, at that moment entering the room, put an end to the fubjecl, and Mr. Lenham perceiving the chaiie al¬ ıca d y
ready at the door, begged to hâve the breakfaft haftened as much as poffible, and the moment it was over rofe to de¬ part. When he was gone, the parlour door was íhut, and Mrs, Barclay, whtf had been in an enormous bufile the whole morn¬ ing, was feated— &e Well," cried fhe, u the day's our own,; we have nobody to ftay at гюпш for, or to confuti; fo leťs agree where wc fliall go to-night.—What fay you, Mifs Clary/ 1 addreflmg Clarenüne f " to the play Г Clarentine flared at this unexpected queftion, and faid 9 flie was afraid, after the death of fo near a relation, it would be very iraproper for her to appear out of mourning ; and at prefent, flie had no* thing black to wear— &i Pfhaw," exclaimed Mifs Barclay, £ê What s that tigni fv ? Nobody will know you!' 1 'bVery true/* replied Clarentine, mild» ly, Ci but would there not be a want of decency in making the experiment ?" 44 Lord» well—you can fend out for a yard or two of black ribbon to put upon your
your hat; and that, with a white gown, will be quite mourning fuffieient, I'm fure. You doni wifh to look like a widow V' u Ko," faid Clarentine, " neither, to be very fincere with you, do I wifh to go out at all." u And in return, to be equally fíncete with you" faid Mifs Barclay, forcing a fmik, " I fancy, Lady-Fair, you have been a good deal accuftomed to have your own way j hav "n't you ?" u No/' anfwered Clarentine, u I have not indeed; and to the prejudice of an« other, forry fliould 1 be if 1 ever had. As this is a matter, however, which intircly concerns m y feif, and it would give me great uneaiinefs were my determination to influence yours ; fu ifc r mc, this once, to be guided by my own feelings, and forbear to pre fs the fubjcčl further.'* fc6 Olì, certainly ! Only yon will ex« cufe my faying, I think you rather odd ľ" fi£ Perhaps/' returned Clarentine, good- humourcdiy, 4i I might be tempted to fay the fame of ycu 9 if 1 knew how to put fuch an obfervation into very civil lan¬ guage/* To
To this, Mifs Barclay, not compre¬ hending, perhaps, the full extent of her meaning, made no reply, and Clarentine, foon after, went up ftairs to write letters, and to unpack her 1 1 links. I liefe occupations, quick and diligent as flie was, employed her till near dinner lime, when, at her own door, juft as flie was going down to beg one of the fer¬ va rits might be feni to the poft with her letters, flic was met by Mifs Barclay, out of breath with fpecd, wdio haitily calkd out-— Sž Lord, my ekar creature ! there's one of the moft faíhionable» handfome young men below, enquiring for you, I ever faw in my life !" " For me ?" cried Clarentine, δέ and pray what is his name r" " Indeed," replied her imperfect, but enraptured informant, u I can't tell, for the maid blundered it out fo, it was im¬ poffible to undcríiand her; however, he came on horfieback, and upon one of the fineft, fpiriled animals you ever beheld. Do pray come down." So faying, flie Hew back heifelf, leav¬ ing Clareiuine íully peifuadcd this daa-* ding
rt ing equeftrian could be no other than Elthafn in perion. The conviction, how- ever t gave hcr no fort of eagcrnefs to make her appearance ; but on the com* trary, (had flic been aflured, that by de» lay ftie could have driven him from the houfe without feeing him) would have in¬ duced her moit undoubtedly to have re¬ mained where flic was till fummoncd down to dinner; but this flie feared it was hopelefs, with fuch a man as Eltham, to expečl; and dreading his becoming too well acquainted with the family, left be fhould be perpetually at the door, flie only flopped to deliver her letters to the maid, and then, however unwillingly, directed hci. (tips towards the parlour. As fhe entered, and kw that it was in¬ deed kkham who waited for hcr, the re¬ collection of а H that had palfed at their late meeting îeeurring moil forcibly to her mind, died her cheeks with erimfon» and utterly bereft hcr of either power or inclination to fpeak» Not fo. the intrepid Eltham. Con· fi ious he nm/n ι kvi, н îs inie, but iar fiom betra ein;; it, be e <IíI гч v d her widi the,fame unemUari affed g c-i* ty lie v í ubi i ел e done í Iu ri n g
during the firft period of their intimacy at Sidmouth;—rallied her upon her gravity, and protclted the air of London, Ibort as had been her refidence in its vicinky, had began already to exert its baleful in¬ fluence over her. " Lord, how ihönld it be otherwife ?" cried Mifs Barclay ; " She has been fihut up ail day in her own room-—-won't go any where even of an evening «—and feems determined to mope herfelf to death V s u Alas ! my dear madam/* cried Eltham, in a tone of affected commiíeration, " you will find her, î fear, a very untraceable creature ! I wifh you well through it; but at for me 3 I would not undertake the management of her for the world ! I never could gain any one point with her in my life !" 44 Try, however/'—re fumed MifsJ&rr* clays 4l we want her to go to the play to¬ night, and becaufe fhe has not got all her mourning-ready for an old uncle whom Ihe hardly ever faw— Ле declares fhe сапЧ. Now do yon think, Sir, that in a play-houfe- ail among ftrangers, this could at all fignify?" 2 " Cer-
u Certainly not/' anfwered Eltham, gravely, u certainly not ; but as I told you before, fhe is utterly impracticable, and theiefore I believe it would be beft not to contend with herk 1 « 6 Well, for my part/' faid Mifs Bar¬ clay, flirugging her flioulders, and look¬ ing reproachfully towards Clarentine, *' I would not be of fo uncomplying a tem¬ per for the world !" « Oh no !" cried Ekham : 4€ With every other privilege that beauty can give r be nobler than your fex, and never, never, dear madam, exert your power with the degree of inflexibility your proud friend has fhewn/' st As for that matter," cried Mrs. Bar¬ clay, who fince Clarentinc's entrance had hitherto fat filent, u I dont know whethei it's her beauty that has made her fo or not, but Lucy can fomctimes be ftub- born and proud as well as hcr neigh¬ bours/' 14 Lord, mama, what a fpeech!" ex¬ claimed Mifs Lucy, reddening-— u A miftaken one, Ì am perfuaded/' refumed Eltham; ** foftncL, and compla¬ cency arc painted in Mifs Barclay's eyes; every
every look fpcaks tenderncfs, every mo¬ tion proc к iras"— ^ Lord, what rattle!" interrupted Mifs Barclay, turning away with an air of confcî- oufnefs, but at the fame time with a laugh, that (liewed her by no means offended, " I •never heard any body talk fo in my life." Whilft this agreeable converfation, or rather dialogu«, was patling, the maid, unchecked by Mrs. Earclay, who was by no means accuftomed to obferve the for¬ mality of retarding fo neceffary a bufínefs till her vifitors were gone, had very lei- furely been laying the cloth, and pre¬ pari tig every thing for dinner, which ihe now informed them was ready, and de¬ fi red to know whether fhe might bring up ? " Oh yes," faid her miftrefs, u call the boys in, and bring it up directly." EUham, upon this, directing a very drøli look at Clarentine, immediately arofe, took a refpeelful leave of the whole party, and left tbc hou fcv ** í proie fi," cried Mif* Barclay, who the moment he u as gone had flown to the window· to fee him mount his horfe, u it was die rude ft filing to let him go juft a^ dînne*j
dinner was coming up, without a iking him to ftav, that ever was done," 44 Rude or not rude," returned her mother, very compofedly taking her feat at table, 44 I could not invite hnn to eat hafhcd mutton with us, and to-day we have nothing better." 44 Well, I hope he'll come again, how¬ ever!—But now I think of it," turning to Clarentine, 4i pray what is his name r" 44 Ehham/* anfwered Clarentine, 64 Ehham!'* repeated Mifs Barclay, with an air of mingled furprife and fignifk caney, 44 Tbaťs Mr. Eltham, is it? Oh, I have heard of him." 44 Whv, what have you heard," cried her mother, C4 Who is lie ?" 44 He's nephew to Lord Welwyn, and an old acquaintance of Mrs. Hertford's, who has written to ine a great deal about о if > urn. * 4 What, ï fuppofe/* cried Mrs. Bar¬ clay, laughing, ** he's one of Mrs. f k it- ford's fliits ? * 44 Ob, no indeed/' refumed the daughter, wilh quiefciu k, * 4 he's flirting juft now with quite a different perlon. 1 ' vol. iu 11 Tbl i
14 CLARENTINE. This fpeech, which it was impoflible Clarentinc fhould mifundcrftand, amre efpccially as,^at the moment it was uttered, Mifs Barclay glanced her eyes towards her with an expreffive fmiie, provoked her extremely ; but fearing to bring on a long converfation upon the fubject, flie thought it beft to let it pais, and went on quietly with her dinner. As foon as they rofe from table, the play fcheme having been entirely given up, they all walked out into the garden ; where Clarentine, much pleafed with the ingenuoufnefsand gooddiumour of young Biandford, who attached himfelf clofely to her the whole way, and appeared to feel irrcfiftibly drawn towards her by the fweetnefs of her countenance, and the gentlenefs of her manners, remained con- verfing with him long after the two ladies went back to the houfe, and where fhe would gladly have remained yet longer, but for the fummons that called herin to tea e Being determined not to give offence by betraying an over anxious folicitude to withdraw herfelf from fociety, Claren¬ tine, as foon as candles were ordered, brought down her work, and eftablifhed herfelf
herfelf in the parlour for the reft of the evening. This little proof of eondefcenfion·, as Mrs« Barclay, whofe expreffions were feldom ехаШу fuited to the importance or iniig« nificance of the fubječis fhe talked upon, termed it, ieemed very much to foften that lady's heart in her favour, and toin«. fpire her with a fentiment of infinitely more cordiality and kindnefs towards her than fhe had yet felt. Clarentinc fmcerely rejoiced to per¬ ceive this change, and airead}' difpofed, rough and u n pol i ih ed as fhe was, ex¬ tremely to prefer the mother to the daughter, did every thing in her power ftill more to ine rea fe this growing par¬ tiality. She read to hci, on finding ihn %v*as diftrcfled for a new maid* every ad- vertifement relative to fervants, that the daily papers of the laft weck contained ; heard all fhe had to fay concerning the difficulty of procuring domeftics that could be depended upon, with the moft exemplary patience ; agreed with her in lamenting the dearnefs of p rov i fions; and in fliort, fo completely entered into all lier family afflictions, that though fhe H 2 nearly
nearly talked herfelf to fleep, fhe fecurely € ft ab İ i Died herfelf, as ihe had reafon tm hope, in Mrs. Barclay's good graces· Meanwhile, Mifs Lucy, appearing to think this converfation infinitely beneath her, and fully perfuaded Clarentine had engaged in it folely for her own amufe- mcnt, had, for nobler entertainment, had rccourfe to a book of little opera fongs, which ihe had fome time before bought at the play-houfe door. Thefe ihe fat negligently turning over, and humming to herfelf the whole evening; never, except it was to fix her eyes upon Clarentinc with a look of contemptuous pity, or far- caflic furprife, defining from her employ¬ ment a moment« With wdiatever folicitude die might affect not to perceive thefe airs, it will eafily be fuppofed, that, induftrioufly и they were perfevered in for near three hours, Clai entine coufd not fail to ob« ferve them. The only effect, however, they had upon her mind, was that of lead¬ ing her fincercfy to compaffionate her mo· eher— a mother who, unentertaining and uncultivated as flic might be, к was ftill evident
evident poifeflcd many qualities that rendered her defer ving of a better daughter. HJ'II III Hl W H H liW ľľ l * * l 'l J U II'lil II W fllH fi l»t WH I'lll iy 1 < Ч М1 *> CHAP. VI. THREE days had now elapfed fince the departure of Mr. Lenham, and Claren¬ tine, though in that time ihe had hourly gained ground in the good opinion of Mrs. Barclay, began moft impatiently to long for his return, when the following letter from himwas brought to her-— MISS Î3ELMINGTON. Somerfet- Halí, July %€* u My dear young Friend, u The intelligence ï have to announce to you, it was my wifh to communicate in perfon, but the probable delays that wdll protraci my return are fo numerous, that I cannot any loiwcr— pofleflìng a fe¬ cret which I think it will give your bene¬ volent beau pleafure to be informed of-— permit myfelf to keep \ ou in ignorance. li Л " Mr.
" Mr· Somerfet's will, you have ak ready heard, has been infpccicd. It was drawn up, as к evident by the date, three years fince* and excepting a few trifling bgacies to fervants, contains nothing that does not relate to his fon. in a codicil, however, which was added to it fo lately as within four days of his deccafc, is a de- idaration ftating, that—" In confideration of Clarentine Delmington's near affinity to his late wife, the teftator gives and be¬ queaths, to the faid Clarentine Delming¬ ton, the fum of good, the capital of which is to be made over to her without limit or reftriction, on the day ihe comes of age; and in the interval between that pe¬ riod and the prefent, to be configned to the management and truft of the Rev. Francis Lenham ; whom, in conjunction with his fon, William Somerfet, he ap* points her guardian and truftec. More¬ over, that from the day of his deceafe, the annual miere ft of the fame 5000k amounting to 250k fhall be duly paid during her minority to the fame Clarentinc Delmington, out of his pedonai property in die five per cents/'
& Now
áí Now my excellent young friend, fuŕľe r me to congratulate you upon thin jtift and equitable donation. To a mind diiinterefted, and liberal as I was long fincc taught to believe yours, the value of fuch an aeqnihtion, as it relates only to.yourfelf, will be fmall, in comparifon to that it muft derive as relating to thofe it may enable you to ferve ; lìnee now, al¬ though not affluent, you are independent 5 and with fuiiieient to fu pply all your own reafonablc wiíhes, have fomethiugto fpare towards the wants—the equally reafon* øble, and far more preffing, \vants of others. How many there are who might envy you this power! and how many more, I fear, who might envy the difpofition which I doubt not will lead you thus to exercifc it! " But permit mc before ï conclude, in juftice to our abfent friend, your guardian now, and always your moil zealous welk wiíher, to acquaint you with an inftancc of hi- early aííection which, perhaps, may not have come to your knowledge. " There was a period when he had reafon to apprehend—and indeed, till lately, who had not ?—-you might at his И 4 father's
father's doccafe be lefs favourably re- uiembercd. Poor at that time himfelf, at leaft, comparatively fo; extremely }otmg, and totally dependent, he had no means oí кеш ing you any immediate provdion : but his generous kart fur- milnnghhn with expedients for the fu tu te, although poweiíeís αι the moment, he íonmd the noble defign of binding him- lelf, by die moft irrevocable engagement to enlurc to you, on his coming into pok klïion of bis fortune, a fixed and certain competency. A promue to this effeft I accordingly drew up for him, put into bis bands to fign, and afterwaids, at his own requeft, fubferibed myfelf. é& Upon the legality of fuch a deed, confidci cd as the act of a minor, there was not, 1 acknowledge, much ítrefs to be laid : upon the fcrupulons confcio tioufnefs, however, with which he meant to ratify it, the fiimeft dependence, 1 am perfuaded, was to be placed ; and there¬ fore complying with the earneft folkita- tionsofthe youthful piojerlor, I fent it lo Sir James Delmington, enelofed in a letter which ftated bus motives for con« Jigmng it to bis care, and the apprehen¬ fions that had urged him to draw it up. *4 What
not, or whether it was ever mentioned to you as being thought worthy of attention. At all events, it feemed incumbent upon me to revive the memory of a circiim- ftance which does fo much honour to tbe heart of Somerfet—and which, without wounding your feelings, muft fo defer- vedly excite your gratitude anil fcnfibility, 44 Farewel, my amiable young ward, I am impatient to return to you, yet, at prefent, totally unable to decide when that will be. Should you, therefore, have any motive for wi firing to write to me before the end of the en filing week, diiect to me here, and be aflured of the punc¬ tuality and readinek with which 1 fhall at all times bc anxious to execute your command?. 4έ I remain, и $Лу dear Mifs Delmington* ^ With the moit affectionate regard, ' 4 Your obedient, 44 And devoted humble fervant, 44 F. L ι n илм/
li 5
daremmo
Clarentine had rapidly perufed this b'tter three feveral times before flie could perfuade hcrfeif that what fhe read was real. Thus fuddenly, thus unexpectedly to find herfelf in theabfolute poilèífion of a fortune which to her moderate and rational mind appeared fo ample, feemed too like enchantment to he believed!— How was fhe ever to fpend it? How create to herfelf new wants fuffieient to render к of any ufe? The point was not eafy to decide, fince abfurd as it would hitherto have appeared to her, for one in¬ ftant, to have indulged the improbable idea of ever becoming the uncontrouled miftrefs of fuch an income, Ike had not one favourite plan to advert to, or one long-cheriiked fcheme, however vifionary it might before have feemed, which now ihe wifhed to realize. u This then being ihe cafe/ 1 cried flie, fmiling at the perplexed, and even vifible deliberation in which flie had been en¬ gaged, " I muft diklaim all title to the admiiation which is the ufual reward of gimrofily^ and learn to be content with ihe more humble commendation that frA*· low* jußiu. In difpofing of my fuper» abundance
abundance towards the relief of thofe lefs bountcoufly provided for, I make no fa¬ crifice, can boaft no merit, and re¬ nounce no gratification. In reality I want nothing, at leaft, nothing which in my prefent circumftances a third part of the annual ftipend I am to receive will not abundantly fupply. Beyond that, all which I might diffipate would be un¬ neceflary, and almoft criminal. I have no fafliionable connexions ; no expenfivc purfuits; no extravagant habits : in what then, without torturing my brain to invent new modes of prodigality, in what could I (who have fo long been inured to fru¬ gality and retirement) fpend an income, which to me appears fo boundlefs and incxhauftible ?" The refult of thefe philofophical, but untutored reflections was, that, without communicating her purpofe to any one, except Mr. Lenham, whom flic thought it her duty upon all occafions to confuit, flic determined immediately to take upon herfelf the difcharge of the full fum Lady Delmington now paid for her board and lodging; and thcn> dividing the refiduc of her whole year's allowance into two II б equal
equal portionsto appropriate the one, at leali during her prêtent exigencies, to the «fe of Madame d'Arzelc; and to retain ihe other, ftill more than fuffieient to gratify every wifh ffic cojidform, for her own expenditure. Having decided upon a plan, which thus effectually relieved her from the troubfefome embarras des richeffes 'm ulu ch fhe had fo fnieerely dreaded to be in¬ volved, Clarentine, with aminci lightened of all its new cares, and a countenance more than nfually animated and glowing, defcended rather before the accuftomed hour at which the family was wont io äf¬ fe mble to tea, and joined Mrs. Barclay m\å her daughter in the garden. The vivacity that fparkled in her eyes, and the un re ft rai ned gaiety with u h ich fhe accofted them, excited Mifs Barclay's immediate attention ; and after flaring in her face fome time with great curiofity, fhe bluntly exclaimed—- ùi Why. in the name of wonder, what4 come Ui you this evening? í never faw you look fo lively and merry before. i lave you had any good news ?" « Yes,"
Sí Yes/' replied Clarentine fmil i ng—- '* î have had vei y good news." ** I am glad to hear it/' cried Mrs Bar¬ clay, u I hope you will tell us what it is.'* To this, Clarentine, not forcieeiug the ftrange conftručtion that might be put upon the uncommon chearfu! nefis flie had betrayed, and naturally too open and nndifguikd to have any prédilection for unncceffary myfleries and concealments, readily confented, and in as few words as poffible, fiankly recapitulated the con¬ tents of Mr. Lcnham's letter. When ihe had concluded— ** Ikion my word/' cried Mils Barclay drily— 44 1 don't fo much v\ onder at vou? íprightlinefs nov;! Vou have good fub- itantial reafons for it; and vet, I dont know how и к, but I fhould have bien tempted to imagine a young ladv like you, w hoíe refinement and diíintereÜednefs has been fo much cried np t v\ ould h iv e flu v, и lefs rapture upon fuch a ivoiL.y dcajun ! î am glad, however, to find the id s not that difference between in I thought there was ; for to fpeak the truth, this is exaaly the way í ihould have received fuch in¬ telligence myfelf/" « Ay,
i4 Ay, to be fure/' cried her mother, intending to efpoufe Clarentinc\s caufe, u you don't fuppofe Mifs Clary has not fpirit enough to be pleafed as much as other people at fuch a lucky God-fend ! For my part, I give her joy on't with all my foul; and heartily wifh flie could do the fame by me V* A cordial burft of felf-applaufc fol¬ lowed this witty fpeech; after which. Cla¬ ri ntine not chufing to enter upon her own vindication, very little more was uld that related to the fiibjeft, and they all walked in to tea.
СПА Ρ β VII. CLARENTINE, aflured of being lek unfavourably interpreted by her friends at Delmington than ihc had been by Mrs, and Miis Barclay, wrote the next morn¬ ing a detail of the unexpected communi* cation fhe had received from Mr. Len¬ ham, and cnclofcd an extraft from his own
own letter, as a confirmation that feemed indifpcnfibly rcquifitc of the wonderful, and fcarcc credible tale, fhe aliened. To this letter, a very few days brought heran an!wcr,abouiulingin congratulations the moft affectionate and cordial, not only from every individual of the family, but from Lady Julia, and her excellent father alfo. As for the warnvhearted Sophia, flic feemed quite wild with joy— u only," as flic confeffed herfelf— 4C the idea of Ciarentine'b being doomed to live with fuch people as the Barclays dif¬ turbed her beyond meafurc.*' δ4 I cannot bear your odious Mifs Lucy," fhe added— 46 and can hardly perfuade myfelf even to think with Chrifr tian chanty of her mama. You fpeak very cautioufly about them—yet î can plainly perceive they are the moft cou trailed, narrow-minded, vulgar animals that ever were created! How is it poffible fuch a polifhed. amiable man as Mr. Len¬ ham, can endure fuch creatures in his houfe ?—Quit them, for fliame ! and come and live with vour charmin?? Madame . CS d'Arzclc again. Indeed, indeed thefe % people
people are not fit fociety for my Claren¬ tinc, u Λ** for Mr. Ehham, who you tell me ha* already introduced himfelf at your houfe, 1 fufpeci he will have fome very entertaining dialogues with Mifs Lucy! She promifes fair to become an admirable butt for him. Pray fend me a minute ac¬ count of his behaviour to her; do alî you can io perfuade her to fall in love with him; and then, if you defire effectually to gel rid of him, betray her to mama, and council the good lady to prohibit his vifits! You will knqh at this advice per¬ haps but 1 can acure you, I mould fol¬ low it myfelf very exactly, in the fame t ircumiUnccs. u But fiprcpos—l fcarceiy know de quoi though, but that is no matter; let me in¬ form you of that dear, delightful Lord Welwyn'i» enchanting plan for his daugh¬ ter next fpnng. lie means to take her to town for three months* in ordeno have her prciuited, and likewifc in order to inure Ыт a little to the buftlc and con¬ iti ho n of the great world, previous to ber mat/i.'gŕ. During the firft month or fix weeks of their refidence in Ьопаощ Har- 3 IÍ€I S
riet, en droit dfaineßci is invited to be with them; after which, my turn is to airive, and I am to join their paity till their re¬ turn to this place in May. Lady Julia s pretty mouth dimples at this proiped, when talkını» of it with me ; but at other о times, if fb„ lus and thinks of it alone, her timid beai t finks with terror at the idea of a fcene fo new, an introduction ,fo formidable, and a manner of living fo bufy and ίο perturbed. Not ίο your en¬ raptured Sophia. Having no presenta¬ tions to fear (thanks to my obfeunty, and thanks alio to the r ural ftyle of life t feem deftined to lead) all I look forward to is amufement, and all ï anticipate is plea¬ fure. Here, thefe are things I never panted to obtain, becaufe I very well knew they were not to be obtained; but there^ as both are aeceffihle, I am fully determined both fhali be enjoyed] And fo, farewel my beloved Clarentine, farewel till next April." Thus concluded this gay and charatte-* riftic biter. It put Cbircntiue into fpi¬ rits for the day* and infpiied her with fo much joy on account oi the happy pio- ípeä it held uut fui the fpnng, that lier
. delight upon the occafion was fcarceS inferior to that of Sophia herfelf. After an abknec of near three weeks, Mr. Lenham at length returned. Cla¬ rentine welcomed him on his ai rival with tlie trueft fatkfaction ; and impatient to make known to him, and to obtain his ianuion of her projected defigns, feized the firft oppoituniiy, when thev were by them id ves, of fpeaking to him upon the I hjeck To her intended donation annually to Madame d'Arsele, the ncarnefs and dear» nefs of that lady's rclationfhip to her-, and the di ft re fled flate of her actual cir« cumftances, forbade his making any op» pofition; on the contrary, he applauded her purpofe with warmth, and a flu red her lie entertained not the leaft doubt of iu meeting with the readieft concurrence kom Captain Somerfet. With regard, however, to her payment of himfelf, during her refidence at his houfe, he declined faying any thing, leav¬ ing her to fettle the matter in whatever way ihe chofe with Lady Delmington herkdf, Thus
Thus authoriled, Clarentine loft no time in farther confideration, but arming hcr¬ feif with courage for the arduous ч « kr« taking, immediately retired to h evn room for the purpofe of wriiing la- dame d'Arzele. Her letter, though fhort, was не perfuafive, earned,and aŕľectionat ry motive ihe could urge in favou. her propofai was ftrongly dwelt upon, and forcibly pointed out. Eloquent, yet timid; animated, yet refpect ful, by turns ihe reaz¬ ione d, and ihe fued, till argument itfelf was exháufted, and fupplication could reach no further. Enelofed in this letter, was a vk for •25bdeducted from the firft quaiti pay¬ ment fhe had received fiom Mr. I »..ш ; an equal fum rema» aed for her rie; and the reft, flie determined to l >art towards the difcharge of the ye r en- iion Lady Delmington bad agr et ' pay for her. Her next bufinefs was, to inform that lady herfelf of her décifion. This '. -uigh by no means fo difficult a t a fit as ai¬ mer, was one, however, that ftill ned the utmoft delicacy and circum' ion· ! .Uly,
Proudly, or ungracioufly, after all the obligations'ihe bad received, to have re- jetted any further fervices the mitant her dependence \\u\$ at an end, would have evinced a degree of felfiih nefs and ingra¬ titude, of which Claremine could not bear to be thought capable. Her letter, therefore, though plain and candid, was more humble atid more diffident than any fhe had ever written before. By return of poft fhe received the two anfwers flie fo ardently defired. The firft fbe opened, that of Madame d'Arzele, affected her fo deeply before flie had proceeded half through it, that fhe had fearce power to read to its conclufion. The impaffioned gratitude and fenfibility it exprcffed; the kind and flattering ac¬ ceptation it contained; and above all, the tender acknowledgments with which it abounded on behalf of the hclplefs babes, to whom fuch a grant afforded certain maintenance and fupport, delighted at once, and diflreffed the feeling Clarentine almoft to an equal degree ! More than ever, however, did fhe congratulate her¬ felf upon tbe difpenfation ihc had made, and
and more than ever prize the pn»/ci' ihe had acquiied. Lady Delmington wrote with lefs en- thuiiafm, it will be bebeved, bur fcarceiy with leis affedion. She agreed to her niece's propofai as to a thing it would be indelicate to oppole ; yet at the fame time rallied her with a confidérable de¬ gree of archneís upon the promptitude with with which fhe had thought it ne¬ ce flury to announce her detei initiation, and good-humouredly cautioned her againft adding one more, to the too-ample lift that already exi fled of proud Deimingtons. Clarentine, though ihe could fcarceiy help laughing, was yet lorry to have ap¬ peared, even in jeft, to require fuch a warning. She flattered herfelf, howevei, that when fhe wrote again fhe fhould be able to prove how little it was neceííary ; and meanwhile, difcarding from her mind all reflections that could exntc uncafi- nefá, gave herfelf up without referve to the plcafurc that refulted from the con- feiouihefs of having benefited tinde fhe loved, and performed her own pact with rectitude.
CHAP,
Ks Tl Jx. I« \ 111 « SîX w r ceks had now nearly elapfed fince Clarentine 's arrival at Hampftead, and except Eltham, who, in that time had repeatedly calkd, and Mrs. Denbigh, who, fince the return of Mr. Lenham, often drank tea at the houfe, fhe had fcarceiy feen one individual who did not immediately belong to the family, or ven¬ tured beyond the limits of the garden, or the fmall field that adjoined to it. One evening, however, being left, at the end of that period, têt f a-tête widi Mifs Barclay, whofe mother was gone to London upon bufinefs with Mr. Lenham, íhc confented at that young lady's preffing folicitation to accompany her on a more diftant ramble* The evening was fo fine, and, when Ίΐ contained no company, Mils Barclays ave r fion to the houfe was fio great, that night was coming on rapidly before Cla¬ rentine could períuade her to turn back; and confequcntly when they arrived at their own door it was already completely dark. Rejoiced,
Rejoiced, however, to have reached home at all, Clarentine, after fhe entered, itaid not to reproach her adventurous companion for her imprudence, but quit¬ ting her at the botlom of the flairs, turned fhort into the parlour to look whether any letters had been brought for her during her abfence. As ilie opened the door, and was haitily advancing without any other light than that which a glimmering fire afford¬ ed, the tall figure of a man itandmg up immediately oppofite to her with his back to the cimmie), Aartìcd her ίο much, that fhe was half tempted to run out again. Hearing one of the maid 1 », how¬ ever, in the pa f fage, fhe (ailed to her, and with as little appearance of alarm as ili e could, laid, in a low voice— " J s this gentleman waiting for your mailer r" " Yes M if v—he came in juli before yon/* ■t Somewhat re-aflured on finding he hat! gained ie/yd ad;nißbti b fhe then ordered candies, intending the moment they were brought to quit the room, and rejoin Mifs bart la). Meanwhile,
Meanwhile, the fl i anger, (w ho in height and figure bore ío pecniiar a rcfembbincc to Eltham, that flie was fomeiimcs half tempted to think it was kkham in perfon) had refigned his ftation at the fire, and very politely placed a chair for her near it, concluding fhe meant as w r eli as him¬ felf to wait there till Mr. Lenham re¬ turned. Clarentine, too much embarraffed by the aukwardnefs of her fituation to at¬ tempt fpeaking, only bowed her thanks, without venturing to move from the door, which fbe held half open in her hand, ready to make her efcape the inoment the maid re· appea red. A filence fo determined, and flill more, fhe cautious diftancc at which fbe flood, icyned to excite tbe ilranger's curiofity, for, before tbe candles could airive, grow¬ ing impatient to fee her face, he once íie\ãtn approached the fire, and gave it fo effectual a flir, that the bright flame into which it burft out enabled him inftantly to take a perfect view of her whole coun¬ tenance, at the fame time that it likewife afforded her an opportunity of examining hun, Tlie
Tbc tood fdencc that had ptcceded this mutual íurvey was now but of ilo ль duration. ( larentine, agitated, and al¬ inoli hrcatblefs, hioke it full; and irre- folutely advancing, laid in an eagei and tremulous accent, whilit her суеь were in- tently ι i vetted on his face— 6i Do I deceive m\íelfí ) Can this be reali* Are \ ou /i'VoYCapt. SomerfeLi 3 " Somcrlct (for it was he himfelf ) allowed her time t»> fa) no more. Struxk by the rarneit tone o^ her voice, and the touch- ine feiuib.iu ν ι luí t was evident in Lei i oun tenance, Ids warm and adcMrnuh» Ľ* u t fpruiig f »ith. *<* m, ' ' ] i. ľ] tvUd : . n, . ι nlWC ili·· í
fU ai , ıh
M !
' 14 IN ' :· \\\л í ^ I · ι ι . il '' i ' O I '- . "M ta О Пи .С
\\ nom · ч and now a fh nih 1 4 * M í V. ards ', · dcai eli í Mľoi hu Γ t : .. Leie ! i )xj \ t .,t !o í 1 lav с ^ ■ ->', :„ι . η ¡w¡¡^ h И m·· r\ , î \ ihm r t íc í i, ¿М!ч1 t ·. * , «blu \ о : ι . ,
11' ι (i! u i Γ í ',Οΐ I tí ν ."ел ' ' j 1 ' Ί ; #1 fl ti! (< LìO i a t л ! > s . i¡íu. ι l' I v j i С О 'П. ' <. s ' о ;к . L ν ι·»·; ; : 1 ; .ii h о. d, ·· !?
p >
oii *ог , I , OC iî ! Г . . ί
1С W t. S j n , v v t O i Ц
j t n'orni J Ι ι L !O*0 • 0> \ UJI .i ,o\ 4 ', a- O-) 0,0 i C ) i u » >
fonably fuppofe, a wanderer fuch as î have been, muft wifli to know, and feel intcrcfted in hearing ľ* 46 I will/* cried Clarentine, fmiling at his eagcrnefs, * 4 I will moft readily : but at leaft fit down to hear my tale; for fince vou afk fo much at once, vou cannot expect me to be very brief/' The entrance of the maid prevented her faying any more, and cheeked for a time the enquiries which Somerfet was fo anxious to pour forth. 1 lis eyes, how¬ ever, during that interval, fpoke moft ex- preflively, and as he again delightedly regarded her with looks of admiration and furprife, plainly indicated all tbe pleafure he felt, and all the friendihip he retained. When once more they were left by themfclves, befitating a moment, and half- imiling, he faid, " '1 be longer I fee you, the lefs I know how to renounce my an* cient privileges ; and yet, I ought not now to addrefs you thus familiarly, to call you, ai· iti fonner times, my Clarentine, and to treat you with this uncourtly plain- nefs. Can you, in confideration of what î am, a blunt, unpoliflied fai lor, can you pardon
pardon fo glaring a foleeifm in good man¬ ners ?" ** Would I could as eafily pardon," re¬ plied Clarentine, a little reproachfully, 64 your long filenccj and your breach of promifc i'* Somerfet's gaiety vanifhed in a mo¬ ment- — 44 Is this," cried he, earueftly, " a juft reproach ? No, believe me-—frequently and conftantly did I write, not only during my late Weft India ftation, but alfo while yet cruizing in the Mediterra¬ nean ; to ibme of the earlieft of thefe let¬ ters I even received anfwers, but to all thofe of later date you have invariably re¬ mained filent." Clarentine at the conclufion of thk fpeech looked a little confeious, and ap¬ peared at a lofs what defence to make for herfelf. r i he fikt was, that not having received, fince he quitted the Meditena- /nean, any ο:κ* oí' the letters he had written, fhe had grown wcaiy of keeping up fo languid a correîpondenee, and had wholly diieontinm d writing herfelf. This, after lome hefitation, ihc honcftly con¬ feffed ; and peace being then reftorcd, î a Somerfet
Somerfet earneftly befought her to gra¬ tify the anxious curiofity he had to know what caufe had determined her to quit her former refidence. Though infinitely avcrfe to entering fully upon this fubject, and fearful of drawing upon herfelf the imputation of vanity and conceit, Clarentine fo far con¬ quered her rciuftance, however, as to fpeak of it, after the firft moment, with all that candour and opcnnefs which So- mcrlct's long friendihip for her, his near relationfilip, and the intereft he took in her affairs, entitled him, ihc thought, to expeft. Throw ing off ail difguife, there¬ fore, flie frankly acknowledged that to Sir Edgar's imprudent attachment was alone to be attributed her laic removal, and lier prefent fituation. This confeffion naturally led to the m nnon id I.ady juba, whok engage- тел ni íhc fpoke of v. iih the fame finccrity, as well as of tbe oblvvtion file had thought herid! under, on -jeeount of the confi¬ dence and kindnefs with which her kady- ihip bad ulwee s honoured Iu r, to reprefs any hopes' Sir Edgar might h:w con¬ ceived with r^ lard ;o ht ï feif. ^ Of
·»* Of ppifidv towaids a intuid fer \\hom î outeitaiuíd lo imu b aífcťtion, and who in hci fell was io amiable, i may venture to aff.nn/* continue ! í laic mine, u í fliould have bien utterly incapable, even had m v love for Sir Edgai been oí a na¬ turale fs hiki 1} than il wa·. Not for one moment, therefoie, did ï hai bour the detelìabìe idea—-form the fhgbiefl wifh of fupplantiug her ; neitb.er fhould I hav« been weak enough, if 1 ha-J^ to iinagine fueli an attempt could ever kw e been fanciioned by his mother. Deftined con- fequcntly, if 7 remained in the fame houfe, to become an object of continual fufpicion—to fhun Sir Edgar afliduouHy —to diflemble with Lady Julia, and in return pcihaps to excite only diftruft, I now began to think, however í might la-, ment it at firll, that the temporary baiiiih- ment to which I have been configiud, was the happieil thing that could have be¬ fallen me. Sir Edgar alfo, 1 am now perfuaded, thinks ίο himfelf. He has implicitly fubmitted to die wiíhes ol his family, and ratified ι very prom/c that hail been made for hnn." í 3 α IV η
** Ten thoufand thanks, my charming friend/' cried Q omerfet, when flie paufed, 4t ten thoufand thanks for this ingenuous recital. The noble finccrity that fo early diftinguifhed you—that fo early excited the efteem and confidence of all who knew you, time, I perceive, has had no power to diminifh. You are ftill the fame open, tinreferved, and generous Clarentine I ever found you !" 44 I fufpect by the warmth of this eulo* gì um," rephed Clarentine, fmiling, " you impute greater merit to me upon the pre¬ fent occafion than I really deferve. Had my heart been as much a fufferer in this bufinefs as my pride, my franknefs to you might indeed have claimed fome admira¬ tion ; but that not being the cafe, I had nothing moie to overcome than a momen¬ tarv fenfation of embarraffment, the natu- ral confequence of being the heroine; and what is worfe, the heroine in difgraee·™™ of my own tale. Let us now, however," added fhe, u talk of fomething elfe. How long have you been in England ?" 44 A very fhort time/' anfwered Somer¬ fet. He
He then proceeded to inform her of the die *JÍ ui fhock he had received, o;ì bis arrival in Northamptonfhire, whither lie haftened the inftant he landed, in total ignorance of the melancholy even: that- had recently taken place. Unprepared as he was for fuch intelligence-"difipirited and completely overpowered by it, he bad for fome days no courage to think of writing, or even to attempt moving from the gloomy and uninhabited manfion to which, with fuch far different hopes, he had fo eagerly repaired. Becoming impatient, however, lo learn fome tidings of his friends İn London, but more particularly of the revered and venerable Mr. Lenham, he had made an effort at length to fliake off the liftlefsncfs and depreffion that had hitherto retained him in inactivity, and determined to fot out and make thofe enquiries in perfon. In London he had fecn only the old do¬ meftie who ftill refided in his fathers houfe ; and from him obtaining no faiis- faftory information, had proceeded for¬ ward almoft without ftopping till he reached Hampftead. i 4 This
This Hule narrative was fcarceiy con¬ cluded, before Mr. Lenlu-m reu,* aed. Claremine witoefed the firft meeting ofthat excellent ıran and his youthful friend, with the moit fympathizing emo¬ tions of delight and joy. 1 hey remained, however, but a fhort time below, as the prelence of Mrs and Mifs Barclay, who foon hïtvx entered the room, feemed to re ρ refs the mutual overflowings of their hearts,, and utterly to prevent their en* gaging in any confidential difcourfe. When therefore they bad retired to Mr. Lenbarr/s ftudy, and Clarentine'was left with the two ladies, Mifs Barclay, with an eagcrnefs it was by no means eafy to account for, afked how long Somerfet had been an ived I where he intended to re fide: what ftay it was probable he would make in England r and fo many oiher queftions of the fame nature, that f iare ntinc. unprepared for inch an exa- ruination, at length attempted to check it, by faying— u I am not yet acquainted with half thefe particulars, my dear Mifs Barclay, pnd therefore cannot poffibly reply to them, but tell røe, whence this extreme folicitude
folicitude concerning Captain Somerfet ? Did you ever fee him before Γ " Yes, very often—and yet, it is not for myfelf İ aik all this. I was defired by--"' She ftopped, and colouring violently, prefently added- - u in ihort, I have rea¬ fons for wifhing to know as much as I can about him. If you don't chukg however, to give me any information, I fhall en¬ deavour to find out thofe tkat will." <f Whv. what is all this lufs and fecrecy about r" enquired her mother, a little angrily-—" i fhould be glad to know, Lucy, what Capt, Somerfet can be to )ou!" 44 Lord, mama !" exclaimed Mils Lucy peevifhly, u how ihould you uiideritand any thing about the malter ?-—! fuppofe ï may afk а common queilion or two with¬ out being called to account for it like a child Г And fo faying, ihe indignantly fbnig out of the room, throwing the door aftei her with fuch violence, that ihe made every window in the houfe rattle in its frame» I 5 " Lord
, éí Lord help us, what a girl it i$ !" cried herloother, as foon as fhe was gone— fei there's no fpeaking a word to her with¬ out putting her in a pet ! I dare fay, howeveij I have guefled pretty nearly what it 'щ Mifs Clary, that makes her fo curious about your coufin. She's a fool for her pains, and had much better be minding her own affairs, than trying to play other peoples cards for them/' Clarentine was totally unable to com¬ prehend this hint, anj but little inclined to feek iu explanation. She .therefore fuffered it to pafs without any comment, and Mrs. Barclay, the next minute, began talking of other things. At fupper the two gentlemen made tbeir appearance again, and Mifs Barclay hear¬ ing them go down, finoothed her frown· ing brow, and tripped lightly after them. She feated herfelf oppofite Somerfet, and devoted her whole attention to him ; fre¬ quently fixing her large dark eyes upon his face with an earneftnefa and perfe ve¬ ranee, that no lefs aftonifhed Clarentine, than it evidently offended Mr. Lenham. As for Somerfet himfelf, it was fome time before he obferved her: but when he did, regarding
regarding her in return with nearly equal curiofity» he fuddenly addreffed htir as a perfon he had that moment recollected, and faid-— 6i ! think ï have had the honour of fee¬ ing you fome where elfe, Madam. Were you not with Mifs Compton at Mrs, Caftleton's near Portfmouth, juft before my laft embarkation but one ?'* MifsBarclayanfweredintheaffirmitive, adding, ** Mifs Compton is Mrs. Hert¬ ford now. She married foon after you failed/' 46 I hope/* refumcd Somerfet, " flie is well/' ** I have not feen her very lately/'— replied Mifs Barclay—" But as ï under- ftand fhe is now in town for a ihort time, î hope to have that pleafure to-morrow/* Someriet's enquiries, after this, pro¬ ceeded no further: but Mifs Barclay evidently wiihing to dwell upon the fub¬ ject, entered into a minute detail of every thing that had befallen her friend fince her marriage; and concluded by lament* ing, in very ftrong terms, th ^fortunate dependence^ and pecuniary embarraik ï б ments
ments to which fo lovely and accom- pliihed a woman found herfelf reduced* Somerfet appeared to concur in this opinion very fmcerely. He immediately wrote down Mrs. Hertford's direction, and declared his intention of calling upon her the ne^ norning. This little dialogue, though it feemed not to ftrike any one clfe 3 furprized Cla* remine extremely. în Mrs, Hertford flie appeared fated to difcover, accidentally and by degrees, a woman, who though nearly a ftranger to herfelf, was intimately known to every acquaintance or friend flie had, and by each of them individually feemed to be held in a different degree of eflimation. Eltham, fhe had found, thought of her with contempt, and fpoke of her with derifion; Mifs Barclay never mentioned her but with the moft un¬ bounded praife and admiration; Mr. Lenham appeared not to doubt the rcf- pecìabiìity of her character, but, at the fame time, to know too little of her to re¬ gard her with any thing but indifference; Mrs. Barclay had already betrayed that ihe confidercd her as a coquette; and laftly, Somerfet, uninfluenced by the par¬ tiality
tiality of the one, or the prejudices of the other, openly ρ rofe fled tí) feel for her the iitmoíl companion, and to look upon her with the trueft cfteem. How were all theie various opinions to be recon¬ ciled? Clarentine was loft in doubt and perplexity, kefs inclined, however, u> diftruft t ie favourable fentiments of So¬ merfet, '„ban to fufpecl the judgment of Eltham, ihe once again, more ftrongly than ever, was confirmed in the belie*" that he had injured Mrs. Hertford, and caufelefsiy led her to imbibe an erroné- ous idea of her» Well acquainted with the early hours Mr. Lenham \\аь accuftomed to keep, his confide rate gneft took leave foon after tbey rofe from table, promi fi η ^ to repcíu his virìt tome time in the courfc of the following day. Accordingly, the next evening, juft as Clarentinc, who, though ihe knew not why, had been called down" to tea fooncr than ν dual, was preparing to obey the fummons, fhe faw him, from her ciofet window, open the gate before the houfe, and walk up to the door. They met at the foot of tbc ii> t ir$ 3 Somcifet on hear- 0 in S
ing her cal! to him having waited there till flie ran down; and after a fliort con¬ verfation entered the parlour together.— In addition to the ufual family party, they founds feated next Mr. Lenham at the tea table, his friend Mrs. Denbigh. Cap¬ tain Somerfet knew that lady well, and immediately haftened forward to pay his rcfpecìs to her; whilft Clarentine, inca¬ pable of attending to any thing Mc^ flood for fome minutes petrified with amaze¬ ment, confi dering the altered drefs and ftrange decorations of Mrs. and Mifs Barclay, who both, it was evident, were thus attired for foreign conqueft, and perhaps alfo for domeftie admiration. As foon as tea was over, and the two ladies did every thing in their power to hurry it as muck as poffible, Mifs Barclay ftarted up, and cafting her eyes towards the antique clock, which, from the chim* ney-piece on which it flood, had with undeviating icgularity monutonoufly chimed each revolving hour for more than thi и y )cars, eagerly calkd out ίο her mothci — * 4 Loid, mama, wc fliall be mon- fl rous late; piay get your cloak and lets be off/' Yßung
Young Biandford upon this addreffed himfelf to Mrs. Barclay, and faid—» u Shall I be allowed to go with you, ma'am ?" 44 1 don't know, indeed, child ; you hav'n't got leave, have you?" u O yes/ J faid Mr. Lenham fmiling, u if you chufe to be troubled with him, he has my full permiffion."' u Well then, good·by to you all/' cried Mrs Barclay. 4 *Good-by. Come along, Lucy, come/* u O, but ftop, mama/* faid Mifs Lucy, ** ftop a minute; i forgot it till now : but Mr. El tham/' added fhc 9 ** overtook me in Pali-Mali, juft as í was ftepping up to Mrs. Hertford's door, and gave me a thou fand meffages to de¬ liver to her; they are half gone out of my head, but I remember, however, they were all exceffive civil, and (audibly whifpering, with affected mvilerioufnefs) exceffive tender! There, now, I have executed my commiffion—-I'm ready.«*- Come Biandford/' Then followed by her mother, in as high fpirits as herfelf, away tripped this exact and puiiäüious kdy· Some r fct ,
Somei fe % extremely amufed by their eagcrnefs, now afked whither in iuch hafte they wei e gone? Mrs. Denbigh, with a fhrug and an cmphatfcal groan, afiixered~~*> u To Bieftaw s, the С,р,;юогГъ Clarentinc ílaied ; Somerfet laughed; and Mr. Lenham mildly faid— 44 Nay, my de tr madam, why fliould we defpifc thefe good people for feeking to divert themfclves their own way ? If their minds are incapacitated for higher enjoyments, in God s name, let them go to the Conjurors.** u Why truly/* refumed Mrs. Denbigh, leifurely tapping the hd of her fhufkbox, 4i if by fomc lucky flight of hand the cunning man could fucceed in twirling their brains round 10 the proper place, î fhould think their time could not be ,bet* ter fpent : but with all his ingenuity* ï nevei heard friend Breflaw poikfkd the rcquifitc abilities for fuch a talk/* 44 Who knows/' thought Somerfet, what friend Breflaw might atchievc if the brains were there to twirl !" Then addrefling Clarentine—· u How comes it," faid he, fmiling, u you were not of this party ?" 44 I never
tr I never heatd it had been planned," anfwered íhc, i( till it would have been too late to have propofed joining it." 44 O, Mifs Delmington, I underflaiid/* íuid Mrs. Denbigh, *< is deemed utterly unworthy of being made a partaker of thefe refined amufements î Mrs. Barclay was not even permitted to mention her intention before her." At that moment a loud ring at the gate» bell was heard; and whilft Mr. Lenham was endeavouring to conjecture who this unexpeüed vifitor might be, the maid entered, and, particularly addrefling the intelligence to Clarentine, announced Mr. Eltham. Somerfet, inftantly recolleBing the parting fpeech Mifs Barclay had uttered, turned his eyes towards Clarentine with an arch fmiie, and was beginning to rally her ирод this vifit, when obferving her chSngc colour, and look extremely dif¬ concerted, he checked himfelf in fome confternation, and directed all his atten¬ tion towards the door, at which Eltham, the next minute, made his appearance. Bowing firft to Claremine, as to the perfon whom his vifit was principally de- I fi g ne d
fìgned for, and then in a more general way to the reft of the party, he drew *& chair near her's, and was upon th¿ point of fearing himfelf, when Mr. Lenham, who had at firft forgot that ceremony, but now recollected that as they might often meet it would be neceiTary, begged leave to introduce him and Capt. Somerfet to* each other« Ekham, ftarting at the name, arid look¬ ing towards Somerfet, who at the fame moment bowed to him, with the moft eager curioftty, made a grave inclination to him in return, and taking hb place ία total filence, affumed an air of extreme referve, and fpoke not for a confidérable time, unlefs called upon by fome direct enquiry. The firft quarter of an hour was de¬ voted, as is invariably the cafe among people who know but little of each others' habits and connexions, to animadvert¬ ing upon the heat or cold of the weather; the fulnefs or emptinefsof the town; the duftinefs of the roads, and other fuch en* livening topics ! By degrees, however, the converfation took a more agreeable turn ; Somerfet, who at firft had been too much
much offended by the cold haughtincfs of £hliam's manners to bear any part in it, animated by the example of Mr. Len- barn and Mrs. Denbigh, made an effort to conquer his ill-humour; and Eltham reviving likewife, and everywhere equally at his eafe, and equally unembarraffed, foon engaged them all three, either in earneft fupport, or oppofition, of the wild opinions he advanced; and, at leaft, if he could not convince i entertained} if he could not overpower^ perplexed them* Clarentine during this converfation fat at work, and wholly filent; but by no means inattentive. She was amufed by the fire and excentricity of Ekham ; charmed by the candour and patience of Mr. Lenham; furprized at the informa¬ tion and knowdedge of Mrs. Denbigh ; and intereited by the modefty, the good fenfe, and una fiumi ng gentlenefs of So¬ merfet. In him, though ihe obferved not the fame boldnefs in maintaining extrava¬ gant fylt cms, or the fame rcadinefs to offert y and eagernefs to defend prepoitcr- ous chimeras ihat ihe difeovered in kk tham, fhe perceived a clearnefit of judg¬ ment, and a confi ftency of principle, that weighed
weighed far more with her than all the falie glare of his antagonift, the brilliancy of his wit, or the ingenuity of his argu¬ ments. This fpiritcd, but amicable contention, lafted till the return of Mrs. and Mils Barclay, and their young companion, Ekham would then have taken his leave, but Mr. Lenham, naturally hofpuable <má polhe, p re ffed him to ftay fupper; and io this, without much importunity, he confented. Meanwhile young Blandford f having feated himfelf next Clarentine, was giv* ing her, at her own requeft, a eircum- ftantiai detail of ail the wonders to which lie had been a witnefs. The fubject foon drew the attention of Mrs. Barclay her¬ felf, wfio as much a child to the full m the juvenile narrator, hung ovec the back of his chair, afli fled him in the recital whenever his memory failed, and ap¬ peared to enjoy nearly as much delight in ripeatmţ what fhe had leen, as fhe could have deme had the whole been acted again befoie her· Their cagernek and volubility at length excited the curiofity of Somerfet and El¬ tham,
iham, who now became auditors in then turn, affected to liften with the utmoft aitonifliment to the many iurprifing feats of dexterity that were recounted; and Ib enchanted the two relators by their ear¬ neft attention, that had not a timely fum¬ mons to the fupper-table interrupted the flow of their eloquence, Ciarentine muft have defpaired of releafe till the whole party broke up for the night. The converfation during their meal, though it was more dilfuic and uncon¬ nected than it had been in the early part of ihe evening, was fupported with good- fenfc by fonu , with good-humour by all prefent; and when the hour ol' kparatku drew near, every body appeared to thiuk of it with reluctance. At the moment of uking leave, Eiih.im perceiving that Claientinc flood at fome difianee írom tiu: reft of tir 4 covpam, took advantage i\f the gemuri coirikh ж, ίο approach« and audtek bit iu a lo л voice-— Ŕí í begin to like \ous Somcrict," bud he, α better than t expected, lie k w ťwnai without being dull; aud the brit hi whom i ever found united the plain hank- nek
nefs of a failor, with the good-breeding and the poiifh of a man of fafliionľ' " I am glad to find you fo well dif¬ pofed to do him juftice/ 9 faid Clarentine* α Ah, but remember/' refumed El¬ tham with quicknefs, " remember upon what terms I do him this juftice; no longer than whilft he inviolably adheres to his prefent character of guardian^ and of friend I** u Then long, I believe/' faid Claren¬ tine, fmiling, ς ' long indeed may he flat¬ ter himfelf he fliall retain your favour!*' u Arc you fincere?" cried Eltham, flcadfaftly regarding her, " are you really fincere in this opinion ? You binili ! 9 continued he, after a fliort fiknrc. u Oh Clarentine ! you fpoke not as your wiflies, or your heart directed !" Clarentine affecting to laugh, yet cru¬ elly confufed, turned away without an¬ fwering him, and walked up to Mr. Len¬ ham ; whilft Ekham, rooted for fome mi¬ nutes to the fpot where flic,had left him, followed her reproachfully with his eyes; and then, hardly confeious of what he did, put on his hat, and ran abiuptly out of the room. Somerfet foon after followed Ыт, and Clarentinc the next moment retired. CHAP.
CHAP, IX. Somerset, unwilling to nove to any di fiance from Hamp ft с bad now eftablifhed himfelf at his hoi ч in Clif¬ ford ftrcet, for the winter, fcarceiy ш fíe red a day to pafs in t l ourfc of which he did not, either mou or even¬ ing, vifit his young ward. mentivo to the minuted circumftance that could con¬ duce to her domeftie comfort and conve¬ nience, and weH knowing th it her o~vn would be the iaft wants fhe would allow herfelf to fupply, he took the utmoft de¬ light in ornamenting and fitting up for her the favourite ciofet he had heard her fo partially commemorate. Books, Draw¬ ings, an excellent harp, pui chafed in con- fequence of having accidentally learnt from Ekham that fhe ufed to perform upon that inftrument ; in fhort, whatever fancy could dcvife, or wealth procure to make this little retreat worthy of the lovely poifeifor, was profuiely laviihed upon it; and by Clarentinc, fenfible of the generous pleafure he took in thus feeking
feeking to promote her fatisfaftion, grate¬ fully, yet fomctimes half reproachfully, accepted. If flie walked out. he accompanied her; w hi lil fhe fat working or drawing, he read to her; whatv ver flie cxprefted the íbghteít wdíh to learn, he fought the beft inii ruftors to leach her ;—-and all this with fiu h unprcfuming delicacy, fuch а con¬ ftant diead of difgufting her by too great an appearance of oflicionfiiefs, that his а ili d ailles far ívom oppreffing, or laying her under tbe fmallcd. íeflraint, ieemed but to wear the fonn of an affectionate ! ioti civ knwlnd.s, and neves leflened, or ι n eve ivw.m in thee keu* that gay and in- VU4 nt knndiw w uli w bii h ibe bad αΐ- чте liren a*, vi 1-jľ.ivd tw treat bun, lie v <. . ίια" Ííiiľúisnr, gtiaiíuau, proteUor, a 1. 1 ίι ¡end «di m ou.* ; ibe loved hım widi .../ι the moll u'lkk tendei nebs; ad- \.í d wer!) ,tnd eouíjded in bun implicitly eg ·,) cdl oc· dviv , uvLivftl cveiy íicHi n , . b ol bı- attı 1.1.on wiíli mingled püde and ph afııng ,ь ,iii additional proof ol hİ4 appvíbatifui and good Oj míon ; delighted i'i bı> ibi ι tv. and nevei fielt ίο thoroughly dv d anduiı íhc * ould battei beried with
with the hope of having, by her cheer¬ ful nefs, and zealous endeavours to oblige him, contributed, in fome meafurc, to his happinefs from whom flie derived fo large a portion of her own. From a ftate of felicity thus pure, and thus ferene, flie was firft difturbed by iht* importunate attentions of Eliham, and the yet more, to her, irk fome and d~- preffing vifits of Mrs. Hertford. Thk lady of late renewing more clofely than ever her former intimacy with Mifs Bav clay, and renewing likewife all her former inexplicable civility to Clarentine, bul eftablifhed hcrfeif, foi о»·* remainder of tk* Autumn, in lodgings vi» bin a few doov of Mr. Lenham's, and might almoft be laid to fpend her whole time at his iv / ч She was accomplifhed, animated, and ' · tractive; by the mapi рак of dv dvd , therefore, her foe kí v wa** conkktvl e. a moft valuable îjcqnktion ; ami lu e\ v iy gueft who met her thev . fie' u о J ч ч , d and admired. Yet Clav -i'iir. v г, ·, n* Id and placid as fhe was í ipported v * h рл rient forbearance the рек diddiuv oí Mils Baickvj or the dvu; t vdgmue oí ^'Oli I!» |\ j и j
her mother; C'larentine, of whom it might lb j u il! y have hitherto been faid 3 that—» ** í 1er Aiìiles were fober, and her îûok$ u Were cheerful unto ail s ' ,si! în defiance of her wonted candour and fweetnefs, knew not how to indure this univerfal favourite* Vain had been every internal argument ihe had hitherto held in hcr behalf; vain all her attempts to banifli from her memory the iirit dif- advantageous impreffion flie had received of her! The more ibe faw her, the mofe refer ved and diftant ihe found hcrfeif ■ in¬ voluntarily becoming ; and to fo painful a degree did theie fenfations of difiiké at length arife, that as often as ibe could, when Mrs. Hertford called, ihc formed fome excufe for quitting the room, and retreating io her own till ihe was gone. Somerfet, unfüfpicious of the motive that gave birth to this fìngularity of con¬ duct, gazed after her on thefe occafions with looks of equal mortification and con¬ cern. Often, though without fuccefs, did he attempt as íhc approached the door to lead her back, or at leaft, to cxaci from ber a promifc that flie would foon return.
However
However gentle her rebufáis, they were alwavs Heady and firm ; ihc could give no reafon for her inflexibility, but if m ged too long, her eyes involuntarily filled with tears, flic looked di fire (fed and em¬ barraffed ; and the generous Somerfet, too confiderà te to preis her further, in filent wonder fuffered her to depart. Erom her cai lieft infancy, Clarentine recolle8cd to have heard it faid, and by one whom ¡he refpected and believed, the honoured Lady Delmington, that the moit certain cure for the dejection of a mind ill at eafe, was activity and employment. Cla¬ rcntine's mind, and ihe too well fuipcekd the caule, zeas ill at eale, more fo than ibe ever lemembeicd lo have known it before. To empio} ment, theicíoie, tb" moil diligent and inteflant, fbe 'nad са.чг lecouife; and though her own vriihev would liave prompted hci to indulge in liftlcflnek, and c\ en indolence, ίο her ou η \rilhes ihe permitted noi heru Hbo at¬ tend ; bai fpurred on by the hope of driving from hır mind the hulv Л >:кч oppi e fled U, every hour vas devoted to the purluk of fome · fi ful occupation«* or
to tbc accomplifhmcnt of fome benevo¬ lent defign« In company with Mrs. Den« bigh, who upon a longer acquaintance flie found as much rcafon to cfteem as to admire, ihc v ifi ted and relieved many of the fick poor in the neighbourhood; re¬ commended their children to the notice and protection of Mr. Lenham; found work for fomc of the young women who were willing to be employed; and dif- penfed with fo liberal a hand around her every blefling which kindnefs, fympathy, and timely, though not pro fufe donations, can confer, that however anxious and dif- quietcd fhe might at intervals ftill feel, all real forrow was nearly forgotten, and in contemplati ng the few, but grateful happy flie had made, fhe was fomctimes more than half inclined to include her/elfin the number.
c II Л P.
С II А Р. X. Hitherto ciarentine, though /he bad now been at Mr. Lenhamk near lour month 4 , had r-irely been in f ondon, and, e.\ccpt to Mrs. Denbegh, had never paid any vifits whatever. She knew not a fingle individual in town; and Someriet had always fo earneftly cautioned her not to accompany the Barclays to any of the inferior public-places to which they were perpetually геюгтц, that fbe bad re- folutely declined ever being of their parties. One morning, however, towards the latter end of November, hearing thai ihe two laches were going to town u {ion what they called jhopping lu/mej^ and шит pofitivek to return tu dinner: wiíbiivto iene that opportunity of' making íome purchakb for heifelf, fhe propokd. it it was not inconvenient, е;отд widitbem. Someifet, who wa> pi cient when ver¬ plan was agreed upon, \et\ firenuoufly fought to obtain permilhoii to attend hn ; lv 3 bui
but this, Clarentine as ftrenuoufly υψ·« pnìcd. Her prcpofleflion againft Mrs. ileitford had for fome time paft began to give way to α iiight degree of rcfentment againft Somerfet himfelf. She feared to whifper it even to he: own heart, and yet flie could not but feel, that the attention bc ран! that lady; the pleafure he ap« peared to take in her converfation ; and the flattering admiration he avowed for her, bad excited in her breaft at fomc moments an emotion io nearly border¬ ing upon envy, and fo clofely allied to jtaloufyand anger, that there could be but one paflion, to which fuch fenfations ч ■ че u> be attributed —and that paffion \ .^ iove! long had flie muft clearly (..iiviiiid \\kit were the defigns of Mrs, ïkiîlord herkif; and long bad fhe he- bed with íriíonifbmcr.t hcr artful and i.ccevciiììii endeavour* to capii vale and Much hnn. trioa t kg between hope and fear ; conktous thai her own heait was cone, and doubtful what would be the ieíult of hv rival's fchemes, it bad, how* c\er, been but of late that ihc had feri¬ ou h v aimichended tbey would be fuc- eckíuk every bour nov/ confirmed her in
in this opinion—encreafed the evident triumph oí Mrs. i iert ford, who feemed perfectly to have penetrated her leeret fentiments, and afccriained the defeat o í Şomerii t. Had the woman, however, whom he had thus feketéd, afflicting to Ciarentine as it muft ever have been to know he had felectcd any, poifeflcd a character mor«* conformable to his own, and appeared tí/ her more deferving and more worthy, ík·.; flattered herfelf, and not unjuftly, that flic could have fubmitted to her difap¬ pointment with greater fortitude, 'Ihe firft wifh of her heart was to fee him hap¬ py ; but happy ibe was too well p< v fuaded a man like him —vriiofe chipo! v tion was all kindnefs and affection, and whofe attachments were ail domeftie-— could never be with a woman who, like Mrs. Ileitford, betrayed unconfcioufly a nature fo devoid of fenfibibtv, a heart lo felfiih, aud a mind fo devoted to dik fipatiou. Sometimes, when fiicntly obferving tnem as thev walked or converfed toge¬ ther, Claientinc had fancietl this idea feemed to ftrike Somerfet likewik. İler K .f blandi fiimeniť
blaiidifinncni.s and her flattery appeared to fatigue hitn; the coldeft gravity often overipread his countenance; and glad of * ny relief, yet fearce knowing what he did, he had eagerly feized on the moil Involous pretences to efcape from her, and wkb ft udled procraftination delayed rejoining her again. On thefe occafions, had fhe permitted it, Clarentinc perceived he would gladly have taken refoge with her. She avoided him, however, moil affiduoufly; or if к any time accident threw her in his way when tii ere was no third perfon préfent* behaved to him with a referve and for¬ mality, fo unlike her former confidential gaiety, that although be formed not the moft diftant conjecture of its caufe, he found himfelf involuntarily repulfed by her coldnefs, and obliged to defiit from all further importunity. Upon the prefent occurrence, this newly-a 11 nmed folemnity had fliewn itfelf with more than ufual force, and Claren¬ tinc's rejection of hnn, uttered before Mrs. I i enfold, had been accompanied by α look of impatience, and а fmiie of dil- d -шз. that confounded no lefs than it amazed
amazed him. He gazed at her for fome minutes, as if he doubted the evidence of his own fen fes, and then after a long paufe, attempting to take her hand, faid— " Mifs Delmington, I entreat, I con¬ jure you, though you have denied my firft requcft, at leaft gramme five minutes converfation before you go!" ■ ť4 I cannot, indeed," replied flic— a Mrs, Barclay, I believe, h ready, and h is time we ihould fet out.'* Then turning to Mrs. Hertford, in whofe eyes flic beheld a gleam of mali¬ cious joy, that made her fhuddcr, ihe flightly curteficd to her, and leaving them together, haftened away. The moment íhc found hci ft/if at li¬ berty, her full heart binding whh con¬ tending pallions, (he gave vay to an agony of tears, and rufiled into the full room that was open, to conceal her for¬ row and her weaknefd Ilei face сел ert d, and her aching head icflin ; againft a chair, ihe was vainly endeavouring to ftiíle ihc deep, and but too audible ideo ihat ckaped her, when, in a voice of the tendereit compaffion, ihe heard hei kif k j íuauvídy
íuddcníy addreíľed by the amazed and benevolent Mr. Lenham— u My gentle Clarentine, n cried he 9 Taking her hand— 4 * whence this excefs of grief*? Who has been with you? Who h h that has thus cruelly difturbed you ?" Clarentinc, looking up, and deeply bhiihing, replied with a melancholy fmik ~~~ u The enemy who has done all this, my dea re it Sir, iá my iel f, it is my own folly í lament, and not either the un- kindnefs, or the cruelty of others/' Then ri fing and gently withdrawing her hand—~ ьь Excufe my giving you any further ex- pknation"—-added ihe— u and forget, dear Mr, Lenham, if you can, that you ever í a w me thus unguardedly cxpofe my leli. So faying, vilhout daiing to wait till he fpokc to her again, ihe left him, and г&п up to her own room. In a short time, the voice of Mrs. Bar- d.tv, calling to ber fmm the landing-place, once more compelled her to appear* She ha it iL' put on he r cloak, and after bathing her cvc>, and (landing fome minutes at ÛM open window. Imping the air would diiptife their icdncL, ihe armed hcrfeif with
with courage to meet Somerfet in cafe he came out to fee tbem depart, and walked quietly down ftairs. No Somerfet, however, appeared. Mrs. Barclay was waiting for her alone at tins door, and told her Lucy bad changed her mind, and would not go—" So иь we have nobody to ftay fork added fbe, i; let s be oft." Accordingly they began their walk immediately; Clarentine reviving as thev proceeded, and in the confeioufnefs that her fecret, tho' unhappily betrayed to Mrs. Ileitford, was flill uttcriv unknown to Someriet, and fhe hoped alio, utieik uniu Iperico" by Mr. Lenham, acqui*, mg, foiritude patiently to bear whatever otht r mortification might await bev At the firft fhop Mrs. Barck\ ftopped at, α few minutes after fbe had entri ed it, Ciarentine beard her very familia: ly ас coiled by a bold, fliewydookii.g woman who followed them intőit, and \riio, win л the brii coïuui fdlutations w t re ovo, in¬ formed her with high glee, that fbe was juft letting off to dine in the cit\ at a íricruľs houfe where, in the evening, their was to be α г л'а>?1 ŕ/kv/k^ri/v and ч!кч- к 0 d e
щ*е! i% Xow, M added fhe, a if you were good for any thing, Dame Barclay, you'd go along with me. You are quite fmart enough, and they know you very well/* Mrs. Barclay, always ready for any thing th<n could be called a frclic % feemed fb willing to embrace ibis propofa!, could íhc but devile fome means of acquainting Mr, Lenham where fhe was gone, that Clarentine very foon perceiving what would be her decifton, and dreading to be included in this party, now ftepped for¬ ward, and faid—- α i can deliver to him, madam, тлу m с fía ς с you pleafe, if this gentleman/* un ning to the mailer of the ihop, " will have the goodnck to permit one of his people to call me a coach/* 44 Lord, my dear," cued Mrs. Barclay, u what ihould y.u go ho ine for if 1 doni? They'll know I'm old enough to keep out of mi (chief, and J dare fay will never be fuch iools as to trouble their heads about me. Ль we.can't conveniently therefore get any body to carry them word, let's go 2 without»
without, and try to get back the fooner fokt in the evening/* To this, as far as related to herfelf, Clarentine moft warmly objecicd : but Mrs. Barclay, half affronted at her re fi fi¬ ance, and totally rcgaidlefs of her argu· ments, urged her fo vehemently to com¬ ply, and fo nearly betrayed a difpofition to quarrel with her if fhe did not, that timid and fearful, a reluctant affieni was finally drawn from her, and a coach im¬ mediately fent for to convey them ail three to Goodman's Fields. After a tedious ride through fome of the clofeft ft ree t s in London— f t ree t s which to Claremine, who had all her life been ufed to breathe the pure air of the country, appeared fcarceiy fit for human habitation, they at length arrived at their rdacc of deftination. What, however, was poor Mrs« Barclay's difappointment, when, on being fhewn up into the dining-room, the firft intelligence, fhe heard from the miftrefs of the houíe, wdio feemed, in confequence,totally unprepared ;oreceive company was, that her child had been taken ill 5 and the ch-ri itenin g was put off î u Lord/*
(C Lord/' cried Mrs. Watkins, the lady who had led the mortified Mrs. Barclay thither, " why did nt you fend me word io r " I did; a note went to your houfe by ten o'clock ibis morning/' " /en o'cloi к î kord help you, î was' dreik.d and out before that time." " I am cMicmciy foiry it happened fo," relumed the lady, u but upon my word I could not fend fooner." u Well/' cried Mrs.Watkins, recover¬ ing from her fiift confternation, " if tbe word tenues to the worft, you, and this \oung lady. Dame Barclay, muft go коше and dine wdth me." *< Л ou are very good/'"faid Claren* tine, u but we may yet get back to Hampftead in perfect time, and that will bc infinitely better on all accounts/' " kurd biefs me, Mifs Clary/' ex¬ claimed Mrs. Barclay, affecting to laugh, yet evidently much difpleafcd at her pre¬ fumi ng to anfwer for her, " you need not be fo impatient, for tliough Mr. Ekham did fay he'd call to-day, X "li lay my life he'll nut fet out tilt evening, and there¬ fore
fore you may fafely dine in town witliou» fearing to nuis bun." 6ς О, there's a fwect-luait :n the (afe, is there?" cried Mrs. Wat kins, fiac ν iou fi) > u I don't fo much wondei tln-n at tbe young lady's unwillingnefs/' Extremely provoked at thefe fpeech es, Clarentinc now determined to give up all interference, and quieti \ to let Mrs. Barclay purine her own courfc. She ac¬ cordingly followed the two ladies back into the coach, wddch fortunately had not yet been difmiíľcd, and in paflive filence heard them give oidcrs to be driven to Long Acre. On there arrival there, Mrs. Watkms ufliering tbem into a dat b ai. d condón* lek back-pailour, in wimh were two or three noify, quarrelling children, left them, to give ouk v; concerning thnnei, and to fee the cloth Idd in the fiont room* u Well/' cried Mis. Ibuelav, as foon as flie was gone, " I've been led into a mighty krape indeed! İt doesn't fignify, but to be fure flie rit Ыу delei ves all the trouble fhe'll have, I dare fay her cup¬ board is empty enough ! Ten to one if wc
wc get a fcrap of any thing thefe two hours." Clarentinc thinking it vain to remon· Urate againft the indelicacy of accepting an invitation, which muft necefiarily be attended with fo much inconvenience to the perfon by whom it was made, was blent for fonic minutes, and then began talking with one of the children, whom finding more intelligent than the reft, flie amu fed herfelf with during the remainder of the time they waited; whilft Mrs. Bar* clay,, who pei haps had fcarceiy looked into a book before fince ihe quitted fchool, took up an old magazine, and fat \awnhig over it till the dinner was an¬ nounced. The inftant they ıofe from table, Mrs. Barclay, by thk time as much fickened of ht ι fro 'и as Clarentine bad long been belo rtv looked at her watch, and declared it wo fo hue they muft ;ς make the beft of thes г way 1 oree dii eti ! ν .'* u Хо, lo, Dame lUrcky," cried Mrs. Wathins, laughing, w ne quite fo fidi rithher! Do yon know that to make you aniciitb for your balk in Gooduıaı/s Field % I lent
i lent offa boy to Hampftead, belene v* e fát down to dinner, to acquaint Mr. Len¬ ham that f ihould keep you here this eveiung to go to the play \ridi me ŕ Ay, and what's more/' added ihc, u you m^y ftay and take a bed here if you like." Joy Jighrcd up every feature in Mrs« Barclay's face at ibis moit welcome intel¬ ligence. As eager now to fet ofl' for tbc theatre as flic had the moment before been to ret urt) home, fhe allowed Mrs. Waf kins no lime to order tea : but like an impa¬ tient child, protefting fhe could not 44 fet¬ tle to any thing/' and had rather 44 ftand at the playdioufe door till it was opened, than fit where ibe was fidgetting and thinking about it an hour before-hand/* fhe peifuadcd that lady, though it was yet icaicely niuiu than five (/clock, to fct out with her immediately, and drew tbe wearkd but unoppoíing Clai entine, who was allowed no option, away with her. In any other party, or m any other ftate of mind, however, the profpect of vi fim ι g for ú\e J: r ft t i /he. not only a Lon¬ don theatre, but α theatre of am kind-—» for hitherto Clareiuine had never been to a play in her life—-would have afforded ne y
hei ilte lìvebef! pkafiute. Xa) , as i? was, lhe cheeiful anima! İpırits ίο natuıal to hei age and genuine chdiaCter. wcie in* luifìbly HMVtıl at the idea; 'Ånd though lefs ìefUck, and kds рем tui bid than her luxini companion, ihe w.is íeaicdy kds pleafi d, and icaicely k fs dt fi rous of reaching ihe fceue of io imu li e>pefted felicity. They had not proceeded far, though Mrs. Ilare lav vvalkcd with a fwiftnck that f** was almoft too much even for the light and attive Clrueuune, when, driving to¬ wards them with great lapiditv , ihe per¬ ceived Mr. Ehham's carriage, and Ekham himfelf within it. She íhiunk behind her two conductori at this fight, hoping to cíc ape his nonce; but Litham's eyes, quu k and diiceiningn h ft d caught a tran- fient vie\^ cã her, and before flic had time to con >iatukte heifelf unoa her fancied (ícapt, the coinage iuddenly flopped, *ind lie vas at k r í '.now - *'* M; Ьп i k*· nune!" cried he, w i tlf hiv atviflomed nnp' tuofiry, u by what luminali· ebani e have i llæ happineís of meeting - v ou г Wh< ie at fuch an hour can you he g^mg ? and hov, is it/' looking carne fil y
earneftly at her, 44 1 behold you here without y cur Guardian 'ľ' Clarentinc replying only to his firft en« quirks, anfwered — e * 1 came to town this morning upon fome bufinefs, and am now going to the play.- 44 To the play?" repeated Eltham, 4έ 1 am very glad I know it, for İ meant to have gone this evening to Hampftead.—· Are you not very early, however r" 44 O, that's no matter;" faid Mrs. Bar¬ clay, 44 wc fhall get the better places lor't." 44 And where, madam/' refumed El¬ tham, 44 may I be allowed to afk, do you mean to fit ?'* a In the pit." anfwered fhe— Eltham upon this looked at Clarentinc with an air that feemed to imply, * 4 and, ào you fit tbe»x* too?" But Clarentine un- confeious of his meaning, and perfectly ignorant which was the belt, or which the worft place in the houfe, remained filent, and walked tranquilly on. In α few minutes, kltham, who Ieemed to have been debating within himfelf how he fhould alt, and whofe carriage during this
thk time had flowly followed him, beck¬ oned îo bis fiu vant, and bidding him go home, ordeied him to te Π tbe coachman likewifc, be fhould not want bun again. Then flying after t kremine, who, ie- ga rd lefs of his flopping, bad hcrfeif pio- C' eded fe>iw\ııd, and neaily reached the end of the ft reet. — u I intend myfelf the pleafure of going to the play with you/' cried he. 6э Eord, Mr. Ekham/ % exclaimed Mrs. Barclay, u what fhould you go foi ? î dare fay you have not dined yet/" " My dear madam/' cried Eltham, laughing, " do you think 1 am a roan of fo little ta fie as not infinitely to prefer -П/.Г company to the grofs plcafures of lhe "table?* a I think, at leaft,'* replied Mrs. Bar- day drily, " theie is a certain perfon in the world whom you infinitely prefer to every things though 1 a'n't fuch a fool as not to know that isVt me Г a You do me great inj uil ice/' returned he ironically, « for were I, indeed, fuf- ceptible of an exclufive attachment, upon whom could 1 baiter fix my choice ?" ТЫ*
This fpeech was rather too ambiguous for Mis. Barclay's powers of comprehen- fion ; ihe felt noi ív abfurdity, nor was pained by its ridicule; and therefore walked on withotn t king oi it the flighteft notice. They were n* rrived at the play- houfe door, win ough it yet, as had been forefeen, 1 d unopened,was al¬ ready crowded e ţger expectants, im¬ patient to gain ν 1 on. Eltham caft an anxious look to ·, Clarentine as thev advanced, and í . r turn pale at the fcene of confuid u hieb flie was about to be involved. mechanically caudu hold of Ins aru< deb he had before vainly offe red) a siting at every loud fhout flie beare *w:ng fearfully back upon the ai riva! -erv fi e ih party, and dreading to be to ly furrounded, very foon completely -ufi fight not only of the dauntiefs Mrs. Barclay, but of her friend. Eltham, whom her terror concerned, though her rciuftance to proceed de¬ lighted, moved as flie moved, and re¬ treated a., file retreated. His manly figure, his height, and commanding af- peft fecured her from the danger of being fpoke n
fpoken to, for no one, feeing her fo pro- tcťted, had the courage to attempt it; but as fhe had now withdrawn from that part of the crowd where ihe anxiety and the throng was the greateft, flie became an objeti of much attention to many of the idle lookers-on, wdio without intending to go in, flood unconcerned fpectators of the hnitie, and whom on all fides Ekham heaid remarking—" 4 She's a deviliih pretty giil I" " How well ilie puts on that look of timidity !" " Ay, to be fure, flies uo favourite wdth her companion I 1 '—and many other İımıhır obfervations, which t>»o\ obed him ίο much, that, caincftlvack flu iling her, be at length exelaimed— 4i For heaven's fake, my deateft crea¬ ture, détendue upon fomething, and either try onte moie to go forward, 01 luflei me to fee you home; for here vou aro hable to notbing but infidi and impertinence!*' Startled by thn> nmonftrance, and now for the fir fi time, peiceiving tbe offenfive cunofitv fhe had excited, fhe endea- yomed to gam more courage, and agreed lo move on. The doors opened at the kune moment, and a general xufli imme¬ diately
diatcly cnfuing, ihc was inftantly enelofed on every fide, impelled irrcfiftibly fo-- ward, and prefled, itaggercd, and over¬ powered to fo great a degree, that after vainly contending for fbme time, in ago¬ nies unfpcakable with the fearful appre¬ henfions that fei zed her, fhe loft all com* mand over herfelf, and uttering α pierc¬ ing flirick, fell back without fenfe or mo¬ tion in Ehham's arms. To defcribe the confternation and dif¬ trefs with which he was filled at that mo¬ ment woukl be impoflible. Eneon by a fct of people, who, callous а moved, flared with vacant furpr his fpeechlefs burthen, and thei ceeded foi ward iu tboughik к indifl to lier íáte, it ieemed to require almoft fupcrnatural ft length to icpri the torrent that oppi e fled him, or to fojec him ici f a paifage through it. Rage, however, and indignation lent him vigour, and in de fiance of every obllaelc, fleinlv com¬ manding thofe about bun to make Wu\, terrifving ionic by threats, and fiubduing others by entreaty, be at length accom- pUfhcd his purpofe, and bore her fafely, ι though
palled id un¬ ie. Al pio ìence
though ftill inanimate, to the firft fhop he found open. The compaffionate affiftance that was there afforded her, in a very fhort time brought her back to life and гесоПевюп, She fmikd gratefully upon Eltham for his care and attention, and thanking the wo¬ man of the fli op, who with much civility prefľed her to ftay till flie was more re¬ covered, declared perfectly able to go 5r and begged to have a coach fent for, that ilie might return home immediately. ей I think, indeed," faid Eltham, «* that will be your beft plan ; but you ftill feem too much bunded and difcompofed to re- 'move fo foon. Sit here a few minutes longer, and let me before you enter the coach fee fomc degree of colour return to \our check ч and fomc of their ufual vivacity re animate your eyes. You are now by much too wan and ghoftly a figure to be truftcd bc)ond the reach of a fli itan с c'* Clarentine wifhing ίο fend either a note or meilage to Mrs. Watkins, to aflure Mrs. Barclay, on lier return from the play, of her lafety, agreed to a few mi¬ nutes delay on that account, and writing upon
upon the back of a tetter, as legibly as her yet unfteady hand would allow her, a few lines to that effect, ihe committed them to the care of the miit refs of the ihop, who promifed they ikouid be fafcly dcli vered. A boy belonging to the houfe was then difpatched for a coach, and Clarentine hearing it approach, arofe to go. Ekham, taking her hand to lead her out, faid, 66 I make no apology, Mi& Delmington, for prefumi ng to accompany yous ill as you have bee% it is abfolutely neceflary you ihould not go alone. Nay,'' continued he, ob fer ving that with a look of extreme ferioufnefs, fhe was about to fpeak, c * do not attempt to oppofe it } for upon this occafion you will find me as ab- folule zsyntrfelfľ He then made a pafling bow to the miftrefs of the шор, and handing Claren« tine into the coach, jumped 'm after her, and directed the coachman whither to drive. Clarentineobferving a profound üleïiee for fome minuter after they were feat ed, Eltham, a little piqued, at length faid— vol ii. L 4 * My
* 6 My deareft Mifs Delmington, I per* ceive with concern, that upon the prefent, as upon every other occurrence, I have had the misfortune to difpleafe you. Why, however, fhould it be fo? Why cannot you confider me in a more friendly view? Have I fo totally funk myfelf in your good opinion, fo utterly forfeited all title to your confidence, that, at a mo- mem like this—requiring proteäion, yet alone, and unattended—you fear to truft yourfelf with me ?" Clarentine aihamed and diltrefïèd, fcarceiy knew what anfwer to make to a fpeech fo ferious, and fo reproachful ; * flie Hammered out, however, a few words of fcarcely-intelligible acknowledgment; and then, feeking to change the fubject, fáid— " How long will it be, Sir, before you go down to Welwyn park ? I underflooi you meant to fpend there the greateft part of the fhooting feafon ?" α I did /' replied Eltham-—" but mo* tives, which, ifl dared, I would frankly acknowledge to you, have detained me in town. Arc you very impatient, how- cvtr 9 for my departure?" «« Would
4 Would an anfwer in the affirmative/* aíked Clarentine finding, *< be remark¬ ably civil ?" 4 Perhaps not*, but fromjew ï difpenfe with civility, m favour of randour. Speak to me then, as you think, and honcftly fay, do you wtfti me to go ?" €б î really wifh you to do nothing but what moft fuks your own convenience. You cannot fuppofe, Mr. Ehham, î have any defire to take upon myfelf the direc¬ tion of your conduct !"— €t A more^c/Äi/iVrt/perfonage than you are/* cried Eltham, « í í rare ely ever met with ? you feem to have made the art of prevarication your peculiar fludy, and bave obtained a degree of p robe km·» in it, that does honour to your application ! ' He then attempted to turn the con¬ verfation upon the fubjecl of Somciht : but that was a point on which Clar etuine was impenetrable indeed î and on ^ ' h her anfwers were fo lacome δραΪ fo guarded, that Ehham, renewing lus re e - proaches, and proceeding fi> fin asivMi openly to accufc her id* diflknuku >n, awakened in her a fpecies ,A m ig uumi which drew from bei a reto? t lo {¡ma d, L 2 and
and fo fevere, that, filencedand offended in his turn, one of thofe mutual and almoft füllen paufes enfucd, the confe quence, fo frequently, of his vehemence and impetuofity. He was the firft, however, at length to fpeak-— ** Upon my honour/' faid he, in a tone which, though it proved him ftill a little angry, wás more good-humoured than Clarentine expected, u I fincerely believe we were deftined to be, time immemorial^ had no malign influence ftepped in be¬ tween us, a pair of true and veritable lovers ! We quarrel with, wc provoke and affront each other with all the per¬ fevering ingenuity imaginable ! Exery perverfe practice that lovers are faid to delight in 3 we likewife perpetually run into. All that is wanting to complete the refcmblancc, are the enchanting tranft« tions from anger to forgivenefs-—the de¬ licious reconciliations that ufually follow thefe fliort-lived tempcils!" « ï fliould think very ill/' faid Claren¬ tine, " of a lover, who made it his ftudy wantonly to ojj nd) merely to have the pleafure of appcafing mc/' " Do
** Do you then prefer the lifelefs infi- pidity of an attachment compofed only of fmiles, and monotonous ferenity, to the animated and ever-varying tranfports of a paffion, which fomctimes breaks out into petulance and caprice, then melts again into tendernek and complacency?" Clarentine with a fmiie replied — α Calmnefs and ferenity, however mo¬ notonous or infipid* I fhould always prefer to fuch tranficnk and unreafunable tranfports/' u Ah, Clarentine ľ T exclaimed he, al¬ moft involuntarily feizing her hand, u î cannot, î do not believe you ! The bril¬ liancy, the fparkling intelligence of your eyes, the glow of fenfibihty difîufed over your whole countenance, convinces me it is impoffible a love fo cold, fo languid, fhould confittine the fole emotion of your heart! you were born to it/ptre and to /¿rz/if^ŕľ/ŕinientMieiits far moie animated and fervent í" Clarentine, extremely difgufted at the incorrigible freedom that led him per¬ petually to addrefs her in a liruin ίο flighty ша improper—particulaily, asthat iree* dom never ίο offenfìvely difplaycd itfelf Λν- -, îÀj ν 1
as when they were alone, and therefore feemed to wear the afpect of defign and premeditation—now faid very gravely— 16 Mr Eltham, I am unwilling to en¬ tertain fo very ill ao opinion of you, as to fuppofe the continual uncafinefs you occafion me by fuch extraordinary lan¬ guage can be intentional : but as I per* ceive thdt to talk to mc at alf, and to talk to me in a manner that gives me pain, is with you invariably the fame thing., be aflured this is the laß time that any circumftance whatever^ fhort of abfolute compulfion, fhall again induce me to accept your attendance, or commit myfelf to your care Г' This timely, and ferious rebuke, im¬ mediately convinced Ekham he had pre¬ fumed too far upon the well-known placability of lier difpofition, and could not be too quick in feeking to make his pcaec, fíe immediately therefoie—and with unwonted humility —endeavoured to obtain ber pai don ; protefted he would make it the ftudy of his whole life never in ihe fame manner to offend her again; and, for the reft of the way, miraculoufly kept iiis promue ! CHAP,
CHA P. Xi. ON their arrival at Hampftead, Mr. Lenham hearing her voice in the en¬ trance, and furpiizcd, after the meflage he had received, at her early return, haftened out to meet and welcome her. Clarentine ruflied forward the inftant he appeared, and delighted once again to be rcfiored to his protection, was beginning an account of her adventures, when per¬ ceiving immediate!) Inbind him, legard- ing her with an atı of gia\e aud frigid folemnity, Captain Sonuikt! lier \oite faltered, flie. turm d pale, and kavciv able to к ham bom tears, walkt tf deje eled h into the pai lout without ven¬ turing to fpeak, 01 look up aga n. Tbey all followed her; and Mr. ken- ham takieg bei haut!, dud addı e fling her wilh the kinddt loluitudc, faid -~ H I feat, my deal )oung fnutd, the tioubiev and tbe fatigues of Cue dav bave been too ibUeh for s оц, Ye«u fiìok ' ' Ί fitti i aliCd
b.arraífed and difpiríted; tell me, whtre did Kits, Baiclay lead you? Where is fhe now, and how came you back without hci ?" Chnemine, in anfiver to thefe friendly intcìiogatoues, now made an effort to Ipeak, and a,s biiefly as ihe could re» counted all that had befallen her. Then calling a timid glance towards Somerfet, who, yet fiknt and thoughtful, fat leaning .e:-ai u It the tabic in an attitude of profound *ли ntion, íhc {vjicci α ímiie, and laid—— u 1 hough ycľt my dear Mr, Lenham kindly fufpended ) our judgment, till you heaid my defence— others^ I fear, have been lefs candid ľ' Somerfet« looking hurt and furpnfed f refe from 1ms feat, and begun walking about the loona in evident agitation^ "wiiillt Mr. f enham faid— 4i Vou deceive vourfclf, my dearyoung iad v ; we veie all perfuaded thai your dtlav was a** m v< duntarv as it was alarm- ing; and when Mis, Watkins'smeffe ger came, and Captain Somerfet, who is but this moment returned fiora town where he dined, learnt it was defigned to carry you to the phy, hi·» uiieaüiids on your ac¬ count
count was fo great, that, juft as you arrived, he was upon the point of felting off for London again, to endeavour to a ffi ft you in getting out, and to fee }ou fafe home." ž$ My interference, however/' faid Somerfet, fufpending his walk whilft he fpoke, and then (lowly proceeding, u would have been fupcrfluous; î kne w mot, at the moment I planned ir, how well Mifs Delmington was attended al¬ ready/' ss Mr. Ehham," cried Clarentine, cruelly difconcerted by the coldnefs and ferioufnefs with which this was uttered, u met me by mere accident; and I anı Certain, till the inftant 1 was taken ill, had no intentions of returning with mc." * c At all events," re fu med Somerfet, u my fervices would have been of little worth, and pei haps í have reafon to con¬ gratulate myfelf that their untimely oftei met not with 'àjecond rejection. 1 ' Ehham, who during this little dialogue bad, by turns, furveyed the two fpeakeir with looks of aftoniihment and curiofity, now gaily faid-— L 5 u The
44 The novelty of this fcene is really enchanting ! On one fide we behold a grave and venerable man/* bowing to Mr. Lenham, α who in his capacity of Guardian, though, anxious for the welfare of his ward, is mild and gentle; willing lo credit her vindication, and defirous of reflori ng her to confidence. On the other/' looking towards Somerfet, u lo! where there ftand.s a young, but (pardon the expreffion) incredulous and rigid cen« for, who in his capacity of Guardian, though tenacious of his privileges, does nothing to fecure them; and who affirm¬ ing the auf! erity that belongs in general only to age, leaves, at once, the gallantry and tbe indulgence of youth, to his fenior in oilice," Somerfet, who towards the end of this fpeech, had flopped fliort and fternly 1:itemed to its conclufion with his eyes íteadily fved upon Eltham, was now be~ ginning fome very farcaftic reply to h^ when X4r. Lenham intcrpofuig< faid— u Captain Somerfet, it cannot really be your intention ferioufly to refent this fpeech ? α fpeech uttered in raillery, and meant
meant but as a good humoured repioof of your gravity." Som riet checked bimklf; and though his countenance refumed not immediately all its wonted calmnefs, forbore faying any thing farther. Meanwdiile, the grieved and humbled Clarentine, one moment petrified at So¬ merfet s chilling indi fleren ce, the next frightened at his apprehended afperity, fat motionlefs and filent, with her eyes fixed upon the floor, and ber whole heart fo faddened and fo depreffed, that it wa.i with the utmoft difficulty flie k"pt her* place, or knew how to difperfe tbe u ars that were every inftant ready to flart. The fight of this deje-etion, tlie paleuek of her countenance. <md the remembrance of the di ill effing (cene be. had w ime lied in the moruing, excited Mr. keduvds utmoft inquietude and concern. lie moved towards her, and w bib 4 Eltham was fpeaking to Miklbuckv, v.dio at that moment cuierul, and Somcriei with ¡Л'- fetted uncoucein was looking over the news paper, entreated her, in the moit anxious and preffing terms, to tell him L 6 what
what к was thai caufed in her fo melan¬ choly a change ? Clarentine, overpowered by this gen« llenéis and fympathy, and no longer able to command the tears flie had fo long, Itruggled to reftrain, now raid in a low and faultcring voice— 6è Oh, do not, deareft Sir, do not fpeak to me with this oppreffing kindnefs, î con* jure you î Could I, dared I confide in any one, it fhould be in you : but mine is à fecret that ought not to be told ľ* ^ You amaze me!" cried he 9 u what fecret can be depo fit ed in a heart fo guile«· lefs and fo pure as yours, that you need blufli to reveal ?** u Alas, Sir!" exclaimed Clarentine, lighing, " how little you fufpeft the ftate of that heart you feek thus benevolently to penetrate. It is filled at this moment with every tvil paffion, Pride, refent- ment, envy, and ingratitude a flail it by turns; and, oh Sir, affai! it fo forcibly, that I know not how to repel the m ľ' Mr. Lenham incxpreffibly aftonifhed at this fpeech, looked at her a few mi» imu,.* in Idem confirmation; then fearing they might be obfex\ed; faid — 65 This
a This is no place in which to folkit you for an explanation ; but to-morrow î hope yon will not refufe to gratify a cu« riofity you have fo painfully raifed !" Clarentines heart was too full to fpeak, and Mr. Lenham, kindîy preffing her hand as he arofe, walked away. A few minutes after, Eltham took his feat, and earueftly examining her, at length abruptly faid— u Has Mr. Lenham been playing the fame part your other guardian did ? You have been weeping, Mifs Delmington ; you feem diftreifed—Wherefore ? What has occafioned it ?" Too much difturbed to attend to him, Clarentine turned from his enquiring eye with embarraffment and uncafinefs. and afluring him he had miftaken fatigue for forrow, befoughr him to kay e her— 66 I will d cried he, rifing immediately, " it would be barbarous at fuch a time io importune you longer/* He then rejoined the party round tbe table ; and Clarentine perceiving the might quit the room without being ob* fcrved, very foon after went up ftairs. Tbe
Lcnham's icqucit of an explanation the next day, there recurred to her with the moft painful fenfations of feif reproach. Should file, acknowledging her wcaknefs to Somerfet's moft approved and eftab- lifhed friend, voluntarily put herfelf in danger of having it betrayed to Somerfet himfelf г 1 he idea was infupportable ! ^ Who I/' cried flic, " Ì be the pub¬ lisher of my own difgraee? î impower any one to report to him a confeffion fo humiliating] difclofe not only my love, but my difappointment, my vain wifhes, my jealoufy and regret? No, never! So¬ merfet's indifference 1 may learn to bear: but to become the object either of his pity, or his contempt, would be too much V* The rcfult of thefe angry fel f interro¬ gatories was, a fixed determination affi- duoully to fhun the halfrpiomifed, but mortifying conference to which (he ex- peeled to be called ; or, if unavoidably drawn into it, frankly to declare fìie al» ready repented having even gone fo far, and molt tarncftly wifhed Mr. Lenham would re 1 cafe her from an engagement öl с found İt fo difficult to fulfil. 44 Perhaps,"
fť Perhaps," cried ihe, " he may, at firft, be tempted to accufc me of caprice and inconfiflency; he may juftiy wonder, that whilft, at one moment, I fpeak with fuch unguarded opcnnefs as even to lead to a fuppofition í wifli to be penetrated, the next, I fliould thus ftrangely recant. Far better, however, is it, he ihould con¬ jecture the worft from my filence, than for a fingle inftant imagine my confidence is intended as a call upon his compaffion, and granted merely ^ith a view of excit¬ ing him to plead for me with Somerfet ! Plead for me," added flic, indignantly, * ť Good God, in fuch circumstances, as mine—in ων cireumflances— pieno for the favour of a man decidedly attached to an¬ other! Oii Somcifet! low as I am funk, hopelefs, grieved, and difpiritcd as ï fecî, not even to obtain your commifération would i fu bj e ¿i myfelf to the fufpicion of a mean η с fs fo a bj e čl ! " The pride which thus fcafonably came to her fupport, aided by reafon and cookr rcflcäion, now led her alfo to a ík herfelf, why fhe indulged agunft him a degree of rcfentment, winch, hec as he was to chufe for himfelf, and painfully as it
it embittered her own exiftence, was, at once, fo uhjuft, and fo irrational ? He was under no engagement to hdr; had never profeffed for her any other fenti¬ ments than thofe of friendihip, and un- defignmg regard. Had flie any right then, either to manifeft open blame, or cherifh fecret difpleafure ? Was it not as degrad* ing to evince fuch unwarranted petuï&rice, as even to betray her unreturned parti¬ ality ?—-She felt, ihe acknowledged it : and firmly determined henceforward to reform her conduct ; and, if not too late, once more to feek his fiicndftjt'pj though flie renounced all claim to his /űtv.— ê4 I owe", thought fhe, 4t this effort to my own сЬагавег; I owe it to Somerfet's paft kindnefs and attention. My referve, my coldnefs, inexplicable to him as it muft appear after all the confidence and cordiality I lately fliewed him, can only tend to infufe into his mind as unfavour¬ able an opinion of my temper as of my heart. He can never know whence the change originated; and confequcntly can never impute it to any better caufe than versatility and ficklenefs of difpofition/' în
In purfuance of thefe reflections, com- pofìng her countenance before ihe de¬ fcended to fupper, and determining to meet Somerfet with all the friendly chear- fulnefi in her power, fhe entered the par» lour fo fully expefting to find him there, and fo anxioufiy folicitous to prove the effeft of her newly adopted plan, that when íhc found he was already gone- gone without a iki n g to fee her, without kaving for her the flighted meilage, or appearing to remember fhe was in the houfe—her intended exertions were for¬ gotten, her fpirits again failed her, and heardefs, defponding, and affiiftxl, flie took her place in utter fdence, and too abfent to jpin in the converfation, had fhe even wifhed it, liftened to all i î- thanťs gay rattle (for he ftill rem lined) with the moll infurmountubkand involun¬ tary gravity, and the firft moment it was in her power, haftened back to her own apartment. The following day pafíed without any remarkable occurrence,- unkfis the ab¬ fence of Somerfet, whom ilie had hitherto, fince his return from k·^ rarely orniti ed feeing or hearing from during fome part of
of every day, could be called fuch. Mrs* Barclay, after fleeping m town, returned to dinner in high, fpirits ; declared Ihe had never been fo much entertained; laughed ai Clarentine for the unaccountable terror that had fo ftrangely overpowered her at the play-houfe door; and-finally* received a very tart reprimand from her fair daugh¬ ter, for not having fent Mrs. Watkins*s meflctigcr early enough to allow of her getting to town in time to make one of their party. The mother defended hcrfeif with her accuftomed fang f reid ^ and the daughter perfevered in her complaints with her ac¬ cuftomed queruloufnefs, till Clarentine, equally wearied of them and their fubjecl, took up her work, and left them to finifli the dilpute by themfclves. The anxious looks of Mr. Lenham, his eagcrnefs to fpeak to her, and the mani feft concern and difpleafure with which he obferved her feduloufnefs to avoid it, gave ber fo much pain, and at the fame time embarraffed her ίο cruelly in his pre¬ lence, that to wank evening, retiring for a few ininutes to her own room, fhe wrote the following note, and delivered it to him
him unperceived, as they were rifing from tea— a To fee you, my deareft Sir, look fo offended and fo grave, occafions me the greateft uneafmeis I acknowledge that you have juft caufe, after whatpafled laft night, to refent my ρ re fent referve, fince for one who meant to fay no more % ï cer¬ tainly then faid infinitely too much : but î fpoke inconikkrately, and at that moment was not aware of the ftrange confidence to which I feemed to be leading. Calmer refleûions, dear Sir, have taught me to believe you would yourfelf difapprove my proceeding further ; and the pain that it would give Ui your benevolent mind, to know the true fource of my concern with» out poffeffmg the power of alleviating it, would, ï am ceruin, induce you rather to contemn than applaud the facility with which it was revealed, ^ Attempt not then, deareft Sir, to dik cover moie plainly the fecrets of this way¬ ward heart; difluí b not, pei plex not \ ottr- felf about me. í anı unwoithy, at this inftant, of your gemu ous attention. When time, however, fliall have rcfiored me to reafun, and I can look back upon the eventi
events that are now purling with indiffer¬ ence and tranquillity, then will I, at the fame moment that I call for your con¬ gratulations, teach you to fmik at my former folly, 'and join with you in moral¬ izing upon the inikbilhy, as well of hu¬ nian happinrfs, as human forrow !" This billet, though it quieted not all Mr. Lenhanťs u nea fy apprchenfions',. foftened him in favour of the gentle wri¬ ter, and made him cautious either of again queiiiontng, or appearing to watch her» Tenderly folicitous to promote her hap- pi nefs; loving her as a father; and anx¬ ious by every pofiìble means to avert агШШоп from her, it is not to be fup- pofed, however, he could fo eafily relin- •qu ìili the earneft defire he had to invefti- gate into a myftery fo alarming, and fo extraordinary. His obfervation increafed, therefore, with his wifh to conceal it f and all í kientine's future prudence, all her care and her difcretion were fcarceiy ade« quate to the difficulty of evading his pe» nenation. She had now fiVadily adhçred to her new plan of conduci for fome days-— tre-Ated somerfet with all her former eafe and
шпа complacency—revived, in fome mea¬ furc, his wonted cbearfulnefs—refumed her old habits—-read, walked, and con¬ verfed with him, as oji his firft arrival; and, though fhe had never yet been put to the trial, determined even when alone with him to behave with the fame friend- li ne f& and unrcfervc; when, one morning foon after breakfaft, whilft fhe was fitting by herfelf in the parlour, he unexpectedly entered, but ftopping fhort on perceiv¬ ing her, feemed to hef? tate a moment whether he fhould advance, and then, (hutting the door, flowly approached her.— ss 1 have wiihed, my dear Mifs Del¬ mington, for fome time," faid he, fitting down by her, and after a flioit filence, gravely addreifing her, α to have a few minutes private converfation with you. Are you at leifure now ŕ and may 1 ven* ture to fpeak with 'all the lineerin \ou formerly authorized . ' Clarentinc, too much confounded by the ferioeiuek oi' hi» look? and vone, and the tutclligihk, though gentle re- pi roach bv bid w οι d j сопл eyed, to be able immediately to anfwer him, eomer- kt
fet perceiving her embarraffment, added with a half fmiie— « \¥hat is it, my deareft Mifs Del¬ mington apprehends? Does fhe believe me fo vety a cen/or as I was defcribed to her? Does my auficiity fo much alarm her» that fh~ even fears to fpeak to me Г 44 О no, no ľ' cried Clarentine with quicknefs, α I am ready, I am anxious о hear, and to anfwer every queftion you can afk. I have no fears but of having, perhaps, of late, too juftiy merited your difapprobation !" a Difcard, difcard from your mind/* cried Somerfet, earneftly, *' aH fuch vain and caufelefs terrors! To difapprove I claim no right, even if î had the will; 1 am mt* Mifs Delmington, the fevere and arbi¬ trary monitor you fufpeft ! Could you for¬ get that fuch a conneftion as guardian and ward fubfifted between us t and view me only as a brother and a friend—-a friend whom in former times you ufed to tru ft —a biother whom you once, I believe, loved—then ihould 1 feariekly proceed, and frankly avow tbe motives that urged me to icqueft this conference." <>* Proceed
u Proceed then, unhefitatingly/' cried Clarentine, with warmth; " fpeak with the certainty of being only interpreted as you could wifh!'* Softened and delighted by this fpeech, Somerfet appeared half tempted to im¬ print upon the hand he held a kifs of gratitude, and acknowledgment. He reftrained himfelf, however, and re- fuming the difcourfe, in a tone of more than ufual gentlenefs and kindnefs, faid— " Could I defcribe to Mifs Delming¬ ton tke anxious folicitude with which, not only now) but ever t I have wifhed to fee her happy; could fhe form any idea of the deep and animated intereft I take in all that relates to her, the queftion î am about to afk would require no other apology than the affectionate fentiment by which it is diBated; as ilie can have no conception, however, of that fenti¬ ment—of half its zeal and fervour— i muft rely upon her indulgence, and the rectitude of my own intentions for par¬ don.'* He then went on to enquire, for Cla» remine was too much agitated to interrupt him,
bitiig with âli lhe confederate delicacy the fu bje ä demanded» how long^he had been acquainted with Mr. Eltham ì What file believed were his views in coming fo fre¬ quently to the houfe, and paying her fuch marked attention ? and what her own opinion and defigns refpcßtntr him were ? " If, my lovely friend/' /added he, u you have any reafon to fufpect him of being ä mere idle flirts one of thofe dei¬ ficatile and prefumtng coxcombs, known under the dénomination of mak- coquettes^ the m**re fpeedily you authorize either Mr. Lenha«! or me^ (in my formidable capacity cf Gaai dian) ίο difcard him— -юг* if you prefer it $ the more fpeedily you announce to him his difini fiion yourfelf, the more juft it will be to your own cha¬ racter. If, on lhe contrary, as appears far more probable, his defigns are ferious and honourable, and are, befides, fuch as you approve, and feel willing to en- courtage, the fooner, through the inter¬ ference of forne friend, he is brought to declare them' — 44 The bette* ť a iked Cl aie nti ne. m» terniptÍ! g hım in a ìà'mt voice, and turn- 6 ing
ing extremely pale, u the better, do you think, Mr. Somerfet ?" Somerfet changed colour, looked irre* folute and difconcerted, and cafting down his eyes, after a fliort paufe, replied—- * fc í acknowledge myfelf by no means a competent judge in this eafe either of the 'better or the wo>ß. Your own heart, Mifs Delmington, тип determine for you; and if I have prefumed too far, í entreat your forgivenefs; it was not, you will be¬ lieve, I hope, my defign to diciate its dé¬ cifion." «« О no," cried Clarentine recovering herfelf, u that 1 am peifuadcd of!· But Sir, before we diop this fubjett — л iiib. jeft painful to me to talk upon, and i am iure, by no means pïeafant to yon, An¬ ther than as it enables you to prove \0111 general good wiíhes and contem fin me »—fufler me to enticat that on no account whatever you will fpeak upon ii to Mr. Ehham. All that I may wifh fin »n' 1 be ídd, 1 will either requ< il Mı. I с ¡de m tn vpeat for me, οι uvkitdv to trii m, n m v felt !" Hoim rit i only bow e d Icv.níuo-Jn t îo afk what livi <d woukl be, neu!· ч <b ! M
he chufe îo pur fue the converfation« After a fhort interval, therefore, rifing, and taking his hat, he faid he was going back to town; afked if fhe had any com¬ mands, and on her faying, u none/* wiflied her good morning, and left the тоот. ifi To what/* thought Clarentine, when he w as gone, th to what would this iin- gular convoi falion lend ? Does he really ivißj me to encourage Ekham ? Were his enquiries only meant to find out toy real ientiments concerning him, or was it their aim to prove to me that he was ready to favour another's preien fions ? Incom- preheníiblc Somerfet! Invoice, in looks, fo tender and fo anxious, in heart fo regardlefs and fo indifferent! Oh, why addrefs mc in language fo flattering^ talk to m с of his folicitude^ his affection^ and his zcah and at the fame moment, by the tranquil unconcern with which he (hews himfilf ready to re fign me, plant a dag¬ ger in my bread !" During the remainder of the day, as he appeared no more, flie bad leifurc to de¬ liberate with hei feif concerning the part flie had now to act v.ith Eltham. S'iperior to all coquctiy·—unacquainted indeed^
indeed, but by report, either with its artifices or its nature, fhe found no diffi¬ culty, as it was her decided wifli to be teleafed from his aifiduities in coming to lhe réfolution of immediately putting an end to them ; yet how, in her own perion, was this to be effected ? She could not tell him fhe believed him to be in love with her—apprehended he had formed prefumptuous expectations^—and thought it her duty to check them ! He had never but once formally avowed himfelf—and that once, the only time his language at any period took the form of a polita e de¬ claration, though he bail profered to 1ч ι his ЬеаЧ? his joi tune, f v. orn even 'o d - dicale his very hit to her; Ь* r , \ hi% faitbh id never lv 'n сое -^ " d ί / · eniimcia'ion ! Го Ί ■ hu ч < - .ι » fi , as a b ι dus рч ί Λ ]ΐ hi ν о / 1 к bh,* i — would be ahnoft like t / ·, 4 k dicftes ^ud ttlbng 1 . η ч * ч t с , perici. ЛИ, tdief>r4*, t ,, í ч k i ,.> do, wa-, t) t» ift tiu hu. л k c, \\ management of Mı. i uıhın , to bt hım in lbs own n ure, and ,^ ií " > f \ tl < ı iis own infii piilon, to i V »ч 'ú » - , 4 ч 'ч tmpiopiie'v oí 1.ь ouitkiL v ni , »
declare to him, very pofitivcly, that they could no longer bc permitted.— A commiffion Mr. Lenham would have felt himfelf more gladly difpofed to accept, could not have been devifed* Ehham's wild and flighty difpofition ; the felfifhncfs, and indelicacy with which —folely for his own amufement, without appearing to have any determinate object —he purfued, and trifled with a young woman not only of fuch unimpeachable character, but alfo of fuch refpcCtable connections, and fuch modeft and un¬ equivocal propriety of behaviour, had long offended him extremely ; it was there¬ fore with the utmoft readincTs he under¬ took to execute the lafkafligncd him, the very firft time Eltham again came to the houfe.
CHAP.
v* ki. ал X g /IbiAe
THE admiration which Mik Barclay had conceived, even from the firft hour fbe beheld him, for Mr, Eltham; the venera» tion fbe had foi his fi kndid advantages of bii ıh and fortune; ihe finking fupe- rioritv of his fafliionable deportment, and eafy addrefs over thofe of every o t îi e r man fhe had till río w converfed wbth, had fo powerfully operated in his behalf, that, without its being necefkry. accord¬ ing to Sophia's advice, for Clarentine to interfere in the bufinefs, flie bad indulged (unchec kcd eidu r by her own рик or his neglefty a very tender, thoutjii hitheito it muft be acknowledged, veiy unprcT- pcrous predileüion for bdm. 1 he bard-* hearted and perfevering indiih з ence, however, with whit h fhe dad) od iv^d that Clauiitine received his attentions; the almoft pofitive opinion ihe beg.-n tj entertain that even were he to offer bon- feif to her ihe would rejetl bun, had «.ι M j ¡ à u
hite infufed into her mind a faint hope, ihat, by purfuing with him the fame con¬ duct Mrs, Hertford had adopted with rcfpeft to Capt. Somerfet, fhe might fue« cccd, perhaps, in detaching him from fo ungrateful a miftrefs, and win him over to hc-iklk It now, theiefore, became her confiant ftudy, by tveiy method in her power, to attract his notice, and engage his admira¬ ción; her drefs, her language, her at¬ ondes, her very voice betrayed the anxiety with which ¡lie not only pre- pared for his arrival, hut fought, when lie was prdent, to make herfelf confpi- luou.s. Jind he been grave and refer ved, fe wrak! have attempted to appear foft and репЬЧе— -as it was, feeing him always (¿fy and earekk; often—to her at Icait, — -impeitineni ; fomctimes negligent and tndokm, ed othcis, active and animated, íhe ciidvufuircd ;o model her own cha- iaat/ upon bie, and by turns, lo imitate every ehan«e that either-accident or de» fign produced in his behaviour, When Clarentine was not prefenk ex« clufivcly to engrofs his attention, there wcie momtT.u when, in preference to fit¬ ting
ting wholly unemployed, he would vouch* fafe with an air of condcicenfion, and fre¬ quently in the midft of a yawn, to addrefs to her a few unmeaning and exaggerated compliments, for the mere pleafure of feeing her look languiíhing and affected. Once or twict^ he had even given bim¬ ielf the trouble, called upon by her re¬ peated though indirect challenges, to romp with her; and after tearing her cloaths, tiring and overpoueiing her, (for on thefe occafions he was feldom extremely gentle) ufed to throw himfelf into a feat very compofedly, and as he lounged back in his chair amufed himfelf witb laughing at the ftrange plight he had put her into, and the difconfolatc figure flie cut I As Miis Barclay neither poifeflcd great refinement, nor great penetration, ibe was as little difpofed to relent his freedom, as fhe was capable of difecrning what his real fentiments concerning her were. All Ihe afpired to was his attention; and pioud of obtaining it in any way whatever, to the more, or the lefs refpecl with wb.icb it came accompanied, ihe was totally in* different* M 4 Tr
ït was on the third day after Clareo» fine's little explanation with Somerfet, that at his ufual hour, juft as the family had met to tea, Ehham, for the firft time fince the night he had accompanied her from town, made bis appearance. The party he found afiem bled, in addition to Mr. Lcnham's ufual inmates, eonfiftcd of Mrs» Denbigh, and Mrs. Hertford. So« medet had been theie ík foie dinner, but v. πί a way in leis tkuı hou>\ Qarentme's reception of him, as at all other times, was, civil, but quiet and com¬ pofed. Not fo Mifs Barclay; her eyes danced with pleafure the moment he en* teicd; with an eagcrnefs and officioufnefs that made even Kirs. Hertford flare, fhe drove young Biandford from the tea-table, and difluí bed every body elk at it, to make room for him next her; looked at, fpoke to no other perfon during the whole nme be lai by her; and in fliort, behaved with inch extreme folly and forwardnefs, ıh. t Lltham, by no means the Iaft to per¬ iéivé it, had fome difficulty, more ıhan once, to fot bear laughing in her face. As foon as the tea-things were removed, Clarentine, who, though fhe made it a point
point when Mrs. Barclay was alone to fit with her in an evening, thought herfelf exempted from this neeeffity, when the contrary was the cafe, rofe to leave the room : but Ehham abruptly ftarting Щ}$ and ftepping between her and the door, faid in a low and fupplicating voice, as flic ftill advanced towards it— 44 You do not mean to confign me over to this intolerable circle the whole even¬ ing ?" " intolerable!" repeated Clarentinc in the fame tone, u Is Mr. Lenham, is Mrs» Denbigh intolerable ?" •^ If they were angels/' anfwered LP tham, taking her hand to lead her back, 4t when you are gone, I fhall wifh them all utterly annihilated!" then raiiini? his voice, " What have you done, m ν de.tr Mifs Delmington, with your harp r Do you never play now V* u Yes," replied Clarentine, who rather than occafion any further contention, h.-d walked back to her feat, u fome times. '' 44 Suppofe, my young friend, " laid Mrs. Denbigh, u you have it brougia down this evening, and attempt by
" Λ folenm air, and lhe bei! comforter ** To an imfettled fancy,*'* rť> quiet una tranquillize Mr, Eltham?** 44 An excellent propofai;" cried Mrs. Hertford fmiling, " though one that, ï own, feems to be applying to Mr. Eltham fomething too much of tbe nature of the Ία r eníu! α Γ α î am not," í* id Eltham, " to bc laughed out of my purpofe; therefore, J\l¿4 'Cvlmington, fuffer rne to entreat you will fend for it, or permit—what i ihould ftill prcfcr~my attending you to your own apartment to hear you." " A modeft petition, truly !" cried Mifs Barclay fnecringly 5 4é I hope Mifs Delmington means to comply with it." Clarcntine's only anfwer to this was a requeft that Mifs Barclay, who fat neareft it, v,ould ring the bell to order the harp down flairs. It was foon brought; and Clarentine^ who bad nov/ taken regular leflbns of a mailer for iomc ume$ and really played with admirable tafte and expreffion, afto» milled and charmed Ehham fo much by
the
the extraordinal y piogiefs fhe had made lince he laft beau! her at Sidmouth, that he would not fuller her to ule, till the repeated yawns of Mrs. Jiarclay, and the loud talking of her daughter, warned ht 1, by immediately flopping, not to lull the one to fleep, or rouze the other to impa¬ tience. Ekham than bed her, when fhe got tqv in the moft animated teims, for the ex¬ treme plea fu ie ihe had given 1 im «Aiul \uu proceeding to afk Iht íome quelbons con¬ cerning the mufic flic had been pkymg, when Mifi» Bai clay, pceviihly nueuupurg him, find-— ** I fiuuy, Mr. Ekham, you would not be fo fond of fuch dolorous dunt ·* ú \ on was'kt in love ľ' Ever*·, body ftand, and Ehham. aio ι a inoment of aftonifhed filence, fiud with л forced fmiie— 6δ And who tol 1 you, my Uw interro¬ gator, that ï it is in love/" u О Lord/ 1 cried ihe, u we all know thati and with v/d, too 1 ** Then darting an angiv gl n^e ¿1 ( 11- rcntinc, who, amazed and κ ι ·η id /, ßood giavely lookin; at hei, ччЬ bv *mİ O' Ilk' ».
υ fu..! abı up tne fs when any thing di kom pofed her, fhe left the room. A dead filence fuccceded her depar» turc lur fome minutes; Mrs. Denbigh, however, who fat near the fire befoie which Flthu.i yas (landing, at length in¬ terrupted it, by faying to him in a low мисс, and with an aich fmiie—- &r If y our bean was not gone already, you could have no chance of re fi ft mg tbe amiable eieature who has juft left us I м Eltham, pa kctly rcgaidlefs of the pré¬ fence either of her mother or her friend, coolly anfwered, as he leaned gemi) back againft the fide of the chimney— u Love i.* a cai"her f g' a*ki joy, il SruooUi aitì Sb s 'ooíxS, and fofi his pace j ÍS lier Cupid »s л blackguard boy, " And ишь hu bük İuA in )our face'" Thk ridiculous, but apt quotation, сов- - queied the gravity not only of Mrs. Den« high, Mrs. Hertford and Clarentinc, but f \en of Mr« lenham. Mrs. Barclay, however, who, though flie but imperfectly urdaftood its dneU tenoni, very fully cxmpiehended tbe unfortunate term bläck- guardiana felt herfelf extremely offended Dy u. now (aid with great folemnity— 44 Let
u Let me tell you, Mr. Eltham, thefe are very ftrangc liberties to take before me j I ihould be glad to know why Lucy, though may-be flie is a little petti fh forne- times, fhould be called fuch low-lived names as them ? I'm fure flic'.« done no¬ thing black-guard by you ; and аз for talk» in<* of links^ ï don't know what you can mean by it ľ* Eltham bit Ins lips, and looking down as if apprehenfive his laughing eyes would betray him, faid wilh fomc hefitation— 44 Upon my word, my deareft madam, you totally mifunderflood me. í was far from intending any improper allufion lo Mifs Barclay, be aflured; there is no¬ body, I proteft to you, that does bel¬ more juftice—-that fees her ical merit in a clearer point of view Γ « 4 Weil, well/* cried Mrs. Ikvkv, fomewhat appealed by ibis ;r- y /vev ,Ό y apology, c4 wc won't bay any пич e ab >ut it 5 I fuppofe you did'n't mean anv Ivrea, and I might not quite make out wbai wu you were talking of; ba, t.vkil w п\е truth, I k nov/ but little of thefe matters, and never was over -and above fond ui' poetry and verfes ¿u my Ufe/ 5 Tbe
The extreme good humour and credu¬ lous fimplicity of this fpecch, really made EUham half i\pent having ever been wicked enough to fay any thing that ivoukl give her pain. He renewed his excufes and his ali u ran се я of r e fp e ft with immitely more ferioufnefs than befoie; and then, finding himfelf perfectly re» !i ore-d to her pood graces, changed the i 'abject and gave ihe convoi faîion a more general turn. \\'hcu he was riiing to take leave, Mr* Lenham, authorized by an intelligent look from Ckrcutine, begged the favour of fpeaking with him a few minutes iu his itudv. Eltham, though the requcft feemed to furp ri /e h i 4i, i imne di atei у agreed to it, and wifh i n g tbc ladies good night, took up his hut and followed him. As foon as they were gone, Clarentine appichenfive of fhe knew not what, fear¬ ful of feeing Eltham, fhould he, after the confidence was over, again return to the pi.rlour; half wühing, yet half dreading, io beai it" re', u k ; ana by no means a if ure d , pi oud and fiery аз íhc well knew he could be, that he w .uld not breakout into fome at t of exua/agance and impatience, put sip her work in haile and alami; and flew f Ol
for refuge to her own room, determined not to venture down again till pofitively convinced he had left the houfe. In lefs than halfan hour, young Bland- ford knocked at her door to tell her Mr. Lenham was in the parlour, and fupper was ready. " And where is Mr. Ehham ?" cried Clarentine eagerly— 6i On his road to London, ï fuppofe/' anfwered В land ford— 66 He is not below, then ?—not in the parlour, you are iure?" íť Yes, quite fure ; he has never been there fince you left it." Clarentine upon this opened her door, and telling Biandford fhe was ready^ ac¬ companied him down ftairs. As flie entered the fuppcr-room, Mr. Lenham, ihe perceived, was walking (lowdy about it, looking unufually grave and thoughtful. Every body elfe was ftanding round the table waiting for him to fit down : lie feemed noi ίο obferve it, however, till Clarentine appeared, wb.cu filent! у taking her hand, he led her to¬ wards her accuftomed feat, and then walked to his own, During
During the whole time they were at table, Clarentine watched his countenance with the moft anxiocu attention. By de- gices the pairing cloud that had obfeurcd it difpeifed ; he looked up at her with his wonted friendly ehcarfuîncfs ; joined freely in the converfation, and befoie they rofe from lupper feemed wholly to have forgot¬ ten the little chagrin he had experienced, Thischange gave her inexpreffibic plea- fure ; yet itili eager to queftion him, con- tta.\ t<> hci ufual cuftom file lingered be¬ low nil ahnoft every body had quitted the parlour, ňná then as he was lighting his candle to go alfo, foftly appioachcd him, and faid iti a whifper— " i4Îay I, dear Sir, attend you for a moment to your ftudy ?" <fi Ye», ceitainly," replied he; and im¬ mediately went out with her. When they were alone, u Well, Sir/ 5 crii d í humme, hefitatingly, 4& how did л our contiene e with Mr. Ltham termi¬ nat« " Amıcaîdy, í he pe /" - On -r г · t.' anfwered Mr. Lenham, » ¡чт!/. 111 ; í* v I \\a·» hrm yet civil; and \A 'u ί 11 w i о-л dl hls pude hioo ked the a'viií', < .muit к inj tud to fetl lorry for kun " С hue nt i nt
Clarentine fmikd-— a I fhould never have fuppofed/' faid flic, "Mr. Lcnham's pity could have been calkd forth by fuch a paffion.—But ieìl me, dear Sir/' added fhe more gravely, " has he promifed to discontinue his vifits in future ?-—May Ì flatter myfelf his aifiduities are entirely at an end ? * 4 I believe you may; but not that if he meets with either vø« or //¿ein the d;xi'k $ fie will he filate to cut our throats/' w Horrible !" exclaimed Clarentine, u was he then fo very iiafciblc ? ,? —~ ** I never before faw a man take fuch incredible pains to prove bimklf qualified for Bedlam or St. î uke'$. Ire raved, be threatened, he abfolutely, 1 believe, f wore ! and when he had vented all h к choler againft «j, proceeded next to utter fuch vehement denunciations affandt the о devoted Somádét — u Good God i" interrupted Clarentinc turning pale, 4; againft Captain Somer- int P* u Be not alarmed/' refumcd Kir. I,en- ч ham finding; " tiede outrageous ebulli¬ tions are never, I believe, very dange» rous; vs ere they to laft long, they would infallibly
infallibly de Iti oy the 11 ronge ft conflitti« tion ш Chtiiícndom, and Mr. Ehham Lmnvs better thè value of lus than to put it to fuch nik. Aker ftorming and exe- € i ating, therefore, lill he w ал completely tired, lindi hg ï made bum no anfwer, but v,ent on very compofedly mending my fire, he fat dovei to cool, and ended the convcifdtion with as much temperance as ! believe il is in his nature to feel/'— io In his calmer moments then. Sir," allied Clarentinc, u did he fay any thing that difturbed you more than in his fury ? You looked, 1 thought, extremely vexed anı! İeıious when I firft went down/* *» To deal plain!) with you« my dear Mils Delmington/' anfwered Mr· Len¬ ham, u he made an appeal to my jufiice f towards the latin part of our confc¬ ience, that embanafled me not a little» ] bad given him, tacitly at leaft, to under* ftand thatjw/ were unacquainted with the nituic oí our debate ; this he ieemed very nnuh to doubt: but admitting it, at length, for fact, he afked me, with all the gravity of a man who thinks himfelf highly aggrieved^ whether, after the fpecies of promue he had once obtained from you, that
that when fixed in my houfe you would admit his vifits upon the footing of a friend, I thought myfelf entitled, un¬ known to you, to deny him this privilege ? Whether, in fhort, Ì thought it juft to kim> or honourable to you ľ' 41 Mr. Pltham," tried Clarentine, a little indignantly, " is the only man breathing, i believe, who, knowing how and whet e ihatpromife was exacted, would have ventuied to (peak of it to you as of one that he de'erved fliould be kept. It wás on my journey from Sidmouth, the night î flept at Salifbury, that, after hav¬ ing perfecuted and frightened me till I was really glad to come to any compro- mife whatever, he diew it ıduüandy from me, upon condition he contented immediately to quit nie. 'I h ih, at length, lie did ; and hitherto к ha* been fbiely in coniidciation of that engaqen. ent, extorted as it was, I ha\e evei permuted hem to fee me." u AH this, my dear voung lady," faid Mr. Lenham, k * I wasuiteily unacquaint¬ ed with ; confequentiy, to hb feiious en¬ quiry had very li tile more to fay, than that 1 would fpeak with you upon the í u bje ft,
fubjeft, aiul afk wdiether it was your wifli the piomife fliould be continued or re» t railed. £ If Mils Dehmngton/ added L 6 coufiults ',v.e in this affair, î believe Mr. idiham, you know what my advice to her will be. Should yon, therefore, hear nothing further from me, 1 beg what î have now faid may be looked upon as conclufive/· Upon this he aiofe, made me a very cavalier bow, and departed." u And peace go with him !" cried Cla« rent ine, fighi ng a weight of care off her breaft, íc í fincerely hope, that as my vifitor, at leaft, I fhall fee him here no more/" She then thanked Mr. î enham for the kindnefs with which he had undertaken fo unpkafant a ta fli, and taking leave of him for the night, retired to reft.
CHAP.
CLAREMINE. β t
С II А Р. XIII. Somerset, difdaining au artifice himfelf, frank, honoutablc, and nobie* minded, fufpcfted not that it was in hu¬ man nature, unlefs funk to the loweft depth of depravity, todiffemble by fyitem, and deceive upon principle. Clear-figbted and difecrning in perceiving merit, he was backward in difcovcring errors; and while it was poffible to believe any action might have a right motive, obftinate in not imputing to it a zvfong one. In courage, in underftanding, in fortitude a man—in heart and difpofition he was itili α child. The blunt, unpolifhcd beings with whom he had been accuftomed to aflociate, though they had infufed into his character no portion of their roughnefs 3 had înain¬ tai ned in it and nourifhed all its genuine fimplicity ; and neither taught him ihe ne¬ eeffity of difguife, or the advantages of diftruft* ín favour of another, whom he wifhed to ferve, he could be vigilant and obfervant; in all that related to himfelf he
he was credulous and unguarded. Com· paflionatc, kind and friendly, whoever he law unhappy he fought to relieve; who¬ ever he believed deferving he fought to conciliate. A character thus open, thus undcfign- ing and liberal, ii required far lefs addrcfii than Mrs. Hertford po fle ffed, to work upon and influence, Quick in penetrat¬ ing every thought of his honeft heart, and ikilful in tracing every avenue that led to its approach, flie began her opera¬ tions with a faga city, a cool deliberate policy, that might have done credit to lhe noble principal whofe agent fhe had conde fcended to become. ît was not Somerfet's afleciion flie fought, or even expected to obtain; fhe knew too well which way the wiíhes of his foul pointed to have any hopes of dire-fling them towards her id f ; tbc artlefs and un- conficious Clarentine—Clarentine whofe congenial mind f о well accorded with his own, fhe was perfuaded en gro ffed them wholly. Stilk however, with fuch a man fhe had hopes of fuccceding ; it was yet poffible to intereft his compaflion, excite his pity, though fhe procured not his lovcţ and
and, as to his fortune only, his rank in life, and indépendance fhe afpired, the feelings to which fhe might be indebted for his hand, were to her indifferent. When at Portfmouth juft before her carriage, flie had firft feen him, cold- licarted, and feif- intere ftcd as fhe was, flie had been unable to defend herfelf from experiencing an involuntary fenti¬ ment of admiration in his favour. The noble, graceful, and unaffected dignity of his deportment; the iiucrcfting ex¬ preffion of mingled animation and f weet» nefs that characterized his countenance; the gentlenefs of his manners; the good« fenfe, good-humour and fpirit of his con¬ verfation, it was impoffible wholly to difregard. Even Mrs. Hertford felt the influence of qualities fo amiable and fo (Iriking; flie felt it, however, without any diminution of her tranquillity ; and had Somerfet, at that time dependant upon a mercenary father, offered himfelf to her at the very moment her partiality for him was the greateit, Mr. Hertford, wholly his own mailer, and faid to be very affluent, would have been unhe fk tatmgly preferred, % Yet
Yet anxious to referve to herfelf the power, whenever Somerfet returned, of lenewing her acquaintance w ; th him-»— pleafed with the profpeft, though now married, of being followed and attended by him, flie molt affiduoufly courted, {in remembrance of their new relationfliip to Mr. Lenham« Somerfet's beft and earlieft friend,) the intimacy of Mrs. and Mifs Barclay, during the whole time flie re¬ mained in England. From them, where- ever he might fix, flie hoped to hear of him : but long before his firft voyage was over, thofe hopes were for a while driven from her lecolküion by the alarming derangement of her hufband's affairs, and t lie melancholy neeeffity that drove them both to the continent. Returning at the end oí her long exile as penmlefis, as deftitute, as when lhe inftiiuated Hertford firft chide her for hie¬ rum ; di (appointed in her ambitious pro¬ jects of forming a fécond cftabliíhment abroad, and hopelefs among thofe by whom ilie was too welt known to foim one in Fngland, her thoughts again ie~ vcitcd to that Somerfet, whom having ie en only by acckfint ihe had hitherto fee n
feen without ferious defign; but whorn now, perfuaded he could have tv ard nothing of her former conduct, and г Hurí d ihe could only have excited in him fen¬ timents that were favourable f о her pur¬ pofe, fhe determined to purine, and whether ftill in expectation or already in ab folute poflWfion of bis father*« pro* perty, to captivau» and conquer. Her firft eager cnquiinvs after him were anfwered by Mifs Barclay, with die welcome information that his an ίνα! w .ή hourly looked for, and bus d e lav ex¬ tremely wondered at, Tbe fame Jetti ľ brought her intelligence ıha* Chu -inn-* Delmington, the o:phui κίαιίοη aud favorite they bad bvb heard biva í ··.■. of fo partially, was np »u tlv pok: οι taking up ber lubne v fiden , at iur kv. iutor's, and meant to !v oar í г ik· · v. íl cad in the cou ríe of α \ ι\ ¡h ч iv v She was then at Sidumuih ; and e.Iv, Hertford, as defirous to co-ieiliate lev favour, as fhe was Írom ч; v free 1 m )ч\е* to cultivate that oi the Bav lav*, fim ulu with fuch diligent thou -h ineílevaal aífiduity toefìablifli au ¡lyviaiv uith ber. it v * T that, had fufpicion been a ^,.etl of native VOL. il. \ оц, % ';
growth in the mind of Clarentine, thofe aifiduities alone would have been fuffi¬ eient to have fed and chcrifhed it. ln«> notent, however, and candid, utile as me felt difpofed to love Mrs. Hertford, flie permitted not herfelf literally to diftruft her till after the fiift conference flie held concerning her with Eltham. Often had Ilie fince endeavoured to craie ihat conference from her remembrance, particularly from the moment flic found Somerfet fpoke favourably of her, and Mr. Lenham feemed ίο regard her with ííftccm : but the palpable artifices (pal¬ pable, at kait, to the keen dikriminating eye of jealoufy) with which fhe had now during f о many weeks ¡\-сп \icr fludying to recommend heri/ If to the one, and to conceal her defigns from the other, had at length fo wholly conquered Claren- tine's generous fcruples, that (he never beheld her without experiencing a fen- fa Jon hoi dering upon difguft arid horror. Yet the fuccefs thai had hitherto at¬ tended Mrs. Ilertfoid's fchemes had neither been very flattering to her vanity, noi very chcaring to her hopes ; her /oi difant paflion, though acknowledged with an
an honefl finccrity for which fhe feemed to expecl great credit, to its pretended object, whom flic found impenetrable to mere hints and looks, had till now ap¬ peared to create in him only perplexity and uncafinefs. Me frankly confeffed to her, and his confeffion was honeft, that his beau was no longer his own; that he felt for her the ti tieft admiration, the utmoft gratitude and the hvelieft friend¬ ihip; but could never hope to repay the diftinciion with width ihe honoured hitn with any fentiments more fervent, Mrs. Ileitford fighed, heard hitn with blufhes and with teán; protefted bis happinefs wis fo much dearer to her than her own % that could ihe but once fee it fecured fhe cared nol what late might await her ; fup- plicated the continuance of his regard- claimed even his compaffioiT, and ended by declaring fhe would never mention hei unfortnn?ie predilection to him more. Iheivxt day« howe\er, tbe day fid- lowing, and everyday fhe could fpeak to \\i"i apart, the fame fubjett was revived, ibe fame proteftations poured forth, the fame lamentations indulged! Somcifiri, .onfounded, diftreíľed, often wearn d, ч fomctimes
fomctimes anfwered her with the uioft ïefpedful ferioufnefs, at others, * ч)у lallied hei upon the unmerited fecn fion with which Ike treated hi^, and befought her for both, their fakes to for¬ bear renewing a converfation he grieved to fay w as ίο u felek, and was certam muft fee fo humiliating. Mrs. Hcitford upon thefe occafions liad the art to conceal her confternation υ ider ihc more touching iemblance of i orro u and delpaii. Sometimes alfo fhe' would talk to him openly of Clarentine; i ninniate that flic had difeovered her to be lise obiect id his attachment, and with that f^eucs of guaulcd warmth fo ncci k f ci r y i. ι oi dei to avoid all appearance of afle« uition, Ipeak to him, as if involuti· tai dy, oí her beauty and her merit, and dwell with modeft candour upon the u\m\ uafons ibe bad to feat fuch α rival, wulhuit hi mg able to dih over one that could juftifv bar in kekmg, even d íhc bad lhe power, to detach him from her. Ikmtratcd by tins gencrofity, charmed Lom w hau ver quai ter to hear the praifes of oik hb heart fo fondly chcrifhed, So» ΐ.κ^α,ηυ longer languid, no longer ab¬ fent,
feni, liftened with an avidity and a de¬ light to all fhe laid upon the fubject of Ciarentine, that convinced her fagaciou*; rival fhe had at length difeovered a never-failing, though a bon owed niagnet of lafting attraction. '1 he hope, towards its clofc, of bearing that beloved name coupled with pi aife, made him patiently attend to all that in the early part of every converfation was irk lome or embarra iling. His friendihip, hk с лн cm for Mis. Hertford redoubled; e el ev Clnrentme's it* ferve encreafed, tbe oidy confolation he feemed to find was in the fympathizing pity of her gentle competitor. U had once been Mrs. I iertford's plan to infufe into hv mivì a jo,.Ions /li fini it of Ekham ; that, hoover, es it was ¡m~ poffible to effect itv. ithout being (db n fubject to feeing i-.iihuin herfelL ibe \'i*y foon rclinquifhed all idea of, dievîn g ne) one's remai к s or obfervai soi v lo vucb. Arch and hgkficant as Indiani bad often looked when wirnelbng her audi¬ tions to Somcrict; thoughth fs, fligbty, and ungovernable rus he was, he might, cuber defignediy or by accident, reveal ίο many tbjngs it was her inteieft ι w keep N J Ice let,
fecret, that ihe trembled every hour at the confequcnces of his perpetual vifits*. To check therefore, or, if poffible, en¬ tirely to put an end to them, flic de- feiibcd him to Somcifet a* a man, who, undci the appearance ot caielckgjiety* lonccaled inch licentious pimuplcs, inch detennined hbeauulm, that he \sas by no means a proper chat alter lo be admitted, wheie theie was a joung w<-mau fo in experienced and aíťatrivc ал С krcniiııc, ι ечи iu^L Lì·. ıha: und mimiate lenii***. lhe vciy partidìuy Um had, whilft ai Sid nuíith, fufpcclcd Clarentine to enter¬ tain for him. fhe now changed into, what ihe had hnev perceived it really was, ťmbarruiíu out t *nd apprehenlion; fpoke ol the uncahiu is ihe wa:> r urc hi* preferire often gave ke! with concern and pity, and uiged Somerfet to coni ult her upon lhe íubjed, and endeavour, аь quietly as he could, to relieve her fiom fuch wearifotne imptntunitn s. Vet whilit ihus anxious to deliver her- fth írom Kliha.n as a ipy upon her own attioib, fhe deeply lamented the necci- íity fhe was under at the fame time of re¬ moving hau 'аъ a rival kom corner fet. >Ahat
What could flic now hope would prevent his keking an explanation with Claren¬ tine of her late coldnefs? and when that was explained, what could fhe hope would Songer fcparate and difunde them ?—*- Thefe queftions were difficult to rcfolvc; Mfí. Hertford, however, fertile in ex¬ pedients, did rcíolve them, and fixed upon a means of divifion ilie wifely concluded would be infallible. Deeply verfed in the art ofinvefliga- ting the characters of all thofe whom either her intcrcft or her inclination in¬ duced her to coint, and equally tlcx- terous in knowing how to iUecl from each the dnferent qualities that could beft be applied to her own fervice, it was not long before, in the delicate, difi me¬ re ftcd, but of late, fomewhat irritable mind of Clarentine, fhe difcovered feel¬ ings upon which íhc might as fuccefsfully operate as upon the unfufpcčting liberality of Somerfet. From Clarentine in perfon, then, fhe was determined the final ciufh of Somer- fet's future hopes ihould come ; but as ilie had great reafon to believe Eliham, find¬ ing himfelf banifhed from her prelence N 4 upon
upon any other terms, wou bl, rather than Iole her without a ftruggle, renew his «dfidukies upon the profe fled and honour¬ able footing of an avowed pietendcr to her hand, fhe waited to begin her machi¬ nations till ihe faw whether her fufpicions were realized, and whether Clarentine herlelf confciitcd to accept him. С II A P. XIV. MRS. Hertford was too good a judge of the i unun heart to be often in danger of forming wiong conclurions. A week had fcarceiy elapfed fince tlie di fini fli on oí Elthrun, w nen one moi ning before Claientinc Wd> up, tbe following letter f ι orn him, laid to be bi ought by one of Ins gioonibon horfe back, was delivered to U rľ MISS DI LMINGTON. ái Baibaious, iy rarmkal and unpitying Clarentinc! 'itil me, was it by your ítem decree I received io infultinga pro¬ hibition ? Gentle and merciful as you are to
to others, why ever thus inexorable to mc? Oh ! iť I dared give utterance to half my indignation aqainft you—againftthc cold* blooded, phlegmatic politicians who fur- round you, how madly I could ra^c and Imprecate ! M With a woman's form, with every atUr&Ûive grace, every fafcinating charm the ÎQYeiieft woman can boaíl, you poflefs, unfeeling Cîarentinei the callous, the impenetrable nature of a rock! Did you even take the trouble to feck a ţrefexd! for difcarding mc ? Did you by one al¬ leviating, one warning fentence prepare me for my doom ? No ; you flabbed me by furprife ; chofe the very moment when, moil implicitly relying upon your once promifed confidence and fiicndfhip, i thought myfelf fecure and uncmlangered. What a time to fele ft for fach а blow Î It came upon me with the fudden fhock of an unexpetled and lehíilefs thundcr- ftrokc ; and but ihat a ívom an was \u caufe—that a v:oiuins band directed it, fcarcc could it have appeared to me pofli- bîe or real ! a You will tell me, perhaps—if in¬ deed you think it worth while to attempt N 5 any
any extenuation of an act fo inhuman* that it was not performed at your infti gation; credulity itfelf, however, could give no faith to fuch an affurance. Who would, who ought to hazard fo arbitrary a proceeding without your concurrence? Oh, Clarentine! I know you too well--*' 1 kar alfo I know too well the actual iiatc of your rcientlefs heart, to entertain any doubt of the ready participation you gave to the whole bufinefs. s< Would to heaven I had never fcen you ! never indulged the fatal propenfity that led me to feek fuch dangerous fociety ! Krom the hour I firft knew )ou I may truly fay ï have never enjoyed a fingle day's uninterrupted tranquillity. I am lick of fuch an exiftence : and after this one s this final effort to induce you to foften its wretchednefis, am determined, if it fails, to fhun you during the remain¬ der of my life î « As a friend, deareft Clarentine, you rejeâmc; as a lover you repulfed and fcorned me; as a protector you diftrufted me ; yet, fairéit and beft of human beings! as a friend, a protector, a lover all in one, as the partner of your future life, the grateful
grateful fliarer of all your joys, the parti¬ cipator and foother of all your cares—as the man, in fliort, whom the moit indif¬ foluble ties have bound to yon at the al¬ tar, the moft fei vent affection attached to you for ever, will you yet, oh gentleft Clarentine ! will you yet vouch fafe to re* с eive me ? 6Í Artlefs and generous as you are, 1 know that fiom fufpenfe or delay ï have nothing to apprehend: I can fupport nei¬ ther : decide then upon my fate but with the fame meicy, you will with franknefs; and in the happieit of men, and the molt ardent of admirers, expect foon to behold your faithful and devoted, fit GtoRGE Eltham/' Idie fui prife, and fomctimes even angei of Clarentine whilft leading thk ftrange rhapfody, could only be equalled by the impatiente fhe felt to anfwer u. Rifing therefore immediately, and dieffing bev ielf in haite, fhe fat down, and without ,% moment's deliberation wrote the fellow mg с* ι cpl у : GEORGE Е1ЛНАМ, КъС», u You were right, Sir, in doing mt the juftice to believe, that on a iuhje/t N G fike
like ihe one upon which you have been pkafed to add refs me, I ihould make it a point not to keep you an inftaot in fufpence. 6S Accept then, Sir, my beft thanks for the honour of your good opinion, but permit me, pofitivcly and for ever, to de¬ cline availing myfelf of it. a I have the honour to be, u Your grateful and " obliged humble fervant, u Clarentinc Delmington/ 1 Of ibis anfwer, though fhe kept no copy, it was not difficult on her dcfcencU ing to breakfaft, and finding Mr. Lenham alone in the parlour, to give him a faith- fui account, at the fame time that ike fhewed him the letter that had occa» lionerl it. " it is well," faid Mr. Lenham, return¬ ing it to her alter he had lead it, 6£ it is " well and happy for this young man he has, at length, met with a friend honed and independent enough to give him fuch a leifon. Naturally anogant, and ren¬ dered ftill more fo by the unlimited prof- pcrity that has attended him through life,
he feems to think the world wa§ made to bow down before him. Pain or uneaftd nefs, being almoft a ft ran ger to the ν try name of either, he fupporis with a proud impatience that irritates their fmart, and gives fiercencfs rather than forrow to his complaints, Whilft he could fee you as often as he wifhed, talk to you of his paffion, and apprehend no other impedi¬ ments to his vifits and importunities than your fofi and gentle remonflranccs, he was happy, becaufe umrefiramed. Tour peace, your tranquillity he thought not of; nor would ihis offer, he acknowledges it himfelf, ever have been made but to relieve his own inquietude/* i& I fancy," laid Clarentine fmiling, *·> it was his interJton to do me a great deal of unmerited honour; fince, having once declared himfelf, he feems to think that a fuffieient retribution for every offen* five and paffionate expreffion contained in the reft of his letter, and dreams not of making any further apology." Juft then the door opened, and Mrs. and Mifs Barclay entered to breakfaft. it was not long now before Mrs. Hert¬ ford, having obtained information of this ¿ whole
whole tranfačiion, begun her plan of ope* talions, Jk hiding her work one morning, as was (tql 'c^Ay her practice, and cftuhlifhing herví as foon as breakfaft was over in M, . nhanťs parlous flie happened ac«» eť d ·ν to be ¡cit alone with Clarentine, w I dient a-nd thoughtful, w r as leaning iii .fual inactivity over the back of a ch oppofite one of the windows. /■-* :r a fhort filence, during which К'Нч ilciďord, difcontinuing her employ- г * ■ fat attentively obferving her, flie ţth faid, in a tone of kindnefs and !lï — ,Vhat is the matter, my dear Mifs ington / 1 liave remarked for fome patt with hifinue regret, that the fülnek and animation which diftin- •ned you when 1 firft came hither, has dv dif q, peared, and given way to an T melancholy painful to behold/' ' fifing her eyes at the beginning of fpeech, but without changing her at- ie, Clarentinc fixed them with the ■ í Heady and unmoved compofure in Mrs. Hertford's face, and after a client's paule replied-— " î ex*
M I expected not, madam, to have ex¬ cited in your breaft an intereft fo generous concerning me. You arc extremely good, and î feel grateful for your enquiries, but muft be ex cu fed anfwering them." She would then have quitted the room, but Mrs. Hertford, recovering from the momentary confternation a coldnefs fo repulfive had occafioned, called her back as flie was opening the door, and haitily faid—- u Allow mc, Mifs Delmington, if you are not particularly engaged this morn¬ ing, to requeft the favour of five minutes converfation with you." Clarentine, ftiil grave and frigid, yet evidently much furprifed, (lowly turned back, and drawing a chair towards the table, feated herfelf without fpeaking—* <s I know not, Mifs Delmington/' faid Mrs. Hertford, at length forcing herfelf ίο begin, u whether the confidence with which I am about to trouble you will ap¬ pear defer ving your attention, but the predicameli, in which I ftand renders it neceffary, that, to enfure my future peace of mind, I fhould now be explicit and un» fcfcrved with you." ^ I am
" ï ain ready, madam/' faid Claren¬ tine, involuntarily dreading fome latent yrriftce, α to hear all you may wifh to communicate/' 46 You are very good, and give me courage to go on. f will frankly, con¬ teis to you then, Mifs Delmington, that, fhe worth, the fpirit, the gencrofity of our mutual friend, Capt. Somerfet (Here Ciarentine turned pale and almojl flart ed) has mack an impreflion upon my heart, too deep to be eafily effaced. 1 knew him before my marriage, and even then, though I entertaint d not for him the fame fentiments а longer acquaintance has brought on, thought him one oi the beft and moft amiable of men. This partiality, however, this admiration, grateful to røe as it is to indulge, î have for fome time Itruggled anxioufly to repick and con¬ quer, A infpicion—may I tell you, my fweet fnend, of what nature ? a fufpicion fbe moft agonizing and painful has haunted and purfued me, and till from your own lips 1 hear it icfutcd or t on firmed, I can know neuber icft or peace," Too
Too well forefecing what was coming, Clarentine abruptly arofe, and again mov¬ ing towards the door, faid — u The fufpicions, madam, whatcvei they may be, which you ente ι tain con¬ cerning me, 1 have no wifh to hear e\^ plained ; ав therefore, 1 entreat, ie> if they had never occurred to you, and accept my beit wiíhes for the recovery of that peace they have been themcans of interrupting." She would then, with a calm dignity that almoft over awed even the intrepid Mrs. Hertford, have immediately left the room, but again fupplicating her to return, fhe cried-— ** О hear rae, hear mc, dear and gene¬ rous Clarentine í My fate is in your hands; decide ior me what и fluii be, and keep me n >t mugí r in this toituring fufpenfe! 'leb wc /' added /h'-, with quicknefs, u ted me. do vou love Somer- fet r" Clarciuincb thcek*:. elowedwkh re k ut¬ rne ut, and ber whok I r „une tiembkd wuh agitation as ihe dndamiuily leplicd —- 6s I ihould have hoped, Madam, that tbe leferve v. hi eh bas haberlo fu Idi lied between us v, oüid kave pieckivcì the
pcjìibiUty of your ever a Iking a queflion, v-hich, even from a bo lorn-friend or a fi iter, would be indelicate and unwar¬ rantable/' u You will not anfwer mc, then? you will not fo »Rich as tell me wdiether by accepting Somerfet's faith I wrong or™" ^ Good dodi '' interrupted Clarentinc, fe - do you believe, Madam, I would re¬ ftrain vou, ƒ would withhuld you? O nol il \h\ Somerfet bas offered himfelf to your acceptance, if к is his defign to become yours, make him but as happy as be is deferving, and be aflured I have no oib-r wifli/' " Excellent, noble creature 'd ex» claimed Mrs. Hertford with energy, α How do I honour the force of mind %\m h can thus- prompt you to renounce-™»" Again Clarentine, though with lefs per¬ turbation, interrupted her—' 4 You have ex* heniely mii!akenm\ ientiments, Madam," laid ihe, Ŕ " i rencume nothing, for I have had no prete niions: Ì exert no force of pdrj^ for I have bad noweaknefs to con« quer. Praife fo humiliating, therefore, 1 muft requeft tobe í pared/' w You
u You amaze and you delight me ?" cried Mrs. Hertford. " So wholly, indeed, had I miftaken you, that, attributing as well your late depreffion as your icfufal of Mr. Ekham to the fame caufe, hoping to ferve you, i ventured, however cauti¬ oufly, to i n fi n n ate my fufpicions to— Somerfet himfelf." With a Itart that was almoft frantic, and a look at once wild and indignant, Clarentine trcmuloully repeated— *' To òomajet ! you had ihe cruelty, ťhe unfcmininc, mercilefs cruelty to repeat fuch conj cčt u res t o Somer fc t ! oh fpea к , " added lhe with qiuckncfs, u tell me, did he believe jou ľ' "Capt. Somerfet/' replied Mis. Hert¬ ford, 4 · is the leaft vain of any man î know: he might have his doubts, but-—· " Oh heavens V 3 exclaimed У kremine, finking upon а с ban, and covering her face with her handketchief, in an agony of ihame and mortification, " \\ hat is it you have done! why rade luth iufulting doubts ? You have luimd, vou bave wil¬ fully and irreparably in μη ed me, and never more, if I can avoid it, will I fee either Somerfet or you !" She
She was then, half diftracìed, hurrying out of the rt nn, but ftopping fhort at the door, and looking round-— 44 Fell him/' cried flie, fpeaking with cípaal halle and emotion, 4i tell him, at leaft, when you are married, and I am gone from this hateful place, how little you were juftified in forming fuch fid- fpicions ! whatever love, whatever friend¬ ihip I once felt for him is now all con- \ч ï teti into horror ľ* She then ruffled out of the room. Mrs. Hertford, afiurcd her labour wats now completed, and fearful, if Claren¬ tine was íven in her prêtent agitated ftate, of being fufipnJed as ib caufe, foon after collected her work, and leiitng ihc maid at the door flie had fuddenly remembered funic bufinefs that called her home, left her compliments to theladies, and quitted tee houfe. The ck teftihle infimiation flie had fo unfeelingly peifuadcd her unhappy victim bad cfcaped ber, it was nothing lefs than true ihe had ever di earned of uttering; ihe knew too well the e fle ft it would have upon the enraptured Somerfet to venture io dangerous and imneceflary an experi¬ ment,
ment, and perfectly convinced Clarcn¬ tine's pride and indignation would be fuch as to lead her now moft anxioufly to flum every opportunity of being alone with him, ihe refted fecure in the firm belief they wOuld come to no explanation, but with encreafed referve continue, one from confeioufnefs, the other from mor¬ tification, to avoid all occafions of being together. In this opinion fhe was completely juftified by the event. Clarentine, whofe paffions, either of forrow or of anger, when they were once thoroughly roti fed, the kcennels of her fcnfibility rendered it extremely difficult for her to fubdue, had been fo deeply hurt b\ the fcene of the morning, and ftill felt herielf fo difluí bed and irritated, that, when ihe received tbe ufual fummons todinner, hearing Somer¬ fet, at whofe very паше flie ihuddered, was below, ihe pleaded indifpofition in excufe for not going down. In a few moments Mr. Lenham, ever kind and attentive, was at her door to enquire pcrfonally after her. She went to him the inftant flit· bearti his voice, and afleHing to fpeak with che αϊ fulne ís
chearfuînefiî, made light of her complaint, entreated him to go back to the family, and to quiet his own apprehenfions about her. « € 1 fliall be well, dear Sir, in the even¬ ing/* added ihe, forcing a fmiie, u and hope to be able to keep my engagemci t with Mrs. Denbigh, at whofe houfe I promifed to drink tea/* Somewhat re-aflurcd by the coinpofed and tranquil tone in which flie compelled herfelf to anfwer him, Mr. Lenham, tel¬ ling her her dinner ihould be immediately fent up, then left her, and returned to the parlour. There had been a time when Somerfet, open and uiubfguifed, attached to her by every tic of gratitude and of love, would have permitted no confideratjon, on hearing Clarentinc· was ill, to have pre¬ vented his Hying with anxious precipi¬ tation to foot h and, if poííibie, mitigate her fufľcrings. 'i hal trne v.as pafled; к was long finer, m the favorite retreat be had taken inch delight in decorating for her, Claremine. by one encouraging look or finde, had granted him admit« unce. Checked by her own coldnefs, ι which
which, tho' within a few days it had begun to abate, he itili remembered with a mix¬ ture of forrow and of pride, all that animated ienhbihty with which he had formerly addi e fled lier, wuh which he had fpoken, not only cf hcr, but to her, had been fuceeeded by a ftudied, diftant civility of behaviour, equally well cal¬ culated to couceal bis ical ientiments from others, and fiom herfelf. The firft emotion and alarm, therefore, which the icport of her mdifpohuon in¬ voluntarily led him to bctiay, having fub- fided, upon bearing Mr. 1 t nhatn hail k<m, and fou n t ber better than be expvted, during the reft of the day be t itelully avoided mentioning hcr name, and af¬ fected, though wuh but little- luce vis, to difcourfe upon general iubj¡rik wuh the fame eafe and ealnmek аь uiuak Meanvriiife (talentine, eager to git out oi the leaih, as well of Mi. Lenham's enquiries, as Some» fet's tl leaded pie- fence, itole down the ftaus as lobi y as fhe could when the hom was come at which flie was aceiiftomed to repair to Mrs. Denbigh's, and taking one of tbe maidg with her, let herielf out at the garden
garden gate, ίο avoid being feen from the parlour windows, and proceeding lightly forward, foon reached that Lady's houfe. it was no difficult ta f к for Mrs. Den«* bigh,fagacious and penetrating as ihe was, to diícovcr in the looks and voice of her young friend, the moil maní feit fymp- toms of perturbation and uncaliiiefs« Ck- rcntine's countenance was one of thole» which, ingenuous and expreiiive, it was as ^afV to read as to uiideritand; and though fince the morning ihe had not ili ed one tear, heaved one figh, or given way to any feelings but of indignation and lefentmeiu, her eyes looked fo heavy, her heart ieemed fo opp re fled, and (he fpoke with fuch unufnal rapidity ;oui incoherence, that, aiuoli frightened io behold her, Mrs. Denbigh, after a fhort and anxious examination, earueftly í oiled out — " Mv dear child, in the name of heaven! what has happened to you? Why do you look thus ftrangc and thus difturhcdV' This eager enquiry (hocked and fur- pi if :d Clarentine fo much, that, flaring at hei at firii without being able to an- fwer
fwer it 3 flic at length, 'm a hefitating and inarticulate voice, iaid—-» α Happened, my dear madam ?—No¬ thing—what fhould have happened ľ" éS Something no lefs extraordinary than terrible, if I may believe your coun¬ tenance," replied Mrs. Denbigh. u Have you had any leiters ? any unexpected bad news ?" Too an lefs and candid long to elude fuch friendly urgency, Clareruine/s burit- ing heart now found a relief, no lefs fea- fonabic than conioìatory, in pouring out all its grief into the fytnpathifing and in» dulgent bolom of Mrs. Denbigh. ît wa*> fo long fince fhe hadpiivd, vainly pined, for fome one in whom, um becked by pru¬ dence or apprehenfion, ihe might fecurely confide, »hat, ioothed and incited by the gentlenefs and compaflion thai mms fhcwn her, every iiafcibk paffion by which flie had been torn fubfbkd, and gave place toa gratitude the moil kivent, and a fen- fibility the moft unrefliaiiied. When her firil emotion, however, had abated, and the teais fhe bad fo abun¬ dantly flicd ceaf-d to flow ? Mn. Den¬ bigh taking lier hand, and addrefling her vol, π, Ö m
ki a tone of mixed plea fanny and feriouf¬ nefs, faid-— " Tender and affectionate as I have long believed you, my deareft Clarentine, ì never fufpected till this moment, that, to fo much fofmefs, your little heart united fo much pride ; you muft curb it, my young friend, by eveiy effort in your power, or greatly do I fear, that of the moft benevolent and candid of human fcemgs, it will teach you to become the rao ft unj u ft and illiberal. 44 Deareft Madam"—exclaimed Ciaren· tine, with difmay— 44 Nay, be not very ferioufly fright¬ ened/' relumed Mrs, Denbigh, fmiling* ■*' what I iaid was more meant as a cau¬ tion than a reproach. I would not hurt, İ would not defignediy offend you for tbe world, yet, my beit Clarentine, is there not fomething a little petulant and baity in the anger with which you permit yourfelf to fpeak of Mrs. Hertford? Al¬ lowing that her regard for Captain Somer¬ ía dailies with your own; that flic has unadvifedly given him to undcríiand more of your partiality in his favour than you could wifh; ilill, however, 1 fee pot
in either cafe any reafon fo feverely to blame her. Let y cur ozva fu kepti - biliíy be an apology for bers; and as for the difclofure flie made to him, im¬ prudent as it was, its motives at leafl could only be fuch as to do honour to her heart/' Clarentinc, with a look of incredulity* and a fmiie of involuntary contempt, would here have interrupted her. but Mrs. Denbigh not allowing her time, fome- what gravely added — " Young as you are, my dear Mih Delmington, thefe dtep-rooted prejudices ihould not be chcriihcd ; fince, if fuch ü now their force, when time adds expe¬ rience to natural diftruft, what will be their bitternets i tih, 1er not /nen a ten¬ dency ίο unamiable fully lhe uuikkí* and youthful fimpîteiry of your charac¬ ter ! He not only virtuous and deferving in vouriclfi but cultivate with care that generous aud noble difpohtiou, which ihould lead all whole own beans art 1 pure to belie\e well of others." Clarentine could bear no more—» u Oh, Madam," cried ihe with earneft- ntfs } 46 what dreadful pi epo ifc fiion are you О 2 your-
yourfelf conceiving againft me? Am I, indeed, fo loft to all fenfe of candour and luflice as you defcribe r Do 1 appear fo ■ce/y illiberal, fo very fevere as to require Iuch α reproof r Oh, believe me, the un¬ favourable opinion Ì have thus unguard¬ edly betrayed of Mrs. Hertford is not the mere refult of fudden refemment, or groundless conjecturei I intended in¬ violably to have kept fecret all I had evei heard concerning her, but you now com¬ pel me» in my own vindication, to fpeak openly," She îhen very circumftantially re· peated every particular which had tended îo infufe fufpicion into her mind whilft at Sidmouth ; fpoke of the my fierions hints that kkham hnú there dropped relating to hcr, the caution her earneft interroga¬ tions had drawn from him, the ftrangc and fignificaut looks with which he had always talked of her; and lafily, of the free and contemptuous ftyle in which he iiad al¬ lowed bimklf pcrfonally to addrefs her. Mrs. Denbigh ijflened to all thefe cir¬ cumftances with an air of furprife which plainly fliewed, that had ihe depended his implicitly upon the veracity of the relator,
relater, flie would have been tempted wholly to diferedit them. u If he gt eat eft proof cfart '," it has been faid, 6i is to cmceal art.' 1 and this Mrs. Hertford had fo ftu cekfully accomplifhed, that, far fiom having ever appeared in Mrs. Denbigh's eyes as α woman of de¬ fign or contrivance, lite bad rallier im- pofed herfelf upon her as one of volatility and ihoughtleflhefs, wdio to a great deal (ft levity added quick parts, but neither depth enough to be capable of regular Aratagcm, or ileadtnek fuffieient to apply her undei dauding lo puipofes of utility. What 'еле (juıliiKv of her heart might be, flie bad found no opportunity oi" feriou 'у inveíiigating* concluding them, howe\er s to be ruber benevolent than othenrik\ from bel confient ieudinek to oblige and her neveviailin; go )d-bumour, ihe hati always feen hei without diikuti, aral con- veiled with, bet without releí ve. Theie being her fentiments, when ( kremine paufid. Mis. Denbigh kankb avowed them, addimi, ' и' ** kpon the opinion of fuch α ))\δι\ as Kir. Eltiiam, earekk and пкогЛикгле as, without a doubt, /чм&, 1 can conk- U j queiith
quently piu but little reliance. Mrs. Hertford, though now I believe flie is ierioiftly attached, once appeared to me, and formerly unqueftionably was, a giddy, vam coquette, fond of admiration, and delighting in new conquefts ; Mr. Ekham himfelf polle fled much the fame turn of mind; and thefe two, playing upon each other, with identical weapons, may very probably have had fome little difference, the gentleman 1 * proud ßomacb knows not, even yet, how to dige ft. If he really thought her more to blame than himfilf there was nothing difhonourabk in his guardedly cautioning you againft her: yet, from an adviler fo ill qualified for ihe talk, I would not, Mifs Delmington, loo readily imbibe injurious fu rm i fes." i& Well Madam," cried Clarentinc, «« further than this, Ì will fay no moie upon ihe fubject: it is ccually impuilible for me either to forget ov not to /¿v'; I am convinced, the reform, ihat as long as I unnain in Mis. Hertford's vicinity •think¬ ing of hei as I muß think, and fullering by bct as I muß fufler, I can enjoy цо rafe or comfort. Where I can go I know nol, but fiom Mr, Lcnham's houfe during
during the prcfent pí)fture of affairs I am determined to remove !" 4i Are you ferions," cried Mrs. Den¬ bigh, with much aftoniihment. 66 1 never was more fo," anfwered Clarentine firmly» Mrs. Denbigh after this was filent a few minutes; but at length, addrefling Clarentine again, and with the utmoft к indue ís, íhc faid— ťí Ιΐ fuch, mv deareft Mifs Delming¬ ton, is }Our decided réfolution, ί\\ν írom attempting to diifuade you kom it, 1 will rather endeavour to make my own ad¬ vantage of it. You fay, that, at this moment you have fixed upon no parti¬ cular place to repaii to : I am myfelf, in a very fhort time, going to Bath : but as motives of fiiuidihip alone will lead me there, and 1 expect not to v i fit or be vi filed by more than one family in the place, its being ίο ear h. or fo /л/е, (I know not u hidi to call it) in the ieafon, is to me pcifectly immaterial : will it be fo, howevei, to m/, my young fnend, and can you voluntarily confent to ihut your¬ felf up, perhaps during fix weeks, wiihfo pceviih an old moralizcr ?'* H AL·
í4 Ah, Xíailam ľ 1 cried the delighted Claremine—-* if i could but flatter my¬ felf you were indeed ferions in making me fuch a propofai! but it cannot be: if would render me too happy, and hap* pineis and I leem de fl ined to be great ft ran gei s!" Mrs, Denbigh, much affected by the pmnon oi this ineech, after aflurim» her in tlie moft friendly terms ihe had nevei ma t к «rn offer flie fo fincere! v wifhed m i giu be accepted, attempted to rev animate her coinage and cheer her hopes. 4,4 I í is too foon for you vet, my Clarentine/' faid Ihc, δί to admit lafting foi row or ddpondeme into your breaft. 'I be worid ih all before you, a world into which \on bave bidierto fcarceiy taken vote than a ftolcn glance: many, main aie tbc comforts ihe felicities I hope, it Iv- ľ: 1 m rektve for you. Your own merii will m ke you friemk; your in- drpi ndatue ei.íure \ou icfpect ; and the gondln is and purity of your heart beflow upon you internal approbation. With f udi profpCvbs, kii 1 health, fuch in¬ nocence 'dnd vouth, why, dien, mv deareft
girl, why give way tothis vain and thank- lek dijéfctionľ' "Ah! believe me, Madam/' anfwered Clarentine, the tears once more gliften- iiig in her eyes—" I have not given way toit! No day has now ever palfed lor many weeks that I have not {trainedevery nei ve to appear chearful, even when my heart has been moft opprefled; and tho* often wiihing to indulge iefieciion, often wifiling to be alone, I have yet always forced myfelf into occupation or fociety/* 46 Jn both," faid Mrs. Denbigh, " you were wife and right : pcrfevere, then, my gentle friend, in the fame courte, and doubt not but that, in a very flioit lime, your vii mous efforts will be profperous and fuccefsfuk" She then reverted to the fu bje Q of their meditated journey, which «he tvddrur it bad been her defign to In g'n in about .1 week, but ıhar, if и w a%k i w. ih* and Mı. Lenham mule no op^duion io it, flu- would accekiare bei dipanili' 1 widioiu hefitation, and pıepaie ive\ i/mg m cider to lit out m thi v? йл\^. Claremine was ven giateful loi thk fécond idler, ,\nd veiv ckíkouv on find- i 111»
-í mg íí really put Mís. Denbigh to по krious inconvenience, of accepting it. Th v mutually agreed, therefoie, to be ;ead) с*ч!у on the following Tue Ida) : and then Claientinc, all thanks ami .u know kdgmenb, and Mrs. Denbigh all benevolent kindnekj imparateci íor th« i Ч 'ling.
í Sl) C r VOL, li a
