Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Sir Ethelbert: or, The dissolution of monasteries: a romance
SIR ETHELBERT; OR, THE DISSOLUTION OF MONASTEIUES.
CHAP. L As no effort could have proved success¬ ful for approaching Lady Warburg during the progress of the pageant, Lord St. Os¬ wald restrained his impatience to take his stepchild by the band, until after his safe convoy of his own precious offspring home; and then, accompanied by Fitz¬ rivers, hastened to Norfolk House, and there experienced the disappointment of finding the duchess and her party—includ¬ ing Rhona—had set off from Cbepe for Lord Surry's, to pass a few days. Upon receiving this intelligence, his lordship vol. hi. ?
left a billet for Lady Warburg, importing where he and his children were to be found. Although Lord St. Oswald's attach¬ ment to Rosamond had been shaken from its infatuated idolatry ere he had es¬ poused her ; and her manœuvring not to accompany him upon his diploma¬ tic mission, with other points of her con¬ duct, had decreased his estimation of her; he yet retained sufficient affection to feel anxious for their re-meeting : but being unwilling to proceed into Kent until something effectual had been arranged for the security ofhis children, as Vespasian Tower was not encompassed with walls like his town mansion, he would have re¬ quested Rosamond tojóin him in London ; only that having written to announce when he should be there, and how long he should probably be detained in trans¬ acting business with Lord Cromwell, and she not having favoured him with a re¬ ply, he felt too much hurt and offended to make this proposition. But soon his lordship, in apprehension
that the air of* the metropolis was ungeniai to De Mandeville, became impatient for the removal of every impediment to his proceeding with his children to a more salubrious residence. At length the king returned from a progress, and Lord St. Oswald had an in¬ terview with his sovereign ; when, upon imploring His Majesty*s benign aidfor the protection of his children, he perceived the royal interest for hira, and compassion for the menaced victims of secret villany, had been warped by prejudice from every kindly feeling ; and in terror the agonised parent detected the existence of some¬ thing like suspicion lurking in the sove¬ reign's mind of Lady Mary's heresy. That Henry was capricious, Lord St. Oswald well knew ; but his agonising despair relative to his children cherished no hope of alleviation through any change in the now prejudiced mind of the mo¬ narch, and with a pale aspect and panged heart he attended His Majesty by appoint¬ ment on the following day ; when, after the business which had ostensibly called
him to York House had been fully dis¬ cussed, the king suddenly turned to the topic of the sorrowing father's anxiety, and in a kind tone said, that he had thought much of the matter since last they had encountered, and that it ima¬ gined him something might be done to vantage the safety of the poor urchins. And in the course of another day His Majesty announced in a joyous tone to Lord St. Oswald, that he now might solace himself in contentation ; for he had adopted apt means to have the matter voiced that he (the king) was determined to whelm with condign severity any per¬ son or persons who might individually, or in conspiracy, plot, imagine, or execute evil against the peace, liberty, or well- being of either of bis lordship's children, " In short," continued Henry, " we have sent a cunning rumour forth, which it may speed you, Villars, to contentation to bruit where it may have availment, that life and chattels of the offender or offend¬ ers shall be the bartery for the crime of daring the abduction of your daughter,
or espousing her without our especial assentment ; and that the culprit shall die by dern torture, who shall even imagine harm to endamage your bov." Tiie agitated father conveyed at once conviction of how deeply his gratitude was penetrated, by falling at the feet of his sovereign in a swoon. Henry, in this moment feeling tint he himself was a father, in sympathising kindness aided in every measure for the recovery of Lord St. Oswald : and as joy had caused his lordship's swoon, his fa¬ culties seemed eaçer for réanimation to taste this joyance ; for shortly be revived, and was able to attempt the expression of his heartfelt gratitude to his royal master, who, however, would not listen to him, but with a smile bade him hie homeward, and solace himself in surance that evil would no more peril his children, since a mighty power had armed in their behoof; and which defied the potent spells of mischief. And this power was indeed so mighty in effect, as to have chased the influence
of prejudice inspired by base artifice from the king's mind ; and was in fact the power of gold : for Sir Ethelberts agents, in their indefatigable exertions, had ascertained that whilst Sir Rupert Warburg had been resting his body in Sanctuary, his mind had been in constant travel to Yorkshire and Vespasian Tower, during the whole period of Lord de Mandeville's imprisonment, in expresses thither most craftily devised. And the moment Ethelbert found conviction of this fact, he determined to have recourse to the power which wealth and the king's necessities placed in his hands : and with the secresy which delicacy towards the monarch, as well as that of his own peculiar situation^ required, he entered into a private negotiation with the king upon the subject ; in which he acknow¬ ledged his unsubdued attachment to the mother having armed him as the secret knight errant of the children, and that thus he had discovered causes to suspect at least the individuality of the persons concerned in the late atrocities enacted
against the young De Rhones ; but that in pity to the feelings of Lord St. Oswald he was unwilling to give publicity to his discoveries, and therefore had come to pray His Majesty graciously to yield aid¬ ance in his plans : antl then, in that form most meet for the occasion, Sir Ethel¬ bert availed himself ofhis flow of golden rhetoric, which proved resistless. Henry now became deeply interested for the safety and happiness of the young De Rhones: and as chivalric feelings were not yet extinct, the idolatrous attachment of Sir Ethelbert to the me¬ mory of Adela, and parental anxiety for her children, excited no ridicule in the monarch's mind ; but, on the contrary, aroused something like sympathy in the bosom of this not too kindly prince for all the amiable persons thus brought to his consideration, and elicited his royal promise to take the most effectual method to secure that safety for which Sir Ethel¬ bert had volunteered in paying a right royal largess. The agent employed by His Majesty ? J,
for securing that safety he had bound himself to protect, was no other than the delinquent Sir Rupert Warburg him¬ self*—the very being who was more than merely suspected of having been the culprit in the atrocities now under royal denunciation. The king sent for Sir Rupert ; and under the guise of a kind wish to befriend him, announced, that knowing the skill of his penetration in the development of plots, and marvellous cunning in delving into the human mind, he had willed him to be summoned, to entrust him as an agent (and for wdiich he should be bravely recompensed) in discovering, amid the daring desperadoes whom he had for his encounter in Sanc¬ tuary, those who might have been en¬ gaged either as principal or agent in the atrocities lately practised against Lord de Mandeville, and intended against his sister ; and then pronounced the dire punishment awaiting such offenders in the past attempt, and against those who might dare to imagine further evil against the said young persons, in the most em-
4'
phatic terms of determined vengeance : and the moment His Majesty ceased hh astounding communication to the crest¬ fallen Sir Rupert, he advised the dis¬ mayed culprit to speed him to his Sanc¬ tuary and voice what he had uttered. Lord St. Oswald did hie him home¬ ward, and imparted to his children and friends the protection so unexpectedly and graciously promised for Mary and De Mandeville ; — intelligence which proved bahn to the heart of Mrs. Morton and Father Hubert; subdued tlie volatile Edward, in his transports of joyful se¬ curity, almost to tears ; whilst Aiary it sent to the secret sanctuary of her piety, there to breathe thanksgiving unseen bv mortal observation. But strange and inexplicable it appear¬ ed to Algernon, — his heart shuddered with as much dismay, as it glowed with pleasure, upon this promised safety for his lovediriends; since in it was specified that the king's consent was to be ob¬ tained ere any man could dare to espouse Lady Alary, and he could cherish no ? 5
hope that her feeling heart would ever be consulted by the despotic Henry in the disposal of her hand ; but that, go¬ verned by any self-willed stimulant, he might bestow this lovely and inestimable being upon some niding even as vile and villanous as Rupert Warburg, in re¬ compence for unworthy services : and soon finding his bosom as much agonised by alarmed sympathy for Alary as if he had himself formed hopes to gain her, and his disappointment sealed by the royal decree, he shortly after fled the house to seek Sir Ethelbert, and impart to him the communications of Lord St Oswald, and the terrors thus awakened for Mary's future peace. And this interview with Ethelbert proved indeed an anodyne to the anxious sympathy of Fitzrivers: for so exalted was the opinion cherished by Sir Ethel¬ bert of Algernon, that he scrupled not to confide in him the secrets of a nego¬ tiation, which, if betrayed, might cost Ethelbert the forfeit of his head. But lest there might be unseen auricular
witness of these perilous communications. Sir Ethelbert enveloped himself in pal mer's weeds, and Algernon in a monk's habit,—-disguises which he had at hand for varying his own appearance, should his watchful guardance of Mary and her brother require it,—and then proceeded with his confidential companion to the Thames, where, embarking in a boat without the incumbrance of a waterman, they set out upon a gentle row upon the river, seated nearly side by side in full con¬ venience for the disclosures of cautious secrecy j in which disclosures were com¬ prised all that had passed between the anxious Ethelbert and his sovereign re¬ lative to the young De libones : and to lull the alarm of Algernon upon the dis¬ posal of Lady Mary's hand, Sir Ethel¬ bert further confided to him, that, appre¬ hensive for Mary's future happiness, lu¬ ll ad further bargained with bis gracious sovereign,— whose prodigal expenditures upon many points for the advantage of his realm had bent to the influence of golden rhetoric, —for that voice in the ? 6
bestowing of her hand which was to pass for Henry's own. At length, all these important communications ended, they were making towards the landing from whence they had embarked, when they beheld the redoubted Sir Rupert in par- liance with a waterman, whom, as they drew near the shore, they found he was importuning to convey him in chase of a boat which had just passed ; as it was of consequence to him immediately to speak to a person in that boat, and there was no other oar for him to hire at hand. " Ait ye hold up two, ay, in troth, a score of your silver groats, they shall not behoove ye," responded the surly river- god. " Odzookers ! it be not so long sithence you bilked me out of my honest earnings. G — d yold it ! but many a faitour * and fopdoodle have I wafted to the Tower's fastness, unto Sanctuary, unto the Vintry Gardens, and elsewhere, ay, and yelden aidment to many a culprit in flight from justicement; but sith a dare-
ful spoiler I will not disparage ray craft to speed on any tack." All in which Sir Rupert was concerned at this juncture being of deep interest to the anxious Ethelbert, who, aware that this Sir knight had never yet en¬ countered him in his proper person, so as to form any conception of his identity, conceived the project of developing the matter which so imperatively attracted Sir Rupert after the passing boat, he therefore, with the appearance of mere kindliness of nature, offered aidance to the distressed gentleman in this emer¬ gency. In a moment the overjoyed Ru¬ pert was seated in the boat behind the heart-bounding Algernon ; and, full of courteous thankfulness for such an apt accommodation, directed our oarsmen which course to steer in chase of the boat he was in quest of, and which had been for some time rowing to and fro from Norfolk Garden to Baynard's Cas¬ tle, and had passed our confederates re¬ peatedly whilst they were so engrossed by their interesting communications that
even Algernon had not dc »cried whom it contained. Our boat soon came up with that it chased ; and the moment it wafted along¬ side of it, Sir Rupert hailed it, and in- tantiy presented a letter to one of three ladies whom this attractive boat con¬ tained : and without an attempt on either side of more than a familiar nod from the receiver and deliverer of this letter, the two boats moved rapidly on in dif¬ ferent courses; our boat to the poiut where the embarking had been prede¬ termined, while that which contained the beautiful Rhona proceeded to Norfolk Gardens. But though this letter was tacitly de¬ livered and received, yet the expression in countenance was not wanting to betray a mutual understanding of the subject of the letter ; but still was clearly marked, that whilst to Rhona it was of no very important interest, to Sir Rupert it was vital : and in attestation that it was so, *-it being no longer necessary to calm his aspect for his encounter with Lady War-
burg and her fair companions,—he now gave way to the inward conflict of his mind, and gnashed his teeth, clenched his hands convulsively, knit his brow, and muttered incoherently from time to time of being undone, and of flight, with oaths innumerable : and, in a state of agitation little short of phrensy, he was wafted to shore, where, without one word of thanks, he sprang from the boat and vanished ; leaving full conviction on the mind of Ethelbert that he had not been misinformed relative to Rosamond being a confederate of Rupert, and that the king's implied suspicion of the principal actor in the imprisonment of De Mande¬ ville had led to the writing of this letter, and anxiety for its prompt delivery, as it contained communications of all their plots being frustrated. And whilst Al¬ gernon recoiled from this belief of Rosa¬ mond's turpitude, yet he could not subdue it ; since this letter, delivered in such a suspicious moment to her daughter, his eye had been quick enough to ascertain,
bon a superscription to the Countess of St. Oswald· The pleasure of so unexpectedly be* holding the beauteous llhona was not without a painful alloy in the bosom of Sir Algernon ; for were it possible Sir Ethelberts horrid impressions relative to her mother were just, Rhona then was not uninformed of the dire plots against the life of De Mandeville : and with too sure a certainty he perceived that Sir Ethelberts intelligence was true, of Lady Warburg having returned w ; th the duch¬ ess* to Norfolk House from Lord Surry's', and that she had not yet repaired to pay her duty to her ever kind stepsire. Nor had this sort of league vvith the niding Rupert, thus apparently formed by Rhona, failed to recall to the mind of Algernon the ambiguous and apparently degrading situation in which he had found her in the moment he last parted from her, — a scene that was yet unexplained ; and he almost trembled in anticipating
apprehension of the explanation not proving to her advantage. And whilst dreading that causes might appear to impel the descent of Lady Warburg from the altitude of his estimation, . , found Lady Alary, on his return to Oswald House, in a state which led to her elevation in it. Her father had an¬ nounced to her his intention to set out for Vespasian Tower on the following day; and although she smiled in obedient acquiescence, her pallid cheek, her trembling frame, and the melting pathos of her voice, betrayed how alarmed and distressed she was by this determination.
CHAP. II. At length the Oswald House cavalcade set out for Vespasian Tower ; and again Sir Algernon was the escort of Lady Mary : and with pain he marked, that every mile she travelled nearer to the abode of her stepdame, her terror be¬ came more evident ; so that the very Mary, w r ho had performed her part so heroically when treason and sisterly affection had called forth her intre¬ pidity, he now beheld quailed to a very craven, in apprehension of a gentle female, whom he had ever found so sweet, and kind, and estimable. The joyful De Mandeville, happy to arrive where pleasure ever thoughtlessly reigned, bounded from his horse the mo¬ ment he found himself within the great quadrangle of Vespasian Tower, Not so poor Mary ; she no longer possessed power to aid in her own dismounting,
and the sympathising Algernon took her from her saddle in his supporting arms like a tender parent ; and as he did so, she softly said, " Oh, Algernon ! be my kind aidance, too, in concealing my agitation from my honoured father ; for it is un¬ meet, and would aggrieve him." At this moment Lord St. Oswald ap¬ proached his agitated daughter himself, to lead her to the presence of his spouse ; and never before did Fitzrivers behold so powerful, so magnanimous an exertion made, and so successful. Alarmed at wounding the connubial feelings of her father by her evident dismay, Mary on the instant commanded, with resolution which enforced obedience, every power of mental firmness to its post. Her pa¬ ralysed tremor in a few moments became scarcely perceptible, and though her lips might be detected in a quiver, she smiled in tranquil sweetness ; and al¬ though there was falter in her touching voice, and something of discomposure 4 in her manner, such agitation might natu¬ rally be attributed to youthful timidity,
in one who was, like her, a novice İn society. Here were to be heard the baying of hounds and the tinkling of hawks' bells, and to be seen the gliding of domestics along colonnades and in and out of doors, and the opening and shutting of case¬ ments to obtain a peep for the curious at the new arrivals, with many other indica¬ tions ofthe family not being absent ; but nothing externally appeared to intimate, that whilst guests had been accumulated within, discord reigned most fearfully, though not publicly, between the mother and daughter, who passed for angels of peace to these accumulated guests : and but one day earlier had Lord St. Oswald arrived, he would have found Vespasian Tower deserted, — the angry relatives chased in different directions bv serious «r disagreements. That rivalry and deeply-felt mortifica¬ tion, deplored by Rosamond to Con¬ stance, had since hourly augmented, with increasing bitterness on Rosamond's part and invidiousness on Rhona's, until all
genial feeling between them became ex¬ tinct ; and nothing but apprehension of losing their altitude in universal admir¬ ation, which they had for many a year conjointly and separately toiled for, could have prevented it from bursting into pub¬ lic observation. And this ungenial dis¬ union the treacherous Constance most sedulously augmented, for the purpose of obtaining that power over Rhona's mind which her mother had lost ; and this, for the purpose of leading her into that matrimonial toil which she had mentally arranged to annoy Sir Ethelbert : and so far had Constance succeeded in her covert projects for counteracting the parental care of her brother in guardage of the hated Adela's children, that her trusty emissaries had icd Sir Rupert into his diabolical plot against the life of De Mandeville for the aggrandisement of the succeeding heir, Alary; whilst the un¬ toward separation of Rhona and Alger- non for so many months alone had re¬ tarded the scheme of Constance for the further vexation of her hated brother,
who had so unaptly discovered the part she had borne in pitiless turpitude against his canonised Adela. To such a height had provocation and resentment at length arisen between these rival relations, that Rosamond became con¬ vinced that nothing less than separation until this climax of irritation should cease to vibrate so tremendously could save their discord from discovery; when Rhona was led once more to comply with ma¬ ternal admonition, — having herself been alarmed, by fear of betrayal to the de¬ ceived and admiring world of the undu- tiful furies which raged within her beau¬ teous bosom, and therefore consented to this temporary separation, and accepted an invitation just then opportunely sent from the Duchess of Norfolk for her passing a few weeks with her friend Catharine Howard. This departure of the fair though faulty Rhona from Vespasian Tower was immediately succeeded by that of her mother, who set out with a select party of her own admiring adulators on
a tour through the west of England ; in consequence of which excursion, and the lack of regular posts through the king¬ dom, neither the intelligence of her lord's arrival from the Continent, nor any of his subsequent letters, had reached her during her absence from home. * But at last an unexpected circum¬ stance occurred, which induced Rosamond to determine upon encountering the mi¬ sery of her child's society much earlier than they had arranged. The anguished jealousy of the mortified mother still raged too keenly for her cordially to aid in any project for the aggrandisement of her malicious daughter : but as a source which promised by maternal ma¬ nagement prosperity for Rhona, w T as likely to extricate herself from much pe¬ cuniary embarrassment, she felt impelled to act as interest pointed out ; and this, perhaps, the less reluctantly, as she thought it not improbable it might aid a project of vengeance against her in¬ grate daughter/which, in the intermittent phrensy of passion, she long had cherished
and recoiled from, as Rhona's provoca¬ tions ebbed or flowed. An uncle of the late Lord Warburg, who had been cut off'by many intervening branches from every prospect of the he¬ reditary honours of his race, resolved upon honest industry for his road to for¬ tune : and an advantageous opportunity presenting itself, he entered into a com¬ mercial house at Venice ; and had at length amassed so immense a stock of wealth, that he resolved to return to his native land to end his days, and, having survived wife and children, to seek out amid his relatives in England for a worthy heir. Rosamond had spent some time in Venice with her profligate firbt husband, and there heard of the reputed affluence ofthe Signor Warburg, although the con¬ summate pride of her spendthrift spouse had outbalanced his necessities, and for¬ bade his claiming kindred with a trader. She therefore recognised the wealthy merchant on his landing at Torbay ; when, with all the wanning sweetness
with which she could beguile, she intro¬ duced herself as led to it resistlessly by the striking resemblance she pretended he bore to her never to be forgotten god¬ like Warburg, and offered him every ser¬ vice which benevolence could dictate to a person in pecuniary distress—for such did his appearance bespeak him ; since, to develop the disposition of the kindred he might find in England, he assumed the touchstone of sincerity and kindness — the guise of poverty. Rosamond, who had developed the in¬ sincerity of this statement, through the immense value of a gem he had presented at a shrine in St. Mary's church at Tor, so effectually deceived him, that, in firm conviction of her believing him in dis- tress, he accepted her kindness, knowing with what interest he could repay her; and this queen of art having invited him to sojourn at Vespasian Tower, she, with this.promising speculation and her other companions, set out upon her homeward progress without delay, and as promptly despatched an express to summon Rhona vol. iii^ α
to meet her uncle in Kent. But to obey this maternal mandate, Rhona was neither ready nor willing: she doubted not that the playpleasures she had in prospect with the kind Howards would prove very delight¬ ful, and that the king was likely to mingle in them; and she would not relinquish them, nor the chance of her becoming a favourite with the queen, for the pro¬ spector* an apparent old beggarman prov¬ ing the sagacity of her self-sufficient mother by transmuting into a gold mine. We have already mentioned how the jealous ire of Rosamond led her at Alba¬ landa to cherish some idea of vengeance upon her ungrateful child, by entoiling her in a marriage with her profligate kinsman Rupert ; and for effecting this vindictive measure, she doubted not of having still sufficient interest amongst the cardinals at Rome to obtain a dispensation for the marriage : but soon hatred to Lady Mary acquiring new poignancy, superseded this project, and led her on to fall into the plot of the diabolical Constance for the union ofthe hated Mary with the niding Rupert.
But not feeling the same personal en¬ mity to De Mandeville, it was not so readily accomplished, the leading Rosa¬ mond into the plot of Constance against the son of Adela; yet during the voyage from Albalanda to the Kentish coast, Sir Rupert contrived, by bis wily blandish¬ ments and promises of immense compen¬ sation, to lure her into acquiescence in this dire project of barbarity : but when the difficulty of abstracting De Mandeville from the protection of his father seemed about to be overcome by Rhona's epistles relative 'to her tournament, Rosamond began to recoil from the conspiracy she bad been drawn into — not through remorse at its turpitude, but in conviction that it would not ultimately prove so advan¬ tageous to her as the present heir being left to inherit the estate of St. Oswald; so that when she found the plot bad been subverted by the escape of De Mantle ville and Lady Mary, she sent off an express to Constance, announcing to her that she receded from every further at¬ tempt against the life of De Mandeville.
And at this moment her irritation against her undutiful daughter having arrived at its climax, the desire of foiling the am¬ bitious designs of her daughter restored once more the project to her mind of entoiling Rhona into becoming the wife of Rupert ; and ere their separation took place, she solemnly cautioned Lady War¬ burg to beware of the fascinations of her cousin Rupert, should he chance to cross her path : and, as the wily plotter antici¬ pated, this caution led Rhona eagerly to seek Sir Rupert upon her very first so¬ journ in Norfolk House ; when his fasci¬ nations so won upon her fair companions, that they never visited London after, whilst Rhona continued her visit, without draw¬ ing Sir Rupert from his Sanctuary to Norfolk House ; for, beside his inherent powers of being witty and amusing, he was a constant frequenter of Paul's Walk, and consequently well versed in ail the news and scandal ofthe day. The king's alarming intimations had rendered it imperatively necessary for Sir Rupert to send without delay an ap-
prisai to his colleagues, both in Yorkshire and Vespasian Tower, to put a present stop at tbast to every project relative to Lord St. Oswald's children, whose re¬ moval from Albalanda was yet unknown to him; and having heard that Rhona had arrived in town the preceding even¬ ing, he hastened to Norfolk House, for her to forward his important information to her mother: and at Norfolk House learning that Lady Warburg was rowing on the Thames, he proceeded to make every exertion to speak to her, as well as to deliver to her care his letter to her mother. But as he approached the boat which he knew to be the Duke of Nor¬ folk's, he, to his utter annoyance, per¬ ceived the Duchess of Richmond formed one of the trio of ladies it contained ; and as Her Grace had pronounced that Sanctuary members were unmeet com¬ panions for ladies of distinction, he knew that, in her presence, he must at¬ tempt no more than the mere delivery of his letter for Lady St. Oswald to the care of her fair daughter.
Rosamond had only preceded the ar¬ rival of her lord one day at Vespasian Tower, accompanied by the party with whom she had set out upon her excur¬ sion, and the addition of Signor War¬ burg now pompously habited at her expense ; and on this arrival, Rosamond first learned her lord was not only in England but in London ; when she in¬ stantly despatched a messenger to Oswald House, to state why she had not flown to meet her dear spouse, and to say that the moment she had arranged her guests in Vespasian Tower she must speed on the wings of the wind to Thames Street : but this elaborate epistle of tender con¬ nubial display her lord did not receive in town, he having set out for Vespasian Tower before it reached Thames Street. Amongst the casements opened to ob¬ tain a peep at the arrivals, was one by the fair hand of Rosamond herself. Dinner had been some time ended, and she had retired to change her dress to a costume befitting the amusements intended for the evening. Upon perceiving by whose re-
tinue the quadrangle was now filled, and in one glance at her lord that his haughti¬ ness of bearing bespoke displeasure, she therefore, concluding her epistle had not reached him, instantly despatched her confidential woman, to state the causes which had compelled her apparent inat¬ tention, and to entreat his lordship to haste to his impatient spouse, who could not at that moment conveniently make repair to greet him. Dame Judith executed this embassy with such attention to the wishes ami interests of her lady, that the resentment of Lord St. Oswald was at once ap¬ peased; and requesting Father Hubert to take charge of Lady Mary until his return, his lordship accompanied Mrs. Judith to the chamber of her lady. This re-meeting of Lord and Lady St Oswald, after so protracted a separa¬ tion, was such as affection and unsuspect¬ ing confidence on the one part, and wily blandishments on the other, were calcu¬ lated to render it ; and, to act consistently with the character of maternal tenderness
which she had ever affected towards De Alandeviile, Rosamond now, as soon as conjugal policy permitted any display save that of joy " for her adored lord's return," expressed anxiety to clasp the dear restored to her fond bosom ; and as another w r ell acted lure for paternal gratitude, to her lord's surprise and plea¬ sure, she announced impatience to wel¬ come Ladv Alarv, " who, from her own perceivancc she knew had arrived with his lordship." But Lord St Oswald would not have experienced so much surprise, had he sus¬ pected the passions were the keepers of the Æolian stores in Rosamond's fluc¬ tuating mind ; for Æolus never presided over winds more variable than the "mental gales of the artful, who blow cold and hot, and from every point in the compass of scheming, as their plans veer like the fickle element. At the moment of Alary's arrival at Vespasian Tower, Rosamond, in the excitement of new irritations caused by a letter just received from Lady War¬ burg, refusing to return until it should
please her own fancy, and levelling many insolent sarcasms at her mother's specu¬ lation of the Venetian beggar, was ac¬ tually planning to seek out some young rival for Rhona, who might prove the in¬ sulted mother's avenger by alluring admi¬ ration from the ingrate daughter : but where to find such an individual to per¬ form this retaliation was posing Rosa¬ mond, to the manifest discomposure of her serenity and the discomfort of her chamber damsels, when Lady Alary do Rhone dropped from the irritated mother's lucky stars ; for instantaneously it struck Rosamond, that through a combination of causes none could prove more likely to attract attention, at least, from Latly Warburg than Lady Alary, and that therefore, were she (Rosamond) to send her implacable enmity towards this child of Adela to temporary rest, she could, by a guise of kindness, manœuvre ber stepdaughter into the wounding instru¬ ment she had been at her wits' ends to procure. Alary, in the study of her revered
friend Father Hubert, was calling all the powers of her mind into active readiness to bear her through the trials she doubted not awaited her; and with such fearful anticipation of all she had to expect from malevolence in Vespasian Tower, the sur¬ prise was indeed infinite and pleasurable which assailed our agitated heroine, when Lady St. Oswald in fascinating guise ap¬ peared, and, after a maternal reception to De Mandeville that awakened the gratitude of his affectionate sister, extended her tender embrace to Mary, and bade her welcome in the very tones of true sin¬ cerity. Mary for a moment doubted if this, after all, might not prove another attempt to make sport of her ; but in a moment more the ingenuousness of her own dis¬ position led her to relinquish this suspi¬ cion ; and she therefore responded to this specious seeming with affecting grace, which but augmented Rosamond's fell hatred, and yet inspired congratulation upon the promise of sure reprisals for her daughter's offences. Not that Lady St.
Oswald pronounced Mary superior to Lady Warburg in form or fiice ; but she at once developed that Lady Mary was indebted to nature for fascinations which art had laboured with all her skill to yield to Rhona. Rosamond herself now most courte¬ ously conducted Mary to a pleasant suite of chambers, which she announced thus luckily trapped for occupation, in conse¬ quence of having expected other guests, who had disappointed her; then kindly added—" Should you, my dear love, find anv matters lacking comfort and consola* tion, incontinently let me wot of it; when it will be for my pleasance to see the dis- commodiousness conformed to goodly guise right excellently, as well it will be¬ come me for the child of my belovetl lord and my sainted protectress :" and having thus winningly performed the ho¬ nours of a courteous hostess to her yet agitated guest, Rosamond withdrew to allow Lady Mary opportunity to make her toilet. Mary judiciously arranged her dress so ? ft
as to elicit no remark either upon its splen¬ dour or the reverse. Good taste was her chief object ; and in this, even in dress, did this child of seclusion excel : since the moment Sir Ethelbert discovered that the wardrobe of Mary was supplied from the coarsest material, the motive struck to lus conviction, and, to subdue its intended influence, he procured casts from Rome and Florence of works most celebrated for the elegant simplicity of their drapery, and had them placed in the study of Fa¬ ther Adrian, as if they had been the holy father's own judicious collection ; added to which, Mrs. Morton had been the most prized fancy worker for female adorn¬ ments in the community where she had professed. Lady Mary was attired a considerable time ere summoned to the guest-chamber; and as her stepdame had adopted so con¬ ciliating a tone, her hopes preponderated of being permitted to pass quietly through the evening. Having determined to retain a place in the back ground as much as possible, so she trusted to escape the
ridicule or unkindness of those prejudiced against her ; but at length her anxious father appeared, to lead her into the circle ofthe family and guests. The most prized of the guests was the Signor Warburg,—a wrinkled old man, who had lost every trace of Englishman in manner and appearance, and looked but little like the scion of an ancient tree ofthe aristocratic forest : but the sterling honour and probity his family had lost, were concentrated within his bosom ; and in Yesparian Tower guest-chamber, he now sat, silenced, humbled, and miserable, through internal upbraidings for having uttered untruths in his announcement of his estate to his benevolent kinswoman, although his intention was not to injure any being ; and impatient to emerge from what he feared was a dishonourable dis¬ guise, because not the livery of truth, he would have given many and many a che- quin that he had never assumed it. But the poor Signor, though wary and intelli¬ gent upon matters of business, was no adept in any other speculation ; and hav-
ing mingled little with any but the com¬ mercial world, no one was more liable to beguiled by insidious policy: therefore his plan of deceiving others, to avoid decep¬ tion in his choice of an heir, was not very likely to meet success. Another of the present guests in Ves¬ pasian Tower, was the venerable Lady Jaqueline Widville, ofthe family of Lady Elizabeth Grey, the consort of Edward IV. — a spinster, proud of her noble descent, and of the exalted talents of her race. She had passed the early years of her life and transcendent beauty in banishment, tlirough the civil warfare of distracted England ; and at length returned to her native land, withered, companionless, and with little means to present her with even the necessaries of life, far, far below that style to which through birth she was en¬ titled. But Lady Jaqueline being deemed a highly gifted personage, whose judgment was appreciated, Rosamond en¬ trapped her friendship, since her fair word would advantage herself and wily daughter ; whilst to Lady Jaqueline the
comforts and luxuries of Vespasian Tower could not fail in attraction : and conse¬ quently she had passed many a month there, out of many a year, resounding the praises of Ladies St. Oswald and War¬ burg, whom she believed superlative ; and annoying the frivolous and unlettered by her literary acquirements and know¬ ledge ofthe language and history of every country in which she had found shelter, as well as by her enthusiasm, which seemed fast approaching to insanity as her years accumulated, relative to the beauty, superexcellcnces, and misfortunes of her kindred. Sir Edmund Target could scarcely r come under the denomination ofa guest, since, from the moment of Lord St Oswald's last departure, \ T espasian Tower became, as it should seem, Sir Edmund's home. Rosamond had become ac¬ quainted with him in Italy, where, with her first husband's perfect approbation, he performed her cicisbeo. Ile was a fine looking man, though now verging from the prime of life. His fortune was re-
ported by himself and Rosamond affluent: and having passed so much of his time abroad as to have become a perfect con¬ noisseur in all the une arts, and in none more completely than that of flattering beauty, he completely ingratiated himself into the favour of the fair ladies in Ves¬ pasian Tower; and having performed something of a crusade, and attended every tournament of celebrity in the south of Europe for the last twenty years, he was well versed in all the feats and pastimes of the age : and he it was who had infused into the mind of Rhona the idea of her tournament, and from whence he would not suffer it to escape ; since nothing pleased him more mightily than forming a prominent figure in chivalric spectacles. Mrs. Alice Sneakup we have already in¬ troduced ; and were there any difference to be found in this dame since her last appearance, it might be that she had be¬ come more grovelling in her subservience to Lady Warburg—more malevolent and insolent to all whom she perceived were
not in the estimation of her idol. Besides the above, there were none of the guests, inmates, or household, whom we find it necessary to identify — although of in¬ mates there were many youths and dam¬ sel? who had at first entered Vespasian Tower for the advantages of pupilage, whilst Rhona and De Alandeviile were educating ; but although having obtained ail the advantages they had ostensibly come thither to acquire, they still con¬ tinued there, with only occasional flights of absence,—so much had the allurements of Lady Warburg fascinated the young lords and gentlemen, and the gaiety of Vespasian Tower both lords and ladies and gentlemen and gentlewomen. There was a large party assembled in the guest-chamber ere Lord St. Oswald led in his blushing trembling daughter, to take for the first time her place amid the guests or establishment of his house¬ hold. And to that daughter it was a for¬ midable introduction : but being received with conspicuous complacency by the lady of the mansion insured at once the
courteous seeming of all Rosamond's sa¬ tellites, whilst her own modest grace and sweetness of bearing pleasing all others present, soon diminished the ter¬ rors of such a formidable introduction ; and as Mrs. Morton had been permitted, by Lady St. Oswald's gracious invitation, to accompany her, Alary with some de¬ gree of comfort tool; her seat in the circle, as her beloved governess was placed be¬ side her.
CHAP. III. Lady Jaqueline pronounced Lady Alary like the Wid villes; and in an audible whisper to her neighbour added, she was precisely the captivating creature, with intelligence beaming sweetly through every turn of her heavenly countenance, that her dear and superlatively girted, mar¬ tyred and sainted cousin Anthony Wid- vilìe (Lord Rivers) would have chosen for his lady love, had she lived in his time. So audible had been the whisper of Lady Jaqueline, that it occasioned the suffusion of a brilliant blush over the face of the astonished Alary ; and as blushes were a rare adornment in Vespasian Tower, the novelty aroused at once the rapturous admiration of Lady Jaqueline, who exclaimed—» Oh, what a rosy blush ! By my troth ! an* it is the very twin to that which impainted my illustrious kins-
woman's before pale cheeks, upon per¬ ceivance of King Edward's passioned glance at her when she came before him with implorement for her children's right. Ay, forsooth, such was the Lancastrian rose which sent its endarting sweets to the heart ofa York." " Howbeit that you come to wot the précisément of the tint, lady of perdur¬ able memory?" exclaimed Mrs. Alice vvith a sneer. " Oh !" replied Lady Jaqueline, not in the least offended at this sarcasm, and in full conscientious conviction that all which this family mania led her boasts to utter was reality ; " that blush, Mrs. Alice, was of so fair a fashion, it cannot gar our surprise its souvenance should find existence in family recordance — or when the tempest lowered so oftimes over us, that we should make restment where'er the sunshine gleamed," " But if the recordation of ye Wid¬ villes be so restful upon gone matters, percase you may have skill to insculp for us the contortions of your famous anees-
tors who suffered on the dern block," responded Dame Alice, with a demoniac smile and a triumphant elevation of her head at the superlative wit she had thus elanced. This exulting triumph w r as, how r ever, not of long duration ; for Lord St Os¬ wald, shocked at her want of feeling, and indignant at such an allusion finding utterance beneath his roof, exclaimed in atone that betrayed his feelings—"Were Lady Jaqueline so apt in family heroism for such an itnpaintment of the sufferings of the brave and honourable, I am hope¬ ful none present would misuse humanity by listening to aught so despiteous ; for the inhospitality then must fortune me to chase them from beneath my rooÇ as unmeet copemates." Lord St. Oswald thus silenced Airs. Alice, and awakened more disrelish fir his lordship's return to stand guard over the manners and morals of his household than had already existed ; for, in truth, he was an unwelcome intruder to almost all the inhabitants of Vespasian Tower,
who bad, during his absence, run wild in the path of pleasure and self-will ; as the admiration-seeking Rosamond and her fair daughter never attempted to curb any indulgence which did not inconveni¬ ence themselves or tarnish the lustre of their own fame, lest by so doing they might diminish their popularity : so that all those who had long uncontrolledlv winged their way through the regions of self-indulgence, now fearing a clip of pinions to confine them in the sombre ground of decorum, felt extreme annoy¬ ance at the return of him they all pro¬ nounced a scrupulous tyrant. Yet, notwithstanding all this indulgent licence, there existed but little harmony amid the individuals of this tolerant household. The mania for visiting Paris some years back, having recently infected the young lords and gentlemen of Ves¬ pasian Tower, the indulgent Rosamond permitted them to visit that alluring city; not, as it appeared, to acquire information at the University, but, like their prece¬ dent countrymen, „o imbibe disrelish to
their native land, and for every thing to be found therein —. Lady Warburg alone excepted: so that the fair damsels of Vespasian Tower, for whom, through the infatuated idolatry of Rhona, contrasting scorn had already emanated, were beheld with contempt and treated with cool impertinence ; which fully evinced these knights and squires having left every former chivalric feeling towards the fe¬ male world behind in France, which rapidly led to every reprisal that the wit or humour or heart-wrung jealousy of the despised or insulted fair ones could devise. This day was sultry, and Lady St. Oswald pronounced it not inviting for field pastime or gymnastics ; and she re¬ gulated for those oí die ladies or gen¬ tlewomen who were competent, to amuse the circle by their musical abilities until the evening cooled sufficiently forexercise, so that virginals, and lutes, and human voices, were called into requisition ; and the fair personages vvho were in the best humour for this employment exerted their
abilities, and might have succeeded in yielding harmonised amusement, had it not been for the unmannered travellers, who, in performing the usual courtesy most ceremoniously practised in chivalric times, affected not only ennui, but abso¬ lute detestation of such tame and unfo- reign performances, and yawned or evinced other symptoms of disrelish — often turning over two leaves instead of one, in the most inopportune moment, when some striking effect vvas about to be attempted. That music little surpassing mediocrity could charm Lord St. Oswald, who had passed so many years in Italy, was out of the question, but urbanity led him to bestow profound attention upon each performance, and by so doing to observe the reprehensible conduct of the males of the household ; and he was sponta¬ neously hastening to act those courtesies which with indignation he perceived so glaringly omitted, when the policy struck him of allowing all matters in this so strangely regulated family to take their
usual course, and silently to note all, ere he should adopt measures for an effectual change of system. And soon Lord de Alandeviile, and Sir Algernon also, perceived this extraordi¬ nary conduct towards these fair damsels vvho were humming and strumming tbeir kind efforts to amuse the circle, and in¬ tuitively they flew to turn over new- leaves indeed of politesse and harmony. The sun declined,and field pastimes were about to be commenced, when a sudden thunder shower sent the whole party to shelter in the guest-chamber ; to the infinite relief of those so out of sorts with their own country and countrywo¬ men, and at the absence of Lady War¬ burg and arrival of their unwelcome lord paramount, that they felt no relish for fatiguing themselves with boisterous ex¬ ertions to amuse those whom they despised. But with evident animation they soon paired off to gamble at mumchance, tic- tack, &c. until the supper messes called them to the hall, where the distance of many of them from their paramount'« vol. in. D
board-end prevented his lordship from observing much of their uncourteous con¬ duct at table: but during their pastimes after the supper-boards were taken up, Lord St. Oswald ascertained that jeers and hanterings upon the serious subject of religion were amongst their favourite sports; — one youth ridiculing Luther and his doctrines; another laughing at the king's supremacy"; and another sneer¬ ing with all his might at His Holiness himself: whilst the conduct of Sir Ed¬ mund Target was as little pleasing to his lordship, since the doughty knight seemed intent upon developing the reli¬ gious principles of his host, who, how¬ ever, was too well versed in diplomatic caution to be lured into making any thing public which he w 7 ished concealed ; and all that Sir Edmund could accomplish by his wily manœuvring, was to lead Lord St. Oswald into discoursing most pleas- iiuriv ofthe countries he had visited, like an historian who states facts without in¬ termingling his own acts with them. Ami altogether so strange and unpleasant a
household did his lordship consider this of Vespasian Tower, that ere he retired to his pillow he had determined to dis¬ solve it, even should it require his speedy migration to Albalanda, where sad re- remembrances would flit around him with pointed arrows to wound his repentant heart ; but where he believed the chil¬ dren of the peerless Adela might remain uncontaminated by pernicious example, Mary retired to her pillow full ot thankfulness for one day having passed in Vespasian Tower without her having been made sport of, and with such ap¬ parent aniity with her stepdame ; and next morning she arose in full brilliancy of loveliness and playfulness of vivacity to aptly accord with Lady St. Oswald's plan for mortifying the vanity of Rhona. But another day was not doomed to pass so tranquilly for Mary, who having, in com¬ pliance with her brother's wish, attended him at early dawn to visit his own mews, was wending her way by the side of the happy De Mandeville, when Sir Alger¬ non joined them, and, in tones that d 2
betrayed regret, announced, he was come to say farewell, as he had just received express a mandate from the Duke of Norfolk to attend him incontinently in London. This intelligence came like a shaft of hostility to the happiness of Edward and Mary ; and they looked so grieved, and De Mandeville expressed so much genu¬ ine regret at the thought of his absence, let it prove ever so transient, that the grateful Algernon assured them it should prove as transient as he could find power to make it : but soon perceiving that Mary became paler and still paler, and had at once lost all the sportive buoyancy of mien which had excited his admira¬ tion as he approached her, it struck him that alarm for her own and brother's safety upon being thus deprived of one of their faithful guards had thus affected her; and therefore he assured her she had nothing to apprehend from decrease of guardage, since His Majesty's decla¬ ration stood as an adamantine rock of defence for them.
«Oh! I thought not of that matter," replied Mary, in tones so sadly plaintive that they melted the hearts of her hearers to almost weeping sympathy : „ but what rock is to guarantee your safety» Algernon, when exposed to the dern treachery of rebellion ? Be assured the insurgents, it imagines me, no longer restful, have caused the duke to send for your aidance thus." « Were this the case, Lady Mary, the duke, I wis, could not but have tarried at his post," replied Algernon, with a heart bounding, though not with fear. " His being in London yields advisement at once, that there is nothing to be told of in the North to demand his valiance there ; and I imagine me it is merely to obtain from my recordation, intelligence relative to prisoners we have in guardage, that I am thus incontinently summoned." " Heaven forefend all evil ! " faltered out the agitated Mary, as she grasped the arm of her brother more firmly for sup¬ port, to conceal the tremulous agitation she feared would become perceptible. ? 3
" I will wend with you to Norfolk House, to seek apprizemcnt if there is aught abroach to astert your sister and brother for your dear safety, Algernon," said De Mandeville anxiously. " No, no, my kind, my affectionate friend and brother," responded Alger¬ non, almost overpowered by gratitude ; " such a wend would not be for Lord St. Oswald's contentation : but I promise you an express, with faithed advisement ofthe whole matter." Being pressed to immediate attendance by this mandate signed by the duke, Fitzrivers made not one moment of un¬ necessary delay, although it was pain and grief to quit his beloved young friends—more especially Mary, ere she had made her own sure way to the good opinion of the strangers by whom she was surrounded ; and with a heavy heart he soon bade adieu to Edward, Alary, and their father. No speculation upon the probable cause of this summons to Norfolk House oc¬ cupied the thoughts of Algernon as he
winged his fleet way to London : for the pale* cheek of Lady Mary, in striking contrast to its preceding brilliancy of bloom, still floated before his vision ; and the tremor of her icy hand when be pressed it in adieu, was so imprinted upon his feelings, that the contemplation of any other theme was wholly banished ; — no, not even to cherish the recollec¬ tion that the beauteous being who had so long reigned goddess of his idolatry might possibly be an inhabitant of the mansion to which he was speeding. And had even this exhilarating possibility beamed upon his imagination, no pre¬ sentiment would probably have arisen with it of the dangers he was hastening to encounter in her seductive society; — dangers of no common form, since they were of deep menace to his own future peace, and the prosperity and happiness of those he loved and those to whom his gratitude was debtor; for this man¬ date, which now called him to Norfolk House, was a trap set for him by the in¬ genuity of the designing Rhona, who D 4
herself was the tool of the diabolical Constance. Constance, who, in her vengeful enmity to the only legitimate child of her profligate sire, had mined into some of the deep secrets of Llanel- len's Rock, had sent her secret injunc¬ tions to the willing Rhona, to leave no lure unattempted to bind her hand to Sir Algernon, whom Constance declared she possessed power to restore to rank and riches which must satisfy ambition, and which would enable her dear Rhona to inflict ample vengement upon her mother for late unkindliness. This transporting intelligence from her demoniac friend was, whilst filling the mind of Rhona with anticipation of delights, perplexing her to find oppor¬ tunities for insuring her success with Sir Algernon ; when the messenger whom she bad despatched with her insolent letter to her mother brought her intelli¬ gence of having, up >n his return, encoun¬ tered Lords St. Oswald and De Mande¬ ville, Sir Algernon Fitzrivers, two ladies, and a cavalcade of attendants, pacing up
Shooters' Hill, and that, upon question- ing one of the train, he learned they« were on progress to Vespasian Tower. Immediately it struck the Alachia- velian Lady Warburg, that it would be better policy to extract Fitzrivers from Vespasian Tower to her present abode, than for her tojóin him where her step- sire would be continually calling him from her side, De Alandeviile interrupt¬ ing her plans by bis pranks, and her mother subverting them. The Duchess of Norfolk being now detained in the metropolis by family con¬ cerns, and Catherine Howard having some masques and numimings in train, and being at a loss for a talented per¬ former to fill a prominent character in each, Rhona recommended Sir Algernon ; when the fair friends, fearing that Lord St. Oswald would not permit his attend¬ ance, and Rhona remembering how well the pretended letter from the Star-cham¬ ber had worked her mother's plot at Al¬ balanda, Catherine applied to Airs. Hol¬ land for aid, and this accommodating D Ô
auxiliary purloined from her husband's papers one signed by the Duke of Nor¬ folk, and left in Mr. Holland's hands for borne expected purpose ; which paper these plotting damsels converted into a summons for Sir Algernon. Not feeling sufficient confidence in our own judgment, or sagacity for so accurately developing characters whom we personally knew not, as faithfully to depict them, we therefore shrink from giving scenes imagined by ourselves as performed by once existing persons, save only where competent notoriety permits our doing so without adding to or di¬ minishing their posthumous fame or real merits. For this cause we do not enter vvith Algernon into Norfolk House, where our meetings with the Duchess of Nor¬ folk, Duke and Duchess of Richmond, Lord and Lady Surry, &c. &c. might puzzle our accuracy in every turn ; it must sunice to state that only which con¬ cerned our hero, whose astonishment was infinite upon finding no Duke of Norfolk in London, but greater still when the fas-
einatme confederates acknowledged tbeir having thus entrapped him to add hh powers to the play-pleasures they had in preparation,—an entailment which neither the courteous gallantry of the times nor of his own nature could allow Alger¬ non's extrication from, until he yieldet! his aid in the pastimes he was thus called in to join ; when during this period of his sojourn in Norfolk House, the se¬ ducing lures ofthe beauteous Rhona were unceasing to beguile him into declaration of the smouldering flame she felt con¬ viction he had long cherished for her, yet without these unceasing efforts having been crowned with the success so point¬ edly aimed at : and immediately after the last performance of their masques, Algernon, anxious for escape, contrived to effect a plausible pretext for an irreme¬ diable return to Vespasian Tower — and that, even after he had found on a table in his dormitory an anonymous letter, stating that the secret of his birthdom was known to a sincere friend, who had long ob¬ served his attachment to the amiable and d G
lovely Rhona Warburg ; and which friend, approving of this union, would come forward the moment a betroth ment w j as seriously entered into between him and Lady Warburg, to proclaim secrets and produce proofs which should restore him to his high estate in society, and over¬ whelm usurpers and those who caused his bereavement. Scarcely had Fitzrivers taken his de¬ parture from Norfolk House, ere the disappointed and highly mortified Rhona despatched a conciliatory epistle to her offended mother, to announce her inten¬ tion of returning home, as she no longer could endure the protraction of her heart¬ felt welcome to her honoured stepsire and her beloved brother. Artfully fabri¬ cated as this composition was, the indi¬ vidual to whom this peace offering was addressed being as artful as the com¬ poser of it, it did not deceive. Rosa¬ mond saw its conciliatory tones were not from the heart, and anticipated the same provocations which had so long wounded her maternal feelings and fe-
male vanity would be repeated ; and Ro¬ samond rejoiced that there awaited the return of Rhona so potent a rival in the hated Mary. Yet Mary had never made one effort, since she bad entered Vespasian Tower, to aim in any guise to elicit admiration. The playful fascinations of her natural manners seemed here under some unge¬ nial restraint ; her heart was no longer the heart that was sportive and gay at Albalanda : and De Mandeville vainly murmured at the sombre Mary ; who ac¬ knowledged she was out of her element, and that he must have patience with her until she became used to the world, when inurement in the manner of it might enliven her into the companion she had been to him in their dear, dear, native Albalanda. And in Albalanda her father was anxiously planning to replace her; for her fading bloom led him to fear the air of Kent was as ungenial to her health, as with pain he saw the manners adopted in Vespasian Tower must prove to her mo-
rals : and in much distress at being led to any thing so uncourteous, his lordship had ventured to express to his fair spouse his disapprobation of the levity and ill manners which disgraced her household ; when, vvith that fascination of conciliatory .sweetness she had at all times endea¬ voured to assume before his lordship, she promised, herself to observe and to correct the evil, — assuring him that it must have sprung up during the ab¬ sence of Rhona, when, having all the superior guests to attend to, she had no time for perceivance of this lack of grace. The return of Algernon was hailed with boundless joy by the delighted De Mandeville, and seemed at once to restore the bloom to Mary's cheeks, and to in¬ spire her vvith courage to be animated and playful in this alarming new world. Yet Algernon was not now the enlivening companion he had been before this tem¬ porary absence. His tones and smiles were become almost mournful ; and his was now the pale cheek, save when flushed
with exercise t tbr his heart was the abode of sadness, — sadness which no soft ray from hope's soothing prospective beamed to cheer—sadness that could find no relief or consolation cither from sympathy or ad¬ vice; since his beloved Father Kenrick was far distant from him, and the hazard oí" committing his secrets to paper he dared not encounter ; andin none near him could he, nor would he, venture to confide. .And one ainon&st the causes which now implanted sadness and perplexity within the bosom of Sir Algernon, arose from the flattering and unexpected encouragement Lady Warburg had all at once a>sumed towards him, as if there no longer existed any impediment to the open display of tender reciprocal attachment : for it alarmed him with dire apprehension, lest his silent unobtruding admiration could have been construed as absolute confessed passion which sought for reciprocity ; for then his honour must be implicated, could it be proved that he had so reprehensibly comported himself under the dern cir¬ cumstances of his hapless fortunes, and
SIR ETHELBERT. ere he had found conviction within his bosom, that Lady Warburg was the being whom he could love and estimate for ever: and that she was not, causes had lately sprung up in numbers to lead him not only to suspect but to believe; and now neither her seductive encouragement, nor the alluring promise of restoration to his estate in society, could flatter his heart into the cherishment of a wish to unite his fate vvith Lady Warburg. There existing no public communica¬ tions at this period for announcing to the multitude the movements of the great, or political individuals or events, the Duke of Norfolk not having made any recent transit from the North remained a pro¬ found secret to all the inhabitants of Ves¬ pasian Tower, save those only to whom Fitzrivers found it expedient to declare that his summons had been an exploit to make up a deficiency in the dramatis personœ of masques and niummings: and though Fitzrivers was not one of those fastidious beings who shrink from the sem¬ blance of untruths in harmless sportive-
ness ; yet he could not approve of such a direct misapplication of any man's sig¬ nature, nor the ease with which Lady Warburg acknowledged to him, that it had not been a mandate from His Grace which had caused to Lord St. Oswald the inconvenience of being deprived of the services of a confidential secretary in a moment when political business required them. And this political business, which afforded Algernon his pretext for speed¬ ing from Norfolk House, gave wings to Lady Warburg's flight thence also; for her ladyship felt alarmed lest it might end in converting the confidential secretary into an active agent and despatching him to some foreign clime, ere she had brought him to open confession of his love, and that betrothment her friend Constance had arranged. CD The altered aspect of Fitzrivers, and his flown animation, were visible to Edward as well as Mary : and although they neither alluded to their observation be¬ fore him, they exerted themselves with
tender kindness to devise all things which they trusted might withdraw his mind from painful contemplation ; which they sometimes conjectured arose from politi¬ cal horrors of executions about to be enacted — sometimes they feared from new calamity connected with his own sad story— whilst sometimes Alary felt con¬ viction that all arose from hopeless love for the beauteous Lady Warburg.
CHAP. IV. Thk morning of Lady Warburg's ex¬ pected arrival arose serene, cloudless and the sun resplendent, as if to meet the wishes of the young lords and gentlemen resident in Vespasian Tower ; for they had arranged a gaily trapped boat in which to attend her as convoy from Quecnhithe, as she had announced her intention of returning from Norfolk House to Vespasian Tower by water : and for the accomplishment of this tri¬ bute of homage to this idol of their idolatry they had been occupied the pre¬ ceding evening in anxious preparation, to the infinite annoyance of Sir Algernon, who resolved not to form one of these adulating attendants ; yet he feared his not doing so must appear ungrateful to the beauteous Rhona, whose recent conduct had been so condescendingly flattering, while, to join in any marked homage
to her, after such unequivocal encourage¬ ment, was arbitrarily forbidden by va¬ rious causes. But in this dilemma, Lord St. Oswald performed his extricating genius : for his lordship determined that De Mandeville, who had become as amenable to parental controul as Mary herself, should enter into no projects of these youths, whom he had found reason to dislike, and knowing that if Fitzrivers tarried at home, Edward would feel no discontent at doing so, announced that he could not spare Sir Algernon from the business which bis late absence had so materially impeded. At length this gallant convoy em¬ barked, trapped in the most becoming bravery which Sir Miles Billyment could devise,-—Sir Miles, the prime beau of the establishment, whose attachment to him¬ self equally counterpoised that he bore to Lady Warburg; and those who wished to obtain the latest information upon the subject of apparel, and where the most becoming articles pertaining to it could be purchased, bad only to listen to Sir
Miles during his pauses from sighmg, when they might be assured of every in¬ telligence they required. The boat was furnished with a full band from the mu¬ sicians of the household, and with the full chorus of a noise of wind instru¬ ments bore away the enamoured gal¬ lants, attended by no approbation but their own : for the female residents of Vespasian Tower were all in dudgeon at such an escort sallying forth without their accompaniment ; Lord St. Oswald not pleased that his gentle spouse had not prohibited its salliance, since it lacked the meet decorum of female at¬ tendance, in which should have been comprised a discreet matron apt for the guardage of a young maiden ; Algernon annoyed lest an apology for non-attend¬ ance might be expected by Lady War¬ burg and if made to her might appear as if he conceived her entitled to every homage from him as her devoted suitor ; whilst the bosom's rage of Rosamond at such attentions to her daughter almost defied concealment, since no return of
her own to Vespasian Tower, after any absence, had ever been so highly ho¬ noured. But the fair damsels of Vespasian Tower possessed not tame spirits to en¬ dure all this provoking contempt of them, and adulation of another, unrevenged — more especially as they had so many slights and impertinences registered in remembrance, committed by these offend¬ ers ; and they had, in consequence of discovering the secret preparations for this exclusive escort, in as secret a coun¬ cil decreed to endeavour at avengement : and accordingly, one of them being niece to the prior of St. Bride's monastery, ap¬ plied to the kind churchman, and pro¬ claimed to him their provocations and their wishes ; and none could thev have been fated to find, who would have been more ready, anxious, and willing to aid in their harmless retaliation than this benign and mirth-loving priest, who, besides his inclination to please and soothe these fair creatures who had been so uncourteously maltreated, had a greater
number of youths for pupilage in his community than could be found in any other throughout the county, and had assembled at this precise moment an an¬ nual visitation of former pupils, whom he invited to perforin under his delighted eye their wonted and vaunted exploits in their old haunts ; and therefore every arrangement was speedily made with the kind prior for their plot, unknown to any but their confederates in the neighbouring monastery. As it did not accord with the plans for cntoiling universal esteem and admiration adopted bv Rosamond, to allow the dis¬ union of herself and daughter to become manifest, she found herself compelled to appear at the spot appointed for the fair Rhona's landing, to bid her now long absent child welcome to her maternal arms; and therefore prepared her mea¬ sures for personating a fond mother : and Lady Mary soon learned that she was expected to attend Lady St. Oswald in this public exhibition ; and poor Alary also found it was a matter which would
demand every effort of her fhmness to perform with composure: for she had made discovery that the partiality she had permitted to take root in her bosom j. was expanding into tenderness likely to embitter her future happiness. And this individual, whom she was then called upon to welcome, was the being whom she had long suspected was the lady love of Algernon : and how in sincerity could she give welcome to a person who was coming to let her behold an attach¬ ment which must pang her heart with the misery of hopeless love — love likely for endurance ; since through her life Algernon had been placed by fate as the flower of her path, yielding her almost every sweet that life had known ? But to go, to behold, and welcome the lady love of Algernon, could not be avoid¬ ed : and Mary determined, whatever pangs might assail her in this trial, they should not be visible to mortal observation ; and that she w r ould endeavour to become the steady friend of Algernon's beloved, and hope and trust she should find her as
perfect in goodness as she was In beauty. Yet still she feared Rhotia was not quite the being meet for the happiness of Al¬ gernon ; for the night of Rock cliff* festivi¬ ties had raised doubts in the mind of Mary, of the sterling stamp of Rhona's mental excellence, and much she ap¬ prehended the selfishness evinced by Lady Warburg in the moments of alarm did not guaranty for tender affection apt for a wife whose anxiety woukl pant to preserve the safety and happiness of her husband ere she bestowed one thought upon her own. At length several chambers from a point which commanded a full view of the river announced, by their explosion, the anxiously expected boat froni Norfolk House and its convoy had appeared in sight ; and Lady St. Oswald repaired to the great hall, where the mustering of her party for the pompous ceremony of welcoming this world's idol was promptly to take place : and though these signal guns seemed to strike with baleful influ¬ ence to the heart of pooi Mary, she vol. ία. ?
dashed at once into action, like the brave hero who unfalteringly speeds to the forlorn hope, where death he knows awaits him. Although remote from observation was her internal conflict, its agitation had flushed her checks, but not now un¬ becomingly; and having had woman sufficient in her composition, she had arrayed herself with taste and elegant simplicity, and at length, linked to the arm of her governess, hastened to join the assembling party in the great hall. Lady St Oswald turned her eager scrutiny upon the aspect and habiliments of her stepdaughter, when the lout ensemble paradoxically struck her with both pain and pleasure ; — her cherished hatred to the benefactress whom she had so basely requited, with dire enmity to Lady Alary herself, darted poisoned shafts through her vindictive and envious heart, on beholding that being so lovely and so graceful, whom she had toiled to render so disgusting ; whilst demoniac influence inspired her with demoniac joy, in feeling assured this noxious Alary would
exbale for her the blastments of apt re¬ taliation to pang the wincing heart of the dire ingrate Rhona. De Mandeville, anxious to ascertain how Alary had garbed herself for this great occasion, exerted unusual expe¬ dition in the completion of his own toilet, and had preceded her into the hall. His eager scrutiny being answered satisfac¬ torily, he smiled in delighted approbation upon his sister ; whose heart feeling with livel ν gratitude this fraternal interest, her responsive smile was so fascinating in affection's sweetness, that it led Lady Jaqueline to exclaim in wild enthusiasm — "One of the very smiles of enchantment that are upon recordation, which were ever and anon beholden to pass in af¬ fection's contentation atween the at¬ tached brothers, my durefullv lamented royal kinsmen, Edward the Fifth and Richard of York, even whilst in the dern Tower;—nay, in good sooth, and in the eventide afore their murder by the deaths- men of their breme uncle. Ween you not the smile of the Lady Alary of ce-
lestial stampage, Sir knight?" turning to address Fitzrivers, to whom she had but a moment before been returning her most cordial acknowledgments for an offer of being her supporting escort to witness the expected debarcation. But Sir Algernon bad vanished ; and poor Lady Jaqueline felt infinitely dis¬ tressed, lest he might have misconceived her grateful acquiescence in his offer, and that she should untowardly be left to totter her weary way to the scene of attraction. However, her gallant knight did not long abandon her to alarm, for the moment Lady St. Oswald motioned for salliance, he was again by Lady Ja¬ queline's side ; and although still sadder than when he had before been near her, yet, by the intensity of his devotedness to her care and comfort, he seemed as if* she was the only thing in life to mono¬ polise his every thought. Lady St. Oswald had been much amazed, upon entering the hall, to per¬ ceive how few of her young lady guests, inmates, or household, were in readiness
there; and not much pleased when Airs. Alice, in a confidential whisper, an¬ nounced that her ladyship could not have their attendance upon this occasion. However, there was now no remedy; and so she smiled as if in delight, although deeply mortified that she must appear with such a scanty train before the multi¬ tude which, Airs. Alice having contrived to send into every crevice intelligence that something worth viewing was to be seen, were thronging in from all direc¬ tions to aid in yielding éclat to the return o f L a dy Wa r b u rg\ To act up to the character of an ador¬ ing mother, by evincing every attention to those wdio assembled to welcome her child to her home, Rosamond had ordered marquees to be pitched for the higher ranks, and benches placed for the multi¬ tude; with viands for all degrees, to regale them after the fatigue of awaiting the arrival of the attracting star, and of joining in, or remaining spectators of, the playpleasures prepared for the occa¬ sion. e 3
None entered the marquees, or seated themselves on the commodious benches, since the margin of the river seemed the present general attraction. The multitude, in one extensive crop, planted closely, with every eager face turned in the same direction, as if to the resplendent sun, whilst the higher ranks stood in groups, like flower plats in a gay parterre ; all that remained of the househokl band of musicians performing on shaums and clarions in glorious noise ; and Weewitte in full costume, and Gabb the Vespasian Tower jester in his best trappings, both beating time—the former lu Tously, the latter consequentially, with their conspi¬ cuous baubles. But at length the noise of music on the embankment was appeased, by the general wish to hear the superior powers of the prime musicians of the household band, who had been extracted from the home station by the escorting gallants, to grace their convoy of Lady Warburg; and whose melodious tones were now stealing on the ear, announcing that the anxiously ex-
pected boats were advancing up the meandering river. A general sensation of wonder had that morning been experienced, on perceiving that, during the night, an apparently strongly fortified castle had been erected upon a picturesque islet on the river, whilst, moored to this islet, were several small pleasure boats : but at length atten¬ tion was drawn from all observation of this mamcal erection to the focus of the expected attraction, and in due time the sound of approaching cornets was heard ; and in the moiuent after this pleasing signal broke on the listening ear, a casement in the mysteriously erected castle suddenlv unclosed, out of which a carrier pigeon flitted, and winged its way towards a hermitage upon the St. Bride embankment, which faced that of the Vespasian Tower domain. Shortly, a hermit appeared, bearing in his hand a scroll, from which he read, in a strain of poetry resembling Skelton's, a strong appeal to courteous and valiant knights to aid some distressed damsels, e 4
who, whilst on the wing of anxiety to welcome home a friend, had the boats for tbeir waftage taken possession of by a band of wild bears from Paris, whilst they themselves were shut up in terror, fearing further evil from these asterting bears. The hermit's pity being awak¬ ened, he attempted to board the most contiguous of the boats; when instantly up started a shaggy bear in every boat, and growled defiance. But the hermit was not to be foiled ; for in a trice he summoned to the bank a party of archers, who, by a discharge of arrows, despatched the savage quadrupeds, and, knocking down the massy walls of the castle, dis¬ covered the bower of Flora, in which were picturesquely grouped the Vespa¬ sian Tower damsels, as Graces and Aluscs and nymphs of fabulous celebrity. In another trice, the prior's barge came gliding out from an inlet which wound down from the monastery of St. Bride, now gaily trapped with sails and awn¬ ings of cloth of gold and canopies of flowers, manned with meet mariners, and
in it ranged the vocalists of the convent choir, whose abilities were the admiration ofthe whole county— now 7 not chanting pious hymnics, but enchanting with popular airs in full chorus; whilst on the awning were grouped, in recumbent attitudes, bands of Cupids armed with bows and arrows, to ward off every dan¬ ger from the rescued damsels, who were presently established in the barge and on their waftage to meet their expected friend ; and on each side of the barge glided the very boats which had been cap¬ tured by the Parisian bears, out of whose shaggy hides had unexpectedly emerged braces of Cupids, who now bore, vvith the most graceful effect, canopies and wreaths ofthe gayest and most fragrant flowers. And soon the two grand attractions appeared in mutual sight, and con- fronted each other ; and never was inno¬ cent avengement more successful. The boats and gallants from Vespasian Tower were no longer gazed upon, although the bright star Venus was in their hem U sphere j and all which they bad arranged E 5
for homage to their divinity appeared at once contemptible, whilst that imagined by the despised damsels for the same purpose obtained the laud of acclamation from those surrounding them. And now the triumph being completed in the achievement of our constellation of fair stars gracing this transit of Venus, no longer was a sound to be heard but the enchanting strains of the choristers, save the ripple of the translucent water over which the boats glided to their point of destination ; until a simultaneous shout r from her satellites proclaimed that the beauteous Lady Warburg had placed her dear little feet once more on terraJirma. A gallant band of friars, lords, and gen¬ tlemen, from St. Bride's, attended at the water's edge to aftord aidance to the bright stars in their debarcation, and Lords St. Oswald and De Mandeville had pressed forward to give their cordial welcome to their dear It hona ; who, therefore, in this throng of gallant wei- corners, had no immediate opportunity to detect the absence of Fitzrivers from
amid this cordial group : but at length she did detect it, and perceived him at no great distance bestowing his devoted attention upon Lady Jaqueline Widville. " But might not this be policy,'* Rhona soon consoled herself with thinking, "to conceal their mutual love from those who might endeavour to divide them ? or, possibly, a continuance of that provoking diffidence in his own attractions which lately seemed to render him so impene¬ trable to her encouragement for avow- ment ofhis passion?" These thoughts and consolations allowed her not, however, to pause in her exhibitions for universal admiration ; and, from the embrace of Lord St Oswald and his son, she flew to prostrate herself in duteous homage be¬ fore her lady mother, — that mother with whom she was in dire enmity, — and to smile in affection's guise, and invoke ma¬ ternal blessings, as if in heart she prized them. Rosamond performed her part effect¬ ively in this sublime scene of histrionic art, and all believed it real but their con- E 6
fidants ; and Lady Mary saw 7 all with such an approving eye, that she could scarcely longer doubt Rhona's being worthy of the love of Algernon, and resolved to o m mence being no longer grieved at his choice. In this moment of benum kindliness of feeling, her hand was sud¬ denly taken by Lady St. Oswald, to pre¬ sent her to Lady Warburg ; and never, perhaps, in Mary's whole life had there been a moment in which she had looked more attractive. The smile of hope for Algernon's happiness sat in seraphic sweetness on her lips — the radiance of benevolence beamed from her beautiful eyes — whilst the sudden surprise awak¬ ened by her stepdame's grasp, with the nature of the introduction it had pre¬ faced, gave a bright tint to her cheeks, as with dignity and grace she sustained her part in this presentation to the capti¬ vating Rhona ; and from this moment many present firmly pronounced that Lady Warburg was not peerless. And also in this moment Rhona saw, and felt, and trembled for the peril her
long undisputed claim to pre-eminence was threatened vvith, and the enmity she hadever borne towards Lady Alary became at once satanical ; and she resolved in unsuspected guise to prove that enmity, vet to flow on serenelv in their course, as if borne on the current of sincere amity. Yet ere this deceptions course of amity had commenced its tranquil glide, one glance ofthe demoniac betrayed itself to a keen observer : her mother beheld it ; and in joyous exultation felt conviction that now she should find her vengement, first upon her undutiful child, anduhen in fierce recoil upon the hateful Alary. As soon as it might appear neither suspiciously prompt, nor the reverse, Sir Algernon made his complimentary greet¬ ings to Lady Warburg; who seductivelv pouted, and coquettishly demanded why, since lie cared so little about her arriv- ance as to perform his greetings so leisurely, he had at all encountered the travail of accosting her. Algernon calmly pleaded not guilty of inattention ; having deferred his welcome
until Lady Oswald, and her other near and dear friends, had gratified the impa¬ tience of affection in anxious greeting after long separation : and then adverting to how lately he had had the honour ot seeing her, hastened to enquire for all the fair ladies he had encountered in Norfolk House ; when a dry response being ob¬ tained from the piqued and alarmed Rhona, he made his graceful bow, and hastened to the side of Lady Jaqueline. Signals now were made for the pastimes of the peasantry to commence, and the running at the quintin immediately suc¬ ceeded : and Rhona, as she sat in the semi¬ circle marked out for the higher orders to observe the game, made every possible effort to increase her popularity, by gra¬ cious nods and smiles at the tenants she individually recognised in the ojfposite hémicycle, and ever and anon despatch¬ ing some confidential message by this lord, that knight, and tother squire, to the neatly coifed dames amid the gaping multitude, intreating to know how her gaffer, or granny, or child, or grandchild
now sped in health ; — acknowledging to each courteous Mercury, that her in¬ terest could not be restful until she had learned advisement of how those she had left in sickness, when she had made her salliance from home, had mended without her anxious aidment. The games at the quintin and prison bars being ended, and the prizes conferred as usual by the fair hand either of Lady St. Oswald or her daughter, the present and former pupils of St. Bride's gallantly commenced their celebrated feats, and with a peculiar grace and spirit per¬ formed a tournay ; and the prizes for these victors were also awarded by the Ladies St Oswald and Warburg. This tournay was succeeded by a comic masque pei formed by the obliging pupils of St. Bride's; and De Alandeviile, now wild with his wonted spirits, performed spontaneously a sort of double to the most mirthful character of the drama — like his own father in that very place of old—and with such comic effect, that he soon led his delighted sister to forget for
the moment her melancholy tendency, to smile with her usual animation, and to make her sportive remarks upon his playful flights to Father Hubert and Airs. Alorton, between whom she had taken her station, with Weewitte, like a a faithful canine guard, seated generally at her feet or close behind her, watching and marking all who approached. Lady Jaqueline had discovered so many resemblances between Lady Alary and the Widvilles of the preceding century, that she could scarcely bring herself to dwell upon any other subject and thus almost compelled Algernon to talk of Mary too ; when something in his tones and manner, according with some fancied tones and manners of the Widvilles when secretly devoted to some rare beauty of their day, led her to believe that it would not be very much to the discontentation of the kind young knight to draw near to this fa¬ vourite of her own ; therefore, by degrees, she manoeuvred to become grouped with Lady Alary : and for a moment Lady Jaqueline congratulated herself upon her
achievement, for she saw the countenance of Sir Algernon beam with rapture as he looked on Mary ; but soon that rapture saddened to a tone of touching sadness, which not even the gambols enacting bad power to cheer.
CHAP. V. ?? length the first act of tlie bustling masque ended ; and in the pause of rest for the performers, when attention might be exclusively yielded to her beauteous self) Rhona approached Lady Mary, ac¬ companied by(íabl) the jester, bearing a cruise of wine, spice plates and other con- fee ts, when with conciliatimi sweetness the captivating Lady Warburg accosted Ladv Marv. " If you have prizement, dear sister, of vour own comfort and contentation. make avoidance of popularity. It has much discontented me, to find myself so in¬ bound by the courtesies of all I made my encounter of fiom becoming an hat mv heart wished— yon r eopeniate ; albeit I am grateful for the kindness showered on me. But at length 1 have vantaged myself of an opportunity for s.lliauce hitherward, to take our refreshments together."
Mary felt grateful for this attention, responded with genuine sincerity, ac¬ cepted some ofthe contects, but declined the wine. " Sir Algernon may perchance quaff it for you, if he objects not to do so from a cruise that I have sipped from," said Rhona, vvith a fascinating smile. " Come, Sir Algernon, pledge me, and drink to your lady love ; and if it pleasures you, in silence, to pose us vvith all the wit and cunniig we possess to make our guess- ment of whom she ???? be." " The forlorn vvho wots not whom he sprang from must not have a lady love," said Algernon in low tones; and then raising his voice, continued — " I will drink health and meet happiness to all the fair inhabitants of Vespasian Tower." " It marvels me why you distemper your peace with such fastidious fancies," Rhona said in a cautious whisper; "if your lady love be worthy love, she will allow no recordation of such unapt visions to tarry in her mind." At this moment, ???. Alice Sneakup
drew Lady "Warburg aside, and imparted intelligence which threw her ladyship rather into consternation ; for how to keep Sir Algernon a<rain at bay after such unequivocal encouragement puzzled even Rhona. The intelligence was, that the heir of Rockcliff 1 , who, being on a visit at St. Bride's, had come with the party from thence, was no longer merely in remainder to the dukedom of Rib- blesdale, but heir apparent, and was now Lord dOriel. Gabb, at this juncture, not choosing to remain inactive in the scene, took the cruise which had been so little relished by those to whom it had been offered, and drank off its remaining contents, and then exclaimed, grinning—" Now, Master Weewitte, will it pleasure you to appoint me as one too low for Your Highness?" " Odd's quaff! you ween you liave raised yourself by this exploit," replied Weewitte scornfully. " But what can cause this difference betwixt you, my mcrryinen?" demanded
Father Hubert, smiling in his benevo¬ lent wish to conciliate. " Odd's witling! holy Sire !" responded Weewitte ; " the difference atwixt us h — that 1 am my lord's jester — Gabb my lady's fool." " Fool !" exclaimed Gabb furiously ; " why, by the daze of my lady's eyes ! oft have the lords, and knights, and squires, who have repaired hitherward, made declarement that I had wit for the en¬ durance ofa midsummer-day: ay, and that it sparkled like — ay, by goles! Üke — like potent hippocras." " Odd's nodders! it was like potent hippocras, dozing all to whom it was mi¬ nistered," said Weewitte ; " unless, per- case, w hen it might sparkle up for a wassail in sole fitment for a nightrule, where lords and knights are not meetly found. Sich wit, that were it to sparkle where those I could name perchance might be mis¬ placed, \ou may keep in mind, that as surely I would plunge my bauble adown your dareful throat."
" Your dareful arm dare not to do it, an' it had prowess !" Gabb exclaimed. " Odd's valiance Ì mv dareful arm can dare many a chevisancc to gar a fool's marvel," returned Weewitte, smiling, as he snatched up the unprepared Gabb in his powerful arm and flung him astride upon a branch of a spreading tree. A loud peal of laughter from the ob¬ serving multitude so mortified the in¬ sulted jester, that he roared with shame and spite. (t Odd's cravens ! exalted witling ! dost fear the chevisance of descending to my standing?" exclaimed Weewitte, in more conciliating tones. t< Come, come ; I will take you down, as it has for¬ tuned me to do oftimes since our en- counterancc. There, ye are not a whit the worse for an airing that I betrust me has purified you ; and that 1 may no more hear, to my discontentation, the craft I follow disgraced by unmeet jesting." * e It marvels me what I hear 1" ex¬ claimed Lady Warburg, with a beautifully arranged countenance of amaze and alarm.
" Has the absence of my honoured lady mother from hence caused your misusing of yourself, by making partage out of that rHit excellent haviour which was your usance ? Go to — I must, forsooth, have meet advisement of this matter ; yet trem¬ ble not, for you may have expectment of my lenience." " And I have expectment to be paid for lenience !" lowiy murmured a voice from behind the bole of the tree beside which Rhona now was standing. The voice electrified Lady Warburg ; and she turned pale and trembled,as the person who had thus spoken flitted from his ambush, and mingling vvith the crowd was quickly lost to view : vet not before Fitzrivers ' ér bad been startled by his appearance as he emerged from his concealment, and gave to his instant recognition the daring personage who bad amazed him by his unmeet conference with Lady Warburg the night be had been summoned to at¬ tend the Duke of Suffolk into Lincoln¬ shire, The words which this individual utter-
ed were distinctly heard by Algernon, and their effect upon Lady Warburg evident to his perception ; and in pity to her manifest dismay, be was about to demand from her if he should send that noyous faitour thence, when a moment's reflection upon the mystery of the case and the delicacy of his own situation with her ladyship led him to pause : and in this moment, when Lady Warburg was almost unequal to self-possession, a party of her late escort approached to announce that her ladyship's attendants from Nor¬ folk House were anxious to re-embark, and only awaited the honour of her com- mands. These commands were to con¬ vey her reguerdon into their coffers ; and hastily she fled away to perform this opportune excuse for quitting this alarm- spot: but soon as her apprehensions sub¬ sided, mortification awakened; for if Sir Algernon were too scrupulous to do aught becoming a wooer, what could have pre¬ vented Lord d Oriel, who had been stand¬ ing close by when she was thus sum-
moned, from making any effort to attend her thence. Lord d'Oriel, from being a favourite of nature as well as of fortune, long bad held the balance with Fitzrivers in Rhona's estimation ; but, more incorri¬ gible than Fitzrivers, he had never even seemed on the brink of love's precipice, which she had toiled with every fasci¬ nation to allure him to during the whole time of his pupilage at St. Bride's and subsequent visits to the priory. And now, had Lady Warburg known her further extent of causes for mortification, she never could have bestowed her largesse and commendations upon her attendants from Norfolk House with becomirur grace: for Lady Mary had been his lordship's attractor to the spot, where he seemed now transfixed ; and where Lady Mary's playful interchange of smiles and nods with her brother whilst he was gambolling with the masquers, at length led Lord dOriel to impart to Sir Al¬ gernon a discovery he was certain of having made, and to acknowledge, were VOL. III. f
he not mistaken in the said discovery, Lady Mary de Rhone had in her unmeet disguise lhe evening of the celebration of his majority stolen away bis heart. Briefly his lordship stated, — for time and place compelled him to brevity, — that the uncommon gracefulness of the two sailor boys had attracted his at¬ tention ; when the playfulness of one of them soon riveted it. In consequence he had observed the playful skipper unglove, when conviction came to his bosom of its being a female in disguise. From that moment he watched her every smile and look at her brother, as unde- viatingly as the attentions he was arbi¬ trarily called upon to pay the guests permitted, and every smile and ray from her eyes entered bis heart : yet that she stole away unknown to him; and that no reward which he offered, and they were great ones, could elicit any intelligence of this foreign party. Still he forgot not the smiles and playful nods at the compeer of this disguised fasci¬ nator; and therefore in one moment
he identified the smiles and nods of Lady Mary; and now, undisguised, she was indeed so potent in fascination, it was no wonder that he should feel and acknow¬ ledge her power of conquest was invin¬ cible. Lord d'Oriel had but just finished this detail to Algernon, when clarions sound¬ ed a call to another part of the grounds, to witness some other exhibition ; when the group they hovered near commenced a hasty progress to witness it, and Sir Algernon escaped, to afford his services to Lady Jaqueline, without a comment upon this discovery. The lords and gentlemen, who had, under the guidance of Sir Miles Billy- ment's taste, arranged their convoy in a style which they expected would excite universal admiration, and be told of in years to come, most deeply felt the mor¬ tification which the reprisal of the de¬ spised damsels had prepared. Some of them, however, after the first moments of chagrin, affected to laugh in chorus at being so outdone ; whilst others, mortally f 2
offended, openly laughed the fair ladies' exploit to scorn, whilst they secretly brooded over it in bitterness,—resolved to take measures, the first promising oppor¬ tunity, to wreak their vengeance upon all whom they could detect in having borne any part in so public a mortifi¬ cation. However, they all joined the gay as¬ semblage with certainly an apparent im¬ provement in manners ; and in good fellowship partook of and joined in the good cheer, and in cheering pastimes, during the remainder of the day; and performed in rounds of dancing, and in the demolition of rounds of beef and of the choicest viands, and in their favourite games of chance, until midnight : when, ere the ail conciliating Rhona allowed her dear sister Mary to retire for the night, she announced her intention of having a gay morning, for the purpose of introducing to her favour her own im¬ mediate goshavvs and all the inhabit¬ ants of her mews ; and also announced, that all who purposed favouring her with
their attendance must join her and her dear sister at breakfast in the hall. And when at last the fatigued Mary was permitted to retire to her pillow, she strove to keep awake for a time, to en¬ deavour to feel pleased with Algernon's choice; and to account to her satisfac¬ tion why, when Lord d'Oriel talked of the festivities of Rockcliff as portentous to him, Sir Algernon turned pale and looked so sad ; and why she herself need have blushed, forsooth, and looked so conscious of having been there. But conquer her disposition to sleep she could not ; and soon she fell into a tranquil slumber, which gave brilliance to her aspect for the morrow. At the hour appointed by Lady War¬ burg for attending breakfast, Mary and Mrs. Morton entered the hall ; where for some time no other individuals appeared save the butler and his compeers, arrang¬ ing the nappery on the breakfast boards, and trapping each tier of the rank-pro¬ claiming cupboards with meet tapestry, and then the ale and wine : but at length
the smiling Rhona, with her train of ad¬ mirers and satellites, appeared ; and im¬ mediately the sewer and his vassals commenced serving in the repast, which was as substantial as any hungry multi¬ tude might find espedient. From this breakfast mess few of the inhabitants of Vespasian Tower were ab¬ sent; but amongst these few, to the chagrin of Rhona, was Fitzrivers num¬ bered, —his excuse for truancy a despatch from Lord Cromwell: "But," added Lord di Mandeville, who was bearer of this ex¬ cuse, "the moment it is possible, he will join us." "I really wist," * exclaimed one ofthe still pouting escort of Lady Warburg, " Sir Algernon might have been on waft¬ age to St. Bride's, as bearer of some prettily imagined subtlety from the en¬ terprising damsels of Vespasian Tower— something aptly to set in train their be¬ coming votaries of St. Bride, or to wit, brides to some saint there."
" How now ! defame you Sir Algernon, by weening this, forsooth?" exclaimed the particularly mortified and irritated Sir Aliles.—" Would he, bethink you, misuse his piety, by speeding to a monastery where the members could have acted so profanely as has been told of? " " Vantage our ignorance, by yielding advisement of what you weet," said Lady Warburg in amaze. " It has fortuned us to hear that the celebrated barge, which was so honoured by the fair damsels of Vespa¬ sian Tower yesternoontide," responded one of the angry youths, " is certes no more than the vessel in usance of the pious monks to smuggle their wines for wassails from the Isle of Sheppy ; and which counterband cargo they have been wont to waft as relics of sacred saints, or corses for interment in their church." " Such an unmeet allegation is as false as Luther himself, or bis doctrines ! " ex¬ claimed one of the Catholic party with vehemence. The asserter of the above statement, I +
and who was more than inclined to the reformation, replied with equal vehemence and in such taunting terms of potent ri¬ dicule, that Lord St. Oswald found him¬ self compelled to call them both to order, and to state fairly that he would not permit repartees of religious controversy beneath bis roof ; and recommended them to take the first teachers of Christianity for their guidance, and then they would learn to deport themselves with gentle kindly forbearance one to the other: and his lord¬ ship spoke with such eloquence, that he laid the evil spirit of discord amongst the angry party. When breakfast was ended, Lady War¬ burg, announcing that they must com¬ mence their salliance incontinently, as she had much to make introduction of to her dear sister Alary, consigned that dear sister to the especial care of her honoured uncle, the Signor Warburg; and herself takitm* the arm of De Alandeviile, she tripped onward to show the way to her dear Mary. Lady Warburg had a superb mews of
her own, where her haw T ks resided, and were served as if they absolutely belonged to some enchantress who had erected for them a palace of magical attraction. Here, where her gracefulness was deemed by all her satellites, as well as by her real admirers, to stand unrivalled, Rhona never permitted any one to exhibit her hawks to company but herself and her prin¬ cipal falconer ; —herself, because she had passed hours of her life in accomplishing herself for this display; and this falconer, because, although competent in training the birds to perfection, yet he was in him¬ self so hideous and ludicrously awkward, that the contrast in the two exhibiters could not fail of due effect. The collection exhibited was fine ; and the manner in which the birds were exer¬ cised call forth, as usual, the most raptur¬ ous applause ; and at length De Alande¬ viile whispered to Fitzrivers, who had by this time made his appearance—" It ima¬ gines me, Algernon, we have seen this chevisance in even more graceful guise ; f 5
at least I wot the bright blush fashioned itself to aid contentment in our admira¬ tion, which beamed on Mary's cheek when she descried any eye in restment on her save those of her observant gos¬ hawks." Algernon pressed his friend's arm as if in accordance, yet replied not ; when De Mandeville in surprise turned his en» quiring eye upon him, and saw that his frame and countenance betrayed some great internal struggle. " You are not well, Algernon," said De Mandeville anxiously : " shall we make salliance hence, and call Mary to yield advisement for your ail ? " *'No, no—not for ten thousand worlds," replied Algernon, as he endeavoured to remand bis firmness. " Believe, for your contentation, I am right weU." Ct You distemper yourself by writing so overmuch," returned De Mandeville ; " and so, I ween, does my honoured father. I imagine me you will both en¬ damage your health, if you enterprise so much of it; and I bethink me Mary and
I must scribe it for you, to make scant your travail." " Our travail will soonly now ? have end, my dear kind Mandeville ! " Alger¬ non responded gratefully, although in low and tremulous tones. But not soonly was the termination of the hawk exercise : for Lady Warburg had had her mews erected in the stvle of a pagoda ; and her birds, from the gos¬ hawk to the eyas, were lodged in apart¬ ments according to tbeir class in estima¬ tion. And there being such numbers of stairs to ascend, so many chambers to visit, so many beauties and fascinations to mark and admire in the hawks and their lovely exhibitor ; and there being lutes and lyres in every chamber, for Rhona to convince her auditors that her birds had musical susceptibility (at least when she played and warbled to them) ; — her ladyship's statement proved cor¬ rect — that from breakfast to dinner there would be scarcely time for all the exhibi¬ tion. But as there were seats for resting, and the "windows commanded beauti-
ful prospects without, and within them so many beautiful objects to gaze upon, few complained of weariness ere they repaired to their chambers to revest for dinner. And perhaps few of the party, which Lady Warburg had encountered so much trouble to amuse and charm, had retired for revesting perfectly satisfied with all the occurrences of the morning. Lady Warburg herself was by no means so. The altered conduct of Fitzrivers towards her — now not only never voluntarily per¬ forming acts of courtesy for her, but re¬ maining wilfully stupid to all her kind and condescending encouragement— highly discomposed her ; whilst Lady Alary, in all her bearings, almost maddened her vvith envv and alarm : for in all, she saw a being who could become a potent rival if she would, and she could not doubt but some excitement might be awakened to arouse her to exert her powers. Having sprouted out of her semblance to the Roman dwarf so miraculously, she could not but fear she might have been
inspired with accomplishments; nor could she divest herself of a suspicion of her own malicious mother having borne a part in preparing this formidable com¬ petitor for her, since now her mother, who had hitherto expressed the most in¬ veterate abhorrence to Lady Mary, was converted into the kind patronising step¬ dame : and the lords and gentlemen she had detected looking with admiration upon this noxious Alary, when she bad expected those looks to be riveted upon her beauteous self. Nor was Lady St. Oswald more tran- •c' quii than her daughter upon her return from their morning pastime ; for the ho¬ mage and admiration that daughter had received during the morning had in¬ flicted tortures scarcely to be endured, whilst the retaliator she had obtained, although she saw with gratification she was fully equal to prove her competent avenger, inflicted by her rare perfections bitter pangs within her bosom : and more than all, the return of her unwelcome lord added torment to her mental in-
quietude; and she trembled at the dis¬ coveries he might be doomed to make for her undoing. And one had been already made to him by his faithful steward, through whose representations his lordship had been in¬ duced, some time ere his return, to limit the allowance for her ladyship's expen¬ diture. Still, however, she contrived to obtain credit ; and in every direction, since the return of her lord, bills had come pouring in to the amazed steward, 4vho presented them to Lord St. Oswald : and the investigation of these bills, which formed proofs of unprincipled prodigality on the part of Rosamond and her daugh¬ ter, and gross imposition in many of the creditors, scarcely to be paralleled, was the business which had so occupied his lord¬ ship and bis confidential young friend Al¬ gernon ; whilst a frequent correspondence between Lords St. Oswald and Cromwell, relative to political matters, allowed of its being stated that diplomatic transactions thus engrossed the time of Lord St. Os¬ wald and his secretary.
Lord St Oswald had been too long initiated in the composure of diplomatics, to permit the feelings of his mind to ap¬ pear ; yet his bosom was far, far from the seat of tranquillity. Few, indeed, had been the hours of its being so, since he had made his first unfortunate visit at St. Mildred's monastery ; but now many a dire doubt had found entrance into his mind, which seemed to portend a com¬ plete overthrow ofhis connubial happi¬ ness. The want of reciprocal generosity, nay, of absolute integrity in the specious Rosamond, had now been proved beyond all doubt ; and suspicions of even a still more vital nature had crept into his bosom, he scarcely knew how, that me¬ naced a complete expulsion of it—and ofa nature which interdicted any confidant to advise with, lest his suspicions might ulti¬ mately prove unjust to Rosamond : so that all he had power to do, was warily to watch over the causes which thus dis¬ turbed him ; and should his painful sus¬ picions prove unfounded, even then
to break up the establishment of Vespa¬ sian Tower, and substitute something more concordant with his own honour and the purity of the peerless Adela's offspring. But although thus occupied by certain¬ ties and suspicions of the most painful nature, the melancholy bearings of Sir Algernon were not unobserved by Lord St Oswald; who well remembering how the admiration of his yoüiig friend had evinced itself for Rhona even in his boy¬ hood, naturally concluded this admiration had ripened into love, and that the very investigation he had employed him in might have panged his honourable mind, upon discovering how unworthy the ob¬ ject ofhis adoration had proved herself: and although this belief led his lordship to commiserate the present sufferings of Algernon, he still took consolation in thinking that it was for Algernon's be¬ tti*· hoof to Kave his eyes unseeld, — and that now he must feel conviction Rhona was no meet spouse for any honourable
man. And as Lord St. Oswald sighed in sympathy for the inestimable Fitzrivers, many a half-formed wish arose that a fair parentage was known for him, and that the guileless Alary had been the ob¬ ject of his choice.
CHAP. VL So many had gloomy clouds overshadow¬ ing their mental views, that the dinner assemblage went not off so cheerily as it was wont; and as it was noontide, the general judgment upon the weather pro¬ nounced its being too sultry for chivalric sports. Therefore it w T as determined to find amusement in the home station, until the sun's daze should have made transit from glaring over the gymnasium ; and at length, when my lord's board-end was taken up, and as many boards re¬ moved as permitted sufficient space to enterprise it, the ladies tapets, and carpets, and cushions, and work-frames, were brought from the chamber where they usually were arranged, which was now deemed too small for so large a party ; and whilst the fair damsels worked, it was expected that those lords and gentlemen
who did not engage in chess or tables, &c. should devise, by lute, or flute, or con¬ versation, to amuse the industrious. And whilst some ofthe fair nymphs were employed in embroidering lace, and in forming birds, and flowers, and bowers ; and some gallants winding most expertly tawny, and murrey, and green and blue silks, and gold and silver threads in requi¬ sition ; Mary, who had declined to play at chess because she was not yet quite versed in it, and mumchance because it was not apt for her sex's propensity, and having no work in preparation, took up a stray bit of canvass, and procuring some necessarv shades of worsted, found em- ployment in working upon her finger a companion for her restless brother ; and with such comic effect sketched the head of a young monkey, that its ludicrous aspect so elicited risibility, that it nearly overwhelmed Lady Warburg in vexation's tears, and with the utmost exertion only of self-possession couki she preserve the semblance of composure. Rhona was internally too much dis-
í on certed at Mary's monkey prank, and w'th the bearings of Sir Algernon, to fulfil her first intention of making her own lute and voice the chief fascination ofthe evening : and not choosing that others should do that in which she felt inade¬ quate to excel, she soon managed to make conversation much more popular than music might have proved, by lead¬ ing it to a topic interesting to all present ; for she commenced a discussion with Sir Edmund Target upon her long talked of tournament, which she now announced her determination to give incontinently, to celebrate her honoured stepsire's return to his native country, her dear brother's escape from treachery, her dear Alary's introduction to her sisterly affection, and the uncle of her dear de¬ parted father being at length restored to iter —the sole survivor of his race. This announcement drew forth a thousand eulogiums upon the amiability of the mo¬ tives which led her thus to such a com¬ memoration ; and this burst of rapture having at length subsided, one of the
young inmates inquired, if Sir Rupert Warburg was dead, as her ladyship had mentioned herself and the Signor as the only survivors of their race. " It has not fortuned me to see or bear aught of that portly knight since we voyaged from Albalanda; I therefore imagine me he must be dead," returned Lady Warburg, with such perfect com¬ posure, that Algernon in amazement heard her, and almost blushed for her thus to make a breach of moral truth so firmly. Sir Edmund now became most elo¬ quent upon the projected tournament; and so most unexpectedly did Lady Ja¬ queline, to the infinite annoyance of this tournay ing knight and the fair Rhona, who were anxious to talk upon the sub¬ ject themselves : but nothing could stop thecurrent of Lady Jaqueline's loquacity, when it flowed out in her elaborate de¬ scription of the tournament held in Smithfield upon the marriage of Alar¬ garei, the Fourth Edward's sister, to Charles the Bold of Burgundy, " when
her illustrious kinsman, Anthony Wid¬ ville Earl Rivers, challenged and over¬ came Count de la Roche, called the Bastard of Burgundy ; and how the Earl of Worcester presided as lord high constable of the joust, and attested the queen's giving the flower of souvenance to Earl Rivers, Lords Scales and New- selles, as a charge to undertake the enter¬ prise, and his delivering it to Chester Herald to carry over, that it might be touched by De la Roche in token of his acceptance of the challenge." Then she described the prize,—" a col¬ lar of pure gold, with the marvellously rich flower of souvenance enamelled thereupon j and how it was fastened above the earls knee by some of the queen's fairest ladies on the very Wednesday after the reserection day : how the Bas¬ tard, attended by four hundred lords knights, and squires, arrived in the channel ; and at Gravesend were encoun¬ tered by the lord high constable with much marvellously gallant barges, and a galley richly covered with cloth of gold,
and filled vvith attendants : how in Fleet Street the champions solemnly met in the king's presence ; and how St. Paul's Ca¬ thedral was appointed for holding a chap¬ ter to solve doubts upon the articles of combat ; and how the train of the grand spectacle İn progress endured atwixt two and three miles : how the works of the lists cost two hundred marcs : how the pavilion, trappings, &c. were fashioned in sumptuousness ; and how the dear exult¬ ing queen thought all this profusion well 'stowed, when she hadthcgladful triumph of beholding her well beloved brother victor in so sturdy an encounter : how, when the spikes in the frontlets of the Lord Scales's house had run into the neck of the Bastard's steed so that it reared and threw its rider, the generous victor disclaimed the vantage, and would have enterprised a renewal of the com¬ bat ; and how the Bastard refused to en¬ terprise him again on horseback ; but how on the following day they fought on foot, when her dear Lord Rivers again prevail¬ ing, and the sport waxing too warmly,
the king gave his signal, and the com¬ batants were parted." And so dazzlingly superb was this detail of Lady Jaqueline's family records (which those whom it annoyed could not succeed in abbreviating), that Lady War¬ burg and Sir Edmund at length found their intended tournament diminish con¬ siderably even in their own estimation ; and so miserably shabby, they feared, every arrangement of theirs must seem after such a description of magnificence, that they respectively judged it judicious to defer discussing their projected tour¬ nament, until the neighing and trampling of Lady Jaqueline's barbed steeds, the rattling of the horses' trappings and of the chain-mail and casques, the noise of the trumpets, and the shouts of the multitude, had lessened upon the imaginative hearing of her auditors and the animated and resplendent spec¬ tacle had faded in their mental vision : whilst Lord St. Oswald and Fitzrivers heard, with more surprise than approba-
tion, this renewal ofthe intent of Rhona at unjustifiable expenditure. So annoyed was Lady Warburg by the details of Lady Jaqueline, that she wished from her heart nothing in the form of chivalry might be enacted at present in Vespasian Tower, to infix the provoking matter upon the minds of those vvho had heard the garrulous dame : but this her wish she knew could not be realized ; since the pupils and visitors of St. Bride's were, by appointment, coming in the eventide to tournay with the lords and gentlemen of Vespasian Tower. To the cirque therefore, in due time, all parties repaired; and the young chi¬ valric rivals commenced their sports with anxious effort for the meet applause of their fair observers, and for the prizes to be awarded by the hand, as it was hoped, of tlie lovely Mary, as well as by that of tiie beauteous Rhona. Yet beauteous, Rhona had never appeared less entitled to be called than on this occasion; for dismay filled her envious bosom, and affected her aspect vvith its mua*. U4 ?
lower, on perceiving many both of the Vespasian Tower and St. Bride's youths with impresses betokening admiration of Lady Mary, and that Lord d'Oriel was decked in the colours Lady Mary had worn on the preceding day, and bore on his impress an avowal of homage none could doubt was for her whose colours he now displayed. Lord de Mandeville not being yet sufficiently recovered from the effect of his dire captivity, even in his own opinion, to join in these athletic exercises, was contented to comply with his sister's wish of taking a seat by her amid the spectators ; where her artless remarks and alarms in this her first introduction to a tournay, upon all she beheld in the lists, yielded to him, as he had antici¬ pated, unbounded delight. The contending parties were celebrated for pre-eminence in chivalric perform¬ ances, but beyond them all Fitzrivers soared to superexcellence ; yet with ex¬ treme reluctance he joined in the disports of this evening. To receive the first
prizes from the hand of Lady Warburg, which he doubted not, whatever were her motives, she would award to him, he felt under existing circumstances would be distressing to him ; whilst he shrunk from appearing as a prominent candidate for applause, lest by it admiration might be elicited whence he trembled at its now proceeding — whence, under more prosperous auspices, it would have been his mind's glory and his heart's rapture to awaken it. In every process of these sports, with scarcely an effort for pre-eminence, Al¬ gernon was adjudged by all to stand foremost in perfection ; and as usual, when galloping around the lists, bad many a fair lady's approof showered down upon him in gloves, scarfs, kc. : but the novice Aiary would have died sooner than have thus evinced her ad¬ miration of any man's exploits ; whilst as to Algernon, although she was as fully sensible of his superiority as any sage judge present, she would not for worlds so laud him, lest in the fali of her tribute
of applause it might unaptly cause a£ frightment to his steed, to the endamage¬ ment of its rider. But the impetuous De Mandeville would not feel contentment at the all- surpassing Fitzrivers being bereaved by timidity of Lady Mary's tribute of ap¬ plause ; and snatching a sleeve from her dress, he tossed it down upon Algernon so adroitly, that not only all others, but Fitzrivers himself^ believed it to have been thrown by Lady Mary's own fair hand. Yet this token did not appear, after the tilts w r ere ended, amid th,e con- spicuous favours upon his breast or hel¬ met. No ; the first in observation were those of Lady St Oswald and Lady Jaqueline — even superseding the victor prizes bestowed by Lady Warburg; — and ere they were summoned to the sup¬ per boards, the sleeve of Lady Mary had wholly disappeared, to the private indig¬ nation of her brother, who felt wounded for his sister's dignity, and determined that on the morrow he w r ould inform Sir Algernon that the favour he had so
unmeetly treated had not fallen from Lady Alary's hand. The exhibitions in the cirque being ended, the performers belonging to St Bride's attended by invitation the supper messes in Vespasian Tower : and during this solid and cheerful meal, Rhona, to her further discontent, heard it rumoured that the prior and pupils of St. Bride's had it in contemplation to devise and give a magnificent festival in compliment to Lady Alary de Rhone, upon her coming to reside in their neighbourhood, and that the inmates of Vespasian Tow T er w T ere equally anxious to project a similar measure ; a rumour which had truth for its foundation, since the admiration al¬ ready excited by Alary was very general —admiration which few ofthe female per¬ sonages in Vespasian Tower had wished or atteìhipted to subvert ; since their good will she had won, by the winning grace and dexterity with which she had diffused attentions of the beaux intended solely for herself) as politesse for every lady g 3
present ; — and by her pleasing and sportive method of throwing from herself the monopoly of adulation, Alary, during the short period since her arrival in Kent, had effected more for the restoration of harmony amongst the juveniles surround¬ ing her, and in removing the evils en¬ gendered by the exclusive homage which Lady Warburg had toiled for securing to her peerless self, than an order from the Star-chamber might possibly have accomplished. All this was obvious to the penetrating Lady St Oswald ; and although the ra¬ pidly augmenting admiration inspired by Alary proved precious balm to her la¬ cerated heart, in the inflictions retaliated upon the ingrate Rhona, yet italsodistilfed wormwood and gall for that heart, as this admired being was the offspring of the hated Adela. Still she hailed with joy all that was consonant to her wishes ; and consoled herself for the misery inflicted through Lady Alary's perfections, by reflecting, that when her avengement against her daughter should be amply era-
ned, she should have the power of hurling the envenomed shafts of her hatred effect¬ ually at the noxious tool of her maternal reprisals : for Lady Mary was a Luthe¬ ran ; and she could yield to her friend Bonner the playpleasure of staking this determined heretic for his amusement. And to increase the conflicting feelings inspired by her stepchild's presence, Ro¬ samond bad obtained conviction of the musical abilities of her, whom she had en¬ deavoured should be reared ignorant and unrefined. Amongst the mortifications devised by Rhona for the vain Rosa¬ mond, had been to affect belief of time having injured her mother's vocal excel¬ lence: and as the most insidious mode in which she could shield her invidious pro¬ ject, she declined joining Lady St. Oswald as heretofore in duets — affirming, " for¬ sooth, she feared some endamage had fortuned her own voice, sithence it no longer meetly harmonised with her ho¬ noured lady mother's right excellent one; which, as in duty bounden, she g 4
would not misuse by discording with her own." From the moment this declaration had been made by Rhona, Rosamond, with painful mortification, perceived that when she sung all her auditors evinced symp¬ toms, not to be mistaken, of listening to her having become an infliction scarcely to be borne with patience : and knowing how superlative her voice had been deemed, and that it still surpassed her daughter's, she could ill brook this contempt, and was panting for a moment when with good effect she might prove how unmerited was this insult. Rosamond had, through her own mu¬ sical genius and recollection of a beautiful Italian air, arranged a duet from a sonnet of Lord Surry's, and was rilled with bitter disappointment when Rhona de¬ clined bearing any part in its perform¬ ance ; and having learned from her lord that his wild Mary was a favoured votary of Euterpe's, she had requested our he¬ roine to play and sing for her — when Mary, in conformity with the duty and
respect she had determined to evince towards her father's spouse, complied: and as her performance took place in the privacy of Lady St. Oswald's own dress¬ ing chamber, Mary's execution of it was not impeded by any unvanquishable de¬ gree of timidity; therefore Rosamond, with cheeks blanched by envy and malice at the enchanting sweetness of Mary's scientific performance, and her bosom glowing with exultation at her anticipated triumph, determined not to seek her pillow that night until she had found meet vengeance for Rhona's invidious insult. At length the supper-boards were taken up, when no moment could have proved more auspicious for Rosamond's projected vengeance. The hall now contained an unusual number of lords and gentlemen, of knights and squires ; and Rhona had or¬ dered in some of her most prized musical instruments. A round and a cinque- pace were, however, proposed, as being meet to digest the solids of the late repast ere the voice should be called into requi- G 5
sition : but Rosamond, not having yet ascertained Lady Mary's paces in the sports of Terpsichore, with an air of su¬ preme authority which she had not lately been permitted by the presuming Rhona to evince, negatived all dancing measures for the present, by snatching up an ex¬ quisite lyre, and playing most touchingly a beautiful Venetian air, in compliment to the Signor Warburg; and having thus collected all the youths of St. Bride's around her, standing in the mute but animated attention of politeness, awaiting in evident anxiety to hear more, she vvith an engaging smile summoned Lady Mary to sing with her the duet they had joined in for the first time that morning. The terror expressed in Mary's counte¬ nance upon this request interested almost every person present ; and the supplicat¬ ing glance she beamed upon her father to extricate her from this dire situation de¬ lighted every one—even Rhona herself, who augured from it that her dear sister was not to be dreaded as a rival. Lord
St. Oswald sprang forward to answer the appeal of his distressed child ; and with a tender pressure of her hand, and an affectionate smile, he said — " My Alary will have meet contentation in aptly oblig¬ ing her mother, when she wots that in doing so she will also pleasure me." Mary's eyes, now glistening with affec¬ tion's tear, beamed in duty's tenderness upon her father ; and with a smile of sweetness and timidity she turned toward Lady St. Oswald, to comply in meet obedience : and in this moment the power of Mary's fascinations proved too mighty for the resistance of Lord d'Oriel, who grasped her father's arm, and faltered out an entreaty for his lordship's per¬ mission to address his lovely daughter, ere that daughter's strain of vocal excel¬ lence had broken upon the delighted ears of the auditors ; for delight she did dit*. fuse, since duty was a stipulant in Alary's mind which had found power to counter¬ balance fear in its most formidable array. So now it stilled her tremor, and per¬ mitted her dulcet voice to warble forth g 6
its thrilling beauties almost to the full con¬ tentment of her father and her brother; but not to that of Lady Warburg, for rapture was enthusiastic and universal : and the vengeance of Lady St. Oswald upon her ungrateful daughter was complete ; since Rhona had not only heard the fascinating strains of Mary, but the entreaty of the heir apparent to a dukedom for permission to address this hateful Marv ; and the re- suit was, that Rhona was compelled to fly from the hall ere her envious fury should betray itself—fury which found its vent in the most tremendous hysterics, which almost menaced reason ere they were subdued. At length the visitors from St. Bride's departed; and as the remainder of the party were separating for the night, Lord St. Oswald whispered to Algernon — * t I shall have to seek your advisement on the morrow, upon the disposition of a suitor who has offered himself for my inestimable Mary; and you, who knew him in his boyhood, will vantage me with truths that shall not repent me of enda-
maging the peace of my sweet child by bestowing her band unmeetly." Γη a few succeeding moments, De Mandeville encountered Sir Algernon in the gallery leading alike to the dormitory of the offended brother and the offender. At the last glance which De Mandeville had turned upon Algernon in the ball, he had looked so pale and melancholy, that the affectionate Edward felt his indigna¬ tion decreasing rapidly ; and he therefore now stopped to enquire if he had ail¬ ment: when, on the instant this address was uttered, Algernon fell to the ground with almost every faculty suspended. The valets, A*Parry and Norman, were attending each their master, bear¬ ing before them their wax-torches to their respective chambers, so that Al¬ gernon was instantly borne to his couch ; when, upon unclosing his vest to relieve his respiration, the depot of Lady Mary's vanished sleeve became manifest to her astonished brother — for there it lav, un- suspected by mortal, next the heart of the hapless Fitzrivers, who, however,
promptly recovered from his state of insensibility, as if renovated by anxiety to conceal this deposit from observation ; and so expeditiously be made his effort, that he flattered himself the tell-tale had escaped detection : and this supposed successful achievement seemed to restring his nerves, and to recover him so effect¬ ually, as to permit his anxious friend shortly to retire, and without apprehen¬ sion to leave him to the sole care of Norman. Many a pillow in Vespasian Tower found a wakeful occupant this night; and amongst those to whom the capri¬ cious Somn us refused his soporifics was ■s the volatile De Alandeviile, for,astounded by the discovery he had made that night, he could not for many hours find rest. His amazement at the recluse of Alba¬ landa attracting a lover from the all-fas¬ cinating Lady Warburg, his pity for poor Algernon, and his uncertainty upon what he himself could or ought to do to promote the happiness of his estimable friend, banished lus slu obers. Some-
times his judgment, soaring to the sapience of maturer years, pronounced that be ought to preserve the secret he had dis¬ covered in sacred silence, since, whilst Algernon continued in his insulated state, no hope could be allowed to cheer his passion ; but much more frequently the buoyant expectations of his youthful feel¬ ings, aiding the ardency of his frater¬ nal attachment for Fitzrivers, led him into chimerical achievements to be ac¬ complished by his own efforts for the happiness of Aigernou ; until at length sleep overpowered him, ere he had come to any determination upon his line of conduct. But though late this indefatigable slum¬ ber of his lordship had coninienced, he had much the advantage of poor Mary and poor Algernon, who never even dozed away one moment of their de¬ sponding hours. The form of Algernon, in all the graces of his supcrcxcelleuce in chivalric exer¬ cises, still floated before the vision of our heroine to prevent her ???? from closing,
to effect even a momentary relief from the pang which pained her heart through the remembrance of how her supposed favour had been disregarded by Fitz¬ rivers; whilst Mary's form and voice, with many and many a bitter pang, tor¬ tured the anguished heart ofthe insulated Algernon too sensibly to permit his taking any portion of that rest, which now, for many a night of misery, had fled from his couch of sorrow's vitril*
CHAP. VII. The fortitude of piety permitted Af- o'crnon to issue from his chamber on the morrow, with an aspect of calmness which might have passed on those not suftb ficiently interested for him to narrowly observe his countenance as that of one without grief; but there were those amongst his companions who saw, through the veil of fortitude, that his heart was the dwelling of sorrow and despair, though none but De Alandeviile had developed the source of his most touching sadness. And De Alandeviile, panting to promote his happiness, yet knowing not how to do it, had at length resolved not to betray the discovery he had made. But vain are the resolutions, when volatility guides the helm ; so ever and anon his lordship found he had but narrowly es¬ caped the betrayal of this secret he had come by, whene'er, during this eventful
day, he had been in tête-à-tête with either Mary or Fitzrivers. For an eventful day it proved ; since ere the sun had accomplished half his morning course, Lord St, Oswald had made discoveries which determined him upon an immediate separation from the faithless ingrate Rosamond for ever. The circumstances had in themselves been trivial, which had awakened his sus¬ picions of the conjugal fidelity of Rosa¬ mond ; but once awakened, they mo¬ mentarily gathered strength, and he resolved to be vigilant in observation, and he was so—yet ineffectually: but accident, where least expected, stood his friend ; and that too, where the guilty culprits firmly believed themselves se¬ cure from every species of detection. Atthe confines ofthe Vespasian Tower domain stood a small chapel. In the dark ages this chapel had been an attraction of much resort, from the numerous miracles performed there at a certain shrine; and, although its fame had long since fallen to decay, the building had not, as its situa·
tion was peculiarly picturesque in adding beauty to the prospect from the guest- chambers of Vespasian mansion ; and this building altogether was so high in favour with the present countess, that she bad expended much on its repairs and orna¬ ments, and kept the keys of it herself, lest the latter might be damaged. In the times when Sir Ethelbert de Courland had been a youth in Vespasian Tower, a secret outlet appertaining to this chapel had been discovered by him and his compeers, in which they had often found amusement in their hide and seek pastime : it wound up a rock at the back of the aforesaid shrine, and terminated in a small cell, in which a stone, bench was a fixture, placed there for the accommodation of those for whom this recess had been formed. This recess, remembered by Sir Ethel¬ bert, was considered by him as a spot likely to escape the eye of observation for his meeting with Sir Algernon, when- ever he might deem it necessary to con¬ fer upon matters relative to the happiness and interest of Mary and her brother;
and although he found, from the luxuri¬ ant increase r of the surrounding under¬ wood, much difficulty in retracing tha path, he did accomplish his route, and in¬ troduced Fitzrivers into this retreat. The morn in question, Algernon, hav¬ ing reason to expect a letter from Sir Ethelbert deposited in this recess, bent bis steps that way as soon as he emerged from his chamber: but not unobserved by Lord St Oswald, who had commenced his morning walk about the same moment ; and being anxious to learn Algernon's opinion upon the disposition and morality of Lord d'Oriel, and not conceiving that his young friend had any cause for seek¬ ing privacy in his course, followed him, and, unseen by Fitzrivers, performed his shadow to his entrance of a building which, until that moment, his lordship knew not was on his own premises. Al¬ though somewhat disconcerted, because he knew this discovery would annoy Sir Ethelbert, Algernon returned the hail of Lord St Oswald with apparent compo¬ sure, whilst his heart shuddered in ago-
nising anticipation ofthe communications his lordship was about to make, and hastily announced this lonely retreat as a discovery made by boyish explorement ; and Lord St. Oswald, perceiving it to be a sequestered spot suited for the confer¬ ence he was about to engage in, seated himself and commenced the communica¬ tion he had reverted to the preceding night. But scarcely had his lordship entered upon this confidential matter, ere he and his heart- w rung companion were startled by the sound of a human voice imme¬ diately behind their seat, and as if it were an audible whisper, yet filling the whole space they occupied. The voice was Rosamond's, and her husband was electrified by a response that instantly fol¬ lowed in the tones of Sir Edmund Target. The dismayed Lord St. Oswald deter¬ mined to await the result, and issued his m anelate for Sir Algernon to remain with him. And no spot in existence could have been more aptly calculated for his lordship's purpose. The recess liad been
erected for the performer of the miracles to remain perdue, to enact the wonders of the shrine in the chapel; and to whom the orders of the officiating priest were conveyed through the medium of appro¬ priate sounding tubes, though uttered in whispers inaudible to the credulous dupes of superstition. The low tones, there¬ fore, of Rosamond and Sir Edmund, who were wholly unconscious of how they were committing themselves, became at once audible to those in the recess ; and the first words which struck their daggers into the ears of the recoiling husband, was Rosamond entreating Sir Edmund to quit Vespasian Tower for tlie present, to save their unvanquishable love from the detection of her unwelcome lord, whose suspicions she feared her were already awakened : and that she could not but adread the dern malice of her undutiful daughter might lead her detested spouse to something more than mere suspicion of their love; but that, were he, her adored Edmund, to make salliance to visit his own estate, and still the clamours
there, it fully imagined her that ere long her lord would be fortunately despatched by the king upon some new r mission, for their comfort and contentation. The reply of Sir Edmund was in op¬ position to this measure, since separa¬ tion from her, he said, would be death to him ; besides, that he possessed not a noble to silence murmurs on his estate, and he knew she had none just then to supply: whilst, by remaining where b 2 was, he entertained little doubt of en¬ trapping her hated lord, or his hateful children, into some toil which he should lay to ensnare the detection of their he¬ resy ; by which means, enabling himself to make his own terms for not betraying him or his offspring to the stake, he should compel his lordship to let him lead him as he listed. The influence which this unprincipled knight had acquired over this diabolical woman, even ere Lord St. Oswald's un¬ fortunately encountering her at Rome, soon became manifest: for he quickl) overcame all her wishes for his tempo-
rary absence ; and ultimately it was de¬ termined that he should remain, and be circumspect in his deportment towards her, whilst he warily performed his projects, and flattered Rhona, by zeal for her tournament, into not betraying that which to her was, they believed, more than suspicion. And having thus arranged, they also agreed in the neces¬ sity of their immediately repairing to the house, and as usual by different routes ; there to be ready, in apt composure, to meet the eye ofthe injured husband. Their voices and their footfalls died away upon the ears of their appalled hearers, and for some moments no sound broke upon the stillness which succeeded save the audible rebounding of Alger¬ non's sympathising heart ; for that of the injured husband betrayed no flut¬ ter of agitation, but seemed as if it had ceased its powers through the dire shock it had sustained — and for a moment Al¬ gernon feared that it was even so ; but hislordship suddenly started from his seat, and sprang towards the door, with venge-
ance scowling on his brow and boiling in his bosom; and as suddenly Algernon bounded after him, and stayed him by a resolute grasp, as he emphatically articu¬ lated— " Oh, think you of your children ; and peril not their only parent !" Lord St. Oswald started—stood stock still — his countenance melted at once to agonising woe — and sinking upon the bosom of his sympathising friend, in tones of anguish he faltered out — " Oh, my angel Atleta! how have your dern wrongs found vengement ! Yes, Algernon, I will bethink me of an angels offspring, and my children's sole parent. shall not be risked unworthily;" — and now, in mental agony, his lordship wept the sorrows ofa sore, a disappointed, and a repentant heart. It was, in truth, a task of fortitude, Lord St. Oswald's hushing the tumult in his bosom to that degree of outward composure necessary to escape the com¬ ments of observation in his homeward walk; but he did achieve this self- possession, though not sufficiently to VOL. III. h
brave the encounter of his transgressing spouse and her vile paramour : nor did he make an effort for such firmness, since he believed it more than human na¬ ture could sustain with dignity, and therefore determined to absent himself from fhe public breakfast board; and instead of pausing to brood over the treachery of her whom he had fostered in his bosom as a rival to the peerless being to whom he owed his aggrandisement, to commence at once his communication^ with his judgment upon the immediati* steps he ought to take for rescuing hi.- own honour and the safetv and respect¬ ability of his adored children. His wary observation of the preseni young inhabitants of Vespasian Tower had made him anxious that his children should mix in their society as little as possible; and, consequently, he had issued his mandate the preceding day, ίο Mary and De Mandeville, to breakfast in private with Father Hubert and Mrs, Morton ; his lordship therefore kneu that thev were safe from contamination,
SIR ETHELBERT. but he keenly felt they were degraded so long as they were permitted to tarry- under the same roof with the unworthy successor of their angelic mother. A few moments only had Lord St. Os¬ wald consulted Algernon upon his be^i method of proceeding in this hour o* trial, ere this sensibly shocked and sympathizing friend ventured to recom¬ mend, as a more competent counsellor» the wise, the good, the feeling hearted, faithful Father Hubert. When Lord St Oswald, conceiving this timiditv in Al· gernon arose through attachment in Rhona leading him to shrink from con¬ demnation of her mother, felt hurt aim offended ; and requested him to summon not Father Hubert, but Sir Leoline Worlington, who had arrived the pre¬ ceding evening: but in a moment, hix little glow of resentment subsiding, he added in a kindly tone — " Were I to summon the meetly competent Father de Bourge, it might enterprise the sum¬ mons of De Mandeville to my novince. ere I had made devisement how to pany h ?
his suspicions. But do you make sal¬ liance hitherward with Leoline, and feel contentation, Algernon, for your favourite Rhona ; for I will not pang her feelings in any guise that is avoidless, albeit Γ have found much cause of late to with¬ hold my approof from her." Sir Leoline was well prepared to hear the discovery made by his uncle ; since observation ofthe presuming deportment of Sir Edmund Target in an establish- ment not his own had led both Lady Worlington and her son to wary atten¬ tion, which terminated in conviction oí" tlie nature ot the case, and in the de¬ parture of Lady and Blanch Worlington from Vespasian Tower, as a roof no longer meet for them to dwell beneath. Lady Worlington was so intolerant to all that was incorrect, that she would not contaminate herself and daughter by re-entering it, even to embrace her bro¬ ther after his long absence; and Sir Leoline had arrived at Vespasian Tower the preceding evening, to make a commu¬ nication and a request : but the latter he
knew not how to accomplish without offending Lady St. Oswald, or betraying the suspicions entertained of the purity of Rosamond to her confiding husband. Lady Worlington, for ever alive to the interest of her son, had at length suc¬ ceeded in finding a charmer for him, with whom she granted him permission to fall as romantically in love as be listed : and most conveniently for his slender finances and his ultimate happiness, the fair prize was such, that compliance with the maternal mandate was neither diffi¬ cult nor tedious ; and Lady Jane Mark- land soon became the chosen of Sir Leo- line's heart, as well as of his mother's prudence. And his lucky star being in full ascendancy, the attachment became mutual — her sire auspicious ; and the time being fixed for the union, Sir Leoline hastened to pay bis duty to his uncle at Vespasian Tower, and then to make his circumscribed invitation to his nuptials as well as he might be able without of¬ fending. The mind of Lord St. Oswald was in h 3
a state of too much excitation to admit of circumlocution in his communications to bis nephew, who, with as little cir¬ cumlocution, candidly acknowledged that strong suspicion of an improper attach¬ ment between Lady St. Oswald and Sir Edmund Target had banished his mother and sister from Vespasian Tower ; and that ere his mother had taken flight, she had candidly informed Lady St. Oswald that such was her intention unless Sir Edmund was forthwith banished as an unmeet guest: that thereupon Lady St. Oswald accused his mother of base ca¬ lumny; and refused indignantly to evince herself a daughter of ingratitude, by banishing from her roof the gallant knight who had perilled his precious lire to rescue her from the dagger of her furious first husband. " Oh, that she had in every case made such prizement of the meet virtue of gratitude ! " exclaimed Lord St. Oswald in an agony of remorse ; " for then she would have spared my life the bitterness which my matrimonial cup has known.
But, Leoline, on your prizement of knightly honour, is this all you wot 0 f? — Say; are you weetless of aught that can dissever the disgraceful bond which binds me to this unmeet successor of an angel?" Sir Leoline solemnly assured his lord¬ ship that he knew of no testimony of Rosamond's faithlessness the law would recognise ; and the three confederates at length agreed upon its being better po¬ licy not to make the matter public prema¬ turely; lest by doing so it might, through apprehension of being called upon for evidence, silence those that otherwise might warelessly tell of matters meet for the establishment of a divorce. But as his lordship's feelings would not permit his remaining another day in the same dwelling with those by whom he had been dishonoured, he determined to set out with his children immediatelv for London. Sir Leoline now found his opportunity of announcing the hitherto embarrassing purpose which had drawn him to Ves¬ ti 4
pasian Tower; which was hailed with welcome by his uncle, not more for the auspicious promise of bis nephew's hap¬ piness, than for the convenience accept¬ ing the invitation afforded to himself. He therefore despatched Fitzrivers with his mandate for the preparation of Mary and De Mandeville for their immediate repair to Worlington Hall, and Sir Leoline he directed to arrange for their prompt de¬ parture; whilst he himself; with agitated bosom and trembling "hand, addressed the following letter to the delinquent Rosamond : — " It may be scant aggrief to you, Madam, that I address you without a hearty commendation in the commence¬ ment of this my rude letter of farewell. I will not upbray, since that I leave for the displacency of your own whelmed conscience; nor shall my letter be un¬ gentle, albeit the matter of which it makes apprizement may not be for your con¬ tentation. False Rosamond ! your unmeet conference with Sir Edmund Target this
morntide in the sequestered chapel, was voiced from your utterance to the ears of your husband, for his appalment ; and it cannot marvel you it embittered me to sorrow and indignation, and speeds me to a separation from you for ever. " For the sake of your daughter, to whom I made promise of paternal love and consolation, I will not peril her peace- fulness by proclaiming my breme dis¬ covery unadvisedly. But to you, Madam, it is my peremptory behest, that you send your guests and inmates hence so soonly as courtesy may conveniently imagine : and that then you, and all pertaining to you, incontinently depart from Vespasian Tower; as I shall make salliance this very morn, with my Adela's insulted children, from this polluted dwelling. " My lawmen will aftord you advise¬ ment, with the apt speed that may become diligence, of all which can ratify your dureful severance from " Villars* St. Oswald."
η 5
Rosamond, her guests and inmates, set out at the appointed time to exercise their hawks, as had been arranged the pre¬ ceding evening with the pupils of St. Bride's, — an excursion which Lord St. Os¬ wald had declined for himself upon the plea of business, and for his children upon some plausible pretences ; so that their absence awakened no surprise, al¬ though that of Algernon occasioned much chagrin to Lady Warburg, who had hoped, during this excursion, by more explicitly confessing her love, to entoil him into that engagement so earnestly desired by Constance. The sports arranged for this morniug occupied so much time, that noon had come upon them ere their return to Ves¬ pasian Tower ; where the moment she arrived, Lady Warburg hastened to he» chamber to repair her charms : and know¬ ing that, like the lovely Queen Jane, she looked more beautiful the more splendidly she was attired, resolved her trappings should be sumptuous. But although practice had made Genifrede an expert
adorner of her beauteous lady, the pro¬ cess was not farin advance, when Rhona, who had been listening in amazement to a detail from her bowerwoman, of Lord St. Oswald and the party which had ar¬ rived with him so short time since having set out from Vespasian Tower, as if on progress somewhere, was in¬ formed her lady mother was in a swoon ; out of which Dame Judith feared she would not aptly recover, as Dr. Balm- field was still lingering on his homeward way vvith other wearied ones of the day's party. That Rhona should fly like an affec¬ tionate child to her suffering mother mav appear surprising, whilst she was in bitter enmity with that mother ; but interest can perform miraculously upon the stabi¬ lity of mortals. During this morning's excursion, Rhona picked up a letter which had been dropped by her uncle Warburg, and was detected by him in the act of reading it ; when her apology was its bear¬ ing no superscription. In this letter matters of business were mentioned, that η (»
yielded full proof the pretended pauper was, as Rosamond affirmed, affluent ; and with a smile he at this moment acknow¬ ledged to Rhona that be was a very Crcesus, and his motive for deception, — a deception which had thrown such lustre upon the benevolent kindness of Lady St. Oswald, that the devoted friend¬ ship of his life, he feared, could scarcely evince his estimation of it. And added to this proclaimed devotion to her mother, she had heard, that very morning, the Signor descant upon filial duty as almost the very first of human virtues ; and that where he discovered its absence, or any lack of affection in a child to its parents, he would recoil from the unna¬ tural offspring as a monster to be de¬ tested : and therefore the wary Rhona had determined to turn over a new leaf as adroitly as possible, and to let it aptly seem the page of duty. This swoon, therefore, of her lady mother affording so favourable an op¬ portunity for commencing her reform¬ ation in filial affection, Lady Warburg,
even but half repaired as she was, flew like an arrow to the chamber of her mo¬ ther, as if the bow of anxiety had shot her thither. Rhona found the swoon of her mother was indeed of formidable aspect : and learning from Dame Judith that it had been caused by a letter from her lord, which she (Judith) had forgotten to deliver to her ere she set out upon the excursion of the morning, Rhona, but yet a novice in the theory of filial affection, turned her new leaf to one in curiosity's folio, and read the letter of Lord St. Oswald, ere she made one effort to aid in the recovery of her mother ; and was herself almost planet-stricken by its contents. But soon self-interest restored the self- possession of Lady Warburg. Here would now be wrested from her all the advantages which her establishment in Lord St. Oswald's family had so long afforded her, should she take pai t with her guilty mother — for that she was guilty Rhona could not doubt : whilst, on the other band, should she condemn and
desert her, she should injure her own hopes of an illustrious marriage, since few men, — for they were so squeamish, — would like to spouse the daughter of an incontinent dame ; and also yield up every chance at once of partaking now, and inheriting hereafter, the enormous wealth of her great uncle, who seemed witched into idolatry of her mother. And in the hasty decision she was now com¬ pelled to make, she determined for the present to affect a belief that Lord St. Oswald was under error, and her mother calumniated. Rhona now amazed Dame Judith by the anxiety she expressed and the ten¬ derness she enacted towards her mother ; and the moment Rosamond evinced suf¬ ficient advance from insensibility, Rhona whispered entreaty to exert her firmness, and she doubted not to extricate her. Hope and curiosity acted as effective stimulants. Rosamond recovered rapidly after this encouragement ; and, as soon as that recovery would permit, com¬ manded her alarmed attendants to retire :
when Rhona, in this tête-à-tête with her agitated mother, lauded the virtue of her filial tenderness, by stating, that her mo¬ ther's criminality had been long sus¬ pected and credited by herself; albeit duty and affection now led her to aid and extricate her guilty parent. And that her plan was, since the ears of Lord St. Oswald were his only testimony against the purity of his spouse, to make it plau¬ sibly appear that the scene enacted in the chapel was the base contrivance of some enemy of her immaculate ladyship : and for them to wind round the feelings ofhis lordship, by addressing such letters to him as an adoring and suspected wife, and affectionate daughter intlignant at the honour of her mother being calum¬ niated, might compose; whilst, by appeal¬ ing to Signor Warburg as their natural protector, they might deceive him into a belief of their being aspersed innocents, and thus obtain for themselves the assist¬ ance of this wealthy relative. Rosamond made a feeble effort to as¬ sert her innocence; but finding it vain,
and that the aid of Rhona seemed to promise something for her extrication, she ceased her effort : and after some arrangements for their üne of action, Rhona retired to complete her dress ; and then repaired to the guest-chamber, to apologise for the absence of her lady mother, and to perform to a miracle a fascinating and competent substitute for her absent parent.
CHAR VI1L Early on the subsequent morning Rhona led the Signor to the chamber of her mother, who performed the melan¬ choly invalid with the most touching effect ; and soon her sympathising child, under pretence of her mother's nerves being too sensibly affected by the vile calumny from which she was suffering, herself to relate her grief, proceeded to state a dire plot formed by some unknown enemies to disturb the conjugal felicity of Lord and Lady St. Oswald, — enemies who no doubt had the cause of the re¬ formation at heart, and who, it was evident, had determined on the separation of his lordship from a wife so devoted to the true faith as her afflicted mother. This tale was so plausibly devised and so effectively delivered—the confederates performed so touchingly—and the per¬ son to be worked upon was so tenderly
compassionate, so guileless, and withal so bigoted to the Roman creed and in¬ tolerant against all seceders from it, —that the bait succeeded to a miracle : for, proud of an opportunity of evincing gra¬ titude for kindness in his supposed indi¬ gence, and filled with indignation at what he considered unpardonable severity in ordering the rout of a female and her guests from the premises in which they sojourned, ere fully assured (which he was led to imagine Lord St. Oswald was not) she was absolutely culpable ; and infatuated as he was by Rosamond's pre¬ tended benevolence, he was at once transformed into a perfect Quixote in her cause, and desired her to prepare incon¬ tinently for quitting Vespasian Tower : for he would instantly procure a residence suited to his fortune, which should be the future home of herself and Rhona; and that he would obtain the best legal advisers to investigate the cruel conspi¬ racy, prove her innocence, and punish her calumniators even at the stake; whilst as to her guests and inmates, he desired
they should all be bidden to accompany his fair and misused kinswoman to his house, wherever that might be situated. The gratitude of mother and daughter was prettily expressed, and the injured innocent was indignantly impatient to re¬ move to the roof of a being who did not suspect her purity. But that roof was to be sought for; and until obtained, Lady Warburg, evjr alive to the possible con¬ sequences of her speculations, now hoping that her old castle might be repaired, said she would offer Warburg Castle to her kind uncle until he could procure a mansion to his contentation, were it not so delapsed and scant of household stuffy and withal so distant, unless they could make repair thitherward by waftage. No lure could have been more tempt¬ ingly baited. Warburg Castle was the birthplace of the Signor, and the remains of his mother were deposited there, and it was ever through lite the earthly paradise he panted to behold : and to add to this, travelling on land was irksome to him ; for so long had he been floating in the
gondolas at Venice, that water was the element of his delight, and no goose was ever more eager for prompt embarcation than the Signor, who grasped at the oblique proposal, and said he would take upon himself all the repairs, and neither spare for expense nor travail in sup¬ plying household stuff meet for the pur¬ pose, and foresee all furniture to be nobly garnished fit for her estate : that in the river Thames were then tarrying vessels pertaining to him, freighted with his possessions, and equal to adventure for the New World, which were trapped with all things apt for comfort and con¬ tentation ; and that therefore, whenever they found it meet to enterprise the voy¬ age, they might with safety thus repair to Warburg Castle, where the superin¬ tendence of the reparations might be advisable. Although this was all beyond even every expectation of Rosamond and Rhona, yet still there were advantages in rank and the estimation ofthe world attendant upon their present situation,
which led them to cling to Vespasian Tower : they therefore contended that it might look like conscious guilt, were Lady St. Oswald to make no effort to assert her innocence ; and therefore it was determined that they should not commence their voyage to Yorkshire, until their meditated efforts for Rosa¬ mond's restoration to spotless fame and the confidence of her lord should be attenui ed, Wo.íington Hall was situated near Tonbndge Weils ; and although not a magnificent structure, the surrounding scenery was so beautiful, and the interior so commodious, that all who entered it expressed admiration, that-was perhaps not a little aided by the urbanity ofthe lady ofthe mansion, and the good house¬ wifery there practised, which diffused comfort with good cheer. Although Lady Worlington had for a few days been in the same dwelling with Lady Mary, yet the manœuvring of Ro¬ samond prevented their introduction to each other; and notwithstanding the
aunt had seen the niece in the latter's memorable appearance in the base court, and that the niece had seen her aunt at R ock cliff, yet now for the first time they were presented tc each other : when asto¬ nishment and pleasure were indeed ex¬ treme ; since Lady Worlington found Lady Mary all that her son had pour-* trayed, but which from his ironical pro- pensity she had not credited ; whilst Mary perceh ed so striking a resemblance to hei father in her aunt, that she ihit at once she must love her dearlv. Lord Markland and his lovely daugh¬ ter were both staying at Worlington Hall, as Markland Castle was beautifying and tiapping for the wedding ; and these being the only stranger guests, and Lad) Worlington's establishment of gentle¬ women and pages being circumscribed, the party at Woilington Hall fell short indeed of that which Mary had just left at Vespasian Tower : and with joy she liailed its being so ; since she thought she should be more happy in this circumscrip¬ tion,—for Mary knew not yet of her fa-
ther's connubial inquietude, and thought onlv of poor Algernon, whom she con¬ ceived woukl be more in contentation removed from the fascinations of Lady Warburg, whilst cause existed to forbi íl hope's cherbhmcnt. The days at Worlington Hail were not passed, as at Vespasian Tower, in per¬ petual display and amusement. Lady Worlinotou was, like many of her cotem- poraries, a conscientious housewife. She arose with the morning, and after private family prayers until within half an hour of breakfast, she, with Blanch, her gen- tlewomen, and now with Ladies Jane and Mary in her train, looked through every department in her household : perfbrmetl the chief operator in manufacturing the contects in preparation for dinner, or in each process of the still-room, — which now not unfrequently lost that lulling appellation by the presence of* De Mande¬ ville and Sir Leoline ; and in her exten¬ sive delivery of dole to the poor : then she hied to her attiring chamber, to dress for breakfast. From the breakfast-board
the lords and gentlemen sallied forth upon their own employments of time, and the females proceeded to the chamber of industry, where the needle and the distaff were plied unceasingly ; one person of tlie party reading some ofthe new disco¬ veries of the literary researchers : and soon to this department Mary was by ge¬ neral wish appointed solely, — her voice and other requisites combining to form her into a reader of surpassing excel¬ lence ; and to the amaze of Lady Wor¬ lington, she found that no interspersion of foreign language amid the English translations which now issued from the young press impeded the progress of her she had been taught to consider the child of ignorance and incapacity. At noon a bell announced tlie approach of the dinner hour, when all hastened to their toilets ; and Lady Worlington, having made her prompt repair, glided into a gallery which presented her with an unimpeded view of the transactions going forward in the culinary departments, and from whence she issued orders, rebukes,
or commendations, as occasion prompted ; and from thence, upon a signal from the sewer, proceeded to the guest-chamber, to lead the way to the hall. The dinner-boards were ever supplied by hospitality and comfort, and the party never numerous. Here, of course, the lords and gentlemen made their appear¬ ance ; and when the boards were taken up, and the dinner assemblage dispersed, the hall was prepared for the evening amusements, which, it now being summer, commenced with field sports or gymnas¬ tics. On their return to the hali, music and dancing wiled on time till the supper- boards were to be laid down ; and when that banquet ended, conversation, or dancing, or some muinini ng devised bv Sir Leoline, endured until nine o'clock, w hen all ictired to seek the sweet repose of temperance. Here Aiary, unembarrassed by any fears for her comportance, imperceptibly found her inherent disposition expanding into all its natural tones of playfulness : for here was no Rhona, to pang her bo- vol. ?. ι
som with hourly augmenting apprehen¬ sions of her not proving a meet lady love, right excellent for Algernon ; and here was Algernon, who, though still touchingly sad, was evidently less mise¬ rable then when at Vespasian Tower, so that Mary was cheered upon his account : and, led on by her brother and cousins, she enlivened ail around her save her father, whose conjugal miseries saddened his heart and brow ; and the observation of this sadness, which Mary had been led to believe occasioned by the persecu¬ tion, or perchance martyrdom, of some of his Lutheran friends upon the Continent, often urged her on to those sportive sallies which, now no longer hoyden gambols, fascinated all around her. But soon Mary, through the practice afforded to her observation since she had been emancipated from seclusion, had become an adept in the art, and import¬ ant matters gradually attracted her spe¬ culation much more seriously than the volatility of her disposition seemed hi¬ therto to promise ; and thus she was led
at length to fear her father's melancholy had a more internal source than sym¬ pathy for the sufferings of absent friends. In consequence, her attention to hini assumed a tender devotedness, which af¬ fected every observer, and went promptly to her parent's heart ; but not as balm to that torn heart—for she seemed as Adela restored to him, and added torture to his compunction and regret. But in all this comportance of Mary, there was nothing- like display ; it was the spontaneous performance of nature, and, as such, was pure and lovely: and those who were most fascinated by it, remembered how she had been neglected by the parent she now so affectingly regarded ; and none more deeply felt this than the repentant and grateful parent himself At length the marriage of Sir Leoline and Lady Jane was celebrated at Mark- land Castle, and to attend these spousals Lord Dalincourt arrived ; who, to the almost indignation of Mary, had not sped him to Vespasian Tower, to greet her father's return to England, and hail λ VL
the safety of her brother. But his lord¬ ship's absence had not been caused by lack of fraternal — but other love ; for his long cherished passion for Rhona had commenced a painful warfare with his reason and his pride. He had detected sneers levelled at the disparity of years by Mrs. Alice and others of Lady War¬ burg's satellites, without Rhona's ever attempting to suppress them, or appear¬ ing surprised or hurt at their utterance ; and thus, fearing thev were the pastime of his absence, Ire fled from Vespasian Tower, to endeavour, during separation from his fascinator, to call up all the forces of his mind to lead him into that path of future conduct which judgment should determine ; and not daring yet to encounter Rhona, he preñTied appearing an affectioniess brother: but the moment he ascertained that Lord St. Oswald was where Rhona was not, he flew on the wings of the wind to assure him oí his unsubdued regard ; when Lord Dalin- court's mental conflict found an auxiliar) for reason he little anticipated, when the
full confidence of his unhappy brother led him to fear, indeed, that the mother of Rhona was unchaste—Rhona herself undutiful, capable of effecting mischief, and therefore unmeet for the spouse of any honourable man. Sir Leoline, his bride, Lord Alarkland, Lady Worlington, and Blanch, bad ac¬ cepted the invitation of Lord St Oswald to accompany him to Albalanda Castle, and Lord Dalincourt now gladly enrolled amongst the number of the bidden thi- ther ; and they all in a few days after the nuptials of Sir Leoline made their sal¬ liance to Oswald House, there to pause ere they proceeded into Yorkshire, whilst Lord St. Oswald set matters in train with his lawyers for effecting his now fervently hoped for divorce from the faithless Rosamond. Awaiting him in Thames Street, his lordship found a letter from Lord dOriel, renewing his entreaties for permission to address Lady Alary, — en¬ treaties which Lord St. Oswald, in the conflict of his mental disquietude, had totally forgotten, and now, upon consult-
ing Mary, he found himself compelled to negative ; her dismay at the intelligence of this flattering conquest, and her agony at the possibility of its being accepted for her, convincing her father that it would rend her heart if he were to press this union. And soon he felt reconciled to this disappointment of an exalted esta¬ blishment for his beloved and amiable child, by learning from de Mandeville that the Duke and Duchess of Ribbles- dale were determined enemies to the Lu¬ theran creed, that Lord d'Oriel was in some degree infected with the same pro¬ pensity, and which he well remembered hearing told of whilst Lord d'Oriel had been in pupilage at St. Bride's. Shortly after the despatch of this letter of apology for neglecting to reply, and of courteous negative to Lord d'Oriel, a letter arrived for Lord St. Oswald from Lady Warburg, inclosing one from Rosa¬ mond. But a little time past, and these letters would have been received with implicit confidence as the assertions of truth and innocence : now Lord St. Os-
wald could detect art the most consum¬ mate and falsehood the most subtle in the letter of his stepchild, and the most daring effrontery, in the guise of indignant innocence basely aspersed, assumed in the epistle of his worthlessspouse; the one, in her soft, sweet, dutiful, and affection¬ ate vindication of her mother, solemnly affirming herself the witness ready for sacred testimony to prove an alibi — and the other, in the highest altitude of vir¬ tue, protesting, that from sunrise to breakfast, on the morn in question, she had been with her daughter upon missions of benevolence far distant from the seques¬ tered chapel. These letters were confided to Sir Al¬ gernon by Lord St Oswald, and not one ray of hope for his lordship's restoration to connubial happiness emanated from their perusal through the bosom of his confidant. No: Algernon, like his lord¬ ship, was now unhooded, and the falcon eye of unclouded judgment could delve with its keen glance into the intricacies of art and fiction : and Algernon, whilst ι 4
be commiserated the injured husband, and grieved for this degradation to the female character, for the first time felt a beam of gratitude warm his bosom for his ow'ii hapless insulation, since to that alone was he indebted for his rescue from sub¬ lunary misery ; for had it been otherwise, he had been entangled beyond extrication ere a light from heaven had unsealed his eyes to behold its own stampt loveliness and virtue. Lord St. Oswald having made his ar¬ rangements with his lawyers, and the divorce of the king from his first consort having caused the learned bench to make much study upon this mode of conjugal relief, there seemed no intricacy to im¬ pede his immediate repair to Albalanda Castle. The party destined for it, there¬ fore, sallied forth upon their progress into Yorkshire ; and as Lord St. Oswald was anxious for Fitzrivers to remain with him, and Algernon felt it not compatible to apply for renewed leave of absence without first ascertaining that there ex¬ isted no newly awakened alarm from the
lulled insurgents, it was arranged by his lordship to make Scarborough one of their places for tarriance, albeit it lay not in their direct line of march to Al¬ balanda. Accordingly, in due time, our troop of weary steeds and riders reached this spot of their present attraction, where Sir Ralph Evers most courteously performed cicerone to Sir Algernon and his friends; and in reciprocal courtesy, Sir Ralph and his immediate compeers were invited by Lord St. Oswald to the hostelry where our party sojourned, to partake of their cheer and all the disports to be devised, and with much urbanity Sir Ralph re¬ newed Fitzrivcrs's leave of absence ; in which poor Algernon acquiesced, be¬ cause he knew not how to evade the wishes of Lord St. Oswald in the mo¬ ment ofhis mental sufferings, at the same time that he felt he ought to fly from Al¬ balanda, and commence his researches after his lost name and family, in the for¬ lorn hope of such a discovery leading him to the possibility of aspiring to the ι O
hand of her whom he now felt to be the idol of his unalterable adoration. With amazement Sir Ralph beheld in the youthful Alary de Rhone, the heroine who had rescued her father's castle from insurgents, and his friend Fitzrivers from the dire plot to sacrifice his life and honour : and though Alary blushed, and trembled, and faltered out her playful endeavours to throw from her all the praises Sir Ralph gallantly showered upon her, he proceeded to tell her that, great a heroine as she had proved herself to be, he wotted of a hero wdio could match her in valiance ; and then detailed heroic deeds performed by Fitzrivers during the siege of Scarborough Castle, —deeds which had aided powerfully in the preservation of the place ; descanted with eloquence upon the benevolence and fortitude evin¬ ced by this young knight in the twenty days of privation, during which water and bread had been the only provisions of the loyal and invincible garrison ; and concluded with an anecdote of this be¬ nevolence, which occurred on the last day
of their black fast. "A pilgrim," he said, " who had accidentally been in the castle in the moment the siege commenced, and, consequently, had been detained therein, and had undergone the privations which had been endured by all the be¬ sieged, was reclining on a bench in a state of pitiable exhaustion, when Sir Algernon passed that way with a scant portion of bread in his hand, which he had reserved out of his benevolent dole for his own recreation, he being almost extinct through the abstinence inflicted by his humanity ; and was in the act of relieving his panged hunger, when the feeble stranger staggered towards him, and in the thrilling tones of despair im¬ plored the mouthful to save the soul of a sinner who had not made that retribution which only could effect it : — " When in¬ continently," continued Sir Ralph, " the pity of Sir Algernon sent its sympathiz¬ ing bound from bis heart to his hand, to reave his own cravings of their scant joyance ; and, by sending the staff of life into the jaws of the supplicant, cm- i ?
powered him to grasp his pilgrim's staff, and inarch w T ith its support out of the castle, as soon as the gates unclosed on the raising of the siege, and fly without payment of the toll of thanks either for his lodgment, orto Sir Algernon for kind behoof to his periled soul." Algernon had been one of Sir Ralph's auditors when he commenced these at¬ testations of his knowledge of a hero who might cope with Lady Mary in he¬ roism. But as Sir Ralph mentioned no name in the beginning of this detail, Algernon had not so aptly identified the nameless hero as Lady Mary had done ; and was soon aroused to observation of her, who had made such genuine efforts to still the voice of praise when her own deeds had been its theme, now listening to eulogiums bestowed upon another, with glowing cheeks, bounding heart, and every symptom of the most intense and agitated interest. And as neither her father nor her brother had been at this memorable siege, Algernon began in alarm to ponder upon whom a being so
interesting to her could be ; but ere the contemplation of this posing question had time to pang his heart or agitate his frame, his own individual name burst from Sir Ralph Evers's lips, as that of the hero whom he thus so enthusiastically eulogised : and now, for the first time, the siege of Scarborough Castle caused Algernon's frame to tremble, and his heart to quail, and himself to seek refuge inflight: for to behold Alary one mo- ment longer, or to hear his own praises from Sir Ralph, he found no nerve for. And tor far distant flight he now felt con- viction he must promptly prepare, for the preservation of Lady Mary's future hap¬ piness ; although his anguished heart assured him that flight from Mary w T ould not be for the promotion ofhis own : for Algernon had discovered, in the moment when the blanched cheek and chill of Lady Mary's hand, on her conceiving that he was called where danger might await him, betiayed she regarded him with tender interest, that he loved her to adoration. But when this change of
the object of his heart's idolatry had commenced, or when completed, be scarcely knew ; but that it was so, the pangs of his heart now guarantied : and those pangs came with bitterness in up¬ braiding, for having allowed the interest which the forlorn situation of Lady Alary had awakened to lead him ever on to be kind and attentive to herself, and an active champion in her cause ; as gra¬ titude had thus won the heart of uncon¬ scious innocence for him, a poor stray leaf blown by villany's tempests from its parent tree, and which, like the fallen foliage of a forest, knew not the branch from which it sprang. Sir Algernon was not the sole observer of Lady Alary's emotions during Sir Ralph's anecdotes of his young hero. Lord St. Oswald was the amazed and agitated observer of his daughter, whose affections he now perceived were devoted, and he believed for ever. And no cir¬ cumstance could have yielded him more genuine satisfaction than this conviction, had he not long since discovered the
capture of Algernon's heart by the beau¬ teous Rhona, and had the parentage of Algernon been identified; for had that been so, his lordship felt conviction it must be approved, since in every look, and thought, and action of Fitzrivers there was a guarantee for the race he sprang from being noble and inestimable. But as the case now stood, he grieved for his artless, his incomparable child ; she who had repaid his apathy and ne¬ glect with the most dutiful and touching affection ; — she who had moulded her fractious brother into a being almost as docile as herself: and now with all his griefs for Mary was painfully mingled self-condemnation, in ceasing to remember the attractions of Fitzrivers, and that Mary was not ever to remain a child, whose love through gratitude might not be awakened ; and often and often he deplored, in his mental regrets, having pressed Sir Algernon into accompanying him to Albalanda. But the die was cast, and our cavalcade resumed their pro¬ gress, accompanied by the heart-wrung
Algernon, and arrived at Albalanda Cas¬ tle safely but not privately; since the last lew miles they were attended by a rapidly augmenting multitude, almost frantic with the unexpected joy of so soon hailing the return of their own Ladv Aiary — which they evinced with heart and voice, and in every mode which could attest their raptures being unfeigned. And as our equestrians jour¬ neyed onward through this joyful throng, Lord St. Oswald, with keen mental ob¬ servation, though with an aspect of care¬ lessness, said to Fitzrivers, " So have we been wont to see the receptions of Lady Warburg on her repairs homeward after absence." " Oh, my honoured lord, not meet like this!" responded Algernon, starting from the meditation the scene had over¬ whelmed him in : u this is, forsooth, the spontaneous welcome of gratitude and affection to heaven's own angel ; whilst at Vespasian Tower all was------. " Al¬ gernon suddenly paused as he blushed in
alarm at what his heart's enthusiasm bad uttered. " All was what?" demanded his lord¬ ship anxiously. " Why, in sooth, nothing to affect as this does!" Algernon replied in tremulous tones, and averting his eyes to conceal the tender feeling which glistened there. Lord St. Oswald now said no more. Sufficient had transpired to convince him that here was another instance of how the heart of man could change the ob¬ ject of its love; or, at least, of its youth¬ ful admiration. " But how," his lordship mentdlv ejaculated with a sigh, " has v' t' ? ' Algernon's love transit proved more meet than mine? lie has changed from adorement of an erring mortal, to one he believes here tarrying from heaven ; whilst I------. Ah, Adela î you have in sooth been venged ! But your inesti¬ mable child shall not be doomed to che- rishment of hopeless love, if that can bo forefended by her rather."
CHAP. IX. It had been Rosamond's policy to ar¬ range for the household stuff she had taken from Vespasian Tower to Alba¬ landa to remain in the latter place, in readiness ultimately to adorn Warburg Castle ; and her prodigal extravagance had replaced every article, with more ex¬ pense, and good fashion, on her return to Kent : so that now Lord St. Oswald and his party benefited by what the un¬ principled Rosamond had thus deposited for selfish purposes. At Oswald House, Lady Worlington, at her brother's request, performed hostess, that Mary might still learn, by observ¬ ation, how to comport herself as such ; and so anxiously observant she evinced herself, that his lordship had no hesitation in in¬ vesting Alary with this sedate character upon their arrival at Albalanda: and during his affecting manner of doing it,
Mary was struck by her father's implied investment of the female supremacy of his castle in her, until fate should call her to halls and castles of her own ; for how was it possible that Lady St. Oswald, on her arrival, was not to supersede his daughter ? This unconditional investment of su¬ premacy also struck De Mandeville, vvho was never slow in demanding the mean¬ ings ofhis father whenever they appeared obscure : and upon now doing so, suffi¬ cient transpired to shock the youth, who lost no time in conveying to his sister the unexpected intelligence he had received; and to Mary the shock was so severe that she burst into tears. <ς Alas !" she exclaimed, " if this dern advisement be in sooth, then our honoured lord and father's peacefulness is strayed for evermore. But 1 cannot imagine me to give this marvel credence, Edward. Oh î she, whom I no lately saw so meet in portancc, could not beseem herself so crimefully ; nor, I wis me, could any one be found who had not suffered impairment
of their senses, who would give their Jove from' our noble, courteous, wise, good, valiant, honourable, ay, and, forsooth, beautiful father, to that dareful, noiseful knight, Sir Edmund Target ? Oh í for surely it is the babblement of some ti one's enmitv to aggrieve our tender *· Do father ! " At' this moment Lady Worlington en¬ tered the room, and who, alarmed at Alary's tears, soon learned the causes ; when, to the grief and disappointment of these' young persons, they now learned from 1 their aunt that there was no ca¬ lumniator in the case, and Alary's tears streamed for the lost happiness of her father : and she, who had before appeared to pay her parent every dutiful attention which child could devise or perform, soon struck every observer with wonder and admiration, by a gentle affectionate in¬ crease that penetrated the heart of' all. Lord St. Oswald, who had feared His Majesty might recall him to court during the approaching winter, to proceed on further diplomacies, found his apprehen-
sions still unverified. Christmas at length drew near, and as hawks were seen on their perches, and cloaks on the benches, and voices were heard in the halis, De Mandeville became importunate to cele¬ brate the great festivitv, with the mirth, hospitality, and magnificence, which his ancestors had observed ; and Lord St. Oswald acquiesced. Lady Alary, as a juvenile, was delighted; but as lady of the castle, alarmed : and soon the most serious consultations commenced with hex aunt, Airs. Alorton, and Aland ; and then the manufacture of surnaps, subtleties, &c. ; while Lord de Alandeviile and Sir Leoline and Weewitte were working their imaginations for merry conceits to outwit the lord of misrule, whom Lord St. Oswald had not yet nominated. But whilst Alary was proceeding in acquirements and performances requisite in her department for the coming fes¬ tival, and the three consociates had their projected motions and masques and muni- mings in fair train, Lord St Oswald's spirits began to quail, upon intelligence
from his lawyers, that the witnesses whom they doubted not would have proved efficient evidence for the establishment ofthe divorce had suddenly disappeared ; and much they feared this essential mat¬ ter would take time and travail to repair. Scarcely had his lordship received this information, ere intelligence for further vexation reached him, of immense quan¬ tities of household sturi having paid toll in the chatellany of Albalanda on passing onward to Warburg Castle ; and that some ofthe Albalandians, in ill will to all that belonged to a Warburg, had seized one of their horses, being under size, determined to make it pay its fine ; and that it was rumoured the young baroness was coming incontinently to take pos¬ session of her castle, with a company of much lords and ladies. Nothing could have proved more an¬ noying to Lord St. Oswald than the vicinity of any part of his faithless wife's family at such a period ; and he would have flown with his children from their neighbourhood, had it not been for the
reduction of his treasury which bis pro¬ digal spouse and her daughter had occa¬ sioned: he, however, endeavoured to con¬ ceal his vexation, and ordered the horse to be restored, and that no hostility should be evinced by his tenantry to¬ wards Lady Warburg or her adherents. And true it was that wains laden with magnificent household stuff which had landed at Whitby from London, had pass¬ ed to Warburg Castle; for the affluent Signor had presented this costly gift of fur¬ niture for her castle to his niece : and as her impatience to reach the neighbourhood of Albalanda and of St. Mildred's forbade her tarrying for effectual repairs, scarcely had wind and water been excluded from her castle, and loads of dust and rushes and worm-eaten stuff removed, ere loads of tapestry, arras, canopies, cloths of estate, cushions, carpets, cupboards, turned chairs, nappery, and pewter, &e. &c, sufficient for Rhona's prodigal crav¬ ings, arrived to replace them ; and shortly after this surprisal of covering to the long bare walls of Warburg Castle, the
company of inhabitants for it arrived, and who were chiefly those whom Lord St. Oswald had left in Vespasian Tower ; amongst whom, and apparently adulated by the peerless Rhona, were her culprit mother and Sir Edmund Target : and no sooner were live and dead stock de¬ posited in this long deserted mansion, than the most magnificent entertainments commenced for both high and low, as bribes for the good will and good report of the neighbourhood. But this carfty nianœuvring was no sooner made known to Lord St Oswald, than he determined his festivities should affect no splendour, and should only evince quiet liberality and rational amusement; since any thing that could be mistaken tor competition would be to him degrading. AVhen Christmas drew very near, Fitz¬ rivers, who had been for some time absent on military duty, returned to Albalanda, and was proclaimed at once by Lord St. Oswald as the lord of misrule ; and with amazement and reprobation Algernon learned who had, during his absence, be-
come the prodigal neighbours of his kind friend and paramount lord. But very long Sir Algernon was not left to learn from report only the mag¬ nificence of Lady Warburg, for on his route from St. Stephen's monastery two mornings after his return to Albalanda, he was encountered by Lady Warburg and a party of lords and ladies, gentle¬ men and gentlewomen, vvith a numerous and magnificent meiny* in chase ofa hind, her peerless ladyship trapped in all the bravery the produce of the times, wealth and fashion could supply, her steed of exquisite beauty, and garnished even meet for royalty ; and Rhona being a super¬ lative horsewoman, the moment she es¬ pied Sir Algernon sím bounded over a stone fence which divided the road lie was pacing from the track ofthe hunters, and to his amazement appeared as strik¬ ingly dignified as Diana herself before him, and sweetly and joyfully smiled her recognition, and never, perhaps, had she shone more conspicuously in beauty,
VOL. III.
?
but her ascendency was past ; and Fitz¬ rivers, although surprised, was perfectly unembarrassed : his bow w T as courteous, yet his smile the serious one, inspired by recollections ofthe dire cause which had separated his paramount lord from her transgressing mother ; and his betraying no tender rapture on this unexpected meeting, alarmed and disconcerted her, and her temper acidulating at this mor¬ tification, a visible diminution of her usual fascinating sweetness was apparent, when, suddenly aware that her chagrin was clouding her aspect disadvanta- geously, she burst forth at once into all the splendour of her bewitching capti- vations, and talked with such sisterly affection of De Mandeville ; with respect, gratitude, and esteem for Lord St. Os¬ wald, and with such a touching falter of voice bemoaned her separation from those she loved in Albalanda, that Fitz- rivers felt almost deceived by her inimit¬ able acting into belief that he had un¬ fairly judged her, until Lady A^arburg buoyant in hope at the prowess of her wiles, motioned her pages, who had
bounded the fence after her, to a dis¬ tance, and drawing close to Sir Alger¬ non, and in the low tones of caution commenced a plausible tale of suspicion, almost amounting to certainty, of an enemy to her dear, dear mother having laid the plan for the destruction of her dear mother's spotless fame ; an enemy who possessing as a gift from nature a power¬ ful talent for mimicry, had therefore been enabled by the aid of those apt through her pupilage, to perform in the chapel a dialogue meet for the breme purpose of blastment to the connubial comfort and contentation of Lord and Lady St. Oswald ; and that she had in sooth found faithed witnesses to make declarement ofthe matter. «* Let those witnesses beware how they miswend you, Lady Warburg. I imagine me, you are not weetless how you have caused for me perceiveance of whom you believe this culprit But let these apt witnesses wot for their marvel that I was with Lord St. Oswald when that ap- palment reached bis ears, which formed
the blastment of his connubial happiness: that with my own eyes I beheld Lady St. Oswald and Sir Edmund wend down the steps from the chapel after their unmet conference. And let these witnesses ima¬ gine themselves as they list, that no wit or cunning they possess can fortune them to prove any action of Lady Mary de Rhone's, but such as heaven might dic¬ tate and seraphs enterprise." And Algernon thus saying, with glowing cheeks and indignant spirit, haughtily bow r ed his farewell, as he motioned the pages forward to protect their lady, whose party in different dispersions were yet in sight, and whilst he galloped off in angry measure Rhona slowly rode through the most circuitous path to join her compa¬ nions, dismayed by the intelligence of Algernon being a witness against her mother to the discomfit of her own plausible tale ; and sick at heart with ap¬ prehension from the indignation with which he had identified Lady Alary as the affirmed calumniator of her mother, that she had been supplanted in the heart
of Fitzrivers by the being whom most she hated ; and although the king was without a consort, and that she believed herself high in the favour of Gardiner, whom during her last visit to the Duchess of Norfolk she suspected was manoeuvring to procure a queen for his sovereign of his choice, that through her influence he might sway his monarch, resolved to yield up every royal chance, and strive for victory over the hateful Mary. Ina few days subsequent to this encoun¬ ter, Sir Algernon was surprised by receiv¬ ing a letter from Signor Warburg request¬ ing, " that as Sir Algernon was a young and he an old man he would kindly come to Warburg Castle, even for a few T hours, as he, the Signor, had matters of import¬ ance to communicate." Fitzrivers was annoyed beyond measure at this request, which he concluded was in consequence of his having acknowledged himself a witness against Lady St. Oswald, and that in this interview he would have opi¬ nions and facts to utter, painful not only to urbanity, but to the long cherished ? 3
regard he had borne for the faithless Rosamond. Algernon not choosing to take any stepin the matter unknown to Lord St Os¬ wald showed him the Signor's letter, and requested his decision upon what measure he was to adopt, when his lordship, hoping that something at least of inten¬ tions might be elucidated by Algernon in this visit, desired him to go, and his stay to be regulated by his own judgment ; and with unwilling mind Algernon set out to the castle of her whom he had sighed for, ere Lady Alary's genuine fas* cinations had won him from the queen of art to the child of nature ; and when ar¬ rived at that castle the magnificence of all its trappings and its state instantly led hi in to imagine that the equitable Signor had sent for him to consult upon the measure of reimbursing all that the prodigality of his heiress, Rhona, had warelessly squandered of the St. Oswald property. But soon he found himself mistaken, and that an annoyance awaited him which he had not expected ; for the
Signor, who alone received him, accus¬ tomed to straight-forward dealings in his commercial négociations, invited Sir Algernon almost immediately after his arrival to walk through the castle with him ; in doing which the Signor called the attention of his companion to the value of the furniture, the plate, Sec. ; pointed out from the highest towers the extent of the domain ; proclaimed the full revenue of the estate, and then pro¬ ceeded to achamber, where was suspended an exquisite portrait of Rhona by Hol¬ bein, which none could behold without enthusiasm ; and having at length wound up the value of the treasure he wished to dispose of to its climax he added, " And will you not marvel, most highly vantaged knight, upon advisement for your meet contentation, I am empowered to stow upon you this castle, this domain, this Rhona, and much thousands in specie." , The start of the astounded Algernon was almost too much for the nei ves of the merchant, who trembled in alarm at ? 4
the shock, and was little prepared with fortitude to sustain the refusal which followed of this splendid offer ; and al¬ though the distressed Fitzrivers uttered bis firm negative with all the urbanity which courteous gallantry could dictate, the pride of the Signor vvas nearly as painfully wounded as the vanity of the rejected w r as when the mortification was revealed to her : and scarcelv with com- v' mon civility was the parting bow of the disconcerted Algernon returned by the angry uncle, who had himself been sp much pleased vvith Fitzrivers at Vespa¬ sian Tower, that he had been promptly won by Rhona's detail of Sir Algernon's long and silent attachment to offer him her hand. This rejection of Lady Warburg seemed at once to excite to almost phrensied display the ostentatious pro» jects at Warburg Castle for outshining the quiet Albalandians. Company was collected from every quarter whom toler¬ ation for imputed, not convicted crime permitted to herd with Lady St. Os-
wald and her supposed paramour, and to grace the halls where sports and festivity challenged ingenuity or expenditure to equal or surpass. The magnificent cavalcade from War¬ burg Castle, which extended their excur¬ sions far and wide, never encountered any of the Albalanda party without be¬ stowing on them some petty sneer or insult, which Lord St. Oswald pronounced it more dignified not to retaliate ; and the juveniles of his troop feeling morti¬ fied at the prohibition, the extent of our Albalandians' flights became consequently circumscribed to a circle of more genial transit ; and when within the walls of their castle, where there was no shelter for the vicious, they contented them¬ selves without bidding new guests to their liberally supplied and elegant ban¬ quets. But in this circumscribed circle there was every thing to be found the rational mind could wish for; and the days of December were declared bv all to be t/ unusually short in tarriance at Albalanda. ? 5
The lord abbot of St. Stephen's, with Fathers Adrian and Philip, were amongst the few who, except accidentally, added to our family constellation of bright stars, save when Sir Ethelbert himself formed a highly prized addition. Lord St Os¬ wald having sought him in the monastery of St. Stephen's, and with affecting gra¬ titude opened his arms to receive as his friend the guardian and preserver of his children ; and with such touching sen¬ sibility was all this performed, that the agitated father conquered enmity in the breast of the noble Ethelbert, who com¬ manded nerve sufficient to seat himself a few days after at the festive board in the hall of banquet in Albalanda Castle; but during the immediate period of Christmas, he yielded to the wishes of Alary and Edward, and became an in¬ habitant of the castle; where, if there was no revelling, no jugglers, no motions, no magnificent processions in druidical form to obtain the prized miselto as at Warburg Castle, they had sportive pranks with the miselto in simple usage ; had mu in-
mings of their own, imagined by Sir Leo- line, De Mandeville, and Weewitte, and performed by all the juveniles ; and when conversation was the recreation in Alba¬ landa Castle, then did they indeed surpas* all that could be heard in Warburg Castle, for in our circle so many were learned not only in the lighter branches of literature, but in deep science, or that had travelled through every spot of interest in Europe, that altogether they knew how to form to perfection the rare garland that bears the attractive flowers and useful fruit ; and here too they had Zari ni and Lady Mary, and no sweet enchanting sound was wanting to melodise the scene ; while the domestics and the tenantry were feasted and allowed all reasonable pastimes, and, unseen by the public eye, every anodyne was kindly and boun¬ tifully yielded to sickness, indigence, and sorrow. This happy Christmas past, Sir Ethel¬ bert withdrew to St. Stephen's monastery, and Lady Worlington and party pro¬ ceeded on to Scotland, to visit some re* ? ?
latives of Lord Markland's ; and Alger¬ non now became more wretched than ever and feeling every hour more forci¬ bly that he ought not to tarry one mo¬ ment unnecessarily at Albalanda, would have torn himself from thence, had not Lord St. Oswald importuned him to await until the rumoured intentions of Cardinal Pole's invasion of England should be de¬ cided, when together they might be called to arms, in defence of their sovereign and their country ; and so his lordship wiled on his continuance in Yorkshire, sometimes at Scarborough, sometimes at Albalanda, or St. Stephen's, until the spring had blossomed, and the parliament called, April 28. 1539, which enacted the dissolution of the remaining monas¬ teries, and the Six Articles, designated in general The Bloody Statutes.
CHAP. X. ?? length the year 1539 advanced, an<l the dissolution of the last of the monas¬ teries was effected. The lord abbot of St Stephen's having embraced the tenets of the Reformation, anxious, like many others similarly situated, to rescind from his vows, gladly sent in bis resignation ; and many ofthe brothers of St. Stephen's, joyfully quitted those cloisters which bad for years surrounded them ; and amongst those who found joy in this removal, was tlie venerable Father Adrian, because that removal was to place him once more in the same dwelling with his dear child, Mary ; for Lord St Oswald kindly in¬ vited the bereaved old man to come and end his days in Albalanda Castle. History informs us, that whilst many monastic institutions were graced by meet votaries, who with heart-inspired
piety practised the sanctity they pro¬ fessed, so others were disgraced by the hypocrisy and crime of their inhabitants, and amongst the latter class the con¬ ventual orders, which our present tale has fated us to tell of, are chiefly to be num¬ bered. The monks and nuns of St. Mil¬ dred, East and West, were, with few ex¬ ceptions, profane pretenders to godliness they never felt, and so covertly had they conjointly expanded the sacred hood and veil over their misdeeds, that they passed for hallowed beings upon the venerating world ; but conscious of the reality of the case, in alarm at the betrayal which an inquisitorial inspection of their houses must lead to, they shrunk from the sur¬ render which arbitrary power demanded, and were amongst those who would not voluntarily yield. When, at last, compulsion broke up these institutions, Sir Ethelbert, accord¬ ing to promise, offered his sister, the execrable Constance, a lucrative supre¬ macy in the Netherlands, but which, upon plausible pretences, she declined,
coming ro a determination either to accept or to reject. But not so tardy in accepting a provi¬ sion for life, did Lord St. Oswald find six of the destitute monks, and six nuns of St. Mildred's, to whom he offered an asylum, in a comfortable range of bouses he had caused to be erected for this pur¬ pose, on the site where the cottage had stood, in which his children had, through the interposition of Providence, been rescued from the devouring flames by the good Kenrick and his pupil ; and to these small houses, with gardens annexed to them, was added a yearly stipend, suf¬ ficient not only for the necessaries but many comforts of life ; and in this asylum some of the ex-monks from St. Stephen's had already found refuge, whilst many more of these last-men¬ tioned had been provided for by the be¬ nevolence of Sir Ethelbert And amid the deterring causes to the willing surrender of St. Mildred's West, was soon discovered a nest of secret prisons; and although no captives were
found within them, many feared they might have been only removed thence in consequence of the pending dissolution, and perchance conveyed to some undis- coverable concealment; and the animad¬ versions which the detection of these dern prisons gave birth to, led numbers to in¬ spect them ; some through curiosity, and many to seek for possible relics, which might have belonged to the hapless cap¬ tives, and might lead to a discovery of who had been thus so direfully encaged. Amongst the latter number Sir Ethel¬ bert and the ex-lord abbot of St. Stephen's one day investigated these dern prisons; so ingeniously contrived that none but the initiated could ever have found them ere the conventual guardage had been remov¬ ed ; and whilst, by torch light, Kenrick and Ethelbert sent their searching glances around them, they discovered some writ¬ ing with a pencil on the wall in a corner, so little in the way of observation, that bad not their torch glared unusually at the moment, they would not have per¬ ceived it Sir Ethelbert rushed towards
it, and after intensely gazing upon it for a moment, dropped on the ground, sub¬ dued by agitation. But life was not long suspended in Ethelbert. Impatience to ascertain that he was not mistaken seemed to reanimate him ; for, shortly he revived, and announced to his alarmed companion, " that the writing before them was the «ingel Adela's." And as evidence of this, Sir Ethelbert, of all persons living, was the most competent; since hour after hour he had sat by her whilst she had made fair copies of the old MSS. found in the Scriptorium of Albalanda Castle ; and he, at one glance, could ascertain her abbreviations, and every peculiarity in her surpassing mode of writing ; and here, in her not to be mistaken cha¬ racters, stood before him a brief diary of affecting simplicity, which announced her having been the inhabitant of that dern prison for two years and two months after the day she disappeared. . " And where is she now ?" was the wildly articulated cry of the agonised Ethelbert : but to follow him through all
his agitated feelings would be impossible; and it must suffice to tell, that he almost instantly fled off to the Netherlands, to re-examine Walter Sanguiffe upon the tale he had told to him, leaving Father Kenrick in England, to break, and speed¬ ily, to Lord St. Oswald, the discovery they had made ; and to aid in every effort for the detection of when and where the existence of Adela had ceased, or if it had indeed terminated. Cautiously as Kenrick made his mo¬ mentous communications, the unexpected intelligence subdued Lord St. Oswald to dangerous illness. Not long succeeding the period in which the body had been wafted to shore, pronounced to be that of Adela —a cross had been conveyed to his lordship by a monk of St. Mildred's, stated to have been taken from the bosom pf the Countess Adela's corse ; and the solemn asseverations of its being so, which accompanied this sacred relic, occasioned that melancholy which marked the man¬ ner of Lord St. Oswald so long after¬ wards ; for if this cross had absolutely
been found upon the bosom ofthis corse, then was the corse not the remains of Adela; for, well he knew, her determined faith forbid her wearing next her heart a cross adorned with symbols of another ; and, therefore, he no longer considered this restored body as unquestionably that of his lost spouse, and for many a day he had had emissaries at work to ascertain her fate ; and all proving unsuccessful, he, at length persuaded by the general belief that the body returned from the deep was that of the lost countess, united him¬ self to Rosamond ; and now, this proof of Adela being in existence when he gave ber a successor, assailed him with such compunctious feelings for not having made his researches publicly, and raising heaven and earth to aid him, that neither mind nor frame could sustain the conflict, and he sunk at once into a nervous fever of great peril, which required all the skill of the leech Philip, who upon the disso¬ lution of his monastery was appointed physician to Lord St Oswald — and all the care of his tender nurses, to preserve his life.
And the prime of these nurses was Alary, his dutiful and affectionate child.— Alary, whose heart was torn by and filled with anguished anxiety for the fate of her n e ver- forgotten mother, commanded every energy of her mind to act as well as think and grieve; and to devote her tender unremitting attendance day and night to the care of her afflicted father, whilst no power which she could actuate by reward, by supplication, or command, remained un¬ employed by her, in researches for elucida¬ tion of her mother's fate; and she seemed now only to exist for the purpose of find¬ ing ease and comfort for one parent, and for striking out means to discover intelli¬ gence of the other. Nor was the hitherto thoughtless de Alandeviile inactive, either mentally or in personal exertions ; whilst in competition with his own exemplary children might be placed tlie grateful and affectionate Fitzrivers, who, except when seeking far and wide for intelli¬ gence of Adela, was seen like a tender son by the pillow of Lord St Oswald ; who, for a short period only of his illness,
had had bis mind incapable of observ¬ ation ; he was, therefore, fully sensible of the affecting tenderness bestowed upon h ini : and had he been before unsuspect¬ ing, he must have now found conviction, that the heart of Algernon was riveted on Mary, and that this attachment was reciprocal, although with ceaseless exer¬ tion they each endeavoured to conceal the fact ; and with such touching resig¬ nation they endured their hopeless misery; that Lord St. Oswald was subdued bv pity; and, firmly believing himself draw¬ ing towards his final scene, he desired that Algernon should be left alone with him, to execute some important writing, which the anxious secretary í bund to be a most affecting address to the king, from his majesty's ever loyal and devoted sub¬ ject, Villars de Rhone, who, then lying on the bed of death, employed an ama¬ nuensis to convey his last solemn request to his ever kind sovereign — which was, to bestow, when she became an orphan, the hand ofhis daughter Mary de Rhone upon —
The fiice of Algernon blanched to the visage of death, and the pen dropped from his palsied fingers, when this sen¬ tence struck on his ears as the fell blast to earthly happiness. With an effort, that in its achievement amazed himselfi Lord St. Oswald took the fallen pen, and with a benign smile replaced it in the trembling hand of the heart-rived Fitzrivers, and said — " Nay, fear no name, to augur ill or discontent for Alary. It is that of a man, who, like to our an- cestors, earned one of commendation for himself right excellently ! It is honoura¬ ble. Proceed without appal ment, and write — Algernon Fitzrivers. — Yes, Al¬ gernon Fitzrivers : and to you, sir knight, I also make a last request, that you will accept to wife my inestimable child ; for to leave my Alary to your protection would solace my last pangs." Fitzrivers had learned, from piety, to endure with fortitude the agonies of hope¬ less love ; but, for such a transit, he had no preparation, and it nearly bereaved him of every faculty ; but in the first dawn of
their renovation, his heart breathed a silent thanksgiving, and then he pressed the hand of Lord St Oswald with enthusi¬ astic gratitude to his throbbing bosom, and to his lips ; but to speak he found an impossibility — since, how could he give utterance to that which would ebullate from his mighty joy, whilst his bliss seemed as if it were to emanate from the bitter grief of losing his best friend! But his look and manner were expressive of all that could gratify an anxious parent's heart, and seemed to operate as a balm on that heart ; for Father Philip just then entered, and upon examination of his lordship's pulse, joyfully pronounced " recovery was possible." This possibility was felt by Lord St Oswald, and his lordship, under firm be¬ lief that this prediction would be verified, and that speed in the betrothment of his child was no longer necessary, arranged with Algernon, that ere any communica¬ tion was made to Lady Alary upon the subject, to summon Father Kenrick to him. For as the king was not likely
SIR ETHELBERT. now to become the arbitrary disposer of Lady Mary's hand, his lordship deter¬ mined to pay Sir Ethelbert the compli¬ ment, of sending him information of his wishes and intentions ; and to obtain Sir Ethelberts approof of the matter, with¬ out which he felt conviction, neither Algernon nor Mary would feel contenta¬ tion. Algernon took good care that Father Kenrick's arrival should be a prompt one; and whilst the now rapidly amending invalid was holding bis important confer¬ ence with the holy man, Mary, De Man¬ deville, and Algernon were in an ante¬ chamber; the two relatives awaiting to renew their anxious attendance, and Iritzrivers to accompany the good Ken¬ rick homeward. " Bui, Algernon," De Mandeville sud¬ denly exclaimed, struck by the alteration in the aspect of his friend ; and by his agitated anxiety relative to the passing interview —" what may be the botlement of this conference ? — You wot, I wis. In sooth, it imagines me it is to yield
advisement to my honoured and sorely afflicted sire that you are to be riched with your lady love's hand ! Ay, those joy an t eyes dance betrayal, and your bloomed cheeks blush forth the secret — ofthe merchant's heiress. In this instant Edward,, angry at this supposed versatility in Algernon's love, caught a glimpse of Alary's blanching cheek, and, in fraternal irritation, he would have uttered a rising sarcasm, wdicn Sir Algernon exclaimed, in tones of rapture difficult to subdue—" Your wits have made unapt stray ance. If our ho¬ noured lord imagines, him now to make parle of any fair lady, it is ofone descended from an an içel — not of------" "What! of our Mary?" eagerly in¬ terrupted De Mandeville, in amaze. ** Sooth, but it marvels me what of Mary can send the sun's daze to your eyes thus splendid! ν 1" " When time is meet, vou shall not tarry weetless of the matter," responded the enraptured Algernon. At this moment the door of the dor- VOL. πι. I.
mitory unclosed for the departure of the ex-lord abbot, who, with an intelligent smile at Fitzrivers, requested his accom¬ paniment a little while on his homeward wend, and informed Lady Mary and her brother that their father bade them to his presence; when Mary, almost bewildered out of the faculty of walking, received the support of the also trembling Alger¬ non, who softly whispered a solicitation for a private interview, when the ho¬ noured being who had encouraged him to hope for heaven on earth could spare her : and Alary, thus prepared, was not so overwhelmed with unexpected joy as she otherwise would have been, when her father folded her to his bosom, and in the most affecting language thanked her for her dutiful tenderness — blest her emphatically — and then informed her of all his expectation of death had caused him to imagine for her safe protection ; and the touching gratitude of Mary, though sensibly tempered by the restraint of bashfulness, unequivocally proclaimed that her thanks were the genuine effusions of her heart.
The boon to Sir Algernon of a private interview with Lady Mary was not long delayed, nor the adoring lover left to sigh in hopelessness; and his grateful raptures would have- been unbounded, could he have proclaimed to the world that the man was of honourable descent, upon whom the inestimable Mary of Albalanda was at no very distant period to bestow the blessing of her hand. But to yield him consolation upon this point, the brother of his betrothed was as joyful at the expected alliance, as if Algernon had been proved the most exalted subject in the realm ; and the well-pleased Sir Ethelbert sent his concurrence as speedily as possible, with a settlement of a portion for his protégé of considerable amount. But all this fair promise of superlative happiness for Mary led to no moment of forgetfulness of the uncertain fate of her mother ; and until that could be fully ascertained, or every hope to trace it utterly destroyed, Alary petitioned that not only her nuptials should not take place, but that the matter might not be L 2
mentioned, even to the king for the form of his assent. But soon they found at Albalanda Castle other matters inimical to the happiness of our young hero and heroine» Kenrick and Algernon being amongst the most indefatigable agents in mining for the discovery of Adela's fate, in consequence had frequent meet¬ ings, and often their place of conference vvith their emissaries was the hermitage in St Stephen's valley ; and on bis re¬ turn from thence one day, Algernon was encountered by a pilgrim, who accosted him by name, and announced himself with glowing grati tti de, the palmer to whom on the last day of the siege of Scarborough Castle he had given his last scant portion of bread : and although Algernon could not recognise him, his observation of him at the memorable time of this event being so transient, he felt no apprehension of returning to the hermitage with this venerable person, to listen to some private communications which the pilgrim was anxious to impart, and which were to the following effect :
__That he (the pilgrim) had entered the castle of Scarborough in quest of a mis¬ sionary of the Lutherans, who for some time had been an inhabitant of the her¬ mitage in which they then discoursed; and this quest was to ease his conscience of a sore burden, which he was aware this said missionary was searching the wide world to discover. That a consti¬ tution destroyed by intemperance had, through awful warnings of approaching death, led him to bethink and prepare : that the privations he had endured during the siege had so reduced him, that he had been compelled to seek shelter and reliefin the hospital ofa monastery ; but when that asylum had been wrested from him by the late dissolution of religious houses, he had been driven forth a feeble destitute wanderer, and had since sought far and wide the aforesaid missionary, but without success : and now feeling firm conviction this world of sin and disappointment was not for his long tarriance, it imagined him to seek the kindly Sir Algernon, with entreaty to L 3
give ear to his fearful communications ; and then for Sir Algernon, when he re¬ paired to his home, to set the said com¬ munications down in writing, since he (the pilgrim) conjectured Sir Algernon could write, though he, poor penitent, could not. And then for Sir Algernon, in further kindness, again to meet him with his statements in writing, so soon as might conveniently become the leisure of Sir knight to read them over to the narrator, who would then place his mark to avouch the authenticity of his con¬ fession, which, with other important do¬ cuments, he would leave in Sir Algernon's care, to deliver to the aforesaid missionary, to find whom he would render every clew. This proposed communication being the avowed confession of a penitent, to relieve a burdened conscience, could not fail in itself of leading the benevolent Algernon to compliance : but when by it he might obtain a clew to him whom he himself so anxiously wished to find, his compliance was prompt ; and with atten-
tion profoundly fixed, he listened to a tale that blighted his every hope of hap¬ piness for ever ; — and the moment he heard all, Algernon wildly fled from the repentant sinner to the good Kenrick, — not for consolation, since there was none for him, but to unburden the agonizing conflict which seemed about to rend his Jiursting heart His aspect sent anticipating terror to the mind of the parentally attached Ken¬ rick; and he expanded his arms to receive the wildly agitated Algernon, who threw himself upon the neck of his venerated friend, exclaiming, in tones that thrilled to the very quick of sympathy — "Un¬ done ! undone ! undone ! Oh, my foster¬ ing friend! that the deathmen of my hapless parents had bereaved me of life ! then I should have 'scaped the dern pangs that tear me from my Alary. Oh, reverend Sire ! I have, to my anguish, discovered my parentage ; and that, oh, Father Kenrick ! has undone me." The sympathising heart of the good Kenrick groaned, as in the hollow tone L 4
of grief he articulated— " Mary is your sister ! " " No, no, no! Thanks to the All-merci¬ ful, I may love her still, with innocence befitting Mary, albeit never — oh, never beholding her more on earth ! Father Kenrick ! — but are we unheard ? — are we in surance no passing breath I heave can convey betrayal, to other ears than yours, of the dire tidings that make me a lorn wretch for ever ? " And when assured the little parsonage of Father Kenrick contained no other individual at that moment but themselves, the agonised Fitzrivers briefly repeated the tale he had just been told, and which, without an apparent doubt, pronounced him to be the lawful heir of Albalanda— the offspring of the sofi or ihe late Lord St. Oswald, supposed to have been mur¬ dered in his childhood ; the confider of these communications to him, the princi¬ pal assassin employed in the dire cruelty which had bereft him of both parents. And this tale was so perfect in its form¬ ation, not only in the actions described a
but in the causes which led to them, that its veracity could not be doubted ; more particularly when those testimonials were promised to be delivered on the morrow, in trust for the missionary, which would attest the marriage ofthe Lord de Mande¬ ville, long supposed murdered, and the birth of his lawful heir. Father Kenrick knew so much of the early misfortunes of Algernon, and had learned so much from the hapless Ethelberts communications, that no doubt whatever arose within his mind of the truth of these disclosures made to Alger¬ non ; and he could have done that which the penitent omitted-— fill up a blank in the narrative with the Baron do Cop¬ land's name, as the foeman to the house of St Oswald, the perpetrator of all that had been attempted and effected to cut off'its male lineal succession—since causes for surmises had amounted to certainty in his opinion upon the subject ; but Kenrick, panting with sympathy, knew not how to yield poor Algernon conso¬ lation. L 5
But the sterling mind of Algernon led him to the prompt determination of sa¬ crificing every promise of his earthly hap¬ piness upon the shrine of gratitude : for the chronicle of his heart's memory told of all he owed to Lord St. Oswald ; and in touching reminiscence of how De Man¬ deville had, in the moment of his first knowledge of his supposed destitution, taken him to his affectionate bosom as his brother, he resolved to sacrifice to duty every golden prospect beaming on him—even to the precious balm of his life, his idol Mary,—and to consign himself to perpetual misery, in voluntary exile far from Britain, and where, should lie be traced, and proclaimed the St. Oswald heir, he might resist the matter, and never, by entering within the pale of wed¬ lock, give existence to those whom, by his own revolt from hereditary claims, he should unjustly bereave of their birth¬ right. The heart-wrung Kenrick had no al¬ ternative to offer in advice to his hapless pupil, and yielded bis approbation of
this heroic resolution with flowing tears of bitter sympathy ; not more painfully taught to flow for his beloved Algernon, than for the hapless Mary, who would have no action of conscious rectitude to bear her through the conflict, and must be left to every torture of surmise and uncertainty for the cause of so strange and apparently unfeeling a dereliction. Algernon had promised, ere he knew the death-blow to his happiness which the penitent, narrative contained, to com¬ mit it all to writing; and he was anxious to adhere to his word, that the dire assassin of his hapless parents might not, by seeking further for a confidential amanuensis, blazon that matter forth, which he wished from henceforward to be buried in oblivion : and with the most strenuuous efforts the magnanimous Algernon endeavoured to trace upon paper those dire characters which stamped his misery for life ; but he could not proceed, and the trembling hand of the sympathising Kenrick performed for him, that they might read it to the peni- L ?
tent and obtain his signature, and thus lull him into security that his wishes would be accomplished ; although the moment Sir Ethelbert should have seen it, and given his opinion upon the au¬ thenticity of the matter it contained, Algernon had determined the flames should prevent its ever appearing to de¬ prive Lord St, Oswald of the honours he enjoyed, and his beloved Edward of that rank he believed himself born to inherit. In the hermitage of the vallev, accord- ing to appointment, Algernon found the penitent impatiently awaiting his arrival, and who, the moment our knight ap¬ peared, exclaimed, " Alack í I have not moments for tarriance, my meet pre¬ server ; and must prove my apt confidence in your honour as a knight, by taking no view of the matter, but avouch my good intendment by the infix of my mark to that you have vantaged my sore conscience by penning for me. Theod- wald Ratton, pen down, I pray. There is my mark, G — d w ? ot ! but my pen
has dulled my name — but it must pass ------ The penitent now placed in Algernon's trembling hand the promised testimoni¬ als, but which were ofthat unsatisfactory nature, which only could be obtained at the period the marriage and birth they were to certify had taken place, since the security of parochial registers was not established until the year 1530, some years subsequent to the entrance of Al¬ gernon into his thorny path of life ; and İn the most emphatic terms this penitent implored Sir Algernon to deliver all of this important trust into the hands of the Lutheran missionary, who, by what he last had learned of his movements, was m the family establishment of Martin Luther. " As to myself," continued the peni¬ tent, " not for long durance as I am, compulsion is for me to fly this spot, and through the right excellent management of a kind friend vantage me in a place of cunning concealment ; for since we last made parley, Sir knight, I have had apt
advisement there are those in full quest¬ ment for me and my testimonials, who are breme foemen to the rightful heir of St. Oswald, whom, to make contentation for my conscience, I would lead to his birthdom. And now fare thee well, pre¬ server of my periled soul ! — may the blessings you have merited wend in your path !" And again and again, raising his bands and eyes in supplication for blessings to attend Algernon, this poor repentant sinner tottered his way from the hermit¬ age, to seek his place of promised safety ; and Algernon not more steadily hastened on his way to his expecting friend —4he kind, the sympathising Kenrick — who had promised to accompany him imme¬ diately to the castle of Sir Ethelbert, to learn his opinion of the narrative and testimonials which Algernon held in his possession, and, should the sad fiat pronounce the bereavement of Alger¬ non's happiness in this life, to return to England alone, to announce at Albalanda that a dire mystery in the relentless fäte
of Algernon had compelled him to fly from all that in life he prized ; while, for their present departure without adieu, Kenrick addressed a letter of excuse, stating, that a summons to attend Sir Ethelbert, prohibiting one moment of delay, had sent Algernon, without the power of pausing to say farewell, to Whitby, to secure a passage for himself and Kenrick in a vessel about to sail for Rotterdam.
CHAP. XL /Is swiftly as fleet horses could convey poor Algernon and his firm friend to Whitby, they reached that port ; and wind and tide being favourable for their purpose, they soon were on rapid waft¬ age for the Netherlands. But not so readily can the pen which hazards the launch of this narrative convey concep¬ tion of the piteous agony which rent the heart of Algernon, upon this magnani¬ mously inflicted flight from love and Mary ; and long after his embarkation, the ifiaguificent castle of Albalanda was conspicuous upon land, and, like the na¬ vigator's needle to the polar star, his eyes were invariably attracted by it: but it was no longer in his life's chai t the star of his happy destination, for the sirocco of his dire fate was driving him from it for ever ; yet still his eyes were rivetted upon its lessening form, even whilst each
delve the rudder of his vessel made, seemed, as it rent the waves asunder, to tear him more and more from the stamina of every earthly happiness. And as the grand towers of that structure he had just learned was his own inheritance were lessening to his eager gaze, he still strained every optic nerve to maintain his observation of them : and when that could no longer be accomplished where he stood, he darted, like a well-practised mariner, to the topmast head, and there intently gazed until every trace of Alba¬ landa was lost to view — lost like his hap¬ piness ; then sorrowfully descending, he placed himself by his sympathizing friend—the wan, the mute, the woeful son of mental anguish. Yet Algernon was not like many a heart-panged exile, who gazed on do¬ mestic domes as long as sight could yield them ; — he was not driven from his country, and all the affections and bless¬ ings of home, bearing still the balm of looking to return upon a given time. No : his home and happiness he now felt
placed beyond this mundane sphere; and assured that in brighter realms he should again meet Mary, he endeavoured to find balm in the deeds which were now wafting him from her, since they were meet to operate like auspicious winds and tides, to lead him to this coveted re- meeting. At length Kenrick and his heart-rived pupil arrived at De Vauban Castle, where they found Sir Ethelbert confined to his dormitory by illness ; for Sir Ethelbert, upon that discovery at St. Mildred's which had caused his prompt flight to De Vau¬ ban Castle, where he had placed Walter Sanguiffe in safe custody, had obtained no satisfactory result from this rapid re¬ pair to Walter ; as this culprit persisted that he knew no further than what he had already confessed — of having aided, under the auspices of the abbess of St. Mildred's and her confederates, in seiz¬ ing the Countess Adela as she walked on the beach, and conveying her to a dungeon in St. Mildred's West, for the purpose of assassination, which he had been informed
was effected, but without his aidance : and with such grief of heart Ethelbert believed he must credit this as the total of intelligence to be discovered, that it overwhelmed him with illness, from which he was only just recovering to some de¬ gree of convalescence, when our sad voy¬ agers arrived at his castle. It required all the wisdom in proceeds ing with which Kenrick was endowed, to enable him to break to Ethelbert the communications of Theodwald Ratton without consigning him to a relapse : but although direfully affected by the com¬ munication of Ratton, he was not so sub¬ dued by it as to overwhelm his faculties ; but he could yield no consolation for the noble Algernon ; since the basis of The- odwald's narrative he had himself, with fear and trembling, ¡suspected, yet had never dared to investigate, lest he should implicate his own sire, whom he had the agony to believe the actuating demon of the fell tragedy enacted on the night in which hh protégé had become an orphan,
and dispossess the children of the hap¬ less Adela of their supposed inheritance. However, as soon as the painful agita¬ tion which such a communication could not but awaken in a mind of such sensi¬ tive tangibility had subsided, Sir Ethelbert desired to see poor Algernon; when no- thingcould surpass the mutually kind sym¬ pathy of this meeting, except the mental agony they each endured, and which, for some moments, overpowered their forti¬ tude : but at length serious and afflicting discussions commenced, and were conti¬ nued hour after hour, between these two afflicted sufferers and Father Kenrick, upon what ought, could, or must be done or attempted ; upon how or by whom it was to be imparted to Lady Mary that Algernon was gone rrom her for ever ; and upon how or by whom coukl be accomplished the investigation of Rat- ton's confession, without the possibility of yielding sounds for echo to proclaim ; and at length Father Hubert and Ken¬ rick were appointed joint agents for the sad disclosures to poor Mary, and deter-
mined that after Kenrick had performed his afflicting mission at Albalanda, he was to return to the Netherlands, to ac¬ company his heart-rived pupil in quest of the hermit of St. Stephen's valley. With an aching heart the feeling Ken¬ rick embarked upon his distressing em¬ bassy, since for many a day of Lady Maiy's life he bad marked that tender attachment to Algernon was intertwin¬ ing with the very stamina of her exist¬ ence ; and to be doomed to disclose to her, that by the breme fiat of ruthless fate Algernon was compelled to fly from her, it was feared, for ever, wrung his heart to agony : yet what were his suffer¬ ings upon the subject to the mental anguish of those he parted from ? —. they, who each would freely yield up life to service Mary. The message sent to Algernon by Lady Mary froai the hermit ofthe valley, with what was addressed to himself at Rock. cliff Castle by a Cistercian monk, whom he now believed to be no other than the Lutheran missionary, had been discussed
repeatedly by Algernon and his two coun¬ sellors ere the departure of Kenrick, and all were of opinion that this missionary knew matters relative to the parentage of Algernon, of momentous import ; and as he had professed himself so warm a friend to Algernon and his family, they all be¬ lieved he would not injure either ; so it was agreed that it was necessary for Al¬ gernon to seek him, and learn from him all that he knew or imagined relative to his descent : and for this measure Ethel¬ bert was particularly anxious, since he had ever suspected that beneath the her¬ mit's disguise might be identified the por¬ tentous being who had, when every hope of promised bliss was blossoming around him, severed him from Adela and earthly happiness ; and if this surmise were just, then was the missionary a man of sterling honour, and devoted to the house of St. Oswald,—one who would part with his life sooner than injure the children ofthe angel Adela. And thus believing, Sir Ethelbert became impatient ; and as soon as he conceived his hapless protégé had
resumed sufficient firmness after the de¬ parture of Kenrick upon his heart-rend¬ ing mission, ordered all things to be pre¬ pared for the journey of poor Algernon in quest of the hermit of St. Stephen's valley; for, in addition to other impel¬ lents to wish for speed in this measure, a gleam of hope had broken upon the deso¬ late mind of Ethelbert through the letter found by Algernon in his dormitory in Norfolk House, since that, he conceived, bad emanated from some wile of the wicked to injure those they hated ; whilst Algernon believed the wile was levelled against him individually, as he had recog¬ nized the handwriting of Lady Warburg in this composition, though evidently disguised, and having identified the cha¬ racters, had placed no faith in their import until after the communication of the penitent pilgrim. As the Protestants were at this identical period turning their steps to Ratisbon tc attend a diet there, Ethelbert counselled Algernon to wend bis way thither, as the most likely spot at this moment in all
Germany to encounter him he sought; and with introductory letters to many of consequence who were likely to attend the convocation, Algernon at length de¬ parted, leaving Sir Ethelbert yet too little invalescent to permit his travel¬ ling. Poor Ethelbert, who mentally sighed, as with tearful eyes and sur¬ charged heart he parted from his protege, — " Ah ! Algernon, you may speed you in questment of the voice of truth, in dauntless surance that no advisement will whelm you in ignominy ; whilst I, alas ! in seeking such for you, may peril the life of my own sire by the breme hand of' the deathman." Algernon reached Ratisbon at the com¬ mencement of the convocation ; but those immediately connected with the propa¬ gation of the Lutheran doctrine being those most likely to know the destiny of the missionary, he repaired immediately to Alelancthon with Sir Ethelberts let¬ ter to him. Melancthon soon called to memory who had borne the designation of the hermit of St Stephen's valley in
England, and with a smile told Aigernou, " that though their proceedings required not such caution in Germany as conceal¬ ment of names, the missionary he sought had private reasons for not yet assuming iiis own designation. That he was now at Malta, gone thither to give in his re¬ signation as a knight of St. John, to the Grand Master ; and where, should Sir Algernon follow him, he must seek for him under thenameof Ferdinand Mentz." Algernon had nothing to impede bis seeking him whom he believed his fate ; for should he confirm the dire history detailed by the penitent, he must, alas! deem it true. Algernon, therefore, quitted Ratisbon without delay, and proceeded towards Genoa, where he believed he could readily engaite a vessel for his conveyance to Malta ; but, to his infinite ¿riei\ his attached valet Norman fell down a precipice whilst crossing the Alps, and was so severely injured, that he could not recommence his journey for many weeks; and Algernon felt it impossible to leave him İn a strange land
to the mercy of those who cared not foi hini : and this delay was indeed agonising to the anxious—the miserable Algernon, who feared that through it he should miss him upon whom the happiness of Alary and himself depended : and at length, when he was enabled to reach Genoa, he found the difficulty almost insurmountable of obtaining waftage thence, eveu to so near a point as Malta, so many ofthe craft and mariners ofthat port had been called into requisition for the conveyance of the Emperor's forces to attack Algiers : but after a further annoyance in delay, he and his little suite obtained a safe passage to Malta, where he found the knights of St. Join 1 preparing for warfare, some already having embarked with their sol¬ diers tojóin the imperial fleet. Although Algernon had little expect¬ ation that the venerable knight hermit, whom nve years since he had seen bend¬ ing towards the vale of senescience, should be one of the intrepid heroes about to join the imperial expedition,
yet delayed not his anxious enquiries for hi in he had come so far to seek ; when, to his utter dismay, he learned from the Grand Master that Ferdinand Mentz had, for tlie present, dropped his missionary bearings ; and, in concordance with chi- valric feeling, had sallied forth with the first detachment ofthe Malta force, which had embarked for Sardinia to attend the Empcior. After a moment's hesitation, and only a moment was there for de¬ cision, Algernon determined upon join¬ ing the volunteers about to embark with the knights of St John to join in war¬ fare ; for this enterprise was not hostile to the interest of England, but rather for the advantage of her infant commerce, if the expedition should prove successful; and only by the adoption of this hasty measure stood he a chance of seeing Mentz, since in battle this man of mys¬ tery might fall, and never return to Malta to yield him the information foi which he panted; and should he himself perish in the enterprise, why then the heir of St. Oswald would no longer ini-
pede the lawful rights of the innocent usurpers. Algernon was too noble a looking warrior for his services to be rejected, and arms and armour were immediately presented to him. His faithful Norman, not sufficiently recovered to attend his master, was supplied with a comfortable birth amongst the convalescent in the Knights* Hospital ; and with him Al¬ gernon left letters and directions in the event of fate's decreeing for him never to return. Algernon, at length, embarked for Sar¬ dinia, and falling in with the imperial Meet, sailed for the African coast And here, as the pen which has composed this fictitious narrative could not trace the historic facts like the elegant and animated writer who gave to the admiring world the invasion of Algiers, we will here transcribe, from Robertson's cele¬ brated reign of the Emperor Charles V., the scene of peril and distress in which poor Algernon was involved; not that we suppose the matter of our transcript
unknown to our readers, but memory might not, to a letter, perform its reminis¬ cence to impress, as we would wish, the scene in which our hapless hero so gal¬ lantly engaged. " Charles adhered to hispían with such determined obstinacy that he paid no regard to the Pope who advised, or An¬ drew Doria who conjured him not to expose his whole armament to almost unavoidable destruction, by venturing to approach the dangerous coast of Algiers at such an advanced season of the year. Having embarked on board Doria's gal- 4 leys at Porto Venere, in the Genoese ter¬ ritories, he soon found that this expe¬ rienced sailor had not judged wrong concerning the element with which he was so well acquainted ; for such a storm arose, that it was witti the utmost diffi¬ culty and danger he reached Sardinia, the place of general rendezvous. But as his courage was undaunted, and his tem¬ per often inflexible, neither the remon¬ strances of the Pope and Doria, nor the dangers to which he had already been
exposed by disregarding their advice, bad any other effect than to confirm him in his fatal resolution. The force, indeed, which he had collected was such as might have inspired a prince less adventurous and less confident in his own schemes with the most sanguine hopes of success. It consisted of twentv thousand foot, and two thousand horse, Spaniards, Italians, and Germans, mostly veterans, together with three thousand volunteers, tlie flower ofthe Spanish and Italian nobility, fond of ??? ing court to the emperor b\ attend¬ ing him in his fa\ourite expedition, and eager to share in the glory which they believed he was going to reap ; to thete were addi d a thousand soldiers sent from Malta by the order of St. John, led by a hundred of its ??? gallant knights. ** The \oyage from Majorca to the African coast was not less tedious or full of hazard than that which he had just finished. When he approached the land, the roll of the sea and vehemence of the winds would not Jennit the tioops to disembark. But at last the Emperor
seizing a favourable opportunity, landed them without opposition not far from Algiers, and immediately advanced to¬ wards the town. To oppose this mighty army, Haseen had only eight hundred Turks, and uve thousand Aloors, partly natives of Africa, and partly refugees from Grenada. He returned, however, a fierce and haughty answer when sum¬ moned to surrender. But vvith such a handful of soldiers, neither bis desperate courage nor consummate skill in war could have long resisted forces superior to those which had defeated Barbarossa at the head of sixty thousand men, and which had reduced Tunis, in spite of all hk endeavours to save it. i€ But how far soever the Emperor miiriit think himself bevond the reach of K~> · t, any danger from the enemy, he was suddenly exposed to a more dreadful calamity, and one against which human prudence and human efforts avail nothing. On the second dav after his landing, and bvtbre lie had time for anv thing but to disperse some light-armed Arabs who
molested his troops on their march, the clouds began to gather, and the heavens to appear with a fierce and threatening aspect. Towards evening rain began to fall, accompanied with violent wind, and the rage of the tempest increased during the night ; the soldiers who had brought nothing ashore but their arms, remained exposed to all its fury, without tents or shelter, or cover of any kind. Tlie ground was soon so wet that they could not He down on it, their camp being in a low situation was overflowed with water, and they sunk at every step fo the ankles in mud, while the wind blew with such impetuosity, that to pre¬ vent their falling- they were obliged to thrust their spears into the ground, and to support themselves by taking bold of them. Hascen was too vigilant an officer to allow an enemy in such distress to re¬ main unmolested. About the dawn of morning he sallied out with soldiers, who having been screened from the storm under their own roofs were fresh and vigorous. A body of Italians who were
stationed nearest the city, dispirited and benumbed with cold, fled at the approach of the Turks. The troops at the post behind them discovered greater courage ; but as the rain had extinguished their matches and wet their powder, their muskets were useless, and having scarcely strength to handle their other arms, they »vere soon thrown into confusion. Almost the whole army, with the emperor himself m person, was obliged to advance before the enemy could be repulsed, who, after spieading such general consternation and killing a considerable number of men, ι e tired at last in good order. '* But ail feeling or remembrance ofthis loss and danger were quickly obliterated by a more dreadful as well as affecting Npectacle. It was now broad day ; the hurricane had abated nothing of its vio¬ lence, and the sea appeared agitateti with all the rage of which that destructive dementis capable; all the ships, on which alone the whole army knew that their safety and subsistence depended, were seen driven from their anchors, some m O
dashing against each other, some beat to pieces on the rocks, many forced ashore, and not a few sinking in the waves. In less than an hour fifteen ships of war, and a hundred and forty transports with eight thousand men perished ; and such of the unhappy crews as escaped the fury of the sea, were murdered without mercy by the Arabs, as soon as they reached land. The emperor stood in silent anguish and astonishment behold¬ ing this fatal event, which at once blasted all his hopes of success, and buried in the deep the vast stores which he had provided as well for annoying the enemy as for subsisting his own troops. He had it not in his power to afford them any other assistance or relief than by sending some troops to drive away the Arabs, and thus delivering a few who were so for¬ tunate as to get ashore from the cruel fate which their companions met with. At last the wind began to fall, and to give some hopes that as many ships might escape as would be sufficient to save the army from perishing by famine, and trans-
port them back to Europe. But these were only hopes : the approach of even¬ ing covered the sea with darkness ; and it being impossible for the officers on board the ships which had outlived the storm to send any intelligence to their companions who were ashore, they re¬ mained during the night in all the an¬ guish of suspense and uncertainty. ^Sext day a boat despatched by Doria made shift to land, w r ith information, that hav¬ ing weathered out the storm, to which during fifty years of knowledge of the sea he had never seen any equal in fierce¬ ness and horror, he had found it necessary to bear away with his shattered ships to ( ape Metafuz. He advised the emperor, as the face of the sky was still lowering and tempestuous, to march with all speed to that place, where the troops could iv- embark with greater ease. • r Whatever comfort this intelligence afforded Charles, from being assured thai part of his fleet had escaped, was balanced by the new cares and perplexity in which it involved him with regard to his army, m (í
Aletafuz was at least three days' march from his present camp ; all the provisions which he had brought ashore at his first landing were now consumed; his soldiers, worn out with fatigue, were hardly able for such a march, even in a friendly country ; and being dispirited by a succession of bard- ships, which victory itself would scarcely have rendered tolerable, thev were in no condition to undergo new toils. But the situation ofthe army was such as allowed not one moment for deliberation, nor left it in the least doubtful what to choose. They were ordered instantly to march, the wounded, the sick, and the feeble, being placed in the centre ; such as seemed most vigorous were stationed in the front and rear. Then the sad effects of what they had suffered began to appear more manifestly than ever ; and new cala¬ mities were adding to all those which they had already endured. Some could hardly bear the weight oftheirarms; others, &pent with the toil of forcing their way through deep and almost impassable roads, sunk down and died; many perished by ík-
mine, as the whole army subsisted chiefly on roots and berries, or the flesh of horses, killed by the Emperor's order, and distributed among the several battalions ; many wounded were drowned in brooks, which were swoln so much by the exces¬ sive rains, that in passing them they waded up to the chin ; not a few were killed by the enemy, who, during the greater part of their retreat, alarmed, harassed, and annoyed them night and day. At last they arrived at Metafuz; and the weather being now so calm as to restore their communications with the fleet, they were supplied with plenty of provisions, and cheered with the prospect of safety. " The calamities which attended this unfortunate enterprise did not end here, for no sooner were the forces got on board than a new storm arising, though less furious than the former, scattered the fleet, and obliged them, separately, to make towards such ports in Spain and Italy as they could first reach." In the foregoing scene of dire calamity,
Algernon signalised himself by the intre¬ pidity of his valour and endurance, even to the admiration ofthe Emperor and other renowned heroes ; and in the promptitude of his deeds of humanity, none were found to equal or surpass him. Amongst the instances of prowess and benevolence which distinguished our hapless exile upon this calamitous enterprise, was his rescue of a man in the garb of a slave, who had been signalising his valour on the side of the invaders, until fallen on by a large band of Arabs. Algernon first overcame by his single arm the assassins, and then bore the wounded slave to a spot ofsafety, and afterwards at¬ tended to him with much humanity, until the order for embarkation terminated his benevolent attention, and in that moment of anxious and hurried separation, the rescued slave implored Sir Algernon, to his amazement, by name, which had not here transpired, to meet him in Alalta, whither the wounded squadron he was ordered to join, were bound to :—" For the man can vantage you, most kindly knight," he
added, " whose soul you in England saved, and body rescued in Algiers." The amazed Algernon w T as permitted fiere no time for explanation. The wounded man was borne away to the hos¬ pital squadron, and Fitzrivers soon after embarked with a detachment ofthe Alal- tese warriors ; sad indeed, for beside all the dire horrors and distresses he had been doomed individually to endure, and * his humanity had been panged to wit¬ ness, the name of Ferdinand Aientz had never met his anxious inquiry, nor could the brilliant prospects cheer bini, held out by the Emperor bending " to desire his repair to his court in Spain to receive honourable testimony of His Imperial Majesty'sapprobation,and to be appointed to a station well according with his mili¬ tant abilities," for these smiles of fbituue were not to beam on him ; for instantly he declined them, since only by consign¬ ing himself to obscurity could he ac¬ complish that magnanimous sacrifice which had torn him from his sublunary happiness.
However, not very long had Algernon been on board ere his sadness was cheered, for İn conversation with a veteran knight, who had distinguished himself both in prowess and humanity in the late distress¬ ing enterprise, and had anxiously attached himself to Algernon since they had be¬ come shipmates, he learned that his com¬ panion had for a time borne the name of Ferdinand Mentz, when he had ceased being designated the hermit of St. Ste¬ phen's Valles.
CHAP. XII. We must now return to England, and detail events which occurred from the period of Algernon's distracted flight from happiness, until we can again have the power to resume the narrative of his adventures. The apology conveyed by Father Hu¬ bert to Lord St. Oswald and Lady Alary for the sudden departure of Father Ken¬ rick and Sir Algernon to the Nether¬ lands without farewell at Albalanda, overwhelmed them in deep concern and anxiety for Sir Ethelbert, until it entered into the imagination of each that this rapid departure had been caused by Sir Ethelbert having obtained some clue to the fate of Adela ;and, under the delusion of hope thus inspired, they solaced them¬ selves with flattering expectations, until the pale and sad Kenrick re-appeared and blighted every hope : for he bad no
intelligence of Adela, and the news he brought was unwillingly communicated of Algernon's mysterious call to volun¬ tary exile. Although with kindly feeling this af¬ flicting communication was made, it came in torture to the heart of Lord St Os¬ wald, and extinguished the vital spark of Alary's happiness. " Algernon torn from her in the moment when hope smiled in every meet promise ! Gone without one parting sentence! —without one word of explanation i Gone with¬ out probability of ever more re-meeting !" and Alary became at once the transfixed statue of despair, until her affectionate brother flung his arms around her neck, clasped her to his throbbing bosom, and bursting into an agony of sympathising tears, by the warmth of kindred tender¬ ness reanimated poor Alary; and by call¬ ing from her eyes the tears of gratitude, led to the uncontrolled flow of those of grief and bitter disappointment ; and by relieving thus the first agonies of her dis¬ tress, allowed her mind to call up forti-
tude to its: imperative station, with the staff which never bends — pious resignation; and to cling to that further consolation which was registered in her heart, the statement of Father Kenrick, " that the flight of Algernon was a magnanimous sacrifice of seif to duty." But notwithstanding fortitude was at its post in the bosom of poor Mary, grief betrayed itself in every tone of her voice, in the pale hue of her cheeks, the sober step of her movements ; yet she was alive to all her duties through the day — her no longer sparkling eyes coukl discover in one glance the wishes of her sire, or of her brother, and where they depended upon her she wuould fly with anxiety, though no longer with sportive buoy¬ ancy, to accomplish them ; whilst, on the other hand, nothing that her heart-wrung father could devise for the consolation of his hapless child whom he had aided in placing on Hope's highest pinnacle to make her fall from happiness more cruelly severe, that he left unattempted ; and the now no longer volatile De Mandeville,
who had saddened with Mary, was her day-shadow, ever near to serve and to amuse her; and Weewitte, whose wit, unstrung by Mary's sorrow, no longer endeavoured to jest, unless he thought it might beguile her of a smile ; and the seneschal found manya tear straying down his furrowed cheeks, when, at times, he hovered near her to observe if grief's canker was making perceptible inroads to alarm, since last he noticed this sweet as lovely blighted flower. Amongst tbc many surmises of the cause which had impelled the flight of Algernon, one awakened in the mind of De Mandeville, w 'neh vvas considered by his father as not improbable, seemed to yield consolation to the heart of Mary, which was, " that he had been discovered (o be what Edward had heard whispered at Vespasian Tower, — a stray scion of the Plantagenets ; and that a humane wish to spare his country such scenes of civil discord as might deluge England with bloodshed by kindred hands, had led to his flight from those who wished
to exalt him as the right heir of the British empire :" and this suggestion giv¬ ing certainty to the magnanimity of Algernon, upon which she could feed in contemplation, took despair from the expression of her countenance ; and in a few days after she first heard it ima¬ gined, the tint of alabaster disappeared fiom her complexion; for now she was firmly assured of what her heart had before clung to, that Algernon was, in sooth, a candidate for immortal glory, and that in brighter realms they should meet again. And now a new distress sorrowed the heart of the lord of Albalanda, the ar¬ raignment of his ever kind and steadv Iriend Lord Cromwell, through whom he had hoped to compel the ex-friars of St Mildred to declare the fate of Adela : for to Lord St. Oswald and his agents they ail steadily affirmed that the secret prisons uere known only to the superior of each convent; and that the abbot who held the supremacy at the time the writing announced the countess Adela
being a prisoner in St. Mildred's West, had long ceased to exist ; and his suc¬ cessor was wholly ignorant of her fate : and although hope, through Cromwell's influence, could no longer exist, Lord St. Oswald was meditating a journey south¬ ward, to implore the aidance of his so¬ vereign, when he learned, and ere the intelligence of the sanguinary death of Cromwell had reached Yorkshire, that Lady W'arburg had been summoned by her friend Katharine Howard to attend her nuptials with the King : and although in this transit of the northern star she was attended by the whole constellation of her satellites, which relieved him from apprehension of annoyance from them to Mary, should he leave her at Alba¬ landa, be soon relinquished his intention of proceeding to court, fearing it would avail him little; since he anticipated much evil to his favour with the king through Rhona's friendship with the intended queen, and Gardiner, and Bonner, and those inimical to all Lutherans, from whoae interests and tenets Henry was
veering more and more every succeeding hour. And this year, so remarkable for the foundation of the Jesuitical order, at length came to its close, without the sad family in Albalanda Castle hearing aught ofthe fate of Adela, or any thing satisfactory from Kenrick, who had re¬ turned to Sir Ethelbert, who still was in too weak a state for his return to Eng¬ land. Another year commenced, and slowly crept onward, without the balm of any terrestrial consolation springing up at Albalanda : for still even in the political wilderness nothing appeared genial to their comfort, since the augmenting in¬ fluence of Gardiner and Bonner increased most fearfully the King's intolerance ; and with the new appearance of rebellion in their county, causing the subversion of mercy, so that the dire tragedies of frequent and lamentable executions panged the feeling hearts of the sorrow¬ ing inhabitants of our castle, many and many an hour: and in addition to these
public sympathies and private griefs, the mortification began to reach their ears of the murmurc in circulation; and which, though slow in gaining credit, still were agonising to liave imagined by any against the lord of Albalanda, " that the dire fate ofthe Countess Adela, whatever it might prove, had been devised by her ungrateful husband, to permit his espousing the beautiful Rosamond," and to crush, these rumouis the indignant Lord St. Oswald knew not how ; for they came, like the breath ofthe wind, through crevices and keyholes, the point from whence they issued undiscoverable, though surmised ; although none who disbelieved the slan¬ der but ascribed it to the partizans of Rosamond. At length, as the season became con¬ venient, Ilis Majesty determined upon going in progress into Lincoln and York¬ shire. " Not yet,^ sajs Lord Herbert, *' so much to extinguish the relics ofthe last commotion, as those of superstition, miracles, and pilgrimages ; besides he was in hopes to meet his nephew of Scot-
land." And no sooner was this progress commenced, than the beautiful and adu¬ lated heiress of the wealthy Venetian merchant, and her numerous company and attendants, set out for Warburg Castle, to prepare all things for the re¬ ception of their Majesties, who had deter¬ mined upon making numerous visits on their way, the presents they received upon such occasions being gratifying and at¬ tractive ; and Lady Warburg felt no doubt of being able to inveigle her royal guests to makea sufficiently long sojourn, to enable her and her confederates to put many schemes against the fame and happiness of the St. Oswalds into full effect. But to the amazement and constern¬ ation of the Albalandians, who thought tlie king would not diverge so far from iiis line of progress, Henry sent intima¬ tion to Lord St. Oswald, fiom Griins- thorpe Castle in Lincolnshire, " that the royal party would pass twenty-four hours in Albalanda Castle, ere they proceeded to York." And in so playful a strain vol. m. n
was this notice written by the king's own hand, adverting to the counterfeit royals, who had whilom astounded the habitants of that castle, with an unannounced re¬ pair thitherwards, that Lord St. Oswald augured kindly feelings in His Majesty, and trusted to be able to interest him into granting aid for the discovery ofthe fate of Adela, although these hopes experi¬ enced many a passing cloud, from fear, when he thought of how the young queen's mind was doubtlessly prejudiced against him and his children. Fortunately for Alary's consolation, Lord Dalincourt, Lady Worlington, and Blanch, Sir Leoline and Lady Jane, had arrived two days before the royal mes¬ sage, as a surprise to the sorrowing in¬ habitants of Albalanda Castle. In these fair relatives Alary found potent auxilia- lics in her department of preparation for the august visitors: while Sir Leoline proved an enlivening aid to Weewitte, who with quaint humour moaned and irroaned over the lost state of his comi- cauties and merry conceits, through the
rust which had enveloped them so dire¬ fully from the fogs of gloom and melan¬ choly ;— and he being the only one of the household who had ever attended upon royalty, he plumed exceedingly upon this superiority ; and with real or pretended mirth inspiring consequential affectation, tutored every one concerned upon their mode of preparation, and their bearings throughout the royal visit, re¬ peating page after page from the different guides for such occasions ; often reiterat¬ ing, with marked emphasis, " that the waiters should serve fasting" until at length they all became quite competent in their department, in despite of the lu¬ dicrous fits of sulkiness, which ever and anon stole over the serenity ofthe butler, the pantier, the yeomen ofthe cellar and ewcry, from this assumption of superi¬ ority, in the power of teaching them " how to serve the table manerly, that every man might speke of their courtesy." Amongst the annoyances which Lord St Oswald experienced upon this p/o- mised royal visit, was the repugnance ofhis n 2
heart to mirthful festivity enlivening the castle of Adela's ancestors, whilst her fate ν as uncertain ; he therefore deter¬ mined that every thing according with the dignity of his guests, in splendour and respect, should mark their reception, but nothing of unnecessary gaiety should be introduced ; and although music could not be omitted in its due time at the banquet, it should be of the softest melody, and that the trumpet should not perform its usual duty ; for " the trom¬ pette ought at principalle festes to blow at every course, both at the gate and throughe the halle," &c. At length their Majesties and suite arrived at the confines of Albalanda do¬ main, where Henry's early favourite, Vil¬ lars de Rhone, as its lord, his son, bro¬ ther, and nephew, with a numerous train of the household and vassals, awaited to welcome the royal pair, and escort them through the chatellany to the castle; and the king, in high good humour, expressed much pleasure at meeting his good Villars, and at the improvement in
the healthy aspect of De Alandeviile, and jocosely demanded him for one of his tall men ; and his admiration of the surrounding scenery, the respectable ap¬ pearance of the tenantry; the noble forms of the innumerable deer, that gamboled forward from every herd, as if to hail their king ; the standard height of every horse he saw upon the domain ; yielded him so much satisfaction altoge¬ ther, that lie observed not the absence of the usual demonstrations of joyful wel¬ come, by clarions, shawms, and drums. But the queen and her ladies marked the circumstance ; and in discontent pro¬ nounced it in whispers, " the forerunner of the sombre visit they now were doomed to penance through, anticipated from the advisement given to them by their dear and amiable friend Rhona, of the penurious turn Lord St Os¬ wald's mind was distempered by," which led him to recoil from every species of gladfulness, fearing the expense might not prove behoveful to his coffers ; " and in these whispers, drawing ludicrous N 3
scenes of scant matters in the miser's castle, and of his daughter's unmeet trappings to receive the queen. But in this anticipation they soon found themselves deceived. Both Lady Mary and the castle were trapped in such guise, as to cast no ray of reflection upon the liberality of Lord St. Oswald; for, in truth, the one was garnished af well be¬ came such a magnificent structure ; and the other, although with simplicity, yet vvith cost, taste,and fashion; and soon they all perceived, that whilst timidity threw its transparent veil of rosy hue over lier as she moved and spoke, that grace and elegance had gifted her with fascinations; and, at one glance, the prejudice which Henry had imbibed, through his consort, from Rhona, against poor Mary, vanish¬ ed, and he pronounced her face to re¬ semble her father, and her grace his own ever-to-be-lamentcd sister Mary. As the hour for dinner wa¿ rapidly ap¬ proaching, Lady Mary ushered her ma¬ jesty, and Lord St. Oswald his sovereign, to their attiring chanibers. At length
they all assembled in the grand hall of banquet, where nothing then in use for the gratification ofthe appetite, or adorn¬ ment of the festive board, was absent ; and all who were not bigots to prejudice against the Albalandians, pronounced that the representations of Lady Warburg were unjust ; and Weewitte, albeit bis moans and groans, so completely emerged from his fog of gloom into the irradia¬ tions of wit and drollery, that the king laughed heartily at his sallies, and the queen showed her pretty teeth in smiling approbation. When the tables were taken up, and lighter amusements than that of solid feeding in requisition, His Aiajesty ex¬ pressed his desire to examine the route by which the youthful heroine Alary of Albalrnda had followed the conspirators to the preservation of her father's cattle. Lord St. Oswald, full of parental sensibi¬ lity, proudly led his royal guests through the extended track to the verse of the trap-door, where this investigation termi. nated ; as the king's corpulency having
commenced, no longer allowed the active enterprises of his earlier years convenient to him, and as, at this spot, the fearful pursuit ofthe lorn pursuer ceased; and,as full proof had been already presented, that Lady Warburg's representation of the achievement had been a ludicrous fa¬ brication, there was, in tact, no need of exploring further ; and, amongst other reasons assigned by His Majesty for not descending to where the great mass of conspirators had been concealed, was, "hiswish to pause a while on their wend back to hear the organ in the chapel which he imagined him was marvellously excellent." To the utter dismavof Marv, who had been sufficiently distressed by the recol¬ lections this investigation had awakened, and the eulogiums she had been doomed to receive for her heroic self-possession, her father directed, that Zarini should repair to the organ, and the moment Ilis Majesty entered the chapel, to commence the most striking portion of the masses composed by Henry ; and for Ladies
Mary and Jane, Blanch and De Alande- \ille, to perform the vocalii ies. Thus accompanied Mary found cour¬ age, although not to perform to her usual perfection, yet to her father's satisfaction, and the high gratification of the agreeably surprised, flattered, and delighted royal composer, who, although highly pleased by ali the performers, was so particularly enchanted by the thrilling pathos of Mary's tones, that he exercised her in repetitions, until practice augmented her courage, and her voice sounded in strams meet for brighter realm*. The del ay thus occasioned compresseti the time for field and chivalric sports ?) much, that not half the intended pastime could be attempted ; but those accom- pJMied, fortunately, proved highly grati. tying to the monarch, especially a game al haloons performed by twelve herculean U'omeu, whose powerful strength in ff ing¬ ing off* these hollow balls so excited the admiration of the king, as to call him forth into action amongst the performer* for α few moments. ? 5
When, at length, their majesties re¬ entered the castle, the king having announced that he should find bis pastime until supper, in conversation with Lord St. Oswald, the queen wa* left to the other individuals ot* the castle to en¬ tertain, which was accomplished almost to the satisfaction of even the prejudiced friends of Ladv Warburg. The king, without circumlocution,com· mencetl this projected conference with the concern he felt at the separation of his good Villars trom hi;» t air spouse ; and Lord St. Oswald had been too long a di· piumati^ not quickly to perceive that His Majestv \?? strongly prejudiced in favour of une party ; but soou, through the in¬ fluence of truth, Henry's view of the subject became such as militated against the transgressing Rosamond ; and this becoming manifest to his lordship, be ventured lo the disclosure of all the facts and all the rumours which had come to his knowledge concerning the sad ikte ol the hapless Adela ; and implored His Majesty's aid to bis exertions for the fur-
ther discovery of that fate, wherever possibility for tracing it might appear, and to do which Henry pledged his royal word; adding, with a gracious smile— 11 And when, if ever our memory of the our royal promise shall be found inaptly dozing, the rays ofthe marvellously rich «rem, vour rillit excellent loval love, ?? \autuged us with this day, will, wc wis- bedazzie it to réanimation." The magnificent banquet served for the royal supper with every ?>tate and homage, and followed bv everv pastime which Sir Leoline and Weewitte had devised, passed off without affording incident for relating. fhe night glided away, the morniug came, and the royal visiters departed, uraciouslv pleased with their entertain¬ ment, and the valuable presents that had been made to them by their loval host. At Warburg Castle, their majesties were received with all the glare of pomp and splendor, and nothing left unat¬ tempted to dazzle the royal guests into a firm belief that the fair Rhona deserved their highest favour and admiration. Yet n C»
the beautiful baroness, notwithstanding the wonderments and merriments she bad prepared for her illustrious visiters, failed in an essential point of pleasing her sovereign in his reception as fully as Lord St. Oswald, for her presents in jewels and money appeared not half so loyal. All that is essential to notice further of this royal visit at Warburg Castle is, that Father Ralph, indebted to the merciful kindness of Lady Mary de Rhone, had had his treason represented so lightly in comparison with his guilt, that he escaped condign punishment ; but discharged from his sacred office in that castle which he had attempted to yield up to insurgents, be was now established as prime priest at Warburg Cattle ; and so elated with his elevation, that he was become a new cha¬ racter : no longer silent in servile defer¬ ence to his superiors, he was now one of the most conspicuous performers in every oral display ; and having ability in his craft of pleasing those whom he purposed to beguile, he, ere many hours had elapsed after the king's entrance of Warburg
Castle, had wound round his sovereign's fancy by his artful manoeuvres ; and being, as he proclaimed, in heart, mind, soul, and strength, enveloped in all the labyrin¬ thine mazes the king's religious principles had sounded forth, that the duped mo¬ narch encouraged his eloquence by gra¬ cious attentions. Innumerable anecdotes of the lately dissolved religious institutions in the county he related to His Majesty, inti¬ mated where wealth was supposed to have been secreted — where there existed de¬ murs against the six articles— and where there was downright apostasy ; and among these latter delinquents, he mentioned, 4i there being a young female in that Rid¬ ing who was likely to effect more mischief to the true faith, which His Majesty had marked out for man's salvation, than fifty other heretics beside ;" and the king having had an intimation from Bonner, of something to this effect, the intolerant Henry commanded the joyful Ralph " to desire the commissioners of the district to take this mischievous damsel into cus-
tody ; and when, upon investigation, her heresy was proved, the royal mandate should not be lacked for incontinent exe¬ cution." And in this artful fabrication, the name of the delinquent was craftily concealed, through apprehension that it might at once subvert the dire malice of her dia¬ bolical enemies, ere facts sufficient could either be detected or fabricated to place her out of the chance of royal clemency ; for the declaration of the king, made a few years since, upon the punishmentawaiting any who might in future imagine or enact mischief against the children of Lord St. Oswald, was well remembered ; yet Lady Mary was the young female whom Ralph, Constance, Rosamond, and Rhona were thus endeavouring to sacrifice at tlie stake — an innocent victim to their de¬ moniac hatred ; and scarcely had Henry's mandate been thus given to the exulting Ralph, ere intelligence had arrived from his reverence's emissaries, of the moment being fair for the commissioners ap¬ pointed for the discovery of heresy, to
seize Lady Mary's person without fear of rescue, she being left at Albalanda with¬ out protection, co be apprehended, at¬ tending the couch of her sick father ; her uncle, brother, aunt, cousin, Maud, and Weewitte, having embarked in haste for the Netherlands ; and from her dutiful station by the pillow of her sick sire, the vindictive Ralph resolved, with all conve¬ nient speed, to snatch her.
CHAP. X1IL l he momentous cause which, at this fearful crisis, had placed the anxious and agitated Mary by the couch of her heart¬ sick father, had many circumstances leading to it which it is necessary to re¬ late, and which date their commencement from the period in which the widowed Rosamond, empowered by the gift of her kind benefactress Adela, returned to the convent of St. Mildred, when filled with increased enmity to Adela, since to her jealous wiles she ascribed Lord St. Os¬ wald's not flying to Rome to be her es¬ cort thence, determined effectually to destroy her wedded happiness ; and, without delay, imparted all her plans of vengeance to her maternal friend the vile Constance, who soon wiled into their confederacy a demoniac paramour of her own, the abbot of St. Mildred's East, who proposed the murder of Lady St. Oswald,
to ensure Rosamond's power over the purse, as well as heart, of Lord St. Os¬ wald, by yielding him the opportunity of making her his spouse ; and this fell pro¬ ject being agreed to without a shudder of compunction, the abbot planned to have their victim seized, whilst on her solitary morning walk in her own grounds, and strangled ; and then, in convenient time, to have her corse conveyed to the deep, to be restored from thence by the tide, and in that advanced state of putres¬ cence, which must deter examination as to the true cause of her death. This was tlie vile abbot's avowed plan 5 but he had deep and dire projects of his own, which had drawn him so readily into this confederacy: for long he had coveted the beautiful Adela for his own, and he projected to get her thus, without the possibility of escape or detection, into his exclusive power. The agents em¬ ployed in this diabolical project were, of course, creatures ofthe reprobate abbot's; and as the secret prisons in the monastery of St. Mildred's nuns, were under the
especial jurisdiction of the superior of the friary, the merciless miscreant had the hapless Adela seized, and conveyed into the most secret of them, it being more secure from observation than any in his own immediate abbey, and from whence he was soon compelled to give up every thought of speedily removing her, by the extraordinary sensation of interest awak¬ ened throughout the country by her sup¬ posed fate. The corse which had been consigned to the deep in the dead of night, to be conveyed to shore by the tide, was that of a young woman, whose remains had been sent by her disconsolate parents to St. Mildred's East, for efficacious masses and interment. This demoniac abbot at length, how¬ ever, found this popular excitement suffi¬ ciently abated to permit his arrangements for the removal of Adela to his ow T n secret chambers ; but in the night preceding that in which this long meditated project was to be fulfilled, the profligate projector was seized with paralysis, which for ever
impaired both mind and frame, and, helpless and crazed, he was shortly super¬ seded in the supremacy ; when his suc¬ cessor, although one of his prime confe¬ derates, forming other projects relative to the important captive in his clutches, became fearful, through the rumour be¬ ginning of an intended visitation of all religious institutions, of continuing her imprisonment in either ofthe St Mildred monasteries, and withheld by superstitious dread, through the fearful judgment which had fallen upon his predecessor, from removing this embarrassing captive by murder, he had her safely and secretly conveyed to a convent of Ursuline sisters in the Netherlands, vvith injunctions to the superior to reclaim her from heresy, to conceal her from every eye but those deemed trustwoithy, and at the same time arranging a liberal pension for her support; purporting amply to recompense himself, either through the captive's own generosity, should he restore her to li¬ berty, or by making Constance and Ro-
samond purchase her continued durance by the most liberal remuneration. The treatment experienced by the hap¬ less Adela from the Ursuline sisters was such as bigotry resolute upon conversion would naturally inflict; and for many a sad day, the misery of her endurance aiding the anguish arising from mental suffering, gave to her wan and attenuated appearance the aspect of approaching dis¬ solution : but at length that gem of the heart, which had lighted her lonely dun¬ geon with its beams, raised its rays to realms above, and there resting every thought and every expectation, illumined scenes of happiness beyond the grave for Adela, with those whom she had loved on earth, until her countenance, from such contemplation, assumed a celestial stamp ; and thus health and loveliness were restored to her aspect by the magic influence of piety. And so advantageous were the labours of poor Adela found to the interests of this community of Ursulines, tlirough the exquisite skill with which she imagined
and executed the fancy works they had for sale, that the prioress had every spe¬ cies of cruelty and even unkindness at last discontinued towards her; and had her place of imprisonment changed to a cheerful though sequestered tower, in the extensive pile of building belonging to this monastery, where, on the summit of this tower, a little garden was arranged for air and exercise to benefit this valu¬ able prisoner. Twice had the abbot of St. Mildred's East \ ¡sited Adela in the Ursuline con¬ vent, with offers to restore her to liberty, upon the condition of her binding herself to recompense him according to his de¬ mands and yield up her daughter, the Lady Mary, to the Ursuline sisters, to become one of their community ; but to the condition relative to her child, no ar¬ gument or threat could induce the captive mother to accede. At length the discovery of Adela's having been a prisoner in one of the secret dungeons of St. Mildred's West was made, and Ethelbert took flight to the
Netherlands, .to seek information from Walter Sanguiffe, but nothing save dis¬ appointment awaited the heart-rived Eth¬ elbert in all his researches for the dis¬ covery of the fate of Adela, until at length believing himself equal to a voy¬ age for England, all matters were pre¬ pared accordingly ; when the day pre¬ ceding that intended for his embarkation, he was surprised by a request from the youth whose life Lady Mary had provi¬ dentially saved at Rockciiff, for the honour of an interview. This interview was granted to the youth, who was just returned from a pros¬ perous voyage to the New World, in a situation which had been procured for him by the kind Ethelbert, to whom he had presented many little tokens of his gratitude ; and then petitioned the bene¬ volent knight, to permit his attendance in his suite to England, that he might impart something of moment to Lady- Mary de Rhona, which could not be con¬ fided to others, " albeit his hazardry in speeding to England," he said, " might
peril him, he should not hesitate, since it might service Lady Mary." Ethelbert, ever sensitive in the con¬ cerns of the idol of his parental care, questioned the ingenuous youth, who was lured on by the prospect of being relieved from the necessity of absence from the spot where he could see his mother, who was yet the goal of all earthly happiness to him — should he confide in the honour of Sir Ethelbert, and make him the agent to convey this important intelligence to Lady Mary, and he therefore informed his kind auditor, that a recent fire in the Ursulinc convent, where through the in¬ terest of Sir Ethelbert, his mother had obtained a comfortable situation, had caused, in the moment of general alarm, a prisoner to be liberated ; and ere the cessation of danger had led to the return of the captive to her place of confinement, his mother had seen her and heard her speak ; and having only a few days prior heard from her correspondent in England, ofthe enquiries making throughout York¬ shire to discover the fate of Lady Mary's
mother, consequently his mother was anxious to convey intelligence to the pre¬ server of his life, that the captive so ac¬ cidentally permitted to appear, and who was the prime fancy-work er of this con¬ vent, was an English lady of noble seem¬ ing with a face resembling Lord de Mandeville, whilst her voice bore every tone of Lady Mary's, whose voice, his mother felt persuaded, had been infixed by the hand of Providence upon the re¬ tention of her ear, for its wise and mer¬ ciful purposes. The tremendous agitation of Sir Ethel¬ bert, upon this communication, seemed almost to menace his existence ; but for the sake of Adela he called up all his for¬ titude to bear him through it ; yet for Adela what was he to do? From his own sad destiny, he dared not himself appear in the matter, unauthorised by her husband; yet delay might be dangerous, and to him torture ; and not enduring to quit a spot which in possibility contained Adela, almost fancying that by vicinity he might protect her from further machinations of
her dire enemies, he determined to de¬ spatch his confidential squire with the mo¬ mentous intelligence to Father Kenrick, who was then in England arranging for his final departure to join destiny with Algernon in exile. By desire of Sir Ethelbert, Father Hubert was to be consulted in the mode most meet for conveying the important information to Lord St. Oswald, and the reverend confederate drew Lord Dalin- court into their secret consultation, when all agreeing that it would be advisable not to awaken hopes in the mind of Adela's dearest relatives, which might haplessly never be realised, they deter¬ mined to embark all three for the Netherlands forthwith ; and there effect, with the aid of Sir Ethelbert, the identi¬ fication ofthe captive. From the moment this information of the grateful Margaret bad been disclosed to Hubert de Bourge, plans for obtaining a view of the captive in question naturally occupied his thoughts ; and for the completion of one of them he era· vol. III. ?
ployed Maud upon some fair pretext, to purloin, as a temporary loan for him, from the precious stores of Lady Mary, a beautifully embroidered pomegranate, which he had himself purchased at Rome, and presented to his beloved pupil Adela ; and which pomegranate contained most ingeniously contrived, a secret re¬ pository for a billet. This pomegranate, therefore, was the first experiment deter¬ mined upon ; and immediately after their arrival at De Vauban Castle, Father Hubert and Lord Dal in court alone, as from being strangers in the country, not liable to dangerous observation, made their rapid way to the Ursuline convent, and en¬ quired for fancy works, and after having purchased largely, produced the pome¬ granate, and without betraying the secret depository it contained, desired to know, if they had not one to match it, if the} could not have one made for them with¬ in a given time ? The nuns, anxious fbi gain, hoped they might get it done, yet from the circumscription of time, they feared it could not be accomplished.
Lord Dalincourt then offered to leave the bauble, that they might consult their workers upon the possibility of having it completed at the period named. The nuns were thankful for this kindness, and Lord Dalincourt with his agitated companion departed ; and the convent dinner bell in this moment resounding its call to the refectory, the nun entrusted with visiting poor Adela's prison not choosing to pause one unnecessary mo¬ ment from a tempting banquet, rapidly uttered all she had to say relative to this pomegranate, delivered it to Adela, and saying she would return the moment she had dined to learn the result of her ex¬ amination, hastily disappeared. And fortunate it was for poor Adela this eargerness for departure ; since the con¬ spicuous start and perceptible bounding of the captive's heart upon thus unex¬ pectedly beholding that which was too remarkable not instantly to be recognised, must have excited suspicion ; and; panting and trembling, she listened to the retreat¬ ing foot-falls, which were leading to the ? 2
sounding of the final fastening of her prison, ere she dared to explore the secret depository which she well remem¬ bered this bauble to contain ; when soon her trembling fingers drew forth a slip of paper, on which was written in cha¬ racters cherished in her memory — " Hubert de Bourge," with the date of the day and year in which it thus came to her hands. Although thus concise was his sign- manual it conveyed to the comprehensive mind of Adela all which was requisite, — that her venerable friend was near her; that he wanted to identify her, and that her announcing herself would not be impro¬ per. — But she had neither pen nor pen¬ cil, for only when her works required them, w* i s she permitted their use, and for a moment she was in despair ; how¬ ever, her fine hair was unchanged by time or griefi and of that she enclosed a lock in a bit of paper, pricked on which, with a needle, were her name and title at full length ; and these attestations she placed in the pomegranate, and then endeavoured
to employ the moments intervening un¬ til the return of her jailor, in acquiring composure sufficient to escape suspicion. The nun re-appeared, and Adela, with all the necessary appearance of regret, stated the fact of her having no materials of so choice a texture as this fruit re¬ quired ; and that the delay in endeavour¬ ing to procure such must prevent the possibility of its being executed within the given time. The pomegranate was accordingly re¬ turned to Lord Dalincourt when he call¬ ed, who acted his regret at disappoint¬ ment so naturally as to escape suspicion ; and then with a bounding heart retreated to De Vauban Castle, where soon the sa¬ tisfactory evidence was drawn forth, to joy the anxious friends of Adela ; and, Sir Ethelbert having acted upon the fondly cherished hope that such might prove the case, had, in a few hours after his trusty squire embarked for England, repaired to the court of the amiable Governess of the Netherlands, to lay the matter before Her Majesty, who kindly gave him every
aid he required, by sending a mandate to the proper authorities, to " act under the guidance of Sir Ethelbert de Courland, who was empowered by Her Majesty to enterprise a matter of importance, which required secrecy and caution ;" and, with his valuable credentials, Sir Ethelbert was at his castle ready to receive the party from England, and to call forth the as¬ sistance of the authorities, which he con¬ ceived would be immediately required after the identification of the captive, and hope awakened in the mind of Adela to sicken her heart by its suspension. But Lord Dalincourt conceived that his brother ought to be apprised of this dis¬ covery first, since in consequence of the evil reports relative to Lord St. Oswald being the culprit in the secretion of his spouse, that he ought to be the person to emancipate the captive, and escort her to her country and her home. An express was, therefore, sent off with the first tide to Sir Leoline Worlington with the im¬ portant intelligence. Cautiously as Sir Leoline made his
communications, it had such an alarming effect upon Lord St. Oswald, through the combination of joy and compunction, that the competent Philip pronounced it a peril to life that must not be enterpris- ed, his embarking upon such a matter of anxiety as the rescue of such a wife from such a captivity ; and it was, therefore, arranged for Lord de Mandeville to act for his father in this important mission ; and accompanied by those already men¬ tioned, and a suitable retinue, this anxious son embarked upon his serious enterprise with all possible secrecy, lest alarm might spread to the subversion of his hoped achievement But not so secretly was this departure of so many individuals from Albalanda Castle effected as it was intended ; for Father Ralph had immediate intimation of it, and not one moment did he lose, ere, in a consultation with poor Mary's inveterate foes, he arranged how by stra¬ tagem the abduction of their victim from her father's castle could be effected with¬ out alarming the chatellany, and pro- ? 4
vokinga desperate resistance, when Father Ralph, in high transports of joy at the now promised certainty of Lady Mary's being shortly to suffer martyrdom for her juvenile irreverence in mocking him, and subverting his treason ; and, also, like Bonner, in ecstacy at the anticipation of dire suffering he was to cause the inflic¬ tion of upon a contumacious heretic, he with difficulty sobered bis comportance for appearing with becoming reverence before the king, who was to start for York in a few hours, and consequently he had no time to lose in obtaining the royal signet for a measure — lacking which, he and the commissioners feared could not be accomplished without a serious rising in the county. Ralph did present himself before his sovereign with the due gravity which became his func¬ tion; and with all the wily craft of his cunning, poured forth an irritating detail of all which the commissioners had in evidence against the female heretic, ** who had made such a marvellous many apostates from that true faitb ? so clearlv
marked out for the behopeful salvation of mankind, by his grace's marvellous wis¬ dom : and how she had pupiled others to scoff at His Majesty's supremacy, and to laugh to scornment the six wise articles." Upon no other ground for high and fearful displeasure — as Father Ralph had been instructed — could His Majes¬ ty be so quickly or in temperately agita¬ ted ; and the royal fury boiled up so auspiciously, that Father Ralph could scarcely control his joyous capers — and no longer felt any hesitation, through fear of unpropitious consequences relative to the name of the hateful offender, when Henry, hoarse from passionate agitation, snatched up a pen, and demanded, " whom he was to denounce, and vvho should not live another day, or he was not De¬ fender ofthe Faith." " Mary de Rhone," being audibly pro¬ nounced, the start of the king caused a reverberation of this involuntary motion through the frame of Father Ralph ; but, when His Majesty dashed down the pen, and sent fiery flashes from his eyes, the ? 5
wily and inhuman accuser began to trem¬ ble ; and long he was not left to conjec¬ ture the result ; for the angry monarch, after saluting him with a shower of epi¬ thets, such as " brute ! beast !" &c. pro¬ nounced " That he had got the wrong sow by the ear, when it imagined him to wis that he could tickle him through it by slanders of the faith of a seraph, who had thrilled through that very ear, in the loyal performance of her sovereign's own masses, strains meet for heaven; whither, whatever might be her creed, it would aptly speed her; and might heaven venge it, if he would interrupt her course, or send her thitherward by any breme means !" and ended his vehement burst of indignation with repeating the sen¬ tence be had pronounced before Sir Ru¬ pert Warburg, " upon all who should imagine peril to the life or happiness of Mary de Rhone or her brother; and that, as he, Ralph, had dared to set that decree at defiance, he should suffer condign punishment ; and that, within twenty- iotir hours, he must quit the realm for
ever, or his life should pay the penalty of his dareful offence." From this stern decree no entreaty of Lady Warburg's, or influence ofhis ador¬ ed young Queen, could induce Henry to rescind : the gratified vanity of the royal composer, with the golden rhetoric of Sir Ethelbert, outswayed them both. Father Ralph was absolutely banished, and thus Lady Mary was preserved from the dire fate which menaced her — as she uncon¬ sciously watched by the pillow of her sire, and strove with all her powers to soothe and comfort him ; and, at length, with visible effect, for the surcharged heart of Lord St. Oswald, overflowing the boundaries of secret musing, bestowed his confidence upon his anxious child, and poured into her attentive ear, the long repented transgression of his in¬ constancy, and of slights and cruel in¬ dignities practised by him towards her inestimable mother, whose meek forti¬ tude, uncomplaining gentleness, and for¬ giving kindness, he painted with as much enthusiastic admiration, as with contrite 0 0
sorrow he deplored his own demerits as a husband. The mandate of the Queen Dowager of Hungary, Governess of the Nether¬ lands, was attended to with meet atten¬ tion ; and, by desire of Sir Ethelbert, pro¬ per authorities for enforcing obedience, accompanied Lord de Mandeville and his party to the Ursuline convent, and demanded from the dismayed prioress, " Adela, Countess of St. Oswald, her prisoner, whom she unlawfully held in durance ;" and, after a feeble effort to deny the charge, acknowledged she had an English lady in her custody, consigned to her care by her ladyship's friends, for the sole purpose of leading her back to the true faith, from which she had apos¬ tatized ; but finding she must bend to the royal decree, led the way, followed by the magistrates, Hubert de Bourge, and the trembling De Mandeville, and Maud, to the turret where poor Adela bad for many a year remained a captive : — the long-suffering Adela, whose state of mind — whose hopes and fears — whose tor-
tures of momentary expectation — whose agonising, palpitating suspense, listening with eager ears and silent heart-inspiring supplication, hour after hour, for some sequel to the unexpected appearance of the welcome pomegranate, foils all descrip¬ tion. The conventual prison dress ofthe still lovely Adela could not have disguised her from the recognition of her old at¬ tached adherents, even had they not been prepared to find her there; but she might not have so aptly recognised them, had not the late communication of the one and the voice ofthe other, in her almost shrieking hail, on beholding her long-lost hearts treasure, identified them both ; when, overpowered by emotions too mighty for her firmness, Adela dropped at once, with every faculty suspended, into the arms of her faithful Maud, when De Mandeville, who had lingered at the door of this miserable prison, fearing the excitement through bis too sudden ap¬ pearance might prove too mighty for Adela, in the moment, when any whom
she had ever known, for the first time in seventeen years, burst upon her vision — now impelled by the yearnings of 1 nature, flew to his mother, and sinking on his knees before her, pressed her hands to his lips — to bis heart ; and, whilst tears in torrents streamed down his cheeks, in attestation ofhis boyhood, and his filial sensibility, he implored those around him to recall the fleeting senses of his mother. But the tears of her asri ta ted child ? seemed more impressively gifted with power to restore the suspended faculties of that long-suffering mother than any other restorative, for scarcely had they trickled on her hands ere the instinct of nature, eager for the re-union of affection, so long, so painfully severed, seemed to commence an effective rally ; and at length she unclosed those beautiful eyes which, for many a lone year, had never opened upon any one she loved or bore her kindness ; when the position of the youth before her, whose streaming eyes beamed in penetrating force his anxious
affection for her, proclaimed to her heart that be was her son ; when instantane¬ ously breaking from the encircling arms of the faithful Maud, with a wild cry of frantic joy she grasped him to her heaving bosom, and as she touchingly articulated " My babe ! whom I was torn from nou¬ rishing !" — she relapsed into a swoon now in the arms of her almost paralised child. Lord Dalincourt, who, with Weewitte, liad by this time ventured to enter the prison, advised the removal of Adela from it whilst thus insensible; and to where, in more space and air, she might aptly revive :and the now officious prioress invited them to her parlour, where there was every restorative at hand, and then advised how with most safety she could be conveyed down the steep, narrow, dark and winding stairs of the tower; wiien the joy-subdued Weewitte, who had been trembling Hke the aspen foliage from the moment be had entered the con¬ vent, exclaimed— " She was the staff of life to me, and shall I not turn into the
sturdy oak in her needment ?" and per¬ ceptibly becoming as the firm tree he talked ofi he took up the swooning form of her he revered, and carefully as misers guard their treasure, and tenderly as mothers protect their young, he bore his long-lost lady to the convent parlour, where the recovery of Adela was speedily effected. After a most affecting scene of reite¬ rated tender recognition between mother and child, Adela with perceptible agita¬ tion lowly and energetically pronounced — " My husband ! my Mary ! " Lord Dalincourt now advanced to her, and pressing her hand with kindness tp bis lips, whilst Lady Worlington did the same, he said, in the gentle tones of kindness— fi Your anxious husband, my dear sister, sent your amiable son, and other of your friends, to wrest you from dem prison¬ ment, and to bear you incontinently to happiness and him, for he so distempered himself by agitation he was unmeet for travelling : and your, and all our, dear, dear Mary, was left in tarriance with
him, for the apt comfort and consolation of her sire." With joy and gratitude, almost too mighty forher bounding heart, Adela thus learned that fate had not bereaved her of her child, and that she was good ; that her lord was living, and not deterred by other affections from restoring her to himself and children ; and after returning the kind greeting of Lady Worlington and Lord Dalincourt with much emotion, she recognised her esteemed and venerated preceptor, Father Hubert ; and whilst they, with considerable feeling, expressed their mutual joy at meeting after such a separation, Adela lowly articulated·— " Oh ! pious Sire ! my meet thanksgiving for this my joyous rescue is glowing where it ought." By order of the queen governess, in her mandate to the authorities, a house belonging to the crown had been pre¬ pared for the reception of Lady St Os¬ wald, whither she was now almost imme¬ diately conveyed, since the Castle de Vau¬ ban neither Lord Dalincourt nor Father
Hubert considered a meet resting-place for her in such a moment, at least, not meet for the hapless Ethelbert ; and in a few days after this release from pitiless cap¬ tivity, Adela, reclad befitting her exalted rank, bade adieu, — a solemn farewell, — for pious gratitude breathed its essence through it, to the tower in which she had been so long a hapless prisoner, and un¬ knowing that she left the poor heart-rived Ethelbert behind her in it ; — Ethelbert, who still retained a hallowed shrine within her bosom, and as yet uninformed of the part he had borne in her rescue, — she set sail for Albion.
CHAP. XIV. Unlike the last voyage of poor Alger¬ non from the shores of England was that of Adela's return to it : he was flying from those whom he most loved upon earth, and from ancestral rank and riches; Adela was returning from poverty and in¬ sulation, and cruel bondage, to those whom her heart clung to, and, as she be¬ lieved, to rank and wealth : yet her voyage was not without painful anxieties and alarms ; for although every circum¬ stance which had occurred in her fa¬ mily after her disappearance had, by the desire of her lord, been revealed to her cautiously and kindly by the friends who were her escort home ; and although they all united in solemn assurances to her that Rosamond's ascendancy long had passed its meridian, and had at length sunk to contempt and detestation, and that she would have been disdainfully
erased from their conversation and recol¬ lection, had it not been for her manoeu¬ vring out of sight every necessary proof for divorcing ber from her supposed lord ; and the anm ^ ice the vicinity of herself and daughter occasioned ; and although all this was declared to her most solemnly by Father Hubert, yet poor Adela trem¬ bled, lest she might only, as humanity dictated, prove a welcome arrival to her spouse, and felt apprehensively as if her return might give the signal for new vil¬ lany to be enacted ; and in the anxious thoughts which amid her happy expect¬ ations, found power to sadden her, w r as so¬ licitude to learn the fate of her once so beloved and cruelly wrested from her — Ethelbert. The debarking of Adela and her escort upon the domain of Albalanda had been previously arranged to take place in the dead of night, not only to prevent tu¬ multuous joy of the vassals, which might prove too oppressive to the nerves of their long insulated lady, but to keep her return secret from the vile con fede-
rates in Warburg Castle, until it should have been formally announced to the so¬ vereign, when it would be too late for them to devise effectively any new mis¬ chief or calumny to shelter themselves from suspicion or disgrace. The re-meeting of Lord St. Oswald with his sincerely lamented and now tenderly esteemed Adela, bad no witness, yet that all-knowing power vested in the scribblers of fancy's pages allows of our announcing it to have been deeply af¬ fecting to both : the agonised contrition of the one for the part which he had borne in the wedded griefs and mortifica¬ tions of his lovely spouse ; and the sweet forgiving kindness ofthe other, were not likely to deprive this re-union of auspi¬ cious promise of future genuine happi¬ ness. But how long this scene of melting compunction and tender clemency might have continued, even we cannot pretend to declare, had it not, by exceeding the term of De Alandeville's patient suffer¬ ance, led him unceremoniously to intei- rupt it, and to proclaim — " That his
poor sister would be shaken to atoms in her ague; fit of quaking agitation, if her lady mother did not do something for her behoof, and by maternal caresses kiss firmness into disjointing joints and un¬ stringing nerves." Instantly, Lord and Lady St. Oswald, almost as much out of repair in joints and nerves as their quivering daughter, darted toward the door, where they perceived the yearning, trembling Mary peeping, and who now, in one moment, was clasped in her mother's fondly encircling arms. Again, and again, and again, Adela em¬ braced and blessed her Ma^, and Mary clung to her as if this re-meeting, like the marriage ritual, were to cause her cleaving to her mother until death should them part ; but at length, Lord St. Oswald, ap¬ prehensive thatsuch excessive sensibiiity,ii longer indulged, would subdue them both, took the hand of bis heart-welcomed wife, and desiring the now almost wildly joyous De Mandeville to lead his sister, proceeded to a chamber where a sumptuoib banquet was laid to refresh the weary and ex-
hausted voyagers, in which every thing that Adela had ever betrayed her relish for, and which the season or the country could supply, were to be found and gar¬ nished ¿is she had been wont to regulate : and this flattering remembrance of her predilections was soon evinced in other forms, for during the absence of Maud, from whom some instructions for the purpose might have emanated, Mary had decked her mother's ow r n particular apartments, under the sole guidance of her father, in the exact guise in which Adela had been wont to have them ; and still hourly was the gratified Adela led to more and more certainty of her return being welcome to her husband by some¬ thing in trifles expanding to her convic¬ tion, that she had lived in his recollection. But the happiness of this reunion was not destined to remain long unclouded. The dire enmity of the villainous con¬ federacy against the lire and fame ofthe Albalandians became more diabolically inveterate, if that Avere possible, upon their plan of destroying Mary having
failed; and their next attempt was ar¬ ranged against the life of her father, and in a very few days after the exile of their prime manufacturer of mischief, Ralph, Lord St. Oswald received a challenge to trial by combat from Sir Edmund Target for the murder of his first spouse, and the defamation of his second ; and this challenge had been given in person by Sir Edmund in form before the king at York, and answered by proxy for Lord St. Oswald, who was then confined by illness to his bed, and the day ap¬ pointed by His Majesty for the battle was as remote a one as his own probable stay at York would permit, to give as much time as possible for the perfect recovery ofthe appellee from his illness. But not only upon the enervating in¬ fluence of serious indisposition which his lordship was reported to be, but upon a still more subduing auxiliary Sir Edmund erected the certainty of his complete vic¬ tory. And this auxiliary was to be pro¬ duced in the moment of the combat's commencement, when he, the appellant,
should whisper to the appellee the har¬ rowing intelligence of his usurpation of the titles and estates of Sir Algernon Fitzrivers; unexpected intelligence, which Sir Edmund and his coadjutors calculated would dismay the scarcely convalescent usurper out of every power of strength or valiance for contention, and thus his guilt would find firm establishment as a murderer, and leave the fair fame of Ro¬ samond without blemish. But this mo¬ mentous secret oí' Lord St. Oswald's usurpation, which the confederates of Warburg Castle still believed under their safe keeping, had transpired by some means to the ear ofone ofthe ex-monks of St. Mildred' ?* East, who had been «riven an asylum by Lord St. Oswald, and this reverenti man, finn in his gratitude as in piety, conveyed the secret to his bene* factor, and the intelligence of when it was to be made public and how. To do justice to Villars de Rhone and his inestimable Adela, their dismay upon this indeed most unexpected intimation was founded more upon parental than vol, in. ρ
personal regrets ; whilst that of their son's regret, although naturally acute, was marked by manly fortitude; and with bis parents he was touched to the heart by the magnanimity of the heroic Al¬ gernon, for this secret divulged, unra¬ velled to them the mystery of Algernon's flight from Mary and his country, and often Edward exclaimed in the midst of his regrets, " the brother of my heart is meet to succeed my noble grandsire and the heroes of our race." But not very long were they left to their own conjectural belief; for the day succeeding that in which this distressing intelligence had been conveyed to them, Kenrick arrived at his parsonage, ac¬ companied by Ethelbert, led thither by painful anxiety relative to the challenge of Sir Edmund Target, intelligence oí which had been promptly forwarded to them by Father Philip, and had reached them a few hours subsequent to the em¬ barkation of Adela for England ; and the moment Kenrick was questioned upon the subject by the auxious usurper, the
holy man, finding secrecy thus at an end, frankly acknowledged all the facts that had transpired, and which had led Alger¬ non to tear himself from his adored Mary, to preserve to her father and brother the honours they had innocently usurped; and no doubt now remaining in the minds of De Rhone and Adela of the usurp¬ ation they had unconsciously committed, and that they must without delay make every restitution to the too long bereaved heir; and as Kenrick did not deny his knowledge of where it was likely to find him, they requested Kenrick to send oft" an express to Algernon with intelligence of the secret having been divulged to the grateful usurpers, who meant to re¬ scind immediately from honours and wealth they had no right to hold, and to request hiin to make no tarriance ere he returned, to yield them the only content ation left for them, that of beholding an individual so meet, so worthy of his an¬ cestors, bearing the title of St. Oswald. But of all the persons concerned in this discovery, Mary seemed the most ν 2
SIR ETHELBERT. distressed by it ; for on the moment the intelligence entered her recoiling ears, she once more became like a marble automaton, until her uncle, anxious to comfort her, alluded to her being the only one of the innocent usurpers not likely to suffer individually, when in¬ stantly her before almost fixed and lustre¬ less eyes flashed with brilliancy, and her cheeks flushed with the bloom of indig¬ nation ; yet she replied not to Lord Da¬ lincourt, and her first utterance was a request to Father Kenrick for a private conference ere he should leave the cas¬ tle, and when she withdrew to this sad conference, she again blanched to the semblance of death, and no bright rose was seen to reanimate her cheek, although she talked of Algernon, for it was to im¬ plore her sympathising friend to break as gently and as kindly as his affection for Algernon could devise, that their betrothment was severed for ever, as, alas! she now never, never could be his, since sİ? eould not vantage herself with honours of which her too hapless mother
had been reft ; never become mistress of a castle, and preside in halls from whence her parents and her brother had been driven by their dern fate; thatshedoubted not Algernon would have expectment of" such a matter, however it might aggrieve him ; and concluded, although almost inarticulately, by a further request, that he would avise poor Algernon to endure this disappointment with that apt forti* tude which would soothe itspangfulness j and to yield him surance that she would never cease her meet aim to deserve her meeting him in a happier world. Father Kenrick could attempt no ar¬ gument to lead poor Alary from her heroic determination, he coukl only weep in sympathy at sorrows that, in their heroism, betrayed through every fibre of her frame the agony which panged her bursting heart; and blessing and re- blessing her, he with slow and faltering steps departed. It had been the determination of Sir Villars de Rhone (for as such he now scrupulously designated himself amongst
those who knew the secret ofhis weetless usurpation, and having long since re¬ ceived the honour of knighthood from different potentates,) to have gone in the style befitting his rank to York, and there to establish his innocence of the charge of murder, by presenting his restored wife to His Majesty the day preceding that appointed for the combat j and an appropriate house had been en¬ gaged for him at an exorbitant charge, which the court being in that city had occasioned. But the aspect of his pros¬ perity had so dolefully changed, that the meditated splendour was therefore out of season ; and even the sum to be expended upon his temporary residence was now become a matter of serious re¬ gret, for restitution of property as well as title was requisite ; and though he knew the amiable Algernon would not demand restitution, yet his own feelings com¬ manded its being made ; and he knew not how he should be enabled to make this restoration, and preserve sufficient to provide for his bereaved boyj, and
yield to his inestimable wife and daughter* even the common comforts of mem gen* tlewomen ; for so prodigal had been the expenditure of Rosamond and Rhona¿ that there had been a sad reverse of sav¬ ing accumulation during the long period of his diplomatic mission ; whilst as to the family jewels, they all, too, must be yielded up : and even those which he had from time to time added to this splendid treasure, he feared would scarcely accomplish more than refund to Alger¬ non the value of the rare gem which be had been led, as much by interested mo¬ tives ae by loyalty, so recently to present with a large sum of money to his sove¬ reign : and, therefore, from these jewels, which only by lawyer's threats had he been able a short time since to recover from the hands of Rosamond, he had no hope of advantage for the provision of his adored family. But as they must pay for the bouse taken for them in York, to that they were compelled to go, although con* sidered by Sir Villars and his Adela p ŠL
unbefitting their fallen fortunes ; they still, how T ever, bad the power to arrange for the presentation of Adela to her so¬ vereign, to be void of unnecessary ex¬ pense ; and at the appointed time a cavalcade, composed of De Rhone and his children, and friends, and faithful ad¬ herents, escorted Adela in a close horse- litter, who was thus concealed to escape observation, which might bruit it to the appellant, whom the appellee wished pub¬ licly to surprise with incontrovertible refutai of the foul charge of murder. Immediately upon his arrival at York, Sir Villars proceeded to the presence of His Aiajesty ; the recollection of whose former kindness and condescension en¬ couraged to solicit a private audience, which was promptly and graciously granted; when Henry, who not being one of those individuals disposed to hide their good deeds, announced at once to the unprepared parent, how he was in¬ debted to hini for the life of his daughter, when soon the king in the contrarieties of 1 ^ disposition, felt shocked and grieved
for the parental agony he thus awakened; and stopped at once every effort made by the horror-stricken agitated father, to express his ardent gratitude, and effec¬ tually to turn the thoughts of De Rhone from the dismaying subject, which the king assured him was dismissed, and her accuser banished for life, Henry, with as little circumlocution as in the case of Mary, accused this long confidential fa¬ vourite of a fraud ; but in doing so with much less severity than he had determined upon ere he had thus so seriously as¬ sailed his feelings. " Why look you, most generous lord," continued the monarch, " the dazey jewel for which our gratitude made the apt thanks, that well became its overflow, is your accuser. Wishing so goodly a gem to aggrace our royal bosom upon the ar- rivance of the king our nephew, we com¬ manded a goldsmith, renowned in this city for cunning in his craft, to alter its setting to the guise we imagined meet for our adornment, when, G—d wot; but he marvelled us with apprisement of p ô
the stone being counterfeit, albeit of suf· ficient artifice to misuse the judgment of all but those well versed in lapidary cunning," The dismay of De Rhone again was pitiable^ though not so acute in the heart's agony, and therefore he was soon able to exert some degree of firmness; and he reminded His Aiajesty be had in¬ formed him, when his grace honoured him by the acceptance of it, " that he had so very recently been able to recover the family jewels from the possession of her he had so long cherished as a faithful wife, that there had neither been time nor opportunity to have it cleaned to its usual brilliancy, which it seemed much to require." The king recollecting this perfectly at the time the jeweller informed him of the imposition, now with a smile related to his agitated auditor, " that he had imagined him where the exchange had been effected, and had employed the jeweller to strive in secresy to develope if any such fraudulent transaction had
been enterprised by any of hfer craft whilere in that city ; for thus be tîïougbt he might fortune them to trace the jewel, which he doubted not De Rhone had, in sooth, believed he bad presented to his sovereign." But even after this graeiousness upon the king's part, and its respondent gratitude being most unequivocally evinced, His Aiajesty felt surprised that the dismay of De Rhone seemed to increase ; when de¬ manding the cause, Sir Villars hesitated not to inform his sovereign of his un- weeting usurpation of the St. Oswald wealth and titles ; and that the family jewels thus purloined, for he doubted not the offence was not confined to one alone, were not his own, and that their restitution would be required. The king, really shocked at such an unexpected stroke of adversity having fallen upon his long and early favourite, he, from whose integrity and judgment he had derived incalculable and import¬ ant diplomatic services, demanded, in a tone of much interest, every particular ; ρ 6
and when De Rhone had imparted all that had come to his knowledge, Henry endeavoured to console his poor Villars, by reminding him that all proofs must be fully established, ere they could or should bave the royal sanction ; —and although the exigencies of the state, and his own individual ones, whispered the interested suggestion, that if one party were to continue in romantic generosity, to reject the wealth and honours thus discovered to be their heritage, and the other so scrupulously to rescind from them, after right to them became dubious, the wealth might be manoeuvred into crown property." But his better feelings soon banbhed such mercenary thoughts ; and after assuring Sir Villars of his friend¬ ship, and of providing for him in some guise befitting his birth, should the pend¬ ing matters not be awarded for bis be¬ hoof, confessed t( that he must not take any apparent measure against the appel¬ lant ofthe morrow, as, in good sooth, his peerless and well-beloved young consort, from friendship to the Baroness of AVar-
burg, mightily leaned to Sir Edmund, and would, through the aidment of her coaxing, have him lean with her to that side; but that his poor Villars might de¬ pend upon his fidelity, and that at even¬ tide he would contrive in some apt mum¬ ming disgu isemen t for the escape of ob¬ servation, to repair with Charles Brandon to identify the long-lost Adela, and to take advisement from her view of the matter, whom to attribute the crimeful measure of her prisonment ; for albeit," added His Majesty, " she has not made shrift of it to you, our command may elicit that which if may imagine her would peril her to voice." At length, Sir Villars left the royal presence, not cherishing very sanguine hope of long retaining his capricious monarch's favour, since the partisans of Rosamond were riched with the queen's influence ; and as be thoughtfully tra¬ versed his way to his own temporary abode, an idea struck him with dismay, that the sad fatality which seemed to re¬ gulate his doom, might suggest to Sir
Edmund on the morrow, the good policy of accusing him of having caused the captivity of Adela upon the same plea as that assigned for his alleged murder of her ; and should this allégement in sooth be made, how should he refute it, since Adela was in total ignorance of the agency by which she suffered ? And the more he thought upon this appalling possibility, the more probable he consi¬ dered its adoption ; since he could not but feel such a suspicion was natural, nor help fearing it had already entered the sovereign's mind, by the penetrating look he beamed upon him, when talking of eliciting, by his command, that which Adela had not uttered to others upon the subject of her imprisonment. But upon reaching home, poor agitated De Rhone found awaiting İtim consolation for this new alarm. Father Kenrick had ar¬ rived, before him and from this good friend he learned, that anticipating the possibi¬ lity of testimony being requisite relative to those who had caused the seizure and imprisonment of the Countess St. Os-
wald, Sir Ethelbert had arranged the con· veyance of one of the principal agents employed in the atrocity to' England; and that this agent, named Walter Sang- niffe, was now in York, under safe guardage, and ready and willing to give his evidence if required. Again the gratitude of De Rhone to Ethelbert was powerfully awakened ; and whilst he thanked him in his heart for the probability of thus proving the pre· server of his fame, if not his life, that heart felt anguished commiseration for Ethelbert and Adela's hapless love ; and almost wished he had never existed to prove a barrier between them : for the cause which broke their betrothment re* maining yet a secret of impenetrable mystery, be could not but imagine the singular impediment might have been removed by time, had not the king so arbitrarily interposed to bestow her hand upon another. Father Kenrick had ever been a wel¬ come visitor to the De Rbones ; their regret was, therefore, infinite when he an·
nounced that his tarriance with them must be short ; and they all concluded that Sir Ethelbert was also in York, and that he wished not to leave him one un¬ necessary moment, as too probably he was unwell, — unhinged by the part which fate had consigned to him in liber¬ ating from captivity the woman whom from youth he had adored : but there was that which evinced itself in Kenrick's countenance and deportment, during his short stay, which puzzled the most pe¬ netrating ofhis observers to account for ; since in him there appeared sudden emanations of the most ecstatic joy, and then of anguished grief! which with the utmost exertions of his firmness be strove to hide from observation. Evening came, and with it that dense veil which afforded the concealment which the king had wished for to shelter his visit to Adela from observation, and his arrival was momentarily expected with nervous agitation by those whose fame, or happiness, or life, depended almost upon his caprice. But at length
his promised companion arrived without His Majesty, who sent for his excuse, that the queen being in a lynx-eyed mood, he could not enterprise an escape undetected ; and then partiality would be told of as the cause ofthe matter. Sir Villars knew the Duke of Suffolk so intimately, that he scrupled not to reveal to him all his apprehensions, and all his hopes and certainties; and in counsel vvith him upon various points, obtained the honest advice of a man deeply inter¬ ested for him, and seriously concerned for his reverse of fortune ; which the king had already confided to him, that he might bear to Dc Rhone his recom¬ mendation not to betray this reverse to public babblement, since adversity too often decreased popularity, and might deter witnesses from coming forward to voice matters for his behoof ý through fear of lack of reguerdon. Amongst other communications from His Majesty, the duke informed De Rhone that the king had scarcely parted from him in the morning, ere the jeweller
had waited on him with information that a Jew residing in York had been that morning to offer for sale a gem of extreme value, of which the false stone which His Majesty had given him to reset was as complete a fac simile as could be imagined: and believing that he had thus found either the thief or the receiver, bargained for the gem, and then made query, ere he would deposit the price, how the vender had come by it» as such a one had recently been pur¬ loined from a great man, and replaced by a counterfeit ; — that the alarmed Jew, who bore as fair a character in York as any of his tribe, frankly disclosed that a travelling foreign merchant, with whom he, the Jew, had never before had any dealing, had come to traffic with him, and in their bartery had employed the Jew to extract from several orna¬ ments gems of much cost ; and to sub- etitute counterfeits in every case wherein the Jew could find a substitute of pro¬ mise j and then sold as many of the real gems to the Jew as he was disposed to
purchase, which were not many, they were so valuable. That upon this inti¬ mation the king had directed the gold¬ smith to inform the Jew that the noble who had lost the gems would reward him to his content if he could discover this foreign merchant for him; but would seize upon him and his effects by man¬ date from the king, if in the space of two months he failed in such discovery ; and that persons would be employed from that very hour to keep a watchful eye over him, the Jew r , to prevent his abscondence or removal of his property· This intelligence afforded a faint ray of hope to De Rhone for the recovery of some part ofthat valuable property which, through his own confiding folly, was thus periled ; for, as he shuddered, he could not doubt its being at least with the con¬ nivance of Rosamond this treacherous fraud had been committed ; and this the Duke of Suffolk fully believed, and said he doubted not His Majesty having the same view of the matter, albeit he had not openly made declarement of it,
being no doubt unwilling to condemn those so vantaged by the queen's favour ; and this influence made the duke, as well as De Rhone, tremble for the royal bias on the morrow ; but his Grace solemnly promised that his friendship should not slumber in his cause, and at length, with a cordial shake by the hand, he said, adieu, and bid poor Villars " be of good cheer, and pass his night on hope's con¬ soling pillow of repose."
CHAP. XV. Βατ the consolation of repose was un¬ known this night in the temporary domi¬ cile of the De R hones, since anxiety can seldom boast of soporific balms ; and the result of the morrow, even the most san¬ guine İn hope amongst them, could not conceive devoid of uncertain conse¬ quences; since new accusations of the appellant, even though false as those pro¬ claimed, might lead to battle; where chance, or strength, or superior skill, might prove the test of guilt or innocence. The morning sun arose with unwonted splendor for the season of the year, as if to inspire the hoping, tearing house¬ hold of De lihone with spirit for the public scene about to be enactetl ; and when Mary appeared to attend the morn¬ ing toilette of her adored and adoring mother, the brilliant sun seemed to have sent some of his radiance to illumine her
eyes, and not one trace of her sleepless night now was visible upon her aspect ; for she had received a hurried note by morning's dawn from the kind Kenrick, which yet, with a tremulous hand, she presented to her painfully agitated mo¬ ther. This note was to entreat Mary to be comforted, for that as far as human fore¬ sight could arrange counteraction for human malice, all was in readiness to re¬ establish, without peril, the unsullied tame and earthly happiness of Lord St. Oswald \ and all to whom this billet was communicated believed Sir Ethelbert de Courland was the mover of all this pro¬ mised consolation ; and all knowing what Sir Ethelbert could accomplish to promote the happiness and welfare of those whom he regarded, they could not but expe¬ rience comfort ÍK ii this cordial billet ; yet Adela's was strangely mixed, for the hopes which emanated for her hus band's good, sprung from a source that agonised the secret thorn which, from her early youth, had rankled in her heart.
But Mary imbibed more than mere con¬ solation from the communication of Father Kenrick, for there was in it a designation which none but herself had noted, and coming from the methodical Father Ken¬ rick, had yielded her joy unutterable. At length the hour approached for the combatants to attend, and drew Sir Vil¬ lars de Rhone and his adherents to the fearful scene of action, which was a tempo¬ rary list, used for such occasions, in which were private chambers for the combatants, and those individuals whom it might be expedient to have at hand. The presence of females on these fearful occasions not being customary, as in the mere tournament, many ladies and gentlewomen unwillingly tarried at home, amongst whom were Rosamond and her daughter, Adela and hers ; the one party because they wished to behold the triumph of Sir Edmund Target over him they now hated and expected to overwhelm with the first intelligence of his usurpation; the other, that they might be at hand to yield their conso-
lations, should such, alas ! prove requi¬ site. His Majesty and suite with all due pomp entered the royal gallery, when the Lord Marshal gave notice that His Majesty was ready to hear the appel¬ lant's charges, when instantly the chal¬ lenger's herald, decked in the most splendid habiliments, proceeded in due form to proclaim the accusation of foul murder against the appellee ; and then Sir Edmund Target made his appearance, trapped in the most imposing style of gorgeous expense, and having pom¬ pously uttered bis accusation, marched to his green velvet chair. Then appeared the herald of the appellee, decked as simply as herald could be ; and audibly and solemnly announced, that Adela, only surviving child of the late Earl St. Oswald, and wife to the Honourable Villars de Rhone, being yet in existence, and even then in the city of York, the allegations in the challenge were foul slanders. Then appeared the appellee in his
plainest suit of armour, and uttered the same attestation with a steady voice, adding, that albeit this allegation was fact, he was ready to prove his innocence by combat, if his sovereign deemed it necessary ; and then walked with in¬ trepid grace and calmness to his blue velvet chair. The appellant, now almost phrensied by this unexpected intelligence of Adela being living, — for then the marriage of Rosamond was null and void, and her expected alimony vanished,—started up, and with vehemence spontaneously ac¬ cused the appellee of having caused the mysterious disappearance which had led to the belief of murder, and of now, to save his menaced life, having restored her to public view ; and of an action so atrocious in all its bearings lie announced himself standing there the accuser, and ready to combat the recreant aggressor in his shirt, and prove his criminality. At this moment a new herald of sur¬ passing magnificence appeared, and an¬ nounced a champion was at hand who vol. hi. q
would defend the fame of Lord St. Os¬ wald from the last foul slander ; as this champion, Walter Sanguiffe by name, could identify many of the culprits en¬ gaged in the abduction and subsequent imprisonment of the long missing countess. A simultaneous shout of indignation now burst from the multitude, demand¬ ing the appearance of this Walter San¬ guiffe to identify to them the base culprits concerned in such a barbarous deed, that they might drag them forth to condign and summary punishment Upon this tumult the king arose, and instantaneously the clamorous multitude became silent and motionless as death, and His Majesty announced his prohi¬ bition to the intended combat, such matters having transpired as to make royal interference meet : that he should, therefore, have full advisement of the whole matter ere he left York, and see the innocent righted as well became him. The now trembling appellant, aware
that investigation would not befriend his purpose, as a last effort of despair pre¬ sumed to raise his audacious voice against this decree of his sovereign's, by an¬ nouncing his having another charge to make against the recreant, who set his dependence upon champions and royal clemency to save him from the perils of combat j and then audibly pronounced Villars de Rhone a usurper, — the late Lord St. Oswald having left a male heir, who lawfully superseded the claims of bis daughter Adela ; and that this said heir, the usurper of his honours had tre¬ panned into cruel banishment, and this misused heir was known to His Majesty and fame as Sir Algernon Fitzrivers. The herald who had announced the proximity of Walter Sanguiffe, now again raised his voice, and proclaimed a champion at hand, ready to testify either by incontrovertible proofs, or prowess in combat, this allegation also a base slander of Lord St. Oswald's enemies, to tarnish his unsullied honour.
The king, not suspecting that this question was in any wise connected with the interests or wishes of Lady Warburg, considered it, therefore, as no link in the wishes of the queen relative to her friend ; and, all anxiety to learn what might tran¬ spire in favour of De Rhone's claims, re¬ seated himself, and issued his mandate for the champion to appear, and make hh statement. The champion instantly appeared, and was such a one as spontaneously to ex¬ cite admiration and awaken interest; foi his form was of noble symmetry, and every turn that of graceful elegance; his every movement that of intrepid valour, and acquaintance with chivalric bearing in the superlative of its perfection. The lord marshal now put his queries to this champion, who undauntedly re¬ plied to the same purport as his herald had proclaimed ; when the king, at once descrying through the dulcet voice ofthe speaker, who was before him, hastily ex¬ claimed, — "Ha! Sir Algernon ! — What is your pronouncement? What is yoiu
estate ? —Your lips, when they close upon recordance, may in sooth be termed the seals of truth, and to combat we shall not have needment." " The estate I glory in," responded Algernon, bowing gracefully in loyal reverence to his sovereign, " is that honour conferred upon me by my mon¬ arch's grace : I claim no higher." " Then come, Sir knight, to our court, whitherward we shall instant our repair," ¿aid the king ; " and we will make au¬ dience incontinently for matters that marvel overmuch our comprehension." Through this command, Sir Algernon was compelled to form one of ?? Alajesty's cavalcade from the lists to the sovereign's court, leaving those un. greeted w r ith whom his heart rested, and to whom he had had no previous moment to devote ; for attera rapid travel during the night, he had only reached York in time to equip for making his appearance when summoned to enact a champion : but when the cavalcade set out for court, he rode by the side of him who had been a 3
accused of intentionally usurping his in¬ heritance, in earnest and amicable con¬ versation. The moment in which Sir Algernon had been discovered in the lists, Lord Dalincourt, who formed one of the anx¬ ious party assembled in the gallery appro¬ priated to the friends of the appellee, said to Sir Leoline in a tone of sarcastic irritation, " Good now ! Sir Algernon, soonly wearied of magnanimity, has sped him back to our goodly realm, to claim his peerage." " Go to ! " exclaimed the enthusiastic Edward de Rhone, with glowing indig¬ nation which even respect for his uncle could not repress ; " the magnanimity of Algernon is sterling as his honour; and my lady mother is, I now do wot, the rightful heiress of my grandsire; and my Mary«— 0 and on this instant remembering how it would joy Mary to learn that Algernon was returned, Edward ceased to speak, and was on the wing of affection to fly with the intelligence, when Father Ken¬ rick stood by his side, and grasping his
hand with grateful energy, impressively said, — " Lord de Mandeville is just to merit, — Sir Algernon's magnanimity is as ster¬ ling as Adela Countess St. Oswald's claims to the honours of her progeni¬ tors." Lord do Mandeville spread his hand over his agitated countenance, whilst he breathed the silent thanksgiving of bis grateful heart, and then, fearing to raise his voice, lest it might betray an unmanly sob, whispered the holy man, that be was flying to kiss his mother in congratulation, and to tell Mary she need not droop in unmeet sorrow, for that Algernon was no longer in self-banishment. Father Kenrick hurried after the im¬ petuous youth, and the dense throng ofthe multitude retiring from the lists allowed ofhis arrival in the same moment with the anxious De Mandeville at the house of Lord St. Oswald, where being instantly admitted by the grinning, prancing Wee¬ witte, they perceived, by his ecstasies, their intelligence had been anticipated. — Yet ?. ?
not a moment did they pause to query, but rushed to the chamber, where they found the almost paralysed Adela sup¬ porting her trembling daughter in her fond encircling arms ; and the moment they appeared, the sympathising mother, affected to tears, exclaimed, as Edward encompassed both parent and sister in his affectionate embrace, *— - f Mary, my he¬ roic child, has not sorrowed me by íaintiiHl — albeit ioyed almost too much for durance." " No, forsooth, Mary has not fainted ; she has now in life too much for content* ation, to lose so warelessly one moment in dull swooning," said De Mandeville gaily ; and then, as he kissed his sister's cheek, whispered the name of Algernon. Mary smiled, and blushed, and hid her joy-mantled face upon the bosom of her tender mother; but in a moment she raised her head, and extended her trem¬ bling hand to her reverend friend, whose kind billet of the morning, she told him, had anticipated much matter for her contentation, since his styling her ho-
noured father Lord St. Oswald gave advisement of much good he had to tell of: but not, she might have added, the good of Algernon's return, as that in¬ telligence had arrived by Weewitte, who had seemed transformed into an eagle on the wing, when he darted from the list to proclaim the joyful fact to his young idol. " Lady Alary was ever apt at com¬ prehension," said the good Kenrick, as with parental feeling he presset! her of¬ fered hand. " A word to the wise was here suffisance ; and Lord St. Oswald, as I imagined me, proved the herald of glad¬ some facts to you :" then lowering his voice, he added ; " it is for perceivance you also wot of the return of our noble Algernon Fitzrivers—he is, in sooth, re¬ turneil to England ; and in that an¬ nouncement you cannot but solace your heart with every expectment of happiness for my magnanimous children." And then turning to Lady St. Oswald, be com¬ menced the intelligence he was fraught with : and yet there was circumscription α o
in his disclosures; for still the fate of poor Algernon laid heavy imposts upon the virtues of this young unfortunate's bosom, and gratitude again enchained him in obscurity ; and to times long past this narrative must now turn for solutions to mysterious matters, ere it can proceed to state the result of the king's proposed investigation. Earl Fitzrivers, a peer of illustrious descent, died, leaving a widow and two young children — a boy and a girl. In due time this widow united herself to Count de Vauban, of the circle of Bel¬ gium or Burgundy. By her second marriage Lady Fitzrivers had no family ; but her second lord became so devotedly attached to her little girl Zalinda, that he resolved to make her his heiress, and he ultimately left her all his possessions, amounting to an immense property, but so tied up, that it was not to be liable to the jurisdiction of her husband when she married, and to be finally disposed of by her last will and testament : and this arrangement for Zalinda's exclusive
right over her possessions arose from apprehension of her becoming a prey to any of those nobles ruined by the civil wars of England, who so numerously abounded both in Belgium and in Eng¬ land. But, unfortunately for Lady Zalinda, she fell not to the lot of one of those ruined nobles who might have been riched by mental treasures ; for, deceived by the hypocrisy and allured by the personal attractions of the father of Sir Ethelbert de Courland, the amiable and lovely Zalinda bestowed her hand upon him, unconscious of his being an un¬ principled libertine and a sanguinary freebooter. The Barons de Courland had for ge¬ nerations enriched themselves by spoiling others, not only of wealth but of life, through those facilities which tha vortex and castle of Llanellen yielded. Their agents in this dire rapine, recompensed to their content, were therefore secret, and the barons themselves fascinating and plausible ; and, residing almost con¬ ci 6
stantly far from the scene of their mal¬ practices, escaped for the most part even the glances of suspicion. Lord St. Oswald, the father of Adela, had, ere the marriage of Sir Ethelberts atrocious sire, been bereaved of his two first-born babes by natural death, and of his then only remaining child the vindictive Baron de Courland determined to deprive him : he therefore arranged for a party of his most experienced bravos to waylay this devoted victim, when with his tutor and attendants he was disporting in the woods, where, by a shower of arrows, the unprepared party were wounded and dispersed, and from which moment the young De Mandeville disappeared, and not until the expir¬ ation of nearly two years could the almost distracted parents obtain any tidings of their lost treasure ; when, to the extinc¬ tion of all hope, the skeleton of a child was accidentally dug up in a forest near to the wood where the cruel abduction bad been effected, bearing upon its scalp the identifying beautiful hair of the lost
De Alandeviile unimpaired, with some remains ofthe bandaged hose of remark¬ able texture which had been wound round bis legs by his adoring nurse the fatal morning he had quitted his father's dome for ever. The hapless Zalinda had not been long a wife, ere, by the death of her beloved brother and his spouse, she became sole guardian to their only child, a son ; and as all the hereditary honours and pos¬ sessions of this young minor were, by the settlement of succession of the peerdom and estates of Fitzrivers, to revert to his aunt in case of his demise without an heir apparent, the cruel baron re¬ solved to aggrandise his own son by the security of this earldom, even though he was to effect it by another dire murder of an innocent child : but this new deed of horror he knew must be managed even more warily than that which had deprived Lord St. Oswald of his heir ; for in this new case there was the ob¬ vious advancement of his own offspring to glance the eye of suspicion upon him,
whilst in the other there was none ap¬ parent — since few could imagine that enmity to a successful rival could lead any but a demon to bereave a sweet and lovely babe of life. At length the long anxiously looked to hour arrived for the carefully arranged completion of this horrid deed. Lord de Courland talked of visiting De Vauban Castle, and sent orders thither to have due preparations made for the reception of himself and family, whilst at De Courland Hall there were arrangements rapidly proceeding for a great display of magnificence at De Vauban Castle : and the day for starting \^th a numerous cavalcade drew very near, when the young Ethelbert sickened of some com- plaiiA incidental to his years, and for which his diabolical father had procured the infection ; and the leech in attend¬ ance being one of his lordship's confi¬ dential creatures, pronounced it of an alarming aspect, and not unlikely to turn into the sweating sickness. The agonised mother would not leave
her menaced child, but, as her lord an¬ ticipated, sent off her ward from the hall, with his amiable and competent tutor, Father Fridulph Swedenburg; and with every apparent kindness Lord de Courland advised their proceeding im¬ mediately to the Netherlands, as more meet for their comfort and contentation, and whither they would be followed by himself and spouse as soon as the reco¬ very of Ethelbert would permit And such plausible commissions did the wily baron give before many witnesses to the good Fridulph to execute for him at De Vauban Castle, that none could enter¬ tain suspicion that it was the baron's fixed intention that he should never reach that place. These intended victims set out with a suitable retinue, interspersed with the baron's most intrepid assassins ; and after a prosperous voyage to the Netherlands, and debarking in the close of evening, the reverend father felt surprised and disappointed that it w r as not at the Hague, but at a lone hostelry near the sea-shore ;
however, both he and his pupil, being much subdued by their voyage, gladly retired to rest, and in the same chamber. But there was something in the aspect of the inhabitants of the hostel, joined to looks of intelligence which passed be¬ tween them and those who had arrived with him from Westmorland, which by arousing suspicion banished repose from the pillow of Father Fridulph, and pre¬ vented his extinguishing his torch : he therefore plainly heard a convent bell toll for compline at no great distance; and this led to the recollection that he had passed some time, a few years since, at a monastery which w ? as situated not far distant from the sea-shore, and near to which stood an obscure hostelry, which awakened serious alarm in the minds of the holy brethren — it was of such unsound repute : and much he marvelled, could that he was in be it ? But from this con¬ templation he was soon disturbed, by dis¬ tinctly hearing the cautious undrawing of a bolt beneath the floor between the two beds ; and instantly after beheld the
head of a man appear through a trap¬ door, and promptly vanish as if upon observation of the light. Upon this signal of danger, the in¬ trepid priest arose ; and now r convinced there was no escape from death for him and his dear pupil except through flight, he cautiously aroused Lord Fitzrivers, whom he had not suffered to undress in consequence of the suspicions which had been awakened, and then vvith noiseless motion placed some heavy portions of their luggage upon the trap-entrance ; and rapidly possessing himself of as much of their valuables as he thought it safe to wait for securing, he, by means of the sheets, succeeded in lowering his trembling pupil and himself from a win¬ dow to the ground, where a gleam of light emanating through an ill constructed shutter caused him to discern a track that led from the house into a path, which, although dark and lonely, he felt induced to venture into, under convic¬ tion the sound of the convent bell had proceeded from that direction ; and as if
through the inspiration of pitying Pro¬ vidence, the convent bell again struck up to toll for one of the community just then deceased ; and by the tone of this knell they were led without difficulty to a monastery, where they w r ere promptly admitted, and which proved to be the same where Father Fridulph had before sojourned. The disappointed assassins lost no mo¬ ment in apprising their employer of how miraculously their prey had escaped their fangs ; and Lord de Courland being foil¬ ed in every exertion to ascertain if his intended victims had eventually escaped, and yet were living, was compelled to account for their disappearance, by the foundering of a boat in which they had incautiously embarked on their route to De Vauban Castle, leaving their attend¬ ants to proceed with their baggage by land ; and there being none living in England, save poor Zalinda, who felt particularly interested in the matter, the truth of this assertion was not disputed. Time moved onward, and Ethelbert, in
consequence of the decease of his heart- rived mother, was pronounced entitled to assume the honours of the earldom of Fitzrivers, in right of maternal inherit¬ ance : yet, as from his minority the wealth of his lamented parent was not yet at his command, neither was this earldom for his use ; for, to the infinite displeasure of his father, he would not assume it, since his mother had in her last moment secretly importuned him to resist it, until proof incontrovertible should appear that his early companion was indeed no more. The exaction of this promise arose through Father Fridulph having sent a trusty agent to the hapless Zalinda, with a statement of all that had occurred to induce his placing himself and pupil in a place of secret security ; and in making this communication to her the holy man felt little scruple, since, having been for some time Zalinda's confessor, be knew how her heart was anguished by conti¬ nuing to live with a spouse whom she believed capable of direful crimes —yet
to which she was impelled, to preserve his father's character unblemished for the honour of her child. The heart-stricken Zalinda sent, with her reply to Father Fridulph, all the cash she could com¬ mand, with jewels of some value which belonged to Fitzrivers j and advised the reverend father to retire with his pupil into some monastic establishment far from the Burgundián circle, and there to educate his charge, and to keep his name and expectations concealed, until her nephew became of age, when he might safely come forward and establish his claims without difficulty ; and she trusted, in remembrance of her and of his loved and amiable early companion Ethelbert, without betrayal of suspicion relative to the dire cause which had led to his exile ; and that, for their future maintenance, she would make every ar¬ rangement consistent with their safety and contentation. But this promise the hapless Zalinda was not iiited to perform ; for the shock conveyed by this new testimony of her lord's sangui-
nary atrocity hastened the moment of her dissolution. In compliance with the wish of Lady de Courland, Father Fridulph repaired with his pupil to Saxony, where most con¬ scientiously he educated his interesting charge in the fertile fields of knowledge, and in the lovely path of piety and honour; and, by economy the most vigilant, and through the cheapness of the country in which they resided, the remittance of Lady de Courland sufficed for their ex¬ penditure until the noble orphan had arrived at that period when he was to come forward for the establishment of his birthdom. The attractions of this incognito peer had won for him, in his seclusion, the affections of a beautiful and wealthy orphan of high birth, whose ancestors had fled from England during the York and Lancastrian warfare, and whose descendants had since continued in Sax¬ ony : and the attestations of the young peer's birth and claims, which had been conscientiously transmitted by Zalinda to
Father Fridulph, having been submitted to the young lady's guardian, he con¬ sented to the union, which was solemn¬ ized in the cathedral of the place ; and the dower of the bride being abundant, every comfort was arranged for their tra¬ vel to Britain, through Paris, where it was deemed expedient Lord Fitzrivers should pause a while, to obtain the advantages of the university there. At length his lordship and party pro¬ ceeded to Cherbourg, where, from its vicinity to the west of England, they embarked, as a brother of Father Fri¬ dulph was prior of a monastery in Exe¬ ter, and who being deeply learned in the law, they expected much advantage from his advice ; but, unhappily, contrary and tempestuous winds blew them out into the Atlantic, and finally compelled them to land in Ireland, where shortly after an heir was born, whom they had baptized Algernon. But haplessly for our exiles, Father Fridulph was recognised, upon his land¬ ing in Ireland, by one of the identical
bravos who had been employed to assas¬ sinate him and his pupil in the Nether¬ lands ; and who, since promoted to the rank of captain assassin at Llanellen, was at this luckless moment at Water- ford, prowling for prey to rich his sangui¬ nary lord. This assassin, named Hardy, lost no moment in apprising his para¬ mount of the unexpected discovery he had made, and of his firm belief that the noble looking young gentleman the priest was now attending was the same who had fled with the holy man fiom his dagger ; and himself awaited in Water- ford to observe the movements of those he had thus recognised, and to receive instructions from his lord. The lapse of time which the accouchement of Lady Fitzrivers required was fully sufficient for Hardy to receive his orders from Westmorland, and to acquire informa¬ tion that the prey he was panting to quarry were about to sail for the princi¬ pality; he therefore presented himself to Father Fridulph, as the owner of a carick about to sail for Milford Haven.
Haplessly the accommodation the specious bravo offered, secured his success. His long sought for victims, with many other passengers, embarked with him : on board was a boat, prepared with a ^row to be influenced by the attraction which had long been discovered in Llanellen's Rock ; — a boat, which, from its costly trappings, was believed to be what Hardy represented it, the property of a gentle¬ man in Wales. The dire catastrophe has been related. Lord and Lady Fitzrivers, with Father Fridulph, were then conveyed to the Castle of Llanellen, and there were mur¬ dered, at the verv same eventful time in which the hapless Ethelbert arrived in flight from Albalanda, upon the termina¬ tion ofhis mortal happiness, and was led, by the mercy of Providence, to rescue the helpless infant heir of Fitzrivers from the assassin's dagger at the imminent peril of bis own life ; which in a few sub¬ sequent hours was again endangered by the vengeance ofthe disappointed Hardy, who knew not at the moiuent that the
preserver of the babe was the heir of Llanellen. Sufficient had transpired through this night of dire horrors to implicate, in the mind of Ethelbert, his own father in this sanguinary tragedy enacted in Llanellen Castle ; and, in the anguish of his feel¬ ings, much he afterwards wished recall¬ ed had burst from his unguarded lips to Father Kenrick, to awaken in the mind of this young monk suspicion of who had ordained the performance of this barbarous deed ; but to preserve, if pos¬ sible, the fame and safety of his guilty sire, Ethelbert endeavoured to attach this confidant of his own inadvertence to him ; and soon he found the intelligent Kenrick deserving of every trust which honour and integrity could engage in: and very shortly after, with joyful grati¬ tude unclouded by a fear, con tided to this monk's care the helpless babe, whom, from the assassin having so designated the innocent victim he was anxious to immolate, he called Algernon. From that being the name of his never- VOL. IIb II
forgotten early companion and friend, he was led, as if by inspiration, to add to it the surname of Fitzrivers, without ever for one moment conceiving that the vic¬ tims so barbarously murdered could be those whom, by the promise exacted from him by his lamented mother, she seemed to think had not found a cemetery in the deep. As time rolled on, the wily and vin¬ dictive Constance, upon the intimations of Ethelbert relative to Walter Sanguiffe, convinced that she must not dare openly to thwart his knight errantry relative to Lady Alary, employed her subtlety in secret plans to subvert his projects to befriend the children of the hateful Adela. The very name of Llanellen Rock aw T akened hopes for her invidious purposes, and therefore she exerted every machination to beguile the ally whom she had infatuated from fealty to his kind patron Ethelbert out of every circumstance he knew relative to hei brother's sojourn in Llanellen Castle ; she then, by letter, communicated with
her mother, who was vile as herself, — when, regardless of consequences, they fabricated a tale to pang the heart of Ethelbert ; first, by implication, laying to the charge of his deceased mother the abduction and concealment ofthe young heir of Albalanda, through her jealousy of her lord's unextinguished passion for Lady St. Oswald ; and next, by substi¬ tuting the orphan Algernon for a sup¬ posed heir of the Lord de Alandeviile, whom, their tale affirmed, had not been murdered, despoil Adela's children of their inheritance. Shortly after they had arranged their plausible fabrications, they had it whis¬ pered in the ear of Ethelbert, that a sus¬ picion was awake that the persons who had disappeared in the Witches' Point, when in retreat from the burning carick, were the erroneously supposed murdered heir of Albalanda and the connections he had formed during the exile to which he had been doomed by the late Lady de Courlantl. But although Ethelbert would not yield credence to any whisper, in « ?
which a censure of his inestimable mothe-· was conveyed, yet, having found dire proofs that his father could act with san¬ guinary turpitude towards the race of St. Oswald, he placed all the fearful possi¬ bilities contained in this intimation to the charge ofhis sire ; and doubted less and less every new whisper that was breathed through the emissaries of Constance, — this barbarous transaction being too, too true : and with grief unutterable, he had at length imbibed conviction ot'his protégé Algernon being the lineal heir of the late Lord St. Oswald ; yet still his feel¬ ings as a son and as a lover restrained his standing forth to investigate and establish the claims of the cruelly be¬ reaved orphan, since, were he to perform all that equity would have else inspired, it must be to overwhelm his own father in disgrace and punishment, and deprive the children of Adela of all that they had been reared to consider as their inheritance. At length Constance proceeded to be¬ tray to Lady Warburg this tale of her own and her mother's composition, which
severely disappointed the towering ambi¬ tion ofthe fair Rhona, who had expected a higher flight for the descent of Al¬ gernon : but upon deliberation she be¬ came reconciled to the information, since it would remove at once the impediment which her vanity had led her to believe had solely operated in Fitzrivers's rejec¬ tion of her hand — his ignorance of his lineage, — and that also it would yield her vengeance upon the detested Mary ; and soon, through the mutual contrivance of Lady Warburg and Constance, the impostor penitent threw himself in the path of Algernon, and by pretending to be the individual to whom Fitzrivers had yielded his scant pittance of bread at the siege of Scarborough, — an incident well known in the county,— impressed the un¬ suspicious Algernon with firm belief that the atrocities practised towards the sufferers in the tale he related were the burden his conscience was panged by ; a tale which had been so ably contrived, as to awaken conviction that the person desig¬ nated Algernon Fitzrivers w r as the legiti- R 3
mate offspring of a long-missing brother of Lady Adela's. But in the expectation formed by the confederates as resulting from this pre¬ tended discovery to Sir Algernon they w r ere most grievously disappointed by the magnanimous flight of Fitzrivers from the splendid fortunes the kind Constance had provided for his behoof; and at length, in despair for their project of de¬ spoiling the De Rhones, they arranged for the secret becoming public through the medium of Sir Edmund Target, whose prowess they doubted not must vanquish the appellee, in the moment when para¬ lysed by unexpected information that he was an usurper and his children bereaved. And their demoniac malice might have proved successful, were designing mortals the sole arbitrators of events, and had not Sir Guy dc Lancy been born, as. İt might seem, to prove the detector ofthe sangui¬ nary Baron dc Courland's pitiless atro* cities.
CHAP. XVI. The flight of Sir Guy de Lancy from the castle of Albalanda *, upon the fatal termination of the foreigner's challenge, was occasioned by excess of feeling lead¬ ing him to shrink from ever beholding more the parent whom lie feared he had aided in bereaving of his darling child, through having confided too rashly in the prowess of his young pupils, and in the honour of their foreign antagonists. Lord de Courland having called off his son from Albalanda at the very moment in which this fatal challenge was to be ac¬ cepted, awakened such unvanquishable suspicion in the mind of Sir Guy, that without a moment's pause he proceeded from Albalanda to Courland Hall; in the vicinity of which he had not remained long in ambush, ere he beheld the identi¬ cal youth who had been the ostensible
R 4}
antagonist of the lamented De Mande¬ ville pass him in a cavalcade, on route from Courland Hail, all trapped as if for a long travel. This was conviction of the fatal chal¬ lenge having emanated from Lord de Courland ; and as speedily as possibility would permit Sir Guy set out in pur¬ suit of this youth. The difficulties and dangers, the fatigue and privations, en¬ dured by De Lancy to effect his purpose, were extreme; but at length he suc¬ ceeded in tracing this youth to his covert, in a farm belonging to the Vauban estates in the Netherlands, and found an opportunity to compel him, by threats, to confess that he had not been the opponent of the intrepid De Mandeville in the moment of encounter, but a bravo of gigantic strength, though of an appa¬ rently slight form, and who had passed, by the legerdemain of contrivance, similitude in the trapping, and the cover of the sur¬ rounding confederates, for the individual who had appeared with his visor up. Upon this confession, made before a
confidant of De Lancy's, Sir Guy de¬ termined to convey the youth to Alba¬ landa Castle, and compel him there to repeat it. But on the circuitous and lonely route they travelled through fear of a rescue, the prisoner fell ill, and no good medical aid being at hand, his re¬ covery was slow, so that De Lancy and his confidant did not arrive with their captive until the evening preceding the intended nuptials of Lady Adela and Sir Ethelbert. To enter Albalanda Castle as Guy de Lancy, and boldly announce to its lord that by base stratagem he had been be¬ reaved of his darling child, this feeling- hearted warrior shrunk from ; and the only project he could devise was, if pos¬ sible, to inform the betrothed themselves of the dire interdict to the union of a Alandeviile with a Courland. And with¬ out compunction relative to Ethelbert was this measure adopted, since the sus¬ picions of Sir Guy glanced at poor Ethelbert as not being ignorant of the intended dire transaction. Disguise was r 5
easily obtained in an age when friars and pilgrims stalked throughout the land; and garbed as the latter, Sir Guy and his companions obtained entrance within the castle gates amid the throng of the old retainers : but it was late ere a billet to Lady Adela, and another to Sir Ethel¬ bert, written in De Lancy's well known writing, were delivered, conjuring them, as they prized their future peace, to meet him at the monument ofthe late Lord de Mandeville, in the castle chapel, at mid¬ night ; and where, to their utter dis¬ may, he fully substantiated the fact, that the death of Adela's late brother was the fell deed of Sir Ethelberts father, vvho had further arranged, that should mighty strength tail to subdue, the bravo was to manœuvre, as if by accident, a mortal wound upon the intended victim. The despair of these hapless lovers has been already recorded, and no difficulty can now remain in identifying the persons w ho liad appalled their superstitious ob¬ servers, as they had flitted with lights to and from the chapel, and had been seen
hovering near the tomb of the countess and her son. Sir Guy de Lancy, in heart-felt an¬ guish at the dire misery he had been com¬ pelled as a duty to inflict there, fled with his companions from Albalanda to the Netherlands, to replace upon the domain of Vauban the youth he had taken thence; and then, year after year, wandered about the world, hapless and alone, and with difficulty subsisting, although much aided by the hospitality of religious institutions on the continent of Europe, in one of which lie at length encountered converts to the Lutheran opinions, and promptly became so able a supporter of them, that he was appointed a missionary by Luther himself; when in Christian kindness, anxious to benefit the vassals of his re¬ vered friend and long time patron, he overcame bis repugnance to beholding tlie towers of Albalanda Castle, and bent his way thither, bearing with him recom¬ mendations from Luther and Melancthon to Father Kenrick — then elevated to the supremacy of St. Stephen's monastery ; n 6
and in consequence of these recommend¬ ations he was permitted to take for his abode the hermitage in the valley ; and not wishing to be remembered, his dis¬ guise was so effective, that none cuuld absolutely recognise him, although si¬ militude to Sir Guy de Lancy was often thought of, and that suspicion floated in the recoiling mind of Ethelbert relative to his identity. Sir Guy found his patron and the Lady Adela no longer presiding in and adorn¬ ing their ancestral halls, and the daughter of the latter an alien to bur own sire's home : and ere long established in his hermitage, he learned tlie lord abbot's wish to obtain an additional tutor for Lady Mary, when De Lancy, being fully com¬ petent, offered himself for this preceptor, and was appointed ; an offer he had been induced to make, not more through a wish to advantage the child of the la¬ mented Adela, than to enable him to keep a vigilant eye upon Sir Ethelbert, whom still suspecting, he feared might neither act with integrity towards Lady Mary,
nor another individual for whom his ap¬ prehensions were awakened and his in¬ terest powerfully excited. In days when no publications existed to disseminate intelligence through the country, whether of public or domestic interest, and when fatigue and difficulty of travelling impeded facility in commu¬ nication through oral conveyance, reports of individual occurrences seldom spread beyond the scene of their enaction. Lord de Courland, therefore, felt secure of the dire secrets of the Witches' Point not be¬ ing voiced beyond the circle of his confe¬ derates ; yet De Lancy, in his extended wanderings, had encountered and formed a friendship vvith the brother of the ill- fated Fridulph, Maurice Swedenburg : and to him Maurice revealed his alarm relative to his beloved brother, who had departed from Saxony two years past for the purpose of seeing a beloved pupil re¬ stored to rank and riches; and at length confided to him the vvhole history of Fa¬ ther Fridulph's adventures with his exiled
pupil, until their quitting Germany for Paris. In this detail, the name of Fridulph's pupil escaped Alaurice, but not that of this young peer's sanguinary foe : yet De Lancy felt at no loss to identify him ; for he well knew of what Lord de Courland was capable, and that Sir Ethelbert bis son was to inherit, through maternal de¬ scent, the title and estates ofthis illustrious family, upon the extinction of the male branch in lineal succession ; and it so happened that the father of Fridulph's pupil had been a cotemporaryand attached friend of De Laney's, and that the bonds of this friendship had been only severed by death. Upon Sir Guy's arrival in England as a missionary, be passed some weeks in the vicinity of Vespasian Tower, when he first saw Algernon, whose striking resem¬ blance to his never-forgotten deceased friend attracted his attention ; aad finding he bore the name of Fitzrivers, he was led to make enquiry relative to his family: when all he could learn, appearing to him
mvsterious, confirmed his belief of this youth being the offspring of Father Fri¬ dulph's missing pupil ; belief which after¬ wards increased more firmly, from his voice and manner, when bv accident he heard and saw him, during his conference vvith Weewitte the day of Lady War¬ burg's arrival with her mumming party at Albalanda, for he was sheltered in the hollow ofthe tree under which they par¬ leyed, replacing a fallen bird's nest; when surprised by their vicinity, and finding their conference was relative to a plan unmeet for Mary's comfort, he remained in ambush to bear all, that he might counteract whatsoever he should think expedient. And, in addition to these sus¬ picions of this youth's identity, Sir Ethel¬ bert having uttered before him something he wished the lord abbot to arrange for Algernon, led him to discover that this mysterious orphan was the protégé of Ethelbert ; and this knowledge awakened suspicions of the integrity of this heart- rived knight towards this Algernon, whom he was now so firmly convinced was grand-
son to his deceased friend, that he re¬ solved, the moment he could accomplish it, to inform Maurice Swedenburg of his conjectures relative to this orphan. The moment, therefore, De Lancy re¬ turned to Germany, he sought for Alan- rice ; when, finding he was gone to Malta, in hopes the knights who had lately been chased from England might yield him intelligence of his brother's fate, to Malta also Sir Guy hastened, where he found Alaurice as be anticipated, but still unenlightened relative to his brother's destiny. He also found the knights in active preparation to join the emperor's expedition against Algiers ; when the militant spirit being at once rekindled in the bosom of De Lancy, he resolved to defer his meditated rescinding from the order of St. John, and join the expedition, which he doubted not would prove victo¬ rious, and that he should soon return to set out for England vvith Alaurice, to investi- gate the history of Algernon, and yield him every clew they possessed to establish a fair claim to the title and estates of Fitz¬ rivers.
Sir Guy proceeded to Algiers, and there distinguished himself both in prow¬ ess and in fortitude, but the most eminent for both he soon learned was a young En¬ glishman, whom the veteran militant mis¬ sionary with amazement recognised as the very being for whose advantage he was meditating a return to Britain, and to whom, during their perilous voyage from Algiers to Malta, he fully unbosomed himself, and on their landing presented him to Maurice ; and as promptly as the debarking of the sick and wounded per¬ mitted, Algernon sought out the man whom he had rescued from the vengeance ofthe Arabs, and speedily found himself repaid for all his services to this person, who incontestably proved him, not the heir to the St. Oswald honours, but one who might without a scruple unite him¬ self to his adored Mary. For this person was the dire Hardy —■ the assassin of Algernon's parents, and who had unsheathed his dagger to spill Algernon's own blood ; and neither in the imagining nor commission of crime
could any man of his time surpass him in atrocity, and for many a day he had continued the prime and favourite bravo of Lord de Courland : but at length he offended the woman whom the baron permitted unlawfully to assume the title of De Courland, because Hardy would not betray to her agents as much of the dark secrets of Llanellen Castle as she required for her daughter Constance's manufacture of a tale to dispossess the children of Adela of their birthright; and the angry dame exerted all her wiles to undermine the high opinion so long and firmly entertained by her lord of Hardy's fidelity. Various consequent mortifications betraying suspicion assailed the stern Hardy from his lord ; and at length a private intimation from a friend in the household at Courland Hall reached Hardy, ofthe baron's intention incontinently to make repair to Llanellen, and there to enterprise a full view and advisement of all matters throughout the castle in questment of treasure, it had been voiced to him, Hardy in faith-
breach had bereaved him of for his own uehoof. Although scruples of conscience never interfered to the prevention of Hardy's despoiling others of property, his sin¬ gularly formed integrity was inflexible in its fidelity towards his employer ; and to be suspected of fraud to his lord sent daggers as deeply into bis heart, as he had ever penetrated one into the bosom of a victim : and with the poisoned point of irritation ¡t rankled into venom ; and he determined forthwith to quit a para¬ mount who could suspect his faith, and, ere he departed, for once to reave him, and of that which he believed the baron might prize beyond gold or gems. Hardy's mind was in this state of irri¬ tation, when an order arrived for the second in command of the Llanellen horde to enterprise a speculation of rob¬ bery and assassination such as had long been the province of Hardy to act in as leader. To forgive this insult the boil¬ ing furies of his mind could not permit, and to accompany as a subordinate where
he had been wont to command his pride revolted from ; and affecting to have secret orders from his lord which must otherwise engage him, he avoided setting out with the troop. Under the shade of night the banditti commenced their march ; and in the castle, with scarcely another occupant, Hardy now was left, without fear of observation, even had his intention been to enrich himself: but no; the robbery of his patron's treasury was not in his honour's code. A box containing papers had been fouud amid the purloined bag¬ gage of Lord Fitzrivers at the period he was murdered, and which had never ^İnce been inspected, because Hardy í ?? neither read nor write, and feared to confide in those who could : the baron, therefore, remained in ignorance of the deposit ; and as oral communication of important matters was prohibited,although gold and jew r els were in constant con¬ veyance to Courland Hall, Hardy had looked to some possible meeting with bis
lordship, to yield the information of these buried papers. To extract this deposit from inter¬ ment was the vengeance of Hardy's détermination, and to burn the papers, under firm belief of their being essential to secure possession of the estates and honours of Fitzrivers to the next heir; and that the lacking these had solely caused Sir Ethelberts not assuming the title Lord de Courland had destroyed so copiously his fellow-beings to obtain for hini. In the dead of night, when be believed the few inhabitants the castle now con¬ tained were consigned to their repose, Hardy turned his intrepid steps to that awful part of the premises where many a corse lay in unhallowed interment, the victims of his immolating prowess ; and where, often as he ranged, light and shade, flitting of bats and owls, or the deep murmuring of the whistling winds, might have presented many an appalling fancy to craven less dauntless heroes. But he who scoffed at the Mighty One,
laughed these fantasties to scorn ; and often as he here paced his way, invoked a demoniac band to come and learn from him bow aptly a mortal could emulate their deeds : so that now the wind howled and his torch flickered, yet be firmly trod over the cemetery of the murdered, and at length arrived at the entrance to the spot of his attraction ; when, as he unclosed the door, an unex¬ pected gust like a whirhvind extinguished his torch ; and with many prompt curses upon this daring element, he was turning off to grope his way to re-light his brand at a fire he had just kindled near, to be in readiness for the meditated conflagra¬ tion, when ne thought he beheld some¬ thing luminous emanating through the half-closed door : cautiously he pushed it open ; when, even to his dismay, his vision presented to his view, as vividly depicted as reality had presented, an ex¬ panse of sea, where, undulating upon the very spot which covered the box he coveted, was the stern of the carick en¬ veloped in flames, with Lord and Lady
Fitzrivers standing in full prominence within its gallery, as they had been seen the night of the fatal catastrophe. For the first time since he became a bravo, Hardy was chased to #ight by craven apprehensions; and as speedily as the dense darkness of the passes he bad to wend through would permit, he made bis way to the before-mentioned fire, wb'Te he re-lighted his torch, and his couu'ge with it ; and soon, indignant at bis cowering alarms, he snatched up a second torch, to establish the security, that if one flambeau should be acci¬ dentally extinguished, the other would light him onward to investigate that which had caused so extraordinary an appearance, and finally to secure the papers. Hardy again with a firm step paced his way towards the deposit it was Ins purpose to dislodge; when jubt as he arrived at the entrance to İt he stumbled — his torches came in sudden contact — and the concussion extinguished both at once. However, Hardy, with a little
quivering at heart, yet ventured vvith some degree of boldness through the door into the vault, which still was bril- liantly illumined by the same species of blue flame which had been exhaled from the consuming carick. The ignited ship had vanished ; but Lord and Lady Fitz¬ rivers still maintained their ground over the spot which contained their papers, each wearing the same noble and lovely form they had been distinguished by in life, and each holding, expanded in their hands, a splendid transparent barrier, as it should seem, to ward off all ap- proach. Yet supernatural as all this appeared, the once more dauntless Hardy did ap¬ proach, and with an unsheathed dagger dared to enterprise the striking down the barrier : but whilst he found that untangible, he felt the flame was palpa¬ ble ; and the agony of his burning hand seemed to expunge every spark of cou¬ rage from his bosom, and he fled once more to obtain a light at a fire which he never once conceived might have been
the inflicterof his pangful suffering, when with speed and trepidation he had bent over it to ignite his torches. Hardy now hastened to his chamber ; and at length, as he lay ruminating upon his truckle, from which pain and agitation banished sleep, it suddenly struck his imagination that it might prove more complete vengeance were he to take the box of papers vvith him to Lincoln, whither he purposed to wend his way, and get his own brother, who was a priest in the bishop's establishment, to examine them ; and then to turn them into a source, if such they could be made, which might teach his ungrateful lord to fear him. It also now struck him, that the vault which contained the papers, being the established depository of all secrets and important matters, would be the first spot for research upon the arrival of the baron ; and fearing he might now have no moments to lose in securing his means of vengeance, and tlie day having began to dawn, when spectres were not wont
to roam, he hastily arose, and set forward undauntedly to the vault, determined that no chimera of his own craven fancy should again foil his anxious purpose. Intrepidly he therefore proceeded to the scene of his recent terror, but where neither flame nor form now appeared to chase him from his purpose ; and without an unnecessary moment of delay he ob¬ tained possession of that box which his present irritated feelings led him * deem a prize : and he was hastening with it from a spot bis resolution was never more to enter, when be suddenly beheld the blue vapour, which had twice already dismayed him in this scene of many of bis atrocious crimes, playing in the door¬ way, and, as he proceeded, ever and anon illuminating the dark passes be had to roam through on his route to his own chamber ; and again resting on the box in stationary brilliancy, as if emanating from within, after he had laid the box on a table, where it remained perceptible until the sun appeared. Should such scenes as these have been
presented to the vision of any individual in the present period, they would have been ascribed to the delusions of a mind enervated by the guilt of conscience ; but in days of superstition's influence, and when necromancy and astrology found full credence, Hardy deemed them preter¬ natural, and firmly believed that it was no delusion, the blue flame which lie be¬ held resting on this important box night after night, as it lay by his bedside in the monasteries and hostelries where he had sought repose on his route to Lincoln ; and what added still to his conviction of its being a supernatural light, was its being visible to no eye but his own. As a pilgrim, Hardy made his long travel oil· foot through every lonely track in which he thought it likely to avoid the emissaries of Lord de Cour¬ land, and at length reached Lincoln worn out with fatigue ; and there had the disappointment to learn that his brother, whom he had come so far to seek, was gone on a mission for the bishop to Dur¬ ham. This intelligence seemed at once
the signal for that illness to assail him, which had been engendered by irrita¬ tion, superstitious alarms, and fatigue; and he had only power to deliver his im¬ portant box and his little personal trea¬ sure into the care of the superior of the monastery he was lodged in, ere a fever confined him to his bed, and which at length becoming low and intermittent, af¬ forded him time and opportunity to think upon his past life and upon the possibi¬ lity of a world to come. The pious fathers whom he had fallen amongst hourly augmented his belief of the latter ; and this conviction increased his horror at the former : but horror, although at length amounting into terror for the fu¬ ture, he would not shrive to any but 1? own brother ; for lie could not endure that any of the community should know his pious brother was so nearly allied to a demon, nor would he betray secrets to any one but his own brother, which might lead to the implication of the employer whom he had served to the peril of his own salvation.
At length, finding another monk was setting out for Durham to aid the mis¬ sion of his brother, Hardy determined to accompany him ; and travelling by the way of Scarborough, they paused there, intending to pay a visit of a day or two to the nephew of Hardy's companion, who resided in the castle; and by this nieans Hardy bad been in the castle when the siege commenced, where the intrepid valour and benevolence of Fitzrivers led Hardy to minute observation of hini. His name increased the intensity of this observation ; and the resemblance he fan¬ cied he could clearly discern in him to the phantoms he had so recently beheld in the fearful vault, led him to conjectures of his being the identical orphan babe whom Sir Ethelbert had rescued from his dagger : and the fearful anxiety this true penitent was overwhelmed by, lest he should die ere he had shrived to his bro¬ ther and obtained absolution, led him so piteously to implore frotn Algernon food to preserve his existence; and this food, so feelingly granted, won him to the dc- s 3
termination of befriending Sir Algernon should he ever have the power. The siege of Scarborough was raised, and Hardy repaired to his brother at Durham; but that relative he found, although a professor of Christianity, no forgiver of trespasses, and so intolerant to his brother's crimes, that he sentenced him to many acts of severe penance to be performed at divers shrines from Durham to Canterbury, and from thence to Rome, ere he could consent to give him absolution, or take him to his bosom with fraternal feeling. Hardy, all im¬ patience for his regeneration, performed his penitential tour to Canterbury, and was proceeding for the further inflictions of his sentence, when on his passage from Dover for Pisa he was captured by an Algerine corsair, and became a slave in Algiers ; whence, whilst the emperor's forces engaged the attention of all sur¬ rounding, he effected his escape, and for which achievement he would have paid tlie forfeit of his life had it not been for the prowess of Sir Algernon.
During the captivity of Hardy, his con¬ templation of his past diabolical crimes often panged his bosom ; and he often thought upon his brother's opinion re¬ lative to the papers which he had con¬ veyed from Llanellen Castle, and which opinion was, that vengeance upon those who offend you is no proof of contrition for your own misdeeds ; and that not in enmity to the biiron should he ever betra ν the secrets which the box con- tained, but only to effect some good purpose wholly unconnected with his wounded feelings. That this box contained secrets of no common nature, Hardy firmly believed, from the supernatural circumstances which he conceived had attended his seizure of it, and of what nature he could not but feel assured : and in his cogitations it often became a question in his mind, if it would not be for a good purpose to restore the nieans of doing ¿rood to one so benevolently inclined as the young hero of Scarborough siege ; and would it not be more for the benefit s 4
of his guilty soul, to prove the means of restitution to a bereaved orphan, than by bilence to permit the Baron de Courland still to spoil and shed blood ? and then he flattered himself that he might devise some means of delivering the important papers to this amiable orphan without betrayal of his ungrateful lord. The incidents which occurred in Algiers turned the beam in the fluctuating m¿nd of Hardy in Algernon's favour, so that when they remet at Malta, Hardy dis¬ closed to Algernon all that he knew or surmised relative to his parents, from sharing whose sati fate he had been rescued by Sir Ethelbert de Courland ; suppressing, however, in this detail, the name of his own employer in the enact¬ ment of the sanguinary tragedy of Llan¬ ellen Castle. This heart-riving narrative proving a sequel to and cmclusion of the matters which Alaurice had related to De Lancy, altogether made out a clear detail ofthe life and death of Lord and Lady Fitz¬ rivers, and only wanting certain certi-
Acates and other necessarv documents to prove the lawful claims of their long-bereaved heir ; which documents Maurice Swedenburg affirmed bad been taken with them from Saxony : and all believing they were contained in the ?*\ deposited in Lincoln, they resolved to make no delay in their return to Lug- land ; and Algernon, to his joy, no bmger felt a scruple to prevent him : >ince by the evidence of Sir Guv tie Lancv, uho had beheld both the Lords de Mande¬ ville after they had been slain by the arrow and machinations of their mur¬ derer— and though the first was in ib skeleton state — there hail been unques¬ tionable proof of his identity ; and not even the bitterest ibe of Algernon, he now had full conviction, could mould him into the lawful heir ofthe late Earl St. Oswald.
s ?
CHAP. XVII. Algernon and his companions made tbeir anxious voyage to England ; and hastening to Lincoln, they endured much alarm for the safetv of the papers they were in quest of, upon learning the dis¬ solution of the great monasteries had sent thence the prior, into whose keeping Hardy had committed the box which contained them : but after some little delay they traced him to Grimsthorp Castle, and obtained the important de¬ posit, which, the prior announced, Har¬ dy's reverend brother, accompanied by some great baron, had endeavoured to persuade him to deliver up to them ; but that, by the advice of his kind friend the Duke of Suffolk, he had refused to do, until the death of the person vvho had confided it to his caie could be fully as¬ certained. And these papers, so providentially pre-
served for Algernon, now proved, beyond all doubt, his claims to dignity and wealth; and even in those moments when his heart was tortured bv filial anguish for » ? the dire fate of his parents, or bounded in love's rapture in anticipation of again beholding Mary, it never forgot its mag- nauiinity. " And how," he demanded i rom De Lancy, " could he make good his claims, without mortallv wounding the filial honour and consequent happiness of him who had preserved his life at the peril ofhis own — his kind, his generous benefactor, the noble, the heart-rived Ethelbert?" And De Lancy being un- able to obviate this difficulty, it was detenni ned the M al tese party should pro¬ ceed to Whitby, there to await whilst Algernon obtained an interview with Kenrick, whom he learned from the ex- prior at Grimsthorp Castle was likely to be found in his old habitation of St. Stephen's monastery, Sir Ethelbert de Courland having purchased it from the crow n. Accordingly this interview vvith Kcn- s 6
rick was speedily effected ; and from him Algernon learned all that had occurred in the De Rhone family since their last communication ; and that the challenge of Sir Edmund Target had drawn Sir Ethel¬ bert and himself to England, through anxiety for the consequences. Algernon, in his turn, had intelligence of importance to reveal to his reverend friend, who soon con¬ firmed his determination not to bring for¬ ward his claims to the title of Fitzrivers at present, by stating that the heart of Ethelbert, gradually broken by the sor¬ rows of his destiny, bad seemed to hold together until he was fated lo bear his part in the restoration of his ever idola- trouslv adored Adela to her estimable family, for that now lie was perceptibly sinking to an untimely grave ; and that such a shock as another confirmation of his father being a fell assassin, would, without a doubt, snap at once the thread of his existence. But the return of Algernon without impediment to a union with his parent¬ ally beloved protégée Alary, Kenrick be-
Heved would prove a cordial of no com¬ mon efficacy to the drooping Ethelbert, as they could inform him that Sir Guy de Lancy was returned to England to give testimony that Algernon had no claim to the title of St. Oswald, and this without implicating Lord de Courland. Accordingly Kenrick communicated this pleasing intelligence to Ethelbert; and the interview between the preserver and preserved was most affecting; but the change perceptible in Sir Ethelberts aspect, with the agonised agitation he evinced whilst the name of De Lancy was uttered, determined the sympathising Fitzrivers sooner to forego his birthright for ever, than add another pang to the ove nv h el m i n £ sorrows of his benefactor. Scarcely had this affecting interview taken place, ere intimation arrived at St Stephen's, through those emissaries whom Ethelbert believed it no flaw in honour to employ in developing the intention of the Warburg party in their devices against the peace and fame of the De libones, that it was in contemplation to
bring against the appellee, in the moment of combat, that he was an usurper of the title he had long borne j and upon this information Ethclbert had set in train every counteraction, as he had before done, for every contingency which might result from the calumnies which had been proclaimed in the challenge of Sir Ed¬ mund against Lord St. Oswald : but now there was short time to prepare tor tins last necessary counteraction, as but three days were to intervene ere the combat, and Algernon had to fly to Whitby for Sir Guy de Lancy, as his proof that he was not a Mandeville ; and many im¬ peding delays occurring in his route, he did not arrive in York until half an hour previous to his appearance in the lists before the king. The intelligence conveyed from tlie lists to Lady Warburg overwhelmed both her ladyship and mother with alarm, and sent the former to the queen, again to implore the friendship of the ran Catharine to rescue Sir Edmund from the nothing short of necromantic machina-
tions of his fell foe De Rhone ; so that at the moment His Majesty entered his palace, the queen assailed him with all her bewitching wiles in behalf of Sir Ed¬ mund, and poisoned his mind with all the cunning craft supplied by Lady War¬ burg ; so that by the time the king was seated in his audience chamber, imparti¬ ality was annihilated ; and none can tell what might have proved the result, had not the culpability of Sir Edmund over¬ thrown this safety bower thus prepared for his repose by his beauteous friends ; for in the moment he was about, with dignified grace, to mount his prancing steed, to follow the cavalcade attendant upon His Majesty, an unmannerly Jew caught him by the collar, with the still more unmannerly appellation of " Thief!" adding unceremoniously,—- " Hah ! tief! de jewelsb thou shelt to me were de shtolen ones from de Lord Sliaint Oswald, as de kingsh do wot." But the Jew was weak, and Sir Edmund strong ; and he broke from his accuser's rough grasp, and springing upon his
steed, with the speed of desperation soon was out of York ; whilst the jeweller hastened to the palace, and orders having been previously given to admit him to a private conference whenever he should demand one, he was instantly admitted to the presence of His Aiajesty, who, from the countersign conveyed to him, left the audience chamber to receive him. He came with information, that the Jew had recognised beyond all doubt, in the appellant of that morning, the man who had, in the garb of a foreign merchant, employed him to substitute false stones for gems : and to avouch there having been no mistake in this recognition, the appellant had showered in largesses to the multitude, amongst whom happened to be the Jew himself^ some of the identical coins which Moses had paid the pretended merchant in bartery for the stolen jewels. The flight of Sir Edmund Target cor¬ roborated this detection too forcibly for its disbelief; but, thanks to the manage¬ ment of the beautiful young queen, no pursuit followed the fugitive ; but Rosa-
mond did, as soon as might be, with all the valuables she could muster—whither none would tell : and Lord and Lady St, Oswald felt satisfied at this abscondance without restitution, though the prime of t heir family jewels were thus lost to them for ever, since by this flight not a doubt remained on any mind as to the credit to be yielded to the charges made by the appellant in that day's challenge against the fair fame of the appellee ; and when His Majesty pronounced all the allegations which had been made against the honour and inte¬ grity of Lord St. Oswald unfounded and malicious, tlie tumultuous shouting of the multitude within and without the palace, and the general rejoicing through the city, proclaimed unequivocally the uni¬ versal sentiment. The re-meeting of Algernon and Mary, after a separation they each believed for life, was almost too mighty in joy and gratitude to Heaven, for firmness to sup¬ port them through it ; and Mary, who yet knew not the rank of him she had pro- mised to wed in his adversity, and had
rejected when high honours and wealth were announced as his, now again pro¬ mised to espouse the grateful and de¬ lighted Algernon for himself alone, whene'er it should be thought meet by their mutual friends that they should be united. But long the family of De Rhone had not been reinstated in Albalanda Castle, when intelligence reached them that the Baron de Courland was then in the ago¬ nies of death in St. Stephen's abbey. And too true was this intelligence. The fabrications of his daughter Constance and her mother relative to the St. Os¬ wald heir, having been voiced to him, he was led to the investigation of these rumours; and found them verging so alarmingly near the ground of facts con¬ nected with the history of the murdered Fitzrivers, that, apprehensive of how such reports might end, he became anxious for immediate reconciliation with the offended Hardy, that he might repur¬ chase his good faith and services. His lordship, therefore, sought out the
reverend Father Hardy, in the hope of learning from him the retreat of his bro¬ ther; and soon succeeded in bribing this scrupulous divine to his interest, and ob¬ tained intelligence from him of a that his penitent relative had disclosed con¬ cerning the papers which he had taken from Llanellen Castle. Lord de Courland now lost no time, accompanied by his new confederate, in assailing the ex-prior to y iel d up bis charge of these important papers, but not even the influence of golden rhetoric could here prevail against the firm feeling of conscientious duty ; and his lordship's next anxious stefi.was to offer a tempting reward for the discovery of Hardy's re¬ treat : consequently, this individual had scarcely arrived in England from Alalta, ere intimation of it was conveyed to Courland Hall, when the anxious baron, with Father Hardy, traced the penitent Hardy to Whitby, where, to his lordship's utter dismay, he learned from his once faithful bravo's own testimony, that the papers in question had been delivered by
him to their lawful owner ; when, like one of every hope bereft, the distracted ba¬ ron fled to St. Stephen's abbey, which he knew was then the residence of his son, and wildly rushing into the arms of the amazed Ethelbert, announced that his character was lost for ever, and that, unable to endure life without fame, be had swallowed poison. And this was too certain, and no ef¬ fort of the skilful Philip could supply an effective antidote ; and in direful agonies of frame and conscience, he expired in the arms of his tenderly sensitive and heart-rived heir, who, in a few moments after this appalling catastrophe, was borne in a swoon, in the arms of the sympa¬ thizing St. Oswald and Algernon, to a lit¬ ter, and conveyed to Albalanda Castle; where, with Adela and Alary for his ten¬ der nurses, and St. Oswald, Fitzrivers, De Mandeville, and Kenrick for his de¬ voted servants, he passed the few remain¬ ing weeks of his hapless and eventful life. But the fell poison which had de¬ stroyed his father's body and soul sapped
the stamina ofhis fleeting existence-, and without one pang in his bosom for his own deeds, this martyr to a parent's crimes at length gently sunk from life, as if to tranquil sleep,—his pale cheek resting on the shoulder of the grateful Mary, and a hand clasped in one of those of the heart-anguished betrothed of his early years. The sorrow of all the hapless Ethel¬ berts devoted friends in Albalanda Castle was deep and lasting, nor could the immense possessions he bequeathed to them dry their tears or sooth their panged regrets ; and the voice of charity in all directions lauding his praises in her melting strains of gratitude still awaken¬ ed fresh sighs in the bosoms of those who loved and honoured him. His maternal inheritance was that which the rightly-minded Ethelbert bequeathed to the friends whom he loved and re¬ spected, and in provisions for his de¬ pendents and faithful servants, whilst all that he could conceive had flowed from direful crimes in his paternal inheritance
he left in that channel which he trusted might yield the most effective retribu¬ tion, namely, for the most extensive purposes of benevolence ; and lest the castle of Llanellen should again heroine a scene of rapine and dire assassination, his last will directed that it should be rased to the ground, and the rocks sur¬ rounding the Witches' Point be hewn away. The death of the vile Lord de Cour¬ land removed at once all interdiction to proclaiming at Albalanda, and in due time to the public, the hereditary digni¬ ties of Sir Algernon, who, without any impeding difficulty, was invested with the honours and estates of his forefathers ; when the first important step he took after he was acknowledged as Earl Fitz¬ rivers was to pang his heart in filial duty, by the exhumation ofhis hapless parents and Father Fridulph ; and under the guidance of their repentant assassin, Hardy, he bore them in solemn progress from their unhallowed sepulchre to the mausoleum of his ancestors.
When sorrow and respect toward the memory of the lamented Ethelbert al¬ lowed of joyous measures, the nuptials of Algernon and his long-adored Aiary were celebrated ; and shortly after these auspicious spousals, the bride and bride¬ groom were accompanied by their imme¬ diate relatives and friends to make sojourn in the magnificent castle of Fitzrivers, situated in the most beautiful part of Cumberland : and when at length the party all returned to Albalanda, it was announced to the happy Algernon, by Lord St Oswald, that unless their two families lived ehieity in one residence, the parents and brother of Alary would be conten tless, and so also would be poor Alaud and Weewitte, who could not migrate from their dear first lady, though their hearts clung to the child of their long care ; and Algernon, assured that Alary would be gratified by this arrange¬ ment, readily acquiesced. And now again the chanibers of Albalanda were filled with guests, and the halls with banquets; and again was De Lancy
seen with a smiling face in his old quar¬ ters, invited in the kindest manner by the lord and lady ofthe castle, whilst a noble independence was secured to him by the grateful Algernon, who left the penitent Hardy no cause to regret his having proved the means of restoring a bereaved orphan to his inheritance ; neither was ample gratitude to Alaurice Swedenburg omitted, nor by Lord St Oswald the most ample recompence to Alargare t and her son. But long our bridal party had not re¬ turned to Albalanda, when they were overwhelmed with amazement, by intelli- gence ofthe beautiful Rhona having be¬ stowed her hand upon her profligate and ruined kinsman, Sir Rupert Warburg: and even so it was; for her great expectations from her wealthy uncle had rendered her a speculation to arouse that spendthrift's zealous efforts to obtain ; and the ruffian Bartlet, who had so amazed and discon¬ certed Algernon when be had discovered him in unmeet conference with the peer¬ less Rhona, and who had then impercepti-
bly given the first serious shock to Al¬ gernon's idolatry of the beauteous Lady Warburg, being the cher ami of the bower damsel Ci eni frede, had been enticed by this said damsel to join the memorable progress of her lady and train trom Ves. pasian Tower to Albalanda Castle, where, when an auxiliary became necessary for purloining dresses from the trussing cases by Rhona, this accomplice was supplied by Genifrede; and this consociate, though liberally feed by Rhona time after time, to purchase silence, was never satisfied. At length Bartlet became a chum in Sanctuary with Sir Rupert Warburg ; and having each propensities to lead them to good fellowship, Bartlet, in a moment of asperity, when disappointed of an »ex¬ pected bribe from the transgressor Rhona, betrayed her transgression to Sir Rupert, who joy fully availed himself of the inform¬ ation by proclaiming his knowledge to the fair culprit, with the alternative for her choice, either to bestow her hand upon him, now the interdict to the mar¬ riage of cousins had been removed, YDL. IUL· T
';»οι? the spousal ofthe king with the fair relative of Anne Boleyn, or to have the degrading robbery in which she had been principal made public. The recent publicity ofthe disgraceful jewel transaction, which had compelled the flight of her mother and her friend Sir Edmund Target, so overwhelmed Rhona in apprehension of dire consequences, that, with th j sage advice of her devoted satel¬ lite Mrs. Alice Sneakup, she bestowed her hand upon her threatening wooer, to save her precious fame : but too soon the årr¬ ing Rhona found, without the effect she had hoped for ; since Bartlet, finding himself not so amply repaid by his Sanc¬ tuary friend for the important secret, as he had expected, in vengeance boldly presented himself before Lords St Oswald and Fitzrivers, and proclaimed the theft which Lady Warburg had committed in Albalanda, and when ; and then voiced to the ear of Rhona and her spouse the vengeful discovery be had made. And thus, through the agency of the profligate Bartlet, were the Albalandians
extricated from neighbours that were not to their contentation ; for Lady Warburg could not endure to remain one unneces¬ sary moment where this disgraceful trans¬ action, which she termed a juvenile prank, had been so cruelly bruited, and, above all, to the inconstant Algernon and the hated Alary : and as Signor Warburg had taken a sudden distaste to Yorkshire, and was gone with speed to the metropolis, to complete the purchase of a befitting man¬ sion there, and to trap it with gorgeous household stuff for her reception, she hur¬ ried her departure from Warburg Castle, and with her unprincipled spouse, Mrs, Alice, and suite, set out on her long wend to London, where the first news which awaited her was a death-blow in sooth to all her ambitious projects through royal favour, — intelligence ofthe execu¬ tion of her staunch friend Queen Catha¬ rine Howard : and when she at length rode up to her uncle's noble mansion, expect¬ ing admission to it as her home, Dame Alice Sneakup, who had dismounted, stalked up to the gate, and after having τ 2
rung a peal of authority, turned round, and with a haughty air informed the dis¬ mayed Rhona there was no admission for her; that she herself had been for some weeks the happy spouse ofthe Signor Warburg, and should not misuse her dwelling, by admitting into it the wife of Sir Rupert Warburg, and the accomplice ofthe piclock Bartlet j\ The subdued Rhona was borne from this inhospitable gate'in a state of insen¬ sibility, to her husband's den in Sanctuary, whence, as speedily as ati things could f be accomplished for their emigration, the wofully disappointed Rupert and his beautiful spouse fled to the Conti¬ nent; there, like Sir Edmund and his friend Rosamond, to aid their means as they might—permitting no barrier from conscience or honour to impede them. But with the polluted names of such culprits we will not close our narrative. No : we wili once more turn to Alba¬ landa Castle, Inhere we left our fa¬ vourites with fame unblemished, and for the mošt part as happy as mortals could
be ; and assure our readers, that none who ever served Algernon or Alary fouud cause to upbraid them with ingratitude, and that in every relation of life they were bright examples of religious and moral duty.
THE ENØ·
