Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Confessions of the nun of St. Omer: a tale
te l M . ll «и » .......... İ H I WH I Ul I I II U II ПШ I I ι ι __ I l l ll» I I I I . II . Ill ■.»■ ■ i mun H I' CONFESSIONS OF THE NUN OF ST. OMER,
CHAP. L ΠΙ К Г A N G · BEFORE, I was miférable ; but the iwect approbation of confcience ihed a facrednefs around my forrows. The conviBion that the facrifice 1 had made was an offering to Virtue was a claim to happinefs far bc)ond ihe gratification vol, и·. в of
2 of felf, which, whilţ ( it racked every feeling of my foul, was but a martyrdom in the cauíe of right. Now the flings of guilt with agonized acuiuK'fs darted their thorns into my heart. Theie was a noblcnefs in my former grie!~ ; in this there was a guilty humiliation that pre¬ clude d pity. Ever accutlomed to refine upon the forrows of the moment, I felt how far beyond the ih etch oi det peu u oc ks the contempt of felt, iMethought no one could evci tell the definition of real grief that had felt it unaccompanied by rem ori e. Agam I pafled the night in Oeeplefs wrclchednefs. Toward noon the fol¬ lowing
3 lowing day, I fiw Fribourg enter the garden. lie was accompanied by Lin * dorf. Anxioufly as 1 wifhed to de¬ fcend, the préfence of the Count re- ftrained me. I fmiled from the window with a throbbing, aching heart, as, looking up, they hade me good mor¬ row. " Wont vou come down ?" faid the Count ; * ( í have not feen you for this age, and Fribourg »efufed to addrefs you in my b eh f/' " Pei hips he had no- jcen me him- felf,'" faid J, glancing a reproachful ey at Fribourg. '* Debar us no longer, then/' cried 8 ii î i udo r f.
4 Lindorf, *' unlefs you wiíh us to pro¬ ceed to hoftilities, and after fcaling the cafile to your turret window, carry you off by main force.'* i left the window and defcended, icarrtly forry the Count was of the party j for I felt I had folicited the pré¬ fence of Fribourg, and blufhed at meet¬ ing the exultation of his gaze. ï was, however, deceived in my furmife; for drawing near, I difcerned not on his brow the exultation í had dreaded, but a defpondcnt gloom fuch as I had once witneffed in the avenue. Perhaps he mourns my degradation, thought I : he triumphs not in my wcaknefs as I wiflied to do in his. The
5 The reflection humiliated me ftiìì more. Such are the attendants on a confcious deviation from the pride of virtue. I endeavoured to ihakeoffthe dead weight which lingered on my fpirits to anfwer the raillery of Lindorf, to forget, if poffible, the caufe of my melancholy. Fribourg appeared inftigated by a like wiih. He fucceeded betier, and forced chearfulnefs lightened from his dim and funken eyes : delufive fmiles, that ferved but to ihow the pain they coll him to aifume, fpread his pale cheek with evanefcent dimples, and then a deep figh, that feemed ftruggling for vent, iifued in broken periods from his labouring bread. в 3 To
б
То prolong the converfation under fuch circumftances could yield no plea¬ fure. I could not even look at Fri¬ bourg without an emotion of acute grief. The Count vainly endeavoured to chear our drooping fpirits. I felt the 'ears ftart momentarily into my eyes* A painful fenfation rofe to my throat; and, to avoid giving way to the feelings which oppreíTcd me 5 I faw my only ex¬ pedient was to go« in the courfe of the day we agahı met. Fribourg was in better fpirits $ he even rallied me* Shall I confefs i was difpleafed at this ? His melan¬ choly, while it pained my heart, flat¬ tered my felf-love : his vivacity alarmed my tenacious fpirit, inikad of yielding me
7 me the pleafure which it ought. Lin¬ dorf was likewife ofthe paity, and the evening went off far better than the morning had done. In this manner I continued for feve¬ ral days to fee Fribourg. Ilis fprighu linefs daily increafed, and added to rny vexation. He even treated me with a degree of coolnefs and difrefpeci: hi¬ therto unufual. What could he mean ? But I paid all my attention to Lindorf; for while I had the pleafure of behold¬ ing him I could bear to wound his feel¬ ings ; at a diftance^ the idea of his ilighteft fufferings was fufficient to rack me with defpair. For awhile me¬ thought I fucceeded in damping his mirth. Reproachfully he now and then в 4 g 1ze( ^
s
gazed on me, and the mournfulnefs of his afpečt ftruck to my foul : yet I de¬ termined topunifh him ftill more. At every interview, however, my per¬ feverance in endeavouring to torment him appeared to wound him lofs. He regained gradually his chearfulnefs, laughed, talked on indifferent fubjects with apparent earneftnefs, and feemed in reality, at leaft to my jealous eye, the merry, careiefs madman he affeded to be. I had no refource but in Lin¬ dorf; I redoubled my attentions to him 5 and endeavoured to repay with fcorn the fancied apoftacy of Fri¬ bourg· The mutual diftance, the feeming in¬ difference
9 difference with which we treated each other, increafed as rapidly as our for¬ mer love had done. Sometimes he en¬ tered not the garden for a day : the next I faw him for half an hour, or he paraded up and down, examining the flowers, and leaving me in converfe with the Count. Methought he wiihed me to repent my former condefcenfion in foliciting his fociety, to convince me he wifhed not to take advantage ofthe hopes I had given, and to fhow me that his love, when once ι ejected, was eafier to be conquered than regained. Meantime the peculiarity of my con- duo to Lindorf appeared to infpire him with fomething like love. Often when diffatisfied and wretched I left my pil— в 5 low,
IO low, î have feen him, at the ftreak of dawn, anxioufly pacing the garden, and examining the windows of my chamber. As I felt not for him the ilighteft predilection, and had only confidered himas a vehicle to convey my refent¬ ment to Fribourg, I would haftily with¬ draw from hib gaze, left he fliould en¬ ti eat mc to defcend. Still indefatiga¬ ble, he was conftantly there, like an un- eaiy ghoft wandering near a former treafure. When in die evening I per¬ haps encountered him, a bluih of plea¬ fure glowed upon his cheek. He form¬ ed a thoufand exeufes to induce the ab¬ fence of Fiibourg, and feemed wretch¬ ed if for a moment I addreíľed him. His former vivacity feemed entirely fled ;
11 fled ; and thus changed, Fribourg rai- lied him with unmerciful feverity. Sometimes I thought him too ferious in his manner. The ambiguity of his language could fcarcely be at all times denominated pleafantry ; but this my vanity attributed to pique or jealoufy, and I determined on not yielding to the caprice of his difpofition. It was the third evening on which ï had not feen Fribourg that, engaged in converfe with Lindorf, and almoft hop¬ ing he would every moment appear, his fervant brought me a letter. —» Imagining it came from him, and angry he ihould deem it fo immaterial to rc« veal his correfpoudence to Lindorf, I в б took
12
took it with a refentful blufh, and threw it with arTc6ted careleffnefs on the bench befide me. *' Ì will retire/* faid the Count, de« fpondently, ** By no means," I replied j *' I amin no hurry to open the letter— fome po¬ etry or piece of mufic, probably.*' <f Are you fond of mufic ?" he in¬ quired» *« Paffionately,'* I replied. " Stay but a moment, then,*' faid Lindorf, apparently delighted to have difcovered fomething in which he might intereft
*3 intereft me ; €t ftay but a moment—I have an oboe, on which I am a tolerable practitioner : if you will permit, I will play you an air or two/' " You cannot oblige me more/' I returned. He was out of fight in an inftant, and returned with his initrument. He pre¬ luded with the grace and chaftity of a mafter, and then he played an air fo exquifite, fo pathetic, and f о har¬ monious, that during its performance I fcarcely remembered the abfence of Fribourg. At its conclufion I felt, with furprife, a tear upon my cheek. Lindorf
14 Lindorf appeared enraptured. ,ť How happy I ara/' he exclaimed, in a quick, tranfported voice, " to have difcovered, at length, a charm to inte¬ reft you ! I defpaired of ever ferioufly for a moment engaging your atten¬ tion/' " Why fo ? Am I then fo volatile ?" I afked. ct You arc not volatile/' he replied ; ťí but when the heart is abfoibed, all other objects appear infigniiicant/' " Is my heart abforbed, then ?" faid L {< You beft can anfwer that queftion,' 1 hc
15
he refumed, fixing on me a pair of archly-fearching eyes» I blufhed, chagrined and hurt that Lindorf even had perceived my love^— had perceived, too, the indifference it had met. I anfwered, with affected pleafantry, " You are really beyond meafure pene¬ trating, Count—you not only perceive things which are, but, with a fagacity peculiar to yourfelf, things which are not.'* " Are not ?" he rejoined, " can you fay were not ?" ·* Speak openly," I faid 3 fomething offended ;
l6 offended : tf to whom and what do you allude?** "Be not angry,*' he replied, with an entreating fmile, " I meant but jeírľ' gs Play me, then, another air,** faid I. He looked relieved, and obeyed me in a manner bewitching and delightful as before· The tone was melancholy in its prelude—iuddenly it changed, and fell into a ílrain of wild snd hurried majefty. My whole foul liÛened with eagernefs and admiration. When he had concluded, I aiked him if he would lend me the piece. " With pleafure/' returned the ani¬ mated
*7 naated Lindorf, and gave it into my hand» As í took it I bade him adieu. " Not one reward?" he afked in a be¬ feeching tone» '* What reward do you aik ?" I faid. *« The paper again,** he replied, H for one moment»* 1 I prefented it to him with a fmile» He preffed my hand to his lips, but left the mufic ftill within it. *· There wa« no neceifity for а ftrata« gem, Count," faid Î, " to gain io flight i te*
iS
a reward« Another time do not barter your franknefs for a fnnilar trifle." * & To you a trifle/* he faid«— ' c co me, beyond repayment.'* ββ Υ ου » dclightfal harmony/' faid I t áť is rønre than repayment,—But adieu for the prefent* Count-^to-morrow I filali fee you again."
l 9
CHAP. IL THE RISIONATION· AND we feparated without feeing Fribourg. When I retired, ï opened the letter, and read thus ; ťť Madam, ** I have heard much of the noblcnefs and goodnefs of your heart—have heard that not to purchafe for yourfelf the poíreífion
20 poffeflïon of worlds would vou volun- tardy iníličt pain upon another : pre- fuming on this, with melancholy heart, and eyes whofe overflowing tears fcarce¬ ly permit my feeing what I write, do ï take the liberty of addreiïing rou.— Fribourg, from the moft tender, the îïïoil affectionate of hufbands, has gra¬ dually changed into a gloomy tyrant» His children and his fervants fcarcely recognize him: his mfi % alasi who once foothed all his cares upon her bo¬ fom, dares not approach him. Before, he was often abfent from his home, but then he returned with fmiles, folded me in his arms, feated his prattling infants on his knee, and pafled the evening in focial joy ; now, the frequency of his wanderings hide him almoft continually from
2t
from my view. When he returns, it is with looks of fufpicion, as though he viewed us as wretches mi¬ litating againft his peace. His perfon is no lefs altered than his manners. The healthful glow which mantled on his cheek is difplaced by the fallow hue of care. For the laft three days I have not feen him twice, and my gloomy fancy is continually harbouring vifions of his danger or deftručiion. " With you, Madam, I have often feen him in converfe : others have met you walking together. Some have faid you loved* It may be fo, Vulgar re¬ ports I ever fcorn to truft. You are young, agreeable, and vivacious. Con¬ fcious, perhaps, of your innocence, you may
%%
m&y be careiefs of the world's opinion- more careiefs of that than in giving room for its deferved cenfure. The peace of a family would nearer touch your heart, or much ï miftake the in¬ genuous lines of your countenance.— Fribourg doubitcß loves you. If it were my fate that he ihould prove in- conftant, happy for me, perhaps, the choice of the objecì î " E чей the fway you have obtained iii fixing his return to virtue, and to me render him once more the huíband that you found him; then no longer ihall the bofom of a wife be filled with care, the fmiles of her children converted into tears, their innocent mirth checked with unmerited feverity ; but together their artici;«
2 3 artlefs voices (hall lifp with mine the bleffings of grateful and oí happy minds, ťí I can fay no more. From know* ing my forrows you can tell my wifhes. Your own heart will direct you how to acL ·* Elinor Fr ibourg." Was it, then, the wife of Fribourg whofe exquifite wretchednefs had caufed her to addrefs me ? Did ße throw her¬ felf for mercy at the feet of her rcmorfe- iefs deftroyer ? Did ftie deprecate the fanguinary arm even now uplifted to ftrike the cruel blow ? Thy appeal fhall not be difregarded, Elinor— Fri¬ bourg ihall bc thine, though thou had ft my life along with him l Deftručtíon ihali
fliall not vifit thy family, as it hath de» folated mine from a firmlar caufe. But vam 5 vain, alas ! would the fupplica- tions of my mother have been, at the footftool of her »nithlefs tyrant; vainly might ibe have bitten with agony the dud beneath her feet; vainly might íhe raife to the inexorable fiend her care¬ worn, tearful countenance ! She would meet s in return, but fmiles of fcorn* or the derifion of pretended ignorance.—- No, wretch—diabolical Rofendorf—let me not refemble thee in any inftance of my life, far lefs in this, to fpread, like thee, defpair and défolation around!— Smile, while thou mayeft, from thy guilty eminence------fmile, while thou mayeft, in thy fancied fecurity—ere long iliall the avenging blow be levelled ät
*5 at thy devoted head ; thou íhalt fall lower than thofe whofe facred miferies thou now tramplefl; on—thou (halt be¬ feech their mercy ; and know, to thy confufion, their revenge fhall he par¬ don ! My heart warmly beating inf)mpathy for Elinor, rcful ving to ípeak peace to her forrowing foul, I fat down and wrote t has ; " Madam, u That you ihould hive deemed u лесеШит ίο addrefs ше —that; the ex* cefsof fonow ihould have allowed you no alternative hut condefcenfion fo un¬ merited, humbles and oppreíľes me with vol, ti. e л de-
a degrading fenfe of my own impru¬ dence—-not to ùy guilt : ilill that you have addreffed mc gives me fome plea¬ fure—that of enabling me to îeftore your peace, No, Madam, your fi ank and generous appeal to my feelings, } our noble contempt of \uigar iage or impotent reproach, and, more ıhan all, the confidence )Ou appear to place in the reclkude of my principles, excites at once my admiration and my grati¬ tude. €i That i beheld Fribourg with no common eye I will acknowledge ; that involuntarily í U.ught Im iociuy I will not deny j for î looked upon him as a being of a fuperior order, and his pre- feiciice an acknowledgment of conge¬ niality ;
27 totality ; that 1 ever dreamt of engaging his affections, or aiming with you at an impious rivalry in his heart, was as far from my intention as my hopes· I fought it not : but when I gained—»con¬ trary to my expectations gained his love, the tide of youthful folly bore down all before it, and ilifled, in its rufhing torrent, the voice of juftice and of duty, fUfled, but not annihilated— tremblingly alive to the call of juilice, again they afiert their empire in my heart, and felf becomes but a fecondary confidération. if ever I poífeífed in¬ fluence on the mind of Fribourg— if yet that influence remain, I will exert it to regain for you that peace of which J have involuntarily deprived you. Мг г е than ever fhall he bc \cur own, A penitent с ш heart
28
heart is fuperior to a heart that never ilrayed ; it acknowledges Rill more the fupremacy of duty and of love.—He iliall return, and at your feet pour forth his remorfeful anguilh ; fwear that you alone poifefs his affcciion^ though a tranficnt pa Шоп might temporarily cf- trange his mind; again^, with the fin¬ cere rapture of a returning piodiga!, preis his Elinor and his infants to his brean ; like him too ihali he be wel¬ comed to his del e ι ted home. K Lately I have feen him, but the ftruggles of his mind rack him with tor¬ ture, and preclude him from approach¬ ing me. This is a good fign.-— Truil me, injured as you have been, you ihali have ample amends, î will improve the
2 9 the prefent mutability oí his ideas into a fLxcd determination for your happinefs. I will not fee him but in the préfence of a third perfon ; to that third perfon í will appear particularly attentive. He fliall believe me a coquet, that he may view you as my fuperior, undefervedly abandoned fur imagined excellence. " I truft the facrifice I have made to duty and to you will enfure from your meek and faint-like difpofition forgive- nefs for paît, unmerited injuries. That i loveds ardently loved your huíband, is a fatal truth î cannot hide even from myfelf; that I itili love hira — İhall love him till death ílops tlie life-blood of my heart—that there, too, when I die, his image will remain entombed—is, I fear, с 3 equally
3° equally certain ; but that never more my mif-piaced, fad affection ihall moleft your peace ; that never more from the facred fepulchre of my heart that image fhall arife to lure me from the juftice î have fworn, is my fixed and immutable décifion* ís May you now enjoy the happinefs your virtues and your merits juftly claim ! May peace fpread around your dwelling her wings of dove-like hue, and her fifter, fair Content, fmiling prefide amidft your innocent groupe ï u For me, the recoïleBion of yourjoy, the recollection too that I have been its humble initrument, fhall be my folace. iwillíearn, fince I have no pleafures of my
3 l my own, to feek them in the happinefs of о : hers. " Cazire Arieni." Thus I wrote, and thuf I determined- Tears bedewed my letter, but they were the laft tears of expiring felf-love,-— There was nothing in them paiïionate or bitter ; they were not the offspring of indignation or defpair; a chaftened fadnefs bade them flow—a natural and guiltlefs forrow ; a heavenly calmnefs accompanied their fall : not like the por¬ tentous calm which warns us of the coming itorm, but a calm like that which feems to reign over íhe heavens, and over nature j at the fručlifying de- fcent of a tranquil fummer ihower.
4
So
32 So far I yielded to the impuìfe of my duty, ftill ftrong, ftill uppcrmeft in my mind. Virtue awhile might flumberon her guard, but, even in her (lumbers was not to bc for" ever conquered.—Still, perhaps, I yielded fomething to felf- love ; but it was feif-love of a lingular kind, which delighted to wound itfelf. When I believed that Fribourg loved me, the idea of only in fancy re- figning him diftraäed my foul with hor¬ ror; now that I imagined myfelf fcorn¬ cd, I felt as though without one pang, without a future figh I could relinquiih him. Pride armed my heart with her fenfitive fhield, repulfed its fofter emo¬ tions, and refolved on victory, though ttceped in tears of blood. All con¬ fpired
33 fpired to retain my fcarce-recovered vir« tue ; all confpired in the didion of my letter ; all flattered the facrifice I had achieved. Infpired by the fpirit of the moment, my cnthufiafm would have led me to the very feet of Elinor with my letter— to have encountered Fribourg —to have joined their hands, and myfelf have witneffed their reconciliation. Reafon, however, oppofed the romantic im- pulfe with all her ftrength. I contented myfelf with fending in my letter by the fervant. I then wrote as follows to Fribourg, and when next I faw Lin¬ dorf gave it to him in charge : u Time was when methinks the man¬ date for my réfignation would have с 5 ftaobed
84 ftabbed your heart with agony : now I imagine to give me up for ever will coft you little. To be indifferently retain¬ ed, not prized by the retainer, was never in my conception of things. I now believe it was fortunate for me that I had not wholly reiigned myfelf to the former ardency of your wifhes; per¬ haps ere now I might have experienced, fatally experienced, their variability.— As it is, we can mutually refign each other without either falling a victim to the violence of defpair. Circumftances —-duty, neceffity—render it expedient we ihould do fo. Thefe combat againft the continuation of our intimacy : I am determined to yield to them. The pride of Fribourg will prevent him from de¬ clining a fimilar réfolution; and thedif- appointment
BS appointment he muft neceifarily have experienced in what he imagined would conftitutehis felicity abroad, will teach him to feek it where alone it can or ought to be found—at home, in the bo¬ fom of his family. < f C. A/ f I thought this letter the only one cal¬ culated to carry the point at which I aimed—the future peace of Elinor.— To have alluded to the love I indelibly retained for him—this might have fleet¬ ed his heart againft the miferies of a wretched wife, have nerved the cruel réfolution of abandoning her, and have caufed him to confider her as the fatal barrier between him and happinefs. To have folicited for her his pity would с 6 have
have degraded the objecì ï fought ta elevate : to have reproached him might have enraged ; but by fimply pointing out his duty, and with feeming coolnefs relinquiih him, I hoped in time his feelings and his fentiments would have infpired him with compaifion and re- morfé. Thus, by relying on the noble- nefs of foul I knew he poífeffed, me¬ thought I ran lefs riik in dictating to him a line of conduci, than arm againft my endeavours the pride fo predominant in his bofom.—For myfelf. I fometimes endeavoured to believe, that while my réfignation foothed the remorfeful an¬ guifh of my mind, I gave up little in fignifying to him my determination.·— His love appeared to me fo fenfibly de- creafed, that much did not remain to be facrificed*
37 facrificed. That little, by feeming vol un* tarily to relinquiih, 1 faved myfelf from the difgraceful extremity of feeing gra¬ dually vanifh.—Thus I reafoned to foothe my wounded feelings, or thus, rather, í attempted to reafon.
за
CHAP. III. THE SON OF PLEASURE, CONTINUALLY folicited by Lin¬ dorf to enter the garden, addreíľed by him in fonnets ofthe moít paífionate and tender excefs, ferenaded at night with hisfafcinatjng mufic, I found it impoffi¬ ble to prefcrve a continued frigidity— Fribourg ieldom or ever appeared. I had learnt with furprifing calmnefs to endure his abfence ; it convinced me ftill
39 ftill more of the decreafe of his affeñion, and nerved with additional ftrength my pride againft him ; I deemed it weak and grovelling to lament his apo fl асу, to bury myfelf in the feclufìon of impotent, unavailing forrow, to feed with painful reflečiions a fatal and imprudent paffion! no, faid í mentally, this is the acme of contemptible folly—I will no longer fly from fociety, to grieve in fecitt for one who has forgotten me, while an amiable and charming youth covets with ceafe- lefs perfeverance my flighted attention, hangs wiih delight upon a fmile, and feems to confider my préfence at his fupreme felicity. A flighted lover is never fo likely to advance his fuit as when a doating heart has
40 has been repulfed. The fpirit of re¬ venge does that for him which love could never have accompliihed, and not un frequently the ruin of a female follows the defertion of an adored apoftate; from yielding at firft to the wifhes of Lindorf, in fometimes entering the gar¬ den, I did it afterwards to bani ih from my mind the gloomy reflečiions which othcrwife engroffed it; habituated at length to feek in him relief from the painful ennui which, ünce the ceffation of my intei courfe with Fribourg, had again infefted my folitary hours, 1 be¬ came in a manner attached, fiom grati¬ tude, to his fociety. Poifeffing an heart formed not to remain infcnfible to the conciliations of tendernefs, warm, vari¬ able, ana enthufiaftic, gradually í per¬ ceived
41 ceived in Lindorf perfections I had never dteaml weie his. Infenfibly his image accompanied me even after he had retired ; m fenfibly he became connected in the cLatn of my though fe, entwined in the occurrences of the day, and brought momentarily to my remembrance by fome indefcribable ratiocination of idea; I found his con¬ verfation fprightly and unaffected ; he pofleffed not the towering intellect or refined judgment of Fribourg, but he pofleffed a native eloquence and attract¬ ive grace, that found its refiftlefsway into the moft flubboin hearts; he had all his infidious fafcinations without his noblcnefs of foul, aud all 1иь powers of tedudion with nit honor enough to nitidi md
4 г withfland the advantages they might obtain him. it was one evening the converfation turned on love; Lindoif maintained it was a pa Шоп the moft interefied; u For," faid he, tf it centres only in the gratification of filf »" 11 Then,*' replied I, " it cannot be de¬ nominated love —'tis paffion only—felfiih fenfual paffion." " And what is love," continued he, " but another term for paffion?" " Paffion/* faid I, *' differs widely from love in its nature—paflion is an ebullition
43 ebullition of tht finfes, heated by the fer¬ vor of imagination ; love is an offspring of the hearty it is a fpecies of refined friendfhip ш*' * e Oh, you mean fentimental love,'" faid Lindorf; " the romantic dream of novel-reading miflcs, the wild eftervef¬ cence of an enthuiiaftic brain t with which the heart difdains connexion/' " And would you have love devoid of feniiment ?" rejoined Ij "ihould mar* refemble the uncivilized favage, whofe fole delight confifts in the gratification of appetite, you would rob love of its deareft attribute—the elevation it de¬ rives from fentiment; but, however, it is a dan*
4! a dangerous paffion, and happy they who arc ilrangeis io it." <c Ddiigeious only to thofe who would refitie on it—'tis the effcnceof aH human biifs to me." (i It overturns the happinefs of thofe who admit; its infidious advances, it rarely yields th« 1 * pleafure we expect from it, hope decays, and leaves us the viüims of our folly; feldom or ever does it componíate for the various mifery it inflicts. You remind me," I added» " offline lines I wrote this morning ; if you will lead them, I have them ahout me. 1 '
Lindorf
45 Lindorf eagerly put forth lm hand, I gave him a paper, and 'm a clear, im» paflkmed voice he did more than juftice to the compofition.
THE DANCERS OF LOVE. Beauty beneath the fhacle reelin'd, Blooming Health ňood oíoťc behind, Hci golden trciľes к lis d the wind , Meek Content, with pîacsd brow, Twin'd her wreath, and iat btlow ; Peace and Virtue iiood aiound— Innocence thur fav'rite crown'tl ; While Youth's bright fire illumM her eye, And gave her cheek? theli polílL'd d) e. Sudden Urange thoughts attack her reťc, Perpìesing viíiüna pain her breaft л TU
The chains of Morpheus burft in twain, And Love approach'^ with glittering train ; Benuty wak 'd, and gaz'd around ; Cupid, Kuighing, kifs'd the ground ; < f Fuiti û \ ι rgtn, hafte away, And rome with me to realms of day— Sleep no more in endlefs night, Come ν i'h me, ¿nd take delight — Come with rae, my name is Love, Fav'rite ofthe gods above-— Fairért virgin, harte away, And come with me to realms of day !" He faid, and Ììily -rtrung his bow, The a ι row fongrt to hide ; A wither'd hand leceives the hîow, Ånd tums the dart afide. 'Twas Age the gr,u4Îcfs faedom took : Vu\ id 'dan p 'd uith frowning look ; Bui Age reg.-mllef? palVd him by, On ÎH'dvity i^íút ur/i heav'd a fïgh— - #í Virgin,
47 u Virgin, ťhun your treachVous guide ! I once was fair as you, But Love from me in vain would hide His wormwood and his rue. The frowning tower, the ftately dome, Their architel, and e'en his tomb, The nfing Oirub, the fturdy oak, Fade and die—like traceleís fmoke All muft yield toTimc'b decay : Th***! why not }ou as wdi as they ?" The maid lookM grave, but Age went on— " Faireft, lite js quii kiy gone , Pale ЕхреГкпсе robs the fcene öf Fancy s iaucLfb eveigreen, Steals the lamp of lo\e away. And fhowa ît cloth'd in i obe r grey j Love in íUr ? < neù ílays no more, Spreads his wing-, and fiieb fouricore. Thmk, oh think, that poltil·'! bloom Every houi draw¿ near the tomb ί
Time
48
Time will dim thofe luft'rous eyes· Turn thee, daughter, and be wife ! Pleafure is a term for foJIy, Ending but in melancholy ; Like the glow-worm's treacherous light, Exifting only in the night ; Experience blows the charm away : The meteor fades at dawn of day— *Tis dull-ey*d Ignorance bids it glare, But Beaton's fun deftroys the fnare. Truft me Love is all deceit, Snakes, not rofes, twine his feet ; Pain, not Pleafure, is his gueft, Jealoufy, by furies nurs'd. Dark Revenge, with bloody crcft, Gall-filľd Envy, nearly burft. Black Sufpicion's baíHiík'eye, Sharp-tooth'd Slander's cunning lie, Foaming Rage and grinning Spite, Mifchief íly, that Öiuns the light.
íolly
49 While pale Experience, clad în tears, Shall mourn the faults of greener years, Bcpentance fad ihall keep thy fide, And glowing Shame, that fain would hide— Alas! no joy iliall you find there, But plunging in a fea of care ; Nothing—nothing but defpair. Now fare thee well—my power muft end- Accept the warning ofa friend; My time is out—no more I dare/* Then melted on the abforbent air. Penfive Beauty gaz'd around, Her cheeks were wet with tears ; And thus, with trembling dew-drops crown'd, The morning rofe aj>pears. Love in grief now fidelong tunťd, His little heart with fury burn d,
TOL. и.
D ·
Hit
S» His drooping wing» defpondcnt hung, And ufeleíš bow was backward flung j Ke/blving yet his power to try, With fweet perfuafion in each eye, Once more his blooming lips divide, AVhile oountlefs dimples laugh befide— " Weep no more, fair-bofomM maid ! Thofe eyes are not for tears to ihadcj Frofty Age no pleafure knows. Youth ami Age have long Ыеп foes , The leaŕcfs tree again ihall bloom, But age is beauty's final tomb. CI eerleíš Winter s ice-clad brow Relaxes with the Summer glow, But Youth no fecund Spring iliall know. Come then, faireß, come with me, Mirth and Joy fliall wait on thee !" Ke mark'd young Beauty's heaving breaft, And eyes that all her foul confefs'd, Saw their brighťníng beams diiplace The clouds that crft had dimnťd her face ; Her glittering tears no more remain Than dew-drops on the fu gny plain. Cupid*s
δι Cupid's wings with pride rofe high ; He bade his dangerous friends come nigh. Swift the fparkling train advance, Twining in a myflic dance ; IÎ apt ure, Hope, Delight, and Joy Kneel before the fmiling boy ; Pleafure led the jocund rear, Laughing arch with wanton leer; Cupid's beck flie flew to meet, Poppies fpringing near her feet ; Poppies crown'd her raven hair, Flowing o'er her flmulders fair. Soft he feix'd her polilh'd arm- Scarce the nymph concc.tľd a charm ; Ringlets twin'd her vaulted brow, And itrove lo hide her breaft of fnow j Seduction lurk'd in every figh, And fafcination in her eye. Beauty blufliM—her eyes withdrew, Nor durll the (líamele Is fyren view.
n г
5 2
Her right hand held a flow'ry wreath, With many thorns conceaľd beneath : Her left a polifiYd glafs difplay'd, J n which was ihown a funny glade, A waving garden richly drcfs'd In all the fwcets of fummcr's breaft. But ah ! what fcrpents lurk'd imfeen, Secure amid the velvet green ! ín every rofe that courts the eye What danger and defìru&ion He Ì Reclining here beneath the iliade Lies a languid half-drefs'd maid ; There a youth, whofe ilufhing check Seems diforder to bť fpeak. Ftrhapá he fees the vifion fade Ys'hu h once Ins wandt ring iteps betray'd. Here, joining in the wanton rout, What liidefs numbers dance about! Al \ariance uith themfelves they roam To duve Keflexion from hci home j There Laughter and hrr revel throng Shake the air with noil) fong,
53 While fome contemn the outrag'd Jaj , And Ìlei ρ their ficîJ) lives away. Yet itili the dear dtîuiîon charms With allit-, thouiand tempting harms ; At diftance the bright ucean cui I'd, And íhowd a trembling watery world. Beauty gaľ'd and ¿>a¿'J again , Pleafure faw her itruggiing pam» So the fell fnake attracts the eye, Then bid· tbe heedleô vi£tím die. And now her filver voice eíľay'dj To fix at once the wav'ring maid · " See/' Uie cried, with luring grace, " Seeft thou yon enchanting place } There, fweet maid, I hold my court. Doil thou view the h any fport ? Thou íhalt be the faireft there, Their idol and the t r only care 3 Kneeling now they v ak thy charms-— Shall I waft thee to their arms ?"
*>3
DJuded
54 Deluded Beauty ardent gaz*d, Half her fylph-like figure rais*d, When lo, a noble youth flie fpied, Who hung his head, and frequent figh'd. His cheek was pale, yet foftcft grace Jllumin*dhis dejected face; Ten thoufand dimples watch*d his fmile, To ürike the eye and fenfe beguile. Still Beauty gaz'd, forgot the fnare, And left her guardlefs boibm bare. Watching Cumdfeh'd his dart, And (hot triumphant through her heart. Swift poiion glow'd through all her veins, Her bofom filľd with nameleis pains. The more üie look'd, the more (he fir'd, Nor knew 4was Love her foul inípiťd. And now (he caught bis wanďringeye, And inftant faw it kindle high, Beheld him glow with amorous fire, And yield his foul to wild defire. TransnVd he feenťd to view the fair, Then firetch'd his arras, and clafp'd—the air. Kneel
55 Kneeling now he kiíš'd the ground, In Beauty's fetters fuppliant bound. Beauty roie, Ín bluihes drtfs*d, RechVd her head on PIcafure's breaft, Trembling whifjierd, " I am thine— Take me, goddcfs, to thy Űirine." Pleafure arch at Cupid fmiVd — Hc laugh'd to lee the fair beguíľd. Each feiz'd a hand—Oh, Keaton, mourn ! Beauty by Love and Pleafure borne ! With their god his train rofe high, Dazzling vifions to the eye j But Beauty's train hung low the head, Nor follow'd where the meteors led. She, failing joyful on the wind, Cafting irradiant Truth behind, Is wafted to that fata! fhore Where Virtue finks tarife no more.
D 4 " Not with-
5$ 14 Notwithftanding all this/' faid Lindorf as he concluded, " I dare not whhout infulting truth ρ rofefs myfelf your convert; b^ a is not dangerous unlefs led along by the wild fervor of romantic fentiment/* ťí I am forry for the infenfibility of your declaration," i replied fmiling. * e Sentiment 1 muft fiill confider as the fallacious bubble of the vifionary enthufiail : continually deceived by the founding harmony of its name, he is lured through fhoals and quickfands to deeds of imagined glory ι grafping thus at an unreal mockery, he lofes the evanefcent joys ofthe moment; anxious to arrive at eminence he dreams of facri¬ fices,
57 fices unnoticed as unknown, and barters for the filly pride of conquer^ig himfelf the few hours of happinefs allotted for h\s life," There was fomething in this argument of Lindorf fo mortifying, yet fo near .the truth—fomething fo like in the pic¬ ture he had unconfcioufiy drawn—fome¬ thing fo nearly refembling myfelf, thai I fcarcely knew how to combat him* " We were talking ol the dangers of love/* faid I, " and you are arguing upon the nature of fentiment ; but be it as it may, I will go ftill farther, and fince I have called the paffion dangerous, I will add that I deem love fentimental and refined^ or love fenfual and inter« d 5 elted,
58 efìcd, equally ά folly, —the only differ¬ ence confiti s that in the former fhape it is a lure for the enthufiail, and in the latter a tool ior ihe licentious." si Now again/* faid Lindoif, fi you go be\ ond my inference; for me to arraign thepo^cr of love would indeed be tieafon to my every fenfation; but I admit it on!) in its native garb—home to my heart 1 take, and there embrace it-— it maddens not my brain with its feducive poifon. I ieize it foi my pleafure, notas a loom at which to work my own un¬ ii appi nefs.'* " Folly, ilill folly/' í replied j « to place your happinefs in love betrays you fora phantom woife than any you have
59 have yourfelf defcribed. For my own part I view itas tiie dicam ofa madman. The moft complete derangement of hu¬ man intellcit could ne\er ha\e con¬ ceived a thing in its nature fo pi t pof- terous. It is a fenfation [o fhoit-îivcd, fo mutable, ίο madde ning v fo wild, it is inimical to the very t ffoi rs of reflexion ; it abforbs in its devaluating pou er c\ery emotion of the heait, and laughs at the ftruggles of teafciU to aflcrt iti» free¬ dom.'* rc Freedom!" Lid lindoif; u love admits no freedom but its олп. The fuggefnons of uhat İn t л mcd prudence, or the whifperings of l-micmc wlflom, he confiders as madnnVvuig mimíUrs againft his power, and, like a wife tuo- n ti rauh,
6ø narch, places his fafety in their enthraî- ment : but how came you a traitor in his caufe ? I thought/* he continued with a fmile, and in a theatric voice^ " that you confidered it as a divine ema¬ nation of the foul) refining our every con¬ ception and rendering us better and more happy, &c. Căc. /" ·* î now find/* replied I, " fuch love as that never did, never could, and never will exi ÍL 1 perceive it was a fairy vi¬ fion, nurfed at the bofom of fancy ; 1 difcard it as an innovation on the pre¬ cepts of reafon—as a di red contradict¬ ion to the fuggefttons of truth." e( So young, and yet fo early an apoftate to the caufe of love! A youthful
St
youthful advocate in its favour I have often feen, but——However, I fhall do juftice to your eloquence through the infpirations of my mufe. When next we meet you fhall have a new piece of mufic, with the words accompany- ing·" « s Be it fo," faid I : " I wiih you would become in reality my con¬ vert." * e Wifh me not fo much ill," he fportively rejoined j <% if once I confi¬ dered love a folly, I fhould lofe the fweeteft folly of foolifh life. It forms my happinefs. What care I for the terms it has derived, unmerited as un- juft, from thofe whofe own imprudence in
62 * in aiming at fomething beyond the power of mortality to reach, have loft, in the artempt, its paffing fwcets ? 1 am not more than human; 1 feek not, with the fcrupulous eye of a virtuofo, to anatoniifc the nerves of a butterfly,— No, I mount the bird of pleafure, whenever it will fuffer my approach ; I foar on its va? legated wing to feenes of boundlefs j >y unknown by melan¬ choly di earners of the earth, unknown by tlie futile vifionary, who waftes his little day in mourning that the rofe will fade, u hen he mould pluck it from its perfumed bed, and feize the tranficnt moment of its bloom.** Surely there was fomething in the un¬ tutored morality of Lindorf ftrangcly fafcinatîng !
fafcinatîng! He feemed formed, as he faid, a votary of pleafure, and calcu^ lated to become her favourite. How charming, how exhilarating feemed his mirthful naivete! How attractive, in their careiefs garb, the eafy fpirit of hi.* fentiments! Pleafed with their novelty, I could willingly have prolonged the converfa¬ tion, but ï dreaded left his vanity fhould con ft rue it into a fymptom of growing attachment. Why did í dread it ? Did ï then feel confcious of any fuch emo¬ tion ? The pei fon of Lindorf was more than elegant; it was too beautiful forman. His countenance, had it been a (hade fairer,
6í fairer, muft have been effeminate : even now it would have appeared fo, if long and dark eyelafhes, arched brows, and auburn ringlets waving carelefsly over his forehead, had not faved it from the reproach. A fmile feemed continually to hover round his lips. Hi? manners, his very drefs were, in their unfìudied fafcination, an epitome of his apparent charaőler. The very found of his foot pofíeíľed a fomething fo infpiriting, it was enough to banifh care as İt ap¬ proached. It was impoffible for any one but a ftoic to view him with indif¬ ference. I wondered how his unob¬ tru five charms had been fb long unno¬ ticed by me. Formerly I defired his abfence, to converfe
65 converfe uninterruptedly with Fribourg : nbw, whenever I left him, it was with the hope of feeing him again foon. Be¬ fide, to feel for Lindorf a ientiment of prepoffeffion was unaccompanied by a conviclion of its impropriety ; to walk, to talk with him occafioned no fem- tiny, called forth no remarks. Even a union with him could not have been objected to by my family ·, and I fome¬ times thought that, more eífeBuaily to ftifle my frequent keen remembrance of Fribourg, fuch a ftep might be condu«. cive. í felt his power over my heart was not yet dead, and doubted, in a mo¬ ment of trial, my own réfolution.-— But Fribourg could abide by his. He fel¬ dom
Об dom entered the garden, or when he did, he feemed fo di flant, fo referved, or infpired by pleafantry fo mortifying, that after the palpitation of heart I felt at his approach fubfided, his préfence became almoil a pain tome. Befide Lindorf who was an inmate in his houfe, informed me that Fri¬ bourg, from a romantic wanderer, had grown domeftic ; that his whole heart feemed devoted to his family ; and then archly remarked how different, a few months ago, he had beheld him. Thus was my pride continually made to combat with my love. It feemed evident that bribourg liad conquered his ι and I diidained my own emotions when
6j when ilill they vhifpcrcd he was dear to me. I did not feel for Lindorf more than piediieUmn. ï admiied him, and liked his fociety, but I wiflied to {how him, as if unintentionally, that his furmife with rect trd to my ever Iming been at¬ tached to Fribourg was fallaci4>us. Through this means I was frequently off my guard. I went farther than I intended, and Lindorf failed not to take his advantage. By degrees I became entangled in my own net ; and while I was endeavouring to w к ft from his mind the idea he had conceived, im¬ perceptibly I laid the gtound-woik of П 1 V
68 my own future forrow and misfortunes, by infpiring and feeming t return a раШоп í had not then remotely heen aware of.
δ 9
CHAP. IV, THE SELFISH LOVER. THE following morning Lindorf brought his oboe into the garden, and played over the air he had promifed to compofe. The mufic was delightful,— The words were as follow :
ELOQUENCE,
yo
ELOQUENCE, PROVING, ON THE ANALYSIS OF LOVE, THAT IT WAS FOLLY. Avaunt thee, dear Eloquence ! exqutfite harm î Nor longer thy poifon impart. Nor longer endeavour, thou dangerous charm, To îure fênfîbîlity's heart. Oh, firft-born of Harmony ! fifter to Love í Partaking its flower and its thorn, That can β r ft bid the fad heart tumultuoufly move, Then (how its íond hope as forlorn ! That can foothe the pale mourner by forrow op" preiVd, Bring comfoit on Pay's fair wings, That can lulj the poor penitent's ftruggles to reft, And d ¡farm even ¡nűn of its ftings ! Ok*
71 Oh, Mufic ! what rapture thy melody bringe, What tranfports the bofom infpire, II the fweet hand of Sentiment fweep o'er the fírings, Ør Lave found the tremulous lyre ! Though thy magic give eafe to the feíleríng wounds Of iove in the canker of care, Or raiíè, by the exquifite ikill of their íounds, Yeung Hope from the tomb of Desiai r : Then, Mufic, though none can thy powers deny, In chafing of Love's melancholy, Yet Eloquence bids thee, defpairing, go die, And fhcws us e'en love is a folly, I thanked Lindorf for his compliment. I continued in converfe with him a little while ; and when we feparated, it was on my
7* my Gde, with increared admiration of his numberlefs and varied powers of pleafing· For fome months time paft on thus. Fribourg and I no longer appeared to feek each other. Lindorf had unequi¬ vocally declared his paffion for me; and I, though I felt not for him the mad¬ dening excefs of love I had experienced for Fribourg, regarded him daily with complacency fufficient to give him hope, and make me think of his abfence with more than indifference. In fliort, I believe the fureft path to happinefs in attachments between the fcxcs is a cool, fteady айеШоп, devoid of
73 oF rbapfody or moonihine, equally dif¬ tant from apathy and enthufiafm. It was impoffible I could ever feel for any other what I had felt for Fri¬ bourg. Fond imagination always re¬ curred to him in moments of foftened folitude. ï often dwelt on his image, but it was no longer with hope, or as with a being it was ever poffible for me to find happinefs with. I confidered the whole of our former exquifite at¬ tachment as a departed fairy dream, on which memory ftill delighted to paufc, which fancy arrayed in all her trembling refinements, but-which truth nor reafon could ever countenance. I only wifli¬ ed it might have been realifed, but felt, with chaftened forrow, its impoflibiliiy. VOL. II· e I bc-
74 î believed myfelf, however, capable of imbibing for Lindorf a fentiment of regard ώ Ilei ing widely in its natuie from that ϊ have defcribed, and vet fuf¬ ficient lo be denominated love. I was undoubtedly prcpoiïefled in his behalf; but no acute anguilh, no indefcribable rap* ure, accompanied my reflexions on him when away ; yet I met him with pleafure, and parted from him with re· ¡net. о in language 1 1 e moli ímpafíioncd he Ind laid, " I love \ou,'' but he had ί,ιηι no morc- —L'nuorf had nevei men* tiuned man iage. One evening with looks of anguifh he !Itw to truet me. With poi tentons fi» lence
76 lence he gave me a letter, and covered his face with his hands as he turned aßde. Alarmed, 1 feized the letíer.— It was from his father, and contained an order for his immediate dipartine. The idea of iiis abfence filled me with. gloom, and .trembling I returned him the paper. " Yes/' he exclaimed, with a de* fpa-iring look, <; I muil leave vou, Ca¬ zire—leave you, pci hap-, to the pof¬ fefiion of another í Well I knvw tlu hateful fubject on which my father would fee me. îîc defpifes the calm happi¬ nefs of my prefent life; lie would have mc marry/' ä £ il 2Í mv/ 1
íc Marry," repeated I ; ** would that bc ίο dreadful, if you might choofe the object ?" ui The object is already chofen,' 1 he uplied with violence, tr I am to wed a creature 1 have fcarcely íecn, 1 can¬ not, I will not } ield to a demand fo prepoficrous. I have fixed my heart, aud world* fhall not aker mv affect- ions." Mì thought the laiïguage of Lindoif appeared ftrange. — If he lovt d mc as he iaid, why not reveal to his father on whom hb affections weie »i\ed ? It was not forme to urge the quefìion; I only hud, e Ls
77 " Is your father harfli, Lindorf? is he cruel or unj uft ? >f " He is a remorfelefs tyrant," an¬ fwered Lindorf. " From a boy f have been betrothed to the daughter of a Ruffian nobleman. We were compa¬ nions in infancy—as age matured we were feparated. For the lafl twelve years we have not feen each other, but the plan of future union has ftill been imprefled upon our minds with unre¬ mitting care. Till now," he added mournfully, ** í never dreimt of oppo- lition." With the thought of lolin^ him f flit every latent fpark of affection rile in mv bofom.
7» u No/* I exclaimed, " you muft not go—4is unj u ft, 'tis ungenerous to de¬ mand it." ° Muft not ?" repeated Lindorf, with doubtful rapture, " fay fhall not, Cazire, and for ever will I remain your flave.'* ts Alas ľ* faid Î, fi 1 fpoke but from the impulfe of my heart. What power dare ï exert in oppofition to your fa¬ ther ? n "OGod!" he exclaimed, u muft î then go, Cazire ? Is there no alterna* nve ľ Yes, one," he refumed, in a quick, tranfported accent; ik let us fly together, Caïire, and defpife the ihame·« itil defpotifm of authority/* α F1> . v>
79 <( Fly !" I echoed tremblingly, " what mean you, Lindorf ?" " I mean,** he anfwered wildly, and fnatching me to his breaft, " I mea'i that you muft—you ihall be mine, in fpiteof fate {—»Let« then, my father re¬ tain his drofsi let him make me the verieft beggar that he can—I fhall have grafped a treafure in my arms he cannot, dare not deprive me of/* He preffed me ilill clofer to his heart. Overpowered by the violence of his emotions and the confufion of my own, my ftruggles at emancipation availed me little. *■' Say," he continued, looking on f 4 me
igo me with rapturous delight; u íaýj Ca¬ zire, íhalt we fly together? Ifivé dc«*. bar ourfelves of every pleafure in exift¬ ence, what fliall the facrifice avail us ? Who or what fliall compen fate our ufe¬ lefs forbearance ? Bid me then tear thiscruel, worldly letter ; 'tis ourfelves alone we can injure or delight by yield¬ ing to that which conftitutes our happi¬ nefs. Tell me, Cazire, tell me if the world's approbation can foothe the for¬ rows of a broken heart. Why then ihould its cenfure ever appall us ?" "Lindorf/* I replied, with a look that releafed me in an inftant from his embrace, "Lindorf, I have often doubted the fincerity of your love, I have often been puzzled to difcover your
8i your aim : but I thank you^—at once you have opened tny eyes to the bafe- nefs of your intentions and your princi¬ ples. Go, jthen—I feck no longer to detain y ou. ,J Cc Oh, Cazire, inflexible girl!" he exclaimed, cafiing himfelf on his knees, and railing his clafped hands with im¬ paffioned fervour ; " Oh, Cazire, you are wrong, believe me. Ere long, re¬ flexion will convince you *of your error. Ob, if ever you poíľeíľed for me the fligbteft fpark of love, if ever you deemed me worthy of your friendfhip, I befeech you to think well before you confign mc to defpair. Why is it that with careful hand you nip for ever in its bud the germ of pleafure ? Well I £ 5 know
8ž know your profpečts and your life· — well î know the gloomy monotony of vour exiftence— the clouds that have a' obfcured your dawning day. When I am gone, peihaps you will deign to think that with me you might have ex¬ changed your griefs for fome portion of happinefs ; perhaps you will deign to think that unneceffariiy you have doom¬ ed to defpair one who fondly loved you ; perhaps you will regret» when taking a rcirofpeciive view of the very fcene now pafting, when in melancholy feclufìon you weep over the miferies of λ our fate, that heedlefbly and unen- joyed you lufìered to efcape the evan¬ efcent joys of exiftence,— -Ah, think well, tľa/nc 1 You were not formed to walle in fohiary repinings the fleeting May
May of life ; to look with faddened eye upon the blighted profpeds of your youth ; to vegetate without a fingle ray of love to gild the darknefs of the fccne ; to have no (oft attachment, noendeaimg tie ; never to impart the tender move¬ ments of the heart to a fympathctic, a congenial breaft ; to breathe, in the wide of expanle of creation, an alien to each rapturous ftnlation. Better to die than todo this î better at once inhabit the filent folitude ofthe tomb than tim» transform exiftence to a blank, or pafs through life iu ftoicai apathy to its fe ,v delights/* As Lindorf concluded he covered his expreflive countenance with his hands. Deeply he feemed to feci what he hai E Q been
84 been depicting. Spite of the diBates of prudence 1 took companion on the viole nee of his emotion, and extended my handfor him to rife. He pre fied it ţo his bofom., to his burnmg "ip?, but fìlli he remained upon his kiues. I Hooped, and endeavour¬ ed to raife him, but was unequal to the taik. Me feemed infpired by the fo fi¬ neis î betrayed ; and as I ftill leaned o\cr him, he clafped me to hib bread as with involnntaiy uanfport. Theie was a fomething ίυ befeeching in his fea¬ tures, yet fo ardent, as though he would have faid, " I cannot check my feel¬ ings; upbraid me not!" that I knew not hov/ to lepulíe him. Yet I felt the imprudence of giving ib fcopc to emo¬ tions
85 tions ever violent, ever İn extremes. Had 1 yielded uttciSy to the fpontaneous diciates of n^y beau, I fhould have ac¬ knowledged to Lindoif that 1 felt the juftice of his argnmen:—that I felt their truth, I might even have followed the avowal with acquiefcencc to his wifhes. But what—what is this obli ufi ve con¬ fidération, this intuitive idea of the fit and the expedient , continually intervening even amid our fineft impulfcs, to mar and check them in their birth ? I withdrew fiom the embi ice of Lin¬ dorf with iblled emotion, and he rofe with a defpondcnt figh. "Dear Cazire," he faid, tf could }OU
86 you but fee my heart, could you but feei how much I love you, you would not, could not difdain me thus! I know the artlefs enthuiiafm of your na¬ ture—its iweet and innocent dictates. it is the fear of others which withholds their victory. You would he happy, but date not.—Once more, ere you fly me, think« Will you ior ever abandon a heart that pants but for you? Will you abandon yourfelf to future regret ? 'Tis not fo vahiclefs, Cazire, to refign the fincere adoration of the foul. We may be happy in each other—Speak, my angelic love, ihali we ?'* Struggling with the intenfity of con¬ flicting fenfatîons, agitated by doubts and
8 7 and fears, I could no longer difguife my feelings^ and burft into a flood of tears. (i Good Heaven ľ* faid Lindorf, with anxious tendernefs, " you weep, Ca¬ zire î Say, are thofe tears propitious ? Let me fupport you, my angel !" I leaned unrefifting in his aims. Lin¬ dorf fupported me with delicate for¬ bearance, and gazed on me with looks of love. Again, when I was fomewhat recovered, he urged, with cmpaíľioned earneftnefs, his fuit. I faw that in flight remained my laft reíource, and that I durft not longer expofe myielf to his fafcinations.
í w а ь
88
I was preparing to depart, after fal¬ tering farewell. *' Cazi re/' be exclaimed, u what is it you fear?" ** Do not afk mc,*' I replied. f< Do you fear acceding to make me the happieft of men ? Kever, never will you ftibmit to an improper im- juiìfe ! If you doubt your réfolution, it argues that your compliance infers your happinefs. Why then would you fear to yield ? If 'tis your mifery alone that could refult, you will find arguments fiiflicient to oppofe me," u There arc infatuations/* İ replied : " thofe
и thofe ofthe fenfes are moft dangerous and apteft to mifiead. Under their in¬ fluence we cannot difcriminate what may conflitute our happinefs or mi¬ fery.·» ** But while we ftop to analyfe, we lofe even the chance ofthe former. The latter remains of courfe." The fimilarity of his arguments to thofe of Fribourg ftruck me inftanta- neoufly. I had often remarked their apparent refemblance, but the real dif¬ ference between them confined that Fii- bourg's were the offsprings of reflexion, and Lindorf's of fclfiilmcfs. Involun¬ tarily I faid,
*■ Lindorf,
9° sí Lindorf, your fentiments are im¬ bibed from Fri- —----- ·* The word died on rny lips—I could not pronounce his name. £l My fentiments are imbibed from Nature," he replied, without noticing my confufion ; " íhe alone is my pre- ceptrefs. Would ihe were yours, un¬ aided by the idle diBates of imaginary refinement!" w Lindorf, farewell! May you be happy, whatever becomes of me ! Pur¬ fue the íyňem j ou admire. For me, I dare not become a follower."
"And
91 " And thus you leave me ?*' he re¬ plied, darting on me a frantic look. ••Farewell!" I repeated trcmuloufly, not daring to traft myfelf with him more. " Cazire, you may hereafter repent your conduci: —Hereafter you may feel the pangs you now inflict on roe î You may be left in the hopelefs anguifh to which I am abandoned.—Adieu, fince it muft be fo ! To-morrow's fun will fee me—far from hence." " Adieu V 1 I faltered once more, and fled precipitately home.
9 г
CHAP. V, WHO WOULD BE A SUICIDE ? WRETCHED and difcontented I paíľed the night ; yet how could î act otherwife? I had given up a felfifb lover, and had retained my virtue.— Wherefore then did I grieve ? Could the gaio be worthy of the facrifice ?— How long would íhe pleafures of love have compenfated the derogation from principle ?
93 principle ? Only till their novelty had ceafed. Reafon approved my conducts pru¬ dence juflified it, and pride upheld it: but füll I was not happy. A painful vacuum remained in my bofom, beyond the power of reafon to account for, or of pride to fill. î felt as though I had relinquished fomething dearer to me yet than prudence, and almoft regret¬ ted my precipitation, even while con¬ fcious I ihould not have fecured my happinefs by an oppofite dec ilion. Uneafy and unrefrefhed I watched the dawn. With what rapture, if I but fmiled, would Lindorf di red his chaife far from the deilined route ŕ— At leaft
94 lead through my curtains I couid watch his departure. Anxioufly I liftened for the carriage wheels. With trepidation of heart I approached the window,— ·Α' a diftance I heard the trampling of horfes.—The chaife arrived.—Lindorf, accompanied by Frihourg, iifued from the houfe : a deep melancholy marked the countenance of the latter; and Lin¬ dorf feemed as though during the night hc bad not been in bed.—-His fervant made the neceffary preparations, and mounted his horfe. Lindorf en- it red the carriage. 'The pofhllion clofed the door.—-lie railed his eyes to my window with a look of for row and re- ¿jut. The hilarity nf his countenance íecmed vaniihed,—-Suddenly the chaife moved.— Ile waved his hand to Fri¬ hourg,
95 bourg, and once more cafi his eyes up to my window. How did 1 wifh, yet dared not to appear!------At diftance I heard the pofhllion crack his whip.— Still farther, the dying echo of the wheels — Fancy prolonged the found, and ftill, flili was the irrefolute Cazire at the window. e< It is all over,'* I exclaimed, with a long and deep-drawn figh, as though I wiflied to throw a burthen from my heart ; IC it is all ovn ! lie is gone for ever, and I am left a melancholy, de¬ ferted being ! AVhy, why did 1 fuffer the moments to efcape in doubt and hefitation ? \\ hat now/'' I added, burning into tears, *■ will compenfatc mc for the lofs of his fociety ?*' With
96 With a fenfation of painful regret once more I approached the window. Fribourg had entered the houfe. ilis door was clofed. Ail appeared chill and gloomy. The drowfy inhabitants of the village had not yet rifen from their beds. The frene was hufhed.— Över the diftant mountains the firft red ftreak of morning began to appear ; the miit from tlie lakes flowly difperfed ; yet ihe bright azure ofthe heavens was covered with a ycllowiih brown, and oh IV u red the radiance ofthe coming άΑ\\ The dew fpaikled on the grafs, and whittling as he went, the early ftep of the fhepherd fu íl imprinted it. Were Lindorf'here on fuch a morn¬ ing, his foft oboe would have courted me
9Í me to the garden. Together we fhould have inhaled the pureft breath of morn, have liftened to the harmonious orifons ofthe exulting birds, have watched the rifing glories of the fun ; and he would have gathered for me, loaden with the yet unbruihed dew, the blooming rofe or modeft violet with fcarce-opened eye : but now, now he was far from my reach, wretched, perhaps, and melan¬ choly as he had left me. How could I pafs the folitary day ï* 1 would íly to books, to mufic ; 1 would forget that ever my hours had been more happily filled. -----—How loil, how dJcrtcd did J feel myfelf í My gloom continued through the day.— í i с ti ι ed to bed, and rofe again defpoude:tt. vol. ι к r Time,
9» Time, fo far from reconciling me to the privation of fociety, feemed rather to increafe my melancholy. „In defpair I wrote to my father ; I folicited him to rehílateme in the fituation I had for-, merly enjoyed, and emphatically afked hjm why I had been exiled. I repre¬ fented to him, in terms rendered ener¬ getic by defpair, the mifery of my mind, the ifolation of,/my prefent life. At leaft, if I was forbidden to be near him, I afked only for fociety, for amufement, fo naturally defired by a youthful mind—for a fomewhat to.pre¬ fcrvc me from.the horrors ofa melan¬ choly that hourly increafed. Letter fucceeded letter, but in vain. Arieni feldom came near us ; and,when he
99 fee did, he feemed to view us as beings of an inferior order—as though dero¬ gated by misfortune, and rendered ob¬ jects of contempt İnftead of pity. His manners were diftant, his language re¬ ferved ; and with fatal prefentiment I viewed iheincreafing infenfibility of bis mind toward us. How does a life of error gradually alienate from the heart its fined fenfatîons. I regretted daily that I had fuffered Lindorf to depart, that I had yielded to a fancied impulfc of virtue. '< Fool that I was," faid I, in the bittcrnefs of my heart, u fool that í was î What really is in the naiure ofa ceremony to fančiify the effufions of tiie F t heart r
100 heart? We love before we marry ; as far as poffible we have then anticipated the only chance of continued happinefs ; will marriage afcertain it farther ? It is calculated only to cement an union, where affection cannot. Oh, Lindorf, wert thou now here, I fhould no longer refill the dictates of mv heart ; I fhould leave, with ilice, the aroi's of mankind, and in the fweet refinement of focial in¬ tercourfe forget the idle diftiri&ions of the world. Yls, with thee 1 fhould have enjoyed that calm and rational delight which is the offspring of icafon, not the wild cffcivefcence of fancy or romantic folly·" Thus I imagined, when 1 no longer poffefled the power of acting according-
ΙΟΙ
ly j and fuch is invariably human na- ture, ever prone to let the moment pafs, and then lament it. Nay, could it again arrive, the lame irrefolution would per¬ haps accompany the poffibility of its enjoyment» Lindorf was gone, perhaps for ever î perhaps, at leaft, for long ! What va¬ rious changes might occur in both our lives before again we metí Perhaps the time might come u hen neither of us» fhould regret our féparation ; perhaps the time might come when ftill more bitterly we fhould lament u ; and taught by chilling age the leíion of experience, view with vain-regretting eye the fait y profpects of our j outh receding, unen- joyed, to dim perfpeBive,------Lindorf f 3 would
ÍC2
would many !—When he folicited my luve he was unfettered, iingie ; in re¬ turning his afte&ions I injured no one. He had no wife, no children, whofe hearts I could have racked. Society could never have been more guilty or Icfb happy, influenced by my conduct, for fociety knew me not : I was an ob¬ fcure individual who could not even have been milled from the face of mirthful day, much lefs my actions feru¬ ti ni zed, and made the precedent for another^ vices. No, I fhould have in¬ jured no one« The power of example diffeminated not Co far from the bofom of feclufìon: but í might myfelf have been happier. In this ilate of miférable defpondency pali
юз pail on upward of a year ¡ no change occurred in the wretchednefs of my fituation, except for the worfe. I con- traded acquaintances with women care¬ iefs of character; J made them my companions, and in the levity of thctr fociety did I feek to drown my forrows ,- but the refource fickened me ; I became fpeedily difgufted with their poliihcd freedom, and returned to feclufìon and defpair. It was impoffible to render home de¬ lightful or even tolerable ; my mother foured in her difpofition by misfortune, was a wretched hdng, who, difappointcd of the only happinefs ihe had ever fought, viewed way thing elfe, nay, t' 4 the
104 гЫ whole bufmefs of life, as the vain del tifien oían hour- Weaiy at length of addreffing my father, weary of myfelf, and of exift¬ ence, I funk into an alarming abftrauion of idea—I became abfent, filent, and deranged—I wandered at âl) hotirs of the night—I left my bed, and iat upon the firfì ftonc I encountered in my way — î neither fighed nor wept, and feemed almoft unconfeious that î exifted—gra¬ dually шу mind became fubject to a total revolution—the chain of idea became more materially disordered, and reafon ftebly tottered on her throne ; medical affi ila uce was called in—amufement, re¬ laxation, were prefcribed, but I could procure neither, though, alas 3 the evil was in
ios in my heart—there it corroded, and baffled the efforts of art; my diforder was a fort of partial lunacy—the wildfit. vifions floated in my brain—dreams of terror infefted- my nights—I never walked but I irmgined I was falling—at dark every ihadow feemed a precipice, from which I ihrunk enhorrorcd—-J was nerve all over in a flate of the moft ex¬ cruciating irritability· Sometimes í believed myfelf in an opprellive dream, fiom winch í endea¬ voured vainly to awake; I applied mournfully to all who came in my way, to roufe me, in compaifion, from a pa· n fui flumber—-they fmiled pitying upo.i me ; terrified voices wrung continually in my cars } fcreams of defpair and fpttifv s of f 5 wee
ιοβ woe haunted my footfteps; I wrote fonnets, that ilie wed the frightful de¬ rangement of my brain, and fung them afterwards in a voice which feemed to my delit ioti& fancy as though it ifiued from the tomb. One of them, which bv chance u-as prell rved, will give you perhaps, a flight idea of my diflraëtion, ľHL 4>J CI RTS.* J UB İLKE. ^3}% \v beu лщ I— <мп you teil — К my Ucdìt w ilam m\ üre lit ? Arit I bound m rn.i^ic ípell — Oibyčnuboí íítiÍpoíUlP ais, xKÌì.xt honor Ixvays щ Ылт J ]>,i 1 lK(.j>, urdo 1 wali e > h I tlt-cp, oh' dit.im ot j>ain— Inn mv Lde ib} íeiUia t dve, ïf
IOJ If within the filent grave Once I could bat fmd my way, Death might pity on me have, Hauling with him let me \>Uy, From the focketsof his eyes Bid me take the twining worm ; Laughing then to fee my pi ize, Let it to its ca\e return, Roufitig ttV.'i f ľuí» ea rf hy bed, Dance amid tho fperbcs u an, Why not gambol with the (k.«l, Aad be happy while we can ? Then at miuuidit frum ihe Um\h О Dimly lival imã íiknt íhay, Steal а bam from yoiuLr muori, Αιν\ hlá ií light из on the w.ty.
г Сз
il.-umt
ιοβ Haunt the bafe wííWí frøne dire, ľrom their bofoms tear the heart, Let them in a dream expire, Then awake to real fmmt. Roaming thus where'er we lift, Dance around, and dance arountî, Sail upon the ihadowy min, Or roll the ftars upon the ground. Thus we fport and thus we play— What have we to do with care ? Bribe the ghofts who ftop our way— Silly home to Death repair. This was written in aftrain of merry rnadnefs ; alternately this, or a deep and dreadful melancholy poífeífed me; thus 1 continued,·—My unfortunate mo¬ ther
I09 ther feared î fhould never more murn to reafon—I was deemed almoft paft hope--nature alone could operate ia my favor· I was not eircumfcribed or bounded in my wanderings ; my de¬ rangement was ofthat fort which bioods upon itfelf without injuring another, It was one night that in a fit of def¬ pair, the moon fhining clearly into my chamber, 1 ftarted from røy bed, and accidently approaching the glafs, imagi¬ ned that 1 faw behind me the apparition of myfelf; the fancy ftruck me inftantly that I muft die, and this was a mandate from the world of fpirits. Habituated as I now was to imagir of terror, I felt not difmayed ; a pen«knife lay on the table —it was open, and its bright blade fparkled
4 IO
fparkled in the moon-bcam % i\\odk\t up, and gazed upon it with a muüng air —my forrows ruíhed ^wildly upon roy mind—I fmiled in gloomy defperation, and as I ftill viewed myfelf in the glafs, I drew the pen-knife near my throat- already its edge imprefi the fkin—a mo¬ ment I hefitated—then fuddcnly feized with au irceíiftible repugnance, I threw the weapon from me, and feated myfetf meditatively upon the fide of my bed. I have often fince thought this moment was the crifis of my diforder. I was feated on the bed, and endea¬ vored to colleâ my fcattered fenfes. My brain refembled a rufty lock requir- ing a ftrong effort to firn it ; by degrees I fell intoa dcfultory chain of argument with
Ill with myfelf—I refle&ed on the nature of tbe deed I had been on the point of perpetrating. u What," faid I, men¬ tally, " if I become a fuicide?—What is death ?—can I be fure that it is, as we are taught, a ftate of annihilation Ь —can I be fure that in death weiofe for ever our confeioufnefs ?—it may be, that to the eye of mortals only we become in¬ fenfible ; our fpirits perhaps may ftill exift, and wander difcontented through the woild. My fpirit perhaps, when it had forfaken my body, (lili might view it with remorfe and anguifli—hovering near it, endued with confeioufnefs, might lament the crime which had driven it forth;—to myfelf ftill might I .exift, though forp tien by the world ;—ftill might I fit among my family, hear them fpeak
1 12 ŕ, ípeak of me in forrow, yet not be per¬ mitted to reveal myfelf. Hell may be a fable as it is depiûed, but no hell could equal the mifery of a confeioufnefs after death—of an exiftence unthought of beyond the precincìs of the grave— un- known, undreamt of by mankind, weep¬ ing o'er my fancied tomb, peihaps í might pafs in agony Fribourg— or my father ! Oh ! horror, too great for re- flection, if the wretched are condemned to lofe their only folace—- the hope of cverlailing peace in death! No.—Let me rather -Ontitiue m the miferies I know—in the forrows that others than myfelf ran afcertain ; let me not have in uncertainty an exi ilence which, how¬ ever dreadful, is not comparable to that gloomy thought of fomething afte ι death,
>*3 death, that while it for ever ihuts out hope, prolongs, perhaps to the end of time, our folitary woes. Vain repent¬ ance may ftill gnaw the foul—ha- raffed through revolving ages, it may pine upon itfclf—view, in unknown an- guifh, the gradual decay of every being it once aifociated with—long Ín power- lefs agony to be recognized by the mean- eft individual—yet be condemned to roam in filent obfeurity, and fink not to envied forgetfulnefs till the total anni¬ hilation ofthe world.'* I turned my eyes upon the pen-knife ; " Life the molt horrible, the moit def¬ pairing, is preferable to a (late like this,'* I ejaculated; "let me to bed, I will endeavor to rejoice that yet I live.'* I re-
ii4 ï returned to bed. í raifed my hands in gratitude to Heaven; and a calm ileep, to which too long î had been a ftranger, clofed my eyes till morning.
HS
CI í AP. VL HOPE DEFERRED МАКЕТИ THE HEART SICK· I AWOKE in a ftate of comparative rationality. Kneeling, I addreíľed Heaven in a fervent prayer, and defcended, wiih altered looks, to the family. I was almoft the ihadow of my former felf; but the eyes late fo fiery and unfteady, the check Ouihcd with
ί ϊβ with crimfon, the hurrying, unequal ftep ? the wandering look, no more re¬ mained; a calm ftupor fucceeded; gra¬ dually it gave way to placidity and eafe, and I regained the heavenly compofurc ofa fane mind* ϊ inquired concerning my father, whether he had been or written, uut, alas! he had not done ei-lrr, What would become of usali, ne. hvtedand defpiíed ! I would rr\ him <^u ¿ .nore •—I would entreat him to sai,e pity on the mifery of my fituation. if he re¬ fufed, fervitude, labour, was preferable tomypreient mode of life. 1 would in¬ form him how i languiílicd for fomc proofs of his affečiion. I determined likewife to addrefs the Rofendorf, to fee if it were
117 were poflible to move her heart* If alt failed, î refolved to abandon my home, anďwander where chance might direcb I fent to my father a letter diciated by the acutenefs of my feelings, and I ad¬ dreiied another to the Rofendorf. I entreated her to facrifice fomething for her happinefs; I appealed to her feel¬ ings ; 1 dwelt on the painful fufferings we had long endured, on the alarming melancholy from which my mattered in¬ tellects had fcarcely recovered ; I be¬ fought her compaifion in influencing my father ; and laftly, I attempted to ad- drefs her heart as to the conduct which ihe ought to adopt. In trembling ex~ peäation I awaited fome anfwer to my letters. Days, weeks paffed on> and not any arrived. At length ï heard the * perfons
ii8
perfons to whom they were addreíľed had been abfent on an excurfion of pleafure, and had only new returned. I wrote again, fimply foliciting fome re* ply, ï had much recovered the ilrength of my mind, but a dreadful oppreflion of fpirits ilill continued. To divert mv anxiety for letters 1 wandered toward the well-remembered avenue. I feated myfelf upon the bank. Suddenly I heard a footfìep. In a moment Lindoif flood before me. The furprife nearly over¬ powered mej fcarcely could I retain my fenfes. 4< Powers of mercy, is it poffible ľ' he exclaimed. " Can this be Cazire, or isit only her apparition?—What can have happened in my abfence/* he con¬ tinued.
mied, " to caufe fo dreadful an altera« tion ?" I faintly fmiled, and anfwered I had not been well. He burft into an exclamation of grief, atid throwing himfelf at my feet, he hid his face in my lap. I confefs I was rejoiced to fee him — it gave me an opening of hope ; and if Lindorf was ftill free, î determined to be influenced in my conduci by*the an» fwers I might receive from my father and the Rofendorf. " Oh, Cazire V' he faid, " had you but
I20
but returned the ardency of my love, this would never have happened !" " I am not worthy of your regret/· faid I. u Worn down with ficknefsand misfortune, I ftiould only give to your hours the fombre hue which peivades my own.* 8 *' Not wot thy my regreţi" he pat- iionately replied ; " Oh, Cazire, would you even now confent, with rapture would í hail the aufpicious moment, watch in tender anxiety over the renewal of your health, fit by your fide and charm away the fadnefs of your re¬ flexions/'
How
121 How delightful to my ears feemed the alien voice of kindnefs ! How, at this moment, I almoil worfhipped Lin¬ dorf! How eagerly did ï lillen to his fweet and foothing language ! " Lindorf," I faid, ** on the import of a letter refis my fate. ï can fay no more upon the fubjeci at prefent.— Tell me, how came you here ?" '* Late lafl night I arrived/' replied he. *' Fi i bourg liad written mc a preff¬ ing invitation to pai\ a few weeks with him: í obtained permiffion from my father, fcarcely daring to hope Cazire was ilill an inlubitant of Staub." vol, u, t . « And
Λ /r M
'* And your ílay- —/' faid í — " Shall be determined by you," he rejoined. ** î expected you would have been married, Lindorf/* faid I. " How fares the daughter ofthe Ruffian noble¬ man ?'' €l Welk I believe/' he anfwered care- leWy. (i How anxiously, Cazire, did î watch, this morning, for уош en¬ trance into the gaïdcn! I heard yon were lUHhcie, and wandered out purely in the hope of meeting you. Shall I ootfee you again ?" *- To*mortow % Lindoif." <* One
1*з u One word more—Did you ever, in my abfence, think of me ?" " To morrow I will anfwer your quef- uon. The dews are falling, I dare not venture longer. Adieu !" And I returned home, where I found the following letters :
Fiom my Fûtiı er. ťí You appear to me to be a difcon¬ tented and repining being, continually dcliring clung?, and mifcrable in ihe bofom of yoni family. Tiî) ï perceive fome alteration in your fentiments I cafi only iay \ou muil ¿ruß ίο itme for infla* β 2 encing,
124 encing, as you wifh 3 my conduci toward you* Adieu. ä( Arieni."
From the Rofendorf rl Young woman, I am furprifed at your unaccountable audacity, and de¬ fire I may hear no more from a pei fon οι your defcription. I believe you reit your preemption upon having once been a kind of inmate in the family, The iecolle8ion of this brings along with it fufficient to warn me how again / admit fuch a viper near rny bofom. Any fur- ïher remarks you may think it nccef- fdiy to add will be configned to eternal oblivion,
125 oblivion, or remembered only to your forrow. " Rosen dorf."
Was not this enough to turn one*s blood to gall, to für one to a pitch of defperation, and bid one confider virtue as a farce, when vice like this could tri¬ umph ? How did I preferve my rea¬ fon? A gufh of tears at once relieved my heart, and faved me from a dan* gerous relapfe. During the night I formed and re¬ jected a thoufand plans. My mind was in a fcvet. I feit it impoflîble to con· tinue thus, and almoft deteimined upon G 3 flying
12Ô flying with Lindoif. 1 felt 1 mould caufe no regret in the bofom of my family. What could my préfence avail them, a piey as í was to habitual gloom ? Morning arrived, but I was fnil unfcttlcd. I arofe. Lindorf was ;he firii perfon ï beheld-—he was in the garden, and 1 defcended to him, He perceived, at once, the agitation of my foul. How dulcet to my ears founded his conciliating voice ! * f Cazire,** he tenderly exclaimed, u druggie no longer with the feverity of fate. Why, in tbe bloom of youth t would you voluntarily become a martyr to defpaii Ì Let us depart together : you fhall forget your lorrows iu my arms ; content and peace ihali viht yuur benighted
127 benighted bofom. ît is now near two years fmce laß I fupplicatcd you : mifery tben had taken up her painful refidence in your heart : you were the mournful piÖure of pining forrow—but ßill you refufed. No change has fince occurred for the better : ßill you mourn in gloomy ftclufion, Defpair has ravaged more openly its vici i m —you are the monu¬ ment of hopelefs woe. What can you have in view by a continuance in this ftate of penance? Believe me you are doomed to unavailing regret. Stay, then, no more, to be the fport of fortune ι fly with me, and defy inftead of yielding to its frowns. 1 * "Lindorf, how could I be affured of the continuance of your affection ľ* g 4 " Doubt
S28 t£ Doubt it not, Gazile/ 1 hetcphedj Jí has it not ftood the teft of time, fcarcely fupported on thefieeblt β reed of hope ? Why then, when crowned with fruition, and thereby doubly cemented, ihould you doubt its continuance ?" lie law my conflicting emotions, and proceeded : " Befide, Cazire, you have a power¬ ful intereft in my heart, from the know¬ ledge i have of your misfortune. To refcuc you from them, by throwing you on mvfelf for protean, gives you an indelible claim on .лу honour* I filali idolize you from a thoufand dear and indefcribable fugge fiions. Say only at once, frank and ingenuous as you aie, will
129 will you be mine? Truft, then, to your own chaims, and the unequivocal * proofs of attachment I have already given, for an union lafting as it will be delightful. 1 ' I paufed upon the words of Lindorf —I looked i ι his animated countenance as he thus pleaded the ardency of his paffion. Methought no duplicity could dwell within that bofom. His voice, clear and melodious, fpoke in the ac¬ cents of fincerity and love. ** Lindoif, I will be thine,'' I mentally ejaculated. í gazed on him with a fmile ; the im¬ pilile of my heart was fixed; it had given the deciûve h,.e to my actions. I felt 1 fhould not change. g 5 Lindorf
130 Lindorf decyphered his happinefs in my eyes. " Cazire/* he exclaimed, " you con¬ fent. When I forget this noble proof of your affe8ion may heaven forget me /'* u May it deal hy you/' ï replied, ţf according to your merits !" " As I ай toward you/' he fervently added, " may Heaven blefs or fink me го perdition !** " Lindorf, no more of this : let me retire» în the evening we (hall meet again.'*
"To
13* u To fix" he rapturoufly replied, *' the hour when we meet to part no more. Adieu, my Cazire! I go to prepare for our depa t ture/'
G 6
*з*
CHAR VII. THE DESPAIRING LEAP. BY duik I had arranged every thing. I hefitated no longer. The impul fe \shich had actuated my determation would have led. me undaunted through feenes of deílruaion. It was irrevo¬ cable as my fate. I left letters on my table, addreffed to my refpeciive pa¬ rents, and one to the Rofendorf«
In
«33 in my mother's I bade her a foieiim farewell, conjuring her not to lament a daughter whofe wretchednefs allowed her no longer to remain with her. I lamented, with unsigned fympaihy, the misfortune of her fate, and concluded by recommending her to the protection of Heaven. To my father I wrote thus : H Unable longer to endure a cru-.d exile from your heart and prcfence, un¬ able longer to view with calm, nnahered eye the ufurpation of w retches who alone enjoy your fociety, I leap, defpairing, into the arms of fortune, and traft to chance for happinefs. Henceforth, whatever may become of rne, let me leave
134 leave my father the parting affurance that from the bottom of mv foul í e&~ cúlpate him as she voluntary caufe of the misfortunes í have endured, in the fuf¬ ferings for which I ilill may be referved. Let me, for hereafter it may prove his confolation, fwcar to him, that though alienated from his bread, left guardlefs to the ftorms of fate, I have never ceafed to love him ; and that ï view as fatality alone the uníortunaie aii that has con fi gned for ever to defpair his fad and hopelefs family. Duty com¬ mands this acknowledgment from my pen. When î am far away, and the dclufions of his prefent life fhall have vaniihed like a dream, he may reflect with pity i truå, not with remorfe, upon
*35 upon a daughter who fincerely loved him. u Cazire.' 3
I then addreffed the Rofendorf. «» For you, miferabie and unfortunate woman, I view }ou no longer with anger. Your depravity cxcitts my pity. The evils you have caufed will diffeminate, in lengthened mifery, through every branch of the family you have ruined. Your immoveable cruelty confìgus to deftruction the once bell: hope of an idolizing father—finks to tne grave, in filent obfeurity, a lamenting, miferabie mother, and buries deep in i m pene-
13б impenetrable oblivion the virtues a;id the laleni s of a family, w! o h;ul ymt not curfed them, {till migut have been happy. "C. A."
Defccndmg into the garden, 1 took u laft farewell of every favourite fhrub. What indefcribable charm is it that ren¬ ders interefting the moil infigniiicant objecb, when viewed for the laft time? I could not gaze on the minuteft trifles without fenfatîons of the moft poignant regret, f approached my flower pots, and watered them for the laft time ; I removed them to fituations more con¬ genial for their growth, and pleafed my¬ felf with thinking how long they might ilourifh
*37 ílüuriíh there after my departure. Aß I dffplaced one, í faw beneath it a let¬ ter. It was long fmce 1 had heard from my unknown corre fpoudcnt, and I feized it with avidity ; I was on the point of opening it, when Lindorf in¬ terrupted me with his p re fence, and I placed it in my bofom. " All is arranged, my angel/* he faid ; u I now wait nothing but your pleafure to depart.'* He then proceeded to inform me that at midnight he would have a chaife in the avenue. He propofed our palling immediately into Italy, " where,*' faid he, u you will be fecure from the re« fearcheç of your family. I have a filter there,
138 there, who will receive us with plea- fure; to her you muft be my wije 9 be- caufe it is neceflary, in appearance, to yield to fyflematic regulations* Her hufband is my friend, and we fhall pafs our hours in the refinement of focial in- tercourfe and delightful ferenky. My Cazire will be the idol of all, and gra¬ dually become animated herfelf by the happinefs fhe will diffufe around.'* " But, Lindorf,* 1 faid I, u to deceive your filler, will that be generous ?** * f Ceafc your fcruples, my angel/' he replied ; " you do not deceive her to injury, neither are you in the commif- fion of a crime; you yield purely to the prejudices of her education, bccaufe you
*39 you condcfcend to fuppofe their in¬ fringement might give her pain. Still you are at liberty to purfue, in reality* the independence of your own princi¬ ples/' There was no combating the fpecious eloquence of Lindorf. I refolved not to embitter my compliance by dwelling too much upon punctilio, and remained filent. Anxious, however, to return to my family, and, as it was for the lajt time, —ob, the magic of that found !—enjoy as much as poflible of their fociety, I bade Lindorf adieu, promifing to be in the avenue half an hour after midnight. We
Ho We then feparated, and I entered the houfe. With what mixed fenfatîons did I liilcn, while converting with my un- fufpeÖing mother, to every hour told, folemniy, methought, by the warning clock ! Never had my family appeared fo interefting. I hung on every word they uttered ; and when at lafl ve rofe to retire for the night, I fcarcely pof¬ fe (Ted fortitude to falute them round, while a painful, agonizing fenfation rofe from my heart as 1 remembered it was for the laß time. With precipitation í clofed my door, and buril into a flood of tears. I fat there muimg and weep¬ ing, till at íait the houfe became hulhed. Sleep had fprcad its downy wing over the
Ч 1 the unconfeious inmates. The clock told twelve—but half an houi longer. My heart heat with increafed rapidi; y.— It paffed.—Softly I unclolcd my cham¬ ber door, and defcended the ftairs. I palfed my mother's room, and paufed to gaze on it with a figh. I gave her an alien's bleffing, and wondered if after mv departure rnppinefe would rc v i fi t my deferted family. I gained th* ilreet door. Λ fmill bundie hang on my arm. I placed it on the ground, while (lowly, and with enervate lingers, I cí- fáycá to remove thv 1 bolt. At length I fucceeded—then í turned the lock > opened the door, and heard it, with difmay, creak loud upon its hincas. I liftened in breathlefs expectation.—The noife had not been heard.—1 took my bundle
14« bundle tremblingly from the ground, ileppcd for the laß time over the pa- reii'al threfliold«, and drew the door afici me.——Now I reached the garden gate.—I was outfide of the houfe, and ventured to breathe.—I turned, and viewed, one by one, the windows of each frparate apartment,—The moon¬ beams fiept peaceably upon them. They made me vifible to myfelf, and fearfully I fhiunk back left others fliould per¬ cer· e me likewife. A few flops pail the houie 1 looked back upon it once mor». Approach¬ ing, α length, the avenue, ere yet it was hidfoi cvcrfiom my view, I gazed for the lait time, fighed delpondently, and in a moment after was in the arms of Lindo) f.
*43 Lindorf. Ile lifted me into the car¬ riage : it rolled off with rapidity, and I bade adieu forever to the feenes of my youth.
44
CHAP. VIII. MAH. BEHOLD now the fcene changed. F.re Ion« I had bcconc the inmate of a о difi anı home— ι abituateci to new fociét) —the companion of Lindorf—and ap¬ pai ently the pride of his exiftence— fhaìl I confefs that, when the images of my weeping family ceafed to pafs before imagination's e)c, fomething like peace beamed its lucid ray into my bo¬ fom ?
45 fom ? The fifler of Lindorf was pofľeft of vivacity that could not fail ofinfpiring others wiih fome portion of her anima¬ tion—ihe appeared the idol of her huf¬ band—he feemed the bofom friend of Lindorf; thus, in apparent harmony, were aH united : even 1 prefumed to hope that ferenity might gild for a lengthened period my days. It was one morning that a rummaging among fome papers, I difcovered the long-forgotrcn leiter I had found be¬ neath tbe flower pots on the evening of my departure with Lindorf; till this moment it had entirely efcaped my re¬ collection, owing to the confufion of my ideas when I had fit íl perceived it. í vol. π. u opened
H6 opened it now with trembling -hafle:. it ran thus: *' Lindorf is married ! Beware howyou accompany him—he is artful, variable, and inconftant—a villain at heart, devoid of principle, made up of froth jaud infen- fibility. Heaven grant you may receive this early enough to preferve you from definition. "Ariel." The paper fell from my nervelefs hands, and I funk upon the neareft chair. Great heaven, what horrors opened to my view; fhort-fighted wretch! already hadft thou dared to hope a ceffatio» from
»47 from mifery, and behold thy fairy vifi - pns are blighted in their earlieft birth. Lindorf married 1 —could it be poflible ? perhaps my .unknown advifer might be mifinformed, and yet the guardian who watched fo anxioufly oven my conduft^ whp had fooften warned me of deftruc- tio.n, who; even now, with fpeed divine, had fought to outflep the malice of my fate, would he attempt to deceive me ?— what interefl could it anfwer to render me wretched, yet reap no feeming bene¬ fit from the conviflion?—why remain concealed if fuch alone were the motive ? and yet could it indeed be that Lindorf had.fo cruelly deluded me ? Should I openly tax him with imputed guilt, or mould I fcrutinize his condu8, and watch for myfelf? alas! on what could
H 2
re -
i 4 8 1 re foi ve, miferabie being that I wai, to hare deb)ed till now the perufe! ofa bttcr :lwt txnght have faved me from a ^ ei¿ht #f ii remediable wee. Fearfully I replaced ii in my drawer, and dared not hazard mentioning to Undort its htël contents, and ftifled in m) bofom the agonizing doubts Σ en¬ dured, again, at leifure hout ς, to be miferabie, I remai ked with fufpicious c^re the con Jud of thoie around me; i could percc:\e nothing on which to ground the L'ulh of the information, and fince I duift not attempt to afcertain it hy the only poffible means, applying to Liiidotf, to refute or confirm it, I deter¬ mined to conceal my fears for the pre¬ fent, and partake, at leaft in appearance, of
149 of the reigning chccrfulnefs ; £1 ill cor¬ roding doubt deitroyed my peace, and gazing ρ jrhaps through its fickle medium, 1 imagined Lindoif became lefs affcÖton- aie, and Olivia lefs chafle, lefs refined than formetly in her manners : a thou¬ fand times í refolved at leaft on hinting to lindorf my fufpicions, but I knew not bow ; the words died on my lips as often as I attempted to fpeak upon the fatal fubječh Alas, how/fw the hours of pleafure that have diilantly variegated ^the fable hue of my exiftence i neany ali has been gloomy and black, and forro* the lead¬ ing feature in the picture· Some months rolled on in a ftate of n 3 dclufi\e
15° delufive tranquillity ; I buried iin ïïlence the defporidence of my foul, and/believ¬ ing [ was doomed to perpetual misfor¬ tune, fcarcely poíTeft tbe defiťe of ftrug¬ gling againft it; already I anticipated a gloomy train of approaching evils ; I beheld the prefent feenes flowly receding and giving place to others ofa gloomier caft ; again I fancied myfelf reduced to defpair; 'and, ever prone to look forward on the darkeft fide, ftood, as I thought prepared to encounter anew the rüthlefs hand of forrow. Leaving my chamber one morning with an unufual depreffion of fpirib, I defcended to the parlour j Olivia was already there, but unaccompanied by Lindorf or her huíband- I inquired con-
concerning them, fuppofing they might have ftrolled out before breakfaft, though this was a circumftance by no means common, <f I am glad you are come/* faid Oli- via, with á haughty fmile ; ' f I would not difturb you with unwelcome tidings, Cazire; but Lindorf and his friend are gone, 1 imagine for ever.** " Gone !" I exclaimed in a terrified accent, " what mean you, Olivia ?** " I mean/' anfvered (he, " that they are gone in fearch of new attachments I fuppofe; we have detained them longer already than I had believed poffible/'
h 4 u You
î 5 s m You fpeak to me in enigmas»** İ replied; г * tell ше. for God's fake, what you would infti.*' fi Did you examine your table ?** Ыа Olivia carcîefbly ; ε< perhaps )ou inight find fomething there would be a ckar explanation of what you cannot at prefent comprehend." î made an effort to rife, but was inca¬ pable. Oľ*via left the room, and pre¬ fently returned with a letter in her hand—it was addreíľed to me, and ran thus : ** When I told you T hved, I told you ¿ruth; therefore you will not hefitate to bjlievc me when í fay I love no longer. To
To remain with Cazire, and be ind ÖV r* ent to ber, would have been an infult to her charrm ; when firft î departed from Staub î paffîonately admired you ; I arrived at my father's, and bereid "here the wife he had allotted me; druck with the beauty oľ her perfon, and inca¬ pable of otherwďe obtaining her, î mar¬ ried, and facriíiced for a while my liberty to gratify my inclinations« Fribourg folicited me to pay hina v ißt ; you again metipy view, again for you my adoration revived; I found you no longer znexora- bkt and bore you triumphant from your home. I have been for long a volun¬ tary flave in your bewitching fetters ; but ever on the wing for new delights, ever, as I formerly told you, in fearch of variegated pleafure, í mouat again h 5 her
*54 her wing of dazzling hues, and foar лп rjueíl of tranfports new and* exquifite as thofe I once enjoyed with yourfelf. u LlNDOáF." . Words are inadequate to exprefs the keennefs of my fenfatîons. Lindorf had abandoned me; and, devoid of friends, deyoid of every refource, what would overwhelm me next? Ina diflraÛîon of thought I turned toward Olivia ; lhe re¬ garded me with a fmile, and approaching me, took my hand. " Be comforted, Cazire/* ihe*:faid,* ·' I am precifely in the fame predicament« aa yourfelf; I too am deferted, bav fcorn to
45 to repine at the inconftancy of man; let us remain together, we are not yet fo miférable as at firft you may imagrne.'' " But, Olivia/' faid I, " are you not the Jifier of Lindorf, the wife of Jiis friend ?. ao you then compare your griefs to mine ?" Olivia buril into a laughs <* Peace, Cazire," íhe exclaimed ; í 1 I am.related to neither 'm the manner you defcribe ; I was unwilling even for a.moment to countenance tbe deception wbich-was pra£lifed ; but I ftood pre- cifely with the friend of Lindorf as you with Агт; neither of us were married, nøither\cah reproach' thoöther y we may h б both
«se both Ьесодае friends, an4 mutually de¬ fpife the runaways.** I clafped my hands in agony too great for utterance ; but this was only the fair beginoing of my woes; ere long the dreadful conviclion a (failed me, that î bad become a mother—that i ha4 in¬ volved in the Ыаск catalogue of my fate another innocent aad yet unconfeious being; compared tothis latter misfortune, alî others feemed trivial, I had become anfwerable in røy own eftimation for the future welfare or mifery ofa wretch that owed its exiftence to me—I had become anfwerable for its vices and its errors, tbe conféquences alas! of mine. Olivia, whofe kindnefs had appeared to
*57 to increafe with my diftrefs, was my only hope and confolation ; but even Olivia was not independent, and I blufhed in my own mind when I refteBed I might be helping to confurne her little aîL İ mentioned my fcrupies to her tbe firft opportunity ; but fhe, on the contrary, affured me fhe was rich, and that while I chofe to remain with her, I fhould be welcome to fhare ш11 fhe poffe Fed. One evening as î fat penfively alone, refle&ing on the cruel apo (lacy of Lin¬ dorf, I involuntarily took my pen, and fketcbed the following:
THE
THE SEDUCER. See'it thou yon îiîy in its blooming pride, Its fţîotîeis bofora opening to the 'view, Surcharg'd with gems of bright and fragrant dew, With envy vîew'd by every flower befide ? 'Tis the fair idol of the gardeners toil, Kais'd by his hand., the favorite ofthe vale, KifsM by the fun and courted by the gale, Confefs'd the glory of the dazzling foil. Too happy fweet-—for now the pirate hand Longs ;u puriuin thee from thy genial bed, Prefers thou íhoukľft be his; and fiiortly dead, Then beauteous bloom amid thy fpotlefs band.
Amo-
*Ő9 A moment fnaps thy haîcyoa life in twain, Some feMöi wight, devoid of foul, decrees That thou muft die, his ihallow mind to pleafe, And then deípoiľd, be caft abroad again. Caft haply on the fpot, where lately too ìfì beauty's pride thou little dreamt thy fate, Dcfpis'd by thofe who envied thee fo late, And cruilfd by feet that once were ftopp'd to view. The gard'ner, whom thy charms were wont to greet, Miffing thy beauty from the fragrant bower, Bellows his care upon a gaudier flower, And knows thee not, distigur'd at his feet. So the bright veilal 'mid the circle <ray Awhile is gaz'd at, envied, and admiťd ; Then by the fell ddlroyer man deftr'd^ Obtain'd y —and then, unpitied, caft away.
Now
i6o
Now fickkmg vtew'4 bf wretcfats -v^îgaı: h®tn 9 Sïî«r*4 M or pitied % the mock wfiiťd; Fity 1 —^gradKDg to the feeling mind, And bitterer than ef ignorance the fcorn, Вефк'а, (it&oaorM, driven føth аюпе, "What Й<ше u&conicıouâ reni ber patient bcsâ^ Or fod « -genial уУШ tbat Ыегй a bed W^re happy tisnoteoce otice h^ bxs Umm ? Or, tøkmng to tbe next feáfficera Ы«, Н^Ьаш awfeîle i^rgîooœy feteáefey'd? îzı vain—it íoHows Икс a vtngcfui íbade, Âsd tho* atdiftaact— hope not it ftali feil Glitter awhile the pageant of the Ыт, Bright as the gem which giiftcos oe th« tbam, Mom flîort-liv*d evea thaath« fleeting raoíR, Юшак in the ray that fendi ite Ы\ЪМв power.
ляьа
ιβι
Äffet! tbe mirth thy languid ilmî difUamSj Laughjwhiìe falié pleafures tighten from thin« tye, The traafitory fmile Øiall haile to åle. But melancholy ftill her place maintains. Prophetic ofthe fate that» imrs'd in gioom, Thioe head devoted häftena to awisfemib— Adds yet a vi£im to tbe crimes of mm» And drives thtcthrough dcilrudion to tbe tomb. Scarcely bad I concluded the poetic metaphor шу fancy had fugge ft ed when I was fuddenly roufed by the appear- anceof Olivia, who entered, accompanied by a gentleman ; ihe introduced him to me as Count Loretti, and he feated himfelf befide us : he feemed to eye me with peculiar complacency; and after remaining a fliort time, took his leave.
The
ι вя,
The following evening he came again : his vifits continued fome time, but he was difgufting in his perfon and manners, and I feldom paid him any attention. One night that he had retired, rather later than ufual, Olivia, who had been a fíiort time in converfation with him, entered with 1 looks of uncommon vi¬ vacity. ** Cazire/* fhe exclaimed, feating herfelf befide me, and taking my hand^ €t Count Loretti paffîonately admire» you ; I partially revealed to him the * embarraiiments of your fituation, and he generoufly offers to become your friend, and extricate you at once from your difficulties/* « Alas!
1бз *' Alas, Olivia,** I returned, " iu what mariner can he affift me; the idea of accepting pecuniary obligations from aman is a fomething fo humiliating, that I had rather labour for a fubfiftence,** " Render the obligation mutual thea," íhe rejoined gaily. w How, Olivia, what mean you ?" *' This affeBation of fimplicity is highly prepoílerous,** íhe replied ι " when I fay that Count Loretti will become your friend, it neceifarily fol¬ lows that he cxpcčh your fociety as his reward." At once tbc infamous infinuation of Olivia.
ч Olivia became revealed ; I ftarted from rny chair in horror, and endeavoured to rufh paft her. ťS Stay, Cazire," fhe exclaimed, for¬ cibly detaining me, «· my intentions were in your favor ¡ I——" <e Ceafe, wretch/* I cried, interrupt¬ ing her % « do you prefume to barter me ?—to make a traffic of my miferies to anfwer your own vile ends ? cruel and perfidious woman! is this your friendfhip ?" t€ It is friendfhip," fhe returned with a bitter fmile, if which fhall be extended no longer to the unworthy; fmce you refufe
i6 5 refufe to enter into my plans—fince my future conduci muft appear obnoxious to the refined delicacy of your ideas, I fhall no farther requeft you to remain an inmate of m ν houfe." φ- u Abandoned woman, İ fcorn to fo¬ licit you, and fhall depart with pleafure from this abode of infamy, happy to have efcaped the threatened danger of your machinations.** tf Depart and welcome/' returned Olivia ; " but remember, your previous condefcenfion in itaying fo long has incurred a debt which you may find it difficult perhaps to difcharge."
" No,"
ιββ " ^ο," I replied indignantly, " 1 have ftill a fraall fum untouched in my drawer ; it may probably anfwer the extent of your demand ; take it, and let me haften my départit re.** I left the room for my purfe, and returned with it in my hand; the mer- cilefsOlivia named her demand-—enough remained to anfwer it, and I con- figned the wretched overplus to my pocket. On the fame night í left her houfe j and a miférable lodging, the firft I could find, flickered my devoted head till morning.
" Lindorf,
167 s< Lindorf, accompliihed traitor, this is thy work," I mentaily ejaculated, as I confidered the horrors of my fituation·
!
j 68
С11ЛР. VL h AD ЕХРЕГч!£хС£. WHEN the firii agitation of mv fpirits, occahoned by the fuddennefs of late events, had in fomc meafure fub¬ fided; I reflected with a calm defpair, an hopelefs réfignation upon the evils which furrounded mc; what plans to purfue, or how, devoid of both friends and money, vifibly too on the near ap¬ proach
i6g proach of becoming a mother, to pro¬ cure a fubfiftence I knew not. I thought over the various heroines ï had read of, and how, when caft on the pitilefs world, drawing, mufic, or embroidery had for long fupported them —how their ready inventions continually fupplied them with new refources ; and fhrunk confounded when experience revealed to me, in its true colours, the miferies attendant on an expofed abandoned female. Kven as com¬ panion to fome female of faihion— even as affiliant in fome feminary of education—or fervitude itfelf, were I enabled to purfue it, were equally precluded from my endeavours, by the vol, it. ι peculiar
ïyo peculiar evident wretchednefs oí my fituation. How is it that in real evils the mind is шоге firm and collected than beneath imaginary ones ? î preferved my reafon* amid the horrors which encompaffied me, and, cured for ever ofthe idea of fuieide, almoft contemplated them with a ftoic fmile: €f for that,'' faid Í, " which is the termination of all human blifs, is likewife the termination of all human woe— Death ! Nature cannot bear beyond its ftrength,—Death then, fooner or later, will put a period to all earthly forrows— Death is no evil to the unfortunate- viewed with horror by the favorites of fot tune, it comes moft welcome to the wretched." Mv
17* My griefs gave an energy to my ideas s real energy can never become dormant but in the chilling froft of age—not while the glowing enthuiiaftic blood of youth meanders in the leaping veins— while İt circulates in fportive paffions round the wildly throbbing heart ; no» that which may deprefs, even beyond the wifli of emancipation, a weak mind* but kindles anew the never-dying fparfes of native energy : ¿t revives after death —it re fue ilutes even in the grave—it tranfinigraus into all that is lively, all that is jocund in the fphere of natúré¬ it lives in the fparkling chorus of a fummer'sdav, in the tranfporting influ¬ ence of a celcilial night. Oh, never can genuine energy bicorne annihilate, ι % or
172
or wholly extinči; the dignity of the foul. it infpired my pen; and under the preffure of accumulated woe, I wrote the poem of the Exile, which you, my fon, have fo often afked permiffion to perufe, little imagining your mother was its unfortunate author« I fhall infert it for you here, becaufe at this period of my melancholy life it was compofed, and will imprefs your mind more ftrongly with the wretchednefs of my fituation.
TBE
173
THE EXILE. WIUTTEN Qri THE SEA SyOKE, Sweep on, ye winds, congenial billows roar, Аь loll I wander on your dubious ihorc, in lad review each fhuddYing vifion fee Га Гь ilow along> and point their looks at me 5 Sec pale Experience, with her fadden'd eye, Gaze o'er the ilmdes, and hear her hollow figh Bleia the relentlef» gloom that weighs the air, And hail it—fit affocate of Defpair j Dark as my fate around the profpect Iow'rs, While robed in fadnefs pals my penfive hours ; The paft a dieani, the future wrapt in iliade, In vain to pierce my trembling foul eflay'd j To dim perfpeftive future lhadows fly, And veil'd in mi ft the (training gaze defy, While fliapes uncouth delufive cheat the eye; In wild conjeéturc Гшкъ my boding heart, As hid ш ambuili Fate fuipends its dart.
i 3
ľ en
174 E'en on life's threfiiold when I firft dicw bieath, A deadly blaft ihrunk alî my hopes with death ; I)aik rofe the morn—from Heaven's awful gate The clouds wept down as tho' they mourn'd my fate ¡ Nor was the eve in one bright iay attir'd, But fad and dark the weeping day jetit'd. Prophetic day^ too well haft thou expreft Th' unvaried woe which has my life oppreft j The mom has paît, the day ftill waftes in gloom, Chill even comes, and night ihall bc the tomb. Welcome, iwset fpot ! ï fondly look to thee As wearied mariners a port from iea j Thou bid'ft alone the fliackl d mtnd be fre«— Thou biďft Defpair avaunt the gates of Death, Ånd fmiľft on evils which attend the breath j No tyrant there can free-horn minds enilave, For human pow'r is pow'ilefs o'er the gTavc, Ah ! what availe it then the chanre that fped, Whether'twas Virtue, Hope, or Fancy led The dazzling vifions of the wand'i ng head— Whether the dupe of Hope—the Ihue of 1л\р— Or wihUnthufuit, only iUU d to ro*t—- \Vheth«4
175 Whether the child of Error, or of foite— » What now avails the folly of debate ? And now what next—great God ! I trail in thee— Teach me to bear whatever thy decree } Let me not fink ignobly 'neath the fcorn Of narrow fouls, or wretches vulgar born, Ľut from their pity doubly fpare my mind, Cheap humbling pity of the unrefm'd ; Let me from added evil ilill arife Like the proud flume afpiring to the ikies, Or freedom ftruggling with an hoft of foes, That more elaftic from орргеШоп grows · } Oh í ht me not, whate'er may be my doom. Involve another in its fatal gloom ; Let none reproach me as the guilty cauíe That iur'd them firit from virtue's facred laws ; Let none accufe me with the harrowing name Of bafe deftroyer of their peace or fame. Preferve my fuffrmg foul from guilt like this ; Compared to this all other woe is blifs.
» 4
Now
tj6 Now fummer fades upon the nemer yeai, That conquering comes with afpe¿l fad and drear j Haile not, mild fummer - } lovely oheerer, flay, With genial beams ftill gild my ling'ring day; Tis fuch as me, who mark with faddened eye ín fad procefliort all thy beauties die, Who mark the fading of thy fmile ferene, 1)eípon Jent yielding to a gloomier fcene. Oh ! where, for tifa enervates mc with dread— Oh ! where İti winter iliall J lay my ht ad? No home, no ilîeîter in the expaníő die.ir j Ko friend, no family have I to cheer j A niggard fum in hopelefs ariguiih told, Speaks to a day how long my life I hold, ЛУЬеп tbis is gone—oh ! Heaven avert the deed—- ¿¡.arvatbn walks, or fuicble bids me bleed. „But e'er ťnat day, llulljiot fweet Hope be mine, Out-rtcpdrltruction with а fj>eed divine ? Shall I not lejed the fatal fteei, Ί And gratitude for God-like mrrcj led ¡
Η cav*·
177 Heave not, vain fighs—weak tears, no longer flow* For happinefs and I ne'er meel below : Hope flies alarm'd from forrows fuch as mine, And back recoils the pow'rlefs hand of Time ; 'Tis Death alone who ftalks with pride elate—. The king of time—the conqueror of fate. Smiles on his victim, ftruggling in the gloom, And bears him hopelefs to the yawning tomb. And now farewell for ever, fi iend and ioc. Indifferent to love or hate, I go : Farewell to man, deftroyer of my fame, Forgot for ever be my injured name ; 'Twas your unkmdnefb dug my early grave- Pi one to deftroy, with every power to lave. In peace for ever ileep my filent woes^— May your hard hearts enjoy a like repofe ' No moro tiie claims ol juftice fliall appear To ftart your fouls, 01 roufeyour cowaid itai But the avenging wrongs that owe ye biith, Like İnjur'd fpirit* ilill fhall kare your miith , Still while you ileep in dreams your mmd ihali iui', And enes of vengeance dimly wake your foul. ι 5 Tin ικ
Thine offspring too, imown'd and wanďring aU, Muil íliare with keen diigrace their mother's fall ţ Unpitied, roaming in the world, ihall find No chance of life, but preying on maukind ; Then, defperately juft, their country's laws Doom an ignoble death, nor fcan the caufe ¡ Jnüice denies what mercy would require, One brd example fets the world on firej 'Tis for a nation's good—they muft expire. Oh ! fee, fond lover of thy vices, fee 'The fateful end of thofe deftroy'd by thee ; Tormenting thought, deftroy'd by thee, tc iay, Oh ! tempt no raore the blood befprinkl'd way ^ 3kform,and fwift thy mthlefs crimes deplore, licyonci the grave repentance is no more. Almighty ruler ,of ethereal Heaven, To whom no equal praife can e'er bc given·— Çh ' man, devoid of honor, but foi thee Still hadl breathM the life of natuie free ; Still
*79 Still tranquil as the dawn my hours had been Not fwift decaying in their earlieft green, Like the pure rofe, juft op'ning to the morn, Hides iri its heart the ííow, but cank'ring worm, Untimely falls in half its little day, And patient leaves its fecret foe to prey.
Want now began to ilare me in the face; it approached with haftening ftrides : and already in fancy I felt appalled its chill and meagre touch :~ At length I parted with the laft fo¬ litary inmate of my purfe—my trinkets followed ; and when no longer ought remained to fupport the cravings of -wretched exiftence, I configned myfelf, with unaltered réfignation, to the fate which feemed inevitably on the point ι 6 of
i8o
of overtaking me— a miférable death, accelerated literally by famine. 1 fat penfively by a few decayed embers: my mind, like an elaftic fp ring, appeared to rife with renovated vigor from oppreffion ; the nearer deftruction feemed to hover, the more my fpirit towered. I difdained to be humbled hy the infignificant preffure of mortal ills, and awaited with philofophie calm¬ nefs the mandate for death. Ferhaps for a moment the idea of fuicide might flaih acrofs my mind, divefted of its fancied horrors î " And wherefore, 1 ' faid I, " labouring under ficknefs, po¬ verty, and want, ihould I prematurely aim at emancipation ? A little patience, and either of thefe miferies fhall give the deftred
i8i defired end; endure them boldly— fhrink not. Are my fufferings the e ft e ci s of others' crimes ?—no matter : Pati¬ ence in misfortune may entitle mc here¬ after to that my virtues might have failed to claim. Are they the confé¬ quences of my own folly or errors?—It is juft I ihould be miférable —my woes may obliterate from its fateful tablet the anger of Heaven/' I retired to bed ; a little water alone had paífed rny lips during the day, but yet I ílcp t in peace; and the next morn¬ ing the gari ih funbeams darted into my chamber, as though by their fplcndor they would mock my woes. ** Oh, lion-hearted independence," I fighed,
% Вг
I fighed, (C 4İ4 delightful to poffefs thee, but to gain thee is glorious/* I added.—«-* 4 Let me attempt thee then." Guided by the impul fe ofthe moment, I took from a drawer various compofi¬ tions, the produce of my leifure hours ι I went into the ftreet, and entering a bookfeller's fhop, offered them to hitn for perufal ; he looked on me with a fmile, and promifed to return an anfwer on the following morning. I returned home ţ a letter was lying on my table, and I underftood the mef- fenger who had brought it refufed to wait. ϊ opened it with trembling ea¬ gernefs—
i8 3 gerneis —gold fell from it on the floor— the words were thefe : " Notwithftanding you thought pros¬ per to quit my roof, and for a trifíing quarrel bury yourfelf from my know¬ ledge— I have ftill found means to trace you, and cannot view your fituation unmoved. If you deny me your friend- Ihip, I entreat you will at leaft accept the flight affiftance I am enabled to offer you. " Yours, truly, " OliviaDi Arno.'*
Poverty
i84 Poverty is one of thofe degrading evils from which we can fcarcely rife uncontaminated; it, in a manner, by its rough, unqualified oppreffion, takes from us the very power of free agency; its meagre form has not the option of refining temptation—for deftructİon is a tyrant too terrific to be braved ; its neceftitous hand ftrikes with trembling agony at the very root of intellectual grandeur, of proud and dignified for¬ bearance. The meflenger of Olivia had departed —perhaps I did not regret his abfence; had he remained I muit ——I could not have acted other.wlc— í ihould have returned the money ; but furely 1 might fendit to Olivia ; I was not com* pelled
i85 pelled to retain it. ťí But your infant, \ whifpered my heart. Nature filenced Pride, and I haftily difcharged the few debts I had contracted; thus putting it beyond my power to return it. On the following morning î applied to the bookfeller for his décifion· u Your manu feri pt may procure you fame, M faid he $ " but politics, meta« phy fies, or ,matters of theology, are more in the circumference of my bufi¬ nefs; but itili,'* he added, returning me the papers with the fame fmile he had the day before received them, t( they will undoubtedly procure you fame/* u Fame without emolument/' faid I mentaily,
l36
mentally, ť< is but a barren wreath, at leaft to tiie neceflìtous,'* and returned home, fomewhat depreifed by my ill fuccefs. Still however I tried various modes to procure a iubfiftence independent of the bounty of others. Oftentimes 1 believed mykU on the point of fucceeding, but obftacles continually intervened and marred my hopes § fome glanced with fupercilious eyes on my fituation ; others refufed, with affecìed kindnefs, to employ me ;— all judged harftily of my conduct and believed me culpable rather than unfor¬ tunate· With defpondcnt eye, one by one, I marked the gradual decay of all my hopes; and when at length the lafl fad
fad beam expired on the bofom of def¬ pair, again I fat penfívely in my fecluded room, aftd reflected on the folly of life : its varied delufions—its bubbles of fairy brightnefs— its youthful vifions — its dreams of enthuiiafm—its idle for¬ rows and fallacious hopes—all, all appeared to me as tbe paflng ihadow of a moment. Again İ fcorncd to yield, ъпа again poverty and its meagre traia emerged from their temporary retire¬ ment. Want, with its hollow cheeks and ftarting eyes, rofe gloomy before me, and ficktiefs a {failed me. In this ftate í received a letter from Olivia. After painting in energetic terms the miferies of my fituation, with which, fhe added, ihe was well acquaint¬ ed j
ιββ ed; fhe advifed me, as a friend, no longer to fight againft the preifure of neceifity. Count Loretti was ftill ready to fnatch me from the bofom of deilruc- iion> and flie with open arms to receive rne again beneath her roof. She con¬ cluded by informing rae, that my further refufal would entail on me nothing but defpair, and advifed* me to return her an immediate and propitious anfwer. Misfortune had not fo fardebafed my raind as to make me hefitate an inftant in rejecting, with the difdain it merited, the infamous propofai of Olivia. I re¬ plied in a manner which fhewed my deteftation of her principles, and ex¬ preffed my determination of never more con-
i 89 condefcending to anfwer upon the fub¬ jeci. A few days pafled on· I had ex¬ haufted every refource, and felt already the excruciating pangs of hunger; to thofe who are llrangers to the horrors of this fenfation, to defcribe it would be fruitlefs; patiently however I endured its painful gnawings—patiently I felt its pangs dart into every fibre of my heart; I threwr myfelf upon my wretched bed, and believed my end approaching. Once more at this crifis Olivia ad¬ dreffed me; ihe haughtily reprefented to me the conféquences of perfevering in my prefent conduci; — íhe almoft de¬ manded
igo manded my fubmiffion; and finiflied by informing me, that to trifle with her longer was to incur her deeped and moit implacable revenge. î fmiled as ï perufed the word revenge. What revenge could Olivia take on me ?— î was beyond Its power, for í was beyond t,hc reach of farther e\Hl ,· the utmoft ftrctch of her malice could difcover nothing that muft not he §n amendment of my prefent fituation. I returned her a verbal meffage, that ï was determined to die in the fenti- Bients I had already cxpreifud. By degrees the total enervation of шу body affected my mind; ï thought myfelf
19.Í myfelf tn a dream, and all around me began to wear the air of a deluíion— my fight became confufed—ohjecls feemed double—and when I raifed my thin hand to my head, fome other power than my own appeared to aciuate it. Surely the laíl ílage of hunger is a fenfation beyond conception dreadful. Even now I cannot call to mind the horrors I experienced, without an uni- veríaí ihudder of my frame. I endea¬ voured to rife, to fhakeofFthe numb- " nefs, as it were, which opprefled me— I tottered from the bed*-~the room fwam round me—a dinning noife, like the found of innumerable bells, rung in m y ears—1 believed myfelf falling from t a dizzying height—I rolled down an imaginary
1 9 2 Imaginary precipice—I fought to catch at fomething which might break my fall—I fancied I muft be dying------ and can remember no more.
END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
Printed by®, N.SHUm\ Bwmd-Stmtt 8eh.
