Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Confessions of the nun of St. Omer: a tale
' CONFESSIONS or THE NUN OF ST. OMER.
CHAP. I. THE FRISON. I KNOW not how long 1 continued in this ftate of infenfibility ; but when I opened my eyes, the firft object I be¬ held was a young woman, who, with a tearful countenance, was pouring down vol. пь в my
2
my throat a few drops of wine, I clofed them again* endcavoming to fli ut f ut the light ; for with returning reafon came the dreadful confcioufnefs of pro- craftinated exiftence. ft Do I ftill live, then ?" ejaculated I, i» an inward voice, "oram í an inha¬ bitant of the tomb ?" Again I opened my doubting eyes.— I began to recollect objecis : I felt my¬ feif ftill a being of the wretched, regard¬ lcfs world. " And who arc you, '* faid I foftly to the young woman who compaifionately gazed upon me, il thus kindly intereft- ing yourfelf in my behalf?" « I am
3 €i I am nobody,'' fhe returned, íC but a poor widow.'* "Nobody!" murmured I. " Did one half of the world but poiTcfs thy benevolence of foul, they would be as beings ofa fuperior order in the eilima- tion of the wretched." The young woman continued her at¬ tentions. She forced me to partake of that which was moit rcquifite—a' lit'Jc Yiouriíhment. She was indefatigable to reflore me to myfclf. She had refcued mc from the clofing j.uvs of death. " And bo.v (hall ever I make you amends," laid I, " for your kind.id's to a defer ted wretch ?" ϋ 2 ÍC Speak
4 * δ Speak not of it/' ihe replied. " î was in the adjoining room at the time you fell. The partitions are but flight. I had heard you rife from bed, and as you fell, ï thought you groaned. Ima¬ gining you muft ftand in need of affift¬ ance, I haftened round to your apart¬ ment, and beheld you infenfible upon the floor. '* u Yes,*' faid 1 mournfully, " you have preferved my life : but how ihall I now continue to preferve it my¬ feif?" " Of that you muft think hereafter, 1 ' íhe rejoined ; " at prefent endeavour to compofe your fpirits, and rely on my aififtance while you will deign to accept it.
b
it. 1 am, like you, an inhabitant oí this houfe: I have for long regarded you with no common intereil ; and if you permit, I will pafs the nighť in your chamber, to render you any fer- vice of which you may ftand in need." I thankfully accepted her offer. She attended me with friendly folicitude, and in a few days I was reftored to health. With health again returned my endeavours for a fubfiftence. ï propofed to Janetta, (as my widow was called,) that till fomething more eligible prefented itfelf, I fliould affili her at her own employment, which was in com- pofmg nets for the head of filk or other materials. Poor Janetta heard me with reluctance ; for without my degrading ß 3 myfeif
б myfeif with that, flie faid all flie poffeffed was at my difpofal. I became, however, íhortly an adept in the fimple art. X improved on it as far as it was poffible to be improved, and Janetta had more work than flie could compafs, ťí Happy the hour/' would flic often exclaim, * c that I entered your cham¬ ber ! Never does the peiformance of a duty go unrewarded/* It was one day that, fitting together, we were bufily employed at our work, Janetta calculating the profits of the en¬ fuing week, and I thoughtlefsly fm iji ng at her innocent exultations, fuddenly we were «oufed by a loud knocking at the door of the apartment. Ereit could be
7 be opened two men rufliedin, and rude¬ ly demanded if one Cazire Arieni was in the room. " Yes,'' faid Î, tremblingly, iC í am that perfon ; what may your bufinefs be with me ?" c< Our bufinefs, Sinora, is to demand the payment of this debt, if poffible; if not, you muft condefcend to follow us till you can difcharge it." Cf Good heaven !" I anfwered, fome- what re-afiured, " you are miitaken, friends ; 1 am indebted to no perfon whatever." " 'Tis you that are miitaken/' replied в 4 one
one of the men, with the infolence of petty authority ; " you are indebted to the Lady Olivia di Orno for the fum of twenty fequins,—-You flare, Sinora I No doubt you begin to recollect your¬ felf." <c I do, indeed," faid I, ** and the infamous caufe of this misfortune. But 'tis no matter," I added, " I am ready to accompany you." Poor Janetta, who during this fcene had felt alternate emotions of hope and fear, now with tears in her eyes be- fought the pity of the wretches before her. She was rudely ordered to ceafe, her lamentations treated with contempt, and unrefiftingly I found myfeif com¬ pelled
9 pelled to follow the men into a timo¬ nella * which waited at the door. Now again behold the fcene fuddenly changed, f became the gloomy inha¬ bitant of a prifon, and without the flighteft hope of emancipation. Olivia, the implacable Olivia, had not forgot¬ ten her cruel menace. I now perceived her imagined kindnefs had only been extended to place me in her power, that hereafter I might be compelled to yield to her propofai s of infamy, as my only re fource from the evils ihe could heap upon me.
в 5 The
io The agony of my mind rofe with the reflexion. There is fomething fo dread¬ ful, fo difpiriting, in being condemned to a feclufion from the better part of mankind, amid a herd of wretches, the refufe of civilized fociety. My forti¬ tude had fcarcely ever ftood a trial fo fevere. The agitation of my fpirits hourly incrcafed, and prematurely hur¬ ried Nature in her operations. Within the wails ofa prifon, you, my Lindorf, were bom ; within the walls of a prifon was ufhered into life the innocent vic¬ tim of its mother's errors. What, in thb hour of forrow, could have pre- icrved my exsHence but the ceafclek affiduities of my kind Janetta! With indefatigable goodnefs nie fui dû the d
11 fmoothed my wretched bed, ihe fuf- tained my feeble fpirits, ihe raifed my foul. You, my Lindorf, was her deareft care, and íhe redoubled her ef¬ forts to prolong your guiltlefs life. " For," faid íhe, " when thy mother ilrall arrive at happier days thou wilt be her greateft joy, as now thou art her care. Happies days, Sinora, muft |ar- rive. Let. not defpondence weigh you down ; the turn of all your forrows may be at hand." 4t And you, my poor Janetta, you are facrificing yourfelf for me. What will become of" vou if vou ccafe to work?" ** 1 am rich/' J «metta would repiy % s β " not
1Ä " not rich enough, indeed, to fave you from a prifon, but Sufficiently fo to alle¬ viate its horrors ; yet I have neither forgotten nor expended the addition you once made to my earnings. Before I vifit you in the morning, by rifing with the fun I can work feveral hours at my employment. When again I leave you for the nighr, I refume my labour, I work faiter than ever, and I retire to m bed more happy.*—When you are quite recovered, Si nora/* íhe would gaily add, on perceiving the tears which üartcd to my eyes, " you will again af- . fill me. Our little darling, here, (hall fit alternatei) in our arms while we work, and we thai! foon become richer than ever. 1 *
Thus
i3 Thus would this excellent being en¬ deavour to infpire me with hope ; thus would flie fît whole days immured with¬ in a prifon, you reclining on her knee, and fmile on me if I attempted to de- fpond. Two months had elapfed. Again I had begun to aflift Janetta as before^ and ihe fometimes carried out my Lin¬ dorf in her arms, to enjoy the purer air of liberty. You flourifhed, unappalled by furrounding gloom, unconfciouseven of its horrors ; and 1 felt that, although in a prifon, the energetic mind may tower above misfortunes, and at times become content.
ч
CHAP. IL FAIRY LANI). IT was one morning that, employed with Janetta at our work, the jailor nattily entered ; and forbearing, as ufual, to clofc the door after him, flood refpecifully on one fide, and told me I w as fice to pafs. '* What," exclaimed Janetta, ftart¬ ing
*5 ing eagerly from her feat, <c what is that you fay, friend?" The man repeated his words, at the fame time prefenting me a letter. I < opened it with anxious hafte, and read as follows : fC If you will condefcend to ftep into the carriage you will find waiting for you at the gate, you will fpcedily ar¬ rive ai home* The fcrvants are inform¬ ed you are their miiìrefs, and a perfon of diftinciion. They are likewife yours. Hereafter you may find revealed one who has been long your friend, "Ariel."
Scarcely
ιβ
Scarcely behVvmg rea 1 what I heard and rei.d, I ich my t mifciably grated prifon, and proceed·"^ t.o the gate.— The carnage awaitid as deicnbed; I entereJ u ; and jin^tt^, after throwing from her ihe net /he had been making, almo! 3 diflracied with joy followed with my'Lindorf. We wet e driven for feveral miles at an cafy rate. We entered a delightful village, and prefently the carriage flop¬ ped at the door of a finali villa, fimihed in a ftyle of refinement and elegance that at once flruck and captivated the eye. The door was opened, we alighted, snd entered the houfe» The infide correfponded
ι
corrcfponded with its external appear¬ ance. We were ufhered into a charm¬ ing apartment. Servants became bufied around us; and Janetta, calling herfelf upon an elegant fofa, while flie prefled my boy delighted in her arms, ff Did not I fay," ihe exclaimed, ** that happier days would arrive? Did I not fay it was impoffibie they íhould be far off ?—Yes, Sinora," ihe added, " look upon this fmiling boy ! Amid the luxury and fplendour which fur- rounds you he will be your chief de¬ light." For my part I believed myfeif in fairy land, I examined every thing around
iB around mc as though í expected to de¬ tect impofition, as though I imagined it would vani Oi from beneath my touch* I entered a bed-chamber. On the table lay a coftly affoitmcnt of toilet boxes. On the lid of one was written, ίζ For Cazire." i opened it, and beheld it full of gold. What could all this mean? Ariel feemed an Ariel indeed; he was apparent every where, yet no where vifible. He feemed a heavenly guard¬ ian, whofe happi nefs was my care, but not permitted to reveal himfelf; and yet the concluding words of his note had given me hope : he had faid, if Here¬ after you may find revealed one who has been long your friend."
How
*9 How anxioufly did I await the time when thefe words íhould be com¬ pleted ! Janetta, to whom I fhowed my piize, was too happy to be reafonablc ; flie laughed, danced, í ung, and indited we íhould immediately furnifh ourfdves with apparel befitting our ftation. She did due honour to the fplendor and comfort of every thing around us; and~ in three days we were as completely ha¬ bituated to our new dwelling as lately we had been to the gloomy horrors of a prifon : fb foon does a tranfition for the better imprefs our minds with peace ! fo foon do varying emotions fucceed each other in the human breaft !
I re-
20 ï refolved that Janetta, who had been my companion in misfortune, fhould remain fuch in my profperity. Walk¬ ing, riding, attending to my Lindorf, alternately employed our time; peace imiled on us fweeter than ever it had fmiled before ; and the only uneafinefs that for a moment fwayed my thoughts was, that the author of this delightful change Hill remained unknown. „ I wrote to my mother, whom, amid my forrows, 1 had forborne to addrefs, a lively piciure of my prefent tranquil¬ lity, ílightly paffing over the late events of my life. I concluded by inquiring of her if ihe likewife had become hap¬ pier, or whether the Rofendoif were ftill in being. I re-
uî
I received a pathetic anfwer to my letter, when, after gently reproaching me for my long filence, fhe mournfully deplored her fituation, which ftill re¬ mained the fame as at my departure,— The Rofendorf, flie informed me, ftill exifted, but a prey to conftant illnefs -, and corroding fpleen. From my father, íhe fometimes heard, but a deep me¬ lancholy feemed weighing on his mind. He fcarcely ever fäw her ; and when he did, the conftrainment of his manners ihowed forcibly the ftruggles of his foul. For herfelf, fhe added, nothing could ever remove the fixed, indelible im¬ preffion made by the early hand of forrow on her life.—-For the reft, all re- remained
22
mainedin the ftate I had left it, and fo was likely to continue. She congratulated me on the bright- ncfs of my prolpecìs, and concluded by affuring mc that their reflexion only might gild hers with a diftant beam, though fo long ovcrfliadowed with un¬ varying gloom. " Great heaven!" thought I, as penfively I gazed upon my mothers letter, " w ¡iile I have been the fport of våning foitunc, hunitd to and fro 4 О * upon her chequei ed lines, the child al¬ ternately ι 'f hope and of defpair, o.hers have remained unaltered by the hand of time, unbiaíľed by conflicrinij events, unchanged in their pofidon by the ftorms
23 ftorms of fate, ftiil fecurely at the bot¬ tom of the wheel, while ť eir ŕ c gh- bours have been buffucu mound them, Thus it us, thought I—S r ) ne are con¬ tented to fît belo v and gaze ferenely, while the. r moie hazaìdous companions foar aloft. Thofc who fly, fay th~y, may fall; but thofe who remain upon the ground can fink no lower ; thev are beyond the leach of dinger.—True, but they are likewife beyond the reach of happinefs. To p if s one'* life in quiet, placid, negative ple-iluie — -this is fuf- ficient for iIk better half of mankind : it is I only, anda Lw icfUofs beings like me, who cannot be content without wandeling about m Íl arch of lorn» thing that may chequer with lntcicfl the ftill dull b'ank of exiftence/' I was
24 ï was interrupted in my reflexions by the entrance of Janetta, who brought me a letter. On opening it I found it to contain only thefe words ; " Ariel awaits you.'* Suddenly the blood ruihed to my face ; my heart palpitated, i wiihed, yet feared to fee the author of my prefent happinefs. î attached to him the idea of fome fuperior being, and al¬ moft expeöed to fee, as I fliould enter, a feraph or celeftial fpirit, fuch as are pourtrayed to watch over the interefts of mankind. '* Did theftranger mention my name?** inquired I of Janetta. " Yes,
25 " Yes, Sinora/ * íhe replied. " I entreat you will go : who knows but he may bring you news you would be glad to hear?" I knew not of any news that could infpire me witb fudden joy, but î fol¬ lowed Janetta to the parlour where tho ftrangcr awaited me. When ï entered, his back was toward me. He turned at my approach, and the recollection of features I had once been familiar with inftantly flruck my view* Every moment methought I could iden¬ tify his perfon, but there was an altered fomething in his looks—a wan palcnefs, which bailed immediate recognition,— He ap*/reached, and gazed upon me vol. m. с with
2б
with an earneíl fmile. Suddenly a ihade of melancholy paß over his counte¬ nance, and a tear ftarted to his eye.— Who could be poffeffed of fuch fenfi- bility? It fíaíhed acrofs my memory •—The blighted beauty of St. Elmer ! ît was himfelf! « c Heaven !" I exclaimed, in a falter¬ ing voice, " can it be poffible ?" Scarcely could I fupport my tottering frame. St. Elmer, the companion of my infancy, the guardian of maturer years., and Ariel, the benignant author of røy happinefs, ftood at once before me.
87
CHAP. Ш. THE REAL lOVER. YES, it was indeed St. Elmer, who, watching for long over my conduci with anxious folicitude and indefatigable care, had yet found it impoffibie to avert the fatality of my deftiny, I ihall pafs over extraneous matter ,· the recital of St. Elmer will explain aii, с 2 " When
â8
" When I firft converfed with you/' faid he, ct upon the authors you had read, it was with a view to difcover your fentiments, and judge, from ob- fervation, on the bent of your reflex¬ ions. Shall I confefs thai, on learning their dangerous tendency, and the fàlfe notions vou had imbibed on various fub¬ jecis, 1 with fad prefentiment antici¬ pated the future forrows of your life; I faw that impulfe, whether right or wrong, would guide your moll import¬ ant adions ; and, fwayed by the fpirit of the moment, you would ruih heedlefs upon deitiuciion. I perceived with acute regret that, led away by a wild and fhilaciöüs enthufiafm, you would become unfit for the uniformity of wretched exiftence, and fink into mifery and
2 9 and gloom, or fatally change the fcene by wandering in the paths of error. " Incapable of exift ing without fome attachment of the foul, I feared your choice would be guided rather bv ima- gination than judgment, and lead \ou into earlv mi.^fortuncb, of whicii ex¬ perience miglit come, too late, to warn you. *' I loved \ou t Cazire, but, alas î I felt you could not return my love. You were a fanguine cnthufiaft, viewing all through the fur ν medium of hope, and gazing on the delufive world as you wiihed it to be : I a weeping philofopher, contemplating as they were, not a* thcy ought to be, the aggregate of mankind. с 3 Our
go Our fentiments were diametrically op- pofite. I was not then calculated for your happinefs: without your love I íhould have been miferable. I deter¬ mined to be near you, to fave you, if poffible, from the fatality of your defti¬ ny, to refcue you from the brink of the precipice on which you tottered, and never to acknowledge my love till the effervefcence of enthufiafm íhould fub- fide, and experience have mellowed into chaftened fentiment your high-wrought vifionary fancy , for then I hoped that Cazire might vicv me as I wifhed, and return the adoration of my foul. ťt The early negl eel: of you* educa¬ tion, I mean the formation of your mind and principles, not that which is fu per«
3i fuperficially called fo, rendered you a being liable to every varying impreff¬ ion ; you became acquainted with Fri¬ bourg, calculated to feduce even the wifeft and moft innocent. I feared for the fafety of Cazire. My heart was wrung with agony, but I dared not to approach her, for I could endure no rival in her love, At diftance I watched her actions, and as a guardian interefl¬ ed in her welfare conveyed to her, under the name of Ariel, my iolicitous warn¬ ings. " Whether I influenced your conduct or not I cannot determine ; but you efcaped the fnares of Fribourg —fnares which perhaps by him were not con- fidered fuch; and I began to hope, с 4 f/om
3* from the victory you had obtained, a future prefervauon from furer déftrue¬ tion. I faw how much your heart had been interefled; I could not but per¬ ceive that you loved Fribourg, and the conqueft muft have coft you much. 1 augured highly of your heart, and la¬ mented only that it was the flave of im¬ pulfe. t€ Lindorf, Cazire, never truly loved· She imagined that ihe did, ßruck rather by the fafcinating graces of his manner, and fuperior charms of his converfation. Lindorf ran away with your feelings without deeply inierelling your heart ; he imprefled your fenfes without ac- quiiing \our affection, for Fribourg only had ever really poifclled it. At his
33 his departure your deep, unequalled melancholy, while it infpired me with forrow, ftill made me hope it would end favourably for your happinefs. ** Fondly methought the time drew near when I might call you mine as I wifhed, no longer fwayed by the delu** fions of fèntiment or paífion. Ration¬ ality methought would guide your actions ; and that which you found it impoflible, in the fad concatenation of events, to alter, you might perhaps en¬ deavour to conform to. But when 1 reafoned fo, it was as í wiihed, not as I ought ; for I fhould have known that the human heart once impregnated with certain fenfations, the miad im¬ bibing certain ideas, never alters, never с 5 foregoes
34 foregoes its character, till the chill hand of mifery or damping age ihall have pal* íied enthufiafm. if Lindorf returned.—Unable longer to exift under the fad preffure of con¬ tingent circumftances, unable with phi¬ lofophie calmnefs to endure the unvaried routine of melancholy exiftence, Ca¬ zire yielded to the defpairing impulfe of her feelings, and left her home. r# it was not love that influenced the raftı decifion, it was the deep con¬ fcioufnefs of woe, a bitter fenfation of difeontenî, occafioned by a retrofpect- ive view of your fituation—the wiih of being ardently beloved, of finding a fympathetic, a congenial breaft an which to
â5 to pour your keen, enthufiaftic feelings —*a being who would underftand and anfwer each vibration of a fenfibie and noble heart, and whofe intellectual and refined converfe would chear and edify the dreary hours of exiftence. It was in the hope of thefe Cazire fled ; in their attainment that ihe was difap- pointed. "My letter reached her, but in the hurrying impulfe of her foul was by a ftrange fatality either forgotten or dis¬ regarded. Lindorf, the treacherous and wedded Lindorf, bore her triumphantly away ; and maddened at the dread con¬ viction, ceitain, in my own mind, of your enfuing mifery, 1 became ener¬ vated with my woe. 1 began to think a с 6 romantic
' з 6 romantic folly only had hitherto fwayed me, that you were lefs culpable than myfclf, and that the love which had influenced my foul toward you fhould have impelled mc to ufc other means for your prcfervation. I began to think that early í fhould have folicitcd you as as my wise, and have truiled to rime for umpiring you with an equal af¬ fection. 1 defpifed my procraitmating idiotcy, and lamented the madnefs of :ny conduti, which had confined to my own brcail the f'ecrct of my love. il The mifery of my helings foon af- fccled my frame—iickne!> «dialled mc. I hcCvVì.c an cdiy prey to a federe and violent dííorder.— Why, why had I delayed my happjnefs, to renat r it more ice u re ŕ
37 fecure? Fool, not to feize the paffing moments, and truft to the perfection I had fuffered to efcape me for reali fing my fondeft hopes ! Now flie was loft to me for ever !— î lingered behind in excruciating tortures, the victim of im¬ becile defpair. ******* ##*####**#*# <; At length I recovered from my confinement. I heard you had fled to Italv, and, fcarcely knowing what end í meant to facilitate, I followed. My journey was twice retarded by expe¬ dition to accomphfh it. Unable to bear the violence of fatigue and emotion, twice I lam-uiíhed on the brink of о death. At length I arrived, b..t re¬ mained
38 mained for long ignorant of your fitua¬ tion. When I difcovered my foul's idol, it was ia the gloomy horrors of a prifon ! I curfed myfeif as the caufe of your misfortunes, but I formed my de¬ termination. My Cazire had already fuffered too much ; ihe muft have ac¬ quired experience. I prepared for her whatever I thought calculated ίο enfure her Tranquillity and com¬ fort ; and when í hoped í had in part íuccecded, 1 ventured to call her from her fad abode, but inflicted on myfeif a penance the fevereft for my former folly, and forbore, till now, to throw mvfelf at her fcet t u Thus, my Cazire, have 1 eluci¬ dated the feeming myftery that attended me«
39 me. If ftill you will deign to accept me—if, foftened by misfortunes, you can condefcend to view me with ought befide indifference—make me, at once, the happieft of mankind, and together let us court that peace which, feparate, we have failed to enjoy." " No, generous St. Elmer," I re¬ turned, in a voice inarticulate from emotion, " I am unworthy the affection of a heart fo noble. Grant me your fiiendfhip alone, and beftow your love where it will be better deferved*" " That it can never be," he replied. u Too bitterly have your deiufions been extenuated in your fufferings. They were the wanderings of the head, Ca¬ zire ;
40 zire; the heart never ftraycd. Oh, puniili me not fo feverely, though I have been to blame! for how could I dare expec\ that experience fliould guide your conduci; amid the impetuous ardor of youth, and, with the effervefcence of your imagination» fuffer you to be car¬ ried coolly through life ? No r:\ther let me hope that, fafe in the faiiäuary of my aims, fafe in the conviclion you have acquired how fallacious the aim of happinefs beyond our reach, that peace¬ ful as the evening ofa day of ftorms to¬ gether we may tiead the down-hill of exiftence. We are both young, but we have acquired maturity beyond the power of age alone to confer. Now too, that once more I fee myfeif befide vou, 1 am half tempted to forget the forrows
41 forrows we have mutually endured, firmly convinced our happinefs now might be more ftrongly than ever ce¬ mented. Teach me not, then, rather to regret the paft, and curfe more deeply my miftake." Noble and dignified St* Elmer! iliall ever I forget the magnanimity of thy conduct ? Shall ever I ceafe to regret it was fo ill repaid ? " St. Elmer," I replied, iC to be¬ come your wife, degraded as 1 am by a fenfc of my own un wor thi nefs, fo far from yielding me the ha^pineh* it ouçht, would fill my foul -*uh paini jl and acute reflexions. (,ontmiidliv fliould I be drawing a humiliating contrail between in*
42 us. You would appear to me as a being of fuperior order ; my only merit I fhould feel acquired in my union with you. It would be a reflective merit with which my fpirit could never be content. No, St. Elmer, exalted and perfeü as you are, even you I could not deign to li ¥? e inferior to—to carry about me the painful confciouihefs of contemptibility, and take from you alone a negative and borrowed luftre." I felt abafhed by the conviction of my fentiments, and blufliing while fcalding tears ftarted unbidden to my eyes, I covered my face with rny hands, and leaned upon the table. St. Elmer approached, he leaned over me,
43 me, he took my hand, which I attempt¬ ed, in convulfive agony, to with¬ draw from his pure and honourable touch. " Oh, Cazire," he faid, " while I venerate the noblenefs of your mind, let me not fuffer by the fcrupulous de« licacy it would enforce. Barter not my happinefs for the gratification of pride. Confent to be mine, and nobly facri¬ fice your tenacious feelings to my love." « No, no,*' I tremuioufly rejoined, not daring to raife my face from the table, li it is impoflible. Let me, in fome fituation of obfcure mediocrity, attempt, by the labour of my hands, to procure
44 procure a fubfiftence; let me in me¬ rited obfcurity be hid from the view of alî, but never, never difgrace the noble arms of St. Elmer; never outrage the untah^cd purity of his love, by return¬ ing it, funk in my own efleem," ** Degrade not yourfelf by fpeaking thus, Cazire. By heavens, you are dearer to my foul, more valued, more efteemed than ever you were ! No, charming and adored woman, it is I who Ihall be ennobled by your pof- feffion/* " It is in vain/* I anfwered, in a voice broken by emotion ; tf the utmoft I can dare accept is your friendfhip, and fometimes your remembrance ; but your love,
45 love, St. Elmer—the offspring of your compaffion is beyond my wifhes as my merits.—I cannot be pitied by you, though I know myfeif unworthy of ought elfe: add not, then, a deeper humiliation to the oppreffive woe I al¬ ready feel ; weigh not down utterly to the earth a wretch who is already fink¬ ing." I fobbed violently ; and raifing from my chair, attempted to leave the room. St. Elmer fought to detain me. He gazed on me with looks of fupplicating anguifh; but the violence of my fenfa¬ tions gave me ilrength, and agonized I tore myfeif from his arms.
4β
CHAP. IV. THE PRIDE ОГ INFERIORITY, ANB THE DELICACY OF SUPERIORITY. IT was to St. Elmer, then, I was in¬ debted for the fplendor that furrounded me ι it was to him that, with an eleva¬ tion of fentiment unequalled, I owed my emancipation from a prifon ; yes, it was he who knew my errors ; it was the noble,
47 noble, the perfect St. Elmer who forgave them. It was too much. Had he but dif- dained, reviled, or reproached me I could have borne it, methought ; but to look over, wiih mortifying delicacy, conduct which I bluíhed to think he fhould even be acquainted with ; to pardon the wild wanderings of an heated imagination; to implicate himfelf, and then, with a maddening condefcenfion, outrage the tenacioufsnefs of my foul to offer me his hand, covered as I was with ignominy, debafed in my own efteem— it was not in nature to love a being fo tranfcendently fuperior. Emulation was from the queftion ; I could only envy him, and weep my inferiority. But
48 But it was impoffibie to live thus in a ftate cf continued obligation : I could not receive favours like thefe, even from a St, Elmer. Janetta and my Lindorf muft quit with me a roof be¬ come obnoxious from the keennefs of my reflexions. I muft depend upon myfeif for fupport. I would thank, kneeling í would thank him for his goodnefs, and then for ever fly him.-«· When next I beheld St. Elmer I would execute my refolve. On the following morning he returned to vifit me. I endeavoured to lead to theti bjecì, and then in faltering accents mde known to him what I conceived my neceffary and indifpenfable decifion. ] dwelt on the miferies I muft endure if ' continually
49 continually overwhelmed with his bounty. Emphatically 1 urged to him the painful fenfationsT endured of con¬ feious unwonhinefs, and finally ven¬ tured to thank him for the unequalled generofi ty he bad difplajed toward me. He heard me out, «* Now then, Cazire," he faid, " attend to me. I will forego the propofai that I made you yefterday ; I will not urge you, fcluBant a> you feem, to become my wife ; I will bury in the folitude of my bofom ns wifhes, and the hopes it has fondly nuifed fo long; but for this î require that you likewife íhould make fome facrifice. Live for ever here-— confider as yours the fpot on which you VOI. ï I I. » ПОЧ*
now refide, and permit me fometimes, on the footing of a friend, a brother, occafionally to vifit you.* 8 " But St. Elmer/' I replied, " this is impoffibie. Confider, for a mo¬ ment, the—'' opinion of the world, I would have faid, but remembered, with keen emotion, how flagrantly I had difregarded it. St. Elmer with his ufual delicacy paifed over my confufion. €t I will confider nothing," he replied. tC Cazire, do not utterly difdain me: yield, at leaft for the prefent, your ac- quiefcence/*
I durft
51 I durft no longer oppofe. St. Elmer endeavoured to infpire me with chear¬ fulnefs. By degrees he banifhed the fubjecì: which had engaged us. He feemed animated with affection and with joy ; and methought had he been lefs immaculate I could have participated in his pleafure. Suddenly Janetta with my Lindorf, whom St. Elmer had not yet feen, en¬ tered with him fmiling in her arms. He regarded us alternately with mixed fen¬ fations. He took you in his arms, and rarefied you, Janetta retired, and) ou remained unconfcious on his knee. İ bluíhed the dye of fcailet, and was nearly fuŕľocated with the intenLncf* of my feelings. i> % 'M.
5« St. Elmer itili kept his eyes fixed on your countenance, that he might not obferve my confufion. He too feemed agitated. 1 could bear it no longer. ct Great Heaven !" 1 exclaimed, íť how ihall 1 continually endure this torture ?~~$Ц Elmer, give me the child —-1 cannot, cannot bear it.*' " My love, my Cazire," he trem¬ blingly replied, ** foibear, 1 entreat you—thefe excelles drive you to mad¬ rids. You are the vidím of fenfation. What, what is there to agonize you thus? Why wiU you create imaginary woes, and then refine upon them ?" '· Öh, kis painful to be thus a witnefs to
53 to your fuperiority/' I cried. " How can I fee you ad thus, and forbear to feel ?" " Why íhould I not &6t lhus? J ' he returned. " In careffing this innocent babe I remember ks mother. I love her, and therefore í love whatfoever is hers. Nought elfe is included in the reflexion." He clafped you to his breafl, and ap¬ proaching me on the fofa, where I fat, he placed you between us, and encircled us together in his aims. My head funk upon his ihoulder ; I was oppreíľed with fhame ; violent emotions battled for precedence in my bofom, D 3 *' Exalted
54 kl Exalted being!" I fobbed. "St, Elmer, do you not dcfpife me ?" He raifed me from his ihoulder ; he gazed a moment with an indefcribable, expreffion upon my tearful, glowing countenance, and fnatched me in trem¬ bling ardour to his bofom. Speechlef» he held me in his pure embrace. I feli his glowing cheek through the muflin on my bofom, and again I could have loved him if I durft. The fcene became too tenderly ago¬ nizing. I withdrew from his arms. ic Cazire/' he cried, iC I would, yet dare not—fay, dare I renew the fub-» ječi neareft to my heart ?" '· Spare
55 *' Spare mc, St. Elmer/* 1 replied, " in pity fpare me for the prefent. I rely on your generofity, on your feel¬ ings, to fhame me no further. Indeed, indeed/' I added, " the painful fenfe of my misfortunes is too great—" <f I have done, Cazire—yet—but I will forbear. Your peace is dearer to my foul than the gratification of my higheft wifhes." " Let us talk on other matters, then/ 1 faid I; li let us walk in the garden—let us do any thing but dwell on this." u Let it be ïo^ he replied ; and with the air of a compaffionati ng angel he rofe, and we entered the garden. d 4 St*
56 St» Elmer left me not till night.— Methought he feemed anxious to recon¬ cile me to myfeif, and the idea morti¬ fied me. In fliort, his every action, his words, nay his looks, fpoke daggers to my confeious heart ; but the noble and dignified creature dreamt not of an at« tempt fo degrading, * Exalted as he was, he imagined me his equal. Thus paffed feveral months. He continued his vifits; he read to me the beft authors, and they formed a forcible cont raft to thofe I had perufed. But even this to my tenacious fancy feemed to convey reproach, and I wrefted ideas from the very breait of probability to torture myfeif on their refinement.
We
57 We walked, we rode, we were ccn- ftamly together. In vain did I decy- pher in the eyes of St. Elmer the moft paffionate, the moit befeeching love ; in vain were his delicate endearments; nought Cv>u!d infpire me with a confi¬ dence toward him, and ihe keen fenii tivenefs of my feelings remained conti¬ nually alive. One evening, with you, my Lindorf, in my arms, fondly careffing you, un- reitrained, upon a fofa, St. Elmer fud- denly entered. Involuntarily 1 threw you fiom me as though I feltdetcQ-d in a crime, and deqdy bluflied St. Elmer feized you in his arms, and drew near me. He looked ол me with a ie- proach ful air, as though hc would have d 5 did,
58 faid, u Still do you dread me, ungene¬ rous Cazire ?" This look penetrated to my heartland I careffed you on his bofom. Then fearfully raifing my eyes to his counte¬ nance, I firft perceived it overlpread with deadly palenefs. I took >ou haftily from his arms, and placed you on the iofa. " St. Elmer/* I exclaimed, in tre¬ pidation, " St. Elmer, you are not well/' fl Cazire," he replied, in faltering accents, " I perceive that you will never love me," He
59 He paufed, but I could not an¬ fwer. '< With patient hope I have watched you long," he continued. " I thought that after a time your heart might dic¬ tate in my favour. î have forborne to touch upon the hateful fubjed of my love; I have forborne to wound you with a repetition of the ftruggles I have endured, with the confli8s of increaf- ing paffion—but I can bear it no longer. I feel the tumultuous wifhes of my foul enervate rapidly my frame : 1 fall a vo¬ luntary viciim to your niifplaced fcru- ples." Hc feemed fainting with emotion ; and forgetting, for a moment, the ima- D 6 gined
б о gined diftance between us, I fupported his head upon my bofom, and my arm encircled his neck. He fighed deeply. " Your care is vain/' he refumed at length, *' unlefs without farther cruel procraftination you confent to become wholly mine." 41 Look on me/' I faid, *' St. Elmer, turn not from me with nn air fo melan¬ choly. Command me wholly in the difpofal of your happinefs-— İ —1—" *' Command you, Cazire ?" he re- ţoined, with an anguifhed fmile; "Is this the language in which alone you can addrefs
βί addrefs me?—But proceed—it canno 1 laft for ever." " О forbear," I cried, diffolving in tendernefs at his diftrefs, " forbear, St. Elmer—you iliall nor, muft not, fuffer thus." He gazed on me for awhile with an increafing languor; then'concealing his face with his hands, he reclined upon the fofa. Alarmed, affected, I bathed his face with my tears. I ventured tre¬ muioufly to imprefs his burning fore¬ head with my lips: he ftretched forth his arms, and clafped mc trembling to his bofom. I funk from them on my knees, and preffing his hand ciofcly to my beating heart ; kJ I.
$2
" St. Elmer/ 1 I exclaimed, " St. El¬ mer, I no longer hefitate : I—I will be yours, and yours only !" The words with talifmanic influence ihot through his bofom ; the blood ruihed eagerly to his afhy cheek, and his fine eyes fparkled with a new delight. " ît is irrevocably fealed/' he cried ; and falling befide me on his knees,prefled to mine his parched and trembling lips.
бз
CHAP. V. THE PHŒNIX AMONG MEN. I BECAME the wife of St. Elmer. Two years paffed on, and my fenti¬ ments, in their tendency at leaft, re¬ mained unaltered. The idea that had fwayed me before my marriage ftill ав* uated my mind ; fo difficult are early impreffions, ftrongly imbibed, to be erafed. Still I viewed St. Elmer as a fuperior
64 fuperior being— t ill I venerated rather than lovt d him. Ие was the tall ce¬ dar, blooming unfupported in the fpa- cious wild, iunounded by plants of an inferior giowth : he towered above mor¬ talít}-. I worfhipped him. I could hai с facrificed, and deemed it gloiious mar- tyidom, my life for his welfare. But St. Elmer, the idol of my infancy, and St. Elmer, the hufband of my bofom, wa& itili St. Elmer, lt was beyond the power oí human ills, * f ills the rao'l humiliating and de^iadmg, to humble his greatnefs. Nothing, in my eftimation, could ha\e reduced him to a level with mortality ; he was an immaculate and perfect being. I poffeffed the errors of my natine, un¬ qualified
65 qualified with the power to refift them. I felt ennobled, elevated in his fociety : I had yielded to him the tenacious feid¬ ings of my breaft ; I had given the higheft proof of the fupeiiority in which I held hira, a conviction the moft dif- interefted ; I had condefcended to live for ever inferior to him, but I could do no more. Never, never, durft I love him with the tendernefs of an equal· « Oh, St. Elmer/* would I fome¬ times fay, «« had you but one error, it fliould be dearer to my heart than all your virtues."— True human nature, that longs foran equality with lelf, and feels as arepioach to
es to its follies the view of perfe8abi- lity! Still our days glided on in peace.— The keennefs of my feelings had fub- fided. I no longer viewed with ago¬ nizing fhame my hufband's careßes of Lindorf ; I dwelt no longer with refined excefs upon his roinuteft words or aciions ; I fancied not reproach in every look—fo far had time mellowed the irri¬ tability of my foul, and blunted the quick tenacioufnefs of my ideas. But it had done no more. 1 ftill remem¬ bered fuch things were, and a feather would have turned the fcale. St. Elmer-—»Delicacy itfelf muft have
6η have courted his embrace ; the very fenfitive could not have ihrunk fiom his touch. It was impoffibie for clii— content or mifanthropy to fail of being charmed at his approach. For me his affection, his ardent love, feemed daily to increafe. He hung entranced upon my flighteft word ; and if it was in na¬ ture for St. Elmer to err, it was in lov¬ ing to excefs a creature fo much his in¬ ferior. What was there, in the catalogue of human pleafures, that with his life he would not have procured for me ? What was there, in the moft unbounded fcope of fancy, that my wifhes could not purchafe ? Was there a heart that even fhared his flighteft love ? Was there a circum^
68 circumftance in which he placed his hap- pinefs—was there an idea, a pleafure, unconnected with myfclf ? No; I was the idol of his waking hours, his dream in flumber, the joy of his exiftence. What muft the wretch have mented who could abjure the fentiments a heart like this demanded ? What muft the wretch have been, who, with a fa- crilegious outrage, could trample on a love fo holy ? I was that wretch.—I flruck to the heart which panted but for me the three-edged dagger of ingrati¬ tude î Shall I proceed?—Yes—the íhame of confeffing enor.N like tl^ie muft be the puniflimtnt of iheii guilt, I had
I had borne a fon to St. Elmer ; but left it íhould curfe hereafter its unfor¬ tunate and guilty mother, a merciful Providence deprived it early of exift¬ ence. Happy and unconfcious, fcarce had it entered into bufy life ere it fought the lonebnefs of the tomb. Yet itili St. Elmer, happy in the poíľeffion ofa wretch born for his forro w and de- ftruciion, contented an^i carelefs trod wich me the mazes of life. Together we rambled, and no impulfive inftinci bade him like a viper thruft me from his haplefs bofom. One night that ï was feated near him, his arm tenckrlv encircling my waift, fuddenly we were alarmed by a loud and violent knocking at the door. In¬ ftantly
7 о ftantly St. Elmer rofe. Two fírangers demanded admittarree for a gentleman who had been dangeroufly wounded by aflâflins, and whofe life was almoft de- fpaired of. Was ever the call of hofpitality unno* deed by St. Elmer ? The wounded itrangcr was inftantly allowed to enter, and laid at length upon the fofa. The men went oft in quell of the affaifins, and St. Elmer entered the room. We approached the fofa to afecrtain if Π il I the Uranger lived, What fudden horror tingled through my frame ! what various emotions rent my bofom! The clammy features, overcaft with the fal¬ low hue of death, were Fiibourg's í — î tot-
71 I tottered to a chair. St. Elmer per¬ ceived my emotion. He too remem¬ bered the perion of Fribourg. " Cazire/' he exclaimed, and in a moment his attentions were turned on me· " It is Fribourg you have admitted," I faid, with convulfive quicknefs. i€ And what then, my love ?" he anfwered -, u are not the rites of hof¬ pitality his as much as another's?" I felt the noblenefs of the reply, and remained filent.
"Ido
72 çí I do not wonder his unexpefìed appearance fhould agitate you/* he pur¬ fued. ** When you are more recover¬ ed, my love, you will give orders for his accommodation.—He ftill breathes/* he added, bending with the air of a deity over Fribourg ; ťC we muft convey him to bed immediately/* Overpowered with a thoufand mixed fenfations, I left the room. * f What a being is St. Elmer?" faid X mentally, as 1 clofed the door. Ere long Fribourg had received every care within the power of friend- fhip the moft refined to have beftowed. His wounds were pronounced not dan¬ gerous,
73 gerous, and exceffive lofs of blood the only caufe of his infenfibility. I had remarked, with Angular emo¬ tion, that Fribourg was habited in deep mourning. Why did I remark this ? and why did it infpire me with emo* tion ? St. Elmer redoubled his tendernefs. He feemed fearful I íhould imagine myfeif lels eftimabìe for a moment in his eyes. He difcourfed of Fribourg as though we had never been other than cafuai acquaintances. Still I was un- eafy and diffati^d. Why was it that chance or circumftance ever more con¬ fpired to elevate St. Elmer, and degrade me? Miferable fenfation, when the vol, in. e vir rues
74 virtues or perfections of another are in¬ voluntarily contrafted by ourfclves with our own errors or inferiority ! " Fribourg and I/* faid St. Elmer, tc were once companions;· but our fenti¬ ments did not tally, and we feparated." " In anger?" "inquired I. ** Not in anger," he returned, i( but mutually diffatisfied with each other.— I am happy, however, that we have once more met : perhaps experience may have made him злу convert/' u I fear not," replied I. '* Fribourg held," he anfwered, " that man
75 man was incapable of rendering a dif- interefted ferviee to his fellow. Now unlefs hc can make it appear that I pof¬ feffed a finifter motive in the ferviee I have had the good fortune to render him, I think his docirinc will ftand poorly fupported." cs He can only make it appear inte¬ refled in one point of view," replied I, charmed with the delicacy of St. Elmer, " that the pleafure you feel in doing good is ample repayment." '* I thank you, my Cazire/' he an¬ fwered, and kiifed my hand.
£ г
уб
CHAP. Vî. rERFECTlON AND FALLIBILITY. FRIBOURG rapidly recovered—he had recognized me with delight, and his former diftance and referve were entirely vaniflied ; we paffed the evenings in his room, while he was unable to quit it í and happy, or rather peaceful as 1 had felt myfeif before, I now became more animated than ever. Elinor was no more—his children remained
77 remained in Germany—and to di veft, as he faid, the melancholy of his mind, he had refolved to travel. He had not been a week in Italy when chance brought him near our dwelling; fud¬ denly he had been attacked by ruffians, probably miftaken for another, or in hopes of booty, and on refilling, they had wOunded him and fled. *' You know the fequel/' he added ; and glancing involuntarily towards me, " I now no longer regret the chande which might have coft my life." « Nor I/' faid St. Elmer, « fince it has been attended with no worfe confé¬ quences/*
КЗ «I could
7 8 м ï could aimoit wiíli/' rejoined Fribourg. u that my recovery had been flower ; for when it is complete, I ihall have no longer an excufe for intruding on fociety fo delightful.*' *' You will need none/' anfwered St. Elmerj « c while vou remain in * ч/ Italy furely you make my houfe your home.** Fribourg bowed^and a bluili of plea» fure mantled on his cheek; perhaps from St. Elmer, but not from me, was his exultation concealed—but 1 per¬ eci v Cvi it, for my heart was nearer allied to evil ; itili when we fhould feparate I determined to follow theimpulfe fug- gefted
/ 79 gefiel by duty, and reprove the too precipitate generofity of St. Elmer. As foon as we were alone í hefitatingly faid: 11 Wherefore did St. Elmer requeft: of Fribourg Чо proloig his ftay even after his recovery ?" " And why docs Cazire object ?" he anfwered fmiling. f * Becaufe," replied I ferioufly, * e it was unneceffary—it was impru¬ dent—" " Imprudent/' echoed St. Elmer, e 4 gazing
8ο gazing on me with emotion ; «* did Q~ zire fay imprudent?" * s 1 did," anfwered I, deeply bluili- ing, '* My love," he exclaimed, tenderly folding me to hi* exalted bofom ; " think higher of yourfelf— think but as I do of your matchlefs excellence, how would St. Elmer's love be deferving of Cazire if uninfpired by confidence in her prin¬ ciples and her affection ? Hadft thou but die thought of injury, couldft thou cau¬ tion/' 1 continued filent.
* I have
8ı <f I have long wiihed/* purfuíd he, f£ to give you fome fuperior pruôíŕ of my idolatry ; chance has placed the oppor¬ tunity in my power; you will be con¬ vinced that when I mock the power of temptation—that when I place in your hands what is dearer to me than exiftence, my happinefs in your love, I indeed look up to you as all that is perfect in humanity ; depreciate not your merits then, my foul—depreciate not my confidence in them—I feel the fecurity I could place in an angel—why then would you doubt yourfelf?'* " I will not doubt myfeif; 9 I cried, kiffing his charming hand; «< I fhould be a fiend of hell if after this I couid— e 5 I feci
82
I feel myfeif empowered to refift, though Heaven's beauteous hoft were near to tempt me—I feel that ere I could injure, even in thought, St. Elmer, I muft be transformed into— ..... " " Hufh/' cried St. Elmer, preffing me in his arms; " I feel, lovely witch, that you could injure no one." I fank upon my knees before him*«—I clafped his hand fervently between mine, and raifed my eyes to his countenance : ** When I injure thee, may I be the forgotten of Heaven!" ¿c And when thou doft, if with my dying
83 dying breath I do not pardon thee, may I never obtain its mercy V' He raifed me in bis arms ; and as hc gazed tenderly on me, I hid my glowing countenance in his bofom, fpeechlefs with conflicting emotions. Was it in woman to merit the affec¬ tion of St. Elmer ? much lefs in me ? Fribourg became enabled to quit his chamber: he fought my fociety with avidity, but I endeavoured as much as poffible to ftiun him, and trembled when¬ ever I found myfeif alone with him—I fought a thoufand pretexts to bre.ihMp the converfation, if, in idea even, it grew £ 6 in*
H interesting—I feared, with the ihadow of a thought, to wrong St, Elmer—I was perpetually опту guard—I dreaded my felf, formy buíband was fupereminentîy perfeB, and Fribourg was fallible, and my equal ; we reverence a fuperior, but we love an equal. He appeared to remark and lament my conduft. One evening for a mo¬ ment he found me alone ; I arofe on his entrance as though I had juft remem* bered an occafion to withdraw—^he caught my hand I thought indignantly* and yet with a mournful air. '' Cazire," he faid with emotion, * 4 you avoid røe as though you fancied I were an evil fpirit—- as though 1 were infectious
85 infectious guilt, which to approach were fin ; wherefore is this ? Time was Cazire fliunned me not—'* He fud¬ denly corrected himfelf*—'' when ihe did not contemplate me with fufpicious eyes; am I then become a monfter in her eftimation?—-does íhe imagíneme funk into black and irremediable vice, that I darkly militate againft her peace—* againft St. Elmer*s ? What an aban¬ doned, wretched being muft fhe think me!" " I know not on what ground you fix your imputai ions," I rejoined, looking afide; " I am not confeious of any particular endeavour to avoid you."
" Or
86 ** Or the contrary/* he mournfully added. " Hardly," I replied; " you forget yourfelf. 1 * *' I do indeed," he anfwered ; a all that 1 afk of you, Cazire, is not to treat me wiih fuch evident fufpicion, truft fomething to me ; grant me at leaft the power of ihewing 1 am not dead to every noble р^порк.' 1 «í I«_í —1 am at a lofs ------1 do not —«-Let me go, Fribourg," at length 1 exclaimed, no longer able to reftrain my emotion, u I obey," he anfwered, inftantly re-
«7 releafing my hand, which he had forborne to prefs. '* I am anxious to depart," I refumed more coolly ; * 4 I have fomething which requires my immediate attention/' *' I do not queftion it," he replied, looking after me as I left the room* From this hour î refolved to alter my plan ; I would no longer appear to fliun Fribourg; for that, while it feemed a tacit confeffion that I feared him, implied likewife that love was the occafion of that fear ; that I felt an advocate in my bofom, whofe victory was certain ifl attempted to pai ley; ¿í Fribourg muft fufpečt fo," faid I mentally ; ζί even this
88 this is a remote injury to St. Elmer. —» He ihall perceive his miftake. In fu¬ ture I will ihow him I fear not any more than him to truft myfeif.**—Dangerous refoiution! The former might be the¬ oretically an evil ; the other was practi¬ cally fuch. S*ill, however, my referve continued. I was only a braggart in appearance—a coward at heart. I durft not relax ; I durft not converfe on fubjecis the leaft interefting, left, by producing argu¬ ment, they might furnifh the powers of Fribourg againft me ; for I remembered the fafcinations he once poffeffed, and I remembered them with dread. Thus, though I fometimes remained alone with him, I occupied myfeif in etnbroidery,
or fomething to require attention, while, to avoid converfation, I defi red him to read, always felečHng fubjecis ferious, moral, or at leaft devoid of ought that could excite the fenfes or fire the ima¬ gination. If for a moment he laid afide his book to converfe, I avoided looking up, and prefently defired him to con¬ tinue· Alas ! why all this caution, if nought remained to be guarded againft but fwift-anfwered fophiftry ? The peace of St. Elmer muft not be endangered by the flighteft riík. —Confcience, how hard art thou to be deceived ! As Fribourg entirely recovered he oftentimes went out in the evening, and returned
9 o returned not till late. Sometimes we faw him not fbr the night. He was al¬ ternately fad and*rnerry ; but one even¬ ing he returned moie than ufually dif¬ ordered. St. Elmer foreborc to notice his perturbation. He remained gloomy and abftračled. On the enfuing evening be again left us. We faw no more of him for the night ; but on the following morning he entered the parlour where we fat. His countenance was fo haggard, his hair difhevdlcd, and it was ealy to perceive he had neither flept nor been in bed. ίβ Fribourg/* faid St. Elmer, ftarting from his chair, and cordially grafping his hand, (ζ what has occurred to diitrefs you?
9 1 you? Believe us your friends/' he added, ťt and only fay in what can we affift you." " In nothing, St. Elmer. Do not afk me. I thank you for your fricnd- íhip, but I muft leave you this evenmg —immediately/' " Leave us?" echoed I involun¬ tarily. He turned his eyes toward me, but inftantly withdrew them, and rofe from the chair where he had thrown him¬ felf. ,c Stay, Fribourg," cried St. Elmer ; " nay, you ftiall not leave us thus: do us
9* us not fo much injuftice. Some un- pleafant circumflances have intervened perhaps ? Accept our affiftance* Say only how we fhall exert it.*' ** It is impoffibie/* he replied. " Perhaps/* rejoined St, Elmer, u you may have involved yourfelf for fome friend ?" <ť No, I am involved on a lefs nobb* account.'* " Oh, I underftand you," faid St. Elmer, with delicate careleífnefs— ,c fome trifling loffes at play—** rf Trifling as they are/' refumed Fri¬ bourg,
93 bourg, " I am nearly ruined, and this night the debt muft be paid. Had I, like you, 'Jt. Elmer, a domeftic charm, î mould not have fought a deleterious exccfs for relaxation* I will confefa that, fi rft from the fol Jtations of other?, afterwards temporarily to amufe myfeif, and finrdly to recover various loffes, I engaged, by degrees, in a folly moft de- ftruciive. Gaming is a folîy that infa¬ tuates its victim. Like the infatiate flame, it aims at complete deftruftion. The evening before laft 1 became the lofer of an immenfe fura. Urged by the ruinous hope ôf recovering all, laft night 1 doubled it. Fortune frowned again.— 1 muft immediately difcharge the debt, and this evening I bid you both adieu."
** í know
94 ° I know not/* faid St. Elmer, « nei¬ ther can I admit the truth of your pofi¬ tion that gaming is déftructive ; at leaft from experience I am not enabled to piove it fo. Fortune has ever fmiled on mo." ** Indeed ?" faid Fribourg. *· Yes/* returned St, Elmer; "per¬ haps you play rather on the judgment of the moment than fpeculation: for tem¬ porary advantages you forego the fu- iure. Were f now in your fituation, I would engage the recovery of my loffes and additional gain/* ** Yon build highly indeed upon your ^powers/' rejoined Fribourg, "Try
95 « Try me," faid St. Elmer : * ť flake any fum you pleafe, no matter how trifling, and be convinced of the truth of my aflertion." ** Willingly," returned Fribourg* Cards were brought, and they began to play. St. Elmer won. ťi Another trial, and I have done/' faid he» Fribourg won the next game» " But," exclaimed St. Elmer, « I will not be outdone—Try once more. 1 ' They
They played again, and ftill Fribourg won. u None but you ever prefurned to beatme twice," faid St. Elmer: %t but proceed— к will be the laft time." They continued playing. Fortune ftill fmiled on Fribourg, and he gained at kngth an immenfe funi. <( This is too much between friends," he cried, haftily lifing ; " I will play no more/' " Novy, how a little fuccefs elevates the man !" cried St. Elmer fportively ; " he prefumes to rife upon his trifling fuperiority, and with* affecied pomp to difclaim
91 difclaim it, Come, come, this is but temporary : I am not to be baffled thus. Ultimately I always gain.—Be feated. Fribourg." They engaged anew ; but the advan¬ tage ftill remaining on the fide of Fri¬ bourg, he attempted to break up the game. " Double or quits/' exclaimed St> Elmer, aï though ki¿ed with the tru^ fpirit of gaming. Fribourg hefitatcd. " You fear for yourfelf/ 1 purfued Sc. Elmer. « Grant me at leaft the chance —You can do no lefs, Fribourg." vol. ni. jr Fribourg
9» Fribourg reluctantly acceded. " No more throwing up the game/" flipulated St. Elmer, and engaged with the air of a perfon fearing no hazard, confident of fuccefs. I now began to decypher his inten¬ tion. I faw that, without wounding the pride of Fribourg, he wiihed to affift him. His delicate imagination fuggeft« ed the ftratagem. On pretended fpe- filiation playing up to the theory he had advanced, he left evident advantages unimproved - and the fum for which he had now engaged his reluctant antago- nift to continue was fuperior to the en¬ tire debt he had contraded.
I re-
99 I regarded him with a tear of admi¬ ration as he affected to mock the in· creaf ng anxiety of Fribourg. But he appeared in every thing more than mor¬ tal, and rofe momentarily in my admi¬ raţiei. At length, as I imagined, the game concluded. St. Elmer rofe with ftitled joy and pretended İhame, and Fribourg was enabled to difcharge his debt. " It is impoffibie/* he cried, " I can fubmit to this. St. Elmer, you muft take back your loffes; I neither can nor will receive them." (i You would infuft me ?" hc replied Indignantly, " I confider debts con* t г îraBcd
ÎOO
traSed at play as debts nearly touching the honour of a man, and, as fuch, to be unhefitatingly difcharged.*——You thought fojuftnow, when you talked of repaying, to-night, Count—who was it you mentioned ?" *' I faid Baron Sternach," replied Fribourg, completely off his guard, " A German,*' added St. Elmer. « I thank you for your information; and lince you are fo fcrupulous about re* ccivmg your debt, i íhaií endeavour to difcover if hc is equally fo." Thus ftî İl further he faved the pride of Fritjurg from alarm, and refcued his own feelings from appearing ever fo
ΙΟΙ
fo remotely to confer an obligation.-» Was it in nature to be infenfible to de¬ licacy fo refined ?
'S
lOŽ
CHAP. VL DANGER. FRIBOURG was not of a caft to find difficulty in conquering an injurious propenfity of the mind, unallied with the heart. He for ever abjured the error of gaming, and remained almoft conflautiy in our fociety. For me, in¬ voluntarily I felt his préfence d iff u fe around an indefcribable charm, of which hitherto
ios hitherto I had been (amidft my higheit pleafures) unconfcious. Purfuant to my delufive refoiution I no longer evidently fliunned him,— When alone with htm I gradually be¬ came lefs referved in the nature of our converfations. We argued on topics the moft dangerous and feduäive ; and I felt confeious of this alteration in my conduct, without the power, fcarcely without the with, to check it. If foran evening he chanced to be ab¬ fent, I perceived with regret, accom¬ panied by a quick fenfation of remorfe, that lefs animated became our converfe ; that even the charming focie.y of St. Elmer appeared lefs captivating than f 4 formerly,
104 formerly, and gloom confpired with ennui to prefide. But he, noble and guilelefs himfelf, therefore unfufpicious of others, ' endeavoured to reflore my chearfulnefs, to entertain my fickly fancy. How, with frequent tears, did I la¬ ment over the bafenefs of my heart, when unnoticed were his foft endear- .raents.. or not equally repaid his idol¬ atrous love t What worlds would I not have given that Fribourg had never .en. tered our dwelling ! What would I not have facrificed to conquer my fatal love ! Still 1 felt affili ed it was not in nature to injure the peace of St. Elmer, but 1 de¬ plored that even in idea î fliould mili¬ tate againft it. What racks, v. lut tor-
tos tures would I not have endured, to faci¬ litate his fl'ghteft wiih! For him I could have braved the united darts of a thoufand foes, and felt ennobled in ihedding for him the life-blood of my heart. I adored him as a faint, and with the holy fervour of a bigot ; while Fribourg I loved, alas! with the fatal latitude of an equal. It was in vain to difguife it from my¬ feif; it was confeffed in every beating nerve at his approach ; it was carried to my heart with incrcafed emotion, лп 1 acknowledged in its hurrying pulfa- tions. One evening a meffenger arrived in hafte from town# He prefented St. EL· ? 5 mer
!Ö6
mer with a letter, A young nobleman, who had been for fome years his bofom fiiend, was feized w ι a hidden and violent diforder juft on the eve of his marriage with a beautiful female whom he long had loved. He requefted to fee St. Elmer before he died. St. Elmer ftarted from his chair : " ï will go immediately," he cried, with agitated eagernefs, and ordered his horfe. Then embracing mc, he precipitately departed, * Midnight arrived, and he returned nou Å fécond time the meflenger came.
IO/ came. The friend of St. Elmer was at the point of death ; it was impoffibie to leave him, and I muft not expect: him till the morning. I rofe, for I felt the impropriety of remaining longer with Fribourg, and bade him good night. " Good night, Cazire," he replied, and ftretched forth his hand. Heűtalingíy I gave him mine. With an air fo gentle he prefled it to his lips, as though he would have faid, " How unjuft it is to fear me!" I fmiled at his manner, and calling for Janetta, left the room.
f6
The
ioS
The following morning» agitated and unhappy, St. Elmer returned. I in¬ quired anxiouflyof his friend. " He ftill lives," replied he, « f but fo dreadfully dangerous is his fituation, that but for my Cazire I «could not this day have left him." *' A few hours' repofe/' faid I, " is abfohiteìy neceffary for you. Let me entreat you not to difregatd yourfelf." "In the evening I muft again be with him/' he returned ; ¿f th-c intervening hours are better enjoyed in your fociety than in fleep." ** Again this evening do you leave us? ,?
109 us?" faid í, with a fenfation I could not define, though 1 felt fomething like re¬ proach accompanying it. *' Yes, my love," he anfwered.------ íť Would not my Cazire do fo for a friend ? But I will return at night." He threw himfelf upon the fofa, and tenderly he requefted me to fit befide him. ** Perhaps my Cazire would lull me on her bofom ?" u Would you Пеер P" I eagerly re¬ joined. ť< Perhaps I might," he anfwered, fixing
no
fixing on me his eyes of heavenly e.x- preífion. "Try, then/' refumed I. He leaned his head upon my bofom. Soon a fweet forgetfulnefs ftole over his fenfes, as though every earthly forrow and every earthly care were forgotten in my arms. Dear faint ! with what mingled fen¬ fations did I contemplate him as he lay enjoying the foft fl umber of unfufpect- ing love ! His aromatic breath fteamed to roy fenfes, and fpoke its fweet le- proach. His hand, fondly clafping mine, addrefted to my keen confciouf¬ nefs a fimilar language. Even the wan¬ dering
IU
dering ringlet on his forehead, his very attilude, his drefs, all fpoke an equal meaning—all addrefted my heart in a manner forcible and energetic. An in¬ voluntary tear ftarted to my eye as with painful emotion I leant over him : it fell upon his cheek. He drew his hand acrofs the place, and fmiled. How did ihat unconfeious fmile pierce my bofom! At length he waked. Fi effing me in his arms, he afked, in anxious terror, why I wept. " Thoughts will obtrude," faid I, at¬ tempting to look chearful. ** And what thoughts fliould caufe a tear
US
tear from thofc eyes ?" he tenderly ex¬ claimed. " Do not aik me, St. Elmer." (C Cazire, are you not happy ?" fi Who mould be otherwife with you ?** faîd I, the tear and fmile con¬ tending on my cheek? * e Who fhould not feel your prcfence a talifman againft every fin and every forrow ? ------1 am chearful again, St. Iľ lier," 1 continued, checking a figh. " My hufband, notice no more my tears.' ' ťí And will not Cazire let me partici¬ pate in their caufe? 4 ' " Forbear
**3 " Forbear to aflv it," I haftily replied ; " with your native delicacy forbear." "I have done," he anfwered. *'· Let me kifs them off ;" and he preffed me to his bofom with fervency. Oh, how little did 1 deferve Sr. El¬ mer. Toward evening again he departed, and a fécond night I was alone with Fri¬ bourg. The next was flill the fame.— I felt my increafing danger, and knew not how to a6t. To remain thus entirely with him—I could not fupport it. The embarraffment I felt was evident. How or on what could we converfe ? how coolly
114 coolly employ fo many hours, with hearts overflowing with emotion ? how even look at each other without con¬ fcioufnefs, without confufion? Love feemed trembling on the lips of Fri¬ bourg. My eyes dared not meet his j my face was in one continued glow. At length arrived the fourth evening of our being together. I had refolved to appear collecied, unembarrafled» I fat down to my mufic, and began a fprightly air. I played for an hour in a fimilar manner. Fribourg arofe from his chair, and ap¬ proaching the piano, he felečted from among the pieces a melancholy air. « Will
fl 5 " Will you play this ?" he faid, placing it before me. €C Why fo melancholy ?" faid 1 ------· *« Choofe fomething more lively.'* * ff This is more in unifon with my feelings," he rejoined. I durft not raife røy eyes nor reply, but I commenced the air. Fribourg leaned over the back of my chair. I heard him figh. My fingers trembled, but I proceeded. Again he fighed. " Do not continue that ftrain," at length he faid, " it unnerves mc." <c One more chearful," faid I fal t ring¬ le
цб
iy, and turning over the mufic leaves with rapidity. " No, let us read/' he anfwered, €< and leave your inftrument." <* I will get my embroidery," faid I. " No, you will be fuftkiently em¬ ployed in attending to me.*' I made no further refinance, but arofe and feated myfeif on the fofa. Fri¬ bourg drew near, and commenced a book which he drew from his pocket.— It was * Charlotte and Werter/ His voice vibrated to my heart, as, foftened or elevated by the fubječt, he energeti¬ cally read it. I liftened with emotion. I leaned
1 Ч I leaned my .head on one hand ; the other hung down. The hand of Fri¬ bourg fought it as he continued. Invo¬ luntarily he preffed it, and it remained clafped in his. The tears trickled down my face : I could not refift them. Fri¬ bourg paufed. He gazed on me—His arm gently encircled my waift—He drew nearer, and I felt it tremble round me with uncommon tranfport. He ef- fayed to fold me to his breafl. « Fribourg!'* I exclaimed,and ftarted from him. " Oh, pardon me, my Cazire; it is not in nature always to forbear. Could you but feel as í do—could—" *« 1 fhould
ив
€ * I fhould endeavour to conquer røy feelings/' î İternîy rejoined. &t So I do/' he replied, with agitated earneftnefs. " I feel that I fliould tear myfeif from your fociety—that ï íhould leave for ever this fpot of fafcination: I feel myfeif imprudent/' u And guilty/'added I. " Not guilty," he rejoined, <c for love, Cazire, is an involuntary fenfa¬ tion, therefore not guilty; but far lefs fo when it is excellence we love/* α Oh, Fribourg," I exclaimed, cn- anguiflicd, €i deride me not. Excel¬ lence !
ii9 lence! Oh no ; vile, diflionourable, wretched !" * c Forbear this facrilège, Cazire/' he cried. " Vile ! torture not your feel¬ ings with the fuppofition.** «* Fribourg, you know not what you fay ; you know not what an angel is St. Elmer." u St. Elmer !" returned Fribourg; 1 hold his happinefs dearer than my life. For worlds I would not mar it/* cc Fly then/* I quickly cried, clafping my hands together, u fly for ever, Fri¬ bourg, and preferve it !"
" Cruel,
İSO
x< Cruel, inexorable Cazire ! my life is yours: but—your harfh command—* oh, how fhall I obey it?—I cannot leave you/' he added, preffing his hands convulfively to his forehead. u What will become of us both if you do not ?" I wildly ejaculated. " My Cazhe, why this emotion ?" ** Do you hold then as nothing *he happinefs cf a hufband—and fuch a hufband—-one whofe whole foul doats on the wretch before you ? Does Fri¬ bourg no longer hold it criminal to in¬ jure another ?" * r And how fliall my love injure St. Elmer?
121
Elmer? How can I detrae from his happinefs by adoring Cazire ?'* H Oh, yes, yes, Fribourg —you 4now too well—you are too fenfibie of the fatal—" I ftopped. " Cazire/' he rapturoufly exclaimed, fnatching me to his bofom, " my foul is delirious at the fweet convieion Oh, no—St. Elmer cannot be—is not injured by this !" "Oh, great God!" I cried; "Fri¬ bourg, you diftraci me I—Rcleafe me, for Flea vc n' s ía kc ľ'
VOL. III.
С
I arole
1?ч2 1 arofe with precipitation, and pufhing him wildly from me, ruihed out of the room·
ŕ 123
CHAP. VÍL TME FATAL SEDUCER. I DURST not look upon Sí. Elmer. I retired haftily to bed, and fcalding tears bedewed my pillow. iC Wretched, fatal attachment !" I fobbed in agony : " I had hoped ere now thou wert extinguiihed in my breaft.— Lo, its idol comes! But the с 2 fpace
124 fpace ofa moment appears the time we were feparated ; forgotten our mutual refignation, when moft it íhould be re¬ membered—all, all fwallowed up in the overpowering torrent of a wild, un¬ governable paflion.—Miferable being that 1 am ! Guilty as miferable!" And then 1 thought of, and perhaps lamented, the ftrange combinations of my deftiny. When ardently I loved Fribourg —when, too, he adored me— then was he fhackled, and í refigned him to the fuggeilions of duty. Now a sain we meet. Still blazes the tri- о uniphant paftion ftrongei and more wild than ever; but Fribourg is no fooner free than I am fettered, it is in vain to attempt at conquering a fen'iment en- chorded
125 chorded with every fibre of my heart; a fentiment which, though dor¬ mant, has never been even momentari¬ ly extinguiihed.—And why muft it bc extinguiihed? thought I. My brain paufed delighted on the queilion,------ Will St, Elmer ever judge of my af¬ fection ? How then ihall he become unhappy ? Befide, did ever I, before the wretched Fribourg trefpaffed hither, did ever I regard St. Elmer with the fame emotions as 1 feel for him ? Was it not a fèntiment fuperior to love—-a fèntiment of awe, of adoration, with which f regarded him ? Was he not too immaculate for common aŕľccl ion ? ìnlovmg Fribourg as an equal, then, I grant him that St. Elmer never pof- fcfled, which therefore cannot be a de- о 3 privation,
X2Ő
privation to him, and muft remain un¬ known. v Thus did I endeavour to fopbifticate away every particle of honour and of juftice, and thus did I feek arguments for the indulgence of a paffion from the bare idea of which I fliould have recoiled with horror· Fribourg had faid our loves could not injure my hufband : I now imagined he had fpoken truth» I fek convinced of ir, but I determined to know on what he grounded his afľertion. The caufe of guilt is ever on the watch for bor* rowed ilrength, ever doubtful of its own.
I heard
ia/ I heard St. Elmer enter my chamber, and I feigned fleep, for I dared not look upon him. Gently he approached the bed, and undrew the curtains. I felt him bend over me. I heard his fweet voice fervently invoke a bleíľmg on my guilty head. Tears ftole involuntarily through my clofed eyelids : my heart experienced an acute pang. Deeply he fighed, and lamented the forrows of a heart which the moment before had been machinating againft him* How dreadful were the conflicts of my bo¬ fom ! To what end did I cherifh a paffion in its delufive tendency fo fatal ? What could I ever anticipate or hope ? —In agony I fhuddered at myfeif. But on the following evening, itili in 04 a dream
128 a dream of pleafure, I found myfeif converfing with Fribourg, liftening to him, and drinking in delufion to my fenfes. At length, blufliing at my im* prudence, I made an effort to rife.«—* Fribourg feized my hand, and drew me toward him. ** Would you fo foon leave me?" he faid, with befeeching languor, " Soon ?" repeated I, averting my eyes. ** Stay buta moment/' he faid,gently feating me within his arms. î had no power to refift, but I trem¬ bled
129 bled with agitation. My heart vibrated with increafed emotion. M Time was," faid he, « when Cazire poífeffedmore confidence in me—when alone flie durft wander with me far be¬ yond all human eye," " Times are altered/' faid I, and again attempted to rife. " Once too/' he purfued, foftly re* taining me, " fhe repented of her gene¬ rous confidence—fhe facrificed me to a fancied impulfe of duty/* Infidious deluder ! he touched on the chord moft fufceptible of fwift vibration ; and looking on him, g 5 " Fri-
1 30 " Fribourg,** I faid, in a reproachful accent, " imaginary as he deemed that duty, implicitly and eafily regarded it. Fribourg then, if he poifefled affection, îeamt well the power of conquering it.'* ut Unjuft," cried Fribourg, with emo¬ tion. " My own ideas were then, as now, immutable upon the fubjecì; ; but it was to your happinefs I facrißced my own. 1 faw that, with the fentiments you poffeffed, to turn you from your fancied fyftem of juftice would be to overwhelm you in mifery ; I felt that Cazire was not indifferent to me—that in time flie might acquiefce io what the ardency of my paffion had once pro¬ posed, that ihe would fly with me ; and the dreadful confcioufnefs vifued my heart
*3* heart that ihe would curfe me afterwards, in the bitternefs of her remorfeful an- guifli. When in the artlefs innocence of her foul (he deigned to write to me, oh, what then were my fenfations I how, in agony, did honour combat with my feelings î how I longed, yet dread¬ ed, to yield ail to love ! * But honour ftill prevailed. I felt your wretchednefs w r ould be certain, and forbore, diffracted as I was, to tempt you : but the ftruggle to avoid you nearly broke my heart; though I would rather it had done fo than that yours íhould have felt a future pang." ·* You could not avert the fatality of' my deftiny, Fribourg/' I blufhingly laid, delighted at the fweet conviction с β that
132 that he had ever loved me. " Could I have experienced, think you, more mi¬ fery than I already have ?" Fribourg had never glanced upon the fubjecì of Lindorf, and, though now urged^ with fcrupulous delicacy avoided the flighted retrofpečlion. Never had the name of Lindorf efcaped his lips. u I have heen fince convinced," he purfued, <£ that I no lefs than you }ieided only to a vifionaiy duty; I have been fince convinced that happi- nefs might have fmiled upon us, and bitterly í regret my having paifed in eiror the fairéit rofe of my exiftence. ! have learnt experience, but, as ufual, it comes lagging along after the death of hope.
»33 hope. Never again will fuch another bloom in my melancholy path !" I felt the whole force of his allufion. u Now to yield," I replied, in anex- preffive accent, cc would be more than ever guilty. So long as the gratifica¬ tion of felfean militate againft the hap¬ pinefs of others, fo long it is an indif¬ penfable duîy to forego it. ï * « Provided it could be proved to mi¬ litate againft the happinefs of others/' anfwered Fribourg. " it would in the prefent cafe/ 7 faid I, difdaining implication.
"Can
44 ш( Can you prove it, Cazire ?" « The happinefs of St. Elmer—", I rejoined hefitatingly, as though the pu¬ rity of his name were fuliied in my ex¬ preffion. " Our happinefs could never injure his/* replied Fribourg. " While he is uaconfcious of our love he retains his peace." " But his honour is outraged by the concealment/' í replied. ** His honour is lefs than a prejudice. Honour is a thing fo variable, fo futile, fuch a bubble of cuftom, that it is folly to amplify on it. If, unknown to me, you can
*35 can deprive me of a limb, rob me of a treafure which 1 ihall not feel the lofs of, you in reality infH8 on me nopain, you do me no injury, and 1 dare not accufe you. Can it ever be a crime to love then, think you ?" " I wifh I could think it were not," fighed I. " Is it nor, as I faid laft night, an in¬ voluntary fenfation ?" íť It is," I anfwered, fadiy confeious ; ** but the lengths to which it may carry
** Can never be criminal," he re¬ joined, ' l That which is not evil ia its caufe
caufe ilio ul d not be deemed fuch in its effects. Befide, man is the creature of fenfation ; how can he command his feel¬ ings ? Will not a wound give pain ? Will not heat ma cold differently affect his bodily fyftem ? Is there not an ir- rciiflible power, a fomething indefinable to himfelf, which actuates the affections of his mind ? How can he be account¬ able for that which involuntarily enters his heart, which he could not guard againft becaufe he could not anticipate, and which he cannot conquer becaufe its innovations were at firft irrepreflible ?" Ci But though the emotion itfelf may be ur conquerable, we may endeavour to avoid yielding to its impulfes.'' " Jt
»37 "It is ufeiefs; for as far as involun¬ tary injury can extend, it is accelerated in the fimple wiih it were no crime to yield. For example—I idolize an ob¬ ject : ihe prefers another, it is impof¬ fibie, therefore, íhe can love me; but that is not her fin. Preference is invo¬ luntary î ftill I am as much injured in her love for that other as I could be in her yielding to it. She deprives røe of nothing I poifefled not 5 íhe compli¬ ments my deluded feelings againft every law of truth anď of fincerity ; íhe up¬ holds me in fancied Elyfium, and injures me more in the real alienation of her heart than ever fhe could in the acknow¬ ledgment of its alienation. Thus the wifti alone to yield is our imaginary crime ;
i38 crime; but while that wiih is innate, without our power to counteract ir, its guilt at once is obviated;" • fc And do you hold," faid 1, " that the delufion which charms is more criminal than the imcerity which wounds ?" ** Not to the daftard wretch who loves delufion. If we confider the real nature of evil, certainly if we confider only what the world terms fuch. No 5 moft beings are fond oí fweet deception, but î could bc happ; in the bittereit a* vowal/* u Oh, Fribourg Fribourg, you de- it roy
*39 fíroy me, you bewilder me with the fo- phiftry of your arguments ! 1 am loft in their mazes of déftructive tendency,'* " Why would Cazire call the dawn- ings of conviâion fophiftry ? Why, if fhe feel not the truth of my arguments, need flie fear them ?" ** Oh, it was ever thus !" I cried in agony, endeavouring to rife. He held me clofer to his bofom. i( You mv?- not go, Cazire—you muft not always leave me thus agitated, as though I were a turbulent demon with whom peace could never dwell."
i( In
140 tť In pity, Fribourg, fuffer me to de¬ part." if In fiiendfhip at leaft, Cazire." u Alas ! 1 άο, 3 ' anfwered I. " Will you not feal it ?** he added, with befeeching languiftiment. " And iliall 1 then be free?*' I tre¬ muioufly inquired. Cs Do you condition, Cazire ?" " I truft to your honour then/ 1 re- fumed I. His
lét His lips dwelt on mine with trembling ccftacy. I tore myfeif from his embrace.
142
СНЛР. VIÍT. DES ÍR UCTI О К. ОН, how dreadful, how agonizing were my fenfations ! in vain 1 wifhed the language of Fribourg would fpeak convidion to my foul. An intuitive fomething perfuaded me 1 was a wretch ; i felt it in every glance of St. Elmer ; his every endearment was a poniard to my heart, i wiihed for the annihilation of
143 of thè globe, that 1 might lofe the re¬ membrance of myfeif. In vain I deteft- ed my guilt ; in vain I was convinced of my infamy. I felt all, and repented but to fin again. Sometimes I hoped that to love Fri¬ bourg, to delight in his tendernefs, to adore his fociety, could not be inimical to the peace of my hufband, couid not injure his honour, while I determined to preferve it inviolable, and fooner to lofe my exiftence than momentarily tref- pafs againft it, even in idea. I endea¬ voured to hope the paffion of my foul became lefs criminal, for ftill I thought his happinefs fecure while he remained unconfcious. Thus like the filly moth hovered I in imaginary fafety round the dangerous
44 dangerous blaze; like it, too fearing no deftručtion, the viciim of fatal teme¬ rity. Meantime the friend of St. Elmer s though now out of авиа! danger, ftill remained in a ftate the moft alarming. The lady whom, but for his fudden ill- nefs, he fliould have married, had, du¬ ring its continuance, eloped with ano¬ ther. The horror of her perfidy had deranged his intelleÜs, and nearly oc¬ cafioned a relapfe. Even yet the fatal conféquences remained, and St. Elmer almoft /eared ^>r the recovery of his friend, " Yet was it not fortunate," would he fometimes fay, ťí that my friend fhould has<
HS have been, by the intervention of Pro¬ vidence as it were, preferved from an union fo déftructive ? Were к not even better to have loft his life than too late have witneffed the agonizing perfidy ofa woman he adored ? Oh, what could ever have equalled that?" he added. u The extinction of every hope, the de¬ privation of all earthly good, never, never could fo have torn his heart-" How did this emphatic apoftrophe flioot like a poifoned arrow through my breaft ! how warm tingled on my cheek the confeious blufh of íhame ! Still theabfencesof St. Elmer, though they became ku ftated, were frequent. The fociety of Fribourg grew hourly vol. in. ц dearer
Чб
èearer to me from habit. I felt I could not have exifted without him ; and while my hufband was employed in the philanthropic duties of a benevolent heart, he was becoming the viciim of its impulfes. At length, however, his fnend grew nearly convalefcent. He was more at home. 1 had fewer opportunities of dreaming away my hours in the converfe of Fribourg ; and while I Ian ¿uifhed in forrow at the deprivation, confcience bitterly reproached me for the caufe. The dreadful flruggles of my mind were apparent in the univerfat melancholy which affailed me ; the bloom of health faded gradually from my cheek, and St. Elmer became diflracied. In vain«
47 vain be urged me to difclofe to him my fecret woe. No, I turned in horror from the inquiry, and lamented my guilt.—-—Still my attentions toward him fuifered no diminution. I adored his quiet—his peace was dearer to me than Heaven iifelf, even at the very mo¬ ment 1 was militating againft it. 1 was like a pitying executioner, weeping while ï ftruek the blow. Now drew nigh the gay carnival. It animated the hearts of all but the con- fcience-ftricken and the hypochondriac, St* Elmer determined we fhould par¬ take of the reigning feftivity. His af¬ fectionate heart continually fought ex¬ pedients to alleviate a forrow which in us very nature was an injury to his love к s. —which
—which he fhould have curfed me for cheri íh ing— -which he was too noble to fufpecì. ît arrived at length— tbc nobility of Italy aftembled. Care, with its leaden wand, feemed bammed from the mirth¬ ful group ; the houfes of the great were thrown open - public rooms were illu¬ minated for the reception of' all ; gondo¬ las, filled with mufic and covered with lights, glittered on the water. Sufpicion fled its gloomy haums difmayed ; and Melancholy, with her folded arms, bent far her folitary ftcps. Even to me was the Rene delightful i not in the penfive mufic fiealing foft along the fliore —not in the gentle íplafhing of the dilla n t oars, nor in the fparkling of a thoufand
49 thoufand lamps reflected in the íhining waters—but in the enjoyment of Fri- bourg's fociety, free, unconftrained, amid the luxurious croud. How de¬ lighted, in an earthly paradife, did I hang upon his arm ! how, with reno¬ vated joy, every evening hail the fweet moment when we met ! St. Elmer, delighted by the change wrought in a few days on my fpirits, weari d imagination in adding to my pkafure. He fuffered not an hour to pafs unenjoyed, and gazed wkh rapture on my altered countenance. The car¬ nival had already lafted three weeks. The goddefsof pleafure ftill feemed un¬ wearied ; ftill her votaries facrificed to her with unabated fervour. «3 it
*5° It was one evening that, leaning on the arm of St. Elmer, we were fuddenly feparated by the croud. Habituated, however, to the feftive fcene, I pro¬ ceeded without alarm, fuppofing we fliould prefently meet. Not p-rceiving him immediately, however, I deter¬ mined to reft awhile, and entered a room fet apart for refr^fhmcnts. Reclining on a fofa, with his maik off, (the glow of exercifeand pleafure on his cheek, his dark ringlets fliading his fore¬ head, and the drefs of his bofom partly open to admit the re fre filing airj lay Fribourg. He ftarted at my entrance; but taking off my mafk, fmilingly I re¬ quefted him not to be alarmed.
" Cazire/'
15* *' Cazire/* he exclaimed, u I had given up the hopes of meeting you alone this evening. Say, my life, ihall we walk, and (hatch a few moments from interruption ?'* He drew my hand through his arm ; we replaced our mafks, and without paffing the croud again left the apart¬ ment by another door, which opened immediately into a delightful garden. Our fouls feemed attuned to love and rapture. Never before had 1 felt myfeif fo happy in the fociety of him 1 adored. I hung entranced on the mufic of his voice ; and, far from the noify-laugh- ing croud, î feemed to tread on air amid the heavenly calm that reigned around m 4 us.
152 us. We entered at length a kind of grotto ereüed at the extremity of the garden, lhe moon caft her penfive beams aflant it, through the thick foliage of inter¬ vening trees ; and in the fighings of the luxuriam gale now and then was wafted a note of diliant mufic. We fat together. His arm encircled my waift. Mine was thrown almoft un- confeioufly around his neck. The fra¬ grance of furrounding flowers springing aimoit at our feet—the fentimental ra¬ diance of the moon—the heavenly lan¬ guor which di if u fed the air-—the foft filence, fcarcely interrupted by the dy¬ ing echo of remoteft founds—carried, undei vaiious forms, intoxication to the fenfes, and left the heart α guaidlefs vieim to hisfweet fenfations, Fıİ bourg
*53 Fribourg removed his mafií, and un- refilling I fuffered him to takeofFmine. Soft emotion trembled inhis voice; and the predire of his hand, in which mine was clafped, thrilled through my bofom with keen and indefcribable pkafure.-— He approached my lips, and ventured on them a foft faîute. My hand fhook in his.—I half returned his kifs ; and glowing with fhame, dared not to meet his gaze,—-There was a rofe in my bo- ibm, and the hand of Fribourg wan¬ dered toward it. Alarmed, hail'iy ï put it afide, and endeavoured to with- diaw. u Cazire !" he exclaimed in a tender, .faltering voice» h 5 < ς Fri-
4i u Fribourg ľ* í anfwered in an em¬ phatic accent, as though I meant re¬ proach, He gazed on me, and drew me clofer in his arms. Involuntarily my eyes met his. Their expreffion difarmcd my foul, and I fink unrefi fling on his breaíL—- In an inftant his lips were fixed on mine«—then they dwelt upon my bofom.—I fighed deeply. I was con¬ feious but carelefs of my danger.—-— Tofled in a delirium of paflion, every nerve in arms, 1 was indifferent to all but his tranfports—his breath of glow¬ ing ardour-— h s trembling agony, as he entwined me in his embrace—I was indifferent to virtue, to the world, to every
45 every thing but love and Fribourg.-— I fealed my déftruetion in his arms—I blafied for ever the honour and the hap- 'pinefs of an hufband.
h 6
î 56
CHAP. IX. H О R R O R ! IN what an abyfs of guilt and mifery did I recover from my delirium of с pleafure ! ît had vanifhed as a fairy dream fiom a wietch poifefled by de¬ mons, and awaking to aH the horrors of confcioufnefs. Could I vent my an¬ guifh in reproach? alas! no—it were impotent to ex] refs it. How
47 How did I reach my home ? How did I receive from St. Elmer the joyful em¬ brace of welcome ? He had fought after mein vain. He had imagined I was returned, and flown after me on the wings of anxious love. О God \ can ever I defcribe the excruciating horrors of my mind? How did I call on mad¬ nefs to blunt its tortures! how pray for blindnefs, to be faved the agony of meeting his innocent glance ! how for the earth to open and fwaliow me, that 1 might be preferved from the bitter conviction of my guilt ! How did I pafi the night I Powers of mercy! Sometimes I fancied myfclf labouring under the influence of a ter¬ rific dream—that my crime was imagi¬ nary·—
*38 nary —that I was incapable of fuch black, irremediable infamy. ï endea- vourtd to throw off the weight which oppreíľed me but ah ! in vain.—Sud¬ denly the dreadful confcioufnefs would ruih like a dark and foaming cataract over my fenfes.— in agony I ftarted.-— Was I indeed the wretch, the miferable wretch of waking reafon?—It was no ideal rmfery.—·Could it indeed be?— Had I at once forfeited my firm, invio¬ lable refoiution ? Had I facrificed all in a wretched, tranfitory delufion? Had I broken thiough my facred vow ? Al¬ ready the curfe became fulfilled,—I felt indeed the forgotten of Heaven! And was I now the fiend, the devil 1 had pourtrayed^—Who could injure, even in idea, St» Elmer ?—I was more, tf pof¬ fible,
159 fible, tbarç devil, for 1 had injured him beyond thiţ power of thought— î had laid low, forever, the fairy fabric of his happinefs. Scarcely were my fenfes re¬ tained. I felt myfeif unfit to live. I thought over his moments of idol¬ izing fondnefs— how he had wooed me to his honourable arms—how he had paffed over, with more than mortal exaltation, my former errors—how he had trufted his whole foul in my care—-how he had relied upon my principles, my affecìions ------oh! there it dabbed! And I had wronged his noble confidence—wounded him in the \ery core oí fufccptibility ! 1 rofe diflracied from my bed ; 1 felt it
χβο it impoffibie any longer to endure the torturing keennefs of my fenfations* St. Elmer was in the adjoining room «—for my foul had ihrunk at the idea of fleeping a violated wretch in his un¬ tainted bofom. Enanguiflied I paced the room. I had reached the climax of guilt—the point which hitherto I had contemplated with immutable horror; I felt it morally impoffibie that my fenti¬ ments could ever change—that ever I could view otherwife my irrevocable crime ; I felt that beyond the power of atonement I had worked the ruin of an angel. I imagined it additional fin to pollute with my breath the air which he inhaled—that í was a monfter too hor¬ rible
l6l rible to live. ï conceived it my duty to die, though all the horrors íhould be mine which formerly I had imagined would haunt the filicide after death, I determined that it fhould be fo ; for fuch punifhmem as that alone could be adequate to my guilt. Inftantly methought I felt relief from the refolve. A weight of horror rofe from my benighted bofom. I looked around me for fome implement of de- Îlruftion. Suddenly I remembered the piftols of St. Elmer were in his ftudy,—· Softly I left my chamber, and defcend- ed* I gained my prize-—They were un¬ loaded. ------Still refolute, I fought for his bullers, and carried them away with frantic joy. Now
ΐβδ
Now then î began my dreadful taik. I loaded one, and left it fliould fail, I loaded the other, and laid it befide me. Then falling on my knees, ï invoked, with ftraining and uplifted eyes, a bjeff¬ ing on St. Elmer. Then I placed the piftoi to my throbbing temple. 1 at¬ tempted to draw the trigger, but my treacherous hand, trembling with agony, not fear, refufed its deftined office.—It fell to the ground, and went off. Maddened at my failure, I feized the other. I dreaded left it fliould be wrefted from my hand.— Lo î my door flew open,—Breathlefs with horror St. Elmer ruihed toward me. He fnatched the piftoi from my nervelefs grafp, and clafped me to his palpitating bofom.
i$3 bofom. I ftruggïed from his embrace, and gazing on him with a fixed defpair, " Miferable man !" I cried, t( you have prevented a deed it was my duty to perform." " Cazire," be exclaimed^ in a terrified accent, and finking on his knees before me, *' Cazire, my foul's idol ! what has thus difordered you ? Oh, for heaven's fake !" he purfued, clafping my knees as my ftraining eyes were fixed upon his countenance, " tell me the caufe of ail this horror !" " Do not come near me, St. Elmer," I ihrieked, pufhing him wildly from me;
1б4 me ; " you know not whom you cm- brace," " I embrace my foul, my every joy in exiftence—my Cazire l'* he anfwer¬ ed j u in pity then, my angel, if you love me—" w Love you, St* Elmer ľ' I frauticly repeated. Cf My idol, be compofed í What can have occafioned this? I thought you feemed difordered, and I liitened to your every movement.** u Oh, Sí* Elmer, would you had flept í " He
i6?5 He ihook with horror. " Retire to bed, my love—'tis nearly morning.—This conftant fatigue has agitated your fpirits. Sleep will revive you/' u Sleep?" I replied, witha convulfive laugh, and gazing piteoufly upon him; 4f Oh, you httle know—" He approached, and endeavoured to lead me toward the bed, but his agony was apparent; and I faw that he ima¬ gined me feized with a fudden phrenzy. Oh, St. Elmer, were it only fo! faid I menially. But little doit thou pre¬ dict the mifery that betides thee I I fuf-
ιββ
ϊ fuffered him io ав as he wifhed.—I reclined upon the bed.—He leaned his head upon the pillow befide me, and I thought he fobbed, I ftretched toward him my burning hand, and lair' t on his cheek. I felt his tears. €i Does hc then weep lor me ?'' faid I. The idea ftrung afrefh my high- wrought agony. I fprang from the bed to pour out at his feet my guilt—-I funk before him on my knees, embracing his with convulfive emotion* I raifed my dry and burning eyes to his counte. nance.
<* Oh,
Η Oh, St. Elmer ! you know not the wretch for whom you weep ; you know not how with murderous hand íhe has ftabbed for ever the peace of your bo¬ fom ! Look on me—I am not mad !—* Oh, no, no, I am awake to all the hor¬ rors of reality ! St* Elmer, my injured hufband, I have outraged your facred honour—trampled on your holy love Ì '* Cazire/* be interrupted with hor¬ ror, " what is it you would fay?'* He ftrack his hand to his forehead— be fhook with ngOny 9 and dared not gaze upon me. ■„
" Yes,
1 68
*« Yes, yes, it is fo indeed í She whom you adored—whom in the hal¬ lowed fancìuary of your arms you faved from obloquy—whom you preferved from mifery------fhe, ihe has forgotten, has difregarded all, in the deiufions ofa fatal—" My voice became fuffocated with rifing aiijj 1 'ih ; my harrowed eyes were bent on \ j ancy.—How did I make the dreadful, agonizing confeffion? I know not.—The name of Fribourg iffued from my trembling lips—- St. Elmer darted from my trembling grafp.—Convulfively I firuggled to re¬ tain him. I called on him as my fenfes fleeted
169 fleeted away—my voice became inarti¬ culate. The violence of his tortures had rendered him infenfible even to me* ------ î г еП enhorrored to the floor.
vor., tn.
IJQ
t
CHAP. X. THE MARTYR.---- TUE SUICIDE. WHEN at length I opened my eyes to light and wretchednefs, the dreadful confcioufnefs of all that had paff d ruflied like a meteor over my troubled fenfes. Regardlcfs of all around me— too defperate for control—I flew wildly from my chamber. Fancy reprefented røs hufband engaged in a dreadful com¬ bat
i;i bat with Fribourg —I faw him dripping with imaginary gore, his angel fea¬ tures clad in the pale livery of death. Scarce had the dreadful picture harrow¬ ed up my foul, when fuddenly it became real i fed. ------Pale and bleeding, lo, I met his dying form !—He was borne into the houfe.—Wildly I followed, and fiw them place him· on a bed,—I bent over him.—He fixed on me his dim a*.ci funken eyes.------Oh God ! how can 1 retrace the fcene? An angiiiíhed fmile pervaded his features ; the name of Ca¬ zire faltered on his livid lips ; he at¬ tempted to fay more, but could not— motioned for my hand, and laid it on his faintly-throbbing heart. Gradually the fmile of anguifh faded into one of heavenly ferenİty— It was the expiring ι 2 fmile
1^2 fmile of mercy and of pardon !------His clofing eyes flill turned on me. Feebly he preffed my hand flill clofer to his heart. It remained there till the laft pul fation faded from bcneaih * * * convinced that hope had fled forever, I threw myfeif upon his breathlefs body. Force tore me from it : but I rufhed into my chamber, iaftened it upon the world, and no entreaties could drag me thence. For two days I remained immured. My brain did not burft—Reafon con¬ tinued to point my pangs with inde¬ fcribable horror—-Defpair W3S my only gueft ; and the wildnefs of remorfe and forrow knew no interruption but when the
173 the keennefs of agony for a moment аГ- fifted even fenfation. On the fécond evening I rofe with intent to iffue from my gloomy cham¬ ber—to feek the body of my murdered hufband—to gaze once more upon his lifelefs countenance, and fee if ftill the fmile of pardon dwelt there. Suddenly my door burft open, and Fribourg darted wildly into my chamber* I re¬ garded him with immutable horror. He appeared to me a nend of hell—the blacked and moft diabolical of villains. I ihrunk back. " Cazire/' he cried, gafping for breath, " I am purfued by the officers of juftice—they haften to feize me. ι 3 £ fe
174. Ere long thcy arrive.-™-You muft fly with rae now, or evermore abandon mc." u Wretch î murderer!** I exclaimed, *' dare you to approach me ? Dare you to touch me ?" I added, fnatching in convulfive horror my hands from his wild grafp. u Look down upon your hands—-they are red in a huiband*s blood—the blood of St. Elmer !" 1 averted my eyes from him. «· Cazire—Cazire hates me then :— yet 'twas for her I did the deed." " For ever I abandon the ruffian de¬ void of foul!'* ï cried, frantic at the bitter
'75 bitter avowal ; " thus to deftroy a faint — to dye the vile eanh in his pure and holy blood ! Perdition feize thee, mon¬ iter of depravity î —I do, í do indeed haie thee !'' I added, fhuddering with the violence of my emotion. **Thoti art loathfomein my fight—more dread¬ ed than hell itfelf !——Hell muft bc Heaven without thee! Heaven hell, if thou weit there!" "This from you, Cazire!" he wildly ejaculated. " Retract, oh, retraft, and and fay 'twas frenzy fpoke !" He caft himfelf at my feet, and em¬ braced my knees*
14
His
176* Hts touch unnerved me—it chiikd my foul. ** Away, ferpent, away!" I cried, ftarting from him ; " I will not retract. I hate thee worfe than pefliience. Oh, go from my fight, left í become frantic at thy view/* " Do ï hear aright ?" he cried, dart¬ ing from his knees. " Ob, this is too much f 4is beyond the conception of defpair itfeîf!' ------But I have heard enough.— Capire, faithkfs fyren, fare¬ well î I never fee thee more Í" He darted from the room, and his ab* fence took a load of horror from my Soul« I fought
i 7 7 1 fought the apartment where St. El¬ mer had breathed his laft; I caft myfeif befide his faded form, and gazed upon his angel countenance. The fame fweet fmile with which he had expired itili dwelt upon his lovely features.------ Methought already they wore a caft of Heaven. 'Twas agony, and yet 'twas peace to look upon them. 1 continued gazing till í almoft fancied that he fmiled again.------ ï burft into a flood of tears— my foul fainted within me, as memory retraced the animated fmile with which fo late he had beheld, enraptured, the guilty, miferable Cazire.—Fatal wretch ! 'twas î that in the bloom of ^outh cut iliort his fpotlefs days—4was 1 thai {tabbed to the heart which panted but for me the three-edged dagger of ingra- i 5 mude —
178 titude —that, invulnerable to the idol¬ atry of his foul—that, carelefs of the bleffings he had heaped upon me—in¬ fenfible to the evils he had refcued me from—in one moment forgot and tram¬ pled on them all. Yet with his dying breath he had forgiven me !—-—Oh, St. Elmer î pure and fpotlefs martyr—no crimes, no errors deformed the fair leaf of thy exiftence. Born for the honour and the happinefs of mankind, thy de- fliny involved thee with a wretch who langüiíhed for thy definition : yet for her thou wouldil have facrificed thy foul, and voluntarily have poured out at her feet the blood flie panted to ihed!
Thus
ï79 Thus, as I fat fwallowed up in the in- tenfenefs of my fenfations, gazing with gloomy and irrelievable horror over the murdered body of my hufband, fudden¬ ly the report of a piftoi, followed by a cry of terror, fhook my ihattered frame. Scarcely confeious, I rufhed to whence the found proceeded. In vain officious crouds offered toobftručt my paffage,— I puflied through them.^-------Oh, fight of horror ! I beheld the wretched Fri¬ bourg extended on the floor, and work¬ ing in the agonies of death ! The blood iffued from his lacerated temple—the weapon of deftruBion lay near him. His cold hand grafped a letter ¡and as, his crimes forgotten, wildly I knelt be*» ï 6 fide
i8o
fide hím, he dropped it on my bofom, and his ftruggles ceafed. I read not the letter for long, but I fubjoin it here. The fight of his ago¬ nies harrowed up my tortured foul ¡ my fenfes, wound to the higheft pitch of borror, held me no longer ¡ and finking in convulfions, I was borne fenfelcfs from the fcene of death.
The Later* e ' Cazire, I have deliberated. Hither¬ to the deiufions of a fatal paffion have blinded ray reafon. Your love was the height to which røy foul afpired ? and your
i8i your undivided fociety—when, in all the horrors of defpair, breathing re¬ venge, St. Elmer fought me. He aimed at my life, but failed. Had not Cazire been the matchlefs prize, the hand of Fribourg never had direOed to St. El¬ mers heart the fanguînary blow : but nerved by the mad hope, infpired by the glowing vifion of future poíTeífion, í aimed and conquered. *' At once your reception enlightened and difmayed my foul. I faw that î had gained your hatred only : I felt that ï had fealed your mifery* Was not this enough ? Could I live, and think over the never-dying words— I halt thtt ? — Still they ring in my ears—they fife my frantic brain.—Ob, but a few fhort hours —how
i8a —bow changed I I dare not think,·-—. The conviction of your mifery deter¬ mined me at once.—I had loft all for which I defired to live» I faw, too late, I had miftaken the path of happi¬ nefs. î followed the delufive ihade through mazes of deflruâion. —I feel myfeif the monfter that you called me. ■------1 remember you curfed me too— But let me not fpeak ofthat, fince thus fatally have been the conféquences of a ' fyftem in itfelf not erroneous, but which combining circumftances muri now make appear fo.-—-Never, never fhall a pub-- lie death clofe the career of folly I— That my principles were originally fal¬ lacious the world may believe j that they have injured the happinefs of others Ì, alas! learn too late, and expiate the, conviction
i8 3 convieion with my life.——Thou, who now, as ever, waft my fouľs idol, I bid thee adieu for ever!"
%
i*4
CHAP. XL ALONE I MOURN. I HAVE little more to add. The feenes of horror delineated by my trembling hand clofed the eventful epoch of my deftiny. I remained for long in a ftate of wild and gloomy dif- traction. It was fucceeded by a dark melancholy, which it was imagined would be lading, and two years elapfed before the flighleft dawn of reafon vifited my benighted faculties. Even then, when bufy memory retraced the dread¬ ful events which had chequered the lat¬ ter
1*5 ter portion of my days, fcarcely could its feeble ray exift amid the rifmg hor¬ rors. Life itfelf was the football of the moment ; and when at length I reco¬ vered to fome degree of felf-pofíeffion, it was only to wiih I had expired on the murdered body of St» Elmer in the un¬ availing bitternefs of my woe. My faithful Janetta had written to my mother an account of my fituation. It was fome confolation in my wretched« neh to recognize her penfive features* Sbe had flown on the wings of айеШоп to an alienated daughter, and her tender care had probably preferved my worth- tefs life. She endeavoured to tran¬ quillize my mind, and prevent it from dwelling on its forrows by bending it to fubjeûs
i86
fubjects of a different tendency. She informed me of the refidue of roy fa¬ mily. My father, fhe faid, whofe later fpe- cuhiions had proved abortive, had come to an open rupture with the Rofendorf, and on the remains of a ihattered in¬ come retired, in gloomy mifanthropy, to the country. His heart, opprefled hy misfortune, and too late convinced of its deiufions, ftiil forbore to feek in io his family, the peace he had for ever forfeited ; a tenacious pride preferved bim from avowed repentance, and he determined now to fhunaworld, to gain whofe ephemeral fmiles he had facrificed fo much.
The
* Tİıe Rofendorf thus lofíng ber fup¬ port, and hurled from her meretricious fplendor by the evolution of events, de¬ fpifed and haled by her family, dwelt with mingled horror and remorfe upon her conduo. Gradually ihe funk into a ftate of pining wretchednefs. From re¬ flecting on her infamous career, remorfe ftruck its three-edged dagger to her heart; and the horrors of her mind temporarily fubfiding into the vain, fa¬ natic bigotry of a devotee, rofe at length to religious madnefs; and in a fit of frenzy, acçebrated by the ufe of ar¬ dent fpirits, ihe put a period to her worthkfs exiftence, leaving behind her no regret but for the latenefs of the deed, not a mourner for the horrible cau~ ftrophe. My
*S8
My fifter had been married, and lived peacefully. My brother, who had pro- mifed iliil higher, difgufted, as reafon matured, with the obdurate neglect of his father, had emigrated' to Ameiica, where, having accumulated an inde¬ pendence, he continued tò refide. Thus would my mother with benevo¬ lent anxiety exert herfelf to vary my ideas : but vain her utmoft endeavours. I could not but view myfeif as the fetal caufe of immenfurate evil, and a gloomy dcftødMcy crept over щ Ш. I viawed ihe world with fomçihitıg more than forrow**-I viewed it with hatreds diffatisfaction. ï had fuffered too much ever to make friends with it-«* ever
i8 9 ever to be forgotten. I determined to pafs the remainder of my days in feclu* fion, and I fixed upon the convent of St. Omer-—there, where the martyred St. Elmer had vifited me innocent and happy, unfufpicious of the delirtiction in whicii I was fated to overwhelm him. I made known to my mother my re¬ foiution. She oppofed it with all the arguments of a being not yet tired of exiftence : but vainly ihe fpoke. î configncd my Lindorf to -ber care; I refigned to him the entire poffeffions of St, Elmer, and I bade her adieu. I embraced Janetta, and configncd to her my houfe, ,and then I retired for ever from the world, where I had experi¬ enced fuch variety of wretchednefs, in
igo In the facred folitudes of St. Omer I wrote for my Lindorf this narrative of my melancholy life—a fatal warning to him of the deiufions of paffion, and a warning of the m tier ies which are en¬ tailed by ncglixUng the early formation of the heart and the principles. Thus not entirely to me ihall my errots be afcribed ; their fource is re¬ mote, Had not the fenfe of ¡n ; * and oppreffion ftung my mind ; ii--. I not keenly felt the injuries I fuffered; had İ enjoyed the protection of a father, undivided by fhameful ufurpation, 1 yet had lived innocent and happy, as now I um miferable and guilty. And ye of my own fex ? whofe lie a rts, like
İŞİ like the Rofendorf's, are not yet dead to every fèntiment of virtue and of honour, fliould ever chatice make you acquaint¬ ed with, this narrative of my fufferings, beware how you even curforily infringe on the facred duties of a Father and a Hufband, left ye entail mifery upon the lateft branches of a family—left the hour of repentance fliould arrive when no longer it can avail, and the bitternefs ofremorfcful anguifh flrew with thorns the pillow of death. Truft not, then, to а few fliort hours for purchafing, by their agonies, pardon for a life of crime; the juftice of Heaven will not be fo ap- peafed : nor let, in the fallacious hope, the reign of error be perpetuated a mo¬ ment beyond the forceful warnings of conviction. And
And ye who, like myfeif, are wildly enthufiaftic, beware how you revel in the gay deiufions of fantaftic fentiment; or bow, under the fpecious guife cf fo¬ phiftry, ye admit the dangerous innova¬ tions of the Paffions. Believe me, dé¬ ftruetion is their bafement; and Expe¬ rience comes too late, fhaking her ftam- ing torch over the fatal havoc they h^ve caufed.
THE $ND*
»nrttdly D* N SIS'MY* Btf*:j Stutt, Sve*.
