Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
An angel's form and a devil's heart: a novel
AN
Angels Form St a Devii' s Hear L
CHAPTER 1.
IHLARA Lindsay, who had contrived to make the house unbearable to every body within it, was standing one morning at the parlour window, looking anxiously into the road, when a servant in a hand¬ some livery rode hastily by, and soon after a coach and four, followed by two out¬ riders, with Charles and Frederic Man¬ ningham on horseback, passed the house. An instantaneous change took place in the countenance of Clara; the gloom of discontent, whicii had obscured her fea- vol. il ? tures
tures and spoiled their beauty, gave place to the joyful smile of pleasure; and she hastened to request of her father that Ed¬ ward might be sent for, as the Manning¬ hams had arrived. "I am glad of it, my dear child," said Mr. Lindsay, " since I shall now expect to see you wear a more contented face than you have lately done Lady Man¬ ningham little imagines how deep an in¬ terest vou take in her concerns, and how much we have all suffered from your im¬ patience to see her. However, my child, i trust tha. you will not be disappointed in your expectations of amusement and happiness." " No fear of that," cried Clara; " but pray send Oliver for Edward, as I expect that Charles and his brother will call here this evening." As usual, the request of Clara was im¬ mediately granted, and honest Oliver was dispatched to Mr. Curwen's, to fetch home Edward with all possible expedition; while
while Clara hurried to her chamber to select from her wardrobe the dress which she thought would best become her for the next morning's introductory visit. Her maid, who for the last ñve weeks had been the constant sport of her ill-humour, was now ordered to attend her. The poor girl obeyed with fear and trembling ; but she no sooner beheld the altered looks of her young mistress, than she compre¬ hended the cause, and sat down with alacrity to perform her orders, knowing that, for a time at least, she should be free from persecution. This young person was a compound of cunning and ignorance; but she had been chosen by Miss Lindsay to attend her, much against the better judgment of her mother, who saw many things in Sally's conduct which made her dislike her to be about the person of her daughter. Clara had resolved to have no other than Sally, and her parents, as was their custom, weakly yielded to her wishes. R â Sally
Sally in her heart, and in secret among her fellow-servants, acknowledged Miss Lindsay to be the veriest tyrant in exist¬ ence ; but her place was a good one, and her perquisites were numerous ; she there¬ fore bore with patience all the caprices of her mistress, who had even gone so far as to strike her in the heat of her passion ; but this act of violence was quickly atoned by a present worth the acceptance of Sally, who would have borne a good many blows from the fair hand of Clara, to be as handsomely rewarded for each. " Sally," said Miss Lindsay, in a conci¬ liating voice, tt I have gained my wish at last. The Manninghams are arrived, and to-morrow I shall be introduced to them." " I am glad of it, Miss, and I hope you may find them pleasant people; for I'm sure you have been unhappy enough for these five long weeks. It was quite piti¬ ful to see you worry yourself almost to death, as you did. 1 am glad they are come at last." « Well,
** Well, I believe that you are a good girl, Sally. I own that I have been out of temper very often lately ; but now I shall be too happy, and too much amused, to be cross—at least with you, Sally. There is five shillings for you to spend at the ensuing fair—it will buy you and Oliver some gingerbread nuts. Oliver is a faithful servant, and I believe is really attached to me." Sally accepted the money with joy.— " Yes, Miss," said she, " Oliver is a faith¬ ful worthy creature, and loves you as dearly as I do." Sally felt this to be no falsehood, as she was well acquainted with Cover's opinion of her young lady. tt I should like, Sally, were it possible for this desire of mine to be accomplished, that you could get acquainted with some of the servants at the Hall, and through them learn the real characters of lady Man¬ ningham and her family : I shall only see them in their best humours; and it is ? 3 impossible
impossible to know any person thorough¬ ly, unless you live under the same roof with them." " It is indeed, Miss," replied Sally, archly. " Many a fine lady would never get a husband, if she w l ere to be seen by him at all hours, and at all times. But I will do my best to obtain your desire, Miss; I will call to-morrow evening on Mrs. Nor¬ ton, and perhaps I shall hear something from her, or from some of the Lunnen servants." Clara, delighted at the idea of being able to gain, through Sally's means, the in¬ telligence she wished, promised to reward her liberally if she succeeded in her secret mission. " But you must be careful not to drop a word to any one," said Miss Lindsay, *' that your inquiries are by my desire. Should you do this, you will for ever for¬ feit my favours : I shall send you back to your own poor home, and never notice you again." This
This threat was sufficient to seal up the lips of Sally : interest, not affection, made her the ready slave to the will of her mis¬ tress, who, when her own gratification was to be obtained, bestowed her gifts with no niggard hand. Sally knew this, and therefore resolved to gain, if possible, all the private history of the baronet's fainii) from some one or other of the domestics, and thus make herself of importance in the estimation of her haughty lady. The heart of Edward bounded with joy, as the sound of the village bells met his ear, which were ringing merrily when Oli¬ ver reached Mr. Curwen's. " They are come ! they are come !" cried he, exultingly, as he seized the arm of Oliver, and hurried forward. " How kind, how considerate of Miss Lindsay, to send for me home !" tí Yes, they be come, sure enough, mas¬ ter Edward," said Oliver, "as sure as Miss Clara told me to run all the way, and never stop until I got to Mr. Curwen's. ? 4 So
So I did as she bid me, out of love to you, master Edward; for I knew that you would be pleased to see me on this er¬ rand." " I am always pleased to see you, Oli¬ ver," said Edward, " but doubly so at the present moment, since you are the mes¬ senger of such joyful news. This evening I shall most likely see Frederic Manning¬ ham, and to-morrow------" i4 Why, sure enough, master Edward," cried Oliver, interrupting him, " you be as madly fond of that there family as our Miss Clara : only that you have not made every body miserable about you as she has done, 'cause they staid longer than she expected. I saw the carriage drive along the road, as I stood at the furthest gate, and I prayed God to bless them as they past, for I knew they would bring peace and quiet to us all." " Did you see the Miss Manninghams, Oliver?" inquired Edward, eagerly. " Ay, master Edward, I thought you would
would be asking me that question. I just got a sight of two very pretty young ladies : the youngest had eyes as black as a coal, cheeks like a rose, and a smile that did my heart good to see it. I thought at the time of you, master Edward, and I said το myself, what a sweet companion she would be for you !" " That must have been Flora," cried Edward, quickening his pace. *' Frederic told me that she had one of the loveliest smiles in the world." " Except your own, master Edward," replied Oliver ; " and your smile has such an odd effect upon one, it seems to make the blood tingle in one's veins, and one's very heart to dance again with joy. I'm sure, if I was dying, it would do me good to see you smile." Edward instinctively, and without mean¬ ing to do so, smiled at this moment upon his affectionate companion. It came from his heart, now full of the most delightful emotions, the most pleasing hopes; anel ? 5 Oliver
Oliver felt the full force of it, as it met his gaze. iS No wonder, master Edward," said he, " that you have such power over Miss Claia, and that she loves you better than any body in the whole world, except her¬ self." Cl? ra's impatience had brought her to the gate to meet her favourite. As soon as she beheld him, she flew r to seize his hand, and to tell him, what he already knew, that the Manninghams were ar¬ rived. She would then have hurried him into her own chamber, that she might converse until she was tired on the old theme, had not Edward reminded her that it was necessary for him to pay his respects to her parents. In the evening, the brothers, as Clara had anticipated, called to inquire after the health of their hospitable friends. An absence of five weeks had, to the imagi¬ nation of Charles, improved the beauty of Miss Lindsay, and in the true spirit of boyish
boyish gallantry, he was lavish of his praises, requesting her, at the same time, to accept, for his sake, an elegant trinket, which he had bought on purpose for her. The next morning, the Lindsays, ac¬ companied by Edward, proceeded to the Hall, where they were met by the bro¬ thers, who had already acquainted their parents with the kindnesses they had re¬ ceived from that family. They now con¬ ducted their friends into a large old- fashioned parlour, hung round with pic¬ tures of various subjects, which at any other time would have fixed the attention of Edward ; but now he could only see one object, and that was the youngest sister of Frederic. Lady Manningham, as well as sir Charles, received their visitors with flat¬ tering politeness. They considered that they were their nearest neighbours, and that to them they might therefore be in¬ debted for much of their social amuse¬ ments during their stay at the Hall. On ? 6 thivs
this account, lady Manningham, in par¬ ticular, cast aside her natural haughtiness of deportment, and behaved to the Lind¬ says in a manner that made them per¬ fectly satisfied with their reception. While the elder part of the company were engaged in conversation upon vari¬ ous topics, the more youthful had removed to the window, which commanded a por¬ tion of that rich scenery, which had so often charmed the taste of Edward ; but now he couid only look at Flora's down¬ cast eyes, and blushing cheeks, as she leaned against the bosom of Frederic. Her brother's arm was thrown affectionately round her neck, which might have vied with the purest alabaster for its whiteness, serving as a beautiful contrast to the jetty ringlets, which fell in wild profusion over her fine-turned shoulders. The colour on her cheek was, as Oliver had said, hke the rose; and her long black eyelashes, and arched brows, added to the beauty of her countenance. An observation of Frederic's
Frederic's made her raise her eyes to his ; she smiled—it was indeed a smile so full of sweetness, so full of sisterly affection, that Edward's heart danced with joy. She spoke, and as her little dimpled mouth opened to give utterance to her thoughts, his searching glance discovered, what was not the least of her perfections, a set of small, regular, white teeth. Edward listened to the soft tones of Flora's voice, and thought it the sw r eetest that he had ever heard ; it seemed to har¬ monize with the loveliness of her form and the tenderness of her features, and he considered Frederic to be one of the happiest boys in the world, to have such a sister as Flora. Miss Lindsay, who with Charles and Constantia had moved to another win¬ dow, now beckoned to him to join her party. They had been talking about Ed¬ ward, and his extraordinary talent for painting; and Miss Manningham, who was herself an artist of no mean abilities, expressed
expressed a wish to have some conversa¬ tion with him upon the subject—" As," said she, smilingly, " I cannot place entire confidence in the warm descriptions of Fre¬ deric, for he is a prejudiced judge. I must, however, confess, that never in my life have I before beheld a countenance and eyes so highly expressive of superior genius." The result of half an hour's conversa¬ tion was such as to stamp r n the mind of Miss Manningham an entire con v -etion of Edward's value, aithoug ι nothing could be more modest than the terms in which he spoke of his own knowledge and pro¬ gress in the art. This modesty was the more captivating, as it came from one possessed of qualifications of the higher order, and of talents as versatile as they were rare; and Miss Manningham was as much struck by the person, and man¬ ners, and conversation of Edward, as be was flattered by the marked attention which she paid him during his stay. She willingly consented to call the next day on Miss
Miss Lindsay, wdio assured her, what she felt to be true, that the inspection of Ed¬ ward's drawings would afford her much pleasure. The Lindsays returned home, perfectly satisfied with their visit, and full of the praises which each were ready to bestow on the family at the Hall. Clara was enchanted with Constantia, wdio she hoped would become her constant companion; while her father anticipated, with equal sanguineness of mind, the social pleasures which he should derive from the acquaint¬ ance of sir Charles. Mrs. Lindsay was too much of the invalid, to promise her¬ self any great amusement from the society of their new neighbours ; but, for the sake of Clara and Edward, she resolved to cultivate it, as much as the state of her health w r ould permit. In expectation of their returning her visit the next day, Edward was desired to remain at home-— a desi hieh he gladly complied
complied with, as he hoped by so doing to gain another sight of Flora. As soon as he had leisure, he went to the apartments which Mr. Lindsay had expressly set aside for his use: one was fitted up as his painting-room, and was full of every thing which wrøs necessary for that purpose ; it w T as hung round with his drawings, the later productions of his pencil, with wiiich Clara had tastefully elecorated his room. In the corners, and on the mantlepiece, stood casts from the antique, which were the subjects of his studious reflections : and well the con¬ templation of them rewardeel him for those hours which would otherwise have been devoted to play. Conscious of his own powers, Edward had begun a historical picture, which he was now more than ever desirous of finishing, that it might not come under the inspection of Miss Manningham until he had given it the last touch. He
He accordingly shut himself up for the remainder of the da}^ in his ow T n cham¬ ber, scarcely allowing himself time for his meals, so anxious did he feei to con¬ clude his task, in which he was en¬ couraged by Clara, wiio carried her work and her book into his room, that she might lighten if possible his labour, in which she felt nearly as great an interest as he did himself. Edward sat up late, and rose next morning by break of day, to resume his occupation. It was for fame tliat thus he toiled—-it w r as to shew himself worthy the high commendations wiiich had been bestowed on him by Clara, by her family, and by his beloved Frederic. Perhaps, also, a lurking hope played around his heart, and stimulated him to still greater exertions—-a hope that Flora might be fond of painting, and that her low sw r eet voice might whisper out his praise : this, this was the guerdon to which he aspired— it was at that moment the summit of Ed¬ ward's
wards hopes ; and wiien Oara after break¬ fast accompanied hira to witness the addi¬ tional progress of his morning's w r ork, bhe saw with surprise that it was nearly finished. *' Another hour," cried Edv/ard, exult¬ ingly, tí and the picture's done!—another hour, anel it will be ready for the inspec¬ tion of Flora—Miss Manningham, 1 mean," added he, confusedly. Miss Lindsay's mind was too deeply occupied by her own ideas to notice either the mistake or the embarrassment of Ed¬ ward ; she had sat to him for one of the female characters of the picture, and she was too much absorbed in viewing the delinea¬ tion of her own charms, and in wondering what effect they would have on Charles, to think of any other object. In little more than an hour Edward had put the finishing touch to the picture; and Clara, overjoyed at the performance, ran to tell her parents that they might have the first view of it before it was shewn to the Manninghams. CHAP-
CHAPTER 11.
It may not be amiss to give my readers some insight into the characters of Mr. Lindsay's new acquaintance, before Ave in¬ troduce them a second time to their no¬ tice, lest in performing the painful office of following Edward through life's vicis¬ situdes, we should forget to do them jus¬ tice. Sir Charles Manningham was now in his fortieth year. He was extremely hand¬ some in his person, and in his manners per¬ fectly the gentleman. He was by nature hospitable and generous, but the narrow r - ness of his circumstances had confined his actions within the sphere of prudence and necessity, as he had little else to subsist on besides the fortune of his wife, until the death
death of his uncle, sir Gregory Manning¬ ham. Sir Charles was a man of firm indepen¬ dent principles ; he could not ste)op to court the uncertain breath of popularity, if by so doing he must act in opposition to his own judgment ; anel for this reason he became obnoxious to sir Gregory, who was the ready tool of every man whose rank and fortune gave him any weight in the affairs of state. Sir Charles married, when he was little more than twenty, a cousin of the mar¬ epus of Anendale, whom he had known from childhood, and to whom he had been affianced before he fell under the displea¬ sure of his uncle. When this took place, he received the most friendly manifesta¬ tions of sincere regard from the marquis, who insisted upon his considering his house as his home, and offered him, in the hand¬ somest manner, any sum from his banker's which the change in his circumstances might require. This shew of solid kind¬ ness
ness in the marquis came to the know¬ ledge of that nobleman's aunt, who still cherished hopes that sir Gregory would restore his nephew to favour, on his mar¬ riage. She therefore bestow 7 ed on Charles Manningham the hand of her daughter, and at the same time surrendered up her fortune, though she was considerably un¬ der age, thus enabling the young couple to live comfortably during the unfortunate anger of sir Gregory. The friendship of the marquis of Anen¬ dale continued long to be enjoyed by Mr. Manningham and his wife, until that no¬ bleman became the husband of Miss Fitz- Arthur. For a time this union produced no very great change, although the ladies were perfectly dissimilar to each other in every thing. The marchioness was a mo¬ del of beauty, grace, and symmetry—Mrs. Manningham was plain, though pleasing in her countenance, tall and genteel in her figure, but her movements, guided by the haughtiness of her nature, were stiff, and certainly
certainly ungraceful, when contrasted with the light, airy, and sylph-like form of the marchioness. Lady Anendale was the votary of fa¬ shion—at its shrine she sacrificed all the tender duties, the sacred claims of wife and mother. Her husband and children were necessary appendages to her state. Over the former she exerted the most unlimited pow r er, and the latter she seldom or ever allowed to come near her, lest they should rob her of any portion of that attention and admiration which was the sole object of her desires. Mrs. Manningham, on the contrary, was an affectionate wife, and a tender toother ; she studied the happiness of her husband, and while the marchioness looked upoii hers with contempt, and preferred any so¬ ciety to his, Mrs. Manningham regarded the partner of her life with reverence and affection, thinking no voice so sweet as his, no discourse so amusing, so intelligent as that of the father of her children. The foibles
foibles of Mrs. Manningham were only like specks in the sun, while those of lady Anen¬ dale approached so nearly to crimes, that they threatened to obscure even the bril¬ liancy of those charms whose loveliness made half the world, at least the fashion¬ able part of it, her slaves. The total neglect with which the mar- chioness behaveel towards her infant fa¬ mily, had often been the subject of Mrs. Manningham's severe animadversions. She had attempted to remonstrate gently with their mother ; but the marchioness, too proud to take advice, felt offended with the adviser; and Mrs. Manningham, angry and disgusted at her want of feeling, and at the total absence of all maternal love from the lieart of the marchioness, indig- nantly took her leave, resolving never again to enter a house in wiiich no one gooe! example was set, to balance the in¬ finitude of bad ones. The marquis, who had long ceased to have a will of his own, mourned in secret over the loss of his friends'
friends' valuable society, but he dared not attempt to hold any intercourse with those for whom his lady had signified her dis¬ pleasure. Mr. and Mrs. Manningham had therefore, from that hour, been as perfect strangers to the marquis of Anendale ; yet in their hearts they loved and pitied the man, while they lamented and condemned that fatal weakness of disposition and of mind, which made him the easy tool to the w T ill of a worthless and unprincipled woman, whose beauty, matchless as it was, had lured him, and many a wiser man, to misery and ruin. Mrs. Manningham, although educated and brought up in the first style of fashion. cheerfully resigned all her gay amusements and expensive mode of living, and retired into the country with her husband and children, thus devoting to them from ne¬ cessity, as well as inclination, the whole of that time which had formerly been spent in the usual routine of fashionable Hfe. The tuition of her daughters now became her
her chief care, as both herself and their fa¬ ther had strong objections to hazarding their morals by sending them to a public school, where they must mix with dispo¬ sitions less amiable, and less innocently in¬ clined than their own. A governess at home would be attended with an expence wiiich she wished to avoid, and which, if saved, would add to their social comforts. Mrs. Manningham, therefore, resolved to educate her daughters herself in all those accomplishments which she hoped it would one day or other be requisite for them to possess ; and in this arduous, but pleasing undertaking, she was frequently assisted by her husband, who took a pride in re- Jie\ ing her in all those branches of learn- ing that came within his province. Tlieir objection to public education did not extend to their sons, whom tbey wish¬ ed to place at some good school near them. The high character given of Mr. Curwen, and of his system of tuition, as well as of bis kindness to his pupils, induced Mr. vol. il ? Manningham
Manningham to send his boys to that gentleman, in preference to Westminster or Eton. Another reason, and that was ~a strong one, for his making eiioice of Mr. Curwen's seminary, was, that the distance was only twelve miles from his house, a distance wiiich would enable him to see them in a few hours, if necessary. The sudden deatii of sir Gregory put "Mr. Manningham into the immediate pe>s- session of an am pie fortune, large enough to enable him to give his two daughters handsome marriage-settlements, as well as to provide liberally for the w T ants of his sons. It is true that sir Gregory hrd spitefully allowred the estate at the Hall to run to decay; but there was timber more than sufficient to defray the expences of repairs, and of every improvement wiiich the) might think proper to make in the building, which w r as intended to be their principal summer residence. It w r as now that Lady Manningham re¬ joiced at tlie pains which she had taken to
to perfect her daughters in every capti¬ vating accomplishment—pains whicii they had so well rewarded ; and the fond mo¬ ther had now the satisfaction of knowing that when the eldest Miss Manningham w r as introduced, she would not bq inferior, either in beauty, manners, or education, to the first nobleman's daughter in Europe. Constantia was now in her eighteenth year; she was the first-born of her pa¬ rents, whom she loved and revered with filial affection. All her comforts, all her pleasures, had flowed from their kindness ; and, as she had mixed but little in society, she had been accustomed to look up to them for every blessing which she enjoyed. She was handsome in her features, and elegant in her form, but of tliis she was well aware; neither was she at all unconscious of the superiority which her various at¬ tainments gave her over many of her sex. She was mistress of music and drawing·, haet a taste for miniature painting, anel could occasionally compose a sonnet or a ? 2 birthday
birthday ode upon some one of her fa¬ mily, which, though not to be compared with those of Charlotte Smith, and many others, yet certainly placed Constantia's talents above mediocrity. She was also mistress of several languages, and of va¬ rious minor accomplishments, which help to beguile the hours of retirement; and so perfect w r as she in them all, that lady Manniniiham with confidence allowed her ? to superintend the finishing of her sister's education, a task which she cheerfully per¬ formed, for Flora was the last and young¬ est of the family, and the darling of them all. Charles was nearly eighteen, and so like to his .ather in person, that if lady Manningham had a preference, it was for him. But this resemblance went no far¬ ther, for Charles was vain, haughty, anei extravagant, loose in his principles, profli¬ gate in his opinions, and only generous from chance or from necessity. Yet these defects were not perceptible to a common observer.
observer. He was lively and high-spirited, handsome in his person, and extremely pleasing in his conversation and address, Frederic was tw T o 3'cars younger than his brother, and though perhaps not quite so dashing in his appearance, yet he was equally handsome, and by far more amiable. He was in fact every thing that could con¬ stitute the polished gentleman anel the man of honour. His failings, if he had any, sprung from the buoyancy of his spi¬ rits, anei from the thoughtlessness of youth, but not one came from the heart. He tloted on his family, on Flora in particu¬ lar, and next to them he loved Edward Mackenzie. Flora was alike the idol of her father and of her mother. She was a little mo¬ del of every grace that can render woman lovely— u Lie;ht as the angel shapes that bless An inlunts. íhenin, yet not the less Rich m aH womrai'b 1?\И???? ;— í 3
With eves so pure, tlwt froin tlieir ??? Dark \ r ice wutiiti turn abaiiicti awnv, Vot iiiled with al! youth's sv% cet de-îirr·, .Mingling tiie meek and ventai fires (ifothcr worlds with all the bliss, Ihe fund, weak tenderness of this; A soul, too, more than half divine, Where through some shades ot earthly feelin;. Religion's softened glories shine, Like li'-ht through summer foîioire stcaliit*:. ^hfddìoj; a gfow of such mild hue, ?? warm, »md yet so shadowy too, As makes the very darkness there More heauti ful than light elsewhere î Such was the maiti ------------- ,; Beautiful as was tiie little sylph-like form of Flora Manningham, and richly as her mind was stored with knowledge lar above her years, yet she was a stranger to every sentiment of female vanity. Her disposition was tenderand affectionate, and lier heart, full of love and adoration for her family, was susceptible to every tale of dis¬ tress. She had a tear and a sigh for every son
son or daughter of affliction, and her store of pocket-money was always laid up to contribute to the comforts of others, in¬ stead of gratifying her own casual wish of the moment. Small as was her hoard, it was often sufficient to dry the tear of mi¬ sery, and satisfy the wants bf hunger or disease, and this was the use to whicli Flora applied the sums which were given her for her own pocket. The blessings which humble gratitude never failed to c¿.d down upon her head afforded Flora more heartfelt delight than all tlie baubles which she might otherwise have possessed. The distributor of Flora's ah n s was a middle-aged, respectable woman, who hael lived with lady Manningham as nurse ever since the birth of Constantia, anel who, from her strong attachment to thr family, had been retained in the capacity of lady's-maid to her ladyship and the young ladies. Airs. Harris was in high favour with her mistress, whose haughti¬ ness of disposition too frequently obscured ? 4 her
her more solid virtues. Her domestics disliked her from this cause, as much as they loved sir Charles for his affability, and for the good-natured interest which he occasionally displayed for their wel¬ fare. But lady Manningham, though na¬ turally humane and benevolent, seldom spoke to any but Mrs. Harris ; through her means the servants heard the orders of their mistress—through her they also received any demonstration of her kind¬ ness, when any of them were unw T ell; anel though at that time lady Manning¬ ham requested her own doctor to attend them, and desired that every comfort her house afforded might be bestow T ed on them, yet she contented herself with doing good by proxy, and by inquiring of Mrs. Har¬ ris after the health of the invalid, without condescending to enter the sick-chamber, and thus by her presence enhancing the value of her gifts. At these times, and when Constantia was engaged with her motiver, would Flo¬ ra
ra steal down to Mrs. Harris's room, and .entreat to go with her to see the poor sick servant. Who could refuse a wish hke this, coming spontaneously from the ge¬ nuine tenderness of the heart ? Not Mrs. Harris ; and Flora was therefore the ge¬ neral companion of her visits. Was it to be wondered, that every tongue w T as loud in the praise of Flora, and that innume¬ rable blessings followed the mention of her name, while at the sound of her light step, or silvery voice, the domestics eagerly ran to catch aglimpse of her dear-loved form ? And well might they run when the tones of her sweet voice met their ear ; not one among them was there that had not ex¬ perienced, at some time or other, proof's of her humane attention to their comforts, that had not received some little token of her generosity, and a promise of what she would do when her allowance was in¬ creased. There was not a servant in the house, from Mrs. Harris to the kitchen- maid, who w r ould not have worked day ? 5 and
and night for Flora Manningham, only to be rewarded by her smile—that smile which shot through their frames, and gladdened their hearts, making every toil seein light, when cheered by the invigoratinginfluence of her presence. Such was the lovely giri, in whose hap¬ piness every being felt an interest the mo¬ ment she became known to them ; and when she quitted the house wiiich she had resided in from her infancy, to inha¬ bit one more adapted to the splendid for¬ tune of her father, not a dry eye was to be seen in the wiiole village. Young and eid poured forth their lamentations at the departure of their youthful benefactress, crying; out. as the carriages drove past, that they should never see her like again, aid praying that Heaven would shower down its choicest mercies on the head of Flora, and on the whole family, for her dear sake. Such was Flora Manningham when in her thirteenth year. The impatience of Frederic to learn the opinion
opinion wiiich his friend had formed of this darling sister w r as so great, that he stole from the family circle, and, running with all his speed through the grounds of the Hall, burst open the lattice-wwk gate, which divided them from a part of those whicii belonged to Mr. Lindsay. He tappeei at Edw r ard's door; it w r as locked * r I must speak to you for a moment, Mackenzie," cried Frederic. " Open the door. I thought you had no secrets from me; you know that I have none that you are not acquainted with." " Neither shall/have oneto-morroxc that you are not acquainted with," said Edward, opening the door, but closing it after bim. " Look not so angry, my dear Frederic ; to-morrow you shall know why I cannot admit you as usual into my apartment." The countenance of Frederic brighten¬ ed.—" 1 am come," said he, " to ask you what you think of Flora ? I coulel not rest until I bad spoken to you, until I had heard your opinion of my sister. But you ? fi did
did not see her to advantage, Mackenzie : she is such a little bashful thing, I could not get her to hold up her head. You have not seen her jet black eyes." "But I have seen her smile," replied Edw T ard, " and I feei it now—I shall ne¬ ver cease to feel it. I shall think of it when I am a man. What w r ould I give for such a sister, Frederic ! How dearly I should love her !" ** I love her dearer than I love all the w f orld," exclaimed Frederic, 6i except my father and mother: and you must love her also, Mackenzie; she shall be your sister, and you shall share with me the af¬ fection of Flora. Can I give you a great¬ er proof of my regard than this ?" Edward blushed painfully; he felt a tear start into his eyes, which quenched their brilliancy.—" Dear Frederic," said he, pressing his hand with grateful love, (i you forget the difference between us. I am not worthy to be deemed the brother of your sister. She is a little angel, and I a mortal
a mortal of the humblest kind. It would indeed be presumption in me to aspire to such an enviable distinction as tbat of bein£ the friend and brother of Miss Flora." " You shall be both," cried Frederic warmly ; ** only say, Mackenzie, that you will love Flora with all your heart and soul—swear to me that, if necessary, you w r ouldjoin with mein protecting her from injury, at the hazard of your life, and that at no future time you will either forget her, or the friendship which we now feel towards each other." A new feeling seemed to pervade the soul of Edward ; his countenance crim¬ soned with sudden joy.—" I swear," said he, " in the face of Heaven, to die, ifit w r ere necessary, for the happiness and welfare of Flora Manningham. I swear to love her with equal fervour as yourself, and to pro¬ tect and guard her from even the shadow of evil, if such be the will of Him who made me ! As to our friendship for each other, I could as soon forget that, my Fre¬ deric,
derie, as I could cease to breathe, and yet continue to exist." " That's my fine fellow!" cried Frederic, squeezing him firmly by the hand ; " that's the boy after my own heart and soul ! and may I perish if ever at a future time I am capable of slighting you, my first and dearest friend, for any lord or duke in the creation. To-morrow I shall bring Flora to see you." " But not a w r ord of w r hat has just pass¬ ed between us," exclaimed Edward, in a beseeching tone; ' ( 1 would not have your sister suppose for a moment that J was f ? presinning." "Nonsense! nonsense! Mackenzie, do you think that I tell my sister all that 1 say or do ? Good-bye, my fine fellow ; I have broken down the old gate, so you may come through now as often as you like." So saying, he hurried back as fast as he could, leaving Edward to pursue with trembling hands the subject of his present secret occupation. CHAP-
CHAPTER III. The next morning Charles proposed to take his sisters to call on Miss Lindsay, as Constantia wished to inspect the draw¬ ings of Edward, thatshe might be herself the judge of his merits. " We will accompan3 r you, my son," saie! lady Manningham, " if your father is nol pre-engaged. I feel some little curiosity to see the performance of so 5 oung an ar¬ tist, as well as to be better acquainteel w ith Mrs. Lindsay, wdio appears a sensible well- bred woman, and whose affection, Frede¬ ric, for your friend, seems to be truly ma¬ ternal." " My friend deserves it all, and ten times as much," cried Frederic, warmly ; " he is the best fellow in the world, and the brightest ornament of our school Ì would
would give something to possess his talents, and yet he is as modest and as humble as if they were only of the common order." " Frederic " exclaimed sir Charles, proud¬ ly, " I love you for the generous enthu¬ siasm of your disposition more than for any other quality. In your choice of a friend, you seem to have been most fortu¬ nate, and it reflects on yourself the more credit, because there are many boys at Mr. Curwen's school whose fortune and rank in life might have promised you a more de¬ sirable acquaintance.—I think, my dear," said he, turning to lady Manningham, *' that never in my life did I behold a finer countenance, or sw r eeter expression of fea¬ tures, than that of young Mackenzie." " He is certainly a very handsome boy," replied her ladyship, " but I have never rightly understood who were his parents," " Nor I," cried sir Charles ; " but that is of little consequence in my estimation. The boy, I am told, has talents whicli will make his fortune, and I am certain that his
his manners and person will not disgrace tlic noblest family in the kingdom." " Have you never seen features which his resemble . J " inquired lady Manning¬ ham, in a particular tone of voice. " Yes," replied sir Charles, with a simi¬ lar look and accent, " T ha'*^; but the person to whom wc botb allude wants the goodness qf heart that characterizes those of Mackenzie. His eyes, also, are afine blue, anel those of the persori whom you mean are dark. In short, there is and there is not a resemblance, for the soul which beams in the handsome face of Ed¬ ward soon banishes from the mind any idea of that likeness, wbich, I confess, struck me the moment I saw him." They now prepared themselves for their morning's visit, and Frederic offered to shew thera a w r ay through the grounds, which he said was nearer and more plea¬ sant than the road. Sir Charles noticed the broken gate, and desired
desired that the carpenters might be or» dered to replace it with a nev/ one. " But you will not stop it up, my dear father?" said Frederic hastily. " Xo, my dear boy," replied the baro¬ net smilingly, " I will not stop ιψ the shortest way wiiich leads to your friend's abode ; it shall be as open to him as shall be my house, while he continue· 1 to deserve your regard." Mr. and Mrs. Lindsay were ready to receive their guests in their best drawing- room, wiiich had been tastefully decorated by Clara, that nothing might be wanting to gratify the pride of lady Manningham. After the commonplace chit-chat of the day had passed, sir Charles expressed a 4vish to see some of Edward's drawings, and Miss Lindsay exultingly led the way to his painting-room, followed by the whole party. The picture wiiich Edward had labour¬ ed so hard to finish was turned with its back
back towards the company. The first ob¬ jects which, therefore, met their eyes, were the landscapes which hung round the apai t- nient, and which, as they were chiefly views from the scenery of the Hall, w T ere noticed with double satisfaction by those who w T ere now become its owners. Sir Charles was loud in his commendation, as he pointed out to lady Manningham and Constantia the separate beauties and excellencies of the drawings. One, in particular, struck him as being superior to the rest. Her ladyship thought fhe same, and expressed a wish to have a copy from it. Edward flew to take it down. He trem¬ bled, and liis face crimsoned with pleasure, ás he advanced with it in his hand to lady Manningham. " If your ladyship will condescend to accept so humble a present," said he, bow¬ ing gracefully as he spoke, " you w T ill not only confer on me a gTeat obligation, but you will stimulate me to future exertions, more deserving, I trust, of your notice." Ì />dv
Lady Manningham looked at him with a smile of pleasing encouragement, as she held out her hand, which Edward in¬ stantly raised to his lips, ** I will not be the first to check the liberality of your na¬ ture," said she, " and therefore accept your gift ; but you must suffer me to bestow on you some other mark of approbation than mere w r ords. I know that a little pocket-money is very acceptable to Frede¬ ric, as well as to all youngpeople of his age, when they are at school; you will therefore do me a favour by accepting this trifle, which you may find useful on your return to Mr Curwen's." Edward blushed, and drew back. " It would give me infinite pain to offend your ladyship," said he, in a hesi¬ tating voice, " but I must decline your kindness, as being wholly unnecessary to my present w r ants, which are amply sup¬ plied by my dear friends and protectors. But I hope—I trust—that your ladyship will not refuse to accept the drawing," " Well/ 3
" Well," replied lady Manningham, re¬ turning the bank-note into her purse, " I will accept your present, on condition that you will select eight views from the finest scenery of the grounds about the Hall, and finish them for me before winter. Those you must allow me to become the purchaser of, as I shall feel a pleasure in knowing that I was the first person from whom you received any compensation for those labours which, at a future period, wall elevate you above many w r ho now stand high in the profession." This proposal Edward could not de¬ cline without giving offence to lady Manningham, whom he felt most anxi¬ ous to please. They now proceeded to examine his portfolio, which contained many fine unfinished sketches of various subjects, and various objects, all of which were carefully looked over by Constantia, whose age gave her the privilege of speaking her sentiments more freely than the rest of her family, except Charles— but
but his attention was divided between the specimens of Edward's talents and the charms of Clara. Edward once ventured to address the youngest Miss Manningham; wiio had never quitted the arm of Frederic since she entered the chamber. In a tremulous voice, be asked Flora if she was fond of drawing? and, in as sweet and tremulous a voice as his own, she replied in the affirmativ ¿—then blushing, bent forward to examine what her brother pointed out for her obsenation, hid ward, trembling for what would be the fate of his first attempt at historical painting, watched sir Charles as he drew near the place where it stood. He saw him raise his hand to turn the picture to the light, and fear almost impelled him to leave the room, lest the temerity of his attempt might draw down upon him the censure ofthose who, only a few minutes before, hael been warm in his praise. " What is this?" cried sir Charles, in a tone
a tone of surprise and pleasure, as he ran over the masterly and beautifully-finished cause of Edwards apprehensions. " Surely this picture can never be the production of a boy of fourteen P' All now crowded round sir Charles, eager to behold what had occasioned the baronet's admiration : even the timid blushing Flora pressed foiward, while Edward's heart beat with unusual quick¬ ness. The exclamation of sir Charles taught bim to hope— anel yet he felt un¬ able to rise from the v chair on which he had sunk. *' What a charming likeness of Miss Lindsay !" exclaimed Charles, pushing aside Constantia, that he might have a nearer view of her graceful form. f * A fine likeness, and admirably done f " said lady Manningham. " In fact, the whole picture is so beautifully executed, that I cannot belie\O but that it is the work of age and experience." " It is Edward's first attempt, notwith¬ standing,"
standing," said Mr. Lindsay, smiling with inward satisfaction ; " and never did any poor fellow w ? ork harder for a dinner than he did yesterday and this morning, to get it ready for your inspection." €i Edward ! what, Edward Mackenzie !" exclaimed the baronet ; " this bold and masterly performance done by him ! Where is he ?—let me congratulate him : this picture w r ill pave the w r ay to his fu¬ ture fortune." Sir Charles burst through the circle, still holding the picture ; and coming up to Edward, who with difficulty rose from his scat, he shook him warmly by the hand, congratulating him upon his brilliant genius, and advising him to follow, by all means, the study of historical painting.-— " At the same time, my dear boy," he said, tt I w r ould have you encourage your talent for likenesses, as it may vary your studies, and as it is also highly profitable. Constantia shall shew you some of her miniatures, and I will speak of you to a friend
friend of mine, who is esteemed one of the highest in his line of painting." The gratitude of Edward was now most eloquently displayed, in returning thanks to sir Charles and lady Manning¬ ham, who appeared equally disposed as her husband to render him all the service in her power ; and as he spoke, as his fine countenance glowed with intelligence and a sense of kindness received, Constantia thouglit she had never beheld so fine a subject for her pencil. * I will not rob you of this picture," said sir Charles, " but I will ask you to lend it me, as I expect a few friends in the course of a fortnight, and among them tlie gentleman to whom I have alluded, and to whom I wish to intro¬ duce you. Mr. Lindsay, perhaps, is not acquainted with any of the profession; therefore he will not object to my exert¬ ing all the interest I may possess, that you may in time become a member of the Iloyal Academy," VOL. II. D Mr.
Mr. Lindsay could not have been more warm in his acknowledgments, had Eel¬ ward been his own son. He told sir Charles, that it had long been his desire to obtain for Edward the assistance which was necessary to perfect his studies, and that any kindness done to one whom he loved as dearly as if he had been his own child, he should consider as a personal favour conferred on himself. í They now returned to the drawing- room, where they partook of some refresh¬ ment; after which, Mr. and Mrs. Lindsay accompanied sir Charles and his family over their own grounds, which, though not large, were tastefully disposed, and full of choice and fragrant shrubs, that cast around their sweet perfume, scenting the air with various odours. Mrs. Lindsay stopped at the broken gate wbich led to Manningham Hall; she felt herself not so well as usual, and therefore declined going further : but the young people were not inclined to part so soon ;
soon ; they proposed walking through the village, io which lady Manningham did not object. They accordingly turned into the road, wiiile her ladyship and sir Charles passed on to the Hall. "That Edward is a wonderful boy," ex¬ claimed sir Charles ; " and I am pleased, my dear Constantia, that you appear to think as highly of him as I do myself. It w r ould be a shame for such talents as his to re¬ main in obscurity." " Certainly it would," replied her lady¬ ship ; " and I shall rejoice if, through your means, Edward arrives at preferment sooner than he would otherwise do. I feel a strong prepossession in his favour, which is, however, checked in some de¬ gree by my ignorance as to his connexions. I admire talent, and would patronize it as liberally as yourself; but I do not say that I would iu some cases place it upon an equality with my own children. Per¬ haps I might allow Edward Mackenzie to be an exception to this rule, as he does D & not
not appear to be one who would presume too much upon any favour or indulgence shewn to him." . " Timt I will pledge my word for" said the baronet warmly ; " I only fear that his modesty may sometimes stand in the way of his advancement in the world. It is not often that you will see one so young as he is, and gifted with his talents, blush at the sound of his own praise, and trem¬ ble for the fate of what would do honour to the abilities of a more mature genius. Trust me, my dear Constantia, that this deserving youth will never give you cause to repent your kind condescension. That your curiosity, however, may be gratified, I will inquire of Mr. Lindsay concerning Edward's parents, though I trust that the result, whatever it may be, will not dimi¬ nish your esteem. Suppose that we send th'; Lindsays to-morrow an invitation for tie next day, to dine with us ? I shall then h h ve an opportunity to gain the in¬ formation )OU wish," . . Miss
Miss Manningham, however, gained it before her father. In walking through the village wâth Charles and Miss Lindsay, sii e passed the house belonging to Patty Smith's father; Frederic, Edward, and Flora, were before them—all the* village children had run out to greet the approach of the new comers, and their buzzing noise called Patty to the door, who, not per¬ ceiving the three who were at some dis¬ tance behind Edward, curtsied modestly as he passed, and he nodded to her as usual. She continued to gaze after him and his beautiful little companion, until the loud laugh of Clara reached her ear—she t urn. ed hastily and met her scornful eye. She felt that the laugh ivas directed at 1??*, and she would have flown into the house •—yet why should she fly ? w hy fear the look, the voice, of one whom she liad never injured? <t Ignorance and impudence always ac¬ company each other," said Miss Lmdsny, staring full in the face of Patty. " I conld r* » find
find it in my heart to pity her, if she were less bold and presuming." Miss Manningham looked at Patty as she passed, but not offensively, while Charles cast a sly glance out of the corner of his eyes, which offended Patty even more than the speech of Miss Lindsay, and she hastily withdrew into the house. ** I should not have thought, from the appearance of the girl," said Miss Man¬ ningham, " that she was either bold or presuming; ignorant she may be, but that is only what we must expect of people in her station of life. She appeared a pretty modest-looking girl, that had not spirit to be impudent." " She has vanity and presumption suf¬ ficient for a dozen country girls," cried Clara, spitefully ; " and, had it not been for my orders to the contrary, she would, ï verily believe, have haunted us day and night, since Edward has resided with my father." " Oh, then it is Edward who has callee! forth
forth her vanity and presumption," said Miss Manningham, forcing a smile. " Poor girl ! I pity her too, since it shews at least a mind above the common, to admire su¬ perior excellence. But really, my dear Miss Lindsay, you do not believe that the girl is in love with young Mackenzie?" " I do indeed," cried Clara; " and though I have done all in my power to put an end to the acquaintance, I dare say that she often contrives to watch for him as he passes to Mr. Cunven's. I wish Patty were out of the village, for I fear that she will not do Edward any good." Al i ss Manningham looked thoughtful. After a moment's pause, she said— tt But liow did this acquaintance commence, M iss Lindsay ? Have you or your father remonstrated with your friend on the im¬ propriety of his encouraging such low r con¬ nexions?" " I have said every thing that I could upon the subject," replied Clara, " but to no purpose: Edward has taken it into his n i head,
head, that it would be base una ungrateful of hira not to notice this girl, whenever he sees her, merely because she was good to Ids old grandmother—-that is to say, Patty was with her during her illness, and when she died ; and therefore Ed- tvard conceives himself bound to be highly grateful for her doing what -my human being wo'iîd ïitive done in the same situa- tum, lle^dvb, the old woman was very find of PatJy, who went to her little sebk 1 ; anu therefore it was natural that the girl should attend on her, when she was meapuble of doing for herself; but now that Edward is looked upon in the 5am e light as if he were my father's son, I think it is great impudence in Patty to imagine herself his equal," Miss Manningham looked incredulously at Clara—-she eoald not comprehend her m can i n if. Charles smiled as he said—" Ho you know, my sweet friend, that you have unawares let drop a secret whicli Frede¬ ric
rie and mvself have never once mentioned •r' at home. My family are perfectly igno¬ rant as to that of Mackenzie." " Indeed!" cried Clara, in amaze; then recovering herself, she affected to turn off her confusion by saying— * t I am glad to ñnd that you can keep a secret, Mr. Charles, though Γ should be loth to trust you with one of consequence. Your sis¬ ter, I am confident, will not think the worse of Edward, because his grand¬ mother was the village schoolmistress." '* Impossible !" exclaimed Constantia. " Edward Mackenzie must be the son of a gentleman* Perhaps his grandmother was some distressed' old lady, wdio from misfortunes w r as obliged to retire to this village, and to gain her subsistence by teaching the poor children the plainer parts of her own education." ** No, my dear sister, that was not the ease," said Charles ; " old Margaret Grey, the grandmother of Mackenzie, was no iady in distress as you are pleased to sup- 1) 5 vow
pose her, but a worthy kind-hearted crea¬ ture, who had lived for many years in the family of lady Fitz-Arthur, as her house¬ keeper, and wiio married her head gar¬ dener ; she left her situation, and came to live in this village, which was the birth¬ place of old Grey. When he died, she set up a school for the village children, and Edward was placed under her care, wiien he was only four years old, by his mother, who was the old woman's daughter, and who was married to a serjeant in the 44th Highland regiment ; he is now either ensign or lieutenant Mackenzie, serving in America. So now, Constantia, you know, for the first tinier the history of Edward's family. I am afraid that it will not afford my mother any more satisfac¬ tion than it seems to give you." * fi Nay," cried Clara, hastily, " I will not believe that either lady Manningham or your sister would allow themselves to be prejudiced against such a boy as Ed¬ ward Mackenzie, merely because his con¬ nexions
nexions were placed in the humbler w r alks of life. Edward requires no advantages of birth or fortune to recommend him to notice. There are few to be compared with him." " I readily agree with you in that/' re¬ plied Constantia, gravely. " But there are some, and my mother is among them, who will regret that one so eminently qualified by nature to adorn the first ranks of society, should blush to acknowledge the lowliness of his own origin." " Why must you tell lady Manningham of what you think would give her uneasi¬ ness, and probably influence her conduct towards Edward ?" said Miss Lindsay. " Because I never concealed any thing from her in all my life," replied Constan¬ tia, " and, well as I know her sentiments, it Avould be highly improper if 1 were to deceive her on this subject Edw r ards own merits, and his unassuming though dignified maimers, will, I flatter myself, D 6 overcome
overcome my mother's dislike to associate with those whom she feels to be her in¬ feriors. I think, nay, I may almost ven¬ ture to affirm, that your friend, Miss Lind¬ say, will never have reason to complain of my dear mother's w r ant of hospitality. I kno\v that she is already interested in his favour, as indeed must every one be who has ever seen him." " I shall trust to your good offices, and to your eloquence, should they be want¬ ing," replied Clara, "to aid the cause of one whom ï love as dearly as if he were my brother. Never should I forgive my¬ self, if, through any inadvertency of mine, Edward were to fall under the displeasure of lady Manningham, or be treated with indifference by her daughter." 4r Fear not for me/* said Miss Manning- ham ; " he has, very unintentionally on his part I am certain, gained too large a share of my favour, for any slight cause to make me change my opinion ; î may la¬ ment
ment the humbleness of his origin, but I feel that it is now too late for it to affect my sentiments." " Upon my word, ladies," cried Charles, " you are both as much enamoured of my friend Edward as he could possibly wish. It is w r ell for Constantia that she is some years older than he is, or I should begin to have serious fears on her account." Miss Manningham smiled, but it came not from the heart, and her features soon assumed a serious pensive cast, which however escaped the notice of Charles. They were now joined by the object of their discourse, *vho inquired if they meant to extend their walk ? but this Miss Manningham declined, and they conse¬ quently returned to the Hall, where Ed¬ ward and Clara took a reluctant leave of their new friends.
???-
CHAPTER IV. jSIiss Manningham, although four years older than Edward Mackenzie, was cer¬ tainly as much captivated with him as if he had been of a proper age to become her serious admirer, Edward was tall, and more manly than the generality of boys at fourteen, and as his person was strikingly handsome, his manners par¬ ticularly fascinating, and his mind and talents of the higher order, some little excuse might be made for Constantia Manningham, old as she was, preferring him to any other person whom she had yet seen. She not only preferred, but ac¬ tually loved Edward with the most pas¬ sionate fervour, and had he been ac¬ quainted with the tender language of the eyes, he could not have avoided translat¬ ing
ing that which was spoken by Constan¬ tia's, which, at parting, beamed on him a look of inexpressible sweetness. Notwithstanding this partiality, which every look, every word of Edward's seem¬ ed to increase, Miss Manningham felt it to be an imperious duty to inform her mother of what she had heard respecting the family of young Mackenzie ; but, that her father's affability and generous spirit might counteract the pride of her mother, she chose her opportunity when they were together, to relate the unpleas¬ ing facts of Edward's humble origin. The change whicii took place in lady Manningham's features paled those of her trembling daughter ; but it gladdened her heart to hear the sound of her father's voice, as his were ahvays the accents of peace and good-w r ill towards every one. " If such is the case," said sir Charles, <( Edward is a more wonderful boy than I thought him ; for never in my life did I behold
Γ behold one more elegant and polished in conversation and deportment than he is." Lady Manningham drew out her dia¬ mond snuff-box, and taking a pinch, which she seldom indulged herself in more than twice ? -day, except, as in the present in¬ stance, when her mind was' wavering upon any particular point, she said— w I could have wished, my dear Charles, that this youth, who is so much beloved by my sons, had been more upon an. equality with them; but I think—I believe—that he will not trespass upon our kindness; should we allow him to associate with our family." Sir Charles pressed her hand affection¬ ately.—" No, my dear Constantia, Ed¬ ward will not trespass upon your good¬ ness. Let me congratulate you, my love, upon your having conquered the only. failing you possess. A stronger proof could not be shewn of Mackenzie's worth than tliat you have now given, and I will answer
answer for the boy*s hot disgracing your good opinion. Bince his connexions are so far inferior to himself, he cannot expect from them any interest in his professional line; nor do I believe that Mr. Lindsay, who seems to be a most excellent charac¬ ter, possesses any pow r er to advance his studies. Let us, therefore, my dear Con». stantia, have the proud merit of patroniz¬ ing this deserving youth, who, trust me this once, or I am no physiognomist, will amply repay us by the most respectful gratitude." tr I never felt more willing to rely on your skill in physiognomy, than I do at this moment," replied her ladyship ; " for, strange to say, I actually became prepos¬ sessed in the boy's favour at our first meet¬ ing—yet, had I given way to my usual prudence, I should have checked that pre¬ possession for one who, the more I see, the more I think to resemble her who treated me with the rudest ingratitude." " Might I ask who that person is, ????. ma,
ma, that Edward Mackenzie is like ?" in¬ quired Miss Manningham, "It is the marchioness of Anendale, my love, whom you have sometimes heard me mention in no very flattering terms," said lady Manningham, M You may form some judgment of her beauty from the countenance of young Mackenzie, but the expression of his features is so sweetly good, so gratefully affectionate, that I am angry when I think he can resemble a woman who is void of every amiable quality—wmose heart, in short, is cold, un¬ feeling, and depraved, and who is defi¬ cient even in common natural affection to¬ wards her own children." " Was not the marchioness of Anendale niece to lady Fitz-Arthur, mamma ?" said Constantia. " Yes, my dear; she became an orphan when quite a child, and was therefore taken by her ladyship, who had married her father's eldest brother. Soon after, she became herself a widow, and having no
no children of her own, she adopted Miss Fitz-Arthur, and maele her heiress to all her fortune, which was very considerable. Un¬ fortunately for lord Anendale, who is one of the best men living, he had occasion to pay a visit to lady Fitz-Arthur, at her estate in Monmouthshire, where he saw her niece. His lordship was struck with her uncommon beauty, and made her an offer of his hand, which she accepted; and, as soon after the death of lady Fitz-Arthur as decency would permit, she became his wife. It is somewhat strange that Ed¬ wards mother and grandmother should have lived in that family." Sir Charles thought the same; he how¬ ever reminded her ladyship of the invi¬ tation which she meant to senel to the Lindsays, adding, that he would take an opportunity to malee some inquiries con¬ cerning the father of Edward, and what were his future prospects for the youth. The result of these inquiries served only to strengthen the interest already felt
felt by sir Charles and lady Manningham: for Edward. Mr, Lindsay, pleased by the kindness which they manifested towards his pro¬ tegee, and hoping that tbeir favour would be more firmly established by his candour and confidence, scrupled not to acquaint them with all that he knew concerning the parents of Edward, concealing only the name of his godfather, and the secret of his letter, whicii was still safe İn his possession: with that delicacy wdiich ever accompanies true generosity, he touched lightly upon the part which he had acted ín recei vinsj under Lis owrn roof the grandson of old Margaret; but he expa¬ tiated largely upon all Edward's good» qualities—particularly dwelling upon his high sense of gntitude, and warmtii of feeling, which η Ltd ? him retain a lively remembrance of any kinelness conferreel either upon himself or upon those he¬ lo ved. " I felt," said Mr. Lindsay to sir Charles, <v that
Kf that such a bov as Edward Mackenzie ivas not to be lost for the paltry consi¬ deration of any personal inconvenience wdiich I might hereafter bring on my¬ self by taking him under my protection. All that I vegret is, that I am unable to do b}' him what I could wish, and what he deserves; for I am perfectly assured that he only wants proper advice, time, and study, to make him one of our best artists." 4i I think so indeed," replied the baro¬ net, "and will lose no time in exerting all the interest I possess in his favour. At the same time suffer me to say, Mr. Lind¬ say, that too much praise cannot be be¬ stowed on you and your family, for the zeal with which you espouse his cause, and the liberality with which you have administered to his comforts. Pray, if the question is not impertinent, are his parents sensible of the obligation they owe you, and are they willing or able to con¬ tribute to his education ? w " I have
" I have trequent communication with Edward's adopted father," replied Mr. Lindsay, " who is a sensible, well-inform¬ ed man. He appears to idolize Edward with all a father's pride and affection, and to think that the boy is unequalled. To the best of his power, he has, by means of his agent, defrayed part of the neces¬ sary expences of his tuition ; but I have made his mind easy on that account, by assuring him that nothing would afford me so much real satisfaction as to procure for Edward the best instruction at my own expence. My worthy friend, Mr. Cur- wen, nobly resolved to make a bold push in favour of Edward, and received him as his pupil, in spite of pride and prejudice. These, however, were soon overcome by Edward's own good behaviour, and I do not think that Mr. Curwen has now one boy in the whole school who would vote for his expulsion. I assure you, sir Charles, that the friendship of your sons is one of Edward's proudest boasts." "Ire
u I rejoice," said the baronet, " tliat my boys have given so wise a proof of their own sense and discernment. Jlut pray, have you heard lately from ensign Mac kenzie ?—a most sanguinary battle was expected to take place between us and the Americans." Mr, Lindsay replied that neither ho nor Edw r ard had lately received any letters from America, bu that they were in daily expectation of hearing from the ensign. * r Heaven, preserve the life of so brave and gallant a man as Mackenzie !" said he, " as w 7 eli for Edward's sake as for his country's. My poor boy would find it difficult to bear up against the loss of one whose life is dearer to him than his own. Gratitude is tfie predemriinant sentiment which governs all the feelings of Edward ; it influences all his actions, and would, I am confident, were it necessary, even regulate his affections. Among the many virtues which adorn the character of my young favourite, gratitude is the most con¬ spicuous ;
spicuous ; it is this godlike quality which attaches him so fondly to the memory of his grandmother—which makes him cling with enthusiasm to every thing in any way connected with his adopted father— and which ensures to me and to my fa¬ mily that respectful love and obedience, which more than repays us for all we may have done to serve him." ** We must see what more can be done for him," said sir Charles, rising from the dining-table : ** the ardour of his genius shall not be damped for want of friends to encourage and assist its progress. We will now join the ladies in the drawing- room." Edward by this visit gained a fresh sti¬ mulus for the exertion of his talents. He had been favoured with a sight of several miniatures, painted by Miss Manningham, and among them a highly-finished like¬ ness of Flora. Edward felt an instantane¬ ous desire to become master of this de¬ lightful branch of the aft, How charming to
to be able to take a faithful copy of dear- loved features ! to possess the shadow of a friend when the substance was far dis¬ tant! to gaze, unnoticed and unknown, upon a form which even envy must ac¬ knowledge to be faultless, and to which he scarce dared to lift his eyes, lest it might be deemed presumption in him to notice so much loveliness! Constantia, pleased by the discriminating praise of Edw r ard, offered to impart to him all the knowledge which she herself pos¬ sessed, an offer that was most thankfully accepted by Edward, who felt himself highly honoured by being considered as the pupil of Miss Manningham. That he might profit by her kind instruc¬ tions, Mr. Lindsay proposed that he should not return to Mr. Curwen's until after the Midsummer vacation, wiiich was close at hand; and this proposal met with the approbation of all parties^—of Constantia and Frederic in particular, the former of whom could scarcely bear to lose the so- vol, π, e ciety
ciety of Edward for an hour, and the lat¬ ter felt nearly the same repugnance as his sister to being separated from his friend, which he would otherwise have been, had not this arrangement taken place, sir ? liarles baving resolved not to send him again to Mr. Curwen's until after the vacation. While Mr. Lindsay and the baronet were engaged in confidential discourse, the younger part of the company had with one consent rambled into the garden. Fre¬ deric, with Flora and Edward, struck into a different path from the rest, that they might enjoy themselves, undisturbed by the presence of those whom Frederic did not exactly wish to overhear his conversa¬ tion. The warm-hearted youth conducted his friend and sister to one of those beauti- ful sequestered spots which had been the subject of Edward's pencil. Heie, from a half-broken seat, placed be¬ neath the branches of a widely-spreading oak, the eye looked down upon a fertile valley, through which a clear small stream gracefully
gracefully wound i ts circuitous cou rse. Over it w^as thrown a rustic bridge, leading into verdant meadow r s, surrounded by trees fine* ly disposed ; while in the distance the pros¬ pect was closed by dark green woods and lofty hills, whose towering summits seem¬ ed to reach the sky. The broken seat would only just contain fhe friendly trio, and Edward's heart beat with new-born pleasure, as he found him¬ self placed close to the side of Flora, whom Frederic had purposely seated between them. " This is a scene well worthy of talents such as yours, Mackenzie," saie! Frederic, " and you have done it justice. Do you remember, Flora, how r correctly Edward has taken this charming view ?" Flora replied in the affirmative, and, as she turnee! her head to gaze on the varied prospect around her, Edward caught a glimpse of her jet black eye, and felt that no painting, however excellent, was able to portray its sw r eet expression. ? 2 « Flora,"
" Flora," said Frederic gaily, " í passed my word for you the other evening, and I now request that you will ratify the pro¬ mise ï then made in your name to Mac¬ kenzie. You must love him, Flora, as you love me ; he is the dearest friend of my heart, and you must therefore love him as if he were your brother. You will do this, Flora, and more, if I were to require it of you?" I 1 lora coloured eleeply.—" Yes, dearest Frederic,'" said she, in a soft voice, <( I would indeed do more than this at your request, û>r now you have only imposed on me a task which will be one of pleasure, not of constraint. You taught me to love the friend of your heart, long before I had seen him, and now tliat î find your par¬ tiality to be so well-founded, I shall take a pride in dividing with you the affection of Edward, and in being received by hin» as Lis sister." Frederic flung his arms round the neck of Floi a, calling her a dear good girl, who was
was always ready to oblige.—" Did I not tell you, Mackenzie, that Flora w r ould will¬ ingly acknowledge my friend to be hers ? You see that I did not promise too much—- not more than* she is willing to perform. Now, Flora, that I may be assured óf ye>ur considering Edward as your brother, you must give him that dear pledge of a sister's love, which I will allow no other to share between us." Flora, confused and blushing, turned her lovely face towards Edward, who, equally embarrassed, imprinted on her lips the kiss of respectful gratitude, mingled with such a pure devotion as no one could have inspired who was less amiable, ? ss beautifully perfect than Flora. if Surely," exclaimed Edward, as his heart glowed within him, and as every feature crimsoned with happiness, ** surely I am the most fortunate and the most fa¬ voured of mortals ! Come what will, I shall never forget the present blissful moment, e 3 when
when røy dear Frederic, my beloved Flora, ackrowJedgid me as iheir brother!" The sound of voices now made them rise from their seat, as they beheld Miss Manningham, with Clara and Charles, ad¬ vancing towards them. " ît is rather unfair of you, Frederic," said Constantìa, " to monopolize the whole of your friend's company. Do you sup¬ pose that you are the only judge of his merits, or the only admirer of his talents, that you thus cruelly rob us of his conver¬ sation ? Come, Edward," added she, offer¬ ing him her arm, " I challenge you to be my companion for the rest of our walk. Charles will take care of Miss Lindsay." Edward, thus doubly honoured by the notice of so fine a woman as Miss Man¬ ningham, gallantly kissed her fair hand, wbich was extended towards him ; then placing her arm witliiu his own, he cheer¬ fullv followed her through many a wind¬ ing path, and sloping dell, crowded with fragrant
flagrant flowers, which grew r in wild pro¬ fusion, clustering indiscriminately toge¬ ther, as yet unchecked by the pruning hand of the gardener. Here, through the opening branches of the trees, the varied landscape burst upon their sight ; and as they pau seel to watch the shifting lights anei brilliant tints of the setting sun, Ed¬ ward gave freedom to the brightness of his imagination, and the glowing colour¬ ing of his rapid ideas, as they passed with¬ in his mind in quick succession* Constantia listened with admiration to the bursts of genius which flowed from his lips. Her ear greedily drank in the harmonious sounds of his voice, and her eyes dwelt with rapture upon his counte¬ nance, at once expressive of sense and sen¬ sibility. Constantia at that moment felt how utterly incapable she was of conceal¬ ing or of repressing her feelings. Tears filled her eyes, as she remembered the dif¬ ference of their years anel stations in life. "Would to Heaven!" thought Constan- r 4 tia,
tia, " that Edward was my age, and my equal ! what sacrifice would then be too great to secure to me the possession of his lieart !"' Constantia v/as passionately in love, and this must excuse her folly.
CHAPTER V.
Nothing now seemed wanting to com¬ plete tlie happiness of Edward. He was flattered and caressed by the beautiful Miss Manningham, noticed by her parents, and loved by her family. All the hours wdiich could be spared from his profession¬ al studies were devoted to the inmates of the Hall, with whom Clara also spent the chiei' part of each day. Yet Edward was not happy. The rumour of a battle be¬ tween the English and the Americans had readied him, and the suspense he was in with
with respect to the fate of his adopted fa¬ ther damped what would otherwise have been the most joyous moments of his youth. Yet to whom could he pour forth the language of complaint except to Patty Smith, the faithful and affectionate com¬ panion of his childhood ? There were those, indeed, who would have listened to his fears, who would have sympathized in his distress, and whose tenderness might have mitigated the tortures of suspense: but Patty* had seen his beloved father; she w r as in a manner connected with his fa¬ mily and with'himself ; sbe knew his most secret thoughts, even his solemn vow to Frederic respecting Flora ; and tö her, and her alone, he gave way to his suppressed feelings. Some friends of sir Charles now anived at the Hall, and among them the gentle¬ man tò whom the baronet had promised to introduce Edward. The Lindsay fa¬ mily were accordingly invited to meet them, and Edward's historical picture was e 5 placed
placed in a conspicuous part of the dining- room. As was expected, the eye of the painter was naturally drawn towards this spot, and as he examined the picture with the attention of a connoisseur, he bestow¬ ed on it the just encomiums which it de¬ served. i% The artist whose performance this is," said he, " is of no common order—why has he concealed his name? This piece would reflect credit upon any man, and gives the fairest promise of excellence that I have seen for a long while in its department. Pray, sir Charles, may I inquire who is the gentleman who lias given so bolei a specimen of great abilities ?" Sir Charles pointed to Edward Mac¬ kenzie, uhoat that moment entered the room with Miss Manningham. All eyes were now turned towards the embarrassed youth, while sir Charles, taking him kind¬ ly by the hand, led him to where his guests were standing, and introduced him. Then, turning to sir Joseph Hermi e, he said— '* Let
** Let me bespeak your kindness for this young friend of mine, sir Joseph ; that he will not discredit your patronage, this, his first attempt at historical painting, will convince you. Another time I will shew you some landscape drawings, which you will not think inferior to some of my best pictures." Edward now received the praise and congratulations of the whole party upon his rising genius, and sir Joseph, pitying his confusion, and charmed by bis modesty, good-naturedly took him by the hand, as¬ suring him that if he meant to make paint¬ ing bis profession, he w r ould lend him all the assistance in his power towards his ad- vancenu4»t in the world.—" I see that you are oppressed," said sir Joseph, " by the overflow'ings of our admiration, which is so justly your due. Recover yourself, my young friend ; at another opportunity we will converse on the subject. í shall be happy to serve you, since 1 shall not only gratify myself, but render my profession e 6 an
an incalculable service, in bringing forward talents like yours, talents which promise to become its brightest ornament." Sir Joseph coulel scarcely think or con¬ verse on any other subject than the ex¬ traordinary abilities of Edward. Painting v/as his favourite theme, and he now found ample scope to display his own superior taste and superior knowledge. The next day he walked to the house of Mr. Lind¬ say, that he might form a judgment of Edward's talents for landscape painting. Here he found fresh food for w r onder and admiration, wiiich, if possible, was yet in¬ creased, wiien Mr. Lindsay shewed him in confidence a nearly-finished miniature of himself, painted by Edward. The versatility of his talents charmed bír Joseph Kennie. —" He is a perfect pro¬ digy/' said be, " and must be immediately brought forward to the notice of the Royal Academy. If you will spare him to me a month, wiien I return to town, I will ?????? to £Ct him made a student, which will
will enable him to study every branch of his art : but I advise him to keep to the historical line. If he does, I do not hesi¬ tate to pronounce him one of our best ar¬ tists in that department," Mr. Lindsay was too sensible of the advantages resulting from the patronage of such a man as sir Joseph Ren nie, to hesitate for a moment how to act. He therefe>re accepted with thanks Ins kind offer, well knowing that at his house alone Edw T ard would be enabled to gain the most important information and know r - ledge respecting his profession. The coun¬ tenance of sir Joseph would also afford him numerous means of enlarging his ac¬ quaintance, and of adding to the circle of bis friends ; and in the sanguineness of his imagination he already beheld him at the summit of his profession, beloved and courted by every body, the brightest or¬ nament of the times, and one of tbe hap¬ piest of his sex. Nor were sir Charles and lady Man- nimrham
ningham less gratified than Mr. Lindsay at the prospect thus opened to Edward of obtaining wealth and fame. Thev re- joiced that through them he was intro¬ duced to sir Joseph í lenmie, whose pa¬ tronage was suilicient alone to stamp the works of Edward with celebrity; anel they rejoiced the more, because Edward had en¬ deared himself to them by the respectful¬ ness of his deportment, and the modesty with w hieb he listened to his own praise —praise whieh was quite sufficient to turn the brain of a much older person than Ed¬ ward. It was tiiis pleasing diffidence of man¬ ners which f r nt induced lady Manning- h'urt to elevi, L írom her settled rule of never aF$/y fF :uiig with any one beneath hir. Üne *se more she saw of Edward, tne less she regretted her condescension; and she would frequently converse with Constan» iaupon his merits and accomplish¬ ments, little imagining how deep an inte¬ rest her daughter took in all that concerned the
the friend of her brothers. In fact, it re¬ quired all the prudence and circumspec¬ tion of Miss Manningham to command her feelings before her parents : while in the presence of her brothers and Miss Lind¬ say, she was less guarded, and, when alone with Edward, she gave way to her tender¬ ness, without it having once excited in his mind any other sentiment than that of gra¬ titude for her kindness. Edward was one morning engaged at the Hall in copying a beautiful miniature of a sleeping child, done by Miss Man¬ ningham from nature, wdien the servant brought into the drawing-room some news¬ papers, which had just arrived by the post. Constantia was leaning o\er him, watch¬ ing with delight the progress of the pic¬ ture, and Fiora was painting a work-box for Miss Lindsay. Edward, who had noticed the entrance of the servant, hastily threw aside his pallet, and inquired if he might look w hether there was yet any news from America? 'The first
first thing which met his sight was the Gazette. Breathless w r ith fear and expec¬ tation, Edward flung himself on a couch, and glanceel his eyes over tho list of those brave and gallant souls wdio had fallen in the sanguinary conflict in America. Constantia sat trembling by his side. She saw him give a sudden start of horror, the glow of health forsook his cheek, he drew a long deep sigh, and fell back on tiie couch. The terrified screams of Flora, who feared lest he was dying, were fortu¬ nately heard by her parents, who were in an adjoining chamber. They immediately came to his assistance* while the paper, which he still grasped convulsively in his hand, too well explained to them the cause of his illness. Among the guests of sir Charles was a professional gen tleman, who, after trying various common remedies, proceeded to open a vein, as the only means by which he conld restore animaa¬ tion. The young ladies reluctantly withdrew, and
and Mrs. Harris was summoned by lady Manningham to afford her assistance, while a servant was dispatched to Mr. Lindsay with the unpleasing intelligence of Ed¬ ward's illness. When the arm of Edward was exposed to view, lady Manningham, wdio would not leave the chamber, ob¬ served on it the singular mark of a well- defined coronet : but this was no time for idle remarks, when the life of one so be¬ loved was in danger ; she therefore smo¬ thered for the present the surprise wdiich she felt on beholding so novel and myste¬ rious a delineation. On opening the vein, Edward gave signs of returning sensation. He unclosed his eyes, and looked mournfully around him, then, closing them again, his head sunk upon the bosom of lady Manningham, who was supporting him tenderly in her arms. Bv the advice of Dr. Barlow, Ed- ward w r as immediately put to bed, whither he was followed by Charles and Frederic, wdio with Mrs. Harris watched by the side of
of poor Edward, while their parents went down to receive the Lindsays, who had flown, rather than walked, from their own bouse to the Hall, upon the summons of sir Charles. " My dear friends," said the worthy ba¬ ronet, " compose yourselves. Edward is as well as can be expected after so severe a shock. Dr. Barlow has bled him, and by his orders we have put him to bed, as he does not think it prudent to remove him at present." They now hastened to the chamber of Edward, where they found Frederic and Mrs. Harris supporting him, while Charles ivas bathing his face. Clara flung her¬ self by his side, and bursting into an agony of tears, sobbed out that he would die—that hewas dying, and that she would not live without him. These violent ex¬ clamations produced a strange effect on most of her heavers. Lady Manningham and sir Charles concluded that she must be passionately attached to Edward, thus to
to expose herself to the remarks of some who were almost strangers; while Charles, much as he felt for the condition of Ed¬ ward, was by no means flattered by this open« display of Clara's sentiments in his favour. Edward looked on all around him : he seemed to listen to the voice of Mr. Lind¬ say, and gazed inquiringly on Clara, who was SoVuiíig alöüd by his side. His eyes seemed to search for some object wdiich they could not find, and again he closed them, as if totally exhausted. Lady Man¬ ningham at length succeeded in soothing the violence of Clara's emotions, and, at her request, Charles supported Miss Lind¬ say to the apartments of his sisters, whose feelings were as strongly agitated as those of Clara, although they had more com¬ mand over them. Tears, however, they might be allowed to shed for the sufferings of a deserving object, yet these tbey en¬ deavoured to restrain in the presence of Clara, whom they now felt it their duty to
to console and comfort, as far as lay within their power. By the advice of Dr. Barlow, who per¬ ceived that fever was fast approaching, all now quitted the chamberof Edward, except Mrs. Lindsay, Frederic, and Harris ; the rest adjourned to the drawing-room, where sir Charles most considerately proposed that JMr. Lindsay and his wife and daugh¬ ter should remain ai; ihe Kali until Ed- w r ard*s life was pronounced to be out of danger. This kind offer was most thank¬ fully received by Mr. Lindsay, who felt ? Jerry incapable of tranquillizing his mind, unless he could be near the person of his young protegee. Edward struggled long between life and death. At length his youth and excellent constitution gained the ascendancy, and Dr. Barlow, to the heartfelt joy of the whole hoLi^ehold, pronounced him to be ih a sto te of con valescen ce. Ed ward's first re- tum to reason was manifested by a sudden burst of gratitude to those about him. He
He had fallen into a gentle slumber, during which all had quitted his chamber except Frederic, who, with unceasing affection, had never left it day or night Flora had crept softly to the bed of the slumberer, while the family were in the dining-par¬ lour, from which she had absented lierself on account of indisposition. As she bent over the sleeping youth, her countenance expressive of the tender solicitude which she felt on his account, Edward suddenly awoke, and fixed his eyes on the lovely face of Flora. " Where am I?" said he, stretching forth his hand. ** This must be heaven, and thou my guardian angel." Flora caught his hand to her lips, and burst into tears.—" Dear Edw r ard!" she exclaimed, forgetting every thing at that moment but the delight of hearing him speak ; " dear Edward ! it is I—it is Flora -—your sister—your affectionate sister." Edw r ard tried to raise himself.·—" Be¬ loved
loved Flora í Frederic too î Dear, dear friends !" Frederic embraced him.—" Yes, I am here, my dear Edward," said he, in a voice of great emotion—" we are all here ; you are surrounded by beings who love you dearer than the whole world. Compose yourself for our sakes —for the sake of Flora, who loves you as tenderly as I do." Edward cast a look of unutterable gra¬ titude and love on both his agitated friends ; he pressed the soft hand of Flora to his lips.—" If I live—if I can survive this stroke»—my life shall be devoted to you, beloved Flora—beloved Frederic." He seemed faint, and Flora, alarmed, hurried out of the room to summon Harris, and to give w r ay to her tears, whicli now w r ere tears of pleasure and of hope, for she trusted that Edward would yet recover, and realize the bright expectation of all his friends. The pleasurable sensations of hopequick-
ly diffused themselves through every bosom interested in his recoveiy. Clara was as loud in her joy as she had been in her dis¬ tress, and Dr. Barlow was compelled to remind her that his patient w as still in a very doubtful state, and that quiet was absolutely necessary to forward his reco¬ very. This had the desired effect on Clara, who therefore looked anel moved with studied gentleness; for in spite of the pre¬ sence of Charles, and his well-grounded jealousy, Clara took no pains to conceal, either from him or from any other person, the extent of her affection for Mackenzie. Miss Manningham was surprised and pained to behold the little self-command which Clara displayed on this trying occa¬ sion. She could not believe that it pro¬ ceeded from an attachment like her own : and why not? Because it would be so ri¬ diculous in Miss Lindsay to be in love with a boy of fifteen. Was it not then equally ridiculous in Constantia Manning¬ ham, who was at least a year older than Clara
Clara Lindsay? Constantia was forcibly struck by this self-reasoning; she therefore resolved to conquer so unequal a passion, or to strive at least to check its progress, before the whole happiness of her life was destroyed by tins growing weakness. Thii s the improper violence of Clara proved a salutary lesson to Miss Manningham, who, though unable wholly to subdue the ten¬ derness of a first impression, had the forti¬ tude and wisdom to keep her feelings with¬ in proper bounds, until time and circum¬ stances rendered caution unnecessary.
CHAPTER VI. The recovery of Edward appeared for some time to be extremely doubtful, as the chief seat of his disease was in the mind. Never was the life of any human being prayed for more ardently than bis¬ ne ν er
never was any human being attended with more real solicitude, more warm af¬ fection ; yet Edward's griefs were restrain¬ ed to his own bosom, out of tenderness fo those about him—and sorrow concealed preys with double force upon the consti¬ tution. Edward thought that he should be better if he could speak to Patty Smith. As soon as lie was able to leave his room, Mr. Lindsay, to his great joy, ex¬ pressed a wish that he should return to his house, as they had already intruded a fortnight upon the hospital^ of the Hall ; and though he was now in a state of convalescence, yet neither he nor his family coulel bring themselves to leave him. Edward, therefore, once more took possession of his own apartments at Mr. Lindsay's, to the inexpressible delight of honest Oliver, who literally cried for joy at his return. Deeply impressed by a sense of the kindness wdiich he had received from the vol. π ν ??????*
Manninghams during his illness, as well as by the tender solicitude of Mr. and Mrs. Lindsay, Edward felt himself called on to make some exertion towards discharging a part of the heavy debt which he owed to his friends. He knew that all of them looked forward to the time when his ta¬ lents, matured by study and experience, would place him among the list of British artists, whose works would be their coun¬ try's boast, their country's pride; if he suffered himself to sink under the pres¬ sure of his affliction, he should not only weaken the pow r ers of his mind, but damp the fire of his imagination—he should be¬ come melancholy and dejected, careless of life, and incapable of providing for its wants. On the other hand, what were his in¬ ducements to live? what charm did the world possess that should make him soli¬ citous to prolong existence? Edward's young heart found an immediate reply to this question: he had .only to imagine himself
himself at the Hall, with Frederic on one side, and Flora on the other side of his bed—to fancy that he felt the tender pres¬ sure of tlieir hands in his, that he saw their looks full of affectionate sympathy, and heard the soft low whisper of Flora's mellow \oice, as it inftbed into his soul the balm of comfort, ?:?! of pious resig¬ nation to the decrees of ??????. Neither could Edward look back upon the hun- elreel acts of generous kindness which he bad received from the Lindsays, or the flattering attentions of sir Charles and lidy Manningham, without acknowledg¬ ing thai the world still contained a charm strong enoimli to bind him to existence. And were these the only claims upon bih gratitude and affection?—bad not his widowed mother, his orphan sister, an equal claim to the exertion of his talents ? The warm heart of Edward acknowledged that they had. All sense of the for¬ mer neglect, of the unjust preference of his mother, vanished from his memory, f l Z and
and he remembered only the words of iu4 ieblized father, which conjured him to love, honour, and protect his mother, and to recollect that Janet Mackenzie was his ehild. Could Eelward forget the daughter of a man who had been to him a father anel a friend, and wiioso tenderness ewen exceeded that of his own parent ? No î it was not likely that a soul, fond, faithful, and afíeclionate as Edward's, could ever folget the sacred and tender claim whicli Janet Mackenzie hael upon his love, and upon his fortune, if ever he possessed one. All, the r efore, combined to create in the mind of Edward a desire to live, that he might repay, if possible, the kindness whieh he had received, and that he might provide for the future wants of his widowed mother, who would now be cast desolate on the world, with only the small pittance allowed to an officer's widow for her maintenance. To make amends in this respect for the loss of her husband was now r become the determination of Edward, for
for in this respect only could he supply the place of his adopted father. To fill up the void in her heart which the depriva¬ tion of his society and of his steady ten¬ derness must' create, Edward felt to be im¬ possible; but it remained for him to lighten. if not wholly to remove, the lesser evils wdiich must attend on her unprotected and melancholy situation. Edward took the earliest opportunity to impart to Mr. Lindsay this new-formed resolution, and to solicit his advice as to the best means by which he could dispose of his productions, hinting, in the most delicate way, his wish to provide in fu¬ ture for himself. Mr. Lindsay tenderly embraced hun. -—" While I live, my dear Edward," said he, " my house shall always be your home ; therefore, if you value my esteem, I charge you not to cherish for a moment any wish e>r plan that will rob me of your society. I love you with a father's fond¬ ness, and could but ill support the loss of ? 3 your
your society. Indeed I may confess,to yon, Edward, what I would conceal from every one else, that my hopes of happi¬ ness, as far as regards the filial love of Clara, are but small : each day too sadly convinces me of her selfish principles— our fatal indulgence has been her ruin: yet there are hearts which this misplaced weakness would have bound to us for ever. Edward, you must not remind me that I have no claim to your duty and obedience—I wish to consider you as my son ; indulge me in this wish, my dear bov, and do not leave me to feel with dou- ble keenness the want of a child's tender attentions, now that you have taught me to know their value." " I wish not to leave you, sir," replied Edward ; " I only wish to lighten the ne¬ cessary expences of my support. It would be base and ungrateful in me not to exert the talents I,, possess for that purpose, since I can no longer expect any pecu¬ niary assistance from my poor mother; on the
the contrary, it will afford me the most heartfelt satisfaction to be enabled to con¬ tribute in some degrœ to her future com¬ forts." ** I respect the delicacy of your feelings, my dear Edward," said Mr. Lindsay, " and will do alt in my power to further your wishes. All that I require of you is, that you will consider this house as your home ; in anv other instance I wish not to con* trol your actions." -Edward replied, that he should always consider himself as bound to consult Mr. Lindsay upon every occasion in whicli his future movements were concerned, and that he should ever look up to him with filial reverence and affection ; that he ac¬ cepted with the most lively gratitude, his kind proposal of considering his house as his home, and that it shonld hencefor¬ ward be the study of his life to* realize the generous hopes of all his friends, by devoting himself more than ever to the labours of iiis art. F -b Mr.
Air. Lindsav now ventured to shew him a letter, which he had received from his mother, in which she said that, on the morning of the battle, her liusband had mentioned Eelward in terms of undi¬ minished tenderness, but with a foreboding that he should not live to see him again. He had written a few lines, which he con¬ jured her to deliver to him herself, in case of his death, and which she had there¬ fore carefully preserved, together with a few articles which he had bequeathed to his adopted son. " Tell Edward, my dear sir," continuée! Alice, " that it may perhaps afford hini some little consolation to know that, though mortally wounded, his father was borne off the field of battle, and that he died in my arms ; his last breath was spent in calling down blessings upon the head of Edw r ard,who,he said, would one day or other realize every fond wish of his heart. Tell him also, my dear sir, that I shall return immediately to England, since I have
have no longer any wish to continue among scenes of carnage and blood, now that I have lost my beloveel husband, my best and dearest friend." Edward was most sensibly affected by his mother's letter, vet he tried to check his feelings before Mr. Lindsay, who nar¬ rowly watched every change of his fea¬ tures as he perused the paper, blotted in many places by the tears of the discon¬ solate Alice. As soon as he was alone, he resolved to gratify his inclinations, by pay¬ ing a visit to Patty Smith, whom he had not seen since his dangerous illness. In passing through the garden he met Oliver, whose open ingenuous countenance bright¬ ened with a smile of affection the mo¬ ment he beheld him. " Thank God! master Edward, that you be once more come back to us," said Oliver ; " the house has been sad and dull while you were away, and we all of us prayed day and night for your recovery. At any other time we should have been F 5 glad
glad to have got rid of Miss CJara, but your illness made us all miserable. Poor Patty Smith watched to speak to me, and when I told her that Miss Clara was at the Hall, and that she might come as often as she liked to ask after vou, she cried out of mere gratitude, though, God knows, I must have been no better than a brute if 1 could have done otherwise. So ï called morning and evening at the Hall, to inquire how you was, master Edward, anel then I let Patty know, who would have given her ears could she but have got a sight of you." " Thank you, dear Oliver,' 1 said Edward, 4i for your goodness to poor Patty; she is one of the best and kindest girls in the world—I am going to see ber, Oliver, and will be back in b alf an hour." * t Ecod, master Edward, you had better not be longer, for if our Miss Clara comes back from the Hall before you return, she will be in a fine ston. , I warrant me ; for half a pin she would set off for Mr. Smith's, and .
and play old gooseberry with both him and his daughter. So pray make haste home, master Edward, or the house will be too hot to hold us." Edward smiled languidly on honest Oliver, then proceeded on bis walk—not, however, with his accustomed rapidity of movement, for he was still suffering from the effects of his illness, wdiich had left him w r eak and low-spirited. He paused at the gate of his grandmother's cottage, for he remembered that it wns there he had seen for the last time his beloved, his adoptee! father. Patty Smith, who had goodnaturedly offeree! to mind the cottage children dur¬ ing the absence of their mother, now came to the door, and, uttering a cry of joyful surprise, rushed out of the house. She caught the trembling hand of Ed- ward, just as he was retreating from the gate, and conducted him back, not un¬ willingly, to the cottage. Here a scene of mutual caresses, mutual inquiries, and f 6 mutual
mutual affection, ensued ; both recollected tbe farewell visit of tbe brave and gallant Mackenzie—both w T cpt on the bosom of eaeh other at his sad destiny. Edward felt considerably relieved by thus giving way to his feelings in the pre¬ sence of Patty Smith, to whom he con¬ fided also his intention of providing in future for iiis own necessities and those of his mother. He repeated to her tlie friendly invitation of sir Joseph Hennie, to spend a month at his house in town, modestly touching upon the flattering encomiums which that gentleman bestow¬ ed upon his talents, well knowing that notliing was more pleasing to the ear of Pati y than his praise. He then very na¬ turally reverted to his dangerous illness, and to the innumerable acts of kindness and affection which he had received from the Manningham family. " Dear Patty !" said he gratefully, " had it not been for them, I must have died under the severity of my affliction ; and, when
when I began to recover my reason and my strength, I should even then have sunk under the heaviness of my loss, had I not remembered that my friends had a strong claim upon my exertion and upon my gra¬ titude, Frederic never left me the wiiole of my illness : to him, anel to the angelic Flora, I am indebted for the sweetest, ten¬ derest consolation ; they soothed my ha¬ rassed feelings, beguiled away my pains, and taught me that existence was still worth preserving, since it coulel solace me with tlie clairm of their friendship: yet for all thut, Patty, I wouki have given any thing to have seen anei spoken to you for halfan hour." "Ah, master Edward P' sighed Patty, " I know that you would not tell me an untruth, } et I can hardly believe that you could cast one thought on me in the pre¬ sence of Miss Flora." " Yes, Patty, even in her presence I thought of you, and I wished that it were possible for me to confide to you the ex¬ tent
tent of my sufferings; for you, Patty, have seen my beloved father, have witnessed his tenderness, and are in a manner made a part of my family." Again Patty sighed,—" Well do I re¬ member him," said she. " I think I see him now, with his arms clasped fondly round your neck, looking in your face, as if his eyes were fixed on it for ever, so dearly did he love you. Then he asked for the pretty-iooking little girl whom hi had seen on his entrance, and w r ho had expressed a wish to see him, because lie was so fond of you. Slowly í d vaneed from lx hind your grandmother's high-back¬ ed chtùr— you caught my hand-» 4 Love her, dear, dear fat iier,' you said, t for she is so good and kind to me and to my grandmother.' Then he kissed me, and gave me this gold coin, wiiich I have worn round my neck ever since I heard of his death." Patty now drew from her bosom the iXolu coin, which was suspended to a nar¬ row
row piece of black ribbon. ^Edward press¬ ed it to his lips in silent veneration, while tbe starting tears fell on the bosom of Patty.—" I will not rob you of this pre¬ cious mark of my dear father's love, Putty" said he, still holding it in his hand ; " but I will ask you to preserve it sacredly for his sake. If you love me, Patty, you will never resign this coin into another's keeping." %t If I love you, master Edward !" re¬ plied Patty, sobbing—" Ah! you know r not how truly I love you, how steadily 1 have loved yon, ever since I was a child. Part with it! no, that I never will, though I might want a morsel of bread ! But i/o ? shall have the coin, master Edward, if vou wish it." " Not for the world, Patty," hastily ex¬ claimed Edward, " would I bereave you of this sacred gift of my beloved fatlier. No, Patty, keep it as a memento of his kindness. Had he lived, you would have shared
shared with me more solid marks of his affection." Patty burst into tears.—" It w T as a sad, sad day for me, master Edward, w r hen your poor dear old grandmother died. I have not known a happy moment since, except those few which I may have passed in your so¬ ciety. I almost wish that 1 had died with her, for I should then have been spared many a bitter pang. You, master Ed¬ ward, have some inducement to cherish life, but I, alas í have none." " Fie, Patty ? cried Edward, in a half- reproachful tone, as his eyes glanced round the humble dwelling: " is it here, m this once happy abode of our childhood, where both of us have listened to the excellent advice of my dear grandmother, that you give utterance to such a wish as that you have now breathed. Have I not set you an example, Patty, of self-command, as well as of submission to the will of Hea¬ ven? Young as I am, I have j et lived to sustain
sustain the loss of two dear-loved relatives, who valued my happiness more than their own. My mother still exists, but my claim to her kindness must be small, since I was separated from her in my fourth year ; still smaller must be my claim upon the heart of my sister, for she cannot even remem¬ ber me. The world is now open before me, Patty, and to its liberality and kind¬ ness I must now look for my support, for I can no longer consent to be a burden to the generosity of Mr. Lindsay, or to live in a state of abject dependence : yet you have not heard me wish that I were dead, Patty, although I have just lost a father wiio was far, far dearer to me than my own existence." Patty's tears streamed afresh, for she felt that she had committed an error, which had called forth the censure of Edward ; yet she attempted to excuse her indiscre¬ tion by reverting to the painful scenes which she daily witnessed at home of her father's extravagance, as well as his fond¬ ness
ness for fhe worthless woman wdio pre¬ tended to take care of his affairs, when, in fact, her fatal love of drinking rendereel it necessary that she should have some one always with her, to take care that she did not fall a victim to her imprudence. Edward, shocked by so disgusting a re¬ cital, and grieved to the soul by the con¬ viction of Patty's unfortunate situation, now flung his arms round her neck, and, mingling his tears with hers, besought her to rely on the protection of the Almighty, who sooner or later would raise her up a friend who would remove her from her comfortless home. " If I were old enough, Patty," said Edw r ard, " í would be that friend—I wouki take you away from the sight of that bad woman ; or if 1 were rich enough, I would even now place you with some good wo¬ man like my grandmother, where you sliould neither see nor hear uny thing to í>i\e vou pain." ? ^ -t < r Ah, ?.??? Edward!" said Patty, wiping
wiping away her tears, l * I will never wish myself deael again, since I have so kind a friend in you. Ì only pray tiiat 1 may be allowed to get my own living by going out in the w T orld ; but to this my father objects, and I am loth to do any thing whieh he forbids me ; and yet I feel that I cannot ahvays live as I elo now. Hael it not been for the cruel dislike of Miss Lindsay, I am certain that Mrs. Norton would have got me a situation at the Hall." " Hope for the best, dearest Patty," re¬ plied Edward. 4i When my mother re¬ turns to England, it may be in her power to become your friend : not all the Miss Lindsays in the, w oriel shall prevent my securing to you her friendship and good offices. Keep up your spirits, Patty—rely upon my affection : whatever may be my futu: : lot, you shall divide with my mo¬ ther and sister all the good, ut none of the evils which may attend my destiny." Edward, with all the innocency of bro¬ therly love, bent forward to kiss ¿he cheek of
of Patty Smith, just at the moment when Clara Lindsay and Miss Manningham, with Charles, passed the garden gate. The door of the cottage stood open, and the former just caught a glimpse of Edward's tender attitude, but not a sufficient one of his companion. Patty, however, had seen her persecuting enemy, and, dreading the ef¬ fects of her malignity, flew into the back garden, and, by the help of the old favou¬ rite arbour, bounded over the low paling which divided it from a meadow, through which she hastily ran, not turning to look once behind her, until she felt assured that sbe was safe beyond the sound of Clara's spleenful tongue and scornful eye.
CHAP-
CHAPTER VII. Miss Lindsay, wiio had left Edward at home on account of his weakness, could hardly give credit to the evidence of her own senses, when she beheld him at the cottage, which had once belongeel to his grandmother. Who was this new person wiio had started forth as a candidate for his favour? wiio could it be for whom he was manifesting such evident affection? Unable to repress either her curiosity or her displeasure, Clara pointée! out to her companions the cause of it, and expressed a wish that Charles would discover the object of Edward's stolen interviews. It was impossible for a youth of seven¬ teen to disregard the wishes of a fair lady, and Charles, who had besides another mo¬ tive for obedience, now sprang forward to take
take a nearer survey of the cottage in¬ mates. Edward, who saw him advancing towards the door, came to meet him, for Patty by this time had disappeared, and, holding out his hand to him, as usual, in¬ quired if it was him that he was seeking ? " You are a fine fellow r , are you not," cried Charles, still advancing towards the door, tt who, in spite of languor and indis¬ position, can find both time and strength to teach the village -g^rls, not the art of paint¬ ing, but what they will learn still quicker, the art of kissing? Come, Edward, let us have a glimpse of your pupil. Miss Lind¬ say will die with curiosity, unless she is informed of thisym/¿ object of your gra¬ titude? i£ Miss Lindsay is very good," said Ed¬ ward, forcing a smile, " to concern herself so much about the objects of my grati¬ tude ; but in this instance her curiosity will not be gratified." " Nay," cried Charles, endeavouring to make ins way into the cottage, " if you arc
are so ungallant as to slight a lady's wish, so ara.not I. Miss Lindsav commissioned me to see wiio it was that you were ad¬ vising so tenderly, and I am therefore, as in duty bound, compelled to obey her." " Pardon me," said Edward, hastily closing the door of the cottage, and placing himself against it, " if I feel myself equally bound, as well from duty as from inclina¬ tion, to oppose the execution of her wishes. I do not choose to expose the innocent οδ- jcct qf my gratitude either to your raillery or her scorn." " Then you refuse to tell Miss Lindsay who is your companion?" said Charles, haughtily. * t Assuredly Ido," replied Edward firmly. " A most convincing proof," retorted Charles, " that you are ashamed of the acquaintance. But I can easily guess who it is, and shall inform JMiss Lindsay of my suspicions." '* You are at perfect liberty to act as you please, Mr. Manningham," said Ed¬ ward
ward proudly. w I am neither account¬ able to you or to Miss Lindsay for my actions." So saying, he coolly bowed to Charles, and, passing onward, quitted the garden, not deigning to cast a look towards the path in which Clara and Con stantia were slowly walking, awaiting the return of young Manningham. Charles,angry and provoked at the steady firmness of Edward, was nevertheless de¬ termined not to be foiled in his errand. He perceived through the window of the cottage one of the children enter from the back garden, and he instantly resolved to gain from him that intelligence which Edward wished to keep secret. As he had feared and suspected, the child vny innocently informed him that Patty Smith was the young person whom he had seen. This information only increased his resent¬ ment against Edward, and he now hasten¬ ed to communicate the unwelcome news to Clara and Miss Manningham. ' 6 That girl is a disgrace to the village," exclaimed
exclaimed Clara, angrily—" what can be done to wean Edward from so low a con¬ nexion ? I will speak to my father, who may perhaps have sufficient influence witli Mr. Smith to advise him to send Patty away ; for it is really shameful to have her eternally running after Edward—meeting him in different places—and encouraging him to waste that time which ought to be so much better employed. If he were a few years older, it would not at all sur¬ prise me if Patty were to ensnare him into a promise of marriage." « I think," said Charles, " that, with his romantic ideas of gratitude, he should be more ready to acknowledge the power¬ ful claim which you and your family have upon him, and which certainly overba¬ lances that of Patty Smith. Where would he now be, were it not for the liberality and kindness of Mr. Lindsay ? I believe that his high spirit would find some little diiferenee, if he were turnee 1 out into the world to get his own living. The com- VOL. IL G tnnv
pany of Patty Smith would but ill com pensate for the elegant society of Miss Lindsay, and the comforts of her father's house. I am seriously displeased with Edward for his behaviour this morning, and nothing but my respect for whatever is honoured with the favour of my lovely young friend could have prevented me from knocking him down, when he so positively refused to comply with her wishes." " I must talk to him once more upon tliis degrading subject," replied Clara, vex¬ ed and mortified by the resolute conduct of her fa\ on rite : " he knows how strongly I am attached to him, and he therefore takes advantage of my partiality. Patty is, however, more to blame than Edw r ard, and 1 beoin now to think that his visit to London will be attended with more than one benefit to his future welfare." Miss Manningham involuntarily sighed. '· We shall all regret his absence," said she ; " from selfish motives, I own, as the con¬ versation
Versation of Edward is so far above his years; yet I shall now regret it Ipsf, be cause I think with you, my dear Clara, that something ought to be done to pri¬ vent that young person from gaining too great an ascendancy over his mind. 1 re verence and admire the feelings of young Mackenzie, wdiich lead him to treat with kindness a being w T ho bad been tender and serviceable to his helpless grandmo¬ ther, but I think the conduct of Patty re¬ prehensible in allowing him to meet hei- at different times, against the consent of his friends." " Anel do you really believe, Constan tia, that gratitude is the sole feeling whicii influences the actions of Mackenzie?" in¬ quired Charles, sarcastically. " Would he be equally as attentive, equally ready to brave the censure of his friends, for au ugly, ill-formed, decrepid object, as he now is for the plump, handsome, rosv cheeked Patty ? Trust me, my dear sister, that both you and Miss Lindsay may deck Ci 2 y otu
your idol in all imaginary virtues, hut ? the end you will find him a mere mortal, no better than the generality of his sex." Neither Miss Manningham nor Clara would agree to this assertion; both vin¬ dicated Edward, and both condemned poor Patty. In the latter opinion they were so warmly supported by Charles, that his sister could not help remarking archly, that she half-suspected that her brother was inclined to rival Edward in the fa¬ vour of Patty—an observation w r hich called a deeper glow into the face of Charles, and rekindled the hatred of Clara, who more than ever determined to adopt some mea¬ sure by whicii Patty might he removed from the village. Charles, in fact, though still £ captive to the beauty and accomplishments of Miss Lindsay, was the secret admirer of Patty Smith. He had long been a spy over her movements, and often attempted to gain her sniles by presents, which,sbe steadily rejected, and by praises and attentions, which
which she equally despised. Mortified by this indifference in one whom he consider¬ ed as his inferior, and whom he had proudly supposed would have felt honoured by his notice, Charles repeatedly upbraided Patty with her preference for her boyish favour¬ ite, telling her that to Edward she was less squeamish, less coy, since he could snatch from her lips the tender kiss, when¬ ever inclination prompted him to seek it. Poor Patty, thus doubly tortured by the reproaches of Charles and the domestic disquietudes of het own home, had more than half-resolved to leave it before hér last interview with Edward, but her na¬ tural timidity, and fear of casting herself upon the world unprotected and unfriend¬ ed, caused her to hesitate, and Edward's affectionate cautions and advice made her resolve to remain until the return of his mother, who she hoped and believed ivould do her utmost to withdraw her from so painful a situation. Clara, though highly irritated by Ed- G 3 ward's
ward's refusal to gratify her wishes, re¬ solved to dissemble the extent of her anger until his departure for London, meaning that it should then fnll with double force on Patty Smith. She even attempted to laugh at his want of gallantry in denying a lady's request, and hoped that, while he was studying the fine arts, he would be equally attentive to the rules of polish¬ ed society. Edward, with less artifice, but equal cleverness, replied to the raillery of Clara, saying, that the knowledge which he had already acquired of those rules taught him to consider it as a point of honour not to betray the name of the per¬ son who had unfortunately excited thecu- • ; )sity of Miss Lindsay. Clara checked her accustomed hastiness of temper, and resolved to try if her pur¬ pose coujd be effected by gentle means.. She therefore endeavoured to impress on the mind of Edward a belief, that by con- tinning to keep alive the friendships of his childhood, he would endanger those of his
his riper years, and, by thus obstinately persisting to disgrace himself, hazard the good opinion, and perhaps forfeit the pa¬ tronage, of the Manningham family. Eelward, however, was not to be moved by any personal considerations of selfish in^ terest to renounce the innocent acejuaint- ance of poor Patty.—" It İs the only sub¬ ject, my dear Miss Lindsay," said he, " on wdiich I am likely to differ from you in opinion ; but on this point we can never agree. Could I treat with neglect the af¬ fectionate companion of my infancy, could I pass without noticing the tender nurse of my dear olel grandmother, I should be wanting in the common feelings of grati¬ tude, and wholly unworthy the generous kindness of sir Charles and lady Manning¬ ham—nay, I should expect that they would despise me, for assuming to myself a consequence which can belong alone to people of high birth." Clara neither could nor would be con¬ vinced of the propriety of Edward's con- G 4 tinuing
turning to acknowledge any intimacy witli Patty Smith, yet she prudently forbore to hint to him her intention of speaking to her father on the subject, though at the same moment she resolved, should her ap¬ plication be useless, to apply to lady Man¬ ningham, who, she doubted not, would willingly exert all her influence to break off so low a connexion. Edward, though still suffering from the shock which he had received, cheerfully prepared to accompany sir Joseph Hennie to London, as he now felt doubly anxious to begin that proper course of study· by which he should be enabled to gratify his own hopes, and the sanguine expectations of his friends. One only alloy to his plea¬ sure was his separation from Frederic, which, as it was the first, was doubly dis¬ tressing to them both, and the more so, as sir Joseph had intimated to Mr. Lind¬ say that it was more than probable that Edwards visit would be prolonged beyond a month, " You
" You will write to me, Mackenzie," said Frederic, on the morning of his de¬ parture, " for neither to see nor hear from you is what I shall never be able to en¬ dure. Charles expects soon to receive his commission in the guards, but I shall not miss his presence half so much as I shall yours; therefore write tö me, my dear friend, every day if you can, for if it is only a line, it will give me pleasure." Edward promised to be a constant cor¬ respondent during his absence; and with this assurance Frederic was obliged to be satisfied.^—'* I wished," said he, " to be the first to lay claim to your leisure mo¬ ments, as I know they will be fully em¬ ployed in answering the inquiries of your numerous friends. Constantia and Miss Lindsay Will not allow you to be idle; but in attending to their wishes, you must not forget, Mackenzie, either your friend¬ ship for me, or your vow to Flora." "Forget!" hastily exclaimed Edward. blushing ; M how can I forget the two be- G 5 ings
ings who are dearer to me than life itself/ Xo, beloved Frederic! it is for me to dread ihe effects of absence, which may efface from Lie mind of your angelic sister ,the remembrance of one whose sole, ????)?1» nienelation is that of being your friend." " That alone, Mackenzie, u ould ensure ro you the affection of Flora," replied J)re¬ done; " but your own merits are a suffi¬ cient passport to the susceptible heart of my sister. Come with me to the Hall, for you must see her before you set off; she has prepared several little presents for your acceptance, wiiich I know will be more valuable in your eyes than the more rosily ones of Constantia." *' 1 have one favour to request of \?? 4 " said Edward, " while we are alone, and I feel assured, Frederic, that you \vill not deny it me. You know the unaccount¬ able dislike which Miss Lindsay hasiakén to poor Patty Smith, and the various ways by which abe has endeavoured to make me slight the poor girl, whom she pleases to
to consider as my inferior. You know also, for from you I have no concealments, the miserable state of Patty's home, whicli she would have quitted long since, but for my advice. I believe that her only comfort has flowed from her interviews with me, and from the consciousness that her wel¬ fare is as dear to me as if she were my sister. What I would request of you is, my dear Frederic, that, while I am in Lon¬ don, you will notice poor Patty, even more kindly than usual, and that you will in¬ form her as often as you hear from me— in short, that you would do every thing to supply to her the loss of my society. Patty has a grateful heart, and a mind above her station : she feels the impro¬ priety of her father's residence being her home, and would give the world could she but obtain the honour of atten ding on your sweet sister Flora. Watch over the poor girl, my dear Frederic, for my sake, since you well know how highly I value g 6 the
the dutiful attentions of Patty towards my poor old grandmother." " Trust to my vigilance and affection," replied Frederic ; u Patty shall see me as often as I receive your letters ; and believe me that I wull never hear her name men¬ tioned before me with disrepect, without vindicating it as warmly as yourself." Thus assured, Edward felt himself at ease respecting Patty, and he therefore proceeded with Frederic to the Hall, where he was received with all imaginable kind¬ ness by its amiable inmates, Charles ex¬ cepted, who had not yet forgotten the manly firmness of Edward in refusing to confess who was his companion at the cot¬ tage. As it was now generally understood that the return of Edward would depend on circumstances, which might protract it for several months, Constantia, in the pleni¬ tude of her affection, had procured for him some books, splendidly bound, a sil¬ ver
ver inkstand, and a variety of other ar¬ ticles, all of which she knew would be use¬ ful to our young artist; while Flora mo¬ destly presented him with a purse and a watch-chain of her own making, to the latter of which was affixed two small gold seals—the one was the sun-flow r er, with the motto ** Constancy ;" the other a grace¬ ful figure of Hope, encircled with an ap¬ propriate motto. Flora had likewise paint¬ ed for him a portfolio and letter-case ; but the gift most saeTed to the soul of Edward was a ringlet of her own dark hair, which, at the suggestion of Frederic, she had weaved with his own, for a locket which he had bought for that purpose, and whieh he took care that Flora should have the opportunity of placing round the neck of his bosom-friend. Loaded with presents, caresses, and ad¬ vice, Edward set out for London, accom¬ panied by sir Joseph Rennie, who took care that the journey should be as interest¬ ing as possible to our young traveller. He
He pointed out to him the finest views of the fertile country through which they passed, and gave him short sketches of the different families whose seats enriched the varied prospect of the landscape, to¬ gether with a slight history of those per¬ sons to whom he meant to introduce him; thus kindly withdrawing liis thoughts from the friends he had left behind, and fixing them on objects of lesser interest, yet of suflicient consequence to divert Edward's mind until he entered tbe gay metropolis of London. Here every object excited new ideas, new hopes, and new wishes. The streets, the houses, the splendour of the shops, and the equipages of the nobi¬ lity, some of whom still lingered in town, as if unwilling to leave the soul of all their pleasures, perfectly enchantée! the senses of Edward; and by the time that he was set down at sir Joseph's house in St. James's-sejuarc, he felt assured that the description given him of London by one
one of the guests e>f sir Charles Manning¬ ham was not in the least exaggerated, CHAPTER VIIL
Nothing could have enabled Miss Lind» say to bear with composure the absence of her favourite Edward, but the conscious¬ ness that this was the only opportunity of breaking off his connexion with Patty Smith. She accordingly informed her father of their private interviews, not for¬ getting the tenderness of the cottage scene, and the firmnesa of Edward in re¬ fusing to discontinue his intimacy with Patty, which she attributed solely to her undue influence over his feelings. ** Consider, my dear father," said Clara, artfully, k * what ill consequences may arise from Edward's persisting to acknowledge so luw a connexion. As it is, he has greatly
greatly offended Charles Manningham, by his conduct on the dav when we discover- ed him at his grandmother's cottage, with his arms thrown round the neck of some one whom he was tenderly embracing. 1 have since learnt that it was Patty Smith; and really, if she continues to fol¬ low Edward, and to engross so much of his attention, I should not be at all sur¬ prised, if in time she does not persuade him to become her husband—a very suit¬ able match for one of his talents and ex¬ pectations in life ! Do pray, dear father, speak seriously to Mr. Smith on the sub¬ ject, and let him exert his authority to give Patty some better employment than that of running after Edward all day long, as she now does." Mr. Lindsay was as completely de¬ ceived as his wife, by the apparent pro¬ priety of Clara's request, since neither of them for a moment supposed that she was influenced by any other motives than her anxiety for Edward's welfare. This was the
the first time that either of them had heard of Patty's supposed misconduct, for such it appeared from the representation of Clara; and Mrs. Lindsay saw it, there¬ fore, in so dangerous a view, that she re¬ solved to go herself to Patty's father, and tí» propose that something should be done to procure for Patty a comfortable situa¬ tion in some famiiy where her time would be properly employed. ** The most effectual means of breaking the connexion," said Clara, " w r ould be to A emove her from the village, to w here Ed¬ ward could not easily discover her abode." ki True, my love," replied Mr. Lindsay, ** but we have no right to dictate to Mr. Smith about the establishment of his daughter; all that we can do is to inform him of the circumstances which bave alarmed us, and to advise with him upon the best means of preventing so growing an evil. Patty is, I believe and hope, a very good girl, but it is highly improper that she should now give way to an aifec¬ tion
tion which it wns natural she should feel for Edward when thoy were children to¬ gether, but uhich, ifencouraged, may tend to their nuitual unhappincss : Patty is nearly ?c\ enteen, and ought to be placed in some comfortable situ tion, more eligi¬ ble than that of her own home." So much importance did Mr. Lindsay attach to the communication of Clara, that lie proposed accompanying his wife to the house of Mr. Smith, that he might assist her, ifit were necessary, by his cooler rea¬ soning. Tiie father of Patty, notwith¬ standing his own faulty mode of living, nppeared sensibly hurt by the account <>i ven him of his daughter's fondness for Edward, and of the probable consequences vvhich might result from her being allow¬ ed to continue so idle a way of life as that » hieh she now led. lie seemed to agree with Mrs. Lindsay, that Patty had now arrived at an age when it was necessary that she should do something for herself, instead of wandering up and down the village,
ullage, without any guide or proper di¬ rector of her actions; and he promised Λ 1rs. Lindsay that more care should be taken in future, to prevent her from meet¬ ing Eelward as often as she pleaded. They were no sooner gone than he called for his daughter, and with a stern look and Voice, demanded what she meant by running up and down the \ i liage after y oun g j\ 1 ackcn z i e ? " I tell >ou what, Patty," said he, " 1 always took you for another sort of a girl, anel never dreamt that I should ever hear a complaint against you, either from ma¬ dam Lindsay or any body else. A fine preaching I have had about your being so much your own mistress, when you ought to be doino* something" for vour own ¿mod. However, 1 mean to have no more ser¬ mons upon your account, Fatty, so 1 de¬ sire tbat you will never speak to young Mac¬ kenzie again ; they have made a gentleman of him now, it seems, and he is too good to be your companion—so, do you mind
røe, Patty ? never do you speak to him again." Patty burst into tears. " Dear father, what harm can there be in my speaking to master Edward," said she, sobbing, * e when we were brought up together by his dear old grandmother ? I could no more help speaking to him when I saw him, than I could help speaking to you." " So, so !" cried her father, angrily ; " if that is the case, Patty, it is high time that I should teach you who I am. Now, if I catch you speaking again to Edward Mackenzie, I will break every bone in your skin. What good will you get by running after a boy like him ? You will only make yourself enemies of those who have placed him above you : the lad may be a very good lad, for any thing that I know to the contrary, but what have you to do with him ? For half a pin, I would pack you off instantly to your aunt Jack¬ son, only that I find that Mackenzie is gone
gone for some time to London. But mark me, Fatty—if I have one more com¬ plaint againsj: you from madam Lindsay, I will scud you immediately to your aunt," So saying, he left, poor Patty nearly heart-broken at the thought of not being suffered to speak to Edward, and terrified to death by the threat of being sent to her aunt Jackson, whom she knew to be a most severe, ill-tempered, tyrannical woman, the scourge of her own family, and the terror of her neighbours. With tear-swoln eyes and crimson cheeks, she proceeded slowly to the once-happy abode of her childhood, hoping to find comfort and con¬ solation in the innocent prattle of the cot¬ tage children. She had scarcely seated herself among them, when she was sur¬ prised by the appearance of Charles Man¬ ningham, who giving each of the children money, desired them to go and purchase themselves some cakes, as he wanted to speak to Patty'Smith. Assuming
Assuming an air of the tenderest solici¬ tude, Charles inquired, in agentie voice, the caut-e of Patty's apparent distress ; and. as he pressed her hand respectfully in his, assured her that he was anxious to render her every service in bis power, and that if she pleastd, he would speak to his mo¬ ther, as' he well knew that her home had king been an unhappy one, Patty, iiattered and deceived by this shew of kindness in one whom she had always considered as regarding her with proud superiority, most artlessly repeated to him the recent cause of her sorrow ; adding, that she was well aware that it o' sprung from the dislike which 31 iss Lind¬ say had ever manifested towards her, a dislike for which she could not account, as she was perfectly unconscious of doing any thing to oflend her. " I w ill tell you, my sweet Patty," said Charles, ** what is your oftence: you are handsome, and the favourite of Mackenzie. This is the sum of your offence, but it ? au
an unpardemable one in the eyes of Miss Lindsay, who has set up Edwarel for an idol, wiiich no one of inferior rank to her¬ self must dare approach. T>ke my word, and 1 speak to you as a friend, that she will never rest until she has driven you on t of tiie village." Patty burst into a fresh agony of tears. " Cruel Miss Lindsay !" said she, sob¬ bing. '* what crime have I committed that I sliould thus be denied the privilege of speaking to one whom I have known ever since I was six velars olel? Why should she try to make my life miserable, when 1 would not injure a worm if I could help it? No, Mr. Manningham,** continued Patty, gratefully, ** your kind offer of mentioning me to your mother would be useless, for Miss Lindsay would soon get me turnee! out of thé house, if 1 were once so fortunate as to enter it. Miserable girl that 1 now am, since ! have no longer a friend in the world, now that master Edward is gone í ' v Yes,
* s Yes, lovely Patty !" exclaimed Charles, throwing an arm round her waist, ** you have still a friend, who is ready and anxi¬ ous to serve you at the hazard of his life, ma wheise happiness and fortune is at your disposal. In a short time I shall be called to town to join my regiment—if you will rely upon my tenderness, dear Patty, and accompany me to London, you shall enjoy every comfort, every pleasure, that I can procure for you; I will take you entirely from the power of your fa¬ ther, and the hatred of Miss Lindsay, and will immediately settle on you for life, one half of my yearl} "ncome." The blush of indignation crimsoned the cheek of Patty. Pushing aside his arm, she said— " I beg, Mr. Manningham, that you will leave me, since you only mean to insult and degrade me. I foolishly thought it possible that you might be sincere in your professions of friendship, and that you might be sorry for my un¬ happy situation; but I should have re¬ membered
membere*d that the lover and companion of Miss Lindsay could not l>e my friend, Pray leave me, Mr. Manningham—I am not the base creature that you take me for." ** Foolish, perverse girl Γ cried Charles, angrily ; " what can induce you to reject so advantageous an offer ? Your favourite Edward, even were he older, ¿annot do half so much for you as I can ; and it is a shame for a handsome girl like you to waste her time and thoughts upon a boy of fifteen* As to my being the admirer of Miss Lindsay, that will not hinder me from devoting to you the chief of my leisure hours ; and I again repeat, Patty, that you shall enjoy every luxury that it is in my power to procure for you, if you will but accompany me to London." Patty, though one of the mildest of hu¬ man beings, now felt herself roused by the persevering insolence of Charles. Bising hastily Irom her seat, she insisted upon his instantly leaving the cottage, declaring vol. il ii that,
that, if he persisted in his dishonourable proposals, sbe would inform lady Manning- .ham of his conduct " I know not, sir," said she, " by what authority you tfyus dare to insult me, merely because I am so unhappy as to have become disagreeable to Miss Lind¬ say; wiiatever may be her cause of dis¬ like, I am certain that she would not think the better of you, for your want of proper feeling. Leave me, sir, I again repeat; ¿md though I am too humble to become 3;our wife, I am yet too proud to think myself honoured by the offer of becoming your {mistress*" . ;* Upon my soul, you act your part to admiration, lady Vatty," cried Charles, gaily ; ** Mackenzie has been your com¬ panion for something: but if you wished mc to leave you, you should not look so charmingly attractive. Passion becomes you, Patty—it adds a brilliancy to your eyes, -and an animation to your whole form. Give me at least, before I go, pne oí
of those sweet kisses which you so often bestow upon the fortunate Edward ; one he can surely spare out of his miser's hoard." Charles now T clasped the tremblingPatty in his arms ; and as he pressed his lips to those of the terrified maid, he caught a glimpse of the black ribbon which hung round her neck, and to which the gold coin giyen her by Edward's adopted father was suspended. Supposing it. to conceal some present of Mackenzie's, Charles with eager violence snatched the ribbon and its appendage from her neck, declaring that he would not restore it until she con¬ sented to.his proposa!. Patty, to whom nothing in life was :,o sacred, except Edward's self, clung in a sup¬ plicating attitude to the arm of Charles, besecchjng him f ? restore the coin·, as she would rather die than part with it. Charles, however, was resolute iq retain¬ ing it ; and as he moved towards the door, Patty, grown frantic with the fear of ? 2 losi p y
losing what was so dear to herself and Edward, uttered a piercing scream, and sinking down on the ground, clasped firmly the knees of Charles, as she con¬ jured him not to rob her of a gift which ¿»he liad vowed never to part with. At this moment the door was burst sud¬ denly open, and a tall, well-made, good- looking young man entered. Seeing the lowly posture of Patty, he hastened to /aise lier from the fìoor ; then, placing his back against the door, he demanded in a firm voice whether Mr. Manningham was not ashamed of liis behaviour to an inno¬ cent' girl like Patty Smith, whose uncom¬ fortable home, and neglected situation, gave her a claim upon the kindness of cvery man of honourable feelings? " And who are ycru/' cried Charles, haughtily, " who thus insolently dare to call in question the honour of my feel¬ ings ? Let me pass, fellow—I shall not degrade myself by conversing with such as you are." " As
·' As to that, young squire, I am no more a fellow than yourself, and were you the first nobleman in the land, I would tell you that you have already degraded yourself by insulting a virtuous girl with your base proposals. I was passing the cottage, when I heard the voice of Patty, as if in distress—and though in birth I am your inferior, Mr. Manningham, yet I conceive myself bound to offer my pro¬ tection to every woman who may stand in need of my assistance. I came up to the door, and I heard enough to convince me that Patty was injured, and in sorrow, therefore I came to her relief; and if you wish to know my name* it is William Ashford; I live with my father, wdio is a master baker in tlie next town." ** I care neither for your father nor your¬ self," exclaimed Charles, " but if you do not open the door,, you may have cause to repent iL" " First restore to Patty what you hare taken from her, Air. Manningham, and η 3 then
then'I will open the doorâLstahtly," 're¬ plied Ashford, firmly. Charles, angry "arid mortified, flung on thè ground the precious gift ; sö- much worshipped by Patty, then poudly stalked out of the ; cottage,^ the door of whieh was immediately 'opened by Patty's manly proiector. ' : This young man had long been a secret admirer of : Patty Smith, whom he had frequently seen as he drove his fathers cart through the village, párt of which hé served with bread ; he had * inquired into her family/"and hád heard of. the improper conduct of the woman entttrsteÜ with : the care of 'her—and ; his genërbusr^beàrt too often felt a pang, when he reflected on what might be the *cónsequences of bad example and bad morals on so young a mind. '' When left alone' with the poor ;trem- bling Patty, he made use of every expe¬ dient ito sooth her harassed feelings; and, às he spoke to her'in the language of pure n * and
.md genuine affection, Patty felt that she had still a friend left in the village, who was both able and willing to defend her, and to hazard, if necessary, his own life to secure her welfare and happiness. When she was a little recovered from her terror, Ashford in the most respectful manner acknowledged his attachment, and besought her to give him a legal right to protect her from future insult. - " If, my dearest Patty, 1 * said he, " you are partial to this village, I will take a house In it, and ás I shall follow my fa¬ ther's business, wè can as -well open a shop here as anywhere else. 1 know that you are not treated kindly at home, therefore the sooner you have a place' bf your own the better; and I am certain, Patty, that you will never get any body to love you more sincerely than I do, for I felt an af¬ fection for you the moment that I saw you and heard that you were unhappy." Patty's grateful heart, softened by the kindness of William Ashford, now beat ? 4 with
witli new hopes, new inclinations : she re¬ membered the stern prohibition of her father, the hatred of Miss Lindsay, and the insolence of Charles. The honourable proposid oí Ashford would shield her from idi these evils— wxnild enable her to act as she pleased,, without being accountable to any other person than himself for her con¬ duct ; yet Patty hesitated to accept of an offer which would place her at once above all her troubles, as she thought it but just to inform her lover of her friendship for Edward, andofall the circumstances which gave rise to it This- she now did, narrating in the.most artless but tender terms tbe progress of their attachment fpr each other while they dwelt together un¬ der the roof of Margaiet Grey ; and Ash¬ ford, far from feehng any jealous emotions from the account of Patty, assured her tliat he should always be proud to receive and welcome her youth's first friend at Iiis house. " Since you are so strongly attached to this cottage, dear Patty, w said he, kindly pressing
t>ressing ber hand, " I will try and pur¬ chase it of Mr. Walpole ; Ave can easily enlarge it, by building a shop and another room on the side, so that your favourite school-room may still remain as it is, and with very little alteration it will serve as a good parlour. I will see about purchas¬ ing tbe cottage immediately, if you mil promise, dear Patty, to become my wife as soon as the bans are published." Patty's eyes sparkled through her tears, at the idea of being made the mistress of old Margaret's* cottage—it was one of her first and dearest wishes,, it was the secret hope of her future years, the dear reward of all her past mortifications—it was the home, which above all others she ardently eoveted: how then could she refuse so delightful a proposal, coming as it did from a worthy and honourable young man, with whose character she had long beer icquaintedy and whose generous ai¬ fection now held out to her a never-failing balm for all her woes? Patty was at 11 5 length
length -prevailed on to give her word that she would become William AshfordVs wife, if : he could obtain her father's ¿on- sent to the marriage. ;
CHAPTER IX.
Had it been possible for the most ¿un¬ qualified praise, to íruiri the mind Of Ed¬ ward, that winch he now received from all the rfriends of sir Joseph avould cer- . tainly have hafd that, effect—but his t was too well-regulated to fbe^injuterl by the voiæiof'ipublic* admiration*·'arid though flattered, caressed, and 'sought r afier by some of the most distinguished characters of the age, though his presence was every¬ where greeted by the encouraging tímiles of female beauty, his heart remained true to the remembrance of his absent friends, and his thoughts were frequently occu¬ pied
cupied by the less happy situation of his humble companion, the affectionate Patty Smith. In his letters to Frederic, Edward failed not to send a postscript to Patty, thus giving her;the strongest proof of the fide¬ lity of his friendship, since it remained un¬ diminished, notwithstanding that his time was fully occupied by all the allurements of fashion, wit,, and beauty. Frederic was equally constant in his correspondence with Edward ;, but though he saw Patty fre¬ quently, yet he was. entirely ignorant of her intended union with William Ash¬ ford, as Patty wished it to be kept secret from Miss Liridsay.and Charles Manning¬ ham, while her own delicacy prøvented her from imparting the change in her circum¬ stances to .Edward, whp,. she hoped, w r ould be both . pleased and surprised by that .which w;ould, take, place at the same time in the cottage pf his dear old grandmother. Edw r ard's first attempt at historical paint¬ ing had, by the desire of sir Joseph, accom- H 6 tanied
pa^ed them to London. The display of such uncommon talents in a youth not more than fifteen, produced, as was ex¬ pected, the me>st lively demonstrations of applause, and he was accordingly made a student of that academy which was after¬ wards enriched hy stilt finer specimens of his genius and taste, wrhen age and expe*- rienee had matured his talents, and brought them to the summit of perfection. Edward was now r possess**d of every ad¬ vantage that could enable him to pursue his favourite study. The painting-room of sir Joseph was open to him at all ?????, except when that great artist was himself engaged in copying from the fair face of nature, it was here that Edward began his second picture, intended! for the next exhibition, from a subject chosen by sir Joseph, who resolved to put to the test tlie towering genius of his young eleve, and therefore selected for him a battk- piece in the time of the civil wars between Charles and his parliament. On the suc¬ cess
cess of this arduous undertaking Edwnrd grounded his hopes of future fame and fortune. He therefore studied well tL* subjeet before he sketched the outline o r> his picture, and, when he felt himself suf¬ ficient master of it to draw the general outline of the piece, he ventured to solicit with great modesty the opinion of his patron. Sir Joseph stood motionless for some minutes. Hewas thunderstruck by the boldness, grandeur, and skill displayed in the conception of the subject, then ; turn¬ ing to Edward, he said—" This is indeed beyond my hopes! Go on, my young friend, as you have begun, and the work! will not require any other specimen before it places your name among those of our first artists. Go on, Edward—there İs not a single stroke that I would efface. When the picture is finished, it will not remain long unpurchased, and you may safely reckon upon its bringing you a sum which, independent of the fame attached to such a work,
a work, will ampi v rena v you for vour lab ni ?. ' " I know t .at you will not be offended witli me, ?? Jt^eph," s«id Edward timidly, ** if I inquire whether you think I might venture to expect ten guineas írom the sale •'Ten guineas!" exclaimed sir Joseph, in a tene of surprise ; then smiling encou- r**gingïy on the unassuming youth, he said— ik Yes, my dear boy, and ten times ten will be the least of its value if it an¬ swers my present expectation ; and tiiat it will, I nave not the smallest doubt." The prospect of obtaining sueh a sum as that now mentioned by sir Joseph, and by his own exertions, jfilleel the heart of Ed¬ ward with the purest, noblest joy. In imagination he already hekl in his hand the reward of his toil, and in imagination he experienced the dear felicity of por¬ tioning it out among those wlio he felt had a claim upon his assistance, until he left not a single guinea for himself Although
Although his whole soul ivas devoted to the accomplishment of this one graiul object, yet Edward was not unmindful of his promise to lady Manningham. He had chosen, during his walks w ith Constan¬ tia, the scenery for his eight landscape drawings, and he intended, if possible, to finish them by the appointed time, as he was unwilling to give her ladyship the slightest reason to believe that he was ne¬ glectful of her favours. Edward was one morning engaged in his accustomed pursuits, when sir Joseph entered the painting-room with a letter in his hand.—" I must disturb you, Mac¬ kenzie,'* said he, '* for I have this instant received notice of a visit from the mar¬ chioness of Anendale ; she will be here in halfan hour for the last sitting." *' The marchioness of Anendale !" ex¬ claimed Edward, with a start of surprise. Then recollecting himself, he added—" I think that I have heard that the mar¬ chioness is uncommonly beautiful." " You
*" Vou shall judge for yourself/ 1 replied sir Joseph, *' if you will have tire good- nes> to assist me i« removing those pic¬ tures.*" Edward, though fie could not account for it, felt what might be called a nervous impatience to behold the resemblance of one whom he but too well remetul>ered had 1>een the friend and mistress of his mother. At length he came to the pic¬ ture of the ladv with ·' an angel's form and a devils heart," as poor old' Margaret Grey used to say ; and with the help of sir Joseph he now brought it forward to the light. It was a whole length of the marchioness in the character of Hebe ; and as Edward gazed with wonder anil ad¬ miration on the* exquisitely-proportioned figure of the marchioness, his youthful heart throbbed with new and undefinable emotions, and he fût as if spell-bound to the spot. " Well,, my young friend," said sir Jo¬ seph, smilingly, " has report been too li¬ beral
heml in describing the marchioness of A ti¬ éndales attractions ?" ** Oh no, no Γ* exclaimed Edward, has¬ tily. " report has not done justn*e to them . I can scarcely believe it possible that so much loveliness is centered in one object. What features í what perfect symmetry of form r How divinely beautiful is th.e mar¬ chioness ! Surely that seraphic smile can never beam on a countenance that conceals a cruel mind." w Lady Anendale, though now in her thirty-second year, is esteemed one of the handsomest women in England," said sir Joseph ; " but I regret to acld^ that her attractions are merely personal—her heart antl mind are not such as win* stand the test of scrutiny. Donot, therefore, suffer your judgment to be influenced 1 by the captivating graces of this picture, my dear Edward, but remember that shonld you, which is very possible, be introduced to the marquis of Anendale, who is ri warm patron of the arts, you will have need of all
all your goeid sense and sound principiei to withstane! tlie dangerous allurements of the marchioness and her followers. Flat¬ tery is tho fooel on which she lives; feed but her insatiable vanity with that, and her sweetest smiles will be your rewarel: but the smiles of tbe marcliioness, like those of the sirens, lead only to destruc¬ tion; therefore guard well your heart, Ed¬ ward, for not even your youth will shield you from the seductions of this fatal beauty, should she but once condescend to enter you on the list of her danglers." " It is not very probable, my dear sir," replied Edward ; modestly, " that so young and humble a being as myself should at¬ tract the notice of the marchioness of An¬ endale; yet—" " Finish your sentence, my dear boy," cried sir Joseph, " nor dread my censure. When I Avas.your age, my feelings were as keenly alive to the power of female beauty as your own, anel would have led me to express the same wish as that wiiich you
you now hesitate to mention. Do you not feel an inclination to be personally known ;o the lovely marchioness? Come, tell me frankly, am I not right in my con¬ jectures ? " Indeed you are, sir," said Edward, still gazing on the 'picture. " I cannot tell why, or for what reason, butl feel a strong desire to become known to the marchioness of Anendale ; and yet this desire does not arise from any motives of interest—it-would be equally powerful were she as humbly born as myself; ï can only attribute it to my having heard her Dame mentioned, when I ivas a child, by a person whom I dearly loved and revered: yet, dear and sacred as I have ever held her opinion, I would give up all my future expectations to be convinced that the marchioness pos¬ sesses an angels heart with an angels form." Sir'Joseph smiled archly on the embar¬ rassed youth.—" I perceive that you are fairly caught in beauty's net," said he, good-naturedly patting Edward's shoulder; " but
4Í but bo wire, m\ young fnend. how von \ ìelel to the danger of firat impressions. I am but too well acquainted with the real character of the march iønes^ of AnvmLile. to mì fTer you to be de^eiveel into a hope that, all- beau tifili as .she rs. she ¡? worth.;» tlic gratefel homage ef a lieart Hke youis If r, in the days of wann ingenuul^ thHelhood. she possessed one single pood quality, *i is now completely smothered b v her passionate leve of »dut í rat ion. 'Ilus dangerous imd serbsh failing has rendered her careless alike io the voice of nature as to that di honour. She is a cold and inat¬ tentive wife, 9 careless and unfeeling mcr- ther—nor do I beHevc that she ever felt an aifection for anv human being in the world, except one little boy. her only sou* wÌM>m she \?? now brought up to towH-, in order tlfât she may have the advice of ail the nio&t celebrated physicians, befon» bhe removes kit» to Clifton. I think that this child may have rubbed the world of a part of her affections, for it is the only one of
< ? 4 her family wiiom she suffers to be seen by ber \ İMtors. She has lost all her child¬ ren but this boy, and her eldest daughter, tetiy Ellinor, wdio, with her governess, re¬ sides constantly at an old family-mansion in Monmouthshire, una who, though now in her thirteenth year, ib still treated by her mother as if bhe were a mere baby, and only a fit companion for her nursery playmates, But as you appear to be so much charmed by the resemblance of the marchioness, 1 will gne y<M\ an opportunity of viewing the oriuinaL that um mav also be enabled to form a judgment of the fidelity of my performance. Ketire into the next cham¬ ber, the gla^fi-door of which, hy removing a small part of the silk curtain, will give you a compete *>ight of my beautiful vi¬ sitor." A loud knock at the door announced the arrival of the marchioness of Anen¬ dale, and Edward hasteneel to his place e)f concealment, with a trepidation of frame for whieh he could not account even to himself.
bimseif. Breathless with impatience, he pLued himself nt^xt the door, and as his listening ear cau/;Lt the ¿soft tread of ad¬ vancing footsteps, his heart beat with a q nickel motion ; yet for a moment it seem¬ ed io stop, as he heard the musical voice of tlit p aichioncsb and as «-he burst upon his . « >?? sight, in all the blaze of studied in e lin >c , a deadly sickness stole over the trembling )outh, and he leaned, half-faint- in . Píxainst fhe thin partition whieh se¬ parated him from the painting-room of sir Joseph. Edw a/d breathed with difficulty, yet his ?- ? ramtmed f ved on the graueful person oí the marehİonoss, ?? á by ?? ?? iuesplicre>!e mystery fite Lad iuærwo; tn Lis díbtiity with hers. Not all the fury ? -1 us of hl·* w irm imag/" nation Lid ever ^¿turcei to liio fancy any thing half so ! vWtiy or so divinely perfect as the he- iiiii oh whom he now gazed with a sort of wild tumultuous feeling, which maele him »v onde r it the force arid ( ner»y of his new- bmu
born tenderness. Had the peace of tbe nwehione^s at tltPt moment depended on the life of Edw T ard, he felt that he was ca¬ pable of resigning it for her sake. Again she spoke, and F d ward's sou 1 ap¬ peared to tremble on his lips. What ma¬ gic power lay hidden in the charmed tones of her mellow voice ! What blandishment, what resistless attraction, in the glance of her dark voluptuous eye ! A sigh burst from tbe bosom of Edward, as the w T ords of his dear old grandmother crossed his mind. " Xo, no!" thought he, " bhe must have beeu deceived—sir Joseph and all the world are deceived ; so angelic a form can never hide a depraved anel a cruel heart!" The niaichiontrs', elegantly attired as Hebe, was in truth a most lovely repre¬ sentative of the blooming goddess, and never could Edward have beheld her at a more fr vourable moment than the present, wiìen tlic consciousness ? ? her own umi- va4ed eluirms difluid over her counte¬ nance
nance the smile of secret satisfaction, thus adding to hen' natural attractions by the outward semblance of a virtue wdiich she did not possess, namely, good-temper. When sir Joseph had released his fair companion from her fixed, though graceful attitude, she sat down to chat with him familiarly for a few minutes until her car¬ riage arrived, and sir Joseph, who took both pleasure and pride in mentioning hib ? leve, now thought the present a good opportunity to shew her Echvarels first attempt at historical painting. The mar¬ chioness, who piqued herself upon patro¬ nizing tlie sons of genius ?? oft'41 as chance threw them in her wa}% expressed a desire to see this extraordinary youth, and begged sir Joseph to bring him with him to din¬ ner tiie next day—-a request which was heard by Edward with emotions of de- I'ght, and acceded to by sir Joseph w r ith good-natured willingness, from a convie- non that it would afford to bis young friend the highest gratification. On
On the departure of the marchioness, Edward rejoined sir Joseph, wiio con¬ gratulated him upon the speedy accom¬ plishment of his wishes. " To-morrow,** said he, (i you will dine with the mar¬ chioness of Anendale, and be introduced to the marquis, whom you will find to be a most worthy character. He is nearly related to lady Manningham, but it is now several years since they have met, owing to some family differences between the two ladies. Indeed it would be im¬ possible for so exemplary a woman as her ladyship to feel any degree of friendship for the marchioness of Anendale." Edwarel sighed, from inability to vin¬ dicate the cause of the beautiful being whose picture he now r assisted to remove, in order that it might be replaced by an¬ other of less powerful attractions, but of equal, if not superior sweetness. tt This is the wife of lord James Os¬ borne," said sir Joseph, " and the onlv sur¬ viving daughter of the honourable Mau- VOL. ?. ι rice
rice Colvill, dean of H ------. She is not so beautiful as lady Anendale, I admit, but if you mark well the mild expression of lier eyes, and the general character of her features, they w ill produce a more lasting, a more pleasing remembrance, than those of the marchioness. Lady James Osborne is a pattern of conjugal and maternal ten¬ derness, and it is to such as her ladyship that I would, were it possible, introduce you, rny dear young friend." Edward acknowledged that the features of lady James possessed a charm which w r as not to be found in those of the mar¬ chioness, yet his eyes insensibly wandered to tlie picture of the latter, though his better judgment pleaded most forcibly in favour of the former. The more that he examined the face of lady James, the more lively became his desire to know her per¬ sonally. Even the lifeless canvas seemed to give promise of protection and kind¬ ness, and the halfopen mouth appeared rc'dáy to assure him of her friendly senti¬ ments
ments in his favour. Notwithstanding this pleasing illusion of his senses, Ed¬ ward could not conquer the mysterious preference wdiich, in spite too of all that be had heard against the marchioness, still drew him towards the spot wdiich con¬ tained her likeness. At length he tore himself from the dangerous contemplation of mere personal beauty, and in order to recall his thoughts to their proper channel, sat dowm to write a long letter to Frede¬ ric, to wdiich he added, as usual, a post¬ script to Patty Smith. The state of his feelings led him to dwell, with all his accustomed energy, on the subject which now r filled both his mind and his heart, and he therefore cancelled the postscript, and began a letter to Patty, whicli he intended to enclose to honest Oliver, wdio, he well knew, would deliver it safely into her hanels. " Dearest Patty," said he, " what will be your surprise when you learn that I have not only seen the marchioness of ι 2 Anendale,
Anendale, but that I am to dine with her to-morrow ? Oh, Patty, well might my revered old grandmother say that she had an angels form, for never could my warm¬ est fancy picture to itself any creature so heavenly fair, so rich in all nature's choicest loveliness, as the marchioness of Anendale. I am told that she is unamiable—that she is neglectful of all the tenderest duties of domestic life ; but as I gaze on the mas¬ terly representation of her beauties, my heart denies the charge, and, as it bounds towards this captivating woman, with a degree of affection hitherto unknowm to me, 1 feel ready to hazard my existence in her cause, and to die, were it neces¬ sary, to clear her fame from the imputa¬ tions which sully the purity of so divine a being. " Fatty, my dear Vatiy, my bosom's early friend, my youth's tried and steady confidant, it is to you alone that I dare venture to expose the singularity of my feelings towards the marchioness of An¬ endale.
endale. The world would ridicule them as romantic, and my best friends, you excepted, would laugh at, it tliey did not condemn them. Eut you, Patty, seem a part of myself; even my follies are sa¬ cred to you; and I can lay open ray whole heart to your inspection, without dreading to meet with either the smile of contempt, or the rebuke of superior wis¬ dom, and superior experience. It is to you alone, dear Patty, that I now confess how strange, how mysteriously incompre¬ hensible, is the love which I already bear tlie marchioness of Anendale. ** You know the tenderness wdth which my heart beats for Flora Manningham, and the sanctity w r ith which 1 reverence every thing which belongs to her, but I cannot so easily define that which my soul felt on first beholding tlie person of lady Anendale. I can now give ample credit to the affection which J have heard that my mother bore her ladyship, and tan readily believe that the marchioness Ik id ι 3 over
ewer her the most unlimited sw T ay, for I feel certain that, notwithstanding I may possess a tolerable share of firmness and self-command, ï could not deny a request made by lady Anendale. She may, if she pleases, become tlie mistress of my future destiny. *< Were it possible for the inhabitants of the other world to be acquainted with what is passing in this, how r would the pure spirit of my giandmother lament the infd tuition of her darling boy! how truly would she mourn over that powerful in¬ fluence which seems every moment to in¬ crease ! It was w r ith difficulty, Patty, that I could leave the chamber wdiich contains tbis angels picture No! I can never be¬ lieve that she has a devil's heart, although my beloved grandmother repeatedly af¬ firmed it " Edward, notwithstanding his reluctance to quit this new theme of his admiration, was ?? u n mi n d ibi of Patty's own situa¬ tion. He inquired with minuteness con¬ cerning
cerning every thing connect eel w ith her welfare, and reverted to his hopes of se¬ curing to her a friend when his mother returned to England. He then requested her to write to him, that she might trans¬ mit an account of all that had passed du¬ ring his absence, which her fear of being deemed troublesome by Frederic had pre¬ vented her from doing. This done, Ed¬ ward returned to what was now become the scene of his devotion, vainly endea¬ vouring to fix his attention to the grand object of his labours, but his eyes instinc¬ tively wandered towards the picture of the marchioness, and his thoughts naturally dwelt on the next day's introduction to her and to her family. Echvard was there¬ fore compelled to relinquish his pencil, until his mind became sufficiently steady to resume his favourite occupation.
I 4
????-
CIIAPTEE X.
The next morning Edward was agree¬ ably surprised by a letter from his mother, ■which informed him that he might expect to see her in London that evening, anel directed him to inquire for her at the house of Mrs. Alexander Mackenzie, the sister-in-law of her late husband, who still resided in Westminster, and who would be as glad to see as him if he w ere her own son. This pleasing intelligence Edward communicated to sir Joseph, who pro¬ mised to leave the marchioness earlier than he had intended, that his young friend might be ready to welcome the return of his mother to her native country. At the appointed hour, Edward and sir Joseph proceeded to the splendid mansion of the marquis of Anendale, wiiich was fitted
fitted up in the most costly style of princelv magnificence ; so various were its beauties, so multiplied its luxuries, that the senses were kept in a perpetual state of fascination, and the eye scarcely knew on which object to rest, until the marchioness appeared, and claimed the universal homage due to her transcendant loveliness. A thousand perfumes scented the stair¬ case and the chambers through which Ed¬ ward passed, until he reached the drawing- room, the splendour of which surpassed his belief, and dazzled his sight ; but in a moment it was confined to one little space which contained the marchioness of Anen- dale and her young son, a boy of nine years old, who, seated on her lap and pressed to her bosom, seemed to engross the whole of her attention ; on a separate couch sat the marquis of Anendale, wiio threw aside his book as soon as the ser¬ vant announced his guests, and rose to încet them with the gooelnatured smile of ι õ pleasure,
pleasure, holding out a hand to each, wdiich lie pressed with friendly warmth, v r hile he expressed his thanks to sir Joseph £»r introducing to his knowledge a youth of sueh brilliant talents as Edward Mac¬ kenzie. He then led the object of his praise to where the marcliioness and her son re¬ clined, on a couch of rose-coloured satin, richly embroidered with golden flowers, supported by Cupids. And well might the fair marchioness have passed for the queen of beautv, since in her form and face were centered every charm that could s t ren »'then her resemblance to the mother of Love. Xo sooner did she raise her dark <\v es to the blushing countenance of Ed¬ ward, than the colour receded from her cheek, and she gave a suelden start of painful surprise ; then, as if recollecting herself, she motioned to him to place himself by her side, and in a faltering voice stammered out something like a compliment to his genius and abilities. The
The penetrating glance of Edward saw and wondered at the visible agitation which her ladyship manifested, as she gazed on his features with scrutinizing at¬ tention, while her own betrayed the work¬ ings of a mind but ill at ease. Yet, in spite of her embarrassment, in spite of her pallid cheek and soul-searching eye, which seemed as if it would pierce into the in¬ most recesses of Edward's heart, in order to discover some hidden secret, the beauty, grace, and elegance of the marchioness remained unimpaired in the opinion of Edward, whose frame now partook of that emotion so visible in hers. The only son of the marquis, a pale and emaciated child, evidently far gone in a decline, held out his thin transparent hand, sparkling with jewels, to that of Edward, v, ho grasped it with a kindliness of feeling inspired by the sight of his weakness, and the presentiment that the boy was past all aid save tliat of Heaven,—" Come with 1 6 me,"
me," said the child, as he quitted the arms of his mother, " and I will shew you my papa's pictures." " I am afraid that you will fatigue yourself, my love," said the marchioness, tenderly endeavouring to detain him. " Xo, no, I shall not," replied the boy, taking hold of Edward's arm. "You know, mamma, that we leave town to-mor¬ row, and I may not have another oppor¬ tunity to accompany Mr. Mackenzie over the picture-gallery. I wish that I had k n owrn him before, for I feel that I could love him as dearly as a brother." The young earl now conducted Edward to the gallery, which contained some of the finest specimens of ancient and mo¬ dern painting; and, though considerably indisposed by his disorder, and a hectic cough besides, he gave to his companion a most accurate description of all the pic¬ tures whicli enriched his father's collection, and whicii called forth the most rapturous exclu-
exclamations of delight from Edward, wiio only lamented his want of time to ex¬ amine them attentively. " Oh, I am certain that you may come here as often as you please," said the boy, holding the arm of Edward for support. tt I wish that I was not going down to Clifton, for I know it will be of no ser¬ vice to me, and I think that I should be better if I had such a friend and com¬ panion as you, Mr. Mackenzie." Edward involuntarily clasped the child to his breast, who as warmly returned his embrace.—" I have a sister," he continued, ít whom I dearly love ; but my mamma would not let her accompany us to town, though I feel than I shall never live to return to Monmouthshire. She has often wished for one of my curls," added he, as he passed his fingers through the light ringlets which clustered round his fore¬ head ; " but mamma expressly forbade my having one cut off. It would make me so happy, so easy in my mind, if 1 could
coulel but gratify the wish of my sister; yet I am afraid to trust to any of our do¬ mestics—and, if I should die at Clifton, I shall die contented if I knew that Elinor would receive a lock of my hair. Perhaps, Mr. Mackenzie, you Avould en¬ gage to perform this act of kindness for me ; for though you are a stranger to me, yet my heart feels as if I had known you dl my life, and it tells me that I can trust vou." Edward kissed the cheek of the young earl, as his eyes filled with tears at the certainty of his fate.— ik I trust, my dear lord," said he fervently, " that you will live to bestow on your sister the gift she has so long coveted ; but, should the Al¬ mighty ordain it otherwise, I promise faith¬ fully to take the earliest opportunity of delivering it into her hands." " Thank you i thank you, Mr. Mac¬ kenzie!" cried the boy joyfully: " 1 will contrive to give you a lock of my hair before you go : and when you see Elinor, tell
tell her that I used every entreaty to per¬ suade mamma to let her accompany us to Clifton, but that this was the* only request she denied me." Edward assured him that, if ever he had the honour to see lady Elinor, he would not forget his lordship's request. They were now interrupted by a servant, wdio informed them that dinner was on the table, and they accordingly descended to the dining-parlour, when the marquis eagerly inquired of Edward what was his opinion of his collection ; adding, that he was welcome to visit them at any time, and to make copies from those he liked best-—a privilege which Edward most gladly accepted. During his absence with the young earl, the marchioness liad recovered her self-command sufficiently to inquire of sir Joseph concerning the family and con¬ nexions of his eleve ; but his replies did not satisfy her curiosity, as he was only able to inform her that he was son to an officer
officer wdio had been lately killed in America, bu.t of every other circumstance sir Joseph was totally ignorant; the mar¬ chioness coulel therefore only gain her wished-for information from Edward him¬ self; and, though she felt it to be of the highest importance to learn who and what were his relations, yet the shortness of his visit, as w r ell as of their acquaintance, pre¬ vented her from endeavouring to question him on so delicate a point. The person of Edward, at once manly and handsome, had recalled to the memory of the marchioness ideas connected with her early years, in which were blended the image of one whom she had deeply injured, and whom she imagined her young guest to resemble. The conscious feeling of having deceived and basely sported with the happiness of an amiable and highly-deserving object—the recollec¬ tion of having outraged humanity, of liaving stifled the common tenderness of Mature, in order to secure to herself the exalted
exalted rank which she now held in so¬ ciety, and to obtain which she had not scrupled to violate her most sacred duties, now forcibly recurred to the agitated mind of the marchioness ; and, as she gazed with fearful earnestness on the finr ingenuous features of Edward, they seemed to re¬ proach her for her want of fidelity to him whom he so strongly resembled ; yet, while they awakened her own selfish ter¬ rors, they failed to excite in her obdurate bosom one sentiment of regret for the fate of him whose peace she had ruined, whose hopes she had blasted. The marchioness felt a desire to attach Edward to herself) not from any noble resolution to assist in raising his fortunes, but from the wish to have constantly in her train a youth of such brilliant talents, rare accomplishments, and captivating manners. His resemblance to the friend she had cruelly injured was by no means a circumstance in his favour, yet she felt the meet powerful inclination to be mis¬ tress
tress of his destiny, and to become the director of his actions—to have him, in fact, completely in her power, and sub¬ servient to her will. Such were the feel¬ ings of lady Anendale towards Edward Mackenzie ; and, that her wishes might be fulfilled, she adopted a line of conduct so flattering to his pride, so congenial to his own sentiments, that she could not fail of making him the dupe of her assum¬ ed friendship and apparent kindness. Although little inclined for any lively amusement, on account of the precarious state of her son's health, the marchioness, in order to add to the entertainment of Edw r ard, called for her harp, of which she w r as perfect mistress ; and as she struck the chords and accompanied them with her voice, she read in the charmed eyes of Edward the effect which she wished to produce on his mind. " When next we meet," said she, sigh¬ ing deeply, as she rose from the instru¬ ment, " I hope, Mr. Mackenzie, that it will be
he under happier circumstances, and that the restoration of my darling boy's health will enable me to contribute more largely to your pleasures ; at present I am but ill able to exert myself, but your sensi¬ bility can well excuse the alarmed feelings of a mother. When I return to town, I shall expect to see you, without your waiting to be invited ; and during our absence I hope that you will avail your¬ self, as often as you please, of whatever sources of amusement or of study our house may contain." Edward thankfully assured her lady¬ ship that he should frequently take advan¬ tage of the permission given him by the marquis, of visiting his valuable collection of pictures, anel that he would also take the first opportunity of inquiring per¬ sonally after the health of herself and her family, as soon as they returned to London, if he was not prevented by his own re¬ moval from town. * f In that case," said the marchioness, offering
offering him her beautiful fair hand, at the same time that her eyes expressed the most seducing tenderness, *' you must write to me—I feel an interest in your fate, an anxiety for your welfare, which nrkes me demand this promise from you." Edward's heart beat w ith painful quick¬ ness, as he felt the pressure of her soft hand within his own ; his eyes became humid, and he ventured tremblingly to raise that singularly dear hand to his lips, as he faltered out an assent to her request. The young earl now watched his oppor¬ tunity, and, as he perceived Edward rising to take leave, he slipped into his hand a small note which lie had hastily scribbled to his sister, and which enclosed the pre¬ cious boon she had so often sighed for in vain. " I know that you will not forget me," whispered the carl in a faint voice, as he flung his arms round the neck of Edward. t% If I live, you shall be as a brother to me, and
arrd if I die, I will send you some token of my regard, asa proof of my sincerity." Edward, strongly affected by the art¬ less tenderness of the boy, as well as by the confidence which he reposed in his honour, embraced him affectionately, and again assured him that nothing but his own death should prevent him from de¬ livering to lady Elinor the note which he had entrusted to his eâre* He looked at bis watch—it was time for him to depart, yet he felt a painful reluctance to leave the intelligent and confiding boy, whose truly honourable mind had led him fear¬ lessly to rely on the word of a stranger. Again Edward embraced him; then, re¬ membering that any delay on his part might give serious uneasiness to his mo¬ ther, he took leave of the young earl and liis parents* and hastened to where Mrs. Mackenzie had specified in her letter that he was to meet her. Various were the emotions which now filled the heart of Edward, as he advanced towards
towards the dwelling of Mrs. Alexander Mackenzie. He was on the point of meeting with a parent, from whose arms he had been separated ever since his fourth year; he could not even remember her, yet he felt inclined to pay her every filial mark of duty and affection, and this in¬ clination was strengthened by the recol¬ lection of his father's last words on the evening of their final adieu. He was now also to receive that beloved parents dying remembrance from the hands of his dis¬ consolate widow, and the contents of the letter might probably affect his future movements. Should his mother, which was most likely, mske a visit to Scotland, where her daughter still resided under the care of her aunt, and should she wish Edward to accompany her on her jour¬ ney, he intended to sacrifice all personal interest and personal gratification, and to obey her desires, although they might interfere with the plan laid down for his advancement in life. · Edward
Edward felt likewise the strong hope revive in his bosom, that now, when he should be once more restored to the ten¬ derness of his mother, she would not re¬ fuse to satisfy his natural anxiety respect¬ ing the author of his being, and that, when convinced of his steadiness and pru¬ dence, she would no longer hesitate to confide to him the name and family of his real father. He was also curious to learn what would be the sentiments of his mo¬ ther, w T hen tokl of his introduction to tiie lady to whom she had been so strongly at¬ tached when a girl, and whom he recol¬ lected to have heard poor old Margaret Grey affirm that she loved as dearly as she loveel her own soul. Edward had now seen anei spoken to the marchioness of An¬ endale, and he no longer wondered &t the blind partiality of his mother. ? ?\? blush of pride heightened the co¬ lour of Edwards cheek on arriving at the dwelling of Mrs. Alexander Mackenzie. and as he entered the shop, which was set out
out with the choicest fruits of the season, he could not help contrasting it in his own mind with the elegant and costly man¬ sion of the marquis, whitih he had so lately quitted. A pretty modest-looking girl conducted him into a neat back-parlour, where two respectable women were seated by the fireside. Both of them were clad in the deepest mourning, but the widow's weeds quickly conducted Edw r ard to the arms of his parent. " My mother ! my dear mother!" he ex¬ claimed, in a broken voice, " welcome back to England, and to your children, who will study to make you happy and comfortable." Mrs. Mackenzie burst into tears as she returned the filial embrace of Edward: then gazing on him attentively, she said— " Ah ! my dear Edward, what would your poor fatlier say, could he but see you now% so tall, so handsome, and so genteel ! Many a time have I upbraided myself for leaviug you behind with my worthy mother ;
mother ; but now I think it was for the best, Edward, since you have met with such great and good friends : but I cannot expect, Edward, that you should love me as dearly as if you had been alw r ays with me." " You may rely with safety on my du¬ tiful affection, my dear mother," replied Edward, kissing her tenderly; " and if my separation from you has gained me the friendship of those wdiose interest will be exerted in my favour, I shall cease to regret a circumstance which has often given me pain, since it will enable me to add to your future comforts, and to fulfil the expectations of him who was as sa¬ credly beloved by me as if he had been my own father, I hope soon to receive a sum of money for some drawings which I am executing for lady Manningham, and which shall be wholly at your service, my dear mother, besides other resources whicii I have in view." Mrs. Mackenzie, deeply affected by this vol. ?. ? proof
proof of Edward's love, wept for some minutes unrestrained on his bosom. Then, feeling herself relieved, she said—" God is very good to me, my child, since, in the midst of my heavy affliction for the death of my dear husband, he has raised me up such a comforter and friend as yourself. Poor Mackenzie always told me what a blessing I should find in the child that I had, as I may say, deserted ; and his words are now come true: for, as I could not expect you to love mc, so it the more comforts and gladdens my soul to see you what you are, and to hear the kind assurances of your affection. God will bless you, Edward ; God will prosper you through life, for you have bestowed on me the only happiness I can now re¬ ceive in this word, and have poured the balm of consolation into the sorrowful heart of the widow." Mrs. Mackenzie now introduced him to the sister-in-law of his adopted father, who had quitted the room on his entrance, but who
who now returned with some cake and wine. It was a sufficient claim to the heart of Edward to be a relation of his deceased father, and he therefore returned her embrace with a warmth of manner which quite charmed the good-natured friend of his infancy, " Many and many is the good hour that I have talked of you," said she, " to my Mary, and have longed to see you 9 for I loved you from the first Γ that your mother came to my house, and I would have suckled you myself, if she would but have let me. How glad I am to see you once again under my roof! and though poor Mackenzie is dead and gone, I shall al¬ ways feel as rejoiced to see you, Edward, as if you were my own son ; but you are too much of a gentleman to come and visit a person wdio keeps a shop, and I would not ask you to do any thing that would hurt your f( elings." £f My feelings can never be hurt," re¬ ii 3 plied
plied Edward, pressing her hand gratefully within his ow r n,." by visiting one who w r as justly dear to my father, and who was kind to my mother, even were that person an inmate of a garret. Had I known your address, I should have called on you long ago." " Ah !" cried Airs. Alexander Macken¬ zie, " you arc just what I thought you would be. When a child, you were the most affectionate and sweet-tempered crea¬ ture in the world, and when I lost you, Mary knows that I cried ready to break my heart, for I sadly missed your innocent prattle, and I thought it would be many a long year before I should either see you or my brother and sister again. However, thank God, Edward, that you have found friends, and are likely to do well in tlie world, for though your mother would ne¬ ver tell me who was your real father, yet I was sure that he was a gentleman, for you always lookeel and moved when a child
<liild much above the common ; and, next to my own children, I shall rejoice to hear of your welfare." Edwwd thanked the kind-hearted wi¬ dow for her friendly zeal towards him ; and that she and his mother might receive pleasure at their reunion, he repeated to them every circumstance concerning him¬ self which was likely to afford them any gratification, again repeating tliat the pro¬ duce of his labours should be at the dispo¬ sal of his widowed parent. Mrs. Macken¬ zie assured him, that although she felt fully sensible of the filial love which prompted him to make iier such a propo¬ sal, yet she trusted that she should never be in want of his pecuniary assistance, as the trifle which she had of her own before her mariage, and the pension to which she was now entitled, would be enough to satisfy her wants.—" I have no claim, my dear boy," said she, " upon the reward of your toils, especially as I can live very com¬ fortably upon what I have. You have a ? 3 right
right to all that you may receive from the exertion of your talents ; and never, if I can help it, shall you be a guinea the poorer on my account. No, my dear Ed¬ ward, you were born to be a gentleman, and it will be the pride of my heart to see you live l.ke one." " That he was," cried Mrs. Alexander Mackenzie, ít and that coronet which 1 saw when he w T as a baby, was not marked on his arm for nothing." The mother of Edward looked embar¬ rassed as she said—" I know, sister, that you think I am very close, and have often blamed me for being so reserved, but I cannot help it. If any human being de¬ served my confidence, it was my beloved husband, but he died ignorant of who was Edward's father, and he loved me too much to teaze me with questions which he knew I could not in honour sa¬ tisfy. The mark on Edward's arm was placed there by a very worthy but su¬ perstitious old woman, and I have often lamented
lamented that I ever gave my consent to such a piece of folly." " Folly or sense," replied Mrs. Alex¬ ander, looking significantly at Edward, " it was a curious, as well as difficult mark to make choice of; but I hope that it will prove the omen of Edward's good fortune. Do you know, sister, that since you went to America, I have had two visits from the little thin old gentleman who stood godfather to your son ? He inquired so particularly after him, and wanted so badly to know his address, that I am certain he wished to do something for him." " He is very good," said Mrs. Macken¬ zie ; " but Edward will, I trust, do very well without any of his assistance." She ' then suddenly changed the conversation, by asking Edward some questions con¬ cerning sir Joseph Kennie, and the per¬ sons whom he had been the means of in¬ troducing him to. . Mrs. Alexander now quitted the par¬ lour to assist her daughter Maryin getting ? 4 supper
supper ready, and Edward therefore deem¬ ed this a good opportunity to inform his mother that he had not only seen, but dineel at the house of her much-loved lady. " Mother," said Edward, smiling sweetly on her, from a belief that the intelligence he was about to communicate would give her joy, " mother, who do you think I was this day introduced to, and only just quitted when I came to you ? It is a very old and dear friend of yours, and one whom, wiien agili, you would have died to serve. Guess, dear mother, who it can be." " A friend of mine !" exclaimed Mrs. Mackenzie, surprised and trembling ; " I know of no friend, Edward, whom it is at all likely you should see." tí Perhaps it is presumption in me to call the marchioness of Anendale your friend, mother, but it is her I mean." Alice grasped the arm of Edward with a convulsive motion,—" Gracious Hea¬ ven! is it possible," she cried, " that you have
have seen and spoken to Miss Fitz-Arthur that was ? But she does not know you ? You did not tell her that you were my son?" " No, my dear mother, I did not ; but what if I had acknowledged myself to be your son, what would have been the conse¬ quence? Why should I conceal from her, or from any other person, wdio were my parents ?" Mrs Mackenzie breathed more freely.— " Dearest Edward, how strange and in¬ comprehensible arc the ways of Provi¬ dence! The marchioness of Anendale, dear¬ ly as I continue to love her, is the last person in the world whom I could have washed you to be acquainted with. It is of the highest importance to your future happiness that you conceal from her your being my son. Should she once discover this circumstance, all her kindness will turn into hatred, and she will pursue you through life as your bitterest enemy, while I shall equally become the object of her ? 5 resentment,
resentment, since nothing will convince her but that I have intended personally to insult her, by not warning you to avoid her presence." " Mother! dear mother!" exclaimed Ed¬ ward, in a tone of painful astonishment, " what is the mystery which hangs over my birth, and wiiich makes it necessary that I should be ignorant of who was my father, and at the same time compels me to disown my mother ? How can my be¬ ing your son either affect the peace, or kindle the anger of lady Anendale ? Once she loved you dearly, why then should she pursue with hatred your unoffending child ? why become my enemy, w hen my heart is filled with tenderness for her, and when, if it were necessary, I would die to make her happy ?" Mrs. Mackenzie gazed with tearful eyes on Edward's beseeching countenance.— *' I own that there is a mystery which I dare not clear up," said she, throwing her arms around his neck ; " but you will not love
love me less, Edward, for my strictly ad¬ hering to a vow which I once made. Miss Fitz-Arthur once loved me very sincerely—so she once did your father : that love turned to dislike ; and the ha¬ tred which she expressed for him, will, I am confident, pursue his son. You must therefore resolve, Edward, never again to see the marcliioness of Anendale, or so¬ lemnly promise to conceal from her who was your mother." " The conditions are bard indeed," said Edward thoughtfully. " I hate conceal¬ ments, but I feel that I can never relin¬ quish the proffered kindness of the mar¬ chioness.'* " There is no alternative," replied his mother. " It is your happiness, not my own, that makes me thus anxious to save you from the inveterate malice of lady Anendale. As long as you conceal from her that I am your mother, I think no danger can attend your intimacy ; but be¬ ware, Edward—perhaps your life might ? 6 pay
pay the forfeit of your boldness. The re¬ sentment of the marcliioness I k?iow to be terrible, and you would inevitably become its victim, were you to forget my present warning." " Oh, mother!" cried Edward, fearfully, " w T hat danger, what peril, can reach me from so divine an object? Lady Anen¬ dale is the master-work of Heaven ! How then can I dread any hidden evil from so angelic a form ? how suspect deceit and treachery in one of the most beautiful works of the Creator?" " Come i;nd breakfast with me to-mor¬ row, my dear boy," said Mrs. Mackenzie,. " and we will talk more coolly on the subject. To-morrow, also, I w r il! give you the few lines written by your adopted fa¬ ther, on the eve of the battle which proved so fatal to him. Had he lived—but I must bow beneath the decrees of Provi¬ dence. I have lost my best and dearest friend, but I have still left to comfort me my darling Janet and my beloved Ed¬ ward ;
ward ; and though you cannot supply to me the place of your dear father, yet your dutiful affection will lighten my sorrow's, and enable me to pass the remainder of my days in peace and tranquillity." Edward, surprised, perplexed, and pained, by what he had heard, but could not com¬ prehend, nevertheless assured his mother that nothing on his part should be want¬ ing to render her life happy. He pro¬ mised likewise to be with her early the next morning, and to adhere strictly to her advice, in an affair of so much con¬ sequence as that of concealing from the marchioness who were his parents. They were now interrupted by Mrs. Alexander Mackenzie and her daughter Mary ; and Edward, w 7 hose mind and heart were too much occupied to think of eat¬ ing, nevertheless consented to stoy and partake of the supper which their kind¬ ness had procured for his mother and him¬ self
CHAI'-
CHAPTER XL
It is not to be supposed, after the singu¬ lar conversation which Edward hael heard from his mother, that he could compose his mind sufficiently to enjoy his accus¬ tomed repose. In fact, he scarcely closed his eyes during the night, wiiich appeared to him the longest he had ever passed ; or if lie did, it was only to dream of the lovely marchioness and her interesting son ; then waking with a start, he leaped from his bed, and hastily putting on his clothes, proceedeel to the house of Mrs. Alexander Mackenzie. His mother received him with a pen¬ sive smile, for the apartment she now T oc¬ cupied w r as that to which she had been conducted on the day of her marriage 1 , and which she had resided in until her husband
husband w r as ordered back to his native country ; it had been the scene of many a domestic endearment, and the w/idowed Alice ft It her heart chill as she contrasted her present with her former happy situa¬ tion. " It was here, Edward," said she, cast¬ ing a melancholy glance round the cham¬ ber, " that I became the wife of one of the best of men. Never was there a kinder, nobler heart, than that of Edward Mackenzie '—oh ' well do I remember with what willinmess he adopted you for his own, promising to love you, and to provide for you like a true father— anel to tbe best of his abilities he kept his word; for never did we differ for one moment upon any subject, except when he thought that I leaned too much to the side of my girls, who were his own children—and then he took your part in preference to theirs, always thinking that whatever you said or did w r as right." " And most dearly did I love him in return,"
return," replied Edward with emotion. " No father could have been more sacredly beloved than he was; and yet, my dear mother, I have always felt the most earnest desire to be acquainted with who w r as my real parent. Surely, when you know more of me, when you find me deserving your confidence, you will not hesitate to tell me his name and connexions." " Ah, Edward ! I have already seen enough to convince me that the- oft-re¬ peated hopes of my dear husband are verified in you. The moment 1 beheld you yesterday, I saw how greatly you surpassed all boys of your age, both in person and mind. I felt that, although I had not done my duty by you, because ï had ahvays shewn such a decided prefer¬ ence for my little girls, and because I gave you up to my poor old mother, that I might wean you from the passionate fond¬ ness of your adopted father, still I felt that I could rely with security upon your affection, Edward, and I thought that Heaven
Heaven had preserved to me your filial love, as a reward for the sacrifice which I was so willing to make for you at your birth." "Banish from your mind all ideas of unkindness, my dear mother," said Ed¬ ward, tenderly ; " whatever were your motives for resigning the care of me to rny worthy and indulgent grandmother, I am satisfied that they were just in your eyes ; and if I still possess your affection, I have no cause to complain—I have friends who are highly interested for my prosperity, and through whose kindness, and my own exertions, I shall hope to rise above me¬ diocrity in my profession, whicii will se cure to me a handsome independence. All that ï regret is, that you fear to trust me with the important secret of who was my father—a secret wiiich is so intimately connected with my happiness. Ah, mo¬ ther ! if you knew my heart, you would not torture me by your silence—you would
would know that you have no cause to dread my betraying any communication whieh you might entrust to my keeping. I would sooner forfeit my life than violate my honour." ** Dear child!" exclaimed Alice, " I be¬ lieve you. I am not afraid to trust you with the secret of your birth, only that I dare not break the vow T I made to conceal it from you, and from all the world. The vow was extorteel from me, I acknow r - ledge ; yet I, nevertheless, hold it sacred. I own that your curiosity is natural, I can¬ not in conscience condemn it, yet I am so unfortunately situated that I have no power to gratify your wishes. The little that I feel myself at liberty to disclose to you, Edward, will only add to your desire of knowing more ; therefore if you are wise, you will endeavour to repress as much as possible all ideas which must tend to give you fruitless uneasiness," " That is beyond my power," replied Edw T ard.
Edward. " Tell me, therefore, I beseech you, dearest mother, all that you are able, to satisfy my anxiety." " Although I am under the painful ne¬ cessity of concealing from you the name of your father," said Mrs. Mackenzie, " yet I do not conceive that I infringe on my vow by informing you, that he was the son of a gentleman whose brother was a nobleman of high rank; and hence the foolish mark of a coronet which was placed on your arm, and which has given rise to many vain conjectures. Although deprived of the advantages of your birth¬ right, I rejoice to see, my dear Edward, that nature has made liberal amends for the malice of fortune, and that you are growing up in every respect to be a cre¬ dit to your parents, and an honour to yourself. All the knowledge that I pos¬ sess, I acquired from the kind attentions of Miss Fitz-Arthur. I was but a child vmen my mother went as housekeeper to her aunt, and I immediately became her favourite
favourite companion. She taught me many things of which 1 should other¬ wise have been ignorant—and if my man¬ ners are above my station, it is to her that I am indebted for making* me what I am. Gratitude and affection bound me so firmly to Miss Fitz-Arthur, that I w T as blind to her faults, and though I have since discovered them, yet I still feel the force of our early attachment; for I am convinced that she loved me, perhaps dearer than she loved any other being in the world." " Why then have you so long concealed yourself from her knowledge, mother?" inquired Edward, eagerly. " Because, my child," replied Alice, thoughtfully, " the same cause which com¬ pels me to hide from you the name and famiiy of your father, obliges me to deny myself the delight of the marchioness's friendship. Although it is many years since we met, I will do her the justice to believe that she has not forgotten me ; but I know
I know her too w r ell not to dread her re¬ sentment, if she was ever to discover that you w r as the son of the man she hates." * t Miss Fitz-Arthur is ignorant then of your marriage with my father ?" said Ed¬ ward. " She knew of your birth," replied Alice, colouring confusedly, " but she possessed that unlimited power over my mind and actions, that she extorted from me a pro¬ mise, urged by her hatred towards your father, which even now I tremble lest she should discover I have not fulfilled. This promise was no other than that I should convey you to London, place you in the Foundling Hospital, and abandon you for ever to your fate." Edward started back with horror—then clasping his hands, he exclaimed—** Oh, thou pure spirit of my dear old grandmo¬ ther ! pardon the incredulity of my young heart, which, seduced by the heavenly ex¬ terior of the marchioness, presumed to doubt the veracity of thy wisdom and ex¬ perience !
perience ! Never again will I trust to the semblance of perfection, since the being who appears all tenderness, all sweetness, could counsel a mother to abandon her own offspring." Edward, overcome by the disappoint- nt of his sanguine hopes, now leaned l·^ inst the bosom of Alice, to conceal the tears of blighted affection. " I did not, could not obey her to the extent of her wishes," continued Mrs. Mackenzie; " therefore I have absented myself from her presence, and done my utmost to conceal you from her know¬ ledge, well convinced that the enmity she bore your father would be extended to¬ wards his son. Chance, or perhaps tbe hand of Providence, has, in spite of all my caution, introduced you to her notice; but surely the strong resemblance wiiich you bear to your father would awaken in her mind a suspicion of your birth. Did the marchioness shew any symptoms of surprise when she first saw you, Edward Γ " I re*
*' I remember now," said he, sighing deeply as he spoke, " that the marchioness looked at me with particular attention— and I thought that she turned pale, and trembled as she addressed me ; but I heard she was indisposed, and I attributed it to her anxiety for her son, who I fear is past recovery. I little dreamed that any cause existed to render the sight of me unpleas- ing* to lady Anendale." '* I have warned you of your impending danger," replied Mrs. Mackenzie, " but you are safe as long as you remain un¬ known.. The ways of Heaven are to us inexplicable ; and as the Almighty has thought nt to bring you together, I would not have you shun the marchioness. Per¬ haps, when she knows more of you, my dear Edward, her hatred may diminish, and time and circumstances may produce a change in her feelings; but be on your guard, lest she should surprise you into a » confession which would Be fatal to us both." " I know 7
(( I know not," said Edward, mourn¬ fully, " that I shall ever see the mar¬ chioness again ; when first I saw her, my heart filled with new r and exquisite emo¬ tions ; it bounded towards her with a ten¬ derness which I seemed never to have felt before; I could have yielded up my existence to prolong that of the child she idolizes, and by so doing to preserve her happiness undiminished* I thought her the most heavenly, the most perfect of human beings í but now—No, mother, I shall never look again on the marchioness with pleasure, for I shall always remember her total want of common humanity, in wishing a parent to abandon her helpless and unoffending infant" " I wonder not at your present feelings, my dearest Edward," replied Mrs. Mac¬ kenzie, " but the keenness of them will abate upon your next interview with lady Anendale ; there is an irresistible charm about her look and manner, that silences our better rjudgment, and, in spite
spite of every thing that we may know 1 against her, makes us anxious to become her friends." *' There is indeed," said Edward, " a strong and powerful charm about the per¬ son of the marchioness, that I acknow¬ ledge to be resistless ; yet I think I shall no longer feel* its influence, now that I know her heart to be capable of proposing so cruel, so barbarous a deed. She has lost several of her children, and it seems as if Heaven intended to make her loss complete, and to deprive her of that filial tenderness which she prized so lightly Her darling son is, I fear, past all hope of recovery—should he die, she will only have one child left, and even she may be snatched from her by the all-righteous hand of Providence." u Such may be the case—but I pray Heaven to avert so terrible an evil !" crieel Alice, fervently. " I have lost one dear child myself* and can feel pity even for her, if she should be visited by so heavy vol. n. L a cala-
a calamity.—I mean, Edward, to go to Scotland the latter end of this week, for 1 long ro see Janet—she must be grown a fine girl by this time; no expence has been spared on her education by her aunt, who tells me that she is quite a gentle¬ woman, and so much beloved by them all, that if nothing happens to rnar her inten¬ tions, she proposes, when she is of a pro¬ per age to marry, to give her to her cou¬ sin, young Colin Cameron, her only son, a promising youth, and who, when his father dies, will come into the possession of a good property. I cannot expect ranch comfort from Janet, as she must naturally look up to her aunt with the affection of a daughter; but as they were very kind to me when I w T as at their house, and as I long to see my child, 1 think I shall go to Scotland this week, if the weather continues favourable." Eelward, who feh an earnest desire to see hi.s sister, of whom he had little or no recollection, proposed to accompany his mother
mother to Scotland ; but this she declined, saying, that, notwithstanding the kind treatment which she and her daughter had received from Mr. and Mrs. Cameron, she could not be answerable for their friendly feelings towards Edward, whom they knew only by name, and whose ap* pearance and manners would lead them to believe that his father had expended on him more money than his circumstances rendered prudent. " Much as I should feel gratified by your company, my dear Edward," said Mrs. Mackenzie, " yet I could not bear to see you looked coolly on by the rela¬ tions of him to w r hom you w r ere so dear. I will therefore go alone, and if I find them willing to receive you kindly, you can follow me, if it will not interfere too much with your professional studies. Those you must not neglect, Edward, for it will gladden my soul to see you live as the son of such a man as your fatl" er ought to live." I- 1 Edward
Edw r ard replied, that he should ill en¬ joy any of the luxuries of this world, unless his mother partook of them with him. He now more explicitly stated to her his prospects, giving her a short history of all that hael happened since she left him un¬ der the care of his beloved grandmother. In this narration Edward took particular pains to impress his mother with the most favourable idea of Patty Smith, who) n be represented in such glowing colours, that Airs. Mackenzie felt some apprehension lest his young heart should have conceived a passion which might colour his future years with gloom and discontent. She however deemed it pru¬ dent to conceal from him her suspicions, and promised to do all in her power to befriend Pftty Smith as soon as she re¬ turned from Scotland. With tliis assurance Edward was forced to resr satisfied, although his ar¬ dent disposition could ill brook any delay where the happiness of a friend was con¬ cernée! —»
cernee! —and Patty was almost as dear to Edw r ard as if the same bosom hnd nourished their infant forms. It was therefore one of the chief wishes of his heart to excite in his mother a lively in¬ terest for her fate, and through her means, to withdraw her from those scenes of domestic impropriety which rendered the life of poor Patty completely WTetchcd. Iiis mother now quitted him to accom¬ pany her sister-in-law 7 into the city, upon business of consequence to the latter; and Edwarel took the opportunity of her ab¬ sence to peruse the letter of his deceasee! father, Mackenzie had a presentiment of his impending fate ; he felt that Heaven hael decreed that his bones should rest in a foreign soil, and that he sliould never again clasp to Iiis bosom the son of his adoption, the child of his heart. With this conscious feeling of his approaching death, Mackenzie penned a few hasty lines to Edward, expressive of his feelings, in which every word betrayed the near L 3 and
and dear interest which he took in tlic welfare of his favourite. After mention¬ ing bis entire conviction that he would luhM all his expectations, and that he wouki rite above the fortunes of his fa- nuíy. Mackenzie solemnly conjured hini v, make the comfort and happiness of his Mother one of his chief studies — "J know," said he, " that she looks forward to the time whicli will reunite lier to her iidughlcr,as one of the most blissful events of her life—but 1 much fear that she is destined to suffer a severe disappoint inent in thb long-cherished hope; my sister will educate Janet above her situation, and she will expect from her all the duti¬ ful aifection of a child towards a parent ; s'îe will be taught to look up to her for every pleasure she is to enjoy—and as ha¬ bit is ever} thing, 1 cannot suppose that ?? peor giil will have much love to spare to her absent parents, of whom she will know littlo, and from whose hands she w ill receive oidy the occasional tokens of their
their existence. Redouble, therefore, be¬ loved Edward, your tender assiduities to your elear mother, who, ν lien I am gone, will have none left io cheer the melancholy hours of her widowhood, and to soften down the severity of her grief, but }our- ^eif It is to your affection, Edward, that \ fearlessly confide the future peace of ) our poor mother ; I know r } our hcíirí, and can rely with confidcbce upon iii filial tenderness. It is this confidence, m\ dearest Edw an!, which enables me to en¬ counter the perils of to-morrow, and, if such be tlse will of my Creator, to die in that cause for wiiich 1 have fought and bled bifore, " I need not tell vou to revere m v me- mory—to follow my oft-repeated counsels, for I feel assured, my darling son, tliat p s long as 5 ou exist, neither the one nor the other will be forgottenn by you. Anel now, my son, farewxil—perhaps for ever ! To¬ morrow's sun may set upon my grave, anel that heart whicli now throbs with all a L 4 father's
father's love, a father's cares, may be cold and motionless ; but my spirit shall re- ascend to its native heaven, and if per¬ mitted, shall hover over those beings on «arth whom when living ? adored—shall watch, protect, and guard its adopted *.hild, and by some secret token warn him of any impending evil. Think then, be- tuved Edw r ard! when the temptations of iife assail thy young heart, think that the 4>ul of thy adopted father lingers near thee—think of his high-raised hopes, his fond expectations, his sacred confidence, his last adieu—and no tear of unavailing penitence will ever quench the lustre of thy bright and happy eye." " Right well have you judged my heart, dear sainted father !" exclaimed Edward, with enthusiasm ; " and never shall you be deceived in your hopes and expecta¬ tions, as far as regards my own self-will. This letter I will wear in my bosom, next my heart ; it will animate me to redouble my exertions—it will stimulate me to every
every great and noble action—it will act as a talisman to remind me of my duties, and to guard me against the weaknesses of human nature." Edward pressed the sacred characters to his lips, then placed them in a small silk bag which he always wore round his neck, and which contained the locket enclosing the hair of Flora and Frederic Manning¬ ham.
CHAPTER XIL
Edwrard now resumed his studies with fresh ardour. He had purchased several presents for Janet, and had seenhis mother part of the w r ay on her journey to Scot¬ land. The winter was rapidly advancing, and the Manninghams were preparing to leave the Hall, when Clara Lindsay de¬ clared that she should not be able to exist L 5 any
any longer in the country after they were gone, especially as Edward was to con¬ tinue in town. Her fond parents imme¬ diately proposed taking a house in Lon¬ don for the season, and Edward was com¬ missioned to look out for a proper resi¬ dence that would suit the family of Mr. Lindsay. Edward was not long in find- ing a comfortable abode for his kind friends, who hastened to town the same week that sir Charles and lady Manningham took possession of the handsome mansion which had formerly belonged to sir Gregory. The arrival of the two families consi¬ derably increased the happiness of our young artist, who took up his residence once more under the same roof with the Lindsays. He had now frequent oppor¬ tunities of conversing with Frederic, and of seeing occasionally his sweet sister Flora; but Charles, who had not forgotten his firm independent conduct at old Marga¬ ret's cottage*, and who also had not for¬ given iiim for the decided preference shewn towards
towards him by Patty Smith, now regard¬ ed Edward with a cold hauteur, a chilling politeness, which was the bar to all friendly communications between them. Charles was now an ensign in the guards ; he had therefore formed new connexions and new friendships, and he consequently deemed himself too much the man of fashion to make such a youth as Edward his public companion. Sir Charles and lady Manningham re¬ ceived Edward with unabated kindness, while the friendly warmth of Constantia's manners made ample amends for the dis- tant civility of her brother's.. By dint of constant application, EdWard completed the eight drawings for lady Manningham, who made him a liberal present for his* trouble, expressing at the same time her entire satisfaction at his performance; and, ordering them to be splendidly framed, she desired that ihey might be placed in one of the best rooms· at the Hall. It is unnecessary to trace our young L.6 hero
hero step by step through two of the most unimportant years of his life, since nothing of consequence, except one or two cir¬ cumstances wdiich it may be proper to mention, occurred, .until he was in his eighteenth year. Till that period he en¬ joyed all the delights which flow f ed from the social intercourse with those he loved, and the increasing fame which the exhi¬ bition of his paintings produced. The picture begun under the auspices of sir Joseph Kennie had been finished in time for the exhibition, and had fulfilled the hopes of that great artist, who still conti¬ nued his warm friend and patron. It had been sold to a nobleman who was a Ube¬ ral encourager of the arts, and whose mu¬ nificence exceeded the humble expecta¬ tions of Edward, who no sooner became master of a sum which to him appeared a little fortune, than he offered to divide it between his mother and Mr. Lindsay. The former steadily declined the affection¬ ate wishes of Edward, assuring him that when
wheb she stood in need of his assistance she would not scruple to receive it ; while the latter accepted as a loan what the gra¬ titude of his protegee would have bestowed as the repayment of a debt. When Mr. Lindsay condescended to borrow what Edward tendered to him as his due, he meant most honourably to re¬ pay him, as soon as his circumstances would permit; but, unfortunately for him, his income did not allow of the increasing extravagance of his daughter, who, blindly selfish, thought only of gratifying her own inchnations, withoutcastingathought upon the embarrassments and vexations which she was bringing daily upon her doting and misguided parents. To please their ungrateful darling, they readily assented to the additional expence of keeping two houses, and of mixing in those pleasurable diversions which cut deeply into their yearly allowance. Clara Lindsay never failed to make one at all the parties given by lady Manningham ; and, as she dressed with
with equal elegance as Constantia, her pa¬ rents unavoidably found themselves com¬ pelled to outstep the limits of their in¬ come, that herwislies might not be damped in what they considered as the most im¬ portant period of her life. Her beauty and accomplishments had already gained her many wealthy admirers, to one of whom in particular she publicly appeared to give the preference. This was the brother of the gentleman who was the received lover of bliss Manningham, and on whom it was supposed that Clara would bestow her hand at the same time that her friend was united to sir Arthur Vivian; But Clara, who had scrupled not to sacri¬ fice to her own selfish pleasures the tran¬ quillity and happiness of her parents, with equal wantonness now deliberately trifled with that of an amiable and deserving man, making him the ready dupe of her apparent kindness, while at heart she was madly attached to Charles Manningham, and determined never to marry unless she could
could persuade him to become the partner of her days. This Miss Lindsay foresaw would be a task of extreme difficulty; for, though Charles still continued her secret admirer, and actually felt some remains of his boy¬ ish partiality, yet he never seriously in¬ tended to make Clara his wife, as he knew that her extravagance would keep pace with his own, and that the fortune of her mother died with her Had Clara been the heiress of large property, Charles would perhaps have preferred her to any other woman, but he had already embarrassed himself to a large extent, and dared not apply again to his father, who had twice before, with great generosity, cleared him of every debt he owed. In this emergency, pressed on every side by urgent creditors, Charles, after re¬ peated losses at the gaming-table, resolved to liquidate his debts by marrying the daughter of a rich citizen, who had a for¬ tune
tune of fifty thousand pounds, a sum w hieh would make him free of the world, and en¬ able him to live in that luxurious ease wiiich w r as so necessary to his happiness. That this new-formed project might be realized, Charles, wiio had âíinceà .several times with Miss Fellowes, took an early opportunity to introduce his intended bride to the knowledge of his family, who, not suspecting his moti ves, received her with all imaginable goodnature and affability, little dreaming that such an object as Miss Fel¬ lowes could ever awaken in the mind of Charles any serious reflections. But they had yet to learn that interest, more than any other feeling, guided the actions of Charles, and that had Miss Fellowes been more plain and deformed than she really was, her large fortune would, in the eyes of Charles, have made ample amends for the defects of her person. It is true that the ravages of the small-pox had cruelly enlarged features which would otherwise have
have been handsome, and that the care¬ lessness of her attendant, by letting her fall when an infant, had occasioned her shoulder to grow out, and otherwise in¬ jured her shape, as well as impaired hel constitution; but this had no weight with Charles-—he saw only the advantages which he should gain by becoming master of her fortune ; and if he could still retain the heart of Cb- .*, and convince her that ne¬ cessity, not affection, urged him to the match, he did not despair in time of gain¬ ing the fond fair one to forgive his breach of faith, and, in the words of Pope, to " curse all laws but those wiiich love has made." If he could but persuade Clara to do this, he had no doubt but that she would eventually become his, on his own terms. With these honourable intentions, Charles Manningham first introduced to his family and Miss Lindsay the delighted Lucinda Fellowes, and then made her the butt of ridicule to the latter, who, unconscious of the sinister designs of her lover, readily believed
believed that he only intended to amuse himself at the expence of Lucinda's va nity and weakness. To sport with the follies of our fellow- creatures, to expose all the little weak¬ nesses of human nature, is by no means an amiable propensity, especially in youth. That is the joyous season of the soul, when the world appears to be truly what it seems, when the heart recoils from the chilling voice of suspicion, and credulously relics upon every glan ce of proffered kindness, and when the inquiring eye views with delight all the surrounding objects, bestowing on each the rose-colour of its own happy mind. The blissful moments of unsuspiciousyouth are worth a wluic dull age of future wis¬ dom and experience, while the remem¬ brance of early friendships, early endear¬ ments, becomes the pleasing charm which solaces our more mature years, when trea¬ cherous friends and disappointed hopes have taught us all tbe sad realities of fate. Edward would fain have concealed from himself,
himself, had that been possible, his know¬ ledge of the worthless character of Charles Manningham. But several little circum¬ stances had helped to develop to him his want of principle, his vanity, his extrava¬ gance, and his self-love. When Frede¬ ric came first to town with his family, for the winter, Edward, as might be ex¬ pected, inquired very particulariy after Patty Smith; but as his friend was ig¬ norant of her intended iinİGîi with Wil¬ liam Ashford, he could not elelight the mind of Edward with this pleasing pros¬ pect of poor Patty's emancipation from the miseries of her improper home. Patty's delicacy also prevented her from commu¬ nicating to him a circumstance of so much importance to her future welfare, and Ed¬ ward, who was the most interested in her concerns, w r as ignorant that such an event as her marriage was even in agitation, until it had actually taken place. in the summer the Lindsays returned to the country, whither Edward accom¬ panied
panied them, as his mother still conti¬ nued with her husband's relations io Scot¬ land. On the same evening he hastened to pay a visit to Patty Smith, but his footsteps naturally paused at the well- known gate of his grandmother's cottage, and his astonishment was greatly excited by the alterations and improvements whieh had taken place in its appearance during his absence. The cottage remained as be¬ fore, but a commodious shop and premises were added to the side of it, and the front garden, which was considerably enlarged, now blossomed with a profusion of his most favourite flowers. His curiosity led him to inquire of an old woman that was passingconcerningthis unexpected change in the inhabitants of his once peaceful home, and he heard with increased sur¬ prise that the cottage had been purchased by young Ashford, the baker, who had been married about three months to Patty Smith. A sudden rush of pleasure filled the heart
heart and eyes of Edward, .lm he listened to the narration of Patty's good fortune, and he immediately comprehended the feelmo'S which had made her select for a residence the cottage of his grandmother. His impatience to behold her scarcely al¬ lowed him to inquire of the man who was serving in the shop about his mistress, nor would it permit him to wait until he had called her from the parlour, but, rushing past the tardy journeyman, he presented himself to the wife of Ashford, w r ho, with a scream of sudden joy, rose to welcome his return. Edward was on the point of throwing his arms around the form of Patty, as he was accustomed to do formerly, w r hen the recollection of her altereel state brought to his mind something like a feeling of impropriety. Both felt a momentary em barrassmeut, but Edward recovered first, and pressing warmly the hand of Patty to his lips, he congratulated her upon an event which had secured to herself so comfortable
comfortable æhome, and so worthy a pro¬ tector. Patty's composure was not so easily re¬ stored as that of Edward. She had been used to receive from him the most tender demonstrations of his affection, and it ne¬ ver occurred toher until this moment that a continuance of them would be improper; but Edward's own feelings now taught her the delicacy of her situation, and, as she blushingly reseated herself by his side, »he strove to apologize for having con¬ cealed from him a circumstance of so much importance to her peace. " Apologies are unnecessary, dearest Patty," repliée! Ed ware!, kinelly; ít your motive could be but one, namely, your wish to surprise and please me by the sight of your felicity within these dear and sacred walls. I know of no circum¬ stance that could have occasioned me so much heartfelt gratification as that of knowing that you no longer stand in need of those friendly offices which my mother is
is so willing to afford you the moment she returns from Scotland." " Thank you, Mr. Edward," said Patty, casting her eyes on the ground, " thank you forali your kind remembrances, which have been the means of enabling me to bear with my fate, before I thought of becoming the wife of William Ashford. But though I am now so happily settled in life, and I trust above the reach of all my enemies, yet I should feel very mise¬ rable if I thought that my change of si¬ tuation would make any change in your friendship, Mr. Edward. For the sake of your dear deceased grandmother, who taught us to love each other like brother and sister, I hope that you will still con¬ tinue í ? honour me w T ith your notice and good wishes." tt Dearest Pattv," cried Edward, bend- hw forward, but a^ain restrainusQ* the wannth of his feelings to a pressure of the hand, " dearest Patty, no change of cir¬ cumstances can diminish the aifection which my
my heart has ever cherished towards you. You are the friend of my earliest ) r ears, the being on whose fidelity and tenderness my heart reposes with fearless confidence ; and though you are no longer your own mis¬ tress, Patty—though I must henceforward drop that dear and familiar name for one of more restraint—yet I shall still hope to find you the walling confidant of all my thoughts, and the gentle soother of my cares, for you know, Patty—Mrs. Ashford I mean, that we all have our cares." *' Wc cannot live without them in this world," said Patty, involuntarily sighing ; " but yours, Mr. Edward, I trust, will be light ones, for I am certain that no one more truly deserves to be happy than you do." Edward shook his head.—" You know little of human nature, my dear friend, if you think me perfect," he replied. " Eut tell me all that has passed since we met. I suppose you know that Miss Lindsay has returned, and that, in the course of a month
a month she proceeds with the Manning¬ hams to pay a visit to the family of sir Arthur Vivian, who, at the expiration of three weeks, will return with them, to spend the remaineler of the summer at the Hall." Patty eagerly inquired if Charles had accompanied Miss Lindsay back to the country ; and, on Edward ι equesting ear¬ nestly to know the cause of her emotion, she, for the first time, confessed to him the ungenerous conduct of Charles, con¬ trasting it in the mostg-ateful terms with that of her present proti r tor and husband. Edwards eyes flashed fire, and his cheek crimsoned with anger, as Patty innocently narrated the various imults wiiich she had received from the young heir of sir Charles. " Why did you not tell me this before ?" said Edward, reproachfully. " Mr. Man¬ ningham knows that I love and regard you as my sister, and that any insult of¬ fered to you, Patty, is a personal one to myself." vol. ί?. μ kí Be
" Be calm, dear Mr. Edward," cried Patty, terrified at the indignation visible on his ñne countenance—" be calm, I beg of you : T am now placed beyond the power of Mr. Manningham, and do not fear his resentment. Pray do not be angry with me for hiding from you his insolence, Mr. Edward, for I know how dearly you valued the friendship of his family, and I could not bear that you should risk the losing it on my account ; for I knew full well that you and Mr. Manningham would have had words, if I had told you how ill he had behaved to me." M Despicable coward!" exclaimed Ed¬ ward : ts if his heart were but half as noble as that of his brother Frederic, he would have died ere he would have added to the unhappiness of your situation, ere he would have cherished a thought which could make your unprotectedness more painful and desolate. I have long feared that Charles was an unfeeling libertine, and 1 am now too fatally convinced that my
my suspicions were not groundless. Oh, how unlike his brother !" Patty felt pleased with the present op¬ portunity of testifying her gratitude for the many little acts of friendship whicii she had received from Frederic during the absence of Edward; she therefore recounted to him several marks of his friend's kind¬ ness, particularly his considerate good-na¬ ture in always hurrying to see her, as soon as he had heard from him, and in in¬ quiring very minutely if she had no further intelligence to communicate, in return for that of which he was the willing bearer. A smile of satisfied affection once more restored to the face of Edward its wonted beauty, as his heart expanded with in¬ creased tenderness towards Frederic, for the promptness and fidelity with which he had discharged the duties of the trust which he had reposed in him. It was now Edward's turn to recount to Patty the va¬ rious circumstances whicli had taken place since they had parted, and in doing this m 2 he
he unavoidably touched upon a subject which produced an immediate agitation of his whole body. " Ah, Mr. Edward," cried Fatty mourn fully, " I see how it is. The marchioness of Anendale has enchanted your heart as much as she did your mother's. But I shall never forget the words of your dear old grandmother; I can never think of them with* at shuddering, because I pic¬ ture to myself what a sad deal of mischief any person might do, who had ( an an- £-e.i's form, with a devil's heart P Oh, Mr. Edward, how can you forget those power« ful words of your dear old grandmother?" " Forget them, Patty ! Oh, you would forget almost every thing if you were but half a moment in the presence of the mar¬ chioness of Anendale. Her look, her smile, the tones of her voice, all produce a ma¬ gical effect upon the senses, and the heart which but an hour before shrunk trem¬ bling at the mention of her faults, expands towards her with adoring tenderness, as soon
soon as the fascination of her form and features are but seen. I had indeed for¬ gi *^ten the words of my indulgent grand¬ mother, or, if remembered, I deemed them merely the effect of prejudice ; but I have that to communicate to you, Patty, which no fascination can obliterate from my remembrance, no magic drive from my heart." Edward, with painful emotion, now con¬ fided to Patty the conversation which he had had with his mother ; and, as he re¬ peated her fearful warnings, the cheeks of Patty paled with terror ; but when he came to that part where the marchioness advised Alice to abandon her child for ever to the mercy of strangers, to the un¬ certain tenderness of hireling nurses, she clasped her hands together in an agony of horror ; then grasping the arm of Edward, she fervently besought him to relinquish all further intercourse with so cruel, so unfeeling a woman. " And yet, Patty, that she can feel I well
well know," replied Edward, " for hei existence appears to hang on that of her only son. They say she is incapable of maternal aifection, but I have witnessed the watchful tenderness of her eyes, as they dwelt with fearful apprehension upon the idol of her soul—have seen the palpi¬ tations of her heart, as she examined all the changes of his pallid countenance, and am woll convinced that however cold and flinty that heart might once have been, it is now capable of melting with all a mo¬ ther's love." Patty had not seen the marchioness; she was therefore uninfluenced by the ma¬ gic of her charms, and only alive to the threatened danger which might befal Ed¬ ward: she once more conjured him to give up all intentions of renewing his intimacy with the marchioness, and felt some relief when told that he felt no wish to revive an acquaintance with one, whom even his mother had been compelled to acknow¬ ledge was wanting in the common feel¬ ings
ings of humanity. He assured Patty that she might with safety relinquish her fears, as it was at present out of his power to throw himself in the way of danger, the marchioness having accompanied her hus¬ band and son to Lisbon, whither they had been advised to take the latter, under the faint hope that the change of climate might save the life of the dying earl. This assurance tranquillized the mind of Patty, who would fain have persuaded Edward to stay and see her husband, whose business had detained him later that evening than usual ; but Edward's feelings had been awakened by their mu¬ tual confidence, and he therefore declined her invitation, not, however, without pro¬ mising to call the next day, that he might be introduced to the worthy man whose honourable love had secured to Patty a comfortable home in the midst of her dis¬ tress, and for whom he already felt, upon that account, an esteem which made him desirous to be acquainted with one to whose
whose cire the peaí e and happiness of the affectionate and faithful Patty were con¬ fided.
KND OF VOL. IL
"IT i T i lnira
Printed by J. Da;hng> Le^denhall-strtet, London.
