Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Italian vengeance: and, English forbearance: a romance
ENGLISH FORBEARANCE AND ITALIAN VENGEANCE.
CHAP. I. AT breakfast the next morning, colonel Belgrave appeared out of spirits, and out of humour. Lady Evelina had not risen, and he now took the opportunity of her absence, to remonstrate with Marian Gor¬ den, upon the coldness of her conduct to¬ wards Campbell on the preceding evening. —" I should almost suspect," said he, re¬ garding attentively her changeful counte¬ nance, " that from the strange indifference with whieh you treat him, your heart must be predisposed to favour the preten¬ sions of another. Your blushes, Marian, VOL. II. ?
confirm my suspicions. Perhaps the min¬ strel, with whom you last night conversed' with seeming familiarity, is the rival of my friend. If this is the case, why does he not come forward, and boldly avow his passion ? or is he fearful lest his name and family should be too insignificant to meet the sanction ofyour friends?" Marian's confusion increased : forcing a smile to conceal it, she repiied, that she did not see the absolute necessity of her being in love with another, to form the only cause of her fixed determination, never to receive the major but as a friend. —" In that light I shall ahvays respect him," continued Miss Gorden, " but in no other ; nor can I imagine why you are so anxious to dispose of my hand to major Campbell, unless indeed that you are weary of my company." " Nay, Marian, believo any thing biu that," said the colonel, recovering his ac¬ customed good humour. (i I think highly of Campbell; and I know that his happi-
ness depends upon your returning his af¬ fection." " I am sorry for it," replied Marian, with sincerity ; " since I again affirm, that much as I respect and esteem the major, I can never receive him as a lover " " The world will accuse you of caprice and coquetry," rejoined the colonel, " since you have allowed him to appear so long as your avowed admirer." " How !" exclaimed Marian, in a tone of vexatious surprise ; but she was now interrupted by the sudden entrance of captain Dashwood, who, pale as death, and with dress disordered, flung himself on a sofa, in evident agitation. Ever alive to the misfortunes of others, Marian Gorden novv hastened to his assistance, and fearing lest some accident had hap¬ pened to lady Susan, inquired first after her welfare. " She has not been at home all night," said her husband, who now, for the first time, felt the impropriety of his own con- ? 2
duct towards her. " She has gone off, I suspect, with Tewksbury." Colonel Belgrave now advanced. " My curses follow tbem," continued he, with vehemence ; " not that I care for the silly little fool, but her seducer shall find that I am not to be injured with impunity. I will pursue them to the end of the world, but what I will have my revenge," " Nay, moderate your feelings, my friend," said colonel Belgrave : " what proof have you of lady Susan's infidelity ? —may she not, out of womanly caprice, have gone home with some female friend, and perhaps ere now have returned to your house ?" *' No, no," cried the captain, hastily ; " I tell you she has eloped with Tewksbury. When I had made every search for her in the apartments of the marchioness, I in¬ quired of one of the domestics, and learn¬ ed that lord Tewksbury had handed lady Susan to a carriage, as she had complained of sudden indisposition: his lordship left
at the same time. Arrived at home, I found that she was not there. My suspi¬ cions were awakened, and this note, which lay on the table, confirmed them." He now requested the colonel to read aloud the following lines, while the quick falling tears of Marian Gorden testified the acuteness of her feelings for the ab¬ sent frail one. The coionel, with an un¬ steady voice, now read the letter, which neither betrayed the consciousness of shame, nor the fear of disgrace. " As we have long been tired of each other's company, the best thing we can do is to part. I leave you to enjoy your own pursuits, while I shall follow the fortunes of one whom I love dearly, and who loves me in return. The onlv favour I shall ever ask of you is, that you will never trouble me again. " Susan." " Save her, I conjure you, if possible," cried Marian, with affecting earnestness ;
" lose not a moment in rescuing her from disgrace and infamy—unfortunate lady Susan !" " My carriage is now waiting " replied Dashwood, rising as he spoke: " I guess the route that Tewksbury will take, and expect to come up with them before they embark for the continent. I follow to avenge ray own injuries, not to bring back a faithless w ife," " Act with coolness, my dear friend," said the colonel, " and do not endanger your own life for the sake of a worthless woman." " For the Jove of Heaven !" exclaimed Marian Gorden, following him to the door of the breakfast-room, " act as be¬ comes a Christian and a husband, who may perhaps have to account to his Crea¬ tor, for the neglect of those duties, the per¬ formance of which might have saved this weak unhappy creature from destruction." Captain Dashwood broke from her, and without even thinking of lady Evelina,
rushed into his travelling chariot, leaving the minds of Marian and the colonel both strongly agitated, though by very different feelings, and from a very different cause, Lady Susan's elopement was soon made public; and while lady Evelina and Ma¬ rian Gorden were deeply interested in her fate, and anxiously hoping that sbe might be reclaimed from a life of guilt, her inti¬ mate associates and daily companions were most loud in tbeir invectives against her —most bitter and unchristian-like in their opinions and their remarks. Next to the family of colonel Belgrave, the marquis of Tyrconnel felt pained at the news of lady Susan's flight. He had looked for¬ ward to such an event as probable, from her own vanity and weakness, and from the culpable neglect of her husband; but as it now happened, it filled him with horror. At the marchioness of Douglas's, he had watched very narrowly the con¬ duct of lady Susan ; he overheard a few words which she addressed to one of the
company, and his reply, though guarded, and deHvered in a low voice, was such as to appal and alarm the marquis for the peace of those belonging to them. He now heard that lord Tewksbury was the companion of her flight; and he could not help wishing that such might be the case, though the words which he had overheard on the night of the ball, gave him reason to suspect that her conduct to¬ wards Tewksbury was only a preconcerted scheme, to divert the attention of her hus¬ band from the real object of her infidelity. The marquis inwardly groaned. Can it be possible, thought he, that man should so degrade the image of his Maker, as to sully the purity of his soul by guilt like this ! The reflections of the marquis were agreeably interrupted by the presence of his young sister.—" I am going, brother," said lady Julia, " to call on Marian Gor¬ den; she half promised to spend the day with us—will you not accompany me ?" The marquis kissed the blooming cheek
of his beloved sister—as fair, as glowing, was that of the unfortunate lady Susan. Alas ! he thought, how soon will its roses fade, when washed by the bitter tears of shame and guilt ! The bright and happy countenance of lady Julia changed in a moment, on wit¬ nessing the deep dejection which those of her friends now exhibited. The colonel was gone out, and lady Evelina and Marian were alone in the drawing-room, when the marquis and his sister entered. They had given orders to be denied ; but the porter was well aware that the marquis of Tyr¬ connel and lady Julia were not included. The melancholy subject of lady Susan's elopement became the topic of conversa¬ tion, and of sincere regret Lady Eve¬ lina could not restrain her tears; while Marian, equally affected, attempted not to conceal her disapprobation, at the cool indifference with which captain Dash¬ wood had allowed his wife to receive the attentions of other men. ? 3
(ί I both blame and pity lady Susan," said the marquis, feelingly ; " for had she been united to a man of honourable prin¬ ciples, and of a benevolent heart, his at¬ tention to her happiness, and his regard for her reputation, would have placed her beyond the attacks of the profligate sedu¬ cer, and saved her from infamy and dis¬ honour." " The indifference or neglect of a hus¬ band cannot sanction the infidelity of a wife," replied lady Evelina. ' e Certainly not," rejoined the marquis ; " but I hold it to be one of the duties of a husband, so to regulate his conduct to¬ wards his wife, even supposing that she is not the object of his fondest affections, as not to lay her open, by his neglect, to the dangerous pity of his own sex." Lady Evelina sighed deeply—it was echoed back by the marquis, who, after much entreaty, persuaded her and Marian Gorden to return with his sister to his mother's. Lady Evelina pleaded indis,-
position, but he would not be denied : there would be no company—they-need not change their dress—and himself and the romping Julia would do their best en¬ deavours to divert their thoughts from the unpleasant subject which occupied them. Lady Julia likewise pleaded; and, thus entreated, her ladyship, after making some slight alteration in her attire, re¬ turned with the marquis to Tyrconnel House. Music and literature beguiled away the hours ; they seemed but as moments to lady Evelina and her friend, accustomed as they had lately been to the tiresome and frivolous conversation of fashionable nonsense. Here their wearied spirits found rest and refreshment, for here they enjoyed the *' feast of reason and the flow of soul." The marchioness, like her son, possessed a highly-cultivated mind, fine taste, and sound judgment: to these were added the graces of an elegant person, and the charm of a feeling heart. Since the
death of her husband, the marchioness had passed the chief part of her time in retirement, devoting herself wholly to her children, whose education she had super¬ intended with religious care. Lady Julia, innocent and guileless as the dove, was all that the fondest mother could wish, and lord Charles promised to inherit all the amiable quaHties of his elder brother, whom he strongly resembled. The mar¬ chioness, since their residence in town, had been particularly fortunate in obtain¬ ing for him a tutor, with whom both her¬ self and the marquis were highly satisfied. They had mentioned this gentleman, in the most flattering terms, before, to lady Evelina and Marian ; and they now re¬ gretted that no persuasion could ever yet induce him to join them in the drawing- room, as they had frequently wished him to make one in their select parties : to all tiieir invitations he had, however, uni¬ formly given a polite, respectful, but firm refusal. This conduct seemed to mortify
lady Julia, who could not help thinking that it was pride that prevented bim from mixing with those whom he might con¬ sider as his superiors. The marquis gently reminded her, that whatever might be his motive in preferring the solitude of bis own apartments, it ought to be held sacred by them, since every thing connected with him bespoke the man of talent, and the finished gentleman. '* I feel so strong an interest in the fate of this young man," said the marquis, turning io lady Evelina, wbo was sitting next him, " that much as I rejoice in the good fortune of Charles in having such a tutor, yet I cannot bear to see Mr. How¬ ard in a situation which I am certain must be beneath him : we have frequent con¬ versations together, and each time I quit his society with regret, for each time strengthens my regard and my esteem : on the subject of himself, or his concerns, he is invariably silent, but upon all others he is communicative and entertaining : when
speaking of our recent battles, and of the complicated movements of the two armies, he discovers so perfect a knowledge of the whole business, that none but an eye¬ witness could have ; yet he has never even hinted, though I strongly suspect that he has been personally concerned in the circumstances whieh he relates, with so much truth and accuracy." Marian Gorden felt the colour pale on her cheek, as the name of Howard reach¬ ed her; and she gladly availed herself of lady Julia's invitation to accompany lier to the music-room.—" I would give any thing that you could see this Mr. How¬ ard," said her ladyship, looking inquiring¬ ly about her. " So would I too," thought Marian Gorden. " I think," continued lady Julia, " that you would think as 1 do. He has one of the finest countenances you can imagine. I will shew you a sketch I made of him the other day ; but you must not name it
to mamma or my brother, for they would think, perhaps, that my time was idly spent, in sketching the resemblance of a young man." Lady Julia now took from her pocket- book a paper, which slie presented to Ma¬ rian ; it was an admirable outline of fea¬ tures, which vvere but too deeply engra~ ven on her heart. To behold them with¬ out emotion, was impossible ; to know that he was so near to her, and in a situa¬ tion so far beneath hib birth, and once smiling prospects, affected her almost to tears. Unwillingly ¡she returned it to la¬ dy Julia, for she would fain have kept even that slight resemblance of the unfor¬ tunate Henry. Could nothing be done to ameliorate his condition ? of what value was her own large possessions, if she could not employ them in dispensing happiness to those she loved ? Judging of the delicacy of his feelings by her own, Marian now wished not to encounter Henry, while under the
roof of the marquis ; she therefore has¬ tened back to the drawing-room, lest chance should throw him in her way; nor could she sleep the whole of that night, for forming plan after plan, by which she could inform herself of the state of his af¬ fairs, and of the best means by which she could assist him, and still conceal from whence it came. Yet to whom could she apply for infor¬ mation, since she was not supposed to know such a being as Mr. Howard ? To whom, but Rosalie ? she, perhaps, was ac¬ quainted with his situation ; but might she venture to inquire concerning him, of a being so wrapt up in mystery as Rosalie—a being, of whom she had been cautioned by Arlingford himself ? was she therefore a fit person to be entrusted with a secret of such importance ? Poor Ma¬ rian, unable to decide, at last determined upon calling upon Rosalie, hoping that she herself might bring up the name of Arlingford, and perhaps, drop some hints
which might enable her to judge of his real circumstances. With this important object in view, Marian, the next morn¬ ing, drove to the florist's, and passed, as usual, by the private passage into the house, occupied by the fictitious madame du Chatillon. At the door of the conservatory, Marian Gorden was startled by tiie appearance of Arlingford.·—" Why do I sec you here ?" said he, tenderly pressing her hand, while a momentary ray of joy illumined his countenance. " I might return you that question," replied Marian, gravely. " My visit here is to inquire after the health of madame du Chatillon." Henry coloured deeply ; he cast a look behind him into the inner apartment ; the shrubs and flowers hid from his view the interior of the room.—" I once took the liberty of cautioning you," he said, ** upon your intimacy here. Pardon my bold¬ ness, dearest iMiss Gorden, but I have
weighty reasons to counsel you to shun this singular, this dangerous woman. Pu¬ rity and innocence like yours, should not," he continued, lowering bis voice, " be contaminated by tbe breath of tlie guilty. Your secret visits here may give rise to suspicions, whieh I darò not think of. You cannot save, you eannot reform, you cannot prevent tl meditated vengeance uf an injured woman ; break therefore the spell, by which she hokis you captive, while yet you possess the means. I would not be thus urgent--—-" A noise from the inner apartment broke off his discourse ; hastily raising her hand to his lips, he darted down the passage, leaving Marian Gorden half irresolute whether to proceed or to retire. She had not time to decide, for Rosalie appeared ; her brow was clouded, and her look dis¬ turbed ; at sight of Marian, ber counte¬ nance brightened.—" Welcome, my sweet friend," she cried ; " this visit is indeed kind of you. I hove been ill, very ill,
since the night of the Douglas ball. You would, I know, pardon my not speaking to you ; it is best for all parties, that in public we should be strangers to each other. Did you not meet just novv with Henry A rii n gfjrd ?" Marian Gorden blushed, and replied in the affirmative. tí That foolish fellow," she continued, without noticing the confusion of Marian, " will not follow my advice. He has sold his commission, and tamely prefers a life of irksome dependence, rather than bold¬ ly confront the man who has wronged him, and from whom he ought to demand the restitution of his property. Such cowardice is unworthy the dignity of manhood." " Call it not cowardice, but christian- like forbearance," replied ^larian. " The honour of a brave soldier should not for a moment be tarnished, even among our¬ selves, by tbe suspicion of cowardice." " Call it what you please," said Rosalie,
disdainfully ; " my native soil does not give birth to such tame and dastard spirits. I would renounce him for ever, did not ray heart beat kindly towards him, from a grateful sense of obligation once received. I would myself avenge his wrongs, and wrest from the treacherous grasp of perfi¬ dious friendship, the just inheritance of Arlingford, but that there is a charm in the tones of his voice, when he entreats for mercy, on the merciless, which even my determined soul cannot resist." " Do you then know the cruel enemy of Arlingford ?" Marian ventured to in¬ quire. « Why that question, lady ?" said Ro¬ salie, with a penetrating look. " Rest sa¬ tisfied, when the hour arrives, you shall know allr The look which accompanied this speech silenced Marian, and determined her not to hazard any confidence with a spirit so uncongenial with her own. Rosalie now reverted to her own situa-
tion, and again requested Marian Gorden not to desert her, when her hour of trial eame on.—" My life will then be placed in a stranger's hand,'* said she, " and my soul may quit its earthly tenement, with¬ out being revenged on its oppressor. Lady, you will not shrink from a scene of pain and grief, to administer comfort and consolation to one who will otherwise be friendless." " With the permission of Heaven, I will be with you," replied Marian Gorden ; " and may the Being whom we serve, pour into your wounded heart that balm which no mortal can bestow !—may he soften the asperity of your feelings to¬ wards a fellow-creature, and teach you to forgive, as you would be forgiven your¬ self!" " Lady," said Rosalie, with calmness, " I honour and respect you for those tran¬ quil virtues which I never can possess ; and could any thing tempt me to abjure my purposed vengeance, it would be thy-
self. I feel unwilling to inflict pain on the gentle sweetness of thy nature. I would shield, if possible, thy tender bo¬ som from every corroding care ; but my vow must be kept, and in the performance of it, I must sacrifice, if necessary, even thy repose, dear lady." " You grow more and more mysteri¬ ous," said Marian G u«en, trying to force a smile upon ¿: nr changeful features. ef But it may be the fashion of your coun¬ try, to appear wild and singular in your expressions. I will, however, trust to you, madame, since no evil can befall me, if I am protected by Providence." " True," replied Rosalie, in a softened tone, " for my guardian angel forsook me when I fled from the palace of my ances¬ tors. Lady," she continued, with appal¬ ling earnestness, " lady, you love—you stand on the brink of the same precipice— your heart throbs with the same tender emotions^—you are capable of the same sacrifices."
" Oh, no, no !" exclaimed Marfan Gor¬ den ; " you accuse me unjustly ! May we not sympathize in the misfortunes of an amiable man, without giving him our heart ?" fi You cannot deceive me, lady," said Rosalie, " for I have suffered too much from love's influence, not to know all his symp¬ toms. But fear me not—I value you too highly, to betray a secret, which w r ould place you in the power of our common enemy. Be as careful not to betray your¬ self; for she is lost, or nearly so, who suf¬ fers a man to know the extent of her af¬ fection for him." " Tlien I at least am safe," thought Marian, " for 1 have carefully kept watch over my feeiings, lest I should indeed be¬ tray the powerful interest I take in the fate of the unfortunate Arlingford." On her return home, the wife of Den¬ nis followed her to her chamber, to relate to her the success of her morning's visit. The partiality which Marian Gorden felt
for Mary, induced her to employ her fre¬ quently in offices of charity; she knew that she could safely trust her to visit the habitations of those objects of her exten¬ sive benevolence, whose circumstances re¬ quired the kind consoling voice of friend¬ ly sympathy ; for Mary's countenance, though weather-beaten, was stamped in one of nature's kindest moulds. Her visit this mornmg had been in re¬ ply to a letter which Miss Gorden had received by the post ; it came from the daughter ofa gentleman, who, by the re¬ cent death of her only surviving parent, was left wholly destitute of the means of support, unless she could raise a small sum of money, to enable her to defray the necessary expences of her father's funeral, by the sale of some of her own drawings, and obtain some pupils for her future maintenance. The style ofthe letter was modestly respectful, yet not servile, and evidently came from a person of mind and education.
Marian wrote a few lines, requesting her to favour her with a sight of some of her productions, and inclosed a bank-note for her immediate relief, and then entrusted it to the care of the wife of Dennis, while she paid a visit to madame du Chatillon. Returned from thence with her heart and mind full of the conversation that had passed between them, she threw herself into a chair, and telling Mary to do the same, proceeded to ask some questions re¬ specting the person to whom she had sent her. Mary was never sparing of praise, where the object, as she thought, deserved it. She was highly pleased with the appear¬ ance of Miss Dela val, whom she pronoun¬ ced a perfect gentlewoman. The bene¬ faction of Marian, and the kindness of her note, had overcome the weak spirits of the orphan, and she burst into tears of gratitude and joy, in thus unexpectedly receiving an immediate relief to her press¬ ing necessities. VOL. II. ?
The amiable character of Marian Gor¬ den, drawn by the faithful Mary, encou¬ raged Miss Delavai to name the next morning, if convenient, for her to call with some of her drawings ; the wife of Dennis assuring her, that she could not have ap¬ plied to one more capable of feeling for her distresses, or more willing to relieve them. " Ah, Mary !" sighed Marian Gorden, (t would to Heaven that I indeed possess¬ ed the power to lighten every afflicted heart of the care which oppressed it !" " You do as much as you can, I am sure, Miss," said the wife of Dennis, " for you are always giving to some one or an¬ other." " Ah, Mary ! but there are those whose proud spirit would not accept assistance, if they knew from whence it came." " Then they do not deserve your boun¬ ty, Miss. Their pride must be their sup¬ port.", " But, Mary, there is one whom I
would fain assist, if 1 could do so without the hazard of a discovery. I think—nay, I am certain that I might rely upon your fidelity— your secresy." " I hope so, Miss Marian," said Mary, with earnestness. * t The person whom I wish to serve," continued Marian Gorden, turning aside her head to conceal the rising blush, " is a gentleman by birth ; his adverse fortunes have placed him in a situation so inferior to his merits, that I would give the world, to enable him to leave it, but that I fear he may suspect from whence the assistance came*" " I can keep a secret, Miss Marian," said Mary, proudly ; " and I would lose my tongue, rather than it should betray any thing you might wish me to conceal. I do not say a great deal, Miss Marian, but either Dennis or myself would die to serve you." " Dear Mary," cried Marian Gorden, " only contrive to convey a letter for me ? Sí
to Tyrconnel House, in which I will en¬ close a sum too valuable to entrust to the post, and you will for ever oblige me." « Tyrconnel House, Miss Marian !" " Yes, Mary. The person in whose fate I am interested, and whom I would serve, unknown to any one but yourself, has been obliged to part with his com¬ mission, and to become tutor to the bro¬ ther of the marquis. I wish to enable him to return, if he chooses, to the army." Mary was suddenly seized with a weak¬ ness in her eyes, which required the aid of her handkerchief. ** Or at least," continued Marian, " I would afford him the means of quitting liis present dependent situation. What is the matter, Mary ?" " Nothing, Miss. The wind, I believe, has affected my eyes." " The wind, Mary ! There was scarcely a breath of air this morning." " Something is the matter with them," said Mary, wiping away her tears ; " they
have never ? n strong, since I slept so often exposed to the night air on the Con¬ tinent." " I will write to-day," said Marian, without noticing the emotion of Mary, " and you will endeavour to convey it this evening to Mr. Howard. I need not caution you, dear Mary, to disguise your¬ self, so as to prevent detection, should he chance to see you at any other time." Mary's overcharged heart would scarce¬ ly permit her to reply. She knew better than Marian, the necessity there was of disguise : the most effectual one she con¬ ceived to be that of her husband's clothes; these, and the help of a ruddy colour to her naturally-pale face, would effectually conceal her from the knowledge of Ar¬ lingford, for the few minutes she would have to remain in his presence. The dis¬ guise was indeed so admirable, that Ma¬ rian started back w 1th surpris^, when the wife of Dennis presented herself in the bedchamber of Miss Gorden, attired in
in a plain suit of her husband's clothes ; and so completely did she alter her voice, that had she not inquired for the letter, Marian would not have immediately re¬ eognised the affectionate Mary in the figure before her. With trembling anxiety did she await for her return. Impatiently did she listen for her footsteps up the back stairs; every minute seemed an hour to Marian Gor¬ den, un' U acquainted with the success of her embassy. At length Alary returned ; she had seen Mr. Howard—had given the lettéi into his own hand, and had escaped detection. Marian flung herself on her neck, to conceal the gushing tears which streamed down her lovely face. The distinction of rank and birth was forgotten-—Mary pressed the blooming cheek of Marian with her lips, and wiped away the falling tears. " Heaven grant that he may accept my friendly gift," said Marian, (t and that it
may promote his comfort and happiness !" " Heaven grant that it may !" fervently ejaculated the wife of Dennis : " and Hea¬ ven grant, Miss Marian, that your good¬ ness may be rewarded here, as well as hereafter! I know but one man in the world who is worthy to call such an angel his own." " And who is he, Mary ?" inquired the blushing girl, half raising her head from the neck of Mary, and looking in her face with encouraging sweetness. " Who would you give me to, had you the power ?" " To one, Miss Marian, whom I dare not name, but whom I knovv to be one of the best of his sex. He has just such a heart as your own—-just such a sweet disposition; and so affable, so kind, so feeling; but he is become poor, and there¬ fore no match for you, Miss." " Am I so fond of money, Mary, that you seem to think it necessary I should give my hand to a rich man ? Trust me,
Mary, if I ever marry, which I do not think I shali, it will not be for riches. I have more than enough myself, and shall therefore make choice of a husband whose fortune will consist in the treasures of his heart, and not in those of his iron chest. If, therefore, you know a worthy man in want of a wife, tolerably good tempered and good looking," continued Marian, with playful archness, " why, dear Mary, re¬ commend me to him ; but he must be very poor, and very miserable, that I may make him rich and happy." Marian hastily wiped away the tear, which, in spite of the smile which dimpled round her mouth, had forced itself into her eye; and giving the coarse, rough hand of Mctry a kindly pressure within her own, she ran down stairs to the drawing- room, wbere her presence had been long and anxiously expected by lady Evelina and major Campbell.
CHAP. II. We must now carry back the attention of our readers, to that part of our history, when Henry Arlingford, having parted with his commission, determined to make application, through the medium of a newspaper, for the situation of tutor to some nobleman's family. His advertise¬ ment was immediately answered, and his presence requested at Tyrconnel House. The handsome person and elegant man¬ ners of Henry, never failed to command the respectful attention of his inferiors; and he was now ushered into the library, where the marquis was waiting his arrival. Struck by the appearance of Arlingford, so superior to what he had expected to meet with, the marquis doubled the sa¬ lary he had at first intended to give, con- c 3
vinced that his present application must proceed from one of those sudden reverses of fortune, to which all men are more or less liable. This opinion was strengthened by the conduct of Henry, when he be¬ came a resident at Tyrconnel House : per¬ severing in his attentions to his pupil, his only hours of relaxation were those which lord Charles passed with his family. In the dusk of the evening, he would some¬ times stroll to Judith's cottage, or, if in¬ vited, pass an hour with madame du Cha¬ tilion ; but he more frequently indulged in the luxury of studying some of his fa¬ vourite authors, or sketching views, dear and familiar to his recollection, as asso¬ ciated with the remembrance of his hap- pie hours. To the frequent invitations to join the family in the drawing-room, Henry al¬ ways gave a polite refusal; and this the marquis attributed to the right cause—his wish to remain unknown and unseen by any of his visitors. The domestic habits
of the marquis, and his growing friendship for Henry, who had continued to adopt the name of Howard, frequently led him to his chamber, to enjoy the social plea¬ sures of conversation, with one whose tastes and sentiments coincided with his own. This daily intercourse between two young men of liberal education, high and lofty souls, noble and generous principles, quickly gave birth to a friendship, which no after circumstance had power to dimi¬ nish. The marquis anxiously waited for the long-wished-for confidence of the man he sincerely esteemed and loved ; and Henry was only withheld from bestowing it, from a feeling of delicacy towards the family of his foe. The reserve of Henry, while it pained the marquis, because it prevented him from serving essentially the man he loved, did not awaken any suspicion in the no¬ ble mind of Tyrconnel, injurious to the honour and integrity of Henry. Once only cjid he feel inclined to accuse him of
mystery and want of candour. In daily habits of confidential communication, the marquis one day expressed his regret, that all his endeavours to discover the residence of captain Arlingford had hitherto proved fruitless. With some degree of embar¬ rassment, Henry asked if his lordship was acquainted with the object of his search ? " I unfortunately have not that plea¬ sure," replied the marquis ; " but the fame of his valour, and the greatness of his tal¬ lente, joined to the peculiar circumstances of his disinheritance, makes me anxious to find out his retreat, as I think I might serve him. Are you at all acquainted with the affair to which I allude ?" Assured that he was unknown, Henry once more regained his self-possession, and replied, that he had a perfect know¬ ledge of the whole transaction. " Perhaps you know captain Arling¬ ford?" " I think I may say most intimately," said Henry, " since there is not a circum-
stance of his life that he has ever concealed from me." " My dear Howard, how I rejoice ! you can of course inform me where I may meet with your friend. Trust me, it is not an impertinent curiosity that prompts me to inquire into his affairs, but a real and sincere desire to serve him." " He would indeed consider himself as most happy, were he but at liberty to ac¬ cept the honour of your lordship's friend¬ ship," replied Henry ; " but I am not au¬ thorized to betray the place of his abode, since he is governed by circumstances of a peculiar nature, and while they exist, so will his wish of retirement.'* " I would not intrude on his privacy," said the marquis ; " but if he is the gene¬ rous, warm-hearted being I have heard him represented, he would not refuse the solace of my proffered friendship." " Refuse !" exclaimed Henry, unguard¬ edly ; " rather say that he would consider it as one of Heaven's best gifts;" then
suddenly recollecting himself, he added— " but my friend is at this moment so de¬ licately situated, that until the cloud is dispersed which at present hangs over him, his chief anxiety is to remain un¬ known." tc I must submit then," said the marquis, " though, I confess, with a very bad grace, to await the time, which I trust is not far distant, which will restore captain Ar¬ lingford once again to that society, of which he will be an ornament. I have a double motive for lamenting his absence; it deprives me of the pleasure, I am cer¬ tain I should feel, were I acquainted with him, and it casts a shade on the character of a man, whom habit has accustomed me to call friend." Henry turned pale,—" I understand you, my lord, but too well. There can be but one person to whom the allusion will apply." *' Tell me, I conjure you, iiiy dear Howard," said the marquis, in visible agi-
tation, " do you really believe the person I mean, to be guilty of using any unfair method of obtaining the property of your friend ? You hesitate ; fear not my pru¬ dence ; I am too highly interested in the welfare and happiness of the female part of the family, to drop a hint that might endanger their repose." ** The same feeling governs the move¬ ments of my friend," replied Henry : " his anxiety to preserve the peace of these amiable beings, induces him to be silent with respect to his own wrongs, and ensures also the personal safety of his enemy." '" Generous, noble Arlingford!" ex¬ claimed the marquis, with enthusiasm; " why are we strangers to each other ?" " I trust, my dear lord^ said Hei:*y, trying to repress the excess of his grateful feelings—" I trust that the day will yet arrive, when my fiiend shall personally thank you for your goodness ; until then, suffer me to express my deep and unut-
terable sense of obligation, for the gene¬ rous sympathy you take in the misfor¬ tunes of a stranger." Henry raised the hand of the marquis to his lips ; with dif¬ ficulty he prevented himself from disco¬ vering who he really was, and confiding his secret to the bosom of the high-souled Tyrconnel—but delicacy restrained him. He could not do this, and retain his situation in the family. The marquis would not allow the man whose friend¬ ship he was so anxious to possess, to continue as tutor to his brother, and Henry was too proud to accept, even from him, any pecuniary aid ; neither did he wish to return to society, under exist¬ ing circumstances. This checked the half-formed confidence which trembled on his tongue, and delayed, until a future time, the discovery so earnestly sought for by the marquis. From that day, however, there seemed to be less reserve on the part of Henry, and more endearing familiarity on that of
the marquis. Honoured by the esteem of the marchioness, and loved by her sons, Henry would have considered himself as comparatively happy, could he have for¬ gotten the rank and fortune to which he was born, ¿he remembrance of which, while it entitled him tö the hand of his beloved Marian Gorden, now only served to remind him of the bliss he had forfeit¬ ed, by the change in his prospects. For her sake, and that of lady Evelina, he vo¬ luntarily consigned himself to the station he now filled ; for their peace he forbore to call to an account his perfidious and pre¬ tended friend, relinquishing his once-che¬ rished idea of vengeance, and leaving the justice of his cause to Heaven, he now felt and acted as became a Christian. Notwithstanding the persuasion which dwelt upon his lips, Henry vainly urged the necessity of a similar forbearance to the beautiful Italian. It was worse than labour lost, to preach forgiveness of inju¬ ries to one still keenly alive to the sense
of wounded honour, of confidence be¬ trayed, and of passion ill returned—to one whose rash and hasty vow of venge¬ ance was regarded as binding, and looked forward to as the only worldly compen¬ sation for the injuries she had endured, the sacrifices she had made, and was still compelled to make: the christian-like for¬ bearance and patient enduring of injuries, such as those which had blighted the fair and sunny prospects of Arlingford, only called down the contempt and reproach of Rosalie, and they always parted mutually dissatisfied with each other, as often as the ungracious subject of their wrongs w r as introduced. It was after one of these unpleasant conversations had taken place, that Henry was surprised by the appearance of Marian Gorden at the door of the conservatory. Like an angel of purity and light, she broke upon his sight, contrasted with the dark and vindictive, though strikingly beautifu], woman he had just abruptly
quitted. The pleasure of the meeting was alloyed by the place, and by his know¬ ledge of the person she was in quest of. What could be the views of Rosalie, in attaching to her interest, a being in every respect so unlike herself? and what might be the result of such a connection ?— Henry trembled for the repose of his be¬ loved Marian, and he therefore warned her to beware ofthe tnysterious foreigner, whose influence over the feelings, nay hearts, of her auditors, he knew to be powerful and dangerous. He was well aware that Rosalie was governed by one ruling passion, and that was revenge ; but who was the object, she had carefully concealed. One little cir¬ cumstance had excited his suspicion : the arms on the dagger, which fell from her hand on thc night of their first interview, were those of a person with whom he was intimate; but still he allowed himself to hope, that chance might have given her the possession of it, and that its owner
was not the being destined to feel the effects of her vengeance. It is true, that she appeared to feel a sincere affection for Miss Gorden, although she seldom men¬ tioned her name; yet when that dear loved name escaped her lips, it was al¬ ways in terms of warm commendation ; yet, should any thing transpire to change the opinion of Rosalie, she might become the deadly enemy of her whom she now professed to love. Henry was brooding over this unfortu¬ nate connection, when Mary, dressed in her husband's clothes, was ushered into his chamber, and having delivered into his hand the little parcel of Marian Gor¬ den, quickly returned, before Henry could inquire from whence it came. Judging it to be a commission from Rosalie, he slowly broke the seal—the hand-writing was new to him—his curiosity was roused, and with impatience he hastily tore open the letter, whieh to his amazement con¬ tained the following lines.
" Your patient endurance of injury, and noble generosity in forbearing to expose the frailty of human nature, calls for some¬ thing more solid than the mere expres¬ sions of gratitude : accept then, I beseech you, the enclosed trifle, which will be sent to you annually, as a small, very small acknowledgment of the debt, which is due to you from one whom you have obliged, beyond the power of pecuniary repayment." Henry, in amazement, unfolded the notes—they were to the amount of five hundred pounds. Again he reperused the letter, but the characters were wholly un¬ known to him ; nor could he imagine from whence they came, unless the marquis had chosen this delicate method of rendering him independent. This was however ra¬ ther improbable, as his salary was ex¬ tremely liberal; and unless the marquis suspected who he was, the donation was not likely to have come from him. From whom then could he have received it?
Henry was lost in vain conjectures: the boundless extravagance of colonel Bel- grave prevented him from having per¬ formed this act of justice; yet the writer of the letter was evidently well acquainted with the circumstances of his disinherit¬ ance, as well as of his present abode. This last conviction was doubly morti¬ fying to the mind of Arlingford, as he had suffered himself to hope that his re¬ treat would remain undiscovered by any¬ one. At one moment, he thought of quit¬ ting the family, but the next he resolved to continue, at least as long as colonel Belgrave resided in London ; for now he was near his beloved Marian, and could learn from Dennis if any thing was in agitation inimical to her welfare. Fortunately for Marian, it never once occurred to Henry, that chance might have discovered to her his abode, and that she might be the generous friend who had thus liberally enabled him to emerge from obscurity and dependence. He took an
opportunity of sounding the marquis upon the subject, and felt convinced that he was not the person from whence it came. Trusting that time might enable him to return the munificent present to its right¬ ful owner, Henry carefully locked up the notes, until the hour should arrive for their restoration, Marian Gorden meanwhile was anxi¬ ously awaiting the result of her letter to Henry. Her visits to Tyrconnel House now became more frequent, yet she could gain no intelligence respecting the inten¬ tions of the object of her solicitude: it was evident, however, that if he meant to leave the family, he had not named it to them, as they were silent on the subject ; and lady Julia, in particular, would have been the first to convey tbe news to Ma¬ rian, from whom she had no conceal¬ ments: her ladyskip was indeed the art¬ less and innocent child of nature which her brother had described her. Born of a noble family, and reared amidst every
luxury, she was nevertheless perfectly in¬ different to the splendour of her rank and fortune ; nor did she attach any value to them, except in proportion as the latter would enable her to contribute to the hap¬ piness of others. The handsome person and elegant manners of Henry, whom she occasionally saw with her brother Charles, had made an impression on her young heart, which she strove not to efface. It was evident that Henry was a perfect gentleman—as such all her family considered him ; and lady Julia forgot, or wished not to remember, that his present situation, as tutor to her brother, placed him in a station of life far inferior to her own : in fact, she loved him, without considering the consequences, and with¬ out knowing herself the extent of her affection; but Marian Gorden had per¬ ceived it from the day of her shewing the sketch of Henry's features, which her ladyship had so faithfully portrayed from memory.
With a generosity inherent in her na¬ ture, Marian continued to love lady Julia with the same tenderness as before the discovery. The delicacy of her own situ« ation, with respect to Henry Arlingford, made her silent on the subject, unless it was started by her ladyship—the same de¬ licacy made her refrain from advising. Once she ventured to remind her of the inequality of their stations in life; but conscious of the deep interest she took herself in the success of her ladyship, Marian checked the voice of prudent counsel, and only listened to the descrip¬ tion of feelings consonant with her own, without attempting to convince her of the impropriety of yielding to a passion, which it was highly improbable would meet with the sanction of her family, unless that of Henry was made known to them. The situation of Marian Gorden was far from a pleasing one. The attentions of major Campbell justified the raillery of all her acquaintances, backed by the sly VOL. II. D
glanées and constant hints of the colonel, wdio openly espoused the cause of his friend. Nothing but the delicate health of lady Evelina prevented Marian from returning to her guardian, lord Macdo* nald; but she could not quit his daughter until after her confinement, though the persevering conduct of both the colonel and major Campbell rendered her stay painfully irksome. The major had writ¬ ten to her, and, in terms apparently of genuine affection, had solicited her hand, which she had refused, with as mueh deli¬ cacy as possible, unwilling to increase the mortification of a dismissal. Notwith¬ standing the candid acknowledgment of her inability to return his affection, the major continued to visit at the colonel's, and to take his station as usual by her side. The deep dejection of his counte¬ nance awakened her pity, while his per¬ severance only increased her chagrin and mortification. To avoid the conversation of a man,
whom she pitied, but could not love, Ma^ rian gladly sought every opportunity of being near to the marquis of Tyrconnel, whenever he was one of the party ; and this evidently gave great offence to colo¬ nel Belgrave. So deeply was he involved with the major, that he regarded his mar¬ riage with Miss Gorden as the only means by which the debt could be liquidated. He therefore secretly counselled the des¬ pairing lover of Marian to make a bold effbrt to possess her, and carry her off at once to Scotland, where he affirmed slie would be glad enough to accept his hand, \ to save her reputation. İ The major was averse to force, although the ardour of his passion would not allow him to resign her to another. He hesita¬ ted, however, in following the advice of the colonel, whom he knew to be actuated by selfish motives ; neither would it be very prudent in him to run away with an heiress, who might choose to avail herself of the protection which the laws of her ? 2
country afforded. Major Campbell was deeply in love, but he yet possessed suffi¬ cient of his national prudence, to refrain from any personal violence to attain the object of bis wishes. Perseverance had won many a female heart, and he resolved to persevere, in spite of the cold and dis¬ tant manners of Marian towards him. The major likewise consoled himself by believing, that his constant attendance prevented that of any other ; and that ivhile he w r as general W considered as the acknowledged lover of Miss Gorden, her numerous admirers would be withheld from openly avowing their sentiments. Colonel Belgrave regarded the forbear¬ ance of his friend in a different light ; and was more than half offended at his not following the advice he had given him. Since the major had become attached to Miss Gorden, he had forsaken all r\$ old associates, and their midnight ca^ ousais. He seldom or ever touched a card, unless when necessity obliged him at a private
party; therefore the colonel had no chance of lessening the debt he owed him by that means ; and as it was very consider¬ able, he felt anxious to hasten his union with Marian Gorden, which event would exonerate him from the payment. Captain Dashwood had returned from a vain search after his neglected wife. He had followed the route of lord Tewks¬ bury, but without hearing any intelli¬ gence of lady Susan. It was ascertained that his lordship travelled alone, therefore he could not be the partner of her flight ; and the captain now felt himself at a loss on whom he should next ñx his suspicion. As interest, not iove, had united him to lady Susan, he felt but little regret at her absence, though he was particularly anx¬ ious to learn who had done him the favour to rid him of her company. He had like¬ wise to endure the mortification ofa visit from her heart-broken parents, who, igno¬ rant of his conduct towards their child, had hastened up to town, upon the first
intelligence of her dishonour, to offer the captain all the consolation of their tender¬ ness, and to assist him in his endeavours to discover her retreat. Lady Evelina and Marian mingled their tears with those of the afflicted parents; while colonel Belgrave breathed forth ven¬ geance against the man who had thus de¬ stroyed the domestic happiness of his dear¬ est friend. At these moments, captain Dashwood found that he had not quite ceased to blush ; his conscience eould not be silenced, and it too plainly reminded him, that do¬ mestic happiness was a flower of such rare and delicate growth, that he had never sought its cultivation. His imaginary af¬ fliction rendered him now the object of friendly solicitude ; and colonel Belgrave seemed to encourage his visits, even more than formerly, as his dearest friend ap¬ peared to forget, in some measure, his loss, while in the society of her ladyship and Miss Gorden ; that of himself the colonel knew he could dispense with.
The close intimacy which subsisted be¬ tween the colonel and captain Dashwood rendered it convenient for the colonel to have him for the present engaged, while he was amusing himself occasionally with a fresh favourite, which for awhile en¬ grossed all his attention. Dashwood was also a professed libertine —yet there were circumstances attending this new amour, that even hkfree and li¬ beral mind might disapprove. In order, therefore, to detach him from himself as much as possible, the colonel expressed to lady Evelina his wish, that she bhould do every thing in her power to soften and assuage the grief of his unfortunate friend. Captain Dashwood had now every op¬ portunity afforded to him of winning the favour of lady Evelina. The absence of her husband enabled him, with well-feign¬ ed concern, to lament the gaiety of that nature, which could lead him from such a home, and from such a woman.
The apparent sincerity of Dashwood's friendship, and the warmth with which he spoke of the colonel, so completely deceiv¬ ed her ladyship, that she looked upon him as a brother, and in that light allowed her¬ self to speak with more freedom and un¬ reserve, as to tbe state of her domestic affairs. Trusting to his specious profes¬ sions of regard for the colonel, she insen¬ sibly allowed herself to converse with him upon his failings ; and felt a kind of reli¬ ance upon his earnest assurances of doing his utmost to wean him from the society of those who, while they fleeced him of his money, only laughed at him for his easy credulity. Certain of the confidence and esteem of lady Evelina, Dashwood now only waited his opportunities of rendering her more intimately acquainted with the private eharaeter of her husband. One soon oc¬ curred. Colonel Belgrave's family had been in¬ vited to spend a few days at sir WiUiam
Arlingford's, to celebrate the coming of age of his cousin, the honourable Mr. For¬ tescue. This young man was an orphan, and a great pet of sir William's, who, as he had no children, he openly declared should inherit all that he coul ^ bequeath unto him, independent of landed estates, which, at his death, must devolve with the title to his neglected brother, captain Ar¬ lingford, of whose fate sir William was in perfect ignorance. Fortescue was a lively rattlebrain, with a ceaseless flow of good humour, a hand¬ some person, strongly resembling that of the unfortunate Henry, and an excellent heart, which united to a good understand¬ ing, kept him from the practice of those vices which were but too prevalent a- mongst his college companions. A congeniality of disposition and of sen¬ timent immediately attached young For¬ tescue to Marian Gorden, who, struck by his resemblance to his cousin Henry, was equally pleased by his attentions. Freed Da
from the irksome presence of major Camp¬ bell, Marian gave a loose to the natural cheerfulness of her temper; and a few days made her and Fortescue . : much ac¬ quainted as if they had known each other so many years. They romped together, with the innocent familiarity of brother and sister, piayed and sang duets, and were partners in the dance, all signs, sure and certain, of a growing attachment on both sides, a circumstance which was by no means displeasing to sir William, for the large fortune of Marian Gorden made her a desirable match for the first families in the kingdom. Captain Dashwood took the earliest op¬ portunity, when alone with lady rvelina, to notice this infant passion of young For¬ tescue, and to express his regret, since he was but too well convinced, that his dear friend the colonel would disapprove of Marian, the beloved Marian, forming an alliance with the house of Arlingford. " And why ?" inquired her ladyship ;
" sir William and the colonel always ap¬ pear to be on friendly terms/' " At least," replied Dashwood, " they are sure to agree upon one subject, their mutual dislike to the brother of sir Wil¬ liam." " I have often felt a desire to learn something respecting that young man," said her ladyship ; " and once I ventured to inquire of the colonel what could occa¬ sion such unnatural feelings in the breast of sir William, towards so near a relative ; but my question seemed to give offence, and I never after mentioned the subject." " You did right, my amiable friend, for it must be an unpleasing one to Belgrave. In a fit of resentment against his nephew, general Beresford, you know, disinherited Henry Arlingford, and divided his for¬ tune between sir William and the colonel." Lady Evelina turned pale ; she recol¬ lected the words of lord Stewart, at lady Warren's, and no longer doubted that the person to whom they alluded was her
husband. She, in a faint voice, requested Dashwood to inform her of all he knew concerning the brother of sir William ; to this, however, he appeared averse, artfully designing to increase by that means her curiosity. 4i It is a disagreeable affair," said he, " and I do not feel perfectly at liberty to disclose circumstances, which from ap¬ pearances, appearances only, go against my friend. 1 can, however, refuse you nothing, and your good sense, I am cer¬ tain, will lead you to perceive, that the colonel is not as much to blame as the world may imagine. The mother of sir William, unfortunately for his brother, died in giving him birth, which, instead of rendering the infant more dear to the father, produced an aversion, which ba¬ nished him from his presence, and from his paternal home. His brother, the pre¬ sent sir WiUiam, joined with his father in this unnatural dislike; and the unoffend¬ ing boy was abandoned to the care of his
nurse, until the return of his maternal uncle, general Beresford, to England. The general immediately adopted him, and Henry was declared his heir; but it seems, that while his nephew was abroad with his regiment, some enemy to the young man contrived to poison the mind of his uncle, with various reports of his extra¬ vagance and profligacy, the effect of which terminated in his disinheritance." " That was too severe a punishment," said lady Evelina, in a trembling voice, " for errors which the tongue of malevo¬ lence might magnify into crimes." S( He was perfectly innocent of the vices laid to his charge," replied Dashwood, watching the alternate changes of her ladyship's countenance. " A more esti- miable character never existed than cap¬ tain Arlingford ; in fact, he was an ex¬ ample of prudence and temperance to his brother officers, and generally beloved, t even by those whose laxity of principles frequently led them to laugh at the mo¬ rality of his."
" And has not his secret enemy been dis¬ covered ?" inquired lady Evelina ; " sure¬ ly nothing can palliate such baseness of conduct; what interest could they have in thus deeply injuring a fellow-creature ?" " I know not," replied Dashwood, " but the disposal of the fortune, which ought to have belonged to young Arlingford, has given rise to many ugly conjectures; and though my friend Belgrave was un¬ fortunately selected by the general to share in that property, which he had de¬ signed for his nephew Henry, yet no blame, no scandal, should be attached to his character on that account. It might as well be given to him as to any other man, lady Evelina." The lovely countenan<4 of her lady¬ ship betrayed the agitat on of her feel¬ ings.·— " It may be wrong in me to cen¬ sure my husband," she replied ; " but un¬ der the circumstances in which the pro¬ perty was left, he should have restored it to the rightful owner. Gracious Heaven !
who knows but that even he may be the man suspected by the world, of ruining the prospects of this unfortunate young man !" tears rushed into her eyes. ** Oh, my friend," she continued, " how can the colonel rest tranquilly, while he retains the rightful property of another !" " No one dares openly to suspect him of being the secret enemy of Arlingford," said Dashwood. " Openly—merciful Providence ! and has any one then privately ------" " Dearest friend, why this agitation ?" said Dashwood, with pretended solicitude; " the rank and well-attested bravery of Belgrave, places him above the reach of idle babblers. He is not to blame ; the ge¬ neral loved him, for the sake of his mo¬ ther, and thought him worthy of his con¬ fidence. He wished his nephew to obtain his friendship, and to cultivate his esteem ; but circumstances occasioned a coolness on the part of Arlingford, which broke off the connexion ; this, I believe, gave of-
fence to the general ; the conduct of Hen¬ ry was misrepresented ; his character, by some means or other, was viÌìifìed; and under the idea of his nephew being a gambler and a seducer, the general too hastily disinherited him, leaving him no other support than his commission, which he has disposed of since his return to England. To be sure, the world is not easily silenced : all who knew captain Ar¬ lingford, esteem him, and consider him as ill used ; while the known dislike of sir William gives rise to the suspicion, that he was at least accessary to the disinheri¬ tance of his brother." Lady Evelina felt too much indisposed, to continue the mortifying subject at that time; but she earnestly besought Dash¬ wood to make every inquiry concerning the fate of captain Arlingford, and to give her the earliest information respecting him.-—" I dare not name it again to the colonel," said she, " for had I been in his situation, I should instantly have returned
the property to its rightful owner ; but it is but just that every assistance should be rendered to captain Arlingford, in as de¬ licate a way as possible. 1 would prevent the possibility of his enduring any pecu¬ niary embarrassments, and yet he must not know from whom the assistance comes. I shall rely on your friendship, to aid me in discovering his abode, and to enable me also to perform an act of jus¬ tice, which will relieve my mind from a dreadful weight, which novv oppresses it." Dashwood readily promised to make every inquiry concerning the fate of cap¬ tain Arlingford; but it was far from his intention to give himself any trouble in the performance of it ; his aim was to lessen the confidence and weaken the af¬ fection of lady Evelina for her husband, and at the same time strengthen her friendship for himself; thus artfully se¬ curing the good opinion of her, whom he secretly hoped would ultimately become his victim.
CHAP. III. The increasing delicacy of lady Evelina's health, disabled her from attending many of the fashionable parties, at which the co¬ lonel was a constant visitor ; and from the same cause, she was compelled to restrict the number of her ovvn. Unwilling, however, to be a restraint on the actions and pleasures of others, lady Evelina fre¬ quently obliged Marian to accept of invi¬ tations, when the affectionate girl would have preferred the luxury of enjoying a tranquil evening at home, and a tête-à-tête with her childhood's earliest friend ; this lady Evelina would seldom permit ; and in order to obviate the objection Miss Gorden had of leaving her alone, she re¬ solved to seek for some well-educated and agreeable young person, as a companion
for her lonely hours. At the moment when this resolution was formed, Miss Deiaval was announced ; she brought with her a portfolio of her own drawings, which, with a blushing countenance, she modestly displayed to her ladyship and Marian Gorden. They were beautifully executed, and called forth their unquali¬ fied approbation ; after selecting for them¬ selves those which they most admired, lady Evelina requested her to leave the remainder, as she thought she knevv ofa purchaser. Tears of gratitude rushed into the eyes of Miss Deiaval ; she essayed to speak her thanks, but could not ; her la¬ dyship kindly took her hand, and pressed it within her own. " These drawings, my dear Miss Deiaval," said her ladyship, " will only afford you temporary relief, not that protection which your youth and loveliness require. If you would condescend to accept the situation of companion, I think I can ensure you one, where every attention would be paid
to your comfort and happiness, and your society considered as an acquisition." " Condescend !" replied Miss Delaval ; " ah, madam, I should be indeed most happy, could I but obtain so desirable a situation, for my present one is far, very far from comfortable." " Perhaps then you would not object to reside with rne, as my friend and com¬ panion," said lady Evelina; "the dJicacy of my health prevents me from going often into public. I prefer the quietness of home, and have long wished for the society of such a being as yourself, that my dear Marian might have no excuse for not accepting the invitations of our friends." The intelligent countenance of Miss Delaval beamed with unexpected plea¬ sure at this joyful proposal, which the de¬ solateness of her own situation made doubly advantageous. She respectfully kissed the soft white hand which was ex¬ tended in kindness towards her, and wil-
lingly consented to enter upon her pleas¬ ing occupation the next day, grateful to Providence for thus affording her a safe and honourable asylum. There was a certain air and manner about Miss Deiaval, tbat instantly won the favour of lady Evelina Belgrave. The paleness of her countenance, which was more interesting than beautiful, be¬ spoke an early acquaintance with sorrow. Her eyes were black as the silken tresses which shaded them ; and her figuro was one of the finest order. There was a na¬ tural timidity and reserve in her manners towards strangers, a bashful blushing doubtfulness of berself, tbat was not with¬ out its attraction to those who were judges of nature ; this however wore off, upon a nearer intimacy ; and Rose Deiaval, when domesticated and at home, displayed a well-cultivated mind, a frank and ingenu¬ ous disposition, and a heart grateful and affectionate for kindness bestowed. The circumstances of her education were of a
peculiar and romantic nature, and gave a tinge of romance to her character, which subsequent events had only strengthened. Her earliest recollections were associated with confused ideas of grandeur, of storm and shipwreck, the loss of a beloved mo¬ ther, and the sorrowing tenderness of a doating father ; next came the remem¬ brance of a youthful stranger, to whose benevolence and generosity she was in¬ debted for a liberal education, and the cul¬ tivation of those talents, which would enable her to obtain the means of support¬ ing herself as a gentlewoman. When alone, she loved to ruminate on the past events of her short life, and to amuse tbe heavy hours, by anticipating the future. Received under the protect¬ ing roof of the amiable lady Evelina Bel¬ grave, Providence seemed to have placed her beyond the reach of malevolence or the voice of calumny. The kindness of her ladyship, and of Miss Gorden, quickly dispersed the clouds of sorrow from her
brow : gratitude* and an ardent wish to render herself worthy of their goodness, soon became tlie chief object of her thoughts ; and by degrees she accustomed herself to dwell on the remembrance of the parent she had so lately lost, without his memory calling forth those violent bursts of anguish which had threatened to prove fatal to her delicate, though healthy frame. Grief, thus subdued by reason, and the tenderness of friendship, did not, however, lessen her veneration and filial affection for her deceased father. On the contrary, Rose Delaval delighted to dwell on the thousand nameless proofs of his love towards her, his constant at¬ tention to her welfare, and liis ceaseless study to promote her happiness; blending 'm his own character of faiher, all tfae softer duties and attentions of a mother. Rose Delaval was in her fifth year, when she was destined by Providence to sustain the severe and irreparable loss of ?? of the tenderest of motkera. Full of
spirits, and endowed with sense and talents above her years, her little heart beat with infantine rapture, when she saw herself conducted on board the vessel which was to bear her to England—dear England, tlie country so often named with delight by her parents! their native soil! the land of liberty! of manly sentiment! of gene¬ rous hospitality ! With childish eagerness, Rose counted the passing days. At length the shores of Albion were descried by the watchful mariner. Joy took possession of every bosom. The smile of joyful expectation, of hope, of love, illumined the weather- beaten features of the toil-worn mariners. With ail the pride of maternal affection, Mose was pressed to the fond heart of her mother; the arms of her father encircled them ; and the exclamation of that mother, in the moment of her hearts proud swel¬ ling, as she gazed on her lovely child, still at times rung in that child's ear. A violent storm arose : fear and dismay,
horror and despair, by turns took posses¬ sion of each mind, whieh a few hours be¬ fore had yielded to blissful expectations. The fury of the contending elements dashed the vessel against a rock within sight of land. All hope was gone. A few brave men, wdio, by the terrific glare of the lightning, witnessed the wreck of the vessel, boldly pushed off in their boat, to save, if possible, the lives of any ofthe persons vvho might be floating on the sur¬ face of the roaring ocean. Their humani¬ ty was rewarded, though at tîie hazard of their lives : another dreadful Hash disco¬ vered to their eager gaze a man struggling vvith the waves ; reckless of tlie death whieh threatened them, they, with the inherent bravery of Englishmen, resolutely steered their boat towards the spot, where JVlr. Delaval, with his infant daughter grasped firmly in his hand, was on the point of sinking for tlie last time. They vrere the oniy beings who ofthe whole crew Mirvived the horrors of tlmt dreadful night» VOL. li. E
Rose and her father were conducted by Rogers, the owner of the boat, to his house, in a state of insensibility. The ten¬ der attentions of his wife, and the prompt aid of medical assistance, at length restor¬ ed them to life, and to a consciousness of their irreparable loss. The ocean had swallowed up the whole produce of six yeaiV residence in the east; but this was trifling, for had it not robbed him of an adored wife, who, for his sake, had braved the displeasure of proud and haughty re¬ latives—who, for his sake, had relinquish¬ ed all the habitual luxuries of rank and fortune, and without a murmur had fol¬ lowed him to a foreign climate—thus abandoning home, country, and kindred, for the Jove she bore to the father of her child That child alone enabled Mr. De¬ laval to bear up against the severity of the shock her it other's untimely fate had oiven him. He resolved to combat with the anguish of his feelings, for the sake of his Httle daughter, thus suddenly deprived
of the best of parents, and with her the only chance of obtaining the countenance and protection of her grandfather, which had been the principal inducement for his leaving the situation he had held abroad ever since his marriage. The father of Rose Delaval was by birth and education a gentleman : the for¬ tune of his family was small, and he was a younger brother. Handsome and en¬ terprising when a boy, he became the favourite of an old maiden aunt, who for many years resided as companion and friend to a lady of distinction. Most of thc leisure hours of young Delaval were passed with his aunt at the Hall ; and it was generally understood, that what little property she possessed was to be left to him at her decease. During one of his visits at Raby Hall, a distant relation of lady Raby came to pass a month with her. She was accom¬ panied by her daughter, a beautiful girl of eighteen, who was the last who sur- e 2
vived of seven. She, of course, became the darling of her parents, who, doting on her to excess, saw not her failings, but blindly indulged her in every whim or caprice which the buoyancy of her spirits might suggest. The lively Rosina was seldom absent from the apartments of Miss Meredith : they contained a charm, in the person of her nephew, which quickly found its way to the heart of the wild and thoughtless girl, who, careless of the future, and indif¬ ferent as to consequences, took but little pains to conceal the affection she felt for Robert Delaval. Love blinded the eyes of his young vo¬ taries. They saw nothing in the wide world but themselves, and rashly confid¬ ing ; n the tenderness of Rosina's parents, they imprudently eloped from the Hall, united their fates in Scotland, and then besought forgiveness for their fault. The father of the imprudent girl, stung to the soul by her want of confidence and filial
duty, returned unopened her letter : ano¬ ther, and another, shared the same fate ; and at length they gave up all hopes of softening the resentment of the justly- offended parents. Lady Raby, though grieved and hurt at the imprudence of young Delaval, did not wholly abandon them. Through her interest, he obtained a situation abroad, which promised him the most ample means of supporting his beloved Rosi¬ na. At the expiration of six years, he found himself master of a noble indepen¬ dence ; and, at the earnest desire of Mrs. Delaval, he resolved to return to England, and once more seek a reconciliation with her father, for the sake of his little Rose. Providence ordained it otherwise: the fatal storm which wrecked the vessel, and gave to an untimely grave the wife of his bosom, annihilated all the hopes of Mr. Delaval. Distracted by his loss, he nevertheless felt grateful to his Maker, í for the preservation of his child, who, if
possible, was now rendered doubly dear to him, bereft as she was of a mother's tenderness, and of those luxuries which, from her birth, she had always enjoyed. The day after the fatal shipwreck, a trunk of Mr. Delavals was cast on shore, which Rogers gladly conveyed to him. It fortunately contained some money, which he had set apart for his immediate use, a few of his most favourite authors, some wearing apparel, the certificate of his marriage, and a small box of ornaments belonging to Mrs. Delaval, which by mis¬ take had been put in with the rest of the things. Heartbroken, yet anxious to live for the sake of his child, Mr. Delaval pur¬ chased a small cottage, romantically situa¬ ted by the sea-side, about a mile from the habitation ofthe benevolent Rogers, whose eldest daughter, a strong and healthy lass, begged permission to go and live with the shipwrecked stranger, and his lovely little girl. In this lonely retreat, shut out, as it were, from society, Mr. Deiaval and
his infant daughter passed five years of their existence, without seeing any indi¬ vidual, except the humble inmates of the few cottages that were thinly scattered along the coast. His aunt had been dead some months, and his only means of sup¬ port now arose from the property which she had bequeathed to him, and which consisted chiefly of an annuity of sixty pounds a-year; this, with frugality, would, if he remained where he was, procure for himself and daughter the common neces¬ saries of life ; more his broken spirits did not aspire to. His child was now the only link that bound him to society ; the cul¬ tivation of her mind his principal occupa¬ tion, and her innocent prattle and lively remarks, his only enjoyment. Habit soon rendered his little dwelling agreeable to Mr. Deiaval ; the bold sce¬ nery around it afforded ample scope for his pencil ; and Rose early acquired a love for the art which her father took so much delight in. She was now in her twelfth
year; her countenance animated and in¬ telligent, and her figure graceful and exact in all its proportions—her spirits, wild and unchecked by her doting father, flowed in one continued stream of innocent hila¬ rity. She was the darling of Peggy Ro¬ gers, and the idol of her father, who, as he listened to the soft sweet tones of her voice, at evening, as she sung the songs himself had taught her—songs which her mother used to sing, as she accompanied herself on the harp, he could not repress the sigh of long-stifled pride—pride which his blooming child awakened ; and as he recalled to mind the talents and accom¬ plishments of her lamented mother, he felt it impossible wholly to repress the wish, that his circumstances were such as to enable him to bestow on Rose a similar education. The painful conviction, that it would not add, though it might, under her present circumstances, diminish her happiness, checked the proud swellings of his widowed heart ; and placing his firm *
trust in Providence, he left her to its care. It was the favourite amusement of Rose. after the lessons of the day were over, to ramble along the sea shore, in search of shells, or climb the bold, projecting rock which overhung the ocean, and with her pencil, sketch the varied scenery which her eye beheld, while round the basement of the rock the foaming waves dashed with monotonous sound. In the distance, tow¬ ering above trees, coeval with the build¬ ing, rose the grey turrets of a magnificent castle, whose princely owner had been abroad for several years : to the right of this mansion was an elegant hunting- lodge, belonging to sir William Arling¬ ford, who came down occasionally with a party of friends for the season, and who had met Mr. Delavai in his walks. His superior air and manner had excited, at first, the curiosity of sir AYilliam, and he felt an inclination to be acquainted with him ; but the cold and distant behaviour of tlie melancholy widower put an end to E 3
all hope of intimacy ; and he was quickly forgotten, or remembered only as one who wished to be unknown. It was the latter end of autumn, and the Lodge was full of company. Rose continued her accustomed strolls, often alone ; but sometimes she would take with her a young girl, the daughter of a far¬ mer, who was her nearest neighbour, and to whom Rose was much attached, as being the only companion with whom her father allowed her to associate. Phœbe Lucas was the same age as Miss Dela val —a pretty round-faced, good-tempered girl ; her parents were in prosperous cir¬ cumstances, and she therefore dressed bet¬ ter than Rose, whose plain, unornamented frock of grey stuff, was a humble contrast to the silken ones of her friend. Yet Rose, simple as was her attire, had an air of su¬ periority above all the young girls of the adjoining village : they felt this superiority and respected it, without knowing the cause—all, save one ; and this girl bore in
secret a deadly hatred to Miss Deiaval— only waiting her opportunity to give vent to the malevolence of her heart. On the last birthday of Rose Deiaval, her friend Phœbe had presented her with a pet lamb ; and the little creature was so tame, and so fond of her indulgent mis¬ tress, that she followed her in most of her rambles. This harmless animal the ma¬ lignant and envious Hannah resolved to persecute, and, if possible, destroy, well knowing the pain that she would then in¬ flict on Miss Deiaval. She knew all the haunts of Rose, and watched for an even¬ ing when Phœbe Lucas remained at home. An opportunity shortly occurred for Hannah to gratify her vicious inclina¬ tions; taking with her a large and fierce dog, she followed at a distance the foot¬ steps of Rose Deiaval, until she saw her enter the park which belonged to Arling¬ ford Lodge. Rose seated herself under a clump of trees, and was proceeding to finish a landscape, which was intended as
a present for Phoebe ; her little lamb was gambolling around her, when, at a signal given by the concealed Hannah, the dog sprang upon her defenceless favourite, and in an instant its snowy neck was stained with blood. Rose started from her seat, and screaming, ran to its rescue. With a fiendish laugh, Hannah rushed from her hiding-place. Rose burst into tears, and conjured her to call off her dog; but the cruel girl only enjoyed her distress. Roused to anger by tlie peril of the poor lamb, Rose caught up the fallen branch of a tree, and struck the dog on the head ; he loosen¬ ed his hold of the lamb, and was on the point of flying at the weeping girl, when a youth, who had witnessed the transac¬ tion, sprang forward, and with his gun laid the furious beast dead at his feet; then calling to his servant, he ordered him to carry the dog back to its owner, and there wait his arrival. The stranger now turned towards the affrighted Rose, who knelt, pale and trem-
bling, over her suffering favourite. With tenderness he soothed her terrors, while he staunched the blood of the little ani¬ mal with his handkerchief; then raising it in his arms, he proceeded to the cottage of Mr. Deiaval, accompanied by Rose, who quickly informed her father of what had passed ; adding, that she was indebted to the young gentleman for the life of her lamb, and that her gratitude would be eternal. Mr. Deiaval smiled at the warmth with which Rose expressed herself, while he courteously thanked his young guest for the service he had rendered to his dar¬ ling, in the preservation of her favourite ; and inquired if he might be favoured with the name of its preserver. The youth, for he did not appear to be more than six¬ teen, presented him with his card, and requested permission to call the next day, a request that Mr. Deiaval could not with politeness refuse. The tender attentions of Rose towards her little favourite, soon restored it to its
w r onted playfulness; and in the warmth of youthful feeling, she thought that she could never sufficiently express her grati¬ tude to its generous preserver, who called daiiy at the cottage. Each visit became longer than the first : Mr. Deiaval seemed to lose in his company the reserve which marked his usual conduct towards stran¬ gers ; and the youth, on his part, evidently felt more than a common interest in the welfare of Mr. Deiaval and his interesting daughter. A month passed away in this pleasing intercourse of friendly sentiments. The drawings of Rose had been inspected by their constant visitor ; he possessed great talent himself, and expressed his perfect conviction that Rose would excel in the art, under an able master. Fully im¬ pressed with this idea, and strongly inte¬ rested in the fate of Rose, he one day, when he was alone with her father, ven¬ tured to express his hope, that Mr. De¬ iaval would give him a proof of the re-
gard he had honoured him with, by grant¬ ing one request which he would ask, and which, if granted, would render him com¬ pletely happy. * t Name it, my dear young friend," said Mr. Delaval, tt and if in my power, you may rely upon my readiness to oblige you." The youth, after some hesitation, with burning cheeks and downcast eyes, be¬ sought Mr. Delaval not to feel offended at the liberty of his request, but to con¬ sider it as arising solely from the esteem and veneration he felt towards him, whom he was well convinced had once enjoyed all the elegancies and luxuries of life.— " From whatever cause, my dear sir," said he, " your adverse fortune proceeds, per¬ mit me, whom you have honoured by your friendship, to lighten your cares: consider me in the light of a near rela¬ tion, and deign to accept from one who loves you with filial affection, what will bestow on Miss Delaval, an education
suitable to her talents and superior un¬ derstanding." Mr. Deiaval was greatly agitated during this speech : the name of the youth was a passport to his heart, and the slight knowledge tbeir intimacy had given of his disposition and principles, had in¬ creased the instantaneous prepossession he had felt in his favour. Pressing his hand affectionately, and eager to assure him that his emotion did not proceed from anger, Mr. Deiaval replied—" I cannot feel offended, my dear lord, at the disin¬ terested kindness which prompts you to assist the fond wishes of parental love. I am agitated, by feelings which my present circumstances oblige me to conceal from you ; yet I will allow myself to think, that a time may come, when you will sympathize in them. I must take a day or two to consider of your generous pro¬ posal : your youth, and rank in life» render the acceptance of it dangerous; yet I would fain secure to my child, the only
probable means of enabling her to support herself at a future time, by the employ¬ ment of a talent given her by Providence. If I accept your offer, the illiberal world will condemn me ......." "Only allow me the luxury of knowing that I am serviceable to you," hastily ex¬ claimed the generous youth, " and I swear, no soul but ourselves shall ever know of the affair, not even the amiable Rose— from her, in particular, I would conceal it. As a brother I love her, as a brother I would watch over and protect her. This your parental care and tenderness renders unnecessary; but Providence has kindly placed me in a situation of life, which enables me still to serve her. Indepen¬ dent of my parents, I possess property at my own disposal, bequeathed me by my late grandfather; my allowance, until I am of age, far exceeds my expences; and I shall glory in remitting quarterly what¬ ever sum you may require for our mutual plan."
The sudden paleness which overspread the countenance of Mr. Delaval, was now for the first time observable to his young friend, who anxiously inquired if he was indisposed. He had not noticed the sud¬ den start of Mr. Delava! at mention of his grandfather's death, nor the universal tremour which agitated his frame. Plead¬ ing illness, Mr. Deiaval abruptly with¬ drew, requesting, however, that it might not be mentioned to his daughter, as he should soon recover. The entrance of Rose engaged the attention of her guest ; she had been to visit, and to administer some little comfciV to a sick cottager: exercise, and the î „en air of the morning, had given an additional glow to her fair cheek, and her intelligent eyes beamed with innocent pleasure, when she beheld on her return home the preserver of her lamb. " Dearest Rose !" said he, assisting her to take off her bonnet, and then adjusting some of the jetty ringlets which the breeze
had rudely blown over her high and po¬ lished forehead, " dearest Rose ! how have I been wishing your return, that I might shew you a little present which I bought this morning, in the hope that when I am far distant from this dear loved spot, you will sometimes look on it, and think of me!" He then drew from his pocket a mo¬ rocco case, which contained a gold chain for the neck, and a beautiful locket, set round with fine pearls. Rose was de¬ lighted with her present, if her father would allow her to accept of it, though she assured him that she did not require any thing to keep alive his remembrance. —" I shali never, never forget you," said she ; '* and when you leave us, I shall nightly pray for your return ; for neither my father nor myself can be so happy again, as we have been since your lordship has favoured us with your company." " Call me Edward ; you know, Rose, I love to hear that name from your lips ; it
is so like a sister, that I feel more than 1 can weli express when I hear you say it. Oh, if 1 had a sister, and she was but like you, Rose, how I should doat on her! Will you promise, Rose, to love me as a brother, and to wear this trifle until we meet again ?" " Yes, dear Edward," replied the art¬ less girl, " I will never part with it. But the locket is empty ; I will ask my dear father for a loek of his hair, and I should like------" ít What, dearest Rose, what should you like ?—you shall not have a wish ungra¬ tified, if I can procure it." ít Oh, you are too good, indeed you are, Edward! and if y ou will give me this little tiny lock of your hair, I will place it with my dear father's in the locket, and then the world should not tempt me to part with it." The young lord affectionately kissed the lovely girl, whose snowy fingers were entwined in the rich auburn tresses of his
well-shaped head. The scissors were pro¬ cured, and Rose triumphantly bore away the prize, not without having first be¬ stowed one of her own silken ringlets in return. Mr. Deiaval gave her permission to retain the gift; but as the chain was too costly not to attract notice, he desired her to lay it by for the present, and to sub¬ stitute in its place a black ribband. The pearl locket, with the two sacred hairs united, was also concealed from the pry¬ ing eye of curiosity, in a little silk bag, and then consigned to the fair bosom of Rose, whose happiness would have been perfect, but for the painful idea that the time must soon arrive, which would rob tbem of the pleasing and entertaining con¬ versation of their noble visitor. A few days previous to the departure of sir William Arlingford and his guest from the Lodge, Mr. Deiaval took an op-- portunity of speaking to his young friend alone, on the subject of his generous proposal
ít If," said Mr. Delaval, tt I accept the offer of your assistance, my lord, I shall rely upon the sacredness of your word, to conceal this act of friendship from the knowledge of every person but ourselves: the world would judge harshly of my con¬ duct, because it would be ignorant of the private motives by which I am governed : you are too young, my lord, for me to explain to you, why I thus trust to your honour and generosity. As you advance in life, even you may condemn what then may appear to you like selfish interest on my part, and your riper judgment may annul the promise of your boyhood." " Never, by all that is sacred !" cried the young lord, " never shall I look back on the happy hours, which you have per¬ mitted me to pass in your society, with¬ out feeling grateful to you for the kind¬ ness you have shewn me. In consenting to accept a part of my superfluous for¬ tune, to bestow on my sweet sister an education suitable to her merits, you
confer on me an obligation, which time will not cancel." " My dear lord," hastily replied the fa¬ ther of Rose, " I will, I must believe you. Heaven only knows when we may meet again. Time can never obliterate from my heart, the impression your virtues have made; yet I trust we shall meet again; for I have that to communicate, which will justify my present conduct, and exonerate me from the odium of hav¬ ing taken advantage of the inexperience, and open confidence of youth. This I may however assure you, my dear boy, that you are now perhaps the only being in existence, from whom 1 would accept an obligation, or whose visits I would have sanctioned ; but there is a charm in the name you bear, which found its ready way to my heart ; I could not hear its dear and sacred sound, without opening my humble door to admit its owner. My daughter is unacquainted with the spell that first drew my affections towards your
lordship, and that induced me to encourage your visits; a mutual kindness has evident¬ ly influenced us both, which I trust time will strengthen ; and should the friend¬ ship and brotherly love, which your lord¬ ship now feels for my beloved Rose, be proof against absence, and the novelties of the gay world—should you, at a more mature age, seek for an explanation of my present conduct, and my former circum¬ stances in life, I shall not hesitate, my lord, to entrust you with the knowledge of all that concerns us, for İt will then be in your power to serve Rose Dela val es¬ sentially." With all the warm enthusiasm of six¬ teen, the young nobleman professed his readiness to devote himself to the welfare of Mr. Dela val and his daughter.—" I leave this place," said he, ** my dear sir, with feelings of deep and unfeigned re¬ gret ; but the vacation is now over, and I am compelled to resume my studies. With your permission, I shall be a con-
stant correspondent; and I shall anxiously look forward to the hope of seeing you afîrain, before sir William's return to the Lodge. Perhaps my brother may accom¬ pany me ; he is only a year younger than myself; and I shall feel proud and happy to introduce him to the knowledge of those I value so highly myself. We are orphans, you know, my dear sir, and therefore have a double claim upon your kindness." Mr. Deiaval pressed his hand affectio¬ nately, while a tear stood trembling in his eye.—" I know not how soon it may be the will of Providence to make my Rose an orphan also," said he, with a subdued voice ; " but, alas ! I know of m> kind heart that will accept her innocent claim," he paused—the feelings of the parent overcame the firmness ofthe man. The young lord took his hand, and re¬ spectfully kissed it.—" Long, long, my dear sir, may you be spared to protect my amiable sister ! but should Heaven's will VOL. IL F
ordain that she should be deprived of so dear a guardian, mine and my brother's tenderness will protect her ; she shall share our fortunes and our loves." Mr. Delaval embraced the kind-hearted youth with parental affection. He would not check the generous ardour of his feel¬ ings; the world would do that, bethought, too soon ; but he prayed that Heaven's mercy would spare him to his child, until she was better suited to sustain his loss. The parting with his young friend gave him visible concern ; he had, from their first meeting, felt attached to him ; and a knowledge of his character only served to render him more beloved. Rose, for softie time after his departure, was melaricholy and unhappy ; her accustomed amuse¬ ments, in which he used frequently to partake, lost their power to please ; atid the good-natured Phœbe vainly endea¬ voured to direct the attention df her friend to their former pleasing pursuits. Rose was pensive and uneasy ; her tottìe
was no longer the circle which bounded her wishes; and her indulgent father, careless of his own happiness, which must suffer materially from her absence, re* solved to place her immediately under the care of a clergyman's widow, who kept a seminary in the next town, ñve miles dis¬ tant from his cottage. The bitterness of parting with her fe¬ ther over, Rose quickly regained her wonted vivacity. The novelty of her new mode of life, the society of so many young companions, all of whom were bet¬ ter educated than herself, stimulated her to the exertion of her own natural abili¬ ties ; and her fond father beheld with rap¬ ture the rapid improvement, which, at the expiration of nine months, she had made in those accomplishments, whioh perhaps would, at a future day, become the chief means of her support The season was now far advanced, and Mr. Deiaval looked forward to the plea- eyre of seeing his young friend, though F 2
to his daughter he was silent on the sub¬ ject. He had received several letters from him, and his regular remittance; and he proudly anticipated the surprise he would experience, on the discovery of Rose's improvement. It had been thc immedi¬ ate wish of Mr. Delaval, on learning the name of bis youthful visitor, to attach him to tbe interest of his child. It was not his rank that operated on the mind of the parent, although the feeling of ambi¬ tion was not quite extinguished by the sad reverse ofhis fortunes; but it was the anxious desire of obtaining for his beloved Jlose the protection and patronage of a family, upon whose kindness she had a strong, though secret claim ; and it was this whicb made him accept the romantic and generous offer of the noble youth, vvho, in his person, appeared to combine all those personal and mental qualifica¬ tions, for which his family were so emi¬ nently distinguished. Rose Delaval had not forgotten the. ap-
pointed visit, and as the time drew near, her beart throbbed with girlish rapture, and with all the embryo curiosity of wo¬ manhood. Wbat would Edward think— what would Iul ward say, when he was informed of her present situation, and of the progress she had already made in the arts in wbicb be himself excelled ? 1??- ? rant that from his munificence the means was obtained, which enabled her fatber to place her wbere sbe could receive instruc¬ tion from tbe best masters, she was only anxious to display her acquirements, and to receive bis praise and her flit her's, as the reward of her indefatigable attention. On the morning on whieh she attained her thirteenth year, she had received a va¬ luable present of books, splendidly bound, as a birthday gift from bis lordship, and a few lines of affectionate congratulation, expressing also a hope of being able to visit tbe Lodge by the latter end of Sep¬ tember. Tbat time had now arrived, and the buoyant spirits of Rose began to
droop, lest any accident should prevent the long-expected, long-wisbed-for meet¬ ing. A week's vacation afforded Rose the enjoyment of her dear father's loved so¬ ciety. Ever attentive to her happiness, hc had procured the loan of an instru¬ ment from the neighbouring town ; and Rose, delighted at this fresh proof of pa¬ rental affection, eagerly sat down to re¬ ward him, by the execution of one of his favourite songs. The next morning, Miss Deiaval rose by break of day, and stealing softly to their little sitting-room, opened tbe glass door which led into the garden. A variety of autumnal flowers were still in bloom, and the dear confiding robin sang from an adjoining tree his matin song of matchless melody, sweet, yet me¬ lancholy, to greet her return; then hop¬ ping close to her feet, seemed to demand the reward he met with from her well- stored hand. The beauty of the morning tempted
Rose to visit some of her favourite spots. She knew that her father would not rise for some time, and she insensibly turned her footsteps towards thc romantic path which led to the Lodge. The scenery appeared to have acquired new charms from absence; and she paused, to take a view, from a small eminence, of the scene she had left behind. Delighted with the prospect, she heard not the tread of ap¬ proaching steps, until thc person was close beside her; she turned suddenly round, and sprang into the extended arms of her noble friend.—" Dear Ed¬ ward !" she joyfully exclaimed. 66 Beloved Rose," he said, affectionately kissing her blooming check, *' how have you been sinee we parted ? well, I trust, and happy ?" ** Yes, quite well, Edward; and now that I once more see you again, I am quite happy. 1 began to fear that some¬ thing had prevented your return to the Lodge. Oh, how rejoiced my dear fa¬ ther will be at your arrival l'
" My stay will be short," said he, sigh¬ ing as he spoke; " but I will not damp tbe long looked-for pleasure of our meet¬ ing, my sweet Rose, by the painful idea of separation. I only came down last night, and rose thus early, that I might pass two or three hours with you, before the family at the Lodge assemble to break¬ fast. But say, Rose, have you thought of me often since we parted ?" " Thought of you often !" repeated Rose, with the guileless innocency of un¬ corrupted youth. " Yes, indeed, Ed¬ ward, so often, that you have never been* absent from my mind. My dear father told me, that I was to regard you as a brother, and my heart ever since has loved and cherished you as such. See," said the lovely girl, drawing from her fair bosom the highly-treasured locket, " see, Edward, how carefully I have kept your present : I have worn it night and day ; nor will I ever consent to part with it, for ten times its value."
" My own dear Rose !" exclaimed the young lord, pressing her to his heart, which throbbed with affection, pure and tender as her own—" my own dear Rose, continue to regard me as a brother, for such you shall ever find me. Should cir¬ cumstances prevent my visits to the Lodge, I shall hear of your welfare, and of your improvement: and be assured, Rose, that your happiness will always be my first and chief study. But you know," added he, with a smile, " you know, Rose, that I am only a schoolboy at pre¬ sent, and not my own master; therefore I cannot enjoy the luxury of your society, and that of your valued father, unless when I am invited to the Lodge. How- ever, I see you now—I hear that ï am not forgotten—and fbr the future I must trust in Providence." They now hastened back to the cottage, where Mr. Delaval received and welcom¬ ed his return with unfeigned pleasure. The instrument, which stood in a recess F3
of the room, soon caught the eye df Ed¬ ward, who directed a look towards Mr. Deiaval, which was immediately answer¬ ed, by his desiring Rose to play and sing the song that had delighted him the pre¬ ceding evening. Rose obeyed with winning alacrity; and in a voice of sweet and powerful har¬ mony, executed her task to the surprise and gratification of her attentive hearers. Her generous friend was delighted, and took the first opportunity of again re¬ questing, that no money might be spared, to bring to perfection the talents of his adopted sister. Watift and affedtiefnate as ever, it wm nevertheless visible to Ml*. Deiaval, that hk young favourite was nøt as gay and lively as he had been on his f&st visit to the cottage; neither wete those visits as long now as formerly. This change proceeded from a cause, which the délicaey of Edward forbade his naming to Mr. Deiaval. The first season øf his residing at the
Lodge, his frequent and long absence from the company had not escaped thc observation of sir William Arlingford; and upon .questioning hitu on the subject, his lordship frankly confessed his intimacy with Mr. Delaval. Sir William had not forgotten the cold retiring conduct of this gentleman, upon his overtures towards an acquaintance, and felt hurt that a youth's society and conversation should have suc¬ ceeded in overcoming that distance and reserve whieh he had vainly tried to con¬ quer. The superior elegance and grace of Rose Delaval he did not consider of eon- sequence ; her girlish years protected the heart of his cousin: but that heart vvas tender and romantic, and a few years of improvement of mind and person, v/ould render an intimacy with the blooming „cottager highly dangerous to the future peace of his ward : he therefore secretly resolved, after the present season, to ab¬ stain from coming to the Lodge, which he intended to let, and pass the autumn
at another hunting-seat, far distant from the present one. His promise had been given to his cousin, tint he should accom¬ pany him again this season; but sir Wil¬ liam so contrived his engagements, that, after passing ten days at the Lodge, they should proceed to the seat of a nobleman, si::ty miles from the Lodge, who was joint guardian with himself to the voung lord and his brother. This arrangement was by no means pleasing to Edward ; he had looked for¬ ward to his return to Arlingford Lodge with rapturous expectation. Sincerely at¬ tached to Mr. Delaval, and loving Rose with all a brother's tenderness, their so¬ ciety afforded to him the expenditure of many a happy hour, which this new plan of his guardian prematurely shortened. Unaccustomed to disguise his feeiings, the disappointment he received visibly affected him ; and when in the presence of the friends who were the unwilling cause of his lost vivacity, he could but ill
force his spirits, to hide the secret vexa¬ tion whieh preyed upon them ; while those of Ml Dela val were unusually de¬ pressed, when the day at length arrived, which was once more to separate him from the young friend of his bosom. A painful presentiment of evil seemed to press upon the mind of Mr. Delaval, as he sat at a little distance from where his daughter and the young lord were sta¬ tioned. Rose was seated at her instru¬ ment, and her companion was selecting some ofhis favourite songs. It was the last evening of his stay at the Lodge ; a shade of melancholy porvaded his handsome countenance, which every now and then gave place to the affectionate smile of ap¬ probation which the performance of Miss Dela val excited. Her father gazed on them both vvith tearful earnestness ; could he but take a view—a passing glance into futurity, to learn the destinies of the dear- loved beings now before him—a cold chill came over him, as the remembrance of
the , past rushed across his -fancy* How joyous, how blest had been a part of his existence î how suddenly had he been be¬ reaved of every thing but of his child— that child whose future fate was wrapped in dark impenetrable gloom! At that moment a,smile of innocent rapture play¬ ed around the fascinating mouth of Rose ; it reminded him of the mother she had lost; while in the warm, frank-hearted youth, *vho hung over her, he almost fan¬ cied tliat he saw himself. *' Blest age . of sweet oonfiding ???- cence," thought Mr. Dela val, " why, oh, why do you pass away so swiftly ! ,???? seldom do the circumstances, of ,our riper years make amends for the joss ,?£ .boy¬ hood's jdelightful season, when the bright¬ est side of the. picture alone meets our view,: and the guileless /heart iß .open (to impressions of Jo,ve : and friendship, -wihich no after change ??? wholly obliterate!" -.ín the ¡generous and romantic friend¬ ship of fthe young nobleman before bim,
Mr. Delaval fancied he beheld the dawn of infant passion, which time might ripen into a lasting attachment. Should ;such be the happy lot of Rose, her father proudly called to mind, that her birth would not disgrace her lover's choice : fortune alone was ¡wanting to render her his equal ; and who was so well calculated, or who had eo great a right to enrich her, as tiie noble youth, who by some secret sympathy had adopted her ? This, however, was known only to himself. Time, circumstances, and the secret inclinations of Edward, might gradually taring about the event he so anxiously prayed for; ¡and -he might still see the daughter of his lamented Ro¬ sina placed in that sphere of /life to which she was entitled from her birth. With heavy 'hearts and fearful eyes, the young people ibade each other adieia : Edward had something still tosay—>some- thing for Rose to promise, which he re¬ membered, and which called dii m back. At length excuses failed, and he was com-
pelled to tear himself away; while the gushing tears fell fast from the dark eyes of Rose, who flung herself on the bosom of her father, as the door closed on her adopted brother, and gave a loose to her grief. Sleep for that night forsook her pillow, which was moistened with her tears. Young, inexperienced, and affec¬ tionate, the engaging manners and tender attentions of the youthful 'lord, had so completely won the affections of Rose, that, next to her father, she regarded him with the fondness of a sister's feelings. Void of ambition, his exalted rank was scarcely remembered ; its importance in society, its powerful influence over worldly minds, was wholly unknown to Rose; the simple name of Edward, the only one which ever passed her lips, w r as in itself a host, and possessed a charm that vanished when the title of lord was annexed to it. Unable to sleep, Rose threw on a part of her garments, and went towards the window, which commanded a beautiful
view of the ocean—its bold rocky coast, and princely castle, now visible from the bright lustre of tbe full-orbed harvest moon. It was a scene well calculated to enchant the senses ofa young and roman¬ tic mind ; and Rose gazed with delight ; every sound was bushed, save that of the waves ; the night, though cold, was calm and tranquil, and Rose, with straining eyes, sat watching tbe distant path which led to the Lodge; then turning tbem on the mild and beautiful orb of night, won¬ dered within herself if Edward slept, or if at that moment he too was gazing on the same heavenly object. She started on ob,- f serving the shadow of a man on the shore ; it approached slowly ; a cloak enveloped his form; and Rose, trembling with fear, scarce breathed, as sbe perceived him open the little gate of the cottage, and enter the shrubbery. At first slie thought of awa¬ kening her fatber, but fear held captive her tottering limbs. Again the figure ap¬ peared ; it stopped under her window,
and looking upwards, she discerned the well-known features of Edward. Gently raising the window, Rose in¬ quired the cause of his presence at that late hour, and offered to call her father. " Stay, dearest Rose," said he, hastily ; " do not uselessly disturb the repose of that best of human beings. I could not sleep; my thoughts were occupied by the^ painful necessity of our separation, and I strolled down here, that I might take ano¬ ther look at the beloved cottage, which to-morrow will be far, far from my sight. I knew not then that I should be so happy as to behold you again. But what, my sweet sister, has disturbed your slumbers ?" " My heart was also too full of sprrow to let me sleep," replied Rose, with inno¬ cent frankness ; " but wait a moment, and I will come down." With light step she descended, and drawing back the slender fastening of the door, admitted the young lord once again beneath the peaceful roof ofthe cottage.
The chill air of a frosty autumnal morn¬ ing blew across the fair cheek of Rose. Edward wrapped her within his cloak, and pressing her closer and closer to his bosom, vainly endeavoured to repress the rising sigh. " You are not well, Edward," said Rose, raising her beautiful eyes to his face ; " or you have some secret grief that disturbs you. Will you not tell it to your sister?" " Yes, sweet one," exclaimed the youth, " you shall know all, and then perhaps my heart will feel lighter. Some ill-na¬ tured person has informed my guardian of my visits to the cottage, and he, little dreaming of the noble hearts it contains, has expressed his disapprobation of my forming any acquaintance without his consent. My resolution not to be con¬ trolled in this point, has produced a cold¬ ness between us ; and instead of his re¬ maining at the Lodge two months, he has, to mortify me, shortened his stay to only ten days. This is the cause of my unhap*
piness, dear Rose : I feel convinced, that to put an end to our intimacy, he will not come here next season; and I may be so situated, tbat it will be impossible for me to travel hither unknown to him." " How cruel—how unkind, of sir Wil¬ liam !" replied Rose, half sobbing. " Wbat have we done to call forth his dislike? I am sure, if he knew tbe virtues of my dear fatber, he would respect him, although our situation in life is ceitainly inferior to his." Edward tenderly wiped away her tears, assuring her tbat the authority of bis guardians could not influence his feelings, although for awhile he must submit to their opinions ; neither would absence di¬ minish the affection he felt for herself and Jier father.-—" But," said he, " there is one thing, Rose, which, if you would promise me, would make me happy until we meet again." " Then I am ready to promise imme¬ diately."
The young lord pressed his lips to her fair cheek, while his own assumed a war¬ mer glow.—" Beloved Rose," said he, " I now behold you—now fold you to my heart; a few moments hence, and I must leave you, under the sad conviction that it will be long ere we meet again. Náy, weep not, Rose; your grief but increases mine. Should circumstances prevent my seeing you, do not forget me." " Forget you !" said Rose, sobbing— " Never, never." " You may grow into womanhood be¬ fore I again clasp you to my heart," con¬ tinued his lordship; " and will you then, dear Rose, remember me as your brother, and will you grant me tbe privilege or one?" « Yes—oh yes," murmured the weep¬ ing girl. " As a brother, Rose, I shall be anxious to be informed of all that concerns your welfare ; and I could wish------" He hesi¬ tated.
A(rain Rose looked in his changeful faee.—** What do yoo wish, Edward ?" ** I could wish tliat you would promise —-but it is a selibh wish, and I am asham¬ ed to ask it." u Nay, now you are unkind, 14 said Rose ; " have I not promised to grant whatever you may require of me ?" s * Then î would ask of you," replied the young lord, hiding his blushing face in the rich tresses of her hair—" I would ask of you» Rose, never to love another better than myself.** " Is that all ?" exclaimed Miss Delaval, with surprise, and smiling with the inno¬ cence of a pure and guileless heart, " I thought it was something very difficult I should have to execute. Why, Edward, you ought to have known, that I could never love any one better than yourself, my father excepted." ,(? Dearest Rose !—-and you will promise iiever to marry any one without my con¬ sent ?"
"Oh, if that will make you happy, I will even promise never to marry any one but yourself." ** 1 arn satisfied,** cried his lordship, rap¬ turously, " and accept, dearest Rose, with gratitude your promise. Remember that I diali one day claim it, as ibe richest gift of bounteous Heaven. Wear this ring for my sake, until we meet again ; it will serve to remind you of your promise, and of him to vvhom you gave it : and now, beloved Rose, to Providence, and to the best of fathers, I resign you." He held her for some moments close pressed to his bosom. " One kiss—one parting kiss, my sweet sister." The delicacy of Rose did not startle at the request; her lips touched his—no blush of shame stained her cheek, for the îiimd of Rose was pure as tlmt of angels; and the parting kiss was given with the same willing tenderness as if the receiver had foeen indeed her brother. After many efforts, ž the young lord 'tore
himself away. Rose watched his receding bteps, until he was out of sight ; tben clo¬ sing the door, she returned to her cham¬ ber, and throwing herself on her bed, gave ? ???? to her tears. i% I bhall never be bappy again," thought ???? Deiaval ; " never be as cheerful as I mcd to be, unless Providence, in pity to my sorrow, hears my prayers, and restores to me my dear Edward."
CIIAP. IV. The busv scenes of school, and the desire to improve in every branch of education, gave Rose but little leisure for melancholy reflection. Hope whispered from time to time, that her noble friend would find some means of revisiting the cottage ; and this idea increased her anxiety to excel in all that she knew would afford him pleasure.
Mr. Delaval secretly hoped the same as his daughter ; but the first and second year passed away, without his cheering them by his presence. He wrote frequently, always affection¬ ately ; but his guardians, aware of the ne¬ cessity of crushing at once what they con¬ sidered as an imprudent connexion, had engaged for him a tutor, whose fidelity was incorruptible, and who made a point of accompanying him in all his excursions. The remittances were duly sent down to the cottage, with occasional presents to his sister, as the young lord still called Miss Delaval ; but he gave no hope of being able to visit the cottage, until the expiration of two more years, which would emancipate him from the control of his guardians. He had frequently urged Mr. Delaval to allow Rose to correspond with him ; but this request was from time to time evaded. The artless and undisguised sorrow of Rose on the departure of his lordship, and vol. ?. ?
the hope she still cherished of his return, betrayed a susceptibility of heart, that made him fear lest her peace of mind might be endangered by a renewal of the acquaintance. He therefore wisely con¬ sidered it as most prudent to leave the event in the hands of Providence ; and as Rose, in the course of another year, would finish her studies, Mr. Delaval resolved at that period to relinquish all further assist¬ ance from his lordship. Rose Delaval, at the expiration of three years, quitted the protection of her excel¬ lent governess, and returned to her homr, greatly improved in her person and in hei mind ; but with the same delightful tem¬ per, the same warm and tender heart. She found her father's health visibly de¬ clining; and towards winter, he was advi¬ sed to take a journey to London, for the benefit of the first medical advice. His anxiety for his child at length conquered his reluctance to leave a place, which ha¬ bit had rendered dear to him ; and he con-
sented to undertake the journey, leaving his little property to the care of the ho¬ nest family who had first shel tered him on the night ofthe fatal shipwreck. The possibility of meeting with Ed¬ ward in London, was also an inducement for Mr. Delaval to take the journey. The education of his daughter was now com¬ pleted, and he had written to decline any future assistance from the young noble¬ man, to whose romantic friendship they were thus largely indebted. No answer as yet had been received ; and Mr. Delaval left orders, that if any came, it must be forwarded to him. When in London, they procured rea¬ sonable lodgings, a little distance from the metropolis, where Mr. Delavai obtained the best medical advice; but the constitu¬ tion was breaking, and medical skill could only relieve, not stay the ravages of time. For two years Mr. Dela val lingered on the confines of the grave, during which period the heavy expences of illness obli- G 2
ged him to sell the cottage and its furni¬ ture; ihk for awhile procured those little delicacies which illness requires, and which his attentive child was so anxious to ob¬ tain at any price. Fortunately for the invalid, the person in whose house they lodged was a widow of respectable connexions, possessed of a feeling heart, and vvho cheerfully assisted Rose in the watchful labours of a protract¬ ed illness. She had seen several of her drawings, and from the open confidence of her discourse, judged that their finances were not able to support long their pre¬ sent expenditure. With the consent of Miss Delaval, she privately disposed of some of them ; they vvere so finely exe¬ cuted, that the purchaser wished for more ; and thus, to the great joy of Rose, she found herself enabled, by her own exer¬ tions, to contribute to the comforts of her suffering parent. When all hope of recovery was past, Mr. Dela val endeavoured to impress upon
the mind ofhis daughter, the necessity of a perfect submission to the ΛνίΠ of Hea¬ ven.—" ? eould have wished,"* said he, ** had it been permitted me, once more to have seen and embraced the generous youth, to whose friendship you, my child, are indebted for the cultivation of those natural talents, which now, 1 fear, will be your only resource. He is now abroad, and 1 feel that we ore no*· destined to meet again Ín this w f TÎd. 1 had a presentiment of our final separation, when we last part¬ ed; but you, niy beloved Ros?, you. 1 trust, will one dav have the gratification of thanking him for his disinterested kind- ness, when I charge you to present him with my last adieus, my last claim upon his affection, which this little packet con¬ tains. Guard it sacredly, my Rosina, un¬ til an opportunity occurs to enable you to give it into bis hands yourself." Rose faintly uttered a promise to obey the injunction of her dying parent. Near¬ ly five years had elapsed since her last
parting with Edward, and though she was now in her eighteenth year, subsequent events had not obliterated his image. She felt a tender melancholy. i n looking back to her girli«· h days, and to the short hap¬ piness of their acquaintance; but the long and painful illness of her rather gave but little leisure for reflection, unconnected with his dangerous situation. In the lady of the house, Rose fortu¬ nately found an intelligent companion and a sincere friend ; i\nd when the dreadful moment of eternal separation arrived, wdiich in this mortal state for ever divided thc fond parent and the child, Rose must have sunk under the severity of the blow, had she not been soothed and supported by the tenderness of Mrs, Knowles, who, with tiie genuine humanity of a Christian, took upon herseif the arrangement ofthe last sad duties which were ?? be perform¬ ed to the deceased. This melancholy of¬ fice she executed with care and fidelity ; and being intimate with the housekeeper
at colonel Belgrave's, she advised Miss Delava!, after the first violence of the shock was abated, to write to Marian Ger¬ den, whose benevolence and liberality was the general theme of lady Evelina's house¬ hold. The result was favourable to the lovely orphan, who gladly accepted the situation of companion to her ladyship, under the as¬ sumed name of Avhner, This innocent -■ deception was the result of momentary re¬ flection: if, thought Miss Deiaval, I am in¬ deed allied to any noble family, their pride may be humbled, should they discover a relation, in the companion of lady Evelina Belgrave, and this may increase their re¬ luctance to acknowledge me. That her mo¬ ther's family possessed rank and fortune, she was well convinced ; but her father, strange as it might seem, had never en¬ trusted her with their name. Rose had little doubt, however, but that the pauket intended for Edward, and consigned to her care, in the last moments of her fa-
ther, contained the important secret. She had the permission of that dear and la¬ mented parent, to open it at the expira¬ tion of twelve months after his decease, in ease she neither saw nor heard of his lordship in that space of time. In the event of herself breaking the seals, he requested her to make known İU contents to thr worthy Mrs. Knowles, who had provetl herself deserving of her confi¬ ci' nee. and who would, if necessary, assist her u kit her advice. Sti ong as was the natural curiosity of Hose, sise still cherished a latent hope, that lier noble friend would return and receive the packet írom her hands, before the ex¬ piration of the twelvemonth. Bereft of her iather, her thoughts more than ever recurred to the scenes of her childhood : she dwelt, with melancholy pleasure, on the recollection of the tender interest wiiich the young lord had manifested in her welfare. His presents she preserved, as saered relics of his aíiection ; while the
ring, which he had given on the last sad evening of their parting, was often pressed to her lips, and wateud with her tears. The gentle and undeviating sweetness of lady Evelina's manners, and the warm friendship of Miss Gorden, soon banished from the mind of Rose thc painful feeling of dependence. Under every circum¬ stance, they purposely addressed her as their friend and equal ; thus delicately en¬ suring for her the respect and attention of those among their acquaintance, whose narrow minds would have shrunk from associating, or publicly noticing her as the companion of lady Evelina : captain Dash¬ wood indeed regarded her as a most un¬ welcome intruder, w T hose presence robbed him of his occasional tetera-tetes with her ladyship, and consequently delayed for a time his purposed scheme of deep-laid villany. Colonel Belgrave regarded her as an elegant and highly-accomplished woman, and as such, paid her every polite atten- G 3
tion. The situation of lady Evelina in¬ creased his anxiety for her health and comfort; and he was pleased with the as¬ surance of her having, in Miss Aylmer, a companion a^d friend, whose superior mind would contribute to her amuse¬ ments in her hours of retirement, and whose careful affection would watch over and alleviate the pains of illness. This feeling overpowered for the present the natural profligacy of his nature ; and Rose was safe from his libertine admiration, as long as her presence was necessary to the tranquillity of his wife, and no longer. Lady Evelina had expressed a wish that her confinement might take place at the Abbey ; and as the colonel made a point of never contradicting her, it was settled, that if her medical attendant deemed it prudent to undertake the journey, her wish should be gratified. it suited well with the deep-laid plans of captain Dashwood, still to assume the appearance of domestic sorrow, or at least
ofa nice and delicate sense ofthe disgrace the desertion of lady Susan had brought upon him; it at least procured him the sympathy of all the ladies at colonel Bel¬ grave's ; for even Marian Gorden, in spite of her former dislike, now regarded him with that kind compassion which she ever felt towards the unfortunate ; and though she could not avoid attaching some degree of blame to his conduct with respect to his wife, she nevertheless commiserated the mortifying situation in which her un¬ fortunate elopement had placed him. All search had hitherto proved unsuccessful, either to discover the retreat of lady Su¬ san, or the villain who had seduced her from her home ; and it was generally be¬ lieved that they must have gone abroad ; which belief was strongly seconded by the colonel, who never failed to rally captain Dashwood for his want of spirits ; adding, that it was singular he had never appeared to know the value of lady Susan, until he had lost her.
Ever considerate to the comfort and happiness of those around her, lady Eve¬ lina would noi permit the health of Rose to be neglected, by her close attention to herself; she therefore found many little commissions for her to execute, which en¬ abled her to enjoy the benefit of exercise and air, as well as the pleasure of calling occasionally on her excellent friend, Mrs. Knowlee. These little absences soon be¬ came known to captain Dashwood, who took care to avail himself of the probable chance of finding her ladyship for a short time alone, in which case he generally contrived to bring up the usual theme of conversation, colonel Belgrave, expatia¬ ting upon his merits, and lamenting over his incurable errors, always softening the bitterness of the latter, by trying to find excuses for his thoughtless gaiety of heart. Lady Evelina at length began to con¬ trast the conduct of her husband with that of his friend. The most delicate friend¬ ship seemed to regulate his actions; to her
it appeared as if captain Dashwood, con¬ scious of the failings of the colonel, and of his sometimes unseasonable levity, re¬ doubled his brotherly affection, watching all her motions, anticipating her wishes, and promoting a change in her domestic amusements, to make her feel less sensibly the negligence of her husband, at a time when the tenderness of one is most requi¬ site. Lady Evelina was fond of reading : captain Dashwood, instead of joining in the parties with the colonel, which kept him from home until a late hour in the morning, preferred taking a book, and reading to the ladies all the best produc¬ tions of the age; while they worked and listened to the tale of fiction, delivered in a voice that did ample justice to the author. Captain Dashwood called one morning, to read to them a new poem of lord Byron's; his countenance beamed with satisfaction, on finding lady Evelina alone in the drawing-room ; she was better in
health than usual, and had requested Ma¬ rian Gorden to take Rose with her in the carriage, to make a few purchases. Dash¬ wood seated himself by the side of lady Evelina ; a fine colour added to the beauty of her transparent complexion, and height¬ ened the attraction of her mild and lovely features. Drawing from his pocket the poem, a paper fell to the ground, which she requested to look at. " It is an old paper," said he, " and does not contain any thing worth reading." fi Allow me to judge for myself," replied her ladyship, smiling; " I am fond of an old newspaper, and shall find entertain¬ ment in what your graver wisdom may deem trifling :"—she stretched out her fair hand to receive it. " You know that I can refuse you no¬ thing," exclaimed the wily hypocrite; " yet, remember that the curiosity of Eve was fatal; and," added he, with a forced laugh, " who knows but that paper may also contain knowledge which is dangerous to attain."
" Nay, now, my friend, you are mys¬ terious, and have raised all the woman's curiosity within me ; I must even wave politeness, and gratify it immediately." *' Where ignorance is bliss, 'tis folly to be wise," repeated Dashwood emphati¬ cally; then watching the heavenly coun¬ tenance of his intended victim, he waited patiently until she had ran over its con¬ tents. " It is indeed barren of news," said her ladyship, " and I see nothing in it to ex¬ cite curiosity, except this advertisement— ' If the foreign lady, who some months ago left the protection of an English offi¬ cer, during his temporary absence from home, is still a resident in either England or Ireland, he implores her, by every feeling of humanity, to give him some in¬ timation of her existence—some token of her pardon/—1 confess," said lady Evelina, returning the paper, " that I should like to know if this strange advertisement was ever answered."
** It never was," exclaimed Dashwood, affecting to be off his guard. Lady Evelina looked surprised.—" Then you know the parties whom it concerns ?" " I do ; but let me beseech you, dearest friend, not to press me on the subject—I dare not satisfy your curiosity," " You have indeed awakened it most painfully," said her ladyship. " The know¬ ledge which you predicted as dangerous to attain, must refer to this advertisement ; and your caution would be unnecessary, unless the English officer—" Dashwood rose hastily, and taking up his hat, respectfully pressed her hand to his poisonous lips—" I must not listen to you," said he, with well dissembled agita¬ tion ; " my profound veneration for your¬ self may otherwise urge me to betray the secret of another." The arrow was true to the mark—-the envenomed shaft sank deep into the innocent and unsuspecting bosom of lady Evelina—the deceiver saw it, and not waiting her reply, suddenly
left her, that it might have more effect. Lady Evelina sunk back on the couch ; the dreadful truth flashed across her mind, ■—" It is in vain," said she, bursting into an agony of tears, " that the generous- hearted Dashwood would conceal from me the fatal secret. I am not the object of my husbands love ; his affections were preengaged ; and he has sacrificed himself and me at the shrine of sordid interest. Alas! with all his faults, I still vainly hoped that I possessed his heart, and that time wouid render him worthy of my dear parents' choice." Poor lady Evelina felt that this last fond hope was now destroyed. The ad¬ vertisement could only allude to the co¬ lonel ; and though his connection with the foreign lady might be dissolved, yet it plainly shewed, that from his desire to re¬ new it, he still·loved her. What a con¬ viction for a wife, tenderly anxious to re¬ tain the affections of her truant husband ! of a wife solicitous to preserve his charac*
ter with her kindred and friends ! for not even to the beloved Marian would lady Evelina breathe a hint that could lessen him in her estimation. To Dashwood alone, as his chosen and most familiar friend, did she venture to speak in confi¬ dence—to him only did she utter the gentle accents of regret, never of accusa« tion ; but always expressing a pious hope, that Heaven would lead the wanderer back again to virtue and domestic com¬ forts. Even for this foreign lady—tbis rival in her husband's affections, thc ami¬ able lady Evelina had a sigh of tender commiseration—a tear of pity. She had swerved from virtue's rules, but she might not be either profligate or abandoned ; she thought that her withdrawing from the protection of the colonel, was a proof that she was not wholly lost to a sense of her shame; and could the virtuous and lovely wife of colonel Belgrave have discovered the retreat of the lost Hippolita, she would have poured into her wounded mind the
consoling balm of religious consolation— have dried the tears of repentant sorrow, and, with the feelings of a Christian, have administered to her mental and bodily wants. Instead of receiving the colonel with sullenness and ill-humour, lady Evelina redoubled her endeavours to please his fickle fancy ; yet she was not happy, al¬ though while in his presence and that of Marian Gorden, she assumed a cheerful¬ ness, which vanished with them ; she would then throw her arms around the neck of Rose, and hide, in her affectionate bosom, the grief she could no longer con¬ ceal.—" My spirits are low, dear Miss Aylmer," she would say ; "and I would conceal it from every eye but yours, I cannot shake off the impression on my mind, that I shall never survive my ap* proaching confinement. If I at times look forward with rapture to the blissful feelings of a motlier, a sudden chill comes over my heart, and checks its transports.
Some evil is hanging over me, dear Rose, else why this strange foreboding, this sin¬ gular dread of an event fatal only to few ?" The tenderness of Rose never failed to sooth the sensitive mind of lady Evelina ; but her disposition was naturally timid, and her spirits weak ; the over indulgence of her parents had unfitted her to btar up against the afflictions of life; and tht con¬ viction, th.* t her husband's affections were devoted to another, was a trial that re¬ quired all the aid and support of her reli¬ gious principles. She wished, yet dared not again bring up the subject to captain Dashwood; while he, secure of his in¬ tended prey, felt no inclination to revive the conversation until further opportunity. The ladies were sitting, one morning, in the drawing-room, when the servant announced the honourable Mr. Fortescue; at the same time, he placed on the table cards of invitation for a ball, from the mar¬ chioness of Douglas. At the name of Fortescue, the colour left the cheek of
Rose; and she, with difficulty, concealed her agitation, on being presented to him by lady Evelina. Bowing gracefully to Rose, young For¬ tescue glanced his eyes towards the table. —" Egad !" said he, " but I am a lucky dog. You go, of course, my fair Marian ; and now I shall have the first chance of engaging your hand. How many will envy my good fortune ! while all the girls in the room will be ready to tear out those two sparkling orbs of thine, for having the honour of dancing with the handsom¬ est fellow in the party." " Go, you vain mortal," cried Marian, pushing him from her with a bewitching smile ; " no one will waste a thought on you, while I am present ; not but Ι ν " T allow that you are tolerably good-looki when compared to most of our fashionab^ beaus." M When you and I are made man and wife, my sweet Marian, you will then know my value, by the number of hearts I shall break upon the occasion."
i( I think I know one or two, who, in case of such an event, would be spiteful enough to swear that interest, not love, was the deity you worshipped," said lady Evelina, The ever-lively face of Fortescue for a moment was grave.—" They know me not," he cried, " who would attribute so base a motive to my actions ; neither could they, with justice, pay so poor a compliment to beauty like Marian's, who, were she stripped to-morrow of all worldly riches, would far outshine all her titled acquaintances, in mental and personal at¬ tractions." " Upon my word, I thank you for your high opinion of me," said Marian ; " yet when it comes to be proved, I find that, notwithstanding the powerful attractions of youth, beauty, and fortune, I am des¬ tined, by you, to wear the willow. Well, it is very provoking ; but I must bear my hard fate with Christian fortitude." Fortescue took her hand, and pressed it
to his lips.—-" This little hand," said he, " so white and beautiful, is a treasure worthy the possession ofa monarch." Then resuming his accustomed gaiety, he added —" But the prize is not for me." " A truce to compliments," exclaimed Marian, fit and tell us the news. Have you heard from your brother lately ? I long to see him. Perhaps he will not be as insensible as yourself" " I had a letter this morning, and we may expect him daily. He is a good fel¬ low—-not quite as handsome as myself— equally fond of the ladies—very tender— very sentimental·—and very romantic. At sixteen he was desperately in love, and, I believe, has continued so ever since; though our prudent guardians took espe¬ cial care to prevent, as they wisely call it, the heir of a noble family throwing him¬ self away, by an unequal alliance. God help them ! much the happier they both are for their own equality of choice." The increasing agitation of Rose made
her dread lest it would attract attention ; and she therefore hastily retreated from observation. Young Fortescue immediately inquired who she was ? " A friend of mine," replied lady Eve¬ lina, smilingly, " in whose welfare I am warmly interested." * fi She has one of the finest forms I ever beheld," said he, " the present company excepted ; but she blushed so confounded¬ ly, when my eyes encountered hers, that I am certain she has notlong been caught." " Caught ! What do you mean by caught?" inquired Marian Gorden. *' From the woods, my fair Marian : however, a short residence in London will soon cure her of such a novel quality as bashfulness." " True, Fortescue—especially if she is in the habit of associating with yourself," said Miss Gorden. *' Upon my soul, you do me injustice," cried Fortescue, warmly ; " for setting all
nonsense aside, I think a woman never looks so lovely, as when the blush of mo¬ desty repels the gaze of admiration. I have often lamented, as much as a thought¬ less fellow like myself could do, that the generality of our young girls of fashion are so totally destitute of nature's greatest charm. I could not love any woman, were she as beautiful as an angel, if she did not blush to hear her own praise, or to feel herself the object of my notice. Do me credit, therefore, to believe, that I would be the last man in the world to rob your friend, of what I consider one of the principal attractions of her sex." The entrance of visitors changed the conversation, and Marian, availing herseif of their presence, left the room, intending to call on lady Julia : she was followed by Fortescue, who, gently detaining her, asked, in a low voice, if she would allow him a few moments in private. Marian replied, by opening the door of the music-room, which they entered. VOL. IL H
The countenance of young Fortescue no longer exhibited its wonted hilarity; a visible confusion dwelt on every feature, and he seemed anxious, yet fearful, of giving utterance to his wishes. Marian perceived his embarrassment, and wished to relieve it, though ignorant from whence it could originate. Possessed, as she was, of great personal beauty, yet Marian Gorden had less vanity than generally falls to the lot of handsome women, Many in her situation, and without half her attractions, would immediately have construed the confusion of Fortescue into symptoms of attachment towards them¬ selves ; but Marian had always regarded this young man with sisterly affection : a pleasing familiarity existed between them — a confiding friendship, which set love at defiance, and which gave to their ac¬ quaintance a frankness, a sincerity, which love, from its fear of offending, seldom, if ever, çan claim. At length he said—" I flatter myself,
dear Miss Gorden, that notwithstanding my seeming levity of manner, you have discovered in me some qualities not whol¬ ly unworthy the enviable distinction of being ranked among your friends. Will you forgive me, if, presuming upon that friendship, I unbosom to you my secret cause of disquietude—if I ask your ad¬ vice, and, if requisite, your assistance, in an affair which deeply affects my future happiness ?" f ' Fortescue," replied Marian Gorden, "Ί have, ever since our intimacy com¬ menced, regarded you in the light of a brother. My knowledge of human na¬ ture is but slender, yet I feel assured that you will never solicit a confidence that I shall have cause to regret your obtaining. Under this impression, I fearlessly pro¬ mise, as far as my feeble power extends, to use all the interest I possess to serve you. Speak, therefore, your wishes free¬ ly : here we are secure from interrup¬ tion." H2
tí Thou dear, kind-hearted creature !" exclaimed Fortescue, his spirits revived by the assurance of her friendship, " how can I thank you ? No, dearest Marian, never, as far as regards myself, shall you repent your willingness to become the confidant of my secret. First, then, let me acknowledge that I am in love ! You smile. Do you then think me incapable of feeling that passion ?" " By no means," replied Miss Gorden : rt light and volatile spirits like yours, are oftentimes, I have heard, when once at¬ tached, attached for life. The cause of my smile I will tell you some other time. Do I know the object of your re¬ gard ?" (S I should imagine not," said young Fortescue ; " although you may have some knowledge of her eccentric father, who is no less a personage than my guar¬ dian, lord Rochdale." " Indeed ! by what chance have you gained a sight ofhis beautiful daughter?"
inquired Marian ; " for I have heard that his lordship has never suffered her to wan¬ der beyond the precincts of Rochdale House, since the death of her mother, and that her only companions have been her governess, and the only beings she has been permitted to speak to, were the grey-head¬ ed domestics left in care of the mansion. They tell me, that when her father resid¬ ed there, she and her governess were re¬ stricted to their own suit of apartments ? for fear that any of his guests should ob¬ tain a peep at Miss Rochdale; but I could never learn the cause of this singular, and, in my opinion, ill-judged seclusion, as the fortune of Olivia is not so large, as to make her an object to a man of mercenary and interested feelings." " But in her person she possesses ten thousand attractions," (Marian smiled,) " and my wise guardian has, I understand, in his own mind, made up a match, though I could never find with whom. His heart and soul were fixed upon Olivia's
marrying this person, and his intention in thus burying her alive, has been to keep her from every eye, until the moment ar¬ rived when he judged proper to introduce to her the intended husband. I think, however, I have been too deep for the old gentleman ; and if you will but assist us^ ------" ie But you have not yet told me how you got acquainted with Miss Roehdale," said Marian. itf True ; my head and my heart are both so agitated, that you must pardon me, my dear friend, if I am not quite consistent. Early in the spring of last year, I was at¬ tacked by a dangerous illness, and as soon as I could be removed, my physicians or¬ dered me change of air. My guardian, lord Rochdale, who, to do him justice, has always been a father to me since I lost my own, proposed taking me down with him into Staffordshire. To this I immediately consented, and soon found both my health and spirits revive. I was now a resident
at Rochdale House, and under the same roof with Olivia, who was exiled to her own apartments, as soon as we arrived. My head nurse was the old housekeeper, whose confidence I easily obtained ; and from her I gained all thc intelligence I wanted respecting Miss Rochdale. As my ill state of health confined me princi¬ pally to the house, she was allowed to walk two hours before breakfast, in the grounds of the mansion ; but this indul¬ gence would cease, as soon as a probability occurred of our meeting. Of course, I instantly became an enemy to early rising, and expressed no wish to leave the house, unless my guardian proposed it, and of¬ fered to accompany me. My first step was to obtain a sight of Olivia from the window of a chamber, which was seldom used, and which belonged to that part of the house which she occupied. Trem¬ bling with a something more than com¬ mon curiosity, I awaited the accustomed hour for her appearing. I felt the neces-
sity of being prudent, and therefore tried to content myself w r ith a view of her through the half-closed shutters. She came with her governess up the walk, and as she advanced nearer, I beheld a coun¬ tenance so exquisitely beautiful—a figure so light and graceful, that I scarce won¬ dered at the caution preserved by her fa¬ ther. " Morning after morning I took my station at the window, while every glance I obtained of her enchanting face increas¬ ed the ardour of my passion. At length her governess was indisposed, and I be¬ came apprehensive that this would rob me of a sight of her lovely pupil. The fear of such an event cast a gloom over my spirits for the day. My guardian ob¬ served it, and fearing a relapse, proposed more exercise.—* I think,' said he, * that early rising, and a walk before breakfast, would be of service to you.' I, of course, assured him, that it w r ould have quite a contrary effect upon me, and that J should
be ill for the whole day, if I made any such exertion ; but that after my usual hour of breakfast, I was ready to attend his pleasure. " The old gentleman, I could perceive, w r as satisfied, for the next morning I had the delight of seeing Olivia take her ac¬ customed walk in the grounds, unattend¬ ed by her vigilant duenna. My first im¬ pulse was to rush down and throw myself at her feet ; but fearing to alarm and of¬ fend her, I hastily wrote a few lines on the blank leaf of my pocketbook, which I threw from the window as she repassed. She stopped, and, looking upward, disco¬ vered my place of concealment. I bowed, and pointed to where my note lay. Blush¬ ing, she stooped to pick it up, and then was out of sight in an instant. Ah, my dear Miss Gorden, you cannot imagine what I endured all that day and night, for sleep I could not, while I was uncer¬ tain what reception she would give my note, or whether she would condescend h 3
to honour me with a reply ! Will you credit that my feelings actually made me in a high fever ?" " I will credit any thing, however im¬ probable," said Marian Gorden, laughingly, " that proceeds from the mischievous power of the blind god, especially when he exerts it upon such a subject as your¬ self: but go on—I am impatient to learn the result ofyour note" " Ah, my dear Marian," replied young Fortescue, " may you always laugh, and never weep, at the mischievous pranks of the blind god ! Where could you find a heart once lighter than mine? and yet love has gained the victory, and spite of my boasted freedom, still holds me his willing captive : but to my story. The few hasty lines I had penned to Miss Rochdale, were expressive of my tender attachment. I besought an interview, and requested that she would, in compas¬ sion to my anxiety, favour me with a re¬ ply, which she could fìx to a string I
would let down from the window on the following morning. Oh, how tardily pas¬ sed the moments until my beloved ap¬ peared! With caution she advanced, and fixing a piece of paper to the line, darted out of sight. I pressed the insensible bil¬ let to my lips, then breaking the seal, ea¬ gerly read the following words." For¬ tescue now took from his pocketbook a paper, which he handed to Marian, whose quick eye soon glanced over these lines. " I rejoice at your recovery, fbr I am no stranger to your merits. My fa¬ ther, my governess, nay, even our grey¬ headed domestics, all love to dwell upon the amiable qualities of Henry Fortescue ; yet for some strange reason, my dear fa¬ ther denies me the gratification of being personally known to the man, in whose praise he is continually expatiating. I am a prisoner in the house of my father, and I feel the unkindness of this seclusion the
more, because I have been told that it will continue until the day of my intro¬ duction to my intended husband. If my liberty is to be purchased by the sacrifice of my hearts best feelings, I shaii conti¬ nue a voluntary exile from that world, which at present I am most anxious to behold. I have been taught to think of you so highly, that I would fearlessly grant your petition, and hazard an inter¬ view ; but the oniy opportunity of seeing you, is when my governess takes half-an- hour's rest after dinner. If you have pa¬ tience to ascend thc long spiral staircase at the west side of the house, it will bring you to a gallery, leading to a suit of apart¬ ments, which we occupy ; I will meet you in the gallery—yet surely you will not hereafter condemn me for disobedience to my father, I have no friend, no adviser to counsel me how to act : I wouid not willingly do wrong, yet this hated mar¬ riage with a man I have never seen, com¬ pels me to accept the proffered friendship
of my father's ward. This evening I shall expect you. Olivia." Marian returned the letter of Miss Rochdale without any comment, and young Fortescue resumed his narration.—- " My impatience was so great, until the appointed hour arrived, that I could scarcely conceal it from the vigilant eyes of my guardian. Fortunately for me, he was engaged upon business, which detain¬ ed him until late at the rectory ; and se¬ cure of his absence, I hastened to the western wing of the building. If I had before thought Olivia beautiful, how much more lovely did she now appear ! her cheeks suffused with blushes, as I ven¬ tured to take her soft hand in mind > to thank her for her goodness : by degrees I gained her confidence ; her timidity and self-reproach lessened ; and we parted with the permission of my seeing her again the
next day. The indisposition of her go¬ verness confined her, for more than a fort¬ night, to her room, during which time I enjoyed the daily felicity of our short sto¬ len interviews. From Olivia I learnt that her father intended to bring her to town in the winter, for the purpose of in¬ troducing her to the person whom he pur¬ posed to be her husband. Who this per¬ son was, neither of us could imagine, though I sometimes thought it not un¬ likely to be my brother, as he was a de¬ cided admirer of female loveliness, and had often declared that fortune would be the last of his considerations in the choice of a wife. I felt however convinced that hc had never seen Miss Rochdale, and therefore my conscience acquitted me of being his rival.—·! will not tire your pa¬ tience, my dear Miss Gorden, by dwelling upon the rapture I experienced in these interviews. The tenderness of my affec¬ tion for Olivia gained upon her innocent and grateful heart, and she promised to
be mine, and mine only. The joyous state of my feeiings soon operated like a charm upon the state of my health ; yet we were compelled to part, after mutually vowing to live only for each other. Lord Rochdale has only been a week in Lon¬ don ; preparations are making for a grand fete in honour of Olivia's first appearing in public ; she is to be introduced to her intended spouse, and as he cannot be in¬ sensible to so much beiuty and elegance, his lordship expects liat the marriage will very soon take place after the intro¬ duction : what strengthens my suspicion of my brother being the destined man, is that he is expected to be in town upon the occasion of Olivia's introduction. By the aid of gold, I have obtained an inter¬ view since her arrival ; she trembles with apprehension, and dreads to encounter the resentment of her father, by refusing to obey his commands. Marian, dear Ma¬ rian, it is to you we look for relief and as¬ sistance, in our perilous situation. Will you befriend us, my sweet girl ?"
tt You may command my friendship," replied Miss Gorden ; t ' but I do not see in what way I can be of use to you." " Of the greatest," cried Fortescue, ea¬ gerly ; " I have gained over my beloved Olivia to consent to become mine, before the day intended for her introduction. We have prepared every thing necessary for her elopement, and to-morrow night «he will leave her prison-house, if you, dearest Marian, will receive her under your protection, until the next morning, when the rites of the church shall make us one." Marian could not refuse the petition of Fortescue, for she was too much an ene¬ my to all forced marriages, not to render every assistance to one, who was on the point of becoming a victim to parental authority. It was therefore agreed, that Mary Dennis should be entrusted with the secret, that she might watch the arri¬ val of Fortescue, and convey Miss Roch¬ dale to the chamber of Marian. Early
the next morning, Miss Gorden and Rose, whom she meant to apprize of the event, would accompany Olivia to church, where a special license would unite her fate to that, of the adoring Fortescue. This im¬ portant affair thus arranged, to the satis¬ faction of the young lover, he took his leave ; and Marian, recollecting that she had promised to lend lady Julia a book, whieh she had left in the drawing-room, returned thither to obtain it. All the morning visitors had quitted, except captain Dashwood, who was seat¬ ed on the sofa, in earnest conversation with lady Evelina. So light was the step of Marian, that she was close to them be¬ fore they were aware of her presence ; the countenance of lady Evelina was thought¬ ful and melancholy ; she raised her eyes, and Marian perceived a tear which fell on her cheek. Dashwood looked confused at her unexpected appearance, and, as if fearful of being suspected, said—■" I have been trying to persuade our friend to take
the benefit of this fine day, Miss Gorden ; her health and spirits are impaired by too much confinement to the house. I am surprised that my dear friend, Belgrave, does not exert a little gentle authority upon this occasion ; but perhaps her lady¬ ship will yield to your solicitation, though mine has been fruitless." He said this with a forced air of gaiety, and rising from his seat, suddenly recollected an appoint¬ ment, and bade them good morning. There was a something which Marian could not well define—a momentary sus* picion of she knew not what, that crossed her mind, and seemed to say, that all was not right within the breast, of Dashwood, ss he left tbe drawing-room ; and she could not avoid remarking to lady Evelina, that the eonversation of captain Dashwood seemed to have a most depressing effect upon her spirits, " The fault is mine, not his," replied her ladyship ; " for I believe he has too sincere a regard for my happiness, not to
do every thing in his power to promote my tranquillity ; but my spirits are weak, and the least thing affects them. I wish we were at the abbey ; I think I should be better there; and Belgrave would not have the same temptations to call him from his home, as he now has." Marian did not notice the latter part of this speech, although it sunk deep in her mind ; she tried to rally the spirits of her friend, and advised her to hasten her de¬ parture from London, if she really thought tiiat the country would be beneficial to her health ; and at length prevailed upon her to go with her in the carriage to Tyr¬ connel House. Lady Julia was indisposed, and Marian sought her in her chamber. They were alone, and the surcharged heart of her ladyship found relief, in pouring forth its griefs in the bosom of compassionate friend¬ ship. To account for her emotion, lady Julia, in a low voice, informed Marian, that Mr. Howard had that morning quit-
ted the family, leaving a letter for her brother, the marquis, in which, as she was told, he had assigned no reason but that of imperious necessity, for the suddenness of his removal.—" And what is still worse," continued lady Julia, '* I have somehow or other lost the little sketch I made of his countenance, which I would not have parted with for the world ; and now it would be doubly valuable to me, now that I may never see him more." Marian pressed the weeping girl to her bosom, nearly as much affected as herself, while she vainly endeavoured to compose her agitated mind, by holding out a pos¬ sibility that he might return, when the cause which had occasioned his hasty re¬ moval no longer existed. It might be the sudden illness of some near relative, or some dear loved friend. • " Ah !" cried lady Julia, " where will he find friends to love him dearer than we did?" Marian could not repress the rising sigh,
as her own heart told her, that he need not seek far, to find one at least, as ten¬ derly and as faithfully devoted to his in¬ terest, as the fair object before her. To leave lady Julia, in the present state of her feelings, was impossible; and Marian, agitated as she herself was, nevertheless proposed remaining with her the chief part of the day. We readily believe what we wish to happen, and lady Julia, in the course of a few hours, allowed herself to trust to the pleasing hope that they would soon hear from Howard, and that his ab¬ sence was merely temporary, and most likely the effect of urgent necessity. Marian was pleased to notice the gra¬ dual return of hope to the bosom of lady Julia, while her own v/as secretly a prey to various doubts and fears. At length she allowed herself to trust to the pleasing idea, that he had listened to the advice contained in her anonymous letter, which Mary Dennis had delivered to him, and that his removal from the Tyrconnel fa-
mily was the result of his having yielded to the private suggestions of affectionate friendship.—' 4 It is not impossible," thought Marian, as she retired to her own apart¬ ment, w but that I may hear some tidings of the noble-minded Henry, through the medium of madame du Chatillon. Oh, if he should condescend to accept the trir fling assistance I enclosed him—if he should accept it as his due, for the gene¬ rous forbearance he has manifested towards a cruel enemy, how amply shall I be re¬ paid !—how joyfully would I devote my whole fortune, to see him placed in that station of life to which his birth and his virtues entitle him !" Hope—fallacious, deluding Hope, now cheered the droop*. ing spirits of the amiable Marian, and she enjoyed for that night, sleep the most pleasing and refreshing. The wife of Dennis was summoned the next morning to the chamber of Marian Gorden, who confided to her the secret of young Fortescue. Charlotte had permis-
sion to pass two days with -an aunt near town ; for Marian did not approve of ma¬ king this young girl a confidant, as her behaviour, since her residence in London* had frequently called forth the gentle ad¬ monitions of her indulgent mistress, who now thought it most prudent to send her out ofthe way, for she shrewdly suspected, what in fact was the case, that Charlotte's eternal love of talking, often led her to converse upon subjects, with which she had no business to meddle. Night came, and the wife of Dennis, proud of the confidence reposed in her, carefully conducted the timid, trembling Olivia to the friendly arms of Marian Gorden, who received and welcomed the beautiful disobedient, with a sister's kind¬ ness. Lady Evelina had retired early to rest; and Rose, after reading to her, until she felt drowsy, left her to enjoy the sleep she courted ; and hastened to behold the destined bride of him, whose name alone was the passport to her affection.
Morning dawned before the lovely trio thought of separating; yet it was requi¬ site to take a few hours repose, as they were to meet Fortescue in Hanover-square, before nine o'clock. The ceremony over, they were to return, and with the assist¬ ance of Mary, regain, unseen, the apart¬ ments of Miss Gorden, where refreshments would be provided. Here they consulted what would be the best means of applying for the pardon of lord Rochdale. Marian was the most cool and collected of the little party ; she therefore wrote a copy of the letter for Fortescue, to his lordship, whose unsteady hand with difficulty trans¬ cribed it; and Dennis was dispatched as the messenger, to convey the intelligence to lord Rochdale. The old veteran was admitted to the presence ofhis lordship, who had but just learned the news of his daughter's elope¬ ment : he was pacing, with angry steps, the floor of the breakfast-parlour, when Dennis entered. Turning sharply round,
he demanded the cause of his intrusion? Dennis held out the letter. " From Fortescue !" exclaimed his lord¬ ship; " why is he not here himself?—why is he absent at a moment like the present ?" then hastily tearing open the letter, he eagerly perused the contents. Dennis watched the changes of his countenance, and saw it brighten with pleasure, instead of clouding with anger. The honest soldier could not repress his feelings, but rubbing his hands with joy, burst forth wdth the exclamation of— "Thank God! thank God !" " Thank God for what?" said lord Rochdale, crumpling up the letter, and putting it in his pocket. " Thank God that your honour is not angry with the young people, my lord. I will run back as fast as I can, for I am sure I may be the messenger of glad ti¬ dings, of peace and pardon." " Stay, my honest fellow, and take this to drink their health," putting five gui- VOL. il ι
neas into his hand; " it is not every father that would so easily forgive a disobedient child : but go, I will follow you immedi¬ ately." Lord Rochdale, while waiting for his carriage, could not avoid reflecting upon the singular ways of Providence, that had thus been the means of bringing together two beings, whom hc had sedulously stu¬ died to keep asunder, from the idea, that if he allowed them to associate in child¬ hood, they would become familiarized to each other's failings ; and, if accustomed to see each other constantly, would, from the force of habit, be, as İt Vere, brother and sister. His lordship wished for a closer union, and therefore secfuded his beauti¬ ful daughter from the ^Jvorld, until time had matured the loveliness of her form and features, which he expected would fascinate at first sight tbe youthful heart ofhis ward. His rage and disappointment were boundless, at the first discovery of Olivia's
elopement ; but when informed with whom, his joy was too violent to admit of reproaches ; but hurrying to colonel Bel¬ grave's, he found the whole family assem¬ bled in the drawing-room, listening to Dennis's account of the favourable recep¬ tion he had met with from his lordship. Olivia would have thrown herself at the feet of her father ; but he caught her in his arms, and kissing her affectionately, assured her of his forgiveness : then turn¬ ing towards Fortescue, he embraced him also, and joining their hands together, be¬ stowed on them his blessing.—-" I am too happy," said he, " in thus witnessing the accomplishment of my deare&t wishes, to express displeasure at the manner of their fulfilment. I dare say, my children, that you consider yourselves as being extreme¬ ly wise, in having outwitted and defeated my plans, little dreaming that you were bringing about the very union I had so long anticipated : nay, ????, I am seri¬ ous—you are the identical person whom I ι 2
had intended to become the husband of Olivia Rochdale." This declaration produced a general laugh, at the expence of the new-married pair, who eould not refrain from joining in it, when tlicy considered how useless had been their alarm, how unnecessary their iears. All present novv congratulated them upon the happy termination of their elopement ; and lord Rochdale declared that he would not be disappointed of his intended fete ; the only difference would be, that he should now have to introduce his daughter as Mrs. Fortescue. instead of Mrs. Fortescue elect. At the entreaty of his lordship, colonel Belgrave and lady Evelina agreed to pass the day at Rochdale House ; he was anx¬ ious to learn how Fortescue had become acquainted with Olivia, so strictly as she had been guarded-—but what will not love accomplish ! Lord Rochdale, when ? boy, had been as passionately in love as his ward ; but the object of his attachment
preferred another, and, contrary to the hopes of her family, bestowed her hand where she had already given her heart : he therefore knew, that nothing is im¬ possible for a lover to achieve; yet be was nevertheless desirous to learn from them¬ selves, bow their intimacy commenced. By the earnest desire of Olivia, Miss Gorden and Rose accompanied her back to her paternal home. At tlie sound of her well-known voice, her poor old gover¬ ness ventured forth from the place which had concealed her from the first burst of lord Rochdale's anger ; the hand of peace was extended towards her, and happiness beamed on every countenance. Young Fortescue narrated to his guar¬ dian the means he had resorted to, in or¬ der to attract the attention of his daugh- ter ; and his lordship good-naturedly ac¬ knowledged, that his system had been a bad one.—" But," said he, " I was induced to pursue it, from having witnessed the ill effects of allowing too mueh freedom to
young females of rank. In my youthful days, I was particularly attached to the fa¬ mily of lord Fortescue ; your father, my dear Henry, was my dearest friend—we were almost inseparable; and the happiest hours of tny life were spent at his father's house. A fatal disease had carried off, in the bloom of life, all the children of lord Fortescue, except your father and his youngest sister, whose beauty and sweet¬ ness of disposition made a deep and last¬ ing impression on my heart. She was the idol of Ker parents, who indulged her to an excess, and seldom allowed her to be out of their sight. Accustomed to regard me as the friend of her brother, she treat¬ ed me with almost equal kindness ; but my heart sighed for a dearer preference, which it was not destined to obtain. I loved with passionate fervency—while she had only friendship to bestow. Early ac¬ customed to mix in society, chance intro¬ duced to her notice a gentleman, who, though her inferior in rank and fortune,
had the felicity to gain her affections. Your father had been dead nearly eight months, when I received the fatal intelli¬ gence ofyour aunts clandestine marriage. This double loss nearly deprived me of reason—yet I felt for her situation, and would have given all I possessed, could I but have restored her once again to the arms of her offended parents. This, how¬ ever, was impossible ; she had sacrificed them, and all their proudest hopes, to gra¬ tify her own fondness for a stranger, whom she secretly eloped with; and from that day the parental door was for ever closed against her." <t And what, dear father, became of her?" inquired Olivia, timidly. " I know not, my love,"' he replied ; t( they went abroad, and probably have remained there, for the parents of Miss Fortescue continued inexorable till death. There is a something in the cast of this young lady's features, that remind me of hers," said his lordship, turning towards
Rose, who blushed at becoming the ob¬ ject of general attention. " Pardon me, Miss Aylmer, I mean not to offend ; but the resemblance is so striking, that, after the lapse of so many years, I feel my heart still warms at the recollection of its first attachment; and if you find my eyes fixed on yours, forgive my rudeness." He pressed her hand affectionately ; and Rose felt that it was impossible to feel any other sentiment towards him than that of respect and esteem. Before they separated for the night, lord Rochdale found an opportunity of expressing his hopes, that his daughter would cultivate the friendship of Rose, and that she would devote to her as much of her time as sbe could spare ; then low¬ ering his voice, he added—" And should any thing occur to render the assistance, or the advice of a friend requisite to your repose, think of me, dear Miss Aylmer, as of one in whom you may fearlessly eon* fide as in a father,"
At the mention of that sacred name, the heart of Rose filled with tender recol¬ lections. Tears started into her eyes, and she could with difficulty thank his lord¬ ship for his goodness ; he observed her emotion, and secretly resolved to inquire into her situation ; and, should it need the essential aid of friendship, he would him¬ self become her guardian and protector. The spirits of Marian Gorden deserted her, as soon as she retired to her chamber. The happiness she had witnessed, in the union of two faithful hearts, recalled the idea of him whose noble forbearance con¬ demned to a life of voluntary seclusion from the world. The deep glow on her cheek, which modesty called forth, be¬ trayed the tenderness of her heart's secret wishes : she loved the generous Henry for his misfortunes, and she would have made him master of herself and large posses¬ sions, without a moments hesitation, could she, consistently with female delicacy, make him so rich an offer. Possessed with ι 3
the delightful idea of being beloved by Arlingford, and conscious that, under his present circumstances, he would never so¬ licit her hand, she wished, vet dared not venture, to express her readiness to unite her fate to his. *' There is no alternative," said she, *' for me—no choice but to re¬ main single. The happiness I have this day beheld, I am for ever excluded from enjoying ; I must live only to bestow on others, what I am shut out from experi¬ encing myself." The wife of Dennis now made her ap¬ pearance in the place of Charlotte, and delivered to Marian a note ; it came from madame du Chatillon-—she was ill, and requested to see her early the next morn· ing. The idea of her being seriously in¬ disposed, and without the consoling aid of female friendship to sooth her agitated mind in the hour of her painful extre¬ mity, determined Marian to hazard a visit that night: she therefore imparted to Mary the nature of the note, concealing
only the name of the writer ) and passing down the back stairs, followed by her hum¬ ble friend, they got into a hackney-coach, which Mary had procured to convey them to the residence of the suffering Rosalie. Arrived at the abode of the mysterious stranger, Marian proceeded alone to her apartments, leaving Mary to return home by the same conveyance, and, if neces¬ sary, find excuses for her absance in the morning, should she not be able to attend at the usual hour of breakfast.
CHAP. V. It will now be necessary to return to Arlingford, in order to account for his sudden departure from Tyrconnel House. Although gifted by nature with high per¬ sonal attractions, he had less vanity than many of his sex» who were inferior to him
in that respect. Notwithstanding this, he could not help observing the artless kind¬ ness of lady Julia, which betrayed itself in many a nameless trifle, unnoticed but by a lover's eye. His own guarded con¬ duct left him no room for self-accusation, and his own high sense of honour would have prevented him from taking advan¬ tage of her tenderness, under his present dependent circumstances, had his affec¬ tions been disengaged. An accident soon occurred, which left him no room to doubt the state of lady Julia's sentiments towards him, By the desire of the marchioness, he had lately given lady Julia some instruc¬ tions in miniature painting, for which she had a decided talent. One morning, after her lesson was concluded, her ladyship took from her pocketbook an unfinished sketch of her youngest brother, and of¬ fered it for his inspection ; in replacing it, a paper fell to the ground, which he did not observe until she had quitted the
chamber. Arlingford was on the point of following to restore it to her ladyship, when his own name on the back of the envelope aroused all his dormant curiosity. The contents might decide upon the pro¬ priety of his continuing in the family, and impressed with this idea, he unfolded the paper, which contained the striking resemblance of himself, which lady Julia had once shewn to Marian Gorden ; since then she had affixed to it the initials H. H. and had written beneath them in Italian, " the name beloved of him for whom alone I live." Although the heart of Arlingford was devoted to another, he could not behold this silent proof of generous affection un¬ moved, and a tear of pity fell on the paper which enclosed the miniature, as he pressed the hand-writing of lady Julia to his lips. A few moments consideration taught him the line of conduct he ought to pursue. The peace of lady Julia, the friendship of the marquis, his own honour,
all were at stake; and to preserve eaeh inviolate, he resolved to sacrifice his per¬ sonal comforts, and quit immediately a house, which his presence might inno¬ cently involve in sorrow and self-reproach. With an unsteady hand, and an aching heart, Henry Arlingford wrote a few hasty lines to the marquis of Tyrconnel, ex¬ pressive of the deep sense he entertained of the kindness he had experienced from himself and his family, and assuring him, that nothing but the most imperious ne¬ cessity, joined to the strongest sense of duty, could have induced him to leave in a manner so abrupt and sudden ; he con¬ cluded by saying, that whatever might be his own sad destiny, he should never cease to pray for the welfare and happiness of the house of Tyrconnel. Taking advantage of the absence of the family, Henry, with a melancholy which could only be alleviated by his sense of aeting right, packed up his things, and desiring a coach to be ealled, waited witl
impatience its arrival. To avoid thc un¬ pleasantness of having his abode disco*. vered, Henry directed the coachman to an inn, where, having discharged him, he procured another, and proceeded to the cottage of Judith, intending to take pos¬ session once more of his own little cham¬ ber, until he had determined upon his future subsistence. A fortnight had elap¬ sed since he had last seen Judith, and when he «topped at the door of her cot¬ tage, he was surprised to see it opened by a young female, instead of his old and faithful friend, who had been confined to her room for a week by a rheumatic fever. Henry hastened to her chamber ; her dog was sitting close beside her, with his head resting on her lap, until the well-known voice of his master called forth his mute yet eloquent caresses. " I am come to be your nurse," said Henry, as he embraced the delighted Ju¬ dith ; " with my eare and attention, you shall soon be well again : but why, dear
Judith, have you concealed from me your illness ?" " Because, my darling, I know it would grieve you," she replied, " and perhaps call you away from those who could not spare )ou. I have been ill, very ill in¬ deed; but Susan has watched and tended me day and night, and God will bless her for her kindness to a poor old woman, who could not help herself." " God will Hess her," said Henry, turn¬ ing towards the young creature who had just entered, "and 1 will bless her also: continue your kind attention to this ex¬ cellent old woman, my good girl, and you shall not go unrewarded." Henry put in her hand, as an earnest of his ap¬ probation, half a sovereign ; then, in a voice whose tones never failed to win the hearts of his inferiors to his interest, he requested her to procure him some milk for his supper; " for I am come," said he, " to take up my abode with you for some little time; but I will not trouble you more than I can help."
The girl half raised her eyes, and look¬ ing through the long silken lashes, which darkened the colour of a heavenly blue, replied, in a low sweet voice, that it would be a pleasure, not a trouble, to wait upon them both. In an instant she was gone for the milk, and Henry availed himself of her absence, to inform Judith that cir¬ cumstances had occurred, which had ren¬ dered his residence unpleasant at Tyrcon¬ nel House, and he, consequently, had left. Judith, oveijoyed at the prospect of hav¬ ing him once more with herself, was ne¬ vertheless grieved that her illness prevent* ed her from attending to him, though she knew that his chamber was ready for his reception at all times ; and of Susan's wil¬ lingness to oblige, she was well convinced ; yet who could wait upon her darling like herself ? The next morning, Henry rose early, and throvving open his casement window, enjoyed tlie pure air of a fine spring morn¬ ing, and the grateful melody of innumer-
able birds, that flew from tree to tree, in the shrubbery ofa garden, belonging to a small villa, which was almost embosomed within its thick and various foliage. Its thatched roof and white chimneys alone were visible to the eyes of Arlingford, who, without bestowing a thought upon who might be its possessor, stole softly down to the clean, red-bricked kitchen of Judith, whose slumbers he wished not to disturb. Early as it was, Susan had been up some time, and with noiseless feet had arranged every thing in the nicest order, swept and dusted the little parlour, and placed the breakfast-things on the table, ready for his.reception. The heart of Arlingford, though brave and courageous, almost to a carelessness of personal danger, was keenly alive to the smallest act of personal kindness ; and in the present state of his feelings, he was perhaps more sensible to any little atten¬ tion he might receive. In this frame of mind, his eyes insensibly wandered to-
waráb the open door of the parlour, and from thence into the kitchen, where Susan was busily employed in cleaning and feed¬ ing Judith's birds. The book which he had wished to peruse was forgotten ; his attention was engaged, and his mind oc¬ cupied, by reflections which tended to in¬ crease rather than diminish his melan¬ choly. As he gazed upon the slight and delicate form before him, he could not but regret that Providence had placed her in a station of life, which was exposed to all the hardships of adversity—all the insults of prosperity. To him she appeared to be about sixteen—a short skirt of coarse blue cloth, striped with brown, discovered her well-turned ancle ; a pink calico bedgown and check apron were not calculated to improve her figure, which, notwithstand¬ ing the disadvantages of dress, had an air of something far above her rank ; her arms were bare above the elbow ; and though the weather had injured their original whiteness, yet it had not taken from the
beauty of their form. Her face was round and dimpled ; her mouth and teeth were beautiful : a linen cap confined her dark brown hair, which she wore plain across her forehead, while the half-open bed¬ gown betrayed to the glance of Henry, a neck, whose snowy whiteness might excite the envy of many a high-bred dame. The birds were finished, and Susan came to inquire if he wanted any thing. Henry was a great admirer of sweet voices, and the voice of Susan was particularly plea¬ sing. He replied to her in the gentlest accents, expressing his thanks for the at¬ tention she had paid to his comforts,—" I am happy," said he, " to think that Judith has had so kind, so tendera mirseas your¬ self. You will not leave her, I hope, un¬ less you are wanted at home." " I have no wish to return home," said Susan, with a sigh. " My own mother has been dead ñve years, and my father has married again* which was a sad day for me."
" Then your mother-in-law is not kind to you, I fear ?" said Henry, in a voice of soft compassion. " Oh no ; she has four children by my father; and because I am not so strong and hearty as herself, she looks upon me as an incumbrance, and treats me w r orse than she does the animals." (( An unfeeling wretch !" exclaimed Henry, with warmth ; " hut your father, he, I hope, is kind to you ?" if Alas ! my poor father, lie is obliged, for peace and quiet, to let her have her own way. When my mother was alive, every thing went on right and comfort¬ able: my father kept a fruiterer's shop, and did well in the world ; and though I often heard my dear mother say, that she was born to her carriage, yet her love for my father made her forget what she had once been ; and she always did her best to make his home a happy one, and to bring me up respectably, and in the fear of God. But now," added Susan, wiping her eyes
with her coarse apron—" now we are the most miserable family that can be. No¬ thing has prospered since my father mar¬ ried again, and my heart is almost broke, to see him drink, and hear him swear, and look so dirty and neglected ; for in mother's lifetime he was a respectable tradesman, and used to go every Sunday to church ; but now------" Susan could proceed no further for her tears; and Henry, almost as mich affected as herself, gently withdrew the harsh apron from her hand, and with his handkerchief wiped from her beautiful eyes the quick gushing tears.—" Trust İn Providence, my poor girl," said he, tenderly, tt and you will find a friend when you least expect one." t€ I do trust in Providence," replied Susan ; "for almost the last words of my poor mother were— ( Love your father, Susan, as 1 have ioved him, and never act contrary to his wishes. Trust in the mercy of God, and he will send you a
friend, should you stand in need of one.' And indeed, I know not why, but the very moment I saw you, sir, and heard you speak so kindly, I said to myself— * My prayers are heard, and God has sent me a friend, when I most want one." The call of Judith prevented the reply of Henry, who no longer thought of fi¬ nishing his almost-untasted meal. The beauty, innocence, and simplicity of Susan, touched him to the soul.^—" Alas !" thought Henry, " my poor girl, thou little thinkest that, like thyself, my only friend is Pro¬ vidence—my only home, this humble cot¬ tage—and my only means of subsistence, a solitary ten-pound note, and half-a-dozen sovereigns." This was the whole of Ar¬ lingford's wealth ; for the notes he had re¬ ceived from Marian, through the un¬ known hand of Mary Dennis, were safely locked up, until he could discover the ge¬ nerous donor, and restore them. His own future fate was involved in gloom; for the pride of his nature would not permit
him to apply to any of those families who had courted him as the heir of general Beresford, lest they should look coolly upon his reverse of fortune. He had been able to provide a comfortable abode for his affectionate nurse, and he now res· \ ved that Susan should stay and share her humble fare, and be as a daughter to the kind-hearted old woman, whose age re¬ quired the tender assistance of youth, and where could she obtain so sweet a compa¬ nion as Susan ? The idea of adding to the comforts of Judith, and at the same time of alleviating the condition of Susan, gave, for a while, a stimulus to the spirits of Henry, which they had long wanted. Judith recovered fast, under the care of her darling, and once more took her station by the kitchen fire, in her high-backed chair. Who so happy, so grateful, as Judith, her dog on one side, her lovely little maid on the other! and when evening closed around them, her darling would quit his parlour,
and, taking his seat beside her, would instruct the docile Susan in writing and arithmetic, which had been neglected, since the death of her mother. At these moments, Judith would strain her old eyes, in gazing on the darling of her heart, occupied in his work of benevolence ; yet when she considered the rank of his fa¬ mily, the fortune of which he had been defrauded, and the crowd of sycophants that had once flocked round him, she could not but sigh to see him thus hum¬ bled by adversity, yet bearing his misfor¬ tunes with sweetness and resignation. There were moments, however, when Henry felt the bitterness of the cup he tasted—moments when busy memory re¬ called the bright scenes of fond indul¬ gence, when he was the gayest of the gay, and the idol of his uncle. Sometimes he wondered at his own forbearance, possess¬ ing, as he did, the document of colonel Belgrave's perfidy~-a document which would for ever ruin him in the estimation vol. ?. ?
ofthe world. In exposing his seciet acts of treachery, he could, in a manner, com¬ pel him to yield up the property which he had unlawfully obtained—property which would procure for himself a hand¬ some independence ; but in doing this act of justice, Henry remembered, that the innocent wife must suffer with the guilty husband ; and he therefore determined to bear the sharpness of his lot with manly patience, rather than injure the peace and happiness of a mild unoffending woman. The debilitated and worn-out constitu¬ tion of his brother, sir William, afforded him the prospect of once more enjoying the luxuries of an ample fortune. He was childless ; and his unnatural conduct precluded him from the pity of a heart, open and compassionate to every other be¬ ing. For the bodily infirmities of sir William, Henry had no commiseration: no trait of kindness—no spark of feel¬ ing had ever, by chance, betrayed a bro¬ ther's feelings : from childhood sir Wil-
liam had uniformly evinced a rooted dis¬ like to his banished brother, and in man¬ hood, he had manifested the same aver¬ sion. Henry felt the unjustness of this behaviour in so near a relative ; and de¬ testing the vice of hypocrisy, candidly acknowledged to Judith, that he looked forward to the death of an unnatural bro¬ ther, as to an event which would enable him to return to that rank in society, from which the villany of mankind had exclu¬ ded him. It was this single ray of hope that il¬ lumined the desolateness of his present mode of existence. When seated in the little back parlour of Judith's cottage, he beguiled the tedious hours of idleness, by anticipations of the future : in imagina¬ tion, he one day beheld himself restored to the home of his ancestors, from which his father had so cruelly expelled him, on the lamented death of his mother. His first step was to seek the kind-hearted girl, who, in the trying hour of adversity, ? 2
had risked her health, nay, life, to afford comfort and consolation to his tortured soul. He could now avow his long-smo¬ thered tenderness, and solicit the return of hers : in his mind's eye, he beheld the virgin blush of kind consenting love tinge her cheeks, as, with her accustomed frank¬ ness, she received him as her destined hus¬ band. The voice of Mary Dennis awa¬ kened him from his delicious dream ; the noble mansion of his forefathers, the be¬ loved of his soul, all vanished from his sight, and the humble parlour in which he sat, and the coarse but comely fea¬ tures of the soldier's wife, recalled his wandering ideas back to sad reality. Henry had written to the honest Den¬ nis, and confided to him his present abode ; and Mary was no sooner informed of it, than she hastened to inquire if she could serve him ? The feelings of Arlingford would not admit of restraint, excited as they were by the influence of his imagi¬ nation : he questioned Mary upon the sub-
ject nearest his heart, and gained the in¬ telligence he wished. No rival worthy to be dreaded had claimed her hand : For¬ tescue was now the husband of another, and Campbell continued to hover round, in gloomy silence, meditating on future mischief. The love which Mary bore to Arlingford often prompted her to relieve the anxiety she saw him suffering ; but she also loved and respected Marian Gor¬ den too highly, to betray the secret which Mary, in her sagacity, believed she had discovered. Pluming herself upon her pru¬ dence on this head, she was off her guard on another, and Henry obtained one grand point of information, without ap¬ pearing to notice it. The mystery of the anonymous letter, with its valuable enclosure, was now ex¬ plained, on his learning that Marian Gor¬ den knew of his situation in the family of the marquis of Tyrconnel. He was not surprised at the generosity of her conduct, but his pride would not allow of his ac-
cepting any pecuniary assistance, even from her* Mary had no sooner quitted him, than he resolved upon returning the notes. Taking up his pen, he wrote as follows :— " With a heart overflowing with gratitude, and the warmest veneration, I return you, dearest Miss Gorden, the en¬ closed generous and delicate proof of your friendship. Accept my boundless thanks for this fresh instance of your goodness ; but I should be unworthy of that esteem, which it is my pride and glory to possess, were I to take advantage of your kind¬ ness, while I have the means within my¬ self of procuring an honourable subsis¬ tence. Should Providence so will it, that I once more obtain my just rank in so¬ ciety, with what rapture shall I fly to clai m the treasure of your friendship ! Un¬ til then, dearest and best of women, fare¬ well. « Henry Arlingford,"
It was the close of day, whrn Henry, recollecting that he had not apprized Ro¬ salie of his removal, determined upon calling on her to that effect. Placing the letter intended for Marian in his pocket- book, he proceeded to her residence. A carriage stood at the door of the florist ; it was lady Evelina's, and his heart throb¬ bed with increased pulsation, as he passed rapidly through the under-ground pas¬ sage, leading to the house occupied by Rosalie. Some one advanced with hasty tread ; and by the faint glimmer of the lamp, which but half illumined the pas¬ sage, Henry discovered it to be Marian. He saw her start ; but at the sound of his well-known voice, her terror subsided, as, with a forced smile, she endeavoured to laugh at her own timidity. Henry saw that she was pale, and felt her hand trem¬ ble in his, " I dare not stay," said she, " though I would fain inquire after your welfare. Madame du Chatillon is dangerously ill ;
and I am compelled to attend, most un¬ willingly, the ball at the marchioness of Douglas's. Through the means of a faith¬ ful domestic, I have been enabled to pass the last three nights with madame, and if possible to-night -----" Henry could not avoid interrupting her-—" Surely, dear Miss Gorden, you risk too much for the sake of humanity. Forgive me, I entreat, but consider how dangerous would be the consequences, were your visits here to be discovered— and at night ; gracious Heaven ! I shud¬ der to reflect upon the construction which the malice of the world might put upon the purity and innocency of your inten¬ tions. Let me conjure you------" " I am perfectly aware of my danger," replied Marian ; " but I cannot now re¬ cede— -madame's life is in danger. I am the only female in this country, on whom she can rely with confidence and security. I cannot abandon her in the hour of sick¬ ness and affliction; but as soon as her
health returns, I promise to give up the connexion ; and as we shall shortly return to the abbey, I shall be enabled to do this, without hurting her feelings. She is un¬ happy, and therefore I would not add to her sorrow." " You are all goodness, all tenderness !" said Henry, in a voice of subdued affec¬ tion ; " would to Heaven that the object of your generous pity was more deserving of your friendship !" " Call it not friendship," hastily replied Marian ; " for no true friendship can ever exist between beings so wholly dissimilar as madame and myself; yet that she pos¬ sesses great influence over me, I candidly confess." " May she never exert it but for your welfare !" said Henry ; " perhaps I know more of her real character than you do, and it is this which leads me to conjure you to break off all intimacy with Rosalie, the first opportunity that occurs. You have already hazarded too much, for a wo- ? S
man capable of executing the boldest act of premeditated vengeance*" S( And yet you visit her.'* " I do, from motives which I cannot explain to you, dear Miss Gorden ; yet this much I may say, that I am influenced by the hope of being useful to others." " Perhaps I am actuated by similar feelings," replied Marian, " as well as by pity for her sufferings:" she then bade him good night ; and Henry recollecting his letter, presented it to her, saying, that whatever might be his future destiny, he should ever consider her as his guardian angel, and that while he had life, he should ever retain the most grateful sense of her goodness. Slowly did Henry return to the hum¬ ble roof, which was now his only home ; his head full of the danger to which Ma¬ rian was exposed, from her stolen visits to Rosalie, and his heart, as usual, softened by the tenderness of his recent interview, with the woman he loved dearer than his
existence, but between whom and himself, fate seemed to have placed an insuperable bar. The darkness of the night rendered the objects before him indistinct, and the loneliness of the road made him notice ???? particularly, that he was following a person, who, from the serpentine direction of his movements, had evidently paid too much devotion to the bottle. The huma¬ nity of Arlingford prompted him to watch over the safety of the stranger, whom, by the light of a straggling lamp, he discovered to possess the exterior of a gentleman. With the assistance of his arm, they proceeded onward, until they eame to the inclosed garden of the villa, at the side of which ran a narrow lane leading to the cottage of Judith. Though unable to speak, the stranger stopped and caught hold of the garden gate ; Henry, supposing it to be his residence, rang the bell, which was quickly answered by the appearance of two female servants—" It is my master," said one of them. The
light now shone on the face of the intoxi¬ cated man, as the women supported him; Henry gave a sudden start of surprise, and closing the gate suddenly after him, paused for a moment to take breath. The man he had been protecting—the master of that villa, was colonel Belgrave í The curiosity of Arlingford was now painfully excited, to learn the motives of colonel Belgrave's visit to the villa. What unfortunate female had become the fresh victim of his libertine passions ? it might be a second Isabella Maynard, whom, un¬ der a false name, and with false promises, he had deluded from her kindred and home; Henry shuddered at the idea— *' Gracious Heaven !" he exclaimed, " that man should be thus privileged to ruin souls ! that he, who ought to be the ad¬ viser, the protector of lovely confiding woman, should become her destroyer !" Full of these reflections, Henry entered the cottage ; the kindly welcome he re¬ ceived, the smile of fond 3 of grateful love,
soothed his ruffled spirits. Judith per¬ ceived that something unpleasant had oc¬ curred ; she therefore fetched a bottle of her best gooseberry wine, wliile Susan got ready the new-laid eggs and the rashers of ham, for his supper.—" Close the parlour door, Judith," said Henry, " and sit down ; I have something to tell you. Remember that if any questions should be asked either Susan or yourself respecting me, I am deaf and dumb ; my name you know is Howard." " Yes, dear, and you shall be just what you please; only the poor old woman would like to know what has robbed thy face of its heavenly smile." " I have proved thy fidelity, and know thou art worthy to be trusted," said Hen¬ ry ; " we must aet with caution, dear Ju¬ dith, for my treacherous enemy is at hand. I have seen colonel Belgrave —he is now at the villa." " 111 luck betide him !" cried Judith, her old cheek reddening with anger ; " may
tiie blight of disappointment wither all his prospects, as he has done thine, niy darling ! and may the chud he looks for¬ ward to«—" * Hold, hold, Judith—do not confound the innocent with the guilty : when Pro¬ vidence thinks fit, he will cut short his career of vice." He now repeated to Ju¬ dith his manner of meeting with colonel Belgrave, and inquired of her all she knew respecting the inmates of the villa. Judith knew but little : she had no inter¬ course with the servants, who were only two in number; nor had she spoken to them, except of a morning, when the cook had given her leave to fetch spring water before her mistress was up ; since her ill¬ ness, Susan had gone for the water; and she now remembered the girl telling her, that she met a gentleman in the grounds, who stared very hard in her face, and called her an angel, saying that she was too handsome to work for her living. " Susan must not go there again," cried
Henry, with ?? authoritative voice ; " she is indeed too handsome to be thrown rø the way of a heartless systematic seducer« - I must however learn who the unfortu·* nate female is, that he has betrayed ; and if «he is not wholly abandoned to guilt, I may perhaps prevail upon her to relin¬ quish a life of infamy, for one of peni« tence and prayer." ** Heaven bless thee, my darling ! but keep out of the tiger's den, for he is cruel and blood-thirsty." " I fear him not," replied Henry ; « though at present I wish to remain un¬ known to him. Remember, therefore, that in future I am deaf and dumb : un¬ der this assumed calamity, I have once before escaped his notice, though we were nearly as close neighbours as now." Judith promised obedience, and Susan was called in to receive her instructions ; Henry strictly enjoining her, never again to fetch water from the villa. To this, Susan most willingly assented, as the
manner and looks of colonel Belgrave had terrified her. With the quickness natural to her youth, she had observed things which the aged eyes of Judith overlooked, and the innocency and beauty of Susan had gained her a friend in the cook, who was on the point of leaving her place, as she told Susan, because she did not like the goings on of her master and mistress ; neither did she believe they were married, for Mrs. Stanley had more the appearance of a school-girl than ofa wife. " As I suspected," thought Henry; " it is some young creature, whom the mon¬ ster has lured, by false promises, from her home : even at this moment, a distracted mother may be calling for her child, an agonized father may be lamenting the hour that gave her birth. Gracious Pro¬ vidence ! make me but the humble in¬ strument to restore this unfortunate to the arms of her parents! for who like them can administer to a mind diseased.
and poisoned by the base artifices of a villain !" Full of this generous design, Henry rose early the next morning, and watched for the departure of colonel Belgrave ; he saw him open cautiously the garden gate, look round him, and then proceed hastily on the road towards town. The chance was, that he would not return until even¬ ing, if then ; and Henry now paused to consider by what scheme he should be most likely to obtain a sight of Mrs. Stan¬ ley : he was aware that she lived in total seclusion, and that it would be difiicult to gain access to her. What plan could he therefore devise to obtain an opportunity of speaking to her? He thought of many, but one only seemed to promise success. In the garb ofa fortuneteller, he was cer¬ tain of being admitted to the kitchen ; for however rigidly might be observed the orders for the non-admission of strangers, the earnest desire of prying into futurity would render the servants inclined to ex-
empt him from the general rule. His earnest desire to save a being, whom, in, his warm imagination, he portrayed as the innocent victim of licentious passion, de¬ termined Henry upon assuming the dis* guise of a fortuneteller, which, with the aid of Judith, and the assistance of some of her clothes, was quickly performed. A faded red cloak was thrown across hi» shoulders, and an old black silk hat tied under the chin with a handkerchief; and a mob cap, which concealed the luxuri¬ ance of his hair, completed the metamor¬ phosis. Henry viewed himself in the glass, and could not help smiling at his own transformation. A momentary feel¬ ing of self-degradation brought a blush into his cheek. Was this disguise con« sisten t with a soldier's honour? Then recollecting that all stratagems are fair in war, and that his object was to save a fel¬ low-creature from eternal misery, he be¬ came more reconciled to himself, and pro¬ ceeded on his charitable mission.
Hemy, as he conjectured, found no dif¬ ficulty in gaining admittance to the ser¬ vants : his well-told tale of love and mo¬ ney, removal, and speedy marriage, de¬ lighted the credulous girls, and a cup of good ale was his reward. All that she had written down must be true ; for she was deaf and dumb, and the seventh daughter of a seventh daughter ! " Egad!" said the cook, " I have a month's mind to ask her if our mistress be married or not." " Do, Molly, do," said the housemaid ; ' f I would give a shilling myself to find out who she is ; for if they be man and wife, how is it that master seldom or ever sleeps at home, though we are so close to town? and yesterday, when I was dusting the toilet, mistress had left open her trinket-box, I peeped into it—and, mercy me ! it was full of such beautiful jewels î but ask her, Molly, for I long to hear. ,n Molly now ventured to put the ques¬ tion to the cunning woman, who had im-.
mediate recourse to her chalk.—" Gracious me!" exclaimed the women, lifting up their hands and eyes to heaven, *' master is a married man, but mistress is not his wife !" " Rot such trumpery !" cried Molly ; " I always thought she was no better than she should be : for my part, I wont stay an hour in the house, after my time is up. Hanging is too good for such a wicked hussy : let her work fbr an honest living, as we are obliged to do." " Nay, Molly," said Veggy, " she does not look as if she knew how to work ; and then perhaps she does not know that mas¬ ter is a married man : for certain she is not happy ; I often catch her crying, and I can't but pity her." Henry now motioned that he had some¬ thing of importance to tell the lady. Molly swore she would never go into the room where she was again, if she could help it; but Peggy, less violent in her feelings of dislike, went up to tell her
mistress, that there was a cunning woman below, that could tell wonderful things. She was ordered to be admitted to her presence ; but Peggy was to remain. Henry was now conducted into an ele¬ gantly-furnished drawing-room, highly scented with perfumes, of various odours. On a couch of pale blue satin, reclined a young lady, in a loose morning robe of white cambric ; a profusion of flaxen hair fell in ringlets over her neck and shoul¬ ders ; her complexion was dazzlingly fair, and her whole appearance that of extreme youth and loveliness; but a want of mind —of soul, rendered her beauty insipid to the taste of Arlingford, The moment he beheld her, he was convinced that he had seen her before ; yet so confused were his ideas, that he could not immediately re¬ collect where. In a voice of childish sweet¬ ness, she addressed him. " Lauk, ma'am," said Peggy, " she is deaf and dumb: you must write down what you want to know."
The lady now took up her pen, and wrote a sentence ; her pretty white hand was sparkling with jewels, and Henry noticed a wedding ring among them. A terrible suspicion darted across his mind ; again he looked at the insipid beauty of the youthful delinquent, and felt convin¬ ced that he was right. Determined there¬ fore to answer boldly her question, he motioned for Teggy to leave them ; then drawing his chair close by the side of the expectant fair one, he wrote the name she had demanded—it was that of her hus¬ band In a moment the colour forsook her cheeks and lips ; with breathless at¬ tention she continued to gaze on the pa¬ per as he wrote-—" Your secret is safe- do not bcfray yourself—have you a wish to leave your betrayer ?" She bastily caught the pencil from his hand, and replied— 4i I would leave him instantly; but I have no friend—no home to receive me. I am sorry for what I have done—I am very unhappy,"
Henry retook the pencil.—*' You have a friend, who, if you are sincere in your desire to leave one, who is the husband of another, will risk every thing to restore you to the fond parents, whose hearts are nearly broken on your account. Are you to be trusted ?" " Indeed, indeed I am !" and tears al¬ most effaced the words. " Have you courage to walk at mid¬ night, in the shrubbery at the back of the cottage, in the lane ? There you will find a friend, who will protect and serve you, and in whom you may confide your safest plan of escape." " I think·—nay, I am sure I have," she replied. " I take you at your word ; for fatal would be the consequences of your de¬ ceiving me. I know, by my art, all that you wish to conceal : if you lose the pre¬ sent opportunity of quitting a life of shame and guilt, another may not occur. Re¬ member—-to-niffht at twelve. Fear no-
thing—hope every thing ; but be cautious of being discovered. I will be on the watch, that nothing shall alarm you." The astonished beauty promised impli¬ cit obedience : she, however, inquired if the friend she was to meet, was old or young, male or female ; and her heart beat quicker at the information that it was a young man, who was thus solicitous to serve her. His point gained, Henry had now to encounter the curiosity of the maids, who were on tiptoe, with expecta¬ tion of learning who was their fine-lady mistress. The heart of Arlingford was moved at the idea of her being exposed, guilty as she was, to the insolence of her domestics: assuming, therefore, a grave air, he took the offered chalk, and hastily scrawled these words— " Treat her with respect ; she is a person of rank, and de¬ serves your pity." While they were deciphering the cha¬ racters, he stole away, and retreated, as fast as possible, over a field which led to
the back of the cottage. Judith was on the watch, to screen him from the notice of Susan ; and he regained his own apart¬ ment, indignantly casting aside his femi¬ nine apparel, which had, however, served to the utmost, the purpose for which they were intended. He could not help re¬ flecting, that his knight-errantry might be attended w r ith unpleasant consequences, should the lady change her mind ; this, however, a few hours would decide. It is true, that she appeared weary of her condition ; the total seclusion in which she lived—the object of unhallowed pas¬ sion—the violater of vows the most sa¬ cred, the most binding—must, he was aware, give rise to many a tedious hour of self-reproach, of soul-harrowing reflec¬ tion. The shades of night were fast advan¬ cing, and the moon cast a watery light over the grounds of the villa. All was hushed in soft repose — not · a sound struck upon the listening ear of Henry, VOL. IL L
save the tinkling of the distant sheep-bell, as he lightly vaulted over the fence into the shrubbery. With cautious steps, he advanced to where an opening in the trees gave him a view of the villa. A fe¬ male form stood hesitating under the porch. At that moment, the moon emerging from a cloud, shone full on the manly form and handsome countenance of Arlingford. She no longer hesitated, but springing forward, caught his arm for support, as, half dead with terror, she was sinking to the ground. Henry gently withdrew her from the view of the villa, while he soothed, in the tenderest ac¬ cents, her agitated spirits. At length she said—" How kind—-how good of you to take this trouble for an unfortunate being like myself! and will you indeed convey me from this hated place, and from the cruel wretch, who, having seduced me from my home, is now grown weary of my tears and re¬ proaches?"
" I will do all that is within my power to serve you," said Henry ; " for I feel most acutely your situation, and I exe¬ crate the monster whose honied tongue has betrayed you." The sweetness of his voice, and the feel¬ ing with which he uttered this, pierced the heart of her to whom it was addressed. Bursting into an agony of tears, she seemed unconscious that she had thrown herself on the bosom of Henry, whose arms sup¬ ported her light and graceful figure. Not to feel for her situation ???? impossible ; not to pity her, guilty and degraded as she now was, an alien for ever from the society of the virtuous part of her sex, was equal¬ ly so. Henry felt her bosom beat con¬ vulsively against his own : her tears, her sobs, her beauty, which the moon's pale lustre discovered to his sight, all strangely affected him.—" Dear lady Susan !" said he, in a trembling voice. " Ah ! then you know me," she cried, half raising her face, and looking fearfully L 2
in his; then, dropping it again on his shoulder, " you are acquainted with the story of my shame—my ingratitude ! and you must hate and despise me." " I cannot hate a creature so formed to inspire the tenderest feelings," replied Henry : " your youth, your unhappy mar¬ riage, the total neglect of him whose pride and duty it was to study your happiness, and to form your principles, weakened by the boundless indulgence ofyour parents- all this should have pleaded for you to a generous mind ; but the treacherous villain who took advantage of your unprotected situation, and whose artifices have seduced you from your home, is incapable of feel¬ ing either friendship to man or love to woman. Hate you ! no, from my soul I pity you ! and if your ladyship will per¬ mit me, I will convey you to the protection ofyour fond parents, who, if I mayjudge from report, will receive you with open arms." " I know they are all kindness," said
lady Susan,drying her bright blue eyes with the lace scarf which she had carelessly wound round her beautifully-proportioned form; " and yet I dread to meet them. I dread also to have another interview with Stanley." " With colonel Belgrave you mean," whispered Henry : " I am too well ac¬ quainted with the baseness of his heart, to expect his amendment: but for the sake ofhis amiable wife, let me conjure you to keep his name a secret, lest her life should be the forfeit of the exposure of her hus¬ band's vices." " I have injured her too deeply already, not to feel the necessity of preserving this caution," replied lady Susan, mournfully; " but I will never see or speak to him any more. Why can you not take me from this place to-night ?" " Because I have no home, alas ! to offer you. The same person who so cru¬ elly injured your ladyship, has ruined me; but I forbear to call him to account, for
the sake of those who are innocent of his crimes." Lady Susan looked mournfully in the face of Arlingford.·—" Have you no home? are you also unhappy, and from the same destroying power? Oh, how my heart swells with hatred towards him ! but you shall go with me to my dear father's ; there you shall find a home and a friend, both capable and willing to serve you " This was said in a manner so innocent and guileless, that Henry instinctively pressed her little soft white hand to his lips, as he poured forth his gratitude for her kind intentions towards himself. " Nay, do not thank me," said lady Su¬ san, " for can I ever do too much for one who feels so generous an interest in the fate ofan unfortunate girl, whose conduct has left her without a home—without a friend ?" *' I will befriend you, at the hazard of my life," said Henry, pressing her still closer within his circling arms, and once
more fixing his lips on the lovely hand of lady Susan, who seemed unconscious of any impropriety What a dangerous situation for a young man of Henry's age, of Henry's feelings ! His arms supported a young and lovely female, whose viola¬ tion of her marriage vow authorized him to think lightly of her principles; the re¬ tired spot they were in, sheltered from mortal eye, the lateness of the hour, all conspired to bewilder the senses of Ar¬ lingford.—" This hand is beautiful," said he, in a low voice, "but those lips are still more." f< Is this not a pretty ring ?" inquired lady Susan, holding up to view the fourth finger of her left hand, which glittered with jewels. " This ruby, surrounded by brilliants, was given me by Marian Gor¬ den, and I would not part with it for all the world." In a moment, the mist of passion dis¬ persed, and Henry recovered his self-pos¬ session and his senses. Blushing at his
momentary weakness, which had yielded, instead of resisting the temptation before him, he gently withdrew his arms from the seducing object they had supported, and counselled her to return to the villa until the next evening, when he would provide a carriage to convey her to Hampton Palace, where her parents had resided since they had quitted Scotland, on the first intelligence of her elopement. Most unwillingly did lady Susan consent to re-enter a house now become hateful to her; yet she had no alternative ; and as Belgrave had parted from her in anger, she trusted that he would not make his appearance until she had quitted it for ever. The sensations of Henry upon regain¬ ing his chamber, were those of the bit¬ terest self-reproach. He had left it with the best, the purest intentions, of rescuing a young and deluded victim of sensuality from the paths of vice. The situation in which they had been placed, the Ioneli-
ness of the hour, her beauty, and, above all, the fatal consciousness that her virtue had not been proof against temptation, had thrown him off his guard, and given birth to feelings which, had they been gratified, wouid have caused him to detest himself. He shuddered as he contem¬ plated the danger from which his better angel had preserved him. He was on the point of snatching a kiss from her rosy lips, when the name beloved, the name revered for every feminine virtue, recalled him to his recollection, and to a sense of the baseness of his temporary infatuation. During his occasional rambles near Bel- grave Abbey, Henry had sometimes met with iL· visitors ; and lady Susan, though a tame and childish beauty, was never¬ theless too pretty, not to be noticed by one who was a great admirer of female love¬ liness. He had heard of her misconduct, and of the indifferent character of her na¬ tural protector ; and when he saw her in the drawing-room at the villa, he was but L3
too well convinced that it was lady Susan Dashwood, who was the degraded mis¬ tress of colonel Belgrave. Shocked be¬ yond expression, he became doubly anxi¬ ous to snatch her from the humiliating life she led, before the satiety and disgust of the colonel drove her for refuge into a similar connection. From the boundless indulgence of her parents, Henry had sanguine hopes of their forgiveness. Re¬ ceived once more to their arms, the un¬ fortunate lady Susan would find protec¬ tion and tenderness, and in a state of retirement with the authors of her being, experience comfort and consolation ; the errors of her youth, to give them no harsher epithet, might perhaps be for¬ gotten in another country ; and he passed a sleepless and feverish night, in anticipa¬ ting the result of the next day.
CHAR VL In the dusk of the evening, Henry once more repaired to the shrubbery ; he had ordered a post-chaise to be in readiness a little distance from the lane, and out of sight of the villa, which was to convey them to Hampton Palace. He had not waited many minutes before he was joined by lady Susan, who, almost breathless with fear, with difficulty informed him that Belgrave had that moment arrived. " Then we have not a moment to lose," cried Henry ; " the carriage is waiting at the end of the lane; trust yourself with me, and fear nothing." He then lifted her over the low paling of the shrubbery, and was in the act of vaulting over himself, when his arm was suddenly grasped by a
person, whom the darkness of the night prevented him from recognising. " Villain!" exclaimed a voice, half choaked by passion—" Villain ! have I caught you ? but you shall answer with your life, for having dared to invade my rights-—where is the lady whom you have seduced from my arms?—speak, scoun¬ drel—restore her to me, or I will—" u Take back to thine own bosom the epithets of villain and scoundrel," said Henry, with calm dignity ; " they apply not to me. Bestow them on him, who, void of honour or humanity, is the heart¬ less systematic seducer of lovely defence¬ less woman. Let the destroyer of Isa¬ bella, the betrayer of Hippolita, thejpro- tector of lady Susan, and the false friend of Arlingford, claim as his own the well- earned titles of scoundrel and villain : I came to save, not to destroy." Saying tbis, he released himself from the slack¬ ened hold of colonel Belgrave, who, ama¬ zed and powerless, fell back against a tree*
while Henry leapt the fence, and gained the chaise, where lady Susan, more dead than alive, was waiting his arrival. The feelings of colonel Belgrave were of the most acute nature, while the con¬ sciousness of his own guilt rendered him incapable of following the man, who had thus accused him of crimes his heart ac¬ knowledged to be true. Rushing into the house, he flung himself on the sofa, in a state of mental agony, bordering on distraction. The voice of his accuser was familiar to him, although intensity of feeling had robbed its tones of their na¬ tural sweetness. Who could he be, pos¬ sessed of knowledge so secret and so dangerous ? " It must be Arlingford himself!" ex¬ claimed the colonel, striking his forehead with violence ; " then what am I ?—Isa¬ bella ! Hippolita ! thou art now avenged." Had there been any instrument of self- destruction within his reach, colonel Bel- grave, in the impulse of the moment,
would have put an end at once to his crimes and to his existence; but fortu¬ nately in this he was disappointed—a far different object met his view. Over the fire-place hung a beautiful painting of a lady, with an infant in her arms ; the fea¬ tures of the mother resembled those of lady Evelina, and as the wandering eyes of her guilty husband fixed on the picture, the enormity of his intention forcibly struck him. The delicate state of lady Evelina's health, her steady kindness to¬ wards himself, novv rushed upon his mind. " Poor Evelina," he cried, softening into tears, " I cannot, will not, be thy mur¬ derer too." He now paced the chamber with hasty strides, uncertain how to act. That it was Arlingford, heno longer doubted—Arling¬ ford, whom he had so unjustly misrepre¬ sented—so treacherously defrauded ! He was too well acquainted with his character to suspect the purity of his present con¬ duct; and Belgrave believed that his inten-
tion was to restore lady Susan to her af¬ flicted parents; but if he was known to have been her seducer—he, the bosom friend of her husband—what would the world—what would that husband say to the duplicity and depravity of his be¬ haviour! I am safe, thought colonel Belgrave, while my secrets are in the keeping of Henry Arlingford. He has hitherto evin¬ ced such generous forbearance himself, that I need not fear that he will now be¬ tray me ; and if that silly little fool has one grain of prudence in her composition, she will not, for her own sake, confess that she eloped with a married man, and that man the husband of her best friend. With this kind of reasoning, colonel Belgrave qualified his fears, and recovering in some degree the appearance of composure, he resolved upon leaving town immediately, lest any injurious reports should reach the ear of his wife, whose situation made him doubly anxious to preserve her tranquillity.
Henry meanwhile proceeded, with the rapid assistance of four fleet horses, towards Hampton; while his fair companion, trem¬ bling with apprehension at the approach¬ ing interview, with difficulty kept herself from fainting. She knew the tender hearts she was on the point of meeting, and feared not their indulgence; yet humbled and guilty as her crime had made her, she shuddered to encounter their tears and grief-worn countenances. The feelings of Henry, though irritated and indignant at the past, were nevertheless alive to the painful situation of lady Susan, whom he endeavoureel to sooth and console into some degree of hope and confidence. Stopping at the Toy Inn at Hampton, he made her take some refreshment, which revived her drooping and exhausted spi¬ rits, and which gave her courage to address a few lines to her parents, which she handed to Henry for his approval.
" MY DEAR, DEAR PARENTS, ' e With shame and horror I con¬ fess myself unworthy your notice, and own that I have sinned beyond forgive¬ ness ; but I am sincere in my repentance, dearest mother, and only ask that I may be allowed once more to behold you and my revered father. The good and gene¬ rous man who gives you this, has, at the hazard of his life, conveyed me from the house where my betrayer had placed me. Dear father, dear mother, do not ask me who was my seducer ; for the sake of his amiable wife, I have sworn never to be¬ tray his name, unu that oath at least I will keep faithfully. Take pity on your child, your once-idolized, your wicked and ungrateful Susan, who is now waiting to receive her doom."
Henry folded up the letter, his eyes moistened with tears, and he feared to
trust again to the tenderness of his feel¬ ings. Lady Susan had covered her face with her hands, which she rested on the table. Henry spoke to her ; his voice trembled. Raising her countenance, she turned her streaming eyes towards him, and giving him both her hands, said—" I am ready to go with you." Henry led her in silence to the carriage, in which she was to remain while he pre¬ sented her letter to her father. The task was a delicate one—so was the situation of Arlingford ; yet, actuated by the best of feelings, he hastened to the apartments in the palace occupied by the earl and countess of Dunbar. They were on the point of retiring for the night, when Henry requested the ser¬ vant to inform his lordship that he had business of importance to communicate to him, and he was instantly admitted. La¬ dy Dunbar would have left the room ; but Henry requested her to remain, and
assist him in pleading the cause of one who had erred, but who was now a sin¬ cere penitent. The cheek of the countess was still paler than before ; she sunk into a chair, and gazed on him with a look which seem¬ ed to entreat an explanation. " I am the bearer, my lord, of a, let¬ ter, which, I trust, will plead my excuse for troubling you at this unseasonable hour." With visible agitation, iord Dunbar re¬ ceived the letter ; and as he read the con¬ tents, it increased to agony. Giving it into the hands of the countess, he covered his face, to conceal the tears of parental anguish, which rolled down his grief-worn countenance. The countess, less able to conceal her emotions, sobbed aloud, as she vainly en¬ deavoured to finish the letter of her once- idolized child.—" I cannot read it, Wil¬ liam," said the weeping mother of lady Susan ; " but we must not close our
hearts, nor our doors, against a repentant sinner." Pride, and the sense of family disho¬ nour, struggled long with the tenderness of a fond father, in the breast of lord Dun¬ bar. At length, turning to Henry, who was visibly affected by the scene before him, he held out his hand, saying— " Young man, I thank you for this gene¬ rous sympathy. The nobleness of your appearance justifies me in believing that you are wholly disinterested in your con¬ duct towards my unfortunate, my lost child. Älay the curses of an agonized father, whose idol he has dishonoured, whose family he has disgraced, fall upon the head, upon the heart of her seducer ! But where is my poor girl ? The world may condemn me, but in heaven ' there is more joy over a repentant sinner, than over ninety-nine just persons." Henry flew like lightning to the chaise, where the poor trembling lady Susan sat, listening for his approaching footsteps.
Lifting her out of the carriage, he bore her in his arms, almost insensible, to those of her anxious parents. Lady Susan sunk at their feet—her hands were raised to them in supplication —her eyes were filled with tears. She was their last, their only child, thus humbled in the dust. Her extreme youth, her in¬ experience, her ill-starred marriage, and her fatal beauty, all pleaded to a parents heart. They raised her from the ground, pressed her alternately to their bosoms, forgave, and blessed her. Henry was satisfied, was delighted— tears of joy gushed into his eyes ; he re¬ quired no thanks, no praise, but hastily quitted the apartment, without its being noticed ; and leaving them ignorant even of his name, he returned the same night from the palace, to the humble cottage of Judith r It was now that Henry felt the full va¬ lue of a conscience unstained by crime, as on his knees he offered up his grateful
thanks to that merciful Deity who had preserved him from the danger and temp¬ tation of the preceding night. He had now the felicity of reflecting, that through his means, lady Susan was restored to the protecting tenderness of her parents ; and a short time afterwards, he had the satis¬ faction of hearing, that the earl and coun¬ tess of Dunbar had quitted England for a foreign tour, which would detain them abroad some years ; w 7 hich prudent plan he hoped would be conducive to the peace and comfort of the unfortunate lady Su¬ san, and the recovery of her health, which had suffered from seclusion, and the " still small voice of conscience." Henry was now undecided as to his fu¬ ture plan of subsistence ; his finances were low, but he hesitated at seeking a fresh en* gagement, as the health of his brother visi¬ bly became worse ; and in case of his death, which the physicians apprehended would be sudden, the title and estate would be* come his ; thus raising him at once to in-
dependence, without the necessity of ac¬ quiring it by exposing to the world the perfidy of colonel Belgrave. Henry there¬ fore determined to continue his present frugal mode of living for a few weeks longer, trusting to that Providence, which had never yet deserted, though it had afflicted him. Dennis and his faithful Mary called on him occasionally ; they feared to offend the pride of Arlingford, by offering him any assistance, although they trembled to think that he might require it ; but with a considerate delicacy, which is too often wanting in their superiors, they sent re¬ peated presents to Judith, which enabled her to place before her darling many of the comforts, and some of the luxuries of life. Henry received them in silence, but his heart felt the full sense of that kindness, which thus modestly and tenaciously ad¬ ministered to his necessities ; and he could not help feeling a glow of rapture thrill
his heart, at the hope that he should one day be permitted, with the blessing of Heaven, to return the kindness of the ho¬ nest veteran and his wife with noble in¬ terest. From Dennis he acquired the know¬ ledge of his brother's imminent danger, and of colonel Belgrave's hasty orders for the removal of the family to the abbey ; which was delayed for a few days, on ac¬ count ofthe indisposition of lady Evelina. Henry smiled at his groundless fears ; and lest those belonging to him should suffer from this effect, he dispatched the following lines by the next morning's post to the residence of coionel Belgrave :—*
" Rest in security—from me you have nothing to fear. Though fully aware ofthe extent ofthe injury done to myself, let my long forbearance teach thee that I seek not justice from an earthly tribunal; I cannot wound the peace, and destroy
the happiness ofan amiable and deserving woman-—while she exists, her husband need not dread the vengeance of " Henry Arlingford."
Henry might have added, " thou art safe too while Marian Gorden lives;" for Henry felt that it would be equally impossible for him to derive any benefit, however great the advantage might be to himself, if it endangered her comfort and repose. How then would Henry have felt, could he have witnessed the surprise and vexation, nay, even the tears, of Marian, upon re¬ ceiving back the bank notes, whieh, in the generosity of heart, she had sent to re¬ lieve his necessities, and to procure him independence. Flattering herself with having managed her grand secret so as to elude the possibility of a discovery, she now felt doubly mortified at finding her- self detected, and wept over this fresh VOL. IL M
proof of a lofty spirit, too proud to re¬ ceive a gift, even from devoted friendship. The keenness of this disappointment sunk deep into the heart of Marian ; and ? for the first time, she felt the gloom of despondency steal upon her mind, which was not lightened by the countenances of those around her. Lady Evelina, the beloved companion of her girlhood, was indisposed, to all appearance even more in mind than in body, while the colonel was evidentlv suffering «from both : his ever-lively irits seemed to have received some violent and sudden shock ; and his manner of giving orders for their removal from town, was so abrupt and embarrassed, that it convinced Marian that something extraordinary had happened, which made him wish to hasten their departure. His well-known extravagance, his wanton waste of property, made her tremble for the peace of her friend ; and Alarían be¬ came equally anxious for their leaving London as early as possible, under the
impression that lady Evelina's happiness would be more secure at the Abbey. Much as Marian disliked the character of colonel Belgrave, and she as yet knew not half his vices, she could not behold his altered looks, without a benevolent wish to restore them to their wonted hila¬ rity: remembering the notes which Ar¬ lingford had returned, she generously of¬ fered them to him one morning when they were alone, to defray his travelling ex¬ pences. Although the heart of colonel Belgrave had nearly become callous to all the finer feelings of human nature, yet this additional proof of kindness and libe¬ rality, from one whom he would coolly have sacrificed to his own interest, visibly affected him. He pressed her hand with an impulse of gratitude, which at that moment he really felt.—■" I will not refuse your friendly assistance, my dear Marian," said he, " though with shame I confess myself so deeply involved, that I know not when I may replace it." He then ac¬ uì 2
knowledged that it was his intention, as soon ps they quitted town, to sell the house and all its splendid furniture, to* wards the liquidation ofhis debts. " Should Evelina be fortunate enough to present me with a son," added colonel Belgrave, " I solemnly declare, that I will never again touch a card ; but, on the contrary, I intend to go abroad, until my affairs are settled, and my estate free from debt, which it will never be while I continue in England." Marian highly approved of this plan, and exhorted him not to change his reso¬ lution ; for she felt assured, that while he remained under the influence of his pre¬ sent associates, he would never abstain froiii the infatuating passion of gambling, which would ultimately reduce him and his family to beggary. She would not, however, promise to accompany him abroad, though she assented to the pro¬ priety of concealing for the present his intention from lady Evelina, as her state
of health required a total ignorance of matters, which would tend to disturb her repose· The prospect of returning to the beau¬ tiful scenery of the Abbey, held forth its -allurements to Marian Gorden, who was heartily sick of London, and its constant succession of heartless amusements. Her removal would enable her to dissolve an intimacy, fraught with mystery and with danger ; for the more frequent her inter¬ views with Rosalie, the more she felt that she became entangled in her web, which, though finely spun, was, nevertheless, strong enough to secure the compassionate tenderness of Marian, who believed her more injured, though she knew not by whom, than guilty. Impressed with this idea, and pitying her desolate condition, Marian had hast¬ ened to the residence of madame, upon the first intimation of her illness. This total disregard of all personal considera¬ tion, to administer comfort to the tortured
soul of a stranger, overcame the haughty spirit of Rosalie, who no sooner beheld the sweetly benevolent countenance of Marian, who, at that late hour of night, came like a guardian angel to her aid, than melting into tears, she pressed her hand to her lips with fervour, exclaiming, " I thank thee, lady, I thank thee: the supreme Being, who fornfied thee of such gracious materials, and who gave thee a heart so srood, so kind, will never let thee stand in need of that consolation and sup¬ port, which now thou hast imparted to a daughter of affliction." Marian tenderiy besought her to calm her spirits, assuring her that she would not leave her until necessity obliged her, and then only for a short time. With this assurance, Rosalie became more com¬ posed, and, ivith her hand locked in thai of Marian, sunk into a gentle slumber. Her features, divested of their wild and vindictive expression, Marian now gaæed on with admiration, for thcy were cast in
beauty's most perfect mould. A few of the jetty ringlets strayed from beneath her cap, resting on the carmine of her soft cheek, while the open robe discovered the graceful neck, on which rested a golden cross, set with diamonds, the symbol of her faith. A smile of serenity played round her faultless mouth, but it was quickly succeeded by the convulsive start of bodily pain, and she awoke, still grasp¬ ing the hand of Marian within her own. " Ah, dearest, best of friends !" said Rosalie, " your presence will lighten my pains ; but should they prove mortal, pro¬ mise me to destroy, unread, the papers which I will deliver to your keeping." " Most sacredly I promise," cried Marian. " I am satisfied, lady, for I know that I can trust your word : you are the only being upon earth, in whom I now feel certain that I can confide. I am too ill to support an interview with Arlingford; but should we not meet again, give him, lady, the dagger which, in case of my
decease, you will find in yonder cabinets it belonged to him who betrayed the un* suspecting confidence of my virgin heart -—him who, with false oaths and false pro¬ mises, seduced me from my home—him who is the father of my child : I know that Arlingford has not sufficient spirit to use it ; let him therefore, if I die, return it to its cruel and perfidious owner, as the last gift of Rosalie—the arms on the blade will inform him of its master's name." " I trust that you will live," said Ma¬ rian—" live to abjure all feelings but those of Christian forgiveness." Rosalie smiled bitterly ; yet the differ¬ ence of opinion, as well as of religion, did not damp the gratitude of her feelings to¬ wards Alarían Gorden. In the agonizing conflict between life and death, she gave birth to a beautiful boy, who was imme¬ diately consigned to the care of a wet nurse, a respectable married woman, who for a liberal remuneration, and comfortable annuity for life, was to convey the infant
to the brother of its mother in Italy, and to continue there as its nurse. The atten¬ tion of Marian was divided between the lovely infant and its suffering parent ; her tears flowed for both; judging by her own feelings, she thought death would be preferable to the agony of giving up her child ; and as the day arrived, appointed for the separation, the heart of Marian bled for the unhappy mother, whose proud relations had enjoined to so unnatural a sacrifice. Rosalie endeavoured to hide the war¬ fare of internal feeling—she held the baby close pressed to her quick heaving breast— she gazed with stifled agony on its perfect features—-cold drops of perspiration stood on her aching brow—tears gushed to her eyes, and fell on the infants cheek. Ro¬ salie kissed them off in trembling fond¬ ness—in vain she tried to rally her sink¬ ing spirits—in vain she recalled the deep¬ ness of her injuries—the perfidy of its father—her own disgrace and exile; the ??
tenderness of a mother for a while gave place to all revengeful feelings. Clasping the child still closer to her heart, she gave vent to her long-smothered tenderness, in tears and sobs of anguish, while Marian, who was the sole witness of her grief, hung over her in tearful silence. At length the high-souled Italian made an effort to regain her self-command, and turning to Marian, placed the uncon¬ scious infant in her arms.—** Take him, lady, take him, while I have power to re¬ sign him. I will not sacrifice the future prospects of my child, to the weak and selfish love of a mother. Let him go to the palace of my kindred—-let him enjoy their patronage, their w r ealth; it is the only recompence I can make him for the disgrace of his birth." Marian, unwilling to obey, yet anxious to save madame from a second relapse of maternal weakness, hastened, with the in¬ fant, into the drawing-room, where its nurse, wdth her husband, was waiting to
receive it. Almost choked with tears, Marian could only articulate—" Deal with this child, as you wish God to deal with you. Be a mother------" She pressed the woman's hand, who, af¬ fected by her distress, assured her, that in the truest sense of the word, she would be a mother to the poor baby, thus cruelly torn from its own natural parent. " So may Heaven prosper you," said Marian. They now departed, in a chaise and four, with their innocent charge ; and Ma¬ rian felt a gleam of hope, as she recollect¬ ed that it would be to their interest to be kind to it, and to prolong its existence, as they would be handsomely rewarded on their arrival in Italy. On re-entering the chamber of Rosalie, she gently approached the bed of the ex¬ hausted mother, who withdrew the hand¬ kerchief from her face, at the soft tread of Marian.—" The conflict is passed," said she, in a low voice; and placing the hand
of the compassionate girl on her heart, she added, " it beats but languidly ; far better would it be for some persons, if it had ceased to beat. My trial, lady, has been severe, but it is over. Once I thought that nothing could exceed the bitterness of my anguish—-it was when I received the fatal letter from my destroyer, which tore from my heart the last sad hope to which it had fondly clung—it was when I felt that I could no longer esteem or love him, and that we must part for ever. I thought that trial great, but this is still greater. I have no more to suffer·—all else would be trifling : I have no bnger any tie to bind me to existence; yet I have something still to live for—some¬ thing to perform." Marian shrunk from the dark meaning of her eye, which, kindling with its wont¬ ed fire, left no trace of maternal weak¬ ness. Half raising herself, she leaned on the bosom of Marian for support, and putting her hand to her throbbing brow,
seemed almost unconscious of her pre¬ sence, as she conti ued io give vent to her feelings.—" My child is gone; the only tie which could attach this desolate heart to the world is taken from me. He will never know the sin, the shame, the dishonour of his mother. I have been called upon to make this great sacrifice, and I have made it ; and am I alone to feel the weight of that crime, which has robbed me of my boy, my home, my kin¬ dred, and my name ?" She paused, then crossing her arms over her bosom, she re¬ sumed—" My life is spared—spared that I may avenge my wrongs on the perfidi¬ ous Englishman, who has thus wantonly violated his oaths, and humbled ie in the dust. Yes, the time is fast approach¬ ing, when I shall see him suffer all that / have now experienced. I shall behold his tears—shall hear his groans—a father's groans for his lost child ; and as I witness the despair, the agony I shall myself in¬ flict, I will whisper in his ear, seducer !—
destroyer ! this is Italian vengeance l She sunk back exhausted on her pillow, insensible to the loud cries of Marian, who fearing lest life was extinct from this conflict of the passions, dispatched a ser¬ vant instantly for her medical attendant. Fortunately he was at home, and imme¬ diately administered the necessary resto¬ ratives, with a strict caution to those around her, to keep her perfectly quiet, as she was in extreme danger. This was the morning of the day ap¬ pointed for the marchioness of Douglas's grand ball. Rosalie had sunk ir ? a slum- ber, which, from the complete exhaustion of mind and body, promised to last some hours, and Marian felt herself obliged to leave her, that she might prepare herself for an amusement in which she could not participate. Dressing early, she stole once more to the residence of the unfortunate Rosalie, who still slept; the doctor and nurse sat watching the event of her wa¬ king. Marian promised to return in a
few hours, and really indisposed herself, was hastening to Tyrconnel House, when she met Arlingford in the passage, as be¬ fore mentioned. With a fearful anticipation of unplea¬ sant news, Marian placed in her bosom the letter of Arlingford, and proceeded to join lady Julia and the marquis. Too much harassed by the scenes she had so recently witnessed, she felt herself com¬ pelled to decline dancing, on the real plea ofindisposition, while lord Rochdale good- naturedly placed himself by her side, and amused her by the various witty anec¬ dotes which he related, and which, at any other time, would have afforded her infi¬ nite amusement; but now, even his kind¬ ness wearied ; and she was at length obH¬ ged to retire from the crowded scene. Lady Evelina had declined being of the party. Charlotte had quitted the service of Marian, intending, as she said, to live with her cousin, who was to instruct her in dress-making; and Mary Dennis, at
this critical juncture, officiated as l^dy'g maid to Marian, wbo, by her assistance, was enabled to pass the night with the suffering foreigner. In hastily changing her attire, the let¬ ter of Arlingford fell from the bosom of Marian Gorden ; the presence of the faith¬ ful Mary was no restraint; the seal was broken, and her heavy eyes eagerly ran over the contents ; they caused an addi¬ tional pang to the excellent heart that had feasted on the pleasing idea of having con¬ tributed in secret to his comforts. That idea—that hope was no longer allowed her ; pained to the soul by the discovery of her secret, and ill from the over-exertion of her feelings, she nevertheless recollected that her presence was necessary to the re¬ pose of madame ; and protected by the at¬ tached Mary, she fortunately arrived at the residence of Rosalie, before her absence had been missed by the sufferer.
CHAP. VII. The slumber of Rosalie continued long and doubtful. Not a sound was heard in the chamber—all was breathless attention, all anxious watching, lest the result of her deathlike sleep should terminate un¬ favourably. Marian had placed herself in an easy chair by the bedside, and near her sat the medical attendant, a young man high in his profession, possessed of great skill and humanity, which last had been painfully excited, by the situation in which he last found his beautiful patient. Two nurses stood at a respectful distance, gazing upon his countenance, in which they expected to read the fate of their mistress, who, to their imagination, had already ceased to breathe. In the next apartment, that he might be ready at her
call, knelt her father confessor, who, on the first intimation of her danger, had recourse to his beads, and who still con¬ tinued in fervent prayer for the restora¬ tion of the suffering Rosalie. He prayed that her life might be spared, for her to dedicate the remainder of it to the holy service of the church. As her confessor, he had acquired a knowledge of her story, and of the rank and wealth of her family. The latter was a powerful inducement with father Ambrose, to use his influence to persuade his lovely countrywoman to abjure the world, and to bury herself, and thc keen sense of her injuries, in the soli¬ tude of a cloister. Rosalie had listened to him, with that respectful deference to his opinion which the sanctity of his holy order inspired, and which gave him hopes that he should ultimately succeed; but Rosalies whole soul was bent upon one bold scheme of vengeance ; and so fixed, so determined, was her purpose of being her own avenger, that nothing but the
hand of death eould stay the meditated blow. The good and benevolent Marian, while watching the deathlike slumber of the unfortunate foreigner, forgot that she was sacrificing her own health by her unwea¬ ried attention to that of madame. The paleness of her looks, the heaviness of her eyes, and the parching heat of her hands, betrayed her want of repose, and doctor Bel ville besought her to retire to rest ; but Marian felt that it would be impossible to sleep, while the fate of Rosalie was un¬ decided. She therefore remained by her side, silently offering up her prayers for her recovery, and for the possession of that grace which would teach her to bear as a Christian the dispensations of Provi- . dence. Rosalie at length unclosed her eyes, and fixing them on the countenance of Marian Gorden, gave a smile of grateful recognition on beholding her. Pressing her hand to her lips, she said—'* 1 owe
you much, dear lady ; but if I am spared, I will endeavour to repay your goodness. I feel better—feel refreshed; go, there¬ fore, dearest of friends, and take repose." Doctor Belville seconded this request, for he perceived that Marian's bodily strength had yielded to incessant fatigue and nightly watching; and as he pro¬ nounced his patient to be out of danger, if she kept herself tranquil, Marian was not sorry to avail herself of a few hours* rest, before she appeared before the family of colonel Belgrave. Feeling herself un¬ usually drowsy, she opened the door of the drawing-room, with an intention of throwing herself on the sofa. The lamp she held in her hand cast but a feeble light on the distant objects, yet she thought she could perceive a dark shadow on the rose-coloured silk couch : approach¬ ing nearer, she distinguished the figure of a man asleep. Fortunately for Marian, the idea of his being a robber never once entered her head, but supposing him to
be father Ambrose, she was on the point of retiring, when a gleam of light falling on the countenance of the sleeper, disco¬ vered to the astonished Marian the loved features of Henry Arlingford. She wish¬ ed immediately to quit the chamber, but her feet seemed rooted to the spot, and her eyes continued fixed on the face be¬ loved. A sprig of geranium, which he had plucked in passing through the con¬ servatory, had fallen from his hand, and Marian eagerly catching it from the ground, concealed it in her bosom, at the instant that Henry, disturbed by the light, awoke, and beheld the fast-retreating figure of Marian Gorden. Springing from the couch, he gently detained her. " Fly me not, dearest and best of hu- man beings," said Henry, pressing her soft hand respectfully to his lips ; " but allow me to account for the strangeness of my appearance here. I came last night to inquire after the health of madame: the distress ofthe attendants, and the im-
minent danger she was in, induced me to remain, and learn the result of her slum¬ ber. Fatigued and indisposed, I threw myself on the couch, to await the promised information. Sleep overcame me, and I conjecture that I have been forgotten." " Your explanation is unnecessary," re¬ piied Marian, with dignity. " You have refused my friendship; I have no wish, therefore, to learn the motives of your present or future conduct." " I see that I have offended you, dearest Miss Gorden," cried Henry, in a mournful tone; " but I have acted from the dic¬ tates of my r conscience. Pardon, there¬ fore, I conjure you, the return of your generous present : already have you made me your debtor for life; do not, I beseech you, withdraw from me your good opin¬ ion—your friendship. It is the only charm which binds me to this hated world : without it I can no longer struggle with my fate." Marian, softened by the plaintive
tones of his voice, as well as by the re¬ membrance of what she had seen him suffer in the abbey ruins, no longer en¬ deavoured to withdraw her hand from the gentle pressure of his.—" If the assurance of my good opinion—of my esteem, can afford you any gratification," said she, with her accustomed sweetness, " think that you still possess both, though you have wounded me deeply, by what I must call a false pride," Henry's features brightened with joy, but it quickly faded, on remarking the visible traces of indisposition which those of Marian bore. Alarmed by the pale¬ ness of her cheek and the heaviness of her eyes, he earnestly besought her not to endanger a life of so much value.— " Deeply as I may regret your absence," said he, " from town, as it will bereave me of my only chance of happiness, the sometimes seeing you, yet I shall console myself with the assurance that your health will be amended, and this dangerous and imprudent connection dissolved."
" I feel all the justice of your dislike," replied Marian ; ** but if you had wit¬ nessed the agonies that I have done—the great, the terrible sacrifice she has made, you would not withhold your pity ; and even while you condemn, may you not be doing her injustice? for I fee! assured, that she has fallen a victim to the diabo¬ lical arts of some unfeeling, some heartless monster." " Of that I am well assured," said Ar¬ lingford. w The injuries she has sus¬ tained, and the dreadful sacrifice she has now made, awaken my warmest sympathy for her sufferings ; but I nevertheless can¬ not repress a feeling of disgust and horror, when I hear a creature, so young and beautiful, give utterance to threats of deadly vengeance on her betrayer, threats which I am convinced she will have firm¬ ness enough to execute, as soon as return¬ ing health enables her to meet her des¬ tined victim." Marian trembled violently ; Henry still
tield her passive hand—'* Not," he conti¬ nued, " that I arrogate any merit to my¬ self» for my forbearance towards the ene¬ my of my peace. Long before this, I should have called him to answer for his perfidy, not, I grant, by stabbing him in the dark, but by an open and public trial. In doing this, I must have destroyed for ever the peace and confidence of your amiable friend, and wounded the kind and noble heart, which so generously sympa¬ thized in the sorrows of the deaf and dumb stranger of the ruins." Marian s cheek was no longer pale, but glowing with blushes ; she dared not raise her eyes, as in faltering accents she ex¬ pressed her gratitude for this disinterested proof of his friendship. Henry raised her hand to his lips ; she felt him tremble ; her agitation increased with the consciousness df his. Suddenly raising her eyes to¬ wards his, she perceived them fixed on her bosom, while the sunny beam of un¬ expected rapture illumined his fine fea- VOL. IL N
tures. Surprised, she instantly looked down towards the object of his attention, and beheld the tell-tale flower just peep¬ ing from above the lace which concealed her bosom. Ashamed, confused, and glowing with blushes, Marian covered her crimson face with her hand, and unable to resist the force of her feelings, sunk into a chair, and burst into tears. Henry was not less agitated, yet rap¬ ture the most exquisite filled his breast ; he flung himself on one knee before the self-humbled girl. — " Ever dear, ever adored Marian," he cried, in a voice of trembling tenderness, " do not damp the bliss, the ecstacy of this joyful moment, in which my soul for the first time dares to hope, that were my circumstances such as to warrant my aspiring to the possession of this beloved hand, you would not re¬ ject my suit ; ah, do not fear that I would take advantage of thy goodness ; I know and feel my own inferiority ; only give me hope, that at a future time you will suffer
me to plead the devoted affection of a heart, which beats only for you." Marian felt that her secret was disco¬ vered; to attempt therefore to disguise her real sentiments, would be an ungener¬ ous exertion of her power, of which she was incapable; indeed, the state of her own feelings, on hearing that she was the object of Arlingford's affection, was too joyous, too blissful, to admit of prudential reserve; and with that candour which had ever marked her character, she in a low voice declared, that notwithstanding his fancied inferiority, she was ready to bestow her hand, whenever his pride would permit him to claim it. Henry forgot that he was poor-—that he was dependant ; springing from the ground, he caught the generous girl to his breast, and as his lips touched hers, all else faded from his mind, all but the exquisite con¬ viction that he was beloved, and for him¬ self alone. Marian was alike insensible to every thing, but the same feeling. N 2
" You promise then, beloved Marian," said Henry, still holding her within his arms, " you promise to be mine, and mine only." " Yours, and yours only," softly whis- pered the blushing maid, at the same time hiding her face on his shoulder. " Oh, Marian ! with sueh happiness in view, how cruel is my fate, to have the cup dashed from my lips, at the very mo¬ ment of possession ! The uncertainty of my future prospects castes a chill upon the felicity of the present hour." Marian raised her head from his shoul¬ der, and with a look of innocent confid¬ ing tenderness, said—" Remember, Hen¬ ry, that I have now en&usted you with the care of my happiness ; do not suffer a iklse pride, or false delicacy on your part, to destroy it. My affection cannot fee affected, either by the loss or the reco- very of your fortune ; my liand is yours, when you wish to claim it." " Was ever man so tempted to become
blest, as I now am !" cried Henry, gazing with fond affection on her lovely counte¬ nance ; " but I will not selfishly give way to the anxious wishes of my heart. A little while, my Marian, and the health of my brother will either decide for life or death ; should the latter take place, I shall be enabled to regain my proper sta¬ tion in society ; I can then claim the pro¬ mised hand of my adored Marian, with¬ out the fear of rendering her an object of pity among her acquaintance, for having thrown herself away upon a beggar." The delicacy of Marian would not per¬ mit her to contend with Arlingford upon this point, though her anxiety to see him restored to the world, independent of its frowns, had made her overstep the limits -of female reserve. To raise him once again upon an equality with his summer friends, and to ensure to him all those lit¬ tle comforts, which, as the heir of general Beresford, he had been accustomed to en¬ joy, Marian would willingly have bestow- N3
ed upon him a legal right to all her vast possessions ; and with a sigh, which did not escape the quick ear of Henry, sh« ventured to inquire if he again intended to procure a similar situation to that which he had heid at Tyrconnel House. Henry felt that he could not explain to her his reasons for leaving it, neither could be be silent, when an opportunity thus offered of doing justice to the friendship of the marquis. He repeated to her the conversation he had with him, and his generous anxiety to learn his fate.—" Ne- ver," cried Henry, " was my prudence more severely tasked, than at that instant, when the kindness of Tyrconnel almost tempted me to confess who I was, and the cause of my concealment. I checked, however, the impulse of my gratitude; vet, I trust, the hour is not far distant, when Ì shall personally claim his friend¬ ship, and thank him for his kind and ge¬ nerous sympathy in the misfortunes of a stranger."
To ealm the inquietude of Marian, con* cerning his present situation, Henry in* formed her of his residence with the faith¬ ful Judith, whose idolatrous love for him would always be thinking of some little trifle to· add to his comforts. With his fond old nurse, it was his intention to re* main, until some alteration took place in the state of his brother's health.— tt But how," said Henry, drawing her closer to his bosom, ít shall I exist, wUhout seeing my beloved Marian, unless she generously takes compassion on her affianced hus¬ band, and permits him to correspond with her, until they meet again ?" Marian could not refuse a request, in which her own happiness was so nearly concerned. By this means, also, she gain¬ ed the address of Judith, whom she se¬ cretly determined to see, before she left London. In the blissful state of their feelings, neither herself nor Arlingford thought of the passing hours, until the rays of the rising sun reminded them that
prudence required them to separate. It was then that they recollected how many things they had stiil to say to each other, which had before escaped their memory : another half hour elapsed, and much was still untold. Henry remembered the tried fidelity of Mary Dennis, and through her means they could communicate with each otlu-, until the necessity of concealment ceased. Again Henry reverted to the danger of continuing her intimacy with Rosalie; and Marian once more assured him, that it should cease, as soon as re¬ turning health should render her visits unnecessary to madame. With difficulty they yielded to the ne¬ cessity of parting. Henry had recovered the tell-tale flower to which he wis in¬ debted foi all his present happiness, and he now refused to resign it to Marian, who relinquished it with less reluctance, upon receiving in its place one ofthe dark waving curls that graced the head of Ar¬ lingford. At length he tore himself away,
and Marian threw herself upon the sofa which he had quitted—not to sleep, but to meditate upon the rapturous certainty of being beloved by Henry. The sound of footsteps awakened her from her ideal felicity, and she hastened to inquire after madame, before the arrival of Mary, who was to escort her home, Marian felt a sincere pleasure in behoMfcg the improvement which rest had made in the appearance of Rosalie, whose counte¬ nance beamed with satisfaction as she approached the bed.— i( I feel, dearest lady," said she, " that for this time my life is spared. Never, never, while that life is given to me, will Rosalie forget the noble disinterestedness of Marian Gorden. Take rest now, dear lady—I must not be selfish ; I must live a day or two without seeing you: your health requires atten¬ tion. My thoughts, my blessing attend the friend of the friendless." Marian did indeed require repose ; she therefore gladly availed herself of the cir-
nese equest of Rosalie, and felt pleased that no engagements for a couple of days would interfere with her desire of remain¬ ing quiet at home.
END OF VOL. IL
Printed by J. Ddlhng, Leddenhall-Strcet, London.
