Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The highest castle and the lowest cave: or, Events of the days which are gone: Rebecca Edridge
CHAPTER I.
The merry, merry bells ring round, And the cheerful chime» rewound ; Far and Mãe the gladsome song Is trod'd by the rejoicing throng: And pomp puts on her li\'ry gay, To lisi.il the young heir'b natal day. Scarcely were the severe commands of Henry obeyed, when the remembrance of them was chased away by an event of happiness and de¬ light; and the castle of St. Evremond became again the abode of joy. Matilda blessed her lord by the birth of a son. The rapture of the birth ofthe heir of St. Evremond, diffused itself through his household, antl every heart expanded with encreased attachment to its master, tvhen thus doubly bound to him by this new and tender tie. The vassals and serfs of his domains demonstrated the interest they felt in the happmess of their chief by the manner in which they expressed their alle¬ giance. Congratulations were sent with every testimony of respect and esteem, and according to the custom then existing, of giving gifts to the vol. ?. ?
?,
superior at the birth of the heir, every one gave to his utmost, from pride, from honour, and from fove. Philip de A'alonnes sont a golden cup, con» î aining fifty marks, accompanied by a robe for the new-born boy, which Eleanor his wife had em¬ broidered, Brian de Rosenne seni a golden plate on w hich he laid an equal sum. The occupiers of biiiid'er estates, sent presents according to their land , : and the humble peasants wove flotvers into iaaeiful garlands, and hung them round the tvin- dowft and gateways ofthe castle. The chivalry ofthe thirteenth century, at which time numners began to be ¡softened, taught every kni 0 ht to consider valour, humanity, courtesy, ju-tice, and honour, as the peculiar character¬ istic- of hi í order: and as in war he was altvavy ready to signalize las courage, so in peace he was ever prompt lo evince his devotion to the fair. Tiiri*· service vyas hi.s dearest duty, their behest-* he si'ongest incitement, and their applaude iiii» best reward. Philip tie Valonnes-, and Brian de Ilosenne, as n »ervice due to Matilda, mounted their boises, as. r halling at the gate of the castle, told »St. Etreinond that they were bound for the mansion r;f Montgomery, to bear the glad tidings to the baron arai his baroness. Iliough they rode with swiftest speed, the sil-
3
ver moon shone on the lofty turrets of Montgo¬ mery's castle, whicii tt as seen from far, ere they reached the foot ofthe hill on which it was erected. The silent repose of all around comínced them, that the inhabitants bad ended the business of the tlay, and that the gatet· were cl jsed. Lnwilling, even on such an errand, to arouse the inmates, and alarm the baron, they threw them¬ selves on the tuil', and like hardy boldicrs, to whom the eaith i& as a bed of down, they slept till the bustle of leturning day brought the labourer to his task ; they then arose, and vv ith all expedition presented themselves before the venerable pair. The beai ers of such information ????? welcomed with warm cordiality, and their tidings so raptu- iouriy received, that the expressions of transport which burst from the baron and lie exulting ba¬ roness, interrupted ihe communication brought to them. No sooner had they heard that the child vva« born, than the baroness -said, " Put the saddle and the horse trappings on the palfry, I will set out thi» moment." tí Get another ready for me," said Montgomery. " Let tis arrange our journev," said de A'alonnes. *· it is easily and quickly ar¬ ranged, we have only to mount and set forward, ' sud the baroness. ■' It wiil be found a tedious journey," said tie Valonnes. " Not tedious" said .Montgomery, '* we ttdl ride f«M." " Aye, aye,"
4
continued the baroness, "I am still able to ride to St. Evremond ere night." " Impossible/' said Brian de Rosenne, " Impossible !" exclaimed the baroness, " ? ! thou knowest not what it is to be a mother." " But I now what it is to be a father." answered Brian. " But thou knowest not what it is to have a grandson." Brian coukl say no more. The baron de Montgomery was never dis¬ obeyed. A horse for himself, and the palfry for the baroness, were at the gate almost as soon as ordered, " Sir knight," said the baron to Philip tie Valonnes, " thy steed may need repose, and so may thine, Sir knight de Rosenne, therefore ye fehali follow ; I and Amicia will set on, we shall be ¡soon joined." " Not so," said both the knights, " our horses hav e been at rest all night. Shame would it be to knighthood should we stay behind, where a lady needs attendance." " îîeed not that/' said the baroness, " I always have a knight in readincbs, have I not," she asked the baron. '' In attendance for ever and ever," replied Mont¬ gomery. " Come, let us on: mount, my Amicia." St) ¡-..vying, he assisted the baroness to seat herself on her palfry, and then vaulted wdth knightly '.?race upon his saddle. " Let the maids and pages follow/ ö akl he, " we shall be going on while the> prepare." So sa} hig they set forward; tie Valonnes, and Rosenne, ordered iheir horses
ã forth, and quickly overtook them. They would have led the palfry. " The palfry and myself, Sir knights," she said, " have both been long ac¬ customed to this steep. Thanks for your courtesy, we shall reach the foot in safety." The exceed¬ ing eagerness of the baroness ???$ such, that she hardly seemed to know if she were in the open plain beneath the scorching sun, or in the wootK shaded by the forest trees ; and ?? -hen it was pro¬ posed that she should stop and partake of ? re¬ past, with which the attendants who had quickly followed the departure of their lord anil lady, had been loaded, she replied, " It cannot yet Ik din¬ ner time," although it was long past noon, n ? almost evening. " Allow me, my good lady, - id Philip de Valonnes, *' to observe, that it i- abso¬ lutely necessary to stop for the sake of the bea-ts weride: they most rest by the way. When M. Evremond conveyed his bride to his castle they rested in the wood. Let me prevail; ¡stop and partake ofthe refreshments."' "I fear, Amicia, that we must comply," &aid Monteromeiy. 4i Ii ??? do not let the horses rest, we shall never reach the castle." Montgomery's opinion tlecided the matter, the baroness dismounted. *· How far be» yond this halting place have we to ride," a -ked the baroness. " We have not yet performed full half our journey/' tt Then we must journey ? J
b through the niobi. Tlie lovely moon novv near ihe full, will light ns ????* wry. Ft w ill he plcasanter than the heat of tlay." ?£ I have not mentioned/' said the courteous knight, fi the plan of our pro¬ ceeding, because 1 was unwilling to interrupt the anticipated pleasure of ihe journey's end, St« IC\ remonti has recommended, that ihou and thy maids bhould stop at nielli at the convent of w hich tlio holy mother Ellrutle is the ??????, wdiere the iady Matilda btopton her journey with her maids. A. neighbouring monastery will receive us," The bareness without icpljin^, looked at JMontgo- mery, who said to her, t4 Let ii be ??. St, ill vre« mond ean better appreciate the distance, than we who never until now have traced the way between our castlob." Aeon tlin«Iy they sped onward to the convent. The way-faring and the traveller always sought refreshment and rtmose beneath ihe holy- roofs of monasterio- and lunvenb; therefore, merely as travellers lie baionesis and her maids, would have· been received bv Jiltrude; but as the wile of the baron de Montemor), rise smc re¬ ceived with ?? ery marked respect consistent with the dignity of an abbe^, who as a holy character could not practice all 1 1)0 ceremonies oftlio worldly. The ?????? Matilda was not forgotten, and the idster.s weie not dispo' ed to attend to the baroness, expecting tne same pride ι hyv had uncovered in
7 her daughter. The baroness, however, although .she never forgot the high station in which siie moved aloft, softened the pride of greatness by the most affable behaviour, and the most amiable conversation. And she had not been long vvitli Eltrude, ere she drew to herself the attentions of the company. Agnes de Plaisseheraut, whose early life had been passetl in the busmess and the bustle ofthe world, was anxious iu her inquiries eoncernmg such events as others scarcely cared to know. The cru iade of Lewis was a theme on whicii she said much, for her husband had been a w arrior. t ' The many tales of war which I have heard related, and which, in my days of y oath, alone were deemed worth note, have made me ever fearful fis' *ne fate of soldiers. The hard¬ ships they endure, the fatigues ihey undergo, the indignitie·» they receh e from their conquerors, and the cruelties they inflict on their captives, are so many circumstances of alarm and terror, that even here, they vibrate in remembrance, and a new wat îs ever to me a new calamity. Memory can re¬ cur for ever to their enumeration, and the year as she concludes her months has not heard halt their recitals. The termination of the mildo-t battles teems with horror, and the horror of fierce combats makes the heart sick. Those event- "ire chiefly dreadful, where parents and children ? 4-
8
serving together behold the sufferings of each other. Among the infidels who opposed king Richard, and king Philip, was the commander of a detachment of horse, ?И??? name was Osrym, lie was attended by two pons, ???? rode on each ride of their father, his detachment came forward to oppose the squadron of an Englirii knight, named Bertram de Totnaens, he also was attended by his sons. They had not singled out each other from any personal pique, but met as enemies thrown together by the chance of battle. Neverthe¬ less, that rancour, ????? strange to say, is always most severe when religion mingles in the dispute, made each hateful to the other, and they met fu¬ riously. The two commanders were hand to hand in combat, when Geoffry de Totnacns, see- big a son of Osrym ???? his scy mitar and rush hetween his father and Bertram, rushed forward also, and with a blowj made doubly powerful by a parent's danger, felled the young infidel to the ground. In the impetuous rurii of Osrym* s ven¬ iec ance hib horse trod on the body of his son, Λν?ιο died beneath the feet of his steed. ít Come on, Malue," he cried to his surviving son, " come on, ihe Christian boy hath overthrown thy brother, and made me trample on his body. Revenge him, as thou art my fou." " Now, Christian/' said Malue, " thou ¡shalt feel the terrible fury of a bro-
9
ther's love." So saying, he thrust his javelin into Geoifry's horse who fell with his rider, then draw¬ ing the scymitar whicii hung at his side, he cried out, (i look on Osrym my father, Selim shall be full revenged," He instantly struck Sewn, the youngest son of Bertram, just belotv the casque, and he fell weltering in blood. The ttvo blows had succeeded each other tvith a rapidity like lightning, and Seton fell, ere the wretched Ber¬ tram had thoroughly beheld that Geoffry wa& down. The grief, the agony of Bertram, for a moment checked his rage, and in that moment Osrym seized him. " I know they are thy sons ; look on them; neither can rise. Thou didst make me trample on Selim, my own horse trod on my son. Thy sons have paid their life for his, and thine shall pay my anguish." So saying he gave the word and his horsemen rushed forward, and notwithstanding the eflbrts made by his fol¬ lowers to rescue him, Bertram fell beneath their numbers/' " Methinks," said Eltrude, " that ihe barba¬ rous ferocity by which both faiths are actuated, almost makes me doubt if either may be called Christian ; and were it not for the assurance ofthe pope, I should think that neither deserved para¬ dise." " Such actions shock humanity," said Agnes, " thougii they be sanctioned by his holiness," ? 3
10
The baroness de Montgomery knew nothing of a convent beyond visiting Adeliza, and the soli¬ tary humble cell assigned her for the night so ill accorded with the pomps of a castle, that she could not sleep, and when the baron and his attendants brought her palfry in the morning she eould not help saying, the saddle would have been easier than her couch, AAlien she bad farewell to the abbess, it ?? ? ?? stipulated that on her re¬ turn she should again rest under her holy protec¬ tion. Her mind was so fully occupied by Matilda and her boy that she passed every object without observing Λν1?3ί she saw, even the mighty ocean was unnoticed. AVhen they reached the end of their journey, St. Evremond tvho was watching for their arrival, was at the gate lo greet them. (i AVhere is Ma¬ tilda ?" said Montgomery, " Where is the boy ?" ^aid the baroness. Matilda who knew the news of the birth of her son had been carried to her parents, was impatient for their arrived, therefore tliey were immediately taken to her apartment, when they entered the room, and saw the child rieeping on the arm of his mother, in the delight of their ht-irt they embraced each other, saying, '* how beautiful is our little boy." Every body was so pleased ihat ihe castle midiit truly be called the house of joy. It wa*
11
the joy of the heart ; no feast, no pomp, no shew, no sports. They were reserved for the christen¬ ing, which was deferred till Matilda could partake of all the grandeur and magnificence vvith which it was to be celebrated. When that time arrived, all the stately parade which had been exhibited when she arrivetl at the castle was again displayed, to do honour to the heir. The dignified prelate who had united the baron to Matilda, again came in state to bap¬ tize their son. Not only all the vassals of St. Evremond, but also tliose of Montgomery were invited : and Matilda expressed such a strong wish that Catherine de Clifford, her little bride- maid might be present at the ceremony, that the gallant Philip de Valonnes again proffered his services, and requested to be permitted to go to the abbey and ask Bertha mid the abbess to allow him to bring her to be one among the guests. He set forward accompanied by Goda, the chief of Matilda's women and ñve other females, and attended by some of his own followers, and ???? of the domestics of St. Evremond. Ma¬ tilda's black palfry, on which she had been placed upon the bridal day, was led by one of the grooms and a donation was sent to the abbey in honour of Adeliza,
? Ü
12
It was the custom then for women to occupy their time in curious needle-work. Bertha tie Clif¬ ford had worked a curious cap wdiich she sent by Catherine, who with permission of the abbess wab entrusted to ihe care of de Valonnes and Goda, requesting that the infant might wear it when he received his name. She stopped, as Matilda and the baroness had done, at Eltrude's convent ; and the pomp of the wedding, having been always present to her young imagination, she entertained the sisters with her lavish account of the splendour which had been displayed. They found her the plea¬ santest little guest that had ever called at the abbey, and her departure was more regretted than that of the baroness, or that of Matilda. " When I go back to my sister," she said as she departed, *' I shall be here again." She was again placea on the palfry, and Valonnes agam led it by a long silken rein. When she arrived at the castle she presented Bertha's gift, the value of which was enhanced by the love of Bertha. When all the guests were assembled, and Ma¬ tilda was able to bear the fatigue of the occasion, the heir was dressed in the robe embroidered by Eleanor de Valonnes, and the cap sent by Bertha de Clifford. The baroness who was his
13
god-mother, boiô her grandson in his mantle of cloth of gold to the chapel ; where, in the pre¬ sence of his father and mother, the baron de Montgomery and Philip de Valonnes being the sponsors, he received from the bishop the name of John. AVhen the holy service was ended the guests returned to the great hall, tvhere an exquisite repast was served with all the pomp and ceremony tthich the celebration of the heir's baptism re¬ quired : all the plate t\ as displayed, and inter¬ spersed among its massiyeness, gay garlands of flowers twined by the domestics hung gaudily, and diffused their fragrance in the apartment. AVhen the dishes vv ere removed, a large tv rough t golden cup w as placed in the centre of the table filled vvith delicious wine. It had been given by Montgomery to his grandson, antl had been given by he grandfather to him. It passed as the cup of fellowship; and was a second time filled to the health of John de Montgomery, the castle's heir. The solemnity of the catire of the meeting pre¬ vented the pastimes of disport, and the Bishop continued to grace the assembly by Ins presence, while the har)) and the song sounded in the hall. Edwin, the httle archer and harper, performed m the presence of his first master, the baron do Montgomery, to whom St. Evremond had îe- 3
14
peated the transactions of the wound of Roger dc A'alionces, and the death of his companion, both from the bow of Edwin. He gave great satisfac¬ tion by the sweet tones which he produced from bis instrument, and vvas much applauded when he ??? Way happincs beneath thm tooi Dwelt e\ei ! Mav u\ despite keep far aloof Tor ever ! Here may no *ud mbfoiîune read ι, No never í So μγ no quart ¿? wc be r eidi Whtãt,\t.r '
CHAPTER II.
Why hend? )<? man the knee, and bows the head As Timon passee ? Timon'b cup is gold ; The man who bendi, drmks from the horn. Timon Wears ? feather in his cap ; and he hath ? itain to laquey htm: but he that f-toops H jth not. What would he he without his train ? Let him who bcaicely deigns a nod to those VVhose humblei lot hath not an attendant, Aik lnuibilf.
It is the display of magnificence which draws tlie gaze and the admiration of the spectators, that constitutes its chief charm. The banner which waves from the wall ; the gold and silver loading tlie shelf, not used ; and the jewels which sparkle in the hair, and spread their lustre over the wearer, are all exhibited for ostentation. It is when many can behold, that greatness gratifies its pride ; and the pomp which no one extolleth, is to vanity Hke the stately funeral to the dead. None ???? tan ieel the pride of elevation like an ancient baron. í h» stood aloft, pre-eminent. The lesser sort had
IG
not then doffed their humility, nor aped what are called their betters. Matilda's whole soul was wedded to such pa¬ geantry ; and sweeter to her ear than the sound of the harp ???? the voice that extolled her mag¬ nificence ; and she ???? prouder of the pomp wliich adorned her hall, than of the son slie baptized at the font. Yet tliink not she was unconscious ofthe dignity ofher heir. With the fondness of a mother, which she felt with the ardour of all her passions, she mingled, even beyond that, the glory of the fame and the name of St. Evremond, His vassals would sound his praise throughout his domains; Montgomery would bear it to her former home ; and Catherine de Clifford would vaunt it in the abbey where Adeliza de Beaufort ???? abbess, and Bertha, her beloved friend, was confined. When the time for Catherine's return was arrived, Philip de Valonnes gave to Brian de Rosenne his turn of gallantry. Under his knightly- care, and again attended by Goda, and Matilda's maids, she quitted the castle, and began her jour¬ ney homeward. She stopped at the convent of Eltrude, and again delighted the sisterhood with her childish observations, " Wilt thou be a nun, Catherine?" asked Editha. "Ono! I love not the gloominess of an abbey, I love the shews
17
and the sports of a baron's castle. í love the dazzling ornaments which shine in their large halls; and the finery which decks the knights and ladies. I would ye could have seen the orilliant plate upon the shelves and tables of St. Evremond, and the sparkling stones ????? glit¬ tered in all tîie dresses. Ye would lay aside the muffles vvhich ye wear here ; and quit these high walls and these dismal chambers." " Catherine/' said the abbess, " the dazzle which thou delight- est in shews thee nought but its brightness ; thou canst not yet imagine the foulness which it oft conceals." " I knew a child once," said Agnes dc Plaisseheraut, " who like thee had a sister in the cloister, and vvho like ihee was dazzled by the glitter of wealth, and the shews of the baronial castle. Adina, the nun, in peace and quiet passed a lengthened life of uninterrupted happmess, free from those cares whicii often embitter tbe bustle and ihe pomp of the worid. Elgiva, elate with hope, married a great baron, but her days ????? full of woe. Her husband was a harsh lord, and her son an undutiful child : and for many years all shr knew from both was vexation and unkind¬ ness. Yet the harp sounded in her hall, the song echoed in her chambers, and the feast and 'he dance cheered her guests. lier estates ????? alienated, her plate and jewels sold, Her hus-
is
band died in Palestine, and lit r son sought a foreign clime. She fled to the reti eat of Adina, and there found ihe insufficiency of ¿.4'catnes.s to command happmess, and of wealth to purchase joy; for until greatness aud wealth were gone, she never knew happiness nor ta.sied joy." " Did slie find them afterward?" asked Catherine. " No doubt she did," said the abbess, " for she sought them in the c'oister." " I hope it will ne\er be my lot to seek them there/' said the prattler. She remained longer witli Eltrude than on her first visit to her abbey, and departed, still char¬ med with the pomps and vanities of life, and siili repugnant to the gloom of monastic confinement. Wlien she reached the dwelling of Bertha her sister, she again detailed all the luxuries slu had enjoyed, delivered the most cordial expres¬ sions of love and esteem from the baron and baroness de Montgomery, and Matilda and St, Evremond. She then delivered many gifts and tokens of friendly remembrance. To Adeliza she gave a string of beads tvhich had been en¬ trusted to her care by Eltrude *, and a box of relics from Agnes de Plaisseheraut, vvhich had been brought by her huriwnd from the holy land. bhe then displayed the gilb she had bought from the castle. A curious case ίο hold needles chicli Matilda had made with the feathers of a
19
goldfinch that had flotvn in at the casement of her chamber window, the morning after her arri¬ val at her husband's castle, and fluttered and died on her couch : it was sent to Bertha as a return for the christening cap ; and to Adeliza was sent a missal, said to have belonged to Godfrey of Bouillon. During the residence of Montgomery and the baroness at the castle of St. Evremond, Matilda continued her feastings ; for she put in competi¬ tion the magnificence of her father's castle, and the pomp of her husband's hall. And when her strength was sufficiently recovered to endure fa¬ tigue she mounted her palfry, and accompanied the cavalcade which attended Montgomery half way on the road to Eltrude's abbey, where the baroness intended to remain several days to enjoy the conversai ion of the aged sister Agnes tie Plaisseheraut, whose talcs of the days which are gone wert* the delight ofher auditors. A widely diffused intercourse with the tvorld, a penetra¬ ting observation, and a retentive memory furnish¬ ed entertainment adapted to all hearers, and was an inexhaustible source of pleasure, tvliich chear¬ ed the gloom of seclusion, and softened the rigor¬ ous restraint of confinement. AVhen the baroness arrived there, she found that Catherine de Clifford had forestalled all riie
20
had to communicate on the events of the castle ; and therefore the tales of Roger Valionces, and Walter de Clovinne, together with the adventure^ of Lundy Island were brought forward, that she might contribute her share of amusement to the eager listeners Λν?ιο sat around. " The death of Roger Valionces/' «»id sistei Editha, if reminds me of a little circumstance, which occurred many years ago ai Exeter. Not far from that city there was a castle, which had gone into considerable decay, and was no longer the residence of greatness, but a poor man and his family had taken up their abode in one of the chambers of its vast extent, After they had re¬ sided there some time, they fancied that they often in the night heard noises round about, and as in the day no one appeared, ihey began to fancy that the castle was haunted by the spirit of some one, vvho either had been murdered, or had concealed trea¬ sure w T ithin its ?????; and they began to be afraid to remain. They were very careful not to be out on the eves of certain festivals, always selected by ghosts for revi. ting their friends and their foes. when they had any thing to communicate to ei¬ ther. Particularly the eve of St. John in June. In spite of all their attention lo these times, M ti¬ dela on the dreaded eve, stayed longer thmi usual in the field, and as she passed near the place
21
where the ghost ?? -as supposed to ???1?, she dis¬ tinctly heard several groans. She entered her chamber aghast, and related what she had heard. All the fiimily huddled togelher as she spoke, and no one dared move, or even look around. Thus riiey sat all night in silence and alarm. Return¬ ing day revived them, for a ghost is harmless while the sun is up. " Assured that he was safe in the day time, a little boy willing to know vvhat disturbance there had been in the dark, went dauntless to the spot his mother had described, and finding a door half open, he entered a chamber he had ????? seen before, and without fear went on, when he entered the second chamber, a voice said to him, c My boy, come hither.* The lad was mstantly fasci¬ nated, which gave ihe speaker time to go on. * I know thee/ he continued. ' Tell thy father and thy mother to attend me without delay, return to them, and do as I command thee/ The terrified child obeyed, lie told his parents that the ghost had ?]>??(? to him, and had Oi dered them into lib presence. The ¿rood fblks were scared, ne- \erllieless knowing thai it would be vain to con¬ tend vvith a ghost, they followed the child to the haunted chamber. They approached, and saw a man extended on some straw. ' Come forwaril, í shall not injure either of you/ 4 1 know thy good
22
•honour will not/ said Jasper. * I know the same,* said Madela. ' I am no good honour,* said the man. * ' I vvould I were. I have no honour. I am a wretched-fellow, who withtmy two Tirothers have committed a foul deed. Some few weeks ago, we met a man whom we attacked, and slew. Inthe scuffle I ireceived a wound which hath laid me low, and mayhap will lay me lower. Ye must know/ good people, that they quietly brought me hither, and for some time tended me with care, but the bue and -cry to find us is up, and they are gone to safety, and like loons have left me to die. Go then fetch me a priest, that I may settle my affairs, and, do ye hear me, come ye with him.' They instantly obeyed, and a reverend father at¬ tended at the call. The first thing the man said, was, * In this purse ís gold ftake it, Jasper. If I have robbed the rich, I will givemy thefts to the poor. What I give to thee will mend thy fare ; thy manners need no mend- ing. I háve my wits about me, and I give it thee in presence of this holy man, that thou mayest not be suspected of the crime, which I have committed. -Now^o, leave mé with the pious father.* AYliat his confession was never transpired, but the priest de¬ clared he died in penitence, and had given money to the church ; part of which no doubt he ordered to be paid fbr masses for his repose, for they were
23
performed for many years. Long after he was buried, the same holy man was called to the dying couch of a woman, who lay in speechless agony and could make no confession. She crossed her hands on her breast, she heaved heavy sighs, and then alternately seized the hand of two young men who stood beside her. The fervent manner in wliich she drew them to her, called his atten¬ tion from her to them. The countenance of one seemed so familiar to him, that he fixt him sted¬ fastly. The young man hung his head and blushed. The priest asked no questions, but w hen he took his leave, he accused hira before a judge of being the undiscovered murderer, so long sought in vain, and he was instantly seized, and the other because they were brothers. * Why are we sus¬ pected?* asked the elder. * Because,* replied the holy father, who was his accuser, ( thou art so like the man who died in the ruins of the castle. Thy likeness hath betrayed thee.* The unhappy youth was so startled, that he exclaimed, * Never more iet the guilty say, I am secure ! when earthly powers fail, those beyond the reach of earthly power are sure to find him out.' He then made full confession, and he and his brother both ex¬ piated their crimes on the scaffold. "It is ever so," said Eltrude, " the youth might
24
well exclaim, * let not the guilty say, I am secure l tt I had a brother who w r as a priest, and I have heard him say that when in the performance of his duty, he has attended on tliose hapless men ???? forfeit their lives in expiation of their guilt, a cause which did indeed appear to be beyond the reach of earthly power ; as the youth of whom Editha just hath spoken did observe, hath ever led to his detection ; and if not early, late, though sure retribution has been demanded," " Aye," said Agnes de Plaisseheraut, i( and when circumstan¬ ces of conviction are much hidden, conscience betrays itself/' tí None of us," said the baroness de Montgomery, (i are so unknowing in the proofs of the insufficiency of the subterfuges of the Λν -icked to conceal their crimes, that we know well, those xery subterfuges often are the means by which the guilty have been detected." " Yea," replied Agnes, " not hug after I married and settled in Normandy, I lost a valuable ring. A young girl among my maids wns .suspected to have stolen it ; but she denied the theft with such an artless air of innocence, that í was vexed to have accused her. 1 lost another, and again every one's suspicion but mine rested on Clare. It passed on, and I lost a third. Every one agaiu -aid that it surely must be Clare vvho was the
26
thief. The maids were all searched, but the ring was not found. Every one but Clare, said she would not take such valuable things from such a good mistress. Clare alone ???? observed to say, she Λνοι?^ not keep such valuable things. Every one but I took notice of the change of the word ; and it was concluded by all that she had taken them and disposed of them. To find out where she had disposed of them became the business and the employment of all my household; and she was narrowly watched. She ???? often seen conversing with the son of a neighbouring frank¬ lin, and he was supposed to have received tliem. He was also watched, and was seen in company with a Jctv. The Jew was seized and searched, and the rings found with him. Thus a prevari¬ cation of expression instead of saving Clare, led to the discovery of her associates : and they all suffered the punishment due to their crimes," ** I wonder much/' said Eltrude, " that the fear of detection, and the certainty of punishment after it, do not prevent the commission of crimes, even when the propensities are bad." The acquies¬ cence in that opinion was generak Yet it may be observed, that fear always operates on instant danger, seldom on distant risk. AVhen the day appointed for quitting the con- vol, ?, ?
26
vent arrived« tlie baroness, much regretted by the sisterhood, departed; and accompanied by the baron, and attended by the pompous retinue which always folîowcd in their train, returned to the high castle of the domains of Montgomery.
CHAPTER IH.
To «??? the holy land from infidels Led thousands on fhe bloud of unbeliever Delug'd the plam in copious flow, with which The blood of Christians mingled. Yet holy As the w .unor deem'd hi > tause, he blew, he iell, In vain tor miidthty btill hold·* He» seat of empu e where the faithful fought, And lords it with a mighty hand. Meanwhile Lewis surnamed the saint, sailed with a powerful fleet, consisting of one humlred and twenty large riiips, and more than fifteen hundred smaller vessels. The place appointed for landing the troops was the isle of Cyprus Tiiere all the arrangements of the enterprize were planned and settled; tvhich was a business tlut detained him longer than had been expected, for though the king had quitted France m June, he was not ready to take the field till the follow¬ ing sprii.^. A stay of ?? many months in such a luxurious iriaud led the croisses into licentious¬ ness, and their holiness was very iur from keeping cii
28
pace with the holiness they imputed to their ?????. Ii had been the kings intention to go direct to Palestine and attack Jerusalem. The con¬ quest of which city ?? -as the object of the expedi¬ tion. But he was prevailed on to alter his plan, and to go against Egypt ; in order, in the first place, to overcome the Egyptian sovereign, who held Palestine in subjection. Begin by conquer¬ ing him, said his counsellors, and then re e¡stabli&h the throne of Jerusalem. The powerful sovereign of Egvpt was named Malee Hala, an experienced general, who with he Saracens was in perpetual warfare with the Arabs, and had consequently alwajs under his command a well trained army. He was master of Palestine, sovereign of Egypt, and he possessed Babylon and other places; from all of which he could collect forces. Not¬ withstanding there were so many strong reasons aaainst the attack of Egjpt it was resolved on. The fleet sailed to Damietta. When the walls and to wer*» were in ? iew, all the vessels surrounded the king's ship, and the officers went on board her to receive his last orders " Recollect," said the king, u the holy ???? 1 for which we figliti and let ib well support the name we bear. Think not ofmy individual s.tfetv, formy life is a breath which may be stopped m a moment: but the
29
cause is universal and everlasting. Let us march confidently on. If we remain victorious we shall acquire a name in Christendom, and our fame and glory will be spread throughout the tvorld. If we fall, we shall obtain the crown of martyrdom." The signal was given. The adverse shore tvas covered tvith troops, the port was defended by a fieet. Malee Sala, though suffering under a dis¬ ease of tvhich he quickly died, was carried to the army to give directions for the combat, Lewis leaped into the sea, and was followed by his troops. They landed, they engaged. The Saracens de¬ fended themselves two tlays, but at length they yielded. They abandoned Damietta, and Lewis and liis soldiers entered it in triumph. They for¬ tified it. They stored it with provisions of all kinds, and made it their place of strength and their magazine. It was then determined to attack Cairo, and preparations were made for the expe¬ dition. Midway between Damietta and Cairo, is Massoura. The infidels were there entrenched upon a branch of the Nile. The king at the beati of his troops set fortvard in November. Their march at first was not interrupted. They beheld nought but one wild vast extensive solitude : as they approached Massoura the enemy began to harass them. Day and night they were perpe¬ tually skirmishing with small parties, disperseti c3
30
here and there upon the road. After many days march they came to the borders of a deep stream. AVhile they were debating on the passage, an Arab for a reward of five hundred golden besants conducted them to a ford. Robert Count of Artois, the king's brother, requested to be the first to pass with his troops. Ilis request way granted ; but Lewis, knowing the ardent impe¬ tuosity of the yotmg prince, was so fearful that he would incautiously rush forward, that he made him swear that he woukl undertake nothmg until the whole army should have passed the ford. At the tlawn of day he marched toward the ford at the head of fourteen hundred knights, templars, ho.-qikallers of St. John, and the English who accompanied the earl of Salisbury. Conducted by the Arab they plunged with desperate courage into the stream. The count d'Artois was the iir^t who set his foot upon the opposite shore. He was opposed by ihe Saracens. " Second me! follow me !" he said to his companions, and for- irettinir his vow, iastantly charged the infidels, who were driven back to their camp. The eager prince pursued sword in hand, though it was- represented to him that their flight might be a feint. Listening to nothing but the unbridled courage by which he was impelled, he darted for¬ ward—-" Come on/' he cried, "Come on! Let
31
us pursue the flyers! Follow! follow! Come oni" The Saracens, imagining that the whole of the French army ???? in pursuit, fied on and were still pursued; many threw themselves into Massoura. Thither the head-strong Robert of Artois contrary to the opinion of all his officers, and in spite of the entreaties and remonstrances of the grand master of the templars, would ΓοΙΙοΛν them. The commander of the Saracen forces was a brave experienced officer named Ben-doc» dar. He quickly perceived that he was pursued by a part only of the French army, and he re¬ turned and ?????\^ the charge. Then the terri¬ ble effects of the imprudence of the count were severely felt. Equal in personal courage the French and Saracen fought with the same fury. Dreadful was the carnage. The enemies rushed impetuously against each other : foe singled out foe. Squadrons met agamst detachments : rush against rush. Robert of Artois fell, and the flower of his army fell with him. The templars perished, the hospitallers were cut down. The earl of Salisbury ???? slain, and his English knights. When the fight was at the height, Henry de Nartonville was dismounted, and the Saracen who threw him, with uplifted arm was prepared to strike, when Walter tie Clovinne, who never lobt ? 4
12
.sight of his preserver, bestrode his body. " While 1 have life," he cried, <r no one riiaii hurt my master, my deliverer." With the blow of mighty strength, doubled by ttie glow of gratitude to him he followed, he struck the sabre from the hand of the infidel, and then felled him to the earth. He took the scimitar of the Saracen, and thus with both hands armed, he stood over Nar¬ tonville, vvho had been stunned by his fall. When he ????, or more properly when he felt that he began to move, he sakl to him, u Be btill." Thus he stood, till the Saracens themselves struck by bis fidelity, ceased to molest him. The slaughter of the Saracens had also been great. Those who fell sold their lives dearly. But those who sur¬ vived, were surrounded by the fresh troops who joined Ben»doc-dar. The Saracen army was recruited by fresh troops, while the king, and those officers who were with him, had no means to replace the num¬ beis who fell at Massoura. The camp of the French monarch was a wretched bight. Beside the general grief for those who fell, there were few w ho had not to lament theii particular con¬ nections .slain. Famine and disease eibued, for the provisions antl medicines which came by water from Damietta, were cut oif. Tlie light troops ofthe enemy who hovered on the banks of the
33
Nile continually drew their bows upon the sailors Λν?ιο attended the boats, destroyed them and pre¬ vented a landing : seize 1 the vessels, and became masters of their freight. The contagion spread. The dead bodies thrown out of the camp, lay around unburied ; a great number were heaped to¬ gether near the bridge. The corruption tainted the waters and the air; almost every one was in fected The king himself caught the contagion: he languished and was inactive* he daily lost his officeis : no orders were issued : no discipline was kept up. In such melancholy circumstances, nothmg seemed practicable but retreat ; the re¬ treat of the sick, the wounded, the exhausted, beneath a burning him, and before a healthy and active army. No sooner did this melancholy pha¬ lanx begin to move than the enemy attacked them on every side, from far and near ; in the front, in the rear : with artxnvs, with swords, with stave**. AVith the vigour of tlieir minds, the king antl his troops reanimated their exhausted bodies : but i f was the flush of a moment. Their strength failed : their difficulties increased ; and surrounded by a multitude of foes, they could resist no longei. The king, his brothers, the nobles, and soklierv Λν?ιοηι battle and disease had spared, \ leidet· themselves prisoners. ? 5
31
In the unhappy circumstances io which Lewu was reduced, he entered into as honourable a treaty as the state uf his affairs could allow him to hope. He restored Damietta for his own per¬ sonal ransom, and agreed to pay four hundred thousand livres for the ransom of his people : one third to be paid down, lie made a truce for ten years. He then returned to Damietta to raise the money for the first payment, leaving hh bro¬ thers, Alph jnso of Toulouse, and Charles* of Anjou, as hostage*». This first payment was made by the voluntary contributions >f such as had escaped from slaughter, and hy the sale of the jewels belonging to Margaret the queen, to Jane the wife of Alphonso, and to the ladies of their train, all of whom gave up not Hone their jewellery and other superfluities tvhich tvere sold to the Jews, but all that they could possibly retrench of what were deemed necessaries. AVith that he redeemed the prisoner». lie then quitted Damietta and retired to St. John of Acres. Thus ended the first ci usade of Lewis the ninth, commonly called Saint Lewis, Himself was made a prisoner, without having even seen Jerusalem, and his only conquest was the price of his ransom. The flower of the French nobility perished. So many templars and hospitallers
35
were slain, that the preccptories and commande- ríes ????? almost emptied : svyord, pestilence, and famine had swept away thousands. The sad ????? of the defeat and capture ol Lewis reached France, where nothing could ex¬ ceed the consternation ; and when it was known in England, those who would have ioined the croisses could not refrain from accusing king Henry of causing his disasters, by keeping from his army a large botly of English, whose valour and intrepidity might have prevented the sad catastrophe ofthe crusade. The vessel which brought the fatal news to England, brought also that of the dett ntion of Henry de Nartonville; and his ransom was sent for to the castle. It was soon raised, and the youth returned from his first campaign, if not victorious, certainly not dishonoured. Before he quitted the east, AValter de Clovinne, uho had been faithf ' in service, begged he might bo left with the French king, to Λν?ιοηι Henry introduced him by telling the story of his standing over him in battle. The reason he gave for wishing to remain, was the credit he had lost at home. í never oan be respected in my nativt land, for I have lost my title to respect. But I have gained a new name in the field, and among strangers I may live without reproach. " To ? 6
36
thee, my honoured master, I am bound for life; for more than life : 1 am bound to thee for my repentance. Thou wilt go back with honour never tarnished ; while I have many spots to clear away. The world, I mean my world, my Eng¬ land, never ??? believe that I am changed : thou hast beheld the change, and wilt report it. Fare¬ well. May every saint have thee in his keeping,« and pom* down every blessing on thee. 1 ' The knights of ancient days were influenced by a spirit which may be ???? deemed-romantic. Beside fighting in the field of battle, ihey bound themselves to redress wrongs, to protect the helpless, and to avenge women; and valour. courtesy, and justice were among their charac¬ teristics. They were trained to knighthood bt previous dincipline. They attained it by gradual progress. They were admitted by solemn, devout, and pompous ceremonies; and they were de¬ graded if they were found wanting in the noble requisites of iheir order, by the most humiliating punishments and the most contemptuous expul¬ sion. A gentleman devoted to knighthood, had af ways a lady called the lady of his devotions and his heart, before whom lie ??? be said to prostrate his services, for her commands were peremptory, and her law paramount. Though this lady ???*
37
the object of ids most profound respect, she was, in 1?? ? ?, but the mistress of his fancy. The reserved circumspection of his conduct did not however always guard the knight from the an¬ ger, nor the wife from the jealousy of a fiery husband. Among the adventures of the knights thus devoted to the fair, tliose of Raoul de Couci, who perished at the battle of Massoura, is the most replete svitli horror and woe. Though history hath already told his fate among the events she hath recorded ; and the muse hath often sung İiis griefs, let us renew the plaint, and pour again the dole of lamentation on the mistress of his devotion, Gabriella de Yergy. She wan the wife of the Lord de Fayel, who was ofiended at the attachment of her devoted knight. When, as he lay languishing beneath the wound he had re* ceived at Massoura, he felt his death inevitable and near, he called his faithful esquire. He entrusted him with a letter ; and charged him to carry it >vitb his heart, enclosed within a vase, and to presem them both to the lady of de Fayel. When the knight expired, his heart was taken from its seat, and enclosed according to his weh. The esquire, charged with the heart and letter, was wandering round the castle, seeking for an opportunity to execute his melancholy commis»
38
sion, vvhen he was met by de Fayel. He snatched from him the letter and the vase, and gave the heart to his cook, ordering him to make a savoury 8ί6Λν such as his ??1?? loved. With malignant joy he beheld her feed on such horrid meat; and Λν?ιβη the repast was ended, he produced the letter and the vase. While Gabriella read the letter her countenance became deadly pale ; and its expression ???? mingled with horror and des¬ pair. Grief seized her soul : and she stood fixed as the cold marble, She did not giv^e ???? to lament or to reproach. After a long silence, she said to her husband, " If I have feasted on such noble food, if I am become the tomb of such a valiant heart, I will not mix such nutriment with any thing less precious, nor swallow aught ????? can disgrace such feeding." Unhappy Gabriella! she was stedfast in her purpose. She shut herself in her apartment, and starved herself to death í
CHAPTER IV.
Bright gleams the lo\ely morning, and ere noon Darkness o'erbpreuds the woild ; agam the sun Dispeb the chíud¡>, and cheerfulness retiirni. So joy and grief, In change perpetual, Chequer the days of man; and often he Whose early houri» of life the fairest shine, Meek, m ?? progress with the roughest stonm, While he who&e dawn, without one ray of light, By clouds was» all o'ereast, beholds them bieak, And smile*, exulting in ? brighten'd e\e.
The plans of life, however wisely laid, and the purposes of man, ???????? sagely pondered, are often disappointed, even at their highest hope, by such events as wisdom could not contemplate ; and which reflection cannot comprehend : so true is it, that the race is tiot always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong. Saint hewh king of France sailed from Europe, elate with hope, exulting in expectation, and bold in confidence. He headed a numerous army 5
40
composed of young, brave, and aspiring troops and veteran commanders; and he was joined by the flower of chivalry, the knights of the temple, and of St. John. Yet he failed. His lot in the east was captivity : the fate of his army w as defeat, disease, and death : and his return to his kingdom was in sorrow. The blood of his people enriched the land of his foes: and the renown of the crois¬ ses glorified the fame of the infidels. The greet¬ ings ofthe few who returned home, could scarcely be deemed glad, for joy was checked by grief. Nartonville had quitted England attended by the furniture of a complete lance ; and he came back alone: and had not AValter de Clot inne, in gratitude for benefits received, stood over liim a^ he lay, and as the lion guards his den, defended hi& life, he would have been left a corse amonu the slain, and his name tvould have perished for ever. Among the many warriors engaged in the cause he had joined, was Ergaud de Guillard. He was the youngest son of a noble family in Brittany, and being without fortune at home, he had devoted his life to arms, and bad vvith credit and honour passed through all the gradations of chivalry, and had been admitted into the order of the knights templars. His first expedition as a knight, was at the unfortunate battle of Ala^-
41
soura. Ile and Nartonville had by many aï- rangements which took place in the army, been thrown together in Cyprus, and had contracted a strong friendship with each other. On that day when Nartonville was dismounted, Ergaud de Gaillard was wounded. They were both taken to the king's camp, and both left in the same tent. Ergaud languished for many days, but never again beheld his preceptory. His wound was mortal, and he expired in the sight of his friend. During the time he lay upon his bed of death, he communicated to Henry the various circumstances of his family, and requested from him a promise, that after he should have reached his native land, he vvould journey into Brittany, and visit the castle of Guillard in Brieux. " My father Alfonse tie Guillard and my mother Juliette/' said he, " still live. Arnaud the heir, defective in his form, in compulsive inactivity stays at home; and Eugene the second son dwells in a cloister. He is a Bernardine. Ilis abbey is near Mairlaix. If thou canst visit him, he vvill receive thee with a brother's love, for he and 1 have one heart, one wish, one hope, one joy, one grief. Could aught have saved me in the perilous hour of battle, it would have been the prayers he offers for my safety. Give him this," he continued, taking an ivory crucifix from his bosom, (i it is the last fond
42
gift he gave me wdien we parted, I have ever worn it next my heart. Tell him and tell my parents I have not disgraced my family, nor my lance. This/' he said, presenting a small box, if contains a precious relic; it is a talisman of potv¬ er to shield from spells. Give it to my sister; the youngest of our family. Give it with the dying blesring of a brother, who never has forgotten her in his prayers. Tell her I have ever worn upon my helmet, as my distinctive crest, the knot òhe wove and gave me. The knight ofthe azure knot has been my appellation. We have lived in love, and though she may lament my death, say unto her that she hath no cause to lament my life. 1 would praise her to thee, but I leave her to renown. AVith a brother's love, give Arnaud my unbroken lance. To thee I give my shield ; let it hang in thy hall, near thine, in proof of friendship and esteem. See me laid in t i-îh as befits a soldier and a knight, antl let my requiem be duly chaunted." He then pressed the hand of Nartonville. " Wilt thou/' he said, " soothe these my last moments, by making the promise 1 require ?" (c I promise thee on my honour as a knight, and my hopes as a soldier ; and on the gift which thou dost send Eugene, that, I will fulfil thy wishes/' Ergaud again pressed his hand.
43
On the morrow Ergaud expired. The maimer of his death greatly affected Nartonville, and the celebration of his funeral was proclaimed, livery soldier of the cam]) followed him to his honour¬ able grave ; and the king himself, tvho delighted in religious ceremonies, followed in the place of his father. " For I am," he said, " tbe father of my people." Nartonville had been many months at his cas¬ tle, recovering slowly from his fall at Aias.soura, and the (»fleets of the diseases in the camp, vvhen he prepared to go to Brieux, The wind was fair, the sea was calm, aud gaily the vessel sailed tvhich bore the friend of Ergaud to the shores of Brittany. He travelled on to Brieux, and sought the castle of Guillard. His name being a name unknown, Nartonville an¬ nounced himself the friend of Ergaud. The friend of Ergaud was welcomed by Alfonse and by Juliette with a parent's joy, " How doth our boy ? Hath he fought bravely ?" (C He hath fought like a brave soldier, and a noble knight/* answered Nartonville. £< And he hath gained re¬ nown ?" " Renown tvhich hath resounded through the camp," tvas the reply of Nartonville. " Will he return to the preceptory we have in Brittany?' 1 " I fear me not," said Nartonville, His coun¬ tenance changed as he spoke. " Liveth our
44
son ?" Nartonville laid his hand on the hand of the old man. " Do not tell it me/' said Alfonse, " Do not let me hear the dreadful news. Er¬ gaud is dead !" " We will talk of that to-mor¬ row/' replied Nartonville. The eager inquiring eye of Juliette was dimmed by tears, and she sunk her head upon her bosom. Nartonville rose and took his leave. " I vrill return to -???????. 1 ??? ? ? much to say/' " Remain vvith us," said Juliette. " Not at present. 1 have business in Brieux ; business which requires my attendance/' So saying, he quitted the castle. ????? he returneel next day, t( Speak/' said Alfonse, " we are prepared to hear, and I trust prepared also to submit. It is a stroke from a wise hantl, and resignation is our duty. AVhat we sliall endure, ??? will endure patiently, but great will be our sufferings." Nartonville then recounted the horrors of the battle of Massoura, the after-sufferings and capture of the king, with all the woeful circumstances he had witnessed. He mentioned his ovvn fall from his charger, and the wound of Ergaud. He then recounted the manner of his deatli. " To thee, and to the lady Juliette, I am to report his eonduct, and to tell you, that he hath not disgraced his family uor his lance. To his brothers antl to his sister I have gifts, bequeathed to them with hve/' He then
AU
bhetved the gifts with vvhich he had been en¬ trusted ; and repeated all that he had said at giving them. (i He hath lived well, and he hath died well," said Alfonse. 'Hiis brothers aud his rister will value his bequests, and keep them for the donor's sake. Arnaud, our eldest son, and Almadore our daughter, are at Dole, tvhere they have an uncle. I will send for them, and when thou dost return from the monastery, wliere Eu¬ gene dwelleth, near Mairlaix, thou shalt thyself present them vvith the tender gifts sent by the dying Ergaud." The reception which Nartonville received from Eugene was. brotherly. When he presented the crucifix, Eugene took it vvith eagerness, pressed İt to his lips, and was silent. When he recovered some degree of composure, he said, "* Thou comest, this assureth me, from my brother, I gave it to him when v\e parted as a pledge of the union of our hearts, and I receive it in proof that union was nol broken. Ile is gone before me to those realms 1 hope ubo to arrive at, and this is the bond of our felicity : How did he die ?" Nartonville again repeated all the sad tale of woe tvhich appertained to Massoura, and related the manner of the death of Ergaud. iC There vvss not in the field a braver soldier, nor one I so much honoured. His life was the ?? of a hero
46
and his death the death of the brave : calm, re¬ signed, happy. He remembered all his family with love, and me as the friend of his selection. His shield, which he gate me when tiying, shall hang in the hall tvhere I feast, among the shields of my father's house ; I also have gifts for Ar¬ naud and his sister," " Hast thou seen Alma¬ dore r C " No, she is at Dole." " Shalt thou not see her i'' (i AVhen I go back to Brieux she will be there." " Thou wilt behold the likeness of our gallant brother softened into woman. I never send to Brieux tvithout some token of re¬ membrance to her. Give her this." It was a branch of consecrated palm. (i As I must love the man who was the friend of Ergaud, I also must give a gift to ihee. I give thee a string of beads, wliich have been told at Jerusalem by Fabian de Guillard, who travelled to the holy land among the first crusaders. Cse it when ihou prayest. It tvill bring to memory the friend whom we ???? lost, and the cause in tvhich he died." Nartonville took it, and said, "I shall use it as thou sayest: but the friend and the cause art 1 indelible in memory. They cannot be effaced." '' Farewell," said Eugene. " If thou shoultlst again resort to Brittany, recollect the Bernardine brother near Mairlaix." Nartonville departed.
47
AVhen he returned to Brieux he again sought the castie of Guillard. Arnaud was returned, and tvith him his sister Almadore. He was in¬ troduced as the friend of Ergaud, and presented the lance to Arnaud. " I cannot fix a lance/' said Arnaud, tí Weakness and deformity pre¬ vent me, but my heart is the heart of the valiant, and I know ???? to honour the brave/' ** Yea," said Alfonse, (( his form is not a sightly casket, but his mind is a jewel of price," So saying he embraced his son, and pressed him proudly to his bosom. t£ 1 have a gift for Almadore," said Nartonville. At that moment Almadore entered the room. She was fairer than the lily which blooms in the valley, and when she met Narton¬ ville, modesty crimsoned her cheek with blushes. She had all the simplicity of a maid of the tlays of yore, and the grace of Gallia's plains. She dropt a tear when she received the box : and after looking on it for some time, she raised her eyes, and said lo Nartonville, *· I will thank thee another time." She turned away from his gaze, and looking at her father, she said, " Have I per¬ mission to quit the hall V " Yea, my child," eaid Alfonse. She made the obeisance tvhich ancient times demanded, as she retired, and when unobserved wept over the gift of brotherly love, the relic which saved from harm.
4 ? *· ?? sweet Almadore/' said Gnilkird, u lovetîi Pí4írernent. Sbe hath not been >hewn to the worhl. She never hath set at the tournament. No knight hath broken a lance in her prairie." * ? The flower which bloometh in the shade," re¬ plied Nartonville, '· is lovelier than the gaudy poppy which flaunteth in the open held." N.irtomille had given the t»ifK «>f his friend. He had bt i en thnnked. He wns not a>ked to re¬ main, (¡rief filled thr castle of (¿nillard: and sorrovv stopped the feast of he ball. Vet X ár¬ tom ille did not depart He had often beheld the d azzima heauty ofthe daughter of greatness decked out for admiration. The sparkling eye of pride had never touched he heart. The de¬ manded homage of stateliness had been yielded but in ceremony. The unassuming Almadore posseted, unconscious that she did ??, magnetic power, and the strength υ? her attraction was irreribtiUe. 'f hough be could find no cause for btaving longer at the castie, he remained in Brieux, and he often found a cans 5 for renewing his attendance on Guillard. Guillard was no more Mispicioiih than he daughter, that it was> to see her that brought him there mi often. Like ihe fruüHUjee ofthe violet, whkh perfumes the air, delighting all whose breath inhales its sweet ne^y 4> Almadore, with native b^aut), charmed
49
each eye wdiich νιβΛν^ her loveliness. Unknow¬ ing as the flower ???? slie, that from her the plea¬ sure emanated. When no one reason remained, which could ??'?????1 his repeated returns to the castle, and when he found that it vvas impossible to stay ?????, he told the lovely mistress of his beat affections and his heart, the render story of his devotion. As (lie sun riseth above the mountains, and sud- tien brightness beams, so the mantling blush which .started sudden to the cheek of Almadore, bright¬ ened her pensive countenance. It was the fiist time she had asked herself if Nartonville wa¡- pleasiiiff. It was the first time that her unpre- varicating truth had not known what to utter whicii might at full declare tiie meaning of her sentiments. It ?? ? ?& tlie first time that she dis¬ covered that praise was sweeter than the bare consciousness of not deserving blame. It was the first time that she found out that pride or vanity had any place within the human breast. It is not to be told how love perceives it ? accepted. Words say ii not. The eye, the blush, the smile, the quickened pulse, the pant¬ ing breath, and all that cannot be dissembled, declare vvitb more assurance than the tongue can speak, that sweet is the voice that entrcateth. VOL. ?. 0
50
The eager hope tvhich animates with confidence, quickens observation, and the fond heart feels tvhat is not heard. Thus Almadore sat expres¬ sive in her silence. Thus Nartonville gazed on her and was blest. The proposals of Nartonville drew the contem¬ plation of the sorrowful family of Guillard from the melancholy fate of Ergaud, and by degrees their great grief softened into fond regret. Gradually the cheerfulness of hospitality revived, and the gladness of welcome met the guest at the banquet. " Thou wilt soon return to us," said Λ fonse, when Nartonville quitted Brieux, i( I shall re¬ joice to receive thee again," said the lady Ju¬ liette : and Almadore said, " 1 will lend thee the talisman of Ergaud, to guard thee from wizards and fays." He quitted Brieux, he sailed for England, he regained his castle. He told the bi»'u v iess how lovely was Almadoie. tk Thou wilt *>e sure to love her, for she is mild as the breath of spring," " The wife that makes thee happy, Henry, must be belov ed by me. Thy mother dwelt with me cheering my early solitude. Almadore shall dwell with me, and cheer my downward path. As I retire and shun the feasts of thy hall, she shall replace the hostess ofthe dais, and fill my empty chair."
51
" Let us make preparations for her," said Nar¬ tonville. " There needeth none," said Emma, u since the death of Randolph, reparation, im¬ provement, and ornament, have been constantly in progress ; and those apartments which once tvere occupied by my mother, I have tvith more than usual care adorned, foreseeing, that one day thy wife would use her chambers." " I never thought of it till now," said Nartonville. u May I examine them ?" " Aye," said the baroness. " Let us w r alk through them now/* Henry. whose curiosity had never led him beyond the hal? and the apartments which belonged to the baron's state, was delighted as he went from chamber to chamber, where Emma and her maids retired, and when he saw the profusion ot rich ornaments which graced the apartments, the baroness in bounteous preparation had arranged for her whom he might choose to wed, he said, " 1 Λν?Ι bring Almadore without delay. Perhaps* Alfonse de Guillard and the lady Juliette will accompany her. Mayhap her brother Arnaud. They will all be welcome. May l not say so Γ íf All," replied the baroness, " thy family and the family of thy vrife are one." The baroness had rightly said. There needed no preparations. All was prepared. Narton¬ ville sailed again for Brittany. In all the pomp ? 2
52
of an English baron did he set forward to fetch his bride. Milward de Rostendale accompanied him ; he went with archers, and with pages, and with grooms. His reception \ms equal to his retinue. Alfonse de Guillard as a lord of Brittany, had prepared to wed his daughter like the daughter of a lord. He diti it for ihe honour of his family and the dignity of his child ; also for the honour of Brit¬ tany his country, for something like rivalry sub¬ sisted between England and every province of the French dominions. It was levevei* national, not personal rivalship; and Nartonville was equally acceptable to Guillard, and pleasing to Almadore as if he had been a Frenchman. The family of Guillard was the fiimily of love, and Eugene came from Mairlaix ; specially per¬ mitted so to do, in order to be present at the nuptials of his sister. All the pomp that the church could confer was displayed on the day of marriage. A full atten¬ dance of the priests, and a full choir : numerous wax-lights, fragrant censers, blooming flowers in wreaths and vases. The bride and bridegroom stood befbre the altar, sumptuously attired. The relatives and friends of Guillard were there. Milward de Rostendale stood near, and the attendants of Nartonville were around him ; and
53
all displayed the pageantry of their state to add brilliance to the ceremony. They returned in a long procession to the hall of the castle. " Nar¬ tonville," said Alfonse, " I receive thee for my son with the fond feelings of a heart that loveth Almadore, and I welcome thee into my family as my child. I rejoice in thy union. But the sprightly dance and the liyely song must be omit¬ ted, for gaiety cannot yet be heard in the hall of the father of Ergaud." When Henry de Nartonville and his lovely bride returned to England, they prevailed on Alfonse and the latly Juliette to accompany ihem, but Arnaud would not undertake the journey. They embarked happily. Her two brothers attended Almadore to the vessel. She stood with her friends on the deck, and looked toward the shore she had quitted, antl waved her hand to those she left behind, till they disappeared in distance. AVhen they came within sight of the native land of Henry, he exclaimed, " there is England ! Look forward, love ! Behold the shores ίο tvhich I lead thee ! Not long and I shall welcome thee to my ???? home, and introduce thee to the love and respect of the gracious lady Emma, the venerable mother ofmy father." d 3
CHAPTER Y.
The hall is gay with feasting, The castle is bright in joy, The echoes resound the song : Pleasure to pleasure succeeds, New sports for each day are found, And time passes merrily on. Modern times know not the feastings, the shows, the merriment of the days which are gone. The baron partook of the sports, and the baroness shared in the glee ; and every heart exulted when the lord rejoiced. On occasions of marriages, of births, of christenings, all contributed to the festivity, and all joined in the holiday. From the highest vassal to the hind Λν?ιο tilled the soil, each brought, according to his means, some tes¬ timony that he belonged to the family: a jewel from a knight, and a chaplet from a peasant were equally accepted as tokens of good-will ; and participation in hospitality was common. In this old fashioned mode of universal rejoic¬ ing, the various dependants of Nartonville pre¬ pared for his reception all tbe festive proofs of
55
liege attachment ; and Almadore ???? welcomed with that cordiality ????? modern times cannot evince, for İt is Λνίηιί modern times know not. The festive board ??-?? spread in the hall. The baroness Emma de Nartonville, and the young wife of Henry sat side by side at the head of the upper table. Emma had wished to place Almadore singly in that station, but the gentle Almadore would not displace the ancient mistress, and they shared the dignity. At the right hand of Emma was seated Alfonse de Guillard, and Juliette sat at the left hand of her daughter. The guests were placed according to their degree. It ?vas highly pleasing to Alfonse and Juliette to behold the state in ????? their new son lived ; and as those modes of life which were practised in an English castle, were also the customs of Brittany, they ????? at home among Henry's guests and household, and alive to the feelings of the entertainment. The cup of felle wship vyas drained in pledge, the harp was struck by the hand of joy, and the song of the ban 1 was jovial. A quinten was set up, and run at ; racers tried their speed in competition; archers shot at a mark ; emulation was strong, applause loud, and j) 4
56
success rewarded. All were pleased, all tvere happy, for all partook of alk Toston, among¬ the franklins, in a finer vest than he had ever flaunted in till then, was foremost to exert him¬ self in joy. He was expert in the use of the quarter-staff, and he challenged, as he said, all die world to try his skill ; many accepted the chal¬ lenge, but Toston ever came off conqueror ; foi¬ be put forth the full strength of a powerful man, and the skill of one whohad ahvays been accustom¬ ed to the exercise, He outdid all that had been expected from him ; for to make the greater merri¬ ment, he flourished his staff ere he struck, in va¬ rious swingings round his head, and when he had thrown an antagonist, he stood over him in various attitudes of awkward gambol, seeming to threat¬ en vengeance. The loud laugh ran through the plain, and when he received his prize, he sprang in the air, with many high jumps, and retired from the scene of his triumph with a shout of i! happiness for ever and ever to the noble baron and the bride." " Thanks my franklin, my faith¬ ful franklin," said Nartonville, as Toston marched away. Odo also came forward, to shew his grate¬ ful joy. He had not laid aside the manners of his former station. He came on in something like a run, and the smiling hilarity of his counte¬ nance, ushered the song which he addressed to
57
Nartonville, accompanied by gestures of drollery and satisfaction. Merry were røy days of youth, Merry are my days of man, And my heart beats merrily. Happy were my days of youth, Happy are rny days of man, To thee I owe it verily, In concluding his song he ?????? with most ludi¬ crous hendings to Nartonville. Nartonville thanked him in expressions which denoted his content, and pleased and gratified him by joining heartily in the laugh ?\ ? 1??? passed universally round : and the playful franklin, the droll of early days, with capers that he could noi restrain, mixed in the throng of happy spectators who were assembled in their holiday clothes, to do honour to the wedding-feast of their lord. While these rejoicings were going on, and these sports drew the dependants of Nartonville in numerous assemblage to his castle ; Aii-tin still meditated the destruction of Randolph de Neville's heir. It was a direful chimæra ever pre¬ sent in his imagination. He may almost be sai i to have been happy while Henry was with the croisses. ? ? many always perit hed in the lm! v wars, and in the marches to the east, that hope was strong, nay, assurance was nearly certai'* d 5
58
that he would not return. Climate, fatigue, riot, and intemperance, were auxiliaries to the field of battle, which swept away many more than the sword cut down : and when the news of the French king's defeat and capture was spread throughout the land, and the loss of Salisbury and the English knights was ascertained, he thought himself already placed in the baron's room, and the honours of Neville allowed him« The return of Nartonville had broken the dream of his greatness, and his marriage, which re¬ newed his despair, renewed also his animosity ; and plans to destroy him revived in his rancour- ous bosom. Yet he was conscious that he was powerless. He knew none in whom he could confide. He could hope for aid from no one ; his only coadjutor was in the grave. He felt he was alone ; he felt he was an outcast ; assassina¬ tion was his only means to get rid of him who barred his pabsage to elevation, and kept him in the low path, where his mother's crime had left him. ** 1 am alone," he cried, " in the wide world, no friend associates with me! no relative acknow¬ ledges me ! Friends İ may make. Relations I cannot find. ? Blanch! ? mother ! Thy guilt pursues thy son !" While tr^se bitter invectives «nd malicious determinations te>ok place in the
09
mind of Austin, he was still daily occupied in the conventual duties of his order : and the scrupu¬ lous punctuality with which he attended every service and every ceremony gave him a high re¬ pute among the brethren, and the inoffensive tenour of his conduct gained him a good name. Indeed the only person in the world he sought to înjure was Nartonville, to every other he was urbane and affable, for no one but Nartonville stood between him and what he sought to seize. How many thus wear a smooth face to the worid, and cover a foul heart, by hypocritical grimace. How wretched should w T e be ????? we acquainted with the many who seek to undermine our happi¬ ness ; but the mask of wickedness conceals its ug¬ liness, and ??? suspect not ????1 it covers. Good¬ ness, conscious of its own rectitude, imagines not obliquity in others. In that consciousness of rectitude Nartonville found happiness, and ihe tranquillity of his castle was uninterrupted.
n 6
CHAPTER VL
When the arm, weaken*d by the press of time, No longer bears the lance, nor draws the blade, Tit pleasing to recount the acure yean, When, full of ftrength, the enemy hath felt Its prowess: and sweet İt is to listen The olden tales, which bring to memory Deeds of past days.
These feasts and rejoicings ended, Nartonville,. at the entreaty of St. Evremond and Matilda, went with his bride and guests from Brittany, to bis friend's castle, to celebrate one of the marked anniversaries of the birth of John de St. Evre¬ mond; who would then complete the seventh year of his age. In the lapse of time since his birth had been celebrated by the pompous cere¬ monies of his baptism, St. Evremond had re¬ mained at home in all the luxurious and expensive courses, which the pride antl haughtiness of Ma¬ tilda perpetually prompted him to maintain. He had not interfered among the disputes between king Henry and his barons, but ha/jl rested in a
61
degree of tranquil inactivity, not very pleasing to hb sovereign : for, not to oppose, was an insuffi¬ cient testimony of adherence to a monarch vvho sought to be upheld. It is true, that as yet those contests bad not amounted to absolute warfare ; therefore, he had not felt himself im¬ periously called forth* As the manners of the continent and the man- nere of England went on in nearly the same pace of refinement, the inconveniences of travelling, and the custom of resting in convents vvere common every where; and thus, when Nartonville con¬ ducted Juliette de Guillard and Almadore with their maids to a convent, and left them, at the end of the first day of their journey under the protection of an aged abbess, he felt, and they knew hovv sacred was the asylum, and they separated without fear for each other's safety. Alfonse and his son-in-law, with their attendants were received by the superior and brethren of a neighbouring monastery, and felt tliemselves equally secure. The superior was named Merton de Barbeau, he was nearly eighty years of age, and bad a perfect remembrance of the expedition to the Holy-Land, undertaken by Philip Augustus of France, and Richard Cœur de Lion of England ; and of the crusade agains'/the Albigenses, a sect
62
which separated itself from the church of Rome. The tvar against them was called a crusade, be¬ cause the soldiers bore the badge of the cross, tvhich they tvore on their breasts to distinguish themselves from the crusaders who went to re- ^over the Holy-Land, and ????? their cross on the shoulder. The recent unfortunate expedition to the east brought back to recollection the crusade of Ri¬ chard, with all the horrors of conquest, and the sufferings of his captivity; and the favour in which Simon de Montfort stood with the king, revived in memory those days of persecution, vvhen Simon de Montfort his father had signal¬ ized himself as a valiant leader. Rapin says, that Simon the son had from some disgust quitted the court of France to seek his fortune in Eng¬ land. Hume says, that Simon de Montfort came to England in consequence of an inheritance in Englanti which devolved to his family. His elder brother, who enjoyed still more opulent pos¬ sessions in France, and could not perform fealty to two masters, transferred his rights in England to his brother, tvho did homage to king Henry, conform to his humours, and entered into bis plans; l thus became his chief favourite, and was raised to high honours and dignities, aod created earl of Leicester.
63
The war against the Albigenses was one of the most cruel efforts of zeal that ever was stirred up by the Roman see ; and the barbarities commit¬ ted on both sides, were more ferocious and atro¬ cious, if possible, than those committed in Asia. Anquetil, a much admired French historian says, that it was on both sides a blind fury, and an equal thirst of blood. He says, that at the head of the council of the croisses, (as they styled themselves,) were many legates, and also a violent and arbitrary man who w T as an abbot of Citeaux. They considered all their conquests lawful ac¬ quisitions to the church. It often happened that in the towns attacked by the croisses, there were many Catholics intermixed with the heretics, a« dissenters from the see of Rome are always call¬ ed. On one occasion the besiegers having asked the abbot how they should distinguish the Ca¬ tholics in order that they might be spared ; the holy abbot, accordingto Anquetil, replied, kill all, God knoweth tliose who belong to himself The miseries of those unhappy times were impressed forcibly on the memory of Merton de Barbeau, they were the perpetual subjects of his conversation; and the sufferings of the days of his youth were the contemplations of the days of his age, Ilis elder brother had served under Simon de Montfort, and the abbey in which he
64
had been placed, wm one among many vvhich ????? destroyed by the Albigenses in the fury which is always most violent when religion raises or repels the sword. The name of Alfonse de Guillard was known to the aged Merton, for Jerome de Guillard, his father, had served with Julian de Barbeau, under Simon. And the old man said, " Thou canst feel for me what none around me here can feel, for thy prime of man was during my time of sufferance. Thou knotest how my abbey was destroyed, and the brethren scattered or slain. AVhen after my escape I took refuge in this country; though I came to safety, I came deprived of every friend, and cut off from all my kindred ; yet in con¬ ventual brotherhood I have found peace and comfort. Regret however still lingers on the days which are gone, and though memory traceth out nought but woe, she loveth to review the drawing. Among the monks of my abbey were tvvo brothers, Fribaud, and Almor de Bisonne. Tliey vvere twins, and more strongly united by friendship than by blood. When our abbey was set on fire, when the flumes spread, and the walls fell, when in despair we fied, when the holy chalice, when the altar was forgotten, Almui forgot not Fribaud. He had fled; he hatl Ued far. He turned hirn round to see who followed.
65
and t he cried out, * where is my brother? where is Fribaud'f Fribaud was not to be found. Almor turned his steps toward the abbey he had quitted. In vain we all remonstrated. In vain we told him many had taken a difierent course, and Fribaud no doubt was with them. In vain we urged his safety, and the peril of return, Vaiuly we used force, and strove to hold him. He burst from us and sought the scene of con¬ flagration. He saw the flames redden the sky, and the smoke which curled around : as he ha¡4ened on, he heard the cries of those within, and the crash of the roof which sunk : and when Ins foot was almost on the threshold, he was barred out by masses beyond the strengtli of man to move." " My holy father," said Alfonse, " none ever speak of war, but they bring to view such dreadful scenes of cruelty, that it sometimes startles me to think they are the deeds of human kind." tí It is hard," said Merton, " to draw the line between ferocity and courage. Grievous it is to ovvn, that both too frequently forget mercy." u I fear Massoura will confirm the observation/' haid cue of the monks. tt The battle of Massoura," r ,iid Nartonville, " the first in which I have bornea part, may more properly be called the massacre of Massoura. Within a town, the gates of which were closed upon us, met in every street by forces
66
led by brave commanders, and overpowered by the inhabitants tvho from their houses drew their bows, thretv stones, and other things of weight upon us, when even children could molest us : the slaughter was so great that no particular hor¬ ror can be picked out as prominent. The sword of every infidel found a victim, and every arrotv pierced a Christian heart, Robert of Artoin paid the price of blood for his temerity, he fell, and nearly all the troops which followed him. " Stop !" said Alfonse, " do not proceed with the sad story of that calamitous day, it involves a fate too dear to my sad heart." He hid his face with his hand, and every one ?? ? ?? silent. After a long pause, Merton announced the hour of rest, and all joined in the appointed hymns and prayers : after which each retired to his humble couch. The next day ihe travellers renewed their journey, and at night again reposed themselves within the walls of monastic retirement. As the history of man is almost without interruption, the history of warfare, tales of war were again the subject on which the holy fathers spoke. They had all parents or brothers tvho had been war¬ riors, and they had all cause for lamentation. Among the monks with whom they sojourned on the second night of their progress was Thomas
67
de Wartlees. He had himself been a soldier. He had also been a married man. He had borne arms in the service of king John, under the ban¬ ner of the earl of Pembroke ; and at the beginning of Henry's reign he had taken the field tvith the king's troops before the castle of Mount Sorel, in Leicestershire. He had, as many persons were accustomed to do, carried with him from place to place during his service his wife Avisa, a woman tvhom he ardently loved ; and when he was in Leicestershire she was as usual with him» AVhile the troops w r ere before the castle, an archer from the walls drew his bow*, not in the height of bat¬ tle, but as a random shot. Without a particular aim it entered the tent of Thomas de Wartlees, and pierced the bosom of Avisa, The distracted husband caught her in his arms : but he em¬ braced a corse. From that moment the tvorld, and every thing w r orldly was odious in the sight of the wretched Wartlees. AVhen the earl of Ches¬ ter raised the siege, he quitted the army, and retired from the business and the bustle of life to the stillness and austerity of a monastery. There the melancholy loss of Avisa continued to embitter his tlays, and ever mixed tvith every thought, even in his devotions. To every one who came to the abbey he told his talc and re-
68
newed his plaints, and it was recounted to Nar¬ tonville and his companions. These sad stories, which were interwoven with the fate of every family, occasioned a perpetual recurrence to the death of Ergaud, and Alfonse found his ? w r n grief constantly kept alive by his sympathy with the grief of others. Is it not the sympathy which we awaken, that causeth all to pour their sorrows in the listening ear. The melancholy recital of a tale of sorrow and the painful feelings it awakens, are soothed by the sigh of the tender breast, and softened by the tear which pity sheds on w T oe. On the evening of the third day they reached the castle of St. Evremond. Sorrow thence was banished. Every thing that was grand, every thing that was joyous, there gratified the luxurious, and delighted the gay. For the re¬ ception of Alfonse and his family, who had already been entertained at the castle of Narton¬ ville, Matilda had prepared whatever wealth could display that was magnificent. She had caused the standard of St. Evremond to be erec¬ ted in the court. The banner, on which she lierself had embroidered the ^vering eagle which ???? his proud distinction waved in the breeze. A trumpet sounded in response to the bugle at the
69
gate ; and when it was thrown open, the minstrels struck the chords, and in loud peal chimed a martial strain, while St. Evremond and Matilda advanced together to bid them welcome. St. Evremond waved his hand, and the minstrels ceased. He said to Nartonville, " Welcome Henry! welcome to England and thy friends!" In saying which he offered his hand, which Henry pressed in friendship. " And I bid thee wel¬ come, lady," he said to Almadore. u To Eng¬ land and ihy friends ! and thou too," he said to Juliette ; " and thou," he said to Alfonse, " all are welcome." Matilda then said, " All are wel¬ come to the castle of St. Evremond!" The baron then led Juliette and Almadore, and Ma¬ tilda proffered her hand to Alfonsa , who taking it with a courteous bow, led her as she followed her husband. Nartonville took her other hand, and she walked with stateliness between them. When they entered the hall, the blaze of lights from golden chandeliers, and the glitter of the plate around the room on stands, and on the table, dazzled the guests, and the surprise their countenance betokened, was more gratifying to Matilda than any observation whicii they could have made by words. The sumptuous board . also displayed the profuse hospitality which she lavished in pride ; and when the repast of the
70
night was ended., and they were conducted to their chambers, the splendid furniture which Matilda had placed in the apartments increased the astonishment of her visiters. The next day the baron and baroness de Montgomery arrived, and with them Catherine de Clifford, whose in¬ creased dislike to the recluse life of a nun, had induced her father to relinquish his intention of enclosing her in the cloister. She still however continued with Bertha, and the vicinity of the abbey to the high castle made it easy for her frequently to change her abode, and she was as much with the baroness as with her sister. In the course of seven years Catherine was grown into new beauty, and the playfulness of the child wa? changed into the lively ease of youth. She was the delight of the abbey and the castle, and Adeliza and the baroness were each equally desi¬ rous to retain her. Matilda received them with that pleasure she always derived from their society, and more than ever was she now pleased, for she was proud to introduce them to the strangers. When they were duly welcomed, she ordered the attendants to bring her son, and when he had received the caresses of his grandfather and grandmother, she introduced him to her guests. " I must be proud," she said, *' when I introduce 9
71
my boy. All that surrounds us is nothmg, but our son shall represent us when we shall mix with the clod." Beside the príde she took in her heir, Ma¬ tilda might be proud of her child. He was a no¬ ble boy. He had the fine form of his father, and the elevated demeanour of his mother. He had her brilliant eye, and dazzling complexion : and Matilda said that he vvould soon be a brave soldier. The pomp of the preceding evening was again displayed, and the sumptuous board replenished. On the morrow, when John completed his seventh year, the display of the noble's haughti¬ ness and the mothers pride ran to excess ; all the vas.^aks of the domain ????? invited, and they and their ladies appeared in all the pomp of the times ; and their reception was equally pompous ; wherever it was possible to place an ornament, Matilda had put plate. Among the many dishes heaped on the tables many were solid gold ; others were silver, many were gilt ; and the vases and cups, and all ????? she could display of cost¬ liness shone in profusion ; and as before, what the table .could not contain was heaped on stands. Her son sat at the head of the table at her left hand. He vtas dressed in a silk vest which she had buttoned with jewels, and round his neck she
72
had thrown the costly string of pearls, with which St, Evremond had presented her the day before her marriage. He had been taught to offer the first plate to Juliette de Guillard, and the second to Almadore. The baroness then resumed the duties ofher place as hostess, and A he baron that of host. When the dishes were removed the cup of fellowship was held to his Hps, and he quaffed to the health of all. The cup passed round, and each drank to the health of the heir. A gratula- tory song was then chaunted by the minstrels, and the women removed the child. As John, for whom this festival was intended was too young to bear the fatigue of attending a long course of sports ; instead of games on the plain, the sprightly dance enlivened the remainder ofthe day; and John, whom Matilda was anxious to shew in all his little modes of childish attrac¬ tion, was brought among them, and performed a little dance, which his mother had contrived for him, and the minstrels air had been adapted to his childish movements. Every one was pleased, and when he waved his little bonnet and said "farewell" every one shouted their applause, and "farewell John" was spoken in a general cry. After his departure the merry dance was" renewed by the company, and continued till supper time. St. Evremond had taken Almadore for his partner,
73
and Nartonville alternately danced with Matilda, and Catherine de Clifford. St. Evremond and Matilda were well versed in all the duties and the ceremonies of master and mistress of the castle, and they in change pro¬ posed riding and walking in the plains and wood¬ lands, from difierent parts of which, the beautiful scenery of the surrounding country presented various prospects ; and the majestic river which flowed near the mansion often induced them to cast the net and throw the line. After a residence of many days, all was ended, and the unpleasant close of all festivity, which is separation, cast a gloom over the last evening, which all the eflbrts of St. Evremond s urbanity, and Matilda's pride could not overcome ; and the next day the last farewell was said. Montgomery and his baroness lingered till an absolute neces¬ sity of reaching the abbey where Eltrude go¬ verned, before the gates were closed, compelled them to depart, and they pressed Matilda to tlieir bosoms and clung to their grandson John, till St. Evremond felt himself bound to say, the horses wait. They departed slowly, for though they had quitted the castle, they felt some pleasure in loitering within its domain. Wlien the eye could no longer see them, the baron renewed his attentions to his other guests, VOL. II. E
74
lie assisted Juliette and Almadore to mount their palfries, and he and Matilda rode with them till they halted to partake the meal which their hos¬ pitality had ordered to be put into a wallet. The host and hostess sat with them on the grass, and shared their own provision. There was no nobleman whose castle could give so grand an idea of English hospitality or one more honourable to its master tlian that of St. Eyre- mond, nor any lady in the land who so amply fulfilled all the duties of mistress of the castle, as Matilda. Alfonse therefore, and his wife had lieen highly satisfied with their reception, and their entertainment, and were very favourably impressed by all they had beheld, and they re¬ joiced in the happiness which awaited Almadore. Nevertheless to leave a child in a foreign land, was in those times of inconvenient travelling nearly, " farewell for ever/* All felt the pang of separation. That they might enjoy as long as possible the society of each other, Nartonville and Almadore went with them to the coast; they saw them mount the vessel ; they saw the vessel sail ; and Almadore was left with none but .Nartonville who was not strange.
CHAPTER VII.
Custom is second nature all agree, It reconciles to ev'ry state of life : It causeth greatness to crave luxury ; And softens down the scant of poverty. Thus, that which one man turns from and abhors, Is by another ta'en with thankfulness.
The long journey undertaken by Nartonville with his wife's family, was one of those expeditions which rarely took place at that remote period. It was an event which a female might talk about during the remainder of her life. It formed an epoch. So many years before, or so many years after I went to such a place, was a calculation which settled the progress of all her goings on. The avidity with which pleasure is pursued in these our days, may be accounted for by the ease with which it is attained. Good roads, conve¬ nient carriages, relays of horses, and excellent inns, enable modern ladies to go twenty miles to EÍ2
76
breakfast, and to return to dinner at her own house. Six hundred years ago a journey of forty miles was the business of a week. Mounted on a palfry, the dame of ancient days climbed rough mountains and descended precipitous hills, her maids ambling behind her : her halting place it noon within some wood ; her collation tied in a wallet ; the table for her repast, the grass ; her seat, the root or branch of an old tree ; and her resting place at night a pallet in the cell of some lone monastery on the way. These were not very inviting to removals ; and but few had the strength, the hardihood, or the means to under¬ take them. Seldom was it that a great lady had an opportunity to display her husband's opulence, or her own taste. When all difficulties were overcome, and a grand assemblage collected, the fame of the costliness of the decorations, and the hospitality ofthe board seldom spread far. The impediments to the journeys of the dames and damsels stopped the boastful spread of the fame of the feast of the hall. Three or four grand feasts to which the nobles far and near were bidden, were as many as the greatest lady could hope to celebrate in the whole course of her life. What a change do we behold ! Lo ! "the daily feasts! the nightly balls! Before she sleeps, a modern dame can visit half-a-score ; and a mo-
77
dem damsel at as many balls, displays her sprightly airs, and exhibits the graces ofher per¬ son. AVbether we be mended by our change, is a moot point. After Alfonse and Juliette had sailed away, Almadore, accompanied by Nartonville, and by the usual attendants on journeys, traced their way homeward. Toward the close of the last d<4y of their journey, at the foot of a hill whose side was covered with trees and underwood, tliey saw an elderly woman cloathed in tatters with diffi¬ culty making her way under a load of faggots. AVhen she saw so many people advance, she threw down her bundle, and approaching Alma¬ dore, said, u Wilt thou giverne aught?" As stories of witches had much credence in those days, Almadore was greatly alarmed, and she seized Nartonville by the arm, and screamed. " Be not thou afraid, fair lady, I shall do thee no harm. Wilt thou do me some good V* t( What good can I do thee V' asked Almadore. " Behold/* said the woman, "I am in want. Lo my attire ! my rags I they scarcely cover me. There is more misery within. Come ! behold how I exist. It will teach thee to know thy own bliss, and to thank the 'giver thereof. My dwelling is not far off. » " Let us follow her," said Nartonville. " WTiere I am, thou art safe." So saying, he dismounted e3
78
aud assisted Almadore to alight. They followed a little path not nvich trodden, till they reached the entrance of a rade bower. The branches of three or four trees which grew near to each other had been closely interwoven, and their growth had accommodated itsetf to the twistings ; fresh shoots as they appeared had been twined ????? the oid branches, till a thick, green, growing, wall had been formed, and a broad covering : a door had been made of branches that had been cut down, and plaited together like the wall. The good woman removed ir, and entering ñrst herself, said to her companions, tí follow me in." The inside of the bower agreed with the rudeness with¬ out. A few large bits of wood served for seats, and weeds and leaves were formed into two heaps which were intended for beds. On one of them ky a lad abou t fourteen years of age. " Robert ï hoy !" said the woman, " art thou awake, lad ?" <c Aye, mother, hast thou brought us something home ?" " I have caught a fish in the stream, and í will dress it for thy supper, boy." " ? rare, mother! cook it straight." " I must go on with my work/' she said to Nartonville, " but I can talk the while. Sit thee down ; and do thou sit, fair lady. I have ticed you here to see my misery. My husband, rest his soul ! was a good man. He did no harm. He drew the bow and killed game,
79
he thretv the line and caught fish. AVe lived m the forest wild as the deer that ranged it. We fared well, for he was an expert archer and pa¬ tient fisher. He began the weaving of this bower, and here our ?? was bora. One luckless day when he went forth to hunt, he stayed away. I never saw him more. Great was the mercy Robert was not with him, for they often went together. Robert can draw the bow, I can throw the line, aud we have lived on; but my bovis rick; he has lain three weeks» upon his leafy bed, and I have nursed him; but m »tv we perish. His strength faileth him; to day for the fit" t time he hath asked for food, and I have been to catch it." So saying, she went to the front of the botver and put together some dry faygob: then with an old horse-shoe and a flint she shot a spark into the midst of them, and the faggots blazed. She dipped her kettle into a little pooi formed by the running of water from a spring hard by, and putting in the fbh, set it on the fire. ** A\lio was thy husband?" He came from a far country and his name was Alartin. I know not who liis father ????." " AVhat country did he come from?" "He came from Britany/' " Brit¬ any !" said Almadore. " He ???? then my coun¬ tryman." " Belike, lady; butin thy country, like this country, poverty hideth its head." " AVhat e 4
80
part of Britany V' " From Brieux. He used to talk much of a great family there ; though thou canst not know Martin Fribourde, thou mayest know a family named Guillard," «· Was Alfonse de Guillard ????? to him ?" " Aye, lady, anrl all his children.' ** Did he ever name his daughter Almadore ?" s< He left her in the cradle. He öfter?, talked of taking us to Britany, to Alfonse, * for he knew me when I was a boy/ he ¡Faid, l and mayhap he will recollect me now.'" "Should¬ est thou like to go to Britany ?" ** No, lady. I had rather stay in my own land." " How ! shouldest thou not like to see the lord de ???- lard ?" " Lady» he would not know me. Likely he would not credit what I told him. Robert and I are English folk." " What wouldst thou say if Almadore should come to thee?" " Lady, as soon would Britany come hither. The know¬ ledge of my misery can never reach her ear. If it did, what am I to her?" " Perhaps some day ¿he may surprise thee." " We will not talk of that. That is a dream. The reality of my wretchedness is before me. Thou dost behold me. Thou se^sfc my son. Give us relief. Save us!" Nartonville rose. He went to the front and shouted, presently a groom approached. " Is the wallet empty ?" " No," said the groom, bow¬ ing, " Bring it hither." Nartonville waited for
81
it, and carrying it himself within the bower, gave it the woman, ft This far to night," he said, tt we will see thee again." So saying, he and Almadore quitted the bower, and remounting their horses, hastened to the castle. The adventure of the bower was the subject of their conversation as they journeyed on. " It cannot be a false tale," said Almadore, " for she did not know to whom she spoke. I have heard my father speak of Gabriel Fribourde, and I make no doubt but Martin was his son. I wish we had met with the widow while my father was in England." It was not far, not more than a journey of four liours from the castle to the bower; and every thing that could tend to the comfort of the mo¬ ther and the recovery of the boy, was sent to them next day. At the same time it was proposed to move ihem both to the castle. " When my child shall be recovered," said the woman, " I will bring him to the castle. At present the quiet of the bower will be more comfortable than the hustle of greater things. The gift sent by Al¬ madore was food and raiment. The comfort of plenty cheered the bower, and Robert quickly recovered. A messenger was frequently dis¬ patched to see how he was going on, and when he began to talk of going forth into the forest e5
82
again, horses were sent to bring both mother and son to the castle. They were ushered into the presence of the lord and lady, and of the ancient baroness. The moment tliey entered the apart¬ ment the poor woman dropped on her knee*· before them. ci Down, down, Robert; if it had not been for the bounty of these good folk, thou hadst been stiff on the leaves ere now." ** Rise/ 1 said Nartonville, " I and the lady Almatlore desire not such humbling/* * f ì)o not raise a phantom," said the woman, u The lady Alma¬ dore is far away." ** Believe it she is near at hand, Aie standeth before thee. Look at me ; the daughter of Alfonsa de Guillard. If thou wilt, ibou and Robert shall tlwefi here in the castle/' '* If it may so please thy greatness," said the poor woman, t% we will remain in our cool bower tvhile it be fair weather, and when the leaves fall we will come unto thee." Almadore was greatly surprised that the wretchedness of such a place as the bower could have more attraction, and be pleasanter than the lofty castle. " Tell us," said Emma, " w hiit we must call thee." " Call me whatsoever may seem good unto thee, but ??¬ ???? is Alice." " Since the forest for the present pleaseth thee best," said Nartonville, u enjoy it. When winter drives thee thence, come hither; Robert shall be made a Httle forestor/'
83
Alice in her green bower was desirous to pre¬ sent some gift to betoken the gratitude she felt toward her kinti benefactress. " Canst thou, Robert, find any thing in the forest which we may venture to give, for I would gladly shew that we are thankful/* if 1 will bring a fawn,** said Robert, ** and it may be brought up tame. I know nothing that I should so much delight in if I were a great lord/' " Do so/" Robert caught the fawn, Alice tamed it ; and when the rough season of the year advanced, and they began to shiver İn the bower, they thought of the warmth of tlic castle. Tliey tied a string round the neck of the fawn, and then quitted their green retreat ; with some little regret was it they did so ; and as they carefully placed the door at the entrance to keep out intruding animals, '* We do not quit thee for ever/' said Robert, When they reached the castle, they presented themselves with their gift to Almadore. She thanked them. " I tvould ??? could have brought thee all the deer in the forest," said Aiice.
f ?
CHAPTER VIH.
Tht» public and the private are so mix'd, The gen'ral weel b so intntbical, Tliat nought affed«, but it ???? through the whole And when the regal throne shakes *neath tbe king, The peasant's cot standa not secure.
While St. Evremond and Nartonrille with tlieir vassals [were thus luxuriating in the pleasures of home, their tranquillity was disturbed by the dis¬ contents of the country at large. The barons were uniting in a strong body to procure from the king that redress of grievances which had so often been demanded, and were taking measures to come forward in open defiance, in case their remonstrances should be disregarded. Simon de Montfort, earl of Leicester, and the earl of Glou¬ cester were at the head of the union, and the weak irresolute monarch trembled for his sceptre. At such a moment every one felt himself bound to come forward, either to assist or tc
85
oppose. Differently influenced were the barons. Matilda spurred her husband on. The enkindled spirit of battle roused all the haughty feeHngs of her aspiring mind ; and she urged St. Evremond to buckle on his armour and go forth. " I would," she said, ** that John were old enough to attend thee." Almadore, on the contrary, hung on Nartonville, and with the soft pleadings of tenderness strove to keep him firom the field. " There are enow to fight," she said, " without thy aid. One arm cannot do much, nor the vas¬ sals of one chieftain turn the ecale of victory. Remember the fate of Ergaud, and venture not thy life." ** My beloved Almadore," said Nar¬ tonville, " the honour of a nobieman and a knight allows not inactivity in the day of battle. Thou wouldst not have thy husband tarnish his i.ame. Thou wouldst not have his lance broken, and his shield trampled." c * Do not go the first of all the champions," Nartonville would not argue the point, he was too true a knight to yield, however tenderly and strongly urged. AU the attributes of knighthood were opposed to the softness of Almadore, and his white plumed helmet was put on. The reign of Henry III. was a continued struggle between him and his people. His ex¬ travagance, his fondness for foreigners, the pre-
8β
terence with which he promoted them to all stations of honour, profit, and trust ; the capri¬ cious unsteadiness of his conduct; and his fre¬ quent breach of promise, made him hateful and contemptible in the eyes of the nation. A strong party was formed against him by the barons. They bound themselves to each other by a solemn oath ; and daringly defied their sovereign face to face. At this time he was reduced to the mere shadow of a king. All authority and power were in tlie hands of twenty-four lords, twelve of whom had been nominated by Henry and twelve by the barons. At the head of the league was Simon de Montfort, earl of Leicester. AVhen he united himself with the barons, in opposition to the king ; and, among other complaints, complained of his affection to foreigners, and of the profusion in which he lavished on them his favour and his treasure: it was, and it still continues to be reproached to him that he was a foreigner himself. Now t , although Simon de Montfort was a foreigner by birth, yet, he most assuredly was in every sense an English subject. For the posses¬ sions which he held in England he had done homage to the king of England, He was created earl of Leicester and was thus become a peer of England. He had taken a wife in England, the sister of his king. He had renounced his
87
native country and was settled in England, thus infiliorating his family. AU the oppressions of Henry were oppressive to him as an English baron, and his resistance was as an English man. He was by homage, fealty, dignity, possession, and connection, entitled to every English right and privilege, and when he leagued with the factious, he did so, beyond all doubt with English feelings. The rapidity with which he rose to dictatorial supremacy among the turbu¬ lent must be attributed to his superior abilities and talents, and his ambitious hopes of becoming the head of the nation, and, as some say, of plac¬ ing the crown on his own head, are imputable to the very nature of ??????. Of all things, ?????? is the most susceptive of inflation, and the most capable of expansion; and ever continues to increase till its own repletion bursts it. As Simon, as an individual, lorded it over his colleagues, so did they as a collective body lord it ?? ? ?? the nation; and the people began to feel that their emancipation from tme tyrant, had subjected tbem to the tyrannical rule of twenty- four ; so that in proportion as the authority of the barons increased, did their popularity decrease ; and there began to be a loud cry against them. Quarrels broke out among themselves : in their jealousies of the power of each other, ancient
88
animosities were renewed. Disputes ran high between Gloucester and Leicester. The latter, exasperated to find himself opposed by the mem¬ bers cf ii is party, in a moment of rage, threw up all concern with English aflairs and retired to France. In consequence of these disputes and discon¬ tents Henry's affairs assumed a brighter aspect, and he had faL prospects of success in any at¬ tempt he might make to recover his authority, but so blindly was he bigoted to the power of the pope, that he dared not take any step to¬ ward that recovery without applying to Rome, to be absolved from his vows and engagements. The pop vvhose interest it was to be on good terms with Henrys and who was at all times ???И pleased to ???? his paramount authority acknow¬ ledged, readily absolved the king and his subjects from tîie oath they liad taken to observe the pro¬ visions of Oxford; whkh was the name given to what the barons deemed reformation of the stale, because the parhament which had imposetl them met in that city. It is to be presumed that oaths were considered to be sacred and inviolable, or they never ????? have been demanded as ratifications of contracts, nor depended on as binding securities. If they were so considered, how strange is it that people
89
so impressed, could suppose ihat there existed any power sufficiently mighty to absolve them from their observance. Chiefly when penalties and punishments are denounced against those by whom they are violated. On one occasion when Henry had been re¬ quired to swear anew to observe the great charter, he did so, as Hume and other historians assert, in an assemblage of prelates and abbots, who all held burning tapers in their hands: the great charter was read before them ; they denounced the sentence of excommunication against every one who should thenceforth violate that funda¬ mental law; they threw their tapers on the ground, and exclaimed, May the soul of every one who incurs this sentence, so stink and corrupt in hell. The king bore a part in this ceremony, and subjoined : So kelp me God, I will keep all tliese articles inviolate, as lam a man, as I am a Chris¬ tian, as lam a knight, and as I am a king, crowned and anointed* Notwithstanding this, no sooner was the ceremony over than it was forgotten, and the king resumed his arbitrary administration, by which every article of the great charter was infringed and broken. Prince Edward, Henry's eldest son, was so conscious of the prejudice which his father's levity, unsteadiness, and faithlessness had been to
90
himself, his authority, and to the nation, that he long refused to take advantage of the absolution ; declaring that although he had been compelled to swear to the observance of' the provisions of Oxford, yet, having so done, he was bound to abide by them. He thus acquired the confidence of aH parties, which enabled him to become a bulwark of strength to his family and his country. The king had no sooner received the pope's absolution, than he issued a proclamation, in which he set forth the ambition and tyranny and breach of faith conspicuous in Leicester and his colleagues, and declared that he had resumed the government. He then called a new parliament in which his resumption of the regal authority was ratified. Leicester however, no way díäcouraged by the bad success of his schemes, formed new plans, and engaged again in a new confederacy. His grand opponent in the party, Richard, earl of Gloucester, was dead, and his son Gilbert had been induced to join with him. Henry, the king's nephew, son of Richard, king of the Romans, commonly called Ilenry D'Almaine, also joined their cause. The incursions of the Welch on the borders of England, ??1??11 had been a perpetual source of quarrel and war, were renewed at this time by
91
Llewellyn prince of Wales, who, like his prede¬ cessors, was most unwilling to do homage to England for his principality. Thinking that the moment of faction and revolt was a favourable opportunity to free himself from such a galHng yoke, he united with the barons, and invaded England vvith an army of thirty thousand men ; and committed sad ravages in the bordering counties. Prince Edward repulsed them and compelled Llewellyn to take refuge in the moun¬ tains of North Wales. The invasion of Llewellyn w r as the signal for commencing hostilities, and Leicester who had planned all the proceedings, came secretly from France, collected all the confederate forces, and raised the standard of open rebellion. It was at this moment that St. Evremond and Nartonville assembled tlieir vassals, and came forward to support ihe royal cause. Their sum¬ mons had been obeyed with alacrity, and they were quickly reatly ; all hastened to follow their chieftain, and oppose the rebels under their great head, Leicester. When Nartonville had put on his armour he sought Almadore. " Every knight, sweet love," he said, " consecrates his lance, his fame, his name, to a fair lady, the mistress of his devotions and his heart. I consecrate my lance, my fame,
92
my name to thee, my true heart's love. In fight¬ ing for my king and for my country, I blend my care of thee, dearer to me than all. Thou must help to arm me. My shield and lance await thy presentation. Wilt thou not send me forth duly accoutred ?" " If thou must leave me," answered Almadore, " I will give thee what thou needest ; thy shield to guard thy noble breast from harm, and thy lance which is thy knightly weapon. I know thou wilt not raise it rashly, nor disgrace it when once raised." He took her hand and led her to the hall. His esquire gave his shield to Aïmadore, who buckled it on the arm of her husband. " May the lion which glares on thee," she said as she dropped a tear on the target, " strike terror and repel the foe," She then presented his, lance; he took it from her, saying, " I will bring it back to thee with honour." His esquire then put on his golden spurs. He pressed his lip to the lip of Almadore, and then placed his helmet. " Wilt thou see me mount ?" he said to her. <f Spare me that," she said, " I cannot behold thy depar¬ ture; it will be enough to know that thou art gone." Completely clad for battle he bade farewell to the ancient baroness. He sunk on his knee before her. " Bless me," he said, " as thou
93
didst bless my father," She bent over him. " Mayest thou," she said, (( with equal honour act a true knight's part ; and mayest thou, more fortunate than he was, return to bless thy family." He rose and met his vassals who awaited his appearance. It ???? a fine sight to behold—Nartonville, mounted on the black war horse which had so often borne him, rode out from the castle to where the vassals were assembled. The gates were opened ΛνίίΙε, and as he issued forth the trumpets sounded the high march which always announced the leader. Loud was the clash of arms in cere¬ monious greeting; and each took the place of his appointment. His banner fanned the air, and he was followed by his archers and his men at arms. The lapse of a fe*v years having strength¬ ened the arm of Robert Fribourde, the youth of the bower in the forest, he was admitted among those w r ho dmv the bow, and attached to his lea¬ der's lance. Alice, his mother, when she beheld him thus equipped for service, said to him, " ???? Robert, shew thyself worthy thy training, and prove thy heart to be grateful." Milward de Rostendale took the place of high¬ est rank next after Nartonville, and all fol^ved tvith hearts full of hope, full of valour, full of loyalty.
94
Equal preparations were made by St. Evre¬ mond. With equal ardour he got ready to depart from his castle like a valiant chieftain, Matilda with military eagerness saw that all was right. She helped to take his hauberk from the wall, adjusted the plumes of his helmet, and tried his gauntlet on her own hand. She overlooked while his shield was burnished. She felt if his sword ????? sharp, and examined the spur for his heel. She seized his lance, and shook it to try its weight. " Raise thy father's lance, lift thy father's shield," she said to her son. " Oi as yet thou canst not bear them. The ???? shall quickly end, or thou shalt overgrow thy weakness while the shout is up—Here ! try thou the fea¬ thered helmet—come—help me to arm St. Evre¬ mond!" She assisted to place his breastplate, she buckled on his shield. She knew all that was needful to accoutre ¿* knight for combat ; his helmet* his sword, his greaves. She stooped and armed his heel. AVhen she presented his lance, she said to him, " Fix well thy lance in the rest; and spur well thy horse against the foe ! ? ! St. EiTemond, how I envy thee thy fame. Thou .shait defend thy king ; thou shalt protect thy country; while 1 remain at home inactive." When he mounted she held his stirrup, while he
95
vaulted on the saddle. When he set forth she put her hand to help the gonfalier to bear the standard. When the cavalcade commenced its march, she was at the castle gate ; she watched its progress as its grand array went on with every martial trophy. Philip de Valonnes, and Brian de Rosenne were first among the vassals, and Edwin was at the head of the archers. At such a time no man could remain in idleness at home. Each either joined the party of the barons, or armed to go against them. Montgo¬ mery among the bravest was found armed for the king. He went forward with the experience of a veteran, and with courage that would not flinch. ** I do not wish to be left out of this grand ar¬ ming," said he to his baroness ; ** I am ready, and 1 go cheerfully ; but I wish it were not against my countrymen. Yet while my heart beats, its every pulse is a throb of loyalty, and I will belp#o prop the throne which is attacked by rebels, and pre¬ serve it for our prince, brave Edward. Come, Amicia, help me once again to cloath my limbs in i^teel ; help me to assume again the lance. Reach me my shield embossed with the argent hantl : The fair white hand of my fathers. I go, I hope, for a short space; if for a lengthened time, be-
96
Heve it, I will do my duty. I must uphold the honour ofmy country, The honour ofmy castle will be nobly upheld by thee." The baroness did the part of the mistress of a warrior's devotion and love, Λνί??ι the pride of the chosen of his heart ; and Montgomery was furnished with all the equipage of chivalry and knighthood. He left his castle at the head of his vassals, and descended the steep hills, on which it stood, mounted on a large and heavy steed. He Λνεηί in slow parade, reserving tlie power and impetuosity ofthe well trained charger for the furious spurring of the onset. Amicia watched him as he descended, and though she felt ardent in the cause which he supported, she could not check her fears for the safety of Mont¬ gomery, the honourable partner of her age, and the distinguished choice of her youth. The violence of Leicester's party raged furious¬ ly throughout the kingdom. The populace, ever foremost in turbulence and faction, flocked to the standard of revolt ; but Simon's chief dependence was on the citizens of London, of all men those tvho had most reason to complain of the king, by whom they had been at all times treated with great severity, and oppressed by repeated fines and taxes. There is nothing so dreadful as a tumult among the lower orders. The factious 3
97
at all times court their assistance, and allure them by the hope of plunder. AVithout sufficient knowledge to appreciate the views of their insti¬ gators, they enter into contests which they do not understand, and with unbridled licentiousness cry havoc, and destroy friend as well as foe. The citizens felt the consequences of such a riot. Ex¬ pulsion of foreigners was the cry of war. The Jew T s tvere massacred, the Lombards were plun¬ dered, and under pretence of searching for fo¬ reigners, the houses of many of the wealthy citi¬ zens w r ere forcibly entered and robbed. The mayor gave the sanction of his authority, and one scene of horror spread around. AVhile matters were in this state, the constable of the tow r er joined the citizens with the meu under his command, and they marched forth together. Plunder their object, destruction their aim. At Isletvorth they deoiroyed the palace of Richard king of the Romans ; and on their return they pulled down king Henry's summer house near AVestminster, AVhile anarchy and misrule devastated, not only London and its neighbourhood, but every county in the kingdom, négociations for peace were set on foot, and accommodations propo¬ sed. Prince Edward had treacherously been made a prisoner by Leicester during a parley at VOL. II. F
98
Windsor, which induced Henry to confirm agaiu the provisions of Oxford; even those which utterly annihilated the royal authority, and the barons were reinstated in supreme command. One of the stipulations of the treaty was the free¬ dom of the prince. When Edtvard was again at liberty he exerted all his influence in the country, employed all his activity in defending the preroga¬ tives of his family, collected a large force, and gained over many who had adhered to Leicester. Among others his cousin Henry d'Almaine. His force was also greatly increased by the accession of the three barons from Devonshire with all their numerous followers. Though they were by many rude cross-roads within reach of each other's castles, so as to be able on some grand occasions to meet in tour¬ naments and feastings, yet their route to the royal army w T as not direct together. They had sepa¬ rately set fortvard, and had appointed the general meeting at Salisbury. Thence in one great body they travelled to join prince Edward, the Hfe, the spirit of the cause.
CHAPTER IX,
■In daysof tumult, when the brave
Either to strengthen or oppose, all arm'd ; The weaker sex within their castles left The silken scarf embroidered, to reward The hero who in battle did the best ; Or iu the tap'itry hangings trae'd at large The story of some battle vvhere their fiiend», Their fathers, brothers, husbands, had been slain, Or nobly gain'd the victory. For they In days of yore stray'd notabioad alone ; But close retired within their lofty walU Waited the return of their protectors.
Never had Almadore felt herself so unprotected as when she turned from the hall where she had helped to arm her husband. A father's or a brothers care had ever made her feel she was secure, but now the lonely castle chilled tvith its vast gloom, and the stillness of all arourd her terrified beyond the bustle tvhich the warlike preparations had occasioned : with equal sorrow r 2
100 Emma had beheld the departure of her grandson, and for a long time neither could console the other. They were however both so amiable that for the other's sake each strove to conquer her own grief. They resumed those occupations which were tlie employments of women in times past, and Almadore began to embroider a scarf for Nartonville. The pleasing idea that she should have something to present to him at his return, on which her fond attentions would have stamped a value, gradually drew her mind from lamentation ; and while she pursued her task, the baroness Emma beguiled the tediousness of time by recounting the events which had occurred in the course of her life, and many of the transac¬ tions of the days of her father. " I was born," she said, cc in the reign of our present sovereign's grandsire, in the old age of my fiither, who had lived half a century when I first ???? the light. He had witnessed the troubles of that turbulent period, and he remembered the tlays of Stephen. líe had beheld the sanctity of Becket, and his after pride ; and he saw the humiliation of the king, who walked barefoot to his tomb." " He was a wondrous man," said Almadore, " few could have endured the mortifications which he imposed on himself/' " I hope/' said Emma, " that I say no wrong, when I presume to doubt
101 if heaven be pleased when we reject the blessings he bestows so amply. Could heaven be pleased that Becket, in the highest station next the king, should forego, not only what we may term the luxuries, but also all the comforts of his life. In spite of all my endeavours to acquiesce, I cannot bring myself to think that he was a better man because he ????? a shirt of sackcloth : nor can I imagine he vms more sanctified because that shirt was changed so seldom that it was full of filth and vermin. Heaven pardon me if I err ! but I cannot believe that all the charms of nature, so delightfully diffused around, are only sent to he despised, AVhen Becket, in order to mortify his palate, used unsavoury herbs to spoil the clear pure water of the spring, merely to make his draught unpleasant ; surely, surely heaven could not accept the silly sacrifice. Heaven have mercy on me if I am impious, but when I con¬ template the dignity of the Supreme, I think ??? derogate his attributes wdien ??? debase ourselves to gain his approbation." " Perhaps," said Al¬ madore, " he did so to gain a name on earth." " If so, the name he sought he gained ; for he has been canonized ; but the more presumptuous bearing of his latter days contributed to that honour, as much as his past sanctity: and the ?????? of martyrdom which was awarded him, was f3
102
not obtained till lie was beyond the knowledge of it." "It may so be," said Almadore, "that crowned as he is in glory, his joy may be encreased by looking down and viewing the devotions at his shrine." " Those are points/' said Emma, " on which mortality cannot decide, for from the tomb none return to tell the sufferings or the joys be¬ yond it." " Our suflerings here are often hard to be endured," said Almadore, "the death of Ergaud, my after separation from my family, and now the absence of my husband, gone to the chance of battle, are griefs, which weigh heavy on my heart." "Listen then to all the sorrows I have known." The baroness then recounted all the events of Neville and Montravers, antl the tale of Austin, and with minute description detailed each circumstance, bringing down the history of her family to the period when Nartonville added Al¬ madore to its members, ** Which I trust," said Emma, t( will be ablessing to us all." Matilda, meanwhile, elate tvith the proud hopes of seeing her lord return victorious from the field, thought not of risk or danger. As her son ad¬ vanced in strength, she put him forward in every exercise which could encrease his hardihood. She had him taught to ride, to vault upon the saddle, she sent him forth to hunt, she trained him to the use of arms, she attended to his walk, his
103
carriage, his demeanour. She imbued his mind with daring, and talked to him of nought but tilts and tournaments, and valiant deeds of battle; and when they dined or supped, the minstrels were ordered to play none but martial airs, and to chaunt no song that did not celebrate the heroes of the days of yore. Thus she led him on, till by degrees she brought him to wield the swords which hung around the hall, to raise the lance, to bear the shield, to wear the helmet ; and gradu¬ ally she buckled on the various parts of armour, till he could stand firm beneath a complete suit. She then made him ride with armour on, mount and dismount full armed, raise his armed hand to strike, to wheel, gallop, rush, and fix the lance ; thus although he was too young to venture to the field, and wars prevented tournaments, he was practised under his mother's training in every point and duty of a knight, with which Matilda was as ???И acquainted as any warrior ???? had ever fought. AVhile Matilda was thus training her son for war, her mother, the baroness de Montgomery, to cheer the hours during the absence of the baron, had prevailed on Adeliza to allow Catherine de Clifford to be an inmate of the castle. Though she was no longer a child, her long residence in the abbey had preserved the simplicity of child- F 4
104
hood, and now that she could range the castle unrestrained by the presence of the baron, she enjoyed the examination of the warlike ornaments which adorned the hall and courts of a military chieftain ; but ????? never found a piace within the holy dwelling whence every thing pertaining to hostility was banished, " AVhat is the use of this ? ?????? shield is that ? ?????? banner hangs irom the wall? where was it taken?" and many such questions were put to the baroness, who was delighted to talk over the honour of her husband's family, and was pleased to relate the history of the shields and banners which were hung around. " The shields which are placed round our hall are those which have been borne by the ancestors of Montgomery, who have all been ???????. They all led the life of the brave. They all fought valiantly, they feasted hospitably, and they quaffed copiously. That brazen shield on thy right hand, is the shield of Erwald de Mont¬ gomery, who went with Robert duke of Norman¬ dy to the Holy-land among the first crusaders. AVhen et r ery one assumed his own distinctive badge, he placed upon his target the ponderous battle axe, emblem of strength. He always ??1??- ed the battle-axe when he went to combat. It is recorded of him, that at the taking of Jerusa¬ lem, he struck it with such force, that he clave
105
an infidel almost in twain. He brought here to the castle the account of the renowned siege, wherein the croisses were victorious. After de¬ fending their city for five weeks the infidels sur¬ rendered, and the croisses entered sword in hand. Then it was the unbelievers found what it was to meet the soldiers of the cross ; for they were almost all destroyed. The croisses, slew with furious zeal the enemies of tlieir faith, and they killed nearly twenty thousand. The city was deluged with gore." " Were they so cruel for the sake of religion ?" said Catherine, " To be sure they were," said the baroness. Erwald left a son named Kelwall, who changed the device of his fa¬ ther, and bore upon his shield a greyhound, em¬ blem of swiftness ; and Jadhael his son bore a key, denoting secresy. Then came the courteous Hubert, ivho on his shield placed a silvc hand, the fair white hand of mercy, his son retained it, and my own brave husband bears it : but every one hangs his own shield in the hall, and see, the hand beams from two at this time hanging here. The one that should supply the vacant place above the mantle, is ???? on the baron's arm." " O," said Catherine, "I delight in the silver hand. It was the kindest device that ever was borne by a knight, and it is the prettiest shield that ever was hung in a hall. If ever I have the FO
106
chusing of a shield, it shall be that with the fair white hand of mercy ; and if ever I embroider a banner, it shall be distinguished by the same fair white badge." '* It was assumed by Hubert, our grandfather, on occasion of a circumstance which occurred at the first battle he had ever witnessed. Itwas in Ireland, when Dermot, the king of Lem¬ ster applied to Henry Plantagenet for assis¬ tance to recover his dominions from the kings jf Meath and Connaught who had invaded his ter- titories, and expelled him from his dominions : king Henry, who was then in Guienne, could not assist him in person, buthe permitted his subjects to go to his assistance. Among those who went on tbat expedition was Hubert de Montgomery. In the height of the battle, when one of the ad¬ verse party was struck down by an English sol¬ dier, a lad appealed to him and said, * ? defend the fallen ! ? defend my father !' Hubert im¬ mediately stepped forward to his rescue : but as he was repelling his assailant, an arrow pierced his breast, and he expired in a moment. The lad said, s thy mercy was in vain ! ? my father ! my father!' et * Weep not, my lad," said Hubert, " now thou hast lost thy father, wilt thou follow me ?" " I will," tvas the answer, and he became Hubert's page. " Dermot being reinstated, Hubert returned to
107 England, and he brought with him his little page. The lad, like most pages at that time, was a toler¬ able minstrel, and often amused himself by play¬ ing on his harp. One day in the heat of summer he had seated himself under the shade of a large oak, and in a melancholy ditty, which he accom¬ panied softly, he told a tale of sorrow. Hubert de Montgomery, who was near when the song ended, approached him, and said, " Art thou the subject of the tale thou hast sung ?" " I am the unfortunate youth, whose father fell in battle, and whose love was stolen from him." " Tell me thy story," said Hubert. " My grandsire was great in Meath, and my father drew the bow in battle when he fought for the chief of Erin, and Roderic fought by his side. Roderic, the friend of his youth. Malla, the daughter of Roderic glowed with the blush of spring, and my heart felt the power of love. But Dermot the spoiler came and seized on the daughter of Meath ; and with hím the fierce Macgregor, who carried my Malla away. She was bright as the flotvers in May, and pure as the sparkling rill. ? my soul it was sad tvhen I went to the w r ar where Connor my father fell, and I wished that the arrow which pierced his breast, had reached to nyy broken heart. The hand of thy mercy hath sheltered ? 6
108
my life, but its joy with Malla is gone. From that time Hubert assumed the silver hand, and called it the hand of mercy." " Let us embroider a banner for the baron," said Catherine, " and fix it on the battlements of the castle." ** Such fancies have passed away," said the baroness, " they are for youthful days, and thou mayest use thy skill." '* I will do it in silver thread," said Catherine, " and the staff shall be long that bears it. I will place it on the highest tower, and its waving shall be seen from far." While thus in various occupations the days were passing on, the months which circled the year encreased the family of Nartonville. During the absence of her father a little girl was born at his castle, and Emma beheld another generation ; but Henry was not there, and the feast of the hall was delayed. The pompous baptism of a baron's child was omitted, and she received her name at the font in all the simplicity of her own i inocence. Emma, prouder of her burden than if it had been a diamond of equal magnitude, bore her to the holy fane, where she received the name of Isabella, which had been the name of Henry's mother. She was wrapt in the same mantle which had enwrapt her father when he was baptized, and siie wore a cap which her
109
namesake grandmother had trimmed and orna¬ mented. Messengers were sent off to bear the news to Nartonville; butthe state ofthe war, and the pe¬ rilous times prevented him from returning home. He sent however an account of matters at that moment. He said that the earl of Leicester resided in London, where he wap supported by the turbulent citizens. That the populace had formed themselves into companies, chosen leaders, and been trained in the practice of arms. They committed daily outrages agamst the royafists, and had entered into an association with many of the barons, and mutually bound themselves not to make peace with the king, but with the consent of each other. His further information was that Leicester, master of the city, and also of the south-east of England, had formed the siege of Rochester, which beside the earl of AVarenne the governor, was garrisoned by many power¬ ful barons of the king's party, to wdiom he and his friends had joined themselves. Furthermore, the king and prince had marched to the relief of the castle, in consequence of which he had raised the seige and returned to London, where he hatl reinforced himself with a fresh body of Londoners, and prepared anew for war, but
no
had sent conditions of peace, which were so exorbitant, that Henry the king, Edward the prince, and Richard king of the Romans had sent him the lie and defiance. We are now awaiting, added Nartonville, the result.
CHAPTER Χ.
Of all the horrors wliich pertain to war, The ravages of civil discord, sure Beyond all others direful are and sad. For father against son, son against sire, Brother against brother, friend against friend In dreadful contest meet, and ev'ry tie Of love and kindred broken, each receives From him who should defend him, defiance And the blow oí death.
When Leicester received the lie and defiance from the king, and his son, and his brother, he sent a messenger to renounce, in his name and that of the associated barons, all fealty and alle¬ giance to Henry. Having so done, he marched out of the city at the head of his army, which was divided into four bodies, one of which ???? com¬ posed entirely of Londoners. The bishop of Chichester gave them a general absolution, and promised all who fell immediate admission into 4
112
heaven as a reward for dying in such a meritori¬ ous cause. Meanwhile, the king with his army had gone forward to Lewes, in Sussex, whither Leicester, who was an excellent general, marched with such caution and secresy, that he well-nigh surprised them in their quarters. The prince, however, by his activity and valour, repaired the negligence of his father, and immediately drew up and mar¬ shalled his troops, and putting himself at their head, he divided them into three bodies, and marched out to meet the rebels. Leading the van, he rushed on the Londoners, who had demanded the post of honour, that of leading the rebels. They met with equal fury, but the Londoners, being ignorant of discipline, and having no experience in action, were unable to stand against the well-trained troops and mili¬ tary commanders who accompanied prince Ed- ????. Their lines were broken in 'an instant, and they were driven off the field. Prince Ed¬ ward, whose courage was daring, and whose dis¬ position was ardent, followed them with every feeling of indignation that could stimulate him to vengeance. They had not only rebelled against his father r but it was they who had insulted his mother in her barge on the Thames, as she was proceeding from the tower to Windsor castle.
113
He remembered the opprobious language with which they abused her, and their cry of drown the witch. He knew that they had been prepared with stones to sink her vessel as she shot the bridge. He had not forgotten her fears, which had compelled her to return and shut herself up in the tower. When they fled, he pursued, im¬ pelled by double motives for revenge. He gave no quarter, but followed them four miles, put¬ ting all to the sword as he came up with them. In the eagerness of pursuit he forgot that part of the army tvhich he had left behind. Leicester per¬ ceiving the flight of the Londoners, and the rash eagerness with which the prince pursued, took advantage of his imprudent absence, and led on his other troops against the hvo bodies of the king's army which were commanded by the royal brothers, Both sides met with equal rancour. Each seemed to fight only to destroy, for neither expected quarter or mercy from the other. The slaughter of the troops led by the king of the Romans was dreadful. The flower ofthe battle fell unable to defend their general; and that brave prince, as he stood among the slain vvho lay around him, was defeated and obliged to yield himself prisoner to the earl of Gloucester. Lei¬ cester himself penetrated to the rear, which was composed of all the principal nobility of the
114
royal party, among whom was the baron de Montgomery, accompanied by his son-in-law, the baron de St. Evremond, and ???? commanded by the king. The violence of the attack ????? them into disorder, and they fled before them. He followed up the advantage he had gained, and pursued them into the ίοΛνη of Lewes, ?????? he overpowered them, and Henry became the cap¬ tive of his audacious subject. Prince Ed?vald on returning to the field of battle, was struck with horror and amazement when he beheld it covered with the bodies of the slain; but how was his astonishment increased when he knew that the king and his faithful fol¬ lowers ????? captives. The earl of Warenne, William de Valence, and others, struck with despair, immediately fled, and made their escape beyond sea. But the baron de Montgomery, and the baron de St. Evremond scorned to desert their sovereign in the hour of his misfortune, and they shared his fate. The intrepid prince shrunk not in the midst of such great disasters, he exhorted his troops to exert themselves to revenge the death of tbeir friends, and to redeem their captive king. " Assist me," he said, " second me at this important moment ! aki me to renew the battle, and to defeat the
115
enemy, already half defeated by the current of their own victory. Release your king, defend your prince, and revenge your friends!" He found his troops unwilling to follow him, and in¬ timidated by the devastation they beheld around. Leicester, fearful that the ardour of the valiant Edward would animate his soldiers, and that a desperate effort might be attended with success, which would annihilate his power, and make the battle of Lewes of no avail, amused him by nego¬ tiation till he had recalled his troops and ranged them orderly around him, and then he dic¬ tated his own terms. The prince, without re¬ source, surrounded by an unrelenting enemy, with no means to provide his army, without money, without forage, without retreat, was ob¬ liged to yield to all that was proposed to him. It was stipulated that the prince and Henry d'Al- maine should surrender themselves prisoners, each as a pledge for the freedom of his father ; and that all other prisoners should be released. That the full settlement of the dispute and the further arrangement of the English government, should be submitted to Saint Lewis, king of France, ???? together with certain counsellors to be appointed, should determine the fate of England, The prince, and Henry d'Almaine
116
immediately surrendered themselves, and were sent under guard to Dover castie. Leicester by this means had the whole of the royal family in his hands ; and he had no sooner shut up the frvo young princes, than he violated every article of the treaty he had made w r ith them, and became sole master of affairs, and the absolute tyrant of the nation, He carried the king about from place to place, used the sanction of his au¬ thority and name in justification of every illegal act of his sway ; kept many of the prisoners still confined ; reserved to himself the ransom of those whom he set at liberty ; even kept from the earl of Gloucester the ransom of the king of the Ro¬ mans, who had surrendered himself to that noble- . man ; seized to his own share the estates and castles of the barons who had forfeited them at the battle of Lewes, and had the audacity to tell such of lus followers as remonstrated, that it was enough for them, that by the victory he had saved them from the forfeitures and attainders which hung over them. The situation in which Leicester notv stood was one of extreme risk ; he held the king at bay, and he used the royal authority even for raising the forces which tvere to uphold his own usurpa¬ tion, and the sceptre had absolutely passed into
11?
his hand. So circumstanced, it was necessary that he should establish his own power and mount the throne, or retire into the condition of a sub¬ ject. He was desirous to sanction all he did by some authority beyond his own / will* and he summoned a parliament to meet within the city, where his party ?? ? ?? the strongest. He not only called together all the barons who adhered to his cause, together svitli many ecclesiastics, but he ordered returns to be made of Ιλλ? knights from each shire, and also deputies from the boroughs. Thus from a state of anarchy grew the English house of commons : and that which ????? honour« ably assembled is the palladium of English liberty, was originally called forth to support the arbi¬ trary proceedings of a rebel, who * -- trampling on every prerogative and privilege í king and people. The supreme rule assumed by Leicester was disgusting to his confederates, who were excluded from all share of power, and more in bondage under his tyranny than they had been under the ? big. Many separated themselves from him. Among others the earl of Gloucester, the most powerful of tliose who had adhered to him. When the desertion of such a mighty coadjutor was known, the friends of the king, and Leices¬ ter's enemies began to recover their courage,
İİH
and their hopes were lively now that they were assured of the protection of such a potent leader. Though war, that is, the meeting of adverse parties in the field, had ceased after tlie battle of Lewes, yet animosities were strong, and the enmity of party discord rankled in every breast. The barons, who after that battle, so injurious to the royal fiimily, had retired to their castles, were there in constant preparation to seize the first moment when they might renew, with toler¬ able hopes of success, their exertions in favour of the king ; and they were ready to unite again in order to procure the liberation of their prince, the valiant Edward. The $???? \vsl$ sheathed no where ; no one hung his coat of mail upon his wall; it was ever ready to be resumed, and every loyal baron had his vassals prompt and eager to follow his banner at the first call. Meetings were frequent among them, and they availed themselves of every opportunity of domestic oc¬ currence, which might take from their assemblies the appearance of political consultations. Nar¬ tonville, to celebrate the birth of his child, who had been born in his absence, gave a grand feast, the ancient mode of celebrating every joyful event. He invited thereto every one ivho by distance could possibly attend. The infant was introduced ίο all the guests assembled, and due
119
honour was paid to the first-born of the baron. Those sports which ????? frequently on such oc¬ casions exhibited among the lower vassals were omitted, that the time usually joviiil might be devoted to deliberation. Montgomery ???? there, and St. Evremond, each attended by such among their vassals whose rank gave them a place in consultations, and Nartonville's vassals of equal rank were also 'there ; and every other baron in like manner attended. They all came without their ladies, for the omission of sports took from the feast all the attraction which drew females from their own castles, While they were all in consultation, intelli¬ gence, which did not travel very fast, ???? brought to them tbat Leicester, unable to oppose the general wish of the people for the liberation of prince Edward, had set him at liberty, but had stipulated such hard terms with him, that all power was still in his own hands, and he still continued to keep on foot a powerful army. As this agreement checked fcr a time the fury of discord, the barons assembled at Nartonville's castle determined to remain quiet, but at the same time to watch the motions of Leicester, and to hold themselves in readiness to march if the articles agreed on bhould be violated. They parted with mutual assurances of union, and de-
ião
termination to come forward again în support of the cause for which they had already fought. AVhen Montgomery returned to his home, the expected joy of his reception was saddened by the illness ofthe baroness. She had sickened a few days after his departure for Nartonville's feast, and had daily become worse. She was at that time unable to rise from her bed, and the physician who was in constant attendance, gave very little hope oi her recovery. Catherine de Clifford, who had been for a long time an inmate of the castle was unremitting in her care, and Austin her confessor was often with her. As she had fulfilled the duties of a vvife, of a mother, and of the mistress of her castle and dependants with strict propriety, and was beloved by all around her, she tvas resigned to meet the lot of human kind, and she prepared for the moment which was fast approaching tvith the composure of hope. She expressed a strong wish to see her grandson, and therefore messengers were sent to St. Evre¬ mond. AVith all expedition, the baron, with Matilda and their son obeyed the summons, and they reached Montgomery's castle just in time to receive the last breatli of the baroness. Matilda, whose every feeling was ardent, ap¬ proached her mother's couch in extreme grief; she stooped over her, and said, " I have brought
121
my boy to pay his duty to thee." A faint gleam of joy overspread the face of Amicia. She put forth her hand, and feebly said, " John, my dear child." He took the hand she proffered, and while he held it, she heaved a sigh, and expired. John, who never till then had beheld death, as he felt the weight of her inanimate hand, and watched the change which passed rapidly over her countenance, gazed in terror on the ghastly appearance it assumed so quickly. He turned to his mother and said, " Is it thus to die ?" Ma¬ tilda made no reply, but St. Evremond, Λν?ιο also stood near the couch, said, " John, this is the death of peace. Yet even this pierces the heart. To live ! to breathe ! to hope ! and in the twink¬ ling of an eye to be a clod ! a piece of earth inani¬ mate ! Though in the tented field we often beliold the warrior and the man of strength fall at our feet, the clash of battle, and the cause of combat, beguile us of our sympathy ; such a scene as this, when every feeling is concentred in the loss we suffer, shews us what it is to die. It is an awful lesson. Let it teach us what it is to live ; for the actions of bravery, the vaunt of power, the pride of greatness, and the pomp of wealth, end thus ; and the succeedmg generation scarcely remembers that which has gone before," The baron de Montgomery and Amicia had vol, n. g
122
Hved together many years in continued conjugal happiness, and he felt her loss with that degree of grief which proceeded from a long attachment: and ???? the object of his love ???? taken from him, he w r as anxious to testify by every respect that he could shetv to her remains, the sorrotv he felt that she was snatched away. The tombs of the family of Montgomery were among the most costly that period had to boast, and their monuments in rough sculpture orna¬ mented the church at the foot of the high hill on which their castle was erected. Thither, in all the magnificence, and solemn pageantry of funeral pomp, the baroness was con¬ veyed, attended by the relations, friends, vassals, dependents, and household of her husband. They followed in tears, shed by real grief, for Amicia had been as a mother to the distressed and the unhappy. The coffin in which she was deposited was oak, it was ornamented with brass plates, on which were rudely engraven sculls, and many other em¬ blems of mortality. It was placed in the great hall, and on it, in massy golden candlesticks, torches were burning night and day. Alwin the chief bard, now too old to follow in the mournful train, sat near it, and all her maids stood round. At stated intervals the sorrowing minstrel sounded
123
a melancholy harmony, and ever and anon he chaunted a plaintive hymn. When the day of the funeral arrived, all ???? were to precede or follovv the corse assembled at the castle. They ranged themselves in prepara¬ tory order ; and when the great gates were opened the procession began its slow march. In the front walked the monks of the neighbouring mo¬ nastery, two and two, each carrying a taper. Austin her confessor followed his brethren, bear¬ ing a missal. The priests belonging to the church went next, in their pontifical attire, each also ^tritìi a taper. Next followed the dignities of 'the cathedral, and the reverend bishop of the see, arrayed in the full robes of his state. On his head he wore his mitre, and the crosier was borne before him. The body enclosed within its nar¬ row limits followed on the shoulders ofthe faith¬ ful hinds, who were successively changed as they proceeded down the steep, It was covered with a long black pall, held by Montgomery and St. Evremond, John de St. Evremond, his son, and Hugh de Clifford, the youngest brother of Ber¬ tha and Catherine, who had followed the standard of Montgomery, and assisted at the consultations of Nartonville. IVJatilda, clad in the sable garb of grief, followed her mother. Her flowing train swept the ground, and her long veil covered her
124
form. She leaned on the arm of Goda and of Eva, her favourite maids : next followed Cathe¬ rine de CHfford, wdiom Matilda had introduced to her parents on her wedding day, and who had attended, with duty like a child's, on the last mo¬ ments of the baroness. She was supported by two of the chief w r omen of Amicia's chamber ; ac¬ cording to their affinity the relatives then followed. The sorrowing vassals, followed according to their rank, from the highest who bore the lance in bat¬ tle, to the humble serf who laboured in the fields of the domain. The afllicted members of the household followed next, and as they tvound down the hill in slow and solemn pace, the children too young to bear a part in the ordered progress, added themselves promiscuously as it went on, and awed by the impressive pageantry silently encreased the train. Tiie monks and holy choir of ihe cathedral chaunted by turns during the long march, and when they reached the church and took their places as they tvere entitled by kindred or by rank, they filled the nave and aisles. When the body was brought within the holy walls, and placed in the midst of the mourning attendants, the esquire of Montgomery, and the esquire of St, Evremond were stationed at the head : the one bearing the helmet and shield of
125
Montgomery, the other holding the banner on which Catherine de Clifford had embroidered the fair white hand of mercy : for the martial spirit of the times, and the chivalric feelings of the baron and his daughter could not be satisfied without military trophies even at the funeral of a lady. When all were placed, and stillness and silence succeeded the bustle of the array, the solemn service commenced. Mass was chaunted accord¬ ing to the form appointed for the dead. The bishop, by the dignity of his manner, impressed on every mind the sacredness of his office, and the lofty tones of the organ which united them·» selves with the voices of the choir, raised every heart above the earth to where they hoped ??? cia would be blessed. When the appointed prayers and hymns were ended, the reverend prelate delivered a funeral oration, wherein he extolled, as was her due, the virtues of the tie- parted, and called on every one to follow the example she had set them. The last ceremony, that of placing the coffin within the tomb, disturbed the pensive congrega¬ tion. All rose s and again walked in the same order to behold the earth thrown on the lid, and to look a last farewell on the saddening spectacle _ ? Go
126
of leaving her mouldering remains to become the feast ofthe ?????. The door of the tomb was closed, and the mourners in the same order they had attended the last duties paid to the baroness, returned to her late stately dwelling ; but they climbed the hill in silence, which they had descended with the chauntings of the holy choir. They entered the hall, where the gloom of the funeral attire chilled all around ; and ????? Matilda was con¬ ducted to the chair .which the baroness had been used to fill, the big drops rolled down her cheeks, and her swoln heart acknowledged the tender¬ ness of filial love. Little was said, the deep melancholy of Mont¬ gomery imposed silence, and the cup of ??????- ship did not pass around. The baron looked on his friends as they departed in sadness, and he ???? soon left vvitii none but his family. Catherine de Clifford vvas so excessively grieved at the loss she had sustained ????? the baroness died, that she returned from the funeral to the abbey, where the gentleness of her sister Bertha was more likely to soothe her sorrow, than the haughtiness of Matilda, which she knew ????? be subdued but for a moment. Catherine ???? right. The impression of the
127
funeral quickly ????? away. She returned to the ambition which ever kept her mind intent on great exploits; and she soon proposed to let Montgomery behold the ready instructed knight of her training. She dressed him in the armour which hung in the hall; she put on him hie grandfather's helmet, and buckled on the shield with the silver hand. When it was buckled on his arm, he observed it was the same device whicii Catherine had embroidered on the banner vyhich waved in the funeral shew ; and he said, *' AVhy did Catherine interfere with the crest of the fair wdiite hand of thy fathers ?" The obser¬ vation of John, brought back to memory the song of Adela. She caught John's hand, and pulling hún to her, she gazed for a moment on the shield, and then hastily giving him alance, she said " raise this." John took it and raised it high, Matilda's heart bounded as she beheld the lance in the hand of her son, and thus martially arrayed, she presented him to his grandfather, and the delight he took in beholding his youthful activity and dexterity gradually softened his grief. Matilda went to visit the abbey, where she once again enjoyed the conversation of Bertha de Clifford. She presented her son at the grate; Adeliza gave him the grave blessing of an abbes«, g4
128
who had raised her thoughts beyond the affairs of earth, but Bertha blessed him as the dear son of her beloved Matilda. She remained for some time at her father's cas¬ tle, and when she quited it, Montgomery said, " May every blessmg attend you, my children, an<l may happmess be your lot for ever : while my lonely heart in sorrow not to be overcome, mourns for the loss of Amicia."
CHAPTER XL
Short intervals of peace never ropose The warrior, for e'en then constant alarm Keeps up perpetual watch, and the soldier, Ever on guard, never lays by the sword.
The momentary cessation of hostilities which fol¬ lowed the liberation of prince Edward, could scarcely be called peace: and the manner in which the prince was detained, together with the king his father, in the power of Leicester, coukl hardly be deemed freedom : for Leicester still continued armed, and kept such a constant watch over him, that he was in fact no other than a prisoner at large, ever guarded by the creatures of his enemy. It may indeed be said, that the king and the prince, who were constantly sur¬ rounded by spies, and carried about from place to place by Leicester, made a part of that auda¬ cious rebel's train. The earl of Gloucester, when he withdrew from g 5
130
Leicester's party, retired to his estates on the borders of AVales, ?????? he confederated with the lords of the Welsh marches ; among others with Roger Mortimer, who at that time possessed Ludlow castle ; a most magnificent structure, whicii had been erected by Roger de Montgo¬ mery, w ho came over with William the conqueror. He was created earl of Shrewsbury and Arundel, and for his good services enjoyed nearly the w r hole county of Salop. He ???? succeeded by his son Hugh, ??1? ???? succeeded by his son Henry : but this nobleman having espoused the cause of Robert Duke of Normandy, against his brother Henry I., and being overcome and obli¬ ged to submit, the king seized on ihe castle at Ludlow, and banished him to Normandy. Henry II. gave Ludlow castle to his favourite Fulke Fitz Warrinne, surnamed de Diñan *. It again reverted to the crown, and king John gave it to Philip di Alliani ; from whom, by the female line, it descended io the Mortimers, and from them it passetl heieditarily to the crown. Leicester was sometvhat alarmed by the union of two such powerful noblemen as the earl of Gloucester and Roger Mortimer, he proclaimed them traitors, and enemies, to the state. lie then
131
put himself at the head of his army, and marched to Hereford, carrying wiih him the king and the prince. The royal captives being thus brought near to the opposers of Leicester, they began to contrive methods for the delivery ofthe prince^ Glouces¬ ter in conjunction with Mortimer, through tîie means of their friends at Hereford, presented Edward with a very fine horse, instructing him to use it for his escape as he should find opportunity, and to flee to a certain fixed on place, wliere Mor¬ timer would be provided with a party to convey him to safety. Accordingly, one day when he was riding attended as usual by the guards set over him by Leicester, he proposed to ride matches between their horses. Riding was one of the accomplishments of a military man, and the pro¬ posal was accepted as a matter of merriment and sport, and continued a long time. AVhen the prince perceived that the horses of his companions were fatigued, and what jockeys call blown, he mounted the horse which had been given him by Gloucester, and had not been among the racers, and clapping spurs in his sides, rode away at full speed. He was pursued for some time, but when his pursuers saw the troop of horsemen headed by Mortimer, ready to favour his escape, they checked their horses and turnetl from the pursuit. g 6
132
Edward was immediately conducted to the earl of Gloucester, who, having exacted from him an oath that he would exert himself to the utmost to restore the ancient laws ofthe land, and to banish all foreigners from the kingdom ; put him at the head of the forces he had raised. Thus the prince was suddenly at the head of an army daily increased by the royalists who flocked to his stan¬ dard, while his enemy, the earl of Leicester, found himself in a remote part of the kingdom, barred from communication with his friends by the Severn, the bridges on which, prince Edward was careful to destroy. The friends of the royal family, to whom in¬ ielligence of the plan had been secretly con¬ veyed, were all ready, the moment the prince was free, to march to he assistance. Montgomery, St. Evremond, and Nartonville, with all their vas- sits and dependents, again left their castles, and joined their numerous forces to those of the in¬ ti epid prince. Matilda, whose every feeling gave way to the impulse of ambition, and the dazzling glory of mili- taiy fame, fanned the ardour of her son ; and when .die ???? ? him set forward to begin his career of arms, and follow his fatiier as his esquire, she ex¬ ulted as he rode away, and she forgot all fear for
133
her son, in the pride of the name of St. Evre¬ mond, Leicester, feeHng how fatal the prince's escape might prove to him, gave orders in the name of the king, who still remained in his power, for all the king's subjects to oppose the prince, and the earl of Gloucester, who were both tieclared trai¬ tors and enemies to the state. The proclamation, however, did not prevent many barons, officers, and soldiers, from offering their services to the prince, tvho was thus soon at the head of a more powerful army than that wliich followed Leices¬ ter. The state of affairs changed. Leicester, who had long swept the kingdom like a tempest, could not notv prevent Edward from becoming master of Gloucester, and many other towns. He was forced to give ground before that brave young prince, who followed him from place to place. And after liaving had all the forces of the king¬ dom at his command, he was compelled to use his best generalship to avoid a battle. In these cir¬ cumstances he sent to his son Simon, to march to his relief, and reinforce him with all his troops. Simon instantly obeyed : and advanced as far as Kenilworth. There he halted, and imagining that all Edward's forces, and all his attention were employed agamst his father, he encamped Λνίί?ι little care and Httle caution. But the prince
134
had too much at stake, not to be watchful every where. He made ? forced march, and surprized him where he lay. He soon overpowered his little army, and took many prisoners, almost with¬ out resistance. He then divided his army into two bodies, one of which he ordered to march with the colours taken at Kenilworth ; while he, at the head of the other, advanced by a circuitous route to Evesham, where Leicester, who had crossed the Severn during Edward's absence, on a bridge of boats, had encamped himself. Leicester was deceived by the stratagem of the colours, and while he beheld hia foes approach, as they bore the banner of his son, he was full of hope ihat Simon drew near. When he perceived his error, and beheld the prince advancing from another quarter, his consternation was evident to all. He defended liimself however, with the des¬ perate courage of one whose life, whose cause, whose friends depended on his valour ; and sus¬ tained from two o'clock till night, the utmost ef¬ forts of prince Edward and his powerful army. He had never dared to trust his royal prisoner, the king, out of his sight, he exposed him to the peril of tlie fight, and placed him in the front of the battle : being clad in armour and unknown to his friends, he received a wound in his shoulder, and was on the point of being slain by a soldier,
:i35
when, taking off his helmet he exclaimed, " I am Henry of Winchester, thy king" St. Evremond who was near, rushed forward with his followers, and Philip de Valonnes rescued his royal master. Edward, who heard the voice of his father, ran instantly to his assistance. By this act of filial duty, he made himself so conspicuous, that a sol¬ dier in Leicester's army ran furiously toward him, and raising his weapon, was about to strike, when Edwin, who was at the head of St, Evre- mond's archers, drew his bow, and his unerring arrow pierced him beneath the arm, He fell. Edward saw the shaft, and looking at Edwin, said, " I shall requite thee." Even in the heat of battle, the prince forgot not to sanctify his arms by the blessing of his fa¬ ther. He sunk on his knee to receive his bene¬ diction, then rising quickly he committed him to the care of a strong guard who conveyed him to a place of safety ; and returned to his troops that he might animate them by his presence, and keep up their ardour by his own intrepid valour. Wherever the danger was greatest, there was he found. His shield was the protection of his army, his arm was the arm of a host. Leicester, too, fought bravely. Each knew that on him de¬ pended all, and that conquest pr defeat would decide the fate ofthe kingdom. At length, after
136
sustaining the combat during a long day, Leices¬ ter asked for quarter ; but mercy was deaf to his cry. He fell, but he fell Hke a hero, and his son Henry fell beside him. The body of Leicester being found among the slain, Roger Mortimer mangled it savagely ; and having cut off his head, with a degree of barba* rity at which humanity shudders, he sent it to his widow as a token of the success of the royal cause, and a proof that he had revenged himself on his enemy. The battle of Evesham, tvhich was fought four¬ teen months after the battle of Lewes, wherein the king is taken prisoner, gave a new turn to the affaix >f the kingdom. Those tvho had so dairingly supported Leicester, now that their chief was slain, came forward to renew their fealty to the king. TJie isles of Ely and Acholme long stood out, but were at length reduced. By the prudent advice of his son, Henry for¬ bore to execute the vengeance he had in his power, and very lenient fines w r ere exacted from the delinquents. The countess of Leicester, the king's sister, who Iiad greatly instigated the inju¬ ries of the royal family, was, with her sons, sent out of the kingdom. The queen carae over from France, where she had been left by her husband, and peace was restored to the land.
CHAPTER XII.
Behold 3 To-day Gobbo ia plac'd aloft, His dress is siiken, aad his cup is gold : All follow cap in hand, and cry, " a God 1" To-morrow Gobbo falls : his riches fly ; He wants the morsel which he threw away 1 Who now cries '· hail !" to Gobbo í ah ; not one, The hail is now to Decus, who was rais'd By Gobbo's fail. Should he too fall, why then Good night—Fiorix or Janse suppliée his place, And then, " all hail," to hiro.
The great events which occasionally occur and involve the fate of nations, call the attention of mankind, and awaken contemplation. The battles of Lewes and Evesham demonstrate the truth that we know not what a day may bring forth. In the battle of Lewes the king was made a pri¬ soner, and his captor Leicester so exalted, that the sceptre was alir ost within his grasp. At the battle of Evesham, Leicester was slain. Such personages are so conspicuously placed, that the reverses in their fortunes are known to all, and
138
the story of their fall passes from generation to generation as a perpetual monument of the in¬ stability of all temporal things. They are, how¬ ever, so above the common level, that they are removed from general sympathy, for it is a change to which but few are liable. In the humbler paths of life, in that very path perhaps in which we ourselves are treading, thousands are falling from rank and honours, or rising to them almost from the dunghill. There we mingle feelings, we know we may so fall, we hope we may so rise : yet even there how circumscribed is sympathy. We jostle some one off his perch, and place our¬ selves upon his stand, and keep the balance al¬ ways playing. Still the sympathy excited, is but small. We rise and there we are, none but a few neighbours know whence we came, and the gos¬ sip of the hour ended, no one traces out our means of elevation ; or we fall, and we are left to lay there where ??? drop. The sympathy we raise is evanescent, the pity of a few who know how wc declined : but many insolent, unfeeling scoffers, vrill say that we deserve our fate, and pride must have a fall* It ???? the general cry against the earl of Leicester, and when he died, every one added a shade to blacken his reputa¬ tion. Had he not been born in the time of Henry IIL, had he lived in the reign of his son,
139
he would have been a faithful subject, and his great talents would have found another field for action : and the traitor, who sought to pull down the king, would have been the firmest prop of his throne. Like the billows of the ocean which continue long to foam after the rage of the tempest has ceased, the turbulent minds of the many long re¬ mained unquiet. The blade was long kept shar*· pened, and the helmet ready plumed. The noble in his castle was long upon his guard, and his vas¬ sals ready for his call. When all were tamed, and thought reviewed the past, Edward remem¬ bered the archer who had drawn a bow in his defence at Evesham. it Who was the expert bowman, whose true aim preserved me in the hour of peril ?" said he to St. Evremond. " The best archer in the land," replied St. Evremond, t( and the best minstrel also !" " Talents not often blended," observed the prince. " I have seen his skill in archery, let me hear his minstrelsy." Edwin was immediately ordered to bring his harp. The spirit of an archer who had drawn his bow in battle, and deserved the thanks of his prince, beamed in the countenance of Edwin ; and the presence of him before whom he was required to sing, animated the lay, and gave en¬ ergy to the chords he struck. Martial was the
140
descant, while his hand wandered from string to string, and noble was the air he chaunted. When deeds ofthe brave shall be sung To the child who is now unborn, Thy praise on the harp shall be amg, And thy virtues the verse adorn, For bold in the field wert thou found, And dutiful still to ??? sire ; Thy ardour had nevera bound, Vet tenderness temper'd thy fire. The proud felt thy terrible stroke, The weak found thy sheltring pow'r ; Thy aim is the strength ofthe oak, Thy mind is the sweet smiling flow'r, Exultingly he raised his voice, and he pulled the string with dignity, for the hero he sang was by, and the praise he bestowed was due. j Ed¬ ward shrunk not from the commendation he received, for he felt that he had deserved his fame ; and when the strain ceased, and the clos¬ ing cadence had sunk into its last chord, the prmce said to the minstrel, "Edwin, I am in¬ debted to thee for arresting the arm ????11 tvas raised against me ; I am again thy debtor for the song thou hast raised to my name. Wilt thou change thy master and follow the fortunes of thy prince ?" " AVith my master's permission, I will
141
follow thee, my lord, and draw my bow for thee with true loyalty, and cheer and animate thee with my harp." fi What sayest thou, St. Evre- mend?" (< Every thing I possess," replied St. Evremond, " is at the command of my king, and of my prince. I yield him with assurance that I present a brave youth, and a faithful follower. One in whom confidence may be reposed, and from whom service Λνί?? never rail." ft He need- eth not thy good word," said the prince, " his actions praise themselves," Then turning to Ed¬ win he said, ít thou art now mine ; I wish not to need thy ????, but thy harp must be always ready." t( Always, for it can never want a theme, when it sounds to obey my lord." With the na¬ tive grace that accompanied all his movements, Edwin bowed respectfully and quitted the royal presence, St. Evremond then related to the prince the simple anecdotes of Ed?vin*s life, be¬ ginning with the prize at the feast of his marriage with Matilda. " A faithful follower," said Ed¬ ward, " even in the humblest station, is a trea¬ sure which even a prince may value." These turmoils, which had endured for upwards of five years, being now appeased, each baron and every noble knight and hopeful esquire, returned to his peaceful hall. Matilda Λν^β so impatient to meet her son, that
142
as he with his father and train approached the castle, she was without the gates to receive them, " Has he done his duty ?" she asked eagerly. "Nobly," said St. Evremond, 'T will not single htm out and say he was the best, for all did well ; but ï profess him to have been as brave, as active, and as true as any : and the next time we go forth, should we again be called to the fierce con¬ flict of the martial field, he goes with knightly honours." " Come, my boy," she said, " thy mo¬ ther bids thee welcome. Her prayers to Heaven have constantly been poured forth for thy pro¬ tection ; and her thanks are now most grateful, for her prayers have all been heard." She then turned to St. Evremond, " and thou too, ray hus¬ band, art welcome to my heart. Thy safety mingled in my petitions for our son. Come— enter—enter all who have accompanied my hus¬ band and my boy." She led the way : she took the banner : she placed it over the seat of the baron, and the bards in full accord shouted the song of victory and triumph ; of return and wel¬ come. The impossibility of his continuing his journey home, without halting to rest, compelled Narton* ville to share the feast Matilda had prepared for her son's first return from battle. That pomp which she had ever displayed, was exhibited with
143
splendour, and the rapturous joy with which she gloried in his fame, animated her every word, her every look, and her every gesture. Though there was not a tournament, she di¬ rected that some chivalric exercises should be performed, and the knights tilted in friendly con¬ test, admitting John to the honour of raising a lance among them. When Nartonville reached his castle, Almadore also stood without the gates to receive him. " Art thou in perfect safety, Ilenry ?" she said aa she met him. " Aye, love," he replied. " We have prepared a little feast to welcome thee," she con¬ tinued. " And I have a gift for thee," so saying, she threw the scarf she had embroidered, over his shoulder. "Where is the lady Emma?" said Nartonville, tí and my Isabella ?" " In the apartments of the baroness," replied Almadore. They instantly repaired thither. There sat the venerable matron, with her grandson's infant in her arms. Like the Hope of Troy she was frightened by the helmet, which he gave to the attendant, and then raised his child to receive the kiss of her father. With the kiss he also gave his blessing. " Has Robert Fribourde behaved well ?" said Almadore. " He always drew Ids bow Hke a good archer," replied Nartonville. " Come forward,"
144
she sakl to Alice, who had been placed among the attendants on the little Isabella. u Come and hear thy son's praise." " Robert ???? the best bowman in the army," said Nartonville. il Hea¬ ven make me thankful/' said the good woman, "Go to greet him," said Almadore, " Aye/ 1 said Nartonville, " go and hear from him how ??? have all behaved." c * Like fine brave men, be sure/' said Alice. From the apartments where they were convers¬ ing, Almadore beheld the train of Anselm the abbot, riding among the trees of the forest, and she said to her husband, <( ??? have received much comfort since thou wentest away, from the sage conversation of the holy abbot of the neighbour¬ ing convent ; and we have invited him to share with us in the festivity made joyotus by thy re¬ turn. Behold, even now he approacheth. Go, love, receive him with thy accustomed hospi¬ tality." Presently the abbot's self was seen slowly in pomp approaching. He was, as usual, ín the full parade of an abbot's stateliness. His beast gorgeously dressed out in all his trappings, his preceding monks and following train. When he reached the castle, needless it was to sound the bugle, the gates were always thrown ΛνίιΙο open, and he crossed the court always as an expected guest. Nartonville, in his coat of mail, met him,
145
and paid him the accustomed duty of helping him to alight. " Methought," said the reverend man, " I should have met thee in the garb of peace." " We hat e marched home in full array of battle/" said Nartonville, "that as we passed along it might be seen that we were still prepared for war. Thus to strike terror in the factious, and to convince the turbulent the throne had still supporters." " That is well said," observed the abbot, " I have been a frequent visiter during thy absence, and many have been the prayers which we ???? offered for thy preservation." " I am much bounden to you all, and joined to the good swords w r e carried," answered Nartonville, " no doubt they have been efficacious." " In the mutations of the world," said Anselm, ír the many unexpected deliverances vvhich occur, demonstrate that we do not pray in vain/' As he thus spoke, they reached the hall. c( Though I have received thec, holy father, like a warrior, I will meet thee at the table like a host." He hung up his helmit as he passed along, and he placed his shield beside the shield of Ergaud, he returned into the hall unarmed, and in a fuMrimmcd silken vest, sat as the host of peace, AVhen he was seated, the abbot observed to him that he tvas fortunate to have left the field without a wound. " The peril of battle is great," vol. n. H
146
said he, u and the chances are so numerous against safety, that I trust thou art duly sensible of the mercy of thy escape. My long life is the record of many a friend who hath sunk into an early grave, and many a warrior who hath re¬ turned from battle with loss of fortune, loss of health, loss of limb ; loss of every thing save re¬ nown. In the days of my youth, ere I entered the holy mansion wherein for many years İ have resided, I was intimate in the family of a noble¬ man, Wildard, baron d'Aiberge. He was sur¬ rounded by a family of ten sons, A few years ere I sought my holy retreat, Wildard was remo¬ ved from the bustle and tumult of the turbulent reign of our late sovereign kmg John. He was succeeded by Humphrey his eldest son. Hum¬ phrey and his nine brothers were all valiant men, and all fought for the king. They served him on the continent, tliey served him at home : and they all fell in the field. Ten noble brothers spilt their blood, and lost their lives for Lack-land. They all past away like smoke from the censer, which filleth the air and vanisheth. Of their numerous posterity, the only one now alive is Nicholas, the son of the younger brother of the house. He was 'in the battle of Massoura, wdiere so many nobles fell." if I remember him," said NarWhville, ** Thou art mistaken when thou dost assert that ?
147 he is still alive; we left hhn among the skin," '* I know ye did," said Anselm, " and he lay loug en¬ cumbered by the dead around him. When night and silence succeeded the horrible slaughter of tlie day, with the utmost efforts he could exert, he crawled from among the mangled heaps with which he had been mingled. At the dawn ofthe next day, a girl, loaded with a pail, and singing gaily, passed where he lay. He did not under¬ stand her language, but he uttered a deep groan, which drew her attention to him. She ap¬ proached : he instantly pointed to his breast from which the blood still flowed ; he took her hand and looked at her with that imploring call fin pity wliich speaks to the heart. ' Ah!' .she said, which is a native general exclamation. She looked around, but saw no aid. She oflered him a cup of milk. It ???8 all she had. She heaved a smb. and went awav. Let the scoffers at nra\er behold that man bereft of every comfort ^ave that of prayer : bereft of every hope from man, raisi ι ig his hope by prayer to Heaven. I tell ihee, Nar¬ tonville, the cup of milk she gave him, \\\c lhc healing balm which saved his life. Abra re¬ turned. She had represented his sad fate at the hut where she dwelt, and had awakened pity in the breast of her father. Adulid bore hiui to his own home. The gentle Abra tended hiui, ? 2
148
Pity is sister to love. He learned a little of her language, and she learned a little of his. She interpreted to Adulid: and when he was reco¬ vered, the generous Saracen gave him his liberty, thougii he might have detained him as his slave. When the moment of separation arrived, when he was about to depart, Abra drooped, she sickened, He could not leave her thus. Adulid vvas frantic at the danger of his child. She again interpre¬ ted to Adulid. * Wed with a Christian !' he ex¬ claimed, t the enemy of our faith !' Abra grew worse, Wavering between his prophet and his child, he at length consented that Abra should be the wife of Nicholas. They were married accor¬ ding to the ceremony of the faith of Adulid, and when they reached the camp of Lewis, a reverend priest united them according to the rite^ of our most holy church. He brought her to England. Love gave fervour to his wishes, and ardour to his words, and Abra is no longer an infidel." "Wherefore did he not join us against Leices¬ ter ?" asketl Nartonville. "Alas!" said Anselm, " the cup of milk ????? saved his life, did not re¬ store his vigour. The great bleeding of his wound, its unskilful treatment, and his long suf¬ fering, ??? ? ? rendered him unfit for service. An inactive soldier does but encumber a military camp."
149 " In my opinion," said Almadore, " there is nothing so dreadful as the recollection of the many miseries w r hich men inflict upon their fel¬ lows. I never heard of any country that had not been ravaged by the sword of devastation ; nor do I know a family whicii has not to deplore the loss of its best hopes in the fury of the field of war. Pardon me, Nartonville, I do not love war, I cannot glory in the fame that lays so many low. Perhaps it is because í am a woman, that I am only sensible to the horrors of the embattled field. The valour which leadeth to destruction, seemeth to me to be ferocious, and the courage which rusheth on to slaughter, appeareth like the un¬ tamed cruelty of a beast of prey. The death of Ergaud maketh me shudder when I recollect it, and when thou wert absent, Henry, in my fears for thy safety, I forgot the honour of thy renown." " Sweet love," said Nartonville, t( it well becomes the softness of thy sex to lament the mischiefs wliich follow in the train of war; but rougher man never can bear oppression without opposing the oppressor." " Thou sayest well/' said Emma, ** oppression must doubtless be opposed : but yet we must lament that perpetual aggression so frequently calleth forth the mighty to retaliate. Review the wavs of record or tradition, trace diem to their source, &nd injustice, rapine, and H ?
uo
plunder have been their real incitements. Con¬ template those who have been esteemed the bra¬ vest warriors, have they not been the scourges of the days in which they flourished ? The destruc¬ tion of a foe is followed by the destruction of an army, that by the destruction of a nation. Those who stir np such discords, those who throw the kindlmg brand, are answerable for all the lives they sacrifice. Those who defend their violated right«, arm justly, but even that is oft productive of so much havoc, that while oppression ? repel¬ led, reparation is not gained." " I would," said Anselm, " that war might cease for ever, but the passions of men never will be calmed, and such halcyon days are not, I fear, to be looked for on this side the grave. Even his holmess the pope is oft compelled to rouse the nations and to sound the trumpet of batde. The expulsion of the infidels who have profaned the Holy- Land which is not yet effected, still urges him to call on holy warriors ; and if all other causes were no more, that is a cause which Christendom through aU her courts roust hear, and must obey." u Doth the trumpet sound again, againat the infi¬ dels ?" " Verily it doth, my daughter," answered Anselm. " Alas," said Emma, " it is almost two centuries since the first crusade was published against the unbelievers ; and the thousands who as croisses have fought for Palestine» have raised
151
the lance in vain. The infidels regain as quickly as they lose, and after all that has been done, all is to do again." " Patience is a virtue," said the abbot, " and perseverance is another. Patience and perseverance put together must gain the end proposed ; and it behoveth all to arm at such a call, that such a race may either be converted or extir¬ pated, and the Christians fixed peaceably in their possessions." ? Forgive me, holy father," said Almadore, " if I presume to differ from thee in opinion. Surely the extirpation ofa race is not for man ; and the sword never will convert an infidel to tlie religion of peace." " If every one were like thee, my Almadore/* said Nartonville, " a knight tvould never raise a lance." " If every one were like our Almadore/' said Emma, " the halcyon days, the hoiy abbot tells us are not on this side the grave, would bless the earth." <( If every one were like the lady Almadore/' said Anselm, ít we should be too fond of earth, our heaven would be temporal." ** I would that every woman were Hke Almadore," said Nartonville, *' for then every man would be a happy one : but till such general happiness be allotted us, the turmoils which ever jar our lives as we take our turn among the sons of men, will daily introduce new cause for war, and new demand for valour." *' Indeed it is a woful truth," said Emma, " we pass from the bat" tie to the feast, and from the feast again to battle ; h4
152
and the sound of the shout of joy is lost in the outcry of grief." Though these observations had nothing jovial in them, yet die pleasures of the social board were not disturbed. All were pleased as they sa t around; and the care Alma¬ dore had taken to prepare every thing she knew would be grateful to Nartonville, gave a zest to the whole repast, and the cup of fellowship pas¬ sed around with more than its wonted charm. While Nartonville and St. Evremond ????? thus again domesticated in their own castles, the baron de Montgomery, without Amicia, found no pleasure in the lofty mansion he inhabited. Her loss not only threw a gloom through every cham¬ ber, but there was a void in his heart which none around him could supply. He was now too old to act again the warrior's part, and too weak to range the plains and woodlands with his dogs and hawks. The union of interest which made all plans and consultations with Amicia centre in mutual aid, ???? ???? no more. Matilda, in her son found such proud joy, that every other person and every other object ?? -as forgotten. Attention to her father, attachment to the place of her na¬ tivity, and the scene of her youthful days, thvelt not in her recollection. The honour of John, and the advancement of John, occupied her solely.
153
Adeliza de Beaufort, the abbess, the sister of Montgomery, was the only one remaining to his old heart. To her he went frequently ; but the grate which separated her from all the world had long enthralled those generous feelings wliich the tvorld calls forth by intercourse. The scorn of all things worldly, which is inculcated within the monastery, tvhile it teaches all to overcome their own regrets, renders every one callous to the fond regrets of others. Adeliza talked much to her brother about the duty of submission, but she wept not with him over the loss he mourned. She sought not to soothe his sorrow, she strove to animate his resignation. Bertha de Clifford sometimes accompanied the abbess to the grate, but her tenderness, which ever reverted to the grave of Raymond, kept up a perpetual grief, before which all other sorrow seemed to be ,? nothing ; and whenever she ventured to conv ???- with Montgomery, it was ahvays to compare tlu loss they had sustained, and ???? to observe that she alone had cause for lamentation. Catherine de Clifford, who had never loved any one without the abbey walls but Amicia do Montgomery, wept her loss as the greatest grief which she had ever known. AVhen the baron named a virku in the wife whom he deplored, Catherine would ii ô
154
always find a theme for commendation ; and the mention of the baroness at all times brought to remembrance some action or some word which she delighted to recapitulate. Thus she became the only comforter; and as she could not now dwell in his castle, the baron often sought the grate where he could converse with her.
CHAPTER XIII.
War, destructive war í The scourge of nations, And the rod of man ; by men deem'd noble, Desolates the earth ; Castles besiegM, Cities destroys, inoffensive people Slain I men, women, children, babes, commingled In one heap of slaughter, cover the plain, And the rough dealer of such gen*ral woe, Looks round upon the mischief he has caus'd ; Struts, and is call'd a hero.
The observation ofthe lady Emma that the sound of the shout of joy is hst in the outcry of grief was founded on the tragical events ????? her longlife had witnessed. Events needless to be re¬ capitulated, they stain the pages of every history which records the times in which they happened. Few enterprises, perhaps none, ever united so many nations in one general cause as those expe¬ ditions to the east, which were called crusades. The wish which is natural to the human mind, to visit all places which have been distinguished ??
156
as the residence of illustrious personages, or the scene of great transactions, induced many to visit that country which had been the inheritance of the chosen people of God, and in which that grand event took place, on vyhich a Christian grounds his faith and his hopes. The first pilgrims Λνεηί peaceably, and the politic caliphs ????? well pleased to receive them, for they brought with them gold and silver, and carried nothing away but a few relics, and a few trinkets wdiich their priests consecrated. After the Turks con¬ quered Syria, the pilgrims were exposed to many outrages, and those who returned from Palestine related the many sufferings they endured, and the many risks and dangers they ran when they virited the holy city of Jerusalem, impressed with the resentment which such accounts excited, the minds of men were easily inflamed, and die wild enthusiasm of one fanatical monk, Peter the Her¬ mit, as he was called, stirred up all Christendom to unite their forces in order to drive the infidels out of the Holy-Land. It is, perhaps, fair to believe that the first crusaders were instigated by religious zeal : but the subsequent holy wars, as they always contmued to be called, v/ere evi¬ dently undertaken with very different feelings and motives, from what can in the least degree be traced to religion, If any of the later crusaders
157
may be supposed to have been religiously influen¬ ced, it is Lewis the ninth of France, who at thb period, notwithstanding all his personal sufferings, and his great loss of treasure and troops, was again preparing to rescue the Holy-Land out of the hands of the infidels. Finding himself but faintly seconded, he interceded with the pope to send a legate to stimulate the people by his ex¬ hortations. Accordingly Simon de Brie was de¬ puted by his holiness. He made in a full parlia¬ ment a most pathetic harangue on the indispen¬ sable obligation by which all Christians were bounden to assist their suffering brethren. He drew a touching picture of the miseries and insults they endured, and spoke of the horror of remaining inactive ?\'?1? the Holy-Land and the holy sepulchre were profaned. Lewis once more took the cross in presence of the whole as¬ sembly. He caused his three sons to do tlie same, and his brother Alphonse de Toulouse, also Theobald king of Navarre, who had married his daughter Elizabeth, and Robert his nephew, the son of that unfortunate Robert count D'Ar¬ tois, vvho had perished at Massoura. He roused the count of Flanders, and the duke of Bretagne. He inspirited the Montmorencies, the Monpen- riers, and many other powerful men of his king¬ dom. The enthusiasm spread wide ; it reached
15Θ
England, whereto a legate was also sent, who exhorted the EngHsh to contribute their money and their persons towards an expedition, the sole end whereof was the glory of God and the good of the Church. Prince Edward caught the fire, and prepared to join the croisses. He received the cross at the hands of the legate, together with numerous noblemen and knights, and a multitude of persons of all ranks and conditions. There is no doubt that Lewis was influenced by the motives which the legate imputed to the cause, and it is certain that now, as well as on occasion of his first expedition, his wish was to go to Palestine : but as then he had been prevailed on to go to Egypt, so now he was persuaded to go to Tunis. Beside, the reasons alleged, which really appertained to the improbability of succeed¬ ing in Palestine, while such powerful chiefs re¬ mained to keep up the strength of the infidels, political reasons were suggested which did not exactly belong to the holy cause, but which even the pious Lewis could not resist. They were chiefly suggested and insisted on by Charles of Anjou his brother, lately become king of Naples. A prince whose name was tarnished by the death of Conradin, and to whom the reduction of Tunis ???? important. The cruelty of his conduct to his competitor for the Neapolitan crown had
159
raised him many enemies, even among the French who had assisted him to gain the victory which placed him on the throne. He promised to assist the croisses with an army which he intended to raise among the malcontents of his kingdom, w-hors he thus, by the allurements of fame and the hopes of gain, banished, if not to death, perhaps to distant settlements which would become de¬ pendent on Naples, and would be able to protect his shores from the ravages of the Moors. By that and many other reasons, the French king was induced to determine to go to Tunis, as a step to the grand object of rescuing Jerusalem. All being ready, the troops embarked at Mar¬ seilles for the coast of Africa ; though Lewis was at that time so weakened by sickness that he eould hardly support the weight of his cuirass, or stand under his heavy helmet. Lewis had flak tered himself with the hope ofa friendly reception from Omar the king of Tunis, who knowing the weakness of king Lewis in matters which concern¬ ed religion, had promised to become a Christian, Lewis had indeed been weak enough to allow that consideration to have great weight among the many other motives which carried him to Tunis. " ? !" lie exclaimed, " what happiness it would be to answer for a converted Mahome¬ tan king at the font !" The deceitfulness of the
160
African was however soon manifested, for when Lewis informed him of his arrival, and reminded him of his promise concerning his baptism, Omar sent him word he would receive it at the head of a hundred thousand men. That answer convinced Lewis, that the pretence of conversion was only a snare which the wily African had laid to entrap him. He therefore instantly gave orders to com¬ mence hostilities. With angry impetuosity the port was attacked and gained, and also the fort by ?????. it was defended. They then besieged the city. The Mahometans, at the time of the holy vpars, were too good soldiers to be unprepared to defend themselves against an enemy ???? was expected. Tunis w r as so well garrisoned, that there was no hope of reducing it but by famine. The besiegers therefore set about destroying all without, but the infidels ????? so well provided, that famine was felt in the camp, before the besieged tvere in want. While the holy warriors were thus enduring the hardships they had piously in¬ tended to inflict,, the oppressive heat of the cli¬ mate, and the pestilential vapours arising from the swamps, caused great sickness in the camp, which carried off the men so rapidly, that in the course of a month half had perished. In these distressing circumstances, it tvas by necessity re¬ solved, that ????? should await the arrival of his
161
brother, who was daily expected from Sicily. This forced forbearance imboldened the Afri¬ cans, who in their turn besieged the camp, and kept the soldiery perpetually on duty night and day. In this miserable condition, exhausted by sickness and fatigue, ill provided with food, and ill supplied with medicine, the contagion spread. The soldiers and the commanders fell. The pope's legate, and the king's son, John Tristan, died. Philip the heir sickened, and at length the king himself. Prince Philip recovered, but Lewis sank. When he found his end approach¬ ing he called his chiefs around him. " My friends," said he, " my course is done ; it is but right that as your leader I should go the first ; ye must all in turn follow me, be ye therefore ahvays ready." He pressed the hand of his son witli tenderness, and gave him much good advice concerning his future reign. He then received the sacrament, caused himself to be laid upon a bed of ashes, placed the crucifix upon his bosom, and expired reciting passages from holy writ. Sicily was then, as it is now, the seat of luxury and voluptuousness ; and the fleet of Charles of Anjou, ????? arrived upon the coast of Africa almost at the moment when the king expired, approached gay with streamers, and with nearly all the crew upon the decks, and sailing to the
162
sound of music which the breeze wafted to the sorrowing camp. Charles, surprised that no reply °f j°y greeted him from shore, leaped into a boat and rowed instantly to land. The woe de¬ picted in the face of every one who met him when he went on shore, declared before he heard it the dreadful loss they had sustained. He ran to the royal tent, where he beheld his lifeless brother, whose countenance still beamed with gentleness and goodness. He threw himself upon the body, pressed it to his bosom, and bathed it with his tears. It appears strange that a man who could with¬ out remorse imbrue his hands in blood, as Charles of Anjou did by slaying Conradin, shouid be so sensible to the loss of a brother ; and if we con¬ sider that the piety of Lewis never was suspected to 4 be hypocrisy, it also appears strange that he should so far have forgotten the crimes of which his brother had been guilty, as to act in con¬ junction with him : it certainly, in a great degree, did away with the eflicacy of his otvn example : for though to be a good man might be a recom¬ mendation to his esteem, it is evident that to be a bad man did not exclude from his friendship. While the vicious continue to be received and countenanced in society, even by the virtuous, vice will be audacious, The greatest check to
163
crime would be to treat the guilty ΛνιΛ contempt. If a man felt that he were despised, he would abstain from c >ing wrong for the sake of that re¬ spect which all are anxious to obtain. Perhaps, however, the continued kindness of Lewis for his brother Charles, may be ascribed to the folly of that belief which people had in the wicked assu¬ rance of the pope, that all sins were expiated by taking the cross against the infidels in the east. A belief so destructive of all the fundamental principles of religion, and of the Christian reli¬ gion in particular, that did not history confirm the fact, it could hardly now be imagined that any men could be so blasphemously daring as to make such a promise, or others so stupidly blind as to place their hopes on such a promise made.
CHAPTER XIV,
Farewell, once more farewell, my native land î Howe'er belov'd thou art by my fond heart, Still fonder cares invite me for tlu 1 go To fight for Palestine ; to gain a seat Among the blest in heav'n : and to atone For ev'ry sin committed. Foolish man ! Heav'n can only be obtained by goodness ; The only expiation of offence Is by repentance.
Preparations fortius sixth crusade were making in England, tvhile St. Lewis was journeying to Tunis, The feelings which originally instigated the crusaders stiU existed. The same enthusiasm still made warriors consider the war holy; and kept alive the same assurance of ultimate success, and the same hope of establishing the Christians at Jerusalem, permanently, and for ever. The same promises of paradise without purgatory were held forth, and the same pardon of sins. To die
165
at Jerusalem, or even to fight for her, was to atone for every crime. Why then are we asto¬ nished at the atrocious crimes committed by the crusaders, while they believed that their holy war¬ fare expiated all? it followed as a matter in course, that they w T ould indulge in every propen¬ sity let it lead to what it might. They certainly would not use a curb, when the head of the church loosened the rein. That every one was not wicked in the extreme, is imputable to the greater or lesser power of passion over the mind, for all had equal licence ; and as it is evident reason had no "sway, it is more wonderful that they were not tvorse, than that they were so bad : bad as they assuredly ?????. Notwithstanding the corruption of the crusa¬ ders, and the absurdity of the crusades as to the end proposed, many consequences, beneficial to society, resulted from them. The west was gra¬ dually polished by the long continued intercourse with the east ; and arts, sciences, and commerce, ????? have diffused wealth antl knowledge through the now flourishing kingdoms of western Europe, owe their introduction to the wild expe¬ ditions ????И never effected the ends for which they were undertaken. Though warriors still set forward with the same intentions and feelings now as heretofore, yet the
166
more refined leaders were now more anxious to appear with splendour ana dignity, at the head of their vassals, than in earlier times, when their ferocious hardihood and their want of polish was their pride. They now marched forth with many appendages unknown to their forefathers, and in¬ troduced a general expense, which was individual ruin. The glee, the rapture, with which Matilda saw that all was right for her son's departure on the expedition which was to be headed by prince Edward, was as ardent as the aeal of the first who took the cross ; and the parade of his appa¬ rel and equipage, was equal to the highest noble in the land. Whatever debts she contracted, whatever inconvenience for the moment she brought upon her husband, she knew the vast property of Montgomery would restore ; and no¬ thing to her pride and her ambition seemed too much for the heir of two such ancient houses as he would represent. He went out a complete knight. He assumed the same badge as his father, and the towering eagle was on his arm. Upon his helmet was a high waving plume. His armour was beautiful to female fancy, but complete and martial as a warrior's safety. The perpetual practice in which she had kept him in the exercise of arms, made
167
him the most graceful knight of the whole train. His grandfather, the baron de Montgomery, pre¬ sented him with a fine courser magnificently caparisoned : and the day he sallied from his fa¬ ther's castle as the champion ofthe cross, was the happiest day of his life. St. Evremond partook the joy and exultation of his mother, and while gazing on the young knight as they rode side by side, it may also be called the happiest day which he had ever known ; even happier than the day which gave Matilda to his wishes. He took such pains to make young John conspicuous, that he almost gave way to him in every circumstance. He had established his own fame, and he seemed desirous to give it up to his son. While John w r as thus the idol of his family, fortunately for him, though he had imbibed all the daring of his mother's spirit, he tempered it with the kindness he had always loved in his father; and thus he was verily the most courteous as well as the most gallant knight tvho ever took his proud seat upon a war horse. Matilda, after he had passed the gates, mounted the highest battle¬ ment that she might see him far away ; and she erected on the highest pinnacle the banner of St. Evremond, that he might long behold it as it flapped the air. When she descended, she walked amongthe arms still hangingen the walls,
168
and as she surveyed them, she traced in memory the battles tvhere those to whom they had be¬ longed had fought. The same encouragement to combat did not ex¬ ist at the castle of Nartonville. The females there were not martial. Emma had seen too much of war, ansl was too well acquainted with the fascina¬ tion of military fame, to attempt to persuade her grandson not to accompany the prince. She could not, "however, exult in his warlike spirit, nor be lively in preparing for his departure. Her hus¬ band and her son both perished in the field, and therefore she trembled for Nartonville. She would have said stay, had she hoped he would thereby have been detained. Almadore, who ???? all tenderness and love, saw his preparations with terror. A voyage to the holy-land, seemed to her, to be the ultimate point of woe. She used et ery soft persuasion to keep her husband at his castle, and while she pleaded, she almost gave offence. The military glory of a nobleman and a knight, was, in his opinion, the first call of honour, and every consideration of love, connection, or family, vanished before it : and charmed as he was by ihe tenderness that feared greatly for his safety, he was displeased at the want of enthusiasm which should always glotv in the bosom of a soldier's wife. " Love," he ¿aid, (C thou w T eepest—fie !—
169
thou shouldst rejoice. Am I not again going to prove my valour in the holy wars ? to fight for my religion ? to plant it in the plains of infidelity ? Am I not going to expiate all my sins, and to gai» Paradise ?" " What sins hast thou to ex¬ piate ?" said Almadore. ** We have all sins," said Nartonville, " I must not contradict thee," said she, " but they may be expiated here ; the holy Anselm will absolve thee, without risking thy dear life," " Forbear, my love," said Nartonville, " I am resolved. Do not, ????????, think I am in¬ sensible to what thou sayest. I delight in thy tenderness and in thy love ; I leave tiiee with re¬ gret, but before such a cause as this, ?? noble, so meritorious, all other considerations vanish, and I go as to a feast." " What must be, must be," said Almadore, " yet, if it be possible, send mes¬ sengers to inform me how thou dost go on, that I may know how to pray." " Pray," he ?????????, " for my renown: my life, ifit be not glorious, is ?????? than death. Farewell, I will not see our child. I feel enough in quitting thee ; I dare not see you both. Give her my blessing, and imprint on her sweet lips this kiss ?????. I imprint on thine." " Farewell," said Almadore, "may every saint whose name I ever heard, have thee in guard. Greatly do I rejoice our child is not a boy. Isabella cannot be torn from me." vol, π. ι
170
He went away with all chivalric ceremony, at¬ tended by his archers and men-at-arms, and was received with loud shoutings by his vassals, at whose head he placed himself with exulting joy. He departed with his banner waving, but Alma* dore could not gaze after the train. She retired. Alas ! it waa to weep. Never till now, since Montgomery could raise a lance, did he see his sovereign or his prince array himself for battle, without buckling on his armour. As the accounts of the adventurous knights who at this time again took arms, reached him in his lonely hall, he gazed upon the coats of mail, i( What are ye now to me ?" he said. *'Ye are as a tale told, or a cloud that hath passed away." He then reached down his shield, which graced the mantle, and placed it on his arm. ile raised it. t( Dost thou shake beneath the weight, old arm V* he said, " shall thy fair white hand never agam shine brightly ?" The penalties ot nature, old age, and death, are sharp and ??? ? ???. Behold the veteran who once plumed his pride in battle, shrink beneath a soldier's harness ! His guarded arm too weak to hold defence against his aged breast, and his armed hand too weak to strike the İoeî The days which are gone, all he can enjoy ; the days to come, joyless !
171
His inability to stir among the warriors in the martial field, followed so quickly after the aid he had given at Evesham, that he felt how he was changed. A few years more, and he had seen the active and the young pursue their hardy course without repining; but now he wished to join them. Now, too, that Amicia was no more. He wept again his loss ; and found no comfort near him. The abbey where Catherine de Clifford dwelt, was the only place on earth where he could forget his griefs, for she alone it was who sought to soothe them. Thither he repaired, and there he found fresh cause for lamentation. As he approached the gate, he met Austin. After the holy salutation always given by a confessor, the monk gravely said to him, " Thou dost ap* proach the house of sornnv, if sorrow may be sup¬ posed to dwell within these holy w r alls." Observ* ing u the consternation of Montgomery, he said, " Death hath visited this mansion, and the holy mother, the pious Adeliza, hath breathed her last while yet I was performing the last duties by her couch." "Say," cried the baron with vehemence. " Do not thou grieve," continued Austin, " thy sister hath paid that debt we all must pay, in a manner that shall be recorded as a perpetual ex¬ ample to her successors." When Montgomery approached the grate, Catherine, who thought the ι 2
172
death of Adeliza Λν -ould bring him to the abbey, wa^ there to receive him ; for all the members of the community, were praying round their de¬ parted abbess. As he put his hand to the bars, she seized it. " O!" she said, " what is there in this ?????! but grief ? First, my dear baroness, and now the abbess taken forever from me. All that remains to me, is my sister." In saying ?????, she bedewed the hand she held with tears. *'Yes," said the baron, " 1 remain." Catherine dropt his hand. " But what art thou to me ? these bars divide us ever." " Canst thou not pass them, Catherine ?" " Yea, I can pass them when I list : but I cannot walk to the castie as I was wont to do when the dear mistress was alive and dwelt there." " Shouldst thou like to dwell again within the castle, Catherine ?" " I should., but thou knowest that it cannotbe." At that moment, one ofthe sisters appeared. She approached the ^rate and said, " The baron de Montgomery must not be ofiended vriien he is told, that until our holy mother is committed to the grave, no stran¬ ger can be admitted within our walls. Not even tliou who art her brother/' The baron, bowing to the veiled speaker, said, " Far be it from me to trespassou the rules of the holy mansion, wherein my sister hath so long maintained them." He ihen bowed to Catliarine, and said, " farewell."
173
He walked slowly up the high hill which led to his now solitary dwelling. He again looked mournfully round his hall, and strayed througii the forsaken chambers of Amicia. All was as she had left it. Nothing had been disturbed. Meanwhile, the solemnity of burying Adeliza took place, with all the pomp due to a noble lady, and a holy abbess. She was borne to the grave in slow march, and the pall was held hy six of the sisters ; the others followed bearing tapers, and at intervals joining their voices to those ofthe priests who walked tv ? and two before the coffin. She was laid within the chapel, close beside her predecessor Ph ìli- berta. When all the ceremonies w r ere performed, and the nuns returned to the empty chamber of the abbess, they sat in mute sorrow, which no sound interrupted, till the bell tolled to prayers. They all attended to the holy call, and after the various duties of the day were done, each with grief re¬ tired to her ionely cell. The want of an abbes&> increased the dreariness of the gloomy abbey : yet such was the excellent discipline which Ade¬ liza had maintained, that each sister knew her task, and performed it, believing it to be right, even now the authority which could compel it was withdrawn, and the regular performance oi ι 3
174
every duty was uninterrupted, though for some time there was no superior in the abbey. At length Bertha de Clifford was promoted to the government of the convent wherein she had been confined so long. Wlien she was duly in¬ vested ???? her high dignity, she said to the sis¬ ters, " We have been so happy under the rule and government of our lamented abbess, the holy mother, Adeliza de Beaufort, that now I am placed where she officiated with so much wisdom, I shall, as far as my weak abilities will permit, walk in her footsteps ; and where I fail, ye, once my sisters, now my children, must assist me with your prayers, that so I may be strengthened in the performance of my important duties." In the name of the sisterhood, Beatrix d'Amboyne said, " Thou hast been so long a kind sister among us, that we look forward with pleasure to the lenity wiih which thou wilt govern thy former compa¬ nions." " And I hope/' said Catherine, " that al¬ though thou art become our holy mother, thou wilt remember, that by blood, thou art still my sister." tí I trust," said the new abbess, "that no one will be disappointed."
CHAPTER XV.
To fly from noise and bustle, and retire To woods and groves, and meditate alone On life, and all its joys, and all it¡> woes, Is pleasant to the man who knows he can, When solitude delights no more, return To dear companions, and partake with them The cheerfulness of their society, Where mingling wishes, and exchange of thoughts Soften each care, and heighten ev'ry bliss. But when perpetual solitude ever Is found, in hall, ín chamber, when no friend Laments our absence, nor joys in our return, The heart discovers that we were not made Solely for ourselves, but that happiness, To be perfect, must be shared.
The oftener Montgomery went abroad, the more severely did he feel at his return that there was no one in his castle to bid him welcome home. How often did he sit alone in the cheerless ele* vation of the dais, and eat his costly meal un- relished. No conversation to make the feast joyous: no pledge to make the cup jovial. A« ι 4
176
these feelmgs increased, so did the pleasure he took in visiting the abbey, and conversing with Catherine at the grate. Bertha, who had succeeded Adeliza in the government, having been the beloved friend of Matilda's earliest days, he went with the courte¬ ous duty every knight paid to a lady, to greet her on her elevation. " Since my sister hath been removed," he said, " from this world of disap¬ pointment and grief, to scenes of everlasting bliss, I must rejoice that the place of her earthly dignity is supplied by the friend of Matilda, and the sister of Catherme." The latter part of this congratulatory address, somewhat surprised Bertha ; and as she now felt doubly bound to be watchful over the sister committed to her care, she contrived, without letting Catherine discover that it was intentional, always to find some occu¬ pation for her that might prevent her from going to the grate when Montgomery, whose visits she began to think too frequent, made his appearance there. She sometimes sent a sister to give an¬ swers to his inquiries, and sometimes, because he was Matilda's father, she condescended to go her¬ self to know why he was there. To see Catherine, was in truth the cause of all his visits, but that he was unwilling to confess to Bertha. Wlien he found, however, that she was never to be seen, he
177
began to be very anxious to know whether she staid away from inclination, or whether she was kept away by compulsion. He did not exactly know why he sought her society while he enjoyed it, but notv it was withheld from him, he found that it would be the greatest happiness he could fir d on earth to be for ever with her. As no opportunity was allowed him to say tvhat he wished to say to Catherine, he one day ven¬ tured to declare his wishes to Bertha. " The many years which I have been known to thee, holy Bertha," he said, ft have, I trust, convinced thee that I am a nobleman of honour and inte¬ grity ; and the felicity in which, as thou knowest, I lived ΛνΠΙι my ever to be lamented wife, Amicia, may assure thee that the mistress of my castie may find happiness within its walls. Thou must liave heard from my wife, my sister, and my daughter, that joy and pleasure, had once their residence in my lofty towers. Now, alas ! cheerless are its solitary chambers. I am further, proud in hope that the report made by Catherine, thy sister, doth confirm what they have said, if Catherine, with thy most holy sanction, will bless my castle with her presence, and share with me its honours as the mistress, the remainder of my life wdl be restored to joy, and the happiness of hers, I trust, not lessened, but promoted." Such a conversation between an elderly noble** l 5
178
man, and a holy abbess, was somewhat, as it may well be supposed, uncommon. Bertha felt it as such. She stood, in regard to Catherine, unusu¬ ally circumstanced. Her sister, younger than herself by many years ; educated by her for a re¬ ligious life, which, as she well knew, had always been repugnant to her wishes : yet, still left ????? the cloister, and still under her sage care. She considered herself answerable for her conduct, or at least, for the sanction she might give to it. She ???$ very much embarrassed. She ??1???11 the baron had not spoken to her on the subject. She Λνίθ?^ she had not kept her sister from the grate. What so vain as a fruitless wish on ????1 is past recalling ? " Thou mayest recollect," she said, after much awkward hesitation, " that we have still a father. To him it is most fitting that thou shouldest apply on this so unexpected mat¬ ter." ** I am loth to say aught to the baron de Clifford ere I know if Catherine be willing that I should. Allow me again to see her. Let me to herself make known what I have said to thee. From her own lips let me have leave to speak to her father, or from her own lips let me know if my request be disapproved," " I will ponder on thy words/* said Bertha, " Catherine hath long dwelt here a favourite among the nuns, and a darling to thy virtuous sister the late abbess. Our dear mother died when she was yet an infant, and I
179
have brought her up. She has ever been dutiful to me as her monitor. Judge then, how tenderly i love her. Her mind is -pure as virtue. Her every thought is noble : uncontaminated by the world ; ignorant of the world's guile, innocence is the inmate of her bosom, and truth the guide of all her actions. Her departure from the abbey fills me with dread.—But—yet—I think I may dare trust thee.—The next time thou dost visit these holy walls, Catherine shall see thee/' So saying, she departed abruptly ere the baron could reply. When Montgomery paid his next visit at the abbey, Bertha was faithful to the promise she had made him, for he did not wait long ere Catherine made her appearance at the grate. ft I thought," she said to him, " that I never should see thee again. It is now a month since thou hast been at the abbey. Hast thou been ill ?" (t Dost thou not know, Catherine," asked the haron, " hovv often I have been here?" " Thou hast not then forgotten me !" " Forgotten thee, Catherine ! that were impossible : but say, tell me, hath not thy sister told thee what I said unto her the last time I was here?" " No—she did not tell me that thou hadst been here, What didst thou say to her ? Need I know ?" " Catherine," replied Montgomery, " what I said to Bertha, I hoped ι β
180
she would have said to thee." " Say it thyself, it will come as well from thee, as it w r ould do from her/' "Sweet unconscious loveliness! Itwas about thy residence at the castle." " If my dear baroness tvere there," said Catherine, " I should like to dwell for ever there." " Couldst thou not dwell for ever there with me ?" " AVith thee!" " Why dost thou start, Catherine ?" " I do not know a great deal of the manners of the world without these walls, yet I know that must not be." " Wouldst thou if it might ?" " Nay, thou knowest that it cannot be, would I or no," " AVouldst thou like to live there, and be its mis¬ tress ?" Catherine paused. t( I mean, Catherine, hast thou regard enough for me to bless my life with thy sweet self, and be the wife and partner of my heart ?" r * There is no one in the wide worhl/' said Catherine, " for whom I have so much regard as thee. I love th.ee next after my dear baroness who is gone. I love thee more than I love Bertha." AVhile Catherine spoke îhus she did not blush, nor hesitate. Yet Cathe¬ rine tvas not bold : and Montgomery knew that she was not bold. He knew that she spoke thus, because she ????, as Bertha had pronounced, un¬ contaminated by the world ; and ignorant of the world's guile. <t Aly stveet girl !" said Montgo¬ mery, " as thou wilt make me happy, so shall the
181
devotion of my life be to make thee happy also." " I shall certainly be happy if I make thee so," she answered, (i but I must consult Bertha." f ' I have spoken to her, dearest," said Montgomery. " Hast thou? what said she?" "She bade me speak unto thy father." " She was right. Thou knowest I must act '^he directs." ** Shall I speak to him ?" " Speak UHiim directly/'said Catherine ; " and, if he approve of what I say, thou ΛνίΠ be mine. Thou wilt again lead joy and happiness to the high castle of Montgomery i' " I al¬ ways found them there," said Catherine. Bertha now joined her sister, " Fie, Bertha !" she conti¬ nued, "thou shouldst have told me what the baron said to thee. I should have spoken better to him, had I consulted thee." " Thy own unpremedi¬ tated, frank innocence," said Montgomery, "spoke more sweetly than any one could have taucht thee. Holy Bertha, thou didst speak her pure as virtue. She is pure virtue's self. The unpre- varicating tongue, thus simple from all art, charms more than all that could be said by preparation. even if an angel dictated." " Thou dost say too much," observed Bertha. " Pardon me," he said, " I mean that thou shouldst understand that Cathe¬ rine is more lovely thau any thing while stili ou earth can ere be made. I have her dear per¬ mission to further my request unto her noble
182
father." '* Until thou shalt know what he may say to thee, thou must not visit at this grate again. Farewell." " Farewell," said Catherine, in saying wliich, she held out her hand, which Montgomery pressed softly. To persons accustomed, as many are, to all the fond ideas of making rapturins love, nay, almost to the intrigues of passion, qVoCt conversations at the grate of a monastery may appear stupid and insipid. Be it, however, remembered, that six hundred years ago, women, whether in monaste¬ ries or in castles, were under restraints which are now done away ; and that meetings in groves, and tête-a-tête promenades, and above all, the inter¬ change of billets doux, could not then be accom¬ plished. Parents had a more arbitrary power over their daughters than exists in these our days, and marriage tvithout their father's consent and approbation, rarely, if ever, could occur. A woman, who in such a point acted contrary to the wishes, or it may almost be said, commands of her father, was, to a certain degree, disgraced. It is there¬ fore probable, that the artless candour of Cathe¬ rine de Clifford said more to Montgomery, than many females in the thirteenth century had an opportunity to declare : and pt?4aps he received from her stronger assurances of affection than were often gained.
183
Gay as youth, eager as love, the baron set for¬ ward to the castle of de Clifford. His errand was soon explained, his answer was soon re¬ ceived. The two noblemen were both brave and honourable ; and each knew the other's worthi¬ ness. Catherine having, even from the very early age at tvhich she had been sent to the ab¬ bey, always expressed her dislike to take the veil, her father had forborne in kindness, to force her inclination : and as in the first instance he had been unwilling to compel, so now he was un¬ willing to refuse. He heard Montgomery with much pleasure, and said it would cheer the win¬ ter of his life, to know that the youngest child of his lost Elfrida, would be allied so nobly. Thus sanctioned by her father's approbation Montgomery returned to the abbey. He in¬ formed Bertha of his joy, and was then allowed to communicate to Catherine what her father had said. She did not attempt to disguise her feel¬ ings. Her eyes sparkled with pleasure, and she unfeignedly said that she was glad. Thougii Montgomery's life was in the wane, and the age of the bride doubled sweet fifteen, the nuptial preparations at the castle, duly marked the marriage of its lord. All the magnificence which had been displayed when Matilda wedded tvith St, Evremond, was exhibited, and Catherine
184
de Clifford was led to the altar with as much pomp. The vassals and dependents all assembled in the same grand an ay, the minstrels struck the chords again, and raised again the song of joy to celebrate the union of Montgomery and Catherine The feast of the hall was profuse and costly, and the cup passed gaily round. " How happy," said Catherine, " Matilda will be to see me here. The little girl whom she once ?? fondly loved. ? how fond I shall be of dear John, now I may love him. I was at Matildas marriage, send for her that she may be a guest at mine." In compliance with the wishes of his bride, Montgomery informed Matilda of his intended marriage, and invited her to join the feast of his nuptial celebration. Let those whose minds are lofty, imagine what the haughty Matilda felt, when the messenoer arrived io say her father was about towed. " The baron de Montgomery marry with Catherine ! Catherine supply the place of the baroness Amicia! Catherine become my mother ! Catherine perhaps displace my son ! Thou do-t bely my father," she said to Joachim the messenger. i( Let not the noble lady Matilda be offended/' .said Jo¬ achim, " I speak the truth." " Dost thou speak the truth ? Can it be so ? Doth my father think i am so iame, that 1 will look on and smile when
185
he doth wrong me thus? Is not my son his heir ? »Shall he be set aside for Catherine ? Say to Montgomery that I will not come !" " Must I say thus to my master ?" " Have I not said it, fool ?" replied Matilda, i( Is there no more to say ?' asked Joachim. " It is enough," said Ma¬ tilda, " begone ; thy message makes thee hate¬ ful." Joachim quitted the chamber, and sought the apartment where the servants were assembled. He told the message he had brought, and the anstver he had received. " I am sorry," said an old man who sat retired from the rest, tt for our excellent master, the ba¬ ron de St, Evremond ; he is kind and gentle ; and I grieve for the young heir, John. He is a good lad ; too like his father to be spoiled by his haughty, turbulent, unquiet mother. She ought to have been a queen among some people tvhere all the rest are slaves. She is more violent than the storm which rages in the winter ; and rough in an¬ ger like the billows of the sea when the howl of the tempest calleth theni. So 1 be out ofthe way cf her wrath, 1 care not how* much she be vexed, for she doth vex all around her/* " Thou hadst better run thy head into the fire, Afton, than speak as thou art speaking," said another. ít I had better run my head into the fire than let her hear me ????? thus ; but I speak the word all
186
give her. So far as this matter toucheth her, I rejoice that it will be ; for the baron and his son I do lament me much. When thou dost greet thy noble master, soften down this message thou hast for him, Joachim ; and say thou nought unto the lady Catherine his bride. Needless it is to add gall to the draught of any one ; we afi find our cup bitter enough without any one mingling therein to make it more unpalatable." " I must say my bidding," answered Joachim. " Tell the old man," said Alton, " his daughter is not tvell, and cannot come to .him." " The baron will find it out one day, why not know how the truth is now?" " I have Hved longer than thou hast, Joa¬ chim, I am old enough to be thy grandfather. I remember the days which are gone. Man and boy I have dwelt witliin this castle almost upon fourscore years. I know what it is to be glad, and I know what it is to be sad : but sad¬ ness outweighs gladness I can promise thee ; and it is like enough that this great joy of thy master in his young bride may be no more than the be¬ ginning of sorrow." " Do not thou turn wizard," said Joachim. " Mind thou my caution," said Alton. '\ I will turn it in my mind," replied Joa¬ chim, He partook of the plenty ever to be found in a great man's larder, and the cup passetl in the ancient round, and all drank to the happmess of
187
Montgomery and Catherine de Clifford. Joachim took the advice of Alton, and said Matilda was sick, and thus the solemnity and the feast had gone on without alloy. " It grieveth me much that Matilda should be sick," said Catherine. " As she could not come to us, let us go to her. We shall comfort her sickness now in the absence of St. Evremond and John/' Montgomery, ???? notwithstanding the great love he bore Matilda, knew the fierceness of her disposition, had been much displeased, that although she could not be a guest at his marriage, she had sent no token of remembrance and respect on the occasion. He had not, how¬ ever, made any comment which might have been unpleasant to Catherine. Now that she proposed to visit her, he said, " Not now. Matilda hath sent us no token of regard, no message to congra¬ tulate, She is my child, I must not stoop to her." " ? ! be not offended, thou knowest she is not well/' " Sweet Catherine," said Montgomery, " she is not mild like thee. AVe will wait ere we undertake the journey." " Thou knowest best/* said Catherine. Catherine tt as the happiest of the happy. The love Montgomery bore her, as every day disco¬ vered new perfections, was on this side idolatry.
188
The uncontrouied command of all the riches and the magnificence of the lofty castle ; the number of attendants always ready to obey her; and a palfry to accompany the baron tvhenever he rode out, were so delightful to her, that she thought her husband the supreme man on earth, and that joy could no tvhere be found but in his society.
CHAPTER ???.
Methought I should inherit all, and now A mincing wheedler hath supplanted me î She, v. hom I have nurs'd within my bosom, Hath like a viper stung me J
After the departure of Joachim, when Matilda was left to reflect on the tidings he had brought her, she sei no bounds to the indignation she felt against Catherine. With equal anger she spoke of Bertha, the friend whom she had loved so long. She paced the hall, she stopped, she stamped upon the ground, she clapped her hands, she tvrung them, she wept. " Hast thou heard the news ?" she said to Goda, her favourite woman. Goda was afraid to own she had, therefore instead of answering, she asked another question, " What news ?" she said. " Is my lord on his return ?" H Thy lord on his return ! I would he tvere. He ihould revenge my wrongs !" " Who hath dared
190
to wrong the baroness de St. Evremond ?" "Who hath dared to wrong me ! He, who in the ab¬ sence of my husband, should have guarded me from every wrong. My father, Goda, my father ! His wanton age hath taken a young wife." " Ta¬ ken a wife !" " Aye. She whom thou didst fetch with such parade to celebrate the feast when John was seven years old. Catherine de CHfford is become the baroness de Montgomery, hath usurped the place ofmy dear mother !—Aye, aye ; the scarf which she embroidered waved in pride over the grave of Amicia. The banner ofthe fair white hand of Montgomery !«—The fair white hand! said I—What shall comfort me! How shall I send to Tunis ? How shall I call home my husband and my son ? Who can advise with rae ?" ** So please thee, couldest thou not con¬ sult with the good lady Eleanor de Valonnes ?" *' Thou sayest right. Let her be sent unto. Let her be told I wish to speak with her. Or Bertha de Rosenne. No, no, not her—There is danger in the name of Bertha, Send to Eleanor. Send quickly, that I may send to Tunis. St. Evre¬ mond will scarce believe what I shall tell hhn. My father married ! Married to a young wife ! ? my son ! my dear John ! How wilt thou bear the sad intelligence ? deprived oí more than half thy patrimony !"
191
The whole day passed, and no Eleanor arrived. At night the messenger returned, and said the lady Eleanor would come to-morrow. " Come to morrow ! why came she not to day ?" " So please my lady, I did not enquire." " Why didst thou not? Didst say I wished to speak with her?" " I did." " Did she understand thee ?" « She did ; and she will come to-morrow." " To-mor¬ row is an age !" Not to be ready to obey the summons of Matilda, was what Matilda knew not how to brook. She would take no food. <t To¬ morrow," she exclaimed again. At night she would not go to bed. She sat up to watch for Eleanor. (( So please my lady," said Goda, " thus to give way to grief is hurtful. Rest will compose the perturbation of thy mind." " Rest! there is no rest on earth. Every one conspires to destroy my rest. Behold! Eleanor cometh not." "So please thee it is a long journey." " Why doth she not depart by times." " Let me entreat my lady to retire to sleep." " Peace ! dolt." As soon as day began to dawn she mount¬ ed the battlements, and she io ^od around: but she saw not Eleanor. Noon approached. No Eleanor. At length toward the dusk of evening, Eleanor arrived. " Thou art come at last," said Matilda. *' I have been long expecting thee." ft My castle cannot be left abruptly," said Elea- 6
192
nor. " There are many things to ¡be arranged ere the mistress can < leave her home " " I wished to tell thee what hath chanced/' said Ma¬ tilda. " Thy father's marriage? It is already known." "Dost thou know it? Is it already buzzed abroad ? Doth the world already point the finger at me ? Am I already scorned ?" " To know thy father's marriage, is not to scorn thee/' said Eleanor. " I tell tiiee," replied Matilda, tr whoever knoweth that Montgomery hath dis¬ graced himself, knoweth that I am fallen." " The baron tie Montgomery hath not disgraced himself. The lady Catherine de Clifford is a baron's daughter : equal to himself." " Equal to Mont¬ gomery! I thought I should have found thee comfortable. I did not expect thou wouldest approve such conduct." " I am ever happy," said Eleanor, " to comfort those who stand in need of consolation ; and I will comfort thee with my advice." " I will send to Tunis. I will re¬ call my husband and my son." " Wherefore ? Thou canst not prevent, for the marriage is already solemnized. Go to thy father." " Go to my father! never. Shall I at my father's board take a place below the seat of Catherine ?" (l She is now thy father's wife,—the mistress of his castle." tt I know she is. I know she is," said Matilda. " And art thou the first to taunt
193
me ?" ft Thou dost much mistake me, lady. I never taunt those who are afllicted. Thy father's castle was become lonely. The bustling business of the world hath passed as a shadow from him. Thou shouldst be glad that one thou knowest so well, one who loveth thee, hath been the partner of his choice. He was free to choose, and might have brought a wife from far, one who might have looked on thee as nought." " ? ! I cannot bear this cold calm argument. I tell thee I am wrong¬ ed ! My son is wronged! If no one can advise me kindly, I will go myself to Tunis." li The baroness de St. Evremond," said Eleanor, " knoweth what she can do." " And she knoweth what she will do/' answered Matilda. " No doubt thou mayest do thy pleasure," observed Eleanor. It ???? not to ask advice that Matilda had sent for Eleanor, Little as she cared for any body, yet she ??18??<1 to find some one ???? would think as she thought, that she might feel that her resentment was ap¬ proved. But the exceeding haughtiness of her mind, could not endure any opposition ; and those who differed from her, she almost looked upon as foes. Eleanor remained many days with Matilda at her castle ; but, as is generally the case, each con¬ tinued in her own opinion. AVhen they separa¬ ted, Eleanor said, " I hope when I see thee next, vol. ?. ?
194
thou wilt have pondered on what 1 have said to thee, and wilt have duly recollected that the ba¬ ron de Montgomery is thy father," " I shall re¬ member also, that ihe baron de St. Evremond is my husband/' replied Matilda. Undecided, unadvised, Matilda was become the most unhappy woman in the world. Her pride was mortified, and her ambition checked. John would not be the powerful chieftain she had hoped. Another heir might represent Montgo¬ mery, and all his riches pass into another line. A journey to Tunis was an undertaking beyond even her daring; and to stay at home was misery. Nothing gave her joy. The magnificent castle which St. Evremond had adorned and furnished with every thing which that age deemed grand. The hall round wdiich she ever kept the armour bright. The board on which she continued to spread profusion. The minstrels who strove by change of song to soothe her ; all failed. Her pride rose to rage, and her ambition to ferocity : and she strayed from chamber to chamber in gloomy moroseness which almost bordered on madness. The perpetual vehemence of her passion preyed on herself, and made all around her wretched: all but old Alton, " Thou canst not stop the wind as it bloweth," said he, " though it uproot
195 the forest. Thou canst not check the rage of our angry mistress, though it out-clamour the whirl¬ wind, They must both have their course, and when their fury be spent, then cometh a calm. Contradict her not, the twig that bendeth riseth again to straitness, while the stiff stick is riven/* " Thou speakest like an old man," said one of his fellows. " Thou wouldest not be so full of pa¬ tience if thou wert young." " AViiat shall we get by thwarting our haughty dame ? IU will. What shall we get by leaving her to her own ire?" " Not good will," was replied, " for she hath no good will to bestow." " But we shall gain rest and quiet, ergo, we shall be happy. Sixty years ago, when I was a young man, and followed the late baron from one end of England to the other, helping to uphold king John. By the way I must observe, that, according to my fancy, all those who did stick to him, did it more to keep away prince Lewis, than in love to him : but that is neither here nor there ; I cannot vouch it, thougii I beHeve it ; so I will let that drop, and as I was going to say I will tell you, that near Swineshead abbey, where the king retired after his sad loss of baggage and treasure in the marshes, there d?velt a nobleman, who like the late St. Evremond, was of John's party ; he was called the baron de Mal- baine. He was like the baron tie Montgomery,
196
in that he had an only daughter, whom he brought fcp with as much pride and haughtiness as our lady Matilda; and she was to the full as froward* It was, as I may say, all one and the same thing ; for she was married to a man, who like our good master, with all reverence be it spo¬ ken, let her run her own fooling. She went on a long time, who but she, as one may sayt she ruled her father, and she ruled her husband. When lo ! Osbert de Malbaine married a young wife. Robesia his daughter, bore it much like the lady Matilda here. Her castle was in the same hurly burly as this just about the time that we, among others, were received by her husband, after the loss which we all shared with the king. The castle was, as it may be said, in a state of civil war as bad as the kingdom. Some defended the old baron, and some helped his daughter to rail. After a while a son was born, and ere long ano¬ ther ; and that mayhap will be the case here. At length the young wife died, and the two hoys died, and Robesia became again the heir. Hah ! hah ! then it was that all the household found out they had better have sung lullaby. Tliough she w r as restored to her father's favour, she never for¬ gave those who had spoken in his behalf; and she began to hate those who had said as she said, because she began to be vexed that she had said 4
197 a bad say. So what with one thing, and what with another, as she grew older, she grew worse and worse, and all wished her dead or else them¬ selves. She is dead by this time most like, and if any be alive there now, who were living then, no doubt they are glad of their loss. Now, the death of our lady would be no such matter to grieve about, as ye all know : yet, she may for all that live a great while to plague us ; therefore, take my advice, keep out of her way, take no notice of what she doth, and say nothing about the matter in hand. Time brings many an odd thing round ; and nobody knows what may hap¬ pen to-morrow. It is a bad thing to fish in trou¬ bled waters : and it is a bad thing to burn thy mouth with another man's broth : and many more such wise sayings as I have heard many a good time from my father, rest his soul, might, if I could recollect tliem, he brought up now in the hearing of all, to warn people to shut their eyes, and stop their ears, when their betters forget their otvn sober discretion; for however things may seem to be as they are passing on, the end crowns all, and all is well that ends ???И : and as none of us know how fhis untoward matter may end ; let us all be wise, and let mum be the word among tis." The advice given by old Alton, was followed by ? 3
IDS
all the members of the household, but it did not mollify the exasperated Matilda. It happened too, at tbis moment, that fresh cause for uneasi¬ ness increased the rancour of her bosom. The sad news reached England, of the death of the king of France ; with an account of the dreadful plague which raged in the camp. No intelligence was brought of the arrival at Tunis of Prince Ed¬ ward and his train. She trembled for St. Evre¬ mond; and was so exceedingly agitated by her fears for John, that her contending passions al¬ most overset her reason. She wandered about the castle, sometimes furious in rage, sometimes sunk in despair. She would often shut herself in the apartments which had been allotted to him, and refuse to take food or rest. There she would gaze on ΛνΙίαίβνβΓ had been his, and then carry all belonging to him into her own chamber, call upon his name ; call for St. Evremond ; and in violent changes from raging anger, to desponding grief, vary the wretchedness of every day.
CHAPTER XVII.
Hope spread the sail, the gallant bark cheerful Sped her way through the mid sea; though deadly Was the news which waited the arrival Of the crew ; yet from ????'? ashes, new Hope Sprang again to life, for, like the Phoenix, She exphreth only to revive.
The next information which came to England, was the arrival of Prince Edward upon the shore tvhere Lewis had expired. The love all the country bore the kingdom's heir, had made every one anxious for his fate. All feared that the pes¬ tilence might have snatched their best hope from them, and hundreds trembled for their otvn dear friends. The impatient Matilda hearing thai des¬ patches were arrived, and not receiving any in¬ dividual despatch from St, Evremond, gave way, with her customary violence, to the impulse of tlie moment, '· O, he is dead," she cried, " or John is dead, and he will not let me know it ! yet, ? 4
200
perhaps, it is thy bliss to die. Thou art thereby spared the knowledge of the great wrong done thee by thy grandfather, ? ! shall I never see thy shield hang among the shields of thy ances¬ tors ? Shall the towering eagle of St. Evremond never be raised by thee ? Shall m>t the enemies of our faith know that thou hast joined the crois¬ ses? Art thou become a knight for nought?" She sent to Almadore, to know if Nartoimlle had sent to her. " Alas ! no/' said Almadore to Ma¬ tilda's messenger. " I hoped thy mistress had sent intelligence to me. Tell her how we grieve his silence." Again public despatches came from Edward. All had left Tunis ; all were gone to Palestine. All were well. Hope now in some degree calmed the vehemence of Matilda. The idea of John's renown, of his deeds in the Holy Land, did away for a space even her resentment against her father and Catherine ; but as time passed on, and no report of his prowess could possibly reach her, she began to forget all he migiit gain, 'm her alarm for the risk he would certainly run* Among the various persons who were deeply i íterested in the expedition which Prince Edward had undertaken to the East, was Austin the monk. The absence of Nartonville awakened ????? the hopes he had so long entertained of
201
possessing the honours and riches of Randolph de Neville, his father. Though he had now nearly reached the age of man, his ambitious wishes were not weakened, nor had his desire to accomplish them, by whatever means, abated. Ever since the day, when in the absence of Adrian, he first visited the abbey wliere he re¬ ceived from his dying mother the confession of lier guilt, he had attended as confessor to the sisters among whom she had resided so long : therefore, when Catherine de Clifford became baroness de Montgomery, he had, as her spiritual father, followed her to her husband's castle, and continued to receive, as such, every mark of res¬ pect, which he had been accustomed to receive from the late baroness Amicia. Matilda toe, when she came to receive the last breath of her mother, and to attend the solemn pomp of her in¬ terment, had told all that lay heavy on her heart, to him. He tvas forthat reason, well assured that at her castle, he should be a welcome guest : and, although he had not been at the mansion of Nar¬ tonville, since his conversation with Odo, he knew that the unsuspicious Emma would receive him kindly. He therefore, notvyitlistanding his ad¬ vanced age, purposed to undertake the journey of such a distant visitation. As it is at all times easy to find a reason to in* ??
202
duce others not only to acquiesce in our plans, but also to approve them, he told the superior of his monastery, that he intended, as a penance, ????? he hoped would be serviceable to the soul of his father, to go once more, while he had strength for the undertaking, and visit the grave of Henry de Montravers, whom his father slew. " Surely/' he said, " it could not be for nought that I was called to hear from the unhappy Blanch, that story which she declared when dy¬ ing. To what it may lead, I cannot in my hum¬ ble state presume even to surmise : but I feel 1 am impelled by some fatality to set forth." The punctuality of Austin's external devotions was so observable, chat he had full credit for the piety of his motive, and free permission to undertake his long pilgrimage. AVhen he made ?????? to Montgomery and Catherine, that he was going, according to a vow he had made, to perform penance r.t the tomb of Henry de Montravers, he had again the satisfac¬ tion to find that his pious character was there also established, and he ro^e in the estimation of the baron and baroness ; for, so little did they know the man, that they imputed his vow to the ten¬ derness of filial love : a feeling at that moment particularly pleasing to Montgomery, who was greatly hurt by the disrespectful manner m which 9
203 Matilda had behaved toward hmi. " It is my in¬ tention," said Austin, " to sojourn as a place of rest, for a sort space at the castle of St. Evre¬ mond. Can I be the messenger of aught unto thy daughter ?" " Tell my daughter," said the baron, " that I am not insensible to her conduct, that the fondness I have ever shown her, deserved a different return, and that her unkindness ran¬ kles somewhat sharply in my bosom." " Add to what the baron says," said Catherine, tt a gentler message from my lips. Tell her that I was much hurt when Joachim reported that she was not well, and that to her sickness I impute her disrespect : haply when she recovereth she will make amends. I wish," she said to the baron, " thou didst uot speak so harshly. AVhen we are sick, we are not quite ourselves," " Catherine, it well becometh thee to plead for her, but unkindness from one so near, and once so dear, wounds deeply, I fear me much that though the ΛνοιιηιΙ were healed, it would for ever leave a scar," " Time, I hope," said Catherine, " will heal ihe wound, and also efface the scar." " Stveet Catherine, do not urge me. Though I would willingly please thee in all, yet ????? I to speak other than I have spoken on this offensive subject, my tongue ????? be un¬ faithful to my heart. Holy father, thou ???? make true report of this our conversation. What I ? 6
204
have said, I cannot, even for Catherine, unsay." Catherine, desirous to change the conversation, said to Austin, '* how long shalt thou be absent holy father ?" ' f The speed at which my age can travel now, is slow," replied Austin. " More than a month ; haply bordering on two, I may be absent." " Thou wilt see Almadore, and the lit¬ tle Isabella ; and the ancient baroness, the lady Emma, whom I so much wkh to know." " I shall," said Austin. " When John de St. Evre¬ mond was seven years old, I was one among the guests bidden to his father's castle to celebrate his birth-day, and partake the feast Matilda made on the occasion. I then met Almadore. I well remember how kind she was to me, I therefore wish to send a gift to Isabella. Wilt thou bear it to her ?" " Assuredly," answered Austin. *' I think children should know the frientbhips of their parents," observed Catherine. " Daughter," said Austin, *' thou dost speak sagely. There are no friends like the friends of our fathers. The love we bear to any man, is always ready to operate in favour of his child." " Animosity is sometimes quite as prompt," observed Montgo¬ mery. " No doubt it is," said Austin. Catherine then took from her neck a string of beads, to which hung a small cross. " Give this," she said, " to Isabella ; and tell Almadore to impi ess upon
205
her young mind, that it is in gratitude for her mother's kindness to my youth, that I send this to her." " I will do as thou desirest," said Aus¬ tin, as he received the gift. " When dost thou depart?" said Montgomery. " To-morrow is my purpose. I therefore now am come to say fare¬ well. I go from thee, my child," said he to Ca¬ therine, " for a short space, and until my return I leave with thee my benediction." So saying, the monk rose and quitted the castle. The next day he commenced the journey he had held out to be so piously undertaken. He travelled as formerly, on foot and alone. It was not however with the same speed. Age would have slackened his pace, had his impatience urged him on as heretofore. Monasteries were thickly spread by the way, though towns and villages were distant ; and he halted frequently and rest¬ ed long. By this slow procedure, he travelled on till he reached the castle of St. Evremond. He found Matilda in that restless state of anxiety for John's Hfe and fame, and that irritated state of resentment against her father and Catherine, which kept up a constant agitation, and made her almost fancy that every one who approached her, was either an enemy to herself or to her son. She was ready to Hsten to every report that reached her, and occasionally exulting or depressed ac-
206
cording to the nature of what she heard. The entrance of Austin at a time tvhen he was so Httle expected, awakened İn her bosom many contra¬ dictory hopes, fears, and expectations. She knew he had ever been the confessor of Catherine ; and though confessional communications are held sa¬ cred, and that the holy men who thus become acquainted with secrets which are the very trea¬ sures of the penitential heart, never should betray what penitence reveals ; yet, as strange discoveries are sometimes made by those wdio should be silent, she hopeJ Austin tvas come to tell her something from the confessions of Catherme. His conversation was so far from realizing what she hoped, that she could, wdth difficulty, forbear from putting questions which might lead him to betray her. When she found that he waved all reply concerning her of tvhom she wished to hear him speak, she inquired about the baron. " Hast thou," she said, " brought me any thing from my father?" " Nought, my daughter, but expressions of anger against thy unkind neglect. AVhat didst thou send to him and to his bride?" Matilda started from her seat. " I fear," continued Austin, " thou didst not act unto thy father like a child/ 1 " Did he act like a father unto me ?" " Daugh¬ ter," said the monk, '* the baron de Montgomery may act as seemeth good unto him." " So may
207
the baroness cle St. Evremond," said Matilda, " and so, holy father, will she." " It is for me to check thee," observed Austin. *· Holy man," said Matilda, '* thou speakest Hke one who know¬ eth not the claims of lineage, and the rights of patrimony. Thou knowest well thy mother, Blanch de Montravers, forfeited thy every claim when she forfeited her own honour. It is not so with us. We are nobly born, and to be injured is not to be endured." The observation Matilda made on the birth of Austin, was a galling taunt. He reddened with indignation. " Daughter," he said, " be silent. It is to expiate in part the hor¬ rors of that circumstance that I am now in pilgrim¬ age to the tomb of Hem y de Montravers, the un¬ fortunate brave brother of my mother. If thou hast forgotten the respect due to the unhappy, remember what is due to the sacred function I have adopted, and the power of punishment vested in a confessor. Thy behaviour to thy father, and this thy conduct unto me, demand reproof. Dare not thou to take thy seat of elevation on the dais in thy hall for seven days. Put not on thy orna¬ ments of pride and grandeur, nor touch thou aught but bread and water during those days of penance." Matilda shrunk. It must not be said she shrunk abashed. No—she shrunk mortified. There only could her lofty spirit be subdued. Against the priest she did not dare rebel. Her
208
eye lost its fire; her lip quivered in silence. *' Until thy penitence be ended, daughter, I shall remain within thy castle, that I may view thy dis¬ cipline." Austin remained, but he did not view her discipline : for unwilling to expose her humi¬ liation to her household, she told her women that she was ill, and she remained within her chamber; and her meagre diet was not known to be com¬ manded. When she had withdrawn from pomp for as many days as she had been enjoined, she returned again in splendour to her place, and par¬ took feastingly ofthe sumptuous board she spread anew. The confessions of a century would not so fully have displayed to Austin the character of Matilda, He found what hold he had upon her as a priest ; and he discovered that her haughty mind had but one submission. The day Matilda appeared again in all the glare of stateliness, Austin quitted her castle; and began to bend his steps toward those domains he ¡wished to wrest from Nartonville. He was still compelled to proceed slowly, but this part of his journey was performed with much more dis¬ quiet than the former. His acrimonious feelings increased as he went on, and the innocent Isabella became, as he reflected on her station, a new ob¬ ject of hatred to his heart. Going to St. Evremond's castle, which he had never done before, took him considerably out of
209
the direct road to the castle of Nartonville, conse¬ quently, in the convents where he staid by the way, he found new fraternities of monks, among whom he was a stranger. He introduced himself every where, as being on a pilgrimage for the performance of a vow. At the monastery where he first stopped, every thing concerning St. Ev¬ remond was known. He there learned how much the baroness had depended on the vast pos¬ sessions of her father ; and how greatly she had been angered and mortified by his marriage v. ith Catherine de Clifford. Austin was careful not to betray his knowledge of the families, and he was very attentive to all that was observed by the va¬ rious friars who gave an opinion on the matter. " I remember," said an old man among them, " not only the late baron, but the late baron's father. I remember him perfectly ; Hugh de St. Evremond. He was in Palestine with Cœur de Lion. So was I. With what changed feelings does age look back on the deeds of early days ! We were then young, and gay, and valiant. The many strange occurrences of that expedition, have been subjects for contemplation when I retire to the loneliness of my cell within these walls, and themes for conversation when I am in society. Every one who has been in camps, and has wiN nessed the conflicts of the times of war, must have his mind stored with anecdotes which tradition
210
shall carry to posterity; but they tvho fought the holy fight of the faithful, have beheld scenes which only can arise when such a cause calls forth the armed squadrons. Grievous it is to own that the infidels fought as bravely to defend their errors, as the croisses who fought for the esta¬ blishment of truth. Still more grievous is it to acknowledge that the croisses committed aets as impious as the infidels, and forgot the cause which led them on, when matters more profane stood in the way of their ambition. Humanity will ever shudder when it hears the shocking tale which relates that Richard and Saladme both destroyed every prisoner each had taken in the battle of Acres. A cruelty which disgraces hu¬ man nature, and is a blot on the fame of those who wore the cross upon their shoulder, which 1 almost think penitence can never wash away, Happy am I that my station in the army, and the circumstances of the field, prevented me from having any hand in such a massacre. The nurs- ber slain by Richard, amounted, with grief I say it of a christian man, to nearly five thousand souls. It is true, that as a soldier, he afterward per¬ formed such deeds of undismayed firm valour, that victory may be imputed to his single arm ; yet was it victory too bloody for rejoicing ; Sa¬ ladme left upon the field of battle forty thousand
211
valiant men. And to what did all this tend ?—a truce, Richard indeed saw Jerusalem. He saw her from a hiU ; and tvhen every one thought he would have sprung upon her, he surveyed the troops tvho were around him, and turned away. O, I tell you what ye all know, but memory will look back, the tongue of age will dwell on the days which are gone ! I cannot stop the progress of events ; I must observe upon the unforeseen mutations of the fate of man. Richard, whose fame had filled the earth : Richard, whose valiant actions were the envy of all the princes of his day, ????? returning in the pride of victory, was the sport of a sudden storm, and in danger of his life by the turmoil of the winds and waves, whose tumults no human power can repel, and forced to travel in disguise within the territories of his in¬ veterate foe. Made a prisoner, hidden and lost to all inquiry ; languishing in chains ! O, who sliall dare to say, ' I am secure/ when the brave, the strong, the great, the royal, the victorious Richard, was in an instant laid thus low r ! Pardon me, my brethren, for being thus loquacious. It is the infirmity of age. Ye all have often heard of these events, but I am the only one here dwell¬ ing who can remember when they were enacted." "Good Eltoph," said r. young brother, ** do not say thou art loquacious ; to us whose days are yet
212
but in their dawn, thy tales of the olden time, make thee the most agreeable of all who dwell secluded in this holy house. I love to hear thy stories ; they make the world known to those who early, like me, withdraw from its commotions. They beguile the tedious hours of their insipi¬ dity, and cheer the solitude to which many causes, differing from choice, too often drive us." "It is well, Selton, if the tales tvhich the aged tell, warn the young to their duty/' " The duties which a monk hath to fulfil," observed an elderly brother, iC vary so greatly from the duties of the world, that scarcely can they be deemed useful as instructions," " They will teach us, holy Eus¬ tace," said Selton, " to advise tliose who may come under our care, and enable us to draw con¬ clusions by which we may guard from crime, tliose, who wanting our monitions, haply might ein," " In the confessions," said Eltoph, " wliich are made by penitents, they enable us to appro¬ priate our penance duly, and to comfort those whose repentance is from the heart, I remember when I first came within these walls, when none, now my brethren, were here, a man, as old as I am now, made a most sad confession ofa crime which had been committed forty years before he dared reveal it. In the presence of all the brotherhood, he declared his guilt, therefore in
213
naming it, I do not betray private communication- His name Was Thomas de Baldowry. He was brought within the chapel, and confessed himself before the altar. He said that the tale he had to tell, had been long pent within his bosom, but that he could not die without revealing it. · My brethren/ he began, f forty years ago, when I ???? blest in life with all that could make life happy, my brother married a young lady, who was lovely as the blossom which first makes gay the spring. I was an invited guest at the nuptials, which gave the young Edgwina to the fond Ha¬ rold de Baldowry. It w r as during the troubles oc¬ casioned to Henry of Anjou, by his rebellious sons, and after Harold had been married a few months, that, as a vassal of the ??????, he was called on to attend his sovereign. He obeyed the summons, and left Edgwina at bvs castle. He was so long detained, that he sent for his young wife, and asked me to guard her in safety to the court. We set forth. ? ! that ere he trusted me with such a charge I had ceased to breathe ! ? ! that the day had never dawned when Edgwina under my care left her husband's castle. I urged her to yield herself a willliig- victim to the passion which her loveliness had raised within my wicked breast : but her sweet purity shrunk from a crime so horrid. The more she proved the innocence
214
of her spotless mind, the more my passion raged. ? I pray for me î — ? father ! he said to the supe¬ rior, fetch thy unctions ! fetch thy balms !—What ? could not gain by my entreaties, I seized by force. She would have fled ; I staid her. I suf¬ fered her not to be an instant out of my sight. When we drew near the place where I was to give her up to Harold, I sent forward my attend¬ ants to tell him I approached— ? I I cannot live to tell the rest.'—* Speak on/ said Aktretl the superior. * Fearing she would betray me to my brother, I seized her like a fiend, I gazed upon the loveliness which I had injured. Say thy prayers, I said, for thou art about to die. * Heaven have mercy on me ? she exclaimed with fervour; and ere the sound of her soft voice had died in air, I plunged my dagger in her breast. I raised her from the ground, and with savage fierceness, bore her till I found a place to hide her. I threw her into a deep pit. The blood I had spilled bedewed me as I fled. I gave myself t wo wounds, and told my brother she had been stolen frora me, 'and that I received my wounds in my attempt to save her. My brother, unsuspicious, generous man ! had the country searched. Her mangled frame was found where I had thrown her, and that which should have proved my guilt, only confirmed my tale. O î that my brother were alive, to hear
215
me, and to forgive me t * He has been removed in mercy/ said the superior, ' He died unknow¬ ing of thy guilt, and thou must ask forgiveness where, I hope thou wilt be heard. Thou art a proof/ he continued, ' that though undiscovered, a murderer never finds peace. Though concealed from all the world, his own bosom is a tribunal which perpetually inflicts a punishment.' The dying man cast a sad look at the holy speaker; he took his hand in violent agitation, and said to him, * ? pray for me ! ? pray for me V The fa¬ ther was about to begin the holy service for the dying, when Thomas de Baldowry uttered a dread¬ ful groan, and breathed his last." When Eltoph had concluded his tale, he made a long pause. He inen resumed his discourse and said, (t I trust*, my brethren, that no one among you has so sad a crime upon his conscience ; if he have, let him not wait till that last hour when confession is made too late, and comfort cannot be administered to penitence." As he thus spoke, he fixed his eyes on Austin ; it was by chance, but the countenance of the Carmelite changed. t< Art thou taken ill?'* said Eltoph. A question which drew the atten¬ tion of every one, and all turned toward the stran¬ ger, " No—thy tale hath much affected me." " How so ?" said Selton. w I once took a similar confession," replied the false Austin Though
21G
the first glance of Eltoph had been accidental, he continued to gaze with earnestness, which every one observed. " My good brother," said Selton, ** forbear thy scrutinizing stare ; the holy stranger is so greatly agitated, no doubt the confession which thy recital hath brought to his recollection, nearly concerneth him. If thou mayest, tell us the painful story," he continued, turning to Austin, u Wìien thou shalt be a few years older," Austin replied, " thou wilt have learned that a confessor betrayeth not the guilt which is entrusted to him. That tvhich my holy brother hath related, was made before the whole fraternity ; that which was revealed to me, was made to me alone ; therefore, it may not pass my Hps," g * Pardon me," said Sel¬ ton, *T did not mean to pry into thy secrets." Aus¬ tin bo?ved his head, and spoke not ; but he ???? so evidently overcome by tvhat had passed, that every eye was fixed upon him, and he felt some¬ thing like shame ; but it was not remorse, for the ruling passion of his mind was now become am¬ bition ; and for the accomplishment of the wishes thus awakened, he laid aside every sentiment that was holy, and every consideration that was ho¬ nourable or honest. It is natural for the wicked always to suppose that they are suspected ; for which reason Austin imagined, that the tale of Eltoph had been pur-
217
posely told to lead him to make some confession ofthe crime with which his conscience ever up¬ braided him. He did not therefore remain as long as was necessary to recruit his strength, but again set forward on his long tedious march. Had he been asked why he undertook it, he would have been much at a loss to have assigned a cause ; for in furtherance of those vague schemes he fostered in his bosom, his presence would be of no avail. The momentary emotions of Henry, at the time when he first heard the sorrowful tale of Blanch, had died away, for a Carmelite needed no help within his monastery; all there was or¬ dered; and he was supposed to have no wish beyond it. There he had been left unnoticed, as belonging to the Neville family. Perhaps the want of peace made him fly from his abode, as if by change of place he could fly from the feeHngs which made that abode restless. Perhaps he tvisbed to see the child, who was a new bar be¬ tween his vain hopes and their accomplishment. Yet, whatever he sought, he was only likely to find discomfort. The baron de Nartonville wa« a favourite with the old king, and with prince Edward, and it was not at all probable, that any thing would be done for an unknown monk, to the prejudice of Isabella, the favourite's child. He was, as he expected, well received at the VOL. IL L
218
castle. Emma was kind to every body ; and Al¬ madore, after the recital of the tale which she had heard of his fate, felt that commiseration for him, which tenderness ever feels for the unfortunate : though, had Blanch de Montravers been vir¬ tuous, and the wife of Randolph, the son thrown off, an outcast, by his mother, had been the bril¬ liant heir of de Neville. Time had laid a heavy hand on Emma. Austin saw the change; and though his first spontaneous emotion was regret, he soon remembered that she would be one re¬ moved whom he wished gone. When such salutations had been exchanged, which at every period of society, graced in some way or other all meetings after absence : the an¬ cient baroness said to Austin, " Thou dost much surprise me, holy father, that at thy age, thou hast strength to bear the painful toil of the long way, from thy retired dwelling to this castle : and still more am I astonished that thou hadst cou¬ rage to undertake it. It is true thou art younger by many years than I am, and in the holy quiet retreat where thy days are passed, the hopes, the fears, the cares, and the exertions wliich agitate the minds, and exhaust the abilities of those who mingle with the world at large, intrude not to in¬ terrupt the calm which is the inmate of a religious mansion ; where happiness, and peace perpetual 9
219
keep the breast serene, and no rough labours waste the body : wliile the happiest of the chil¬ dren of the world are oft exposed to dangers and fatigues which destroy their strength; and to losses and disappointments which nip their pleasures even,while they are enjoying them; and distant fears too often check their hopes as they arise. Thus, blest in holy peace, many days may yet be thine ; for mc, the hour draws near when all my earthly joys shall cease, and all my sorrows will be ended. I have been blest, let me witli thankfulness acknowledge it, with a father, a hus¬ band, and a son, who all did honour to the name they bore, but they were quickly taken from me. All that now remaineth to me, is my grandson and his child ; for them, holy father, I still cling to life. Should I be snatched away while Henry is in the east, I shall leave the world, long as I have lived, somewhat before I wish." " Such a life as thine," replied Austin, " if it be prolonged, will be for the happiness of those around thee. What happiness I may enjoy or promote, must depend only on myself, for I am left without a friend to aid my purposes, or to assist my plans. I am so far from home in pilgrimage to the tomb of Henry de Montravers, whom thou canst well re¬ member, in the hope that my penance may be useful to Randolph de Neville, my father, and % thy brother. Thou needest not be told by me, Lã
220
that much of thy happiness, and all my woes arise from him. Thou knowest, that had he not injured Blanch, my station had been here, where now thy grandson planteth his name : but that is past, and I live a miserable proof, that tbe sins of the father are visited upon the child. How much my parent's crimes require yet to l>e atoned, and to what extent they may still affect his family, is not for me to say. I do not mean to cast a stone at thee, whose goodness I acknowledge and admire; but, lady, when thou dost speak of the peace and happiness whicii dwell within the monastery, and of the losses and disappointments of the world, thou shouldest recollect, that in the cloister me¬ mory looks back, and that even there, regret is felt, when we know that we are the victims of those crimes which others have committed. It is true, that in the retreat where I have for many years resided, I have found a shelter and a home ; but compare that shelter and that home with the honours of this castle, and say, if losses equal to any which those who continue in the world may suffer, must not have embittered tliat cup which it hath been my lot to drain." Emma was astonish¬ ed, wlien abe heard the regret which Austin ex¬ pressed for the loss of those honours, which she ^apposed he had been perfectly, as & holy man, re¬ signed to lose. She knew that men within a clois¬ ter renounced every thing tbat was worldly, and as
221 hypocrisy made no part of her character, she had never suspected, that the renunciation of Austin had rankled in his bosom. The strange and un¬ expected expressions of comparison between his real condition and the situation in which he would have been placed, had his mother been chaste^ struck her forcibly, and she gazed on his venera¬ ble figure, and his countenance at once sorrowful and indignant, with emotions which partook of the regret he had betrayed: but it was a subject on which she scarcely dared reply. She felt she was cxaltod by his fall, and the melancholy re¬ view of ail the sad circumstanceis »??? wore involved in the fate of those concerned in those events, produced very painful sensations. At length she said, " Holy father/* in saying which, she heid forth her hand, which the monk involun¬ tarily grasped, " the woful days which are gone, and the terrible consequences of the conduct which excluded thee from the castle of Randolph de Neville, my brother, are of such deep import to all connected with them, that they astound the mind which ventures to contemplate on their sad¬ ness. True it is, as thou hast said, memory looks back, and oft have I remembered that thou art my brother's son, and also the son of Blanch, the companion of my early days. Hadst thou been introduced among thy parent's relatives ere thou L 3
222
hadst been a Carmelite, mayhäp another lot had been thy fate ; but in the cloister, all have ac¬ counted thee in comfort and in peace, and happily removed from risk and peril. Thou shouldest not, on those who are not guilty of offence, lay blame for what hath chanced, for none have ever blamed or upbraided thee. Whether the honours of this castle, which thou dost seem to covet, would have made thee happier, is a doubt ; but, how¬ ever that might have been, at my age, and even at tliine, the transitory possessions of the world must sink in estimation, and th* *»ind must raise its hopes of happiness to those scenes which shall endure when we shall vanish hence, and the world itself shall perish. Whatever may be the feelings with which we pass the spring and sum¬ mer of our lives, like the yellow leaf of autumn our honours fall away, and in the winter of our days, consolation cometh not to cheer the gloom, by the remembrance of the helmet or the hood, but by the remembrance of our conduct under either. Had thy father married Blanch, thou wouldest have been a nephew whom I should have loved, be now a nephew whom, though fallen as to worldly exaltation, I may honour." " Thou art/' said Austin, " that balm of life woman was intended unto man ; and among the various sor- sows of roy degradation, I may reckon the loss of
223 such a relative as I should have found in thee. I will not now pursue the painful subject thou hast started. If any thing could reconcile me to my adverse fate, it would be to know, that it is thou who dost receive advantage by my overthrow : yet, as we ever stand the injured and the gainer, our feelings must ever be discordant. Thou art, however, I con^ss it, in thy pre-eminence so gen¬ tle and so kind, that even to gain thy place, ï would not injure thee." (i I assure me, holy fa¬ ther, thou ivouldest injure none." " Until the opportunity occurreth, which may lead the heart astray," said Austin, " no one can answer for the actions he may be tempted to commit. What I am hither come at this juncture to perform, as I have said already, is to visit the tomb of Henry de Montravers. Many years have passed away, since last I trod the earth which covers his re¬ mains, and perused the monument, which convey¬ eth unto future ages the wretched tale in which I am so deeply interested. What I have felt there, what I have resolved on there, is rooted in my heart. The sculptured cherub there weeping on his ashes, weepeth blood to those who gaze, and calleth loudly, though he speak not, for re¬ venge. Who may be found to be the champion of the dead, Time doth conceal. One hand, thou knowest hath been raised against thee, and Lb
224
he who raised it never hath been found. Haply thy foe lurketh near thee in disguise. He was a Benedictine, and the Benedictines are near thy castle." This last artful observation, so entirely drew the suspicion of Emma from himself, that ????? he arose to depart, and said, " Pray to thy saint to have thee in his protection, lest danger should hang over thee ;" the baroness again held out her hand, which he again pressed between both his.
CHAPTER XVIII.
The action we perform is seen, belike It is approv'd, perhaps it may be scorn'd : The tale we tell is heard, mayhap believ'd î Yet we so gloss and dress what we relate, That the very fact appeareth seldom 1 Now were the motive of the act reveald, Or were the truth of what we say display'd; How many might be prais'd who still are bless'd ; And, ah ! how many more for ever lose The credit they have gain'd. But the false tongue Hideth the falser heart, and the thick mask Worn by hypocrisy cannot be pierc'd.
The manner in which Austin expressed himself to Emma was so ambiguous, that vyhat he said bore two interpretations, and the excellent ba¬ reness, in the consciousness of her own truth, put the most favourable construction on his ???^? : and he left the hall without having lost her good opinion. After his departure, Almadore said, " We are
226'
apt to figure to ourselves the image and counte¬ nance of those concerning whom we hear much. Yet we seldom represent to ourselves such fea¬ tures or si:ch persons as we find. Austin is so different from what I had imagined, that I can hardly persuade myself that I have seen him. The quick glance of his eye, which seems to read the heart 5 the prompt fiery glow, and often kin¬ dled flush of Ms clieek · and the impetuous vehe¬ mence of his speech, appal. Verily, I shuddered as he surveyed me." " All who are not as lovely as our dear Henry/' replied Emma, tí appear to thee severe." ** Not so," said Almadore, " but this Austin hath a countenance so full of guile, that he appeareth to me like what I fancy of the foe of man ; and I shrink and tremble while he speaketh to us. I shall rejoice when he return¬ ed! to his own dwelling, for I feel as if I were unsafe while he is present." " Banish such thoughts/' said Emma, <{ we never should sus¬ pect those who have not forfeited their good name." i( I trust," said Almadore, " that as I advance in iife, I shall become wise as thou art. At present, I must confess, that I ever am inclined to fear." While they were thus talking, Toston, wdiose grateful heart still loved the family in whicii he had been reared, and often wandered near and
227 round about the mansion of his early days, and sometimes entered the hall to view the long remembered swords and bucklers which hung around it, came somewhat abruptly into the pre¬ sence of the baroness Emma, and the lady Alma¬ dore. " So please my ever honoured ladies," he said, as he advanced respectfully, " let me be pardoned for my intrusion ; I have seen Austin the CarmeHte. A man, tvith all reverence be it spoken, who pleaseth me not. He remembered not me, I am not remarkable. I followed him as he stepped on, and then I overtook him, and anon I avoided him, and thus, in and out, and about, I still kept him in sight. Lo! he wandered to the tomb of Henry de Montravers, which is in the cemetery of the convent, ?????? the abbot, holy Anselm, dv^elleth. He smote his breast, and said, * I should have been by thee, acknowledged as a nephew! O, that thou, dear Theodore! wert alive to aid me/ he continued, stooping over the sod of a grave beside him. Pardon me, my ever dear mistress, and pardon me, ? lady Alma¬ dore, that I presume to say my mind, but I must, indeed, I must say, that I tlo not beHeve there is any white about Austin but his cloak." Toston had but just uttered the last word, Λν?ιεη Odo entered the hall. He had often taken his accus¬ tomed seat at the lower table in the hall of Nar- l6
228
touville, since he was become a franklin, and had ever been a welcome guest, for, except that he had laid aside his cap and bells, he was the same merry fellow he had always been, and he had often enlivened the gloom of the baron's absence, and raised a laugh, when no one but he could taise even a smile. " Here I am/' he said, ,f come to bring you ?????, ever honoured and ever loved ladies. Behold, that wily monk, Aus¬ tin the Carmelite, is here. He hath been prowl¬ ing among the okl ruins of the castle of Montra- vers, there is no harm to be sure in that, I prowl there too, sometimes, no harm in me. t Thou shouldest not be in ruins/ said he, ( I should not appear thus within these walls ! Blanch and her son sliould here be honoured !' Ile looked here, and he peeped there ; and I looked here, and I peeped there, more than ever I had done before, but I found nought but rubbish. I watched him into an apartment that had but one door, and then 1 popped upon him. He started. 'What dost ihou here ; what brought thee hither ? AVhat comest thou to seek V So please thee, holy fa¬ ther, I said unto him, what dost thou here? what brought thee hither ? tvhat comest thou to seek ? 4 Dost thou repeat my words/ said he. May it please thy reverence, said f, thy words I do repeat. Are not thy words holy words?
229
* Dost thou come a spy upon my actions ? Who sent thee hither V No one, I replied. I came as thou art come, to prowl about. To think of the days which are gone. ' If I thought thou didst come to watch me, to pry into what I do, I would throw thee from the battlements.' In such a place as this, said I, thy employment can be no other than holy meditation: serious contempla¬ tion on the vanity of grandeur, and on the rapid wings of ?????? : therefore it is of no importance to thee, who beholdeth thee. ( Begone l he said. Holy father, I replied, these melancholy ruins ought to teach thee to be kind unto thy fellow men. They shew thee 1??? every thing in this world passeth away, Thou seest the tower of strength crumbleth. AVhat then is the weakness of man. t Make me kind!'he exclaimed. 'Away, away ! They make me mad l ? ! my most dear ladies í methought he spoke the truth. So as it was near the full of the moon, I marched off, say¬ ing to him, The lofty tow'r which stands to-day, Oft Mis to the ground to-morrow : And we pass so quickly away, We are but a tale for sorrow." t( Odo," said Toston, " thou dost think as I think, and yet neither of us can tell what we think.''
230
u Bo please xny gracious mistress," said Odo, *' our thoughts are like the mists of the morning, which sometimes evaporate in brightness, and often fall in tears." " Aye," said Toston, " and he who trusts the mist without putting on his cloak, may chance to be drenched by the shower," " Well said, Toston. Thou hast well declared it. Consider what he hath said, my most noble ladies! Guard, guard, guard against danger.* " I thank you both for your love and your care," said Emma, " I am unwilling to suspect any one, but caution becometh the aged. I will be wary," " I shall watch him," said Toston. " I will fol¬ low hira like his shadow," said Odo, {t and I have two brave boys, who were taught to love the ba¬ ron de Nartonville and his family, as soon as they were taught their prayers : they will help me to protect you all irom harm." " I have also hoys, wiio are, heaven make me thankful, ready to de¬ fend this castle : but a monk advanceth slily ; he Λν?Ι not come with open force. Some trick; some cunning device ; some artful stratagem ; marketh a friar's mischief. Heaven pardon me for saying so ; yet, as I speak the truth, I hope I say no wrong." " I hope thou dost not," said Emma, " but the motive which induceth thee to speak thus, shall do ????? the wrong, even should thy speech be faulty." The two trusty franklins
231
bowed and retired. " Thou seest," said Almadore * that I am not singular in my opinion of the Car¬ melite/* " I assume thee, Almadore, that though I am well pleased to find that those around us are attached to Henry and his family, I almost wish I had not heard their fears, it is so painful to sus¬ pect, and yet not know what we must guard against." ,t We must guard against Austin," said Almadore, " We cannot know what vow he may have made, nor what penance he hath enjoined himself; but surely, what Toston ob¬ served and saw, did not much appear Hke a reli¬ gious obligation: nor doth the report of Odo shew much sanctity," " It is," said Emma, " a perplexing and a distressing occurrence." Austin staid away a week, and when he return¬ ed, Emma and Almadore were so very reserved in their conversation, and so very distant in their behaviour, that he observed the change, and as a guilty conscience is always its otvn accuser, he fear¬ ed that he was suspected, or perhaps discovered. He strove by every means he could devise to draw them into unrestrained discourse, and at length he took a small box from his bosom, and holding it while he spoke, he said, " Ere I depart¬ ed from that abode ?????? thou dost think, most gracious lady Emma, that peace d?velleth ever, I passed many hours at Montgomery's castle, con-
232
versing with him and the lovely Catherine, whom he hath made his wife. I received from her a gift for Isabella thy young daughter. She bade me say that it was in gratitude for the kindness with which thou didst behave to her at the grand feast made by Matilda, when John de St. Evre¬ mond was seven years old, that she novv sendeth this to thy child. Thou art to impress on her young mind the motive of the gift; for she sweetly said, children should know the friendships of their parents." As he concluded, he held forward the box. Almadore ???? become so very timid, in consequence of what Toston and Odo had said, that she hesitated about receiving it. Austin perceiving her reluctance, opened the box in which he had deposited the gift of Catherine, and displayed the beads. As he held them, Emma said, I remember them ; and I also recollect the cross. I have seen them worn by the late ba* roness Amicia. That assurance mduced Alma¬ dore to take them from him. <t I accept them/' she said, se as they were sent, a gift to my child, and a token of remembrance to me, I will give them as such to Isabella." Austin then said, " My vow is now performed, and I shall go hence to-morrow. Have ye aught to say to Ca¬ therine ?" " Thou shalt see my daughter," said Almadore, " that thou mayest make report of her
233
to Catherine." So saying, she turned to an at¬ tendant, and said to her, t( bring hither the lad/ Isabella." When she entered the hall, the coun¬ tenance of Austin changed. " I have a gift for thee, my dearest/* said Almadore, " the baroness de Montgomery hath sent thee a string of beads and this beauteous cross. We will speak of them another time." She put the ornaments round Isabella s neck as she spoke. Her bright eyes sparkled ; *' I never had any thing so pretty be¬ fore. How kind she was to send it to me." AVhat shall I send to her ? " What should¬ est thou like to send? Thou dost sometimes employ thyself in curious needle-work; hast thou any thing thou deemest sufficiently well done to be a return for this so pretty gift?" " The girdle I have embroidered in gold flowers." " Wilt thou take charge of it, holy father?" asked Almadore. " I will," replied Austin. Em¬ ma then said, " Isabella may retire." When the child was gone, she said, " Holy father, thou may¬ est report her lovely." " I may indeed do so," said Austin. AHce now entered with the em¬ broidered girdle, which being given to Austin, Emma gave him a golden buckle, saying, " when thou givest our dear child's gift to Catherine, add to it this buckle. Tell her that we duly appre¬ ciate her gift, and that we request these may be worn together, in remembrance of us all» Say
234
to her, how much it grieveth me that age and dis¬ tance prevent me from undertaking a long jour¬ ney, and that therefore it is probable we may never see each other. Bear to her, however, that assurance of regard which h due to the wife of Montgomery,my old friend; and to the daugh¬ ter of Elfrida de Clifford, who was one of the beloved companions of my youth. It is one of the sorrotta of a long life, to survive those who shared with us the days when hope smiled gaily. Indeed it is afflictive to look back and numerate the friends now mingling with the earth, who once danced in the glad circles of mirth." It is natural to old age, occasionally, to make such melancholy reflections ; perhaps it would be well for youth to make them too; it might prevent many actions which the young, even while com¬ mitting them, cannot vindicate ; and it would take a sting from recollection, which often pricks old age severely. It would have been well for Aus¬ tin, if he could notv in his mid career of sin have checked his course, and made them: but he had taken one daring, one dreadful step in crime, and to stop notv, would be to have taken it in vain. When Emma ceased, he strove to renew the conversation, but he could not draw the two ladies forward in discourse. He knew so Httle of Almadore, that he could make no comment on
235
her silence, but the want ofthat courteous atten¬ tion which he had always found from Emma caused him some alarm, and the embarrassment w r hich it occasioned him was so great, that ïie felt compelled to quit th#> ?«?· " It is, per¬ haps, for the last time that we have met/' he said as he rose, " perhaps we now part for ever. I bid you farewell." He paused. Emma said, " Farewell ;" and Almadore silently bowed her head. When he had left them, Emma said, " Toston hath ????????? fears and suspicions concerning Austin, which I hope are groundless ; but they cause such a scrutinizing observation, that I take notice of the changes in his countenance, and the various tones in which he speaketh. O! he turned pale when Isabella entered the hall, and I observed the colour mantle in his cheek, when thou didst put the beads upon her neck. He trembled with agitation when he received the girdle and the buckle : and his lip quivered, and his tongue faltered, when he said his last farewell." " Above all things, I observed/' said Almadore, " that he made no inquiry concerning the de¬ parture and the fate of Nartonville." Austin, immediately after he quitted the cas¬ tle where he took leave, as he supposed, for the last time of the mother and wife of Nartonville,,
236
began to retrace his steps to Matilda, He found her still haughtily resenting her father's marriage, and still anxious and eager for the return of St. Evremond and her son. The return of ?»«*? to her castle, checked in a smaU degree the excessive violence of her be¬ haviour, but it was a restraint which she could not continually lay either on her words or her actions. Her passions, Hke the pent flames of a volcano, occasionally burst forth ; yet, as when Austin had enjoined the penance to which she had so equivocally submitted, it had been more in anger against her for having insulted him person¬ ally, than for liaving shewn her resentment of her father's marriage with Catherine, he was satisfied with that observable constraint which he knew his presence occasioned, and which marked her deference and her awe ; and he passed by every thing which was unfilial without taking notice of its impropriety. Perhaps the consciousness of what he felt against Randolph de Neville, and Blanch de Montravers, his own parents, might to a certain degree justify to his private opinion the resentment of Matilda ; notwithstanding, that to support the character of a priest and a confessor he was sometimes compelled, by outward forms, to evince his disapprobation. Saying and doing are two thingSf an adage, of the truth of which
237
Austin was not the only proof. Alas ! there are too many even in this our day ! " Had the baro¬ ness de Nartonville heard any tidings of the camp from her grandson ?" asked Matilda. " None," answered Austin. t( It is strange that every one should be so negligent. Hast thou heard aught ?" " I have had nought to do with camps for many years," said Austin. " In the whole world I have no friend, no relative who may communi- cate with me either from camps, from towns, or from monasteries. I am a solitary being, crawl¬ ing on the earth, although I should have tow¬ ered aloft, and mixed with the high spirits of the land. More than thou, may I revile the man who gave me being, for he hath deprived me of all : but I need not tell to thee ????1 injury my parents did me : thou didst hear the melancholy tale which my dying mother, the deluded Blanch, told before the altar. Ere I took the sacred vows which withdrew me from the world, and led me as a confessor to her couch, I had been a sol¬ dier; and I served in France. I can speak generally of camps by what I then experienced. I can tell thee, that the hardships of a campaign are so severe, and the privations so manifold, that every one exposed to their endurance, is as likely to be assailed by pestilence and to die diseased within his tent, as to be slain in the perils of bat-
238
tie or the hard conflicts of contending champions: and the silence of Nartonville, of St, Evremond, and of John, thy son, proceedeth peradventure in that the tongue which should indite intelligence is mute. Thou must not think me harsh for speak¬ ing thus to thee. Women who stay at home, hear of the great deeds which bold men enact, and their bosoms kindle while they listen : and when the number of the slain be told them, so those belonging to themselves escape, they deem it glory to have dealt the blow. Should it be thy r fate, my daughter, to lose thy husband or thy son, thou must let that daring spirit which caused thy exultation when they departed, uphold thy firm¬ ness, sliould they never more return to the ho¬ nours of their castle." " Holy father," said Ma¬ tilda, " thou knowest what thou wilt not speak. Thou hast heard the fate of those 1 love, and thou endeavourest to teach me how to bear the tale thou hast to tell. What dost thou know ? No¬ thing but the risk of war. Thy son hath been taught by thee how noble it is to dare all danger ; and thy husband will lead him on ; therefore I would prepare thee to meet with proper fortitude the loss thou mayest sustain, but I know not that thou hast a loss to bear." " Father," said Matilda, " thou speakest with a spirit that is quelled. Thou dost forget tlie ardour of thy
239
youth. Thou dost forget what it is to overcome, and w**at it is to triumph." " Daughter, he who hath ever been in battle, never can fo%<ít the cir¬ cumstances of the field of war. Thou mayest perhaps rejoice. Thy husband and thy son may both return with honour, but it is like unto the flower which sendeth forth its fragrance for a short season, and then its leaves are scattered. The fame of St. Evremond and thy son shall be chaunted by the minstrels of thy castle, but the days which are to come shall not know that they have been named in Devon. The trumpet which soundeth the fame of the prince soundeth for him ¿done." a The records of the nation," said Ma¬ tilda, " and the song of the castle's bards shall unite in the praise of the name of St. Evre- mor ? " " The fame of thy husband's house shall be chaunted as long as thou shalt live to hear it. What shall be hereafter, or who shall be extolled when thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, availeth thee not. The joy of the moment is all we can know, and the possession of to day is aU we can call our own." " Possession, holy father, is joy." " Daughter, thou sayest true, to possess is to enjoy. To be deprived of our possession, is to be robbed of joy." *' It is, it is," exclaimed Matilda, Ci and thus am I deprived, so am I rob- bed. ? ! holy father, thou dost thyself acknow-
240
ledge I am wronged, and yet thou preachest to me that I should submit, and bear my injuries without repining." *' To thy father thou should¬ est yield in all. When I quit thy castle, and visit next the castle of Montgomery, I trust that I shall be the messenger of reconcilement." * r Holy father, thy own words justify my resent¬ ment. To be deprived of our possessions is to be robbed of joy. As thou hast spoken, so I feel ; and thou mayest repeat unto the baron tie Mont¬ gomery thy own words," Austin, in the expres¬ sions he had used, had betrayed the feeHngs of his heart, and those feelings were so congenial with the feeliryi of Matilda, that he could not reprove the quick retort with which she had as¬ sumed his very saying : he therefore said to her, " Hast thou any thing more to send ?" " Holy father," she replied, i{ add what thou wilt tnat may more fully manifest the justness of thy own remark."
CHAPTER XIX.
The art in secret done, amid thick groves, Yea, in the deepest gloom of dreary night, May long remain concealed ; and yet at length, Whe» detection is the least expected, Some l ¿foreseen event drags into day EvVy foul deed.
Austin's return to the castie of Montgomery had been anxic sly expected by the baron and ba¬ roness. At the expiration of two months, to which period he had said his absence haply might extend, they began to fear for his safety. '· I could not perform on foot," said Montgomery, 4i the weary march which Austin hath undertaken, if events which touched my hfe or thine should call me forth. Thou dost know the dreary way hence to my daughter's castle, but compared with that beyond it, on to where the castle ? Narton¬ ville displayeth its gray towers, it is smooth riding. The hills, nay the precipices, and the vast forests which are between them, would tire YOL, II. ?
242
a younger man than Austin ; and should he drop by the way, so unfrequented are the roads, he may lay amid the thick growth of the wild under- tvood and never be heard of more. I remember that many years ago, while Randolph de Neville was in Italy, and his castle was left to the rude care of a few menials, that a youth belonging to the family of Miltvard de Rostendale, a vassal of the domain, now Nartonville's, was sent by Mil- ward's father, Edwy de Rostendale, to invite Jasper de Druvenne, who had married his only daughter, to a tournament. The youth, also named Edwy, set fortvard accompanied by ttvo attendants. They stopped by the way at the neglected castle of Nartonville. They arrived there late in the evening, and departed the next morning early. Ere they retired to rest, a man entered, and said, ' Can ye give me a morsel of bread and a night's lodging/ ( Aye/ said an old man, £ stay here and cheer thee.' He sat him down among the servants, and began to talk of the castie, and of Neville, and of his absence, and the various sad events which hatl occurred, f It is very unked to dwell here without thy master/ said he, * no grandeur kept up, no feasts, no tournaments, no merry makings/ * Aye/ said the same old man, who had bid him stay, t the castle wherein I remember such high mirth, serves not?
243
for nought but sometimes to receive a traveller. AVe have now here a sprightly youth and two attendants, who are journeying on through the forest. They Λν?Ι appear at supper time/ At supper time when they entered, one of the atten¬ dants produced a flask of wine, and Edwy said, * Hand it round, haply these good fellows do not often taste such beverage/ the bounty of Edwy drew the attention of the traveller, and after he had partaken of his wine, he advanced toward him and said, f I thank thee much. It is long since such a draught hath cheered me. I have travelled far, and I am going far. How far art thou going V ( I am going a journey/ said Ethvy, * that will keep me three days more on my horse, for the unfrequented paths of the forest are so intricate and shrubby, that I make but little way/ During this short conversation, the traveller examined Ed?vy wdth a very scrutinizing eye, and then ivalked ?????. Early in the morn¬ ing they all departe Time passed on, Ed?vy did not return. Jasper did not appear at the tournament. On inquiry, it was found that Ed¬ wy had never reached the castle of Druvenne. Where it might be supposed that Edwy would have stopped, messengers were sent to seek for him. He had been no where seen but at the castle of Randolph de Neville; and there his m S
244
meeting with the stranger was recounted. Years passed away, and Edwy was not found. After a long lapse of time, a man leaning on a large oak stick, and scarcely able to ?????! as he went on, entered the hall and sat him down, He sat long in silence with his two hands on the broad head of his staff, leaning his forehead on them, s Good man/ said one of the domestics, * thou dost seem ill. What shall ??? do for thee V ( I am very ill/ he said, ' I ??? ? ? fallen in the forest, and I am greatly hurt. It was with difliculty I reached this castle. I have been more than half the day about it, walking a few steps and then halting a long time, and so on. I could have walked the distance three times within an hour, ere I fell. Canst thou put me on an easy couch V * Aye ; come ; come with me.' t I do not think that I can rise.' Two or three among them raised the man, and carried him to another cham¬ ber, wdiere they stretched him on a bed. i How dost feel now ?' ' Very bad/ * Wilt thou have aught to eat, or to drink V f I would that some kind soul would give me a cup of wine/ said the man. The mention of a cup of wine brought instantly to their recollection, the kind Edwy, who had sent the cup round. t Didst thou ever have a cup of wine in this castle V ( Yea/ said the sick man. * Mayhap it ?? -as when a gentle
245
traveller emptied his flask among us V * Hah ! what sayest thou ? Who art thou talking about?' * About a gay young spark who staid here the same night that a poor traveller asked for a mor¬ sel of bread, and a nights lodging. He gave us good wine : did he not V ' How should I know what he gave thee/ * Marry come up, old boy, thou knowest the taste of his wine as ???И as I do: and so I shall prove it upon thee. Thou art safe here. I will not let thee escape. AVe are ????? to guard thee, be thou sick, or be thou hearty. We have thee in a cage, and Ι Λν?Ι answer for keeping thee safe/ * Stop thy prating/ said the man, * thou talkest thou knowest not what/ Old Walaran however stuck to his assertion ; and the man said no more. There he lay very ill, very helpless, very silent. One day he said, * I know not what aileth me, but one side of me seemeth to be dead. I have no more use of it than if it were made of stone/ ' My master/ said Walaran, * if thou beest half dead already, expect that thou shalt be quite dead anon. If thou beest he who did partake of the Λν?ηβ which the gay young tra* veller sent round, it is most like that thou canst tell his fate. Dost thou know what chanced to him by the way? Thou mayest as well speak out, for thou art very near the end of that jour¬ ney where all thou hast done must be answered uS
246
for.' t Happen I may/ said the man. ' What is that to thee V ' It will satisfy us to know, and it may do thee good to have a priest to help thee to go off piously.' « What good would it do me to have a hundred priests ; can any one of them alter what is done ? no, no.* * But he may alter what is to come. He may make thee fit for a better place than thou art fit for now.' * Happen he may.' ' Wilt thou have a priest to comfort thee? 1 f That will do another day.' * There is no time like the present. To¬ day we are sure of, to-morrow we know nothing about.' 'Will it pleasure thee to hear what I have to say.' c Yea.' * Well then, call thy fel¬ lows together, and I will tell a long story in the hearing of all.* * That is not the thing I mean. Send *br a holy father and tell all to him.* * If I thought my time were come, I ????? send for one ; but I am worth two dead men yet.' * Thou art but halfa man: half of thee is gone already.' r Well, well : send for a confessor, and then we shall both be easy. Let all come and hear me. I care not who heareth me.' Walaran, happy to have brought the man to acquiesce, sent instantly for a priest, and by the stranger's wish, he and his comrades of the castle stood round while he related the circumstance of the latter years of his life. * I need not go back, holy man, very far in
247
what I tell thee. Some few years ago, I settled an account of many years standing with good old father Clement. Didst thou know him, holy man?' * I never knew a brother of that name. i ' Well, I told all to him, and I did all he ordered me to do ; so that is done with, and I am going to begin a new tale to thee.' · My son/ said &- ther Philip, * thou must speak with more serious¬ ness and more reverence. This holy office is not to be performed vrith scoffing.' * Beg pardon, I beg pardon, holy man ; I will mend my speech : and in all seriousness, and with all reverence tell thee how it is with me. Thou shalt understand, my most holy father, that about seven years ago, I came, as I do now, to take advantage of the security of this castle, and asked a night's lodging. Thou old man, it seemeth,* said he to Walaran, * dost recollect me. There was here at the same time a youth, who in the open boimty of his heart shared his wine among us all. Now, holy father, that wine did his business, for I thought to myself, he that travelleth about with attendants and wine, must be somebody, antl rich. I set off nekt morning ere he started, and I loitered about in the forest till I saw him coming on. He rode first, and I let him go past ; and then I drew my bow, and down fell one ofthe men. I then laid me down in the thicket ; and they looked about, m 4
248
and saw me not. When they seemed to have given over the search, and were busy raising the dead man, in order to lay him on his horse, to carry him away I suppose, I rose, and drew my bow again, and down dropped the other attend¬ ant. When the two attendants were thus slain, I advanced, and seizing the youth suddenly, I felled him to the earth with the same good stick that helpeth me along now. I then began to rifle røy victims. Holy father, they were not worth the killing. I found one bauble of a ring on the youth's finger, and his golden girdle buckle : little enough of money among them all. I also found another flask of wine in a wallet. As to the fine geer they had on, it was not worth stealing. Thi v . is all. That is all the harm I have done for the last seven years of my life. What I did be¬ fore that, father Clement, as I have told thee already, settled for me. Holy father, I never killed any one before that time in all my whole life; and I can tell thee, that since I did that which I have now confess to thee, I never had one happy day. By my troth I need not say day, I may say, I have not had one happy minute. For though I passed on well enough with my companions, and no one suspected what I had been doing, yet I always felt as if it were coming out; and I began to be afraid of every
249 body: and that went on till when I heard the wind among the trees 1 trembled, lest some one were coming to serve me as I had served the mi¬ serable lads I slew. At last I grew to be afraid when I saw my own shadow move. I often wish¬ ed I might die, and so have done with all these fears and terrors; and again methought, what then ? What shall come after that ? Holy fa¬ ther, that was the saddest thought of all.—I wish I knew how to tell thee how it was with me ; but I cannot Jind words to make thee understand me. It was sometimes as if the lightning were going through my heart ; and sometimes as if a heavy hammer were beating upon it; and it used to beat and flutter about like the boughs when the wind is high : but all that doth not half tell how I felt : it was worse than I can speak, and it grew every day worse and worse. Beside that, I can tell thee that I fell down, and lamed myself as thou dost see, close by the very place I had done the deed. I marvel what carried me there! There lay some of the bones whitening beneath the wind and the rain, and there lay a scull. O, father ! how it grinned at me !' * Dost thou re¬ pent, my son?' said father Philip. * I know not what to say about that, hut I am so sorry for what I have done, tbat I would do any thing that could be found for rae to do, so ï might undo the deed m 5
2Ô0
again. I would let any one kill me, if my life could be given to them I slew. However, father, as thou dost know, that cannot be/ t Thou art willing to do penance, my son V * Any thing, holy father, any thing/ f Leave what thou hast to the church/ * Holy man, I have nothing to leave.* * Nothing t f Not one penny, holy fa¬ ther.* * Then I fear thy state is desperate/ * Do not tell me so, holy father, do not tell me so/ t Art thou grieved V ( ? ! I feared thou wouldest not understand me—I have told thee—father, a knife in my breast would not cut sharper, nor pain more. ? ! it is in the night and in the day ; be I asleep, be I awake, it is all one. Father, I am haunted/ t My son/ said the confessor, * a deed so daring and atrocious I have seldom heard. Thou couldst not hope ever to be at rest again. It is just that thou who didst take the lives of those who were unready to be called away, shouldest be in thy turn tormented, I trust, though thou hast expressed thyself strange¬ ly, that thou art penitent, and I hope that the gates of mercy are open to thy repentance. Thou canst make no reparation for thy crime. For them whom thou didst slay there is no remedy. On this thy bed of sickness, perhaps thy bed of death, thou canst do little to expiate thy guilt. Thy prayers, to which I will add mine, are all
251
which ???? remain for thee. Pray from thy heart, and raise thy hopes to where the prayers of penitence arise Hke incense/ ' Wilt thou come to me again, holy man V ' I will return to-mor¬ row, my son/ * I am very sorry to day, holy fa¬ ther, and when I shall have thought over all that thou hast said, I shall mayhap, be more grieved still. Remember me, holy man, and when thou prayest, pray for Godfrey de Chaime/ Walaran and those who had stood around while Godfrey told his tale, fol^ved father PhiKp, and left the poor fellow to his own reflections. " The time of fairs and other matters, brought just at that time many persons to the castle, and the inmates told every one who came the sad story of Godfrey de Chaime. They dispersed it at the various places to which they were journey¬ ing, and it was by that means known in the coun¬ try round. Not long after the confession had been made, while father Philip was again by his couch, the officers of justice entered the apartment 5 and approached to seize the offender. * ? save me, save me, holy father l The priest rose from his knees, and turning to the men, said, * This is my penitent, touch him not/ * This is no place of sanctuary ; holy father, let us pass thee/ In say¬ ing which, they strove to put him by. * ? save me, holy father ! touch me not my good fellows, 1 m 6
252
am dying : ye will get nothing by me, nor from me— ? save me, father!* Notwithstanding his entreaties, the men advanced, and when they would have seized him, he again cried, ' O! save me, father !' and shrinking in the gripe of him who took hold of him as he started in his bed, he fell again on his pillow and expired." When the baron concluded his sad tale, Catherine looked aghast, and took his hand, as though she were alarmed. After a short pause, she said, " It is very strange that wickedness, however secretly committed, always is detected. Thy dear sister Adeliza, often told us in the abbey tales of va¬ rious woes, and various crimes, and detection ever awaited the guilty. Indeed we may say, s happy is it to be discovered/ Discovery often leadeth to repentance. Did guilt die undiscovered, haply the perpetrator might die impenitent." " Sweet Catherine," said Montgomery, " thou dost always find something to soften the worst ills of life. So considered, discovery is happiness. Rarely is it that the wicked die without the blazon of their guilt : and though I hope, with thee, that penitence is the consequence of their detection, yet here they suffer all the penalties of crime ; for the punish¬ ments appointed for them must he inflicted. Yet, they arc to the body. The punishment which «rime itself infiicteth is to the mind: and ae God-
253
frey de Chaime said, it is as if the lightning were going through the heart." " I would not," said Catherine, s< feel what Godfrey, and such as Godfrey feel, to raise myself to be a queen." " Thou art too good and too gentle to do any thing that maybe wrong," said Montgomery, " but the times are as bad, and the perils are as many, as when Godfrey slew Edwy and his attendants : and I begin to fear for Austin. Should robbers assail him in the forest, he can make no resistance : an old man's strength will be of little avail." u Nor the strength of youth when the enemy cometh slily/' observed Catherine. As thus they sat in alarm, Austin, by slow and short journeys advanced leisurely. He stopped at all the monasteries where he had called as he Λνεηί forward, even where Eltoph told the tale that had overcome his apathy. He was there received with more than common kindness, for, so thick is the veil which covers the secrets of the heart, that what he had said had been believed, and it was thought that the recollection of the confession which he had once heard, had been the cause of his emotion ; and he therefore rose in the opinion of the brethren,
CHAPTER XX.
Often we wish to know that, which when known, Disappoints the anxious heart. Then, alas ί Vanisheth our ev'ry hope, and sorrow Takes her seat within the bosom.
The anxiety of the baron and Catherine was daily increased by the long absence of Austin. At length they sent to meet him. The messen¬ gers were ordered to make diligent inquiry, and to proceed within half a day's journey of the castle of St, Evremond, " Let them pursue their way even thus far," said Catherine, " we shall then have tidings of Matilda." t( Nay, Catherine, thou shouldest not, love, ask for such condescension. I must not send to her. When Austin shall return, we from him shall hear how she doth demean herself, and how far she hath been restored to health, so thai we may ?????- what to exact from her attention." The messengers returned and said, that they
25O
had heard from many that he was on the road homeward, but that they had not seen him. *' Go to his convent, and inquire for him there." Joachim did as he tvas commanded, and while he tvas making his inquiries, Austin arrived. " How now, Joachim ?" said he. " How fareth the no¬ ble inmates of the castle ?" " AH well," replied Joachim. " I am here in search of thee, holy father. Thou hast overstaid thy time." " Say unto the baron and baroness," said Austin, " that the long way hath made me weary ; more than I thought I should be, am I fatigued. Many years have passed away since last I under¬ took such a dreary painful journey; and much had I over-rated my weak powers tvhen I tried my strength so far. Tell thou thy master, that I am unable to ascend the steep hill on which hi castle stands. A few days of rest are needful to refresh me ; when I shall be recovered, when my feeble limbs again can climb, my duty in every sense that duty is required will lead me to his hall." Those few days appeared as tedious to Mont¬ gomery as all the time that he had been away ; for notwithstanding the behaviour of Matida, the fondness of a father still dwelt witliin his heart ; and when Austin entered, he eagerly exclaimed, *' How is my daughter ?" " AVell," answered
256
the monk. " What hath she sent to us ?" " No¬ thing." The baron drooped. Catherine was silent; yet willing to draw attention to some new matter, after a pause she asked, " How doth she bear the absence of Si. Evremond and John?" " Impatiently and anxiously. She is much dis¬ tressed, I may say much alarmed on their account. She feareth greatly for their safety: and she grieveth much that tidings from the east do not arrive concerning them. The life and the fame of her son draw all other considerations from her thoughts ; and she forgetteth what is due to every one ; even to me." " Let her great anxiety for those so dear to her/' said Catherine, " be her excuse to thee, my dearest lord." " It is that, Catherine, which shouid teach her how I feel for her." " Intelligence must soon arrive in England," resumed Catherine, " and then she will be at peace. Till then, lei thine anger pass away." Turning quickly to Austin, she said, " Thou didst continue thy ???? on to the castle of Nartonville. Didst thou see the lady Emma and Almadore, and her dear child ?" " I did. I saw them all." (i Emma was one of the lovely when I was young," .said Montgomery. " How memory loveth to dwell on the days which are gone, I need not tell to thee, holy father. To thee, Catherine, still in youth, in strength, still
257
looking forward to many days of life and enjoy¬ ment, I may say, that the fond retrospect of events long passed away, solace the evening of our days tvhen their morning has been spent with honour. Then it is that contemplation assumes her sway over the mind, and we all discover that however the brighter hours have been enjoyed as they fleeted quickly in the round of time, their transient pleasures w f ere evanescent, and that per¬ manent delight is seated in the deep recesses of the heart. There the sun w r hich comforts dis¬ tress of every kind, which brightens the grave where moulder those we loved, and which dis¬ perses the calumny by which we may have been traduced, shines brighúy amid the tvorld's gloom, and maugre all the world." " I trust," said Ca¬ therine, tf that there are in store for us many bright days mutually to be enjoyed," " Cathe¬ rine," said Montgomery, " I hope there are, for thou dost make my evening almost as bright as ???? my dawn ; and were Matilda like thee, my long life would be as a gay summer; but her con¬ duct is like unto a cloud tvhich oft darkeneth the sun even at its highest glory." " But the sun, thou knowest, doth dispel the cloud," said Cathe¬ rine, " and brightness breake th from beneath it," u It is the hope of that returning brightness," observed Austin, " that cheers us in the gloom :
2O8
and as the sun disperseti! far the cloud by which it oft is shaded, so hope we that the darkness of sorrow will be dispelled by returning joy. Were tmt our prospects cheered by hope, action would want its stimulation, artd performance its energy. ?? we do is for the future, the present flies while we perform/' ** What thou dost say is true, my holy father, yet how often doth the fritare disap- ysfatour hope." « If W e perire ? our re- sabes," «aid Austin, *' sooner or later, be ihey what they may, success shall crown our labours. We fruì, because we stop in our mid-way. AVhat we would brmg to issue, we must unfaltering pur¬ sua 1 ' ** het us change this conversation/* said Catherine, ** and iet us hear, holy father, what thou canst say of Isabella." " Isabella, the young daughter of Nartonville," said Austin, '* is lovely as spring, I gave thy gift, which she received with much delight, and in return, she hath sent thee an embroidered girdle, which to ornament hath been the employment ofher leisure hours/' *' TravelHng is hazardous for women/* said Cathe¬ rine, w yet, perhaps when Nartonville shall return, he will bring her with her mother to our castle : or mayhap," she said to Montgomery, " thou wüt take me to see him, who led me by the hand when I attended Matilda at her splendid nuptials. I shall be right glad to see his child, and to tell
250
her how I value her industrious ingenuity." H The perils of war are many and great," said Austin, " he may perhaps never return." ·* He may die in the Holy-land," said Montgomery, " so may St. Evremond, so may our dear John, but hope sayeth, * cheer / and I trust that we shall all meet and rejoice together on escapes of battle, though thou, holy father, dost dwell on the risks of the field." This conversation, the prattle of an old man, and an inexperienced young woman, who had seen little but the monotonous routine of a convent, afforded little entertainment to Austin. Nothmg social, nothing friendly had place within his breast. He had hardened his heart in wickedness, and his whole mind was occupied in schemes to open to himself a road to the honours of Neville. Since the sad confession of his mother, every thougiit, every action had been with a view to that great end. To slay Nartonville and Isabella was not a stumbling block in his way to greatness, but how to slay them was what he could not decide. He would not run the risk of being himself their murderer, because he feared detection. He had endea* voured to dive into the character of all with whom he had conversed for many years, but he had found none in whom he could confide. Could he have found anv one whom he might dare employ,
260
lie had the means of remuneration, for he had kept, and carefully concealed the money and the trinkets whicii had been intended for Gaston de Prestone. Yet, so deep was his contmued hypo¬ crisy, that he had procured a name of sanctity in his convent, and was become the confessor in many families: but even as confessor, he found none whose mind was so depraved as to be a fit instrument for destruction. Were those now in possession gone, he knew all were so venal, that for money he could be legitimated, and that for money his holiness the pope would discharge him from his vow : and then—the murderer would be lord of his castle, and paramount of his domains. Happier, far happier was he, when as an unknown outcast he was left upon the plains of France, and by begging journeyed on to Rome. Every far¬ thing which charity bestowed on him was comfort to his heart, though it was all hehad; and now he had all things needful, his heart was comfort¬ less. He was perpetually agitated by those cor¬ roding feelings which such a state of mind ever endures: and when the passing moment was either mirthful or friendly, or sunk into the in¬ tercourse of courteous kindness, he flew from companionship to brood alone over his griefs and his plans : therefore, when he had delivered Isa- bellas gift to the baroness de Montgomery, he
261
rose, and with the customary parting benediction quitted the castle. How little are we benefited by the blessing of such a man, who, while the words of peace and righteousness are in his mouth, covereth with the cloak of his hypocrisy the mischievous intentions of a cruel heart ! The invocation of a false priest must be a vain call, and the lie which he raiseth to heaven, will draw condemnation on himself.
CHAPTER XXI.
To possess* is to erjoy~~0, how true í But, ah í how quickly are we oft deprived Of all in which we joy ; and by a hand That taketh and that giveth for Mime end, Which the limits of our comprehension îsever cun contemplate.
There is nothing so much to be lamented, as that the happiness and peace which ought to subsist in society, are frequently destroyed by the unkind¬ ness of the dearest connections with whom we are united : and that persons placed in stations of re¬ spect and honour, and possessing all things which are denominated the good things of this world, .should so conduct themselves, that those who are most interested in their welfare, and most anxious for their prosperity, and who seek from them friendship and love, are made unhappy, often¬ times pierced to the very soul by their neglect antl by their scorn. Is it not strange that the
263
desire to possess or to inherit riches should so absorb every other feeling, that we wish to cur¬ tail the joys and gratifications of others, in order to procure joys and gratifications for ourselves. Doth not each day produce instances where pride, ambition, md avarice cut asunder the fondest ties ? and doth not every one occasionally feel the truth of the assertion ? Are not benefits forgot¬ ten, obligations cancelled, friendships changed into animosities, and all duties withdrawn, when we fear that riches will elude our grasp ? Ma¬ tilda is not a solitary instance, though now as on all other occasions she felt in the extreme. Her joy, her grief, her love, her resentment were excessive. All her feelmgs went beyond their bounds except her gratitude. There she stopped short. All former kindness, all gifts bountifully lavished, sunk mto nought now Ca¬ therine was become ihe wife of Montgomery. He should have lived alone, he should have pined in solitude, he should have remained comfortless, that she might to the full indulge her pride, and that John her son might be the sole heir of his vast possessions. The undisguised manner in which she gave way to her indigr, aion was more than displeasing to her father. It wounded him severely ; it grieved him beyond the power of Catherine to alleviate,
264
or of his confessor to overcome ; it was a disap¬ pointment to his affections which he had never imagined, and a sad drawback upon the happi¬ ness, which he would otherwise have enjoyed in the society of his kind and gentle wife. (( Let not Matilda's conduct so afflict thee," said Ca¬ therine, ** remember thine own observation to Austin. Didst thou not say that deHght was in the heart ? Thou didst : and thou didst say true. Thou hast behaved to her with the full duvy, and the unbounded love of a parent. Thy heart chideth thee not. Her disrespect, and her neg¬ lect of thee are but for a moment, her ???? heart shall reprove her, and she will return to thee and to her duty. Till then, be cheered. Enjoy thy dignity, thy wealth, thy castle. Partake gladly of the good bestowed on thee, for it is sent thee in plenteousness. Let not sorrow canker thy peace, for it will not avail thee, nor hasten her repentance. While thou grievest I cannot be happy ; for my sake then, forget that she hath done amiss ; and let my love supply the want of hers/' AVhile Catherine thus strove to soothe the grief of Montgomery ; Matilda, for tvant of some kind friend to soften her anger, continued to vent her resentment. The excessive harshness of what she said, was not, it is true, reported to her fa-
265
ther, therefore he knew it but in part, but all around her heard her expression with dismay, and witnessed her behaviour with amazement. No one, however, dared to say, ( be pacified/ Her attendants all kept as much out of her way as the services required from them would ?И???, and all who might aspire to the estimation of friends avoided her castle: for however highly any persons may think of themselves, or what¬ ever submission they may expect from those ????? they may deem their inferiors, it is very certain that none will bear unkindness or submit to ill humour and insult, but such as are so un¬ fortunately dependent that they cannot escape from endurance. If we look round the world, how many are there thus unhappily compelled to suffer, and how many haughtily induced to in¬ flict ! how many drag on a weary life of unin¬ terrupted misery, and then " Sink into the grave unpity'd and unknown 1 ." while he who hath caused their woe, finisheth his earthly career in a pompous funeral proces¬ sion, and is laid in a stately tomb, " 'Mid the execrations of those he wrong'd.' There dwelleth not a man on earth, even the most abject, whose heart is insensible to kindness vol. n, N
266
and unkindness ; and there are few among the lowly who are not ready to evince their gratitude for favour. There they out-do those who are styled their betters, and in their readiness to reta¬ liate wrong they equal them to the full. To the humble so little is a favour, it is astonishing that any one should withhold it. There are few situations or conditions, exclusive of bodily pain, which are in their own nature woful. Woe ariaeth from treatment: and woe befall him who treateth another ill. The anxiety which was so deeply felt by many individuals concerning the fate of those friends who w r ere gone to the Holy-land, spread rapidly from castle to castle on account of prince Edward. The alarming state of the king's health made every one desirous to bring their prince to Jingland ; and it was at length resolved to send to him, requesting in the name of the nation at large, that he w T ould return to the kingdom. Every one wished to be the messenger, and every one wished to send tidings, and tokens, and in¬ quiries to those they loved. Matilda, more al¬ most than all others, was anxious to send accounts of what had happened since the army sailed awuy. She sent messenger after messenger to say, <c Tell this to St. Evremond, tell the other to John Ids son. Convey such a thing to my
267 husband, present such a gift to my son. Bid them both return, inform them of the events which have occurred." When the person who was to he the messenger of invitation to Edward had received his orders concerning his embassy, he said that he would speak generally of the friendly attentions of those in England to their friends abroad, but refused to be the bearer of individual messages or gifts : and the various fond remembrances which love and friendship had prepared were returned to the several owners. When Matilda was informed oi the refusal, she forgot that it was general, and receiving it as an af¬ front to herself, she srid, {< Say, my presents must be delivered, and my orders must be obeyed." " So please my lady," said her messenger, " I dare not say so at the court." " Say I sent thee." " So please thee, thy power doth not extend be¬ yond the limits of St. Evremond's domains. I shall not be attended to. The same refusal hath been sent to every one. No disrespect was meant unto the baroness de St. Evremond." " Nothing but disrespect is intended to me," said Matilda. " The marriage of my father hath ex¬ alted Catherine, but ii is my fall." The impetuous manner which accompanied her words, would have alarmed a stranger, but her household n 2
268
\ccre so accustomed to her haughtiness that they beeded it not. She neither gained pity, nor love, nor consolation. " Is the ambassador depaited?" " So please thee, 1 cannot tell." " I will go to him myself." " Shall ??? prepare thy palfry?" The simplicity of the question checked Matilda's rage. She made no reply ; and the mar quitted her presence. Again she gave herself up to anger, and again she traced all her present sor¬ row to her father : again she accused Bertha de Clifford ; again she expressed resentment against Catherine. Vain rage! Bertha was honoured in her abbey. Catherine was happy with Mont¬ gomery : and Montgomery, but for her unkind¬ ness, would be happy with Catherine. Nartonville's family had also prepared gifts for him. but like others» they had received them back. The disappointment was to them equally great as to Matilda, but they did not deem themselves thereby injured. " We will keep them/' said Almadore, " till Henry shall return. " Antl iu readiness for that happy time," said Isabella, '* ?-, ? ?? ili collect many more and many better gifts than these, which ????~ too hastily prepared." '' The Holy-land," saitl Emma, " hath caused me much m oy and many more than we may wish a zeal so unavailing to the interests of religion never had
269 been roused. No ????? have ever been so unpro¬ ductive of advantage to the Church. What other benefits may ultimately result from their continu¬ ance, futurity may perhaps experience ; at present they yield no profits that can counterbalance their loss. I am not the only one complaining of the calamities they may have occasioned, thousands of families deplore as I do the death of their best hopes and their dearest friends. Thou knowest what the fate of war bringeth on the ???? e. Er¬ gaud may be added to the long list of those whom tenderness deploreth, and who serve to fill the records of destruction. We have both cause for lamentation, and both cause for fear. Should Henry be snatched from us we shall have no hope." " O," said Isabella, " thou must not talk thus, my mother Λν?Ι have hope in me." " Dear child," said Emma, " thou wilt comfort her afflic¬ tion, should grief assail, but thy feebleness is no defence, thy arm no protection." " Do not make us sad," said Isabella. " If misfortune shoukl overtake us, ??? must send for Alfonse my grandfather, or for Arnaud, or perhaps John d< St. Evremond may defend us." " I trust," said Almadore, " that Nartonville himself Λν?Ι return in safety to his native land, and bless us all with his protection and his love : for though the home and friends I left in France are dear to my heart, N 3
270
yet the home I have gained is dearer, and the friend ï have in him is far more beloved than were the friends of my early life, though they still hold a fond place in my heart : on John de St. Evremond we have no claim. We have heard thy father speak of him as a youth of pro¬ mise, but it is yet to know what manner of man he shall be," " Thou dost bring to my recollec¬ tion," said Emma, " a young friend, who in the days when my hopes were gay, was the companion of my sportive hours. Among those who came to England with prince Lewis, was Ermadoud de Boillon. After a short residence in this coun¬ try, he married my dear namesake, Emma de Daltonne. When she went to France, sh< pat¬ ted her English relatives and friends with much regret, and with the fondest hopes that she should return to Hve among them. She once came to visit them and staid here a month : but so fond was she become of the family of Erma¬ doud, that she declared to me that nothing would tempt her to reside again in England ; and when she unhappily became a widow, she continued in Paris because it had been the dwelling of her husband. t No home is like his home/ she said, • no country like his country ; no friends like his friends/ " " She spoke my sentiments/' said Al¬ madore, " no place is so dear to me as England,
271
because in England I have dwek with Narton¬ ville." While anxiety, and fear and expectation per¬ vaded every castle in the kingdom, Montgomery's towers were cheered, Hope sprang anew. Ca¬ therine would bless him with an heir who would counterbalance the unkindness of Matilda. The child of his old age, and the first-born of his youtli are children whieh deHght the heart, Montgomery's heir, John de Montgomery, died when childhood was passing away, and youth began to shew its incHnations and to indicate the future character. The fond parents had plumed high their hope, and seemed to enjoy his Hfe, as the continuance of their own : when lo ! their son, their joy, their pride, was suddenly snatched from their love, and the name and the honours of Montgomery were laid in an early tomb. Not many months before their hopeful boy was con¬ signed to his narrow chamber, Matilda was born. From the first moment, therefore, that her young mind could understand and feel what it was to be great, she had been taught what was the exalta¬ tion of her station, and what were the possessions of her father; and had been imbued with the pride of the dignity and honours of Montgomery. She had consequently raised herself in her own estimation to the topmost round, and thus self- n4
272
elevated, she had looked on every one as being far beneath her. To be hurled, as she might be by her father's marriage, from her giddy height, was an unlooked for degradation ; and she knew not how to fall. Her conduct to her father, tliough it had not cancelled tvhat a father feels, had much lessened the fondness with which he had been wont to love her, and when he contem¬ plated the jo*y of a young heir, how that heir tvould mortify his daughter diminished not the pleasure he anticipated. Every pompous preparation was made to celebrate the birth of the expected heir, which had formerly been made for the son of Amicia, And the love which Catherine had borne the first wife of her husband, and the ten¬ derness with which she still lamented her death, although she had filled her place, made her always well pleased, when it was said that such a thing should be so because it had been thus for John. The premeditated feasts were all arranged according to the former arrangements of Amicia, and every thing that remained of tvhat had ever been possessed by her, was carefully selected to be a part of the decorations of the mother, the child or the hall. All the old friends of Amicia had notice of the expected joy, and of the in¬ tended feastings, and so little was Matilda be-
273 loved, that all the vassals and the dependents of every degree rejoiced in the expectation ofa new paramount. " I wish," said Catherine, " my sister Bertha could behold the preparations we are making. She would surely rejoice in the splendour intended to honour me, and to cele¬ brate the birth of our child Though for herself she hath renounced all worldly pomp, yet the love she beareth her family, ????? is still warm within her heart, will teach her to exult in the dignities that I enjoy. I, the child whom she hath reared, for Λν?ιοηι her fondness hath been almost equal to a parent's love. I do not like the dull seclusion of a convent, holy as a nun is deemed ; how much happier am I with thee, than she can ever be, although as abbess she is become supreme. Highly as that rank is prized, here she would be happier, and here she would add to our happi¬ ness, and here she would be prized as highly." " Sweet Catherine, she would not add to our hap¬ piness, for the happiness I enjoy Λν?ίη thee cannot be heightened. Such of thy family as can par¬ take ???? us, I have invited to our castle. Thy noble father is expected, and the wives of both thy brothers, Λν?ιο are in the east with our valiant prince. My messengers are ready to bear to them the glad tidings of our infant's birth, and they will all repair to us when we shall announce the ν 5
274
baptismal feast. I shall be glad to be surrounded at the font by thy family, for thine is the family of love." " I will go to the abbey, and tell Bertha all we have planned; that she may know how kindly thou dost intend to act," Montgomery ???? indeed all kindness; and every thing that Catherine desired, it was his greatest pleasure to procure. On occasion of the child's birth, he was anxious to anticipate her wishes, and with the magnificence which he had at all times displayed in his castle, he now commanded all things to be got ready. In the hall of a chieftain of ancient days, mili¬ tary pomp was always conspicuously displayed on every occasion of festivity and rejoicing; and now in the hall of Montgomery, the decorations of martial trappings were exhibited with soldierly pride. The coats of mail were all again made bright, new plumes were put in the helmet ????? he had worn at Evesham. His shield with the fair white hand was burnished, and the banner which Catherine had embroidered with silver thread waved over it. The swords and battle axes were cleaned and sharpened, and the lances were placetl in rows. Catherine admired their glare, and remembered the tales of Amicia, but she felt nol the ardour of chivalry* for her breast was the mansion of peace* Montgomery's heart
275
still glowed with a soldier's fervour, and it was not without a sigh that he told Catherine when he had worn his cuirass, and where he had brandish¬ ed his sword, The oaken tables were rubbed with mint till their poHsh was like a mirror, and their scent perfumed the chamber; and rushes were collected to strew upon the floor. The massy gold and silver plates and dishes were got ready ; the ewers, the bowls, the cups. " All shall rejoice, all sliall feast," said the baron, " as all rejoiced and all feasted at the birth of John." " Shall we not invite Matilda ?" said Catherine. " No—dear Catherine, no/ 1 replied Montgomery. Among those who rejoiced was Alwin, the old bard of the castle. He sought for his ancient airs, he exercised with increased practice his hand on the chords of his harp, and he strove to re¬ cover the tones of his voice/that he might join in the song of joy, and again chaunt the fame of Montgomery. The gonfalier placed a staff on the highest tower ready to receive the banner, whose wavings should announce the birth of Catherine's child. The bells were newiy hung, in readiness to sound their peal when the banner should be displayed, and the maidens began to weave the garlands to adorn the gates of the castle. The archers, and wrestlers, and runners began to exercise their N 6
276
feats, that they might acquit themselves properiy when the sports of the feast should be proclaim¬ ed. The children of those who had performed well at the feast of Matilda s marriage, were now all hilarity, all hope : every one was anxious for victory, every one was eager to gain a prize. The vassals, who had ever found Montgomery a noble and munificent chief, all prepared the customary gifts for the occasion; and the joy which reigned in the castle, was shared by the friends around. The feasts of Montgomery's hall had ever been so profuse, that the lowest serf was regaled ; they caused a cessation of la¬ bour, and the holiday ???? universal in his do¬ mains. The old and the young mingled, and the prattling child rejoiced ; and the bountiful mas¬ ter of the feast ???? beloved like a general father. As he advanced in life, and withdrev^ from noise, his heart expanded with feelings of more intrinsic union to those who might be deemed by vassalage his family ; and as he experienced, so he inspired a tenderer interest, than ????? tilts and tourna¬ ments imitated war in his plains, and woimded competitors oft sowed the seeds of broils vriiile they met for sport and pastime. On this occa¬ sion, every thing that could promote happiness among the lowly was devised by Catherine. " The great feast daily," she said, " the humble
277
only sometimes : and those times not very often." How happy is it when considerations such as Ca¬ therine's for those below them, make the affluent and the mighty remember, that to diffuse joy is theirs. That as they receive plentifully, so are they bound plenteously to bestow. While these preparations at once stately and hospitable were making at the castle, Bertha de Clifford and the nuns of her abbey, were busily employed in making those unassuming gifts, which were meet to be presented by a sisterhood of pious women, who had renounced all worldly pomp and glory. Many among them remembered the day when Catherine had been brought by her father, and placed under the care of her sister, and the late abbess Adeliza; and many others had grown up with her within the waUs of the sacred mansion. When she was taken from their society, and removed from the cloister to the cas» tie, she had presented some token of esteem and love to each of her long known holy friends, and she had been their frequent visiter since her mar¬ riage tvith Montgomery, The kind, the lively Catherine de Clifford, who had been a favourite with every nun, had always, notwithstanding her exaltation to baronial dignity, gone among them tvith the same gaiety that had enlivened their gloomy chambers ???1? she dwelt with Bertha ;
278
and she had always been expected as a bright ray, and welcomed as a cheerful beam. They now all looked forward with impatience to behold her child, intendmg that the first time it should be brought to the abbey, they would present all their gifts to the mother, and bless her infant when they offered them. There was one among them, Margaret de Visme, who had been as great a favourite with Catherine, as Bertha had been with Matilda; and she was most sedulous to enrich her gift with every ornament that she could add to make it valued: that is, by curious broidery, for pearls and precious stones, or any other of the vain ornaments which she had thrown away, she could not again procure. The only use made of jewels in a convent, is to adorn the shrine and the altar. There all that could be collected was profusely lavished, and the splendour of them both, had increased the fame of the abbey : the pride which was checked for herself, wan encouraged for the tutelar saint. The anxiety of Bertha was greater than she chose to betray, because she felt bound to im¬ press those committed to her care, with the foil reliance they should have in all circumstances on the protection of heaven, and that tliey should allow no sense of family love, no tie of family
279
connection to intrude on their mmds and draw them again to the wotfld* Yet her own heart rebuked her. She still remembered, and she still regretted Raymond la Faye, and she loved Catherine with fondness that had increased since she had resigned her charge. Even Austin the Carmelite felt an interest in the events of the castle, and the fate of Cathe¬ rine. He was the depositary of her secret heart, and never had he heard the confession of a heart so pure. Thus amiable and beloved, the good wishes of every station and every class were for her, and may she have health and prosperity was the prayer of all who knew her. Wlien all that appertained to the hall was ar¬ ranged, the apartments of the baroness vvere newly decorated. Every thing from every other chamber that could ornament the room wherein she slept, was crowded there to make it gorgeous and stately ; and every thing that could add to the comfort of its mistress, was placed there for her accommodation. The most sumptuous drapery ???? hung in the rude taste of the times around her couch, cushions were put into every chair, and a footstool was placed near to each« Her apparel was got reatly with anxiety, her wrapping owns, and her robes of state. Fine wrappers 12
280 and costly robes for the baby. Stores for the nurses, and gifts for the sponsors, in interchange for theirs: and the cradle in which John de Montgomery had been rocked, was produced for the child of Catherine. It played, suspended by silken cords, between two pillars. At the head of one was a shield, with the fair white hand of mercy : and the head of the other was graced with the figure of a cherub, bearing a branch of palm, It was carved in wood, and was gilt with burnished gold. The coverlet was embroidered tvith flowers, Catherine surveyed it all with delight. Every thing pleased; all she could wish for was found. At length the babe was born ; a boy ; an heir ! Montgomery heard the faint cry which nature utters when first she breathes at large, and having blessed his little one, he hastened to his wife. She held forth her hand, which he rapturously clasped between both his, and before he could express his joy, she closed her eyes for ever, and never beheld her ihild.
CHAPTER XXII.
Sorrow in each degret pierceth the heart ; But sorrow, when the heart beats high with hope, Doubly is severe.
Let the man who hath ever been united to a wife he loved, and ever looked with rapture to the hour when she would bless his fondest hopes by bearing him a child to call him sire, imagine what Montgomery felt, when the hand of Catherine which he clasped with joy, dragged him by its dead weight. He gazed in agony too great for utterance. She was gone in that dear moment to which they both had looked delighted; and his happiness was destroyed by an event from which they both had expected that perpetual bliss would ????. If to lose a fond companion rend the heart, every pang that loss inflicts is doubled, ????? in the tenderest circumstances of
282
connubial joy, the mother yields her life in giving birth to the sweet pledge ofher union. Montgomery stood motionless, still grasping the hand she had held forth ; and pressing it as though he would re-animate its pulse. The si¬ lence of the chamber was appalling. Not a word—not a sigh. A second faint cry from the infant startled the amazed attendants, and roused all to a sense of woe. Montgomery was with difliculty prevailed on to remove frora the bed of death, and when he entered the hall, glittering in bright preparation for festivity, he smote his breast, and called on the name of Catherine. How suddenly are all the pleasures of man nipped by a withering blast ; how quickly are his plans destroyed and his prospects darkened! Far round his castle were the hopes of Montgo¬ mery known, and far had his feasts been pro¬ claimed. t Come and rejoice with me/ he had said to ail, and now, t join with me in grief,' was the salutation he had to offer. Those who had been bidden to the gay board of his joy, were now asked to walk with him, and convey his joy to the grave. To speak of her funeral almost deprived him of life. " Let her be laid in my father's tomb with all due honours, and placed by the side of Amicia." He could say no more. The despon-
283
dent domestics knew not how to proceed, till Alwin undertook the direction of the sorrowful solemnity. On every occasion of joy, he had for more than half a century chaunted the song of gladness, and on every event of sorrow, he had struck his harp in grief. " Never again shall I be called upon, I trust/' said the old man, " to pull the strings for the funeral dirge of the castle. O! never again may I witness a death in the house of Montgomery." The coffin in which her cold remains were de¬ posited was brought into the hall, and placed amid the arms which shone around high bur¬ nished. The long black pall of state was thrown over it, and wax lights in golden candlesticks set thereon, as had been done for Amicia. Priests, among whom was Austin, in change knelt round the bier, repeated the prayers for the dead, and chaunted their funeral hymns, and at every close, Ahvin descanted in solemn symphony among the chords he could strike so well. Beyond the hall Alwin could not follow his mistress, his old limbs could not descend the steep. For many years he had not strayed farther from the castle than the brow of the hill on which it was erected. There he stood to watch the slow march of the moumful train of death.
284
" 1 cannot hold her pall," said Montgomery, 14 and no one else shall touch it. Let it float in the breeze, and flap the air in dull moan as we descend. The priests went first, chaunting as they moved slowly ; and then followed the coffin, next to which walked Montgomery. The relatives of Catherine followed him ; and they were followed by the vassals, the household, and every depen¬ dent of the baron. They all entered the church in orderly parade. The banner she had herself embroidered waved over her, but no other mili¬ tary emblem or trophy was exhibited. When every rite was performed in the church, she was borne to the silent chamber where the departed Amicia reposed. Close to her coffin, the coffin of Catherine ???? laid, and the massy door ofthe tomb closed heavily on them both. Montgomery had made a great effbrt when he descended the steep hill from his castle ; to re- ascend on foot ?? -as beyond his strength ; the ïong and stately pall was thrown over his old war- horse, and the palfry of Catherine ???? brought for the baron de Clifford ; and they rode at the head of the procession, as with slow and solemn pace, they all returned to the castle. They dismounted at the great gates and en¬ tered the hall, but Montgomery could not take
285
his seat, nor preside as host where Catherine had left an empty chair. He retired to the solitude of his own chamber, and in pensive grief ate his morsel alone. Without the hospitable host, without the gen¬ tle Catherine, the guests sat in silence, and the joy of the board was gone. The hand ofthe minstrel trembled, the voice of the bard wa« choaked. The lower table was as joyless as the table at the upper end. The mournful office of the morning had left its solemn character in every breast. Every one went away unnoticed, no one said, * farewell.* The next day every one departed, and Montgo¬ mery was left uncheered, uncomforted, and alone. He could not bear as yet to see his child. 8????1 innocent! Λν?Ιίιοιιί a mother's care ; thrown on a stranger's nursing! Gradually however, he so far overcame his grief, that he ordered all things to be prepared for taking his boy to the font : and when tlie day for giving him his name in baptism arrived, the same friends, Λν?ιο as members of the family of Catherine, had folkrwed her to the last mansion of mortality, ????? invited to attend him Λν?ιο η his son was to be borne, in all the pomp of his heir, to be baptized. Elgiva, the wife of the eldest brothei* of his beloved Catherine, presented him as sponsor, to
286
the priest : and the baron de Clifford her father, gave his grandson the name of Joscelyn. Montgomery, in honour of the occasion for which he had assembled his friends, took his seat among them, and after the repast, he called for the cup of fellowship. It passed round ; and the health of Joscelyn de Montgomery was afterward drank by every one. The attendants w r ere then ordered to bring the child, whose lips were moist¬ ened with the richest wine from the golden cup, which was replenished, that he might taste from the mantling brim. AVhen the baron was again left alone, he com¬ manded that his son should be brought to him every day, and in contemplating his features, which resembled those of his mother, he began to encourage hope, and he looked at him as the only comfort now remaining on earth. Yet, as so young an infant could not be at all companion¬ able, he began to wish for society» The cheer¬ less gloom of his empty chambers, perpetually reminded him of the loss he had sustained, and Austin, ???? still continued his attendance as confessor, prevailed on him to subdue his anger, and to invite Matilda to the castle.
CHAPTER XXIII.
•'?*· 1 All should be be done graciously. Kindne&s, ungraciously perform'd, becomes Unkirbdness»
Ledgers, Chronicles, Gazettes, and Gazetteers, by which events are conveyed from one end of the country to ¿he other, almost as rapidly as they occur, are things of modern date, In the days of Henry of Winchester they existed not. When a special messenger was not dispatched with information, circumstances of near import remained long unknown, even to those most in¬ terested in their consequences: and when Joa¬ chim arrived at St. Evremond's castle, the com¬ munication of all that had happened at her father«, was for the first time made known to Matilda. " Dead!" she exclaimed. " Is de¬ tested Catherine dead?" u With grief, I tell
288
thee so," replied Joachim. " With grief! Doth that grieve thee? I say unto thee, man, that I rejoice." " I rejoice, and so doth every one, that the child surviveth." " Därest thou to tell me so ?" " So please thee," said Joachim, " it spreadeth universal joy throughout the domains." ( ' Universal joy !" wildly exclaimed Matilda, " Do all rejoice that I am thus excluded ?" *' So please thee, even so," replied Joachim. " He is the loveliest boy that I ever beheld, and so like to his dear mother, that I love Iiim for her sake. He is the only comfort that thy father hath," " Thou art most audacious to speak thus to me. Canst thou think my father's comfort in his son can give me joy ?" " So please thee, I was com¬ manded to inform thee, I was not told to think," " Hast thou aught else to say l* " Thy father in the lonehness wherein the death of his dear wife hath left him, hath commanded me to say, that he requesteth thy presence." " Let him not send for me. Let him enjoy the comfort, which is, as thou dost say, the only one he hath. What am I?" " So please thee, thou art the daughter of the baron de Montgomery." " Dost thou scoff at what I am ? Am I nothing more ?" " So please thee, no." w My father did once before send thee to me. He sent thee to bid me to his marriage. Likely! should attend it, He
289
now sendeth to hid me help to share his joy in a boy who doth eclipse me, Tlie »newer thou didst bear back then, thou mayest bear back now." Joachim having, hy the adviee ^>f old Alton, forborne to tell her father that she would not attend his call, was eomewhat at a loss now to take her answer å*om her, " So please thee, say it again, lest perackenture I should speak it wrong/' w Tell thou my father that I wffl not attend upon his bidding." " It was the holy ¿monk, Austin the carmélite, who did give counsel to thy father, and prevailed on ?? to send for thee." " Austin tiie carmélite 1 What may he mean. I marvel hé should interfere between us." 4ς So please thee, no doubt he knoweth wherefore. When a friar interfereth it is seldom to no purpose/ 1 ** Even for him I will not go." Joachim remained silent. ts Why dost thon not depart? Thou art answered." Joachim went not away, " Depart I tell thee." " So please the baronees de St. Evremond I must not bear such answer to my lord." Matilda who never tall jiow had thus been held in parly by a domestic, and who felt how much the birth of a young heir had lessened her lofty hopes, imputed even the conduct of Joachim to that cause, and she said, " Begone ; here at least all shall obey me," Joachim bowed lowly and re- vox, il ?
290
tired. The anger of Matilda, was violent, it par¬ took of resentment and humiliation. To go to her fathers castle, where she had been so long con¬ sidered as the future mistress, and feel herself no longer so considered, to behold the care of all turned toward a child who by the difference of age might be her grandson, to view the fond caresses which Montgomery bestowed upon him, and Λνίίηεββ the pride with which he contemplated his boy, she could not endure, She had so long been honoured as supreme by all around her, she could not bear to take the second place. Yet, her father sent to her in the moment of his sad¬ ness. It was from her he sought for consolation. Therefore she still was dear to his affection. But she was not the first object of his love. There was one above her, one dearer than her¬ self. While thus she argued with herself, her haugh¬ ty spirit was alternately provoked and checked. She paced the hall; she called upon St. Evre¬ mond ; she reiterated the name of John. She was without decision, she was ????^ advice ; for her unsocial conduct kept every one aloof. She was without friend, she was without companion. In solitary stateliness she wandered from chamber to chamber, and thought on the days which were gone—on the days when she was the only belo¬ ved—vhen she was the heiress of Montgomery.
291
At the period when Matilda lived, the great were more separated from the other classes of society than they are at present, especially great women. Greatness might then be called cum¬ brous. The great could not condescend to know more than one degree below themselves, and even from that they ever required submission. Every one must submit to his destiny, that is, to the station in which he happens to be placed ; and every station, even in the highest, occasionally finds something that must be called endurance, for though « ..... Every greeze of fortune Is smooth'd by that below————.* yet every inferior yields reluctantly to what he denominates command ; and no one submits be¬ yond that point where dependence is conscious of compulsion. Hence, not only the petty distur¬ bances of domestic peace, but hence all the gene¬ ral risings which have caused the great revolu¬ tions of the world. The love of power, and the hatred of slavery, are inherent in every man, and every woman too ; and the triflng thou shalt, and / will not } extended among many, and pushed to the extreme of obstinacy in all, produces riot, revolt, rebellion.
292
In its degree Matilda proved it. She, haughty in her exaltation, ever compelled to the full ex¬ tent of power, and required to the utmost of yielding. Therefore, love, friendship, or attach¬ ment, brought no one to her castle : and as feudal tenure, and with it feudal tyranny, began now about to pass away, compulsion, as a natural con¬ sequence, was much diminished. Matilda had felt the eifects of its decline, when she had re¬ quired the attendance of Eleanor de Valonnes at the time of her father's marriage. For that rea¬ son she would not send for her on the birth of her young brother. Joachim, meamvhile, was telling tlie domestics all the minute detail of all that had happened. He told them the preparations that had been made for rejoicing, and the horror of the stroke when the baroness expired, " She was the best wife/' said Joachim, iS that was ever given to mán, and the kindest lady that ever dwelt in a castle. O t it was a black day when we lost her. I cannot speak the sorrow that spred far and near among all. But among all, none was so grieved as Alwin. The good old man had got ready songs of joy and thankfulness, and instead of the cheerful sounds that would have gladdened the hall, he struck the chords to the sad notes of the funeral hymn, ? ! his hand shook on the strings, 2
293 and he could scarcely pull their tones ; and his voice trembled as he sang, and the tears ran down his aged cheeks ; and as he raised his eyes, they were quite dimmed with weeping. As for the matter of that, there was not a dry eye throughout the whole domain. The highest and the lowest loved her ; and the highest and the lowest equally lament her loss. Heaven make us all thankful the boy surviveth his mother. None of ye all will believe me when I tell you what a sweet child he is. Dear little fellow ! he knoweth nothing of the woe that hath attended his birth. It was a sad sight to behold my old master stand beside the font, and afterward when he knelt : and it was grievous to hear how he sobbed when the priest called down a blessing on the little innocent to whom he had given the name of Joscelyn. I beHeve, for my part» that the holy man's prayers were heard, for the babe grows finer and ñner, and stronger and stronger every day, I wish I may live to hear the sound of his voice when he begins to talk. We all long to see him run about. We all bless him every day : and we all pray for his Hfe, and for the iife of his father. Would that prayers could call his mother from the grave ; she would not lay there long, I can tell you." Old Alton, who had been listening with much earnest¬ ness to all Joachim had to say, observed, " How ? 3
294
unked it was to be sure, but I told thee," he said, " that mayhap the baron's great joy was the beginning of sorrow, and now thou seest how sadly and how quickly it is begun." " Aye, sadly indeed," said Joachim, " and I have more sorrow for him yet. I came to request the presence of his daughter, and she refuseth him : not that it would be a vast pleasure tlid she go to him. She is the very opposite of Catherine, Yet I wish she would go, if it were only for compliance, be¬ cause it will please my master ; but as for us, we shall all wish her gone again." <t Well, well," said Alton, " be sure thou dost not let thy master know how untoward she is. As for her going to his castle, she is better away. She is bad enough here ; there, where her brother is, she would be worse, for the sight of him would keep her in perpetual anger." While the matter was arguing thus, a summons from Matilda called Joachim again into her presence. " What didst thou say," she asked, " about my father?" " I said, so please thee, that the baron de Montgomery did request thee at his castle, to comfort the affliction he endureth now his baro¬ ness is dead." " To comfort his aflliction ! and to behold the child she hath left him !" " Yea, lady. To behold thy little brother." " Say unto my father, that at my leisure I will attend him.
295
It doth not suit me to attend him now." " So please thee, come now—come directly." " Hence, and say as I command thee." This determination was owing to an observation made by Goda, that for certain it would be right to go, because a holy monk had prevailed on the baron to require it of her. ** When a monk meddleth, so please my lady," said Goda, " it is always for some rea¬ son that he has in his head : something that no one else would dream about." The idea of a holy call pleased Matilda. " A holy call," she said, " must be attended to. The call of mortal man I heed not." Joaclr ? returned to Montgomery, and a few days after he ?? ent away, Matilda prepared to follow him. Her departure was melancholy, and though not without attendants, might also be said io be solitary, for she had no companions. Her palfry was made ready when she ordered it forth, and the saddle and horse-trappings ?\ ? ??? sumptuous as heretofore ; but there was no anxiety that all should be right, just what she said let be, was done, but no anticipation of comfort, no care that she should travel pleasantly. No one offered her refreshment, till she said *' Is it not the hour to dine." So little care was taken of her when she dismounted, it might be said she was unassisted. There was more attention paid to Goda. " Be
29?
careful, Goda," said one of the attendants ; and, " take my hand as thou dismountest," said ano¬ ther. When they dined beneath the spreading branches, nothing was offered her but what she asked for. Not one of all the many who attended her, seemed desirous that she should have Che best of what they brought, but many a nice bit was handed to Goda. Now as Goda was not younger than her mistress, it could only be for that Goda was a well behaved woman. Though Matilda sat retired from those who followed her, as if there were a dais, yet she saw with mor¬ tification, that her woman was more prized ths ι herself. When she reached the convent where she meant to pass the night, she was received with respect, but without cordiality. No one seemed glad to see her. Ehrude saluted her coldly. Agnes took no notice of her. It is true that they were both so very far advanced in years, they could not exert themselves in courtesy, but the younger nuns scarcely deigned to recognize her, though two of them said, " Hab, Goda, it is long since thou wast here ;" and when they heard tlie öorrowful tale of the death of Catherine, the grief they expressed was so displeasing to Ma¬ tilda, tliat she becar ì quite sullen, and saying that "he was greatly fatigued, she retired to hsr chamber before die customary hour of separation.
297
The next morning she renewed her journey, and in the evening of the .second day, she reached the high castle of Montgomery. The message she had sent by Joachim, that at her leisure she would attend him, had not been pleasing to the baron, and as it could not be ascertained when that leisure would occur, no preparations were made for her reception. No eager expectation caused any one to watch for her arrival, and she waited at the outer gates, after the bugle had been sounded, for many minutes ere she gained admittance. Perhaps she never had till then ????^ for admission. She had omitted to order any one to go forward to announce her coming, and none offered an uncommanded service. Her father's bosom heaved, and his heart palpitated tvhen he heard she ???? arrived, and his first im¬ pulse ???? to hasten to receive her, but he recol¬ lected her unkindness, and checked his inclina¬ tion. He waited in the hall till she was announced. The sight of her overcame the resentment which he meant to shew, and he clasped her to his breast. She stood unmoved in his embrace, and the old father's heart sunk within him. He started from her and was silent. She waited a short time expecting the words of welcome, and then took a seat unbidden. The emotion of the baron was severe : he covered his face with his hands, and
298
sobbed aloud. ít Art thou not well ?" said Ma¬ tilda. " No, my child. The melancholy event tvhich hath taken place within my castle, and this thy most ungracious conduct make my heart sick, I did not look for such behaviour from thee." i( Didst thou expect that 1 should come with joy to gratulate a marriage so injurious to myself and to my son ?" " My child," said the baron, tí we will speak another time on a subject so distressing to us both," Matilda gazed round the hall where she was wont to be the magnet of attraction, and beheld the helmet tvith its new plumes, and the banner which Catherine had embroidered. She rose and took it from its station. " That banner need not wave here now," she said. The baron angrily snatched it from her, and replacing it, saitl, " While I have life and sense to know what pas¬ seth, that banner shall grace my hall. The fair white hand which it beareth, was worked by the hand of my wife ; by the beloved friend of Amicia ; the honoured and regretted mother of my son. Remember, Matilda, that thou art my child ; remember the love tvhich I have for ever borne thee, and remember thy own duty. Thou art no doubt fatigued, retire to thy chamber, AVe will converse again to-morrow." Matilda rose and left the hall: but she went abruptly, and omitted
.299
due ceremonies when quitting a parent for the night. Montgomery and Matilda were both mortified and disappointed. His was mortified and disap¬ pointed tenderness and love ; hers was mortified pride, and disappointed haughtiness. Since the first hour that Matilda could recol¬ lect the treatment she had received, and remem¬ ber the submisbion all had shewn to her imperious will and ΛΛ^Ικίβ, this was the first occasion wherein she had found that all things were not made for her. Her father had another object for his love ; his inheritance had another heir; his vassals a new chieftain ; and his dependents a netv master. She had fallen from her high dignity, she had sunk in the estimation of every one. Sleep fled her eye-lids, and when she was left alone, she pondered on the events which had occurred since St. Evremond left England, and in violent perturbation, passed the night in melan¬ choly and painful reflections. Yet, restless aa was the night, she dreaded the return of day. She feared to see the child who stood between her and her ambition. " ? ! why," she exclaimed, although she was alone, Ci did I allow the words of Austin to have any influence over my mind," Montgomery had been so agitated by the arri¬ val of his daughter, and so hurt by the manner in
300
which she had behaved, that he lamented he had suffered himself to be prevailed on by Aus¬ tin to send a messenger to seek her out. When he went according to his custom to see his son ere he retired for the night, he took him Ín his arms, and leaning over him, he said, " My boy, the love I bear thee, however great, is not greater than tlie love I bore thy sis¬ ter. O, how hath she requited me ! Shouldest thou faii me, Joscelyn, thou wilt indeed bring my grey hairs ???? sorrow to the grave." How wretched it is to reflect that the ties of kindred, of love,and of friendship are broken when ambition interferes ; that parents are scorned, brethren despised, and relatives forsaken, ΛνΙιβη riches intervene : and tliat to be the person pos¬ sessing what another wishes to enjoy, is sufficient ground for hatred. So placed was the innocent Joscelyn, He was a spider in the path of Matilda.
END OF VOL, 11.
R GILBERT, PRINTER, ST. /OUVs SQUARL.
