Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The forest of St. Bernardo: a novel
' ' ?- ' '- THE FOREST OF ST. BERNARDO.
. , - 7 « chap, ι., , ; * ABOUT the year 17— Mr.Millward arrived from the East Indies, where he had resided near ten years. He had acquired a competent fortune with the greatest honour, and returned to his native country ? with an .unblemished re¬ putation,, and a constitution little im- * vol. ι. ,. ? /t ^paired
paired by the climate. A disappoint- ment in love had occasioned his leaving England : early in life he had, attached himself to an amiable and beautiful girl, the only daughter of General Roberts, who having a superior match in view, ' forbad ,her thinking of Mi*. Millward. This was a severe command; but the gentle Emma, accustomed to obey, dis¬ puted not her father's will as far as it related to Henry ; but neither threats nor - persuasions could induce her to . give her hand 'to Sir William Maynard, to whom 'her 'father had 'contracted lier without her knowledge or consenti The General, provoked by her refusal bf so advantageous an offer, 'serit her tò- a convent situated in Languedoc, arid " 'used
3 used such precautions that it was impos¬ sible for her to obtain' an ihterview.with Henry, or get even a line conveyed' to him; and he left England fully con¬ vinced that she had voluntarily resigned him, and was in a few weeks to become the wife of Sir William Maynard, General Roberts seemed almost to have forgotten his once darling daugh¬ ter : it is true that he twice a year re¬ mitted her pension, and a smallstipend ' for clothes and pocket-money ; but not one line of inquiry after tier health'. ' r This conduct he pursued for nearly ten years : judge then of Emma's 'sur¬ prise, wheu t bne morning she was told a, person from her father waked inthe ìì 2 " par-
4
.parlour.. /On going í down, she found a : "decent/ weïïrbehavëdu woman 5 in; deep £ mournmg,:,who rose with ^ greats respect .on^her^entrance,-and, presented a letter, j w ; hich;<Emmaííréad íseveràl times* before ..she cquld believe the contents. ■- "· . - 'It informed her that her father had , sent the bearer, whose name -was Ward, tO; attend ,her to England; and that his 1 carriage and-servants waited at Dover to , convey/her to the arms, of her truly ¡^affectionate and repentant father, who was, impatient to. .embrace her, and. to account for his cruel treatment and seem- ,.ing neglect, which he hoped to'convince .. her -, arose entirely from necessity. He . lamented* having, so Tong secluded her , from the world, and.that.hehad sepa^ , . '-rated
5 rated two persons formed to make eacli ¿ other happy. He concluded by entreat¬ ing her to forget the past, and assured her that his whole studýin future should be to render her happy. It is easy to imagine the various sen- sations this letter excitetHn tfie breast of Emma ; but joy soon 'predominated' over every other ; the thought of being restored to the affections of à father' whom' she always" tenderly loved, in 'a - moment obliterated his' past' 'urikinoV ness. ' She turned to Ward ' with her accustomed sweetness, and said she was* going to acquaint the Lady Abbess with J her arrival, and the commands of her father. ' Ringing the bell, 'she'desired a lay-sister to take care' of 'Ward, and ? S pro-
6 procure her some refreshments: she added— „ r , ,** I will send for you to my apart¬ ment in the course of an hour, as I have many questions to ask." The Lady Abbess, though .much af¬ flicted at the thoughts of parting with Miss Roberts, whom she fondly loved and had ever treated. as a. favourite daughter,, yet sincerely congratulated Jier, on the return of her father's affec¬ tions and her being restored to .society, which she was every way qualified to adorn. ι , «, , \ l '\ <\ , V ■ r r, : \ < Emma settled matters with the good Lady Abbess, and fixed her departure for
7
for the next morning.. She then sent for Mrs. Ward, from whom she learnt that her íather resided at Upton Hall in Devonshire, on an estate that had' been left him by a distant relation, who had been dead about three weeks : he was a bachelor, very rich, a most worthy, but very eccentric character. Mrs. Ward also gave her to understand that the late Mr. Roberts had never seen the Ge¬ neral till a few months, before his death, when he sought him out, and was so much pleased with him that hè would not suffer him to quit the Hall. Mr. -Roberts had left him an estate of ten thousand a year, and a »considerable sum of money in the funds ; and had " recommended his servants, in his will, to the care of the-General, who had ? 4 behaved
s , . behaved in the most liberal manner : those that were old he had settled in comfortable cottages, and allowed them pensions ; he told them they were' wel¬ come to come to the Hall whenever they chose, but on a Sunday he should always'expect them to N dine there : the General had retained the younger part of the servants in his service : that her- self' had been housekeeper to the late' Mr. Roberts fbr some years, and was so happy as to keep her situation, Mrs.· - Ward concluded "her account by saying, the General continued all the charitable institutions founded by her late mas¬ ter. " J j Emma · asked- if hcr father had brought any of his own servants to the - ■- HaH,''
? Hall, and whether' he kept < Belle- Vue* Ward replied—" Only Mr. James * came with the General ;" and that she had not heard any mention of Belle- Vue. The truth was, Mrs. Ward, finding Miss Roberts a total stranger to the de¬ ranged state of the Generals affairs and embarrassed circumstances previous to his becoming his cousin's l heir, 4 thought it prudent to be silent on the Subject Emma mentioned 1 her design of begi fi¬ ning her journey early the next day; but recollecting ' that Mrs. Ward might be too much fatigued, oflered to defer it. Ward thanked her for her kindness, but said she should be sufiiciently rented and able to set j out as early as she thought proper ; that tlie General was ? 5 so
10 ' so impatient to behold her, he had, de¬ sired they would be as expeditious as possible. It was then fixed they should set off at seven in the morning. t Ward told Emma she had another letter for her; " the General· gave'it me, Madam, just as I was getting into the chaise, and ordered me ta take care of > dt as there were notes in it : I put it into my trunk as the' most secure place j I will fetch it immediately. The General gave me also a letter of recommendation to Monsieur Dessein at 'Calais, and de¬ sired- him to furnish me with a hand¬ some travelling chaise, and a steady man to act as a courier, as I was going to fetch his daughter from a convent in Languedoc. And I assure you, Madam, Mon-
ti Monsieur Dessein has obeyed my mas-, ter's commands ; the carriage is an ex¬ cellent one, and La Fleur is a very civil ' and well-behaved ,man, and perfectly, understands his business." , . Mrs. Ward went in search of La Fleur, whom she found waiting Avith the trunk below. , She told^him her Lady had ordered the carriage to be at the convent "by seven the next morning, and that if -she had any further com¬ mands she would let-him know. * " r '' ' <· >' . '' 1 .? I She took the letter to Emma,; who, on opening it, found v it contained bank notes to the amount of, five hundred, pounds ;,.which her father desired » her ~ to lay.out in'replenishing'her-wardrobe, '??\\'.^ ? ? and
- 12- and in présents tocher;friends· for their past attention. ^ He added— » ~? > ' ? , ; < Λ' I .. - ': . \ " If you wish to engage r an attendant, J I have ho objection to your bringingra French- one over ; "though I would ra- ther yoa would wait' till you arrive an England, and make choice of an .Eng¬ lish one : but consultyour own inclina- tion,~which, believe me, in future shall be free from restraint." » ^ * The more Emma considered the*tunb things had taken, the more she^was astonished; every* thi rig appeared as a' dream,! yet it was : so pleasant that f she * did notwish to.awake sfromnt.f Thei fc permissions ta faring" ari attendant ' with, her gave her -pleasure,- as the'relwas '?? - í ■ English '
13 English orphan girl whom she was verý fond óf '; ■ 'and she .determined,·,' with'the Abbess's-consent, to ' take - her > to í Eflg- 1 landi - /liiat' amiable woman was truly 1 happy so favourable-an : opportunity oftered Of- placing her young charge in," such'igood hands. " ·'>- ' ' ! - ν'λ»*; ■'·. ·· ■ ;■;-.■ ·'· :■ '- ■-.'■ ·""· '"-Fanny íEdwar ds had been brougljit ?to. the convent a few months after Emma's; arrival.' She wasthen about six years old/and hade been delivered to the Lady Abbess « by her ' father,·' who .was, in the ; last stage, of > a\consumption.- ?β r told - this 'truly,'pious, woman his short -sad story- whichi induced;, her to promise, hiriuo protect.the child ; and that if-shcv lived ,tq ¿roW'UpV she would, Jf possible,, place her /under the protection- T of, an- iî'v ' · English/
14
English lady. According to Iiis desire, she,had educated Fanny to get her livmg in a'genteel situation; the Abbess was therefore extremely pleased to have it in her power to peiform.her promise, and to put her little favourite under the pro¬ tection of one who would watch over her unguarded youth, and by example and precept render her a worthy and useful member of society.- 4 " ' ■ " Fanny was called, and told'of ; the sudden alteration in her situation. . The poor giri's sensations quite overpowered her ; she was gome;minutes .before she could express" her thanks to Emma, to whom she was mošt' ardently ^attached ; but the thought of quitting,'perhaps' for ever, the worthy Superior, who had been
15 been more than a mother tel her, filled her young heart 'with the t most poi¬ gnant afiliction. At length a flood' óf ' tears relieved her : Emma pressed her to her heart, and withdrew. Fanny threw herself at the feet of the Abbess, and would have poured forth lier ac¬ knowledgments, but her feelings again overcame her, and she could hardly ar- ticulate— * ' ? J . ' * " My dearest Madam," must T then be separated from you, quit this sacred abode of peace and innocence?" < The Lady Abbess, who was sensibly affected, raised her ; and, tenderly em¬ bracing her, said—,
« My
16 - " My dear Fanny, r child of my adop^ tiòn, modérate your feelings : in parting-" with you I give - the strongest-proof-of 1 - my.'affection'/as I sacrifice niy own cpm·/*' fort to'your advantage.. In placing you. underline, protection of my beloved; friend, ? securebyou 1 am asylum · where, you will be in perfect safety,- and I fulfil the promise Tirade your dying rather : 'he wished you, my dear girl, to be a Protestant; and"though you have at¬ tended ï our 'mode of' worships you are sensible that L have 1 not .been unmindful of y 'your parent's » injunctions,, as my « amiable friend, your future mistress and patroness, <. baso instructed' you in the theory /of? that* religion ï you will soon have it in your power to practise^ You have long known my sentiments on that ,— * ' sacred
17 sacred subject ; that the form of worship is not so essential as purity of h«art and uprightness of life. My whole conduct has, I Hope; proved to you and thé semi- náty I have' the honour to govern,' 'that T am' no enthusiast,' but adhère 'sfríctfy to the mild 'precepts of* the' Gospel, which 1 'strongly enjoin' universal 'charity and toleration"to all men. '' Your' being under ^the ' guidance ' of ' šó sensible and ' worthy'a* mistress'renders any further: instructions or 'advice^on my part.untíe-' cessary : " continue, my' dear Fannys ' İn ' the path you'have hitherto trod, and I shall ever retain the affection of a mo¬ ther for you, ' Write to me often, and · tell me 'ëvérywish of your heart, l Leave me how, my child,! will 'see'you again ' in .the v evening. * Give orders' to Sister Agnes.
là
Agnes to have your things properly packed." Fanny left the .yartment much com¬ forted, and in a great measure resigned to her riew situation. Miss Roberts, having given' the necessary directions to Ward, joined tiie, community at dmner ? who alLexbressed their sorjcow at being deprived so suddenly of their amiable inmate; Emma thanked them, and as- 1 sured them of her gratitude for the numerous favours conferred on her dur- ' ing her residence with them. ? ee Believe me," she said, <£ I feel, severe- ly feej our separation, which nothing could reconcile ,me to but the, thought of seeing my father, and being restored Γ to
19 to his affections. Whatever may be my future lot, I shall neve/ forgei the wor¬ thy friends whose kind attentions and precepts have enabled-me to bear with resignation the-disappointments of my youth* and to obey, without a murmur the will of'my father; yes, my beloved friends, your examples have taught me to submit to the wise dispensations of Providence, and have convinced me that. afirm reKance on His goodness,, anda strict observance; of our religious and moral duties, will conduct,us througk life (however thorny thei-path) with % some degree of happinessl-, ' Qur, good Superior has permitted .me the^honour of corresponding with her ; I shall avail myself of her kindness, by which means .'\\' · '' bhall·
20 I shall have the pleasure of hearing fre¬ quently of the welfare of my friends."'' ?"-? ' l l -. * ? ?\ -ι. (' /iWith äifficuHy Emma concluded her address to the mms,< *as' her^ feelings almost deprived iher of the power ? of articulating; . and t she »was obliged ta leave the refectory abruptly. - 'J " '^* f -? , ''i, } s It was some time oefore Emma was sufficiently composed to* meet the Lady Abbess, Viih whom she had promised' to spend/the afternoon. A'summons' to attendûn her apartment roused'her : on; her entering, that * inestimable'wo- man'embraced'her; and leading Emma tOtaséaVsáid-»-* r * { < *■ e ' L " - -.4 « "( t T 4 , ' «■ X« « if A * V u . - ? " ei Let
•61 ' i ífi Let{'us not, my beloved friend, ■embitter the few « remaining hours ~we shall pass together by unavailins regret ; - I only look ori our separation as a tem- ; ??????* one, as-'I^am vain enough to 'flatter myself that I shall retain â hold" in - your heart sufficiently strong to induce <you to'revisit theAbbey of De — ? The recollection of ^ having been obliged to pass the greatest partof your youth in it-may excite disgust ; but' ram cer¬ tain the inhabitants will be exempt from it, and you^ will convince us of your unshaken-regard by passing a few weeks with us next summer." ,\,? -, Emma assured the good Abbess, that, with her father's permission, which she had no doubt/of .obtaining, she should Avail .herself \of the kind> invitation · 9 * they
they tiien changed thè subject, and .passed three or ,fbur hours in conversa¬ tion not ? only amusing but instructive- The bell for vespers obliged theni -to separate; but it had been agreed to spare, themselves the pain of a formal adiea, Emma hastily bsde the Abbess good night, and'withdrew ; tb her own. apart¬ ment,, which she determined hot *o quit „till her » departure .from the Convert. She, had fixed seven in .the .morning, as at that hour.,;the whole community would be at chapel.. Emma sent for Mrs. Ward and Fanny to.supAvith her; as'šhe did not wish to s be alone,- .Fanny .entered in tears $ she had just takenieave of the Lady Abbess, who had presented her with ton guineas for
23
íor pocket moneys ( Miss Roberts soon dried thè' tears of her young, protegee, by promising her, if she was a t good girl, she shoulct accompany híer the èn* suing year in' hér intended visit to her first benefactressí Fanny expressed her thanks; at the same timé 4 assuring Emma, that she felt herself truly grate^ ful for the honour conferred on her, and thought herself very fortunate ?? bang under -such protection. ? l La Fleur was punctual to the ap¬ pointed hour, and had every thing'pro¬ perly arranged for the journey. Emma liberally rewarded the lay-sisters, and left a handsome donation to be distri¬ buted to the poor.
The
24
f The^ travellers took a ^asty, breakfast Miss Roberts had only to bid farewell to Sister Agnes, who 'had - constantly .attended" her, and the Porteress. The tears, and prayers, cf those, good crea¬ tures distressed her, and she hurried into ,the carriage, followed by her two attendants. * , , ι »' ?" i (J ' '' ^ ; Poor Fanny's tears flowed afresh, as the Convent gutes closed ; and, t ,spite of her fortitude, Emma was much af- fected. For ???? ? miles they pursued their-journey in silence ; at length the fineness of the morning, (it being the middle of May),andithe beauty of the prospect. roused Emma from her .re¬ verie, and she entered «into discourse with Ward, whom she found sensible and^
25
and well -educated;- Fanny soon reco¬ vered her spirits, the novelty of the scene operated like a charm on her young mind; and when they stopped to dine, she was not only reconciled but delighted with the 'change of her situation. On the third day they reached Paris, and drove to the Hotel De ------in the Fauxbourg Øe Sti Germains, Fanny's astonishment, and remarks on every thing she saw, amused^ Miss Roberts ; and she wished much to pass ? few days in that famous capital, but her impatience to see her father determined her to proceed on her journey without delay. Two days more brought them in safety to the Silver Lion at-Calais. VOL.J. ç ' Miss-
26 Miss Roberts ordered La Fleur to en¬ gage a packet, and let her know when it would sail'. In less than two hours, La Fleur re¬ turned, and informed his mistress that he had settled with a captain, and had seen every thing put on board necessary for her ^accommodation ; and if the wind continued fair, he would sail by ten the next morning. La Fleur said he would take care and háve the bag¬ gage on board that eyening. ,.- They embarked the next morning, and after a pleasant passage arrived at Dover the same evening. The -first , person Emma distinguished on her land¬ ing was James, who had for some days taken
27 taken his station on the t pier, in hopes of seeing the vessel that contained his beloved mistress. The poor'fellow was overjoyed to see her.. " Ah, Madam 1" he exclaimed, " have I lived to see the happy day that brings you back to good Old England? and shall I again behold you at the >head of my master's family, who (thank GodM) has got 'tiie better of all his troubles, * and has a fine fortune ?to ,bestow on you." ' * Miss Roberts was íimch affected at this honest fellow's repeated marks of his strong attachment : he had tlived with the General before his marriage. Emma assured him she was glad to see - ? 2 him
28
him in" good health, and much obliged . to him for the joy he evinced at her " return to her native country. She in¬ quired of James, if he had heard from ♦ her father since he left home. " No, Madam," replied he ; " but I left his Honour the General tolerable well; who desired to hear from you - the moment you landed : andT have no fears about him, as I gave great charge to Betty, whom we brought from the cottage in Wales ; she is an excellent * nurse, and understands all about his Honour." Betty and the Welch cottage were quite an enigma to her ; but she made no inquiries. They had now reached the
? 29
the inn ; and Emma, who had not suf¬ fered from sea sickness, immediately wrote a few lines to her father, inform¬ ing him she shouid leave Dover the next morning, and hoped in four days she should have the pleasure of embrac¬ ing him. She mentioned that she was much gratified by his kind attention in sending Ward for her, and the care he had taken to arrange every thing to render her journey comfortable : she likewise said that she received great sa r tisfaction ' at finding honest James at Dover, who was the same grateful wor¬ thy creature he had ever been. She told him she had availed herself of his permission of bringing over an attend¬ ant ; that she was an English orphan ; and when he heard her story, she had no ? 3 doubt
30 doubt but he would approve of what she had done, and find himself much interested in her favour. > Emma con¬ cluded by assuring the General she was impatient to convince him in person of her unabated affection, and to prove to him it had not been the least diminished by absence. The next day brought them at an early hour to London, where Fanny again testified her astonishment at all she saw. ^They slept át the hotel in ------, and pursued their journey at the break of day. ' The close of thé third day brought them in sight of Upton Hall, which was ' situated on an eminence a few miles from
si from Plymouth : it stood at the end of a large park; the approach to it was through a long avenue of venerable^ oaks, "intermixed with fine large limes of a more modern growth. The house > was large, and in the gothiç style ; it commanded 'from the back front a dis¬ tant but an extensive view ofthè ocean ; the pleasure grounds were beautifully romantic,,' 1 "Where woods, grots, temples, lawns, promiscuous rose, " ^ And Nature Vied with Art to deck the scene- It was superbly furnished in the same tastei as the building.' Emma's miiid was too much agitated with the 'ap¬ proaching'meeting to pay any attention to ths picturesque scenery that sur- c 4 rounded
32 rounded her on every side : she tried to be collected, and in some measure succeeded. The General observed the chaise enter the avenue, and starting up, traversed the saloon with great perturbation, till the carriage stopped at the great en¬ trance ; he then almost fiew down the steps, forgetting his crutch stick and his lairieness ; the servants were just" in time to prevent his falling,, and letting down the step, Emma was in a moment in the arms of her father, who received her with the greatest affection y but his emotions were almost too much for ??, nor was his daughter's less agitated. As soon as she could speak, she said— "* - · Js
33
" Is it possible, am I indeed so blest, my father ?· after so long an absence, am I restored to your affections ?" " Forgive, my child, my generous injured Emma, forgive me," was all the n General could utter. At, length teara relieved them both, and they were sufiiciently composed to enter the house ; but the General was obliged to have the support of his ? crutch stick and James's arm to ascend the steps. Having conducted Emma into a most superb and elegant draw¬ ing-room, he again pressed her. in his arms and welcomed,her to Upton Hall, sayingi— ? t 1 1 ? .5 « My
3è
u My- dearest Emma, I know not what reparation I can make you for many years öf undeserved suffering; but in order to explain the motives of my seeming cruelty 'arid total neglect, I must enter into a detail of circum¬ stances you are ignorantof : but as the : recital will cost me some pangs, I entreat your patience till -to-morrow : you re- ■r ¡, quire refreshment ahd rest." Emma begged the General would not think of gratifying her curiosity till he found himself equal to the task. J^t this instant honest James brought in candles : he exclaimed— ** I believe your Honour iri the joy of seeing my Lady has quite forgot to order
SS
order tea ancl coffee, so- 1 have made 1 bold to get it ready: Mrs. Ward is put¬ ting every thing to rights in Madam's apartment," " Apropos," said the General, " where is the little English girl that you have taken 1 under your, protection, ' whose 1 story you mentioned in your letter wpuld interest me ?" Miss Roberts told Jame? to· desire Fanny to come to her— " I think, Sir," continued she, " you- will approve of what I have done in taking charge of this young creature - r her little history at some future period I will relate." , > ? 61 « - The
The General assured Emma of his> entire approbation. Fanny now en¬ tered, and, blushing, curtsied to the General, ' " Come hither, my good girl," said he, " be not so timid ; in me you shall ever find a friend, who will add his pro- 1 tection to that of his daughter. I would,« Emma, give Ward particular charge to instruct Fanny in every thing that is ne¬ cessary for her to learn." " I mean, Sir, to place her immedi¬ ately under her care, as Ithink her'a well-educated worthy woman." The General asked Fanny how she liked England, and if she was pleased s with
37
with her situation'? She· replied, she was quite delighted with what she had seen of it; and that in regard" to her situation, she could not fail of- being happy in it, honoured as she was with his friendship and that of her beloved mistress^' the continuation of which she should make it v her study to deserve.' After some more questions from the General, who was much pleased with her modest and sensible answers, Emma gave Fanny some orders, who left the room quite charmed with the kindness of her master. The General then entered into con¬ versation with his daughter relative to her journey and various subjects, which lasted
Sff lasted till-supper. At eleven the Gene¬ ral wished Emma a good night. w God bless you, rny dear child; I trust I shall meet you to-morrow in health ; believe me I long to inform you of events long past, which I wish ever after to consign to f oblivion.**
89
^
CHAP. İL Emma was much pleased with her apartment, which consisted of a large dressing-room and bed-chamber, ele¬ gantly fitted up arid furnished, though . quite in the gothic style. Within her bed-room was a smaller pne for Fanny. Miss Roberts soon dismissed her young attendant: being fatigued she retired to rest immediately, which she . , " , enjoyed
40
enjoyed till the rays of the morning sun awoke her; and being sufficiently re¬ freshed, she arose and dressed herself without disturbing Fanny who was still asleep. It being only six o'clock, she determined to amuse herself in taking a view of the grounds _till the breakfast hour, to which she was induced by the delightful and extensive prospect from 'her window, which was bounded by the ocean.' ¡, V t Emma descended the great stairs, and enjtered the grand saloon, which having examined, .she perceived a small v door that "led by a flight of steps into a large. shrubbery, in the middle of which, on a rising ground, stood a temple dedi¬ cated to the Muses ; it consisted of a spacious
41
spacious lofty apartment divided into nine compartments, in each of which, on a pedestal, stood a statue of a Muse highly finished in white marble ; a table stood under it, on which were placed proper books and implements for the attainment of the different sciences. The deling was a painted one, finely ex¬ ecuted; the subject, Minerva, as the goddess of wisdom, conducting a' train of young people of both sexes through the path of knowledge to the temple of Fame, which appears in the back ground. Minerva points to the figure of Time, who has discovered to Britannia various arts and^ sciences, which she has already laid open to Europe, Asia, Africa, and· America : Britannia is attentively look¬ ing at Time, who is breaking the .seal of a box
42
a box containing arts and sciences not yet revealed. Miss Roberts, was en- chanted witjt the temple, she promised herself to spend many jioìirs in a place where she found not only amusement. but instruction. * l' " . " t Ibe breakfast bell reminded her it was time to seek her father, whom she v founcl waiting for her, and much reco¬ vered from the agitation of the, preced¬ ing evening. He observed with plea¬ sure Emma's looks bespoke her mind at ease. «\ As soon as they had finished their re- pist, the General Jed her to the library, which was fitted up in a superb 'style : ii large collection of well-chosen books
43 in different languages were arranged in perfect order, in elegant book-cases. The,General said— " I perceive, my, dear, you are evi- , k dently surprised'at the uncommon mag¬ nificence, blended with exquisite taste, that surrounds you îjt r is necessary I should give -you an idea of the late owner': Mr. Roberts was a man of lite¬ rature, of which he was an enthusiastic admirer; but of a most eccentric turn of mind : for the last forty years he had excluded himself from society, and de¬ dicated his time to study and embellish¬ ing Upton Hall, which he rendered the admiration of all that saw it ; the .beauty n of the grounds, in which nature and art / combine, bespeak the romantic turn of the
44 the late possessor. The traveller could not flatter him more than by requesting to view it ; a servant was kept on pur¬ pose to shew it ; the rights of hospitality ,. were strictly attended to, refreshments s. of every kind 'wereprovided, and ,the stranger W£S allowed to spend the whole day in gratifying his curiosity: Mr.» Roberts'never appeared, but ¿hut him¬ self up in his apartment, which is situ¬ ated in the left wing, and consists of a bed-chamber,^ eating-room, and study, fitted up in the most simple manner. This extraordinary man was of the most philanthropic disposition ; his charities, both public and private, were un- 'bounded,*his manners the most polished, his understan«ding the most refined and highly cultivated, his temper placid ; yet« did
45 í' did he entirely exclude himself from ?? admiring world ; no*cause appeared,'nor did he ever, assign a reason why he shunned mankind. He. reached the great age of ninety-eight, and enjoyed his faculties to the last ; his health and strength did not fail hini till within three months ' of his death, when he sought me out, who am a distant branch of the family, and the only relative in t existence. He died lamented by all who had ever heard of his name, and by none more sincerely than myself. I informed Mr. Roberts of every, circum¬ stance of my life, and entreated his per¬ mission to send for you ; he replicd-r e . A very short time will terminate my existence; you will then be the owner
46 owner of all I possess, and I have no doubt you will make every retribution in your power for your past unkindness to>your injured and amiable daughter; at present I beg you will let matters rest as they are.' " — Buf enough of this subject—-it is „ time, my dear, I should perform my promise, and begin my painful task, " On the death of your ever-lamented mother, (whiclryou recollect happened Just as you had entered your fifteenth year,) for a long time I remained incon- soleable, and, but fof your filial atten¬ tion, should have sunk under my loss. I that time placed my whole dependence of comfort on you ; the likeness you bore
47 / bore your v mother, both in person and disposition, endeared you to me more - than ever ; and when the first violence of my grief was over, and I could enjoy your society, my mind became tranquil, t and I was thankful to Heaven which still had left me such a treasure. '' 'a tc Two years you may remember past happily ; you improved daily, and more than answered my fondest expectations, Henry, who was then at Oxford^ at the vacations, added to our enjoyments by his society. He too was making a rapid progress in his studies, and promised to be an ornament to the human race [an involuntary sigh escaped Emma, nor was the General unmovçd ; but after a mi¬ nute's pause' he continued]. - < ' " It
48 " It was just, after Christmas ?? the year 17—*, that business of consequence called me..to London: I left you with the greatest regret ; you top were.much affected at this parting, though I did not intend being absent above' two month's. '' " ; · · í ì . " On my arrival at>he capital, which I had not visited since I lost your mo¬ ther, J was recommended-to lodge and board with a widow of the name of Benson, who resided "at tlie west end of the'town. - She was near thirty, well educated,,4pleasing in person, and of the most fascinating manners : she appeared open and ingenuous, but was artful-and designing. - * ' She
49 /'■/« ' She,· soon ', by her,. attention ingra¬ tiated herself in ,my favour.' í Of an evening she had constantly card-parties ; I was invited to.join the 4 set ; ^at first I .objected, as I found they played high ; but at last was prevailed on., I lost con¬ siderably the first evening, and spent a restless .night../ [ · ■? ? .?? .-.". ■ - ■"/ - .í.' "··. >";The next-morning brought, mea letter from you.; init you ; anticipated the pleasure of our meeting, which (you added) you;expected daily, .This awak¬ ened,all my'affection; and L resolved, to leave town immediately; as my business 1 had been finished some time. - v;" v ' λ «V;»''"-' ' ír "'"~ ? " '-*-' , ί: - ;í) J ' ν> ' s " On going down to breakfast, ¿men¬ tioned my intention of setting off the :;> ; vol. i. a follow-
ÒO following'morning for Belle-Vue. * Mrs. Benson burst into tears, and entreated I would not leave her. ** It is needless to recapitulate- the arts this worthless woman made use of to detain riie. Alas ! at that time she had a powerful advocate in my 'heart; for, "with shame I own it, I was no longer master of my actions; s so completely had she entangled me in her snares, that her will was r my law,! forgot your an¬ gel mother and the sacred-pledge she had left to mý care, Ar connection f soon took place, 4 which proved'my ruin ; her extravagance knewno r bounds; gaming now' became my constant evening's amusement.·"' > « You
61 " You begati to be aîarmed at my long absence; but young and inexpe- rienced as you then were, I easily quieted your fears by pretending I was still de¬ tained ori business. j Your letters were daggers to my heart ; I félt, though I had deviated from rectitude, I was still a'father ; this woman could not entirely 4ivest me of natural 'affection, 'though she certainly weakened it. '' " My faithful James often expostu- v lated with merbut I was deaf to his well- meant remonstrances. < One day; in par¬ ticular he ventured to hírit that Mrs. Benson worild be my ruin ; this irritated me, and-I sternly bid him leave the 1 rp#m, and never dare resume the sub- , D 2 ject.
52
ject. The poor fellow obeyed this harsh command with tears in his eyes, \ " Thus things * went on for some months, till I was roused from my infa¬ tuation by 'receiving an anonymous letter, telling me I was a dupe to a set of sharpens, and an abandoned woman who was/in league with them, andj shared the spoils. Every action of her fife was laid open to me, and I was desir¬ ed to meet the writer, at eight in the evening, at the Shakspeare Tavern, Co-„ vent Garden, and inquire for A. Z. " So much was I agitated, it was with diificulty I composed myself to attend dinner. The syren met me with her t accus-
53
accustomed smiles; and whether she thought I had some suspicions, she strove to amuse me, and displayed all her blan¬ dishments ; but in-vain, the film had fallen from my eyes, and she now, ap-· peared in her native colours. : - ? £ As soon as coffee was over, I 'rose to go to my appointment ; she urged me to remain, as she said I should be expected at the card-table.' I coldly told her I had particular business which would detain me till a late hour, and begged the party. would not wait. Bowing, I left the room and chastened to my appointment. " To my very great astonishment, 1 found Sir William Maynard waiting for me: I became acquainted with him í . , . ." "d 3 at
54
at Lord B— 's, at whose house we fre¬ quently met. He politely apologised for the liberty he had taken, but his mo¬ tive, he trusted, would plead his ex¬ cuse, I told him I considered him as my best friend, anti entreated he would inform me of every particular, and how he came to the knowledge of some cir¬ cumstances he had mentioned. 1* He then entered into a long detail it would be useless to repeat; suffice ta say he laid open such a scene of villany which even at this distance of time makes me ^ shudder ; tlie proofs hci brought were undeniable, and I found the woman who had made me a slave to her caprice, ruined my fortune, and caused me to neglect my child, was a common
55
common prostitute, instead of the wi¬ dow of a respectable man. ' - " I asked Sir William what could be done, as I had lost large sums at play, and was considerably in debt.. He ad¬ vised me : to leave town as soon as pos¬ sible, and on no account return to my lodgings, but, empower him to discharge them, and to, order my trunks and ser¬ vant to the Hummums. I accepted liis offer, and. the, next morning wrote a line tp my faithful James, telling him to come to me immediately with my bag¬ gage, and not to let Mrs. Benson know where! was. " The poor fellow was overjoyed tó find me safe, as he had been - much d 4 ' alarmed
56 îdarmed at my staying out all night. He told .me he had left Sir William and Mrs. Benson at high words. She swore my things should not go .out of her house. He told her at her peril to de¬ tain them ; and ordered Jamesjo take coach, put my trunks in, and go as di¬ rected. " It was near seven in the evening-be- fore Sir William came. He said he had with diificulty settled my affairs with that infamous woman: he was forced to use threats, and to tell her he would bring her to ζ severe account for the fraudulent manner she had obtained of me large sums, and shared the spoils with a set of sharpers who had cheated me at play. He insisted orijiersending " * . for
57
for two of her accomplices, who had my bond for six thousand pounds. He convinced them he was acquainted with their real characters, and no stranger to the various frauds they had practised on me. In short, he made them give up the bond on paying them a thousand pounds. ! And Mrs. Benson's bill, which was enormous, he reduced to two hun¬ dred pounds, for which he made her give a receipt in full of all demands. w I thanked this generous friend for his kindness. His friendship did not stop here ; I was greatly in debt to different tradesmen, and had sold out all my pro^ perty in the funds ; even your mother/s fortune, which was setded on you. I had stiU honour enough not to touch D 5 Henry's
58 Henry's litde property, which was all that escaped the general wreck. - " In a few days matters were finally settled, and we set off for Belle-Vue. As I drew near my own peaceful abode, I could scarce conceal the violence of my feelings ; I longed, yet dreaded to see you. On our arrival, the affectionate manner in "which you received me, and the joy that beamed in your expressive countenance, quite overcame me, and I fainted. Your kind assiduity restored me, but how painful were my sensations oh hearing your artless expressions of filial love ! Sir William endeavoured to calm your agitations by assuring you I only required rest, as* my impatience to · see you had made me pursue the jour¬ ney
59
ney with, too great rapidity for my strength, ! " Under pretence of taking some re¬ pose, Sir William led me to, my apart¬ ment, where he exerted every argument friendship and good sense could, sug¬ gest to inspire me with fortitude. At length he so far succeeded, that at din¬ ner I was able to meet you with compo¬ sure. " A week, or tep days passed, whicb \yere employed in concerting plans/qr my future mode of life ; but we could - not fix on an, eligible one. Yet it was necessary to·"come to a speedy determi nation ; I ha4 nptfying left but my half- pay-and the small estate of Belle-Vue* d 6 and
.' 60 and owed Sir William upwards òf five thousand pounds: yet he would not hear of my making any reduction in my household, or any alteration in my usual style of living, w " I told him I could not 'trespass fur¬ ther on his kindness. He replied^ that he was the person obliged, and ere long he hoped to be my debtor, as I had it amply in my power to repay any little act of - friendship he had been so happy as to render me. He instantly changed the subject, nor could I get him to renew it. - ^ - " I thought X perceived he was par¬ ticularly attentive to you, and found he sought every opportunity to pay you the
61 í the most flattering compliments ; yet, as I had made him acquainted that a mu¬ tual attachment had subsisted between you and Henry,-1 had no idea of his in¬ tentions towards you, or that' you had • made an impression on him which in the end proved the bane of our hap¬ piness. ■- ■ - % " One mormng, Sir William had been saying a profusion of fine things to you, and was all animation and gaiety. James brought me a letter from Henry, which mentioned his intention of passinga few days with us in the course of.the month; this part I read aloud; your too expres¬ sive eyes spoke the feelings of your heart. Sir William was at that instant admir-
62 - admiring a drawing from nature you had just finished; he changed colour, his contenance was distorted by passion, and he-abruptly quitted-the room. This circumstance alarmed me ; you were too intent on making inquiries after Henry, to remark this extraordi¬ nary behaviour. In less than a qnarter of an hour Sir William returned, per¬ fectly placid and in apparent good hu¬ mour : he was rather' thoughtful and absent for some little time, but soon re¬ covered' that suavity of f manners, fbr wliich he was remarkable ; never had I seen him more agreeable. I entirely forgot the occurrence of the morning : I was therefore much surprised when on the following day, after breakfast, he< , entered
_ 65 entered my study, and after some ge¬ neral conversation, addressed me nearlv as follows : " c The approbation you have ever honoured me with, and the partial light you have beheld the trivial acts of friendship I have been so happy as to render you, to which I will add, your knowledge of my character and fortune, induce me to hope I shall not only have your consent to what I am going to propose, but, if necessary, I flatter my¬ self I shall find you a warm advocate in my favour.* 1 <e I assured him he had a right to tommand me in every thing, ^except—I meant
64
meant to say, thè disposal of your hand.;. but he stopped me by saying— " t Hear me out: in short, my friend, the only recompense I ask, the only one lwill receive, is the hand of your lovely daughter..' '- ' . " Involuntarily I started, " e I am aware,' continued Sir Wilr liam, -* of your objections : the differ¬ ence of-our years \ you "will «likewise urge Emma's ^attachment to . Henry : these are obstacles I am sensible i.haye to surmount ; yet I think I shall, with your assistance; .overcome.them. Hear my proposal : I will cancel· your bond; • - -. and
65
and settle on Emma asum equal to her mother's fortune, which I think you mentioned was ten thousand pounds, I will also exert my interest witlv the Minister to procure you a lucrative em¬ ployment, and nothing shall be wanting bn my part t to make you and Miss Ro¬ berts happy. In regard toher 'affection for Henry, I look on it merely as a childish affair,land has in ? more of friendship than love. As' they.have never solicited. your approbation, you cannot plead a breach of promise! Con¬ sent "then, my friend, to bestow your daughter upon me, and-by so doing you will insure our mutual felicity.*,, - " In short, my dear Emma, v he made use of every argument his passion sug- , - gested,
. 6Ç gested, , now and -then ^pointing out (though^wiíh extreme delicacy)'my dis¬ tressed situation,- and the fatal conse r quence that must arise from his with»· drawing his friendship ;. and dwelt in the most forcible manner ón what would be'your feelings on being.acquainted with the real' state qf my^ afiairSj 1 » ^ It is needless to 'say he, at length pre¬ vailed, and I consented to' my child's unhappiness. I .promised to exert my authority over you,; and to breaji off'all connection between you aud Henry ; to whom I wrote immediately, acquainting him, that you had accepted the offer of Sir William Maynard, arid that the mar¬ riage would take place in less than a month, Sir William hael procured Henry a very
G7
a very advantageous situation in the East Indies, and promised always to be a friend : by his advice I told s Henry the appointment had been ob¬ tained through the interest of a friend of his father. I said, as he was sq near being of age, I begged* leave to resign my trust, and had desired Mr* Seward (my agent) to sjetUe accounts with liim ¿ and I flattered myself he would find 'I had been a faithful guardian of his pro¬ perty. I lamented that we could not have the pleasure of seeing hhn at' Belle- Vue before his departure ; as the ship would sail in less than 'a week, he would scarcely have time to arrange his affairs. I concluded with assuring him of my parental regard, and that you joined me in most affectionate wishes; and
68
and hoped we should hear from him as often as the distance would permit, I " I "' " I had it announced -İn all the pa¬ pers, that a union between you and Sir William Maynard was on the tapis, and would certainly take place as soon as the settlements, equipages, and jewels were ready, which were to be executed in the most brilliant style. * ■ ·' " The return of post brought me a letter from Henry, avowing his passion for you, and entreating me to sanction it : he beseeched my pardon for not hav¬ ing sooner solicited my consent, which nothing but the smallness of his fortune had prevented ; and as I had ever treated him with the greatest indulgence, he flattered
69
flattered himself he should .be forgiven, and that I would not persist in forcing you into an union he could not believe you would ever consent to. * His letter to you I opened, and found you had plighted your vows during my, resi¬ dence in London. It is needless to say I suppressed it, and prevented your writ-; ing to him. ? - i " Believe me, my Emma, my con¬ duct gave me severe pangs : but what could I do ? my folly had put me entirely in the power of Sir William Maynard ; who too late I found was not the disin¬ terested friend I thought him : he had seen you by chance the summer before our acquaintance commenced, during an excursion he had made in Kent, and de¬ termined
10 termined to ask my permission j to ad¬ dress you J : " He applied to Mr. Seward to intro¬ duce hini, who you rémember was on aii intimate 'footing with s Henry, 'and the'confidant of his attachment. 'Mr. Séward assured Sir William -that your heart had long been engaged to the most * worthy of men, and he had no doubt of 'my consenting -to the union ; and urged so 'many arguments of the'impos¬ sibility* of'succeeding, that Sir William seemed-to be'convinced, and-lefts the country withouttaking any stepstobe introduced at Belle-Vue. ? But 'meeting me frequently at Lord' ? — 's, he' renewed'his intentions, and * assi-
71 assiduously courted my friendship. ' He" was perfectly acquainted with 'the cha¬ racter of Mrs. Benson, and traced with an attentive eye iný progress to ruin. " 'It iá useless to dwell on the many persecutions'you suffered; your un- shaken constancy «and fortitude asto¬ nished me. '"Sir'William grew impa¬ tient, 'and pressed me to 'use : every ar¬ gument to bring you (as he'termed it) to à sense- of your duty. - "" L blush 1 to think 'that interest' pre- vailed'over parental-affection, and trust¬ ing to the "natural mildness, óf your dis¬ position, I had no doubt of prevailing on you' to marry Sir William. I little knew the strength of my ^Emma's 'mind, * or the
72 t. the resolution- she was capable of main¬ taining in a just cause, , . ; ; I ." ",At length Sir William was so unge¬ nerous as to ' insist on my using force. This touched me to the quick, and I an¬ swered with asperity, that I had already gone too far to oblige him, and that if he had the least.generosity he would 4 long since have.desisted from urging me to, render my child miserable. 'l' " He retorted in a manner that roused f ? every spark of pride ; high words. en¬ sued, and he left the house in a, rage, vowing vengeance against me. , , " My xuin was now inevitable: I could not prevail on myself to inform you
7d ' you of my situation. * ^t^g 1 with re¬ morse, and almost cteprived of niy, rea¬ son,, I resolyed ¿to .senti l ypu tp aicißn.yerit till I ??И rezeye , rny, 4 aífajrs. s ???^? ???? I forget yourjbeføyjpur in tlie »try¬ ing ^nom'eï?t of separation, ? ??? ,the ready acquiescence, youjpaid tt;o >my com¬ mands, f ^ 'i '^ r )r ,η ?, t , \ ι ,' Í, 1' "' ι J'' ! f í ' f 'l i tt The instant you were gone I g^ve loose to my feelings, and for some days j 1 wiis incapable ; pf t t^ing t ^he necessary steps ^or Repaying ßir, William,, ^ich I determin^eii tp do^immediat.ely, t ,¡tyy faithful James's ,ki^d attentions ?? spme measure { .corned the agitation, pf -my lïiinçl, arid -?? about ,a^y ( eelç ísAvasíSulfi. ciently composed tb.pçQceed tp ^siness. <\ r vol. i. e î sold
^4
' r " I sold Belle-Vue; my plate, furniture, and. even 'yout.' mother's 'ï jewels, by which Tobtained the sum of seven thou- sahd pounds' and upwards, 'l sent .my ■ attorney tó Sir; William,^ and' paid · the bond * with interest ; ' I likewise dis¬ charged the^debtsl due' to my trades¬ men, and dismissed all my servants ex¬ cepting James, who , would not leave me. « í?". · 'j . ' » ' '.'' * ' ' "Onfinally séttlingJdíy affairs,!found' I had only twelve 1 hundre'd pounds left, which I placed in the barik, and resolved, after paying your pension and the very small stipend I allowed you for clothes " and'other, éx'penšives, 'to let it accumu¬ late for your benefit. ' - íjí ' " I retired
· 75 , ' * t f I retired on mý half paytò a cottage with .a few acres; of land, ¿-situated near Conway. I furnished it. in'the plainest manner';- ,my, only, "attendants,.iwere- James, and a strong .Welcb girl to ?? the; household .work, i attend,'our - litde dairy, feed the poultry and pigs. James cultivated our little garden. „ r' ' í > < " Deprived by my folly of the so- cietypf my dçarest'Emma^L continued to Ldrag ön .life, tili, my late, relative made mquiries after, meland sent fór me;-the* result of which you are already ac¬ quainted with. Believe me I was not the inattentive parent t Itseemed : 'the good La$iy\ Abbess undsr whose .pro¬ tection I placed you had been in í the early part of life your mother's most '- -.? ' . »2 , inti-
ÍT6 intimate friend ; iby her! was lîmnutely informed aof <every circumstance relative to ???, and iiad the pleasure of hearing you 'hadwegained ?????? spirits, that your Aealth was good^ànd that you appeared happy. Let mâ hope you will ^pardon my past tonduct ; impute 'it, my dear child, to the weakness of human' na¬ ture." Emma>embraced her father, and'as- sured him she was too sensible of'her present' felicity-evfer to bestow a thought on thb past. ' *■' j * 1 At this moment James'entered, and giving his master a significant look, said— ->*.*♦'*'♦ 'mím, 1 » Please
77 " Please your Honour^ Mr. Seward is arrived." » ? t I The General' turned to Emma¿ say¬ ing— ' , <t I have some business which will en¬ gage me till dinner ; ï shall then intro¬ duce Mr« Seward, ?? agent* to you, whom you have often heard m& men¬ tion, and frequently seen when a child ; in the meantime I wiãh you to examine, - my ? household, and make what addi¬ tions you think necessary ; I have pre¬ pared them to receive your orders, and henceforth to consider.you as tlie mis¬ tress of ^this mansion, ? Johnson the house steward, andWartl, will give you every information you may require." £ 3 Emma
78 Emma instantiy -retired, saying he should be obeyed. ' The General 4old James to present his compliments to Mr. Seward, "and say he wished to see liim . in the library. . • " Ah, Sir," cried James, (no longer able to contain himself,)-hearings rare good news; Mr. Millward Is -found," afíà will be^at Upton HallitfVfew^daysVhky in a few hours; if your'Honour approves of at."—(He-was going one, expressing hisjoyi-but suddenly» correclinghimsølfi said)^—"-Ihope your Honour iwill par¬ don mei, for İdare- say youf are às impa- tient as myself to know" all- 1 about /iti ' I will run directly ahd deliver your mes¬ sage." ! > s ■ v? ï ( % ? ** ,J ^ f '** - 1 .· ' \ t\ ' * '! 1{?·<> •i'i - . Witliout
79 ♦ Without' waiting' for an* answer, James,flew to Mr. Seward. . , .· . ** "Come, Sir, come with me; the coastals; clear ; Madam" Emma.has, left his Honour, who t waits for you, in the Kbrary" '"' ' , . ;, ý »ι '' î - ? ' ; w j. 1 r '* ■. - ,*·; ? τ t \ ?, ? ím \ JheHGeneral waSí l sincerely,.,gbd v tq see b Mr. a Seward ; /t and,* r sha^ing ; him by the hand,¿said— :i ^;.. sí ^ lxVJ ; \ u "*.'.** 'W mi v¡ t «.ji *>ri '^ii í .vnukni α ^« I am j heartily .rejoiced 7 to ¡see yotij myjolçl ^friend ; it is nianyyeæ:s^ siltçe" we jipgt ? accept rny; best J tjianksifor your readiness to oblige mè,'and fon the trouble» yqu^htwe^takeit in trayelfing : SQ many ????. to be Jft jthe 1a ^earjer.of gopd news;, for I gathered,**enough frorn „?» e 4 James's
«?
James's* exclamations of; joy to· firid that . ybu have succeeded in Iracing, my dear Henry." • ;l -Mr. ;Oetwiíées?tötf the General, that : eher ftfeatsWe õi ffieetìng was reciprocal $ - and most sincerely congratulated iffîtt on ?? accession of fortune, arid on h^ír^ír^éltrecl h^dáughtér isàfë/^âhçt once ???????^ her ? á few more compmiierit^^Mr^SéwaTä informed the General, that on receiving hfe'letter 'he^w^i^^ Miíhvátd'sx agerit ^hé^./lUf''fiéa]f<J e tbäfi; ? ?$ been 7 arrived Íri Erigland äbóút š^riibMšv arid after sëttlitlg tø ; åfåirs; . ? W? 6ü -i visit to his frfcnd;Mr; Stéi ward, '* wKö ; had u béén married éöriiè yéàrèj äihcT settled near Milforİd ??? ì fen/.,V' . ; . :■;■; v.- .■:».-:4 S "--.,
81
" As I happened to be at leisure,"' continued Mr. Seward^ " I thpught the best way of executing your commis¬ sion was to deliver your explanatory letter to himself. Accordingly I set off, and reached Milford Haven on the even¬ ing of the third day* I fpund Mr.' Ste¬ ward's estate was,about three miles off. After- breakfast the next morning, just as I had ordered my chaise, two gentle¬ men with servants stopt at the inn (which was the post-office) to inquire for c letters. ,1 instantly recollected Mr. * MiHward,,who, .excepting a more manly appearance, wis very little altered. I stept out, and calling him by his name, asked if lie rememberecj an old friend* He looked at me for ? a ^moment, and exclaiming-7- e 5 e Is*
82
? ls it possible !* * ' - <t Dismounted, and shaking me by the hand, assured me ^this unexpected meeting gave him · great pleasure. I told him, though unknown to Mr. Ste¬ ward, I was 'going to take the liberty of calling on him at Croft' Lodge, as I had some intelligence that I flattered myself would give him pleasure. ' I re¬ quested they would favour me with their company for an hour. · They con¬ sented. Mr. Steward politely said, he hoped I would give him the pleasure of my company as long as I remained 4n that part· of the country." I thanked him, and said I should'avail myself of his kind invitation," but I'proposed set¬ ting off for London the next day. I i then
83 then" told Mr. Millward that Γ came from a very great friend of his, and had a pacquet for him. On presenting ( it, he looked at the, subscription, and changed colour, -....'.. , 'Am I awake?' cried he; does Ge¬ neral Roberts remember there is such a being as myself in existence ?'—^(Then recovering, he said)—* May I ask how Lady Maynard is ? is she-well, and happy?' ..'.?'.'. "I told him, I had not the honour of knowing her Ladyship. He was much agitated, and said— : . , *. Not . know ς Lady. Maynard, ; the daughter; of General Roberts!'. ·....·;; « :.. . · e 6 « Ian-
" ï answered, Miáã Roberts' ís still unmarried. ' She rufused Sir William, whcrin'the course of a few months was united to another lady. ' Never was astonishment equal to his;' Öpen the letter, my dear Sir, the contents will unravel the mystery : as İt vvill take a considerable timé tö tead the detail, i£ Mr. Steward will give me his company, 1 will take a view of thè beauties 1 of the surrounding country. MrV Steward ac¬ quiesced; and after a delightful walk, we returned to fhe inn, just as Mr. Mill- ward had finished your narrative.'* ' Congratulate me, Steward/ cried he, * my Emma never was false ; she ^will still be mine. Oh ! what years of un¬ happiness had beeu saved, had the Ge¬ nera!
nera! thought' me -worthy of his confi¬ dence. His story has affected me greatly* you 'must read it, my friend, l have leave to communicate it fo you. How much am I obliged, Mr/Séward, by your taking this' journey. Ah í had I known the General's misfortunes, had I known 'the persecutions my' Emma suffered fot my sake l r * How could I for a 1 moment doubt, her constancy ! ho'w. much * have I injured that angelic wo- man/ " - * jfJ ! ? í 4 r £ . < 7 " Mr. Steward and myself sineerely partook of his joy. It was some time before he was perfectly composed. -Mr. Steward proposed our setting' out for Croft Lodge, ' as it was near his dinner hour, and he feared Mrs. Steward would be
86
be alarmed at their longabse^e, having only designed tp take a sh^rt ride, and his horse r was rather unruly. As Henry had many questions v to ask, we agreed to go in my chaise, and send the' ser¬ vants and horses before us. ", On our arrival I was introduced to Mrs. Steward, ~who is a very accom¬ plished and amiable woman, and tliough not a perfect beauty, is truly pleasing and interesting. After a dinner served with elegance and in the "true style of Welch hospitality, three fine boys and a lovely little girl made their appear¬ ance. Though 1 am an old bachelor, I found much pleasure juti contemplating this, scene of conjugal felicity, and re¬ gretted I could not accept their kind , invita-
87
invitation ofïpassing, a few weekst with .'■ -them. Ι ν ■■.'":■■■·■· ■*.·. .··■' -;:;.-;1'.--??>?^ -'^??}'.·/ "The house, the pleasúrergtounds, be¬ spoke the,taste of the owners; and their well-regulated household ; and the hap¬ piness that beamed in the countenances of, their tenants f and.the; cottagers, ¿imi- pressed me. with the highest opinion òf their character^ ; > :. i; x .? ? ?? "w-ï ■ -■-■^«-jíMrJ Millward was all jimpatienceto ,, commence^ his journey ;á^w^siísettled ' we: should set outî in, two; days* , We travelled-with expedition,, but^^ were de? tained by businessia wee3i\in London.· x/ ;^^ 5We- arrived at>--^last2 night/ I left Mr, Millwardi;at| the inn'till he re^ ■■'v.i:i ' "-..'. ■ '. _ ceives
S8 teíves your orders, as he did not know whether Miss'Roberts was arrived from France, or if you had prepared her for the interview.*' " • It was agreed that the General should in the course of the afternoon inform, Emma of every particular. r . „, o«- '- · ,<?' ·.;-.·. . The dinner bell reminded, them, it was time to dress, which they soon dis¬ patched, and joined Emma inthe draw- ing*rooinyi\vho; welcomed Mr. Seward with politeness 1 as, her father h friend. She was in ¡good spirits, and the General uncommonly cheerful. '^ 'r Thé conversation during dinner 1 turn¬ ed on hews and- politics. As soon as the
89
the desert was placed on the table and the servants withdrawn, the General said— ** My dearest Emmas, I trust I yer havet it ih my power to recompense you foy your past sufferings, and render you happy. Say, my child, is not Henry still dear to you ? My worthy friend brings goodjiews relative to him." Emma was confused, but recovering herself quickly, said—» « -■ . . ' * «. " It would indeed make me happy ta hear of Henry. I do not < wish to dis¬ semble ; he retains the same place in my affections^he^ever did; but the years 4hat have elapsed since we met, f the va- i l rious
öo riöús · scenes f hévhas ¿been* engaged in^ andi above í all, ithe ill ? opinion, he must have entertained of my conduct towards. him,; which certainly appeared in the - light! of i.a most-finished? coquetí'í with whichideä-he 1 left vEngland; ¡V cannot s therefore 'flatter í myself that I am still ' remembered'by r him, at leastiiwith any ' degree ofesteem;".'. : ; ¿íòv ς.' ■ Tsr&'diUi· ■ ■ ■·.;'ƒ■■ y^f^b^'^ ■ " Then, Madam," replied Mr. Se- Ward^^-yoii' wrong him>:.: whatever' ill impressions your™ supposed:! ímárriágé with Sir William Maynard might occa¬ sion are; entirely! done'awayí;4hé knows you rare "still /¡Misst; Roberts;: ;}arid ? only \yaitSxyours and the 'General·s : permission tö'CQnvihce you;that ^s/affection. is hot the-leastábatèd,";;·^!^ ?^-?'/ ? : ?-:'-{ -j ■·;.:!,*■- ^'■■■■í·'-' ■ -Emma
91-
Emma desired to be 'informed of. par¬ ticulars : \Mr. Seward / briefly -related them. : 'She heard him^with visible agi¬ tation; as soon as she was sufficiently composed, she turned to her father and • said—'. ,·. ■ "' ' " You have indeed, ; my dear Sir, rendered my felicity complete. Where is Henry ? Do send for him immedi¬ ately, I am not collected enough at pre¬ sent to write,- wfll you send a few lines tohim^-- -¿'.;.':'.'■ v-^w. The General rang for his writing ma¬ terials, and Ordered a groom to be in readiness to set off for ———. In less than a quarter of art hour the note was ..';'_..'.. ready;
92
ready ; it merely contained a request to see him at.Upton Hall as soon as pos¬ sible, where he was most anxiously eii- pected.
??
CHAP. ?. « 'r ι ! ? '' - ' We will leave the trio to amuse them¬ selves in surveying the beautiful grounds of Upton, and follow the messenger to the'inn'at —, where Mr.Millward was counting the minutes till his arrival, Hfe had fallen into a retrospection ofhis past life, which it may not be improper to give the Reader a sketch of. He
94
He was the orphan son of a Lieutenant in the same regiment as General Ro¬ berts, between whom a friendship sub¬ sisted that had commenced at a very early period of their lives. He lost his mother while an infant, ,ι.ι t * ' * and-his surviving'parent was mortally wounded at the battle of — -, and only lived longa enough to entreat the Gene¬ rals protection. for his darling boy, and «that he ¿would be-thei guardian of) his little) 1 fortune, ι The jGeneral r promised .to be a father ?? every »respect to t the young- Henrys who had just enteret! his tenth* year. <> " Mrs. Roberts," said he, « will re¬ ceive
95 ceive him as a son, and my« little Emma will love him as a brother." ~ J These assurances rendered the closing scene of the Lieutenant's life cahn, and he resigned his breath in the arms of his friend with that * resignation and composure that ever attends a life well spent. J 3 J The General severely felt his loss : he had himself received a wound in the same engagement in his hip, s which con¬ fined him some months. As soon as he could bear the journey and voyage, he returned to England for better ad¬ vice, Mrs. r·
96
< Mrs. Roberts met him at Portsmouth. They travelled by easy stages toLondon. The wound was - soon healed, and he recovered his health ; but a lameness and contraction whfch could ,not be re¬ moved obliged him to quit the service on 'half pay. He retired with his family to ÍBeUe-Vue. , v •? Henry was sent to Eton, where he continued till he' was sixteen ; he was -then removed ito Oxford, as the Gene- jçaLdetermined to give him a liberal edu¬ cation. * He was a fine manly boy, of uncommon abilities, and possessed ? jçuost excellent heart, and great sweet¬ ness of temper. He loved the General and Mrs. Roberts as his parents ; and to Emma
91
Emma he was united by the strictest bands of brotherly affection, which in¬ creased with his years, and at length ripened into love. > Neýer were a family more happy in each other. Both the General and Mrs. Roberts saw with pleasure the growing attachment between their daughter and Henry, pften would the General, when conversing on the subject after the young folks were retired, dwell with pleasure on the future prospect of seeing tiiem united, ci Emma," he would say, " will have a fortune sufficient to render, the mar¬ riage state comfortable, and to provide .for a young family ; arid Henry's little , vol. ï. f ' fortune
98 fortune is daily improving, as I take care tliat his expenses ~ do not amount to more than two thirds of the interest. Henry is much devoted to literature, has a taste for music and drawing, and a great turn for agriculture ; with these endowments, my wish is to see him an independent country gentleman, and hope he will one day become a 'senator 1 of these 'realms, and a supporter of our glorious constitution. Our dear Emma promises to fulfil our v most sanguine expectations, nor can we bestow her on one more worthy of her'in every re¬ spect." Mrs/Roberts listened with pleasure to these J arrangements, which a t few years, she thought, 1 would realise. Had it
90
it pleased Heaven to have spared the life of this truly amiable woman, ?? would have been settled according to the Ge¬ nerals plan : nor had he the least idea of t altering his intentions in Henry's fa¬ vour, till unfortunately business called him to London, where- he fell into the snare of the unprincipled;Mrs. Benson, who not only (as has been already re- clated) ruined 'his fortune, but entirely defeated his project, and rendered tw,o .persons formed for the happiness of each other completely miserable jfor many years. . We left Mr, Millward ruminating on past events, which he continued till he 1 1 fell into - a;most< profound reverie. Tho • v . · > ï 2 arrival
100
arrival of the messenger from Upton Hall roused him completei/ : he had no sooner received the pleasing summons, than he ordered his servants to get ready his chaise immediately, and in less than two hours he was in sight of the place wliich contained the object of his un¬ abated aiïection. James was on the look out, and no sooner saw the groom enter the park, than he began capering for joy; and exclaiming— " Here comes Mr, Millward !" ran to meet him. He received the hearty, though rough welcome
101.
welcome of thè honest .fellow, with real pleasure ; and returned the shake of the hand with great cordiality. , The party at the Hall were just re¬ turned from their walk, and were taking tea and coffee in the * drawing-room, which being towards the garden, they did not hear the carriage, or know of Mr. Millward's arrival, "till James opened the door, and instead ¡of announcing him, cried— 'f Walk in, Sir, pray walk in." , The General, who was standing at the window pointing out a beautiful statue to Mr. Seward, turned suddenly f 3 round,
102
round, and in a moment Mr. Millward was in his arms. The scene that followed was interest¬ ing, the meeting of Henry and Emma truly affecting* It was a« considerable time before the parties'* were calm enough to "enter into conversation ; mu¬ tual' and heart-felt congratulations then paösed ; after which > the General ^ad* , dressed'Mr, Millward as follows : " I hope, my ever dear Henry, we .are frienda ; and' that you- found as much to pity as to condemn in my con- duct towards you and my dearest Emma. Believe me I have severely paid for my folly, nor can I ever forgive myself for the
103 ? tfie train of misery it occasioned. Hea¬ ven has at length put it ín my power to atone for the past : I am blessed with an immense fortune, which I prize only as the means to insure the happiness of others : my Henry and,my Emma have the foremost claims on me : you both are past the age of romance, but are still, young enougfi to enjoy many years of felicity: receive from my hand, ?????, Heaven's best gift—a virtuous, an accomplished and truly estimable woman. May the all-wise Dispenser of gopd and evil shower down blessings on my .children! may their lives pass se¬ renely on, blessed in each other, and blessing all around them! long, very long may they enjoy every happiness this transitory world can bestow !" r 4* Henry
104
Henry pressed Emma to his heart, who did not attempt to disguise the feelings of hers ; it beat in unison with Ins own. They both expressed their warmest acknowledgments to the good old General. - Henry said— " You.have, Sir, amply repaid us for our past sufferings,;. be it our care to evince the gratitude we feel, by every attention to your wishes that filial affec¬ tion can suggest," Mr. Seward wished Henry and Emma joy ; they thanked the worthy man for the interest he had taken „in their wel- · fare. i · r I ' 'The
105 The General proposed waving all business till the next day. - " Then," said he, « I will settle every thing relative to your marriage. Let us devote this evening to domestic ^enjoyments ; it is some years since I have felt peace of mind, or any relish for society," , '. The General's spirits were exhila¬ rated ; Mr. Millward's wound up to the highest pitch. The conversation after some time turned on Mr. Millward's afiairs: he amused them with several pleasant anecdotes. " As to adventüres," said he, " I have none to ι elate. I was well received j 5 by
106 by the Governor of Madras, and by all the principal people in office, I had the* happiness of pleasing my patron, who was the most worthy óf human be· îngs. " I rose very rapidly : the post I held was lucrative ;* at the end of nine years î found myself master of upwards of sixty thousand pounds, wliich I had at¬ tained with honour. M On my leaving England, I had re¬ solved never to.return to it, nor hold correspondence with any one, my friend Steward excepted ; and I made him pro- mise never to mention any thing relative to past occurrences.
" Had
107 , <c Had I known, General, that it-was through the interest of Sir William May¬ nard that I obtained my situation, I cer¬ tainly would not hâve accepted it, but I thought I was obliged for it to an old friend of my father. * " Mr. Steward pressed me to return to England, and purchase an estate near him. He described in glowing colours the beauty of the situation, and the hap¬ piness he should experience in my so¬ ciety: he actøed, that Mrs. Steward would unite her cares to render me happy. " At length I complied with his repeat¬ ed sotycita^ons ; and having settled my f 6 affairs
108
afiairs in India, and remitted my for¬ tune to my agent/I embarked for my native country. Little" did I imagine the felicity that awaited me. On my arrival, I made a short stay in London, aria set out for Wales, where I had the pleasure of embracing my early friend, whom I found united to one of the best of women, and surrounded by a family of lovely children : the eldest is^ my godson, and one of the finest boys I ever saw : 4 he and his two brothers are educated under the eye of their father : the girl is still an infant. ι "' Here I was witness to conjugal'fe- licîïy in the highest degree ; and though I sincerely rejoiced in the happiness of my
109 my friend, a sigh would sometimes escape me when I» thought of the trea¬ sure I had lost. " Mr. and Mrs. Steward did every thing in their power to amuse me, and I passed six months with more tran¬ quillity than I'had experienced since I left Belle-Vue. " The morning I unexpectedly met Mr. Seward, I was going to look at an estate ; about four miles from Croft Lodge, which I had some thoughts of purchasing. ^ This day' has obliterated all my past troubles, and made me the happiest of men." The
İİO
The General -proposed. passing the time: tillr supper;in; the music-room, which like the rest of- the; apartments was fitted up in the most elegant style: .' the various instruments werg. in the best order, and. finely toned ; · the, ceiling, was; ornamented with emblematical de¬ vices, and differentcmusical instruments^ at the; upper end a bow window com¬ manded 4 an extensive prospect termir nated by hills which appeared cultivated to the top ; in a niche, on. one side stood the Apollo of Belyidere, and on thè other St. Cecilia playing on the harp, both .finely ,executed by an eminent Italian; ¡artists ■■: y .: i v K iy, : _ t . ,:,';■] .:·.■.··. <■ ./^ ·.. Mr. Miflward was an enthusiast in mu- ..■;r .·''■;'. ' SÌC r
Ill sic, anda completemaster of the science both in theory and practice, and' particu¬ larly excelled on the violin. He led. Emma to the harpsichord, and placing- some charming Scotch music before her, accompanied her on the violin, Emma's voice was perfectly adapted to the plain- * tive : she sang with exquisite taste several beautiful Scotch airs : Mr· Mill- ward joined her in a favourite Italian duet,rather applicable to their situation; siever had they sang in so masterly a style, it was in unison with their feel¬ ings, the room too so well suited to the voice. The Gener?! and Mr. Seward were delighted, and desired a' repetition, with which the concert concluded. As the bell announced, supper was served ; the
212
the'happy pair enjoyed the repast ; nor did-they think of separating till nearly two hours later than the General's usual' time of retiring.
IIS' ■ ' ■ : . ;;J
Slezp was fot sokne-hote banished fì4>m Emma ; she lay ruminating pñ thè occurrences; which hadïipassed 'ria such ,. rapid succession; and' thè'strâhge/altéra¬ tion a- few wéeks^hàd^ brought about;; At * length she feH ¡ into a slumber, .from whiçll·- shjé ; wâsf awoke at r an early hour" by the melody of the birds. . ί ·;
As
IU As soon as she was dressed, she in¬ tended to pass an hour or two in the library ; but from her window perceiv¬ ing Mr. Millward in the garden, she in¬ stantly joined him: after the compli¬ ments of the morning, they entered into- an interesting conversation. He found his Emma as beautify as, ever ; her per¬ son rather improved; and her mind, though well cultivated at the period of thf&C separatio^ : hael received an addi- tädnaJiipoUahjfromiimei.and the,in,stru,c- tiòns andi attentions o£>the/ gppidr Ladyj Abbess/> r Hejleflžhér-a most, lovely ??? amiable girl;, andí found,her an elagant, fascinating, í accomplished: woman: she, had just completed berr, twenty-seventy year. fi ' : - * ,
Henry
115
Henry was near thirty ;.he was finely formed, rather above the middle sta¬ ture, an animated countenance, and fine expressive eyes : his mind wás the seat of every virtue, and he possessed a supe¬ rior understanding, and the* most: re¬ fined männers; > · - They r strolled over part· of the grounds: a serpentine, walk »led them to a grove of aromatic shrubs, which concealed anj^elegant ,* Chinese temple, fitted up and adorned with all the luxury off the East ? it was hung round with pictures of stained glass,, descriptive of the 'difíèrent palaces, amusements, and remarkable places in and near Pekin* The tables, chairs, and sofas were~ bam-* boo ; thei latter had fine chintz cushioná trimmed
??
trimmed with light green silk fringe, thecurtains of the same texture. Æolian harps, were placed * round the. temple ; and an aviary filled with various singing birds stood near, but concealed from sight: from the front a foaming cas¬ cade was seen at a distance ; the back and side views were wildly luxuriant. This charming retreat seemed the work of enchantment. t . >Mr. Millward and Emma were capti* yated; but had only time to .take, a hasty survey of it, as it was neari the breakfast íiour. ,Οη the lawn they, met Mr. Seward coming in search of them;, as the General was rather impatient fpr his breakfast, i'« % „.' - : . « - ""■''-j l ' ' „'j '' Ujti'tjlij " Come,
И? "Cornet Emma," said í'_hé¿- as ! söön äs he had embraced her, ec do give us Some tea, Mr. Seward and myself are half famished; do you know it is past nine o'clock ? but I excuse yoii, as you must: have much ;to say to each other. Henrys give me yoiir hand, once more welcome to Upton Hall; soon shall you be master of it and its domains; I have not been idle this morning; Mr. Se¬ ward has taken mý directions, and Svill set out next week for London to for¬ ward the settlements. I have dispatched a note to.the rectory requesting the í fa* vour of Mr. and Mrs; Montagues com¬ pany tö dinner, ás İ long to introduce those worthy people tó yóuï l The Rec¬ tor is one of the greatest ornaments of the r church/ áiid I am certain ýou will \;ν:,,,·νύ ■ . ,. : ... be '
118
be pleased with Mrs, Montague. 'When we have dispatched breakfast, we will proceed to business," . As -soon as they had finished their repast, the General led the way to the library. He directly eritered on the subject .nearest his heart : he began by saying he wished the marriage to take place ás soon ( as a t decent time had elapsed from the death of his much re¬ gretted relative.' " It is,now nine «weeks since that event, in less than a month I intend ¿o change mourning j and I think at that period, my beloved children, your nup¬ tials may be celebrated in a private man- » ner, without the least disrespect to ttie memory
119 ι memory of the deceased. It is now ne¬ cessary to enter on my future arrange¬ ments, wbich, I trust, you will both approve.' The rent roll ofthe estate, at present'a clear ten thousand pounds a year, and still improving'without any oppression to the tenants, ? mean'to resign to you; my children. The perso¬ nal,'which amounts·'to upwards of four¬ score thousand, paru of which isin the 'funds, and the rest out on good-mort¬ gages at a legal· interest.; Lshall keepin 1 my ownhands,* and hope to live to por¬ tion'the younger branches'of your^ fa¬ mily," '» '■',♦» 'Mr.Millward knd Miss'Roberts» ex¬ pressed their-'thanla'in the -warmest terms;
fu 20
terms yi at the same.timè. joined in wish· ing therC^neralto retain the estate. ¿, Q ~ t y ; f f í'Hearj'^ replied jthe General, > Ä the restf of mýí propositions;;Lmean tq -re¬ side with^ you oaring my; life>v; my esta- cblishment? will iioi be large ; myfaithful James, suiy yalejtii^whp f is^an f excellent -yot^^ri?ahj?a^d;Md^}Hyed^^i^ íwithiiriý ¡late cousiri;), a cqachman, a.pos- ^?10?;??> footman, groom i¿. and .Welch .Bettys who is an ; exceeding good nurse, andimuch attachødi^Q nie jj^mes and :*she/have ■ long.been sweethearts, I svyquld settle them in a farm, but they will not leave me ;; I thereiore intend; to have a double t^yødding, ^nd shall pavide;· for ? them at my cleat^^ ,I|need ; not ¿recom- . ' ; ^íít:-íí--'-'-"'- r v' ■.■■■■¡■.'.''- ■■■■·-' ' ?- ? ?-:-{?- : 'einend
121
mead to you to adhere strictly to all the plans of the late owner of the estate, of which I will give you a list : one altera¬ tion will be necessary for our comfort, which is in regard to the privilege al¬ lowed strangers of viewing the Hall and pleasure grounds ; I think it should be confined to one day in the week during the summer season ; I would wish you on that day to keep an open table. The charitable institutions have sufficient funds appropriated to their use, of which the good Rector has the manage¬ ment." Henry and Emma assured the General that it should be the chief study of their lives to conform to his wishes in every respect, and tb follow, if possible, the vol. i. ? steps
122
stöps of the late Mr. Roberts. Henry asked the General what jointure he should setde on his dearest Emma— "Any present settlement is needless,. as she will ever have my whole fortune * at command ; I cannot say İ approve of separate- interests between' man and wife; but I beg, Sir, you will name the ■dower." ,.:/.·■.-' .'■■■;,, :V.·-'·'..-'; The General mentioned four thou¬ sand a year, which was instantly agreed 'to. Henry said—- " I wish, Sir, to consult you and Mr. Seward-in regard to the disposal of my property; it consists in India bonds, and about ten thousand pounds in my ; banker's
123 banker's hands. I mentioned my inten¬ tion of purchasing an estate in Wales, where I determined to set down the rest of my life a churlish old bachelor ; but my better stars prevailed, and I have now before me the pleasing prospect of every social enjoyment and domestic bliss." It was agreed that Mr. Millward should purchase land as near Upton as possible, and divide it in small farms. " There is," said the General, " a large tract of land to be sold within a few miles o£ us, which only wants culti¬ vation to render it very profitable ; you and Mr. Seward can ride over to-mor¬ row and look at it."' oS These
124
These affairs being settled, they ad¬ journed to the toilette; the duties of which were scarcely finished when Mr.. and Mrs. Montague^ arrived, with whom -- it may not be amiss to bring the Reader acquainted. Mr. Montague was descended from a good family, of which his father was the younger branch. He was educated at Eton, where Mr. Roberts and he con¬ tracted a friendship which always sub¬ sisted : they regularly corresponded. On the death of Mr, Montague, Mr. Roberts took thcyoungest son, Edward, his namesake and godson, entirely under his protection, and, with the boy's con¬ sent, educated him for the church., - * ? Edward'
125
Edward made a rapid improvement in his studies both at school and college, where his philanthropy of disposition, his goodness of Iieart, and rectitude of conduct, gained him the approbation and respect of all that knew him. As soon as he was a proper age he entered into orders, and was presented by Mr. Roberts to the living of Upton, which he had enjoyed near thirty years," twenty of which he had been married to Mrs. Montague, who brought him a good fortune; but that'in his^eyes was of small estimation, compared to her in¬ trinsic merit ; she was every way wor¬ thy of being the partner of his heart, g3 They
126 They had had a largo family, but Heaven thought fit to deprive them of all but two: the eldest, Edward, just turned of nineteen, was at Oxford, as he had chosen the church : the youngest, Louisa, was in her fifth year. Such was the family of this truly worthy man. The General introduced Mr. and Mrs. Montague to Mr. Seward, his daughter, and his intended son-in-law, who con* - gratulated themselves on this agreeable addition to their society. Before din¬ ner was ended all restraint was banished; and when Mrs. Montague and Emma retired to the drawing-room, they con¬ versed on the footing of old acquaint¬ ance.
127
ance. Emma expressed a wish to see her little Louisa, and hoped in future she would wave all ceremony and bring the child, which Mrs, Montague pro¬ mised— " And I expect," said she, " I shall be favoured with Miss Roberts's com¬ pany often at the Rectory, which was fitted up by our late worthy patron with his accustomed liberality and taste." Emma assured her she should be happy in taking every opportunity of improving an acquaintance which she already felt would be a great acquisi¬ tion. g 4 The
12S
The gentlemen now joined them· After tea Mr. Montague said— * · " The evening is remarkably fine; will you take a stroll to the hermitage, and give me leave to introduce you to the hermit ?" They all agreed they should like the excursion exceedingly. * Emma feared it would be toó far for her father. The General told her he would ' not be left out of the party, as James should drive him in a garden chair. v 4 They had a delightful walk through the park, at the end of wnich they en¬ tered a thick wooä, through which a road
129
road was cut that led to the Hermi¬ tage. A wicker gate and a winding gravel, walk brought them to the door. On each side was a green bench, over which honeysuckles and woodbines formed an arbour. On the entrance was the fol· bwing inscription in black and white, written by Mr. Montague's son when a youth scarcely thirteen years of 'age: Oh, stranger, welcome to tliis calm reireat ; And, if disposti, I pray thee take a seat. If grave reflection does inspire thy mind, Here, quite at ease, a refuge you will find ; All nature hush'd, evoept the geptlc breeze* And little songsters yonder in the trees. G S U
130 If precious time will not permit thy stay, Then kindly deign to call another day. Retirement's joys I wish thee, with content. And all the blessings of a life well spent. The venerable man received them. with great pohteness, and welcomed them tp his cell. Mr. Montague he treated as an old friend,'the General with great respect, who introduced Mr* Millward and Emma to him. , They found him a sensible learned man, though he appeared to have little knowledge of the world : he was cheer¬ ful, yet a sigh often escaped, him ; and on the late Mr. Roberts being men¬ tioned, he burst into tears.
" Forgiv«-
131 " Forgive me, my friends, for intrud¬ ing my sorrows on you ; but they are a tribute of gratitude to the memory of the most exalted of human beings. Oh, what do I not owe him 1" The General begged him to make noi apology for feelings that did him ho¬ nour. To change the subject, Mr. Mon-» tague proposed going over the Hermi¬ tage : it consisted of the outer room, a beoVchamber, a small chapel, and a study in miniature ;- the shelves were filled with the best authors in all languages ; and the whole was fitted up and fur¬ nished with neatness and simplicity í every convenience and comfort were to be found in this little peaceful »abode ; the garden was well cultivated and laid ? 6 out
132
out with peculiar taste, a profusion of fine flowers, and well stored with the choicest fruits and vegetables. On their'return from viewing the garden, they found a table spread with fruit, cream, biscuits, and wine. After partaking of the hermit's hospitality, they prepared for their departure. The General told the hermit, that Mr. Millward and his daughter would in future be his patrons— " And," added he, shaking him by the hand, " in me you will ever find a friend." , > , > Henry and Emma assu/ed him that they
133 they would do every thing to contri¬ bute to his ease and comfort. The good old man -blessed them, tears of gratitude rolled down his furrowed cheeks. The whole party were affected, and much pleased with the interesting her¬ mit ; particularly Emma, whose curio¬ sity was so much excited, that she ap¬ plied to Mr, Montague for information relative to him. " His story, Madam, is a melancholy one ; if it is your wish, I will relate it this evening." Emma thanked him, and said she should claim his promise. As
136 feel the want of parental attention; the superior of the Convent proved a father and a friend to him, Carlos attained 'his sixteenth year without having formed "a wish beyond the wallå of the Convent, or ever having expressed the least dis¬ like to obey the will of his father. About that period a young nobleman became a pensioner in the Convent, with whom he contracted a strong friendship. Don Claudius (so he was called) visited Madrid twice a year, and on his rerum constantly related the amusements of the capital, and painted ' an intercourse with the world in such pleasing colours, that Carlos, who was of a lively disposition, conceived an aversion to a monastic life, which every day
137
day grew stronger and stronger ; but fear of offending the superior, made' him confine his sentiments to his own breast. He had not seen either of his parents for above two years ; at length his father paid him a visit, when he gained courage, and mentioned the change that had taken place in his sentiments, and entreated to be permitted to enter the army. Nothing could exceed the astonish¬ ment of his father, who told him he could not comply with his request, as his fortune was not equal to his rank ; that his four sisters were destined to take the veil ;
133
veil; and though he practised the strictest economy, he had scarcely suffi- cient to support his eldest brother, who had just entered the army. Young Carlos entreated and remonstrated in vain ; his father sternly told him he must be reconciled to his fate* as it was inevitable; and he must absolutely entet on his novitiate in three- months. H© frequently during that time received 'N letters from his father, representing to him in the strongest terms the necessity of his complying. The friars did every thing to - induce him to accord with their wishes; and the Abbot, to whom he was fondly attached, exerted, all the· influence he had
139
had over Carlos; and, by mildness and indulgence, gained his consent. Before he was twenty he agreed to commence his novitiate, which they took care to render so pleasant,, that at the appointed time he took the vows and habit without any degree of repugnance : his parents loaded him with caresses, and the friars spoke highly in his praise; Six years passed in per¬ fect tranquillity; and if the young'friar was not happy, he was at least content. Ne.ar the Abbey stood a .convent of nuns, of the order of Ursulines, to which Father Edmund (the name he assumed ' when professed) was appointed con* - fessor.
Among
140 - Among the nuns was a beautiful girl of eighteen, who made no secret that the vows she had taken were forced. Father Edmund had frequent opportu¬ nities of conversing with sister Isabel, and he soon found her beauty the least of her attractions : she possessed a great share of wit, and had a peculiar archness in her manner, that rendered her con¬ versation irresistably charming,. A short time convinced them they were not formed for a life of seclusion ; a mutual affection took place, and neither had strength of mind to resist the im-' pulse of a passion which proved .their ruin. - * For some months their conscience was lulled
14í lulled to sleep, and they continued the -guilty intc&ourse ; at length they were awakened from their illusion by sister Isabel being in a situation that threat¬ ened destruction to them both. Father Edmund beheld with horror the fatal abyss which opened to receive them, and severely repented his deviation from moral and religious rectitude ; nor was Isabel less stung by remorse. For some weeks after this discovery he was unable to form any plan for their escape; at length he fixed on one— Isabel was to feign illness, in order to be excused attending micbight mass, and ,beg not to be disturbed in the morning. As soon as the nuns were assembled in the Chapel she was to contrive to get into
142 into the garden: Edmund had pre¬ viously procured disguises and a'rope ladder by the means of a poor man, to whom he had rendered an essential service^ who was firmly attached to him, and on whose secrecy he could depend. The community to which Father Ed¬ mund belonged retired exactly at eleven, and did not rise till five. As soon as . he found all quiet, he got over the gar¬ den wall, and arrived at the place of assignation a little before twelve ; a few minutes after Isabel gave the appointed signal. Despair inspired them with resolution : he mounted the wall, and flung the ladder, over, and.Isabel reached the top with safety. He received her in his arms, and conducted her down. Having
143 _ - Having gained the outside of the Con- vent, their first step was to assume the disguise of peasants, which Edmund had procured, and they" hid their-habits in a deep ditch. Being equipped, they set out on their pilgrimage. It was a fine moon-light night in the month of October. - Fear lent them wings ; and for some hours they tra¬ velled without stopping. . When morning began to dawn they found themselves at the entrance of a large forest, which they entered. Isabel being quite exhausted with fatigue and anxiety, they determined to seek a place of shelter where they might rest them¬ selves. Edmund had provided a small basket
144
basket of provisions, cpntaining bread, cold meat, and a couple of bottles of wine. , After some difficulty they found a convenient place, quite out ofthe beaten path ; here they concluded to pass the day. After they had refreshed them¬ selves Edmund prevailed on Isabel to try to sleep, and promised to watch. All remained quiet, and she awoke somewhat recovered. As soon as the day closed they pur¬ sued their journey, uncertain of the course they were taking, and dreading being ρμrsued, or falling into the hands of banditti. The
145 The third morning they reached the extremity of the forest, and an open country lay before them, but they dared not venture to pursue their course till night. Their provisions were spent, and Isabel's strength entirely failed her. * Edmund was scarcely able to support himself, yet he endeavoured to. comfort Isabel ; the sufferings she endured both in body and mind proved too much for. her, and brought on the pains of labour. Before night she was prematurely deli¬ vered of a boy, who only saw the light and expired, ' To describe the feelin'gy of Edmund is impossible; they were little short of madness. The place where these unhappy victims of their folly lay„con- voL. ι. h cealed
146 cealed was within a quarter of a mile of the road. In this extremity he heard the sound of a carriage and horses ; regardless of the hazard he ran, lie called aloud for assistance, babel had just strength to say— " You have ruined us !" and fainted. In a few minutes a gentleman and three servants approached, who were struck with the horrid scene—a dead infant, a beautiful young woman dying in the arms of a man who hunf over her with inexpressible anguish. The stranger ordered one of the servants to fetch a cordial from the chaise, and in the most compassionate accents
147
accents addressed-Edmund, assuring him of every aid in his power ; he poured some ofthe cordial down the throat of Isabel, who just opened her eyes, pressed Edmund's hand, implored the mercy of offended Heaven, and expired without a groan. , Edmund remained the image of despair. Mr. Roberts (for he was the good Samaritan) was on his road to■■ where he meant to embark for England. Hehad heard the story ofthe elopement of a friar and nun, and circumstances made him certain he had met with die unfortunate fugitives. On the fidelity » and discretion ofhis servants he could depend. There was not a moment to be lost, as he knew the strictest search h 2 was
148
was making after them. The death of Isabel made it easier to save Edmund, whom he begged to confide in him as a friend., <c Your story," said he, " you need not repeat ; I already know it." ^Edmund heard not his kind offers ; he was insensible to all around him. Mr. Roberts, ever collected, and en¬ dued with great presence of mind, de¬ sired the servants to cover, as decently as possible, the bodies of the unhappy mother and child, which he assisted in doing; and wrapping Edmund in a large cloak, he had him conveyed to the carriage. It
149
It was near midnight, and they had ten miles to go to the town of----- -, where Mr. Roberts intended to have slept ; but thinking Edmund would not be safe, he pursued his journey, and reached the sea port of------—, Early the next morning they stopped at a small inn. Mr. Roberts sent his valet to let the Captain of the packet know he was arrived and wished to speak to him. He was a rough honest- hearted .sailor ; and when Mr. Roberts had made him acquainted with the cir¬ cumstances attending Edmund, he swore he would save him, even at the risk of his life. They agreed to say that Ed¬ mund was an attendant of Mr. Roberts, who had been taken ill on the road, and h 3 that
150
tliat he wished to put him immediately under the surgeon's care. The Captain managed to get him on board the packet without any suspicion arising. The wind being fair, Mr. Roberts fol¬ lowed in less than two hours, and they sailed before evening. The surgeon pro¬ nounced Edmund to be in a most dan¬ gerous way; a violent fever and delirium ensued : he raved incessantly of Isabel and the child. For some days his life was despaired of; but youth, a good constitution, the skill of the surgeon, and, above all, the kind attention of Mr. Roberts, restored him to health and to some degree of composure; but a settled melancholy remained
151
remained during the voyage. They landed at Plymouth, after a pleasant and quick passage, and directly set off for Upton Hall, from which ? Mr. Roberts had been absent six years. It was at tiiis period he turned his thoughts on embellishing this charming place, and forming plans for the benefit of man¬ kind. Mr. Roberts found Edmund possessed of profound learning, quick parts, and a most excellent heart. Mr. Roberts poured the balm of comfort into his wounded mind ; for, though he severely condemned the violation of religious vows, he sincerely pitied the fate of two young people sacrificed to the avarice of their parents. Insensibly he led him to h 4 return
15â
return to the path of religion, and coiv vinced him, by mild arguments, that despair was the-most heinous of crime», and that a contrite heart never implored in vain at the Throne of Mercy. Edmund became serene, nay even cheerful ; his heart glowed with grati¬ tude and veneration for his benefactor ; he expressed a wish for retirement, and to devote his life in atoning, by prayer and every means in his power, for his, past offences : he dared not join any re* ligious society. Mr. Roberts ' suggested the design of building an hermitage, where he might live secluded from the world, and prac¬ tise the duties ofhis religion. Edmund embraced
15S
embraced .the offer with joy. The spot was soon fixed on, and the hermitage finished, and every thing ready for his reception tlie ensuing summer. Mr. Roberts insisted on his having a servant to assist liim, and settled a 'hundred a year on him, to dispose of as he thought fit . ,* ; ■ / , ; / l r '» .* i i V i « It is now forty years since this truly penitent, and I may add pious man, has passed the boundaries of his small do¬ main; he has made physic his ,study; and, by his skill, has preserved the lives of many of his fellow creatures. The country people adore him, and he is universally respected. About five years ago the hermitage was repaired, and the h 5 in-
154
inscription placed on it to gratify my son, it being his first production. Mr. Montague received the thanks of the company for the affecting narrative. Soon after Mr. and Mrs. Montague took their leave ; Emma having promised to pay a visit at the Rectory the following mdrning, and Mr. Montague agreed to accompany the gentlemen on their excursion.
?
CHAP. VI. The family assembled early in order that the gentlemen might have time tb survey the intended purchase, and return todinner. ι During breakfast Fanny brought Emma a packet of letters from the Lady ' Abbess ; there was one enclosed for Fannys who was quite delighted to hear from her respected friend» On, her h 6 leaving
150 leaving the room, Mr. Millward observed she strongly resembled a person, of the name of Edwards, who held an office under him in 1????, to whom he was executor. * * " Good Heaven Ï" exclaimed Emma, " that is Fanny's name." Before Mr. Millward could teply, the General reminded her that she had for¬ got to relate Fanny's story. <? 1 am much interested in the fate of this little girl, frør she is a great favour¬ ite of mine." ^Bmmîisaid'she was ready to perform Iher promise, which nothing prevented but
î£7 but their time having been entirely occu¬ pied. Mr. Millward requested the nar·* ration might be deferred till his return, as mVcuriosity was excited. The Ge¬ neral consented. Emma said she^vould pay her visit to Mrs. Montague, and pre¬ vail on >her to return with iher, and spend the day, en famille, at the HalL As soon as tlie gentlemen set oS, Miss Roberts perused the Abbess's letteç, and had the pleasure of finding that excellent woman and ^aU .-her friends were welL ' It contained the warmest expressions of friendship and affection, and great anxiety to hear every particular relative to her future destiny. t It concluded with inquiries after her darling Fanny, whom she trusted continued the same artless
in-
; interesting girl, and that her conduct merited her approbation* Emma answered tlie kind inquiries o£ her revered friend immediately,'being assured the account of her. present situ¬ ation and future prospects, would conr ftir happiness* .,■;,■■. :,. Having finished her, letter, she sat out for the Rectory, at the door of which she was met by Mrs. Montague, who wel¬ comed her with something more than politeness—with affection,andconducted her ; to the drawing room, which : (lis- : played elegance and simplicity combined; the whole bouse was fitted up Jn the same manner. The: breakfast-room and study particularly attracted the notice, '.'■:■ *"'"■"' ■of ; ;
159 of Emma ; the former was hung with drawings from nature, highly finished: and the latter contained a small but valuable collection of books and manu- scripts. Emma inquired for the little Louisa, who at that instant entered the room running, aiid exclaimed— ít Oh, my dear mama, I have had such à delightful walk." She was going on, but perceiving Miss - Roberts, she stopped and coloured. ** Come here, Louisa," said her mother, " that is the lady I promised,. if
160 if you were a good child, I would intro« duce you to.?* Louisa made a »courtesy, and without further ceremony jumped in- Emma's arms, which were extended to receive her ; they isoon became the best friends imaginable^ . Miss Roberts found the more she conversed with Mrs. Montague, the more she was attached to her. Accus¬ tomed from her youth to the society of persons ¡rather advanced in life ; -she was happy to und so entertaining and sen¬ sible a companion ; and Mrs. Montague was equally pleased with the polished maimers, the -intelligent sweetness of coun-
16i countenance^ and highly cultivated un¬ derstanding of Miss Roberts. After spending an agreeable morning, * she returned to the Hall, accompanied by Mrs. Montague and Louisa, whose innocent pratde and infantine gaiety greatly amused Emma. They found the General in the saloon waiting their arrival. <c I have just," 'said he, " received a note from Henry, desiring we would not wait dinner, for he was so pleased with the situation and r soil of the land, 'that he is determined to conclude the bargain, and begs his and the gentlemen's apology to the ladies/' After
162
After dinner they amused themselves in the-picture gallery, which contained, besides the family portraits, several very fine. pictures of sacrèd and profane his¬ tory. The gentlemen returned to tea. Mr. Millward had settled every thing relative to the purchase ; and it being necessary for him to go to London as soon as possible, the party agreed ta meet the next day at the Rectory, and the following one Mr. Millward and Mr. Seward were to take their departure. Mr* Berry, the land steward of Upton, received orders to have the land divided into small farms, none exceeding two hundred a year ; the greater part fifty -and under. Tw.enty cottages were'to be
??
be built, and ground annexed sufficient to feed a cow, with a garden planted with. necessary vegetables and roots. Mr. Montague promised to superintend the whole,· and to lay the plan of the Upton estate before him, which, if he approved of, he could proceed in the same manner. Immediately on Mr, Millward's and Mr. Seward*s return the marriage wøs to take place, every thing being finally arranged. - In the evening Mr. Millward begged » of Emma to relate Fanny's^ story; , " As I have a great idea 'she is heiress. to the Mr. Edwards I mentioned."
- « I will, 1
164
" I .will," replied Emma, " satisfy your curiosity immediately. Do us the favour-to read this letter aloud; itis the copy of one written by Fanny ? s father, addressed to the Lady Abbess a few days before his death." , " In order to obey your commands, Madam, I have endeavoured to trace on paper my short but melancholy story. „ " I am the son of an opulent woollen- . draper of London. Myself and a younger brother received a good education, and were brought up to the business. On the death of my father, which happened in the twenty-third year of my age, we found ourselves masters of a large stock, an
, 165 ari extensive trade/ and five thousand pounds in money. ' ' . - < ç Charles was just' of age, of a very dissipated, extravagant turn, nor could all my remonstrances keep him within bounds. I Was fondly attachedto him ; and as he possessed a good understand¬ ing and a most excellent heart; l was in hopesto reclaim him by lenity; and that, after he had ran his course of pleasure, I flattered myself he would attend to business. " At the end of the second year I married a young lady, the orphan of a clergyman, who was endowed with every requisite to render the marriage state
166 state happy, except money, and that I did not consider a defect. " For the first eight years nothing ·, happened but Charles's extravagance to disturb our domestic bliss. My wife had brought me several children, but all, except Fanny, the youngest, were either still-born, or died soon after their birth : at length our affairs took a disagreeable turn ; we sustained several severe losses by the failure of two mercantile houses, who were greatly in,our debt ; and, to add to our misfortunes, our banker, in whose hands v/e had deposited a large sum to make good a payment which 'came due in a few weeks, became a bankrupt. I took this opportunity of talking
367
talking very seriously to Charles, who . heard me with attention, and promised amendment ; ¿ β ί It was agreed that the only expedi-. ent we 'could take to save our credit, would be to solicit our principal cus¬ tomers to pay their bills. On casting up the different accounts, wé found we had more on the books than the sum wanted, ? Charles undertook to collect the money : he succeeded beyond, my expectation. ' -■■'. <s Charles had, unknown to mc, been drawn in by a set of gamesters, to whom he had lost considerable sums, and was '.·■'■■ . ^ ; . · ' ' ' * deeply in their debt.
« Re-
168 * c Returning home with the money he had been collecting, he unfortunately met a Mr. Black, (one of the harpies), who he looked on as his best friend. He told Charles that he would have an opportunity that evening of redeeming his losses. " Charles imprudently mentioned the business he had been on, and said he would only step to the counting house with the cash, and join him directly. " c My dear friend,* said Mr, Black, e unless you^can bring a few hundreds with you, it will be useless to come. You know I am in the same predica¬ ment as yourself, and cannot command' ,a guinea. Fortune favours the bold: make
169 make, one essay to extricate yourself from the difficulties, you aré involved in j( defer seeing your brother till to- " morrow.' " Charles hesitated. Eis conscience revolted at the idea of risking what if. lost, must prove my ruin*, Mr. 'Black urged him,/by »the most delusive arguments ; and awakened his fears, by telling him the person who had his note was determined* to^bë paid : at length he prevailed,-and they agreed to diné at a tavern. ,·** Charles, to drowii thought, drank ■ freely, while his.treacheroús friend kept himself; perfectly sober. By the time they joined' the^ set «.Charles was com- voL. ι. ι ' pletely
170
pletely intoxicated, and .he fell an easy prey. Before they suffered him to depart they stript him of every shilling; 7 " He returned to his lodgings in a state of madness ; he flung himself on the bed quite exhausted, and fell into a short slumber, from which he awoke in all the horrors of despair* i- " In this situation of mind he wrote me -an incoherent letter, confessing his crimes, and fixed determination never to see me more. It is easy to conceive my distress on receiving this account. I dreaded the effect it would have on Mrs. Edwards, who had been for some time past in a very languid state ; yet long to conceal my situation was im- , possible.
171 possible. In three days the bills became due. " As soon as I could exert myself I made every inquiry after my unhappy brother, but in vain ;> I never heard of him more. My creditors were clamour¬ ous; I gave'up my all; and, after ι appearing to my bankruptcy, I was forced to conceal myself, as two of my principal creditors refused to sign my certificate. A friend generously stepped forward and made a collection, which, with fifty pounds he gave, amounted to two hundred : with this I determined to embark with my wife and child for France. My friend gave me a letter of recommendation to a mercantile house at Boulogne- ι% tt Mrs.
' 172 " Mrs. Edwards bore the shock better than I expected, and did every thing in her ppwer to keep up my spirits. We _ arrived at Boulogne safe ; but the fatigues of a very bad passage, attended by a dreadful sea, sickness, proved too much for the weak state of mý wife, and in less than a month she resigned her spotless soul into the hands of her Maker. <ç She was sensible and composed to the last, and.strongly urged resignation to the fiat of the Almighty, ' and that I would endeavour to exert myself for the sake of our little Fanny» I strove to* obey the request of my beloved wife, but this last blow had struck deep. My child too was a continued source of affliction
113 affliction·—she was her mother in minia¬ ture. , * ' ._. n tC Monsieur De la Ponte,, to whom; I was recommended» was a .very worthy man; he visited me often ; and, finding I daily declined, advised me to try the air of Languedoc, and offered to procure accommodation for me; at a distant rela¬ tion's of his, at a small expense ; and promised, if I recovered my health, to receive me into his counting house. He advised me to place Fanny in a convent, andspoke so highly of you, Madam, that I resolved to solicit your protection t for my child. " I find myself nearly exhausted, and a few days will, I am certain, terminate
?74 my existence. Your benevolence, in promising to take care of my dearest Fanny, and your kindness in assuiing me you will comply with my request in regard to her future destiny, leaves not a r wish ungratified. May Fanny prove worthy 'or your patronage, and may her gratitucle in some measure repay you for your, unexampled goodness in* re¬ ceiving and supporting a destitute little orphan, ?/ , tt Her, unhappy father has nothing to bequeath her but his prayers and bless¬ ing ι accept the same, honoured Madam, from your most respectful and grateful humble servant, r c " * tc James Edwards. " Among
175
? Among some papers of my poor wiie's I found the enclosed lines, written,. by the date, a few weeks before her eleath. If Fanny lfves she may value them."— When fortune frowns how few are friends, - * My heart too late is taught ; And each false breast that did pretend, Now shows their inmost thought, The world is false ; the man is vain That hopes a joy to know. From the gay world, that feels no painj Nor once has tasted woe. But let the cheerful hours return, Again they'll crowd around ; Their hearts with former warmth will bum, And wonder why you mourn'd.
" Such
176 Such ia the state the wretchedi feek Thalhope tOigain a friend j Unhappiness is the true steel, False friendship for to end.
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
Prmttdij J>. JV, SHUUTt BtrivUhStmt, Soho.
