Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The farmer of Inglewood Forest: a novel
THE
FARMER O F INGLEWOOD FOREST.
? Pl A P. I. AGNES had retired, with a mind too much difturbed by the vifible uneafinefs of Edwin, to fall afieep, and immediately ftaited on his entrance; for fiie hea: d him not until he opened the chamber door and addrcfied her, fo cautiouily, had he ftepped along the littL· pifiage that feparated her room from the other apartments. For a vol. ?. ? moment
moment ihe fck difpleafed at his intrufion, but her heart was too guilelefs to fufpect his purpofe, and affection and pity mattering every other fentiment ihe replied to his addrefs : cc Retire, I entreat you, Edwin ; were you not fo vifibly uneafy I could not forbear to chide you ; we will fpeak more fully to¬ morrow. You are difpleafed at William without caufe ; he is at once a kind brother, and a prudent and difinterefted friend ; banifii then thefe thoughts that difiurb you ; all, I fear not, will be for the beft." Edwin, who was charmed to meet with fo gentle a repulfe, replied, " And can you, Agnes, fo eafily adopt his unfeeling maxims ? But why do I afk when I fee you do ? Ab¬ fence has weakened your affection for me, and it cofts you no pang to doom me to mifery."
" Cruel,
a Cruel, unj ufi: furmife !" replied Agnes, ready to burft into tears, " had your affecìion been great as mine, you had never, Edwin, fought a change; no prefeimenr, no great- nefs, ihould have tempted me to quit you ; but I am wrong to fpeak in a manner you may conftrue upbraidingly. Your mind, my Edwin, is difturbed ; retire, I again conjure you, to your reft, this is no place ; in the morning you fhall be convinced, that you are offended widiout caufe." tc And will you not, Agnes," replied he, " allow me a fingle half hour's converfation alone this laft evening I have to remain with you ? Will you fuffer mc to depart, over¬ powered as I am with anguiih ?" cc Good Heaven!" what would you re¬ queft ? You know, Edwin, your uneafinefs diftreffes me more than my own; but go down, if you defire it, I will rife and join you in a few minutes." ? 2 « No,"
" No," replied he, " we ihall but awaken the familv, which will prevent me diklofmg what I wim to fay to you alone. Can you not, my lovt, luffer me fi»r a few minutes to convcrfe with yju here? You were not wont to diftruft your Lid w in : Have I, Agnes, defer ved fufpicion ?" ft No, Heaven forbid !" replied the un- fufpecting victim j " withdraw while 1 drefs; we can convcrfe for a ihort time at the window," Edwin, though he fcarcely knew how to command himfelf, immediately obeyed, by retiring into the paflage, where he remained fome minutes, then joined herat the window of h<r own apartment. Perfuaded it was his laft refource, he redoubled his former vows until he tiiought her heart fufficiently ft ftened to his purpoie, then entreated her, though with fome cautious preliminaries, to prove her affection by accompanying him to town. « Why
*· Why will yuu aik me what you know ? iaipoiTibïe ?" replied fhe. " Does not our parents think it wrong ? And you as well as ii.e, Edwin, ufed to be fadsfied with their ikeifiorii but you are grown ilrangely impe- uiv>us, a little time cannot furely make much difference, and then it will be my duty, as well as inclination, to «accompany you where- cvrr ycu go." f< Ah, Agnes!" replied he, " if you loved me you would not thus calmly fpeak of a fepa- rarion, tho' even for a íhort time. My foil leaving the Forcft was, I can truly fwcar, to procure you additional happinefs, as well as myfelf Our beai ts, my beiuved girl, have long been united j you can neither doubt my honour nor my love -, confent then to go with me to town, and let us never more be fcparated." ct How can you prefs what you know is impracticable ? Has it not been expreftly denied ?" B j " But—
€í But—but," befitated he, tt could wc nor, ?? beloved, find means to go without thrir γ* rmifPon ? It furely, Agnes, would f ?. a ? ery venial t rel paf» ; ^e could bc married rmnv\hatch\ and you cannot doubt but v,c ib.oulJ be forgiven." ** And do you think I would be guilty of fo cruel and defpicabk an ad ? % * rephed ibe, indignantly, attempting to withdraw her kand :—-*' No, Edwir», my love fcr yon 1 confers is interwoven u ith tny lift? ì but neither love nor life irfcif fhail make rnr fo ungratc- ku and unworthy of the beñ cf friends and parents, for your's, Edmîn, arc already mine, and fhall I clouil their venerable features with forrow, and wound their worthy hearts ? — Ko! you are not yourfeif, or you could not have propoíêd it." Though Edwin found his fchtme com¬ pletely fruftrated by this reply, he yet deter¬ mined not to relinquifli his purpofe, and fummoning all his arts, by looming and pro- teftations,
tefi ? tions, he at kngth removed the uneafi- nc»^ his propoLI had given, and his pardon wab îcaicd on her i»p¿.— " And now, Lei wir,,* i.j fhr, l * retire, fvrget all xexatcn, and relieve me entirely your's." *< Yet a moment," rfplied he. " in what lufte a* e you u L ani ib mer Are y a not ny wife ? all but the name r Suffer me, t-.rn, my love, to place this rinj upon your fv.ger," drawing ore from his own (which hâd been prefented him by Mrs. Delme ι ) and putting it on her's, ** and iwear, Agae:, yoo will never give yourfeif to antier." * f Alas I" faid Agne<, u î know not what f range Idea has poffeffed you î Have I nat frequently given you that afiursnce, and can an oath bc more binding r Surely not : I never repeated one in my life, and have fre¬ quently wiíhed }ou would not, for they ever leave an uneafy fenfation on my heart."
B 4
<f You
** You refute me, thei, Agnes ?" rephed ??, ftrikiög his forehead withuis hard, " ¿nd I íLoli, accuried thought, hk you for ever/' ei Good Ilea/en !" how \r,u terrify mr^ f*id Agncb, trembhnc^th, agitation · ** ï ïow ι «.r you dx übt me ^ But" cetate u Kit I am to fa), and î %ili repeat ?ι Λ if:i*a: will remore you ? caltunets," Edilii now proposed the oath, and the rer.tic ÂSfncb finking on hei knees, exclaimed, ** Heaven tergi v e mc I for an aci ¿ga-nrl «hich my heart recoils , but here I call God to v.iirefs never to have another love, and if you are not my trufband, to die unmarried." u Enough—enough," cried Edwin, ex- iilnngly, " my heart is now fatibfled, you are my wife, and from this hour I claim you as my own·" Her gentle fpirits were overpowered with the fcene that had taken place ; her head funk on
on Edw'n's bofom, and fhe could fcarcely prt ferve her kit from tainting. In ti at utoi moment the guardian angel of v.rtut; apa innocenct, for a ihort time, left the unhappy end too fufceptible Agnes—and the villain Edwin fucceeded in his infernal purpofe. Daughters of chaftity, condemn not, but p. tv, and let her example warn you, that ir cree v and temptation is ever to be avoided. The triumphant m i ferrant had now no doubt but that all bib deCrrs woukl be com¬ piled with, he therefore again preffed her to uceompany ?? unknown to their parents, but in vain. *' No," cried fhe, weeping bitterly : " It is true you hav e rendered me unworthy, both of our friends and vourfclf, vet will I not lad ingratitude to vice. Be gone, Edwin, nor tempt me further, ??? I not already funk enough in your opinion ?—hateful folly— de¬ lí 5 fpicable
?? ΤΗ? FARMER ?? fpicable weaknefs ! Would to Heaven I had died yefterday—innocent and happy." Edwin exerted all his art and influence to calm her fpirits, and difappointed in his views of perfuading her to accompany him clandeftinely, changed his plan, fparing no vows to convince her of his fixed intention to return in the courfc of a month and cfpoufe her, being determined, if poiTible, to keep his marriage for that time private, and in the interim fix on fome fcheme to get her into his power. His repeated promifes in fome meafure calmed her agitation ¿ but ihe ftill preffed his abience with an earneftnefs that all his arts could not overcome,* and he was at length neceifitated, though forely againft his will, to return to his chamber, as the only means fo keep her íòrrow within bounds, for he dreaded left it ihould be heard by the family. 5 The
The remainder of the night was paffed by the unhappy Agnes in felf reproaches and tears, her heart weakly endeavouring to ex¬ culpate her betrayer ; for the firft time the dawn of morning was difpleafing to her ; fhe fhuddered to appear before her friends, and dreaded every eye, left her confciotis face fhould difclofe the weakneis fiie had been guilty of. In the morning her diforder and confufion was vifible to the whole family, but all at¬ tributed it to the fame motive, the approach¬ ing departure of Edwin, and endeavoured to confolc and cheer her, but in vain ; flic felt herfelf unworthy of their carefies, and fhrunk from them ; nor was Edwin more calm, though actuated by very different motives i triumphant villany it is true fat enthroned within his heart ; but yet he was uncertain whether he might not for ever lofe Agnes, of whom he was now more paffion- atcly enamoured than ever· ? 6 Edwin
Edwin, though he ardently wiibed to affume his new honours, could hardly de¬ termine to tear himfelf away, and therefore determined to protract his ftay until the following morning, in order to exert his utmoft endeavours in rcaffuring Agnes, whom, as he found he could by no means perfuade to leave the Foreft clandeftinely, de¬ termined to return himfelf as fpeedily as poffible, feduce her to fome diftance, then carry her off in fpite of oppofition, trufting to her affection to plead his excufe. In the evening irrived Mrs· Delmer's fécond letter, containing the intelligence of Emma's elopement with Whitmore. This was delivered to Edwin when he chanced to t>e alone with William. Aftoniflutl at re¬ ceiving another fo fpeedily, he haflily broke ic open w but had no fooner glanced over the contents than art» and its attendant dif- fimuladon, for a moment forfook him. — " Damnation íetze the vULun," exclaimed he aloud, rcQardku of William, and almod infenfible
infenfible he was prcfent : " I will purfue- him to the verge of hell ; am I to bc thus immediately punifhed ?" " Good Heaven ! Edwin," replied Wil¬ liam, ftarting, " What do you mean ? What has happened ? Speak, my brother, why arc your features thus difturbed with mingled rage and anguifh ? Are we not both the fruit of one kindly íhiub? Why will you then un¬ kindly have a feparate intcreft ? for furely with-holding your thoughts muft be thuj interpreted. My whole heart is your's, read ir, it is open as my fpeech to a beloved brother." " Alas! William,"replied Edwin, íhrink- ing within himfelf, u What do you afk ? ~ 1—I—J have no fecrets, or, if I had, what could it anfwer io rack your bofom V* " If, you are fo infenfible to the confola« tions of fftcixifhip," returned William, u ta prize tbem ro lightly i 1 will endeavour» though
though reluctantly, to withdraw my claim ; ?? he**rt nas hitherto forced me to be an intruder in your intcreft : I will, however, hereafter ftnve not to hold it fo infepa- ???? »ith my own, until, at kaft, you are cured oí th:*» dt ii π urn cf folly and grandeur^ then, roy brother, wiil 1 forget yoarunkind- nef% .aid again open my arms and heart to receive you. öne only thing, Edwin, would I wiili to aík, if you have a fubject tor unhappinrfs, is London a place for Emma ? Can ihe be prudently left there alone r" ** Damn her !" involuntarily replied Ed¬ win.—■ William made no anfwer, he wa« unequal to any ; he caft an eye of anguiih on his brother, and dropped on a chair in Üknce. On that inftant entered Godwin, with his wife and Fanny, when both brothers endea¬ voured to conceal their uneafinefs, though from different motives, Edwin to hide his own villany, ??? William to prevent their hearts-
hearts being agon zed with he knew not what, anil which he wihed, but dreaded to hear. Edwin was a far better dirlembler than his brother, and firft overcame his confufion, fimply informing his fnen s, that he had received another letter, preffing his imme¬ diare return, but that he bored to fee them again in the fpace of a monrh at fartheft, and tna: he wouid now uke ene of their horfes to the next market town» from whence he coukl immediately procure a conveyance. His venerable parents would have qutf- tioned hkn refpecting this repeated znd pe¬ ren ¡ptory call; but Edwin appeared io cnclofed in referve and caution, that the good man, with a figh, withdrew his fuir, and obferving his fan's impatience tobe gone, told hirn to take any of the horíès he ap¬ proved, and fearing his uneafmefs might proceed from want of money preffed him with a fupply, which, however, Edwin de¬ clined, even to obíl.nacy. He then left the party,
partv, and hafteoed to take leave of Agnes, who vi as ìockcd up in her chamber for the firft time, p< rhaps, L· hti Le , but foe Wulied now to conceal herid.— -trom i erkli —but confcicncc, üout)Iy poignant frum fcnfibiiity and wounded vir.ue, had nxed a barbed arrow in her boforn, wmch ihe could neither with¬ draw, norwiiofe anguiih flie could palliate, Edwin cilli'Y. ile however replied, " I will attend >ou directly belov.," and opening tic door, with ? ??, paíled him, and de- feended the ilairs, he in vain attempting to detain her. By this time he had entirely recovered his cenfufion, and renewing his promiiès, he re¬ ceived their affectionate farewell, departing in two hours after the receipt of his laft letter.
????.
11 imi ? m
CHAP. IF.
EDWIN was no focncr departed than William drawing his father afide, with caution informed him cf Edwirls diícom- pofure at the receipt of the letter.—" Believe mc, my dear Sir," faid he, " I mould not have mentioned it, had I not thought it for his happinefs : Edwin's good-nature, and, if I may call it fo, conftitutional cheerfulnefs, may, ï doubt, have drawn him into fome difficulty, from which he cannot extricate himfelf. ï almoft fear to fpeak my wifhes* yet why fhoukl I hefitatc ? You have fre¬ quently honoured me by calling me your rcprefentative ¿
reprefentativc ; would you condefcend to make me fuch now, I would go to London, examine into the immediate fituation of Edwin, if he has any pecuniary difficulties remove them, and, finally, bring down Emma, whom I well know vou v\i!h returned." Godwin for a moment regarded his fon, unable to reply, tears falling down his cheeks. At length embracing him, he faid, <c My fon— my fon —furely thou art the favoured gift of God ! thou anticipateft my words, but not my wifhes i I am not blind to the cloud that bangs over Edwin, but for thy offer ihould have fuffered in filence, unabic to de¬ velop it i let us then forra fome excuíc for thy abfence to thy mother, Fanny, and her gentle fifter ; as for Bernard I will tell him our intention, and, I doubt not, he wiil applaud our honeft deceit." Bernard entering in the height of the con¬ verfation, was informed of the whole, under promife, however, of not revealing it to either
either cf his daughters, whkh he firmi? promifed ; in the mean time good-naturniiy endeavouring to laugh them out of their fears, obferving, he was fure Edwin was both a good and prudent ?, and fcr any difference in his behaviour, they fnouid con¬ fider hii change of fituation, ard that Gen- demen had frequently more to müe their thoughts than Farmers, though they might choofe to keep it to themfclves. William, with his father's approbation, determined to depart on the following morn¬ ing, aad join his brother in London, and accordingly at fupper Bernard, by agreement, afked him if he could contrive to fet off on the next day to York, as he had a relation there who was fick, and that he was unable to ride fo faron horfeback himfelf. William immediately expreffed his wil- lingnefs, and the affair was foon concluded, unfufpected by either Mrs. Godwin or Agnes ; but the keen eye, and attentive ear of ten¬ de rnefs,
dernefi, was not fo eafily deceived : Fanny read the unufual gloom in her William's features, though determined to conceal her fufpicions. On their retiring to reft William could not avoid obferving Fanny was unhappy. She was filent, and appeared to preis the young Reuben with redoubled affection to her bofom, while a tear would now and then efcape her eye, and fall on his dimpled cheek, " What is the matter, my love, my wife ?" faid William ; " you arc unhappy, and I have a right to claim a fliare," ** Forgive me/' replied íhe, weeping ; —. " but you are not, I think, going to York." " Suppofe I am not, where can I go that the remembrance of your tendernefs and virtue will not cheer me ? Dry your tears, my love, and you ihall hear my deftination, for
for I know you will not difclofe it to my mother or Agnes, whom I fear to ahrm." — He then informed her of his determination of haf. ening tc London, as he was rather uneafy at rhe behaviour of Edwin, and yet more concerned at the protracted (by of Emma." Fanny entirely coincided İn the prudence of his journey, while fiie grieved at its ne- ceffity, yet hoped all his fears were ground- lefs ; then promifed to conceal her own uneafinefs for the fake of his mother and Agnes, and finally entreated him, in fuch a great and hateful city (a^ ihe had heard it reprefented) to be careful of his own fafety, and by no means to hurry back on her ac¬ count, until his heart was fully fatisfied in refpect to his brother, as," concluded fiie, ** an inconfiderate haite might leave )ou itili unhappy and uninformed in rt fpect of him : In the mean time I will doubly carefs Reuben, trace your features in tlie lineaments of his little vifage, talk to him of your abfence, of your return, while the unfeeling little varlet," concluded
concluded íhe, fondly kifling her babe, " will fmile at both." William caught her in his arms, alternately embracing her and the infant, then retired with her to reft, happy as the firft created pair, before guilt had baniihed peace from their bofoms. William arofe at the dawn of dav, and having taken an early breakfaft with his family, departed on horfeback for the me¬ tropolis, which he reached five days after his brother, who had rode poft the whole journey. Edwin, on his arrival in town, had imme¬ diately gone to Mrs. Delmer's, who con¬ firmed the vexatious tidings fhe had before fent him. At firft his rage knew no bounds ; he execrated Whitmore, Emma and himfelf, nor did he hardly fpare Mrs. Delmer in his pafiionj then rufhing from the houfe haftened to Whitmore's, where, however, he could learn nothing more than he already knew reflecting
refpeciing their departure ; but was prefented by one of the domefiics with a letter, which had arrived three days before, and which bore a foreign poft mark. On opening it, he found it came from Whitmore, and con¬ tained thefe words ; DEAR EDWIN, <c You have fiolen my fifter, and as I hate to be out done I have fiolen your's ; it is but a mere exchange, yet, as I wifii to act gene¬ rouíly, and muft confefs that I have the beft of the bargain, you are welcome to my wife to make up the deficiency. In the mean time I wiíh you all the happinefs attendant on the marriage ftate. You pleafed yourfeif, fo have I, and, I truft, you have now too much feníè and knowledge of the world to be angry at the ftep I have taken, particu¬ larly when I affure you, that your fifter is dearer to me than life, and that her happinefs fhall be my particular care. I prefume you have heard of my affair with Darleville : I was
was too much of a pbilofopher to notice his amour with my wife ; but to fpeak difre- fpectfully of my fifter and beloved Emma, was too much for even philofophy to bear. Adieu, I fhall make the tour of France and Italy before I return ; but, if fettled in any place for a time, you lliali hear from me, Calais, whitmore." Edwin's rage was redoubled by this epifile, with which, open in his hand, he flew to Mrs. Whitmore's apartment, expecting that, tho' the Lady was faulty, ihe would in this cafe bc as outrageous as himfelf; but he was difappointed, fhe only laughed at his emotion, ridiculing him for being fo vehemently exaf- perated at an occurrence which was fo com¬ mon in life, and that, if he had the leaft penetration, he muft have forefcen : " But what, in the name of wonder, does he fay ?" added fiie ; " Does he congratulate you on your marriage ? For my part 1 knew it ? week after it took place, though I did not mention it to him, and gave you credit for an
an apt fcholar, a pupil worthy your pre¬ ceptor î but tell me, does the letter contala any fecret, or may I fee it r" " Take it," replied Edwin> fulleniy ; the ktter at leafi is worthy the writer." Mrs. Whitmore received it, but had not proceeded far when ilie began laughing im* moderately : " By my life," fiúd íhe, «Whit¬ more is a delightful fellow, notwkhfiandin^ he treats mc fo cavalierly : Was he not my hufband I inould certainly be tn love with hirn. Take my advice, Edwin, and do rot, when you meet, quarrel about trifits. Believe me, you have, whatever he may fay to tlie contrary, the bdt of the bargain, having not only the woman, but the fortune, he the woman only, which I pray then, in the eye of common fenfe, has the advantage» even though /fhould not be thrown in to make up the deficiency?" vol. iu ? Cf But
" But fuppofe," replied Edwin, half ral¬ lied from his vexation, <f I fliould refufe any thing fliort of the full compenfation r" fc Why, in that cafe," returned flie, fmiiing, " ? ihould fay you was an avaricious wretch, andas bad as your patron." This difcouife was for fame time purfued with the fame degree of fpirit, until the fubject became fo far realized that Edwin at length departed, impreffed with the idea that he was completely revenged on Whitmore. On Edwin's return he found the domefiics at Mrs. Delmer's (who hereafter muft be called Godwin) prepared to receive him as their mafter, the Lady having declared her marriage. Though his promotion and this diftinction would at any other time have gra¬ tified his pi ide, and overbalanced every other idea, yet now he accepted their attentions with coidnefs : His heait was torn with con¬ tending paffions, which even his wifhed-for v.ealtb could not alleviate. The departure of
of Emma, which almoft drove hím to de¬ fpair, and the diítcmpered frenzy of defire (which he called love) for Agnes. To purfue Emma without any certain route he knew would be vain j befides, his marriage in the mean time might reach Inglewood, and Agnes be loft for ever. This idea foon baniihed all thoughts of following Emma» whofe abfence he, however, determined co keep fecret as long as poffible, at ieafl until lie got Agnes in his power. Thus refolved, he endeavoured to conceal his uifcontcnt under the fpecious guifc of uneaflnefs for his fifter, his imfufpecìing wife viewing him with too partial an eye to fu í peci* his diffi mu lation. Five days after, as before mentioned, ar¬ rived William, who repaired immediately to the houfe he thought Mrs. Delmer\ intend¬ ing firft to vifit his fifter, fuppofing Edwin ftill refided at Whitmore's. Though a ftranger in London, as his direction was clear, ? 2 he
he had not much difficulty to find it, and> tying his horfe to the raihj knocked at the door, and inquired for the Lady. William's good perlen and natural ailability was with every one a powerful letter of recommendation, and the domefiics immediately fiiewed him into an apartment, and requeued his name* <c William Godwin," replied hej "tell her from Inglewood, and that I requeft to pay her my refpecb»" When the fervants announced this unex¬ pected vifitor Mrs. Godwin was alone, ihe was amazed, as ine was certain Edwin knew not cf his journry. He had told her that he had difclofed his man iage to his Father and William only, who were to declare it on his departure, as he had no w iili to diftrefs Agnes, who, he faid, he fared, was yet rather attached to him. As for the elope¬ ment of Emma, that he informed her he could not refolve to mention, until at leaft he had heard more of the bufine fs» The
The parties were thus in mutual ignorance when they met, Mrs. Godwin ihuddering that it fell to her lot to difclofe the flight cf his fifter, particularly as it was with Whitmore. Mrs. Godwin met him at the door, ami holding out her hand bade him welcome, expreffing her forrow that Edwin was gone out. This declaration ftruck William as nothing uncommon, as Edwin he furmifed might juft have paid her a vifit. Having returned his compliments, his eyes wandered round the room in fearch of Emma : " And ray fifter, Madam," faid he, " has long in¬ truded on your kindnefs ; I am charged with the thanks of my parents, and mean to take her home with me : At fome future period, perhaps, you will condeicend to honour us at Inglewood with a vifit as you pafs to your feat." Mrs. Godwin bowed i íhe felt awkward that William did not congratulate her on ? 3 her
her marriage, and knew not how to reply to him refpect ing Emma. - cf You are filent, Madam," faid William, with an emotion he could not entirely fup¬ prefs, obferving fhe made no anfwer i tt May ï not fee my fifter ?" Thus urged fhe could not avoid a reply. cc For pity's fake, Mr. Godwin," faid flic, iC do not preis the fubject until Edwin's re¬ turn, t expect him momentarily. You may believe me, whatever happens to difturb your family is diftrefling to me." "If any thing has happened to my fifter, for Heaven's fake difclofe it inftantly ; my foul cannot bear fufpenfe on a fubject fo near to us all. I truly confefs I fufpected fome- thing on Edwin's receiving the laft letter, and could not reft fatisfied until I haftened to town. Speak, Madam, my diftrefs is immaterial, is Emma fick —dead—I can hear of either as becomes a man—or has fiie, what
what I dread far more, difgraced heríèlf and family ?" Mrs. Godwin ftill hefitated, until again preffed with an earneftnefs that almoft fhocked her, fhe replied, " Indeed, my dear Mr. Godwin, this unhappy bufinefs you may believe has greatly diftreffed me, pardcularly as the aggreffor is my brother." " Enough, Madam," interrupted William, impatiently, " I have heard enough to plunge my unhappy parents into an untimely grave." fc My huiband," refumed Mrs. Godwin, ,f would inftantly have purfued them ; but his abfence, and the uncertainty of their route, made fuch a ftep fruitlefs ; they can be traced no farther than Abbeville." " Abandoned, deluded girl !" exclaimed William, his voice choaked with contending paffions : tç Is this the return you make your parents for eighteen years watchful tender- C 4 nefs —
nefs— parents, who never regarded you but with a fmile — ungrateful wretch ! I will, however, if pofiible, find you, and, if a fpark of virtue remains in your bofom, endeavour to revive it. Pardon me, Madam, I fcarcely know what I lay ; I think that you kindly mentioned that your hufband would have puriued them-^excufe me, I did not know you was married. Eut why is Edwin fupiue in this cruel bufinefs ?" William's anfwer increafed Mrs. Godwins perplexity; he expreffed his ignorance of her marriage, and fpoke of her huiband and Edwin as feparate perfons." « You-T-you*-r- are, I fear* Mr t Godwin," replied ihe, " under fome miftake." €Ç For Heaven's fake, then, Madam, con- defcend to fet me right ; if you can leiïèn íny tortures I will blefs you, at leaft," con¬ cluded he, « 1 am iure you cannot increafe them.'* «1
H I would it were in my power to remove them," replied ihe : " What I have to fajr will not, however, augment them. I furely mifunderftood Edwin, when he informed me that he had divulged his marriage to his father and yourfeif." tc His marriage !" faid William, cc ?& marriage Î" repeated heagain,after a moments pau fe, Ct whofe marriage — not furely my brother Edwin's ?" " Yes, Sir,.Edwin is my huiband, we have been married thefe three months." <c Tour hu/band ! then you are married to a villain," exclaimed he, throwing himfelf into a chair from whence he had juft rifen,, * c Great God ! how blind is man ! I thoughc my miferies incapable of increafe, and they now are fallen four»fold on me. Parents— Agnes—Fanny—ail—all—will fink, beneath tills cruel ftroke !" ? 5. f* Surely*
<c Surely, Sir!" interrupted Mrs. Godwin, haughtily, " Edwin's marriage with me can¬ not have increafed your unhappinefs ?" co You, perhaps, did not know of his engagements to Agnes ; yet I thought you had. Excufe me, Maciam, I cannot ftay ; my mind is too much torn with anguiih, — Favour me with all you know refpecting my unhappy fifler: Iwould, if pofiible, feek her, bur fe-ar mv labour would be vain. We will, if you pleafe, banifii ail other fubjects." Mrs. Godwin then briefly related all ihe knew refpecting rhe elopement of Emma with Whitmore, faying the advantage was. taken unfufpected by her, and in her ab¬ fence ; and finally, that to purfue them woulei be ufelefs, as their route was unknown." When flie concluded William rofe, and vvas about to take nis leave, faying he ihould fet off again immediately for the Foreft, bting uncenain what ftep to puilue until he had
lhad confulted with his father, as he dared ¡nor truil to writing, knowing the ftroke ¡would fall fo heavy as to need all his pre¬ caution and care in divulging it. " You will not fure," faid Mrs. Godwin,, {< depart until Edwin's return ? Let me en¬ treat your ftay, he cannot be long, and would, I am convinced, blame me for fuffering you* to leave us fo haftily," ¿ " No, Madam, he would rather thank you, had you even preffed my abfence ; but î muft be gone," continued he, advancing towards the door, " and wiíh you more hap¬ pinefs than I have now to expect."—With« thefe words, in fpite of her entreaties, he left her, and mounted his horfe, fu ft requefting the fervant to direct him to Mr. Whitmore % s~ " I will call there," faid he, mentally, as he rode forward, " perhaps the villain belied his wife ; from hts conduct it is more than. probable he did. Edwin too confirmed his* ? 6 affertions **
affertions; but what are the words of fuch men ? I will go, and doubt not to find their character of her falfe ; perhaps fhe was too virtuous to countenance their villany, and poffibly from thence arofe their difiiké of her." Impreffed with this idea he rode to her houfe, determined to procure from the Lady more certain information, not doubting but he ihould find her overwhelmed with forrow, and firmly perfuaded that all he had before heard to her d ifadvantage would prove falfe» On his arrival, fearful ihe fnould refufe to fee him, from his confanguinity to Emma, he ümply defired the fervant to inform her a perfon on particular bufinefs defired to fpeak to her. The man led the way into an apartment, and defired him to be feated, then proceeded to anROunce him in the adjoining room, and preíêndy returning informed him his miftrefs would wait on him prefeatly, William
William now left alone was for fome mo¬ ments loft in thought ; the partition between the rooms being however flight, his medita¬ tions were foon interrupted by two voices, one of whom was finging : V Come, come, bid adieu to fear, *' Love and harmony live here > " No domeftic jealous jars, " Buzzing flanders, wordy wa«, " In my pieiencc will appear, " Love and harmony reign here." " But I will neither fing, nor fay any more, till I have difpatched my vifitor," — continued the fame voice.—* c By his ñáme¬ le fs modefty it is, I fuppofe, one of Mr. Whitmore's creditors with a bill as long as my arm, but I fhall difpatch him in an inftant."" With thefe words the Lady opened the door, and affuming more gravity, faid, " If 6 you
you pleaíè, Sir, I will now attend to your bufinefs." William, more overpowered than before with vexation to find he had called on fo defpicable a wretch, yet determined to ad¬ vance and queftion her ; but had no fooner entered the room than he became fixed as a ftatue with furprife and horror ; for on a fofa fat lolling his brother Edwin, apparently quite at his eafe. " Amazement !" exclaimed Edwin, ftarting from his feat, hardly lefs aftonifbed than "William : " Is it poifible, my brother !" " No, you miftake," replied William, put¬ ting him back with his hand, for he had advanced towards him ; tc you have no brother -, you loft him when you became a villain." The firft idea that ftrtick Edwin was, that his fcdííclion of Agnes was clifcovered, and that,
that he fhould lofe her for ever ; anger and diftradion at this thought mattered every other confideration> and humiliated to be thus treated before the haughty Mrs. Whitmore hy his ruilic brother : " A villain," echoed he, feizing William by the arm, " dare not repeat it, left I indeed forget our relationfhip." " Yes," replied William, with equal hear, ' ? a falle and moft defpicable villain, delti ture of honour or honefty ! Nay, unhand me," continued he, fhaking Edwin off, who ap¬ peared almoft ready to ftrike him, u left I ihouki be tempted to chaftiie you en the fpoc." Mrs. Whitmore, by this altercation, difco- vering her miftake in refpeci to the ftranger, and fearing fome mifchief, fcreamed aloud, and violently pulled the belk on which three íervants ruíhed into the room, and İn fome meaiure calmed the Ímpetuoíity of both brothers. 5 *' Edwin
cc Edwin needs no protection," laid Wil¬ liam ; " he is beneath my reièntmenr. I came to inquire of my unhappy fifter, whofe fault is already leffened, when I fee what dangers her inexperience has been expofed to. Mrs. Whitmore would, if pofiible, have adopted her ufual haughtinefs, but her beha¬ viour, like an arrow drawn againft an impene¬ trable target, only rebounded without injury to the object : He did not, it is true, return her fcorn for fcorn, but appeared to feel her efforts as little as doth a giant thofe of a pigmy. Edwin too, after the firft exertion of paffion, feemed funk within himfelf, and ? ¡filing in fpite of all his pride,, to appear to owe his fafety to the domefiics, entreated Mrs. Whitmore to command their abience, which being at length complied with, unable to bear the prefence of his brother, he ruíhed out of the room.
William.
William, who was anxious to gain fome intelligence of his fifter, on Edwin's leaving the apartment, made a cold apology to the Lady for what had paffed, and began the difcourfe neareft his heart; but finding he could procure no information foon left her 4 and remounting his horfe, with a heavy heart took his way towards Inglewood.
CHAP.
CHAP. ?.
WHEN Edwin left his brother he haftened home, where he was foon informed of all that had paffed in the inter¬ view between William and Mrs. Godwin, the Lady not fparing her reproaches for his duplicity. Edwin was not in a temper to bear, much lefs palliate, and high words in confequence enfued. To a charge of ingra¬ titude, he replied with a thoufand curfes againft his own folly, until at length the Lady retired highly difpleaièd, Edwin neither en¬ deavouring to detain nor footh her.
No
No fooner was he alone than he fra ve w αν ? to the mingled paffions that overwhelmed him. " It İs now complete," exclaimed he, " I have gai.ied the points en vvhich î fixed my happinefs, wealthy and the pejeficu of Agnes, and yet am plunged in the depzh of mifery—mifery too great for human nature to bear, for have I not loft all that made life defirable ? Parents—Agnes—brother—that brother whofe friendfliip was once fo neceffary to my happinefs 5 he fpurned me—defpifed me ; that temper I never before faw ruffled with paffion was now ungovernable î By hell, vice has made me a coward ; had he even ftruck me, I think, I could not have returned it. My fifler difhonourcd too ! — Accurfed Whitmore, thou (halt pay for all, for thou art the original caufe i the tempter that firft feduced me from home, happinefs* love, and virtue, that firft taught me to laugh at vows, and gratify my paftions at the ex- pence of innocence and honour, mayeft thou be as accurfed as I — then annihilation will be mercy ; yet had I but Agnes to footh my
my cares, I could yet be comparatively happy," continued he, after a paufe : " By Heaven I will ; they already hate, defpife, and curfe me, they can then ?? no more, and fuch a prize is worth a bold effort." Towards evening he returned to Mrs* Whitmore's, as he was curious to hear how his brother's vifit had concluded, having no doubr. but that he had immediately fet out on his return for the country : — He likewife wiflied, if poflible, to efcape from himfelf, and Mrs. Whitmore's levity was the moft fpeedy palliative lie could think of; as for his wife, now flie began, as he furmifed, to fufpect his villany, flie became almoft hateful to him, fo true it is, that notunfre- quently the aggreffor finds it moft difficult to pardon. Mrs. Whitmore rallied him on the whole tranfaclion; his brother's behaviour ihe con- ftrued to proceed from his difpleafure re- fpeciíng Emma, and a fuppofition that Edwin had
had nöt been fufliciently attentive to her, for ????? at his marriage fiie had not the moft dit- tant idea of; nay, ihe was aftonifiied that the iadsfaction file * fuppofed he muft feel from that circumftance had not obliterated all other ideas. ci 1 thinki" fuid íhe, " he might at leaft have behaved with more polirenefs before me ; but what, in the name of wonder, woukl the handfome ruftic have had you done? keep a duenna to guard her, cry your mercy> fhe had onej though I confefs noc fufliciently vigilant, for fiie vvas engaged in her own affairs j or did he wiíh you, now the mifchief is done, to iet off like another Quixorte in fearch of the raviiher, and refcue the dam fel ; nay> never look ferious, have Ì not equal caufe* when I have loft my deat fpoufe, yet bear it widi patience ? Why did you not anfwer your brother in the fcriptural language he is accuftomed to, making free with the words of Cain, « Am I my fifter's keeper ?" u Damnation,
<c Damnation, Madam," replied Edwin, * t you go too far !" then throwing himfelf on a fofa, he muttered between his clofed teeth, u I am indeed Cain, curfed of God and man." Edwin's compunction was, however, far from being permanent; before the night clofed the company of Mrs. Whitmore had greatly alleviated it, though reflection, when he was alone, returned with redoubled poig¬ nancy : He certainly did not love her, but ilie was a voluptuary in pleafure, and fafci- nated his fenfes at the expence of his reafon. Her paffions were by nature violent, and, untaught by education to fubdue them, they had gained frefh ftrength by the neglect of Whitmore, whom fiie had long regarded with indifference, and amufed herfelf as beft fuited her inclinations ; but as, until very lately fhe had been cautious in her outward conduct, was univerfally well received. ■—■ The affair with Darleville had been the moft public, probably from his vanity, for fiie certainly
certainly felt no particular affection for him, having difmiffed him before the duel took place, expreffed no uneafinefs when flie heard he was wounded, nor pleafure when informed he was out of danger. While Eduin was endeavouring to diftipate his merited uneafmefs, William, as he ad¬ vanced on his journey, was forming a thou¬ fand different plans to leffen the weight of the news he had to communicate to his friends, while his own heart was diftracled with grief and vexation. He had made the journey to town on his own horfe, but found that un¬ equal to the fpeed with which he wifhed to return, and therefore left it to be brought down by the waggoner, and returned poft. William by this means reached the Foreft much fooner than either his father or wife, who knew his real deft inadon, could expect, for Mrs. Godwin and Agnes had no fufpicion of the truth. Ashe advanced towards home, the tidings he had to communicate became fo.
fo painful that he ftackened his pace, and thé pleafure he would otherwife have felt on the idea of embracing his beloved wife, fmiling babe and family, was loft in the agonizing thought, that it mould fall to his lot to dif¬ clofe events, whofe effects he much feared would have â fatal tendency. I ? was the clofe of day when he reached home ; never before had he thought it painful to crofs the threihold ; he reflected with vexation on tiie fpeed he had ufed on his journey : " It is,'* faid he, " as if I was in hafte to diílrefš them as deeply as myfelf." He then, not meeting any one, turned his horfe into the itable, and with an inelblute itep advanced towards the door, when in the kitchen he heard Fanny, whofe voice was wild mufic$ finging to her infant ; *' There's ??? luch about the houftj Theie's ??? luck at a', Thtre's ??? luck about th: houfe, When our gude man's awa\ Sit
bac kveet his voice, (?? fmooth hva tongue, His breath like caulei air, His veiy ti ead has mufic İn't, As he comes up the ihir. Therc'-t ??? luck, 5íc."
ct Oh! it is too much,"exclaimed William. íC Inhuman, barbarous monfier ! for I can¬ not call him brother, who rends afunder fuch ties, and agonizes thofe he is bound, by every fentiment of honour and gratitude, to pro¬ tect. Alas ! I have now no brother—no fifter^ would to Heaven I never had, or that they had died in infancy-—innocent and happy." He now entered, and found his parents and Fanny feated together : All leaped up to receive him. Fanny depofiting her little charge in the ciadle, and flying into his arms Mrs. Godwin uafufpiciouQy inquiring after Bernard's friend, while Godwin fixed his eves in filence on the altered and pale face of his vol. ir* D fon,
fon, and already fhuddered at the expecta¬ tion of what he had to repeat. tt ..... His brows, the title page, That fpeaks tlie nature of a tragic volume ;
Thou tteniblcll, and the white nefs of thy check Is apter than tby tongue to teil thy errand. E'en inch a man, fo faint, fo fpirhlefs, So dull, fo dead in look, fo wof-be-gone, Drew Pr'.am's curtain in tbe tlead of night, And would h .ve told him half 1rs Tioy was btirn\f i But Priam found the fire eie he his tongue **-—." William gave an evafive anfwer to his mother's queftion, and having returned his wife's careffes, anxioufiy caft around his eyes, and inquired after Bernard and Agnes. " My father," replied Fanny, " is our, and cur dear Agnes has been very indifferent 'ever fince you went away, and is now retired to bed; but how pale you are, William-—in¬ deed you are fadly altered—I am fure you are
are ill-—perhaps you have hurried too much — I did not expect you yet." Mrs. Godwin expreffed the fame idea refpeciing his appearance, while the vene¬ rable father remained filent and loft in thought, for William's fpeedy return withoit Emma confirmed all his fears. At that inftant entered Bernards finging blithe as a hale conftitution and an upright mind could make him. <( What, William !" cried he, " art come, my lad ? Nothing but eood news I know ? My kinfman is got well I hope ?" winking tignificantly, " and thou art fatisfied ?" William fighed, and wrung his hand in filence. <t Why, what a pies art tired, or fick, thee lookeft quite ill ? And what poor horfe ist in the liable, 'tis miferable thin, and as weary as a dog, thee uftd to have moie. D 2 me: ??
mercy on a dumbbeaft? I lookedin as I came round, and could not think whofe half-fa- miihed creature it was." Before William could reply, Mr. Godwin took his wife by the hand, and faid, " My beloved friend, we have been married fix- and-thirty years, in all which time i never before ufed deceit, and, perhaps, it ? even in this inftance unjuftifiable. William, my love, has been to London, and I am amazed at his fpeedy return : He appears ill too; I myfelf fear all is not there as we could wifh ; but wc are Chriftians, and will endeavour to receive the evii as becomes us in this tranfitory fiate." Mrs. Godwin made no reply, maternal terdernefs fwelled in her bofom, and was too poignant to be relieved by words. cc Speak then, William," continued God¬ win, " we are prepared, certainty cannot be mure horrible than this fufpenfe." William,
William, though thus prefied, appeared in no hafie to reply ; even Bernard's features were marked wir h alarm, while Fanny, as if William's affection could fecure her from forrow, drew her chair elder to iiis, and preffed one of his hands between both her's. tí Oh, my father!" at length hefitated William, his voice hardly articulate, " par¬ don your fon for being the meffenger of tidings which muft wound you even more deeply than they have wounded me. Edwin, anxious for indépendance and wealth, has— " " Gained it at the expence of honour and rectitude," interrupted Godwin. William's affirmative was a figh. « Ne —no," exclaimed Mrs. Godwin, haftily, tf it is ? miftake ; you believe too eafily ; William is misinformed ; Edwin is young and lively, and may err, but not grofsly," D 3 « Ay—
*' Ay—ay," faid Bernard, * f it is only fo ; William is fo good himfelf he cannot make proper allowance for common frailties : I am glad, however, Agnes is not here ; he has made a trip I fuppofe— fom ? girl I doubt— never mirul, we muft keep it a fecret; but what has that to do with wealth and inde¬ pendence ?" " I will not believe it," replied Mrs. Godwin ; ít he loves Agnes too well to bc guilty in the manner you allude to : But where is my Emma—-my chikl—why is fiie not returned with you ? She wiil no.t be Icandaiized—fufpected—not the world i)\A\ now keep her from her mother." " Alas ! where fhall we find her l" ci k d William, invokin:a;i!y. " Find her !" fcreamed Mrs. Godwin : —· 11 Is fhe dead? (or living, who iliall hide her iiom me ?" <f None
ft None but herfelf, my mother," replied "William. "Alas! ihe is unworthy you; fhe has fied with a vile betrayer." A fiicndiy infenfibility for feme memento deprived the wretched mother cf her fenfe ff ahp/'ifh, and all leir.ahcd filent; buc re¬ fi .vei mr*, bv the ai 1 dì' F.mnv, tc^b .n fon^e meaiure eafcd hci ovcrchaigcd heai t. " And what remains, William," faid fhe, " fear not now to f^ieak—the blow is ftruck. What of Edwin, is he too loft ? I charge you, by your love and duty to me, fpeak i I will know the worft, and pray for patience to fupport it." Godwin repeated the command. William, thus preffed, with the iitmoft agitation, related all he knew refpeciing Emma, concluding with the marriage of Edwin to Mrs. Delmer, but fuppreffing his finding him at Mrs. Whitmore's· ? D 4 'Ait
All remained for fome time loft in afto- nifhment, until at length Godwin exclaimed, u Cruel, deceitful boy ! is this the return for my anxious cares for your happinefs ? — Alas ! I feared even to refufe what my heart could not approve, and by a falfe indulgence have undone you. Miferable man that I am, how ihall I bear this ftroke, or comfort this unhappy fu fi erer," looking with anguiih on his wife, Cf when I cannot myfelf fupport it ? Oh, God of mercy !" exclaimed he, raifing his clafped hands, " how did I pray for chil¬ dren, and in thy anger thou gaveft them r" Fanny dropped on her knees at his feet : " Oh, my father !" replied fiie, looking ten¬ derly at William, if all your children arc not the gifts of anger." " No, my daughter," replied the old man, " William and thy felf, nay, and my Agnes too, have virtues to overbalance the other's errors, for ye are all mine, and from this hour, if my heart is capable of diftinction, A £tne j
Agnes muft claim it, for who ihall comfort her ? William, I doubt not, will endeavour to requite thee y for his love is fincere, and worthy its object." As he fpoke he raifed his weeping daughter- in-law, and preffed her to his bofom, while ihe hung round his neck, and watered his grey hairs with her tears. if Oh, Bernard 1" cried Godwin, u let not this blow divide our friendfhip-—condemn not all for the errors of one." Bernard held out his hand, and grafped that of Godwin, exclaiming (while forrow almoft choaked his fpeech) α Condemn you! May Heaven condemn me if 1 do. No, my lieart bleeds for you. Ah, William ! thou waft right when thou blameft me for ap¬ plauding his going to town." " 1 will retire," faid Mrs. Godwin, rifing, but finking ag^in into her chair, cc I am not D 5 well,
well, my head is giddy, and my heart is cold; give me your hand, Fanny, and lead me to bed. Oh, my children Î— my chil¬ dren!" Fanny and William led their unhappy mother to her chamber, where the former infifted on attending her for the night, but was refufed by Mrs. Godwin.—" No," faid ihe 7 " you will hereafter, my child, 1 fear, have ro attend your fuffering fifter; furely fhe already fufpect s ibmcthing, for her health droops daily." Fanny again prefied to ftay :<— C£ Will not my beloved huiband be with me ?" replied Mrs. Godwin ; cf we will pray and comfort each other. Flow often have we paffed the hours in exultation over the growing virtues of our children ; to night we will weep theijr vices."
Fanny
Fanny retired, and joined the unhappy father and William, who were devifing means how to difclofe Edwin's perfidy to Agnes, Godwin at length taking the taík on himfelf. The parties then withdrew to their refpecTive chambers, not to fieep, but to deplore the depravity that had baniihed happintis from their bofoms, and converted rhe manfion of peace into a houfe of mourning.
D6
CHAP.
CHAP· IV.
IN the morning all met at breakfaft but Mrs. Godwin, who appeared too much indifpofed to leave her bed. Agnes, appa¬ rently loft in melancholy, was not, however, infenfible to the diftrefs that hung on every face, and with a fearful energy entreated to know the caufe. Godwin at length informed her of Emma's flight, adding, as he con¬ cluded, while tears ftreamed down his vene¬ rable cheeks : " But I will endeavour to tear her from my heart; thou, Agnes, íhaltfup- ply her place, and become doubly dear to me." « Oh ;
" Oh! my beloved, my unhappy Emma, 1 ' cried Agnes, weeping, " how fincerely do I feel for you ; She has been deceived, deluded, and, if íhe can bat be regained, forgive, my father, and receive lier to your bofom. Oh ! fiie has a thoufand virtues t-i counterbalance this one error, and will, I hope, behave hereafter in a manner to make even you forget it." As none feemed wil¬ ling to continue the difcourfe it ceafed here, and the breakfaft paffed in filence*, being re¬ moved almoft untouched, each appearing to fhun the eye of the other—even \??\? Uet> brn's fmiles being difregarded. The vifible anxiety that already hung on Agnes made Godwin doubly unwilling to difclofe the unhappinefs that awaited her, yet he thought it unjuftifiable to lengthen her delufion, therefore, after breakfaft, being alone with her, began the painful tafk : -— As he proceeded his tendernefs redoubled his emotion, and he was frequently for fome minutes inarticulate. Agnes's
Agnes's behaviour, on the contrary, was even painfully calm ; fiie ihed no tears, vented no reproach, but liftened in filcuce as one on whom neither joy nor forrow could any longer make impreffion. " Oh ! my be¬ loved child," concluded the old man, "how iliall we be able to obliterate from thy memory the unworthinefs of the ungrateful Edwin ? Yet it ihall be my daily prayer to Heaven to effect it, and the confiant endeavour of us all to love thee with redoubled affection, parti¬ cularly of mine, my child." " Oh ! lam unworthy," exclaimed Agnes, breaking filence, " I am unworthy ; call me not your child ; I am vile—abandoned—loft, in an evil hour I forgot virtue, and Heaven has forfaken me I" Ci Impofiible, my love ! Diftrefs has im¬ paired thy fenfes, thou wert ever virtuous as lovely, the delight of the eye, and darling of every h^ait." . « Ah !
" Ah ! no, my more than father," replied íhe, falling at his feet, the fcalding tears flowing in torrents down her blufliing cheeks, and concealing her face on his knees, "I cannot deceive you—you are too good to be deceived—your kindnefs pierces my heart, and forces me to lay it open to your view ; yet do not hate, do not baniih me your pre- fence ; I cannot bear your difpleafure, though I am not the virtuous Agnes you once knew ; do not fpurn me, my life will pay the forfeit" A gloomy prefage feized the mind of Godwin, and transfixed his foul with horror. *' It is imponible," faid he; "yet fpeak, my Agnes ; fear me not, Edwin cannot have been fuch a villain ; he could not fure attempt thy innocence." Agnes for a moment made no reply ; at length exclaimed : " Oh ! my father, Edwin is not more guilty than the abandoned Agnes." Godwin
Godwin gaveo cry of fuiprife and mingled horror, refignation and patience appeared totally to have forfaken him, in ipeechlefs agony he threw himfelf on the floor, and tore from his head its venerable honours. The affrighted family heart! the noife, and rufiiing in, found him on the ground, Agnes trembling, and ready to faint, endea¬ vouring to raife him. fC Oh! my father," cried Fanny, " whv are you thus, you will alarm my mother l Alas î I fear fiie is already convulfed." " May the villain who occafioned it be accurfed," replied he, with vehemence, de¬ fpair in his voice, and his features diftorted with anguiih. tc Ah ! whom do you curfe, my father ?" exclaimed Agnes, <c recall, recall the cruel words, Edwin cannot exift under ? parent's malediction." " it
íf It has involuntarily paíled my lips," replied Godwin, " ï cannot recall it. Mer¬ ciful God ! and have I lived to curie my fon ? But give me your arm, my child, lead me to my wife, I am fick with forrow, we will die together." William and Fanny raifed their rather, and led him to his wife's apartment, Fanny re¬ maining to attend her mother, while William, who had no fufpicion of the laft intelligence his father had received, returned to Agnes, whom he endeavoured, by every means in his power, to confole, and perceiving that his father having curled Edwin hung on her ipirits, endeavoured to remove the impreílion. <c I am equally difpleafed as my father," faid William ; " but I cannot curfe, nor yet hate him, though I delpife him beyond the power of words to exprefs ; nay, weep not, Agnes, lie is unworthy your tears, he merits onlv your difdain as he has mine." " Whj.
<v Why will you fpeak thus ?" cried Agnesy ct why recall a fcene I have frequently en¬ deavoured to obliterate from my memory ? Unhappy Edwin ! would to Heaven thou h adii not fworn fo raflily ; yet, I truft, thou art not abandoned of God, though, alas! thou art cm f ed by thy father, de/pifid by thy bro¬ ther, and by thy Agnes— -forgiven" William knew not that fhe alluded to the cuife Edwin had called on his own head, fhould he break his vows, and ftill continued endeavouring to footh her, when a cry of forrow ftruck on their ears, and baniihed every other idea. Both flew in hafte to Mrs. God¬ win's apartment, where a fight prefented that at once ftruck them with grief and horror ; fiie was ftruggling in a violent convulfion that had juft feized her ; the terrified Fanny, with the fervant, endeavouring to fuccour her, while Godwin, in fpeechlefs agony, was on his knees by her fide.
William
William remained in the apartment but a moment, then haftened away, and mounting his horfe rode oft full fpeed for the neareft medical help, with whom he returned in little more than an hour. Mrs. Godwin was ftill in the fame fituation, and though at length in fome degree recovered, yet was fo weak¬ ened and low, that the affiftance they called in pronounced her recovery very doubtful ; the fhock fiie had received from the conduci of her children had impaired her underftand- ing, and her confiant dwelling on their names, fhewed the impreílion ftill remained in fpite of agony, and even delirium. For three days little alteration appeared, the unhappy family fluctuating between hope and defpair ; and, to add to their forrow, Asmes, though ihe forced herfelf to attend on Mrs. Godwin, yet it was plainly perceptible that ihe was not equal to the effort. At this period the con- vuifive fpafms iricreafed, and in two days more the unhappy mother became at once both fpeechlefs and fenfiblc, and was de¬ clared paft all hope ! Who. at that fearful hour,
hour, can paint the agonies of the affii&cd family ? Edwin and Emma were forgotten in the greater forrow, or only at periods re¬ membered as the caufe of alk On the bed, fupported by pillows, and the arms of a huiband, whofe aílection had increafed with growing years, fit Mrs. Godwin, placidity on every feature, hei half-extinguiihed eye raifed alternately with confident hope, or turned with foft compaffion on her weeping family. On his knees, on one fide, was William -, on the other Fanny and Agnes ; at the feet Bernard ; and at fome diftance the old fer- vant, who had lived with them ever fince their marriage, nurfing Reuben, and bathing his face wich her tears. Mrs. Godwin bec¬ koned her to approach, and taking the hand of Margery put it into that of Fanny, as though ihe commended them to each other. iC I underftand you, my mother," faid Fanny, " I will regaid the happinefs of Margery as oik of your lafl commands, and hold
hold it facred ; (he is too old to labour, Reu¬ ben flrall henceforward be her only care." Mrs. Godwin bowed her aftent, and draw¬ ing Reuben clofe to her, kiiled his fmiling mouth, and by her raifed eye appeared to* a ík a blefiing on him ; then holding a hand 10 each alternately fine faluted all, Bernard, as he received tins laft token of her friend - fiii p and affection, fobbing aloud, and wring¬ ing his hands in agony. His emotion dif- treffed her i ilie endeavouied to ipeak, but the effort was fruitlefs, and only brought on a fre ili convulfion, in which ihe ftruggled for fome moments, but at length recovered, though with increafed weakneis, and addi¬ tional fymptoms of approaching diffolution ; her fpeech too, though aimoil inarticulate, was returned. tc Blefs ye—bids ye—my good—my dutiful chikijen—roigive—pray for your deluded brothei and fifter. Agnes be comforted—Edwin is moil to be pitied, for you aie virtuous, he-------;" then turning to
to Godwin: "Friend—hufband—companion, be comforted, we fiiall meet again." — ■ As ihe fpoke fhe extended her arms, and was received into his, where, after remaining fome minutes, apparently in filent prayer, flie bowed her face, and articulately faid :— " From thefe arms, which have led me in innocence and peace, oh ! receive thy fer¬ vant : Bleffed—bleffed;"—her voice faileei, refpiration grew weaker, and in a few minutes flie expired on h'b bofom ! " And art thou gone for ever!" faid Godwin, after a long paufe, at the fame time laying his wife's head on the pillow, and fixing his eyes upon her lifcleis face— ff Am I indeed left to weep thy lofs, to mourn thy untimely death ! Devoted children, how will ye here¬ after anfwer this ? Edwin, thou haft gained wealth, but loft thine own foul 1" William and the family were unequal to the tafk of admìniftering comfort, and ftood around weeping in fiicnt anguiih. " But ihall α
fhall I felfiihly repine, bleffed faint ?" refumed the old man, killing her hand : cf Forbid ic, Heaven, thy cares are paft, and thy reward prepared. Be comforted, then, my children^ and blefs the Power that fpared her thus long. Methinks fiie fmiles upon us. Let us kneel around her ; our prayers will afcend to the Throne of Mercy, where we have now a bleffed mediatrix." The family obeyed ; the old man prayed long and fervently, until at length that re¬ fignation, which true piety ever infpires, calmed the acutenefs of their feelings, and left them able to perform the laft attentions which duty demanded for the honoured clay.
CHAP.
mm
? FI A P. V.
WHILE forrow and death had been bufy at Inglewood, Fxiwin, who car¬ ried a vulture in his own bofom, which, in fpite of all his efforts, he could neither filence nor deftroy, was endeavouring to for¬ get reflection, by plunging yet deeper and deeper in error. His wife, who had raifed him to what he once thought the pinnacle of happineis, was neglected, and almoft abhor¬ red, for being the means, of placing an infu- perable bar between him and Agnes; while the lafcivious and wanton Mrs. Whitmore, with 3
with whom he fpent the greater part of his .time, was careffed, not from affection, but becaufe ihe poffeffed the art of intoxicating the paffions, though at the expence of rcafon and judgment. The idea of Agnes was, however, a confiant intruder, he reflected with horror on the agonies he fuppofed fiie muft fuffer, nor was he more eafy en ac¬ count of his family i in fpite cf vice and folly he loved diem, and his wealth loft half its charms as they could not flure it. Eager to find excufes to his own confeience for hU conduct, he regarded Whitmore as the caufe of all, and determined, fhould he ever meet him, to take ^a full revenge. In the mean time getting Agnes into his power was his confiant determination, though he could not as yet devife by what means j at firft he expected to meet her anger and refent¬ ment $ but had no doubt that he fliould be able to calm the ftorm, efpecially as he had fo ftrong an advocate in her own heart, vol. ?. E Edwin,
Edwin, as foon as his marriage was ac¬ knowledged, had hired a fervant particu¬ larly to attend him ; a fhrewd and intelli¬ gent fellow, one whom he thought he could venture to truft on fuch an occafion ; he therefore difclofed fuch part of the bufineis as was neceffary for his purpofe, and that could be unfolded with honour to hhnfeif; and determined to fend him uifiniifed to Inglewood, to endeavour at leafi to inquire into the health of the family, if pofiible, fpeak to Agi.es, and declare nis bufine fV, which was to entreat her to form no decided opinion of Edwin's conduct until fiie faw him, as he had been grofsly m iire prefented, and could not vindicate himfelf from the imputation but by a perfonal interview. This meffage was to bc delivered verbally, as Edwin feared that, fiiouid he write, it might be produced as frefii evidence of duplicity againft him ; while in the firft cafe there was no danger, as he could eafily on occafion for- fvvcar both the mcffige and meffenger. Thus
Thus determined, accompanied only by his fervant, he departed, and reached a fmall village at about nítcen mjies diftance from Inglewood, where he remained whiie Iris fer¬ vant repaired alone to the Fort ft, from whence he did not return until ihe fécond day, Edwin had waited for him with înr^rier.ee. and fo n'lmtious were his queftions, tliat the Uian knew n<-t how £0 irply, but ntiraxd liis mailer to fuiîlr hira to relate the vriidc methodically, " it was," faid Harris, <c ncur four in the afiei noon before I got there; I meant to re¬ main in the vicinity until the evening, then, as I was on foot, pretend to be benighted, and inquire at your fathers my way to the next market town, never doubting but they would have humanity fufficient at leaft to offer me fome refrethment, if not a lodging for the night, as I had all my dory ready, end thought in that cafe I mould find an oppor¬ tunity to deliver my meffage. As it was far E 2 too
too early to appear I kept walking about at fome diftance, fearful of being noticed, and at length came to a little church, and for a while paffed my time in leading the grave ftones until the bell began to toll, and ? faw numbers of people coming from all fides, and thronging the church-yard. As I had plenty of time 1 thought I might as well ftay and be a fpectator, not doubting but it was the funeial of fome nobleman, and much beloved, as almoft every one wept." " Damn your funeral, come to the point, they have loft their paragon 1 fuppofe. I have forgotten her name, though I heard her praifes fufficiently founded while I was at Inglewood; but my mind was too much en- groffed with Agnes to think on aught elfe." íf It was not the perfon you allude to," re¬ plied the man, in a voice that alarmed Edwin; f< the lois concerns you more neaily."
" Difiraaion I"
it Diftraction !" exclaimed Edwin, ftarting fiom the chair, a cold fwcat bedewing his foichead, and his knees knocking againft each other. "Say not it is Agnes, unlefs you would lay me dead before you." " It was your mother's funeral," uplied Harris : " I faw her laid in the earth." u And art thou gone, mildeft, beft of women ?" exclaimed Edwin, weeping bitteily, regardlefs of his fervant. iC Any vexation I may have given her, furely could not be violent enough to occafion her death. — Emma's conduct muft have wounded her far more deeply : She was in years too, near fixty 1 think, yet hearty, and apparently likely to live much longer." Thus did he induftrioufly endeavour to exculpate himfelf from any fi, are in his mother'*· death ; and finding the uncertainty refpect ip¿* tne i v ft of his family painful, ft ro ve to calm lub ablution, and 01 dered Harris to E 3 continue
continue his narrative, fix m \ h<4 v he had left ofi^ without the leaft re ferve. " Well, then, Sir," faid Harris, « I mingled with the crowd, and inquired what great per- fonage was to be buried, that caufed in fuch a fcattered neighbourhood fo great a number of people to aflèmble?" íc It is neither Lord nor Lady," replied an old man i " but the wife of an induftrious 3 7 armcr, who was born and has ever dwelt among us, eafy in his circumftances, and uni- verfally beloved and refpected, as you may judge by the people affernbhd at the funeral. Ah ! well/' continued the old man, tf do I remember their marriage ; he was the fon of our Rector, anel íhe the daughter of a neigh¬ bouring Farmerj fhe might have matched higher, but Godwin alone was her choice, and truly a worthy ene, for the longer they lived together, the more they appeared to love one another." iC And
« And what children have they ?" faid I, carelefsly, thinking the quefiion might lead to fome other refpeciing Mr. Bernard's family. " Two fons and a daughter," replied he, " fine grown handfome young folks ·, the eldeft is married, and accounted one of tlie beft men, as well as farmers, in the county ; every thing thrives with him, and every body loves him, and that is a bold word." " And the other two," faid I, -------. ct Are of late become Londoners," replied he, Ci more's the pity \ but I know little of them ; they went out of the country worthy their parents, and, 1 trufi, will come back the fame." Our difcourfe was here inter¬ rupted by the approach of the funeral ; the corps was carried into the church, a fermon preached, and a Pfahn fimg by thofe whofe tears would permit them to fing. On bear¬ ing out the body í obferved the mourners, L 4 and
and afked my communicative friend (whom ï kept clofe to) their names." " The firft," fays he, « is Mr. Godwin, fupported by his fon ; how the youth weeps, while the father's eyes are raifed in anguiih to Heaven ! God give them comfort, he alone can. The next is Farmer Bernard and his daughter, an excellent girl, and as handfome as good, not a tongue but bleffcs her." Fie then mentioned the names of feveral others, all relations or neighbours, and among them an old grey-headed woman, fervant, who, he faid, cc iiad lived with them fix or feven- and- chit ty y ears." " I will not pain you, Sir, by endeavouring to defcribe the cry of diftiefi>, which was uttered by every one of the unhappy family on the body being laid in the giave, each endeavouring to fuilain the other, though nnabic to fupport themfclves. At length, rli being ronclucYd, the people began to fepiu ate, and the fon ov* fui pai ty mot ? their wa; ho me ward >
homeward, the old man, who had been fo communicative, joining one of the mourners, and accompanying them, a circumftance that greatly difappointed me, as I wifiied much to queftion nim further. The night was dark and rainy, and I ventured to walk feveral times around the houle, where, however, I heard fo many voices that I relinquiíhed my firft purpofe cf pretending to be benighted, left I fliould meet among them the old man 1 had converfed with 5 befides, from the bad nefs of the weather, I had no doubt many would ftay all night, I tlicicforc proceeded about Lur miles, where, at a little alchoufe I procured a bed, and early next morning meafured my fieps back, walking cart left ly at a diftance from tke houfe, which three hoi femen wei e juft leaving, and paficd me on the full gallop. Soon after I faw your Cthcr, with Mr. Bcinaid, and your brother, whom 1 inftantly recvììlected, come out, and u.ke the road to the ? 'tun h. I dcteiminid. not to bie tini» opportunity, and w^k^J up to t l, e llOU 't, \\h"R, lu ib V i«>0d í' H 1 tlí\ ?? L ??\??> CT t i i ^ l' f\ ? ' 1 ? t.
. t the door, it was opened by the beautiful gill { faw at the funeral, and whom I inftantly knew again. Oh ! Sir, you will forgive my beinj the me flenger of fuch ill tidings as î have fucceeded in my errand. She was alone, I therefore immediately declared my bufineis, wliich, when fiie had heard, fiie withdrew, defiring me to ftay as fhe would write an -ar.fwtr." ít Charming angel ! and how dared you keep me thus in fulpen ft ? By Heaven I will never forgive it. Haile — hafte —why did you not begin by delivering İt?" " 1 kept it to make my peace after my bad news," replied Flarris, with the freedom of a fervant deeply in the confidence of his matter's unwoithy fecrets, <f and hope it will fully anfwer your expectations." Edwin received it with a trembling hand., tore it open, and read as follows : " INHUMAN
u IX M UM AN EDWIN' ! <4 Was it not encugh that but vefternit-Jit vour mother was laid in tiie c.uth, bu: \ou muft feck to redouble tho blow, in.! puriu * the dcvot;d Agnes to the brink or the grave? Gii! befoie itibtoo late rcj χ nt of the tlcaih of venir mf)ihcr, and foon that of Aixes ν id ι ¡unse vou in tniilt bevond uli hci.cs oí y·, r- don: With the liebes you have fo citai İv obtained, if pofiible be happy, and by nume¬ rous tood actions endeavour to obîireiate your p t »il errors, refpect ihe woman tliat lib htiicwed them, nor hek to injure hei neaee. cr ouïs, by infuking thofe you air bouiid to honour j ior every affix -ne oîilie'J to Agnes y\>i.r íather anel biother will look on ili ihi ir own, f( As for your ]>inJer, I have lefi i.s-p .π his mi,kike, he thinks me Airier. ??. 5 í Live not wo'ds to throw axvav c<i h.* ii Kfiv's ??- v\oukl adv'ilè vou, for b/i> ?\.? iike\ : » it :id him ro more, as the hu !v .1 l· ? uf
of Mrs. Delmer can have no corre fpondence with Agnes, and I fhall not fail to declare hib errand to your father and brother. Fare¬ well, Edwin, review your actions, and their confequence ^ then can you not fail to re¬ pent, and your mother will not have died in vam. F. GODWIN." u Hell and deftruction 1" exclaimed Ed¬ win, " you have miftaken my brother's wife fur Agnes ; the letter is from her. and my father will be doubly incenfed againft me. — Fool—dolt, that I was to truft you. How could you miftake when the direction I gave you was fo plain ?" " If there is any miftake it cannot be my fauk," replied Harris. "Did you not, Sir, teil me a fine formed elegant gii Ì, remarkably handfome, about nineteen, with blue eves, and auburn hair failing in ringlets down her lac . ; and befides, Sir, did not the old fellow nil
tell me fiie was Bernard's daughter ? Surely alter all I could not be miftaken." tc You were—you were," cried Edwin, impatiently : " Fanny is the model of her lifter, though not fo lovely.—Oh ! you have ruined me beyond all hope ; but tell mc, relate the whole infernal ftory of what you faw and heard in the houfe." u Why, Sir, on my knocking at the door, that handfome ghl, whom you fay I miftook,. opened it; I afked if her name was Bernard ?" She bowed fiightly, and replied, viewing me with curiofity as 1 thought, " my father's name is Bernard. Tv'ow, Sir, you may re¬ collect, that, though you told me your bro¬ ther was man ied, you did not fay to a daughter of Mr. Bernard's ; how therefore ihouki i fufpect it ? I then opened the bufineis dttlaiir.g how unhappy you were, how greatly you had been mifrep: e fented to her, ..:;d íi\/íiy, cîîü eating her to give vou an ???«? tunity to excu'patc yourfeif. She heard
me through with toleiable patience, though 1 nov/ recollect fiie bit her lip, which at the moment I thought no very good fymptom ; but when I concluded, as ilie replied, Cf I have nothing to fay to you> but will write my anfwer to your employer, I thought ail was well, and waited accoidinghy. While fiie was abfent I cannot fay but 1 was under fome uneafmefs left your father or brother fliould leturn and fufpect my bufineis, and egad, Sir, I fiiouid not much like a contra- vcifiy with the latter, for hofterns a poweifid man, and one that don't look as if he would be tiirled with; fiom the former my heels might have fãved me, but againft yui-r bro¬ ther 1 am confiions none of mv efforts would have availed." <i Ceafe vour digreffions, wlicd care I fui your ftais, or his pi ? v. ? is," tried Luv,. ? impatiently. tc Sir, í have juft dene." — She füOn ?? hi' d<*\ il Widi tlie UtUl, ?.?? L\^\ u Take
<€ Take this, und give it to your mailer; but beware how you come any more here ; next time you may not efcape fo wti]. 1 ' tí I proteft. Sir, I thought fhe meant kindly, and thanked her accordingly ; for if ihe meant otherwife, and her voice is fuch mufic when fiie chides, what muft it be when fiie is pleafed ? Her eyes, to be fure, were red and fwelled with weeping, and fhe fpoke particularly ferions, but that I attributed to her recent lofs." tC Enough—enough," exclaimed Euvun, {t I vvill hear no more—begone—I will call when I want you. Totally ruined with mv father," refumed he, mournfully, iC detefttd by my brothei—my mother dead—and her death laid to me—that of A^ncs too, her laven-like fifter has predicted—diftraction is in the though:—that alene İs wanting· to complete my crimes, my mifeiy—- at leaft ic ihouki bc the lignai for their ccnchifion," Oí.tiUicd he, bokirg at lib pifiolr, which were
were hung up in the apartment, " for I have not plunged thus far in guilt to live without her." Edwin could not be long abfenr from his regiment, nor yet could he refolve to live in continual uncertainty refpeciing Agnes ; he therefore at length came to a determination to leave Harris in the country, to fend him con¬ fiant intelligence, which he determined to obtain by the means of the landbrd, where they then were, Edwin telling him he was Godwin's fon, under fome difpleafure with his father, and on that account particularly unhappy, and interefted to hear conftantly of his family* Old Godwin, though not perfimally known to the hoft, was too much refpected for his name to be a ftranger, he therefore lamented that there fhould be a difference between him and liis fon, efpecialiy as Edwin's ap- peaiaiiCe and belunbur much tUmphtedhiai, wondering
wondering within himfelf hew the former could be difpleafed with ib fine a Gentleman, whom the fervant affured him had a verv handfome fortune ; all which finally operated with him to promife he would procure the waned-for intelligence, and keep the whole a fecret, as particularly recommended him. Accordingly the Farmers, that were con¬ tinually paffing to irglevvood or returning, were queftioned reflecting the Godwins, who were fo generally known and beloved, thr.t every material occurrence refpeciing their health or welfare ufually tranfpired, the recent death of Mrs. Godwin furnifiiing a pretence for the landlord's inquiries. The whole family, they informed him, were faid to be in the deepeft affliction, not only for the lofs of Mrs. Godwin, but for the prcfent unhappy ft ate of Bernard's youngeft daughter Agnes, who was feized, on. the death of Mrs. Godwin, with a delirious fever, which
which had increafed to fo great a height that her Hfe was defpaired of. With this intelligence Edwin was forced to fet off for London, not being able to procure any more fatisfactory, leaving, however, ftrict charge with his fervant to write by every poft.
CHAP,
? II ? 1\ Vh
THE intelligence of the Farmers, re¬ flecting the Godwin family, was ftricìly truc. Agm s'b fpirits, exerted to the utter- moil, ha 1 1 sported her until th.e death of Mrs. G.^ ìwin , hut that blow, added to the preceding difticfs, was more than her nature could iuftain, and a fever an;! delirium the MİmofL immediate confequence. Her cruel feduition by lid win ihe had alone levcaled to his father, who had not the heart to dif- Ciofe it to any one, though the fecret preyed mi hls vitals, and redoubled his forrow. — üe was cominuaîly by her fide pi a} ing with he r.
her, adivinifterlng her medicine?, 01 endea- vouiing to calm her ficnzy, eve 17 exclama¬ tion ilie uttered audibj an iddmond pang. as they tjfualìy reijitcttd Edv.in, ?nd he: own unîuppineib. At the beginning of her îiîmfo the iing ihe had received fiom Edwin fiie had put upon hei finger, faying fiie W3¿ his wife, an affeveiutlon no one chofe to denv, the leaft contiadiction making her outiageous. For two months her life was declared in the utmoft danger, and for a confiderable time longer continued in a very precarious fiate ; but at length the fever gradually decreafed, though the effecb itili remained, her under¬ ftanding having received a ihock the more alarming, as though her bodily ftrength flowly returned, her mental faculties le- mained equally deranged, though more calm, her ideas ftill dwelling on her faithlcis lover, and ufirlh concluding every fubject with — i( 1 am Edwin's wife." Mrs,
Mrs. Pal· ··-, who had beeu abfen«. from Ingle wood, returned u: 'h »s period, åik\ was both grieved and fnocked at the diftjefs her favourite family had experienced, though ihe knew not to what extent. Eager to endeavour to alleviate their woes, ilie immediately haf¬ tened to them, and did not refufe a friendly tear at the alteration that had taken place in fo ihort a time ; her eye, which ever way ilie turned, was wont to meet placidity and happinefs, now how changed ! Mrs. Godwin's feat was vacant, Godwin much thinner, and his form, \vhiv.h w'as ulcd to be perfectly up¬ right, bent forward, with the appeaianct of an added twenty years, and his eyes fixed conftantly on the ground ; Bernard with his arms acrofs, his head funk on his bofom, his jollity fled, his pipe neglecled in the chimney corner, and his jug empty on the iheh ; William endeavouring to conceal his diftrefs, fearful of increafing that of his father and wife, while the fighs that frequently efcaped him, and the looks with which he viewed them, befpoke the acutenefs of his feelings j the
the once cheerful and livelv F nny, pale and nielancholv, whiie Agnes, urconccined at ali, fat in a comer amufing i t rfdfwith trifles, a faint finfii ip'ead over her checks the mikl luftie of her foft blue tyrs changed to a daz¬ zling, but lefs pleafiii v > brightneb, and per- pecudly caft around ? s if in ii-aich of fome obiect, which failing to meet, they ulur lly fell on the ting upon her fii.gcr with a iigh, ?n j—<« ¡am 1 Juins -zv fe." Iti íhojt, littl· 5 Rt uren was t.>c only one who iuT.kd, h( appeared to tîiiive in calamity, laughint whiif* his mother wept, feizing his giandi^ rher'i buri/p^, or iometimes his giey nain vu,'' ι* i ,, 3 1 f oietit nwn to notice him, ai.d for a moment beguiled him of his forrow. Mrs. Palmer apjeartd p.:¡ticn! lt ¡l·, inre- refit d bi Agnes, and tiiat with fuch fyuipa- th.zmg teudeinefs that fie ? came tn^it eliiniable tha.i ever; they law liei ι on piíiioj , as vvtli as tuiiofity, wab not a Hule excited by the confiant allufion to Iul w in and rlr ring. She had frequently hcaid the fan.iiv fa)
lay they were affianced to each other, buc no word of inquiry efcaped her, ilie only endeavouring to footh ar.d prevent the at¬ tention of Agnes being too much fixed on one object. <£ My dear child," faid Godwin, addrefilng Fanny, " my bi other Bernard, William and myfelf, are going out for a ihort fpace, our good and condefcending friend will excufe us; Ín our abience open your whole heart to her, fpare not niy unworthy fon, nor yet more unhappy daughter ; a female friend, of her judgment, will not only be a comfort to you, but a bleifing to us all, for fhe will not deny her advice where íhe has not retufed a tear." When Godwin ceafed fpeaking, Mrs. Palmer arp. e frem the fide of A^nes, and taking his kuu!, replia ', " Believe me, my good friend, not only my advice, bur any thing eife in my power, is cntiicJy at your fervi ce in this unhappy juncture, wliich, I hope,
hope, will, however, terminate happily, and more fpeedily thin you expect; the derange¬ ments of Agnes I regard as merely the effect of fever, and that once totally removed, the other will naturally ceafe." Godwin bowed, repeated his thanks, and, accompanied by Bernard, left her alone with Fanny and Agnes. Fanny was too much diftieffed to be in ???? to obey her father-in-law, and was like- wife reftrained by the prefence of Agnes ; bur en her retiring to refi, with few words, but many tear-., fhe related a·i "hat had paffed, the goodnefs of her own heart prompting her to palliate the whole as much as truth would allow. As ilie concluded Mrs. PJmer embraced her, faying, tc Fear not, my amiable girl, \our duty and utterly affection vvill meet its reward ; the preíent trials are fevere, but will, ï hope, be fuccteded by a cairn. In the mean
mean tíme regard me as your friend, mother, fifter, or any title that belt accords with your own heart. I, alas ! Fanny, though enjoying wealth even more than I wifh, have room for all thofe claims ; as I am literally (tho' poileíled of relations) alone in the world, my deareft connexions being torn afunder." Fanny preffed the hand of Mrs. Palmer ro her lips, and bathed it widi her tears. — tf Oh ! how truly, Madam, diel my father ipeak, when he faid you would comfort me. Alas !" fa i J fhe, hefitating, " I have íècrets that I cannot reveal to men, however dear." " If necefiary ? difclofe them, my dear girl," replied Mrs. Palmes, "fear not to truft to mv prudence, yourfeif ihall only withdraw them from my bofom." Fanny wept, and feemed irresolute ; but rhe kind ailurances of Mrs. Palmer at length, i.i ib.ne meafure, reaffuiing her, with tears and glowing blufnes fnc owned, that ihe had vol. 11. F a
a fearon her fitter's account that overwhelmed her with ihame and confufion i in fine, that during the latter part of her illnefs fiie could not avoid perceiving an alteration in her ihape, which but too truly corroborated what ilie revealed in her frenzy, frequently fpeak¬ ing of an oath, and ever at the time viewing a ring (which was a diamond kz in the ihape of a heart, and fiirrounded with rubies and brilliants alternately) repeating her favourite adage— <c lam Edwin's wife," Mrs. Palmer, though fiiocked at this in¬ telligence, endeavoured all in her power to confole her young friend, reprefenting it was very poffible fhe might be miftaken in her furmifes ; but if not, ihe thought the un¬ happy Agnes fo greatly to be pitied, that ihe would devife means (if fiie furvived) to conceal the misfortune from the world. Fanny could not fpeak her thanks, but threw herfelf at Mrs. Palmer's feet,exprtfiing her
her gratitude in a language far more em¬ phatic than words. Mr. Godwin and his companions, on their return, were pleafed to find Fanny more compofed than ufual, and returned a thou¬ fand thanks to Mrs. Palmer, who, however, delighted more in doing a good aeYion than hearing it acknowledged, and cut them fhoit, by faying, " You will fright me from my purpofe of vifiting you daily if you treat me thus." Mrs. Palmer was true to her word, not a day paffed but fhe called at the Farm, and by her kindnefs and attention alleviated the for¬ rows of* all but Godwin, who, though he felt her kindnefs, could not forget the inmw titude of his children, whoíe conduct, like a corroding poi fon, was continually preying deeper on his heart. Mrs. Palmer, with the charactcriftic good¬ nefs that peculiarly diftinguiihed her, on F 2 beine kJ
being informed by Fanny of Emma's flight, and that, if William could have difcovered her route, he would have purfued her, wrote to feveral correfpondents fiie had abrord, requefiing them privately to inquire after Whitmore, and if poffible fend her informa¬ tion. The only account ihe gained was from Paris, where fiie learned he had remained a month, and that he had a Lady with him remarkably handfome, who was Lid not to be his wife, but apparently happy in her fituation ; that he went from thence pi ivately, and it was uncertain what route he had taken. As this account contained nothing fatisfactory Mrs. Palmer communicared it alone to William, who could only thank her for the intereft fiie took in their affair?. The health of Agnes, in the mean time, continued in the fame precarious fiate. An eminent phyfician, who had been confulted, advifed a perfeverance in thtir own lenient methods, together with mufic, exercifc, and converfation ; by purfuing which means, he entertained
entertained no doubt but time would reflore her rea fen ; but had far more fear for her health, whkh he pronounced had confumptivc fymptoms very alarming at her age. Her fituation, which confirmed all Fanny's fears, became weekly more confpicuous, though unfufpected by any of the male part of the family, until unable to conceal it much longer, Mrs. Palmer perfuaded Fanny to fuffer her to difclofe it, a ftep fiie thought the more neceffary as Fanny herfelf was pregnant, and in fuch perpetual anxiety refpeciing her fifter's fituation, that it materially injured her health. Godwin and William received this intelli¬ gence like a frefh ftroke of thunder, Ber¬ nard, the big tears chafing each other down his own cheeks, in vain endeavouring to fpeak comfort to them. Mrs. Palmer propofed that Agnes fliould be moved to a houfe of her's on the borders of Yorkíhire, where ihe had a perfon ilie could fafely truft, and that Fanny might ac- F g company
company her with any other of the family they thought proper. This generous offer was, after fome confultation, accepted, but delayed as unnecefiary for two months at leaft. Mrs. Palmer, in the mean time, as if the good of her fellow creatures was her neareft concern, being confiant in her vifits to the Farm, where fne had caufed a harpfi- chord to be brought, an inftrument on which fhe was an adept, and played to Agnes daily· At firft ihe tried fprightly mufic, but it ap¬ peared to increafe her derangement, and was therefore immediately changed for the pen- ferofo, which had a more happy effect, at¬ tracting her attention, and calling forth her tears. This fuccefs encouraged Mrs. Palmer to continue, and one day, after having played Pope's Ode of Vital fpark of heavenly flame^ and accompanied it with her voice, Agnes, for the firft time fince Mrs. Godwin's death, appeared to recollect her, and, ftarting up > holding her hand to her forehead, fhe faid, " I will go to my mother's grave, for 1 am Edwin's wife,'* Mrs.
Mrs. Palmer defired lhe might be grati¬ fied, and fending for her carriage, Agnes was lifted in, and accompanied by Fanny and her generous friend. When they arrived At the church-yard, leaning on Fanny's arm, ihe walked to the grave, and fitting upon tiie ground, kiílèd the fou that covered it, faying, ** Ah ! my dear mother, I am ill, very ill, but do not forget you, though you are in Heaven, for / am Edwin's wife, I will bring flowers, and ftt them here," con¬ tinued ihe : " Flowers for fummer, autumn, winter, and fpring ; nought but flowers ihould cover her grave, and who fo proper to plant them as me, for lam Edwin's wife" Fanny wept bitterly, and though Agnes had never before paid any attention to her tears, ihe now noticed them. fi Why do you weep, Fanny ?" faid ihe, " If it makes you uneafy, you may plant the flowers for fpring and fummer yourfeif, for F 4 you
you are William's wife, and your heart ib warm ; 1 will fet thofe for autumn and winter. for my heart is cold, I am Eâwtn's wife" (C Oh! I cannot—cannot bear it!" ciied Fanny : tf Inhuman—barbarous—degenerate monile r !" tc Of whom do you fpeak, Fanny ?" re¬ plied Agnes, " Not of Edwin I hope, though now I remember," continued fiie, paufing for fome minutes, as if endeavouring to recollect herfelf, " his father curfed him, and his bro¬ ther defpifed him; I, however, forgave him, fo you may all do as you pleafe, though it does not become me to hear it, for / am Edwin's wife." Mrs. Palmer, who perceived the effect this fcene had upon Fanny, by gentle means drew Agnes from the grave, and placing her with her fifler in the coach returned home with them. From
From this time Agnes went daily to the church-yard, ufually accompanied by her brother or Margery, for the whole family had joined commands to entreaty to keep Fanny from attending her thither. During the firft two months of Agnes's illnefs, Edwin's fervant had remained at the inn, procuring intelligence by various means; but after that period, being affured by the country people it was a regular infanity, which they attributed to her lover being falfe hearted, (though her fituation was a profound fecret) he returned to his mafter, leaving it to the landlord to give them information by letter from time to time, and which he did not fail, as he was quite of his wife*s opinion, that Captain Godwin (as ihe called him) was a very handfome man, and as generous as handfome. In this ftate paffed the time for near feven months after Mrs, Godwin's death, when F 5 Edwin
Edwin received a letter from his correipon- dent in the country to this purport : HONOURED SIR, " I think fit to inform you, that three days ago Farmer Bernard's two daughters Idt the Foreft in a poft-chaife, attended only by an old black fervant, whom I never faw before. As our houfe is the firft ftage from Inglewood upwards, they changed horfes, but never got out of the chaife ; nor fliould I have known them but for the poft-boy, who informed me who they were. As the black came into the houfe I thought he might have given me an anfwer like a Chriftian fervant, and therefore .afked him to take a glafs, which, as he accepted, I faid (not pretending to know them) you are going to London I prefume ?"—To which he replied, « No."— Crofs country ?"—« No. — " To the races mayhap ?"—" No," and throwing down the money for his liquor, mounted his horfe, 3
horfe, and followed the chaife like a Pagan as he was» I am fure, Sir, you will allow with me, that it is a wicked fm to prefer fuch blackamoor heathens to good white fer¬ vants, who know how to give a civil anfwer; but, as my wife fays, it is all owing to their want of education, for they run wild before they are taken and tamed by us Chriftians, and know no Religion but what their own foolifh nature prompts, nor have any laws to reftrain them ; which, however, don't much fignify, as they have no property to fecure ; but would make fad work in a Chriftian nation, where people know right from wrong, and act accordingly : But all this, good Sir, is from the purpofe, I was willing to oblige you, and fo by the poft- boys traced them two flages, where they were met by a plain chaife and pair, in which they continued their journey, but I know not whither.
F6
i! I have
" I have no more to add, but my beft wifiies for your welfare, and thanks for your kindnefs, and remain your obliged, Humble fervant, JEREMIAH JENKINS.'* This intellicence added curiofity to the other unpleafing fenfations which poffeikd Edwin ; where could Fanny and her fifter be going, while the health of the latter was in fo precarious a ftate ? Their attendant too, what could he be? He appeared bound to fecrecy, and equal to the truft ; in ihort, the more he ruminated, the more he was per¬ plexed, and at length came to a determina¬ tion to entreat leave of abfence, and endeavour to develop the myftery himfelf. The death of his mother, nor yet the fubfequent illnefs of Agnes, had been able to awaken him to a proper fenfe of his errors ; he felt, but it was a momentary fenfation, for feared at the very idea of reflection, he fied to diifipation, and
and foon obliterated, or at leaft protracted the pangs of retrofpection, by debauchery, luxury, or gaming, neglecting his wife, and adding ingratitude to the catalogue of his crimes. Mrs. Godwin, whofe only incentive to marriage with Edwin was love, had alter¬ nately recourfe to teais, entreaties, reproaches, and anger; but equally vain, he fied fiom all ; home he thought hell, and his wife the fiend commiíTioned to torment him, w hile he had confiant recourfe to the fprightly wanton Mrs. Whitmore, who laughed at his fcruples, and gave occafion for fre İh ones ; yet Agnes was ftill dear to him, and he would willingly have relinquiíhed all he poffeffed to have been reinftated at Inglewood, as he was before his acquaintance with Whitmore.
CHAP.
? ? wm trtm
? II A P. VII,
HEN Agnes was fuppofed to be about feven months advanced Ín her pie< y ancy, accompanied by her fifter, ñ\z was moved to a firali houfe near Richmond, that appertained to Mrs. Palmer; but in vvhich fiie had lately fettled the widow of a fea officer, who had been left in indifferent circumftances. Here Fanny and Agnes were received with true tendernefs and refpect, Mrs. Palmer having prepared Mrs. Smith, the lady of the houíê, for their reception, and alfo fent them attended by her favouiite do¬ meftic FeliXi the negro, mentioned by Mr. Jeremiah
Jeremiah Jenkins. The feparation was pain- ful to the whole family, though allowed by all as the moil prudent plan to conceal the unhappy fituation of Agnes, whofe intellects, though rather more fettled, were yet far from right, and, to their further uneafinefs, her bodily ftrength apparently weakened, a:> her mind recovered its vigour. Mr, Godwin's health too daily declined fince the death of his wife, and the effects of the raifery that continually preyed on him feemed haftening ω a cri lis. The change from Inglewood to Rich¬ mond, after fome little time, appeared to have a happy effect on the fenfes of Agnes ; ihe frequently inquired for her father, Wil¬ liam, and particularly Mr. Godwin, prefíing Fanny to let her return to him, in a manner that pierced her heart ; ihe apparently too began to be fenfibie of her fituation, and fre¬ quently wept for hours.
William,
William, who had not attended them on the joui ney, joined them foon after with his father, and after fonie ftay returned to the forcit, leaving Mr. Godwin behind, as Agnci appeared rejoiced to fee him, and fo greatly difi refied when they fpoke of his de¬ parture, that he determined to remain and wait the event. About a month before the delivery of Acnes, her fenfes became perfectly coilccled ; but that event, which they had fo earneftly dc fired, ferved but to increafe their forrow ; her felf reproaches were continual, and the kindnefs of her friends apparently increafed her difi ic fs, thinkiui tur tht ir confiant at¬ tention, but ever declaring, that, though they forgave her, íhe fhould never forgive her¬ felf. Fanny was likewife advanced, though not fo forward in her pregnancy, and the fatigue and uneafinefs fhe had undergone on account of her fifi er had greatly impaired her health, though ihe carefully endeavoured to
to conceal it, left it ihouki increafe the general uneafmefs. Mis. Palmer, before they liad been moved a month to Richmond, came to fee them ; her general philanthropy eafily accounted to her domefiics for her conduit to the fillers ; the only one of them who had any know¬ ledge of the real fituation of Agnes being Felix, whofe attendance Mis. Palmer had judged neceílary, as Mrs. Smith kept but one female fervant, and it was thought moil prudent, at the prefent period, not to increafe the number. The chaife, in which Mrs. Palmer travelled, was the fame that had met and conveyed Fanny and Agnes to Rich¬ mond, at which time the latter was fo wrap¬ ped up in a long cloak, that her ihape was by no means difcerniblc, had the man who drove the vehicle been even curioufiy inclined, which was fin* from the cafe, for he had long refided with his miftrefs, was fatisfied implicitly to follow her commands without 'queftion, and loved her better than any other object,
objeci, except his horfes. On her arrival at Richmond, not choofing more inmates than abfolutely neceílary, ihe had fent this fervane with her carriage to an inn, Felix going with orders when any were given : Thus there was no apparent fecrecy affect _d in the re¬ treat of Agnes, Mrs. Palmer fimply faying, among her own people, that ilie was moved to try the change of air. Felix had replied to Jenkins in the manner he did merely be· caufe he conceived his queftions impertinent, for to every other perfon who inquired, Bernard and William by agreement anfwered, truly, that the fitters were at a houfe of Mrs. Palmer's, in Yorkíhire, though without fig- nifying the immediate fpot. Mrs. Palmer, in the kindeft manner, en¬ deavoured to cheer the depreffed ípírits of Agnes, and having no mufical infiniment, drove to divert her attention by various re¬ lations, fome amufing, others melancholy; and obferving that me fometimes appeared to regard Felix with an emotion of fear, faid to
to her one day with a fmile, when he ivas abfent, " My dear girl, I think I can tell you a ftory that will make you forget Felix's colour, or at leaft reconcile you to it ; be¬ fides İt will pafs tht time this long evening, and banifii more painful thoughts." Agnes bowed ; all fubjects were imma¬ terial to her, but that neareft to her heart, while Fanny, glad of any attempt to divert her filler's melancholy, returned thanks for Mrs. Palmer's condefcenfion $ as did alfo Godwin, who declared he was totally regardlefs of the complexion of Felix when he converied with him, as he appeared at once well informed, and poffeffed of a good heart. " Well then," faid Mrs. Palmer, taking her feat between Godwin and Agnes, ? I will fimply relate to you the events of my own weary pilgrimage ; Felix has fome fhare in them ; nor am I the only one of my fa¬ mily on whom he has conferred obligations ; but
but the occurrences before í knew him will bc beft related by himfelf." u 1 am the only daughter cf an affluent merchant, cailed Sommerton ; my grand¬ father, by the mother's fide, pofleíled a con¬ fiderable eftate in Jamaica, and had only a fon and daughter, the younger of whom, my mother, was educated in England, and by that means, in all probability, her life was faved, for both her parents were killed in an infurrection of the negroes, and from which fate her brother was only preferved by the affection of a flave. My mother, at this unhappy period, was nineteen, her brother a year older ; both were left in the guardianfhip of a merchant, with whom (as foon as her brother could reach England) they took up their refidence. The only fon of this Gen¬ tleman, in about a twelvemonth after, married my mother, by whom he had feveral chil¬ dren, ail of vvhom died in their infancy ex¬ cept myfelf, who was the youngeft. My uncle,
uncle, whofe name was Walters, in the mean time difiiking an inactive life, and being dif- eufted with the Weft-Indies, had fold off the greateft part of his poffefftons there, and commenced merchant, in which profc fiion he was uncommonly fuccefsful. From the death * of a young Lady, to whom he was contracted, he had formed the lefolution of remaining a bachelor, and to divert the melancholy, oc- cafioned by his lofs, frequently took long voyages, fo that he feldom remained in Eng¬ land for any length of time. He was ten¬ derly attached to my mother, who was equally fo to him, and myfelf the darling of both, my uncle, whenever he was at home, loading me with prefents, and gratifying my wifiies even to profufion. tf In this manner p-ified my childhood until my fourteenth year, when my uncle departed for India, leaving my father the entire care of his whole property in his ab- knce, and tenderly embracing me before his
his departure, feeing me weep, he faid, — c Cheer up, my girl, I am only getting rich for thee/ and pulling out a valuable watch he prefented it to me, adding, ζ there, let me fee how carefully you vvill preferve this for my fake, and on my return I will change it fjr one double the value.' He foon after depaited, leaving me very melancholy,though I muft confefs my grief was lather leffened at intervals on contemplating the prefent he had made me ; it was a gold watch, with the cypher of my name enamelled on the cafe, and the face furroimded with pearls. His bufinefs it was expected would detain him near three years, during which time my father had a young man articled to him ; he was an orphan poíleíled of a decent property, which his guardian wifiied him to better by trade, and therefore placed him for inftruc- tion with my father. This young man was about five years older than myfelf, and by his engaging manners, before I was feventeen, had made an impreffion on my heart, w h i eh.,
which, however, at that time was not fuf- pected by any one. At this period we re¬ ceived a letter, informing us, that fpeedily we might expect ro fee my uncle, as he pro¬ pofed returning to Europe by the firft ihip that failed ; but how great was our forrow and difappointment whin fome time after we learned that he had indeed failed, but that the vciTel had been caft away on the Coa ft of Cantaria, and what became of the crew that efcaped the waves was uncertain ! This news was a heavy blow to my mother, who loved her brother with unfeigned affec¬ tion -, yet for two years we flattered ourfelves with hopes of bis return, at which period our expectations began to decreafe ; for my own part I tiuly confefs I L ved my uncle better than my father, for he was indulgent to all my whimfies, while, on the contrary, my father could not allow for the errors, or even the playfulnefs of childhood, you may there· fore readily judge my tears were fincere for his lofs. My father ftill continued the ma¬ nagement
nagement of my uncle's property, as in the cafe of his death my mother was heir at law, he imprudently having left no will. £C I was juft nineteen when young Pal¬ mer's articles to my father expired, and he fettled for himfelf: He lamented with me the lofs of my uncle, as that event would apparently increafe my fortune beyond what he could expect, efpecially as my father was rather addicted to a love of wealth, and my mother's will was ever fubfervient to his. — Thus were we fituated when I unhappily loft my mother in an apoplectic fit, by which means my uncle's property became totally veiled in my father. I ihall pais over my grief for this iofs, which, however, I affure νου, was sreat, as was alfo m v fithei's for a confiderable time, applying himfelf with redoubled carnei! nefs to bufinefs to baniih thought, and fettling ail my uncle's affairs on the moft lucrative principles ; the eftate, which remained unfold in Jamaica, he dif- pofed
pofed of, together with the negroes that cul¬ tivated it, and who, during my uncle's life, and indeed until this period, had been fo happily fituated asto have no wiíh to change, being only under the command of the negro who faved my uncle's life, and who had from him received his liberty, making him alfo overfeer of the plantation he re fer ved i a truft which he executed with juftice to his employer, credit to himfelf, and to the uni¬ versal fatisfaction of his fellows. tC My fadier was enabled not only to do this, but alfo to make what other changes he thought neceílary, as, previous to my uncle's departure, he had given him a letter of attorney to act in cafe any alteration fhould be found neceílary in his abfence. He had been gone five years at my mother's death, and a year had ehpfed fince that period, when my father formed a connexion unworthy cither his underftanding, fituation, or age; in íhort, it was with the fervant that immediately at- vott f I. G tended
tended me, and who was about four years older than myfelf. I was involuntarily a fpec¬ tator of fome little freedoms that paffed between them, but vvhich I thought it moft prudent not to notice for fome time, though ihe grew negligent of her bufinefs, and was frequently abfent at thofe hours when ihe knew I ftiould particularly want her. <c I was not weak enough to fuppofe I had power to break this connexion, but, on mature deliberation, concluded it would be lefs vexatious to me, puiiued in any other place than immediately in the houfe where I dwelt, and accordingly one evening, after her lemaining out very hie, I gave h^r a difirfifiion, defiring fiie would feek another fituation, as I had no farther occafion for her fervices. I am not naturally paffiorate, and gave this difcharge in niy ufual manner, sud without entering into the caufe oi' my dif¬ pleaiure; yet fiie anfwered me with uncom¬ mon infolence, faying, ' You miftake, Madam,
Madam, you will have more occafion than ever for my fervices, and muft likewife learn to deferve them, or you may find yom felf uncomfortably fituated.' With this ipeech ihe bounced out of the room, leaving me both diftreffed and aftoniihed, as her threat« appeared to imply a greater power over my father than 1 could either fufpect or dread. The next morning, at breakfaft, my father was uncommonly ferious, and continued to treat me with a kind of gloomy referve for Jome days, without, however, mentioning the lubject of his difpleafure. until one even¬ ing, after fupper, firft increafing his courage by two or three glafies of wine extraordinary, he ventured to tell me he had been very uncomfortable fince the death of my mother. I naturally expreffed my forrow at this infor¬ mation, hoping no neglect of mine had ad¬ ded to it, declaring he had only to name what had given him difpleafure, and I would be particularly careful to remedy it. Before Ga I
I could proceed he interrupted me, faying, tc No, no, I cannot accufe you of neglect ; but I have thoughts, Anna, of marrying again, and therefore would prepare you to receive the woman I filali choofe with the refpect becoming my wife and your mother." The bufinefs w-as nov/ plain, but endea¬ vouring to conceal my diffatisfaction, though a bad diffembler, í replied : <c As the ob¬ ject of your choice, Sir, will doubtlefs be lefpectable, I muft neceflarily efteem her, though I cannot flatter myfelf with meeting the tender affection of a firfi parent." " I poffefs the means of making her re¬ fpectable," anfwered my father, drinking another plafs of wine, u and I have no one's inclination to confult but my own." I bowed my acquicfccr.ee ; he foon after retired for the ni°,ht, and the firft news that reached me the en fu ing morning was, that at¬ an
an early hour he had taken Mary with him in the poft-chaife, and fet off for the country. Two days after their marriage was publicly declared, though they continued for a fort¬ night out of town, I leave you to judge the uneafinefs I experienced ; I was totally de¬ pendant on my father, whom I had every rcafon to fear would be a fiave to the capí ices of the woman he had married, and whom I naturally concluded would be my enemy, were it only that I was apprifed of her con¬ duct before he efpoufed her. I can truly aver, that had he married a virtuous and wor¬ thy object, whatever had been her fituation, rny pride would never have overcome me fo far, as to forget what was due to my fa¬ ther's wife ; but my heart recoiled both at her former conduci and infolence, fo that I knew not how to receive her. Deliberating on this fubject two or three days after the marriage, Palmer was announced, and imme¬ diately admitted : After the ufual falutations, G 3 « I
" I will not congratulate you," faid be, " on your father's marriage, though I will, my Anna, truly confefs it has given rife to hopes I before dared not cherifh, as I think he may now be the moie inclined to part with you. I have already faid I was partial to Palmer, I was yet more, for I fincerely loved him, and though pofteffed of nothing romantic in my difpofition, had determined, that if ever I married he fnould be my hufband ; little pcrfuafion therefore obtained my confent that he fiiould apply to my father, as I judged he would, as well as his wife, be pleafed at my removal. I was, however, miftaken, my father defired time to confider, and confulting my new mother, an abfolute denial was the confequence. I could attribute this but to one caufe, which was, that ilie fufpected my affection for Palmer, and took a malignant pleafure in thwarting my inclinations. After this refufal Palmer wrote ro entreat me to accept his hand without the confent of
of my father : " His bufinefs," he faid, " was profperous, and my fortune never an incen¬ tive, and that he was convinced I was un¬ happily fituated at home." Pleafed at the genevofity of this offer, T, however, declined it, at leaft for the prefent, as i wanted ten months of being of age, but promifed at that time to anfwer him moie fully. I ihouki but weary you by relating all the defpicable methods my father's wife put in practice to render my fituation cm- pleafant, while he, who was abfolute in my mother's life time, had no will but what this woman pleafed, and was blindly fubfervient to all her arts. We feldom met but at meals; I was polite, but cold, familiarity being as much avoided by me as abfolutely difpleafing her ; as in the firft place I muft hive been obliged to fuller perpetually the empty vul¬ garity of her converfation, and in the latter all the vindictivenefs of narrow ideas, and confined education. My father's fondnefs vas entirely founded on her perfon, which, G 4 indeed,
indeed, was good ; he was Hkewife flattered Ly the (liow of affecìion, which ihe was con¬ tinually and difguftingly bellowing on him, and if he had a grain of paternal love left for me it entirely vanÍíhed, when fix months after her marriage ilie declared herfelf with child. "My father came from 'Change one day, accompanied by an elderly man, who was a dry-falter of confiderable fortune, but had rifen unexpectedly to his prefcnt affluence by the death of a relation, depping at once into a great fortune, but deftitute of under- ftanding, education, or even common polite- nefs. This man honoured me with his good liking, and made propoials to my fadier, which liis wife approving, were immediately accepted, and 1 was defired to regard Mr. Brewer (which was his name) as my future huiband. I have already told you I was not romamic, therefore I neither wept, nor threw myfelf at my father's (ctt 9 but before his Lady Amply defired him, on niy part, to thank
thank Mr. Brewer for his good opinion, but that I could not accept his offer." u And pray why not?" faid my father; " what are your objections ?" €t In the firft place," replied Ι, ίζ he is low bred and illiterate, which, I think, my dear Sir, is a powerful objection, and fufficient without any other." Mrs. Sommerton looked as though fhe could have ftruck me, while my father gave a hem, and took a pinch of fnuff. fe And pray what other great objection can you make ?" faid my father. " As great a difference in age, as dilpofi- tion," replied I. iC You, perhaps," refumed my ftther, have forgotten the change in your circum¬ ftances, and confider yourfeif as my imme- G 5 diate
díate heir î but I would wifh you to recollect the alteration that has taken place, I may now have a numerous family to íhare my property.." I could fcarcely fupprefs a fmile, but íe- plieJ, " To prove to you, Sir, that I have not difjegarded that clrcumftance, it was in < ider to leflen your family that 1 confented to Mr. Palmer's entrer.! ing your approba¬ tion to our union." <c So then, Mifs," faid Mrs. Sommerton, s< ir is not matrimony tliat you objeci to, but the man r " fí Exacììy fo, Madam," replied I, forget¬ ting my ufual coolnefs j " there are fome men as well as women whom I view with peculiar difiiké.' 5 Mrs, Sommerton at once applied my anfwer to herfelf, and choofing rather to in*· ccrefi my father by her foftnefs than by her fpirits
fpirir, pretended to burít into tears, and be ready to faint; my father in the mean time entreating her to be pacified, and vowing no one fliould offend her with impunity, con¬ cluding with telling me, that he regarded Mr. Brewer's as an unexceptionable offer, and which, if I did not accept, he totally dif- claimed me; bidding me confider what he had faid, and on the morrow return my anfwer, u It need no tíme, my dear Sir," replied ï ; f< to-morrow can make no difference^ gtieved as I am, and ever muft be, at your difpleafure ; vet Mr. Brewer iliall never be my huiband." " My dear love," faid Mrs. Sommerton, addrefilng my father, a give way a little, Mils Anna is in love with Mr. Palmer, and your fe verity may make her regardlefs of confequences, and elope with him." <( Do not think it, Madam," replied I, provoked at her duplicity, " I will never tbr- G 6 «u
get what İs due to my father, while he recol¬ lects I am his daughter; nor will I ever form a connexion fo ferious as man iage without his confent, unlefs abfolutely forced tvi í: y in tint cafe, Madam, I will neither leap out r f * ?^^ nor fly to Gretna Green, but wait unti! i .. n of agr,, which will be in tin ?? months '-¿en walk into me firft pariíh church 1 meet with, and give my hand where 1 have airead) beftowed my heart." My father was fo much provoked at this reply, that he ordered me to leave tlie room, a command which I inftantly obeyed. My fituation, from this period, was, if pofiible, ten times more irkfome than before. My father refufed to difmifs Brewer, I there- lore took that tifk upon myfelf, and was foon îieed írom his períecutions, though his ac- qu'dl'cnce redoubled the rancour of Mis. Scrrmenon towards rne, and confequently die
the ill-will of my father. The old fervants, many of whom were grown gtey in our fer- vice, were difcharged on various pretences, the fmalleft particle of attention to me being certain to procure their immediate difmiffion. Thus difagreeably paffed my time until I completed my twenty-firft year, when Palmer once more, at my requeft, preifed my father to confent to our union ι nor did I fcrupîe to fécond the entreaty, but fruitlefs was the attempt, though Palmer's profpects might have entitled him to a fortune fuperior to what my father now declared he meant to give me, if I married with his confent (which was ten thoufand pounds) but if I difpofedof myfelf wirhout his concunence, I was to ex¬ pect nothing. Mrs. Sommerton was likewife prefcnt when my father gave his final determination, and appeared to exult in thus croffingour wifhcs; while Palmer fee med overpowered with dis¬ appointment and vexation, declaring that his folicitation
folicitation was not With an interefted view, but merely to procure my father's approba¬ tion, as he well knew I ht hi his concurrence neceílary to my happinefs, >'> ne .ted to be informed if there were any thing m ¡us con¬ duct or circumftances that operated to his difadvantage, as he would endeavour to re¬ move it, or if that was impracticable, fiiould at leaft have the fatisfaction of knowing win he was refufed. All thefe concefiions, however, were pro¬ ductive of nothing more than a repetition of the refufal, Mrs. Sommerton adding, with her ufual infolence, that as matters ftood his vifits at our houfe would be difpenfed with. I kept filence until the whole converfa¬ tion was concluded, and Palmer was advancing towards the door, when calling ? im back, I faid, " I have liftened with uneafinefs through this difagreeable bufinefs; had my father any reafonable objection to you, and would con¬ deicend
defcend to explain it, far be it from me to act in opposition to his wifhes ; but as he advances none, I naturally conclude it pro¬ ceeds not from himfelf (looking firmly at Mrs. Sommerton) and therefore fet it afide, and freely offer you my hand, if, poor as I am, you will accept it. The niece of Mr. Walters ftiould, indeed, have brought her huiband fome fortune ; but which, if you can overlook, I will never regret, and in its ftead endeavour cheerfully, with prudence and affection, to make up the deficiency. ,, To defcribe what followed is beyond my power. Mrs. Sommerton endeavoured to appear fiiocked at my undutifulnefs and in¬ gratitude, while Palmer expreffed his tranf- ports as though I had a throne to beftow with my hand - y my father alternately footh- ing his wife, and uttering vows of vengeance againft me, finally declaring, as I had formed my reiblution, the fooner I left the houfe the better. In 4
In this temper we feparated, and I retired to my own room for the remainder of the day, during which I received a letter from Palmer, entreating me to be prepared at eight the following morning, at which time he propofed to call for me, with a licence, and, accompanied by frftJâjc guardian, who would act as my father on theoì^&Sgn at the pari ih church. In the evening I wrote to my father, in- clofing Palmer's letter, entreating him, by every thing he held moft facred, and by the beloved memory of my mother, not to caft me off"; but my writing was equally ineffec¬ tual as my prayers, for he fimply returned for anfwer, u that I had choferi my fate, and muft abide by it ; all he defired was, to hear no more of me," The next morning Palmer was true to his time, and, accompanied by his friend, we reached the church, where I was united to a man,
man, whom I loved living, and whofe me¬ mory muft ever be dear to me—the man who won my virgin heart, and never gave me caufe to repent its difpofal." Mrs. Palmer's voice became tremulous, and fuddenlv lifin?, "I will relate the re- mainder to-morrow night," faid fiie, " it b now almoft fupper time."
CHAP.
CHAP. VIII.
THE following evening Mrs. Palmer refumed her narrative. ' f As I brought my hufband no fortune, I thought it my duty to be peculiarly econo¬ mical, and had the fatisfaction, at the end of two years, after our marriage, to find our expences kept confiderably within our income, add to which I thought myfelf the happieft of wives and mothers, for that time had given us a lovely boy. My father's unnatural be¬ haviour, and the recollection of my uncle, were the only fubjects that gave me pain ; the
ilie former had a fon born in about two months after my marriage, and the death of the latter w r as no longer doubted. My felicity had continued for two years, when a capital banking-houfe at Amfterdam, and an eminent commercial one at London, in both of which my huiband was neariy concerned, flopped payment, and gave at once a blow to our profperky and happinefs, for every effort to retrieve the lofs was tried in vain, my hufband was unavoidably a bank¬ rupt, and all our effects barely fufficient to pay twelve ihillings in the pound. So highly was my huíband refpecled, that had he but pofteffed a fum to have enabled him to wait the returns of trade, he might have obtained credit to any amount, and furmounted every difficulty ; but we had given up all without referve, and ?.?! ^.o refouicc, my father, to whom I, unknown to my huiband, applied, refufing to advance a finglc thoufand pounds, and, to add to my calamity, Palmer's health had received a blow, in confequence of his lïihfonmiçSb
misfortunes, that I much feared might termi¬ nate f trail y. Thus fituated, we determined for fome time to remove a little diftance from London for change of air, which I hoped might prove falutary, and accordingly took lodgings in the moft private part ot' Ifiington ; the few valuables I poffeffed, and mv houfehold linen, which had been fpared by the kindnefs of the creditors, being our whole fund, and all the referve we had to truft to. Though we lived with the utmoft frugality, and kept but one fervant, yet our means daily dtcreafed ; and I confidered with angui ?? the poverty that was ready to over¬ take us ; determined to protract it as longas pofiible, I yet more retrenched our expences, moving to a cheaper lodging, and difcharging the only fervant I kept. In this manner paffed the firft year of our misfortunes, Palmer's malady, by almoft im¬ perceptible degrees, undermining his confti- tution, and rendering him unable to make any
any exertion to extricate us from our unhappy fituation, or even to foften its afperity. One day, that he liad been yet more dis¬ ordered than ufual, he walked out for air into the fields, leaving me engaged in my domef¬ tic concerns ; but had not gone far when he was feized with ? pleuritic pain, and fhortncfs cf breath, that rendered him unabic eidier to proceed or return. Hoping it would abate, he fit himfelf down in a field where fome hay-makers were at work ; but in a Ihort time became fo much worfe, that his iilnefs was perceptible to the labourers, feveral of whom came and fpoke to him, and among others a negro, whom, perhaps, you vvill truly furmife was Felix. Mr. Palmer by this time was almoft unable to fpeak, and could only faintly fignify his defire to get home ; but his pain was too violent
violent for him to be able to walk, and in the middle of the fields no conveyance could be obtained. In this dilemma Felix flew off with the utmoft fpeed, and reaching the town ran into the firft apothecary's fhop he could meet with, entreating the mafter, for the love of Heaven, to come into the fields, for that a man had been feized with fo violent a pain in the fide, that he feared, without imme¬ diate affiftance, it would prove fatal. The apothecary, who doubtlefs furmifed, from the appearance of Felix, it was one of his fellow labourers, replied, by defiring him to lead the fick man to his fhop, and he would bleed him, which he did not doubr would aftbrd relief, but that himfelf had not time to go fo far. <f Not time !" replied Felix, iC then the poor foul muft die, for 1 am iure he cannot walk hither ; befides, I thought it was your proteinon
profeffiOii to altend the fick, not the fick to attend you." íC You are an impudent fellow," anfwered the apothecary, " to iuppofe I fhould walk almoft a mile to bleed a man for fix-pence, or, perhaps, for nothing j but go about your bufinefs, there is a barber a few doors far¬ ther that will, perhaps, fuit your purpofe ; for my part I never ftep over the threihold to let blood under half a crown." Felix paufed, then fumbling for a moment in his bofom, pulled out a dollar, in which a finali hole had been drilled, and a piece of ribbon drawn through: "Here," laid he, " I have no money but this, keep it until to-morrow night, I will then redeem it, if the fick man cannot pay you, for he mult not die for want of help : I have th?n my week's hire to receive ; all I begis, you will be careful of iu" As he fpoke he held out the dollar ; but the apothecary, doubtlefs afhamed
afhamed to be outdone by this fimple child of nature, putting back his offered hand, replied, "No—no," e.nd fnatching down his hat, bade Felix lead the way. On their arrival at the fpot where M'·. Talmer ftíil fat he was immediately bled, and in halfan hour fo greatly lelieved as to be able to walk home, attended by the apo¬ thecary and the friendly Felix, the former being now as affiduous as he was at iirit carelcfs, for though we were in reality very much reduced, Ρ aimer had itili an appear¬ ance of refpcctability. " Had you told me," faid the apothecary, as they were helping Palmer home, " that it was a Gentleman who was taken fo ill in the fields, I fliould not have heli tated a moment ; but as you fpoke I proteft I thought it was one of your comrades." " I was not fufficiently acquainted with European cuftoms to know that fuch a diftinction
difiin ilion was neceffary," replied Felix, dryly i but you may depend hereafter I vvill not fail to remember it, and every man that wants afiiilance fhall by me be ftiied a Gentleman," " Theu art an odd fellow/* faid the apo¬ thecary ; <% have you been long in England ?" Cf Long enough," replied Felix, if to con¬ vince me of the erroneous opinion I had formed, for the hrft forty years of my life, of Englishmen, whofe hearts, I had perfuaded myfelf, were as good as their faces ; but have learned, to my coft, the only difference between many of them and us is, we bear the black without—they within.* 1 Palmer, in fpite of pain, could not fup¬ prefs a fmile : " I am glad," faid he, " you do not include all in your account, as it feems to imply you have met fame few who deferve approbation."' vol. n. H c Appro-
" Approbation," replied Felix, " is a coki word ; 1 could almoft Íay adoration ; but it is paft, meteors are not frequent, nor in your country fubjects of worfiiip. I, indeed, knew one whofe virtues made this land dear to me, but he is gone to Heaven, as you call it, or the land of fouls, it is the fame thing, and where even negroes will rejoice to meet him." This difcourfe brought them home, and was repeated to me both by Palmer and the apothecary, the latter declaring it had made an impreffion on him never to be effaced, and which would oblige him henceforward to attend fufferers without queftioning their pretenfions to gentility. Palmer was much better in the evening, at which time Felix did not fail to come and inquire after him with great refpect. Recovered from my firft alarm I was not yet fo defiitute, but chat I had it in my power to offer him fome fmall compenfation for his trouble,
trouble, and the time he had loft i but de¬ clining it, he drew back, faying, — - " No, Madam, I labour for hire, I have not laboured for your huiband." " But your labour," faid I, " is not, ï fear, fufficient to fupport you in the necef- faries of life, ftranger as you are, you can¬ not be fuppofed to poffefs the refources of a native." " Induftry, Madam," replied he, tc is uni- verfally underftood, and with health fully adequate to fuftain the wants of man; it procures me bread, and fometimes meat °, this habit to fliehe r me from the weather, and at night a place of reft for my wearied limbs." I put my money back into my pocket, at once humiliated and pleafed, faying, men¬ tally, " A diamond is equally precious whe¬ ther inclofed in a cafiket of ebony or ivory." H 2 From
From this time our friendly negro, by my defire, frequently called, and was ever anxious to render us a number of little fervices, that he thought we might feel derogatory. My little boy, who was now turned of two years old, had at firft been frightened at his ap¬ pearance, but by the gentlenefs of 1rs manners had grown fo attached, that he never failed lo cry after him. Three months had now paíled fince we knew Felix, whom I frequently determined to queftion refpeciing his former life, but was fo entirely occupied by my domeftic con¬ cerns, and the ftill declining health of Palmer, that it was ever neglecled 5 befides the name of mcfler never efcaped him unaccompanied by a tear, and I could not bear to gratify my curiofity by renewing his diftrefs, which muft apparently have been the cafe ; his flay too whenever he called was ihort, as he con¬ ftantly laboured in the fields or gardens in the neighbourhood of Ifiington, his vifits being
being merely as his conduct fhewed, to en¬ deavour to do us fer vice, as fetching me coals, cleaning Palmer's clothes, or any other little office he could devile, ever refufing money, at moil accepting the remains of our frugal table, and a draught of beer. At this period my little darling was feized with the fmall-pox of a moft malignant kind, and for three weeks my heart was alternately torn with anguiih, or revived by hope, as the fymptoms increafed or abated. Regard¬ lefs of my poverty, fo I cou*d fave my child, I fpared no expence, employing every able phyfician I heard recommended, but in vain ; I was doomed to be chtldiefs, and ro furvive thofe ties dearer to me than life." Mrs. Palmer ceafed for a moment, and perceiving both Fanny and Agnes wept, fhe faid, croffmg her own eyes with her hand¬ kerchief, c( I rejoice, Agnes, at this proof of your fcnfibiiity ; it is a plain demonftra- H 3 tion
tion that your own forrows have not felfiíLly narrowed your heart, as they yet leave you a tear to beftow on others." u I ihall pafs over the death of my fon," continued Mrf. Palmer, <f for the fubject even yet is painful j fuffice it that í found myfelf not even pulfeficd of money to hy hib beloved remains decently in the earth ; all our little valuables and linen had been üifpofed of, the watch given me by my uncle alone remained, and which liad been prcicrved merely fiom affection to the giver. My huiband, depreffed by a long illnefs on the lofs of his fon, appeared totally to fink under his calamities, and to regard every thing around him v, ith an infenfibility that cruelly alarmed me To confuli hirn, then, in this dreadful crifis was ufclef% and could anfwer no end but increafing his diftrefs. To apply to my father I knew would be unavailing ; nor could I bear the thought of giving his unworthy wife the pleafure of triumphing over
over my mifery. Feüx had been daily with us fince the child's ficknefs, and, in fpite ot all oppofition, had frequently fat up with him, attending him with a tendernefs, that, even young as he was, he was fenfibie of; for the evening before he died he faid, as he hekl Felix by the hand, c Dear papa and mamma, alwa)S love Felix, for he loves me." But I wander from my fubicct, which was to pafs the child's death,' continuée! íhe ; íf but the fond partiality of a parent involuntarily beguiled mc. Unable, as I before obferved, to confuí t Palmer, anel without any refoLirce but the w .»ich given me by my uncle, I determined to part with it, and for that purpofe, calling Felix into the 'garden, I difclofed my ii.tciricr:, :..ii afked if he could take it to London, ar., fed it for me, as 1 reaily mjfelf was un.'Lh- ? Felix had been too much with us to be ; ^?- ». rant that we labouied under difficulties, yet ieemed diilreffed at this proof of it; but promifed implicitly to obey mc, and repair H 4 to
to a capital watch-maker, vvhom I fpecified, and return with the money as fpeedily as poffible. This fettled Felix cook the watch, and left me about nine o'clock in the morn¬ ing. As he h.\d only to go ro Cheapfide I naturally fuppofed he might mum in about couple of hours; but five had pafied without his appearance, and I began to be uneafy. I did not doubt the honefty of Felix, but dreaded iome accident had befallen him, yet did not venture to declare my fears to Pri¬ mer. At length I heard a knock at the door, and haftening down 1 met Felix in the paffage, but at the houfe door difcovered a man apparently waiting. Wiihing to fpeak to him unheard I ftepped into the little par¬ iour, and was upon the point of queftioning him, when raifing mv eyes to his face, the animation of his features aftonifiied me, — What has happened, Felix r" faid Ï, " furely you have met with fomething uncommonly pleafing ?"
u Uncommonly
tc Uncommonly pleafing !" repeated he. " Oh ! I am too happy ;" but fuddenly ap¬ pearing to recollect himfelf, and to ftruggle with his feelings : Cf The man, Madam," continued he, u that is tlie watch, Madam·— the Gentleman waits." " For Fleaven's fake what do you mean, Felix ?" replied I; iC furely you do not drink ? Tell me, what faid the watch-maker ?" " Say, Madam," anfwered he, apparently loft in fome other fubject : " Why, he blefled God, and faid ten thoufand pounds !" Again fuddenly endeavouring to recall his miftake, he added, " The Gentleman waits, do let me call him in." " Diftreffed for the lofs of my child, and my heart torn with anguiih from my unhappy fituation, I replied, peevifiily, vvhat do you mean — what Gentleman —- where is the watch ?" H 5 Felix
Felix then gave me to underftand, though in the fime incoherent manner, that the watch-maker would not purchafc it without feeing the owner, left it fliould be difhoneftly obtained, and had fent a Gentleman with him for that purpofe. Convinced that Felix was in liquor, I ad¬ vanced towards the door to call in the ftran¬ ger ; but regardlefs of compliments he ruíhed before me, fiying, "Walk in. Sir, pray walk in, Heaven blefs you." The ftranger immediately entered ; he was a man in the decline of life, and of a very refpectable appearance. S£ I am forry. Sir," faid I, fC that you have taken this trouble ; the watch is mine ; a cruel emergency obliges me, Heaven knows how unwillingly, to part with it" As I fpoke I could not reftrain my tears, nor was die ftranger unmoved. u Aí
fe As you appear, Madani, to value it fo highly," replied he, " pardon me, but can nothing elfe fupply this emergency, as trin¬ kets, rings, or other female decorations ?" " Alas ! they are all gone," cried I, weep¬ ing j cc this only remains j it was the gift of my more than father, and nothing but thr; diftrefs of the prefent moment could force me to part with it, to lay the beloved remains of my infant in the earth, and to nourifh the expiring fpark of life that ye. remains in the beft of huibancls." " And what, Madam, do you aik for it ?" replied he, turning afide his head. cc Alas !" anfwered I, " I am no judge ; í fee you feel for my diftrefs, and will not, I am fure, wrong me : I am willing to abide by your decifion."
H 6
Oa
On his firft entrance he had drawn the watch from his pocket, and laid it upon the table that ftood between us. " Well, then/' faid he, after a paufe, and with i.icrealed emotion, " I think thirty pounds is nearly the value -, it has apparently been carefully kept." His offer was double what I expected, for the price obtained fcr the things already fold fcarcely amounted to a third of their value. <f I am content," faid I, weeping, and taking it, as I thought for the laft time, in my hand, could not refrain preffing it with my lips : " Farewell," cried i, ff laft token of the beft beloved of friends j could he even fee me in this hour of anguiih, I fiiouid ob¬ tain his pardon." " Thou haft İt, my Anna—my child"—· exclaimed the ftranger, clafping me in his arms i
arms; " henceforward doubly endeared by thy misfortunes." I was fo loft in aftonifhment, that I had not power to repulfe the ftranger had I been fo inclined ; but fixing my eyes in filence on him, I eagerly endeavoured to trace the perfon of my uncle Walters, but in vain ; my uncle was fair, lufty, and wore a brown wig; while this ftranger was uncommonly dark-complexioned, thin, and wore his own hair, which was as white as flax. " And has ten years totally obliterated thy uncle Waiters from thy memory, Anna?" cried he : " Indeed, I believe my perfon is changed, but my heart is ftill the fame," My pleaiure and amazement were too great for words ! I threw myfelf on his neck, and wept in filence. Felix, who had withdrawn as foon as my uncle entered, had in the mean time been with Mr. Palmer, to whom,
whom, not being charged to keep filence as he was to me, he had diiclofed the happy meeting that was taking place, and returned down ilairs with him at the moment I was weeping on the neck of my uncle. In a few moments Mr. Walters feated me in a chair, and affectionately faluted my huf¬ band, telling him all his pecuniary difficulties were over, and to look forward to health and happinefs. In the mean time the behaviour of Felix was ftill far from calm, and might have alarmed an uninformed fpectator for his in¬ tellects: He walked round his maíKr (for Felix was the identical fiave that had before faved his life) examined his face, touched his hair, rubbed his own hands in an etftacy of joy, and finally fnatching up my uncle's hat that lay in the window, kiffed it with tranfport.
Our
Our tumults being a little fubfided, my uncle beftowed a tear to the memory of my child ; but peremptorily infifted that all the care of the funeral fliould centre in himfelf, thus kindly endeavouring to fpare me what he truly furmifed muft increafe my forrow,
CHAP.
CHAP. IX.
A FEW days after the remains of my infant were configned to the earth* Mr. Palmer and myfelf, at the exprefs defire of my uncle, removed to his houfe, vvhich. he commanded me henceforward to confider as my own. The firft emotions of grief for the îofs of my fon, and the joy of meeting my uncle, were no fooner fubfided than mutual inquiries took place of all that had befallen us during a ten years feparation.
My
My uncle informed us that he had, as we truly heard, been caft away, on his return from India, on the Coaft of Caftraria, about three years after he left England, that the greater part of the crew had periíhed in the wreck, twenty-four only efcaping, twenty of whom had endeavoured to explore their way to the Cape of Good Hope, but had doubt¬ lefs periíhed either by hunger, or from the natives, as they had never reached it. For the others, two were my uncle's domefiics, and the third, a young man, his clerk, who attended him on his voyage, all of whom determined to íhare his fortunes, when he refufed to accompany the party who fought the Cape, being convinced it was impracti¬ cable without knowing the country, and a flore of provifions, tne fmall flock they had been able to procure from the wreck being foon expended. The inhabitants of the Coaft had at firft behaved with ferocity, but finding the un¬ happy intruders too few in number to give them
them alarm, and likewife unarmed, and wil¬ ling to part with any thing they poffeffed, as their clothes, watches, or money (the two laft mentioned of which they converted into ornaments) they foon became familiarized, and fuppiied them with milk, rice, and venifon, fufficient for their fupport. My uncle's defign was, if pofiible, to gain their confidence fufficiently to perfuade fame, who were beft acquainted with the country, to accompany them to one öf the Dutch fettle¬ ments, for to undertake to walk fuch an ex¬ tenfive tract of land, penetrate the thick ftrtfts, crofs fuch rapid rivers, or climb the almoft perpendicular mountains, without a guide, was at once vain and impracticable. None, however, of the inhabitants of the fertiement had ever been at any great diftance from home (as they informed them when they began to comprehend a little of the language) nor would, far any reward, under¬ take iuch a journey. Thus circumftanced, my uncle thought his deftination fiy ed, and endeavoured
endeavoured to comfort his companions. — With the approbation of the natives they erected themfclves a hut, and fiirrounded it in the manner of the Caftres, with a planta¬ tion of rice. The clerk, who was a youth, and one of the domefiics, who was likewife young, by infinite perfe veranee, learned to throw the affagay with fo much fkill, that it not only procured them plenty of food, but raifed them much in the opinion of the in¬ habitants, who faw them with pleafure give into their cuftoms, and adopt their weapons. In this manner paftcd three years, my uncle and his cldeft domeftic convinced they fhould draw their laft breath in this country, and the younger people only with-held from the wild undertaking of exploring their way to the Cape, by affection for their compa¬ nions. At this period two brothers (natives) who had ??? made prifoners in a conteft with fome neighbouring nations returned, after five years abfence, the greater part of which
which time they had refided in the diftant countiy of the Auteniquas. Travelling, or perhaps the difficulties they had endured, had enlarged their minds ; for they treated the firangers with more humanity than any of their companions, and, after holding various difcourfes with them, as they now perfectly underftood the language, faid, that affection for their father had alone induced them to return, being much better pleafed with the inland country than the Coaft ; and that, was their parent no more, for a proper reward they would not fcruple to riík the journey ; but that, during his life, nothing ftiould tempt them to forfake him. This difcourfe again revived their hopes, for the traveller's father was very old and infirm, which gave them daily expectation of their wifhes being foon fulfilled ; but, to their great difappointment, he lingeied two years. He was no fooner dead than my uncle renewed his promifes of reward, and, in ihort,
ihort, foon obtained what he had fo long folicited, they agreeing to accompany him to the fiift Dutch fettlement, where he had no doubt but, by making himfelf known, he could obtain credit for the promifed reward, which was to confiti: of iron, tobacco, and other articles, confidered by them as paiti- cularly defirable. The difficulties they encountered durino- this jouinty were innumeiable, and would have been im poffible for them to fupport, but for the refources which necefiity had taught the natives, whofe ikill at their wea¬ pons conftantly procured food, the country abounding in elks, &c. They were likewife well ve ried in the necefiary precautions to fecure them from the attacks of wild beafk, Some days they could not advance more than four or five miles, from the obilacles they met with, as thick woods, and ftcep mountains ; at other times were detained by waiting the rcfiux of prodigious rivers, which they
they were obliged to crof>, or to coaft along the Banks at tlie exuence of both time and íàtigue. At length, however, they reached a Dutch fettlemenr, where their appearance caufed no fmall furprife, for my uncle, as well as his companions, were naked, the fmall remains of covering the natives had left them having been fo long worn out, that they were grown perfectly familial ized to the omiifion, and their fkins burned to the complexion of copper.
CHAP.
■
CHAP. X.
THE Dutch factor received them with tolerable kindnefb, but did not appear willing to advance a reward my uncle thought adequate to the fervices of the Caffres, he then fore, without much difficulty, perfuaded them to accompany him to the Cape ; and after fome ftay they refumed their journey, and, to their great fatisfaction, at length reached it. My uncle was well acquainted with two capital merchants there; one, to his great dilappointment, he found was dead; but was more
moie fortunate in his fécond inquiiy, though this friend at fiift dici not know him ; but after fome few preliminaries acknowledged, and readily embraced him, infifting that he fliould take up his refidence at his houfe, and draw on him for what funis he found neceffary. My uncle at fiift thought to write to Eng¬ land, but after a ihoit time determined to furprife his fiiends. The merchant's offer he willingly accepted, his firft care being to reward his guides to the utmoft extent of their wifiies, difmiffmg them with four oxen loaded with what they thought moil valuable. This bufinefs fettled, he waited for a home¬ ward bound indiaman, and at length em¬ barked with his three faithful companions for Europe, which he reached after a pleafant voyage. On his firft landing he immediately re* paired to my father's, and though his appear¬ ance 4
a-nce was now very refpectable, yet the change his perfon had undergone rendered him per¬ fectly unknown ; he, however, foon made himfelf acknowledged, and then learned, to his grief, that his filter was dead, and my¬ felf, his great favourite, married to a worth- lefs man, who had lately become a bankrupt, and with whom I wac now withdrawn, no one knew whither. It was not my uncle's cuftom to condemn unheard, he therefore determined, if pofiible, to fee ive, for he found no great predilection for my father's wife, and even déclinée! taking up his refi- dence with them. He had bczn but a fort¬ night in England when he met with ceux, and had already advertifed three times, de- firing me, if alive, to apply to his attorney, or, if any one could give Intelligence refpec · ting me, offering a revartb This kindneis had, however, been fruitlefs, for wc never faw the news-papers; nor did any one, fince our laft removal, know where to find us, as we wifhed to conceal our miferies from the worid. vol. i u I The
The morning my unele fortunately met with Felix he had accidentally, in palling along Cheapfide, recollected that he wanted a watch, anel walking into a fhop the man-had fhewed him feveral, and they weie on the point of making an agreement when Felix entered. My uncle recollected him at once, but aftonifiied to lind him in England, ftood for ? moment loft in furprife, rnd feeing him offer ? watch for fale, determined if pofiible 1 , to remain undifcoveied, and wait the event ; but vvhat was his aftonifhment, on taking the watch from the hand of the fhop-keeper, to recognize it for the fame he had formei ly given to me. " How came you by this watch, my fiiend ?" faid my uncle, addreffmg him in a kind voice, " it appears to be a woman's, and of fome value." Though my uncle's perfon had totally efcaped the notice of Felix, yet the found of his voice ftartled him, and viewing him fora moment with fixed atti n, he anfwered, withdrawing his eyes w.di a figh—" Blefs your
your voice, it is like mufic to my heart ! — The watch is not mine, but a Lady's, who muft fell it to pay thofe rites, which your country's cuftom demands, before the body of her child can be permitted to mingle with the duft ; to hire men who affume the fem- blance of forrow with a black coat, and pay for a peculiar fpot of earth, as if ail on which the fun fliines was not equally hallowed." " And what is the Lady's name ?" faid my uncle. " Palmer," replied Felix. My uncle made no reply, but feadng him¬ felf by the counter remained loft in thought. " And what do you afli for the watch ?" faid the fhop-keeper, addreffing Felix. " She leaves it to yourfeif/' returned he ; (i fhe is no judge; but I conjure you by the God you profefs to ferve, confider her dif- I 2 trefs,
trefs, and do her juftice;—a dead infant!— an almoft dying hufband!—weigh thefe for¬ rows before you fpeak. Ah î had you feen her part with it, you could truly have judged its value: It was the gift of my beft friend, faid ihe, then preffed it to her lips and wept: See, it is yet dull with her tears." <c I will kifs them off," cried my uncle, fnatching the watch. " Ten thoufand pounds fiiall not pui chafe it." The fhop-keeper looked aftonifiied, while Felix again fixed his eyes attentively on the face of my uncle with vifible agitation. * c Have ten years hardfliip, and grey hairs, made fuch an alteration, Felix," faid my uncle, " that I have loft a friend, the pre¬ ferver of my life ?" Felix £ave a loud crv, and fell fenfclefs at his feet. By
By the care of the mafter of the fhop Felix was foon leftored ; but his eftufions were ungovernable, he couid neither afk nor anfwer queftions, all was genuine tranf- port, unmixed with form or reftraint, and fpoke the unadulterated language of nature. At length, being fomewhat calmer, my uncle informed him, tint he fufpected the owner of the watch was his niece, and defired to know how he became acquainted with me. Felix disjointedly related what he knew, mixing the whole with encomiums on myfelf, and Mr. Palmer, not forgetting a tear to my little one. My uncle then determined to accompany him back, charging him to fay nothing of what had paffed, but to introduce him as a perfon fent to conclude the bargain for the watch, I 3 Felix
Felix certainly obeyed him to the beft of his power, buc nature in him was fupcrior ro art, and, in fpite of all his endeavours, could hardly b ? re ft ?? i ned. I have now informed you how my uncle and Felix met, and have only to tell you that, even when furrounded with affluence, I was to feci yet more acutely than ever, for in three months after finding my u.>ole, ï lofe my beîcved huiband ; Siis m\bhù urnes had made an impremVn never to be eraied, a:id which totally ruined hib health. Bath, und the various watering places in the kin^r- dom, were tried in vain ; he died in my arms, ore of his hands locked in that of my uncle, blefiing the Almighty that he had lived to ice me fee u red fiom want, and perfectly re- figned to his fate. Pardon me, my friends, though time has alfo taught me refignation, yet ??? I not forget that I \v*s once a wife and mother—tender claims, ye are wricten on ni}- heart in traits never to be obliterated/' Mrs,
Mrs. Palmer ceafed, and for fome time gave vent to the emotion painful recolleftion occafioncci ; nor were her auditors unmoved, all bore filent fympathy : Godwin rofe and walked to the window ; Agnes had involun¬ tarily laid hold of her hand, and Fanny in* ftinctively drawn her chair clofe to her's. * c It is paft," faid Mrs. Palmer : " I will conclude a narrative that I am not forry to fee has interefted you; it will teach ??? Agnes, that there are others equally unfor¬ tunate with yourfeif." " Equally unfortunate," replied Agnes, u they may be; but few, I hope, have equal caufe for felf-reproach." Mrs. Palmer, to prevent farther difcourfe on the fubject, refumed her narrative. " Though I by no means aggravated the behaviour of Mrs. Sommerton, and totally endeavoured to exculpate my father, yet my 14 uncle
uncle came to an immediate feulement w-ich him, reimburfmg him for the trouble he had taken, and having a piodigious fum to re¬ ceive, the interdi being accumulating on rhe principal for ten years. Λ coklnefslvd fubfntcd between them ever fincc dy un ?? Jiküvuvd sue, and tiie bufi¬ nefs between them was no looner completed than an entire alienation took place, which my father's wife did not fail to attribute to the influence my ait had gained over my uncle. He next fettled his domeftic economy, giving me the entire command, and retaining Felix, by his own defire, about his perfon, rendering him firft independent, that in cafe his mind fhould hereafter change, he might be under no reftraint. For the faithful attendants who were íhipwrecked with him, the clerk he retained as fteward to his eftates; and for the other two, the elder retired "upon a comfortable provifion,
provifion, and the younger married, and was by my uncle fettled in a lucrative bufinefs. I have now but little more to tell you. — My friendly kind uncle furvived his return ten years j in him at once I loft a tender parent, and a fincere friend, nor could his whole fortune, which he left me without re- itriction, have any effect, but making me more fenfibie of my lofs, as it plainly proved how truly he efteemed me. The difpofal of my uncle's effects, as you may fuppofe was very difpleafing to my father, whom, how¬ ever, I have never feen, though he is ftill living. On my uncle's death I endeavoured to baniih my melancholy by travelling, and change of place· Inglewood I had frequently heard him fpeak of, but never feen, as it was purchafed before he went abroad, and had not been viiited fince his returni his preca¬ rious health ufually confining us in the neigh¬ bourhood of the capital, for the advantage of medical affiftance. The fituation particu- I ¿ laiiy.
larly pleafed me, and difiiking a town life, î determined to fix my refidence there, a re- folution J do not think I {hall change, as I efteem my neighbours, and hope they do the faiiie by me." Mrs. Palmer ceafed, and received the thanks of Godwin and his daughters, the former of whom faid, <c Efteem, Madam, however flattering the term may be, when applied from you to us, is not comprehenfive enough to exprefs what we owe to you ; add to it gratitude and affectian, and it will more neariy declare the fentiments your kindnefs has infpired." " Ah !" faid Agnes, " I fhall never more. Madam, look on Felix's face with difiiké ; I fhail confider him as attending the little fuf- ferer, and forget his complexion." " I always liked him," added Fanny ; — ·* but from this day he will be yet more efti- niable to me." •'I
" I fhall leave you to«morrow," replied Mrs. Palmer, 5C and will defire him in my abfence to relate to you how he faved my uncle's life, the reafon of his leaving Ja¬ maica, and his fubfequent diftrefs in England. I fiiould not neglect to tell you that his grief on my uncle's death was equal to my own, and though I offered to double the inde¬ pendence my uncle had left him, he declined it, entreating that he might never leave me." " Do not baniih me, Madam," faid he ; <c I am almoft fixty years old, and fhall die with grief, if I am again driven into the world." " You will eafily fuppofe he was not neceffitated to preis his fuit; I affured him he was free to choofe, and in confequence he remains my confidential fervant, and I do not blu ih to add—my friend."
16
Fanny
Fanny and Agnes then retired to their chamber, after which Godwin and Mrs. Palmer converfed for fome time, both coin¬ ciding in their fears that Agnes would hardly iurvive the event that was now almoft daily expected ; a thought that wounded Godwin to the foul, and grieved the friendly Mrs, Palmer.
CHAP,
CHAP. XL
ON the morning following Mrs. Palmer arofe eaily, and taking leave of God¬ win and the fitters returned ro Inglewood, leaving Felix to execute any commiffion they might want, or, in cafe of any alteration, ride over to the Foreft, for though he was in years he was ftrong, and able to undertake a far longer journey. She likewife defired him to relate fuch evenrs as might illuilrate her own ftory, and pais die time in her abfence. The evening after her departure Fanny reminded him of the promiie, defiring hint to
to take a feat among them, which, however, he declined until much preffed, he drew a chair ac a refpectful diftance, and began as follows : " I was born on the Coaft of Guinea, and kidnapped from thence when about twelve years old, and brought to Jamaica, where I was expofed to fale. Among others my late mafter's father, Mr. Walters, came to view me, but thought me not fit for labour ; his fan, who was about my own age, was with him, and looked upon me with fuch com¬ paffion, that, fenfibie of my fituation, I could not avoid faying, " If I muft be a fiave, I had rather be fo to you than any other." I was, however, not underftood, my melan¬ choly therefore rather interefted him than my words ; for running up to his father, he pref¬ fed him fo warmly to purchafe me, that he at length confented. The bargain concluded, I was ordered to follow them home, and introduced to my miftrefs, who was a Weft- Indian by birth, but had married Mr. Wal¬ ters,
ters, who was an Engliiliman, when on a vifit in that country, where her children had likewife both been born. Education and ex¬ ample had rendered Mrs. Walters harfli and unfeeling; fhe was fo to her huiband and fon, you may therefore readily fuppofe the fiaves were not exempt, I know not whether you are acquainted with it, but it is the cuf¬ tom to mark the newly-purchaftd fiaves juft above the ihoulders with the initials of tneir owners names, an operation that is performed by heating a piece of filver, on which the letters are engraven over the flame of fpiiics, and preffmg it on the back. This ceiemony Mrs. Walters always performed hericlf, af¬ firming, that the fiaves never prefied tlie ftamp fufficiently to make the letters legible. After finding numberlefs faults (at leaft I judged fo by her actions and countenance) ilie made ready to give me the ufual mark, which though in reality no more than a common burn, appeared doubly horrid from the prepaiation. My young mafter, who was
was called Henry, was not prefent, but en¬ tered at the moment : I knevV not then what he laid, yet could plainly underftand by his geftures that he was pleading for me, for I was crying bitterly from the mere dread ; but 1 afterwards learned from an old fiave, who was prefent, that he infifted to his mother, who, in fpite of her temper, was extravagantly fond of him, that his father had bought me for him, and that he had determined I fhould be marked with his own initials only. A ihort contention enfued, but my young mailer got the better, and bore me off, my back unmarked, but his goodnefs engraven on my heart in far more indelible characters. " From this time I can truly fay I loved him ; I wifhed to learn his language to ex¬ prefs my gratitude. He was fenfibie cf my endeavours, and would frequently condeicend to teach me my letters, and finding I was not dull perfevered with an attention uncommon for his youth, until I could write to make myfelf
myfelf underftood, and read panably well.— By this time I was abont fourteen, and { c:- feetly underftood my fituation, wiiie.ii I con- fidercd as fixed for life, yet cannot by ti.e thought on my own account g^vc me much pain ; fo true it is, thatkindneis ai.d humanity mav make e ven bondage u arable. About this time my miftrefs, who w.-.s extravug-.nti/ fond of china, had a prefe.ic of ? valuable fet from England, and which was placed on a table in the faloon. One day, that my mailer and miftrefs were gone lome miles on a vifit, Mr, Henry and myfelf wtre trying who could leap the fartheft in the fame apart¬ ment, when unfortunately he icll againft the table, and totally demolí ihed the whole. — For a moment our fears kept us filent, to conceal it was impoftible, and we well knew that her rage would exceed all bounds. At length we agreed to retire to a pavilion in the farther part of the garden, until the firft florin fliould be blown over, and then Mr. Henry fhould prefent himfelf, and exprefs his contrition. We accordingly went thither, I could
! THE FARMER OF I couid not but fee that this filly accident made him untafy, and racked my mind how to exculpate him from any fliare of the blame. At length, having remained until u ? were affured my miftrcis muft have been fome time returned, and have difco¬ vered the mifchief, as fhe always fat in the faloon, I propofed that I fhould repair to the houfe, and difcover how ihe bore the lofs, if with calmnefs I would wait him at home ; but if, on the contrary, íhe was out¬ rageous, I was to return in the courfe of an hour, and let him know. He confented to this conditionally, I was, as the fecret was entirely between us, not to confefs I was even prefent when it happened, but to fay my young mafter had told me of the mis¬ fortune, and was under great concern for it. This plan fettled I returned home, but I know no terms ftrong enough to paint the confufion I was witneis to ; all the llaves had been called, and accufed with the mifchief, but
but their innocence alone had been a poor defence; fiie had buffeted and ftruck them wich her own hand, Mr. Walters in vain endeavouring to pacify her. 1 entered at this moment. Iwas anew object, icreaming with pafuon, fiie exclaimed, "It is this young villain that has done it ; I fee it by his face, I will have him flayed alive." Summoning all my courage, which I con¬ fefs was inferior to the love I bore Mr. Henry, for had not the latter fupported me I fhould certainly have relinquifiied my pur¬ pofe, I replied, " If I have done it, Madam, I am willing to pay the forfeiture/* " And pay it you fhali," furioufiy ex¬ claimed ilie, and without further queftion ordered me to be taken into the court and feverely whipped. Had not my pride fup¬ ported me at that moment I know not what might have happened ; but the idea of file w- ing my young mailer of what I was capable to
to bear to fcreen him from blame, rendered me equal to the effort, and I accompanied the men who were to puniih me, without refiitance, tears, or entreaties ; my miftrefs, with an inhumanity unbecoming her fex, placing herfelf at a window to fee her com¬ mands properly obeyed. I was tied to a pofi, my crime proci umed aloud, my back uncovered, and the feource raifed to ftrike, when Mr. Henry ruíhed fo fuddenly between myfelf and the executioner, that he could not with-hold his hand, the blow fell on his moulders, and dyed his cotton waiftcoat (which, except a fiiirt, was his only covering) with blood. Diftracted at the fight, I ciied aloud, and ftruggling with violence broke the cord that held me, covering his body with my own ; but there was no occafion, the man who inflicted the puniftiment ftood aghaft, without attempting another ftroke, my miftrefs at the fame time making the colonade refoiyid with her fcreams ! — " Strike," faid my young matter, t< I alone am.
am guilty, and think you I will fee another punifhed for it ? If the paltry china muft have a victim let it be me, I am the offender, and if blood muft be the expiation, it iliall be mine." The behaviour of my young mailer put an entire flop to the bufinefs ; my mifliefs was fhocked, and ordering me to my work, called Mr. Henry to attend her t'j her cham¬ ber, wkere, feeing her weep as his fiioulder was bathed with fpirits, he faid, " Ah ï Madam, hereafter remember that the un¬ happy men, whom fortune b.as placed at your command, have alio equal feefipg, and perhaps parents, who may contemplate their wounds, with as much anguiih as you do mine." Mr. Henry, almoft immediately on my leaving him, had followed .ae, he feared I fhould incur hi* mother's iuiger for only lear¬ ing the news, and throwing off all fear, generouíly
generoufly determined to meet the ftorm himfelf. In a word, he arrived in the critical moment I noticed, faved me from the ftroke of the whip, and wrote a frefh obligation on my heart The favour of my young mafter procured me the kindnefs of the fiaves, and from this time until I was near twenty, at which period my mafter and miftrefs were unhappily killed, my fituation was far from unpleafant. i The eftates adjoining to my mailer's were very extenfive, and belonging to two Gen¬ tlemen particularly difiiked; the one em¬ ployed about two hundred negroes, and the other a yet fuperior number. Thefe men, from repeated provocations, had formed the defign of rifing and revenging themfclves on their perfecutors, and accordingly feizing an opportunity which they thought favour¬ able, they joined, and executed their pur¬ pofe,
pofe, killing their tyrants, and deluging the eftates with the blood of their oppreffors. This event had been planned by the fiaves of both plantations, and who, having fatiated their vengeance at home, haftened to the eftate of Mr. Walters, which they reached by break of day (and whofe wffe, I am grieved to fay, was particularly difliked) and, removing all oppofition, ruíhed in, and facri¬ ficed both her and her too complying hufband to their refentment. My young mafter's apartment was on the other fide the yard, and I, by his own defire, lay in the anti-chamber; the none awakened us, and haftening to the window, what was our alarm to fee the carnage that had taken place? Mr. and Mrs. Walters dead—naked, and disfigured, were carried and cxpofed in the open couit, together with feveral over- fcers, whom the negroes confidered as their oppreffors. The fight was too much for an affectionate 5
affectionate and dutiful fonj he fell oa the ground in a ftate of infenfibility, which, dearly as I loved him, I at that moment thought happy. After battening to faiten the doors of all the outward apartments, I returned to the window, where I had the mortification to fee that many of our own llaves had joined them, and, though not abfoîutcly active, were at leaft paifive in the mifchief. Throw¬ ing up the window I cried aloud to be heard, but the general confufion for fome time ren¬ dered it impofiible. " Give us your young mailer," cried the ftrange fiaves; we have cut down the tree, and will pull up the root." With thefe words they advanced to the out¬ ward door, and all hope nearly forfook me, when calling aloud to feveral of our own people by name, I faid, " Hear me but a moment, I have fouicthlag material to lay, I will then throw open the doors, and leave you to act as you plcafe." I have already laid I was foruma tj enough to be beloved by the companions of my fhwery, and the prefent
prefent inftance proved it, for crying aloud they ftayed their companions, and entreated I might be heard, faying I was their coun¬ tryman, and a defirable ally, as I not only underftood the ufe of fire-arms, but could alfo decypher the thoughts of Europeans, as they expreffed them in black characters on white paper, and by that means might fore¬ warn them of threatened danger, if any fuch communication ihould fall into their hands. Fortunately this reafon procured a fliort cef- iation from violence, and I was permitted to fpeak, when addrefling particularly our own people, who were about two hundred* I faid, as nearly as 1 can recollect : tc Friends, countrymen, and fellow-fuf- ferers, it is an European faying, tliat time and chance happeneth to all; in you it is verified, the prefent time is yours, and your enemies are cruflied beneath your feet ; but may not hereafter the fame chance make you the vanquiflied, for what fo variable as for- voL. ?. ? tune,
rune, not even the moon itfelf is half fo inconftanr ; dien may not they redouble our harcilhips,and plead for excufe that we let the example oi blood, and aie only to be ι tiled with a rod of iron. Their powers and re« fourccs in this ifland are numerous, what are outs? a herd of naked, unarmed men, v> hole iole defence acainft their numeions engines of death, is bodily ftrength and undaunted tourrgc ; poor auxiliai ies to wind off tlie thunder of their cannon, or yet more ceitain niufkct-íhot. You have been cruelly op- ptcfied, I conftfbit; but your tyiants have paid tlie forfeit, tlu it* blood ieft upon their heads. To tlie fiaves of this plantation I would limply direct a quefiion : Cf What has Henry Walters done? If he ib the ion of one of your oppreffors, is that hhs fault ? lb he to fuller ibr the errors of his parents ? Let the man fpeak whom L bis iijürej, and í here pledge m\ m.th to hi-, to yield him inftantly to hii power. I: is not you, Peter, for I icmember he faved you, at the expence
expcnce of blows, from his mother. Nor is it you, CVcfar, for when you were ill how tenderly did he vifit you, fupplying all your wants unknown to tlie family. You, Juba, I think, he purchafed with the money given him to expend in pleafure, becaufe with your former mailer you were harihly treated ; it is not therefore you, nor yet Stephen there, for I remember when his wife and child lay- dying of the fmall-pox, though he had never had that infectious d i íl e m per, he came to ice them, brought them wine, and when they died he wept." I here paufed a moment, but all being filent I refumed : "If none anfwer, I muft then prefume none have been ofiended ; — why then do ye ilek the life of one who never wronged ye ? bor me, my fiiends, I freely declare, my own fàìdy Is not dearer than his. Ingratitude is not a negro vice, it is tlie produce of colder climates ; he is my friend, his ihoulders yet bear the fear of the ? 2 whip
whip that would otherwife have marked mine j pain with him vvas not to be put in compe¬ tition with truth, he iaved me at the expence of himfelf. I have no more to fay, he is in this apaitment, vain would be our ftiuggles againft a multitude, we will make none : I will, as I promifed, unbar the doors, and, if your hearts vvill let you, kill the nueft friend you have among the Chriftian men, and flab the bofom, who would willingly bleed to give you liberty and happinefs; for I will not furvive him, we will die together." With thefe words I opened the doors j my mailer, who had ïecovtred the Π t ft ihock, advanced to meet them, prefenting his bieuft, and faying, <c I am prep' 1 1 eel, ih ike." My countrymen, at thefe words, fat up a loud cry, exclaiming, " Live, white man, live to conquer black man by humanity." Soon after this the firangers began to dif- pcrfe, our own men, who had been Ín any ς means
means inftrumental to the mifchief, accom¬ panying them, the reft hanging their heads in mournful filence, or falling at my mailer's feeti and entreating his compaffion and par¬ don. My mafter, foon after this event, failed for England, and fettled there; the melan¬ choly fcene that had paffed had difgufted him with Jamaica, he therefore fold off the greater part of his poffefiions, referving only one fmall plantation, whofe fituation he was particularly fond of. At the earneft entreaty of the negroes he made me the overieei, firft giving me my liberty, and inveftiog me with the entire command. I was very unwilling to be left behind, but my dear mafter fo cieariy pointed out that my ftay nearly concerned his inrereft, and the quiet of che plantation, that I confented. K j For
For twenty years I fulfilled the duty he enjoined me with great fatisfaction to him, nnd alfo to thofe over whom he had given me command, and if I have any thing in the world to boafi of, it is that, by mild mea- f'ires, fifty negroes on our plantation did as irmeli labour as double that number on moft oche¡>. j J lu .n j, the period İ efoic- mentioned I had feen my mailer foui tiu.Cb, in the laft of which he informed me he fliould, in the year following, go to India. Alas 1 you know the event of that voyage, I even now tiemble at tlie recollection ; the newt, of his being Cift away, I can tiuly MTw.e you, was fincerely lamented by all iiis dependants ; but how much moie, I leave you to judge, was their forrow incr*afed, when the year after they received the dieadfui tidings that the plantation was to be fold, and the labourers difpoied of to the beft bielder; for myfelf I was ordered to England to render up my accounts. With a heavy heart I bade adieu to my faithful companions, and on my arrival in
in England immediately repaired to the houfe of my mailer's brother in-law ; but what a difference in manners— Mr. Sommerton' was narrow minded and avaricious ; and having examined my accounts, which he found per¬ fectly juft, he difcharged me entirely from his fervicc, prefenting me with five guineas in recompenfe for my fervices. I well knew my mafier had a niece, but what had I to expect from her, when her father had treated me fo inhumanly ? For had he only empow¬ ered me to go to Jamaica, many Gentlemen would have been glad to employ me : Thank Heaven, however, he did not, for by that means I not only met my generous miftrefs, whom I did not even know by name, but alfo my revered and lamented mailer. Stranger in England, re w to the cu floms and manners, I at firft found it difficult to get employ ; but after fome time was feldom at a lofs, the gardeners and farmers about Ifiington almoft conftantly employing me, ? 4 Here
Here it was, as I believe you are informed, tüat I firft met with Mr. Palmer, and had io me difficulty to perfuade an apothecary to walk into the fields to bleed him, and whicli, I verily believe, he would not have done, but from Ihame of my offering him a dollar to keep until he was paid for his trouble. — Alas ! nodi ing but the diftrefs of a fellow- creature could have forced me to make the offer, for the dollar was prefented me by Mr. Walters on rhe day he refcued me from being mai ked on the back, fince which pe¬ riod 1 had ever worn it in my bofom, having drilled a hole, and faftened it to a ribbon for that purpofe* When I met my long-loft mafter at the watchmaker's, his perfon was fo altered, that İt totally efcaped my recollection, yet the found of his voice attracted my attention, and made me anxioufiy examine his features, which, though I found exactly formed like thofe of the perfon I lamented, yet the dif¬ ference
fèrence of ten years, complexion, and grey- hairs, deadened my hopes, until he bleffed me with a certainty, by calling me the pre¬ ferver of his life. To paint my joy is impofiible j let it fuf- fice, that I confefs it the moft happy day I ever experienced, fave one, that on which I enjoyed the plenfure of recalling to the minds of my countrymen the virtues of their mafter. Often has he Mattered me by naming me the preferver of his life j but it was his goodnefs, and gratitude alone, that gave rife to the idea. His virtues alone preferved him; they wanted only to be remembered, to operate in their full force." When Felix ceafed Mr. Godwin arofe, and ftretching out his hand, faid, " To ex¬ prefs the fentiments your narrative has in¬ fpired would, I am fure, be difpleafing to you ; I can therefore only íay, that for the time í have to live, I ihall be much gratified K 5 by
by being ranked among the number of your friends." Felix took the offered hand, preffed it to his bofom, and expreffed his gratitude. « Ah !" faid Agnes, foftly to Fanny, "I would compound for all mens faces to be like Felix's, to make them equally virtuous." Fanny too exprcfièd the fatisfaction the narrative had given her, after which the con¬ verfation took a more general turn, the favourite topic, however, being Mrs. Pal¬ mer's goodneis, numberlefs inftances of which Felix repeated, and among others told them* that not only Mrs. Smith, where they now were, but alfo her brother, the furgeon, were totally indebted to her for their prefent happinefs, which he concluded by obferving» they were perfectly deftrving of,
Frcm
From this evening Felix rofe confidera- ?? in the opinion of the family; Godwin ever affiduoufiy íèeking his company, and frequently .beguiling his forrow for an hour by his converfation.
K6
CHAP.
•??????
CHAP. XII·
AT length the hour arrived when the unhappy Agnes was to feel the pangs of a mother; her ftrength before exhaufted, 2nd her fpirits funken, fiie was ill able to bear the ftruggle of nature, which was long and dreadful, being attended with repeated faintings and leturns of delirium, that leftlittle hopes of her recovery, ihould ihe even live to be delivered. The kind and attentive Fanny almoft equally agonized kept clofe to her fide, praying, whifpering comfort, and entreating her beloved fifter to fupport her fpirits, and forget
forget every thing, but that on her recovery depended the happinefs of her friends. At length the practitioner, who was par¬ ticularly fkilful, delivered her of a living daughter, which he gave into the hands of the trembling Fanny, who prefíing it to her bofom, wept over it in agony, Agnes being infenfible for feveral hours that ihe was a mother. W he ? the child was prefented to Mr. Godwin he received it in his arms, and railing his eyes to Heaven, exclaimed, " May the blefiing of an old man, offspring of forrow, hover over thee s may thou never feel the ingratitude of a beloved fon, nor the ihame of a deluded daughter j mayii peace and in¬ nocence attend thy iteps ; and, to conclude, may thou be more virtuous than thy father, and happier than thy mother/* As he ended he preffed its face with his lips, and returned it co Fanny, who laying it tenderly to deep, was
was foon after obliged to retire to her own bed, which was in the fame room with that of her fifter. Agnes fiept long and heavily during the night after her delivery j but the effort had been too much for Fanny, who grew fo ill that Mrs. Smith, who fat up with them, thought it neceffary to call in the medical practitioner, who declared, that the emotion and fatigue fiie had fuftained had brought on a premature labour, and in two hours deli¬ vered her of a dead child. Agnes was perfectly collected when fhe awoke, though difturbed by the general con¬ fufion i and fenfibie of what had paffed, the pangs of her fifter redoubled her own. — Weeping over her fieeping infant, " Alas î child of forrow and filarne !" cried fhe, "thy birth has coft the life of one who might have been the pride of its parents, and produced to the woild with honour, while thou, un¬ happy
happy babe !" continued íhe, ff if thou liveft, will be icorned by the cruel virtuous, and pitied by the gentle. Ah ! may the fame hour that clofes thy unhappy mother's eyes, clofe alfo thine, and in my bofom thy innocent ihame be buried widi my weaknefs." Fanny, who was declared Ín no danger if kept quiet, ordered her bed to be placed clofe to that of Agnes, and taking the infant to her affectionate bofom, foon forgot fiie had given birth to a dead child* Mr. Godwin, on the firft alarm, had lent Felix to Inglewood, and who returned the next day with William and Mis, Palmer. William at once felt the forrow of a dutiful fon, a tender brother, and an affectionate huiband. His father's health was vifibly on the accline, Agnes grew daily weaker, his beloved Fanny was confined to her bed, and he liad loft the fecend pledge of hi r affection. Gcdwin
Godwin led the way into the apartment, and calling his eyes mournfully around, faid, in a low voice, " Alas í Edwin, could'ft thou but fee this thy work, it furely would awaken thee to repentance." Mrs. Palmer drew near the bed of Amies, and feeing her overcome with confufion took her hand, faying, " Banifii your fears, my good girl ; I came but to endeavour to fpeak peace to your wounded fpirit; I have long learned to diftinguifh between guilt and weaknefs ; yours is forgiven by your earthly father, and I have no doubt by your heavenly one ; bear up, nor fink under calamity ; your life is dear to your friends, and neceffary to this little one ; endeavour then to overcome the unhappy fenfibiiky that deftroys you, and live to fulfil thofe claims, which friendfhip and paternal care have on your heart." " It will not be," replied Agnes, " though fenfibie of the kindnefs of my friends, I rejoice
rejoice that my diimiffion is at hand, and, like a tired traveller, look forward to the hour of reft. For the little unfortunate I have no fears; if it furvivcs it will not mils a mo¬ ther's tendernefs," looking on Fanny. ------ " Would you believe it," continued fiie, tc ihe gives it fuck, and though a child of ihame, lulls it to ileep in her virtuous bo¬ fom ?" William, who was leaning over the bed of his wife, dropped a tear on her face, and preffmg her hand to his lips, faid, in a low voice, " Oh ! Fanny, how is it poffible you can love Edwin's brother ?" « Becaufe I love virtue," replied Fanny, warmly, " and revere her in William God¬ win." " One thing alone/' continued Agnes, after a long paufe, during which no one broke filence, " hangs on my fpirits, my un¬ happy
happy child, fliould its biith tranfpire, may be claimed by Irdwin—and Edwin, though alas ! he muft be beloved until my heart fhall ceafe to beat, is not I fear virtuous enough to educate ? daughter i but what is education, or c\en example ?" looking at Funny; <f all I would thu e fore aik is, that, as ilie cannot be pioduced at the Foreft without divulging my ihame, and incuiring the danger 1 dread, that fhe may be put to nurfe under the guidance of Mrs. Smith, who is a good woman j my Fanny will at leaft fee her yearly, or perhaps oftcner, and when time fiiall have obliterated my memory from all fufpicion, fhe wiil perhaps condefcend to take her under her own care, and, at a proper age tell the ftory of her unhappy mother ¿ but conceal her father, for Edwin's chilei, though unknown, ought to refpect ??." Fanny attempted to reply, but Mrs, Pal¬ mer prevented her, by faying, " Warmly interefted
întcreftcd for your family, from the ili ft mo¬ ment I faw you, I flatter myfelf, I have ? propofal to make, which yet may be more agree ible : Fanny has already the cares of a mother, and from her age clinic ci urns m?y begieatly incieafed, anu' fi.n'ucnt ior her to fulfil. I have none cf thoL cares, no iears to apprehend, no fcandal to dread, and ha\e nequendy wifiied, as I a*n (ouù ot children, for one whom I a ight rrar from its infancy, and be witneis of the growing virtues I would endeavour to inculcate, for if I failed, at leaft my heait.ihonld exculpate me : I piopofe then to iu.upt thio littk ilran- ger, will hire her a nurfe, take her home with me in a íhort time, guai d her during my life with care, and at my deatn place her above thofe temptations which frequently prove fo fatal to poverty." u Beft of women 1 " exclaimed Godwin, bending his aged knee, <c accept an old man's thanks i but the God, whofe precepts you follow, e-m alone requite you." Mrs*
Mrs. Palmer raifed hirn: "Speak," faid ilie, addrefilng Agnes. IC Do you approve my offer ?" Agnes clafped her hands, but could ouly articulate an almoft incoherent bleffing. " I know not," faid Fanny, " whether gratitude ihould compel me to filence, or affection force me to fpeak j but fure of favour from all, affection for once ihall get the better. From the hour I found my little one was dead, I formed a plan, which, I truft, will meet the approbation of all j it is to fubftitute this infant for my own, and to take it home as fuch. My pregnancy,'* con¬ tinued fhe, a flight blufh crofting her cheek, e< was vifible, and known long before I left the Foreft, who then can fufpect the decep¬ tion ? Surely none. The fecret will reft with ourfelves and Mrs. Smith, whom we can truft. To your propofal, Madam/* added Fanny, " I would alfo make a reply, but
but am unequal to the taik ; to refufe your generous offer would be to be unworthy of it ; let the cares of the firft year cr two be mine, the reft will more worthily fall on you, and may fiie live to prove her gratitude." Agnes railed her eyes to Heaven, and, after ftruggling a moment with her emotion, exclaimed, α Merciful God ! I thank thee, thou forgiveft me, or blefiings would not thus be multiplied upon me !" Mrs. Palmer applauded Fanny, warmly faying, iC Be it as your tendernek has beft devifed, moft exemplary of fifteis; to aik the opinion of either your father-in-law or hufoind would be fuperfiuous, their eyts fufficiently fpeak their fentiments, the little one iliall be baptized heie, and on your return acknowledged your child, and my god-daughter, which will, in fome meafure, account for her hereafter íefiding with me."
The
The preliminaries thus fettled Mrs. Pal¬ mer, as Agnes appeared exhaufted, propofed to retire, and was accompanied by Godwin and William, the firft in filence contemplating on the arrangement that had taken place, and the latter in exultation, which he could not fupprefs, blefiing the hour that allied him to Fdliny. They were foon after joined by Bernard, who had juft arrived, anxious to fee his daughters. He was informed of all, and cxorcfièd the higheft fatiufacìion at the ar- rangement, repeating his unpoliíhtd thanks with a fmcetity that politenefs cannot always boaft of. On beinet introduced to his daughters, he fcarcely knew which to carefs moil, and was not a t little delighted to find Agnes better than he had dared to hope, the return of her fenfes being regarded by him as a certain fymptom of her lecovery ; embracing both his
his children, kiffing the infant, and affuring the weeping Agnes it was as dear to him as herfelf. He then obferved, that the abfence of Godwin and William from the Foitft made more inquiries than that of his daughters, and preffed them to return with him the fol¬ lowing day, obferving, with Mrs. Palmer's kave, the babe might be baptized that even¬ ing, and ail fettled ; that when he reached home he fhould give out that Fanny had mifreckoned her time, -And been unexpectedly delivered y and that Agnes was fomewhat recovered, and, with her filler, expected to return fpeedily. if Ah ! my father," cried Agnes, ff I fhall, indeed, fpeedily return; but never moie iliall thefe eyes behold the Fortil of Ingle¬ wood. Lay me by Mis, Goduria ; living ihe would not have deipifed mc, nor have forbidden my dull to be mingled with hers. Fanny,
Fanny, my beloved Fanny, ihall return with my unhappy babe drawing life from her bofom, hers fhali leturn to moulder in mine." " Why wilt fay fo ?" faid Bernard, « thee art better I am fure, and do not make thy father unhappy, all will yet be well." Mrs. Palmer changed the difcourfe, by giving her approbation to Bernard's plan of immediately baptizing the child, that they might return, at leaft ail but Godwin, whom Fanny and Agnes both entreated might re¬ main. The curate of a neighbouring village was ?ίκη procured, and the child, by Mrs. Pal¬ mer's expreß defire, baptized after her, Anna Palmer, and truly regiftered as the daughter of Edwin Godwin and Agnes Bernard, the generous fponfor firft taking the clergyman afide, intrufting him with the unhappy ftate of
of the mother, and entreating his fecrecy, which he faithfully promifed. The ceremony was juft concluded when the medical practitioner entered, and pro¬ nounced Agnes on the whole better, and Fanny almoft recovered, entreated both might be kept quiet, and foon after took his leave. The following dav Bernard and William departed for the Foreft, and foon after Mrs. Palmer, firft bidding an affectionate adieu to the fifters, and promifing to fee them again Speedily.
VOL. II,
L
CHAP,
CHAP. XIII.
EDWIN, as before obferved, had deter¬ mined to get leave of abfence, and endeavour to develop all that was pafiing at Inglewood ; he had no doubt but Fanny had revealed to his father the bufinefs of Harris, and immediately furmifed that the health of Agnes was reftored, and fhe removed from the Foreft to be out of his power. Full of this idea he prepared for his departure, neither the entreaties of his wife, nor yet the fafci- nation of Mrs. Whitmore, having power to alter his purpofe, or even to procure intel¬ ligence where he was going, Harris alone being
being in the fecret. Mrs. Godwin, whofe temper was naturally violent, and whofe con¬ duct had proved how much fhe was attached to Edwin, could ill brook fuch confiant neglect from a man fhe had raifed even to the height of his own wifhes, and having in vain tried entreaties, could no longer con¬ ceal the fentiments his conduct infpired, and gave free vent to her anger, reprobating her own folly, and his ingratitude, in the ftrongeft terms, all of which had no effect but in¬ creafing his difiiké to her, and forcing expref- fions that wounded her in proportion as ihe loved him : In ihort, the agitation of her mind b 'ought on a fever, which raged with fuch violence that her life was pronounced in the greateft danger, and Edwin's journey in confequence flopped, not from affection, but merely to preferve appearances, Harris, he however, immediately fent off to Mr. Jere¬ miah Jenkins to procure all poffible intelli¬ gence, and endeavour to difcover the retreat of Agnes, Mrs. Godwin's fever, from its L 2 firft
firft appearance, had been declared of the malignant kind, and on the tenth day mani- fefted the moil alarming fymptoms : Edwin was therefore, with all due preliminaries, defired to prepare for an event, which gave him the higheft pleafure in expectancy, the death of his wife ; his confeience would, in¬ deed, in fpite of all his endeavours, be trou- blefome, and prefent his ingratitude in ftrong and glaring colours ; but thefe qualms were more than counterbalanced by the rapturous idea of being at liberty to addreis Agnes, whofe fbi givenefs he could not doubt, cir- cumftanced as they were, and he pofteffed of afortune, which, even difinterefted as fhe was, could not fail of having its proper weight. The cold feverity of his father, and the warm refentmentof William, gave him fume uneafinefs, but even thefe he thought could be eafily fbrmounted -, he ihouki reprefgnt his former conduct as an error he was un¬ warily
warily drawn into, and throw himfelf totally on the mercy of Agnes. Notwithftanding thefe meditations, he was fo good an adept in the art of difiimulation, as to conceal his pieafurable fentiments, under the fpecious guifc of concern and tendernels, attending his wife with an unwearied care, which was applauded by the fpectators, and highly grate¬ ful to the unhappy object, who ftill loved him well enough to beiieve every excufe he chofe to advance for his paft conduct, and every affeveration for the future, if ilie was fpared to him. Thus, for her own fatis fact ion, happily deceived, ihe forgave all, and expired as he was feated by her fide, the unhappy victim of a mifplaced affecìion, to which ihe had firft facrificed her perfon and fortune, and loft her life 1 Though this event was more wifhed than dreaded by Edwin, yet, when it arrived, it L 3 made
made an impreffion, which he could not im¬ mediately fhake off, paiticulaily as he had no pieafurable refourccs in his own mind to baniih the uneafy feniation, nor could in fuch ¿ι cafe feek them abroad. Mrs. Godwin had particularly defired to be carried to the family vault of her parents in Leicefterfhire, and partial, even in her laft moments, to the unworthy object of her affection, had requefted he would attend her remains; all which he faithfully promifed, and as tu.ly performed. During Mrs. Godwin's illnefs Edwin had heard twice from Harris, but nothing fatis- factory, except that it was reported Agnes's unhappy malady was rather decreafed, and that ihe had only been removed for change of air. Pofteffed of this intelligence he attended his wife's funeral, which was no fooner over ;iian
than he returned poft to London, determined to fettle his affair with all poffible difpatch— repair to Inglevvooel—procure his pardon— abjure his errors—and wed Agnes as ibon as her confent and decency would allow. He fck the influence wealth had on his own heart, and doubted not but it muft alfo have fome on that of Agnes, and therefore determined, on what he thought a mafter ftroke, to filence all reproaches : This was no other than caufing a deed to be properly executed^ by which he endowed her on their marriage with the entire command and dii- poíàl cf the fum of ten thoufand pounds, which was more than the half of his pro¬ perty, and that he thought a full compenfa¬ tion for paft errors, and what muft effectu¬ ally filence all prcfent objections. Thus prepared, he determined todepart and join his fervantatjenkins'í, make every necefia¬ ry inquiry, then act accordingly j but the even- L 4 ing
ing previous to his journey received the fol¬ lowing letter from Harris : Sir, ί( ï have been indefatigable in the bufineis İn w hi. h you employed me, and hope this time tf» icîiieve- my cn<,r at inglewood. All n.y inquines in diicwvu* the retreat of the iihci s wue fruitlefs ι.:. ril yefterday mon.lr.g, when I faw ? chaife pais the inn full fpeed, followed by your brother, and foon after by the negro, wiivmi Jenkins mentioned. I loft no lime, but mounting my horfe kept them in view the whole da), and towards evening faw them flop at a fmall houfe near Richmond, where your brother handed out a Lady, and difmiffed the chaife. As this plainly proved it the place of their deftination I rode into the town, entered an inn, and having ordered fupper, aíked feveral queftions, and among others, de¬ feri bing
fcribíng the houfe, and pretending to admire the fituation, inquired to whom it belonged. The waiter replied, i* was originally pur- chafed by a Lady of great fortune, but who was fuppofed to have given ic to a Mrs. Smith, the widow of a fea officer, and fi íle r of a furgeon in the town, whofe name having inquired, I ceafed my quei- ion., íl^ríld of inclining fufpicion. The next morning bv!·* ing for your fer vice, Sir, conveniently feized with a bilious complaint, I walked to the doctor's to procure a medicine, cr rather intelligence, but found the principal w a* engaged with his patients, and a deputy, ex¬ actly fuited to my wifhes, left in care of the ihop. After drinking one of his infernal potions, which nothing but my refpect to you, Sir, could have made me fwallow, I retired, en¬ treating he would call on me at my inn in half an hour, as I affured him that my dif- order fometimes increafed very fuddenly, and required
required immediate affiftance. The fellow was punctual, but being quite recovered by the firft fal u ta ry draught, I generouíly, Sir, as I knew you would approve, pi efe n ted him with a couple of guineas for himfelf, and called for a bottle of wine. In íhort, Sir, the money and my elocution charmed him, and the wine warming his heart, he grew communicative, and before we had finiihed the fécond bottle perfectly underftood each other, he anfwering my queftions as readily as I afted them. His mailer, he faid, was ä çjofe old fellow, whom it would be ufçlçfs to interrogate, and that for his own part he knew little of the Ladies at Mrs., Smith's, except that one had juft recovered from a melancholy ftate of infanity, but was fuppofed in the îaft ftage of a confumption, yet, on the whole, ihe was, hç heard his mailer fay the evening before, better than he had ken her. Not being able to procure more fatif- factory information I difmiíled him, having firft finiihed another bottle, and obtained his promile
promile of calling on me again in the even¬ ing. I was, however, much vexed and dif- appointed, for he leturned in an hour, rnife- rably diunk, and with a melancholy face in¬ forming me his employer had difcharged him in confcqucnce of his being in liquor. Sincerely vexed at this, I entreated him to go back, and endeavour to make his peace ; but he affured me his mailer was fo obflinate a dog it would be of no avail, nor did he, as he faid, much care, as he had long purpofed to go to London. Thus obliged co acquici ce I bade him farewell, and fat down to give you this information, waiting your orders at the Angel inn in this town, and not venturing near Mrs. Smith's, left I (hould be difcovered by your brother's wife, and give fufpicion* Waiting your anfwer with impatience, I am, Sir, Your humble fervant, EDWARD HARRIS.**
Edwin
Edwin had no fooner read this letter, than inftantly ordering a poft-chaife and four, he departed, travelling day and n>ght until he had reached Richmond, rejoicing at the intelli¬ gence that Agnes's fenfes were reftored, and never doubling but, as her malady proceeded from his faifehood, his return, leady to dpoufe her on any terms, would remove it. At firft he thought of writing to his father, or Agnes, but foon relinquiihcd tiiat project, faying, as he confidered on the fubject — <f No, no, a perfonal interview, and that unexpected, will be moft dccifive for me ; a letter would be only productive of a con¬ fultation, in which cold prudence would be predominant, and our meeting protracted ; while, on the contrary, if I take them un¬ prepared, on my knees entreat to be heard, plead for pardon, and promife never more to err, nature will at once incline my father to pity, and love force my Agnes to forgive, and
and once more receive my vows — vows which I henceforward mean to hold facred, for where can I find fuch another angel ? — Methinks I already feel the exultation I filali experience on prefenting her to the world— ihe univerfally admired— myicif univerfally envied—thus at once gråtit) ing both my pride and love. The ill ftate of health of Agnes would now and then intrude; but elate with the fiattering picture his ardent fancy had painted, he endeavoured to caft off ah unea ί v reflec¬ tions, and think alone of the pleaíure that awaited him. On his anival at Richmond he ordered the poft-boy to the inn Han is had men¬ tioned, and found hím waiting either a letter or his arrival; he could, however, inform him nothing farther than what he before knew, except that he believed theie were none of the
the male part of the inglewood family at Mrs. Smith's, as William and Bernard had pafled him on horfeback on the hi?h road the afternoon he wrote the letter, which brought Edwin with fuch fpeed, and who arrived at Richmond the feventh day after Agnes's delivery. This news was not unpleafing to Edwin ; he fiattered hi mièli' he fiiouid be more fuc¬ cefs fu I by taking Agnes alone, or at leaft only fupported by Fanny, and therefore, regardlefs of fatigue, he determined to lofe no time, but vifit them that very evening. Harris would have diffuaded him from this ftep, as it was late, and he apparently much tired ; but in vain, he ordered him to flie w him the houfe, vvhich before they reached it was nine o'clock, and the night completely dark.
Arrived
Arrived at the gate, Edwin difmiíled his fervant, and entered the court before the door; an unufual tremor feized him as he raifed his hand to pull the bell, and with¬ drawing it without the effort, he paufed a moment to reflect and recover his emotion : " Why do I tremble thus ?" faid he. " What have I fo much to dread, or whofe frowns need I fear ? An hour's anger will be the moft of the bufinefs, or a few reproaches, which I iliall long to filence while uttered from the beautiful lips of my Agnes ; away then with this childifii folly, 1 am determined to conquerand triumph over every difficulty." During this foliloquy he was walking round the houfe, the garden of which joined the fore court, and completely furroimded it. In the back front was a door, and what gave him no fmall pleafure it was half open, determined, if poffible, to diicover whom ; he
lie had to expect to meet with, he cautiouily entered, and for a moment ftood ftill to lifien ; but all was dark and quiet, except on one fide, in a parlour fionting the garden, where he perceived a light under the door ; emboldened by the folitude around, he ad¬ vanced, and lent an attentive ear, but no found reached it. His eye was next applied to the key hole, but the apartment was ap¬ parently deferted, though he could not fee to the fai ther end, but plainly perceived two large candles burning on a table in the centre. At that moment he heard a walking over head, and was on the point of retiring haf¬ tily, but again all was ftill, and he regained his poft. He now repented that he had not written firft to Agnes to inform her of ail that had paffed, his contrition, and prefent intention -; but it was too late : " Yet," continued he, after a paufe, " as I am fo ridiculoufiy weak to
to night, I am half inclined to retire, firft leaving on the table in this apartment the deed, which makes the greater part of my fortune over to Agnes í I have it in my poc¬ ket; it will fhew her I am free to offer her my heart, and prepare her for my re¬ ception to-morrow ; it is fealed and directed, fo there can be no danger of leaving it ; or ftiould it by any means fall into other hands, it would be ufelefs, fortunate thought, it will fave me a world of explanations, nor can ihe be infenfible to it. I am tonight overpowered with fatigue, and íhall to-morrow urge my fuit with redoubled ardour." Thus refolved, he opened the door with, caution, and convinced the apartment was empty advanced ; but a fcene at once pre¬ fented that ftruck him with aftonifhment and horror, for on the fide of the room he had not before feen, ftood on trefsles a coffin, fimply decorated with the ufual infignias of death. A cold fweat bedewed his forehead, vol. π. M his
his knees knocked together, and for fome moments his feet feemed rooted to the ground. At length, " What bufinefs had I here ?" exclaimed he ; " yet what is this to me, cannot people die without caufing me this alarm ? I blufh at my folly to be thus ftartled at the fight of a mere wooden cafe ; yet, Merciful God ! ihould it contain my father, for he was faid to be ill ; but, fool that I am, he is doubtlefs at Inglewood. — Difiraaion," continued he, viewing the coffin, without approaching it : "I can bear no more ; — away foolifh fear—I will be fatisfied, what¬ ever be the confequence." With thefe words he approached, and, with a forced courage, fnatched one of the candles from the table, and advanced towareis the object of his terror, twice raifing his hand before he could find ftrength to re¬ move the lid, whicli at length pufiiing afide, regardlefs
regardlefs of the infcription, he difcovered, in the calm fieep of death, the beautiful» and once blooming Agnes, with an infant on her bofom.
SND OF THE SECOND VOLUMS,
