Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Ariel: or, The invisible monitor
? ? I E IL,
•e«^i-d£>l©«e*
CHAP. ι. ** While confcience, like ? faithful friend, β£ Shall thro* the gloomy vaie attend, * ( And cheer our dying breath— * f Shall, when all other comforts ccafe, ** Like a kind angei, whifper peace, " And fmooth the bed of death.** Cotton. >Y the death of Angelina, Rofaline was releafed from every obligation that induced her to vifit Switzerland ; and as the feafon, though beginning to be cold, was not yet far enough advanced to render travelling dangerous or unpleafant, flie concluded on what appeared to her to be the rnoft eligible vol. ii, ? expedient
expedient flie could adopt ; and that no time might be loft, determined on inform¬ ing the Baron of her intention the next morning. This was to fet off immediately for England, attended by Agatha, who flie knew woukl willingly accompany her, and whofe attendance would obviate every objection there could be to her going. Her inexperience in travelling, and total igno¬ rance cf the country would have proved final barriers to her undertaking fuch a journey without fome one who, like Agatha, was acquainted with both. She doubted not that flie fliould be received with plea¬ fure by Lady Deiford, and fhe could not fupport the idea of parting the whole winter in that dreary chateau. Little as was the pleafure to be derived from the fociety of Angelina, yet while (lie lived, there was fome one to feel interefted for; but now there was fuch a dreadful void, that her heart funk within her when¬ ever fhe caft her eyes down the long paflage that
that led to the apartment of her deceafed friend. It was a confiderable time fince ihe had received any intelligence from England, and fhe had long been in daily expectation of a packet from thence. Only one letter from Henrietta had reached her fince ihe had been in Switzerland ; but from Lady Del- ford and Mifs Arundel flie had heard more than once. Her refolution, with regard to what plan it vvas beil to purfue, being formed, fiie re¬ tired, refolving to aik an early interview with the Baron, and impart to him her intentions, which fhe determined toput in practice with as much expedition as poffible. Her pecu¬ liarly forlorn fituation occupied her thoughts long after ftie retired to reft, for " that fweet reftorer of tired nature/' fled far from her pillow : " He, like the world, his ready vint pays " Where Fortune fmiies ; the wretched he forfakes : *< Swift on his downy pinions flies from woe, " And lights on lids unfullied by a tear.'*
? 2
The
The misfortune of her birth was now moft feverely felt, when compelled to have recourfe to ftrangers for that afliftance and protection which the iiand of Deftiny for¬ bade her to receive from thofe allied to her; yet firm in the principles flie had been edu¬ cated in, fiie relied on that Power, whofe mercy never fards, to conduct her through the intricate path marked out for her, and doubted not that he would finally guide her along it with fafety. She could not help feeling anxious to fee more of the brother of Angelina; and ftill hoped, as appeared probable from the friendfliip which he knew had fubfifted be¬ tween his fifter and herfelf, that he would vifit her before he quitted the chateau: in this expectation fhe was however difap¬ pointed. She was fcarcely dreffed on the follow¬ ing morning, when Agatha cielivered her a ktter, whicii ihe faid fhe had been defired by
by the Chevaliei's fervant to convey to her from his mafter. It contained the following words :—
TO MÏSS MELVAN. " MADAM, " To intrude on the indulgence of forrow like your's may 5 perhaps, in a ftranger be deemed impertinent ; but confiftentiy ? ith the principles by which 1 am ever actuated, I find it impofiiole to quit the chateau without affuring }ou or ihe deep and hveîy gratitude I lhali feel to the lateft hour of my exiftence f ^r the benefits you have con¬ ferred on one whofe earl) errors we may furely hope were expimd heie by a 1 ng courfe of furieri ng which, till her ir.ore happy fate brought her acquainted with you, was without relief or mitigation. *' Labouring under a mental derange¬ ment as well as a bodily illnefs, how fweetly ? j did
cî'.d you, with a Ampathy peculiar to your¬ felf, loot h the onej and with a care and at- tei:ti?n you oni) could have fhewn, allay the ether! Through the whole of along lin¬ gering ccmplaii.t, how conftantly did you give up every pleafure to attend my fuffer¬ ing ft üti ! and at length, by an "exertion of fiiendihip that has, I fear, been feldom exemplified, quitted with unexampled humanity your native kingdom, to feclude in the folitude of thefe mountains a mind cekftí ? as the form it inhabits! and in the laft dreadful hour of angui İli, without for* faking for a moment the melancholy though facred tafk, cobducicu yourfelf \\\\h a for» titude feldom equalled !—When you fhal] yourielf arrive at this hour, which we muft all fooner or later come to, then will )our angehe conduct to the poor fuffering An* gelma add frefli vigour to thofe hopes with which you will, I truft, one day meet her in the leaioijs of eternal blifs—then will you receive the reward you fo eminently deíírve, and .
and be entitled to what you will doubtlefs experience—everlafting happinefs î " From my regretted Angelina's own au¬ thority, who was happy, even in the laft agonizing hour, to do juftice to your friend- fliip) did í learn every particular of her (fo fortunately for herfeif) forming with you a friendfhip'that has yielced to her, in the lateft hours of her exiftence, more folid comfort than fne had known for years be¬ fore j and you have the glorious fatisfaction of knowing you were the caufe. «*To-day î bid a fina: adieu to the chateau. Ycu arc 1 find in poíleíl:on of a key, by means of which you w'.ll obtain a know¬ ledge of the events that reduced my hap- Ief- fifter to the ftate of fuffering in which you, IVbdm, found her. May they ferve as a waning to others! and may you Madam, ever happy in a confeioufnefs of innocence, retain to the lafl hour of your li'e the la r,e irrei roachable heart you at pitie.t ^oüeís i This alfo allow mc Lo fay, ? 4 that
that in whatever quarter of the globe may be my refidence, though wholly unknown to you by perfon, the remembrance of your virtues and benevolence will remain im¬ printed in indelible characters on the heart of " BERTRAND ST. ALVAÄS.**
Such were the contents of the letter put into the hand of Rofaline from the Che¬ valier, wiih whom fhe now more earneftly df fired to be better acquainted. She was charmed with the gratitude he expreifed on his fifter's account, and her bofom glowed with the fweet emotions öf kif- fatisfaction as ibe reperufed the epiftle of this fingular young man. Amply did fhe fed recompenfed for the anxiety and grief flie had experienced during her attendance on Angelina, by the internal conviction which aílured her, that her exertions had' brightened the rugged path
path of her fbrrowing friend to thofe dread regions of eternity which, when fhe firft knew her, the deranged ftate of her mind rendered her fo unfit to explore. At firft fhe thought of fending to re¬ queft an interview with the Chevalier ; but recollecting that his letter feemed to decline a meeting, ihe refolved to fend a written anfwer to his billet; and hearing from Aga¬ tha, that ftie had learned from his fervant his intention of quitting the chateau within a few hours, ihe wrote in hafte the following lines, which ihe defired Agatha to convey to him immediately.
TO THE CHEVALIER ST. ÄLVARS·- ·« SIR, " I cannot forbear attempting to exprefs the fincere forrow I feet that you fhould have thou¿ht u neceilar ; ίο grca.y to ? 5 oveimte
overrate the ads of friendihip I was fo liapp in having it in my power to render to your amiable fifter, which the com¬ mon ties of humanity called on me to per¬ form. As 1 propofe very fliortly to return to England, it mav perhaps never again be in my power, to teftify the fincere efteem I fliall ever feel for every relative of my much-lamented Angelina; and, kt me add, that to whatever part of the world the brother of Mifs St. Älvars may travel, he wíl affurediy carry with him the ardent good wifhes and ñncere prayer¿ for his hap- pLefs of ** EOSALINE MELVAN."
This was conveyed by Agatha to the Chevalier's fervant, and Rofaline foon after¬ wards deicended to breakfaft with the Baron, who behaved to her in the fame mannt r he had done the preceding day, and quite aftoniihed her by the condefcenfion of
of his manners, fo different from his former referve and aufterity. Unable, however, to fpeak on any fubjed but one, when they had concluded their repaft, fhe entreated his attention for a few minutes, and then imparted to him the fcheme ihe had formed of immediately commencing her journey to England, at¬ tended by Agatha, who had with much pleafure received the propofal. The Baron's brow clouded gradually as fiie unfolded her plan, and before (he had concluded, a deep and impenetrable gloom liad fupplanted the forced good-humour that a few minutes before had appeared on his countenance ; and with his accuftomed gravity he faid—" You furely cannot feri* oufly think of returning aione to England, or only attended by a waiting woman ? If fuch be your intention, pardon me if 1 fay I hold myfelf bound in honour to oppofe it. You were placed unckr my protection ? 6 by
by Lady Del r ord, who, as the reprefentative of your guardian, Sir Walter Edgecumbe, delivered you into my care; and I ihould ill anfwer the characler of a guardian, ihould I allow you to undertake a journey fo long, and, unlefs you had fome male protector, fo perilous. I fliall myfelf, 1 believe, go to England next fpring, when í will with readinefs undertake the office; till then you will content yourfelf I hope at St A'vars, and let me hear no more of idle fchemes that 1 cannot, fora moment, think of giving my fanciion to." So faying, without watting for any reply, he ftalked out of the room, leaving Rofa¬ line utterly amazed at a behaviour fo pe- > remptory. Had he not approved of her plan, fhe could not have fuppofed he would affume fo much authority over her, as pofi¬ tively to forbid her thinking any more of it. The few myfterious words flie had over¬ heard between him and the Count de Polloni
Polloni now came to her recollection, and fiie drea ed to tlvnk what might be their im¬ port, yet whv they ibould either of rhem be in any rvifpefi: interefted absut her^ the couid not imagine; and fhe retired, vexed and difappointed, to her apartment, to rumi¬ nate on what had juft paifed. She began to entertain doubts of the Baron flie had never before harboured. From feveral things Angelina had unguard¬ edly uttered, as well as many hints ihe had heard from different perfons, ihe had long been led to think there was a myftery in his character flie could not develop. She remembered the expreffions of Angelina in the vaulted room, which, though ap¬ parently wild and incoherent, flie fliuddered to think might imply fome dark and dread¬ ful meaning. The manufcript of Angelina, and the key fbe had delivered to her, now occurred to her, and flie refolved, as foon as (he could fummon fufficient courage, to apply it, as íhe had ????? 9 to the lock of the 1 tí
the cabinet in her dreíTing-room: but at prefent fhe felt unequal co the laik. Her fpirits, which had been raifed by the delightful idea flie had ío fallaciouíly che¬ riíhed, of returning immediately to her native . /miiy, had again funk under the fad conviction cf its prefent impoffibility; and a dreadful pn flure on her heart, which lhe cou d not difpel, feemed to weigh down every cheerful hope, and nil her mind with nougl t but gloomy forebodings and horrid predidions. Ardently as flie wifhed to be acquainted with every particular relating to- the haplefs Angelina, ihe was yet too much depreifed to truft herfelf in the apartment of her late friend; and had flie had the manufcript in her poffeifion, flie found ihe fhould not have been able to perufe it. She took up a book fhe· had brought from the library of the Caftie to her own room, and tried to amufe herfelf; but flie could not fufficiently attend to its contents to
to be entertained by it ; and throwing it afide again, was compelled to feek in her own fad reflections for confolation. She re¬ mained alone in her chamber till dinner, when (he again met the Baron, but no longer with forced condefcenfion and ftudied po¬ litenefs in his manner. His brow was ftill contracted, and a deep gloom fat on his countenance ; he fpoke little, and what he diu lay, was with his accuftomed gravity.
CHAP.
S3»
CHAP. II, ·' In lifers fair morn ï knew an 2ged feer, ** Who iad and lonely pafsM the joylefs yearj *' Betray'd, heart-broken, from the world he rarr, " And ihunriM, Oh dire extreme ! the face of man í ·* Humbly he reatM his hut within the wood, *» Hermit's his beard, a hermit's was his food. " He was, i» footh, the gentleft of his kind, • ( And, tho' a hermitj had a fociul mind." PRATT* JlV OSALI NE retired immediately after dinner to put in pradice the only fcheme flie could devife to pa's the hours which, in her prefent ftaie of mind, feemed inex» preffibly tedious ¿?—this was to pay another vifit
vifit to the cell of the hermit, whofe man¬ ners had fo much charmed her when driven by the weather to take refuge in his hut. She ardently wiflied to hear how the Baron was generally fpoken of by thofe uncon¬ nected with his family, and fne hoped to learn fomething of his general character from the venerable anchorite who, during the fliort time (he had before feen him, had appeared remarkably fociable and commu¬ nicative. Unfit to remain longer with only her own melancholy thoughts for her compa¬ nions, flie told Agatha flie was going to take the air on the ramparts, and iliould re¬ turn before the hour of fupper; and taking the way to the armoury, flic deicended to the fubterranean cavern.. She reached the cave ir- fafety; and thinking it probable her ablcnce m^ht be more remarked now there was ? ut her object
object: to take the attention of the family, flie haftened as fait as flie could towards that part of the mountain, where flie fancied the* cell was fituated. Heie, however, fhe was miftaken; no traces of an human habita¬ tion appeared on the fpot whither flie liad directed her fteps, and flie ftood for fome mo.nents on a point of rock, which, though it commanded an extei.five view, ihewed no appearance of the mountains being inha¬ bited, to confider whether flie could recol¬ lect which way fhe had been conduded by tie young ftranger, u ho had been 1er guide. The intricate windings of the rocks, how¬ ever, with their numbcrîefs cavities, effec¬ tually prevented her diicovering in what part it flood; and while fhe couinuul un¬ certain anci perplexed, flie i udden y heard the luu nei of v ? -.ces in merriment behind her. Slit liai ted, and uas turpnfed to find they drew neai er. Alarmed, lhe caft her eyes around to diicover iome place to conceal
conceal herfelf in. They again ceafed, and in a moment the found of the young ftranger's flute reacrifd her ear. She Iif¬ tened for fome minutes, but it was again filent ; and ¡ts murmuring vibrations long . echoed, and were at kngth loft among-the rocks. Unable to difcover the object of her fearch, flie ftood irrefolute whether to pro¬ ceed, or return to the Caftle, when, from a fudden turn in the mountain, flie beheld advancing towards her the ftranger flie had before feen, with his flu* e as ufual in his hand, while a beautiful girl leaned on ??? arm, whofe ruftic habt, and artlefs lovelinefs of form ftruck Rofaline with amazement, She wore the plain ftraw hat of a peafant girl, and her fine dark hair fell from under it over a countenance which difplayed rund innocence with mingled candour and fweet¬ nefs. In one hand fhe held a ribb >n, the other end of which was faftened ruund the neck of a little dog that followed her. They
They both ftopped, with furprife evi¬ dently depicted on their countenances at beholding Rofahne, who, И? undetermined how to proceed, flood hefitating and look¬ ing round her to try if flie could difcover a path that fed to the hermitage. Obferving her apparent perplexity, the young ftranger advanced fome paces for¬ ward, and politely availing himfelf of their having before met, afked if he could be fo happy as to be of any fervice to her, as fhe appeared to be feeking her may, which, he added, he did not wonder at, as even he» who *as fo well acquainted with them, was frequently btwildeied amidft the intricate pines of ihe mountain. Roiahnc dunk¬ ed him, and lad îhe wiflied to be diaeìed to the cell of the hermi*, whither he had once before conducted her. « Wc are now goi:»g there,*' returned he, " ad ihali 1 am iure bc luppy if you will allow us to accompany you, 1 * There
: ' There wai. a. fomethiiig' fo. ???????? prepoffeffing ■ in' .the niímncr& ■ of;- the ftranger, that» though-.ihe could not ac¬ count- for ? kofalme frft ■ fo ■ afic¿te&t t the could with' .difficulty frftram her tears;' which- Ihe had l^en freely imktgtpg jwíl licforc the uncxpecltcd íatimjs of voices, and mufic had mad¿ them give way to alarm* and the traces of grief 'were ftill vífifole' in lier exprcflîvc count enanca It dì I not efcape the obferv^uon of her new acquaint^ ance, who, perceiving ihc teemed to hefi¬ tate on his ofier ot' attending her to the cell» ?? —"Jf you would rather go alone, 1 will. readily give you the mofl explicit directions in my power; but even t lien'you will be liable 'to miftake the way frorn its extreme, intricacy. 1( % however, company be an intrufion. on your forrow, believe me» though wholly a flranger to your name and fituation» 1 fee! too interefted in both, and too defirous to afford you confoUtton, to wound you by curiofity» or diftrefs you by unavailing converÊtioa ;** and taking tiie baud
hand of the young woman, whofe fweet eyes gliilened as fhe contemplated tîie mc- lancholv countenance of Rofaline, while he added, ** í an fure în this young perfon you nih find one uho, if allowed, will take ptcafute in endeavouring to mitigate your griefs.** The t motions of Routine would not allow her to anfwer $ fhe could on'yavcept the young woman's offer. d hand, mid fer* ventîy ptefted it totxprefs her giautudc. They now began their walk to the her¬ mitage; and ftriving todiipel the weight oa her mind, fhe toed to converfe with her two guidesen the furrounding vieas and fcenery ; but her fpirits were not in uniibn wiíh the beauty üf nature, and her obferv¬ ations were ev<dentiv forced. Their anfwers were calculated to amufe and enliven her; ar.d fhe began already to feel in fome mea¬ fure relieved from the extreme preffure on her heart, vjicn the party arrived within fight
fight of the habitation of the hermit. It tbmd beneath the fliade of a hi^li itn- pending rock» in a furt of dell formed 5a ¡ts cavity, and overshadowed by a ctudip of lofty pine-trees that r ?'? frum the other fide, awl extended th ?? broad branches quite over the roof of this humble d .vei¬ ling. Wild thrubs and plants the iponta* neous growth of the mountains, grew in clutters round the entrance ; a narrow winding path being cut through them to the dt>or which» opened into an outer cell paved wkh pebble*, aad the walls well lined with thick molk Here they paufed, and hcird voices within. €C The Father,** faid Edmund, fmiling, ** has company with him. That, however, I believe is nothing extraordinar)-, as tra¬ vellers frequently» in their journey over the mountains, call at his ceil tor reft and re¬ freihment; and the fame of his hofpitality an ! benevolence is fo prevalent ia this part of
of the world, that he is feldom a day with· out vifitors of this fort, 1 * The hermit, as he fpoke, appeared at the do^r < f the inner cell : he waved his hand when he perceived them» as if defiring them to ftop, and then again disappeared. He foon returned, and invited them in. They accepted the invitation ; but on tl eir en¬ trance found the inner apartment qt ite empty. This mora was warmer, and fl-.el- tered from the weather by thiek w lis and a comfortable roof. It had no ceiling* ami the floor was cf ftone; finali wooden (tools were placed round it, and a cheerful fire blazed on the hearth. It had one fmall lattice that admitted a glimmering rat lier than a light into the room; and when they were feated, and Rofaline caft her eyes on her companions in their ruftic habits, ihe hermit in his cowl and cap» and the ftrange appearance of the dwelling, flie could fcarcely perfuade herfelf it was not all a dream. She
She was, however, fliortly recalled from her reverie by the hermit» %vh^ had juft Lamed from Edmund how they met her in the mountain, mû now enquired if flie had come purpofely to vifit htm as ftie Iiad pro¬ mifed. She replied in the affirmative; ani the remembrance of all flic had undergane fincc fhe was laft títere recurring forcibly to her memory, the tears Itale from her eyes as fhe attempted to anfwer. ** Are you afflicted r'* faid the Father; ** if fo t you are come to one who can teach you from experience how to bear mifery/* Fíe fixed bis eyes on her as he fpoke, ~ and as lie furveyed her countenance atten¬ tively, iuddenly ftarted up, clafped his bands wildly together, and abruptly quitted the room, ¡eavhig his gueits in mute fur¬ prife at his ftrange iacoherert b Jaaviour. Obferving RofiKne looked alarmed, Ed¬ mund told her flic need not be frinitene vol. ?. ? at
at the Father, for it was well known that he was fubjed to ftarts of infanity like this; but as he had feen him, he faid, feveral times affected in the fame fudden manner, it never gave him caufe of alarm, lt was fuppofed, he continued, that forae very dreadful mif* fortunes were hk firft motives for adopting this way of life, and it was very natural to conclude thefe violent fits of paffion arofe from fomc fad remembrance occurring to him. The hermit returned as he was fpeaking; he feemed again calm and compofed, and after a few moments* filence, faid— u I was going to afk you if, young as you are, you have already made acquaintance with for* row ?** *' I have indeed,** faid Rofaline, " been lately in a moft diftreffing fituation, and within the laft week have loft a beloved friend by the hand of deadi.** ** Was that friend the daughter of the Baron St. Älvars?'* afked the hermit, «It
« It was indeed," faid Rofaline» « the tmtablc Angelina." ** Happy Arriba? 1 * exekimed the old . man, ** ??? br far than thofe wh> now lament thee! 1 * Ihen turning to Routine, he fiúd —** I to! I yon you were come to one who could ¡nftruft you to bear miten* ; for know twenty times has tlie bright orb of light made its annual courfe f* ce 1 have refided in this hut ; and though labouring under tlie heavteft misfortunes, 1 made a vow, ere I paffed thb humble threlh >Id, that no murmuring or repining fliould iílue from thefe lips while I continued to bear my griefs within it; and rigidly have I adhered to my vow· In purfuaace of it, whenever my forrows or reflections have teemed too vaft to fupport, 1 have imme¬ diately employed myfelf in fome occupa¬ tion that took off, or at ieaft diverted, my thoughts from the fad fubject of my miferies. In all weathers, expofed to the inclemencies of the feafon, hare I wandered unrepiningly ? ? » through
through vaft tracts of Alpine ftiows, aiul clin.bed the higheft ftccps to try if I could cípy the wearied traveller, wham, wlien I have fometimes rr.rt, 1 have con¬ ducted to my cell; and while 1 attended to his hiftory, and fupplied his prefent exigence by neceflary warmth and refreih¬ ment, have beguiled for a time the fenfe of my own woes by the exercife of hofpi¬ tality. Such is my manner of life; and few as you may perhaps imagine are its com¬ forts, fcanty as you may fuppofe to be its* pleafures, the folid and permanent fatisfaction it yields is, í believe, far fuperior to any the haughty Lard of yon vaft domain can boaft of having experienced." « At prefent," faid Rofaline, u the Baron is certainly very far from being an ob¬ ject of envy. The lofs of an oniy and be¬ loved daughter in the bloom of youth muft to him be irreparable." 4 * Let him arm himfelf with leffons of religion and philofophy," returned the Fatheri " every other method he will affurediy
ÄÍfureaiy find unavailing. Had I not applied to them, where would now have been my boafted compofure? Antl fliall he compire his griefs with minei Bereft in early life of all my foul held dear, by means huma* ni: y would bluih but to hear, a dreadful void was ieft in ?? aching breaft» which only thofe celeftial guides could fill with peace. And even wkh their aid it was ÌQ*ìg 9 very long ere the deeply inflicted wounds *ere healed i and now when 1 be- hokl that form, that countenance, they bleed afrdh ! Every pulte vibrates to that v^ce» and every nerve thrills with a horrid pleafure when features fo well known, fo deeply rivetted on my agonized heart, are once moie prefented to roy view V* Again in a wik! and frenzied manner he aroie and paced the room ; then returning, he took tîie hand of Rofi hie, and , erceivmg he had terrified her by im bcohercncy,ùkî— * c í frighten you who are a ftranger to me; but,** turning to Edmund «* you, my young c j triend,
friend, who better know me, will give thu facet cherub reafon to believe fhe need not fear me. Alas! you have no caufe for it; a helplefs old man, who İn mifery, in wretchednefs, has twenty years dragged on a miferable exiftence, can have little power to terrify you. Heaven, in pity to my fufferings, once deprived me of reafon for along lapfe of timej and ever fince my intelleds are affeded by any temporary ex* ertion cf my feelings : but folely difordered by deep, by innate woe, even wben mofl confuted in mind, you will not find that I feek to injure others/* His guefts now arofe to depart. ** Let me," faid the old man, " before you go, recommend you to each other * H and» joining the hands of the young woman and Rofaline, he added—** Though this be your firft interview, fuffer me to exhort you not to let it be your laft. You are both young, and I truft innocent. Cultivate then tht friendfliip
facfuîfhip you hav« this day begun, and preferve ¡t through life. For you t tf turn* iag to Rofaline, ? 1 am not ignorant of your prefent fituation and circumftances i hereafter we will talk more of it* Make them acquainted with it alfo, ánd for the prefent adieu ί** He then conducied them to the door, and they took their kave. Rofaüne was aware that he had obtained a knowledge of her fituation (mm the fa* mily at St. Atrars, where íhe had fcen him on the fatal night that terminated the ??* Mence of the napleis Angelina; and Ute promifed herfelf much pleal^re in future ia converfing wkh this fingular old ???· Father Francis (for fo (he found he waa called) was a tall thin figure, bending more from afflatoti than years. Hts face bore no marks of extreme age, and wouid have appeared ftill younger, had not the length ? 4 of
of his beard, and the cap he wore on his head, co.xeakxi great part of it, and gave to the remainder more the appearance of antiquity than it woukl other*ife have borne. His countenance was placid and ferene, and feemed forme:¡y to have been remarkably hand feme; an J Iris voice when he fpoke had a bc-nignity, yet a folemi.tty in it, that penetrated to the heart of Rail- line. As they walked through a romantic part of the winding A!p$ in their way home, they converfed on the object of their late vifit, and the }oung woman reminded Ro¬ faline with much fweetnefs» of his wifh at parting concerning their future friendihip. She faid her own name was Roía la Vere, that her faiher was of the clerical function» and refided at a fmall retirement among the lowlands adjoining the Convent where he officiated, Edmund (the young man fhe faw with her) flie added, was her father's ward, educated under his care» and having, while
w'.ïite he purfued the wild game among the mountain», as he was accuftomed to do, dis¬ covered the beauty of the fcenery around, he had lb awakened her curiofity by his defcriptions, that fhe had at length con¬ fented to accompany hira in fome of hk ram! ks amidft the Alps at thofe times wlien the duties of her father's office called him to the Convent ; for as he İnercafed in years, and flie was his only child, fhe never for a moment left him a'onc, the whole udy of her life being to render the remain¬ der of liis happy. In one of thefe rambles fhe had a few weeks before loft herfelf while Edmund was purfuing the game, and was the real fubjed of that converfation be ????* Edmund and a peafant whicli Ro¬ faline, as ihe fat concealed under the rock, had applied to henelf. Delighted with the converfation of her new acquaintance, Rolaline was tòrry to find they were arrived almoft at the entrance of ? 5 the
the cave, where thanking her new friend for her unreferved communication, ihe added flie muft now with forrow take her leave* but ho; ed, when again fhe fliould bc fo happy as to meet her, time would allow her to be equally explicit. She ??? parted from Edmund and the intereiling Rofa, and paffing through the cavern, took hor way to her apartment.
chap.
ИИ????????????ИИ???
CHAP. İH. ! «* M$ tongue cûull nevertearnfweet foothing wor Jî i ** But now thy beauty is piupos d my fee, Ci My proud heart fues, aod prompts roy tongue to f^eak/' ?? was twilight when (lie arrived at her folitary apartment. Agatha had quitted it, and the feated herfelf by the clofet window, her mmd naturally reverting to her laœ adventure. She felt internally much pleated at the acquabtan e fhe had formed w t h the hermit, as well as with ihe two you g penons, whofe manners auU converta? on had fo charmed her; and as Ihc revoivvJ ? 6 the
the fubjecl in her mind, Che could not help» witli a figh, cont rafting the reception they would meet with on their return home, to that flie experienced. Inftead of the cheer¬ ing fmiies of welcome from a beloved father or guardian, with whicli they would* be probably met in a warm comfortable manfion, a cold dreary chamber, where the hollow echo of her own folitary footfteps was the on'y found that reached her ear, was the place fhe could alone repair to ; or if flie exchanged her folitude for the fociety of the Baron, it was not lefs melancholy. Gloomy and referved, he feldom fpoke, and his converfation was fo auftere, and void oí cheerfulnefs whenever he did enter into difcourfe, that (he could find no pleafure in converfing with him. The idea that her friends in England had forgotten her corroded her peace, and preyed in filence on her heart. Everyday fhe indulged hopes of receiving intelligence from her native country, aad was as con¬ ftantly
ftantly difappointed ïn her expeåatbns. The recoltecìbn of Henriettas írieidthip and her brother's affeñt*»n» wuicti flie had hitherto believed equal ? unalterable* had in e%ery difficulty fuj pored her fpirits, and in ever) trial ftimulated her to preferve Ler fortitude. The dreadful idea then of having loft either feemed too great an af¬ fliction to fupport; but in a moment when fhe remembered their love for each other from their infancy, fhe reproached herfelf for having for a moment doubted that it itili exiftcd. Thus in 'melancholy reflections fhe had paflèd an hour alone m her chamber, when Agatha came to inform her the Baron re* quefted her company to fupper. More than commonly dejected, and not inclined to defcend from her apartment at prefent, íhe defired he might be informed that Ihe begged leave to fup alone in her chamber. Agatha/ however, foon returned with the Baron's requeft, that if flie were not veiy 6 ω
ül indeed, (he would favour him with her prefence* Unwilling to appear ? though (he rc* fented his behaviour of the morning, know* ing how entirely (he was in his power, (he defcended to the parlour. She was,, how¬ ever» told that the Baron was in the great faloon, where to her furprife (he, contrary to the ufual cuftom, found fupper prepared. As (bon as he perceived her, he took his place at table without fpeaking, and Rofa¬ line following his example in the feme mute manner, the meal pafled, neither breaking (tience but when the mere compliments of the table obliged them. As foon as it was concluded, irftead of rifing to retire as he generally did, the Baron, abating a little of his referve, afked her if fhe were inclined to give him an air on the harp. He had never made fuch a requeft beiore; and feeling no imme liate wifli to retire» fhe compiled, and removing to
to the window, which was ftill open, while flu* contemplated the moon, whofe bighe rays were reflected into the tootn, fhe pbyed and fung an Evening Aldrefs by ? ? ??* light, compofed in happier days by AJol* phus, and by her fet to her harp. It was Henrietta's favourite piece, and as fhe ftruck the chords, the well-known founds recalled every delightful fcene of her early youth to her memory. Every netve vi¬ brated to the touch ι and wrapped in pleafing meditation, ftie tried to imagine herfelf once more at the refidence of her childhood, and playing, as had often been her cuftom, to Sir Walter and Lady Edgecumbe after fup¬ per, when they frequently adjourned into the mufic-room, the windows of which commanded a beautiful and extenfive pro¬ fpect over the diftant ocean and cultivated Ihores of Wales, where, while fhe was ac¬ cuftomed to exercife her mufieal talents on the harp, Henrietta accompanied her on the piano, and Adolphus joined in the concert with his flute or clarinet· The
The fweet rcmembr nee : m**arted a pain" ful delight to her bofom, and in sbe imagi* nary piclure her %icv had formed, that the fame fcerc of happinefs was acting again, Che had forgotten that there exifted fuch a perfon as the Baron, and that inftead ofthe fea, antl a cultivated country, fhe had for her prr fent *iew only tbe moat that fur· rounded the Caftle, beyond w4ch were faintly vifible the tops of fome high trees of the mountair/s growth, while a ridge of rocks overtopped with the fummits of mountains, crowned whh perpetual lnows, terminated the dreary profpect. Involved in herow*n delightful reflections, fhe continued to playón without noticing the Baron, till a deep hollow fort of groan from him at length recalled her to recol* lection; and looking round, fhe perceived him ftandirg oppofite her, with his eyes fixed on her countenance; but tn her ceafing to play, he fuddeniy covered his face with bis hands, paced ihe room in a feemng
a feeming agony for â few moments, and then rufhed oot of it« He had fcarcely left her when a violent knocking was heard at the outer gates of the Caftle, the great bell was founded, and immediately afterwards the rattling of a carriage was heard over the eaftern draw* bridge. It was the firft time fhe had heard the arrival of company fince flie had ro fided at the Caftle : and the unufual noifes echoing through the feveral paved courts from the rattling of carriages, catling of fervants, and trampling of horfes, refounded with fuch deep and hollow vibrations from the high walls and lofty buildings, ftruck her with a fort of alarm (lie could not fup¬ prefs i and imagining they were ftrangers* fhe would have retired haftily to her charø* ber, but fhe was obliged to pafs the great hall, where flie knew they muti ertici and therefore determined to remain where fhe was till they were gone into the north par· bur*
lour, whither íhe concluded they would be conduded· From the cafement (he perceived fhe lights enter the inner courts, and directly heard voices in the eaft hall. They feemed to approach the room (he was in, and ihe was furprifed to hear them draw nearer. The door was prefently opened by the fearon, who, to the amazement of Rofaline, nfhered in the Count de Polloni, The latter advanced towards hef* and taking her hand, enquired with an affected earneft* nefs after her health. She replied coldly lo hb complimenti, and would have retired immediate^, but was not allowed to leave them. They entered into converfation on the Count's journey, who (he found had come from his villa at Polloni that day. He defcribed ¡ti dangers from the fwift nefs with wbich he had travelled through the intri¬ cate-and rugged paffes of the Alps, owing tih
to bis wifh of reaching St. Aivars that night, and talked of the fears of Madame de Polloni, his fifter, whofe dread of travel¬ ling through a country fo unfrequented, had deterred her from accompanying him. The Baron expreffed a wifh that he could have prevailed on her to be of the perty» but made no enquiry why the Chevalier did not attend him, which much furprifed Ro* faline» who had underftood that be con¬ ftantly refided with his father* More w tne was called for» and Rofaline» feeing the gentlemen in no hafte to leave it» arole and bade them good night. It was not with¬ out fome difficulty ihe was fuffered to de¬ part. The Count, who was already elevated» with much vehemence prefled her longer ftay ι but her grave and determined man* ner feemed to deter him from continuing his entreaties, and lhe was at length allowed to retire* She haftened immediately to her own chamber»
chamberí but the fudden arrival of their unexpeded vifitor had fo much furprifed her» that fhe felt no inclination to fleep. He was evidently expected by the Baron, though he had not mentioned the fubject: to her,, as appeared by the fupper having been feryed in an apartment which, when with¬ out company, was never ufed for that pur¬ pofe. She now fancied flic had difcovered tlie Baron*s motive for afking her to ¡¿lay inftead of retiring, as was his ufual cuftom immediately after fupper* though why he fliould particularly wifh her to be prefent at his arrival, fhe could not imagine. She hoped,. however, one good effect would Ipring from his vifit, and that the Baron would be fo conftantly with him, that fhe fliould find leifure to perufe the manufcript of the un¬ fortunate Angelma, which flie determined to feek the next day in the cabinet that had been pointed out to her. With this refo¬ lution flic retired to reft. In the morning flie awoke early j but was fcarcely
fcarcely arifen, when Agatha entered from the Baron, to defire her attendance im¬ mediately in the north parlour, She obeyed the fummons with as much alacrity as pof¬ fible, though fhe could aflign no reafon for the requeft, and found him, on defcending, waiting her arrival. He gravely bade her good morning, and clofing the door, faid^— * 4 1 fent for you, Mifs Melvan, on an affair that will, I hope, make you amends for having been fo many months confined in this fecluded fituation, and amply reward you for the time you have pafled in foli- tude." " Oh," thought Rofaline, « he has then at laft relented, and will allow me to return to England l* With a delighted countenance fhe was preparing to thank him; but without at¬ tending to her, he proceeded with a look of much importance—" In fliort, to put you out of fufpenfe, I am commiflioned by my noble and huiourable friend, the Count de Polloni,
Polloni, to make you an offer of his hand and fortune.'* The amazement of Rofaline at this fpeech was fo urbounded, that, entirely de¬ prived by it of the power of utterance, flie remained totally filent, and he added, with an air of confequence— tc 1 fliall efteem myfelf extremely happy in being the means of enfuring to you, by your late introduction to the Count, a rank in life I doubt not your merit entitles you to, and at the fame time prefenting to my friend a treafure, of whofe value I affure you he is perfectly feníible.*' He ceafed; for, unaccuftomed to make fpeeches of this fort, it was not without an extraordinary effort he had faid fo much ; but he might have continued ipeaking with¬ out any fear of being interrupted, for the extreme iurprife of Rofaline had fo entirely overcome her, that ibe had no power to make any reply. Seeing her ernbarraff- ment,
ment, and attributing it to a caufe totally different, he only added—" 1 will not dif¬ trefs you by requiring any anfwerj the Count himfelf will be permitted an inter¬ view in the courfe of the day, and you will perhaps prefer breakfafting in your own apartment. We fliall go out immediately for the whole morning, and return to din¬ ner, when I hope we fhall find you ready to receive us/* So faying, he ftalked gravely out of the room, leaving Rofaline motionlefs on her feat. She, however, recovered herfelf fuftici- ently to haften to her apanrnent, from a fear that the Count, hearing flie was alone, ihould pay her a vifit (lie was fo ill difpofed to receive. Every myfterious circumftance refpecting the arrival of the Count was now cleared up, and the Baron*s defire that fhe fhould be there to receive him fully ex« plained ; yet how the Count could for a moment think ferioufly of offering himfelf to her acceptance, appeared a myftery ihe could
cauîd not Solve, fie \m% in point of age» on an equality with the Baron, though he drdied evidently with a defign to appear younger; mid befides a difagreeable perfon, had manners «he moft repulfive. She reflected for fome time on what was beft to be done, and at lenglh, as fhe Lit an unwilluignefs fhe coukl not conquer ία ipeak to the Baron on the fubject, deter¬ mined to write to him her anfacr to the Count's propofal» Swift in executing what¬ ever flie determined on, flie hefitated not in writing the following billet*
TO ?И? BARON ST. ÄLVARS. ** MY LORD, " The great furprife I felt on hearing the very flattering propofal your Lordfhip this morning honoured me by making from the Count de Polloni, rauft
muft plead my excufe for the total inability 1 then (hewed to make any reply to if ι but, unwilling to keep either your Lordfhip of the Cou t in fufpenfe, I cannot hefitate tn begging my moft grateful thanks may be returned to htm for the great and wholly unmerited honour he intended me* which I am neceflttated to decline, as being totally repugnant to my inclinations» though the gratitude due to him and your Lord« fliip, will, 1 truft, ever remain impreffed on the heart of ° ROSALIN£ MBLVA».** ■ m i n ι ι ■ At foon as (he had haftily written it, fhe gave it to Agatha, with orders to deliver it to the Baron before he went out ; and then fat down to her folitary breakfaft, which flie had fcarcely finifhed, when a fummons to attend the Baron in the north faloon was brought her. She obeyed it with trem¬ bling fteps, yet determined to adhere vol. ii. ? fteadily
flea Hy to the refolution fhe had declired in her c¡ idle to the Baron, whom the found pacing ti e to m in an agnation that plain'y apfea^td on his |erturbcd countenance. He looktd ?.t her without (peak i ".g, wbile his features liefpoke anger and indignation; and it wa^ not till Ihe had re:utfted to know his commands, that he unbent the deep dí'píeafure oí his brow fufiiJent!y to fiy, in a tone of luughtine*š and of· fende*; j ride—** I d*d not imigre, when I this morning condctcendeû to add t eis )ou in a ftyle 1 am httle accJtucd to ufé, thai I fhould find caufe to defile aaothcr conference on the fame fubject; but ï believe it is what I deferve for ellceming one whom I perceive is, in fome degree, unworthy of ¡t. 1 never entertained a very high opinion of the prudence and good ien'.e of )our fex, but 1 fancied you were an exuption to the general rule: how¬ ever 1 find I uas miftaken; but fmce you are )uurie;f blind to your own intereft, it ? proper fome one more experienced fliould judge
judge for you, and, in lhe character of guar* d »an, that office certainly devolves on røe. Äs a friend, therefore, let røe aJvife you to confider of the hafty billet you thii mora- ing tent to nie.** ·* Confideration, my l*ord," faid Rofa¬ line, ** can on this fubject be of no avail» fince my mind is folly made up to decline, with the trueft fenfe of the honour intended me, lhe very Û vite r ing offers of the Count de Polloni; and allow me to fay that, how· ever condelcending it is of your Lordihip to oflêr me your advice, I ani certainly fubject to no control from any one/* u Da not,** replied the Baron, ** pro - ???? me to iay bow far 1 am able to con¬ trol you: it is fufficient that you are at prefent wholly in my ??? er, thougn I ihould be forry you Ihould oblige me to fhew you the*extent ofit/* €t I am grieved, my Lord," faid Rofaline, 4 * to incur your vUfpleafure, or to give you caufe ot oftence ι though patdoo me if I ?? %
fay in this cafe, t cannot help thinking ¡t wholly unmerited.** ** It is from your inability to diftinguifh right from wrong,** faid the Baron, * 4 that you „ufe a liberty of fpeech 1 am little ac¬ cuftomed to. But know,** added he, with a fternnefs that made her tremble, ** my power here is unlimited, though I ftill hope you will, on confideration, know your own intereft fufficiently, not to make me fhew you how far I can exert it. You will now retire, and when you appear at dinner, let your behaviour towards the Count be fuch as 1 fliali approve.** u As your friend, my Lord, and as à vifitor at the Caftle, he will, 1 * faul Rofa¬ line, fC ever meet from me the refped he merits; but in any other light pardon me if I add 1 can never bring myfelf to think of him/* *< It would better become you to be more guarded in your words** faid the Baron; " you now, however, know my .commands, and I do not wifh to be forced to
lo repeat the confequence of their not being obeyed.**—Saying thb, he left the room, and Rofaline retired with as much (peed as poflible to her chamber·
\# Xa/Va · 1V·
« Wbtrt uo» tbt Joys ?« «aet «cr« utbet *· Where alt my hop«« of 1???? ??»? «« Muft 1 tbofe joys, thofe hopes refign r " I» all his fiiemKhîp come to thfe ?* LOVI I&tGIiS* ιτρ X HE fituation of Rofaline had long been far from pleafant» but it now appeared fo much worfe than fhe had ever expected» that flie fliuddered to think of it· Her heart revolted at the bare idea of an alliance J> 3 with
with the Count, though how to avoid tt fhe law no probable means. Her firft impulfe was to avail herfelf of her knowledge of the fubterranean cavern, and quit* the Caftle immediately; but whither could flie go alone and unprotected ina forugn countr) ? Expoîed, fí om her fex and age, to number* Jtfs dangers, flie had no on¿ to I ok up to for affittince and protection; and on the B«ron flie too plamly fax the could have no reliance. Tnere w..s a myftery in his character ihe could not devel jp, and the obdurate feverity of lus tempei gave her no room to hope he would be moved in her favour by the claims of meicy or humani; y. how b« t tedy cli J ihc nuw re- gat lur abfence frum thoic fiu.nd* who would have defended her from his tyranny, and how did Ihe look back, with unavailing regret* on the happinefs of ber early years I Unable to determine on any thing, fhe at length formed a fort of refolution to pay another vifit to the hermit, and open to. him
htm her fituation, as he had offered her his counfel and afliftance whenever flie required cither. Tl*e prediction ol her pretended fylph when he had kit talked to her, came to her recollection ; and if, as he had de¬ clared, his office was to protect her, ñw hoped he had not refigned it at a time whea íhe moft required advice. She had, how¬ ever, heard no more of hin fince a few nights before the death of Angelina» but willing to catch at any glirnpfe of hope, flie eouid not help indulging an idea that he was reaUy fome one who had a regard for he* welfare, and would watch over it. The unexpected circumftance of the morning had entirely erafed for the time from her memory aft recollection of the determination the had taken the preceding evemng, to begin that day the manufcript of Angelina í and the hour of dinner ar* rive 1, -Ahd found her ftill in the fame anxi* ou> ftaie ot ι oceriainty an 1 perturbation» When fhe ticiiCbutd to the lalocn* the was J* 4 met
met by the Baron with looks of difpleafure; but the Count approached her with an af· fected tendernefs, and taking her hand, enquired after her health. She drew it back f and coldly replied to his compliments. The dinner pafled as ufual, and Rofaline retired directly afterwards to her chamberí for flie was afraid that, fhould the go to her mufic in the faloon, the Count would avail himfelf of her being alone, and join her. She therefore haftened to her room, and endeavoured to calm the diftradion of her thoughts by reading; but her moft favour·· ite authors had now no charms for her, and İhe was throwing the b >ok afide, when Agatha entered with a fummons from the Baron to attend him in the north parlour. She enquired if the Count were with him ι and being anfwered in the negative, a faint hope arofe that he might have relented of his imperious behaviour to her in the morn* ing.
Infpired
Infpired by this idea, flie defcended with tolerable a f acrityi but how was fhe incenfed, on entering tie room, to fiad not the Baron, but the Count alone, tearing whh affected indolence on a fofa. He arofe haftily on her ent f ance, and advancing» feised her hand, which flie endeavoured to withdraw, faying ftie underftood the Baron had been there. « He was here, my divine Mifs Melvan,** replied the Count, ** a few minutes fince i but it was to give me the felicity of fpeak¬ ing to you that he requefted your prefence here/* Forcibly drawing her on as he fpoke, he obliged her to be feated, and when with great fcluctance fhe confented to lear him* he repeated the propoials tlie Baron had made in the morning« offering to fettle any part of his vaft eftates on her, and repre¬ fenting his large fortune as if he thought allurements were wanting to induce her 0 5 acceptance»
acceptance. Rkhcs, flie told him, were fir from being any inducement to her ti ficri- fice her own happinefs, and again repeated with firmnefs her unalterable refolution never to accept his offers. Willi- an un¬ daunted countenance he tierfevered in his entreaties and remonftrances in a manner fo cool and determined, that it feemed to alarm her as much as the Biron's violence. She remained, however, quite immo.eabV, though he overpowered her with the moft extravagant compliments, which he abfo¬ lutely forced her to ftay md hear. All her efforts to get from him were ufelefs, till the door was fuddeniy opent d by Agatha, who delivered to Rofaline a t a;kct juft arrived from England. At the much wiihed-for fight flie darted like lightning from the Count, and taking it from the hand of Agatha, flew with it to her own apartment, without making any ex**u ? to the Count, who in vain entreated her to ftay.
With
With hands trenïbling with tïeîî hr, Rofaline unfol/ed the eo er, anti lounj letters fram Lady De ford and Cecilia Arundel, but none bom Hen? ? tu, That from lhe former coniarne! the tnit?gc**ce of her føn'b arrival 1*1 England froj¡n having been abioad in a public char »etcr, to the great joy of tier Lord and herfeK. SLc f|K)le of the ill health of the former, and added they were going to Bath, bv order of the phyhcuns, t"> tiy the efitcì nf il e waters, aiul were to be accompanied In û e Arundel family, and flie hoped bv Henri¬ etta, %vho, by the perniitfioti ol Str Wulf er and La fy Edgecumbe, v%a» lo fj end the enfumg winter ??» Irt aunt m town. She made t.o mention of Adolphus in parti, ubr, but (puke of the lamiiy at the Had as being all well· Ctc»lia, however, wa« more unguarded. After retatine to het muvhof t e t hibehat of the day, flie added—** 1 Lad Del o*d, I conclude, has told y >u of our propofed excur- ? ? Loa
fion tù Bath, which, as I have never been there, you may imagine I anticipate with great pleafure ι and I hear we are to have a very agreeable addition to our party in your friend Mifs H. Edgecumbe. Her Lady Ihip has of courfe informed you of the prefent fituation of that family, and that there is likely to be another wedding in it very fhortly. Adolphus, we hear, has at length acquiefced ia the general wiflies of the family, and is very foon to be united to Mifs Otway. He has appeared in public with her feveral times, and we yefterday morning met them in his phaeton in Hyde Park." At, the end of this paragraph the letter dropped from the trembling fingers of Ro¬ faline, and flie funk, almoft fenfelefs, into a chair. Every fenfe for a moment feemed annihilated, and fhe fcarcely breathed with excefs of emotion. In this fituation fhe was found by Agatha, who, terrified at the vacant look of her countenance, the pallid hue that
that overfpread her complexion, and the unmeaning manner in which fhe regarded her, without fpeaking, or feeming to fee her» enquired if fhe were well ; but received no anfwer but a convulfive figh to all her enquiries. Perceiving the letter on the floor, fhe took it up; but Rofaline fnatched it eagerly out of her hand, looked at it for a moment, and then agiin threw it down. It was not till (he had continued for fone time in this ftatc,that a violent burft of tears a little relieved her, and fhe began again to have fome recollection of where ftie was» With added diftrefs fhe now re¬ flected on her forbì α fituation, and every dreadful idea fhe had entertained, that fhe was forgotten by Henrietta and her bro¬ ther, feemed in reality fulfilled. He had cancelled in her abfence every vow he had uttered but a few months fmce, and was about to give to the woman, whom of all fhe had ever fecn fhe moft difltked, the hand and heart he had fo often declared were devoted
devoted wholly to her. Yet flie tried tø diveft herfelf of every Telfilh feclbg, and to rejoice that he had confented to the united wiihes of his family ; but in fpite of her endeavours, ihe certainly that every fond hope Hie had fo lon¿ and ardently cheriflied, was deftroyed, ftruck a deadly damp on her heart, and again depreifed lower than ever her drooping fpirits. She was now obliged to give over all thoughts of vifiting the hermit that night, as the time was fcarcely fufficient for her to try at gaming compofure enough to appear at fupper, where flie well knew her attend¬ ance would not be d*fpenfed with. A vio¬ lent head-ache was urged in anfwer to the enquiry which was immediately made by the Count after her health, her looks being fufficient evidence that fomothing: ha I hap¬ pened fince dinner. On this plea ihe was fuffered to retire early, though (he did not attempt to fleep, but made a fecond tffjrt to perufe the letters flie had received, 5 The
The remainder of Cecilia's conramed no* thh'g material, and fhe plainî? fiw that I ??? De'ford had purpofely avoided making any mention of Adolphus in her epiftle; but Cecifia, lefs guarded, and not aware of the con eque rices that might en'ue from it» had t ?! her, as a | ???? of news, what had ίο fa: al an efTrft on the already deprefled fpirits of Rofaline· She remaitied near an hour at the win¬ dow, in hopes, for the ñrd rime, that the fliould hear the mufic of her ethereii friend, whom flie wifhed to converte with on the fubjeit of the Count's propofal; but no found reached her,except at intervais tlie faint fcreams of fame bird cf prey, who inha* bited the mountains, or the deep tones of the turrct-'ciock which lhe hati heard three tines tepesi the hour before fhe made any attempt to gaia repofè, and it was at laft Ihort and difturbed. Frightful dreams terrîfi d her ikepbg imagination, and the images of Adolphus aad Henrietta, fer-» golful
getful of her, and wholly devoted to newer friends, haunted her flumbers. Sometimes Sir Walter accufed her of having inter· rupted and finally deftroyed tbe happinefs of his family; and at others Adolphus him¬ felf appeared to her, not as he was wont to look, but with a frowning afpeci, and try* ing to ihun and avoid her. Wearied with vain efforts to procure undifturbed fleep, fhe rofe at a very early hour, and perceiving the fun had fcarcely begun to difclofe his radiance, a fudden thought occurred to her that fhe might now pay her projeâed vifit to the hermit, as it would be nearly two hours to the general time of breakfaft. She had fcarcely thought of this plan before (ht haftily put it in execution; and gently unclofing her chamber-door, took the way to the ar* moury, from whence fhe proceeded as ufual through the fubterranean paflage to the cavern. She paufed at ¡ts entrance to view the rifing fun, whofe bright beams were jua
juft difcernible at the extent of the vaft horkon, and then continued along the path fhe had traverfed a few davs before with * the young ftrangers. She had walked but a few paces, when fhe defcried the venerable hermit reft¬ ing on his ftaff as he ftood on a projec¬ tion of rock, with his face turned towards the eaft, apparently in contemplation on the firft view of the great luminary of day. At fight of her he quitted his pofture, and advanced to meet ber* He enquired what caufe had brought her out fo early» and afked if the were come purpofely to feek him. She replied in the affirmaiive,*adding that» induced by his having offered her his ad* vice, (lie had come to impart to him her fituation, and to entreat his counfel. He commended her confidence in him, and leading the way to a mols feat in a little recefs of the mountain, feated himfelf by her; and at his earneft requeft Rofaline unrefervedly related to him the principal evenes
events of her life, concealing only the myf¬ tery of her birrh, faying (he ? as early left an orphan by Mr. Mehun, an I at his death configned to the care of Sir Walter Edge¬ cumbe. She faid Or.e had been obliged, from fai.ily motives, to quit Edgecumbe Hail, and acknowledged the re 'on s tliat had inJuced her to leave 1er n ..ive country, and vifit Switzerland with the family of the Baron. She then proceeded to relate the offers flie had the preceding morning re¬ ceived from the Count, and the Baron's behaviour to her on her refufal ; fhe de¬ fcribed in lively terms her diflike to the Count, and owned that, being fo entirely in the power of the Baron, flie was at a lob how to proceed. The hermit heard her with the pro· foundeft attention, and after paufing a few momenis, faid— vt 1 will not diíguife from you that 1 think your fituation a critical one. In my eariy )ouih I knew both the Baton St. Älvars and the Count àt Polloni» and
and I know the firft to be violent and def¬ perate—the latter artful and defigning; nor do I think the hafty paffion of the one more to be ieared than the dark filent cunning of the other. The Count was not born iole heir to the eftates he now pof¬ feffes, and had once profpects far different from his prefent rank in life. He was married young to a lady, whofe family, for its own aggrandizement, forced her to an union with the Count, whofe ill treatment, ? was generally believed, caufed her death in a few years. Wtiat other crimes he has to anfever for í will not fay ; if any» let his confcience be his puniihment—we need not confign him to a feverer judge. He had once a brother, by whole death be unex¬ pectedly came into pofleffion of bis vaft fortune, which was large enough to fatisfy even his boundleis ambition." " Good Heavens!" faid Rofaline, ** for what a man does the Baron defign mc! But furely he muft be unacquainted wiia his general charader?" " He
* f He needs no information of that fort»** replied the hermit ; *· but k t me give you this advice. Be guarded in your words to the Baron, nor let your native franknefs get the better of your prudence. I know his temper to be hafty—fwift to take of¬ fence, but flow in pardoning it. Give him then no caufe to oppofe malevolence to in¬ nocence, and confide in him who can alone defend you. I will confider your cafes vifit me again to-morrow or to-night, and you ihall know the refult of my delibe* rations. Meantime be fecure in your own reft it ude. Providence has put you ? pofleflion of an important fecret by dif* doting the way from the cavern, which you muft preferve inviolably ; and be convinced that ??, who never forkkes his own, will* guard you from danger, and defend you from harm/' Fearl· g íhe íhould be too late for break» fãft, Rolaline now arofe, and thanking the permit lor his communication and advice» departed»
departed, promifing to revifit htm on the morrow. She returned with the utmoft alacrity to the cavern; and, cheered by the hope of avoiding the impending evil, which the venerable Father had infpired her with, ihe went to the faloon, and attune 1 her harp to airs that ftie thought would enliven her. She (aw the Buon and Count below on the ramparts, in earneft converfation, from the open cafement; they both per¬ ceived her, and came into breakfaft. The Baron was rather more condefcending ihan on the precedmg day; and the Count, by tbe moft affiduous attention, feemed ftudioufly to recommend himlelf to her notice. Her behaviour was, however, uniformly the fame. She wiflied not to difguife her fentiments, and pretend a partiality (he could not feel, though the ende 1 voured to behave with neceflary politenefs to both. Immediately after breaktaft Öie was fuffered to retire; and the morning was fpent in her own apartment, as fhe underftood from Agatha that the Baron and his friend were to be at home
home all day. At dinner flie again met them, and W£S not entreated to flay after¬ wards. She could not help feeling rather furprifed tiat the day had pafled without the Count having made any attempt to fpeak to her, and began to hope they would re; ent their fruitlefs perfecution, and rc· iinquiih iu
CHAP.
CHAP. V.
** Oh partner of my infant griefs and Joys l * <* Kig wuh the letnes now pail, my heai t oei flows, € * Bit!» each ????? lìient f tir as ot.ee tu rite* 41 Aud dwells 1??? ious on her uniting woes." MlCtLLB. TT JljLAVING argued herfelf into a tolerably compofed frame of mind, and being anxious to begin the manufcript of Angelina, Ro¬ faline in the evening vifited with Agatha the apartment once inhabited by her un¬ fortunate friend. They unlocked the cahi- net, and in one of the receffes found a large packet direded to *« Mifs Melvan. 1 * A fmaii
fmall folded paper lay by it with this in¬ feription :—
<c For my beloved Mifs Melvan, to be worn by her, and left as a token of grati* tude by her for ever obliged and affection¬ ately grateful « c ANGELINA ST. ÄLVARS."
The paper contained a miniature of An¬ gelina richly fet in diamonds; and Rofa¬ line, as fhe furveyed it, could fcarcely be¬ lieve it had ever been a refemblance of the emaciated form fhe had known. Agatha told her it was drawn when Mifs St. Älvars was very young, and both were moft for¬ cibly ftruck with the refemblance it bore to Rolnii ne. Tears forced their way from her eyes as flie contemplated it, when fhe reflected on the early fate of its unfortunate original. Taking
Taking the manufcript, íhe proceeded with it to her own chamber, unable to re« main longer where every object brought remembrances fo painful to her recollection. She felt fo deprefled in mind, that when fhe attempted to unfeal the packet that con» tained the woes of Angelina written by her own hand, her fingers refufed their office, and (he was compelled to forbear at¬ tempting the perufal till her fpirits were fitter for the undertaking. Seating herfelf by the window, fhe in* dulged the melancholy of her mind, and gave a free courfe to the fad ideas that occupied it. Her reflections did not tend to reftore the peace of mind the recent tidings from England had fo effectually deftroyed for the prefent. Reafon, how« ever, foon told her it was not more her duty than intereft to expel from her mind an attachment which could not now be in* dulged without a deviation from that rec¬ titude by which every action of her guile» vol. ii, e leis
lefs life had hitherto been guided. The innate purity of her mind revolted at the idea of entertaining a fentiment that could tend to fully it; and flie refolved that (being now convinced Adolphus was loft to her for ever) flte would exert every active fa¬ culty of her foul to drive from her memory the partiality with which fhe had once re¬ garded hi \\ and to retain only that fond fraternal affection he was fo juftly entitled to. No efforts, fhe well knew, could eradicate from her memory the hours which, through infancy, childhood, and early youth, had expeditioufly fled, winged with felicity ; but flie now determined the recollection ihould ferve as a ftİmulus to affift her in perfe- vering in her new refolution, by reflecting *that he, who had been the companion of her infantine happinefs, had Hftened to the voice of reafon, and facrificed his own wifhes to the dictates of duty; for ftill ihe could not believe the heart of Edgecumbe ίο
fo utterly changed, as to be influenced by real regard for Mifs Otway in accepting her hand. The firft vifit of that lady to the Hall, with the difguft he evinced towards her, all recurred to her recollection, and a fecond perufal of Cecilia's letter alone could convince her that fhe had not received the intelligence from lefs indifputable authority. " Oh Adoíphust* exclaimed fhe with fervour, " reared by the fame hand as your¬ felf, and nurtured by the fame idolized parents, fhall I not ftrive to emulate your conduct, and by an ^effort, which will for ever expel all hope *tf felicity from my bofom, at once conquer every rifing emotion, * every,fond remembrance that may tend to encourage a fentiment 1 muft now blufh to avow even to my own heart ? No, never can the mind formed by your revered mo¬ ther, and once believed the counterpart of your own, fuffer ideas fo degrading to its native dignity, to dwell on it. From this moment 1 refolve to aft up to the precepts e 2 of
of my loved, my early monitrefs, and to leave no means uneffayed to facilitate the victory over my ?\\*? heart." This fad retrofpectioti was at length in¬ terrupted by a fummons to the weft faloon to fupper. She obe)cd it, and found the .Baron and Count in converfation, which they ceafed on her entrât ce. The latter, as ufual, was obfequioufly polite, and the forced good-humour of the former wa> again biought into his countenance. They had nearly finiflied fupper, when the Baron, addreffing her, faid, as if fuddeniy recol¬ lecting himfelf—" Oh Mifs Melvan, I had almoft forgotten to mention that you will be ready as early as poflible in the morn» ing to accompany me to Polloni; for 1 in¬ tend fetting out as foon as I can after fui». rife." Rofaline flared without fpeaking; for though flie had feveral times heard he had propofed an excurfion thither, yet as nothing
nothing had been bid to her on the füb¡etiv flic had flaturvd heifeit it was to be made alone. She immediately made the fliort* nefs of the notice a plea for begging to bø excufed, addmg that her prefent indifferent fiate of health and fpirits rendered her very unßt for company. The Baron replied he bad no doubt change cf air would not only be of fervice, but was quite efiential; and that as Madame Polioni expeåed her % her attendance could not polhbiy be difpenfed KÛÛU ** How long do you propofe to ftay, my Lord?" faid Rofaline. € * That I am at prefent undetermined in/* anfwered the Baron i u probably two or three cays at the utmoft will be the limits; and if )ou have any oid^fb fer the fei vants, you will find Rodtrigo or Marcus ready to attend to thera.** The Count fat f lently by while they con¬ verfed on the fubject, without attempting to interfere; but Rofaline, as fhe rofe to retire, e 3 thought
thought íhe faw a malicious triumph on his brow as he entreated her t*> ftay, and give them an air on her harp. She coldly de¬ clined it, faying fhe had preparations to make for the journey, if fhe muft ? ob%*d to undertake it, though fte ftill ardently wifhed to be excufed. The Baron on this with a ftern look and voke faid—* c When you know my itnti- ments on the fubject, I am armzed }ou fliould pi etend to rcmonftraie, Eve; y thing is fixed or», aiid no arrangement can poffibly be altered/* Finding a4 entreaty vain, fhe filently re* tired, provoked to be ihi:s forced againft her inclination toa jnirnej flie could not think of without trembling. The Baron had evidently poftponed informing he/ of it till ihc laft moment, that timo might not be aloAed her to flart objtåionsj and íhe dì eaded left it was contrived purpofely to make her by iome means or other confent to
to accept the propofals of the Count. Ste reflexed, with fome degree of hope, that the Count had a fifter, and trufted fhe fhouid at kaft be able to move her in her favour. On enquiring if Agatha was to accom* pany her, (he was told that the Baron had given her orders to remain at the chateau,, faying their vifit would be fo fhort, that Mifs Melvan would have no need of an attendant. Late as it was, Rofaline was obliged to prepare for her journey that night, orders having been given to the fcr· vants to be ready at daylight to fet for¬ ward. Not inclined to fleep, Rolaline therefore fat up the firft part of the night, and to¬ wards morning lay down for a few hours, and gained in repofe a temporary fufpenfion from the anxious doubts and fears that ter¬ rified her waking thoughts. She was dif¬ turbed early by Agatha, who informed her the Baron was already rifen, and that the ? 4 Count
Count had been fet out feme hours hefere. The latter intelligence Rofaline was not forry to hear, though it furprifed her. Being (bon ready, (he defcended to breakfaft in the north parlour. The meal was pafled, as ufual, almoft in filence, and tliey had fcarcely finiflied, when they were informed the carriages were ready. Rofaline travelled with the Baron in an old landau, drawn by fix horfes, whofe birth and for¬ mation fecmed to have been coeval with that of the chateau. They were attended by a train of armed fervants following the carriage. They had no fooner proceeded through the inner courts, and paffing the folding gates of the chateau, afcended the eaftern drawbridge, than Rofaline looked around to fee if flie could defery any of the fpots the had vifited in her fecret rambles among the mountains; but the cave was on the fouth fidt of the chateau, and the front gates of the edifice opened to die eaft· It
It was a fine clear morning in the begin* ning of Odober ; and as they iffued from the outer court, and heard the heavy folding doors reclofe, after having given them ac* cefs to the mountain, the heart of Rofaline dilated with the pleat ures of liberty, and fhe longed to be allowed to alight from the carriage, and contemplate the fine feenes around her. The Baron feemed afive to no fenfation of deHght ; he preferved the fame invariable gloom on his countenance, and continued the fame pofitive fiknet, leaving Rofaline to amufe herfelf with her own thoughts, which, though in fome meat ure enlivened by having it in her power to con¬ template the wonders of nature around her, could not return to her own fituation or affairs without calling forth fighs of the bittereft anguifh. By this time it was ???? bable that Edgecumbe Hall was once more the fcene of nuptial rejoicings, for ihe had no doubt Adolphus's marriage would be celebrated by his family with the fame fcfti* vity as had prevailed at that d his brother. ? 5 She
She well knew the hofpitable temper of Sir Walter, and that it had ever been his boaft to preferve, in one inftance at leaft, fome remains of ancient hofpitality. It was therefore, improbable that on this joyful oc¬ cafion, the wedding of his favourite fon, he ihould not indulge hirrfelf in his pre¬ vailing pleafure. But Henrietta flie thought could never join in the mirth around h¿r, without giving a figh back to thofe days paflèd in the fociety of her once loved friend and companion. What then muft be the feelings of Adolphus himfelf, he who had fo often, as they wandered round the park and plantations, fondly planned fchemes of ideal felicity, and vowed never to fwerve from that firft fentiment of his heart, the fond regard with wbich her vir¬ tues and attractions had fo early inlpired him. Her méditations were uninterrupted by the Baron, who, wrapping his cloak round bim, maintained a gloomy filence during the journey.
journey* Rolaline, as Oie fat oppofite» could not at times forbear cootempLting him with fcnfatbns fomething rcfernblmg fear. His t II majeftic figure reclined againft the fide of the carriage, and his cap, ornamented with a waving plume, hung over his face, and gave additional fierce* nefs to his terrific countenance, every hm of which expreffed deep thought, and â total abstraction from all prefent objecis. Once, when arrived at a fteep precipice, along the brink of which they travelled for fome time, he obten td Rofaline caft a fearful glance from the window, and then hide her eyes with her hand. He afked if lhe faw any thing to alarm her* «· The road," replied fhe, " feems fo dangerous, that I ihould think it *ouU be iafer to alight from the carriage, and walk till ?? are paft this frightful precipice. We feem as if we fhoukl every moment be precipitated into that dreadful chafm !" ? 6 «* Your
** Tour fears are groundlefs," am%ered he coldly, "and only arife from your noc being accuftomed to thefe Alpine roads.** ** Ah no!" faid Rofaline, u 1 am not indeed accuftomed to them;" and fhe would willingly have added, " Would I had never beheld them!" but the dark con¬ tracted brow of the Baron, frowning over his fierce eyes, ftopped her proceeding, and again intrufive recollection of former hap« pinefs darted acrofs her mind, and filled her foft eyes with the involuntary tear. The Baron was intently obferving her :—his face fuddeniy grew of a deadly palenefs j he drew his cap more over his eyes, and a fort of groan efcaped him; but in an inftant appearing to recollect himfelf, he called from the window to Roderigo, who rode near the carriage, to afk if they were nearly arrived at the termination of this fteep pre¬ cipice. He replied in the affirmative ; and Rolline in a few minutes with delight per¬ ceived they were in a more level track ; ftill the road was rocky and rugged, and they were
were frequently obliged to travel cautioufly, ftom the crags and roughnefs of the way. They took provifions in the carriage» that no delays might arife from being under a neceffity to ftop on the road*
II Ψ J''„ '???
CHAP. VI. 41 ihm fank tbt fim ι the cfoíiftg h&m ùf ásy ** Caune ormaid mantel ??? with robe* of gt*y j «« Natine in filene« blj tîie wai ? repule*. tf When near the ruad a íbtdy t aber yole. «* Ί 1??« by the mount Lu ?' rankt cf tre*s they pafs, ** Wmk vcidute crowti\l the ítapiug údes oá graí'ü.** HP X ILL about noon their way lay along the Alps; but towards evening, after having tra¬ velled for neariy two hours in a fort of deil, between two high ridges of mountains, whofe
whofe lofty fides were overgrown with pine, larch, and cedar trees, they fuddeniy turned imo a road, by which they entered the fruitful province of Lucen e, whofe beautiful and cultivated appearance, after having, for months only beheld tiie dreary folitude of the Alp , feemed to prefent a new world to the charmed eyes of Ro r aline, and reminded her of the beauties of her native countrv. The remembrance brought a train of melancholy thoughts to her mind, which fiie was trying to difpel by turning the courfe of her reflections to other fubjects, when, by a fudden turn in the road, they entered a fpacious plain, on one fide bor¬ dered by groves of pine and cedar, while on the other the eye ranged over an extent of country, bounded by a view of the ocean, which, duáng the remainder of their journey^ was the moft ftriking object in the landfeape. The plain was of many railes* extent, and terminated in a lofty eminence, planted with groves of larch and chefnut, 3 oa
tm the top of which was fituated a mag¬ nificent building. Its high rooft and orna* mented pillars were diftinguiihable long before they drew near ît, and they arrived at the foot of the fteep eminence on whkh it ftood, juft as the grey hght of evening had fpread itfelf over the earth. Ardently wifhing this might be tht ?* mination of their journey, Kofalme looked wiftfully from the carriage, but could dif¬ cern no other human habitation in fight, and at the fame time perceived they had entered a narrow road, that feemed to wind «p the fteep. She hoped thrçy were now within a (hort difbnce of Polloni ; but the rock on which it ftood was of fuch an amazing height, that nearly two hours more had elapfed, during which they continued flowly to afcend, when juit as the evemng was clofed in, and the moon had arifen with uncommon brilliancy, they came once more on even ground, and quickening their pace, ftopped before the gates of an elegant villa whkh
which Rofaline knew to be the fame fh« had feen as they journied for fbme hours before dong the plain that led to it. The bell at the gates was fcarcely founded before they were thrown open, aad the car¬ riage drove up a beautiful lawn to the front of the manfion, which appeared the feat of elegance and gaiety. Lights were viôble in every window, and a numerous train ot fervants-was ready at the door to attend them. Tiie carriage had hardly ftopped, when the Count appeared at the fide cf it. He was gaily habited ; and having affifted Rofahne toiaiight, he welcomed her, fhe thought, with an ak of exultation to Pol¬ loni, as he conduâed her through ? hall fupported with light pillars of variegated marble to an elegant ornamented ftaircafe, and through a fuperb gallery, whofe painted walls and ceiling fhewed the gaudy tafte of the o* ner, into a fplendid faloon, where tbey found a numerous party of bath fexes«
At
Αι one end cf this magnificent apart¬ ment was erected a grand orcheftra, tup* pert r d by pilìars of Hdtc marble, mund wh : e e i were entwine I wreaths of flower* i aid at each end a flight of high fteps, orna· mented with a gilt railing, led up to it. A fuperb canopy hung over it» from which depended curtains of rofe-coloured filk, fefto^ned up with wreaths of white rofes. Here was a band of mufical performers» and a variety cf inftruments, fame of the company occafionally joining them» while the reft attended to the concert. A profound filence reigned through the «»diente, while, in the front of the orchef¬ tra ftood a lovely female figure habited in a light fanciful dre s, Her long flowing hair was ornamented with diamonds, and a waving plume of white feather*. Her countenac. was beautiful and intea fting; and as fhe reclined gtaccfully over her lute» Rofaline thought ftie had never behe'd a more enchanting form. She was finging a tweet
fweet Italian air, and the moment ihe had concluded, refounding plaudits were echoed by the company. * The Count now arofe, and introduced Rofaline to Madame Polloni. She was a woman of elegant and fafcinating man* ners» paft the bloom of life, but ftill retain¬ ing fiffictent marks of peí fonal beauty to convince the beholders flie had once pof¬ fe fled a form of fuperior lovelinefs. She received Rofaline with an air ofthe greateft kindneíš, fearing her next herfelf, and intro· ducmg her to feveral ladies, who fat near her; but her extreme politenefs leérned overaäed» and the tender friendfhip fhe evinced foran utter ftranger, too violent to be fincere· Rofaline looked round for the Chevalier, but was forry to perceive tie was not among the party ; and on enquiring of Madame concerning him, the replied—** How greatly is my nephew lion· ured by your enquiries î He is, you know, of a peculiar turn, and feldom
feldom gives us much of his fociety here, particularly when we have other friends at Polloni. Indeed by far the greater portion t f his time is fpent in Italy with his bofom friendt thô Count Lorraine*" Rofaline expreffed her regret that he was ibfenti and foon after Madame Polloni rifiig. prefented to 1er the young lady, who V was ringing on their entrance. She ws introduced to her by the name of Μα - demoi fef e Niverre, and fhe f *und was the ward and companion of Madame Polloni. Her manners were not fo prepoffeffing as her perfon. She fecmed ftudioufly to fori- tate her protect refs, but unfortunately re¬ fe nbled her moft where (he was leaft to be admired. What in Madame Polloni feemed the refult ol habitual politenefs, and com¬ merce with the higher circles, was in her friend a fort of obfequious flatten, which bore no refemblance of fincerity. Rofaline was folicited to join in thecencert ; but
bur of late unaccuftomed to numerous af* fcmblies, Ihe would have declined, had fhe not feared to appear particular in fo fteatlily refufing the entreaties of the Count. With confeious dc! ght, and a look of triumph, he conduâed her up the fteps that led to the orcheftra; and then leaning over the back of the fofa, on whicb (he placed herfelf, he maintained his ftation during her per* formance. Univerfal filence prevailed while ihe touched the firings of the lute, and every ear feemed abforbed in attention when the melody of her voice was joined to that of her inftrument» When fhe had concluded, and the Count had conducted her to her feat by Madame Polloni, a gentleman, who, during the whole performance, had appeared particularly at¬ tentive, advanced to the latter, and whii- pering her, was by Madame prefented to Rolaline as the Marquis de Bernom He was a Paraftan Nobleman of diftinclion, and Jbad all tbe vivacity and gaitíi du €œur peculiar
peculiar to his nation, joined to the moft perfect confidence in his own power to pleafe. He addreffed Rofaline with the air oí one who had log known her, aiking her opinion of feveral pieces of mufic that had been played, and complimenting her on her Ikill and execution in terms the moft extravagant. The Count, who never for a momenlltfthcr. ftemcd to hear with im- patience the ftyle of flattery in which the Marquis addreffed her, and feizing the firft moment of his ceflation, endeavoured to draw her into converfation with himfelf; but he fucceeded ill in his eflbrts. Wearied w?th travelling, and fatigued by being introduced to, and addreffed hy ftrangers, fhe was fincerely rejoiced when, after a magnificent collation, the was fuffered at a late hour to retire. She was fhewn to her chamber by one of Madame*s female attendants, who was directed to wait her commands during her ftay at Polloni.
Through
Through a fuite of noble apartments fitted up in the firft ftyle of elegance, flie was conducted to that prepared for her. It confifted of a bedchamber and dreffing- room, lofty and fpacious, but rendered by their fituation and furniture light, elegant, and airy. She di!mifled her attendant, and immeuiately retired ; but fleep was for Iome hours a ftranger to her eyes. Reflections on all fhe had that evening feen kept her a long time awak Ci though of all the cha- raâers íhe had been introduced to, of none could flie yet form any decided opinion; and after the fiift part of the night being paffed in anxious meditation, overcome by weatinefs, lhe enjoyed a profound flumber till the morning. She awoke early, and arofe, as was her cuftom, immediattlv. The fun was already rifen, and its bright beams reflecting into her light cheerful apartment, formed fb ftriking a contraft with the Gothic gloomy chamber fhe had of late inhabited at St. Älvars,
Älvars, that fhe could fcarcely believe her* felt awake; but her firprile uas greatly in* <reafed, when, on gomg to her cafement, fl.e beheld the fcene fom ît The profpect immediately under her window prefented to her \iew a beautiful grove of pines, whofe wide branches were in ??? parts per¬ mitted to fpread around, f r ning a delight¬ ful fliade over feats in various forms placed under them ; while in others the boughs were cut away to difclofe the beautiful views that were to be feen of the adjacent country. In the centre of the grove was a grotto, compofed of variegated marble, and (hells of different fizes and hues, while mar¬ ble ftatues were placed amidft the thick plants and trees, forming on the whole a folitude fo enchanting, that Rofaline, ever attracted by the beauties of retirement, felt an inftantaneous wifh to vifit it, and quitted Jier chamber, refolving to try to explore her way to the beautiful grove. She defcended a flight of ftairs that led from
from a paffage near her apartment into a ftone hall that looked into a fmall planta¬ tion, which fhe remembered to have re¬ marked from her window, led by a narrow chfe walk into the pine grove. She opened a door into a lofty portico, fupported by pillars of the richeft marble, from which a glafs door opening on a flight of fteps, con¬ duâed her to the little lb rubbery fhe had juft feen. She paffed through it with light quick fteps, and entering the grove, was fo enchanted with ¡ts novelty and elegance, that fhe paufed at almoft every ftep to view fome new beauty. Yet the hand of Art was evident throughout, and in fome parts, inftead of affifting it, had helped to difguife Nature. At the fartheft end (he perceived a fmall wicket. ît opened into a path that feemed to afeend fo narrow, that it was with the utmoft difficulty the could make her way through it, fo thick the brambles and bulhes grew on each fide; but curious to fee where a walk
a walk fo intricate could lead, fhe pcrfe vered for a confiderable time before flie found any opening, and frequently thought íhe muí t have been obliged to return, from the ex¬ treme narrownefs of the path, and the ftcepnefs of the afcent. Having, however, at length reached tlie termination, fhe was tally requited for the trouble fhe had taken in getting there. The walk flie had come wound imper¬ ceptibly, by a gentle and gradual afcent, to the top of a lofty rock, on the fummit of which ftood the ruins of a temple. The bare watl?, overgrown with ivy» were now all that remained of it; but the glorious pr afpect it commanded quite wrapped the fenfes of Roiaìiiie in a fort of delight which flie had feldom of late experienced. She fat down beneath what had or.ee been a buy arch at the entrance of the building, on a loofe ftone covered over with mofs and ivy, to crjoy the enchanting feenes around her. voi. ?. f Fat
Far different from the grove flie had juft quitted, all here was the work of Na¬ ture. Built on the folid rock, the temple had perhaps once been intended for the purpofe of repairing to by the former pof- feíTors of Polloni,· to admire the beautiful views on every fide. It was ftill allowed to remain for an object from fomc of the win¬ dows of the manfion, its piciurefquc fitu- * ation rendering it peculiarly proper for that purpofe. As (he fat in this lonely fpot, and beheld on one fide, at a fmall diftance, the majeftic beauties of the unruffled lake of Lucerne, on the other the town cf the fame name, and at the extent of the horizon the towering Alps rearing their fublime heads to the clouds, all the ftudied elegance and uniformity of art in the grove that had at firft fo ftruck her fmcy, vaniíhed from her imagination before the more natural and fublime beauties to be viewed from the ruin on the rock. » , Loft in meditation, flie remained near an
an hour on the feat where fhe had firft placed herfelf, her thoughts wandering, as they ever did, to Henrietta when any ftrikingly beautiful feenes of nature were prefented to her view ; and fhe would per* haps have continued ftill longer, had not a loud laugh near her roufed her from her reverie, and ftarting up, fhe beheld with fur¬ prife Mademoifelle Niverre, accompanied by the Count and the Marquis de Bcrnon, at the entrar.ee from the path leading to the grove, all engaged in contemplating her· Seeing they had difturbed her, they ad¬ vanced, and Mademoifelle Niverre laugh¬ ingly told her that, had they not heard fhe had walked that way, they fliould have taken her for one of the Fairies who Fame re¬ ported inhabited the rock. Rofaline in animated terms defcribed how the fpot had charmed her, and the Count Hftened to her with a delighted coun¬ tenance, while fhe pointed out to them thofe particular beauties in the profpect '***■-* ' f z which
which had moft pleafed her, unconfcious that they had not, like her, a tafte for the feenes of nature, but preferred the falfc glare of art to the native majefty that every where furrounded them. The Marquis, who had the art of feeming what he pleafed, readily joined in the admiration flie ex¬ preffed, though he owned he had never before contemplated this place with fb much delight, adding an extravagant com¬ pliment to her tafte, and powers of defcrip¬ tion. Mademoifelle Niverre who had evidentlv heard with no pleafure the Marquis's ad¬ drefs to Rofaline, now told the Count they fhould be too late for breakfaft; and, taking the arm of the Marquis, obliged him to walk on firft with her, leaving Rofaline with the Count. Fearing he would begin a par¬ ticular converfation, fhe continued her en¬ comiums on the place (lie had left, and to aflc queftion» concerning the grotto and ftatues in the grove as they pafled through it,
it, while the Count with alacrity anfwered her, and feemed to wifli their walk length¬ ened, having feldom experienced from lier fueh condefcenfion. They were met at tlie entrance of the portico by the Baron, who appeared pleafed to fee her with the Count, and addreiled her with unufual complacency. She was rallied by the reft of the pany on her early ramble and ¡ove of retirement, which Ma¬ dame Poüoni told her ihe could no where better indulge than at Polloni; adding, flu believed if it were not for her interference, her brother would be a perfect hermit, and wander ail day amidft the woods aud groves on his eftate. Though this was evidenti; faid to recommend him more ftrongly to Rofaline, ? had a contrary effect. She could not fo eafiiy be convinced that fo great a fimilarity of tafte fubfifted between her and the Count as his lifter feemed to wifh her to believe, and its meaning was too ob¬ vious not to difguft rather than foften her, f 3 ????·
'*"■" '- "-gi'H'i '??????????? ....... mftf
CHAP. VII. *' How fweet the moonlight ííeeps upon this bank I ts ??? will wë fit, and let the founds of mufic " Creep in our ears i foft ftiltnefa and the night «' Become the touches of fweet harmony.** Shakespeare. AMONGST the numerous vifitors at Polloni, there was one only who at all in¬ terefted the reg-.ird of Rofaline. This w r as a lady of middle age, who had an eftäte adjoining that of the Count, and had under¬ taken a long journey from the place of hea* ufual refidence, to fettle fome affärs with him who had purchafed it. The form and face of Madame Malvini were calculated to
to infpire reverence and admiration of her character; the former was tall and ele¬ gant, and the latter replete with benevo¬ lence and goodnefs. There was fuch a benignant foftnefs in her riiannet that, though Rofaline felt inclined to love, fhe was alfo compelled to admire and revere her. She took no part in the amufements with which the reft of the party diverted them¬ felves; but often, when accidentally feated by Rofaline, addreffed her, and feemed in¬ clined to enter into converfation with her. Over her countenance was fpread a foft melancholy, with which her manners and difcourfe were alfo vifibly tinged ; and fome¬ times, when talking to Rofaline, the latter obferved tears fill her eyes—at other times, particularly when attending to melancholy airs played by any of the company, ihe leemed greatly affected. To the great grief of Rofaline, this lady fhe found was only to remain at Polloni till the third day after her arrival there. On f 4 the
the lefond evening a grand gala was ^ive.i by the Count anct his fitter, and the Baron I* ? Ktfaltnc in the morning that »t was hb particular *ulh ihc (hould appear en that evening lo advantage, in her prefent ftate n( mind íhe thought that was impoflible ; for though nothing further had been faid to her either by the Baron or his friend on tlic fubject, Ihe (aw fhe was univerfally be¬ lieved to be engaged to the Count. When fhe defcended to the faloon in the evening, fhe again underwent various intro¬ duirions to thofe of the Counts friends whom flie had not before feen. The rooms were fplcndidly illuminated, and decorated in a ft} le of fuperior brilliancy. Variegated lanij s of cryftal entwined round the pil¬ lais that fupported one fide ot the fpacious i.Jocn, and forming various devices, were calculated to give a glittering and brilliant ahtl to the whole. When the company were all afiemblcd, the
the curtains of the orcheftra drew up, and difcovered Mademoifelle Niverre prepared to open the concert. A bandeau of dia¬ monds encircled the flowing ringlets of her hair, and a light crape robe, confined by a 2one of brilliants, difclofed to advantage the elegance of her form. She played fevt* tal fine airs with inimitable grace and fweet¬ nefs ; and then defcending from the orchef¬ tra, and being joined by a young Italian Signior of dìftìnétbn, they danced to the foft Italian mufic in the fame ftyle of ele¬ gance. When fhe had concluded, fhe was conducted to a feat next that of Rofaline, who complimented her in terms (he thought but juft oa her ikill in mufic ** Ah ν fair Rofaline!" faid flie, ** till your arrival my execution was deemed tolerable; but fince your voice was heard» mine is efteemed even below mediocrity." " It muft furely then," faid Rofaline, 11 be by thofe who are incompetent to judge* for though extremely fond of the ? 5 art»
trt, I feel very confeious of my own defici¬ ency when put in competition with the performance^ of thb country.** * c Native tafte and genius are confined to no country,*' faid a voice behinti Rofa¬ line; ** and, in fpite of national prejudices, who muft not acknowledge, in one lovely inftance at leaft, the fuperiority of the Eng- Jifh ?** Rofaline ftarted round, and biufhed at this compliment on meeting the eyes of the Marquis de Bernon. *« It was not difputed, my Lord," faid Mademoiselle Niverre, in a tone of pique, ** nor d*d I require any afliftance from your Lordihip in the tribute I was paying to the excellencies of Mifs Melvan — ■" <f Which al that behold muft be too fenfible of," adJed the Marquis, in a low voice to Rofaline. Fortunately İt pafled unnoticed by Mademoifelle
Mademoifelle Niverre, who íbon after being joined by a party of ladies» the Marquis endeavoured wholly to engrols her attention. His converfation, when divefted of that adulation, which he teemed to imagine ne* ceílary to recommend himíèlf to her notice» was lively and entertaining; and that flat¬ tery which diftinguiflied his addrefs to females, was lb artfully intermixed in all he faid, that Rofaline was amazed at the pains he took to compliment one, to whofe real character he muft be wholly a ftranger· The behaviour of the Marquis was dif¬ tinguiflied by that habitual gallantry and general politenefs, fo peculiarly the charac- teriftics of his nation. With the ftriking beauty of Rofaline he had at firft fight been fafeinated; and when he difcovered that to the charms of perfon, were added that dif¬ fidence and circumfped ion of deportment, in which the ladies of his prefent party were wholly deficient, Mademohellc Ni- * verre, who was in general fuppofed to be ir 6 felected
felefted by this gay Nobleman for the future Marchioncfs cle Be r non, loft infinitely by the compatifon, and he wondered how he could ever have admired her; and all liis incen*e was from this time offered up at the ftirine of ta belk Anglmß b a* he termed Rolaline. The latter, glad to be relieved for ever fo fliort a period from the affidui- ties of the Count, Iiftened to him with complacency, till the Count, who had for ibme time been minutely obferving them, approached, and taking the hand of Rofa* line, led her to the orcheftra, where fhe was obliged to take a part in the concert. Glad once more to be releafed, fhe had no foonei? concluded one fong, than declining to fing again, aad perceiving Madame Maivmi fitting alone, (he went towards her, and paffed the remainder of the evening in a pleafant converfation with her. The Count more than once joined them; but, finding Rofaline feemed averfe to liften to him, and feeing her at prefent free from, the attentions
attentions of the Marquis, he a^*m left them. While he fpoke to Rofaline» Madame Malvini had feemed to regard them both attentively; and no fooner had he left them, than obferving Rofaline had remarked the particularity of her notice, flie fiid—" Par¬ don me, Mifs Melvan, if I have appeared rude, but I will candidly tell you how my thoughts were this moment employed. I was wondering that in a fcemt of gaiety like this, you fliould fo feduloufly avoid mixing with the gay characters who compofe it» and fly for fociety to aa antiquated ifolated being like me.** ** Ah Madame l* faid Rofaline, " did you but know how little I am really interefted in that gaiety which you wonder has no charms for me» no longer would your furprife be excited ; rather would you feel pity that i am obliged to be an unwilling fpectator, though never can i now regret the excurfion I was forced
forced to make to Poltoni, fince to tt I owt the knowledge of you." ** Since you are thus candid," replied Madame Malvini, *« Γ may venture to hope the report Madame Polloni is fo anxious to propagate of your engagement to the Count, is vo!d of foundation." With eagernefs Rofaline affured her no fuch engagement exifted. ** So well authenticated," added Madame» ** I feared it was undoubted, though even the little knowledge I have of you gave me, I thought, reafon to hope it might be otherwife ; and I rejoice to hear it confirmed by yourfelf." "Oh never l* faid Rofaline, " can Î, from mere interefted motives, confent to iacrifice my future haj pinefs, and barter that invaluable gem, peace of mind, for the pofleflion of wbat is fo inadequate to enfure even content/* ** You are right indeed," uid Madame, fighing
fighing deeply» t€ and I rejoice to find fentiment to juft in the breaft of one fo young as )ourfelf." Here Madame Polioni approached, and interrupted any further converfation. The company foon after feparated, and Rofaline retired for the night. The following day was fpent like the preceding one. Before Madame Malvini's departure, fhe particu¬ lariy fought out Rofaline, from whom Ihe had heard her fltuation, and motives for Vifiting Switzerland, and, with an air of kindnefs and fincerity the latter had of late been Uttle accuftomed to, affured her of the pleafure with which the fhould receive her at the Chateau de Malvini in Italy. During the iaft few months fhe had been at the villa of a friend not a day's journey from Polloni, for the purpofe of difpofing of an eftate contiguous, which the Count had jufl. purchafed» Madame Malvini was no fooner gone, ? than
than Rofaline was aftoniflied to hear Ma¬ dame Polloni, who had treated her with the greateft apparent friendfhip and atten¬ tion» join with Mademoifelle Niverre and a party of ladies in ridiculing the formality of her manners, and rejoicing ihe had kit them. Difgufted with thek duplicity, and finding Ihe was expecìed to partake ot their mirth, at the expence of a lady ihe fo much and juftly admired, flie arofe, and ftole out unpereeived» with a defign of taking a lonely ftroll in the grove. She eafiiy explored her way to the portico, and clofing the door gently after her, pro¬ ceeded through the fhrubbery. It was a ferene evening, and the ftars afforded at in¬ tervals a twinkling light, though m*t fuf¬ ficient for her to fee a great way round her. As flie purfued the winding walk that led to the ruin, her thoughts involuntarily turned on her ftrange and fearful fituation. When fhe firft heard from the Baron his intended journey to Polloni» fhe fhuddsred at
at the idea; but finding herfeif obliged to undertake it, fhe thought airy change muft bc for the better, but fhe had found her¬ felf miftaken· The characler of Madame Polloni feemed compofed of difiimulation, and her con* ftant converfation with her had been an eulogium on her brother, and the happinefs they fhould all feel wben ftie became one of the family. This lhe % had, with much fincerity, aflured her could never be; but ihe affeded to laugh at her declarations of this fort, and invariably treated her as her future relation* In this fhe wa? fupported by MadeKioifcUe Niverre, wL«i, with no fmall difpleafure perceived the attentions of the Marquis were more readily directed to Rofaline than to herfeif. In her pre¬ fence, however, and that of the Count, he was more guarded in his behaviour than at firft; but when unpereeived by cither, ì is manner and converfation were fo particular, that flie feized with avidity every oppor¬ tunity
tuñity to efcape from him, and avoided if poflible feeing him, except when the reft of the party were prefent. To the Baron nie could not complain, for he ftudioufly avoided giving her any opportunity of fpeaking to htm, and be¬ haved as though fhe had accepted, inftead of abfolutely rejected, the propofals of the Count. She could not feel fufficiently at¬ tached either to Madame Pulloni or her friend, to fpeak to them on any other than general fubjects; their deportment was fo void of real friendfhip or fincerity, that it feemed to forbid any advances to intimacy, though they profeflcd to feel the moft vio· lent regard for her, and pretended the moft exceflive fondnefs for her fociety; but it was evident Mademoifelle Niverre was too envious of the general admiration the ex¬ cited, to be fincere in her pioieffions. Unable, however, to nuke her fituation more agreeable, flie mob ed to take the advice
advice of the venerable hermit of the Alps; and conlcious of her own rectitude, truft ín ! in who never forfafecs the innocent, and letve to his providence her future deftiny. She grieved to have been obîîged to leave St. Älvars without again vifiting the cell of the Father, whom flie had taught to expeft her on the fucceeding day; but fhe hoped to have it in her power to convince him the omiflîoii was involuntary» Such were her reflections as the pafled the narrow path, and arriving at the ruin, feated herfelf under the mouldering arch. The moon had by this time arifen, and fhed a gentle light around. The cluttering trees in the wood, with tacir thick embowering foliage, tinged with tlie filver rays of the beautiful planet of night, diffufed a not unpleafing fliade. The partial beams glit¬ tered on the mofs-grown fummîts of the r-vicks, and tlifcloíed their tubed declivities, in fome places rich with the variegated vrikl flowers that grew among them. At a dif¬ tance
tatice the undulating waters of the lake, on which the mild effulgence of Luna caft a tremulous gleam, were faintly vifible; ar.d ftill farther the Alpine ridge-, with their awful and fublime fcenery, terminated the vaft profpect. The calm ftillnefs of the fcene had in* finitely more charms fcr her than all the unmeaning m»rth and trifling converfation of the party flie had left. Here the could at leaft enjoy her own méditations, and was not obliged to join in ridiculing characters, they who criticifed them would have done well to imitate. Her reverie was İn a few minutes interrupted by a fudden ruftlir.g in the wood, and the found of a footftep near her. She baftily arofe» and looked around, but no one appeared ι and imagining it was probably fome bird of prey, that might have íormeá its neft among the ruins, and was difturbed by her enti ance, flie fat down ; but the fame noife was a? ain heard, and con- vinced it was the ftep of a perfon, ihe thought
thought ¡t was perhaps fbme of the party. She Iiftened, and on its being a third time repeated, fhe faid in a raifed voice—" Is any one there?"—No anfwer was returned, but the foft mufic of her friend Ariel was in a moment heard playing the ?? with which he always announced himfelf. It concluded, and all was again filent, till Rofaline, though flie could not help feeling fome decree of alarm from the lonelinefs of the place, faid— ? Who is it that plays at this late hour of the evening?" ct One/* replied the fame voice, " who is as void of harm or intentional ill as your¬ felf; but furely that queftion was not ne¬ ceffary, or is it that my prefence is an in¬ trufion on your retirement ? ff it be fb, fpeak ; and painful as will be the fentence, I will ftrictly abide by the decifion," " You iliould not form fuch hafty con¬ clufions," faid Rofaline, «« as you will per¬ haps agree, when I tell you that I have more than once wiftied your return, and a few moments fince felt really glad when the
the found of your inftrument warned me of your approach." ** Why then," replied the fylph, " was the enquiry of who I was neceffary?" " Alas! I know not," faid Rofaline, ** unlefs it was that my fituation at prefent makes me doubt every thing, and fills me with fears and uncertainties 1 cannot difpel from my mind." " To diffipate thofe fears and appre- henfions,'* replied Ariel, " is my prefent errand ; and think nop that, becaufe 1 have not appeared, I have been unmindful of my charge. Your rejection of the Count was worthy your character, and your perfe¬ verance, notwithftanding the unmerited feverity your are treated with, will be doubtlefs at laft rewarded. Have you at prefent any counfel to aik, or queftious thac I can fblve?" " indeed 1 have fufficient need of ad¬ vice/* faid Rofaline, " and fear I am en¬ compaffed with dangers, from which I fee no chance of efcaping." ft I can
*« 1 can," anfwered Ariel, " plainly per* ceive you ftill hai bour doubts of my fin¬ cerity. Would 1 could convince you of its reality!** c * I have ever been taught/* returned Rofah'ne, * 4 to diflike a*4 tntng that had the appearance of m>fLry, and 1 own I fliould be much better fatisfied, were you to make in perfon the profeflions 1 have more than once heard from you.** *· Would it at all add, or contribute to your fatisfaction,** replied the fylph, * € this moment could I ftand before you; and great asare the difficulties, if you require it, I will immediately prelent to your eyes the form i now wear: but I will warn you that you muft not be alarmed, however hideous or terrifying it may be.** c< Oh pray then remain invifible! 11 faid Rofaline; who, though flie gave no credit to the infinuation, recollected that the figure of a ftranger at that late hour, and in a place fo lonely, would probably give to her mind terrors which, in her prefent ftaie
ftate of fpirits, fhe was ill able to fup¬ port. " I will own," continued her unfeen friend, €C that T am not forty you will not oblige me to appear; but as I grieve to give your bofom one doubt or fear that can be avoided, if you will repair to this fpot alone to-morrow night at this hour, I will render myfelf vifible to your fight; but you muft faithfully promife to require nothing farther: I could not even grant this, did not the folitude of the fpot, and the latene fs of the hour take from me all fear of being overheard or fecn fave by yourfelf." '" I will be punctual to the appointment," faid Rofaline; who, though flie almoft trembled at the folemnity of tone with which the affignation was made, yet felt inclined to place an involuntary confidence in her invifible monitor. " We will now talk of your own imme¬ diate concerns," faid the fylph ; " and let me, ere we proceed, advife you to avoid the Marquis de Bernon as ftudioufly ?? you
you are inclined to fhun the Count; for I am greatly miftaken if he harbours not defigns equally prejudicial to your welfare. For your own fafety, 1 hope your ftay hei ? will be fhort. Preferve towards the Count your w r onted equality of behaviour, for much depends on this. But I hear tlie tread of rnortrl feet, and muft depart. Perhaps they are feeking you, but fear not. 1 am here, and will protect and hover round you till I behold you free from danger. At prefent adieu! To-morrow night at this hour I fliall exped you. Good angels guard your repofe! Serene as your temper be your ilumbers, and free as your heart from guile, unfullied as your confcience by reproach, be your dreams from frightful ululions or terrifying vifions!" " I will not fail, and may your piius wifhes be grantedi" faid Rofaline· immediately the fare.vel ftrain, with which he always left her, ftole, in a foft low tone, on the air, anditi a few moments vol, ?, G vcaíiag
ceafing its faint echo, was heard, and all was again quiet. It now grew darker, and as the approach of perfons had been predicted, fhe arofe, and entered the clofe dark walk, though the idea of encountering any one in a path fo narrow rather alarmed her; but fhe could not help feeling fecure of having an invifible guard near her, and purfued her way with hurried fteps. She reached the entrance of the grove in fafety; but had proceeded a very few paces, before lhe heard fteps advancing. It was too dark to dif¬ tinguifh any object, and liftening, fhe heard them more diftinctly. She was obliged to go on, as, were flie to turn back, fhe would probably be overtaken in the wood. She therefore continued, in the hope of reach¬ ing the grotto, and fecreting herfelf there till whoever it was had paffed ; but here (he was difappointed: for the hope had fcarcely arifen in her mind, ere it was entirely fruf- trated, and her hand feized by the Marquis, who
who exclaimed—" I have then found you, charming Rofaline, though I almoft began to doubt whether it were indeed you, who proceeded thus filently and cautioufly along this dark lonely place. Say what can in¬ duce you to quit the company witliin to wander here alone at this late hour, when all the rural beauties of the profpect arc veiled by a robe of darknefs ?" " Had I imagined I fliould have been interrupted, I fliould certainly have re¬ mained in the houfe," faid Roialine; €< and I muft beg your Lordfhip to releafe me, and allow me to return thither." ** Ah, do not," faid he, " deprive me, with an air of fuch chilling coldnefs, of this the firft opportunity I have been able to procure, to avow, unheard, the fentiments of adoration with which you have infpired mc ! Admiration and delight you muft ever raife in all who behold you; but how far fhort are thofe fenfations, however per¬ manent, of what î feel ! and yet, uncon¬ fcious of your own power to charm, how 0 2 do
do you every moment rivet more firmly the fetters your beauty has forged l* u Pray, my Lord, let me go,'* faid Ro¬ faline, ** and do not force me to ftay and liften to a converfation by which you can onlv mean to infult me.** ** And why are you fo anxious to leave me, Iovelieft Rofaline r'* faid he. « Not to return to the Count? ?? beauty and fweet¬ nefs like your*s, furely age nnd deformity cannot be rendered attractive by the power of wealth? And in the fociety of the other triflers within, fuperior excellence like your*s can find but few charms." " If unreafonabie flattery be a proof of fenfe, your Lordfhip," faid Rofaline, u cer¬ tainly poffeffes İt in an eminent degree, whatever fliare my ftaying thus calmly to liften to it betrays." " Ah, do not," cried he, " be offended» , nor regret the few fhort moments you allow me, when you reflect on the long hours of mifeiy I endure!"
He
Vie had fcarcely pronounced thefe words when voices from the manfion reached them; and, ftarting from his knee?, on which he had thrown himfelf, the Marque as if afraid of being fcen with her, hurritvl to another part of the grove, while Rofa¬ line, glad by any means to be releafed, fiei towards the ftirubbery, and at the door of the portico was met by Mademoifeüo Ni¬ verre, who, with looks of fufpicious envy, enquired where fhe had been. She replied, 4C to the ruin/' and paffed on to the faloon, where flie found that young lady was the only one by whom her abfence had been remarked, as her jealoufy of Rofaline, who fhe feared favoured the fuit of the Marquis, kept her ever on the watch to difcover the motions of both. A concert» in which Rofaline was obfged to join, concluded the evening. As ihe was retiring, the Baron ?? —" 1 (nail ex¬ pect your attendance, Mils Melvan, in the g 3 roiè
rofe parlour to-morrow immediately after breakfaft/' She bowed in acquiefcence, wondering what he could have to impart to her. Re¬ flections on her invifible guardian, and their converfation of this evening, occupied her mind as fhe retired, She had long fmce given up every attempt to diicover who he really was as impoflible, though flic could not help forming a hope that the next night's interview would tend towards a difcovery·
CHAP.
?????????·
?И??. VIH. «« Thm pale tb*y meet $ their eyei with fury burn ; *' Noae greet, for none the greeting wiH return ï " Then both, no moment bit, at once advance u A^aiöft each other, armed with fword ai4 lance/» DRYDEM. Immediately after breakfaft on the following morning, Rofaline went to the rofe parlour according to her appointment with the Baron; but it was empty, and on looking from the window, flie obferved him in earneft conversation with the Count on the lawn before the manfion. Concluding, therefore, that he would not yet be at G 4 leifure
leifure to fee her, flie was returning to hef ? apartment, when, obferving a door ftand o|en diat kd into a long gallery, hung with portraits which flie had never yet had time to examine, fhe entered with an in¬ tention of amufing herfelf there till the Baron was at hberty to admit her. The collection confifted chiefly of family pictures; but flie was particularly ftruck with a large piece that hung in the center of the gallery. It reprefented two young men of lofty ftature, both in military uni¬ forms :—one of them, who greatly refembled the Baron, had his fword drawn, and the other was in the aclion of drawing his from the fcabbard. The countenance cf the former was expreffive of rage and revenge, while that of the latter was milder and more gentle, though he feemed as if forced, in his own defence, to follow the example of his adverfary, who appeared to be pre¬ paring to aim a violent thruft at his breaft. A third fisure, who, though meant to reprefent
reprefent quite a youth, ilill bore tme re¬ femblance to the Count, tried to hold back his arm ; but t he moft interefting object in the piece was a beautiful young woman, w ho, with a countenance expreffive of the deepeft dif¬ trefs, feemed to have thrown herfelf between the combatants, and on her knees in an atti¬ tude of fupplication, appeared to be im * ploring their forbearance. Her form was ftrikingly lovely; and while her fine eyes were caft upwards, her beautiful hair hung ioofe and difhevelled over her flioulders, the light veil which depended from her head being thrown back, and fhading part of her face on one nåe. Her interference the painter had reprefented as having an inftantaneous effect on the young man who was acting on the defenfive, and who was anxioufly ga2ing at her, while, as if charmed into peace by her prefence, he ftaid his hand as flie knelt between them. The uncommon lovelinefs of the figure, and the interefting expreffion of the coun- g 5 . tenance,
tenance, on which were depicted horror, alarm, and fupplication in legible characters, fo charmed Rofaline, that fhe could not take her eyes from the piece to examine the numerous others that lined the walls of the gallery ; and flie was deeply engaged in contemplating it, when fhe heard an ap¬ proaching footftep, and at the fame moment ^faw the Marquis enter a door at the fartheft end. He no fooner perceived her, than he haftily advanced, and with an affected air of dejection, and the moft obfequious ten- dernefs > paid her the compliments of the morning. Eager to be informed concern¬ ing the object of here urioftty, fhe enquired if he were acquainted with the fubjeci: of the piece that had fo forcibly attracted her attention. He replied in the negative, adding—" But why, Iovelieft Rofaline, do you lead me to fpeak of inanimate objects when, were the portraits of this apartment ten times more mimerous and more admi¬ si rable
rabîe than they are, their trifling luftre muft all vanifli at your approach, like the in¬ ferior planets before the fuperior brilliancy of the higher luminaries." Turning from him in difguft, Rofaline was attempting to pafs him to leave the gallery, but, feizing her hand, he prevented her by falling on one knee, and forcibly detained her while he poured forth the moft wild and ridiculous exp re fiions of unbounded admiration; in the midft of which Rofaline fuddeniy caft her eyes towards the door, and beheld there the Baron ftanding with his eyes fixed on them, apparently in filent wonder at the fcene he beheld. The mo¬ ment he faw he was obferved, he gravely waved his hand as if to require her attend¬ ance, and difappeared ; and Rofaline, with as much fpeed as poffible, followed him, refolving to relate to him the whole beha¬ viour of the Marquis, as it now grew too troublefome and particular to pals longer unnoticed. ? 6 At
At fight of the Baron he had let go her hand, and fhe fiew precipitately to the ftair- ca!c, which flic defcended to the rofe par¬ lour, where lhe found the Baron waning for her. He took no notice of what he had juft been a witnefs to; but, clofing the door, and defiring her to be feated, faid— ** I wiflied to confult you, Rofaline {as your be! aviou r here has certainly been fuch ps 1 api roved) on your approaching change cf fituation, which I own I cannot help wi«'.ti.*«g fliould take place as loon as poflible; and on the eagernefs of mv friend, the Count, to have every thing immediately concluded, I need rot enkure.** ** Wìut you fay, my Lord,** faid Ro¬ fahne, " is to me perfectly unintelligible. 1 thought your LoiJihip had long lince underftood my aiifiur to the propofals with which the Count honoured me/* ** I rccoìlect,*' laid the Baron, while the feeds of paflion began to rife in his coun¬ tenance, "that you fome time ago thought proper to incur my difpleafure by a deport¬ ment
ment î imagined you had long fince re¬ pented, as you have certainly given t Ite Count every r*afbn to fuppofe by your manner fmce vour arrival at Polloni/* « j^fy manner then, my Lord/* faid Ro¬ faline, ·* has been tar difterent from my intentions, as my refolution to decline the Count's offers remains irrevocably fixe I ; and I entreat your Lor 'fliip to undeceive the Count immediately, if I have been the nuaus of leading him iato t.n error/* u Tiiere is nothing to undeceive him in," replied the Baron haughtily, u nor can 1 think fo lightly of treating a man ofthe Count's rank and honour with i ach caprice, if you have no greater fen*e of propriety ; and fmce advice and perfuafion are of no avail, you have my command to \ repare for your immediate acceptar.ee of the Count** hand, and the nuptials Ihall be concluckcl beibre 1 quit Podoni. 1 did not wiih to be under the neceffity of ufing fevcrity to enf ree your obedience; but 1 perceive, by what 1 was juft njw witnefs to, ycu have other reafons than
than thofe you alledged before you quitted St. Älvars, for declining the nsble offers of my friend, and are ready to encourage the addreffes of another, who, you muft know, is already engaged to an amiable and deferving young woman/* On this unmerited charge Rofaline at* tempted to expoftulate, with an intention of entreating his interference to prevent the Marquis's further perfecution; but he would liften to nothing the faid, and order¬ ing her, in an angry tone, to prepare to obey him, he quitted the room. Every terror fhe had apprehended, feemed now about to be realized; and fhe trembled when fhe refleded on the violence of his manner, as he infifted on her immediate compliance. His threat that every hing ihould be con¬ cluded before he left Polloni, terrified her to think of; and the fortitude flic had hitherto preferved, almoft funk under the preffure of an evil fo heavy and unexpeded.
«Is
fí Is this/* thought fhe, when flie reached her apartment, * c the reward of my quit¬ ting my native country to footh the laft hours of his daughter? Was it for thisl have undergone feenes of terror, fatigue, and anxiety I had before been fo unaccuf¬ tomed to?—to be facrificed to a man I deteft, whofe perfon and manners I have ftrong reafon to believe are not more dif¬ agreeable than his principles are bad l* It was evident that what the Baron had fakl of her behaviour to the Count fince fhe had been at Polloni, was merely an excufe to haften the marriage. How fincerely did fiie now wifh herfelf at St. Aivars, where» in poffeffion of the important fecret of the fubterranean cavern, with the aid of Aga¬ tha, whofe long- 1 ried fidelity to Angelina convinced her fhe might repofe confidence in her, fhe might, if driven to the expedi¬ ent, have efcaped from the power of the Baron, and concealed herfeif in the cell of the hermit, or in fome retired cottages fcattered
fcattered at the feet of the Alps fome mües diftant, till flie could procure means to re¬ turn to England : but here there appeared no method of evading the dreadful fate that feemed to await her—every creature in the manfion fubfervient to the Count—her fteps conftantly watched either by the vigi¬ lance of the latter, the paflion of the Mar¬ quis, or the jealoufy and fufpicion of Ma¬ demoifelle Niverre, who, to forward her own defigns on the Marquis, feemed to have undertaken the promotion of thofe of the Count on Rofaline* The refult of her meditations on the fub¬ jecl was a firm refolution to die, rather than give her hand to the Count. With bitternefs fhe recollected fhe had not, as once, an additional motive to tumulate her to perfevere in refufing the addreffes of the Count, from the remembrance of Adolphus's continued affection; and, added to her other griefs, fhe had now a tafk harder than all to perform, in trying to banifh from her
her memory him whofe recollection flic had once fo fondly cherifhed. Oppreffed with the weight of misfortune that feemed about to overwhelm her, and the fad reflection that flie was too far diftant from thofe friends who ftill loved her, to entreat their interference, her fpirits funk under the idea; and when (he was fummoned to dinner, the evident marks of diftrefs im¬ printed on her expreffive features, feemed to intereft the attention of every one. She was furprifed to find that moft of the guefts had taken their departure, and that there now only remained, befides the Baron and herfelf, the Marquis and Mademoifelle Niverre. The latter flie found was a con¬ ftant refident at Polloni. The Count was more attentive than ever to her ; and when (he would have retired, fhe was compelled to endure an interview with him in the rofe parlour, whither he followed her, and where lhe entreated him to
to d^fnì from a purfuit which wou 1 d af¬ furediy never yield him the fmalleft fatis¬ faction: but nothing could induce him to forbear, and at laft, provoked by her per- fevering coldnefs, he hinted exultingly that fhe was now too much in his power to efcape him, and that, therefore, fhe had better fubmit with a good grace. It was nearly two hours before fhe could get from him, and fhe no fooner efcaped, than, flying to her chamber, fhe gave way to all the fad¬ nefs that oppreffed her; but while indulging her melancholy in folitude, fhe recolleftcd her approaching meeting with the fylph, and as night drew near, flie felt a fort of dread when fhe looked from her cafement, and b* held the grove and fh rubbery below involved in total darknefs: but reflecting that her fituation could fcarcely be worfe, flie determined to difcard all fear, and confiding in her own innocence, proceed immediately to the place of appointment. She accordingly defcended to the fhrub- bery
bery without going to the faloon; and though in the dark, eafiiy found her way to the grove. It was darker than on the preceding night, a úw faint ftars only at intervals afforJmg a glimmering light, ex¬ cept which, every object around was veiled in profuund obfcurity. Silently and wtthquick. fteps ihc paffed through the avenue, and entering the clofe walk, thought Aie heard a ruftling among the trees. She paufed, but all was again quiet, and ihe proceeded with« out interruption to its termination* There was no one waiting her arrivals and fhe walked filently round the Gothic ruins without hearing any found that indi¬ cated an approach. Unwilling to fuppofe Ariel had deceived her, fhe fat down on the mofs feat to wait for the well-known mufic ; but the gentle murmur of the leaves agi¬ tated by the air, and at intervals the diftant fcreams of the owls from the high trees in the furrounding woods and groves, were all the founds fhe could diftinguifh. Ten
Ten minutes had elapfed while fhe fat liflcmng with the deepeft attention to every noife, and ftarting if a fudden gufi of wind produced any unufual motion in the trees of the wood, as if ihe feared tlie approach of an enem) ; when fuddeniy fiie felt cer¬ tain fhe heard fomc one approach, and look¬ ing forward, perceived a figure through the gloom at the wicket leading from the clofe walk. Concluding it v\as her aerial friend, flie arofe from her feat. The perfon ad¬ vanced on her moving; but how was fhe provoked and difappointed when the voice of the Marquis broke on her ear ! *« Dare I hope/' faid he, approaching her, ** that you came out purpofely to give me an opportunity of feeing you ? I caught a view of your robe as you paifed the portico, after having waited all the evening in the faloon, in the vain hope of feeing you there." " So far from it, my Lord/' faid Roia¬ line, in a tone of difpleafure, " that I feel extremely
extremely offended· 1 cannot for a moment quit the company, but my retirement muft be liable to mvafïon, and my cars wounded by profeflions I can never attend to. Do not detain me, my Lord, but either rerire yourielf, or fuffer me to return to the manfion; and be aflured, as remonftrances and expoftulations are vain, I fhall take other means to fecure myfelf from your mtrufion,'* <r And to whom, beautiful Rofaline, uili you complain ?" faid tie Marquis. ** To the Baronr and to avoid me, lie immediately united to the Count ? for fuch, believe me, I am well informed are their villanous in¬ tentions towards you. Ah, rather," added he, in a tone oí entreaty, and falling on his knees before her, ** rather fly from them with one who will aflift and protect you !" *« Villain, take the reward your pctildy merits l* faida voice near them; and in¬ ftantly the Count, with his fword drawn b his hand, and fury flaihing from his fierce eyes, rufhed from a neighbouring thicker,
and aimed a violent thruft at the Marquis, who, haftily arifing, put his hand on his weapon with equal rage in his countenance, and placed himfelf in a pofture of defence. The terrified Rofaline, lofing in the dreadful idea of bloodlhed, all enmity to either of the parties, would have tried to feparate them; but the enraged Count, pufhing her afide with even favage ferocity, plunged his fword into the fide of the Marquis» who, while a purple ftream iflued from the wound, returned the thruft with no lefs fury· Rofaline faw no more the enraged com¬ batants· The ruined temple, the weapons of death, all fwam before her fight· She uttered a fliriek of horror, and ftaggering backwards, fell motionlefs to the ground, void of fenfe or reafon, while the incenfed rivals were too deeply engaged by the in¬ veterate fury which feemed to actuate both, to notice her till the arrival of the Baron and
and a train of fervants feparated them, each covered with marks of the other*s prowefs.
CHAP. IX.
** The foil improved around the ?????? rea?, " And ncììher poorly low, nor idly grtat i *· It &em\J to ????? hs mailer's turn cf mind, ** Ccnteci, zná not for ptauV, but vhtue kind." PARKEtL. w V HEN reafon and fenfe were again re¬ ftored to her, Rofaline found herfelf in the interior of the ruin, fupported by a perfon, who was attempting to recai her to life; and fhe no fooner recollected the hor¬ rors
rors of her fituation, than flie ftarted up, exclaiming—" Where are they?" " Be compofed," faid a voice (lie well knew; <f be not alarmed—it is Ariel who fupports, and will defend you from all danger." He raifêd her as flic fpoke, and turning towards him, flie beheld, with no fmall fur¬ prife, the tall figure of a man w r rapped in a loofe robe; but the extreme dark¬ nefs quite prevented her feeing his face. On her enquiring after the combatants, he faid the family had been alarmed by. the abfence of the Count and Marquis, and the clafliing of fwords being heard from the grove, the Baron and a train of fervants had come from the houfe, and divided them, but not before both were wounded ; and that the fervants were now conveying them to the manfion, while in the general tumult he had brought her to a place of fafety, and<:aufed it to be believed that fhe had fled in terror to the houfe. At
At the bare id< \riia: it was poffible any life might be ??, Ro al'ne's faintnc's re¬ turned, an<l ihe was obliged *.υ reft again on a iooie ftone. " Good Heavens!" faid fhe, when a little recovered, " for what am f referved, and what new terrors am î fated to ex ?> rience?" ** Fear. nothing," replied her fr'erd; " this may perhaps prove a f irtunatc cir¬ cuniftance. The wounds of both a^e trifling, and their raih violence meii:cd a tempoi ai y puniihment. I foresaw what Wn^ li^ cly to haiipen, and forbore to realer myielf vifible till my aid could be of Ù rvicc to you. I joined rny fcreams to the ricrc- inj; one you ti' tered as you fainted ; an 1 the noife drew the family, who were already affembled, to the place of combat, from whence I inftantly conveyed you before their arrival, and while the two antagonifts uere too much engaged to obferve me, into the moft intricate part of thefe ruins, that the vol. ir. 11 light
fight of you might not revive their fury when the interference of their friends had feparated them; and not finding you here, it was immediately concluded you had efcaped to your own apartment. Tn- vifibly I law and heard all that paifed. I toid you 1 would in perfon meet you here> and you fee have ftri<ftly adhered to my promife." " And where now,*' feid Rofaline, u had 1 better fiy ? 1 fliall be immediately fought for, and not finding me in my chamber, they will doubtlefs come hither to feek me l' ** Would to Heaven I knew any afylum where you could, without fear of purfuit, repair toi but 1 fear there is none within a great diftance. I will, however, protect you to the end of the grove. I forefee the event of to-night will prove favourable to you : let not, therefore, your fpirits droop, or your amiable fortitude fink under ) T our diftreffes; but confole yourfelf that they are not brought on by your own guilt, and doubt
doubt not that he who infligís misfortunes^ will fupport you through them." " 1 will encfeavour to fellow vour advice," faid R^fa'in'; " and if I ippear uogratefil for vour counfel, attribute it to an inability of uttering what I fee!, fom ? pretfjre on my heart I have no power to deferire, tnan to intentional ingratitude." She now arofe, and they proceeded to- wards the cblc wa=k ; but the fy.'ph t kl her he could conduct her a ne-irer way, through an avenue ot .cedars that led immediatelv to a fmall door opening to the portico. She followed his direction; and as they tra¬ vcrfed the cedar walk, flie cfien turned towards him, to endeavour to pain a -v.ove diftinct view of his perfon; but the da«k- nefs feemed to increafe, and fhe could barely fee İt was a humanTorm that walked by her. He perceived her wifh, and faid—" You ftiil think ? more perfect view of my form ? 2 nv-ceflaiy
neceflary to evince my fincerity. Alasi were you to behold it more plainly, it would perhaps only make it more doubtful; and were you to fee me fuch as 1 really am, it is probable your doubts would be turned into deteftation. Yet 1 will not deny that a time may arrive when l fliali rejoice to throw off all difguife, and appear in my native fliape to you; but how long it may be firft, or whether it may ever happen, remains at prefent unknown. Of this truth I ardently wifli you to be convinced, that it İs in my power to be of effential fervice to you; and the period is now faft approaching when it wih be manifefted, and when I may pro¬ bably be the humble inftrument of a fuperior Power, to lave you from a dreadful fate that may otherwife await you." As he pronounced thefe words, they came within fight of the houfe, in various parts of wliich lights were diftinguiihable, and all feemed hurry and buftle. Ariel imme¬ diately paufed to take leave, and Roialine involuntarily
involuntarily held cut her hand as he wiihed ?? r good repofe. He accepted the offered favour, and feeming at once to fonr/t his aerial character, f ι venty prefled it befóte he refigned it ; and then appearing to recol¬ lect himfelf, he again uttered, in an altered and filtering tone of voice, his parting compliment, and darting out of fight, dif¬ appeared in a moment. With trembling fteps flie entered the porrico ; and paffing to an inner hall, heaul fuch a tumult ab ve through all the mm- fion, that a dreadful idea that ti e womids of one or both oi the Cia valers had proved fatal, occurred to her. A faint? efi> came o\ er her as this thought croffed her mind, aud flie iunk on a fofa by tie vva.L Here (he had remained but a few minutes, when a light entered the hall. It was borne by Madame Polioni, who was followed b) the Baron. On perceiving Rofaline, they ad- vaneed with amazement depicted on the countenances of both; but at fight oi them h 3 flie
flie -had fainted, and was conveyed to her chamber, utterly void of fenfe or motion* On the a; plication of proper refloratives» f* e uas at length recovered by her attend- a r% when flic learned that lurgeons had 1 ren fent for from. Lucerne, and were juft ? rmed, but that they had not yet declared t eir opinion refpeciing the wounded Che¬ valiers. While converfing with one of Madame Pdionls women on the fubjecl:, and en¬ quiring into the particulars of the affair, orders were brought her from the Baron to prepare to quit Folloni within two hoOrs. Aftoniihed at a refolution fo fuddeniy förmedt flie enquired if any one knew whither flie was togo but was anfwered in the negative. A female attendant of Ma¬ dame, who brought the intelligence, faiJ ihc was commiffioned to affiti her in making the neceffary preparations. This was eafiiy done, and ffie was then defired to wait tbe larthcr orders of the Baron· It
It was now confiderably paft midnight, and fo great had been the diforder of her mind for the laft few hours, and fo,weak- ened was her whole frame by the repeated attacks of faintnefs during the evening, that flie could not fufficiently collect her thoughts to meditate on her ftrange fitu¬ ation, but fat, as if ftupified, by the window in the dreffing-room, while attending the Baron's commands; and when at length fl.e received a fummons to the carriage, flie arofe mechanically to fiïllo.v the fervant; but her head was fo giddy, that lhe could not walk without fupport, and was obliged to be led down the ftaircafe by an attendant, who conduâed her out of ? door that opened from the great frlî, to an avenue at the back of the edifice, where a traveiling carriage was waiting for her. No one was in it, nor did any but fervants appear to witnefs her departure. She ftepped into the carriage without aiking any queftions, and it immediately drove off; but for fome hours ii was too dark to difcern where they went. 11 4. The
lhe urclfturbed ionvîitufs cf the ride, am tht m î on ut t e ca ri ge leemed iu f itit decree to recai he. fettered feiifes; and w\ e . ll.e be^ n to rt col leu the varkd fenile c t the evening, íht could not at firft help thinking it. was ali a mere illufion. Her furprile was ftrongly exeited at being thus fent fudden'y au ay alone, without any apparent motive, at fuch an unleafonable hour of the night; and the privacy with whieh it was conducted, made her fear flie had frefli caufe for alarm. Day began to dawn, and found hei in the lame fitte of perplexing uncertainty. They travelled* with amazing fpeed ; and Rofaline, as fhe looked through a back window of the carriage, perceived Rcderigo attending it wirh three armed fervants. They journied through an open country; but it was not the fune way they came, a i d a faint hope fecmed to arife that íhe was not going back to St. Älvars, But lur clothes were all there, and what flie, above *V
ill, regretted, the manufcript of Angelina flie had left there, fuppofing they fhould fo foon return. On confideration, however, it appeared very improbable that the place of their deftination (hould be any other; and as flie revolved the fubjed in her harafled mind, dreadful forebodings of forne unforefeen ill feemed to fill it. About noon they arrived once more at the feet of the Alps, and halted in a beautiful valley to take fome refreihments, which were plentifully provided in the carnage. Rofa^ line, however, was unable to partake of them ; and while the domeftics made their meal, wandered along the edge of a clear ftream that watered the valley. She had once addtefled Roderigo, and enquired whither they were commifltoned to conduct her, but he replied that he had been delu ed to aniwer no queftions; and leaving them* tõ enjoy their repaft, ihe moiled on by the H j fide
fide of the rivulet, a J mirin -? its meanders, till her attention was attracted by a neat p»ain building fituated in a romantic part of the mountain, fheltered on one fide by a fteep and craggy eminence, while a plantation of lofty pines furrounded it, ex¬ cept juft in the front, which was overgrown by vines that extended their fpreading branches quite to the upper windows of this little manfion. Vaft piles of rugged rocks feci ed to guard from hoftile winds and the rude ftorms of winter this romantic abode; and at no great diftance a fmall ftream„ guihing from the rock, tumbled with a loud ruihing noife down a precipice many feet- deep, into a channel, which meandered ia a gentle rivulet through the mazy windings of the rocks, till the eye couid no longer difcern it. One large overlhadowing tree of the mountain's growth waved rits wide. fpreading boughs over a craggy projection, juft high enough for a feat, and commanded an extent of fcenery which only the awful and
and vaft mountainous region of the Alps couki afford. ce There," thought (lie, " do the happy and peaceful inhabitants of yon fweet re¬ tirement probably repair, to enjoy the fub¬ lime views of nature around them. Living in the bofom of their family and friends, loving and beloved, they are not exiled from their native countrv, and being driven among ftrangers, are not barbaroufly com¬ pelled to endure a fate, to which, in my eftimation, death were a thoufand times preferable. Ko, ignorant of forrows like thefe, and bleifed with health, eafe, and competence, they can, unconfcious of evil, unfearing of ill, perhaps fay— *' E'en now where Alpine ToUtudes afcend, 11 I fit me down a penfive hour to fpend j *! And, plac'd on high above the ftonits ??????| *« Look downward where an hundred lealras appear, " Lakes, foretts, emes, plans extending \vide¿ "· The pomp of Kings, tbe íhepbeids humbler pude l v
? ?
The
The picture her fertile fancy hid drawn, almoft drew tears from her eyes, as flie con¬ templated the neat edifice whofe interior ihe had imagj .ed prefented a fcene fo con¬ trary to her own melancholy fituation; but her reverie was fliortly interrupted by Roderigo, who came to tell her they muft luften to proceed, or they fliould not reach the place of their delti nation before funfet. She once more endeavouied to enter into converfation with Roderigo ; but he was fb guarded in his expreffions, and cautious in his anfwers, that flie could learn nothing fhe wifhed to be informed of from him. She well knew this man had for many years been the confidential fervant of the Baron, and fhe ftood in almoft equal awe of him. Nature had given him a wild, fero~ cious afpect, and his manners were at once füllen and fierce. Dark overhanging brows fliaded his eyes, whxh exprefled unufual fero¬ city ; and lbs referved unfocial deportment, the counterpart of his patron's, rendered him
him totally unlike the other dependants of the Baron. When fhe could fufficiently diveft her¬ felf of the dread «? hich the apprehenfion of what was going to be her iate would at times excite, her eyes wandered in a maze of delight, and the wonders around her caufed a temporary eftrangement of the mind from her own peculiar forrows. The laft view flie had caught of the little build¬ ing, whofe external appearance had fo charmed her, dwelt on her mind long after it had faded from her fight in the mift of increafmg diftance ; and the grey walls of an ancient monaftery, which gloomily and folemnly arofe, and towered in heavy mo¬ naftic grandeur above the fummits of an enormous pile of rocks, added not a little to the fublimity of the fcene. Rofaline had alighted from the carriage. The diftant found of the Convent bell was wafted to her ear by the wiud that began 6 to
to b 1 ow c^ld around her. She gazed on the lofty f pires, and could have wiihed herfeif an inhabitant of its peaceful walls. " There at leaft,'* thought flie, " ï fliould be ùee from the· detefted Count : there no terrific Baron could fill my mind with alarms by unjuftifiable feverity, and there perhaps the remembrance of all I have loft might ceafe to purfue me." At this idea a long train of mournful reflections came to her mind ; fhe fighed deeply, and at that moment Roderigo fum¬ moned her again to the carriage : and as it once more drove off^ ihe gave a laft look to the view behind her, but in an inftant the Gothic walls of the monaftery, its lofty fpires, its towering majefty faded in diftance, and the romantic little duelling which her fertile fancy had ivieally pici ured as the abode of every comfort, was quite loft in tlie grey miit that enveloped the mountain tops. She then leaned back in the carnage, and
anel for the remainder of her journey con* figned herfelf to filent meditation. Towards evening, after having for near an hour travelled through iome of the rnoft v./ rugged and intricate paffes of the Alps, by a fudden turn fhe defcried the high bat¬ tlements and lofty dome of St. Älvars rifing from behind a fteep mountain, which they had no fooner paifed, than they came within fight of the well-known walls; and as they paifed the drawbridge, and once more entered the great gates ofthe chateau, the heart of Rofaline funk vvith dejection, and íhe Iiftened,.hi a kind of breathlefs de- fpondence, to the hollow echoes of the car¬ riage, asit rattled through the two inner paved courts, and was vibrated back in difmal murmurs from the lofty walls of the edi¬ fice; On arriving at the front of the building, fhe alighted irom the carriage, and was im· formed íhe would huve fupper, or any refreihment
rffîciîirr.^nt fl e chofe, ferved up in her own ap.ftmuit. She enquired for Agatha, and wa* told an attendant woukl immedntcîy be lei»t to her. She afcended with a heavy heart (he great oak flab cate, -md proceeded immediately to ber ftfitarv chamber, in the hope that ihe fhouid find Agatha there ; but no ore appeared, and the ro m fecmed not to have been inhabited fince her dv¡ arture. Here fhe had remained mar half an hour, when a raj ping was heard at her chamber- door. She aiofe and opened İt, but inftead of Agatha, beheld Mandel ι r a, who came to enquire if flie chofe fupper. Without anfwering this queftion Rolaline enquired fcr Agatha, hut ivas informed ftie had, by order of l! e Bai on, quitted the Caftle two days after Rofaline had left it. * 4 Got d Heavens!** fuid Rofaline, "where is ihe gone to i'* ** She is gone ? believe into France, Mademoikile, to iome relations fhe has there. She defired 1 would tell you how forry
forry ihe was that fbe coitd not take kav ? $ ai! p-iv her duty to you, Maden soi felle, b.l^;e ¡he went; but the Baron ha! left critic s w\ ich flic was not told of till after )Ou were gone.** Rifiline feU truly grieved to hear of the a*>iet.te of Agatha, and doubted not, by îî e fecrecy With which ihe had been dn- mtfild, that it was on her account fhe had not been fullered to ftay, as, from her hing rdiJence with Angeli La, íhe was well ac* quainted with the cha: act cr of the Baron, and had often, in converfation with Rofaline, hinted her fears of what íhe had to expect fr jm him. Defi:it:g Ma¿de!¡:u to bring her f me flight refieihaicat, íhe now fat dovvti alone to her folitary Kipper ¿ after which fatigued ifi boily and m.nd, havmg Iwd no reit the precciïiiîg night, ihe retired to lepofe, and, overcome by exceflive w carinéis, ilept, un- ciílulbed, tid the u*ornb¿. ????.
CHAP. Χ. fl Laft nights adventure is roy theree ^ ** And fiiotild it ftrike jou as a dream, ** Vet icon tîs high imp it " Muft make you own the mat î er Aie h, *' So dt icate, it were too föwcb, '^ To be corapoi'd in ipewt·*·- Covntcu Or C——> FTER breakfaft the fucceeding day, ?? paid an early vifit to the hermit, and related to him her mctives for omitting to fte him, as flie had promifed, on the day fhe had been forced to quit St. Alvan,, re¬ counting alfo all that had happened in her abfence. The venerable Father commended her
A
her perfeverance in refufing the addreffes of the Count, and gave her fome farther particulars of iris character, that increafed her horror and deteftation of him. He alfo darkly hinted that from the Baron fhe had as much to fear; and flie returned to the chateau trembling for her future deftiny. She dined alone in her chamber ; and Mag¬ deiina, who attended, told her it was the Baron's orders, Roderigo had informed her, that Mifs Melvan fliould not quit her chamber unlefs flie accompanied her. " But if you like beft to bc alone, Ma¬ demoifelle,'* added Magdeiina, " I fhan*t exactly mind what Roderigo faid, for he is fo croîs, that he never ipeaks without frightening me; and fo as you do not leave the chateau, I fuppofe it does not fignify where you walk about it: for, as 1 told him, Mademoifelle can't very well iun away, urn- lefs flie was to climb over thoie high walls, aud fwim acrofs the moat, and you muft be
be a little ftronger than you are, Madc- moiieile, to do tlut." Rora'inelet her go on, fmiling at the inno· cent n amicr of the uninformed Magdeiina, and «:lad even to converfe with her, rather than pa. s the time in total folitude. When her dinner wns removed, íhe determined to amufe tiie tedious hours by a perufal of tin manufcript bequeathed her by her haplef: friend; and fearing herielf at her cafement, fhe unfealed it, and read the following words.
THE MANUSCRIPT. " Induced, from motives of gratitude, to begin a recital of woes v.hich it is too probable life may not be allowed me to finiíh, may the forrows Ì ihall here delineate be a warning to thoe who filali hercailer perufe them, and by teaching them to &\ oíd
avoid giving way to tlie firft impulfe of m- ciiiuiion, preferve them fro 11 funii ?. errou! Defcended from an ancient and noble family, and born of parents who in u> cen¬ tered all their hopes, uhotc on! ? offspring we were, my brother a id myfelf ??? eared to the world to have fairer profpeÜs before us than the generality of mankind ; butit was early nippetl by the bitter blaft of dis¬ appointment, and the ???? unclouded view overcaít u ith unkindly florais, c< I received my education in ? Con- \ent in Fi a. ce, as my mother, from ill !:ea>ih» could m*t unl.citakc tue employ íhe would othenvite have rtjjicwd to have per- tormed herfeif; but forbidden to indulge ner naturd inclination tor icdentary occu¬ pations, flie generally accoupamed my lather ia his vifits to his leverai eftates in France, England, and Switzerland, His own family chateau in the latter was our confiant reíidencci but in right of the Barone s,
Baroneis, who was defcended from a noble Engliíh family, he inherited a very large eftate in Great Britain. The folitude of Sr. Aivars was more uitable to the inclina¬ tion of my mother; but as it was efteemed injurious to her health, fhe feldom refided there tong together. She paid me an an¬ nual vifit at the Convent, and was fome¬ times accompanied by the Baron. *' Anxious for fuch a companion as flie fondly thought I fliould proie to her, flic perfuaded my father to a low me to leave the monnftery at the ead ν øge of fifteen ; though 1 have too much Raion to fear thia indulgence was rather granted, becaufe he thought 1 fliould be even more free from the danger of wifhing to fee more of the world, and as much in fafety in the retire¬ ment of the A!ps as in the ieJufion of the cloifter, than from any indulgence to her, whofe unremitting attention to him, through a feries of years, during which her patient forbearance
forbearance met only the bitiereft return, ■cannot be fufficiently admired and praifed. " I was no fooner liberated from the confinement of the Convent, than I ac¬ companied the Bironefs to the chateau. From my infancy í had been remarked for a peculiar turn for every thing that was romantic; İt had been obferved by the Abbefs, who had often cautioned me againft a too great indulgence of it: but young, giddy, and lively, I heeded little her in- ftruftjons. The beautiful though awful feenes round St. Älvars, and the wildly fublime views every window prefented, en¬ chanted my youthful imagination. J foon raifed airy fabrics in my creative fancy, of which 1 was myfelf the heroine, and to re¬ alize which there only wanted fome com¬ panion as romantic and enthufiaftic as my¬ felf. This 1 fliortly found in my brother, who vifited the chateau foon after i arrived there, and whofe difpofition was exactly fimilar to my own. "He
tc He had been educated from his earlieft infancy with an onl. brother of my mother, a man of a peculiar character, who never baring b en married, refided in a remote part of It a'y, where he followed his own purfuits, having Berirani to indulge his natural irclivirion for ftudy without inter¬ ruption. As he intendvd him for liis fole heir, he infifted on his refiding with him, which, as he knew how much it wuiiîd probably be for my t* other'.·» advantage, my father readily confented to. During his childhood a tutor uas kept for ! im in the houfe; and as ioon as he Aas of an age to travel, he made the tour of Europe; at Jus return i e to ? up his abode ? ith my uncle, a*id only mavie xrcufionai viuts to his native caftle in Switze.land. " Unlike moft other ^oung men, he was rema kably f liy and refen ec ; and though poflefled of the moft humane at d' benevo¬ lent heart, ab ays fled from and avoided company, rather than fought it, but for rne • whom
whom he had never fcen fince my infancy, he had the tendereft fraternal affedion, which the fimilarity of our taftes and fenti¬ ments probably contributed to increafe; and after I left the Convent, he was never more than a few months together abfent from the chateau. " My faithful Agatha, who was ofthe fame age with myfelf, and had attended me during the time I had been at the monaf¬ tery, was my only female companion; and, accompanied by her, I was fometimes per¬ mitted, as a great indulgence, to walk with¬ out the gates of the chateau at the time the Baron was abfent from St. Älvars, 'who, had he known it, would have forbidden me to venture beyond the ramparts of the caftle. In one of thefe walks Agatha told me flie had a great fecret to impart to me, which I muft promife never to difclofe be¬ fore ihe would reveal it. This I readily agreed to; and after pledging my honour to conceal whatever flie fliould tell me, fhe vol. 11. 1 proceeded
proceeded to fay that fince flie had flept in a fmall chamber adjoining mine, w hich communicated by means of a long paflage with my mother's drefling-room, fhe had heard the door of the Baroneis's apartment open foon after midnight, and fomc perfon go along the north gallery, and down the great ftaircafe, who feemed to return the fame way in about an hour, fometimes longer. This circumftance (he faid had happened before the Baron's laft retu r n from England, who was then abfeîit vifiting his eftates in France; and fearful of alai tiling me, the had told my mother's woman, who had pretended to laugh at her for fancying noifes ftie could not have heard, and had defired her not to mention it to any one clfe. ??? the had promifed, and had kept her word. The Baron ? t arm d to tîie cha, ??? the following day, ard flic he, rd no more of the founds that had alarmed her. * The ight before laft, however, Made¬ moifelle/
moiiclle," continued Agatha, c which wis that of the day my Lord fet out again for France, exactly at the fame hour I was awoke with the door of my Lady's dreffing- room opening, and forne perfan, in the fame manner as before, went along the gallery as gently as they could walk, and as if they tried to make as little noile as pjf- fible; and after having been gone mure than an hour, 1 heard them allend the great ftaircafe, and return the fame way. Laft night it was repeated, and this morning 1 again told my Lady*s woman, adding that to-night I would watch aad fee whom it was. Seeing me fo determined, ihe told me that if I could keep a iecret, ihe would teil me one ? muft be fure never to reveal; and when ? had faithfully promifed, flie find that, ever firxe about a month after my Lady the Baronefs came to refide conftantly at the chateau with you, Mademoifelle, every night, as foon as you have lett her ia lier dreflìng-room, flie d t fini fibs her, and pretends to retire to her chamber: but flie 1 2 ibon
foon found that this was only an excufe to get rid of her, and that, inftead of going to bed, fhe wraps hcrtelf up in a cloak, and taking a light, goes through the north gaU ïery, down the great ftaircafe, erodes the north hall, and by a Httle pnvate door paffes through the inner court towards a door that leads to the eaft tower, which they fay has fo long been haunted ; and juft there fhe always lofes fight of her, far fhe has leverai times followed her, but can never tell how much fart! ι er fhe goes, for exactly at that fpot ihc di>appears.* <c This ftrange flory of Agatha I at firft gave no credit io$ but, on her reiteratod affurances that I fhouid find it true, I was compelled to believe tiiere was fome myf¬ tery m the affair, and at the entrea'y of Agatha determined to watch myfvlf the moMons of the Baronef ? at fame night. I accordingly onb laid down in my clothes in Agatha's chamber, nllead of » Ang to bed j and having counted the hour of mid¬ night,
night, in a few minutes I h:ard the door of me BaronefVs apartment open, and iome perfon proceed along the gallery. " I immediately arofe ; and having heard the fteps defcend the ftairs, I proceeded, at¬ tended by Agatha, from our place of con¬ cealment, and perceived the Baronefs, as fhe had faid, wrapped in a long cloak, croffing the north hail. We followed her as quietly as poflible, and faw her unfcften the pnvate door, which' fhe left open, and pafled through ic to the inner court. We haftened towards it, and arrived juft as flie approached the call tower. The light ftie canied made her eafiiy diftinguiihable; but juft before fhe reached the bottom of the tower, flie difappeared, as her woman had defcribed, and no traces were left of where fhe was ???? to. The court was involved iu total darknefs, and no glimmering of light appeared in any part of tãe building. ** It was a cold ni¿ht ; only a few umt 1 j twkkimg
twinkling flars were vifible, which, fiintb gleaming, flied a glimmering and tremulous reflection on the ancient walls of the cha¬ teau. " My curiofity was more than ever raifed, and 1 refolved to ftay and fee the event, I accordingly leaned on Agatha, fhivering with cold, tili in about an hour the Baronefs again appeared as fuddeniy as fhe had vaniflied, at the fame fpot at the bottom of the eaft tower, without feeming to have come out of any vifible door, and again advanced towards the houfe. We fecrefed ourfelves in a recefs of the hall till fhe was gone up the ftaircafe, when we returned to our apartments as much perplexed as ever on the fubjed of our curiofity/ 1
Tlie increafing darknefs of the evening here prevented Rofaline from proceeding further at prefent, and fhe was compelled to
to lay down the manufcript, though flie felt deeply interefted in its lequel. Notwith¬ ftanding the gloom of night had overfhadow- ed every object within her fpacious cham¬ ber, flie remained alone by the window, watching its gradual approach, firft veiling from the fight the high tops of the moun¬ tains; then the trees were hidden from view, and at length the walls and moat were concealed in obfcurity. In expectation that Magdeiina would bring her a light, fhe had remained near an hour in the dark, when fuddeniy the great bell at the gates was founded, and the noife of a carriage was immediately heard over the eaftern bridge. She concluded it to be the Baron, and dreaded left the Count fhould accompany him. In indefcribable terror flie continued near an hour longer, not daring to quit her apartment, left fhe fhould encounter them. At length a low rapping at the door an¬ nounced Magdeiina, who, as fhe entered, 1 4 exclaimed
exclaimed—«« I hope,, Mademoifelle, you wilt excufe my not coming fooner, but there*s a fine piece of work below ftairs. My Lord Baron is juft arrived in fuch a dreadful humour, that nobody but Rode¬ rigo dares go near him. He fet out yefter¬ day, and has had fo many mn fortunes on the road, that Roderigo fays he dares fay he won't be good-tempered again for this week to come." " What misfortunes then have hap¬ pened?" aflced Rofaline. " Why, in the firft place, Mademoifelle," returned Magdeiina, « the old landau broke down yefterday foon after they fet out, for my Lord intended to have been Jiere laft night, and they were all forced to go back agam." *« They!" faid Rofaline; " is there then any one with the Baron?" " Oh yes, Mademoifelle, two of his own men, and three of the Count's." " But there is no company .then ?" faid Rofaline, relieved to hear the Count was not
not come, though fhe feared the arrival of his fervants indicated his approach. " No, Mademoifeîie," returned Mag¬ deiina, " he has brought no company, and it is well he has not, if he is to be in ? ????? for a week to come. But, as I was faying, the old tmclau broke down, and they were all forced to go back agiin, not that it is any wonder, for it looked exactly as though it were all tumbling to pieces before it fet out, and fo they were obliged to wait fome hours till ft was repaired, and then tliey fet off again ; but they could noc think of getting here that ni¿ht, and were obliged to fleep on the road. However, long before they got to the town, 1 forget the name, where they were to flee r >, one ofthe horfes was tired, and would go no further. My Lord Baron infilled on the fame horfe going on to¬ day again in the landau, and what was the confequence?—why,, that to-day, as they were croffing the river in the mountains yonder, it fell down, pulled ^the carriage with it, and they had all like to have been r 5 drowned,.
drowned. My Lord was quite wef. Γ am fure it is a pity it did not wafh fome of his ill-nature away, for I heard him juft now afk in fuch a paffion where you* were, Made¬ moifelle 5 fo I got out of his way as faft as I could, and hurried to you to tell you ail about it, Mademoifelle/* K But the Baron has not defired to fee me then?" ** Oh no, Mad^rnoifelle; he only afked where you were, and ordered fupper in the weft faloon. And now what fhall 1 bring: you, Mademoifelle?'* ** Only a light Magdelina, 1 * returned Rofaline, " for I have no inclination to eat; but I wifli you would enquire among tlie fervants, as if from yourfelf, whether the Count is expected, and how his and the Marquis's wounds are/* 44 1 will do it directly, Mademoifelle/' faid Magdeiina, and difappeared. By the Count not being returned with the Baron, Rofaline now feared his wound was more
more dangerous than fhe had apprehended * and great as was her reafon to deteft him, fhe yet felt ihocked that he ihould by her means receive any material injury. Mag¬ deiina returned in about half an hour. All fhe had been able to learn was, that the Marquis with his train had quitted Polloni the day the Baron left it. His wound was faid to be a very flight one, and it was fuppofed he was gone to his eftate in France;. but the Count had not been vifible to his family before they came away- The Baron had been ihut up with him in his apartment, and no mention had been made of his coming to St. Älvars. Imperfect as was the account brought by Magdeiina, it was a great relief to Rofa¬ line that there did not appear any probability of the Count's immediate arrival. It was 4 * doubtlefs his indifpofition which had pre¬ vented it, though, had there been any danger of a fatal conlequence, it was improbable tho Baron would have left him.
1 6 CHAP.
r»
CHAP. XL
w I might call him. ·* A tbiiig dîfîne í fop nothing natural ** J tver faw lb n©ble» * Shakespüarï^ IvOSALINE received no fummons from the Baron; and when Magdeiina had again left her, though it now grew very late, flie opened the manufcript, and proceeded.
THE MANUSCRIPT CONTINUED. " When I returned to my own'apartment, and began ferioufly to confider of the late adventure,
adventure, I feverely reprimanded myfelf for the part I had acted in it, and felt much grieved that I had been prevailed on to indulge an unwarrantable curiofity which I knew nothing could juftify my having taken means fo di (honourable to gratify. ** What right had I to enquire into the fecrets of my mother? Her character was too well known to doubt for a moment the rectitude of her conduct, and I formed a firm refolution that nothing fhould in future tempt me to be guilty of a fimiliar meannefs. That there was, however, ibme great my Mei y in the affair plainly appeared, particularly as I difcovered that her noctur¬ nal vilits were difcontinued whenever the Baron was at the Caftle, which did not happen very often. His marriage with my mother I have fince heard was contrary to his own inclination, and to gratify the ambitious views of his family; but, unfortunately for her, the violence of his temper wouid not allow him to treat her with the tendernefs and
and refpect her virtues deferved, and her merits fo eminently chimed^ even if he had not felt for her the fondnefs of a natural affect ion r ** The Baronefs always encouraged and approved the early tafte I evinced for every fpecies of readings and as the library of the chateau is very extenfive, I was i*ver in want of books in any language. My mother, undertaking to direct my improve¬ ment after I quitted the Convent, went with me herfelf to the library whenever I wiihed it, to felect fuch as flie chofe I fliould perufe. * c it is fituated in the eaft wing of the chateau, and connected with a fuite of apartments which, for a great number of years, had been difufecf, at the end of which was the myfterious eaft towers The door that opened towards them was faftened by ftrong iron bars, which I had often re¬ marked; and once, foon after the circum¬ ftance I have related, I expreffed a curiofity to*
to fee them, but was checked by the Ba- ronefs, who faid they had much better re¬ main (hut up, as, ftom the number of years that had elapfed fince they vvere inhabited, they were doubtlefs unfit to enter; and by the decayed appearance of the outfide, it might be dangerous to venture into them. After this I never again mentioned the fubject, though it dwelt ftrongly on myr ni ind. " The Baronefs being one day prevented by indifpofition from accompanying me to the library, 1 went alone ; an 1, delighted with tlie liberty, remained there much longer than ï had ever done before. It grew dark; and when 1 could not fee to read, I fat looking from the cafement, which pre¬ fented a view I coulel fee from no other window in the chateau, the whole of the eaftern fide except the library being fhut up. ' I had remained here a confiderable time, when fuddeniy I was furprifed by ? low found, like fome one in lamentation. I ftarted,
ftarted, and, on HPening attentively, was convinced it proceeded fiom under the room 1 was in. The imftery of my mo¬ ther's vifits to îhe call: tower now occurred to me, and 1 felt a ftrong and irrefiftible inclination to examine farther into it. I advanced ibme fleps forward towards the door that ltd to thofe apartments, but paubd to afk myfelf if I were ading right in thus wifhing to pry intoa íl crer, which,. if it were proper for. me to know, the Baronefs wonld not, doubtlefs, have con¬ cealed from me. Curiofity, however, at length got the better, and I attempted, which wiíh fome difficulty 1 accompliihed^ and difcovered beyond a wide paílage» " I went fome paces down it, and per* ceived feveral doors that led to a fpacious fuite of apartments. Entering one of them, I followed whither it led^ and after traver- ring fèveral lofty rooms, once furniflied in a ftyle of fuperior elegance,. I came to a winding ftaircafe, which appeared to be
of confiderable length. It inftantly ftruck me that it probably wound round the eaft¬ ern tower; and though I now wonder at the courage I was then poffeffed of, fo ftrong and ungovernable was the defire I felt to explore the myftery that feemed to hang over this part of the building, that I deter¬ mined to defcend it. '* For a confiderable time î purfued its intricate windings, and could find no ter¬ mination, till at length I defcried a fmall narrow paffage leading from a landing-place. 1 travcrfed İt for fome time by the faint glimmering light that proceeded from a high-arch ed window, here and there juft admitting twilight fufficient to guide my fteps. I had not gone far when I fuddeniy perceived the light of a taper dart along the walls at fome diftance, and on approach¬ ing it, I found it reflected from a room oppofite, the door of which ftood half open. I advanced towards it, and beheld, to my aftonifliment, the form of a tall young man
man reading by the light of a lamp that ftood on a deik, over which he was leaning in a melancholy attitude. He appeared to be fo deeply engroffed by the fubject he was perufing, that I remained unnoticed, and had leifure to furvey his figure, which was remarkably elegant, and the noble man- linefs of his features befpoke his mind the feat of opennefs and integrity, " Never before had 1 feen an object fo interefting; I could have fancied him an immortal being, fuch as I had read of. His feníible dai ? eyes fparkled with animation, and his whole countenance vvas replete with intelligence. Rivetted to the fpot where J flood, with my eyes attentively fixed on the fafcinating form before me, I know not how long I remained in the fame attitude of filent attention. The apartment was fpacious and gloomy, and the glimmering ofthe Angle taper by which it was illumined, made its appearance ftill more folitary.
"He
" He was fo abforbed in ftudy, that I remained unobferved by the young ftranger, tillheping toefcape undifcovered, 1 turned iuddenly, with an intention of going im¬ mediately back to the library, and unfor¬ tunately caught a part of my robe in the lock of the door, and drawing it after me, pulled it to with violence. Dreading a dif¬ covery, I haftily difengaged myfelf, and be¬ fore he could open it, had fled through the paifage, and began to afcend the ftairs. I heard the fteps of purfuit, and with as much fpeed as pofíible efcaped to the library, where 1 arrived fafely, and immediately re¬ placing all the bars I had unfaftened, liitened a moment, but could hear no found* and having fati fied myfelf that the way of my retreat had remained undifcovered, I joined my mother in the weft faloon> where, as it was the moft cheerful room in the chateau, we always lived when the Baron was abfent. She wondered at my Jong ftays but being utterly void of fuf¬ picion, was eafiiy fatisfied with the excufes I made. « For
*· For the firft time in my life, when t rclifid fjr the night, I was more inclined to lit up than to fleep; and going to my window, meditated on my late adventure. I liad itili befoie my eyes the h*;tj;e of th: interefting ftranger; and made a thoufaud fiuiricfs attempts to guefs the rcaion there could poflibly be for my mother's private vifits to the tower, the object of which í had fo little ex« tcird to find fuch as he pruvcd. All my endeavours, however, to g'iefs what 1 had at prefent no mens of discovering, pioved .¿ictllctual; a\d * was Cibrp^Hed to reit in uncertainty titl ume diíciokd thv truth to my knowledge."
The turret -???? foun 'ed a r Rofiilint perufed tht^ paflage; ard reminding, lur that the n Jit was wearing faft au ay, anxious as flie was to read the continuation of the manufcript, tbe hoped, from the late- nefs of th.* Lour, flie Ibould be able to gain fome
tome repofe; and putting it by for the night, enjoyed for ibme hours undifturbed reft. She aro r e at her ufual time in the morn- in^i and Migdehia having waited on her wuh hef breakfaft, returned in a few minutes witu an urder lrom the Baron for Ritaline to attend him in the north par¬ lour. <c Is he alone, Magdeiina/* afked Rofa¬ line, uho fdt a dread die could n >t conquer when flie thought of encountering agiin the haughty violence of the Baron, ** Oh yes, he is by himfelf, Mademoi¬ kile/* re-uraed Mag felina, u though I can't fiy he feems in a verv good humour. He law me crofting the norrh lial!, and, coming out of üie parlour, fai \ .n a voice that 1 am fure made me trembîe — * Delire Aiifš Melvan to attend me here immedi- ate!\ !*■—1 only ft^id to curt'V, and fay, * Yeb, my Lord, 1 and ran up ftairs as faft as I could." Ti¡e
The recital of Magdeiina convinced Ro- faline (he had flill much to fear, and fhe defcended vvith no very fteady fleps to the north parlour, where the Baron waited lur attendance. He furveyed her as flie ad¬ vanced down the paifage that led to it, without ipeaking; and when (he entered the door, iuddenly turned from her, and appeared violently agitated. He travcrfed the room İn (İlence for f*me moments; and then appearing to have, in fon,e degree, recovered himfelf, he clofed the door, and tunnus towards her, üi\d —** The hafte in which 1 was obliged to quit Polloni, and the difigreeabie events which tranfpired there, nnd haftened your departure, have prevented my feeing you before, to hear your final determination on a fubject which, by one in your fituation, requires, 1 ihould imagine, but little deliberation/* He paufed; and Rofaline, too well knowing fhe was the caufe of the unfor¬ tunate accident that had happened, could not
not forbear faying—** How did your Lord¬ fhip leave the Coun ?** " Better,** returned he, " than, fro n the appearance of the wound at fifft, ccuîd have been expected ; and a very fhort time will, 1 hope, bring him to St. Älvars.** Rofaline fliuddered as he uttered thefe wouf, but made 1:0 anfwer; and he con¬ tinut d —*« G* ?? tiy as he has already de¬ graded his own igiuty by concktccüding to requeft your acceptance of an ofilr ίο noble, and much as he has fuffered from the ftrength of his attachment to you, yet, in canfideration of your youth and inexperi¬ ence, he ? ready to obliterate fiom his nicrriury all recollection of the paft; ;\ud as foon a. the effects of his wound will allow him, will come to St. Alvan, aud with un¬ exampled affection claim your hitherto reiukd hand.*' 4< lie will, I hope," faid RofalVe, with as much firmnefs as Uie could affume, "give himfelf no fuch unneceftary trouble j and I am
am forry that either the Count or your Lordihip fliould have formed fo light an opinion of me, as to imagine that, without any reafon, 1 fliould, in fo fliort a time, have altered my fentiments on this fubject.** 44 The romantic fentiments of young women on thefe occaiions," replied the Baron, haughtily, " ought never to be re¬ garded ; and if they are fo weak or blind as not to difcern more clearly what is moft conducive to their own good, it is proper fomc one of more prudence fliould judge for ihem. I once hoped you rofe fuperior to the generality of your fex in fenfe and diferetion; but í find I was miftaken. I was wrong to enter into another difcufflon with you on the fubjeci:: this, however, is the iaft rime. Prepare, therefore, for com¬ pliance with my orders as foon as the Count arrives, and dare not utter a word in con¬ tradiction to them.'* In an agony of tears Rofaline now funk on her knees before him, and with a look of unutterable S
unutterable diftrefs implored his pity and protection, appealing, in the moft pathetic terms, to his mercy, to fave her from the perfecution of the Count, inftead of affift¬ ing him in it; but, deaf alike to the voice of Juftice and the fofter pleas of ¿Vlea/ or Humanity, he regarded her for a moment with eager agitation as fhe knelt before him, ???1 th*' n ftriking his head with his hand, burft from her, and rufhed out of the room, as if afraid her fupplicating pofture and the agonized earneftnefs of her manner fhould tempt him to yield to her entreaties. As foon as flie could colled her thoughts, fiie arofe, and with faltering fteps returned to her melancholy apartment. Here flie had full leifure to confider her unhappy fituation, from which ftie faw no means of extricating herfelf but by efcape; and iliould flie not be able to effect it, a mar¬ riage with the Count feemed inevitable» Wholly in the power of the Baron, of what avail would be the feeble refiftance fhe was vol» ?. ? able
able to make againft his will ?—and a few days might perhaps fee her forced into a marriage with a man, whofe perfon and manners were equally deteftable. Yet if flie efcaped, what was the profped that awaited her beyond the walls of St. Älvars? Her friends at Edgecumbe Hall feemed to have totally forfaken her, and Adolphus was, in all probability, long before this time, the hufband of Mifs Otway ! A chilly dread came over her as flie furveyed in imagina¬ tion the picture her fancy had drawn, and flie fighed deeply at the melancholy thoughts that oppreffed her. One alter¬ native alone feemed to be left to her—this was to retire to a Convent, where flie might be fife from the purfuit of the Baron or Count j and flie recollected to have heard from the young ftrangers fhe had encoun¬ tered on the mountains, that there was one at the diftance of a few leagues from St. Aivars, in the lowlands towards Italy. The hermit fhe thought might be of fervice in promoting her efcape, and directing her flight.
flight. To him, therefore, fhe determined to appîy; but it was now much more-diffi¬ cult than formerly to get to his cell, Mag¬ deiina being deputed to watch over her, with ftrict orders never to fuffer her to quit her apartment alone. The weather was bad, and prevented her from thinking of leaving the chateau that day. To amufe her thoughts fhe again took up the manufcript; but the was not fufficiently collected to read, and felt com¬ pelled to lay it down again, with a conviction that more compofure was lequifite for a continued perufal of it. She had now been confined three days within the Caftle; and feeling as if walking wou Id, in fome mea¬ fure, relieve the depreflion of her fpirit% fhe determined, under pretence of fetching a book from thence, to go to the great library, which fhe had never vifited but once, and endeavour to explore fome of thofe apartments the manufcript mentioned* as well as the myfterious eaft tower, She ? a told
told Magdeiina her intention, who went to old Martha for the keys of the apartments fhe muft pafs through, and attended her to the door of the library, where flie left her. The gloomy extent of this once magni¬ ficent place, its lofty decorated walls, and high-arched windows admitting a partial and glimmering light, in (¡»red her with an awe that almoft made her repent vifiting a part of the manfion fo dreary and retired in her prient ftate of fpirits. The windows looked towards one of the moft romantic parts of the Alps; and flie feated herfelf at one of them till flie had fummoned re¬ folution to explore the caft tower. The door that led to it was, as Angelina had defcribed, loaded with bæs and bolts; but the faftenings were now much decayed, and it required little exertion to remove them. She paflld to a paflage, from which fhe entered a fuite of rooms, that appeared to have been once the ftate apartments of the Caftle, from their fuperior fize and ftruc- ture :—
ture: — fomc of them were omam ?*£? ? with rich carvi :vj and ????·^ and in m -ft oi them there nas a great vat ¡ety oi pJnîhr* Amoral them, to her fu?p -ifc, llie dtt- cov "red < ? ?? exi^h· tlie f; me as trat w!;tch had ib n»uch ibrr-k her ft*:cy iü ther^d'ery at Poucni, and fhe gazed, with renewed de¬ icht, on the ?. -xiv ??! inìerefri;^ coun* tenance U the f.veet female ibi ni, w «?? intervention feemed to have at kail ia> pended the rage of the combatants. While furveying the portrait, flie fud¬ deniy thought lhe heard a faint groan. She ftarted round, but could perceive nothing, and lifte ni r-g attentively, heard no briber found* She proceeded down a paíltge, ?? the c*.d of which was the ftaircafe that wound round the tower: fhe defcended in* voluntarily, and more plainly heard a bw found of lamentation from a paflage into whieh it led* She proceeded aiong it, and coming to a door that ftood haif open, di.co\Cit\i a r^om that would liave been ? 3 - totally
totally dark, but from the glimmering of a fingle taper, which difclofed to her view a female foiin kneeling before a table, on which her head was reclined. She was habited in a long mourning robe, and Ro¬ faline no fooner beheld her, than flic ic- coliecÍed her to be the fame figure whofe loud fobs had attracted her attention at the funereal rites of the unfoitunatc Angelina. She contemplated her in iilence for fome minutes, till at length, fuddeniy raifing her eyes, the ftranger perceived her, and ftarting up, with faltering and agitated fteps difap¬ peared in liLnce tlirough an oppofite door, taking the taper with her, and leaving Rofaline in total darknefs. The latter, roufed foni her reverie by the fudden de¬ parture of the ftranger, now turned htr llcps again towards the librai y, where ihe arrived wichuut discerning any farther traces cf the unknown. She could foi m no idea whom it could be, and returned to her apartment late in the evening, with a fub¬ ject that fur the time diverted her thoughts from htr own uncomfortable fituation, CHAP.
-56
CHAP. VIII.
< f Oft, ns Û e ralV'J» hsr ti : ng heart *' ît; iboiigu' íeivJeir.ela cunfcll, ·' An. t eft û € iîngtrM îo împart " Tu fome luft tba*k her kcrtt bicsii. 1 Hov» flow the heavy houi s advance,* ShecryM, * fince that eventful day, * When firft I caught the fatal glance, * That ftole me from myfelf away I « Ah youth beloved ! tho* low thy birth, * The noble air, the manly grace, 1 That look that ipeaks fup^iicr « f cith, * Can fathton, fully, fear erafe ? « Yet lure frenn no i^noMc item 4 Thy ¡ineage fpiin^s·, though now unknown. 4 * ?????.???. J T was quite duflc when Rofaline reached her apartment. Magdeiina was not there; íhe therefore fat in expectation of her wah ? 4 ? light,
a light, till it was confiderably paft the hour at which ihe generally took her lonely fup¬ per, and had begun to fear fhe had forgotten her, when flie fuddeniy appeared, making abundance of apologies for not comi^j fconcr, feying flie had been detained by the preparations that were making ior the re¬ ception of the Count, the Baron having given orders for all the chambers on the fouth fide of lhe chateau to be prepared fer company. This intelligence brought with it a ftiil ftronger conviction to the mind of Rofaline of what flie had to dread, and fhe almoft funk under the accumulated evils that feemed about to overwhelm her. As foon as flie had concluded her fliort and meianchoiy repaft, (he difmiifed Magdc'ina, and though it was very late, kit tifmciined to flee,). She therefore once more unfolded the manufcript, and proceeded.
THE
THE MANUSCRIPT CONTINUED. tc Some weeks elapfed afier this adven¬ ture; and t ough 1 made every enquiry rny anxious imagination could fu 2 Lieft, of thofe fervants who had been the longed refident in the manfion, I cculd obtain no information that at all ierved to develop the myftery of the eaft tower. Every thing went on as ufual; but the ferenity thac had once reigned in my boiom, was effec¬ tually difturbed. The object of my mo¬ ther's nocturn ;1 vifits was continually before my eyes, and in my creams I irequentiy faw him fiich as, in the tranfient view í had caught ot him, he appeared to me. The Baron, ho ? ever, foon afterwards returned to the chateau, and the Barone fe difcon¬ tinued her nightly excurfions immediately. " It may probably appear ftrange, but I ? 5 cannot
cannot exprefs the fatisfaction I felt when I knew flie was not gone to the eaft tower of a night. Often have 1 fat up, and with a palpitating heart heard her cleicend the ftairs, nor could by any means compofe my- felf fufficiently to retire to reft till 1 had heard her return to her chamber. This may feem fingular to any one who 1ms not, like me, a romantic difpofition; but I was formed with a mind the moft fufcep¬ tible, and fated to îmbibe a firft impreflion, which nj time or circumftance couid erafe. " My brother Ín a fhort time arrived on a vifit at the chateau; aud during his tem¬ porary refidence vvith us, he fometimes ob¬ tained leave for me to accompany him, at¬ tended by Agatha and his fervants, in his rambles among the mountains. He one day went out with his gun, and made me promife to meet him at an a] pointed hour in a particular part of the mountain on his return. This 1 readily agreed to, and with Agatha fet out on my walk. «It
« It was a beautiful calm evening ; and Bertrand not being arrived at the feat under the rock when we reached it, 1 was tempfed to extend our ftroll to an adjacent moun¬ tain, from whence I had often heard him fiy there was a profpecl: uncommonly beau¬ tiful. We had fcarcely attained its fummit, when the delightful notes of a lute ftruck on my raviihed ear. Ever an enthufiaft in mufic, í Iiftened attentively, and difcovered that it proceeded from behind a projection of rock juft by. Motioning with my hand to Agatha not to fpeak, 1 proceeded foftly towards the place; but what words can do juftice to the emotions of mixed furprife and pleafure that filled my heart, when I beheld the interefting ftranger, whom I had difturbed reading in the eaftern apartments? His attitude was the moft graceful as he applied his fingers to the firings of the in¬ ftrument, and made it vibrate in tones the moft melodious, while it difplayed to the beft advantage the elegance of his figure. I could have ftood hours to contemplate him, ? 6 but
but he gave me a very little time; for in a few moments, as he concluded a little air lie had been playing, he arofe, and flinging his lute on his arm, purfued a different path through the mountains, and 1 foon loft fight of him amidft the intricacies of the rocks. ** For fome minutes I remained rivetted to the fpot where he had fat, and fhould perhaps have ftaid much longer, had not Agatha reminded me that my brother would be alarmed at not meeting me; and roufed by her fpeaking, I filently took her arm, and proceeded thoughtfully back towards the rock. We had not, however, quite reached it, when a confufion of loud voices ftruck on our ears. Terrified, we looked round, and defcried, to our unfpeakable alarm, a party of banditti emerging from one of the cavities of the mountain. They were I fuppofe juft fetting out on their nocturnal excursions, as the evening was beginning to clofe in ; and they no fooner perceived us, than fpringing forwards, three of them
them caught hold of me, while the reft furrounded Agatha. ce Exceflive terror quite deprived me of fpeech, though I ftruggled vtolently.to get loofe from their grafp; but this, weak as I was, I had no chance of effecting, and they vvere dragging me towards the cave 1 had ken them come out of, when, with a heart beating with unexpected delight, 1 beheld the young ftranger advancing to us. His countenance was fierce, but he was with¬ out arms or means of defence. In a mo¬ ment 1 beheld him level at his feet with one blow one of the wretches who had hold of my arm, and wrench violently from him his weapon, which he aimed at another. I faw no more ; my ftrength was quite ex¬ haufted, and 1 fainted. I know not what paifed during this interval, but wdien I re¬ vived, I found myfelf fupported by my de¬ liverer, and furrounded by my brother and his fervants, who had happily arrived in time to affift the gallaat ftranger in our refcue.
refcue. I remained on my graffy feat till I was quite recovered, and then arofe to purfue our way home. ** Bertrand, delighted with the courage that the young unknown had evinced in our caufe, begged to know to whom we were indebted for this timely fuccour, * I perceive with furprife,* faid he in anfwer, * that ï am not known to you, nor did ï wifli to be obliged to tell you I bear a name you have doubtlefs been taught to hate; but, however prejudice may have operated on your minds againlt the de- fccndants of the haplefs St. Lucia» I ftiil hope the humanity which I fee in your countenances will induce you to grant a requeft I am neceflfuated to prefer :—it is that the Baron St, Älvars may ever remain in ignorance of the fliare 1 was lo unfortu¬ nate as to have in the adventure of this evening·*
«The
" The words of the ftranger deeply per¬ plexed us; and when my brother protefted he was utterly ignorant of what he alluded to, he faid time would not then admit of an explanation, but that, could he dare to hope for a fecond interview, he was ready to give any he or 1 fhould require. " Much ftruck with the opennefs and in¬ genuity of his expreffive countenance, Ber¬ trand took his hand, and after exprelfing an ardent wiíh to continue the acquaintance he had thus accidentally commenced, agreed to meet him the fucceeding evening in the fame place. He again enjoined us to fecrecy with the Baron, from whom he faid it was of the utmoft confequence his name fhould be concealed ; and then he took his leave of us, difappearing into one of the moft craggy and unfrequented parts of the mountain. « I returned home with emotions I had never before experienced i and trifling as the
the adventure may appear, it was. that era from which I may date every fucceeding misfortune. 1 had often heard the name of St. Lucia, and underftood it was that of a former great Chief, whofe domain was in an adjacent canton. I alfo knew that my father bore an inveterate hatred to him, and that frequent wars and ikirmiíhes had, in former times, been the confequence of the mutual enmity of the houfes» in one of which it was reported St. Lucia had been killed; but I knew not that he had left any defendants, and ftill lefs fuppofed they inhabited the Caftle. After revolving the fubject long in my mind, I could form no other idea than that he had been made prifoner, though how to reconcile the time 1 could net tell. Young St. Lucia ap¬ peared not more than twenty; and the de¬ cifive battle, which it was laid had coft the Chieftain his life, had been fought many years before. " Hoping, however, to hear every myf¬ terious
terious circumftance explained, I waited with no little impatience for the following night, when 1 accompanied my brother to the feat under tiie rock. Here we were again met by the young ftranger, who n we found impatiently waiting our arrival. With ea&ernefs he teftified the gratitude he felt at our condefcenfion, as he termed it, in thus vifiting one who feemed def¬ tined to finifh his exiftence in obfcurity. From him we learned a part of my father's hiftory with which we were never before acquainted, and, I am forry to add, a part of his character alfo. " The Baron St. Lucia poffeffed a Caftie and eftate not at all inferior to St. Älvars, fituated fome leagues farther among the Alps. A violent hatred had for many generations fubfifted between the families, tiU at length, in confequence of fonie in- curfions made on his domain by the foldiers of his enemy, my grandfather, the late Baron St, Älvars, befieged the Caftle of St, Lucia
Lucia, and came off victorious. Several dreadful and bloody engagements were the confequence, in one of whicii St. Lucia fell, and his wife and helplefs infants were conveyed prifoners to St. Alvais by the proud victor. ** Here, for a long fuccefllon of years, did the unfortunate Baronefs St. Lucìa drag on a miierable exiftence, which would have been devoid of comfort or hope, had not her conftant attendance on her child diverted her thoughts, and ferved to keep alive hopes of their being one day delivered from imprifonment. Thefe fallacious hopes were, however, finaUy extinguiflied on the death of the Baron St. Älvars, who was fuccreded in his title and eftate by his fon. He inherited all his father's aufterity, and was too devoid of the godlike aï tribute of mercy, to fuffer them to ¡i.dulge an idea that from him they would meet more com¬ paffion.
« Confined
" Confined in the folitude of the Caftle, did Madame St. Lucia educate her unfor* tunate fon, who feemed born the child of forrow. Reared in total feclufion, he was a ftranger to the world and its manners j but, young and unknowing as he was, he had fcarcely attained his fifteenth year, and had learned from his mother their real hif¬ tory, than he panted for revenge on the authors of his father's death and his mo¬ ther's bondage, and never accidentally faw the Baron pafs through one of the inner courts, into whkh the windows of the eaft: tower looked, where they were confined, without the moft violent emotions of rage and indignation. ." When he married, for reafons he beft knows, he concealed from my mother the ftory of the haplefs fimily of St. Lucia j and, committing the mother and fon to the care of one old confidential domeftic, reported among the others that Madame St. Lucia was dead, and that he had provided for her child.
child. Accident one day brought the Baron- efs to the library, where flie was furprifed to hear voices that feemed ?? proceed from the eaft tower, which fhe thought was un¬ inhabited. Thus came about her difcovery of the unfortunate Madame St. Lucia, who related her melancholy hiftory to her, 'and in my mother found one who fincerely fym- pathized in her forrows. Finding her vifits would be an alleviation of her mifery, flie readily confented to repeat them ; and, as fhe could not go without danger of dif¬ covery from the fervants in the daytime, they fixed on midnight for the hour of their meeting. * c There was a way out of the inner court, where flie was lefs liable to be feeri or heard than through the library, as flie muft traverfe a vaft extent of the Caitie before fue arrived there, and pafs through a part of it, which in thofe days was inha¬ bited by fervants. Thus did my motlier, with her accuftomed generofity of mind, devoce
devote thofe hours which, by the generality of mankind, were employed in fteep, to the amiable ofhce of confoli ng the forrows of the afHicied, and affording comfort to thofe rendered miferable by the rigour and feve¬ rity of her family. " This was the recital given us by the ion of the unfortunate St. Lucia, whom, ior feveral evenings after our firfl; rencoun¬ ter, we met under the rock, and continued our ilolen interviews till my brother was fumnioned to attend my uncle; and before his departure he renewed his proteftations of friendfliip to his new acquaintance, whom, at the united entreaty of Bertrand and himfelf, 1 confented to fee in his ab¬ fence; but he was no foor. er gone, than I repented my confent to this plan. " J already felt greatly prejudiced in his favour, and dreaded the Baron's or my mother's difcovery of our meetings. The form and face of Henry St. Lucia were fuch
fuch as muft have interefted every beholder, and his manners, though unrinftured with the pollili of the gay world, had a native ele¬ gance and ingenuous franknefs in them, that to me, who was equally inexperienced, was infinitely preferable; yet was I long infenfible of the fentiments I felt for him, though 1 always wiftied yet dreaded the hour of meeting. «* Before this fatal period I had never known anxiety or care but by name, but now I endured their bittereit torments. I no longer retired to reft the moment I came to my apartment; but, after difmifling Agatha, generally fat down by'my cafement, and meditated on my laft or approaching interview with Henry. Sometimes by moonlight I ventured to repeat our meet¬ ings through a private cavern, from which he taught me to explore my way to the mountain, where together we admired the beauties of Nature, and the fimilarity of our taftes and fentiments became every day 4, more
more evident. But whatever pleafure I experienced İn thefe nocturnal excurfions, it was feverely imbittered, as foon as they were over, by the reproaches of my own confcience, when I refiecled that I was acting in fecret a part 1 too well knew would be difapproved by my ^parents : and fre¬ quently has the great clock from the turret founded the midnight hour before thefe corroding reflections would allow me to gafn any repofe.*'
As Rofaline . perufed the Jaft fentence, fhe fuddeniy thought fhe heard a noife in her chamber. She looked fearfully round it, butali was again quiet, and llie proceeded.
** My reft was not now, as formerly, quiet and undifturbed. 1 often ilarted from my Heep, and fancied ? faw imaginai ? forms gliding
gliding paft my bed by the faint light c f the taper that burned by it. Frequeml· I Iiftened to ideal founds that I thourht a^ofe from the gallery adjoining my chanibei, or the uninhabited apartments beyond, and counted the turret-clock till near the morn¬ ing, before my fears would permit mc to fleep/'
Here the fame noife was heard, and Rofa¬ line laid down the manufcript; but it agai:. ceafed. She Iiftened, but could not hear it repeated. Her fenfations vvere, howevei, too fimilar to thofe Angelina defcribed to fuffer her to go on with the manufcript, and flie fcarcely dared to caft her eyes tu t Le extent of her fpacious and gloom\ chamber. While flie thus fat in trembling expectation of the notie a third time return¬ ing, the great clock ftruck twelve. Evu y ftroke vibrated on the heart of Rolaline, and an univerfal tremor fhook her whole frame»
(rume. She felt wholly unable to rrtfve from her feat, which was by the cafement in her chamber, clofe to lhe door thit ftood open into the clofet. She knew that Ihe was the enly perfon up in the Ciftic, aid the folem- nitv of the hour, together with what flie had juft read, and the founds which, whether real or imaginary, fhe fancied slie had heard, ftruck fuch a damp on her ipirits, that flie could not refolve to reriic to reft. ?? fhe thus fat in fearful expectation, the noife fuddeniy returned much louder. 4ie could now diili nelly hear it ; it appeared a* if fome one was endeavouring to vim ihe rufty lock of a door. It was not ihe one that opened from her bedchamber into the gallery, and that into the clofet flood open. She now fuddeniy recoLecied ihe conceakd door under the portrait. She again Hftened, and found indeed that the noile certainly proceeded from thence. Ex* ceffive terror leemed to overpower her as vol. ii. L this
this conviftion came to her mind, and flie fat motionlefs, while every faculty was fuf¬ pended, and her fenfes wholly abforbed by alarm. In a moment fhe heard the private door give way, and the picture removed, and a flow and cautious ftep was inftantly heard in the clofet. Involuntarily flte ftarted up, and proceeded a few fteps towards the gallery door ; but her limbs refufed to fup· port her, and her trembling fingers had fcarcely unfaftened the lock, when a dread¬ ful faintnefs came over her, and fhe was fmking to the floor, when a man fuddeniy darted from the clofet, and caught her in his arms as (he fell. Difordered as were her fenfes, an imme¬ diate exclamation that burft from his lips betrayed to her aftoniflied ear the voice cr the Marquis tie ?????? and it was more effectual in reftoring her fainting ftrength than any thing tife could have been. She ftruggled violently to get from him ; but the fuperior ftrength of the Marquis pre¬ vented
rented her. Sîie attempted to feream, but her voice died away ri inarticulate mur* murs; and íhe v.as vainly trying to obtain her liberty, while her bewildered fenfes were nearly forfaking her, when fuddeniy, by an unfeen hand, the Marquis was proftrated at her feet, ami the taper being mftantîy extinguiflied, tliey were left in total dark¬ nefs. They were clofe to the door; and, groping about for it, Rofaline, to her aftonifliment, found it opened for her. She fled Iwiftly through the galleries, and a long paílige that led to the apartments of the Baron, who had retired two hours before. Like Rofaline, he had occupations which pre¬ vented his fleeping, but not, like her, had lie ** a confcience void of offence.** After having finiihed fome writings he had to do, he went to bed, where failing into an unquiet flumber, a dreadful and ter¬ rifying dream awoke him. Finding he could L a gain
gain no repofè, he arofe, and throwing his gown over htm, travcrfed his fpacious apartment. The vifion he had feen in his fleep haunted his imagination; and much as he defpifed fuperftirious alarms, he could not drive it from his memory. He was vainly endeavouring to difcard it from his recoiled ¡on, and regain his compofure of mind, when he was fuddeniy ilartled by the found of fteps at the door of his apanrnent, A faint but ihriil feream was uttered, and fomething fecmed to fall down heavily agai u ft the door. Whether thefe founds had any connection with his dre mi, or whether he thought it about to be fulfilled, is uncertain; but they had no fooner reached bis car, than he ftood aghaft and motionlefs. He was, however, recalled from his reverie by a fort of low moan that fucceeded, and endeavouring to collect all his courage and wonted ftrength of mind, he refolutely opened the door; but what were hib fenfa* tions when he beheld Rofaline fenfelefs on the floor, to all appearance dead ! Her hair hung
lung loofe and difhevelled, and her whole drefs was evidently much difordered. The blood had totally forfaken her countenance» and every fpatk >t mimat son feemed fled. This fpectaele had fuch an immediate and ftrange effect on the fpirits uf the Baron, that he was obliged to hold by the door for fuprort. He conte- n plated her inanimate form in a fort vi fi tnzy, and the bittereft recollections came to his mind, la his delirium he thought ? was one fro ? the grave, and İn an ago;iy exclaimed— <c h 15 her fpectre! Yet why fend me terr fying vifions to warn me of her approach? Alas] I need not them to render me more mifer¬ able l* Rolaline now began to recover, and ihewed fome figns of fife. Raifing her eyes, and perceiving the Baron ftanding over her, fiie held up her hands as if imploring his mercy, and again funk into infenfibil.ty· Rouled from his temporary infanity by thia ?. 3 action,
action, he began to collect his fcattered thoughts, and obeying the firft impulfe, rung his bell violently. The terrified do¬ meftics, imagining fomething very extra¬ ordinary had happened, were foon aflembled, and employed in endeavouring to reftore Rofaline to life. For fome time, however, their efforts were ineffectual, and fhe re¬ mained quite void of fenfe or motion. Meantime the Baron approached the couch, on whicii they had laid her in his dreffing· room, and as he contemplated her pallid, but ftill lovely, countenance, his agitation was fo great, that he was obliged to with¬ drav, and, fending for the houfekeeper, defired every means might be ufed for her recovery, and that he might be informed as foon as any figns of life appeared. For more than half an hour flie remained in the fame ftate; and then opening her eyes, fhe' caft them wildly round, as if fhe beheld fome imaginary form. Magdeiina fpoke, but fhe made no rational anfwer; and
and her ideas feemed fo unconnected, that ? was in vain they attempted to roufe her from her ftupefaction. ?? foon as the Baron was informed of her fituation, he vifited her; and fhe no fooner beheld him, than, throwing herfelf from the fofa, fhe funk on her knees before him, exclaiming, with uplifted hands and eyes—** Oh fave me! if you have mercy, fave me from the Mar* quis! 1 * ·* From the Marquis ?" faid the Baron r " what Marquis? 1 * " Oh, I had forgotten,** faid fhe, " I believe you are the Count, and he is ftill worfe; but whoever you are, if you know what mercy and humanity are, Oh fave and protect me t* " I will protect you l* faid the Baron, who feemed greatly moved ; ** confide in my protection, and you fliall be fate l* Then turning to the attendants, he de* fired flie might be conveyed to her apart- L 4 * ment,
aient, ard every care taken of her; hut this (he abfolutely refuted, faying the Mar* quis was there* Her incoherent exprclTions the fervants attributed to infanity j but the Baron wr.s ftruck wuh the encrsrv cf her manner, and ordering Roderigo to attend him, they wen: to the chamber of Roia'me. They found it empty, and every thi.u quiet, nor did there appear figns of ???? ene having been there. After examining the chamber and clo¬ fet adjoining, and every thing being in its place, they were again qui t ring ir, when Roderigo obferved fome drops of blued on the floor, and pointed t ??? out to the Baron, who, on examination, found they could have been there but a very fliort time, being ftiil wet. But how the Marquis or any one couid get into the Caftle without his knowledge, füll fecmed an enig . a Lo could not fol ve. The fervants were a ! fummoned before the Baron, and feparate! y examined; but he could diicover norhii^ from
from them, and all was ftill involved in tht darknefs of myftery. The terrified fenfes of Rofaline were not in any degree reftored till towards the morn¬ ing i when, by order of the Baron, fhe was conveyed to the apartment that had for¬ merly been Angelina's, where fhe was fier- faaded to go to bed. Her ftrength and fpirit* being quite exhaufted, fhe at length fell afleep, and did not awake till towards noon, when, as Magdeiina was fitting watching her, fce, for the firft time for fome hours, fpoke rationally, and enquired where flie was. Poor Magdeiina could hardly anfwer her for joy to perceive her mtellech vvere at ail reftored j but at laft told her as much as íhe knew of the affair. Rofaline now began to recollect ail that had pafled, and couid fcarcely perfuade herfelf the ad¬ venture of the night had been real; but as ioon as ihe was fatisfied by hearing Mag- delina*s account, and comparing it with wliat fbe herfeif remembered, flie attempted L 5 to
to rife, but was fo weak from the exertion fhe had undergone, that fhe was fcarcely able to fupport herfeIC She was juft dreffed, when a rneffiige was brought from the Baron, intimating a wifli to "fee her. She judged, as was the cafe, that he wiflied to be informed of the caufe of her laft night*s alarm, and refolved to tell him all that had happened. As flic entered the room, fhe was ftruck with the haggard and agitated look he wore, and he feemed not lefs fliocked at her pallid coun¬ tenance and trembling frame. He enquired if fbe found herfe'.f recovered; and pro¬ ceeded to mention the general alarm of the family at being difturbed at fuch a late hour of the night. As well as her memory would allow, flie related how flie had been frightened; and when flie mentioned the concealed door under the portrait, the Baron was evidently much furpri'ed, and as foon as fhe had con.luded her recital, he afked her if fhe would accompany him thither. Slie
She readily agreed, and, attended by Mag* defina, Roderigo, and Marcus, they bent their fteps towards her chamber. It was exaâly as the Baron had left it the preceding night. The portrait was replaced, and there were only the drops of blood on the floor to evince that anyone had been there. By the Baron's orders Roderigo, aififted by Marcus, removed the picture. The blood was traced through the hidden door-way into the paffage beyond. The Baron fallowed the fervant, but ftoppeol when he came to the end. u Whither does this paflage lead?*' fardi he in evident confufion to Rofaline, who anfwered by a dei cri prion of the room An¬ gelina had formerly vifited. He ftarted and trembled. His countenance was^ in^ ftautly over!pread with a deadly palenefs, and he hefitated. At length,,reluming more cal m neis, he laid—** We will yroceed no farthei ; you all fee there is no perion here. L 6 We
We muft therefore purfue other, means for inveftigating this aflair. In the meantime, Roderigo, order that door to be nailed up, and Mifs Melvan, if flie have no objedion, fhall remove to another apartment/' ** Had you not better go on, my Lord/' faid Marcus, who had proceeded firft, and re¬ turned; « there is a ftrange place at the end of the paffage, like a prifon/* The countenance of the Baron under¬ went another change at this unguarded fpeech of his fervant, who, reproved by a look from Roderigo, was filent, and his Lord, recovering himfelf, faid— ít No, no, my time is precious : there are a great many places of this fort in old buildings, I will make further enquiries into this ftrange affair* though I much apprehend it will pro\e to have been a mere phantom, of the imagination/' Rofelme was, however, convinced it was no phantom, but expoftulation with t tic Baron
Baron flie well knew would be vain; flie therefoie again returned to the room where flie had flept, and w fiere a cheerful fire was now lighted ; and her clothes being removed from htr former chamber, flic prepared to take up her abode in the apartment of An¬ gelina. Magdeiina, at her entreaty, was allowed to fieep in her chamber, and Rofa¬ line forbore to look at the manufcript for that night.
CHAP.
CHAP. XIII.
** Perhaps kind Heaven în mercy dealt the blow, '* Some laving truth thy roving (oui to tcacn—· ** To weau ihy heart fiom grovtiiing views beiow, " And po;nt out blifs beyond misfortunes reach—— «* To Ihe.v that all the flattering fchemes of joy, *' Which tow'ring Hope fo fondly builds in air,. ** One fatal moment can deftroy, <* And plunge the exulting maniac 'm derpair.** Shaw* J N the meantime the Marquis de Bernon» who, by corrupting one of the Coum's fer¬ vants that attended the Baron toSt^Aivars. had
had obtained admittance in the davtime to the Caftle, fuffered the fevereft mortifi¬ cation from the fulure of the enterprİÎe. He had fecreted himfelf İn an uninhabited part of the chateau till nigiit. The fame fervant, ftrongly bribed by him, and know¬ ing, from the conftrudion of the building». fome of thofe unfrequented' apartments muft have a communication with Rofaline's chamber, had e&amined, and difcovered the concealed door. He inftantly informed the Marquis of his difcovery, who immediately determined to·have an interview witli her, well knowing that, from her determined rejection of his addreffes at Polloni, no> letter would be attended to from him. His intention by this conference was to propofe to free her froai her prefent confinement, and to fly with her to England ; and if ihe agreed, to conduct her from the chateau« that night, the Count's fervant bein¿ m readinefs to convey him again wirhout rhe walls, where he had three of his own at¬ tendants waiting. 6 He
He had ftaid in the paflage, into whiclr the concealed door opened, till pa^ mid« night, when, imagining the family muft be all retired, and knowing the diftance at which fbe was from them, he began his operations, and kmnd 9 on entering her chamber, fhe was ftill up, and alarmed at the noife he had made. He was endea¬ vouring to reaffure her, and debating with, himfelf whether he fliould not by force carry her down the private ftaircafe, whicli he thought he could eafiiy accomplifh, when a violent blow from fome perfon behind hini kid him fenfelefs on the fioor. The light was immediately extinguiflied, and in this fituation he was conveyed, by the fame in* vifible hand, the way he came, to a paffage, at the end of which Carl), the Counts fer ? an t was waiting his return. He. ing fteps, he approached to meet them -, but to his aftoniíhment beheld only the body c£ the Marquis, who was to all appearance dead, and ftill bleeding. Unable to imagine who had brought him, but concluding he had beea
been difcovered by the Baron, he fum¬ moned the Marquis's own fervants, \Ui3 conveyed their mafter away with all ????? fpeed. Carlo foon after heard the alarm-bell founded by the Baron, and attending with the reft of the fervants, found that the real ilaje of the cafe was yet undifcovered, though how the Marquis came by his wound full remained a myftery. It praved ? flight one in his fho'jlder; but the irritation of his mind, and the pain he had endured, brought on a fever, the effects of which he was impatiently labouring under at his cha¬ teau, refolving to make a fimilar attempt as foon as his health would permit him. Rofaline, having the fucceeding day al¬ moft recovered tne immediate conlequence of her alarm, was very anxious to coiâCİude the manufcript ; aad taking her feat at the cafement of her new apartments proceeded as follows, ÇöNCLVSîOH
CONCLUSION OF THI MANUSCRIPT.- *« The fummer pafled fwiftîy over, and our fècret interviews were continued for nearly a twelvemontbundifcovered, till ï was at length compelled to acknowledge the in¬ tereft Henry had infenfibly gained in my heart. He often exprefled his earneft wifhes that he might be allowed to intro¬ duce me to his mother, from whom, he faid, he could* no loager conceal an attachment that everyday became more fervent, though he never had dared to harbour a hope of its fuccefs. I was at length prevailed on to vifit the eaft tower, where I was prefented to Madame St. Lucia, who related to me the hiftory of her life; and after having fpent almoft the whole evening with her, i returned to my apartment. ** I declined going to the faloon to fupperv and
and remained alone in my drèífing*room. I was enchanted with the manners of my new friend, and could not help indulging my inclination for building airy fabrics, by look¬ ing forward to an union with the amiable Henry, whofe merits I fondly hoped would induce my father to accept him as a fon. His family was not inferior to my o,*n. I delighted to enjoy in anticipation the hap¬ pinefs of being related to the interefting Madame St. Lucia; but, alas! this felf de¬ lufion was not of long continuance. 1 re¬ collected the inflexible aufterity of my father, his unforgiving haughtinefs of tem¬ per, and invincible hatred where he once took a diflike, and I could entertain but little hope that he would ever agree to what he would doubtlefs think an eternal difgrace to his name. " As thefe melancholy reflections came to my mind, I fighed deeply, and tears llancd into my eyes. In this fituation í was iound by my mother, who, perceivings
my dejcClion, i;.Gfted on knowing the caufe; and on my pleading low fpirits, fhe entreat¬ ed, with fo much gen¬tlenefs, to be informed of their fource,. that I could no longer re¬ tain the fecret, and unrefervedly commu¬ nicated to her my acquaintance with Henry St. Lucia, as well as that 1 had the fame evening commenced with his mother* " She heard me with calmnefs, and when L had concluded— 5 I will candidly own, my Angelina/ faid fhe, * that 1 fincerely wifh this friendfhip had never been formed; but it was doubtlefs the will of Heaven, to which we muft all fubmit, and we have now to e^cert our utmoft prudence, to conceal it from your father, from whom, 1 grieve to aeld, you muft with care hide it. You as well as I, my love, know the high fenfe he entertains of his family honour; be it then our care to fliew him we are not lefs tena¬ cious, of j.t." " I promifed ? every thing to follow her adv ice i
advice ; and, happy in my mother's knowledge of our mutual partiality, ï with lefs fcruple continued our ftolen interviews. My bro¬ ther, whenever he vifited the chateau, was aivvays of our parties, and his fondnefs for the fociety of Henry daiiy increafed. Thus hnppy were we when my father, on his return from Italy, brought with him the Count and Chevalier de Polloni. The latter very foon evinced a great partiality for me> and made propofals to the Baron, who commanded me to accept them. I entreated to be allowed time, for I could fix on no other expedient to defer what I dreaded to think of· " The arrival of thefe guefts filled St. Lucia with alarm. He feared I fhould oe prevailed on to accede to the wiihes of my family, but I removed his fears by avowing my determination never to be united to the Chevalier, much as I revered his amiable character and many virtues. ** While aifairs were in this fituation, the Baron
Baron and Baronefs fixed on going to Eng¬ land, and determined to take me with them. I need not fay with what regret I prepared for this journey j but í dared not object to it, and was therefore neceffitated to confent, I took an affectionate leave of Madame St. Lucia and her fon ; and the latter was f> affected, that 1 was obliged to tear my felt from him, after having promifed never to forget the fentiments I had been pre¬ vailed on to avow. *« The following winter I fpent in tht metropolis of England, where I was fol¬ lowed by a train of admirers, from being young and novelty. Amongft them w as one whofe real name I will for his own fake conceal, and call him only Horatio; he was the only one I diftinguiflied by the moft trifling mark of preference* 1 found hira fenfible, elegant, and agreeable in conver¬ fation, and the omiverfal good character he bore, made me regret not being able to return tlie attachment he profeffed for me. I candidly
I candidly told him my heart was irrevoca¬ bly engaged, but my friendfliip, if he would condefcend to accept it, would ever be his. He was not fatisfied with this reply, but perfevered in his addrefs, though I repeat¬ edly told him it would be fruitlefs. Ey my mother this gentleman was particularly ap¬ proved. His family and fortune were not inferior to my own, and his perfon and manners fo prepoftefling, that, had not my father been too earneft to promote the fuit of young Polloni, he would doubtlefs have efpoufed his caufe· u After fome months fpent in England, our return to Switzerland was again pro¬ pofed, when my new admirer declared his intention to travel, and was invited by my father and mother to St. Älvars, with the lefs fcruple by the former, as he faw my determined obftinacy in rejecting Polloni. Perhaps, if it had not been for the ex¬ pectation of again meeting Henry, I ihould have felt forry to quit London ; but that
every otber, and 1 prepared with pleafure for our return to St. Aivars, where we ar* lived in the fpring» I need not fay with what delight 1 was m^t by St. Lucia and his amable mother, öjr meetings were renewed, and continued during the fummer and part of the autumn*, when the Engliíh gentleman before mentioned arrived at the chateau. I could not doubt the fincerity of his regard, of which he ever gave the fnoft ftriking proofs ; and if my heart had been difengaged, I fliould certainly have preferred him to any one ï had ever feen. He was nesrly three months with us, during which time J was obliged-to be particularly cautious in my interviews with Henry; and foon after he left us, I received a letter from JLady Arundel, inviting me to fpend the next winter again in England. " As my fether, from his ignorance cf any other attachment, fufpected that! felt a decided preference for Horatio, whom he couid
could not difapprove, he as well as my mother, promoted this fecond excurfion to England, and í was obliged, againft my own inclination, to go. 1 returned with re¬ vived pleafure to Switzerland the following fpring, and was attended to the chateau by Horatio, who was now regarded by the world in general as my accepted lover, though from me he had no reafon to think himfelf fo ; but as he could not difcover to whom I was really attached, he imagined perleverance would conquer my indifference. My brother was abfent from the Caftle when he arrived, which I did notat all regret, as his prediledion in favour of Henry made hini regard with diflike any other pretender to my favour· ** I am now arrived at that period of my life which was deftined to render the fuc¬ ceeding part one difmal blank, and to ob¬ fcure for ever the bright profpect I had once indulged myfelf in contemplating; but 1 no longer look with regret on the vob. 11. m paft,
paft, now that every afpiring hope of my heart has been long fince defeated, and that heart, by the unerring decrees of Providence, feverely humbled. I can rejoice at the mandate, bitter as was then the harfh de¬ cifion. Eight years of unceafing anguiih have, I truft, in fome meafure expiated my early error; and fince my intellects have been at intervals reftored to me, I have en¬ deavoured to prepare for the awful change that will foon, very foon lay me at peace. Nothing but the obligations I muft ever own myfelf under to my beloved Mifs Mel¬ van, could have tempted me fo far to divert my thoughts from this great end, as to be¬ gin a recital of forrows which I fear will wound her gentle heart to perufe. « My mother foon began to wifh me very much to accept the propofals of Horatio, and my father was as earneft an advocate for it as he could be for any one after Polloni was rejeded; but I fo ardently begged every thing of this fort might be deferred
tîîl I Was older, that they kindly confented. Alas ! how did I repay their indulgence! cc My brother left us towards the end of the fummer, and had been gone a few days, when I one evening ventured to meet Henry in the armoury, which had often been our place of meeting. It was never fre¬ quented by any of the family, and I had myfelf heard the Baron fay he had not en¬ tered it for many years. The prolonged ftay of Horatio at the Caftle had alarmed the affection of Henry, and our converfation on this night was on the eagernefs of my mother to fee me united to him. ct The ftrange romantic turn of my bro¬ ther, with his diflike of the world and its inhabitants, I well knew had made both the Baron and Baronefs place all their hopes in me, whom they fondly thought they fhould fee united fo as to do honour to our family; but fate decreed far otherwife, and I was deploring my father's pride of anceftry, μ α when
when fuddeniy a private door of the armoury burft open, and the enraged Horatio appeared with his fword drawn. He bade Henry defend himfelf and in opprobrious terms charged him *with diflimuiation and ingratitude to the Baron. This'language from a ftranger threw him off his guard: he drew, and what followed 1 know not. " Overcome with horror, I flew up the ftaircafe with an intention to alarm the family, but before I reached the top, I fell fenfelefs on the ftairs. I was recalled to life I believe by the claihing of their fwords. Again I directed my fteps towards the armoury ; but what a fight there awaited me ! Even at this diftance of time 1 cannot re¬ member it without fenfations of horror that no pen can do juftice to i Henry lay ex¬ tended lifelefs on the floor, his wounds itili bleeding, while his murderer, with a coun¬ tenance expreffive of the moft heart-rend¬ ing agony, was kneeling by htm. I recollect throwing myfelf befide him, but the fhock was
was too great for reafon to fupport. It failed me at this fatal crifis, and for many years its aid was but partially lent me* 1 was conveved to bed, where, after a fucceflion of fainting fits, a violent fever fucceeded, which the ftrength of my conftitution at length enabled me to overcome; but a dreadful delirium took place of my dilbrder, which lafted without intermİffion for nearly two years. € * The beloved corfe of the unfortunate Henry was interred by order of the Baron, as 1 have ixnet heard; but guefs what muft have been the agonizing fenfations of his mother, who parted from him ia full health and fpirits a few hours before, to have him brought back to her apartment a lifjefs foni* I The unhappy man, by whofe hand he fell» quitted the chateau immediately, and I have neter fmce beheld him. " In about two years the frenzy that had poffeffed my mind, by degrees fubfided. m 3 One
One dreadful idea had ever fince the fidai period taken full pofleflion of my thoughts. The mangled corfe of St. Lucia was in- ceifantly prefent to my imagination, and by turns I called on him, and reproached his muiderer. The profound quiet and retire¬ ment in which I lived, together with the unbounded indulgence granted to all my wiflies by my diftracìed parents, at length reftored in fome degree my long-loft reafon, though I never recovered it entirely ; and when at laft I began to revive, a frefh ca¬ lamity fliortly overwhelmed us. " My mother, never of a ftron<* confti- tution, could not fuftain the fhock of feeing an only and beloved daughter, in the bloom of youth, loft to her friends and the world for ever ; and after ftruggling for fome time with the anguiih fhe daily endured, from feeing me under the dreadful fway of con¬ tinued infanity, flie was fent to the grave by ber, who, to fave the life of a parent fo juftly beloved, would gladly have refigned her own.
own. The confeioufnefs of being myielf the caufe of this lad cataftrophe again af¬ fected my fenfes, whkh were juft reftored* and a total alienation of reafon once more- took from me all recollection of my forrows. The anguifh of my brother I think t need not add was beyond any defcription when he heard the dreadful particulars of this unhappy affair. He accufed himfelf for having firft encouraged me to meet Henry, but for fome months he could not fummon courage to vifit the chateau. I have fome faint recollection of our firft interview after the death of my mother; but my head was at that time fo confufed, that the remembrance is very imperfect. He incurred the heavieft difpleafure of the Baron, who reproached him for having promoted the attachment between St. Lucia and me. Bertrand retorted with forne afperity, hinting at the Baron*s treat¬ ment of that unhappy family, which en* raged my father ίο violently, that he forbade m 4 hint
him hts prefence, and has never fince par¬ doned him. " Soon after the death of the Baronefs 1 was taken from St. Älvars, and conveyed t-> an eftate of my fither's in England, where 1 Lave ever fince continued. Since my refi* de-ce there, the frenzy of my diforder has fubfided, and a fettled melancholy has fuc¬ ceeded. In hopes of routing rne from my lethargy, the journey to St. Älvars was propofed, the Baron being obliged to go there hinifelf on bufinefs; bur, alas! the only remedy for me is one that I feel will be fliortly applied by Hirrt, whofe unerring hand direcled tlie fatal dart that at one blow robbed me of ail terreftrial happinefs. I alfo more readily acquiefced, becaufe í hoped to learn fome tidings of the unfor¬ tunate Madame St Lucia, who, my father has told me, is provided for at a diftance from the chateau ; but 1 have ftroog reafon to believe fhe is ftill within the walls of St. Älvars. To you, my amiable Mifs Melvan, whofe
whofe bofom is the refidence of huma¬ nity, do I commit the facred tafk of feeking out this haplefs viftim of forrow; and in the name of her who was the caule of them, endeavour, I conjure you, to alleviate her woes. This is the requeft I once mentioned, which I have no doubt your fweet benevo¬ lence of difpofition will prompt you to perform· " And now that I have at length con¬ cluded my melancholy tale, let me, with unfeigned thankfulnefs, exprefs the grati¬ tude I feel to her for whofe perufal it is penned ; and while the power is allowed roe, declare the grateful fenfe 1 muft retain of her friendly fympathy to the lateft moment of roy exiftence* Before it is concluded, let me alfo breathe a fervent prayer that the Being, who has by her hand adminiftered comfort to the laft hours of her unhappy fiiend, will at length recompenfe humanity fo difinterefted ; and when fhe arrives at the awful period tlmt will terminate a life un¬ ja 5 fulìied
fullied by guilt, unimbit tered by remorfe, may he convey to her aid forne fympathizing friend, fome angel of comfort, fuch as, in the fweet form of my beloved Rofaline, was mercifully fent to cheer the wounded mind, and fupport the drooping fpirit of her eternally grateful u Angelina."
Here concluded the manufcript, which Rofaline had no fooner perufèd, than fhe determined to extend her enquiries after the unfortunate Madame Sb. Lucia. She could not, on recollection, entertain a doubt that it was that ill-fated woman whom ihe had fecn in the eaft tower on the preceding day ; and when fhe compared that rencontre with the founds fhe had formerly heard iffue :from the turret, and the appearance of the perfon in black fhe had feen afcending the ftairs that led to it, fhe concluded it muft "be the haplefs object of her propofed en¬ quiry who had caufed her alarms· CHAP.
chap. xiv. «* ?? ??& to roe who never had a fon. ** Grief fills the room up of my able n t child» ** Lies in hts bed, walks up aad down with roe» 44 Puts on his pretty looks, repeats his words, ** Stuffs out his vacant garments with hi» form ; ·* Then have 1 reafon to be fond pf ÇrrietV' SUAKEStCAU. W HEÜ Magdeiina brought up her din* ner, Rofaline enquired for dkl Martha, and defired fhe might be Wormed fhe wiftied to fpeak with her. The houfekeeper obeyed, the fummons ^ and elofing the door, Rofahne defired (he would inform her in what part of the chateau Madame St. Lucia was confined- m 6 Ät
At firft the oíd woman ftífred with aftoniíh¬ ment at this queftion without anfvering; but Rofaline, afturing her 4he knew the Baronefs was alive, and in the chateau, bade her be under no apprehenfion from the Baron, who would never know any thing relating to this circumftance from her; and, wouid ihe difclofe to her where the apart¬ ment of Madame was fituated, fhe might hereafter have reafon to be glad. It was, however, fome time before flie could con¬ vince the mind of this old domeftic that her only intention in vifiting Madame St. Lucia would be to comfort her under her misfortunes. By perfuafion and remonftrance fhe at length learned that this unfortunate relict of a powerful Chief had for many years in¬ habited a fmall room in the turret Roiàline had once vifited, in the vain hope of ex¬ ploring the myftery that feemed to hang over it* Her aim now was to procure an interview; and after fome farther entreaty, fhe
fhe prevailed on Martha to carry a meffage to Madame St. Lucia, who had had no other attendant than this almoft fuperan¬ nuated houfekeeper, fince fhe exchanged her apartment from the eaft tower to the turret. She defired her to acquaint Ma¬ dame St. Lucia with her name, and to inform her flie was the intimate friend of Angelina, by whofe exprefs defire fhe re¬ quefted to be admitted to her, and cu^ treated fhe would favour her with an inter¬ view. This commiffion Martha promifed to execute in the courfe of the day, and departed, leaving Rofaline impatiently wait¬ ing her return» The whole afternoon elapíêd, and her meflènger did not return. Daylight va¬ niíhed, and left her ftill in uncertainty as to the event of her embafly. To amufe her thoughts, fhe took up the manufcript, and perufed again fome parts of it. Ια every line that unfortunate romantic turn of mind, which had been fo fatal to her haplefs
haplea friend more evidently appeared, and the hints which even íhe gave of the Baron's ehara<5ter and difpofition, terrified her be¬ yond expreffion. She dreaded the arrival of the Count, and ftarted at every noife with fear, left it was the rattling of car¬ riages through the courts* Night arrived, and found her itili alone ki her folitary chamber* While fhe fatui* expectation of Magdeiina with her fuppers fee heard the ftep of old Martha rø the gallery, who, on enter ingvtold herthat fhe had fome difficulty to ???? Madame St. Lucii believe the meffage (lie had carried, was really fent to her by Rofaline, whofe name and character ih? was not unacquainted with> having been induced, from feeing her at the funeral of Angelina», to enquire pf old Martha concerning her· She returned for anfwer to her requeft that fhe might be admitted to her apartment ;. that it was fo many years fince fhe had feen any but fer¬ vants, or thofe who, like herfelf, were humbled
humbled by mifery, that fhe was now ill fitted for fociety; but did Mifs Melvan really wifli to fee one, who for a long lapfe of time had known only forrow, her. vifit would with gratitude be received. It was now late; but finding it was not yet Madame St. Lucia's hour for retiring,, Rofaline determined not to defer her vifir. She therefore defired Martha to refcurn with her to the turret, and at her reiterated re* queft,. the latter conducted her throughfome unfrequented paffages to the prefent abode of the unhappy Baronefš. She inhabited the upper chamber, where Rofaline on her firft arrival at the chateau, had been fo much alarmed., Martha went in firft to warn her of the arrival of her vifitor. Rofaline followed, and beheld a final! room, the damp wall and cei¬ ling of which leemed mouldering away, but it was rendered tolerably comfortable by a cheerful ñre which blazed in the chimney. 6 A fingle
A fingle taper was burning on a fable by it, near which fat reading, in deep mourn¬ ing, the unfortunate object of her vint* ♦■ Madame St. Lucia arofe from her feat to receive her; and advancing to the door, took her hand, faying—* € Allow me with the trueft gratitude to thank you as I ought for a vifit fo unexpected." She conduâed her to ? feat, and they fliortly entered into converfation· She heard from Rofaline the fatal conclufion to the hiftory of the haplefs Angelina, and related the principal events in her own life· She had never beheld die Baron fince íhe appealed to his humanity to fet her at liberty when he fucceeded to the title and eftate by the death of his father; but he inherited all his predeceffor's arrogance of manner, äs well as his fixed hatred to the unhappy family of St. Lucia, and rejected her pe¬ tition with fcorn.
" Since
" Since tliAt period," continued Madame St. Lucia, «* I have endured in filence my ftate of bondage, nor fhouid I have re¬ gretted it on my own account ; but to be¬ hold the beloved refemblance of my loft St. Lucia, inheriting all his father's courage as well as his manly form, doomed to fpend his life in imprifonment, and inftead of retrieving the ruined fortunes of his family, and revenging on the perpetrators the mur¬ der of one parent, and the confinement of the other, fated to drag on an ignominious exiftence within the hated walls of his ene¬ my's Caftle, was more than a mind like mine could endure: and for the fake of my Henry, I vented complaints which for my¬ felf alone would never have efcaped my lipsj but Heaven thought proper to turn their courfe, and to inflict a ftill greater calamity. My Henry, my fon, was early taken from me by an untimely death, and his wretched, his defpairing mother was left to lament his lofs in this dreadful folitude, rendered ftiil more dreary by the confeioufnefs of having difpleafed
difpleafed the Almighty by repinings at the deprivation of that liberty» whkh, when he was gone, I no'longer folicited. Now in¬ deed did I rejoice at being in obfcurity, where fcarlefily I could indu'ge the weight of woe that oppreffed me; and when time had, in fome degree, blunted the keen edge of my grief, 1 gave way to the melancholy dictates of my half-broken heart, and amufed myfelf wkh drawing the plan of a monument, which I got erected during tire abfence of the Baron in an obfcure part of the mountain. This place I vifit regu¬ larly every day, and pour forth at it the bitter tribute of maternal tendernefs." Tiiis 'fits the tönib RõíáÍinè hau acci¬ dentally vifited, and was fo much fur¬ prifed to find in a fpot fo folitary. She was greatly affected with a recital of woes fo deeply fett, and not lefs pleafed with the manners and appearance of the narrator. They did not feparate till near the morning, wlien
when Rofaline took her leave, promifing to repeat her vifit the firft opportunity. Madame St. Lucia was now in the de¬ cline of life, and forrow and ill health had robbed her perfon of the charms it had once boafted, and given to her countenance a gìoominefs and referve it had once been exempt from; but misfortune had added a majefty to her appearance which, together with her native elegance of man¬ ner, rendered her fo interefting, that Rola¬ line found it impoffible to difcard her from her thoughts for fome hours after fhe had left her. For feveral fucceflive days fhe conftantly vifited the itnhappy Baronefs. who long un¬ accuftomed to the voice of fympathy or compaffion, almoft idolized her, and would have retained her conftantly with her, had they not feared a diicovery of her vifits, ihould Magdeiina find her abfent from her chamber. She
She was one evening returning from the turret tp her own apartment, when, as flie traverfed the north gallery, a confufed found of voices arofe from below, and the opening and (hutting of doors in différent parts of the manfion, together with various noifes from the courts, leemed to announce fomething unufual. She ftopped a moment tojiften, but could diftinguiih nothing* AH feemed buftle and confufion, and the found of voices in the hall appeared to increafe. Once fhe fancied fhe could diftinguiih that of the Count, and a dreadful tremor took pofleflion of her frame. She could- with difficulty iupport herfelf to a Gothic wißr- aow at the end of the gallery, which over¬ looked one of the paved coutts. She haftened thither as faft as her trembling limbs would allow her; and though it was now nearly dark, perceived, by the glare of torches which fome of the fervants bore, feveral carriages, with a great number of attendants bufied in taking out the horfes.
Convinced
Convinced ît could be no other than the Count, the fad forebodings of her heart fhook her with horror and alarm. She re¬ turned deprefled to her chamber to wait the arrival of Magdeiina, from whom flie knew flie fliould hear every particular ; but her patience was nearly exhaufted before flie came. Twice had the great turret clock founded after her general hour of fupper before lhe made her appearance, and then her looks betokened that fhé had fomething important to communicate. « Oh Mademoifelle ? faid flie, « I am afraid you are almoft ft arved ; but there is fuch a to-do below ftairs, it is well they have brought fervants with them, or 1 am fure they would never have got waited on here." "Are there fo many then?" laid Rofa¬ line. " There*s my Lord, the Count, Made¬ moifelle, and three or four gentlemen with him, and then there's Madame Pol¬ loni and five or fix ladies; and I really think there's
there*s at leaft forty fervants í I thought they would never have done coming in." " Good Heavens!" exclaimed Rofaline, in an agony of terror*, as ihe Hftened to the arrival of her perfecutor, " what will be¬ come of me?" Then turning to Magde¬ iina, who ftood ftaring at her in ñknt aftonifliment, " Do you know," aflced ihe, " if they are expeded to make any long ftay here?" * c All ï know about it, Mademoifelle, is, that 1 faid, fays I, to Luco, one of my Lord Counts men, c Why, here's plenty of you, however.'— c Yes/ fays he, * this old place has not contained fb many guefts ihefe many years I fuppofe/—* I wonder,' fays 1, * my Lord Count fliould like to bring his friends to fuch an old, ugly, out of the way place as this.'—< Why, Lord I Magdeiina,' fays he, * don't you know my Lord is going to be married here ?'—* Mar¬ ried!' fays I, * why, who will he get to have him ? I think· he had more need to be thinking of dying than marrying/—* Ah, but
but he has found a lady,* fays Luco, * and a young one, and a handfome one too/ fays he; and then I afked him who it could be. « Who do you think ?* fays he.—* Oh, I am fure,* fays I, f I can never guefs, but I fuppofe one of thofe fine ladies he has brought with him.*— c No, no,' fays Luco, < it is one handfomer, and more affable, and not to be compared with any of them;* and then ( why» Magdeiina,' fays he, * what do you think of your young lady, Mils Melvan?'— ' Think,* fays J, * why J am fure fhe would not have him;* and then, Mademoifelle, he went away laughing at me." It now occurred to Rofaline that, in order to effect her projected efcape, it would be neceflary to enfure the friendfhip and afliftance of Magdeiina. She therefore determined to tell her the fituation Gf her affairs with regard to the Count. This fhe immediately did, and had the fatisfaction to perceive her narrative had the áeñiQÚ effèft on
on her auditor. The innocent Magdeiina exclaimed with great warmth againft the Baron, faying ihe had often before heard it hinted that he was no better than he íhould be, and promifed readily to do every thing in her power to ferve her. She was now obliged to leave her for the prefent, to join the reft of the fervants at fupper; but was to return to fpend the night as ufual in Rofaline's apartment. The latter did not, as in general, retire as foon as fhe left her. Though fhe knew not that there was any immediate danger to apprehend, fhe could not feel perfeclly at eafe. Her mind was not fufficiently com¬ pofed to read, and fhe fat penfively at her cafement, from which fhe could difcern lights İn other parts of the Caftle, and the founds of mirth and revelry frequently rofe to» her folitary apartment from the weft faloon, where the Baron entertained his guefts. Sometimes flie cpula 1 diftinguiih female voices finging, particularly the fuen tones
tones of Mademoifelle Niverre, which, in foft Italian airs, often reached her ears. At length when the night was nearly half fpent, Magdeiina again appeared. The Baron and Count, flie faid, were juft retired, but the reft of the gentlemen and all the ladies were ftill in the faloon. Rofaline feared fiie was the caufe of the Baron re¬ tiring with his friend before the reft of the party, and would not take off her clothes that night, but laid down for a few hours in them» Early in the morning fhe arofe, for íhe was too reftlefs to enjoy undifturbed repofe,. and fearing herfeif at the cafement, watched the fun as it rofe from the eaft, towards the tops of the lofty mountains that fronted her window. Magdeiina had no fooner quitted her apartment than ihe paid an^ early vifit to Madame St.. Lucìa, with. whom ihe renewed a converfation they had been engaged in the preceding evenings vol. 11. n in,
in which Rofaline had related the particu¬ lars of her fituation to Madame, and hinted at her intention to attempt an efcape if the Baron continued to infift on her acceptance of the Count. Madame no fooner beheld her ín the morning, than fhe again began the fubjecl: of the evening, and afked her if flie would accept a companion in her flight.—" Dead as I have long been to the worid and its inhabitants," continued Madame, " I ftill feel an inveterate repugnance to refign my- breath within the walls of the tyrant» At the diftance of a few leagues* among the receiìès of the Alps, ftands a monaftery, the Superior of which is remarkable for benevo'ence afld hofpitality. Thither it is my vvjíh to retire, and pafs the fmall rem¬ nant of my da}s; and there, my dear Rofa- 1 ne, you may accompany me, and remain tili }0u "think yourielf fafe fiom the pur¬ fuit of the ?????"
Rofaline
Rofaline heard with delight a propofal fo confonant to her wifties; the only regret fhe could poflibly feel on quitting the chateau being on Madame's account, whom fhe felt very unwil ing to leave alone, as, from her haggard appearance and worn-out frame, it feemed fo probable that the period which would terminate her life and woes, might not be very far diftant. When flie returned to her chamber, and while fhe was par¬ taking her loneiy breakfaft, fhe reflected with pleafure on this plan,^and queftioned Magdeiina, as fhe attended her, concerning the fituation of her father's cottage among the mountains. She had fcarcely finiihed her breakfaft when a meffage was brought from the Count, importing a wifli to be allowed to fee her; but as the Baron well knew her fentiments, flie thought, fliould flie fee him, it would appear as though there were a poffibiluy of their being changed. She therefore only returned for anfwer that flie n 2 was
was indifpofed, and begged to be excufed feeing any one. Meantime flie determined to pay another vifit to Madame, and con¬ verfe with her again on their projected plan of efcape; but when fhe attempted to quit her apartment, flie was ftopped by the ap¬ pearance of Roderigo, who told her he had ftrict orders from the Baron not to fufter her to leave lier chamber that day ; and ihe was compelled to turn back with a fad conviction that fhe was now indeed a prifoner. All the propofed fcheme was now at once rendered abortive, and well as flie had hitherto fupported her fpirits, her fortitude at this crifis almoft forfook her; and fhe could fcarcely refrain from repining at the apparent feverity of her deftiny. An in¬ ward and unerring monitor told hef that the evils flie endured were unmerited; and with her native rectitude of thought and difpofition, fhe tried to contóle herfelf with this felf approving idea, and to place her reliance
-reliance for protection on a fupport, that flie was well affured would not, in the bitter hour of diftrefs and perfecution, forfake or fail her*
1ND OF VOL, II.
'tAVTt, ?????? ?И?, LtADEMiAlL-STUIİT.
