Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
"There is a secret, find it out! ": a novel
THEEE IS A SEC -ЖЕТ.
CHAP. L IVI RS. Hunter's cordial had so effectually succeeded in composing Air. Freeman, that he did not move till after ten on the Sun¬ day morning. Indeed our hero would have felt alarmed by the stillness which prevailed in his room till so late an hour, had he not heard him cough more than once, which convinced him that his re¬ cent fatigue had not proved fatal ; and the moment he was stirring, Airs. Hunter paid him a visit, and after inquiring how he did, advised his breakfasting in bed. This v оь. ш, в he
he did not chuse to do, alledging that he had had so good a night, he felt quite revived, and infinitely better; and when he joined Francis, he thought his looks were very much improved since they had parted ihe overnight; still his frequent fits of coughing did not lead him to suppose he was very long for this world. From Mrs. Hunter, who was never tired of sounding her master's praise, the old gentleman had learnt tbat our hero had declined joining a party of pleasure, that he might devote the whple day to him, 4vhjch had greatly flattered him; and after breakfast, having given orders to be de* u ied to all visitors, as he presumed his guest would wish to dedicate this day of rest to that purpose, Francis very adroitly led to the business which he presumed had induced Mr. Freeman to undertake so long a jiourney—relating how Mr. Corfe, ha4 ţ>een seized—how patiently he bad. borne his illness—what ,he had said in his last moments, ад4 bfe subsequent surprise when the
the will was opened. Mr. Freeman wished he might be equally composed when the awful summons came-^relating, iit his turn, the loss he had sustained by the death of his brother, adding—" Though it is folly tp repine, since I make no doubt but I shall soon follow him, as I shall find it very hard, after having lived so many years in affluence, to be reduced to a bare compe¬ tency." Francis's countenance denoted the ex¬ treme of surprise, while he exclaimed— (t Reduced to a bare competency, Sir ! surely I misunderstood your meaning, since I know Air. Corfe supposed you were much richer than himself." " I once,* nay very lately, certainly was so; but I can no longer boast of my pos¬ sessions. You wil!, therefore, oblige me very much if you can make it convenient to advance me the four thousand pounds which I understand my relation left me and my brother, to whpin of course I am heir, as he made ng will. But to account 15 2 for
for what 1 perceive has greatly amazed you, you must know that I in a great mea¬ sure attribute his death to the very severe loss .which we sustained about a week pre¬ vious to his being taken ill. You have probably heard of the ------ Bank having failed for a very considerable amount in February last." " I think I recollect the circumstance, Sir; but I am convinced that Mr. Corfe had no idea of your having been any suf¬ ferer owing to that event." " Why neither my brother nor myself ever felt inclined to make either our good or our bad fortune publicly known ; but one of the partners in that house, was our most intimate friend, and I am sorry to say he greatly deceived us in various instances, I hope hot absolutely wiiful, since he might flatter himself that matters would come round again, when he prevailed upon us to stretch our credit to the ut¬ most to serve his purpose; but it would be useless to detail the specious arguments that
that he made use of to induce us to act so imprudently—suffice it to say, that we be¬ came the dupes of his eloquence, and have paid very dear for our credulity. My bro¬ ther, poor soul! was even more deeply affected than I was, since we not only ad¬ vanced him all the ready money which we could command, but also entered into en¬ gagements that in a manner completed our ruin ; and as the creditors of the firm do not seem inclined to shew any one at all connected with the house any mercy, I may be under the necessity of selling off my estates to very great disadvantage." " Surely they cannot be such unfeeling wretches," rejoined Francis, '{ as to oblige you to part with any thing during your lifetime, as they must be sensible that you have been doing every thing in your power to support the credit of the house. I must hope you have viewed the matter in the worst light. Surely they will listen to some terms of accommodation." Mr. Freeman shook his head, saying, в 3 « You
** ŕ You have not lived rpıİte so Ιοηή in the world as ï hâve. Mr. Yatès, therefore tire far more sanguine in your expectations; however, my worthy relation's bequest will place nie above absolute wahr* though I do hope 1 shall be able to preserve at least 4i couple of hundreds a-VCAr from the wreck nf my fortune, which, ¿dried to the interest of the four thousand pounds, will enable ire to make a verV #ood shift." " You shall never be so reduced, Sir," hastily exclaimed Ot:f hero, t( though I never was more surprised. Why did not vou iet your cousin know what had occur- red at the time? He was one of the best οΐ men, and Would, I am fcure) have döne âli in his power to iserve you ; fet all events, he would certainly have made you his heir, and at тш ï should only have come in for a legacy similar to y our's. The four thousand pounds shall be paid over to you to-morrow; and in your place, as you have: neither children nör any near relations, I Would sink the principal ih a life*annuity, to
to which I will engage to add fi\e hundred a-year, as long as it pleases God to spare you." The poor old man, who had been atten¬ tively considering our hero during his ani¬ mated speech, actually burst into tears when he ceased speaking, and at last sighed out—" Then í have still a friend remain¬ ing, who will not suffer me to starve in my old age."—But having recovered some de¬ gree of composure, he put out his hand, vSaying*— " I wish your name was,Freeman; how proud I should have been of such a son ! yet to have left you in poverty would have broken my heart—it is there¬ fore better as it is." " I cannot agree with you, Sir," rejoined Francis ; " for though I have in many re¬ spects been one of Fortune's favourites, what might have been my fate, had it not been for the interposition of your bene¬ volent relation?—since I cannot claim a relationship to any one, and am in fact a sort of outcast, having had a name given a 4; me
me to which I may have no legal right, though I have been told it is the one my mother bore; be that as it may, I have still my doubts as to who really was my father; and that is a matter of little moment, as it is pretty evident that I am a natural child." ' f That does not take from your merit, my dear your friend," replied the agitated old man, who, having rather recovered his breath, added— ff You were kind enough to tell me what my poor cousin's last words were; will you be so obliging as to repeat them?" ' f He was kindly exhorting me to perse¬ vere in the mode of conduct which I had adopted upon my entrance into public life, and dwelling upon the various temptations to which I was likely to be exposed, when I felt the hand which held mine slacken its grasp; and he was only able to add—» ' My dear boy, Ì have—*, as the conclusion of the sentence was unintelligible, and his lifeless hand fell upon the bed." " I am
" î am perfectly satisfied," replied Mr. Freeman ; " it was both a melancholy and an affecting scene ; and he acted very right in making you his heir, though had he lived a few years longer, it might have been bet¬ ter for you, as you are very young to be entirely your own master; however, your conduct has hitherto been so exemplary, that I am tempted to believe Providence orders every thing for the best. I shall therefore accept your truly considerate of¬ fer, since I perceive I shall not, by so doing, deprive you of any essential comforts; but I do not feel inclined to follow your ad¬ vice respecting the four thousand pounds, as it would be extremely wrong at my time of life, and in such a precarious state of health, to sink the principal. I had much better dip into it in case of need—^but that is a matter for future consideration." ' f I would only have you consider, щу dear Sir, how you can render your latter days most comfortable; and you may be¬ lieve me when I declare, nay í call upon * 5 Ш у
my Maker to witness the assertion, that I nevefrfrk so happy es I do at this moment, in having had atı opportunity «ď proving my gratifudfe towards twy. benefactor, by со«й4Ь«*Й.£, in Шпе tdegree, to the cv?m- íort^of åTelatton of tiis; ami if ii is per- rñ^rled İrim t^ ktvöw what is going forward here bebw, I «m «ure ¿he ^ill »pplaud dæ tfse í mean tè make of his bounty—for though I only mentioned five hundred a- year, Ί ican ^ery well spar« double that sum, 'strouHyou really ч ant it; and I hope you Wrfl apply to me upon ай emergencies, with even more freedom than you would ïtave dorre to'the deceaíťed." *** *&¡ety word you utter increases my esteem for you, Шг. Yates ; and I am even 1 4cmpteé to rejeice J that vârf ousuntowiardcir- cifi^rfštánTeií -induced Ые once more to visit London^itKië I have positively fang wished ¿ó fôrnr^tt'ácqMairttanee'wifh «о general a fa^öurllë^s^you^rë with the publié— and Wëîdon, ; nfy «öliéiíor, ivrot^ trite that you 4were ^no ks^esteeiiied by your more intí¬ mate
mate friends—nor do I feel «ô anxious as í did yesterday to be upon the road home" " Then 1 hope you will favour me witb your company for as long as it euite your convenience/* was the reply. " To¬ morrow morning I will accompany yon to Mr. Weldon's, or to any other profes¬ sional gentleman whom you may prefer employing, to secure to you the annuity that you have obliged ttíe by accepting. The four thousand pounds is lying ready a* my banker'*; therefore your receipt will be sufficient to enable me to pay that over to you immediately, and I would have transmitted it within a week after Mr. Corfe's death, bad I known howmneh you stood in need of it." " You are very obliging, my dear young friend; but, as 1 have already told yon, yo» bave not lived quite so long in the world as I have, consequently you tire not quite so accurate a jodge of mankind in general as İ oughi to be^-and your excel¬ lent beert, atti tbe gratitude yo» feel to- B 6 wards
wards my deceased cousin, would induce you not only to embarrass, but even to ruin yourself, were I inclined to take ad¬ vantage of your generosity. God forbid I should ever be so base, since my having been a dupe myself would be no excuse for my endeavouring to render you mine; and I wish to leave this world with a clear conscience. When I am no more, many people will probably sit in judgment upon me. Indeed I am aware that my brother and I have always been deemed great od¬ dities, because we chose to live for our¬ selves, and not for the world; and admit¬ ting that we did not do all the good we might have done when we had the means so to do, there are many richer people than we ever were who have done less, and many more who have done a great deal of harm, owing to their having more money than they knew what to do with, or to make a proper use of. When young, we* were perhaps more generous than we have been of late years—no uncommon thing. My
My brother was upon the point of mar¬ riage soon after he entered his twenty-fifth year, to a lady by no means his equal in point of fortune, who happened rather prematurely to tell one of her friends that she merely married for the sake of having a comfortable home, and in the hope of governing a poor weak-brained young fel¬ low, who had not the spirit to spend his money, which she proposed scattering pro bono publico. This and similar speeches having been repeated by her welt-wishers to the weak-brained admirer, he made a rash vow never to place his happiness in a woman's keeping ; and I adopted the same resolution. He therefore lett his house, and took up his abode with me, with whom he resided till he died ; and I need not add that there is very little chance of my mar¬ rying now. I merely entered into these details to account for our having remained bachelors, which may not have given you a very favourable opinion of our disposi¬ tions and pursuits; and I now wish to stand
stand higher in your esteem than in that of any other person living, that you may not repent having rescued me from a state of poverty, and all its concomitant evils. But I do not chuse to tie you down by any deeds or writings, as I am resolved to rely upon your bare Word for the fulfilment of all your promises. I require no better «ecuri ty than the avowed excellence of your heart and principles. I have besides other reasons why I cannot allow you to «settle the uve hundred а -year *«pon me through the medium of any lawyer, since /such deeds, tö render them valid, must be ¿registered; and were «the bankers* assignees to be made acquainted with your gene¬ rosity towards me, they might be less in¬ clined to favour me^nay, were they to know that I was intit led to the four thou- «and pounds which my-cousin left me, they might endeavour to lay an embargo upon it; therefore, upon second thoughts, 1 uhall £et you ttø place it tn *he stocks for me iti your »name, 4İ11 1 have come to some sort of
-of settlement with them. í must also re¬ quest that you would consider ali I have been telling you as confidential Communi¬ cations, and that you would not mention your kind intentions in my fhvour even to vour most intimate friends." Our hero assured him in return that he might rely upon his secrecy. Indeed the caution was unnecessary, since no one would have been less inclined to boast of what be deemed а very natural action. Thk matter being however settled, per¬ fectly to the old gentleman's satisfaction, he told Franc» that be bad not yet seen Mr. Weldon, his solicitor, but proposed waiting upon him the following morning, as he wished bim to attend on his behalf (\t a meeting ofthe creditors of the— Bank, which he understood was to take place in London in the course of а few days. Frtm- tcis hoped he Would not think of returning home till this unpleasant business ^was Ht least in a train to be settled* as much to bis 'satisfaction as circumstances wotild admit. « Your
f< Your kind reception of me, and being so agreeably situated, will not induce me to hasten my departure," was the reply ; and having dined tête-à-tête, our hero pro¬ posed a short drive in the environs to his guest, observing, that London was daily, nay hourly, improving. Mr. Freeman readily agreed to his pro¬ posal, and was very much pleased with his airing. The following morning, as Francis was more anxious than ever to render every thing comfortable to his guest, he insisted upon his making use of his carriage to convey him to Ely-place, setting out him¬ self en foot for Brompton. Not wishing, however, to extend his walk unnecessarily, when he reached Pimlico, he took the pri¬ vate road leading to the upper end of Sloane-street, and was proceeding towards Knightsbridge, when he perceived three females in earnest discpurse before him. The figures of two appeared familiar to him, as he continued to follow them ; and as they moved very slowly, he soon came within
within hearing, and was confirmed in his first conjectures, since he overheard Mrs b Wheeler, who was addressing a lady that was walking between her and Caroline, say — ff Oh, my dear, I was obliged, in a man¬ ner, to forbid him my house, he grew so proud and saucy ; and indeed, had he come of honest parents, and that we could have made up our minds to the match, Cary must have been miserable, had she married him, since, though he does keep his car¬ riage, what comfort would that have been to her ? He will always be making use of it ; and supposing his voice was to fail him, what would become of them then ? for 'tis very hard to be reduced, after living in a style ------" " You are very right, my dear Madam," was the reply ; " therefore, indeed my dear Caroline, I think it w T as rather a fortunate circumstance that your mother was not so much prejudiced in this young man's fa¬ vour as you seem to have been, since the lowness, not to say the disgrace, of his birth would
would have rendered him a very improper match for you." At this moment, as Franciscould no lon¬ ger with any propriety loiter in the rear, he Walked forward, looking the trio of fe¬ males full in the face as he passed, which Induced them to make a sudden halt, ex¬ pressive of surprise not unmixed with dis¬ may, and Caroline even exclaimed— " Oh Iti!" He bowed, and mended his pace, though he fully participated in their surprise, if not in their dismay, upon recognizing Air. George Haslemere's Mrs. Smith in the com¬ panion of Mrs. and Miss Wheeler, and who did not appear to be the least disconcerted of the party, as she had of course particu¬ larly arrested his attention. Miss Atwood (for it was no other) veiled her own con¬ fusion, by affecting to participate in her companion's feeling, inquiring—" What is the matter, my dear Miss Wheeler? Your sudden start and change of colour quite alarmed me, Who was that rude being who
ΛνΗο Stared you sô uiuttercifully out of countenance?" " The very persoti we were talking about, as 1 am alive," cried the old woman, as Ca¬ roline was absolutely unable tö speak for a minute or mofé ; indeed they were obliged to have recourse to «alts to keep her from fainting. " So that whs Mr. YnteV' resumed Aiiss Atwood; " well, I am sure I should not have known him, though I have seen him more than once upon the stage; but he does not look near so well off it, in my opinion: you must endeavour to meet him with indifférence, my dear Caroline, since it appears to me he delights in flurry¬ ing you, and I would not let any man sup¬ pose that he had such powei* over me." " I am always preaching to the same ef¬ fect, my dear Miss Atwood," resumed the old woman ; " though I vow I am templed to believe the impudent fellow watches all our movements. I thought we could have walked upon this nice pavement free from interruption,
interruption, else I would not have ven¬ tured hither—for this meeting has done Cary more harm than the air of Knights¬ bridge has done her good ; but please God we will take some other road in future. I cannot think where the fellow goes every day past our house ; however, I will watch him in my turn, but I will discover." Aiiss Atwood thought it very possible he kept a mistress somewhere out there. Both mother and daughter agreed that was very likely—some trollop, no doubt, whom he dare not bring home ; but having reached their lodgings, they resolved to watch for his return. Our hero had not been less puzzled to account for his having found his immücidate aunt and chaste cousin in such company, the old woman having frequently said in his hearing, that all good-for-nothing sluts who intrigued with men folk ought to be burnt—of course she would have doomed his mother, he conceived, to the flames, as a slight penance for her error; but then how
how came she to associate with one of these said sluts? when it instantly occurred to him that she had once- more become a madame commode to Air. George Hasle¬ mere. She was evidently in many of his secrets; and if the former scandalous re¬ ports were true, it was not more surpris¬ ing her associating with Mrs. Smith, than her having brought him up as the son of her brother, after doubtless conniving at Air. Haslemere's connection with his mo¬ ther. Possibly Airs. Smith was, in the fa¬ mily way—so her admirer had taken a house at Knightsbridge for her, in which he pre¬ sumed Mrs. Wheeler presided. Caroline's ill health afforded her an excellent excuse for her removal from home, and John Wheeler was possibly to father this child, except indeed Mr. Haslemere had interest enough to get it received into the Found¬ ling. Not being, however, so fond of pro¬ pagating scandal as his aunt had always been, he resolved not to mention the re¬ cent discovery even to Kempthgnie, as he did
did not feel himself authorised to repoit as facts what was founded upon mere con¬ jecture, since all he could affîrm was that he had seen Airs. Smith in 81oane^street, with the Mesdames Wheeler. Having reached Bayfield-house, while making these refìeciions, υροη his being ushered into the music-room, the Countess inquired how he came ? observing that he looked warm. " líe had walked," he said, ff having lent hjs carriage to an invalid friend." (t That was being very kind, but he ought to be careful not to overheat him¬ self such warm weather, as a sore throat might to him be attendai with very serious consequences; iii the autumn the walk from bis lıotiüö; would be merely pleasant exercise/' insisting upon his drinking a tumbler of wine and water, to wash down the dust he must have inhaled. Though very much flattened in one sense, oür hero was very пщсМ tempted to lang h at her 1#4уьЫр'§ seçmiílg tç thjuk w lia f he had
íl
had íoxind merely pleasant exercise was a very great exertion, as he dreaded giving way to indolence, which he thought was rauch more likely to prove hurtful to him than walking from Marsham-street to Brompton even in July; but having con¬ cluded his task very much to her Lady-* ships satisfaction, she asked hi in whether he was going to his other scholars that morning? (< He should only in future attend her Ladyship, three times a-weck—on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays. Had her Lady¬ ship any commands for him ad interim ?" " I shall merely detain you, Air. Yates, while my barouche is getting ready, as I shall not suffer vou to return on foot. We ane all interested in the prcservaiion of your health." Frauds felt a stilj greater inclination to laugh, though he did not even venture to smile, but wished to have declined her very polite offer. She wøuM Aiot, however, listen to any thing he had to say, ,and his innate
innate politeness taught him to appear re¬ signed to her will ; in consequence, he took his seat in a very elegant barouche, behind which one of her Ladyship's foot¬ men was exalted, and was thus driven past Mrs. Wheeler's abode, who, he presumed, would be as much surprised at seeing him in such an equipage, as he had been when he found her in company with Air. Hasle¬ mere's chère amie; but that circumstance he thought he had perfectly accounted for. As he had expected, Afrs. and Aiiss Wheeler and Miss Atwood were all upon the look¬ out for him, though they did not wish to be seen, nor would they have known him, had not the coachman taken that side of the way, and had not he been looking at the house from the moment he had it in sight, having resolved to convince them that he knew where they lodged, leaving them to guess what other discoveries he had made. Aiiss Atwood, having some trifling know¬ ledge of heraldry, when they all agreed that
that the barouche was not his chariot, ob¬ served, that there was a coronet upon this one over a widow's lozenge ; some lady of fashion, she presumed, had taken him into keeping. " Why, now T you talk of it," said the old woman, " I have heard of such wicked doings/' <c Oh it is very common," was the reply; (c at least so I have been told by Mis'? Sowerby, who was, to be sure, very fond of scandal, since God forbid I should ever have been in company with any such crea¬ tures, who must indeed be lost to all sense of shame." lf God forbid, indeed, my dear Miss At¬ wood ; but your mind is as pure and as beautiful as your person," rejoined the old woman, drawing up her head in token of self-approbation at having made her com¬ panion so fine a compliment, adding— f ' but you are the very model of my dear Miss Haslemere, who was, to Ье sure, an angel upon earth ; she was Cary's god- \ol. in. с mother.
mother, and she loved me as well as if she фаД been my own daughter—however, it pleased God to tako her—I can never talk of her without feeling sorrow fu J," and for once the old woman did display some to¬ kens of sensibility. ** Come, let lis change the subject/' cried Miss Atwood ; " I cannot bear to see you melancholy. Whicb do you think is the most to blame, the woman or the man, when the latter is kept by the former?" (t The шап, to be sure," whimpered out Caroline ; tc aud I would not have such a one if his skin was stuffed with gold." " I commend your spirit, child," cried bcr^nother: " aye, you will soon cease to thittfc of the worthless fellow, who will corøe to nothing before he dies, take my ViQfà for it." " I «Jare say he will soon run through 4us prient fortune," said Miss Atwood ; * ( actors and singers are proverbially ex¬ travagant/' Mm Wheeler was by no means inclined to
to except her nephew from this general censure, and Airs. Bever made a very co¬ pious addition to her strictures. In the evening, John as usual made his appearance ; and having been made ac¬ quainted with their morning's adventures, he made no doubt of the fellow beine: in keeping by some old woman, prognosti¬ cating that his would be a short life and a merry one, never failing to pay the most diligent court to his fair enslaver, to whom his mother grew daily more attached, as she wcs more than ever confirmed in her opi¬ nion of her riches; and she told her son that he ought to propose taking hcF to some public place, as he must not mind a few shillings, nor even a few pounds, when thousands were depending. John, who was bonafide in love, only wi«sjied he knew where she would like to go, as he should not mind spending a guinea upon such an occasion; and this his mother pro¬ mised to find out, since nothing should be spared to conciliate her favour. c S CHAP,
CHAP. II. Frakcis drove up to his own door about half an hour after Mr. Freeman had return¬ ed from Ely-place, who was looking out for him ; and being a greater proficient in heraldry than Aiiss Atwood, he said with a smile, when he came in— ff Though I de¬ prived you of your own carriage, I per¬ ceive a lady of some consequence has taken compassion on you this warm day. Pray where does the Countess of Bayfield re¬ side ? I thought all the fine folks had been in the country at this season." Francis explained how he came to be upon such intimate terms with her Lady¬ ship,
ship, adding—" I was not permitted to put a negative upon her polite offer, and I know she would have felt herself offended had I alighted before I reached home, though I did not relish the idea of driv ing up to my own door in so elegant an equi¬ page." " You are not fond of exciting curiosity, I perceive; but I am happy to inform you that Weldon has some hopes οΐ accommo¬ dating matters rather more to my satisfac¬ tion than I had expected. He wishes me to remain in town for a short time, as my presence may be required when the final settlement takes place ; meanwhile I shall be his frequent visitor, as there are many things to arrange, and my head is not so, well calculated for business as it was for¬ merly." Francis asked no questions, not wishing to appear curious, merely requesting he would always make use of his carriage whenever he wished to go out upon busi¬ ness or pleasure; and observing, in answer c3 to
to his expressed hopes of there being a favourable termination to the business which had brought him to town, that pos¬ sibly the four thousand pounds now lying at his banker's, had better be paid into Mr. Weldon's hands, since a little ready money was sometimes of use in such cases. " By no means, by no means; Weldon agrees with me that it would be extremely proper you should place it in the Batik In your name, as we had settled." " At all events, suffer it to be placed in the joint names of Mr. Weldon and me. Sir, I may die. J * ** I will run the risk of that, Mr. Yates; therefore pray oblige me." " I shall certainly conform to your wishes; and since Mr. Weldon is privy to the transaction, I trust that every difficulty would be obviated, were I to break my neck, or to meet with any other misfor¬ tune before your affairs were settled; and $urely if you are in want of money, you wiU
will not scruple to draw upon me very freelv." te I shall take you at your word. Before I return home, we will settle all our pecu¬ niary business. At present I have no need for superfluous cash, since I am boarded and lodged at free cost/' A summons to dinner broke ift uport their discourse ; and though the feeble old man could not eat more than sonie chil¬ dren of six months old would have dotte, he was very fond of a glass of good wine, and his host treated him with some that Mr. Corfe had had in reserve, to produce ίο his best friends, for many years, and which quite revived the invalid, Who pro¬ tested he thought he Was growing young again ; and while he was running on, being in a very gay humour, there was a double knock at the street-door. <{ You will have no objection, I hope, my dear Sir, to two intimate friends of mine joining our party; but if you have the slightest, I will receive them in ano- c 4 ther
32 THERE IS A SECRET, ther room, and dismiss them as soon as possible." iC You shall receive them here, if you please. I am fond of company, and shall like to be introduced to any friend of yours." " You are very kind, I have but few visi¬ tors, and those chiefly men of my own age." <e They will be the most likely to amuse me," was the reply; when Mr, Moreton and Mrs, Jones were announced, and shewn in, instead of Kempthorne and Kalkreuth, whom our hero had expected to have seen. Mr. Freeman smiled, as these visitors were certainly rather older than his host, Mr. Moreton being the very counterpart of himself, in respect to age, size, and figure, though he enjoyed a much better state of health. Francis introduced them to Mr. Free¬ man as a near relation of his deceased friend's, who had done him the honour to take up his abode with him for a short time, telling that gentleman that they ranked
ranked among his most intimate friends. Mr. Freeman said, he had been politely compelled to become a,very troublesome guest, paying his host some very flattering compliments, in which he was ably second¬ ed by Airs. Jones, who then said, that Mr. Moreton having dropped in rather unex¬ pectedly, as she had not been able to pre¬ vail upon him to drink his tea with her, much less to promise to accompany her to the altar, she had insisted upon accompany¬ ing bim into Marsham-street. Francis de¬ clared that he felt himself greatly obliged to them both. They were, however, scarcely seated, ere Kempthorne and Kalkreuth joined the party, and were equally introduced to Mr. Freeman, whom they were very happy to see appeared to bc upon excellent terms with îhtîr friend. Having heard that both him and his brother, who Francis, had told them was no rnorc, were very great oddi¬ ties., this one appeared, however, to wish tu render himself agreeable, as he soon en- с Γι tered
tered into chat with Mr. Moretón, whom he said strongly reminded him of his de* ceased brother, while Mrs. Jones rattled away as usual, wishing to enliven the party; and having discovered, as the old gentle¬ men were comparing notes, that she was a few months older than either of them, she prohibited all croaking for at least twenty years to come. Kalkreuth was quite in his clement, and the very pink of politeness, she declared; and as every one present were anxious to contribute to the amuse¬ ment of the others, they were soon ex¬ tremely gay, reserve and ceremony having been soon banished, as they wished to be in the fashion, said Kalkreuth, following \ip his remark by an excellent song, meant as a critique upon the present manners, which amused Mr. Freeman so much, that he laughed till one of his fits of coughing seized him, which induced him to tell the German, that he certainly wished to make him croak before the prescribed period. His song led, however, as he had expected, 4 to
to a request from every one present to be equally favoured by our hero, who readily agreed to oblige them, merely inquirinf whether they were fond of the gay or the grave style ? " Give us that charming ballad you treated us with on уоги* benefit night," said Kempthorne; and Kalkreuth, produc¬ ing his hautboy, prepared to accompany him. tc Let us adjourn to the music-room," said Francis, " as I wish to do my best; and that apartment is more favourable to the voice than this parlour." Thither, therefore, they proceeded, when our hero, as he had promised, exerted all his powers for their amusement; and most eminently did he succeed, аз those who had heard him before declared he seemed improved since that time; and Mr. Free¬ man protested he never had heard singing in any degree of perfection before, and never supposed he shoulď again when he leñ Aíarsham-street —nay, even were he to c Q heat
hear his young friend in public, he should not enjoy his almost divine melody as he had now done—yet it would be almost a sacrilege to deprive the public of such wonderful natural and acquired vocal powers, though he could have wished Mr. Yates had never gone upon the stage. Mi\ Moretón conceived there was nothing: dis- honourable in the profession, and Mr. Yates might ennoble, but would never bring any stigma upon it. The appearance of tea and coffee put an end to the debate, Mrs. Jones merely ob¬ serving, that as there was much profit, and but little fatigue attending his present line of life, she should advise Mr. Yates to con¬ tinue to amuse the public. Kempthorne spoke rather to the same effect, adding— f< Mr. Haslemere, senior, was once of your way of thinking, Mr, Freeman, but he now conceives the excellent example of my friend may prove of material benefit to the rising generation of public perform¬ ers." Kalkreuth
Kaikreuth was silent upon the subject; and soon after tea, Mr. Moretón said he must be going. Our hero insisted upon his stopping supper. iC Are vou aware," said Mrs. Jones, " that if he does he will run the risk of being robbed and murdered ? and then what will become of me ? Like poor Caroline Whee¬ ler, I shall be obliged to go into the coun¬ try for the benefit of the air." cť Surely you do not conceive there can be any danger to bc apprehended between here and St. James's-street, at any hour?" resumed Francis. i( You have now convinced me, Mr. Yates," rejoined Mr. Moretón, " that you have not been in St. James's-street for the last ten days, else you would have heard that I have gone into country lodgings, which I did about a w T eek ago; therefore Mrs. Jones's fears for my safety are not absolutely chimerical." Francis was obliged to plead guilty to the charge brought against him, requesting ' to
to know where he should now have an op¬ portunity of paying his respects to him? " You will always be a welcome guest in either town or country; but as I am still within the sound of St. Paul's, if not of Bow bell, will you and all the company present, do me the favour of dining with me on Thursday next?" ** Being the oldest, and the only female in company, I suppose I am required to speak first; therefore I readily accept your invitation, if any one present will accom¬ pany me to your abode, though I don't yet know whither you have removed." (C To no great distance from town, I gave you to understand, my dear Madam ; in¬ deed I am too fond of sowing gapeseed to have admitted of my going far into the country. I chose my present town resi¬ dence for the sake of what there was to be seen from my windows; and I resolved, if I did remove, not to pitch my tent where 1 should run the risk of dying of etmuL Hampstead and Highgate had been recom¬ mended
mended to me ; but I know the air of both would have proved too keen for me, and that I should have found them very dull—- they were besides too far from town—bift having resolved to remove to a more ele¬ vated situation, though not to ascend Hampstead or Highgate Hill, I thought I would look out for a lodging in Islington, where an old friend of mine, a physician, resided for many years before he died, as he maintained that he breathed the purest air there he could have done in the neigh¬ bourhood of the metropolis; and as I had a very high opinion of his judgment in such matters, í resolved to pitch my tent irt or near that village, at least during the dog-days—and in consequence, I drove to the turnpike in St. John's-street-road, where I alighted, meaning to reconnoitre. As I was advancing towards Sadler's Wells, I was much struck with a very neat row of houses, facing the road, a great recom¬ mendation to a man of my turn of mind ; and seeing a bill in the window of one of them,
them, I walked in. The first floor, which was to lev, was very handsomely furnished ; and as the lady was reasonable in her de¬ mands, I set myself down to reconnoitre from my usual station—the window, from whence the prospect was very difïêrent from what ! enjoyed in St. James's-street, since, instead of seeing elegant carriages driving backward and forward, with ser¬ vants in flaming liveries, officers upon guard, and other smart bucks, lounging up and down the pavement, staring at well- dressed female pedestrians, through their eye-glasses, I now saw a variety of tax- carts, shabby one-horse chaises, and hack¬ ney-coaches, roaring by, all filled with blackguards going to a fight, the landlady told me, in Islington-fields, and such ele¬ gant processions frequently passed her door, she was grieved to say, as there was generally a pitched battle at least once in a week, somewhere in the environs; and in addition to those carriages^ were stage¬ coaches innumerable, coming in and going out
out to all parts of the North, besides Is¬ lington, Pentonville, Hampstead, Highgate, Hornsey, &c. &c. coaches in abundance, the progress of which was every now and then impeded by a broad-wheeled waggon, a dung-cart, or a drove of oxen or sheep, going or returning from Smithfield, and in the fields opposite, vast numbers of those animals were grazing. I therefore thought I should enjoy every advantage of the coun¬ try, and yet be in all the bustle of town, as I also enjoyed a very good side-view of Sadler's Wells, and every carriage that went there must of course pass the door. Con¬ vinced, therefore, that I should have plenty of amusement, which would have the addi¬ tional zest of novelty to recommend it, I told the good lady that if she could accom¬ modate my old woman, I would engage her lodgings for the ensuing two months. She readily acceded to my proposals, and I entered into a conditional agreement, not chusing to close the bargain till Elliot had seen whether she approved of the accom¬ modations
modations she would meet with ; therefore when í returned home, í sent her to settle thé business—and as she liked the kitchen and the sleeping-room allotted hér, she gave earnest, and the following day we took possesion, and are now very com* fortably settled at No.------ in ------ Row, where I shall be extremely happy to see all thè present company to dinner, on Thurs¬ day next, though I merely promise bache* lor's fare ; but as Elliot says she can dress a plain joint, and as there is a baker near for her pie and pudding, I can promisé you a plain dinner and a hearty wel¬ come." ** That will prove excellent sauce/' re¬ joined Mrs. Jones; " so for one I promise to come." The rest of the party readily followed her example, Mr. Freeman adding—" About thirty years ago, I was once at Sadler's Wells, which was at that time a place of great resort ; so what say you, good folks, to our concluding our evening there, that I may
I may have something to talk of when I returh hoine ?" u With all my heart," cried Mrs. Jones; ' r I never mind where 1 go in good com¬ pany, though î must own, when last í was at the Wells, which was about sixteen years ago, 1 was not fftuch amused/' Mr. Moreton was convinced she would not have a similar reason for complaint this time, as thé Welk were Very much improved since it hád become ân aquatic theatre, as he, having been tempted, front its vicinity, to go the second night after bis removal into thé country, had been so well entertained, that he had already beett there again, and should ëtïjöy visiting it a third time, as the scenery was magnificent, and the introduction of the water very well managed. He therefore proposed securing places in a front box for the party on that evening. He was requested to d ^ so, and it was settled that they should dine at four o'clock, as Francis could not make it convenient to
be there sooner ; but this was of the less consequence, as they need not move before seven, the first dance being the least worth seeing; and in consequence of this matter being settled entirely to Air. Moreton's satisfaction, he agreed to stop supper, Air. Kempthorne promising to see him safe home. They therefore spent a most agreeable evening; and after supper, Airs. Jones petitioned our hero for another short song, which she knew would occasion her a good night's rest, and pleasing dreams. He in¬ stantly complied with her request, singing, with exquisite taste, the old but pleasing ballad of ¡Xullaby—" Peaceful slumbering on the ocean," Nothing could have been more apropos, they all agreed, when their applause ceased ; and as it grew late, they talked of separating, and Francis's servant was dispatched for a hackney-coach, Air. Aioreton declaring he would set Mrs. Jones down, and then if Mr. Kempthorne would ride home with him, he should feel himself greatly
greatly obliged, secretly resolving to pay the coachman to take him back into Austin Friars. Kalkreuth, who was always all whim, wit, and eccentricity, declared he would also be his escort, as he should enjoy the walk home. Now it so happened, that on this very evening John Wheeler having supped at Knightsbridge, reached his own door soon after the clock had struck eleven. The watchman had gone his rounds; and he had just raised the knocker, when he heard the sound of music. Letting it down again, therefore, very softly, the moment he discovered from whence the sound pro¬ ceeded, he approached his neighbour's win¬ dow, and heard the concluding verse οΐ the Lullaby, and the applause that followed ; and as he could now and then catch a word, and was able to distinguish the voice of Mrs. Jones and Kempthorne, he placed his ear almost close to the parlour window, under which he stood, and was so earnestly engaged
engaged in listening ţp wtøat wqs passing within, that he paid no attention to the sound of footsteps without ; and we must acknowledge, that those who surprised him thus giving way to the meanest of »U pro¬ pensities, had advanced with great prec&u- tion* and had seized him by the collar, be¬ fore he was at all aware of their vicinity; the sensation they occasioned him was therefore of the most unpleasant nature. u Who are you ?" they cried, being two of the guardians pf the night, who patrole the streets, but who have no particular sta¬ tion, therefore are far more useful than the watchmen ; and as they held a cudgel or bludgeon nearly j,n contact with Ιφ ideaci, and were besides armed with cutlasses, their appearance and sudden sa-lute might have startled a more courageous main than John Wheeler, w b ho was at last, though with evi¬ dent inarms of perturbions able to ask, what they wanted with tøj-in? yuisiakbg thejTA for sjtreeNrokbers. In this aspect he was,
was, however, soon undeceived ; and feel¬ ing his courage revjve, he requested tfcey would set Kim at liberty. The one who still held him fast replied — f( Not before you give an account of yourself. Pray what was you doing under that window ? We have been watching you for some time, and have reason to suppose you were planning how to break into the house." " What! do you take me for a thief?" replied John, in a half whisper, fearful those within might overhear the debate. " Take you for a thief! Why should we not, pray ? Surely we ought to take any man for a thief, whom we find, as we have done you, lurking about people's houses ; for any thing we know tp the contrary, you were endeavouring to fereak in ; at all events, we sjudi secure you as a suspicions character." " Search him," cried the companion; " he may have fire-arms about him* or im¬ plements for house-brea^iug." John,
John, affecting great bravery, asked them if he looked like a house-breaker? tc If you allude to your dress, that is all against you, since thieves of every deno- minatif.n are well dressed now T -a-days—so please to come along." The other also seized him, desiring him not to make a n obe to alarm the neigh¬ bours, who were all in bed, beginning to drag him along towards the watch-house. John was infinitely more afraid of cre¬ ating a bustle than they were, since he would not, upon any account, have had the party assembled at our hero's have known why he was thus roughly handled, though an appeal to them might have pro¬ cured him his liberty. lie therefore suf¬ fered himself to be dragged to some dis¬ tance before he ventured to remonstrate, when he informed his companions that he resided in the street, and was only listening to a song. Mr. Yates, the famous singer, resided where they had seized him. il That might be ; but neither he nor any
•ny one else was singing when they seized him ; therefore that excuse was merely a fetch to get away; so to the watch-house he should go, and there he must give a full and true account of himself, since the atti¬ tude in which they had found him war¬ ranted them in detaining him." John's avarice would not suffer him to understand the real meaning of the mer¬ cenary beings into whose power he had fallen, else a few shillings would have pro¬ cured him his liberty, as they were well aware that he was not one of those whom they are employed to look after; butas he did not chuse to make use of the only ar¬ gument which would have convinced them of the truth of his assertions, they obliged him to accomnanv them to the watch- house, where thev delivered him into the charge of the constable of the night, to whom he repeated what he had told the rner., w*ho was verv sorrv that he could not release him upou his bare word; he rhust give them a reference, and find bail for his vol. ni. о appear-
appearance in the morning, or he muăi lock him up till he could be taken before a magistrate. John's natural bad temper rendered him nearly furious; but his ravings did not procure him any redress; he was in these men's power, and they were resolved not to let him go—still he could not bear the idea of spending the night in the watch- house, and he was equally averse to declar¬ ing his name, as that might lend to many unpleasant discoveries ; but finding he had no alternative, and having no friend to whom he could apply to extricate him from this dilemma, knowing besides that he must declare who he was in the morn¬ ing, he very reluctantly told his name, adding, that he resided next door to Mr. Yates, and was merely listening to a song. None of those present doubted the truth of his assertions, and he might have been immediately released, had he chosen to put his hand in his pocket. This he was given to understand by the constable, in polite covered
covered terms, but he did not feel inclined to pay for being thus dragged about against his will. It was not besides in his princi* ples to part with money, except upon some very great emergency. At last, therefore, one of the men went to inquire whether he had told them truth, leaving him in confinement; as for his father's being·* in bed, and too lame to move, that was of no consequence, as he could go to him— walking off, resolving to frighten the old* man out of a little hush-money; and as he happened to reach Aíarsham-street just as the party at Francis's were preparing to depart, the coach having been sonie time in waiting, out of pure spite we must sup¬ pose, the fellow inquired of our hero, who had come out with his guests, whether he knew such a person as Aír. John Wheeler? relating where they had found him, how they had secured him, supposing him to be a housebreaker, and what he had alleged in his defence. The three young men laughed so henr¬ ii 2 ti ly,
ttly, Mrs. Jones and Mr. Moretón joining in their mirth, that for some time they were unable to give the man, who was also very much diverted, an answer. At last, how¬ ever, Yates told him that he might very safely release their prisoner, commending his diligence in apprehending him, and giving him half-a-crown to drink, which amply repaid the man for the mirth he had occasioned them, as the party were obliged to return into the house to have their laugh out before they departed, Mrs. Jones vow¬ ing she would have given five shillings to have seen John's seizure, who had paid for listening this time, she observed ; and most amply was our hero revenged, when the roan told the paltry being that he had ap¬ plied to Mr. Yates himself to have the truth of his tale confirmed, not wishing to dis¬ turb his lame father, since John was all but raving. . Being, however, at last set at liberty, he resolved not to mention the circumstance to any of his family, as they would only abuse
abuse him for having acted so foolishly,; he therefore took no notice to his father during breakfast; and though he fancied he discerned an ironical smile playing round Kempthorne's mouth, when they met in the counting-house, he resolved not to take any notice, except his new master questioned him respecting the adventure, and then to put a good face upon the mat¬ ter, and to tell a very ditferent tale to the one that gentleman had already heard; but Kempthorne appeared in so good a hu¬ mour, and as he never alluded, even in the most distant manner, to the overnight's adventure, John presumed he had left Aíarsham-street before the man made his inquiry, or had not comprehended what the fellow said ; and as if to make him amends for his recent mortification, one of the under clerks, who was intimate with Air. D ------, of Sadler's Wells, having re¬ ceived a box-order of admission for two people for the ensuing Thursday night from that gentleman, being prevented from n 3 going
geting by another unforeseen engagement, to which he gave the preference, he made an offer of the order to John, who had once or twice given him" some assistance at his books. It may be supposed that it was thankfully received, having had it for some days in contemplation to take Miss At¬ wood to some public place, and this order would prove a great saving to him, though he reared he must take his mo¬ ther and Caroline also, and the old lady would not put her hand in her pocket, at this time, when she was endeavouring to secure him so advantageous a match; and by way of introducing his fair mistress to one of their most respectable friends, the old lady hád desired him to call upon Mr. Moretón, and invite him to spend his first leisure day with them at Knightsbridge, knowing that he was partial to a country jaunt at this season of the year; and he need not be told, she observed, that they had only taken a bed-room, since they could always command Mrs. Bcver's par¬ lour,
iour, and be would certainly in return in¬ vite them all to dine in Sŕ. Je mes Vst reet, from whence they might proceed to the Hay- market theatre. Now, though John hoped the taking Miss Atwood to Sadler's Welk would excuse him from taking her to the Haymarket, he nevertheless resolved to call Upon Mr. Moretón in hb way to Knights¬ bridge that evening, by which means he learnt his removal to Islington. He was rather chagrined, till he recollected that the old gentleman could visit them from thence, and that he might equally invite them in turn ; but having, in consequence of not finding Mr. Moreton at home, reached Knightsbridge sooner than; usual, he found Caroline alone. Having been a very long walk in the morning, her mother and Miss Atwood, who were merely gone into the neighbourhood to make sòme pur¬ chases, had recommended her remaining at home; she was sure, however, that they would soon return. John, of course, took d 4 a seat,
a seat, since, his love for Miss Atwood apart, he greatly preferred supping with his mother to eating bread and cheese, or at most cold meat, with his father, lie therefore told Caroline of the order which had been given him, and she declared she should prefer going to Sadler's Wells far before going to the little theatre, and made no doubt but Miss Atwood would do the same ; declaring it would be his own fault if she did not bear the name of Wheeler before three months were at an end—sigh¬ ing deeply as she concluded, fearing, we must suppose, that she would never change her name. John, who never failed to display his airs and bad temper, wherever he could take liberties, swore a violent oath, upbraiding her with still pining after that squalling fellow Yates, though there were so many reasons why she ought even to dislike him, adding—" And no one but an ideot like yourself would think of marrying an out¬ cast,
cast, a fellow without a name. Why, z : —ds and d — mn it, a marriage with a bastard like him might not stand good." " Afy mother must have been the best judge of that," resumed Caroline, " and she would not have encouraged me to think of him, had it been improper; buf I nei¬ ther expect nor wish to marry him." Caroline's argument was not to be refu- ted, John felt, who replied— ce True, I did not think of that; but, Cary, can you at all «uess who he really k? for there is a mystery, lam well convinced, hangs over him, and I vow I do not think he is our uncle's bastard after all." " Nor L John; I am more inclined to believe, for all what mother says, that he is a bastard Haslemere ; and 1 do say, 'tis very provoking to be kept in the dark as we have been." " There vou are riüht. Carv ; it shews a ml CJ - r ti great want of confidence in us." Caroline spoke to the same eifert, and they were resolving to put the question D Г» very
very borne to their mother, when she and Miss Atwood returned home. The former only, however, came into the parlour to them, observing, she thought she should find John there, inquiring what was the eubject of their discourse when she entered, as they were both talking very* loud, and both together. ** We were complaining of your want of Confidence in your children, mother," said John. f( And pray how have I deserved such a reproach, Master John ?" " Why for never having told us who Francis Yates really is." " Pray what megrims have entered your silly head, John?" " You may throw me off as far as you please, inother, as you have often done be¬ fore; but I am sure there is a secret be¬ tween you and the young squire respect¬ ing Francis, and ------" ** Now hold your nonsense, boy; how¬ ever, to end all debates respecting Frank Yates
Yates— There is a Secret ! Fbıâ U out!»— and so saying she turned upon her heel, and soon returned with Miss Atwood. John, who had been nearly as much pro¬ voked as his mother had felt herself, wished she had not been in such haste to introduce his mistress^ as he wished to have consulted her respecting their going to Sadler's Wells, and he did contrive to start the subject. Miss Atwood had not been there since her sister left England (whose visit, by the bye, she had returned, she had told Mrs. Whee¬ ler), but she had heard it had been verv much improved of late. John had been told the same; therefore proposed their making a party to go there, that they might judge for themselves, giving his mother a significant look, who declared she gave him credit for the thought, adding, looking at Miss Atwood— " We will make him stand treat, my deaT." John affected to feel hurt at her having thought it necessary to give him such a hint, observing, that the sole use of money о 6 was
was to procure us necessaries, luxuries, and amusement, ^îiss Atwood was diverted by, his wise remarks readily promising to join the partys though she did not meau to avail heflself of Mr. Wheeler's avowed generous intention, leaving the room to speak to Mrs. Bever, who was just come in, promis¬ ing to return in a quarter of an hour. John instantly produced his order. The old woman agreed he had been in luck ; but there would be no need to mention the circumstance to Miss Atwood—rsince he must pay for some of them, she might as well be led to suppose l\e did so for them all, observing they r must ride at least part pf the way there, and rnost of the way home,, nevertheless it would be cheaper than going into the pit at the Haymarket, and infinitely more genteel, since they must» all go into the boxes. He must re¬ member, however, to invite Mrs. Bever ai*d her daughter, else the fat would all be in the fire, as she allowed them the use of her parlour gratis. John
Jahn by no means relished such ait addi¬ tion to the party— (< however, if;she npist go she must," he obsen cd ; ťí at all events, the same coach would convey them all." '* fo be sure," replied the mother; " but did you, as I desired, call upon Mr. More- ton?" f * Yes, and he has moved to No.------ iu the Islington Koad—not for good though, { understand.*' ** We.ll, that is lucky," exclaimed the old woman ; " please the Lord, we will set off in time, and so drink our tea with him, and go from thence to the Wells ; he may ac¬ company us there, and if he does, 1 am sure he will pay his part, for he is not mean— Frank's benefit for thai ; and I dare say he will invite us to supper when all is over; it will be no more expence coming home at midnight than at ten or elev en o'clock/* " And if he only gives us a biscuit and a glass of wine/' said Caroline, * f we shall make a very good shift." f% I believe
" I believe so, truly ; however, we must bc guided by circumstances." Miss Atwood's return broke in upon the conversation, though she was informed whi¬ ther Mr. Moretón, their old friend, had re¬ moved, and of their intention of drinking their tea with him on Thursday in their w f ay to the Wells ; and Mrs. Bever having been asked in form to accompany them, to which she very readily agreed, it was finally set¬ tled that John should dine with them at three, and should then escort them to Air. Aioretom's, and from thence to the Wells.
CHAP-
CHAP, Ш.
Mr. Freeman having an appointment with his solicitor on the Thursday morning, and supposing that he should be detained there some hours, felt unwilling to return to Marsham-street, as he understood he should be halfway upon his journey when he was in Ely-place ; and as he knew Francis must attend his daily engagements at Brompton, he absolutely refused making use of bis car¬ riage—his footman could pick him a good hack, which he should discharge at Mr. Weldon*s; and if Mrs. Jonefc would call for him there in another at three, he would not keep her in waiting, awl they would 4 proceed
proceed together to Islington. This our hero took upon himself to settle, waiting upon Airs. Jones for that purpose, who was very agreeable to enter into any proposal that was not likely to affect her pocket, though she was positively grown liberal to what she had been, as she was now, she said, enjoying the fruits of her former in¬ dustry, so much had she benefited by asso¬ ciating with Francis and his friends, as he in particular frequently rallied her out of her former saving notions, insisting upon İt that, as she had no relations to whom she wished to leave her money, she ought to live up to her income, and to render her¬ self comfortable and respectable ; and as she wished very much to conciliate his re¬ gard, which she soon perceived would not be done by holding out hopes of making him her heir, she resolved to follow his advice, and ; in consequence engaged a maid, and warned out one of her lodger», that she might have a comfortable apart¬ ment to receive her friends in, and made some
some requisite additions to her wardrobe, to enable her to appear like a gentle¬ woman . She was very curious to know a vast deal about Mr. Freeman. Our hero was ex¬ tremely guarded in his replies to her ques¬ tions, merely giving her to understand he was come up upon business of importance, blaming him, as he should have done her, he told her, for having travelled unattend* £d, and in a stage, particularly as he was in so precarious a state of health. The old lady hoped he would not be seized with one of his fits of coughing, when alone with her in the coach, as she should be afraid he would make his exit, prognosti¬ cating that he would be shook to death if he returned as he came. " That he should not do," Francis assured her, " even if he sent him down in his own carriage ;" adding—** I shall make use of the same arguments to him I have fre¬ quently done to you, namely, that he ought to live for himself* «If
u If any one can work a reformation in his way of thinking, you will do so ; how¬ ever, I ought not to criticise the poor old soul, since he is positively a favourite of mine, and evidently would be very gay and very good company, if his health would permit him ; but I am afraid of making him laugh, for fear he should bc suffocated in one of his fits of coughing; however, I will run the risk of calling upon him in Ely-place, you may tell him, which he may take for a very fine compliment—at all events, I will be punctual to my appoint¬ ment." Mr. Freeman was rejoiced when he learned how well Francis had succeeded, who set out, as usual, for Brompton after breakfast on the Thursday, leaving his foot* man to attend upon his invalid guest. Miss Chetwynd improved, he fancied, upon acquaintance. Though she always ap¬ peared rather embarrassed for the first ten minutes, and though she seemed anxious to profit by his instructions, she frequently entered
entered into conversation with him ; and as her remarks were proofs that she was rather an able discriminator of men and manners, he was much entertained by her conversation, though he thought she had rather too great a propensity to satire; nevertheless she was altogether the most pleasing woman he had ever conversed with, and if he had not resolved never to think of marriage, he had never seen one more likely to promote his felicity in thç married state ; but he was convinced that he merely admired the handsome girl—his feelings towards her were not those of love. Had hé suspected she had inspired him with any sensation resembling that passion, he would, under some pretence or other, have declined visiting her, and he was convinced that vanity alone could induce him to misconstrue her politeness towards him into proofs of her regard for him ; yet he thought of this said fascinat¬ ing scholar much oftener than he was even himself aware of, and he generally^ sepa¬ rated
rated from her with regret ; but that was owing to her being a very agreeable com¬ panion, and to her excelling in his favour¬ ite science. He did not, however, on this day pro¬ long his visit at Mrs. Perkins s, as he wished to reach Islington before the appointed dinner-hour; and while driving through Knightsbridge, he caught sight of John Wheeler bustling along to his three o'clock dinner at his mother's. He affected not to see our hero, though he plainly perceived a sort of malicious grin upon his counte¬ nance as he leered at the carriage. Pre¬ suming he had obtained leave of absence, by the time of day, he supposed. Mrs. Smith and her friends either entertained a party at home, pr were going out, and so honourable a connection was exactly cal¬ culated for the whole family, since doubt¬ less Mr. Haslemere junior was paymaster- general, and he was but too weil convinced that the Wheelers were capable of any thing either to saye pr to get money. He would
would therefore readily have given one of his odd thousands to have had it clearly ascertained that he bore no affinity to them, though he felt that his pride would not be at all more gratified, were it clearly proved that Mr. George Haslemere was his father; and he could readily have forgiven his keeping a mistress, knowing how uncom¬ fortably he must always feel himself in the society of his wife, who had invariably studied onlv how most to torment him— still he thought he ouçbt to have carried ©n his intrigues rather more privately, and at less expence, though perhaps these Wheelers were set as spies over the fair lady whom he had placed under their pro¬ tection. He had his doubts, however, whether a farther bribe might not render them perfectly subservient to Mrs. Smith's wishes. Such were his reflections, when bis arri¬ val at Mr. Moreton's, for the time being, banished the Wheelers and their compa¬ nion from his recollection. There was a larger
larger party assembled than he had expect¬ ed to meet—-as, in addition to his friends, there were the two old gentlemen who had accompanied Mr. Moretón to the theatre on his benefit night, and the sister of one cf them, the widow of a rich merchant of the name of Allingham, who resided in Tindall-place, Islington. Having been in¬ troduced to the strangers, who convinced him that they did not conceive his profes¬ sion placed him beneath them in the scale of society, Mr, Freeman, who seemed to have tbe feelings of a father towards him, told him Weldon had hopes of settling the business which had brought him up much more to his .satisfaction than his apprehen¬ sions had suffered^im to expect, adding— 41 Shqulcl it please God to spare me for a few years longer, I shall be tempted to pay; London an annual visit, in hopes that some of my recently acquired friends will visit me, in their turn, at Moat House." Mrs. Jones instantly assured him, that he might rely upon .her making one of the party ;
party ; then turning to Mr. Moretón, she hoped he would not put any bad construc¬ tion upon her appearing so forward, as she particularly dreaded being the occasion of a duel between her two admirers. The dinner, which was served as the clock was striking four, broke in upon their mirth, and they were soon convinced that their host had no inclination to starve them, since, after a very large dish of fish, boiled fowls, ham, &c, a very fine haunch of venison was set before them, with every requisite to render 1t more palatable, with puddings and pies in abundance ; and the good man seemed so anxious to convince аЦ present that their company was a greater treat to him than his dinner could be to them, that they all felt inspired with a sprt of general wish to contribute to his and to each other's hilarity. Mrs. Jones observed, that Airs. Elliot had given them proof of there being very great conveniencies for cooking in the lower regions. "At
" At all events, I should have had no excuse for placing a very humble repast before you, good folks," replied Aír. More- tou, t( since there are some very good houses of entertainment very near me, and from any of them I could have had a good dinner, as I sometimes drop in at one or other to dine or sup, by way of variety." When the cloth was drawn, a very hand¬ some dessert was placed upon the table, and various sorts of wines, which the old gentleman had sent for from his cellar in town; and the company had just done honour to the third toast from the chair— f ^A speedy and an honourab-c peace," when a slight disturbance occurred. The maid of the, house was in the very act of unlocking the house-door, having been to fetch a fresh pot of porter for the party in the kitchen, consisting of our hero's and Mrs. Allitigham's men-servants, who, as well as herself, were being regaled by Mrs. Elliot, when a young gentleman hastening towards her, asked whether a Mr. Aioreton did
did not lodge there ? She of course an¬ swered in the affirmative, which induced him to beckon to a party of ladies, who were slowly following him ; and the girl, naturally supposing that they were come to drink their tea with those already above*. setting down her Brown and Parry's genu¬ ine beer, she preceded them up stairs, and opening the dining-room door, where all the company were assembled, desired the new comers to walk in. Every one present, of course, directed their eyes towards the door, particularly the founder of the feast, who was sitting at the head of the table, when, to his infi¬ nite surprise, Airs. Wheeler made her ap¬ pearance, followed by Aiiss Atwood, Airs. and Miss Bever, Caroline, and John. The two first had been in a manner forced for¬ ward by those behind, especially by John, who called out— (e Go on, mother, go on," and she had ırijechanİcaliy obeyed him, while Mr. Aioreton having risen, as did vol. in. e the
the whole party round the table, said— * f How do you do, Mrs. Wheeler?" As our hero, Kempthorne, and Kal¬ kreuth, had been sitting with their backs to the door, they politely faced about, when, to the utter amaze of the two last, they recognized Mrs, Smith in the lady toearest them. Francis bad rather expect¬ ed to see her, when he heard Mr. Moreton address her chapeivn. The alarm and agitation of the quondam Mrs. Smith may be better imagined than described« Her imploring looks and qui¬ vering lips had, however, the desired effect upon those whose compassion she wished tõ awaken, as they all appeared to consider ber as an entire stranger. Still she was obliged to catch hold of one of the chairs for support. Fortunately for her, the Wheeler family had participated too sin¬ cerely in her unpleasant surprise, to no¬ tice her visible disorder. John, who had followed her io, as instantly made a retro¬ grade
grade motion, and thus so completely blocked up the door-way, that neither Mrs. Bever nor her daughter, who had re¬ mained upon the landing, could see who was within the room ; but Caroline hav¬ ing pushed past her disconcerted brother, had a full view of the whole party, which occasioned her nearly as great a shock as her dear friend had experienced. General silence prevailed for a minute or more, till Mr. Aioreton resumed, say¬ ing—" Upon my word, Mrs. Wheeler, I am sorry you favoured me so very unex¬ pectedly, as I am fearful I shall be puzzled to find chairs for so large a party, admit¬ ting w r e could make room for them to be brought in—for my rooms are like myself, upon a very small scale." " I beg, Sir," stammered out the discon*· certed old woman, <e you would make nó apologies; we were not aware of your having company, or we should not have thus intruded." Miss Atwood, who was extremely βηχ- Ε 2 ious
ions to be upon the move, twitched her elbow, whispering— e< Let us be going ;" then slightly curtseying to her three for¬ mer friends, she made good her retreat, while they endeavoured, by their looks and gestures, to assure her they would not be¬ tray her secret, but in so delicate a man¬ ner, that she alone could understand their meaning, as even John Wheeler had not the least suspicion they had ever met be¬ fore ; to be sure, he did not see his mis¬ tress's countenance when she first met their astonished gaze, and he was besides so con¬ fused, provoked, and disappointed, that he was hardly aware of what was passing round him. Mrs. Wheeler alone spoke, requesting the party would resume their seats. She had merely called to ask how Mr. Moreton did, but could not have stopped had he been discRgaged, as they were going fur¬ ther. She then slunk down after her party ; and as Kalkreuth hastily closed the door after her, Francis, Kempthorne, and him, gave
gľive a free loose to their mirili, though thev did not chuse to' communicate their rejections nor suspicions to each other before so manv strangers. " I must have a peep at the poor souls," said Airs. Jones, approaching one of the windows, " as I know there were more be¬ hind. Never was poor Airs. Wheeler more mortified. I should have voted for their having been pressed to partake of this tempting dessert> if I had not been aware that there were those present who would have deprived them of their appetite ; but here they go —one, two," counting up to six, as they stepped out upon the pave¬ ment; <f three Wheelers—but who the- other three ladies are, I cannot pretend to say. Who are they, Air. Yates?" " Upon my honour í cannot resolve your question, Airs. Jones," ft They are friends of Airsv Wheeler's, I presume," said Air. Aioreton ; if and she thinks she may take the liberty of bringing who. she pleases to see me, but in future I e 3 shall
shall not be at home when she comes; in¬ deed she would not have been admitted now, had Elliot gone to the door, or* had she been called to them." <s Well, never mind, my good friend, since they are gone," said Mrs. Jones ; " I never saw Mrs. Wheeler so disconcerted before; and that handsome girl, who just came within the room, seemed as if she would have dropped upon the floor—who or what alarmed her so cruelly, ï cannot pretend to say ; can you, young gentle¬ men?" (f Are we so very frightful, my dear Madam," asked Kalkreuth, " as to have occasioned her any degree of terror? I rather think she was dismayed upon per¬ ceiving so large a party ; and as a pretty woman is always a pleasing object, we might legard her rather too earnestly." " I am ghd you attribute her confusion to her modesty/' rejoined Mrs. Jones; ' e I suppose the other ladies were her mo¬ ther and sister—however, I shall find it all out
out in time. They are crossing the fields, so I suppose they are going, to drink their tea at White-Conduit-House; -now I am convinced Mrs. Wheeler did not intend to> put herself to that expence." The company were all more or less amused by these remarks; and Mrs. Jones having resumed her seat, the conversation became general. Kempthorne, who was a very good gentleman-singer, treated them with one of Dibdin's songs, and was very much applauded. Our hero, unasked, so little did he wish to appear to be confer¬ ring an obligation, followed his example, thus amply repaying his kind host for his entertainment, and then made his friends join him in a popular glee, in which they seconded him very ably, he having been their master. But while they are thus contributing to< the amusement of Mr. Moreton and his guests, we shall return to Knightsbridge, end to the Wheeler party, who, having dined together, sallied forth, all adorned e 4 for
for conquest, it having been decided that they should walk into Piccadilly, as John affirmed that they should not meet with a decent coach sooner. Now the fact was, under this pretence he knew he should save a shilling, besides the turn¬ pike ; and he had ако calculated, that by being set down ra the gate near which Mr. Moreton resided, would be a further sav¬ ing ; he therefore proposed ordering the coachman thither. His mother was for driving up to the door; but as Miss At¬ wood very prudently sided with her ad¬ mirer, he prided himself not a little upon bis excellent management. When they stopped accordingly on this side the gate, the coachman demanded four shillings; John swore his fare was but three ; how¬ ever, after a long wrangle, he paid the money, taking the man's number, and de¬ claring he would summon him the very next day. The fellow only laughed at him—he had brought six grown people, and he was not obliged to carry mqre than four.
four. The party therefore agreed, that: they feared he would meet with no redress. John did not mind the money, only he could not bear to be imposed upon, and was running forward to knock at the door, when they gained admission as· has Ьееш already stated,; and having been also* obliged to make their exit, Johawas very much puzzled how tordispose of his· party till the doors opened at the Wells, and that would not be-for an hour or more— they must go somewhere and have their tea, his> mother told him—White-Conduit-IIouse, or Bagmgge-Wellsy were at- too great a distance, he conceived, since, if they made it late, they should not get good places at the Aquatic Theatre. At last they decided, in consequence of a hint of Aiiss Atwood s, to go to the Isling¬ ton Spa—that was close to the Wells, as she had been told, never having been there. Thither, therefore, they proceeded, Airs. Wheeler lamenting her dear friend should have had so large a party, though e 5 that;
that would not have prevented him from pressing their stay, if he had not known that they had almost made a vow never to ait down in the same room with their un¬ gracious nephew ; however, it was only a pleasure deferred, though she had felt that this was a liberty she must not take, as she knew the old fool, as she often termed Mr. Moretón, could run restiff, and she wished to remain friends with him—and Miss Atwood had firmly resolved never to run the risk óf again meeting either Mr. Deputy Smith, or any of his friends, whom she had seen were upon a much more inti¬ mate footing at Mr. Moreton's than her mother-in-law elect was, which induced her to hope she would never learn what it was so much her interest to conceal from the Wheeler family in general. Their dish of tea having greatly revived them, though John was by no means pleased with this additional expence, still he threw down the money required with an air, even giving the waiter sixpence, 3 observ imr
observing that he never liked to .look mean; and having understood the doors were open at the Wells, thither they proceeded, John running forward to pay, thať they might not be kept waiting in the lobbjr. By this means, he effectually prevented their seeing the order; but when they reached the boxes, there were no front seats to be had, as they were all taken, and. servants and other people were, keeping the first three rows in almost every box. John blustered, insisting upon the ladies. he had brought being properly accommo¬ dated; but all he said was of nò effect— and, as his language soon degenerated into abuse, he was at last threatened to be given in charge to one of the constables in wait¬ ing. The ladies were therefore obliged to content themselves with back seats iñ one? of the center boxes. John was, however, by no means satis¬ fied—he was convinced the fellow before^ them was not keeping places for,- nine* ь о* people, ,
people, but he wanted a bribe, and he would «ee him d —nd first. This wrangling continued till the curtain drew up; and as it dropped again after the ballet, before the, party for whom the places were kept made their appearance, John renewed the quarrel, endeavouring to bring a party who were in the next box, and in a similar situation, into his way of thinking; and as one fool often makes many* the quarrel had nearly be¬ come serious—nay, the peace officers were actually summoned, when Mr. Moreton's places were called for, and that gentleman and his guests made their appearance. Mr. Moreton walked first, leading Mrs. Allingham, and was followed by Mr. Free¬ man and Mrs. Jones, the other gentlemen bringing up the rear. Their progress was, however, arrested by the disputants, who .wem top eagerly maintaining their cause to attend to any thing else. Mr. Moreton enquired what w T as the matter ?—and the man
man Who was keeping the places instantly rose, say ing —"Here is the gentleman come to release me; so you may appeal to him, if you please." John, whose rage knew no bounds, and who had not heard the name of Aioreton, swore one of his best oaths, politely send¬ ing him and the gentleman to the d-v-1, for the places he would have. Air. Aioreton, who was now close to his elbow, said—"Softly, Air. Wheeler; I am not in such haste to go to that warm place as you are to send me there—so suffer this lady and me to pass you." John's under jaw absolutely dropped, and he instantly made room as desired, while the man who had been keeping the places, lifting up the seat to facilitate their progress, said— t( I am very glad you are come, Sir; for that young man was going to throw me into the pit, and to seize your places by main force." <( Are there then no constables or po¬ lice
lice officers within call ?" asked the old gen¬ tleman ' f Oh plenty, Sir, and í had sent for one just as you came in." tť You did right ; and had you given •this turbulent gentleman info the charge of one of them, Γ would have protected you," The Wheeler party wore confounded, as they perceived the old fool was seriously offended ; and it was particularly provok¬ ing to be> thus mortified before Miss At¬ wood and the Bevers. Ti »ey, however, readily made way for the whole company to pass. Our hero, wishing the old people to go first, remained for several seconds close to Mrs. Smith who gave him a look οΐ en¬ treaty, and imperceived took his hand. He returned the gentle pressure, giving her fully to understand that she might rely upon the honour of him and his friends. Mr. Freeman and the two old ladies having taken.
taken the front seat, Air. Aioreton made the three young men take the second row, fearful John Wheeler might endeavour to pick a quarrel with our hero, whom he was well aware that he hated most cordially, or with Air. Kempthorne, having, it may be supposed, been informed how basely that gentleman had treated Caroline ; but that matter having been explained per¬ fectly to his satisfaction, he did not chuse to expose either of them to be insulted by the impudent John. This arrangement enabled the young men to converse together in French, when our hero related to his friends where he had first seen Mrs. Smith with the Whee¬ lers; and they both declared she was doubt¬ less placed under the protection of the old woman, agreeing they could not have sup¬ posed she had been so despicable a charac¬ ter—while Kempthorne greatly blamed Haslemere for having thus increased his expences — Kalkreuth knew he had re¬ moved the fair lady, and supposed John W ; heeler
Wheeler was now appointed deputy pro¬ tector of the fair frail one, observing that he made so excellent a bully, he might obtain full employment in the lobbies of the theatre, were his talents known to the Cyprian corps. The appearance of Grimaldi broke in upon their discourse, and from our hero in particular did he meet with the applause that was his due. When all was over, the whole party agreed they had been extremely well amused. The Wheeler party wou id have been equally so, had they been less un¬ pleasantly situated; and the moment the curtain dropped, they made good their re¬ treat. There having been a heavy shower, not a coach was to be had; they were, therefore, obliged to set forward on foot, Miss Atwood declaring that had she known they should have met with any difficulty ia procuring a coach, she would have engaged one to have been in waiting. This was a most severe reproach to John, who pror tested
tested that he was shocked to death—the idea had not occurred to him—excusing himself upon every thing having gone cross ; indeed he had been so vexed and provoked, that he had hardly been himself the whole evening. His excuses were gra¬ ciously accepted, though could he have read what was passing in the heart of his mistress, he would not have been much flattered. They had, however, the good fortune to meet with a coach upon the stand under Gray's-inn-gardens, which John ordered home to Knightsbridge. Their evening jaunt, therefore, cost him more than thirty shillings, and they returned home, hungry and dissatisfied. John hoped, how T ever, to be able very speedily to make them ample amends. They would go to Astley's, or the Circus, next time, and from thence to Vauxhall, Aiiss Atwood appeared very much pleased with this spirited determination ; but the moment his mother found an opportunity, she took poor John severely to task for his recent
recent behaviour—foreseeing, she said, that old Moretón had been very seriously of¬ fended, and she knew Airs. Jones and Fran¬ cis would take care to blow up the coats —upbraiding him also for not having pro¬ cured them a coach at any price, lamenting his great resemblance to his father, which might be the means of his letting such a prize as Miss Atwood slip through his fin¬ gers; however, if he did, she would wash her hands of him. John promised to be guided wholly by her in future, which rather appeasing her, she suffered him to depart, commanding him to bring his mistress a present of fruit, as a sort of peace-offering, the next even-*
CHAP,
^1, ' „L iU.'SJ.'.^! 1
CHAP. IV· Mr, Aioreton 's party having, by his parti¬ cular desire, accompanied him home to eat an oyster, and drink a glass of wine, again laughed over the second discomfiture of the Wheelers, Air. Aioreton declaring he never more would notice them. Francis defended John, upon the plea of his not knowing of whom he was speaking when they entered, therefore could have no in¬ tention to insult their host, for whom he believed he entertained a very great re¬ spect. <s He has wished to make me suppose so, Mr.
Air. Yates; but I have, independent of his rude behaviour to-night, seen so much of late to dislike in him, *as I was never abso¬ lutely the dupe of his fawning civility to¬ wards me, that I shall not punish myself by admitting him in future, since 1 am not eo great a hypocrite as he is—as he hap¬ pened, no long time ago, to speak his real sentiments of me, and of a lady now pre¬ sent, to one of his fellow clerks, who is distantly related to the lady who resides here, and who dined with her last Sunday, which led to his repeating the character he had heard of me, and thus my panegyric was handed down to Elliot, who of course repeated it to e the silly old fool/ whom he only courted in the hopes of figuring in his will, since I was au absolute driveller, and could hardly keep myself out of fire or water; and in addition to these flattering praises, I found all my foibles (and I havo my share) had been exaggerated in terms pf derision in Air. Haslemere's counting- house
liouse—not in your hearing, Mr. Kemp¬ thorne, 1 know*—and Mrs. Jones has not been more spared." " Never mind, my old friend," cried the old woman, in a gay tone ; te the grapes are sour, that is all—and so he shall find in the long run, though I will not cut with the family, I do so enjoy tormenting them." As it grew late, the party separated. Our hero, Mn Freeman, and Mrs, Jones, drove off first; and having set the lady down, Mr. Freeman declared he had not been such a rake for many years, yet he could not say he felt the worse for having sat up so much beyond his usual hour. Our hero hoped be would say the same in the morning; and soon after midnight they retired. Mr. Freeman slept backwards, in what was styled the best bed-room ; our hero forwards, on the second floor—and while undressing, he heard a knock at jthe next door, which he supposed was John return¬ ed
ed from Knightsbridge. This led him tò wonder that he did not also sleep in the country, when he reflected that probably Mr. Haslemere would have objected to such an arrangement; again reprobating that gentleman's conduct, in thus putting himself in the Wheelers' power, though possibly he considered, by denying his relationship to him, he was so much so ab ready, that their being more or less in his secrets was of little consequence. Having stepped into bed, while condemning his supposed father, he had but just closed his eyes, when he was disturbed by a second and more violent knock next door. He must have been mistaken in his former conjectures, he conceived; this was cer¬ tainly John come home ; and as the peal upon the knocker was repeated, he re¬ solved to be satisfied* The night being very warm, he had put one of the sashes a little up, while undressing, which enabled him to listen unseen, and he soon heard John
John calling out from the front garret window, his sleeping apartment—** Who is there?" (t My name is Wright, Sir, and I want to speak with you, having something of importance to communicate ; so please to come down, as I do not wish to alarm your father," "What! Wright the bricklayer?" i( The same, Sir ; but be handy, if you please, or I cannot stop." ff What the d-v-1 has happened ? but I will be down in a minute," retiring from the window to slip on a few с 1 oaths. Now as this same bricklayer had fre¬ quently been employed by Mr. Corfe, and once since his death by our hero, he could not conceive what he could have to com- manicate to John Wheeler. Was the old woman or Caroline ill? but then how should Wright have known of the circum¬ stance, as he resided in Westminster, and they were at Knightsbridge? and if they had met with any accident going home, John,
John, who was with them, must have known. While he was thus lost in conjec¬ ture, he thought he perceived an unusual light in the air, which induced him gently to raise the sash rather more ; but softly as he endeavoured to do it, Air. Wright heard him, and coming under his window, cried— ct You need not be afraid, Mr. Yates; the fire is far enough from you." cf ís there a fire in the neighbourhood?" demanded our hero. " Yes, Sir; and I am afraid there will be a great deal of damage done. It began at the------Office, on'Milbank; and just as I came away, two other houses fronting the water (the office runs at the back) had caught fire—one of them I know belongs to the old gentleman next door—so I thought it would be but right to apprize the family of the circumstance; not that they can do any good, since there are a thousand people assembled already, more than can be of any service." At that moment they heard John unbolt¬ ing
ing the street door; Wright, therefore, wished our hero a good-night, who in¬ stantly retired from the window, not wish¬ ing to ask any more questions, now John was in hearing, though, could he have been of any service, he would have hurried on his cloaths, and have hastened to the spot, but afler what Wright had said, he con¬ ceived it would be absurd; besides, upon reflection, he recollected that country people in general had a very great dread of fires—he was therefore resolved that Mr. Freeman should not know, if he could pre¬ vent it, that there was one in the neigh¬ bourhood, till all the danger was over; he therefore returned to bed, but was unable to compose himself for some time. He had heard of old Wheeler's having pur¬ chased two houses a few months before, ami presumed this was one of them, as he bad not heard where they were situated, nor did he conceive that he would be any loser by the fire, since the insurance offices generally eitlier rebuilt the premises, or vol. m. ρ other-
otherwise made up such losses, not know¬ ing that the insurance was just expired when old Wheeler had made the purchase, and that the old man had not renewed the policy. John was, however, perfectly aware of the circumstance; therefore when he learnt why he had been disturbed, he rapped out a dreadful oath, exclaiming, ¿they were not insured. * c So I feared," replied Wright; " how¬ ever 'tis of no use to alarm my old master ; it will be time enough to tell him the news when he wakes ; but you had better hasten to the spot, Sir, and offer a reward to the «firemen to exert themselves to save all they can, as they will be very idle when they discover the houses are not insured." John was almost bereft of the very few senses which had fallen to his sliare ; and had it not been for his father's annuity, which he chanced to recollect in time, he would probably have run the risk of kill¬ ing the old man, by his want of precaution in imparting the melancholy intelligence to
to him; but as this might have militated against his interest, he made the very best of his way to Milbank, and arrived just in time to see the second house in a blaze, and that there was scarcely a chance of savins: either. Two others were also in flames ; and to these the attention of the firemen were chiefly directed. John had recourse to his usual method of raving—running in among the firemen, whom he commanded to play their engines upon his father's houses ; but as he had no authority to enforce obedience, and did not offer them any bribe, he was mereh hustled or shoved about among them, and finally forced back among the useless croud, and soon had the mortification of seeing the roofs of both, one after the other, fall in with a terrible crash. Thus was his father's great bargain rendered a great loss, though he had hoped to have made ten per cent. of his money, as the houses had only cost him eight hundred guineas, and they now Jet at fi ve-and- thirty pounds a-year each г "2 to
to tenants at will, who were to be raised to forty the next quarter. John burst into tears when the roofs gave way, though he felt for ho one else, nòr would he have lent a hand to have saved an article belonging to the tenants. " What must be done ?" said he, addres¬ sing Wright, whom he stumbled upon among the croud. ■" They must be built up again," was the reply ; '* and I will undertake to do the job as reasonable 41s any man in the trade." John was provoked at what he conceived to be a very unfeeling speech ; but as he felt that it would be useless to quarrel with the low fellow, he calmly inquired— t: And what will it cost to rebuild them ?" " I must make my calculations before I can give you a direct answer, Sir; but I should suppose between fourteen or fifteen hundred pounds." " Fourteen хмг fifteen hundred pounds !" repeated John; "then d — mme they shall remain in ruins for ever." " But
" But perhaps, Sir, the ground-landlord may object to that; he can oblige you to rebuild them; it was your look-out to in¬ sure them against fire, not his." John felt that there was but too much truth in what the bricklayer said ; and hav¬ ing remained upon Milbank till the houses were literally a heap of ruins, he returned to Marsham-street in a state of mind by no means enviable, revolving how he ought to proceed. As it was broad day-light when he reached home, he went immedi¬ ately into his father's room. The old man was awake, and seeing his son, cried— (( John, what is the matter ? where have you been ? I heard you go out." ( ' Been ! why to see a bonfire at your expence," was the surly reply; "however, 'tis no use your fretting and stewing about it, now the mischief is done. The two houses you so lately bought, and did not insure, arc burnt down. I saw them a heap οΐ rubbish before I left Milbank. The fire began at the office behind them, and the ρ 3 wind
wind set direct for your houses. Two others are very much damaged, but the firemen paid most attention to them." The poor old man groaned audibly, and was some time before he could ask any further questions, while his unfeeling son went on repeating what Wright had told him. " Fifteen hundred pounds !" sighed the old man ; " why I shall be half ruined, as I know I must rebuild them." " Then why not have insured them ?— but, as mother says, you are penny wise and pound foolish." " Your mother has no reason to com¬ plain, John ; and, could we look into fu¬ turity, we should seldom any of us act wrong. I certainly ought to have insured them, but I was anxious to save the money —and for whom but my children ? God help me, I have not long to live, and I am amply provided for—therefore, you are more likely to be a sufferer from my neg¬ ligence than I am : had I my time to come over
over again, I should act very differently to- what I have done in many respects. Those houses I intended for your skier's fortune,. and she must have them when they are re* built, or an equivalent in money, since you are more able to ñght your way through the world than she is, a poor ail¬ ing girl! and may, as your mother says, if you úo but mind your hits, marry a very beautiful young woman with an indepen¬ dent fortune." " And pray what chance will there be of my marrying Miss Atwood, if she under¬ stands I am half ruined?—since it seems. the loss is to fall wholly upon me." fi I did not say that, son,, but of course you must be a sufferer. Fourteen or fif¬ teen hundred pounds, did Wright say ^ why 4 surely there are many of the materials wilfc do again." " 1 wish you may find it so ; but be that as it may, if you wish me to succeed with: Miss Atwood, we must endeavour to pre¬ vent her hearing of this, misfortune, as mo* f 4 their
ther has been boasting of a vast deal more property than we shall be able to find." " Ah ! John, how many crimes are pa¬ rents guilty of for their childrens' sake, and are yet blamed by them very often for what they have done ? However î have no wish, upon many accounts, to have our loss made public; so you must break the me¬ lancholy intelligence to your mother and sister, and give them their instKuctions. You know how ready and willing: thev are to serve you, even at the risk of their cha¬ racters suffering—for every thing must be found out sooner or later—and if we escape detection in this world, there is a true ac¬ count of our misdeeds kept in heaven, and God knows how soon I may be called upon to plead for mine. I did not require this fresh misfortune to add to my troubles, now that I am unable to help myself." John knew and felt what his father al¬ luded to, and for once in his life self-inte¬ rest induced him to forbear from pressing him upon what he thought laid very heavy at
at his heart, else he was more curious than ever to fathom the secret his mother had acknowledged there was respecting Frank; but as the old man seemed inclined to sink the fire, he must not provoke him; still. there was a risk of its being known, owing to what had passed between Francis and Wright,· who had told him he had been speaking to Mr. Yates—however, as he с on Id not make the bricklayer retract his words, why he must trust to chance in this instance; and as our hero would certainly, never hold any conversation with Miss At¬ wood, and had no acquaintance with any of his connections, he did not conceive that his knowing the circumstance would at all derange his plans—but having spent near a couple of hours with bis father, la¬ menting over their irreparable misfortune, it was at last settled that John should set out for Knightsbridge, and if his mother was not up, he must fiing something up at the window, which would induce, her. to look out, and he could then make her a. ΐ 5 sign
sign to come down and let him in. Mrs. Bever, he understood, seldom or ever rose before eight; and as he should be there by seven, they could have their say out before she was stirring, and he could in¬ vent some plausible excuse for his early visit, should he see any one eise. Away, therefore, he posted; and having reached Knightsbridge, he had just caught sight of the house, when he thought he saw a gentleman come out of the gate; but as the entrance to the nevt house was only separated from Mrs. Bever s by a wall, he was not absolutely sure whether he did not come out of the next door—and as he crossed the road, and walked down Sloane- street, he did not have a sufficient good view of his face to be a judge whether he had ever seen him before ; but upon look¬ ing up at the house, he caught a glimpse of Miss Atwood at her dining-room win¬ dow, peeping from behind the curtain. He instantly made her a sign that he wanted to speak · to his mother ; and in three mir mites
nutes the handsome girl came down to the door in her night-cap and a loose wrap¬ ping, but very becoming, morning-gown, wondering what could have brought Mr, Wheeler at such an early hour. John did not let so fine an opportunity of paying her some of his best compliments escape him, declaring that he-found it almost im¬ possible to exist out of her sight, much less. to rest, though he little hoped he should have met her bright eyes, when he looked up at her window·. The fair lady was evidently confused; while she said, she had been disturbed by a noise at the next door, she presumed, though she had supposed, when she came to the window, there was some one in their garden. John instantly related having seen a gen¬ tleman come out of the next door, point¬ ing which way he went, but he was now out of sight ; and as the next door chanced to be standing open when John passed, p. G he
he made no doubt οΐ having spoke the trath. " Oh it was no doubt Mr. Blagdonj the owner of the house/' resumed IVI iss At¬ wood; *' he makes a common practice of abusing his servants in public," recovering by degrees from the agitation and flurry which she said Mr. Wheeler's unexpected appearance had occasioned her. John was extremely flattered, and she led the way into Airs. Bever's parlour, de¬ claring that she would not have come down in such a dishabille to any one else, even had they knocked for an hour. She would, therefore, go and make herself a little de¬ cent, and let Mrs. Wheeler know he wished to »peak to her. "Why as he was there, his mother might take it amiss if he did not stop breakfast, else he had merely made his wish to see her a pretence to entice his fair friend down," declaring she looked so lovely in her night-cap, he hoped she would not think of taking it off. "He
(i He was resolved to make her vain," she perceived, promising nevertheless to join him again in two minutes, as she should not devote that time to her toilette which she could spend in his company, aware that she could iwt have appeared to more advantage than in this said elegant night-cap. She soon, however, disturbed the whole house, as she hoped Mr, Whee¬ ler would stop breakfast, which she pro¬ mised to have ready immediately; there¬ fore, could John have forgotten the recent fire, he would have been completely happy, since never before had his lovely mistress given him such unequivocal proofs of her partiality ; and perhaps he was the more aware of the strength of his own regard for her, from having felt a twinge of the green-eyed monster, when he perceived her at the window—but she had accounted for her being there in so satisfactory a manner, that his jealousy soon vanished ; he would besides have thought it a crime to have entertained a doubt of her chastity, 3 and
and he recollected having heard her draw the bolts before she admitted him—then were not his« mother and Airs. Bever her inmates? the most scrupulous lover could not have required greater proofs οΐ the immaculate virtue of his mistress—he was, therefore, extremely rejoiced at having had so excellent an opportunity of displaying his talents for speech-making. In a very few- minutes the fair lady again joined him, still in her night-cap and morn¬ ing dishabille, and he had almost forgotten what had occasioned his early visit ta Knightsbridge, when his mother bustled down, wondering what had brought her dear John at such an hour. He accounted for it nearly as he had done to Aiiss At¬ wood, who seemed so flattered by such a proof of his regard, that the old woman could have taken her round the neck and have kissed her. As she did not, however, leave him and his mother tête-à-tête, as he had rather hoped, he therefore told the old woman he thought his father was more unwell
unwell than usual, advising her to look in upon him in the course of the morning. She understood his knowing leer, therefore proposed returning with him, as she dis¬ liked walking alone, and did not wish to take Caroline home; therefore, after break¬ fast, which her impatience to learn what he had to communicate made her hurry over, they left Knightsbridge together, when John told her what had occurred since they had separated the over-night. The old woman was so shocked, he was fearful she would have fainted ; but bv the help of his arm she was enabled to proceed, though she protested she had never been more hurt in the whole course of her life, laying all the blame upon the poor old man for not having had the houses insured, at least for a thousand pounds, as she had advised ; however, they were burnt, and must be rebuilt, which would be a very heavy expence ; it therefore behoved them all to exert themselves in endeavouring to cover
cover such a loss—and as it was now evi¬ dent that Aiiss Atwood loved him (John), the sooner he put the question to her the better, as she hoped to see them married before Michaelmas, promising to feel the way for him, that he might make his decla¬ ration very apropos, and before she made any unpleasant discoveries—of course they must sink their recent loss upon all their friends; nor would she mention the cir¬ cumstance at present to Caroline, as it would only fret her, and might lead Aiiss Atwood to suspect they had met with some misfortune. John commended her prudence, and having separated at Charing-cross, she pro¬ ceeded into Marsham-street, and reached her own door just as our hero was follow¬ ing Mr. Freeman into his chariot, that gentleman having expressed a wish to see Brompton, and to take a stroll in Kensing¬ ton-gardens, where he was to be set down, after leaving Francis at Bayfield-house, and was
was to call for him again at two, this not being one of his days for visiting Airs, Perkins's. As he had seen nothing of the fire, our hero merely slightly mentioned İt at break¬ fast, but entered into no details, never chu¬ sing to make the Wheelers the subject of his conversation when he could avoid it, having nothing to say in their praise, and not wishing to speak his real sentiments of them to a comparative stranger, and one who could have no opportunity of judging between them. Having a full view of his aunt as she was advancing, Air. Freeman being rather slow in his movements, he could not help remarking that she looked very much out of spirits, therefore sup¬ posed they had sustained a greater loss than he had imagined. Curiosity had induced him to rise rather before his usual time, and to walk to Alil- bank to see what damage the fire had done. As he could not learn upon the spot to whom
whom two of the houses then in ruins be¬ longed, he presumed they were old Whee¬ ler's, for whom he therefore felt a great degree of pity, as he understood they w T ore not insured; and could he have done it unknown to the rest of the family, he would have paid him a visit, not only to condole with him, but also to have offered him the immediate loan of a sufficient sum to rebuild the damaged tenements; but fearing that his kind intention would be misconstrued by Mrs. Wheeler and John, upon reflection he relinquished the idea, particularly as he had every reason to sup¬ pose they were what might be deemed rich, as he knew they had a staunch friend in Mr. George Haslemere, and if they did his dirty work, they were entitled to his support ; besides, the annuity Air. Hasle¬ mere senior had granted the old man must keep him above want, and the other part of the family were infinitely less entitled to his pity. He was, therefore, resolved to
to let matters take their chance, and never to trouble his head about them, except indeed they applied to him for assistance. Mr. Freeman was extremely pleased with his drive to Brompton, and greatly admired the wonderful improvements which had taken place in the environs of the metro¬ polis since he had last visited it, though he feared, at the rate the builders were going on, it would soon be a difficult matter to supply the London markets, the population was so fast increasing. Francis thought the supplies at present kept pace with the de¬ mand, though every article of provision seemed increasing in price : but having set him down at the Countess's villa, the ap¬ proach to which he greatly admired, he proceeded to Kensington-gardens, where he alighted, desiring the coachman to put up as usual, but to call for him in time to return for his master. The man promised to be in waiting at a quarter before two ; and the old gentleman, having visited the palace,
palace, strolled about in the gardens, rest¬ ing whenever his breath failed him. Meanwhile our hero was as usual devot¬ ing his time to his pupils, with whom he had not spent more than an hour, when the Countess, who always took her station near one of the windows, exclaimed—- " Who can this be, driving round the sweep at so early an hour?-—the Earl of Merioneth, I protest. I did not know he was in town, I shall introduce you to his Lordship, Mr. Yates ; he is extremely fond of music, and I am resolved he shall hear the girls, as he has three daughters, whose education is not finished, and I dare say he will endeavour to engage you to give them lessons when they come to town for the winter," leaving the room to receive her visitor; but in less than a quarter of an hour she returned with the Earl, who was in his fortieth year, and to a very handsome, pleasing countenance, he joined a fine commanding figure, therefore looked like a man of rank. Our
Our hero thought, though he was not absolutely unconscious, that he had been equally favoured by nature, and he had seen peers whom he thought, in point of figure, would disgrace the drawing-room ; and we must suppose the Earl of Merioneth was astonished to see so elegant a young man rise from the organ upon his entrance to pay him the respect due to his rank, as be absolutely looked him out of counte¬ nance, while the Countess w r as declining his name, and speaking in the highest terms of our hero's voice and talents, till^ appear¬ ing conscious of his rudeness, he endea¬ voured to atone for it by the familiarity of his address, saying— (( It must appear sin¬ gular, Mr. Yates, deservedly celebrated as you certainly are, that I should never have seen you before; but I spent last winter at Bath, the Countess having been advised to drink those waters, and the preceding one in Cheshire with my late father. In¬ deed I have never made any stay in Lon¬ don for the last three years, which must account
account for my never having visited the theatre when you performed ; therefore I have a very great pleasure in store." " As great a one, my Lord," resumed the Countess, our hero havin«: merely bowed in silence, " as your unexpected visit has occasioned me. I thought you were at Caerwyth Priory." " I left it last Monday, having business of importance in town. You have proba¬ bly heard that Lady Aferioneth's younger brother has sold out of the guards." " The papers learnt me the unpleasant intelligence. I grieve to find he is still so devoted to the dice-box." ťi I hope I shall be able once more té reinstate him in his former rank, for how long I cannot venture to predict—though I have some hopes of his reformation, as he tells me he is in love with an heiress, Aiiss Chedworth, the only daughter of the late rich banker of that name." " Oh, I frequently meet her in the win¬ ter," rejoined the Counter ; " she is a fine shewy
shewy girl, and will just suit your brother- in-law, as he wants money, and she ought to marry a man of family." " But is she likely to bring about a refor¬ mation in his way of thinking ? But excuse my thus breaking in upon these ladies'stu¬ dies. May I request to hear them sing? They were great proficients last autumn, and are doubtless very much improved." " Wonderfully so, in my opinion," re¬ joined the Countess, desiring the elder Miss Irvan to oblige the Earl. Our hero instantly resumed his seat at the organ, and Miss Irvan, who had been early accustomed to sing before strangers, and who was extremely proud of her musi¬ cal acquirements, soon convinced him that she was very much improved in point of taste, as she sought to please more than to astonish her hearers, and therefore perfect¬ ly succeeded, as his Lordship's bravoes came from the heart, and he was by no means a despicable judge of true harmony. Having paid both master and scholar some
some very flattering compliments, he peti¬ tioned for one more song, as he must be going, though, if her Ladyship was disen¬ gaged the following day, he should do him¬ self the honour of dining with her. '* Your Lordship will greatly oblige me by so doing ; and in return for your kind intention, you shall hear the finest Italian trio, in my opinion, that was ever composed. Lady Jane and Air. Yates, I must call upon you both to assist Fanny in enchanting his Lordship." Lady Jane was extremely flattered, and our hero, having of course acquiesced, the young ladies arranged themselves on either side of him, while he played the symphony in a style which convinced the Earl he was one of the first musicians of the age ; and when he joined his voice to those of his scholars, the Earl became all ear, being far more anxious to hear him than his pupils, whose trifling errors he so judiciously con¬ trived to conceal, that never had his Lord¬ ship been so delighted ; and the Countess, who
who saw how well she had succeeded in amusing him, felt her triumph compíete. Having thanked the lidie«"» for the supe¬ rior entertainment they had afforded him; turning to our hero, he said— f< ï no lon¬ ger wonder, Air. YateS, át your standing so high in the public, estimation; and if you should' have an hour or two tö spare, a few days in the week next spring, you will greatly oblige me by devoting them to the instruction of my daughters; the se¬ cond, in particular, has a good ear, and in my opinion a very ñne voice, which only wants cultivation, and you shall give mé your opinion of the two others, though T ain already convinced they will never vie with these ladies; and I would have theni excel, or they shall never attempt to sing or play in 4 company; for mediocrity hi music is horrid." Francis perfectly agreed with his Lord¬ ship, though he thought there were diffe¬ rent degrees of perfection. " Aiost certainly ; and as you have at- VOL. uu o tained
taiiicd the ne plus ultra of perfection, I am conv inced you will endeavour to form your scholars after your own model, as these la¬ dies are fast approaching to what you have Ιοπίϊ since attained." " Your Lordship's approbation will in¬ duce me to redouble my diligence to insure the continuance of it ; and I shall feel high¬ ly flattered when I receive your permission to attend the Ladies Caerwvth." His Lordship made a very polite reply, rising to depart. The Countess having rung for his carriage, accompanied him out of the room, to whom he said, the moment she had closed the door—" What a pity such a fine young fellow should be a music- master ! how much better he would look at the head of a regiment ! In your place, Countess, I should be afraid of his running away with one of his scholars ; and upon my honour, I should be almost tempted to forgive a daughter of my own, were she to accompany such a man to Gretna-green." " I have no fears of my nieces being so imprudent,
imprudent, my Lord, because I am always present during the music lesson ; and as there are four of them always together, there can be no chance of their giving too much expression to a love-song." " Ľut have not the eyes a language of their own, Countess, far more expressive than any words ? Before I was that young fellow's age, I was desperately in love, and had read my doom in my mistress's eyes," humming of a sigh as he concluded. " Young men of fashion are seldom re¬ nowned for their-discretion," resumed the Countess, in a gay tone ; " but I have so high an opinion of Air. Yates, that I have never entertained any fear of his taking improper liberties with his pupils, as he has the most diffidence, and the least self- sufficiency, οΐ any young man who ever fell under my observation ; at the same time he knows what is his due, as he is al¬ ready in possession of an independent for¬ tune, and 1 hope, in a few years, he will greatly increase his income. At all events о 2 > our
your Lordship will run no risk in suffering him to teach your daughters, as they are baldly in their teens. He would certainly appear to advantage in regimentals, as you observe ; and he equally does so upon the stage, as his fine figure and handsome coun¬ tenance add: greatly to the effect of his me¬ lodious voice. You have seen« В ------ , who* for want of his figure, is not half so m udì admired as many inferior singers upon the same stage/* Tbe Earl agreed that such a figure was a great advantage to an actor, taking his leave, assuring her that he had formed as high an opinion as she could desire of her elegan bprolêgêe; and soon after Mr. Free¬ man called for this m u chladmi red youth, who little supposed he had been the sub¬ ject» of the Earl and Countess's tête-à-tête, and who was pleased to find his invalid IVi end had deri ved both benefif and amuser¬ aient from his ramble.
CHAP,
CHAP. V. Mrs, Wheeler had so many things to talk over with her husband, and so much to settle, that she resolved .to dine in town, John, who had made very particular inqui¬ ries respecting where and how this «calami¬ tous fire broke out, žold them, when he came home to dinner, that some people were of opinion it did not originate in ac¬ cident, and every one agreed it must have been owing to very great carelessness. Mrs. Wheeler inquired whether they might not sue Government, tò whom the office in which it broke out belonged ? " People might do any £hiag/* tbe old g 3 man«
man replied ; " but except they were sure of obtaining heavy damages, it would be very absurd ; as they wished to keep their loss a secret, they had better immediately contract with some surveyor to rebuild the premises, and teil Wright they had merely made the purchase for a friend, a circum¬ stance, John could say, he had not been aware of, when he informed him of the fire—and a surveyor would run them up upon a slight scale, and much cheaper than Wright would undertake the job." Both η other and son thought he spoke like an oracle, and John was to find out some stranger to do the job, and to pay his usual evening visit at Knightsbridge, since the sooner he brought matters to a con¬ clusion with Miss Atwood, the less likeli¬ hood there was of any discoveries being made inimical to their interest. The old woman was extremely vexed when she understood that Francis knew of their misfortune, as she was sure he would rejoice were they to be ruined, judging him,
him, as most people do, by her own stand¬ ard ; however, as they had resolved to throw Wright oil, they hoped that would lead Francis to suppose he had been also Jed into an error. Now, though she was so anxious to keep him in ignorance of their concerns, she was extremely curious to learn who this old man was who had been his inmate for the last week she un¬ derstood, and whom she had seen the night before at Sadler's Wells, She therefore sent out her usual scout, her maid, to make the enquiry; but in vain did Nanny parade from shop to shop—no one either could or would satisfy her. Mrs. Wheeler, there¬ fore, resolved to pay Mrs. Jones a visit, though she was beginning to hate her most cordially, as she conceived she had been paying her court to both Mr. Moretón and Francis at her expence ; still as she meant to pass her off to Miss Atwood as John's godmother, from whom he had great ex¬ pectations, she was by no means inclined to break with her. She was besides very Q 4 anxious.
anxious to discover whether she had heard thi\t they had been any suderers by the fire, and what had been said respecting her mal apropos visit, and subsequent meeting with Mr. Moretón. Mrs. Jones, in consequence of the deter¬ mination she had formed, though to the full as much provoked with John's strk> tures as Mr. Moretón had been, received her, if not cordially, very politely, and readily told her that Mr, Freeman was the }ate Mr,. Coffey nearest relation, and that so far from blaming the deceased for hav¬ ing made Mr, Yates his heir, she had reason tQ suppose he meant to follow so good an example, as she fully intended doing, since «such merit and »virtues as her (Mrs. Whce- Jer's) nephew possessed were sure to meet *\hh their reward even in this world; and by way of adding to her mortification, she related when and where she had been in- >itcd to dine at Д1г. Moreton'* dwelling, with well-feigned regret upon John Whee«- ler's detention at the watch-house on that evening;
evening ; next expatiating upon the excel¬ lence of the repast, and the spirit of convi¬ viality which prevailed among the guests; and concluding by observing, that Mr. Moreton had felt so offended by John's. address at Sadler's Wells, and by some strictures which he had passed upon his, conduct behind his back, that she feared he was quite in that gentleman's black books. This amusing recapitulation had all the- effect Mrs. Jones had hoped or expected,, as her auditor wept most bitterly, saying— (t John was certainly very hasty, but had, nevertheless an excellent heart, and «he would never believe he had ever spoken disrespectful of Mr. Moreton behind his, back. To whom, pray, had he been so* wicked ? to that snake-in-the-grass Kemp¬ thorne, to that mischief-making Francis Yates, or to her (Mrs. Jones) ?" tf To ne'er a one of us, my good friend," was the cool sarcastic reply, relatiwg^ex- actly what Mr, Moreton had said upon the * о 5> subject;;
subject ; tr therefore you may have chap¬ ter and verse from Mr. Bradshaw, who very naturally gave in his report of the old gen¬ tleman, when he found him lodging in his cousin's house : but now I have answered all your questions, Mrs. Wheeler, pray who were those ladies vou brought with you to Islington ?" ff The lady where we lodge at Knights¬ bridge, Mrs. Bever, her daughter, and a Miss Atwood, a young lady of family and fortune." She now took leave of her former friend, resolving to take John pretty severely to task for his imprudent communication to Bradshaw, and for having suffered him¬ self to be surprised listening at Frank's window, though she did not chuse to men¬ tion either circumstance to her husband, as she wished to keep him in good humour with his son, that he might do the hand¬ some thing by him when he married. She therefore merely returned home in search of a few things she wished to take with her to
to Knightsbridge, where she arrived be¬ tween five and six that evening, and found Carolinein Aiiss Atwood's apartmen t, where having joined them, they declared they were afraid she would not have returned to tea. Aiiss Atwood requested both mother and daughter would join her party. To this they readily absented; but the old woman wishing to dispose of her bundle, and to put her cap on; she said, went into her own room, acknowledging she wa» ex¬ tremely fatigued, and was relating to Ca¬ roline the fictitious tale John had concert¬ ed, to account for her private expedition: to town, when a very handsome open lan¬ dau, the coachman and footman in rich laced liveries and hats, drove up to the door. There were four people in the car¬ riage, a gentleman and lady, and two young ladies from ten to twelve years of age, as far as they could judge; and it may be supposed that both mother and daughter approached the window. The footman. с 6 havinsî •л
having descended from his elevated sta¬ tion, rang a peal upon the knocker, in¬ quiring whether Miss Atwood was at home? which Caroline distinctly heard, as she was leaning out of the window, i{ Who, in the name of fortune, can this be?" cried the old woman; " did Miss Atwood expect company ? to be sure she asked us to join her party—oh, she only meant Mrs. and Miss Bever, I dare say 'tis Captain and Mrs. Boughton, though «she seemed taller than that lady, and they have no children —But îhen who che can it be?" resumed Mrs. Wheeler. While they were thus debating, the party alighted, and entered tiic- house. 'It must be the Captain and his lady," said the old woman, in an affirmative tone; * l and ihev arc come to tea, and to take leave before they go into the North." The party were now ascending the stairs, and they having softly opened the door, heard Miss .Vtwood cxpre^ing her joy at MA Hi li'
seeing them ; but she mentioned no names. The carriage drove off to a public-house across the way ; of com so they meant to make some stay; and as they would cer¬ tainly drink tea with their young friend, they must proride for themselves,, the old woman desiring Caroline to look sharp, and to get some water, for ten to one it would soon run short with such a party. But before Caroline could go down, Miss Atwood came running up, and having knocked at their door, came in, saying— r * 1 am afraid î shall make you wait for tea rather longer than í had intended, my dear Mrs. Wheeler, for some verv intimate friends of mine have just dropped in, but whom I cannot treat quite so familiarly as you allow me to do you, and 1 am very anxious to introduce you to them. Mre. Bever is quite in a bustle preparing coffee, &c. ; therefore I came in search of you and my dear Caroline." * f You are all kindness and condescen¬ sion, my dear young lady; but we arc not 3 sufficiently
sufficiently dressed to be introduced to such fashionable folks, and we have no ci oaths here much better than those we have on." (< Nonsense," cried the young lady ; ct people of real fashion never attend to dress; they are of course obliged to appear like other people, but they never form their opinion of any body from their dress." " Captain and Airs, Boughton, I pre¬ sume," said the old woman. íť Bless me, how came that into your head, mv dear Aiadam ?—oh no, thev are upon their journey into the North. 1 calied in Gower-street this morning, where I learnt they set cfľ yesterday. I should not have styled the Captain aa intimate friend, I give you my honour. This lady and gen¬ tleman are Air. and Airs. Eggleton, of John- street, the Adelphi, the great solicitor, and two of their sweet girls—a most amiable couple, I can assure you—they live in the first style, as you may suppose ; indeed his practice is immense ; he is making a very rapid
rapid fortune, and I assure you I consider a \ isit from him a very great favour; but he is happy, as he says, to steal an hour\s relaxation from business, as his head is sometimes absolutelv bewildered, he has so many calls upon his attention, and the so¬ ciety of ladies is sure to enliven him. So pray come along—they will fancy lam rim away." Mrs. Wheeler, whose consequence, in her own estimation, was ve* y much raised, and whose curiosity was greatly increased, only requested to be allowed three minutes just to slip on a better gown, promising to join the party the moment she had made herself a little decent. Miss Atwood made no objection, running down again to an¬ nounce their promised visit, she said; and both mother and daughter were speedily arrayed in the best cloaths they had at Knightsbridge, lamenting they had not been aware of being introduced to such fine folks, as Mrs. Wheeler could have brought a fresh supply from home. This
This was another convincing proof that Miss Atwood was indeed a lady of family and fortune,· Mrs. Wheeler sagaciouslv ob- served, as she perfectly recollected the name of My. Eggleton, of the Adelphi, having heard him mentioned as the first man in his line. The old woman would have scorned to have never before heard of ^o great a man. Caroline made no doubt of his living in great style, as Miss Atwood had said, since she had never seen a more handsome carriage, nor a more shewy livery. This was something like. Frank's chariot was shabby in comparison, and so much like a Quaker's, she thought nothing of İt. tc Nor I neither, child; so think no more about him, as you may yet hold up your head with the best of them." With these cheering hopes, they descend¬ ed to the drawing-room, and having tapped at the door, they were immediately admit¬ ted by Miss Atwood, who introduced them as her particular friends to Mr. and Mrs. EegletoiK
Eggleton.— fť He was a very good-looking man, about fifty, whose manners and ad¬ dress corresponded with the character Miss Atwood had given of him," said Mrs. Whee¬ ler to her daughter, when they retired for the night; iC his wife was a very fine wo¬ man, between thirty and forty, and had she never spoke, people might have supposed she was born to keep her carriage, .and had not, as some French people since the Revo> lution have done, fallen out of her garrei window into her elegant lăudau," —since even Mrs. Wheeler discovered that her manners were by no means so genteel as Miss Atwood's; of course she did not re¬ mind her of her beloved Miss Haslemere. She, however, said but little, nor was Mr. Eggleton very talkative, though both were extremely pobtc; and he took occasion to tell Miss Atwood that he was in hopes of making an addition of at least fifty pounds а -year to her present income, in the course οΐ the ensuing twelve months, as he pro¬ posed warning out two of her present te¬ nants
nani s the next quarter-day, and they must pay a very advanced rent if they chose to remain where they were, warning her against seeing them, should they address themselves to her. Then turning towards Mrs. Wheeler— " I ought to be fined for talking of busi¬ ness out of office hours, and in such good company; but I have so little time to spare, that I am obliged sometimes to transgress against the laws of politeness, and young ladies are apt to be too generous. Now I should scorn to set the example; but if other people raise their tenants, why should not we ? as I tell my young friend and client, whom I have known from a child, as I did all her late father's business, and she has ever found me her sincere friend. Her sister married rather contrary to my wishes, and I grieve to say that I had formed a better judgment than she had of Captain Boughton, who wishes, I believe, my young friend may remain single, as her fortune would in that case, in the event of her
her death, devolve to his wife. I advise hx*r, however, to marry, when she meets with a man likely to contribute to her hap¬ piness; but she is too difficult." Mrs. Wheeler made what she conceived a very suitable reply, but which would have led a man of less penetration than the one she was addressing to guess what her views and hopes were ; and after a visit of two hours, the solicitor talked of going, inviting Miss Atwood and her friends to meet a small party at their house on the Wednesday following. Fortunately, just as orders were given for the carriage, John arrived, and was in consequence introduced to the owners of it, and included in the invitation, as he would protect the ladies home. John was extremely flattered, as these were, in his opinion, very great folks, since even Mrs. Bever did not join the party, though both Mr, and Mrs. Eggleton more than once spoke of her in very favourable terms, as having been unfortunate, but as highly rcspec-
respectable; and as they went down te their carriage, they addressed her very kindly, her parlour door being open, con¬ gratulating her upon having such excellent lodgers, Mr. Eggleton desiring her to apply to him without scruple whenever he could be of any service to her. She was profuse in her thanks; and as all her lodgers, and Mr. John, supped with her in the parlour upou cold ham and lobsters, which Mrs. Wheeler had brought from town, she re¬ paid Mr, Eggletou in his owai coLu.^—" He was the best of men, and had carried two suits on fox her gratis, because she was a widow, and had been left in narrow cir¬ cumstances, and he had recommended her dear· Miss Atwood to board and lodge with her, which she .considered as the greatest favour he bad conferred upon her." Hie Wheelers were all ears; and the old woman told her son, ia a whisper, when they separated* that though she had no doubt now, nor indeed ever had had, re¬ specting Miss Atwood's family, fortune, and
and connections, still, for her own satisfac¬ tion, she would make a few inquiries the next morning in the neighbourhood of Gower-street, as people could not bc too particular when their happiness was at stake, hinting to him that he would never learn prudence, and appointing to meet him the next evening in* Grosvenor-place. John departed, not exactly comprehend¬ ing his mother's allusions, who, agreeable to her promise, sallied forth next morning, under pretence of going to see how her good old man did ; and having reached Gower-street, being acquainted with the number, she soon found the house she was come in search of, and read tne name of Sowerby upon the door; but as she could not make her proposed inquiries there, she looked round Her in search of a likely place where she might unsuspected ask the questions she wished to have resolved, and perceiving a public-house at the corner of a street, at no great distance from Miss Sowerby*s, thither she proceeded, and find¬ ing
ing only the landlady in the bar, of her she inquired at what number in Gower-street Airs, or Aiiss Sowerby lived ? The person she addressed immediately gave her the expected answer to this pre¬ paratory query, *' Possibly then you can inform me whether Captain Boughton and his lady are still there r" (t They are not. They left town two or three days aço for the North, and are gone to Scotland 1 have been told." " Bless me, how unfortunate!" resumed Afrs. Wheeler ; " then I have had my walk for my pains ; do make me a small glass of brandy and water, for I shall be so fati- g u ed, I shall never gel back to Brompton without some refreshment." The landlady politely asked her to sit down in the bar, while she prepared her beverage; and feeling rather curious to know what had induced her customer to take such a long walk, said she was sorry she had been disappointed, hoped her not having
having come in time to sec the Captain and Mrs. Boughton was of no consequence; at all events, she dare say she would find Mrs. Sowerby at home. " My seeing that lady will be of no use; therefore Ishall not trouble her with a cull, since I came into Gower-street in conse¬ quence of having heard the Captain and his lady were just returned from the East Indies, and that the lady wanted a decent young body to attend upon her; and I have a very nice girl, whom I have brought up out οΐ charity, whom I should have wished to have placed in just such a situa¬ tion." u Then you are certainly too late," re¬ joined the landlady ; <f though I never heard that Mrs. Boughton was looking out for a servant, and I should suppose she would not have engaged one in London, as she will probably meet with one who will demand much less wages in the coun¬ try, and the Captain, 1 believe, knows the value of the money." This
This was leading to the very point to which Airs. Wheeler meant to bring her, who replied— ťf Then perhaps Anne has had no such great miss. I believe ail Scotch people are mean. But perhaps they are not rich." iç That I cannot take upon myself to de^ cide. The Captain has been a long time in the India service; but he may wish to lay by against he grows old. 1 have heard that he was supposed to have a plenty, and he has no children ; but it is not always those who have the most money who are the most liberal." €i There you speak very true," replied Airs. Wheeler; " pray can you tell me who he married ?" " Most certainly. He married a Aiiss Atwood, the niece of Airs. Sowerby : there were two sisters of them, and' the unmar¬ ried one is one of the finest voting women you ever clapped your eyes on. She had used to live with her old aunt, who fo be sure is one of God s unaccountables ; and as
as the young lady was her own mis* tress, at last she left her in a huff, and I s cannot say I know where she resides at pre¬ sent; but Mrs. Sowerby is one of those who, because she has a little money to leave behind her, fancies she has a right to torment every body about her to death, and that they ought to put up with her fancies and caprices, because they may stand a chance of coming ín for what she has to leave behind her. However, I say Miss Atwood acted with becoming spirit when she set her at défiance ; and should she go wrong, the guilt will fie at *AA Madam's door." This " go wrong" made Mts. Wheeler start, who hoped there was no chance of so beautiful a young creature's going wrong. The landlady, (earing from the gestures and visible interest her auditor seemed to take in Miss Atwood's concerns, that she knew more about her than she had chosen to acknowledge, declared she had quite vot. ш. n mişun-
misunderstood her, if she supposed she meant to insinuate the young lady had gone terong. She only knew she had left her aunt, who fancied no one could go right, when from under her eye, " I suppose," resumed Mrs. Wheeler, ** these young ladies lost their parents when they were very young, by their being left under the care of this severe aunt; and as the youngest has moved her quarters, I presume they were not absolutely depen¬ dant upon her." « " Oh dear, no—I have heard that Cap¬ tain ^Boughton had six thousand pounds with his wife, and some people say nearer ten ; and I always understood the sisters had shared their father's property between them. He was a West India trader or planter, and Mrs. Sowerby is their mother's sister; she is reported to have at least twen¬ ty thousand pounds at her own disposal, and I suppose she will make her nieces her heirs." The entrance of several male customers took
rook off the landlady's attention ; and as Mrs. Wheeler could not renew the subject, she departed extremely well satisfied witb what she had picked up, convinced that Miss Atwood had at least six thousand pounds, and, as the Captain had no chil¬ dren, might come in for part of his savings. As for Mrs. Sowerby, she considered the half of her property as good as secured to this beautiful girl, since if she could but brins: this desirable match about, she made no doubt of effecting a reconciliation be¬ tween the aunt and the niece, as her son must insure the regard and esteem of so saving and prudent a woman. Having, therefore, communicated all she had picked up to Caroline, they redoubled their politeness towards Miss Atwood, who had no idea where the old woman had been, or she would have felt greatly alarmed, well knowing that not only Mrs. Sowerby, but many more people in that neighbourhood*, not only suspected but knew she had gone wrong; and as she lived in a sort of conti¬ li 2 n uai
Bual dread of something transpiring to> lower her in the opinion of the Wheelers, she was more or less gay or dull in unison with them, as she was to the full as anxious to get a husband as John was to make her his wife. As she had perceived that he was really in love with her, she hoped that would render him, as the blind god usually does his votaries, blind, deaf, and insensible to all her failings. Airs. Bever and she were, therefore, as diligently planning to bring the match to bear as the Wheelers were ; but they felt that much more rested with the gentleman than with them. While Mrs. Wheeler was gone upon her secret expedition into Gower-street, our hero, as usual, drove past her door ; and Caroline having wondered where he went so constantly, Mrs. Bever promised to make inquiries; but having devoted his accus¬ tomed time to the improvement of his pu¬ pils of fashion, he proceeded, it being Sa¬ turday, to Mrs, Perkins's, where he found the fair Louisa apparently impatiently awaiting
awaiting him. Did she feel as much plea¬ sure in his company as he did in her's ? he mentally inquired ; yet he was frequently at a loss how to frame his conduct towards her, and not always exactly satisfied with her behaviour towards him, the blind god not having inflicted a sufficient deep wound upon him to render him insensible to what he deemed caprice in his scholar. Some¬ times he feared she thought him too free, *s she always seemed hurt, even pettishly so, he fancied, when he ventured to correct what he deemed her errors in singing— perhaps she thought he was the more prone to find fault because he taught her gratis— he would be more circumspect; yet of what avail would his lessons be if he did not attend to her improvement ?—but she was not so anxious to succeed as his other pupils were, often appearing to think she had already attained perfection, as she ge¬ nerally seemed anxious to draw him inta conversation. But on this day, having risen и Sl from-
from her seat to fetch a duet she wished him to sing with her out of the front par¬ lour, as she was returning, her foot caught in the edge of "the carpet, which had been raised by the wind, of which she was not aware; she therefore fell upon one knee, giving a gentle scream. Our hero instantly flew to her assistance ; and having assisted her to rise, expressed his fears that she had hurt herself, with such apparent anxiety, that they appeared, by gratifying her va¬ nity, to induce her to forget the pain which % her knee occasioned her. " How extremely aukward I must have been!" she exclaimed, as he was support¬ ing her to her seat. The sudden entrance of Mrs. Perkins prevented our hero from making any re¬ ply, as she instantly inquired what was the matter ? she thought she had heard an un¬ usual noise. " It was me, my dear Mrs, Perkins, dis¬ playing how gracefully I could fall upon one
one knee, I dare say Mr. Yates never saw an actress throw herself into such a posture with more dexterity." This allusion to his profession instantly restored Francis to his self-possession, as his heart was almost upon his lips when Mrs. Perkins entered ; and he declared himself very happy to find she could laugh at what he had feared, in the first moments might have been of serious consequence. " Your countenance bespoke your alarm, Mr. Yates, when I came in," said Mrs. Per¬ kins. ct But you perceive, like me, Mr. Yates has soon rallied his spirits," was the reply, in a tone of pique ; " however, as my fine acting has incapacitated me from singing any more to-day, I hope you will excuse my retiring, Sir. By Tuesday í make no doubt I shall be sufficiently recovered to join in the duet I have brought part of the way into the room, for there it lies upon the floor." Francis instantly picked it up, though u 4 he
he hardly knew what to make of his Echo- lar, who he requested would make no apologies for retiring, requesting Mrs. Per* kins would inform him how Miss Chetwynd was before he departed, since having or¬ dered his carriage at three, he must wait its arrival ; and the ladies having left the room, he took up the duet which had occa¬ sioned his fair scholar's fall, but his mind was too much occupied to attend to either vŕords or music. ^Sorely," he mentally exclaimed, rr there is a strong nuance d'affectation in this Mrss Chetwynd' 4 — únee the more he reconsi¬ dered the recent scene, the less was he pleased with her behaviour. He was an «ctbt, he knew, and no one had hitherto apf>eare-å fo reproach him with having adopted such a profession. Then should à young person, upon whom hè had been endeavouring to confer an obligation, al¬ lude to it with a smile <of contempt ? did she suppose he considered himself her su¬ perior í 'She was very much mistaken, since in
ih point of fortune excepted, he should ever- consider himself the inferior of every pen- son of decent family, and bom in wedlock;; and what had there been in his behaviour to pique her pride, or to offend her sensi¬ bility ? He wished he could ask. her to ex¬ plain. The appearance of Mrs. Perkins roused; him to a sense of his felly, in thus dwelling upon the capricious behaviour of a hand¬ some woman.. " Miss Chetwynd is perfectly recovered^ my dear Sir, a slight bruise being all the* injury she has sustained'; and Γ have taken, proper precautions to prevent her suffer¬ ing any inconvenience from so trifling am accident; but since we are alone, what is. your real opinion of her?- Ts she capable* of undertaking a governess's place;, as I have heard of one Γ think might suit her?** f * Then l· am eonvanced. her musical' ta¬ lents will insure her every advantage уош can require, or she caa expect,, Mrs¿ Per- η 5 Uns;;
kins ; and if her other acquirements at all keep pace with her thorough knowledge of music, she must prove a treasure in any family of distinction.*' "Л am glad you think so, Sir, as I feared J was prejudiced in her favour. Next week I am to give Mrs. Mortimer's friend my final answer. Louisa feels rather reluctant | о enter upon so arduous a task ; but as she has no better prospect, she must bend her back to the burthen." The arrival of our hero's carriage saved him from the necessity of replying at length to Mrs. Perkins ; and he drove οίζ after promising to call again on Tuesday, hardly certain whether he was or was not in love with her fair relation. Would she render a domesticated sensible man happy? was the grand query, he conceived ; when suddenly recollecting her implied sarcasm upon his profession, he resolved not to put it in her power to reject him, or, like the lady Mr. Freeman's brother had been so
so near giving his name to, to marry him for a comfortable home and a gpod for¬ tune,.
CHAP. VL It being one of Mrs. Wheeler's maxims;. that " in for a penny in for a pound," she resolved not to be sparing, since thousands might depend upon the proper and judi¬ cious expenditure of a few pounds; To be sure they- had recently sustained a very great loss ; but this marriage would set all to rights. This was Saturday—John· was engaged to spend the Sunday with them ; Wednes¬ day they were all engaged to Mr. Eggle- H G ton's;;
totà*s; atid before they went Aere, she wished to ¿íve !Miss Atwood sottie idèa of their stvle of living in Marsham-street, and to take her to some place of public amuse¬ ment, where they were more likely to be better entertained than they had been at Sadler's Wells, as she wished her to give in a favourable report of them to this rich solicitor, she seeming to look up to him for advice, and what he said might clench the nail in their favotrr. She therefore went to meet her son, as agreed upon ; and before she communicated to him what she had learnt in Gower-street, she told him what Mrs. Jones had said respecting his having been caught listening, and then reproached him for having ridiculed old Moretón to Bradshaw, John swore that the patrole had told a d—nd lie when tney said they had taken him under Frank's window, as they had seized him while listening at their awn door for the maid to let him in, and vowed he had never ridiculed old Moretón but to Kempthorne,
Kemptnorne, who bad of course repeated what he bad said, with many exaggera¬ tions. Though by no means satisfied with these explanations, as she did not chuse to quar¬ rel with him, bis mother appeared to be contented, telling him what she had learnt in Gower-street, which was pouring oil upon John's flame. It was therefore de¬ cided that they should on that evening ŕn- \ ite Miss Atwood and Mrs. and Miss Bever to dine in Marsham-street on tbe Monday, and that they should go from thence to Vauxball, it being the I2th of August, and there was to bé a grand gala hi honour of the day. " That would be doing things in style," the old woman observed, " as she had heard Miss Atwood say she delighted in being at Vauxhall on a gala-night; and after baving given her such a treat, she thought he might venture to declare himself." So thought John—" But who should they invite to meet ber in Marsham-street?" 3 " Why
" Why what think you of asking Mrs. Jones and Mr. Moretón ? You can walk over to Islington to-morrow morning,, and then you will see whether he has taken affront." The conscious John declined doing this, advising his mother to go, which convinc¬ ing her that he had imprudently given loose to his tongue, induced her to give up the dea of inviting the old gentleman/ since she feared he would not join the party^— taking upon herself to invite Mrs. Jones, as she should walk home the next morning to make a few preparations, though it was Sunday ,\ and that very evening the three ladies were invited in form to dine, drink tea, sup, go to Vauxhall, and to sleep in Marsham-street.. Miss Atwood readily accepted the invita¬ tion, requesting they might be considered as friends, and treated accordingly, hoping Miss Wheeler would not catch cold in the gardens. Caroline vowed she had never been better in all her life, and that she should
should like of-all things to be at Vauxhall on such a night, the fire-works were so well worth seeing. Mrs. Jones was extremely surprised at receiving a visit from Mrs. Wheeler on the Sunday soon after breakfast, though she seldom went to church in a morning, and was busy packing, she told her visitor, as she was upon the flight for Margate, and propo«sed setting off on Tuesday. Mrs, Wheeler was lost in amaze^— " Go¬ ing to Margate, Mrs. Jones! why I thought it would have been as easy a matter to have moved the Monument as to have got yoa from home." " Time was when it might have been so«> 'Mrs. Wheeler ; but I am now resolved to enjoy myself while I do live; and my only lodger and his sister propose going thi¬ ther, and have persuaded me to join their party." " Well, wonders j will never cease. I .thought Francis had put this crotchet in your
your head ; however, I wish you may Bö' the better for your journey." (< I am convinced you do/' replied the old lady, with a provoking smile. c ' But Γ came to ask you to dine with us^ to-morrow, to meet a small party," resumed Mrs. Wheeler. " Have you then given up your country lodgings?" " No ; our month was up on Saturday,. but we shall stay another week, if not lon¬ ger, Caroline has found such benefit from the air. The ladies you saw with us at Sadler's Wells are the party you will meet. The young folks talk of going to Vauxhall in the evening." * c I will dine with you with all my heart/ K replied Mrs. Jones ; ^ but as for going to Vauxhall, I am much too old to venture into such a croud as there will be there, should the evening prove fine,"' Mrs. Wheeler was by no means inclined to press her going.; they therefore ¡sepa¬ rated,
rated, if not in friendship, with civility, though curiosity alone had induced Mrs. Jones to accept her invitation, as she mere¬ ly remained upon apparent good terms with the Wheelers for the sake of hearing what was going on in the family, being perfectly aware that they would never break with her, if she did not throw them off. On the Monday morning Mrs. Wheeler came to town very early, bringing Caro¬ line with her, and they found full employ¬ ment in superintending the cooking, &c. as the old woman was resolved to spare no cost upon such an occasion, as she was baiting with a «prat to catch a herring. She told her husband they were to dine at four, as it being a sort of general holiday, John could get home by that hour, with whom Mrs. Wheeler consulted, before he went into the city, as to the cheapest mode of proceeding to the gardens. A glass coach would be infinitely too expensive, yet a hack might appear mean after their «great boasts. « Then
"Then what say you to a boat, mother?" cried John; <c it is but a step from hence to the horse ferry, and there wc can em¬ bark ; and by keeping the boat in waiting, we can return the same way." His mother gave him credit for the thought; and if Miss Atwood had no ob¬ jection, so it should be. John also proposed their supping before they set off. They could not think of going before ten, and he thought the en¬ trance-money on one of these gala nights would be more than enough out of his pocket. " None of your mean notions, I desire, John. Here am not I going to spend I cannot tell what to treat your mistress, and you begrudge paying for a supper? you that never took either me or your sister into public, since you have had plenty of money at your own command. However, one word is as good as ten thousand ; if you lose such a prize through your mean, a varici о us.
avaricious notions, why there may be greater losses in store for you." John was once more all submission ; and at four o'clock precisely, the ladies from Knightsbridge drove to the door. John happening to come up nearly at the same moment, he had the advantage of handing them out, and of discharging their coach, which Miss Atwood requested him to do; and though she did offer to return the mo- ney, John peremptorily refused to take it —he should have fetched her in a coach, could he have left Austin Friars in time, and he was overjoyed at having arrived so very apropos. The old man was extremely pleased with this beautiful young creature, who address¬ ed him in the kindest and politest terms, lamenting his being of necessity so con¬ fined, strongly recommending the Bath waters ; and as poor old Wheeler had been an utter stranger to the accents of kindness since Francis had been in a manner banished the house, he was affected even to tears by the
the appearance of sympathy Miss Atwood evinced for him, who was delighted with the house, the rooms were so large and lofty—no one could require a country re¬ sidence, except after an illness, who lived in so airy a part of London. Old Wheeler told her, that at his death (and it could not be supposed he should live many years) he meant to leave it to his son, who by that time would, he hoped, be well married. Miss Atwood readily took the hint, and found all was going on as smoothly as she could wish. Afrs. Jones soon made her appearance,. well knowing that Mrs. Wheeler's four o'clock dinner would not be served till near five ; and she was even more struck than the old man with Miss Atwood, though she thought she was dressed in rather too shewy a style, yet very decently, the fashion considered ; and as her language was what might be deemed refined, and she had a good deal of small-talk, and appeared to have moved in much higher circles than the
the one she was now in, the old lady won¬ dered how she and the Wheelers came to be upon such an intimate footing, though she perceived they treated her rather cere¬ moniously, as even the Christmas dinner was not to be compared to the one Mrs. Wheeler now set before them ; but before it was over, John's knowing looks and fre¬ quent tender glances, or rather leers, in addition to his great politeness to Miss Atwood and her party, led the old lady to guess what was in agitation, and she felt grieved that so fine a girl should fall to the share of a man she now most cordially de¬ spised. What a handsome couple her fa¬ vourite Yates and Miss Atwood would be ! had she ever seen him ? she wondered. But not chusing to disturb the harmony of the company, as she was not deficient in what might be deemed the common forms of good breeding, she did not start the sub^ ject. Indeed her frequent intercourse with our hero and his friends had greatly soft·« ened down many of her asperities, and rendered
rendered her a far more agreeable compa¬ nion. She nevertheless rallied her former beau, affecting to feel herself deserted, la¬ menting the depredations of time, since once she might have vied with the lady to whom he now paid his devotions. These speeches were all taken in good part, and John even hoped he was still in favour. Mrs. Wheeler had given her Knightsbridge visitors to understand she was the rich god-mother from whom John had such great expectations; and as she was very well dressed, and w T as very good company, Miss Atwood endeavoured to in¬ gratiate herself with her, Mrs. Jones was extremely anxious to learn who she was. A young lady of family and fortune, Mrs. Wheeler had told her, when she had first inquired. But what young lady of family and fortune would ever throw herself away upon John Wheeler?—-and this beautiful girl certainly gave him all the encourage¬ ment he could desire. No opportunity, however, occurred to question
question Mrs. Wheeler; and about eight o'clock tea and coffee were brought in. Never had she been so splendidly treated before. However, the Wheelers took such pains to render themselves agreeable, and Miss Atwood and Mrs. Bever were such pleasant companions, she spent a very agreeable afternoon, and would have been perfectly satisfied, could she have learnt a few particulars respecting this handsome stranger ; but as it grew dusk, Mrs. Whee¬ ler became rather anxious to get rid of her, fearing, notwithstanding what she had said the day before, she might wish to ac¬ company them to Vauxhall— however, soon after dusk, she called for her cloak, and taking a polite leave of the whole party, whom she feared she should not see again for some time, as she expected to be ab¬ sent at least a month, she retired. When in the street, she felt half inclined to look in upon her favourite, but she could not have done so unknown to the Wheelers— besides she saw his carriage advancing down the
the street, a proof that he was going out ; she therefore proceeded hotne, resolving to call tbe next morning, as the hoy or Margate packet was npt to sail till after¬ noon. It was now submitted to Miss Atwood whether they should go by water, or send for a coach. As she easily guessed which they would prefer, having soon discovered the foible of the family, she voted for a boat. John had previously engaged one* having resolved not to be able to procure a coach, which being in waiting, they im¬ mediately walked down to the ferry, and were soon landed at the gardens, where a tolerable croud were already assembled, which seemed increasing every moment, as the evening was delightfully fine, and the fire-works were extremely brilliant. In short, every one present seemed to parti¬ cipate in the delight and hilarity of the scene; and if it had not been for the mo* ney which John had already spent, and the future demand he foresaw there would be upon
upon his purse, he would have been as happy as a selfish miser can ever feci. Of course he tried to make himself extremely agreeable; and аз for his fair mistress, she was quite in her element, though rather ashamed of her party-r-but her own folly had thrown her out of the circle in which she might have moved, and her constitu¬ tional levity soon made her shake off all disagreeable retrospections. Time insensibly stole away, the amuse¬ ments were so varied. It was therefore past twelve before any parties sat down to «upper; but having seen many people re¬ tire into the boxes. Airs. Wheeler gave John a look which he perfectly understood, sav¬ ins:, she began to crow tired of walking. Aiiss Atwood did not wonder, they had been so long upon their icet. Mrs. Bever did not like to be the first to complain, but now acknowledged she should enjoy sitting down. John apologised for not having sooner looked out for a box, but he had been so vol. ni. ι miïc h
much entertained, he had not been aware how time wore ; however they would now make for the first empty one they saw, and having soon found one, as the generality of those present were not inclined to sup, being well aware of the expence attending such a repast, upon these crowded nights, the ladies took their seats, and John put the general question to them—" W T hatshall we have?" Neither Miss Atwood nor Mrs. Bever chose to «say what they liked. Mrs. Whee¬ ler, therefore, desired her son would order something nice, as they did not come there to cat cold boiled beef and ham, and there were plenty of delicacies in the larder, she made no doubt, John was not inclined to be sparing, he assured her, in reply ; but before he had given any orders, Mrs. Eggleton, her two daughters, and a youth between fifteen and sixteen, slopped directly opposite the box, the lady exclaiming—" How happy 1 am to see you, Miss Atwood ! Mrs. Wheeler, your
Vour most obedient. How are you, Mrs, Bever?" not forgetting John and Caro- Üne. The whole party rose to return her sa¬ lute, when she proceeded— tr I began to fear that in such an immense croud I should not meet with a single person of my ac¬ quaintance, for we have been verV unfor¬ tunate, as you shall hear; indeed I have wished we had not left home more than once, for just as Air. Eggleton was placing me and the girls in our wherry, and was preparing to accompany us, Hewson, his head clerk, came running after him to tell him Lord------required his immediate at¬ tendance, he having been taken suddenly ill, and had sent his own carriage for him —so not to disappoint the children and John (a nephew of A Jr. Eggleton's, Airs. Wheeler), who is just come out of the country, he sent us off, promising to join us as soon as possible ; but as we have seen nothing of him, I suppose he has bren en¬ gaged in making an intricate will, and has ι 2 been
been unable to get away, though it is very possible he may be in the gardens, and not have been able to find us, for 1 think one might bc here for a week without meeting, except by chance, the croud is so great." John hoped she and the young ladies would take seats—he could stand, if there was no room. Aiiss Atwood and Mrs. Wheeler seconded the invitation ; and as she thought she might be more likely to meet with Mr. Eggleton if she remained «stationary, she at last consented ; and by sitting close, there was very good room for both the Johns, the elder of whom did not relish this addition to their party ; but as he hoped Mr. Eggleton would soon join them, and would of course pay half, it might eventually prove a trifling saving to him—he therefore requested Mrs. Eggle¬ ton would say what she preferred. " She was a very little supper-eater/' she assured him ; t( the girls would like a few cheesecakes, but as for her, whatever he had already ordered would suffice." Resolved
Resolved to display his spirit and gal¬ lantry, John called a waiter, and gave or¬ ders for the 1 est the larder afforded, as he detested cold beef, ììììcì ham was only good as an accompaniment to fowls. Mrs. Whee¬ ler gave him a look of approbation ; but Airs. Eggleton grieved he had been so libe- ral in his orders, as these people hardly knew what to charge upon such nights. John wished he had been more prudent, but wisely affected to care very little about the expence. In a few minutes their table was covered with every delicacy the larder afforded, and with a variety of tarts and cheesecakes, custards and jellies, for the children. John turned pale when he saw the profusion which was set before them ; but as he hoped that he should only have to pay for what was eaten, he rather rallied his spirits; but Airs. Eggleton, who was« much better acquainted with the rules of such places than he was, advised their en¬ deavouring to make a good supper, since whether or not, what was placed before ι «л thettt
them must be paid for. That Mrs. Whee¬ ler supposed, not chusing to appear igno¬ rant; and some sherry, negus, and arrack punch being ordered, the latter by Mrs. Eggleton, who never drank wine, they en¬ deavoured to do honour to the elegant cold collation. John regretting that he had made ao hearty a dinner, and reflecting, now it was too late, that that was an expence which might very well have been spared, since, as it was, they had none of them much appetite ; but the Eggletons, parti¬ cularly the daughters aud nephew, were by no means bashful, which John remarking, he kept looking about him every third mo¬ ment, in hopes of perceiving Mr. Eggle¬ ton, whom* he conceived had the greatest right to pay for their gormandising; and as the genteeler part of the company were now filing off apace, if he was in the gar¬ dens, he thought he must get sight of him. While he was thus staring to the right and left, Mr. Freeman and our hero, arm in ami, slowly walked by, followed by Mr, Moretou
Moretón and Kempthorne, Kalkreuth and «mother oli gentleman bringing up the rear; and, as if on purpose to disconcert the Wheeler family and the fair Aiiss At- wood, the three young men were on their side, and the }oung Eggletons and their cousin, and Aiiss Bever, were so gay and noisy, that they attracted their attention so forcibly, they made a sort of momentary pause before their box, to the infinite con¬ sternation of four of the party. Airs. Whee¬ ler wished to have addressed Air. Aioreton, but he had hold of Kempthorne's arm, whose contempt for the whole party was legibly imprinted upon his countenance, (since he supposed they were thus sumptu¬ ously feasting at George Haslemere's ex- pence, little imagining John would ever have given so extravagant an order), and as he stedfastly considered the assembled group, she dared not venture, Francis had merely taken a passing glance at them, the appearance of Mbs Atwood perfectly accounting for their be- i * ing
ing there, in his opinion, wondering whe¬ ther those rude girls nnd boy were rela¬ tions of her>, or natural children of Mr. George's, whom Mrs. Wheeler kept in the back ground. Kalkreuth.. like Kempthorne, took a full stare at them—and the droll, ironical expression of his countenance was, if possible, more provoking than Kemp¬ thorne's stern contemptuous regard. Miss Atwood had lowered her eyes the moment she caught sight of them, nay even bent over her plate to conceal her confusion, though she flattered herself thev would not address her. Caroline, in some respects, participated in her unenviable sensations ; und John was so provoked by Kemp¬ thorne's scornful looks, and Kalkreuth's ironical smiles, that had he dared, he would have knocked them both down ; and even Francis's delicate forbearance he construed into a wish to affront him, supposing, and in that respect he was not mistaken, that our hero thought him beneath his notice. The moment they were out of hearing, Mrs*
Airs. Wheeler exclaimed—' f I never saw- any thing so rude—why the impudent fel¬ lows fairly stared you out of countenance* my dear Aiiss Atwood." " That is an old failing of Afr. Yates's, you know, Ala'am/* was the prompt reply Γ " but I cannot suppose I was the magnet that attracted his regard." " Oh he grows more insolent every day," was the reply, pressing her hand under the table, as much as to say we will drop the« subject, while an expressive look at Caro¬ line was a farther explanation of her mean¬ ing ; and Aiiss Atwood rejoiced at having thus thrown off all suspicion from herself^ hoping the young men would not agai» cross their path, though she did not sup¬ pose they would be so malicious as to ad¬ dress her : if they did, her confusion, she was well aware, would betray her secret. John had muttered out an oath, and Mrs.. Bever felt rather ill at ease ; Airs. Eggle¬ ton had her suspicions, but affected not to? ι 5 havei
have remarked the sort of general conster¬ nation that prevailed. This rencontre was, however, such a check to their appetites, that they suffered the remains of their sup¬ per to be horried away, without putting a single negative upon the waiter's expedi- tioiH The negus and the punch were pro¬ nounced excellent, and the repeated draughts of both which John swallowed alone enabled him to keep up his spirits, since he must discharge the reckoning, nnd there was no sign of Air. Eggleton's com¬ ing to their assistance; to be sure his wife would offer to pay îıer share, as lier chil¬ dren and nephew had eat more than all the rest had done^—but he feared he must not buffer her, for should Eggleton fancy he resembled Captain Boughton, he would certainly put a spoke in his wheel. At last, therefore, with a faltering voice, he called for the bill, which the head-waiter 4 instantly produced, when, forgetting that he had assumed the character of a man of S fashion j
fashion, he exclaimed-«-" Ζ —ds and d -^пщ toit! five pounds eighteen shillings! how the d-v-1 do you make out such a sum ?" " The articles are all mentioned, Sir," was the reply ; and a look from his mother recalled John to his recollection. He, however, looked over the long scroll very minutely before he very reluctantly put his hand into his pocket and drew out his-, purse. Airs. Eggleton said she would not offend Air. Wheeler by offering to pay the whole- of the enormous charge, but she must in¬ sist upon going his halves, producing a five pound note, which she laid upon the table. Airs. Wheeler instantly caught it up, and folding it very neatly, she returned it, saying— rc Afy son would indeed have· kad a right to be offended were you to· have proposed paying our expences, anď he will think himself very much favoured 4 by being suffered to discharge the whole."' ** Upon my word, Airs. Wheeler, this is taking an unfair advantage of me. I would' ι о uou
not have joined your party, had 1 supposed Mr. Wheeler would have availed himself of the privilege of being the only male in company, for John is nobody." The elder John, very much against his will, was obliged to second his mother, protesting that the money was no object to him ; yet he could not help expressing hts surprise at the amount of the bill; but, as she had truly observed, the people had -no mercy on such nights. "Oh thev fleece their customers without any ceremony," was the reply; " but po¬ sitively I would have gone home, ifl had not been in momentary expectation of seeing Mr. Eggleten ; however, you must sulfer me to fee the waiters," kindly re¬ minding the party of their engagement for Thursday, which rather consoled John for this drain upon his pocket. ile therefore threw down the money with an air, telling the waiter to keep the change. tf That is going from our agreement," cried
cried Airs. Eggleton ; ζς but I find you will not lie under any obligation to me," throw¬ ing down a seven-shilling piece, telling the waiter she only paid half price for chil¬ dren, which was giving John to understand that he ought to have given the man at the rate of a shilling a-head. The fellow bowed very re«spectfully to her; and hastily gathering up the cash, darted away, crying— " Coming, coming," without even thanking poor John, who had the mortification to perceive that not¬ withstanding the enormous sum it had cost him, he had appeared mean, as Airs. Eg¬ gleton peremptorily refused to receive the seven sb îl lings again, declaring it was a pity such bills could not bc taxed. tc Indeed it is, Madam," cried the dis¬ concerted John ; (C now had Air. Eggleton made such an unreasonable charge, his client might have had recourse to that me¬ thod." Afrs. Eggleton assured him such a thing had
had never occurred to him, extensive as was his practice, Miss Atwood protested that he was renowned for the equity of his demands. John declared he had merely spoke in general terms, as alluding to gentlemen of that profession, not by any means intend¬ ing to insinuate that Air, Eggleton was not an honour to it. Mrs. Eggleton readily acknowledged hav¬ ing led to the remark, and was convinced Air. Wheeler meant nothing derogatory to her husband. She therefore proposed their taking one more turn, and then setting off home. No one durst object, though the Wheeler family were afraid of again stumb¬ ling upoii Francis and his party, and Aiiss Atwood was in still greater dread of their so doing. She, however, took hold of Airs. Eggleton's arm, whom she drew to rather a distance from the party, while Mrs. W ľ heeler muttered to Caroline— ťf What can have induced these old men to
to mix in such a croud ?—that Moretón is ps fond of gadding and sights as he was at twenty," if He is an old fool, and always will be," said John ; " and Frank is paying his court to him and old Freeman, in hopes of mak¬ ing them as much his dupes as he did old Corfe." Kis mofher desired him to attend to Miss Atwood, whom he hastened to join ; and as the remaining company were growing very riotous, they soon left the gardens. Kaving reached their respective boats, as the tide was unfavourable, Mrs. Eggleton resolved to be landed at the Horseferry with her companions; and Mrs. Wheeler hoped she would do them the favour of going round by Marsham-street—it was not much out of her way—and a cup of tea would do them all good, and she could, soon have the kettle boiling. Miss Atwood seconded the request, pro¬ mising to accompany her home afterwards. John, of course, also volunteered his ser¬ vices,
vices, which induced her to accede to their wishes. When they landed, the waterman, as they had previously agreed, demanded an advanced price, in consequence of having been detained so long after midnight. Mrs. Eggleton instantly paid the two shillings more than her man required ; and John, fearful of again appearing mean, was obliged to follow her example, though it galled him to the soul. This matter being settled, they proceed¬ ed into Marsham-street, where, as the maid i\as sitting up, they soon sat down to break¬ fast, Mrs. Eggleton declaring she had never been such a rake since she married; how¬ ever, «she could not have played truant in better company—and between five and six John and Miss Atwood accompanied her and the young people into the Adelphi. She was sure Mr. Eggleton had been in a fine fright, if he had returned home, though she rather supposed he had not, since he had not come in search of her; and she was confirmed
confirmed in her suspicions by the servant who opened the door. f ' He had not seen his master, whom he had supposed had joined her and the young* ladies at Vauxhall." Mrs. Eggleton hoped they had not, after all, missed each other, but would not detain her young friend and Mr. Wbeeler, as they must, like her and the children, be in need of repose. John, therefore, enjoyed a very comfortable tête-à-tête with his lovely mis¬ tress, who refused to go to bed when they reached Marsham-street, because her admi¬ rer was afraid of doing so, for fear he should over-sleep himself, and old Hasle¬ mere moved by clock-work, he observed— indeed he was a strange old quiz—how¬ ever, he would soon be a sleeping partner, and when his (John's) name was added to the firm, he should be less tied by the leg. Now it may be supposed that Miss At¬ wood had made some few inquiries respect¬ ing the Wheeler family, though, like them, she had done it under the ro«se, having em¬ ployed
ployed Air. Eggleton, who had informed her, that though he believed ihey had talked rather large, still they were rich, and as intimately connected with the Ilas- lemeres as they said they were, since the report was that their supposed nephew was in fact the junior Haslemere's natural son ; therefore it was very probable John might in time be admitted a partner in the firm ; at all events, they would always have a staunch friend in him—therefore if she was but guided by his advice, he hoped to settle matters very much to her advantage, entering into various details, which we shall not at present communicate to our readers, but return to her tite^à-Uie with John, who did not, as she had rather hoped, seize the opportunity to make her an olfer of his sweet self, though he was the least to her taste of any man she had ever known, since, independent of his total want of grace, the vulgarity of his manners, and his grovelling, mean notions, had com¬ pletely disgusted her; but he was likely to marry
marry her, and she was too much in want of a husband, to allow her to aim at pleas¬ ing her fancy; and she plainly perceived, even during their têie-à-têie, that notwith¬ standing the love he felt for her, he bit¬ terly regretted having expended so much money, as he could not help calculating what he had been out of pocket, not to mention what the dinner had cost, resolv¬ ing to push his fortune with his* mistress the very first opportunity, forgetting that he was losing a very good one, so much was he chagrined at the demands there had been made upon bis purse; however, if he did not soon bring matters to a crisis, he felt that he must relinquish the prize, since even gold, he told his mother, might ba too dearly bought,
CHAP.
CHAP. Vii. Вит as it may be necessary to explain how our hero came to be at Vauxhall on thi* memorable evening, we must inform our readers, that it was in consequence of Mr. Moretón and his friend having dropped in just before tea, which they proposed taking with Francis and Mr. Freeman, as they had resolved to go to Vauxhall, in defiance of age, croud, and cold ; and as is generally the case, since the force of example is sel¬ dom withstood, they at last persuaded Air. Freeman tojóin their part)*, having assured him that the fire-works in particular would more than answer his expectations, not to mention
înention the military and Pandean bands, with many cireteras ; and as our hero had half promised Kempthorne and Kalkreut h to accompany them to this scene of gaiet), after his guest had retired, not having dared to propose to a man in so weak a state, and whose lungs were so much affected, tojóin their party, he was very glad Mr. Moretón had dropped in so opportunely; and when his younger friends came in, they were, аз they politely said, very happy to find the elderly gentlemen were so gaily disposed, though they all three thought they should have enjoyed themselves to the full as well had they gone alone, Mr. Freeman having, as he told our hero, nearly settled the business which had brought him to town, hoped to be able to return home in the course of the ensuing week. Our hero wished very much to have advanced him the twelvemonths annuitv, but he declared they would not discuss pe¬ cuniar} matters till the eve of his departure. This had passed rather before the arrival of their
their visitors; and much about the same time t\\v Wheelers did, they proceeded to Vauxhall in a hackney-coach and Francis's carriage ; and having been extremely amused, after being very sumptuously treated by Mr Moretón, who, as the pro¬ moter of the party, insisted uport regaling them, they resolved to take one more turn before they retired, when they saw the Wheeler party assembled round their well- covered table, with a party they w T ere by no means acquainted with. We ha\e already informed our readers what were the private thoughts of the young men, who could not, as they were situated, compare notes. Mr. Moretón was therefore the only one who made any re¬ marks concerning them, and they were cer¬ tainly not to their advantage. About half past one o'clock they retired, Mr. Freeman assuring our hero he was not conscious of having caught any cold, though he agreed to breakfast in bed in the morn¬ ing, acknowledging he should like to in¬ dulge
d «1 tre rather later than usual. Francis, therefore, took that meal alone ; and as he conceived both his servants and hordes had undergone much more fatigue than he had done the overnight, he resolved to walk to Brompton, as the sun was covered in, and there was a pleasant breeze, ordering his carriage to come for him at three at Mrs. Perkins's. Having to call in Parliament-street, he left home soon after nine, and thus missed seeing Mrs. Jones, who could only leave a very kind message for him with Mrs. Hun¬ ter, to whom she related e\cry thing that had passed at the Wheelers the day before, inquiring whether she knew who this Miss Atwood was ? Mrs. Hun! er had nexer even heard the name before, though she was convinced she was no great things, if she was going to marry John Wheeler ; nor way Mis. Jones greatly prepossessed in her Яалоиг from that very circumstance; but having many things yet fo do previous to her departure, she made but a short \Ìsit. Francis
Francis hawng called, as he proposed, in Parliament-street, proceeded through the Park and np Constitution-hill ; but had no sooner turned to the left in Piccadilly, than he saw a croud assembling at the turn¬ pike-gate, and as he was so very near, he rather deviated from his road, to learn what was the matter. While he was crossing from the foot-path to the gate for that pur¬ pose, upon looking to the right, he caught Mght of a curricle, in which was a lady and gentleman, followed by an outrider, whose liverv he thought he recollected; and as the vehicle drew near, he recognised his master in the gentleman who was driving, upon whom he would not have bestowed a recond glance, if he had not almost in¬ stantly recollected the well-known features of Miss Louisa Chetwynd, in those of the elegant well-dressed female who was seated by the side of Mr. George Haslemere ! Astonishment for a moment rendered him immoveable; however, to his great joy, their eyes were directed to the croud to¬ wards
wards which he was advancing; and as »Mr. Haslemere had reined-in his «horses, not to create a further bustle by driving over some oné, Francis, rouzed from bis mo¬ mentary stupor, rushed forward, and Wel¬ tered himself from observation by pushing in among the croud, feeling, nevertheless, very anxious to take a second look at Mr. Haslemere and his fair companion. He looked towards them; and as the curricle stopped within a very few yards of »him, he had a still better view of both, while he remained concealed from their notice—in¬ deed he was well convinced that neither of them saw him, as he thought tjhe lady at least would have displayed some signs of confusion; he however· remained in the croud till they drove through the gate. The bustle he .found had merely been oc¬ casioned by a man wishing, w T hat they termed, to bilk the toll. He therefore pursued his walk, lost in thought. From the appearance of his horses, Mr. Haslemere had come some way out of the v «f« ΐ". к countrv;
country; and the lady, owing to her morn¬ ing di ive, looked more blooming than he bad ever seen her, and was, as we have be¬ fore observed, very elegantly dressed for a morning. His blood began to mantle when he reflected upon the deception that was evidently carrying on, since, though he bad not thought Miss Chetwynd was a " faultless monster," he had felt persuaded that she was a woman of character, and that her little foibles merely arose from her foreign education. Indeed he was now most forcibly convinced that he had been all but in absolute love with her, else be felt that he should neither have been vexed nor mortified by his recent rencon¬ tre. The scene in Henrietta-street came across him; and he would like to have known whether this young lady, who evidently bad supplanted Mrs. Smith, bore that lady's name at the country villa from whence he presumed they were coming, and how de¬ void of feeling they must both be, thus to drive
drive past the door of the deceived favour¬ ite, who might, for any thing they knew to the contrary, be standing at the win¬ dow !—and what must those two girls think of each other, he wondered, İÎ their eyes did meet í Why, Miss Chetwynd would very probably look down with contempt on Miss Atwood, though perhaps, Sultau like, Mr. Haslemere had them both in keep¬ ing/and this, he conceived, must be the case, else why need he have had recourse to the Wheelers?—but then, what fortune could suffice to answer such calls? Бш possibly, he reflected, he was going to portion Mrs, Smith off to John Wheeler, who fell lower than ever in his opinion, upon his bare surmise, since there could be no excuse for the miserly being, who, he firmly believed, would have married the greatest fright, nay a woman old enough to have been his grandmother, for the sake of money; and he presumed Haslemere must come down very handsomely, if he had guessed right: but what cared he к 2 about
about either John Wheeler Or this said Mrs. Smith, whose dupe he might perhaps as easily have been as he had been that of Miss Chetwynd ?—since he must be very deficient in penetration not to have disco¬ vered that she was a light character; and 'be felt .greatly lowered in his own opinion, to think he should have volunteered his service to teach a mistress of George Has¬ lemere's to charm him with her vocal ta¬ lents, when Mrs. Perkins's last conversa¬ tion came across him, and some of the in¬ consistencies in the young lady's conduct seemed to be perfectly accounted for— yes, he &aw through the whole scheme, he conceived; Mr. Haslemere hoped to get Tid of Miss Chetwynd through his means— yes, Mrs. Smith was to be portioned off by George Haslemere, and Mrs. Mortimer would probably portion off her protegee, whom he was taught to believe had a situ¬ ation in view, by way of hastening his resolves; but the actor had more pride than this excellent actress perhaps sup¬ posed ;
posed; and never would he unite his des¬ tiny to a female whose fair fame had evem been sullied by the breath of scandal. Has¬ lemere would probably have enjoyed dup¬ ing him into marrying one mistress for love, as he must certainly make it very well worth John Wheeler's while to marry the other.— <f But, gracious Heaven!" he was near exclaiming aloud, " can he be my father?—impossible; or else let me hope be is not aware of my visits to Mrs. Per¬ kins, though she must have heard the re¬ port, so must Miss Chetwynd; and they could not be so lost to all sense of shame» decency, morality, and religion, -as to en¬ courage the son to marry the father's mis¬ tress! Forbid it, Heaven, tha t such wretches should exist!" While he was thus bewildered in conjec¬ ture, having worked himself up into a most charming temper, within a few hundred yards of the Countess's villa,, he caught sight of Mr. Haslemere driving gently to- K % wards»
wards him, having set the young lady down,, he presumed, wiio had doubtless been brought to Airs. Perkins's to receive her lesson and his devoirs. Not feeling, how¬ ever, at all inclined to return the salute he made no doubt of receiving from Afr. Has¬ lemere, he quickened his pace, and was rushing so hastily through the iron gates leading to Bayfield House, that had not a gentleman on horseback, who was riding out, instantly pulled up, he would have come in contact with a very spirited horse. *' Aír. Yates, I beg your pardon," cried the Earl of Merioneth, touching his hat ; i( my eyes were directed another way, and ï almost fancy so were yours. However, as I was able to pull \\p in time, you must excuse my inattention." "It is, me that ought to apologize, my Lord, since, had I made use of my eyes, I should have entered by the lesser gate, and of course not have crossed your Lordship's path, npr have impeded your progress." rf Well,
" Well, butas we have met, and without jostling," resumed his Lordship, bending down to address our hero (at the moment Mr. Haslemere's curricle drove by, whom Francis thus avoided seeing), " will you do me the favour to select some easy songs and lessons for my girls, and to send them to my house in Cavendish-square, in the course of to-day or to-morrow morning, as 1 leave town in the evening, and the Countess desired me to bring them some new music?" t{ Your Lordship may depend upon hav¬ ing them this evening," was the reply. " You will greatly oblige me ; and re¬ member I shall keep you to your promise when I come to town in the spring," ť * Your Lordship does me honour by reminding me of it," said our hero, bow-, ing, as the Earl rode off. This rencontre rather broke the thread of his late unpleasant reflections; and as be was well aware that he had no right to display his bad temper in the Countess's x 4 music*
music-room^ he endeavoured, for the pre¬ sent, to banish Miss Chetwynd and Mr. Haslemere from his mind. As the Coun¬ tess had remarked his rencontre with the Earl, he related what had passed between them. " I was to have mentioned his Lordship's commission to you," she replied; ts so pray do not stint the Ladies Caerwyth; only remember they are but young begin¬ ners; but if you take them in hand next spring, I shall expect them to make a rapid progress, for every creature who has heard my nieces, and the Ladies Cardonnel, have complimented me upon their wonderful improvement since they have been under your tuition." Our hero felt very much flattered; and during a pause after a quartetto, which had delighted her ^adyship, she again reverted to Lord Merioneth—" He is a most amia¬ ble, domesticated man, and the· Countess iss. his exact counterpart; they were formed for each other—she superintends the edu¬ cation
eatipn of her daughters, or rather divides the task with a very accomplished woman*. their governess ; and they promise to do- them both credit." The renewal of the singing prevente^ 1 any more being said upon the subject 1 ; bufr Francis, while accompanying Miss Irvan upon the organ, more than once caught himself drawing comparisons between the Earl and George Haslemere, not- much to, the advantage of the latter. He;, however,. got through the lesson better than he had. hoped to have done, and was not sorry he- had been allowed time to cool and for re¬ flection, before he proceeded to Mrs. Per¬ kins's, having resolved, before he left-Bay¬ field House, not to give either her or Her¬ in mate reason to suppose he had made 1 any discoveries to their disadvantage, as he con¬ ceived, from what she had said on the Sa¬ turday, Miss Chetwynd had met with an- eligible situation, or, in plain English, that the farce was drawing to a conclusion; and» as he h;id never, from motives of delicacy,, ¡t 5 mentioned!
mentioned,her to any of his friends, no one could laugh at him for having been, for a short time, her dupe, almost resolving never to marry, since he had seen such re¬ peated deceptions among the fair sex ; but almost immediately felt angry with himself for daring to suppose many women resem¬ bled the mistresses of Mr. Haslemere, since even upon the stage he had met with wo¬ men of character, and among those who were spoken more lightly of, he had nevei? seen any thing like deception, at least any wish to impose themselves upon such inex¬ perienced youths as him for ladies of im¬ maculate chastity; now of that Miss Chet¬ wynd stood accused, in his opinion—and doubtless, could Miss Atwood have been equally well introduced to him, she would have pbyed her part no less correctly. Of the two she was infinitely the handsomest, and had an air οΐ nahe innocence, of which he Felt he should have become the dupe. Was Mrs. Hunter in her friend's secrets 't — No, his heart promptly answered; there- fore
fore Airs. Perkins ought to be unveiled to her, but not just at present, as he was now resolved coolly to investigate her's and Aiiss Chetwynd's designs. Perhaps the Wheelers were aiding and abetting in the plot ; Mrs. Smith might also be concerned in it. How fortunate he had walked to Brompton ! He had truly accounted for having done so to Lady Bayfield, and had told her his carriage was to fetch him; home. Having reached Airs. Perkins's door, he was welcomed with her accustomed smile. " I hope Aiiss Chetwynd is perfectly re¬ covered from the effect of her fall," he said. " Oh, quite so," was the reply; " and here she comes to answer for herself." Francis received her with cool civility. She seemed unusually gay, and was more dressed than ever he had seen her before, and exactly as when seated by the side of Air. Haslemere. This by no means in¬ creased her charms, in his opinion; and. ro the-
the evident embarrassment she evinced, when they first met, merely confirmed all bis latent suspicions, and made him almost recoil from her in disgust. Much as he strove to appear perfectly self*collected, he could not acquit himself to his satisfaction; and what added to his vexation was the fear he entertained that she might attribute his abstraction to his being dazzled by her charms, when he felt that her beauty had quite faded in his eyes. Cautiously, therefore, did he avoid saying any thing which she could possibly con¬ strue into a compliment ; and she seemed, on her side, to be very much piqued by his unusual cool behaviour. The moment his eaniage was announced, he made his parting bow, extremely happy to be released from what he began to con¬ sider a very irksome task, resolving to per¬ severe in his cool behaviour, in hopes that would induce her to bring her farce to a conclusion. Haling reached home, he found Mr. Freeman
Freeman in unusual spirits, and learnt that Mrs. Jones had called during his. absence. Kalkrcuth, by special invitation, joined them at dinner; and never had the old gentleman seemed in better health, declar¬ ing that he believed he should follow Mr. Moreton's maxims in future, and endea¬ vour to enjoy himself while he did live, since, so far from feeling any inconve¬ nience from his overnight's excursion, he fancied himself the better from having been so well amused, when unfortunately he was seized with a more violent fit of coughing than usual, which led our hero to fear he had not escaped without cold; still he felt no immediate alarm for his safety, till the bursting of a blood-vessel convinced him that his life was in imminent danger. Kal¬ kreuth participated in his fears, while Fran¬ cis, hastily ringing the bell, dispatched his footman for Mr. Jordan, and his coachman for Or. В-* —, in whose skill he had the greatest faith. The poor old man, who ьееш ed conscious of what would be the 3 consequence
consequence of this accident, would not saffer our hero, who* had assisted İn con¬ veying him tip stairs, to leave him for a moment, saying sufficiently distinct to be understood—■" You must not mind—you must not leave me, I have made my will, and I shall die happy." These assurances were some consolation* to the distressed Francis, who would never¬ theless have been much more satisfied had it pleased God to have prolonged his life till he had reached home, foreseeing: what it w T as probable might be said, as the four thousand pounds was^ still lying at his ban¬ kers, not having as yet placed it in the funds. Afr. Jordan, who returned with the foot¬ man, gave some hopes of his recovery, though he agreed that he seemed too fee¬ ble and too much exhausted to afford to lose much blood; and when Dr. В ------ar¬ rived, he privately told our hero> after he had felt his pulse, and inquired into the nature of his seizure, that he would not have
have insured his life for a month, admitting him to have been in what might have been deemed good health when the accident oc¬ curred ; but as he was now convinced that he had no inside left, nothing short of a miracle could keep life in him for the en¬ suing four-and-twenty hours. As this wor¬ thy man had foreseen, to the infinite regret of Francis, he breathed his last soon after midnight, as he would very willingly have doubled the legacy Air. Corfe had left him, could his so doing have prolonged his life, being extremely shocked at his having died under his roof, though he felt con¬ vinced that no one could doubt of his hav¬ ing done all in his power to save him. Kempthorne, who had called in during the evening, and had, with Kalkreuth, re¬ mained with our hero, fearing that Mr. Freeman would very speedily pay the debt of nature, was half angry with him for feel¬ ing so much hurt at his having done so in Alarsham-street. if Well, I may be wrong, I agree," re¬ plied
plied Francis, ff since I eould not foresee bow suddenly he would be called away ; but I am extremely at a loss how to pro¬ ceed—and Mr. Weldon, the old gentle¬ man's solicitor, for whom I sent soon after be was taken, is unfortunately out of town, and is not expected home before to-mor¬ row evening, and Mr. Freeman was so situ¬ ated, that I hardly know whether it would be prudent to buffer his decease to be made public." " That may be easily avoided, till you have seen and consulted with that gentle¬ man," resumed Kempthorne, "since y ou have only to keep your windows open as usual, to prevent its being generally known that there is a corpse in the house. Your servants may be depended upon;, and to prevent the possibility of your acting wrong, even with the best intentions, sup¬ pose you consult with Mr. Haslemere, se¬ nior, to-morrow, or rather this morning— he will be flattered by such a proof of your confidence, and to him you can state what it·
it might be improper to mention to any ori e else, and from him I am convinced you will receive the best advke." Of this Francis was fully convinced ; and as neither of hisv friends could be of any farther service, they both retired, Kalkreuth promising to dine with him, and Kemp¬ thorne assuring him he would join them the moment he could leave the counting- house. Next morning, immediately after break¬ fast, our hero proceeded into Austin Friars, having previously given orders that all might remain in statu quo till his return·. Kempthorne had prepared the worthy mer¬ chant for his visit, who received him tiìe-à- ttte with his accustomed cordiality, and to whom Francis in confi«dence related every thing that had passed between him and the deceased On the Sunday after his arrival in town, making very light of the promises he had made him, seeming to think, situated as they both were, that they were a matter of course. Mr, Haslemere was not, how¬ ever,
&ver, inclined to consider them in that light, though he did not launch out into eulogiums upon bis generosity; but Fran¬ cis felt that the old gentleman approved of what he had done, though he merely ex¬ pressed his approbation by a fervent pres¬ sure of the hand, and by a supplication to his heavenly Father in behalf of the youth¬ ful philanthropist, whom he advised to wait the return of Afr. Weldon, before he made Mr. Freeman's decease known, by paying him the usual compliment of shutting up his house ; and as no one but Kempthorne knew of the melancholy event, there w T as no chance of John Wheeler's making the discovery in Austin Friars : therefore, after sincerely renewing all his offers of friend¬ ship, Mr. Haslemere suffered our hero to depart, requesting to have notice sent him if he could be οΐ any service in settling matters, so as to insure Mr. Freeman's body from any malicious arrest. So anxious was this truly excellent man to impart his feelings respecting his late visitor
visitor to Kempthorne, that hesent før hím out of the counting-house, to reiate-trbat- had passed between them^ having received Francis's leave so to do, of whom he spoke in the terms he deserved; and Kempthorne felt proud of his friend, when he learnt the sacrifice which his benevolence had taught him to make, observing that the Wheelers had been greatly their own« enemies in quarrelling with so amiable a young man, from whose acquaintance they must have derived advantage; if not honour. Mean¬ while the subject of their eulogiums was slowly retracing his steps home, and though lost in thought, in passing Mr. Wheeler's, he remarked a gentleman, who had pre¬ ceded him down the street, after reading the bill İn their parlour-window, knock at the door» and as he passed, he heard h i in say to the maid—" Let me see them," and saw him follow her in. Now this,said bill had not been exposed for the last two days, on account of Miss Atwood's visit, which hadi led Francis to suppose
suppose that their apartments were lef. He, however, hastened home, and soon fiprgot both the Wheelers and their lodg¬ ings, while forming plans for a private fu¬ neral for his deceased friend, resolving to have him buried by twilight, rather than run the risk of having his remains subjected to any insult.
CHAP. VIII. For the present, we will leave our hero Ю form and reject plans, while anxiously awaiting the return of Mr. Weldon to town, as we wish to introduce the stranger whom he saw entering Mr. Wheeler's house to our reader's notice. The
The maid, in compliance with his desire, ushered him into the front parlour, where the old gentleman was, as txsual, sitting in his arm-chair, who made an endeavour to rise the moment he caught sight of his visi¬ tor, who was a very gentlemanly, good- looking man, about thirty, and who polite¬ ly insisted upon his keeping his seat, as in¬ valids were always privileged people, tell¬ ing him that the bill which he had read in the window had induced him to knock at his door. The old man told him what apartments they had to leU observing that they had merely acco nmodations for a single gentleman, though they could make shift to lodge a servant. " 1 am but just come to town, Sir; in¬ deed 1 generally, nay I might say always, reside in the country, and I did not bring any servants up with me, as country fel¬ lows are of no use in London/since they never can find their way any where, are al¬ ways getting into scrapes, and are, in short, absolute torments ; and, except at hotels, it
it is sometimes difficult to procure accom¬ modations for them^—however, should 1 make any stay in London, I may perhaps be tempted to hire one." Mr. Wheeler descanted very ably upon the idleness and impudence of London servants, concluding by observing, that happy w T ere those who could do without them. He then proceeded to inform the stranger, that his wife and daughter were from home at pre¬ sent, but could return at any time, and would, he was convinced, do every thing in their power to make things agreeable, desiring the maid to,shew the apartments. The stranger followed her up stairs, and soon returned, declaring he was perfectly satisfied ; the rooms were large and lofty, and the furniture struck him as being re¬ markably clean for London ; indeed the house was so very superior to the present modern-built ones, he could almost fancy himself in one of his own spacious rooms in his old family mansion in Cheshire. Mr. Wheeler was extremely happy the lodgings
lodgings met his approbation, inquiring when he wanted to come in, admitting that he took them ? ff I care not how soon," was the reply, " since, though I am extremely well known at the ------ Hotel, in ------ Street, St. James's, and of course meet with every civility, I am both expensively and uncom¬ fortably lodged, though my apartments are extremely good ; but the continual noise and bustle of such houses, where people are coming in at all hours of the night, effectually prevents me from sleeping. What are your terms, Mr. Wheeler?" *< Why, as you are to be waited upon, Sir, I suppose my wife, who takes upon herself in general to settle these matters, will not think she is paid with less than five-and-twcnty shillings а -week. I wish she had happened to be at home, for she understands making these bargains better than I dor " Well, but possibly she can make it convenient to give me the-meeting here to¬ morrow
morrow or next day, though I do not think your demand unreasonable; still, as i ra¬ ther expect to remain in London till .near Christmas, if not longer, why she may agree to make some abatement in the price—but we will leave that to her, as she will not find me a troublesome lodger, and I am very ready to engage the floor for four months certain, since I have a law-suit pending, and have of conr.se much to űo previous to the Michaelmas term, during which I expect it will be decided, and it is next to impossible to treat with lawyers in writing ; besides, if ever you have had any thing to do with those gentlemen, Mr. Wheeler, you must know how necessary it is to be near at hand to spur them on, as even the best of them are proverbially di¬ latory." Mr. Wheeler readily assented to the jus¬ tice of this remark, arguing very ably upon the uncertainty and delay of the law, branching oñ every now and then into an illiberal invective against its professors, since
since though we do not pretend to affirm there are not some who are deserving of the opprobrious term of rogues, we could instance many more who are an honour to human nature. But to revert to our tale. The old man concluded his philippic by presuming the law-suit his guest had mentioned was of some importance. " It certainly is, Sir," was the reply ; <c indeed I would never have recourse to a jury upon trivial occasions; but the suit in question is respecting the title to an estate, which brings in about eight hundred а -year, and I am assured that I shall make my claim good, in spite of all the chicanery of my adversaries; indeed, were they poor, I might have been tempted to have divided the rents with them, as I am already in possession of an income more than ade¬ quate to all my wants; still I think myself in duty bound, even admitting I am oniv working for my heirs, to defend m ν riffhis, though I am well aware it will be done at vol. m. L some
some expence, as I shall have many wit·» nesses to bring up out of the country, and their travelling and maintenance in Lon¬ don will cost me some money, though, if I dare place any reliance in the crown law¬ yers* affirmations, the costs will all fall upon my adversaries." Mr. Wheeler made no doubt oť his suc¬ ceeding ; indeed he thought it very pos¬ sible his adverse party might not suffer it to come to a trial ; at the same time he acted very prudently in providing against the worst—and it was finally agreed that he should lake possession the following even- ingj admitting that the inquiries respect¬ ing his character proved satisfactory, since, though Mr« Wheeler made no doubt of his being a gentleman, and every thing which he gave himself out to be, he must abide by the general rule, as his wife was very particular as to who she received into the house. " She is very right, Sir ; people of cha¬ racter are always so. I should not have feir
felt inclined to have closed the bargain had not you required a reference; and you may apply, in the present instance, either to Mr. Allworth, the master of the hotel where I now am, who has long known me, or to Afr. Wilton, the great Afanchester warehouseman, of No.------, Bread-street, Cheapsíde, or to Sir James Bowman, of Harîey-street, with whom I supped last night." " Oh, one reference is quite sufficient, Sir ; therefore I shall content myself with ending to Mr. Allworth." Afr. Eastwood, for such was his name, therefore departed, leaving his card of ad¬ dress. When John came home to din¬ ner, he was told w 7 hat had occurred since morning, and his father desired he would ( all at the hotel before he went back into Austin Friars; and if, as he made no doubt, the gentleman's character answered, he was to call upon his mother at Knightsbridge in the evening, that she might come home h 2 to
to make the necessary preparations for his reception. John did as he was desired ; and upon questioning Mr. Allworth, a very gentle¬ manly-looking man, he told him that he had known Mr. Eastwood for years, who was a gentleman of very large property in Cheshire, where he had a fine old family- seat; assuring him that he regretted his having resolved to go into private lodg¬ ings, as he had hoped he would have remained his inmate for some months, though he owned a man of his retired turn would be more agreeably situated in a decent quiet family. John was very well satisfied with this account, but chose also to ask whether he was a married or a single man ï " He was still a bachelor, to his certain knowledge," Mr. Allworth replied. Now John had put this query, owing to his having been revolving in his own mind what might be the probable consequence of
of this said Mr. Eastwood's seeing Miss At¬ wood, whom he feared might, when she learned how rich he was, give him the pre¬ ference. He therefore prudently resolved to prevent, if possible, their meeting fill ht had made sure of her, as he made no doubt of his mother's soon returning home ; in¬ deed it bad already been settled tbat she was to give up her lodging the ensuing week, as the old lady conceived it would be paying the fair lady a higher compli¬ ment to have her son visit her alone at Knightsbridge, and they could frequently ask her to dinner or tea in Westminster; but he must, during these visits, keep her out of Mr, Eastwood's way, and he had planned how to do that very dextrously before he waited upon his mother to let her know the likelihood there seemed of her having an excellent lodger in this said rich country squire. The old woman was so extremely eager to secure such a prize, that she proposed waiting upon him the next morning to let L 3 him
him know that every thing should be ready for his reception in the evening; and in consequence she sallied forth immediately after breakfast, and was shewn into a very handsome front drawing-room, upon in¬ quiring for Mr. Eastwood, who soon joined her in his morning-gown and slippers, and who treated her so politely, and seemed sp much the gentleman, that she departed quite delighted with having let her apart¬ ments so much to her satisfaction; there¬ fore, upon reaching Marsham-street, she told the old man Air. Eastwood w T as a lodger who would do them credit, while as for Kempthorne, though his name was now tacked to the fag end of the Haslemere firm, he would never look other than a quill-driver; but Air. Eastwood's manners, dress, countenance, and language, bespoke him quite as much the man of fashion as Air. George Haslemere. So long as she was but pleased, the old man said, he was satisfied; and having set the maid to scower and dust, air the sheets, &c. she returned to
to Knightsbridge, to give iip her room, and to settle every thing there ; not that thely meant to give Miss Atwood room to Suppose they were in the habit of letting lodgings, but this gentleman was to have been so particularly recommended to them, they had been induced to accommodate him for a short time, and were of course to be under tbe necessity of returning home for that purpose. This was nearly wbat Mrs. Wheeler said at Knightsbridge. Miss Atwood was very sorry they were so suddenly obliged to return home, while Mrs. Bever merely re¬ gretted the loss of their society, since she could let her room any day, as she was al¬ ways so reasonable in her charges, that she was never long without lodgers, frequent¬ ly baving the same return again. Mrs. Wheeler assured her she should make a point of recommending her, observing that she proposed paying for the week which she hâd but just began «pon, and ĺ 4 should
should always be very happy to see Mrs: and the Miss Bevers in Marsham-street; and had it not been for the vicinity of her abode to that of our hero's, Miss Atwood would very readily have -accepted her invi¬ tation to become her guest for a week ; but she was so averse to being seen by Francis, that she merely agreed to sleep there the following evening, when she was to accompany them to the Eggletons; and as she did not propose calling for them in Marsham-street, Mrs. Wheeler told her that they would call for her by six o'clock. She promised to be in readiness ; and a coach having been called, she and Caroline reached Marsham-street in time to receive Mr. Eastwood, who, being shewn into their parlour, upon his arrival, seemed so totally free from pride, and so chatty and agree¬ able, that Mrs. Wheeler ventured to ask him to eat part of a lobster and some sallad with them. As he was very partial to both, he said, he readily accepted the invitation, though
though he was no supper-eater, he ob¬ served, notwithstanding he generally dined at three in the country. " A very good hour," said the Whee¬ lers, animadverting very freely upon the present fashions, which led people to dine when formerly reasonable folks were think¬ ing of their beds. Mr, Eastwood agreed with them in la¬ menting the present ,mode of turning night into day ; while John, as it had been pre¬ viously concerted, went to Knightsbridge, under pretence of conducting his mother and sister home, who, not expecting him, were already gone, which enabled him to enjoy a very comfortable tête-à-tête with his fair mistress, to whom, with becoming diffidence, or, more properly speaking, with awkward sheepishncss, he more than half disclosed his passion, and had the su¬ preme satisfaction of being listened to with due modesty and no lack of encourage¬ ment; of course he began to hope he should ultimately bear ofí' the prize, . L 5 While,
While, however, he was exulting in hi# happy prospects, and his fatlier and mother were enjoying their lobster and lettuce, and Air. Eastwood's agreeable conversa¬ tion, who could be very entertaining when he chose, Francis having, out of respect to the deceased, and in conformity to the mere forms of society, sent his excuses to Lady Bayfield, for not visiting her as usual, stating, in his note, exactly how he was situated, and promising to wait upon her in the course of a few days, received a very polite answer, expressive of her Lady- 'hip's regret for the decease of his friend, to which she added her commands not to think of coming to Bayfield House till his feelings led him to conceive he could do so with perfect propriety. He was ex¬ tremely flattered by her kind indu%ence, resolving to resume his visits the moment Mr. Freeman's- remains were on the road to Staffordshire, аз he supposed, could Mr. Welaott venture upon such a measure, he would certainly have him laid by his bro-. ther ;
ther; and this he was debating with Kemp¬ thorne and Kalkreuth, while his neighbours were regaling with their new lodger, la¬ menting the continued absence of Mr. Weldon, since he must have recourse to an undertaker the next day, and he did not at all relish the idea of giving any or¬ ders without the concurrence of that gen¬ tleman, who, to his infinite joy, made his appearance just as they were sitting down to supper. As a letter our hero had sent in the morning to his office had informed him of his client's death, whom he declared he had hardly hoped would ever have reached home alive, and as he had had the best advice, and had been treated with the most tender attention, he was weil con¬ vinced, he thought, upon the whole, it was rather a fortunate circumstance that he had resigned his breath in Alarsham- street. (t So now," sard he, " before we pro¬ ceed to ^business, let us eat our'supper, ĺ G as
as I posted hither the moment I reached home." No objection being made to this pro¬ posal, they all sat down ; and after rather a hasty meal, the servant being dismissed, Mr. Weldon said, it was now necessary to conform, as nearly as lay in their power, with the will of the deceased. " Undoubtedly," rejoined Francis. " He did not die intestate, I presume ; but I sup¬ pose his will is in the country." " No, it is in my pocket," was the reply, pulling it out while speaking. " Then we shall not be at a loss how to act," rejoined our hero; " as I never w r as more perplexed, though I must have sent for an undertaker, had your return been delayed." " You might have done so very safely," was the reply; "but I am sorry my ab¬ sence should have been so perplexing to you—however, as no time ought now to be lest, with your leave, as these gentle¬ men
men are your most intimate friends, I al¬ ready know, we will read the will." " That rests entirely with you, Mr. Wel¬ don ; if you think we ought to be made acquainted with the contents, we can have no objection. I speak in all our names, as I know my friends will acquiesce in what I say." " Undoubtedly," they both said. f< As I dare not, in my official capacitv, keep you any longer in suspense, Mr, Yates, I shall break the seals, which were affixed by the deceased himself," shewing the packet round. Our hero instantly recollected the Free¬ man arms, of which the old gentleman made no small boast, as he traced his an¬ cestors to rather a remote period ; but as his father had purposely cut off the entail of his estate, as there were no heirs in the direct line, both the brothers had had the full power of willing their property to any alien in blood, or to any relation whom they
they might think proper to make their heir. Having broken the seals, Mr. Weldon unfolded the deed, to which was annexed a loose sheet of paper. * f That we will refer to by and bye," he cried, turning it over, and beginning to read the usual preamble. " Did 1 rightly understand the date?" interrupted our hero, " I dare say you did, since it is only five days since the poor old soul put the finish¬ ing stroke to all his worldly affairs; in¬ deed, had he not taken this London jour¬ ney, I am very much of opinion he would have died intestate." " Yet he did not seem to fear the ap¬ proach of death," said Kempthorne ; <( and that к the only reason I ever heard alledged for people objecting to settle their affairs." " Mr. Freeman was a great oddity," re¬ plied the solicitor, resuming his lecture ; when, to the unspeakable astonishment of our
our hero, he found himself nominated sole heir to all his landed property and perso¬ nal estates, and joint executor with Mr. Weldon, to which liberal donation was merely annexed, upon condition that he assumed the name and arms of Freeman within six months after the testator's de¬ cease, else the whole was to be devoted to paying off the national debt ; and every precaution which two of the first counsel¬ lors in England could devise had bee» taken to render this, as our hero thought, strange will perfectly valid ; and his looks were so expressive of wonder and amaze, that the solicitor was highly amused by the incredulity his countenance evinced, while he wished him joy of such an accession oí fortune, as he presumed he would not ob¬ ject to conforming to the prescribed con¬ ditions. rf He must be insane if he did/* cried Kempthorne, sincerely joining in the law¬ yer's congratulations, as did Kalkreuth r drolly observing, there was no knowing what
what lengths their friend's patriotism might carry him ; and surely no one would dis¬ pute his claim to that virtue, if he suffered Mr. Freeman's estate to be appropriated to the laudable purpose last mentioned. " I am positively bewildered," cried Francis, " actually lost in amaze, as I was completely the good old soul's dupe ; and so far from expecting to be any gainer by his death, I had resolved to sacrifice half my present fortune, had it been required, to have protected his remains from insult. So pray inform me, my good Sir, why he led me to suppose he was ruined, when it should seem he was in very affluent cir¬ cumstances?—and why he made me his heir ?—and much as I feel myself indebted to him for having thus munificently pro¬ vided for me, I am still more obliged to him for baving provided me with a name, as I shall very joyfully accede to his last wishes ; therefore I am no patriot you find, Kalkreuth." " No fool, you mean, I presume," was the
the rejoinder ; while the diverted solicitor said— " Then as you seem to wish it, Mr. Yates, we will refer to this loose sheet, in which Mr. Freeman has very properly ac¬ counted for having done a bare act of jus¬ tice, as you generously resolved to share your fortune with him when you thought him in distress, and he, in return, has made you his heir," reading the annexed memo¬ randum, in which the old gentleman gave his heir due credit for his recent generous behaviour, which had induced him to afford him more ample means to give way to his benevolent propensities; and for the be¬ nefit of future generations, he desired that his reasons for so doing might be registered with his will, to which they might be at¬ tached as a schedule. " Upon my word he attached much more importance to my very simple adherence to the golden rule than ever I did," re¬ joined our hero; " however, w r ere every one to be equally rewarded for having barely
barely done their duty, self-interest would render us all charitable." " Misers excepted," gaily resumed Ihe solicitor; " but to me, in confidence, Mr. Weldon gave another reason for having selected you, Sir, to transmit his name to posterity. He was convinced, in his own mind, that you were the son of his de¬ ceased relative." " Good Heavens, what a mistaken no- sion!" cried Francis; " I am sure I never gave him reason to suppose I fancied my¬ self even related to Mr. Corfe." €€ He was convinced, he told me, you were ignorant of the circumstance; and 1 own I told him what I had learnt from re¬ port, which certainly did nut tally with the idea he had formed ; and he quite si* lenced me by declaring that were even Mr. Corfe to rise from his grave to contradict his assertion, he should not believe Ыт. At all events, as he had chosen to adopt you* there could be nothing extraordinary in
in his doing the same ; and were you the son of a scavenger, that would not alter his intention of making you his heir. You will, I hope, believe I did not wish to ad¬ vise him against thus doing you justice, though I did request him not to mention his suspicions respecting your relationship to the late Mr. Corfe in the annexed me¬ morandum, as it could not have been pleas¬ ing to you to have had his chimeras, whether ill or well founded, publicly can¬ vassed." i( I feel myself infinitely obliged to you, Mr. Weldon, for so kindly consulting my feelings, and I also rejoice at Mr. Freeman never having been led to believe he was right in the strange conjectures he had formed; but 1 shall tire you with ques¬ tions, though I still wish to know why the worthy man led me to believe he was in distress ?—and also the gross amount of what he has leÎt me ?" " You have a right to every satisfaction I can give you, Sir. A wish to prove how far
far you were deserving of the favour Air. Corfe had shewn you, induced him to come to London, and to travel in a stage, and finally to deceive you into the idea that he was ruined ; and I do assure you he shed many tears while informing me how kind¬ ly you had condoled with him, and how amply you wished to provide for all his wants; and had he lived to have returned home, he meant to have presented you with the four thousand pounds Mr. Corfe had left him, and about as much more, which is now lying at his own banker's. Of course he meant to undeceive you with respect to his supposed losses, though his brother and him were a few hundred pounds out of pocket by the failure of the bankers he mentioned. The estates he has left you, to which both brothers have made great additions, bring in at least four thou¬ sand а -year, independent of the manor- house and home-farm, as he was a very great breeder and experimental farmer, I understand, nay have seen." "Well,"
" Well," said Francis, " I once thought singing was a very easy method of getting money, but, thanks to good friends, I am become a rich man in the very commence¬ ment of my career; and I hope I shall never give the world reason to blame my benefactors, since my regard for their me* mory will induce me ever to shape my conduct by the rule of right; indeed I should deserve general reprobation, were I to make an improper use of their bounty." " Mr. Freeman had thoroughly studied your disposition, I find, Sir; but let me advise you to send some confidential per¬ son down to Moat House, to place seals upon every thing, and to inform the small household of their master's decease." " I can afford to lose a trifle," said^Fran- cis, " should they be inclined to take ad¬ vantage of my ignorance ; though I under¬ stand none of Mr. Freeman's servants have lived with him less than nine years, and one in particular has been in the family upwards
upwards of twenty^ which is certainly proof presumptive of their honesty." " Agreed/' rejoined the solicitor; u but as a professional man, it is my duty to sus¬ pect every one, and at all events, î am al¬ ways averse to place even an honest man in the way of temptation." t( Then may 1 hope you will be able to make it convenient, my good Sir, to pro¬ ceed thither, to take what I agree are very necessary precautions, and to give such orders as will be necessary against the arri¬ val of the funeral ?" fr You are paying me a very great com*- p-liment, after the hint Γ have given you ; but as this is our holiday, and as I have long been in the habit of doing business for Mr. Freeman, of course am pretty well an fait of his affairs, I will readily under¬ take this journey to oblige you ; and as the sooner I am off the better, I will start to¬ morrow morning:" " Then will you add to the obligation, my
my kind Sn?, by endeavouring to amuse yourself at Moat House tilt the arrival of the funeral ? I mean to precede it thither, and we can correspond during the inter¬ val. And may I intreat, as decency must render me a close prisoner, to see you in the morning, suppose to breakfast, as we may both have thought of*many things it may be necessary to do, or to give orders respecting." Mr. Weldon readily accepted the invita¬ tion; and at a late hour the party sepa¬ rated, Kempthorne and Kalkreuth readily promising to spend the evening with our hero, who rose very early, having given orders overnight not to have the front shutters opened, since there was no longer any necessity for keeping Air. Freeman's death a secret; and having likewise ordered his footman to desire the early attendance of the same undertaker who had buried Mr Corfe, to whom he gave such orders as he thought would meet the approbation of Mr. Freeman's and his own friends, though
though he proposed paying the elder Mr. Haslemere the compliment of consulting him once more before the funeral left London, as he might suggest some altera¬ tion in the arrangement, to which he should readily agree. Mr. Weldon having breakfasted with him, set out upon his journey; and when left alone, our hero reflected that he should probably be expected at Mrs. Perkins's. He, therefore, not feeling inclined to pay Mr. George Haslemere's mistress any great respect, requested Mrs. Hunter would write a few lines to Mrs. Perkins, to excuse his non-attendance for the ensuing three weeks or a month, desiring she would dispatch her letter by a porter. She did as he desired; and as she shewed him her billet, he was more than ever confirmed in the opinion that she was still completely her friend's dupe, resolving, since his better genius had thus broken in upon his engagements with Miss Chetwynd, never to resume the task of instructing so able an actress. CHAP.
^^^^r^^^^^^^^^^ľl^^^^^ . .11 Γ- '-
CHAP. IX. The Wheeler family, at least the female part, were no less busily employed on this very morning in spreading out their best cloaths, and in settling what purchases it would be necessary to make, to enable them to appear like people of consequence at Mrs. Eggleton's rout in the evening; and Mrs, W heeler, notwithstanding their recent severe losses, was telling Cary she would buy her a mock amber necklace and ear-rings, when Jenny coming in from an errand, expressed her wonder at Air. Yates's shutters not being yet open, as it was past Jiinc, and they were seldom closed so late vol. m. m as
as eight. Mrs. Wheeler was too anxious respecting her employment, which was se¬ lecting some lace Caroline was to make into a cap for her, to care about her ne¬ phew, who she supposed was gone into the country, perhaps had followed Mrs. Jones to Margate, so had ordered his house to be shut up, to appear of consequence, and to have it remarked that he was from home. Caroline-thought it very likely he was gone home with old Corfe's relation, to whom, according to Mrs. Jones's account, he was paying great court. " Aye, aye, ten to one you are right," resumed the old woman ; " so now make me a smart cap." As Jenny reported that the house was still shut up at noon, and as his carriage had not, as usual, driven by, even the old man presumed he had left town, agreeing, with a deep-drawn sigh, that it did not concern them. Still the old woman, not¬ withstanding her avowed indifference re¬ specting this said nephew, could not help declaring
declaring that had she been more at leisure, she should have liked to have been satis¬ fied; but Mr. Eastwood must not be ne¬ glected, as they had never had so agreeable an inmate before—he had sat chatting with them till near midnight, as John had spent the evening at Knightsbridge, and had given them a short sketch of his family history, something very apropos having led to his so doing, and had told some very pleasant stories; in short, the old woman had declared he was a charming man when he retired. In the morning, he sent down a handsome fashionable tea-chest, with the key in the lock, which contained two sorts of the very best tea, and a bason of One sugar, requesting Mrs. Wheeler would make him a bason of tea, and send it up with a French roll, and a slice of butter. " This was behaving like a geitleman," said his hostess ; " as for that paltry fellow Kempthorne, he always kept his tea and sugar and liquors closely locked up, as if he thought they were capable of making m 2 use
use of any thing that did not belong to them;" and to add to her satisfaction, this generous lodger had a roast fowl for din¬ ner, and would not hear of the remains being set by. " Now they might boast of having a genteel lodger, for even old saw- ney Moretón was a mean-spirited stupid fool, when compared to Air. Eastwood ; there was a pleasure in having to do with real men of fashion." Thus did the old people and Caroline run on, while indulging over this generous man's leavings, as John was to dine, or ra¬ ther lunch at some cook's shop in the city,. not to delay time, that he might be able to reach home by five ; and the new lodger, who had been what he styled settling him¬ self in his new apartment all the morning, left home at that hour, leaving word with the maid that he did not suppose he should either drink tea or sup at home, though he should make a point of being home before iridnight, and very probably by eleven, as he should be very sorry to keep the family up.
up. This polite message was of course carried up to the old woman, who was adorning, and who observed, Kempthorne made nothing of keeping them up till one in the moaning; but he was a paltry fellow, and Mr. Haslemere would sorely repent taking him into the firm; rejoicing, as she and Cary were, going out, that Mr. East¬ wood would also be from home, though, as Mr. Wheeler made a very tolerable cup of tea, he took charge of the key of the tea-chest, in case Mr. Fastwood should, contrary to his intentions, return home ; and she was giving him particular direc¬ tions how to act, and what to say, when John came bustling in ; and as every thing was laid ready for him to dress, his toilette was soon completed, notwithstanding he expended sixpence upon his head, wishing to have his hair stand erect, according to the newest fashion, though Caroline de¬ clared " Francis's natural wave was infinitely more becoming, and when he was dressed for the theatre, his hair was arranged some- M 3 thing
thing like—so was Air. Eastwood's, who would not, she was sure, have chosen such a gaudy waistcoat with a brown frock; like Francis, he wore white." " Nobody asked her opinion," John re¬ torted ; " and her yellow glass necklace and ear-rings looked much more gaudy than his waistcoat." While they were thus wrangling, Airs. Wheeler sent for a hacknev-coach ; and the maid happening to meet with so good a one, they wished they could have taken off* the number. The old lady insisted, however, upon John's settling with the coachman before they left their own door, that they might not have any squabbles \ihen they stopped in the Adelphi; and this being done, about half past five they şet out for Knightsbridge. ^liss Atwood was si anding at her dining- room window when the coach stopped. John kissed his hand to her, before the step was let down, and swore, looking at his mother, she was a most heavenly creature; but
but as she and Caroline objected to alight¬ ing, he went in to fetch the lovely girl, whom he met upon the landing, and hav¬ ing pressed her hand to his lips, he handed her down to the carriage. She was both elegantly and becomingly dressed, and could not have had a better foil than poor Caroline, who was loaded with trumpery ornaments, which bv no means added to her attractions. Mrs. Bever accompanied her to the coach-door, to ask Mrs. and Miss Wheeler how they did., declaring the latter looked charmingly, bestowing great encomiums upon her taste in dress, though, like Miss Atwood, she thought she had never seen a worse selection of ornaments; but she wished to remain friends with the silly being, and knew she was very open to adulation ; and having made her parting curtsey, hoping some of the family would see her dear Miss Atwood home on the morrow, the coachman was ordered to die Adelphi. m 4 lohn.
å ohn, who had not forgiven Gary's mrie* tures upon hb appearance, did not fail to contrast her dtts$ with Miss Atwood's, till, but for the interposition of his mother and that lady, he would have provoked poor Cary to shed tear»; and by way of chang¬ ing the subject, Miss Atwood wondered who they should meet?— úm Eggletons had a very numerous acquaintance; but to be sure mtt&t of ihe fashionable folks were now in the country. fieføre, however, ihe had decided who were Kkely to bc it her friend's, tttey drove up to the «door of a very handsome bouse ш John-street, ihe AdeiphL A footman opctted ibe door, and u sh e re d them into the front drawing-room, a very spacious and elegantly-furnished apartment, ín which a select party of % f eay*wd.Mrcssed people of both ^exes were assembled, to whom the Wheelers were separately intro¬ duced by the master of the house, as friends of Miss Atwood, who was already ac¬ quainted with every one present, among whom
whom was a Baronet and his daughters, amf some still richer Commoners ; and as Miss Atwood appeared to be quite at home among these grear folks, the Wheelers en¬ deavoured to divest themselves of the re¬ straint they felt; and Mrs. Wheeler took an opportunity to tell John, in a whisper, that she delighted in the society of people of rank and fashion, as they did not stand upon punctilio as many city folks did, but treated every body with politeness. She only wished old Haslemere was there, to take pattern from his betters. From Afiss Atwood they learnt that the house håd been recently new furnished, at a very great expence, who added, that had it been spring instead of autumn, they would have met a still more fashionable party, as many noble families ranked among Mr. Eggleton's friends. Tbe entrance of two footmen with tea and coffee, which was made in another room, broke is upon their discourse ; and the rich gilt china, and silver salvers, were m å convincing
convincing proofs of the opulence of the* solicitor—and such a vanety of. cakes were handed about, the old woman declared that the routs in Austin Friars were not to be mentioned пот compared to this tea party. Between eight and nine, Mrs. Eggleton informed her guests that she had engaged two violins and. a harper to play country- dances and reek in the back drawings-room, as young folks she knew were fond of dancing, aud. she thought they might mus¬ ter nine or ten couple. Card-tables should be prepared for the elder guests. The Baronet, though not,a young man; and a, widower,.declared he would head the. dancers, requesting the hand of the eldest Miss Eggleton, a tine romping girl of fif¬ teen. John -Wheeler secured the hand of the handsomest woman present, namely Miss Atwood; and the party were rising to adjourn into the ball-room, when the footman announced Mr. Eastwood, whom, Mr, and Mrs. Eggleton hastily advanced to receive,.
receive, declaring that they had^ given up all hopes of being so favoured, he had made it so late, " Positively I could not get away from Counsellor ------ 's sooner, he made such a, point of my drinking my tea in Blooms- bury-square. The moment he suffered me to depart, I hastened hither, as I was very impatient to join so many good friends," bowing round him. " Then now suffer me to introduce you to Miss Atwood, Mrs. Sowerby's niece, and to some friends of her's." Miss Atwood received him as a stranger, but the Wheeler family gladly hailed the arrival of their new lodger, who recollect¬ ed that he had not informed them Mr. Eggleton was his solicitor in the suit he then had pending, and had long ranked among his most intimate friends; but upon being informed that the younger part of the guests were going to dance, he gaily declared, that he would very rea¬ dily join them, if Miss Wheeler was dis¬ si 6 engaged,
engaged, and would accept him for her partner. Caroline coloured, fluttered, and seemed to increase in height, while she stammered orit, that he did her great ho¬ nour, but die was but an indifferent dancer I» of late. Mrs. Wheeler explained—" Cary had been the pride of ^her ffáncihg-m aster, but owing to her having had a dreadful fall, she rather limped ; still there were many worse dancers even now." Air. Eastwood was so full v convinced of this, that he would take no denial, leading* íivVay the gaudy nymph, who took no small pains 1 to conceal her. lameness ; and as she certainly had once been able to go down a coiíntŕy-daiice in tolerable tíme, and without deranging the set, she did not ap¬ pear to such very great di.sadvantage as- might have been supposed ; and her part¬ ner's well-timed praises, who declared he would not resign her hand, almost turned her weak brain. As the old woman began to hope she had made a far more favour¬ able
able impression upon their present than sbe had done upon their late lodger, she whispered to her, that if she did but mind her hits, she might make her fortune by marriage, as well as her brother. Caroline needed no such stimulus to induce her td give Mr. Eastwood due encouragement; and John was delighted at his having pre¬ vented a change of partners, though be laughed in his sleeve at his folly in prefer¬ ring his ill-dressed, silly, aukward sister to several fine girls, who were of the party, besides Miss AtwOod. Refreshments of various sorts were fre¬ quently handed about by the footmen ; and about a quarter before twelve, the lady of the house requested they would sit down, as supper would be served in a few minutes; and soon after midnight the party sat down to a most sumptuous cold repast, which was served in the front par¬ lour. Four-and-twenty sat down ; and hav¬ ing satisfied their appetites, the ladies sang, then the gentlemen, and those who had 5 no
no voices related some amusing story, which so enter tained ţ Mrs. Wheeler, that she declared, in the fulness of her heart,, she had never spent a more agreeable even¬ ing; indeed it was past three before the company talked of moving. As the carriages of several were in wait¬ ing, John Wheeler proposed going in search of a hackney-coach. Mr. Eggleton would not suffer him to stir a step, order¬ ing one of his servants to procure one. Now John would have been quite as well pleased had he been less polite, as he wish¬ ed to have seen the carriages that were in waiting, that he might have known them again, and have boasted of his acquaintance with the owners. He was, however, de¬ prived of thus gratifying his curiosity, since the servant was so long gone for a coach, the Wheeler party were the last to take their leave. Mr* Eastwood made the fifth in their ve¬ hicle, and, to John's great satisfaction, he discharged it when they reached home—a strong
strong proof of his gentility, in the opi¬ nion of the whole party. Miss Atwood shared Caroline's bed, and they slept but little, Cary was so full of the praises of her partner, declaring that Eastwood was the prettiest name she had ever heard, dwelling upon every word he had said, which induced her more wily companion to congratulate her upon hav¬ ing made so desirable a conquest, artfully giving her to understand that John would ever remain unrivalled in her esteem. Cary protested she should be completely happy were she allowed to style her sister. t( And I should be no less so, to address you, my dear Cary, as Mrs. Eastwood; but if I am any judge of men in love, he is so with you." The vain silly girl was half wild with joy, declaring that she preferred him great¬ ly to Francis Yates, even in point of figure. Miss Atwood affected to coincide with her, though she was of a very different opinion, since our hero had made a very favourable impression
impression иропЪег; and could shehave hoped he w r ouId even have connected hitm self 'with her as George 'Haslemere had done, she would have readily resigned all hopes of shining as Mrs. John Wheeler— but as she had learned from the quondam Mr. Smith, that the woťld supposed this celebrated singer to be his son, she felt that he would never make her even his mistress. She, however, talked her com¬ panion into an absolute belief of her hav¬ ing acquired this rich country squire for a lover, who would keep her a carriage, she made no doubt, as Mrs. Eggleton had told her he was very rich and very generous— therefore, poor limping Caroline fell asleep the happiest of mortals, but soon awoke to recommence castle-building, kindly resolv¬ ing to look down with contempt upon Francis, to cut witk old mother Jones, and to laugh in Kempthorne's face the first time she met him after her marriage; indeed, like Miss Jenny, in the Journey to London, she already saw herself in imagination go¬ ing
ing to court, and heard her carriage-called up, telling Miss Atwood how prettily it would sound—" Mrs. Eastwood's coach." That young lady, though half inclined to laugh in her face, even en creased her va¬ nity by her flattering remarks ; and as she complained of fatigue, Caroline requested she would breakfast in bed, to which she very readily agreed, since, notwithstanding her predilection in favour of t>ur hero, she never felt quite at her ease in his imme¬ diate vicinity—therefore sincerely wished herself once more at Knightsbridge. John was very much pleased to learn from Caroline his fair mistress wished her to marry Mr. Eastwood ; and as he was even more vain than his silly sistei* he gave her credit for her taste—but though so ready to fancy his own sweet person irresistible, he absolutely scouted the idea of Cary's having made any impression upon the country squire, kindly reminding her that even Frank Yates was not fond of hops, and bidding her remember how sure she had
had made herself of shining Mrs. Kemp¬ thorne, when it came out at last that he had never thought of making her his wife. His mother took him to task very severely for his impertinent reflections upon his sister, observing that he had been very for¬ tunate in captivating so sweet a creature, though if she was acquainted with his vile temper and nagging ways, she was sure her love would soon cool ; and if he did not behave like a brother to Cary, who had said and done «11 in her power to pro¬ mote the match, she would make him re¬ pent having shewn himself so ungrateful. John, who was well acquainted with the old woman's irrascibiiity, declared Cary never could take a joke, protesting no one would rejoice more than he should to see her well married, instancing the pains he had taken to make Kempthorne do her justice. Thus, therefore, peace was restored ; and the old woman %vas preparing to pour out Mr, Eastwood's breakfast, when Jenny, who had
had been out for his French roll, brought it in, saying—" She had found out why Mr. Yates's windows were closed : the old gentleman who had been there some time, had died there on Wednesday." tf Old Corfe 's relation, as I am alive!" cried the amazed old woman ; " who, Mrs. Jones told me, had taken such a fancy to Frank, she supposed he would make him his heir." " What has he to leave ?" asked John. " How should I know, boy ?" asking the maid a thousand questions ; but she only knew that the old gentleman was dead. " I dare say he caught his death at Vaux¬ hall," said Caroline. " I should not wonder," resumed the old woman ; " and who can pity him ? Such an old man ought to have been at home and а -bed, when we saw him parading the gardens." €t Who knows but it will be old More- ton's turn next," cried the feeling John ; i( and if he does but make me his heir, I don't
don't care how soon he goes the way of all flesh." *· Nor me neither, son John, J suppose," said the old man, who seldom ventured to give his opinion unasked; but as John's speech had also offended his mother, she reviled him for daring to wish for any body's death, reminding him of the dislike old Moreton had taken to him, declaring she onlv wondered he had not treated Miss Atwood with a specimen of his bad temper, as he had greatly lost ground in Mr. Has¬ lemere's esteem, and was no favourite of Mr. George's; Kempthorne was his avowed enemy, and so were most of his brother clerks, yet he could not help telling them his opinion of old Moreton. John defended himself as ably as he knew how ; and as they did not wish to appear a divided family just at present, he escaped rather more easily than he would have done, the old woman again reverfing to the old man who had died next door, kindly hoping " Francis had nothing to ac¬ cuse
cuse himself of, though 'twas a very sudden seizure ; and if he had made a will in his favour, why ------" The poor old man could not bear these dark hints, and he defended Francis so warmly, and censured the old woman so freely, giving her a few hints in his turn, which induced her to retract all she had been saying to the disadvantage of our hero, as she did not absolutely .dare rouze her generally submissive husband, as she was well aware that it would be very İm* politic to provoke him beyond forbear¬ ance. " How sorry 1 am that gosstpping old woman, Mother Jones, is from homel" she cried, after a momentary pause. " 'Tis very unfortunate/' said Caroline ; ' f she would have told us all we wish to know. When does she return ?" " Oh she talked of staying a month. She will be as extravagant and as dissipated now as she used to be fond of hoarding; Frank and Kempthorne have succeeded in convincing
convincing her that she was a fool to save for those who are to come after her, be¬ cause they knew her property would have fallen to us." f( That was not so sure, wife," cried the old man; f( for you have heard her as good as say she would leave every thing to Francis," " She is growing foolish in her old age," resumed the matron ; ** however, rather than Francis should benefit by her savings, ï wish she may sink all she is worth in a life-annuity, for there was a time she cer¬ tainly meant to have made John her heir." " I believe there might; but he marred his fortune there as he has done with many more people." " Well, 'tis no use repeating old griev¬ ances, Mr. Wheeler; however, as 1 am very curious, I will go to Jordan's. I want a pennyworth of bitter aloes, and I shall learn all how and about it there." Caroline, therefore, went to assist her friend to rise, John proceeded into the city,
city, and the old woman went to the apo¬ thecary's. He was not at home, but having made her purchase, she introduced the sub¬ ject, saying to the shopman—" So, Mr. Jordan has had the misfortune to lose ano¬ ther patient next door to me ?" " Yes," was the reply ; " if he could have saved Mr. Freeman's life, he would have been skilful indeed." *' What was his complaint, pray ?—for I dare say I have been misinformed in that particular." " His was a very common complaint, as many people die of a vrorn-out constitu¬ tion ; and he broke a blood-vessel, which perhaps rather hastened his death, though Dr. В ------declared he would not have in¬ sured his life for a week, if he had not met with that misfortune, which, however, as might have been expected, soon put him out of his misery." " Well, when I saw him at Vauxhall on the lath, I little thought I should so soon hear
hear of his death. Have you heard who is his heir?" " I dare say Mr. Jordan never inquired» as all he has to think of, when a patient dies, is to make out his bill, and to get his money as soon as possible." As this was all Mrs. Wheeler could get out of the impudent low fellow, as she termed him, she returned home not much wiser than when she had set out, and re¬ lated what she had learnt to the old man, Caroline, and Miss Atwood, whom she found with them, and who perfectly recol¬ lected the deceased, she said, and who cer¬ tainly felt greatly relieved from her appre¬ hensions, when she understood that their neighbour's house was shut tip, and that themaster was rendered, at least for the moment, a close prisoner. She, therefore, readily agreed to stop dinner, to Johh's great satisfaction when he camé home, who in treated she would drink hér tea in Mar¬ sham-street, after which he promised to see her
her safe to Knightsbridge, which be did, accompanied by Mr. Eastwood and Caro¬ line, that gentleman having politely made the proposal, as he was not particularly engaged, and was very partial to walking. While John and his beloved loitered İn the rear, and he was pushing his fortune in as delicate a way as his feelings rendered him capable of doing, the more polite Eastwood piiid the vain, forward Caroline, many flattering compliments; therefore, had chance thrown either Kempthorne or Francis in her way, she would have looked down upon them with contempt. Mrs. Bever, who had been in expecta¬ tion of her boarderand Mr. Wheeler, had prepared a delicate little supper, which was nearly ready to be put upon the table when the party arrived, a few minutes be¬ fore nine, when she declared she began to fear she should not have seen her dear Miss Atwood that evening ; and though sbe ac¬ knowledged «he was not provided for such an addition to her party, she hoped Miss vol. m, n Wheeler
Wheeler and Mr. Eastwood (to whom she was introduced as a friend of Mr. Eggle¬ ton's) would do her the honour to sit down with them ; and as it rested solely with Mr. Eastwood, he declared he required no other inducement than such agreeable companions to lead him to accede to her request. A couple of hours soon slipped away, at the expiration of which Caroline remarked that they had to walk home. Mr. East¬ wood proposed sending for a coach, but as the evening was so fine, she declared she should prefer walking; they, therefore, took a very polite leave of their, kind hos¬ tess and her fair boarder, when, just as they were without the door, John recol¬ lected something he wished to say to Aiiss Atwood, desiring they would walk on, he should soon overtake them. Now this was what he deemed a remarkably clever ma¬ nœuvre, as he should thus enjoy a short ttte^à-íête with his lovely mistress, and af¬ ford Mr. Eastwood, if he was so inclined, an
an opportunity of making love to his sister, only wishing he might feel tempted to run away with her. This not proving the case, be overtook them just as they were turning down Marsham-street, vowing they must have walked very fast. , Mr. Eastwood ral¬ lied John upon having thus given them the blip, declaring he had been as little aware how time wore as he appeared to bave been, never having been more agreeably entertained. Caroline felt the compliment, and John was, almost against his will, forced to believe she had made a conquest. Mrs. Wheeler was sitting up for them, and aflected to be alarmed at their having made it so bte, having expected them home by ten at latest, inquiring whether they had supped ? Mr, Eastwood informed her where they had taken that meal, which induced her to launch out in praise of Mrs. Bever and her daughters, and to expatiate upon the many comforts Miss Atwood en¬ joyed in so well-regulated a family. " I dare say Mrs. Bever was the widow n 2 my
my friend Eggleton mentioned to me when 1 told hitti I had it in contemplation to go into private lodgings," said Mr. Eastwood, *' as being a very eligible person for me to r-ßside witih ; but as he thought her apart¬ ments were all fufl, and as 1 rather objected to the distance from town, I did not take the trouble to make any inquiries at Knightsbridge ; and I am extremely happy enhance, or my better genius, directed me into Marsham-street," giving Caroline a look she readily construed into a ccmpli- ment paid to her charms, and wishing them a good night. Greatly did they all rejoice that he had become their inmate, as even John now gloried in Cary's bright prospects. His mother cautioned him to be particularly upon his guard, since if he gave way to his fits of passion, or displayed any of his vulgar airs in Mr. Eastwood's presence, nay even in his hearing, the consequence, con¬ sidering his intimacy with the Eggktons, was very obvious, CHAP.
CHAP. X. Francis, whose regard for the deceased, in addition to hie wish to conform to the rules of decorum, rendered a close prisoner, re¬ quested Kempthorne would oblige him by waiting upon the Countess of Bayfield, whom it was necessary should be apprised of his intended journey into Staffordshire, since it was very probable he might be detained at least a week at Moat House ; besides, he owed her the compliment of letting her know how amply the deceased had provided for all his future wants, before the newspapers rendered his increase of n 3 fortune
fortune public. While his friend was gone in his carriage to Brompton, he dispatched the no less attached Kalkreuth to Islington, to impart the recent events to Air. Aioreton, to whom he also considered himself under very great obligations ; and as he did not chuse to appear to slight any of his former friends at such a juncture, he wrote a long explanatory letter to Airs. Jones, who had requested he would let her hear from him during her stay at Alargate, and that he would direct to the post-office there. Lady Bayfield gave his ambassador a very polite reception, remarking that Mr. Yates might truly be deemed one of Fortune's favourites ; requesting Mr. Kempthorne would desire he would not hasten his re¬ turn to town upon her account—he must have much to do and to settle in Stafford¬ shire—and as her plans had thus been so unexpectedly deranged, she proposed going to Brighton with her nieces for a month or six weeks, though she hoped to scc
see Mr. Yates when he returned tò town, even admitting he relinquished the task of teaching her nieces. Kempthorne, in conformity to his in¬ structions, assured her that his friend was by no means inclined to break any of the engagements he had entered into previous to his great accession of fortune ; indeed he had heard him frequently say that be should always consider himself under the greatest obligations to Lady Bayfield, whose early patronage had been of the greatest use in establishing his fame. This musical lady had never felt more flattered, nor more convinced of her superior judgment, having often prognosticated that our hero would make a rapid and a splendid for¬ tune. Mr. Moreton was not less pleased—first, because he sincerely regarded his young favourite—and next because he knew the Wheelers, whom he now (as weak minds generally go into extremes) most cordially detested, would be very much mortified. n 4 Mr.
Mr. IL'tslemere, senior, readily gave his advice, through the medium of Kemp¬ thorne, to the modest, unassuming youth, who was more and more endeared to all hts friends, from bearing his prosperity so meekly. Mr. George Haslemere, he learnt from Kempthorne, had been seized rather suddenly, on the very day Air. Freeman had died, with a low or nervous fever, which still hung about him, but which change of air, it was hoped, would re¬ move ; and Dr, В ------ had, in conse¬ quence, ordered him to Brighton, as his spirits were extremely affected, which was die more extraordinary, as he had appeared in perfect health on the preceding day, " Surely I saw him on the 13th," said our hero. " í should hardly suppose so, as he was at the villa on the 12th, and did not return to town till late next day." Francis said no more, not chusing* to mention where nor in what company he had seen him, as he felt very unwilling to acknowledge
acknowledge that he had been, even for so short a time, the dupe of one of Mr. George's kept mbtre&ses; and in what other light could he consider Miss Chet* wynd ?—besides, what Kempthorne had said perfectly agreed with his own notions; he had been at his villa, and with his then favourite sultana—this certainly led him to wonder whether Mrs. Haslemere ever visited this said country retreat, or whether he was there Mr. Smith ? But as he knew of no means of satisfying his curiosity, he ceased to think of what he was fully re¬ solved should never concern him, having made up his mind to relinquish the post of ma^er to the deceitful syren, who had made him her dupe. On the eighth morning after his decease, the remains of Mr. Freeman left Marsham- street, in a hearse and six, followed by two coaches and four, all decorated in the most expensive style, with white plumes, &c. and attended bv truncheon-men in -ma' white hatbands and scarfs, and every etce- ь 5 tera
tera which are requisite upon such occa¬ sions, our hero's chariot, Aír. Weldon's and Mr. Jordan's carriages, closing the melan¬ choly procession. Francis's servants were in deep mourning, with scarfs and hat¬ bands, the solicitor's and apothecary's with only gloves and hat-bands; and the two latter equipages merely accompanied the bodv as far as Camden Town, and there the undertaker and his attendant took pos¬ session of the black coaches, and began their journey, the former having engaged to reach Aloat House on the fifth evening. Our hero's carriage and servants accompa¬ nied them down, as he wished to pay every mark of respect to the memory of so mu¬ nificent a friend. Air. Haslemere senior ïe\t himself so interested in the concerns of this much-favoured young man, whom he found, from Kempthorne's account, had been nowise absurdly elated by his unex¬ pected prosperity, merely feeling extreme¬ ly anxious to evince his gratitude and re¬ spect towards the deceased, that he drove into
into Marsham-street the morning after tbe funeral procession had departed, wishing not only to offer his personal congratula¬ tions to his favourite, but also to express his entire approbation of every thing he had hitherto done ; and having given him some very excellent advice, he kindly told him that he had so arranged matters as to enable him to give his friend Kempthorne a short holiday, having understood he had expressed a wish that he could have made it convenient to have accompanied him dotili. Never had Francis felt more gratified—« such a proposal wan so truly considerate. situated as he was, and going among totid Grangers, Mr. Weldon excepted, and hh acquaintance with him was of a very recent date ; but Mr. Haslemere seemed even more anxious to consult hk convenience than his own, uhich he politely hinted to the old gentleman, whom he sincerely re- verenced ; and though the general tcncir of hi» conduct, and the irreproachable cha- я tf racier
raeter he bore, were to him convincing proofs that he was not his father, he could not help fancying that he was his grand¬ father, and that Mr. Haslemere entertained the same suspicions, as he was very certain he bore no affinity to the late Mr. Corfe, гни withstanding Mr, Freeman % erroneous ideas upon the subject ; and though he Mt by xìo means anxious to fathom the mys¬ tery which hung over his birth» he r&thrr rejoiced that this worthy merchant thus taciîîv allowed his claims to his kind of- fices and to hh regard. Ila vin sr, in very polite terms, (as few- men of his. age, owing to his having been ro rrirly introduced into public, could ex¬ pres» themselves with more propriety, or siknit themselves, in any company, with more grace) expressed gratitude for so unhoped-for a favour, he proposed, if Mr. Haslemere had no objection, that they should set off the following morning, a- he wkhed to reach Moat House at least a day before the body, as it would seem more respectful;
respectful ; and thus it was finally settled— but »ot wishing to pass the procession, they took a different road. Mr. Weldon had been apprized when he might expect them, and when it was sup¬ posed the late owner of the mansion would reach bis journey's end, that e%ery neces¬ sary preparation might be made for tbe approaching funeral ; and having slept at —, they arrived in sight of Moat House between one and two the following day, w hieb they both agreed had a very vene¬ rable appearance, though Francis thought it would have appeared to greater advan¬ tage bad it stood in a more elevated si?na¬ tion; the surrounding grounds apperred more dedicated to use than shew, as the lawns, or rather fields, seemed stocked with sheep and oxen, and but a very small tn- closure seemed allotted to plantations and pleasure-grounds,— " This might be very profitable," our hero remarked ; *' but the size of the house required a larger garden ; though he might in time become an adept 4 in
in farming, at present he must intrust thç management of that department to the bailiff, from whom he must take some les¬ sons before he could pretend to issue any orders, " Mr. Weldon and the small but venerable household, were assembled in the spacious hall to receive their new master. The me¬ nials appeared very dejected, which he thought very natural, since, independant of their attachment to their old master, his death must have reminded them that, ac¬ cording to the common course of nature, they had not many years to live. He had besides left them entirely dependant upon his heir, alledging, as a reason for so doing, that he was unwilling to appear even to doubt his benevolence, after the strong proofs he had received of the charity of his disposition. Mr. Weldon had of course mentioned the circumstance to them, as¬ suring them, at the same time, that they could not have fallen into better hands; and though they entertained no doubts of his
his veracity, had they appeared more cheer¬ ful, they would have betrayed a want of feeling, more likely to have lowered than to have raised them in our hero's estima¬ tion. Not wishing, however, to keep them in suspense, Francis seized an early opportu¬ nity to inform them that they should each receive a year's wages, in addition to their mourning, promising to pay the three el¬ ders the same sum annually, should they chuse to leave their places, though it was entirely at their option to retain their situ¬ ations, which they preferred doing, feeling- perfectly reconciled to this change of mas¬ ters, and very much pleased by the assu¬ rance of their present, that whenever health or inclination induced them to alter their determination, they should receive the promised annuity. As dinner was not ready when the tra¬ vellers arrived, they walked over the house and gardens, and found much to admire in the Gothic pile, as the rooms were large
and lofty : and though the furniture was by no means fashionable, every article was Very good of its kind, and in very neat order, since even an old maid could not have been more particular, in many re¬ spects, than these two old bachelor bro¬ thers had been. Our hero, therefore, re¬ marked that every thing, as in his town- house, seemed more calculated for comfort and use than for shew ; though he was de¬ lighted with the library, which was fitted up in a very expensive style, and contain¬ ed, in addition to a very fine orrery, a very large and well-chosen collection of books, having early imbibed a great love oflite- ratttre, and being (owing to the advantages he had enjoyed by haviiig what might be termed the run of Westminster-school) very well versed in the dead languages ; and from Kalkreuth he had learned French, Italian, and German, if not in perfection, âufficiently to make himself understood in each, and to read the authors in those lan¬ guages with advantage; and as the cellars, were
were as well stocked as the fields, Mr. Wei- don informed him, he agreed that a man might contrive to spend a very large for¬ tune in so comfortable an old mansion.— ,ç As I was not aware that the library was so well furnished/' he went on, " I was afraid you would have found yourself very dull, my good Sir, while you remained the solitary inmate of Moat House." <( Then positively you were very much mistaken, since, indépendant of the op¬ portunity I had of studying Coke and Lyt- tleton, I have also renewed my acquaint¬ ance with many friends, as I was born in гиг π£Χί COüníy, Cheshire; and have тлпу distant relations in this, and more acquaint¬ ance ; indeed I have been in the habit of doing business for many people in these environs, besides the Mr. Freemans ; and after I had done what I thought necessary upon my arrival here, I ventured to visit my friends in the neighbourhood, as you had requested me to invite a few of those most distinguished by Mr. Freeman, to his funeral,
funeral, which I have done in your name, and I give you my honour they are all anxious to be introduced to the present owner of Moat House." , " Owing to your favourable account of me, my kind friend, ï will endeavour not to disgrace vour recommendation, as I Orf * much wish to be upon friendly terms with all my neighbours ; and I intend in future to reside chiefly in the country, where I hope every summer to see my small circle of London friends, among whom those pre¬ sent rank foremost." " Then in return for your kindly ex¬ pressed invitation," replied the solicitor, " I will introduce you to one of the most amiable young women, not only in Staf¬ fordshire but even in England." " Pray defer it," interrupted Kemp¬ thorne, " till the funeral is over, as I should not wish to see Yates in love, when he must of course appear il penser oso.'* " Oh, I mean to pay some regard to de¬ cency," was the reply ; i( and though my rambling
rambling might not be deemed indecorous, his appearing abroad certainly would ; be¬ sides, we shall all three find plenty of em¬ ployment to amu.se us during the ensuing week, in looking over the hoards." « Very possibly," resumed Kempthorne: (C but to return to this fair lady ; I hope she ts handsome and single, in addition to her numerous good qualities ?" " She is, in my opinion, every thing that a woman ought to be, and what so few of them really are, since if they can boast of their family or descent, that generally ren¬ ders them proud, let them be rich or poor; and if they are merely wealthy, they fancy themselves irresistible upon that very ac¬ count, and look forward to marrying an Earl at least ; and if thev are celebrated for their beauty, they fancy they have a carte blanche to give themselves airs, and gene¬ rally merely endeavour to make fools of all their male acquaintance ; though posi¬ tively I attribute the errors, both of women of family, wealthy heiresses, and first-rate beiks*
belles, more to their parents' folly than to their own, as the first are taught to despise their inferiors in point of birth, the second to look down upon those who are not equally favoured by fortune, and the last are so early taught to fancy themselves irresistible, *tis next to impossible they should not believe themselves to be so. " The lady in question had a most excel¬ lent mother, and was early convinced, by sad experience, that even people of family and fortune may be reduced to a level with many whom they once ranked among their inferiors, and that virtue alone distinguishes the tçood from the bad. I have known her from a child—I admired her then, but I admire her much more now, since her con¬ duct through life has been truly praise¬ worthy. " About five-and-twenty years ago, I became acquainted with her father, Mr, Melvin, who had recently come into the possession of an estate of about fourteen thousand a-yearj in one of the finest situa¬ tions
ations in this county, and who, î a the course of nearly as many years, with the assistance of a rascally steward, contrived to sell and mortgage, till he was unable to raise another guinea; and as poverty and a prison now stared him in the face, he took to drinking, which fas he had led a most debauched, dissipated life) soon ter¬ minated his existence, thus leaving a most amiable woman, the very counterpart of her daughter, whom he had married more for her beauty than her fortene, but who had received a most excellent education, and three daughters, to lament his unpar¬ donable imprudence, since it is hardly to be supposed that they could regret the loss of so unworthy a being. Some part of the estate was entailed upon the next таю heir, therefore did not afford any resource to his wife and family, as every tl>ing of value he left behind him, and all his re¬ maining property, was seized by his nume¬ rous creditore the moment the breath was out of his body. The distressed widow wrote
wrote me a brief but pathetic account of her situation, requesting my advice. I answered her letter in person, and was, I flatter myself, of some little service to her, as I obtained more favourable terms from the creditors than she had reason to expect from the harsh measures they had pursued in the first instance, as they were all rather mercenary people, which was not to be wondered at, considering the low company with which the deceased had always asso¬ ciated. " His ill usage, for I cannot express his conduct towards this deserving woman in any other terms, had greatly impaired both her health and spirits; of course she was very unable to cope with the harpies with whom she was surrounded : but as they found me resolute, and were not inclined to have their demands legally scrutinized, thcv at last agreed to resign the house in which the rascally steward had always re¬ sided, to the afflicted widow and her or¬ phans, and the small surrounding estate, comprising
comprising about twenty acres of fine mea¬ dow land ; however, as the late owner of South Lodge had only to give his orders to have them obeyed, a more comfortable rural abode is scarcely to be met with ; and thither Mrs. Melvin and her three daugh¬ ters removed, her small jointure being all they had to depend upon, and as it was merely in proportion to the fortune she had brought her husband, it was only four hundred а -year, which he maintained was as much or more than any woman ought to have, or indeed could know how to spend; possibly when he married, he might have it in contemplation to give his younger or female children fortunes, since the principal of their mother's jointure was all that was settled upon them ; and they were now to be educated and pro¬ vided for out of this small stipend, though he could not make fourteen thousand a- year do for himself—but unfortunately there are many such selfish, if not many such
such extravagant, husbands to be met with. " Mrs. Melvin's conduct had been ex- amplary as a wife, and vvas no less so as a widow. Having, as 1 before observed, re¬ ceived an excellent education, she w^as the sole instructress of her daughters from their infancy, as Mr. Melvin affirmed that it w T as all money thrown away to send girls to school; of course his daughters were never removed from under their mother's eye, which was, in many respects, a great ad¬ vantage to them ; and after her removal to South Lodge, she devoted her whole time to their improvement, and had the satis¬ faction of seeing them all second her en¬ deavours so ably, particularly the eldest, that she was with justice proud of her girls. I had not seen my favourite for the last eighteen months, and I did not expect to have found her at South Lodge, though she has resided theee some time, and has one of the sweetest little girls I ever saw, between two and three years old." «Z—ds!"
tc Ζ — ds !" interrupteďKempthorne,"f she is married then after all ; and here I have been building castles, and almost resolving to have her myself." <f Pray pursue your occupation," re¬ sumed Weldon ; f< for though I have told you she is a mother, you need not des¬ pair." " Nay, surely that circumstance implied that she was cither married or worse ; of course you have overthrown all my castles, else I was thinking that South Lodge, and so beautiful a woman, would, exactly have suited me, as I should have been so near my friend." " Only suffer me to conclude my story, and you will find they are still both to be had, not perhaps very easily, though « my favourite is a widow, as you shall hear. So to return to Mrs. Melvin. She did not sunke her husband more than five years, and when she died, she left me and a distant female relation, a most worthy, sen¬ sible, maiden lady, of the name of W " d.\ VOL. UU О joint
join t guardians to her daughters; and my ex- cellentcoadju trice insisted upon their hence¬ forth becoming her inmates. Miss Melvin was at this period about eighteen, her se¬ cond sister sixteen, and the youngest, Emily, in her fourteenth year. They readily acce¬ ded to her wishes of removing to Liverpool, as she could not take up her abode with them at South Lodge. I therefore took upon me to let that house ready furnished, and the surrounding estate, which I imme¬ diately did to an excellent tenant, upon a seven years lease, for a hundred and fifty pounds a-year ; and Mrs. Melvin had been, so economical and so excellent a manager, that she had lain by upwards of a thousand pounds, during the five years she had been á widow, which she had left between her two youngest daughters, who were also entitled to their thirds of her jointure. South Lodge she bequeathed to Miss Mel¬ vin, certain that her sisters would always find an asylum there, and as some return for the assistance she had afforded her in their
their education ; and from tbe period of her mother's decease, she has afiectionately supplied her place, and completed the edu¬ cation of her amiable pupils: indeed they were so accomplished, and so well read, when they removed to Liverpool, that Mrs. W 7 right was not a little proud of her wards, for whom, at her own expence, she en¬ gaged the first dancing-master the place afforded. Music they continued td study under their sister ; and if they do not rival you, Mr. Yates, they are by no means in¬ ferior performers. Miss Melvin, in par¬ ticular, then sung with great taste ; and as Mrs. Wright soon introduced her and her second sister, Fanny, into companf, within a twelvemonth after their removal to Li¬ verpool, a particular friend of their kind guardian's fell violently in love with my favourite. He was a most amiable, excel¬ lent man, and reputed to be very rich, his father and grandfather having been, Vke himself, in the mercantile line, and though in his thirty-ninth year, he was still a ba- о 2 ch clor,
chelor, never having met with a woman in Whose keeping he had chosen to place his happiness, till he saw Miss Melvin, -He however warmly pressed his suit ; and as he w T as most ably seconded by Mrs. Wright and your humble servant, to oblige us, and for her sister's sake, Elizabeth Melvin accompanied him to the altar on her twen¬ tieth birth-day. As he was a most indul¬ gent husband, attd she was a most exem¬ plary wife, they were extremely happy during the three years they lived together, as he died while the young Elizabeth was in her nurse's arms. " Fanny Melvin had continued to reside with Mrs. Wright, but Emily had removed with her sister to Mr. Archer's spacious habitation, who, when Fanny was addressed by the only son of a very great manufac¬ turer, presented her With six thousand pounds, upon her making over her share in their mother's jointure to his wife, to whom this act of generosity greatly en¬ deared him ; and I understand the young couple
couple are very happy, and are making a rapid fortune. " Mr Archer died worth between sixtv and seventy thousand pounds, and he of course, in compliment to his wife's recom¬ mendation, who, like her mother, thinks she can never be sufficiently grateful for the trifling services I rendered them, ap¬ pointed me joint executor with her, and joint guardian to the infant Elizabeth, to whom he left twenty thousand pounds—to Emily Melvin six thousand, upon the same conditions annexed to the gift he made her sister, a thousand pounds to your humble servant, and the rest to his amiable wife, who mourned very sincerely for his lots; and aa she resohed to remove to South Lodge, the moment her tenant's lease ex¬ pired, she did so last spring—but I feared I should riot find Jier there, as she had in¬ formed me she proposed accompanying Airs. Wright to Harro wga te this summer, that lady having been recommended to drink those waters ; but as she found no о 3 great
great benefit from them, she proceeded to Scarborough, and Mrs. Archer and her siíster returned to South Lodge, as Airs. Wi ight was going to visit a relation at the latter place. Therefore, should you ob¬ ject to marrying a widow, Air. Kempthorne, the sister may please your fancy ; still she is not to be compared to Mrs. Archer, at least in my opinion." 4i I shall not give mine till I have seen both ladies," was the reply; " but where am I to look for South Lodge, as I own wc did not pass any villa resembling your description of this earthly paradise?" * r It is about a mile and a half from hence ; but I do not think you could see it the road you came." " I am resolved, however, to r' tain a glimpse cf the house, at least, befon. 1 leave Staffordshire," rejoined Kem ρ thorn . t( I propose introducing you to he fair owner," said the solicitor; " we will there¬ fore walk over some afternoon, and drink our tea with her and Aiiss Mclvin." " As
" As you are upon such intimate terras with Mrs. Archer," said Francis, " you have certainly learnt from her whether the neighbouring gentry approve of Mr. Freer man's strange disposal of his property ; therefore, pray be candid, as 1 am very anxious to know how 1 am likely, to be received among them." " With pleasure, I give you my honour. One gentleman, to whom the greatest de¬ ference is paid, has seen you in London, and his report has been so favourable, and your private character has been pronoun¬ ced so unexceptionable, that most people rejoice at Moat House having fallen to your share, though they have all more or less imbibed the same suspicions which Mr. Freeman entertained respecting your rela¬ tionship to Mr. Corfe ; and I have not thought it necessary to inform them that you are of a different opinion, as it is a matter which cannot concern them. Mr. Freeman's sudden departure to town sur¬ prised every body, and many people fore- o 4 saw,
saw, arhas-piwed the case, that it would hasten his dissolution—of course they now boast oB their foresight : but though you dkl not see South Lodge, did not you re¬ mark, about four miles from hence, a very noble séât to the left?" " I recollect it perfectly/' replied Fran¬ cis ; '* we drove by the side of the park- paling for ffeariy halfa mile." " You must 1 have done so," said Air. Weldon ; " well, that very seat once be¬ longed to Henry Afe! vin, Esq. but it is now the ^property of the honourable Lionel Caerwyth, a wealthy nabob, who was only brother to the late, and who is uncle to the present, ' Earl of hïerïoneth, to whom it is thought it will devolve i:: due course of time." " 1 had the honour of Ľ-'^g introduced to his Lordship," said our я* о ; íf and he rea nested me, when thö uuilv came to town for the winter, to une* ríake the in¬ struction of his daughters, ι* which I rea¬ dily agreed, aş he struck me as being a, most
most amiable great man ; but I am afraid this increase of fortune will make me lazy, at least I shall not feel anxious to increase my scholars." " I should not suppose you would," re¬ joined the solicitor; (t and of course you do not mean to continue a candidate for public applause, since though I agree your defection will be severely felt, your re¬ maining upon the stage would be attri¬ buted to either avarice or vanity." f ' Hiat 1 dare say ; and I have no right to deprive those more in want of public patronage of an opportunity of replacing me—therefore, as soon as I have completed my present engagement, I will turn far¬ mer." " And can there be a finer si^it than the one you enjoy from this window?" ob¬ served Mr. Weldon, " or a more varied landscape ?—fine sheep, both of the Eng¬ lish and Spanish breed, ranging the same pastures; young horses, whose pedigrees would not disgrace a Welchman, and of о 5 different
different ages; and the same may be said of the horned cattle: then you have an excellent dairy, supplied by your, own cows; and if you are fond of shooting,, your inclosures are well stocked with game, as no manor was ever more strictly preserved." At this moment they were summoned to dinner, which broke in, for the present,. upon their conversation, and the evening was devoted to walking over the home grounds, and to regulating various con¬ cerns which devolved upon the hero of our tale.
CHAR
CHAP. XL iNviTATiONsJiaving been issued tp all the particular friends of Mr. Freeman, and to all his tenants, to assemble the next day to attend the funeral, between three and four the company began to drop in. The body was to be at Moat House by ñve o'clock at latest, and another mourning coach had been engaged at Stafford to convey the mourners to the village church, which was about three quarters of a mile from the mansion, and where the family had a vault. Francis had proposed having one of the parlours hung in black, where the corpse 0 6 might
might have lain in state for one night ať least ; but Mr. Weldon had rather objected to the measure, as he thought it would be a useless addmoVoľ" expence, which would merely draw together a great croud of low people, and might be deemed os¬ tentaron in the heir. As our hero was ever ready to attend to^thevtdvicc of those he deemed wiser people than himself, he instantly agreed to the justice of his friend s advice, as Ыт. Freeman was bv no ml means a distinguished * public character, and there was a sufficient-croud 'assembled* as it WQS>'to«ee him consigned to his mo¬ ther-earth, as, having stopped at a village three miles short of Moat House, the hearse and horses were again decorated in the same splendid nianner as wrten they drove through London. The plumes were also carried before the hearse for that distance, and the truncheon-men walked on either side—-therefore altogether·, it was a far su¬ perior sight to what bad been expected, and
and to what are generally exhibited upon suclvoccasibňs* in countrý : iplaces at such a distance from town.. 1 At six o'clock they proceeded to the vil¬ lage chitpdh, the tenants on horseback two and' two, in scarves, cloaks, hatbands, and gloves; -six'gentlemeh in handsome scarves, Scerbate 4he *рШ when TheyTeaxhed the church- y írrd, ^he^herr ^following as chief mourner, Kempthorne; the solicitor,tmd it- few other friends, "bringing up the rear, the tenaríís and servants closing the pre¬ cession s and -as еЧНету- thírľg* v^as extremely well 4rondircted, brid no expence had been spared, as batbands," scarves and gloves had been very generally distributed, and as every one.of the lower classes who had visited Moat House *u pon ' the meíaňcholy occa¬ sion, hâd found aplenty l ofgood cheer, which' many of them agreed they had never done during the old gentleman's life-time, ^oth gieať -and small'returned home perfectly satisfied; ^hd Very much' prejudiced 'in favour of the J successor *of the
the deceased, as one and all declared that this was a far superior funeral to the other brother's, who had only died three months before. The company,' who had most of them carriages in waiting, which had fallen into the procession> having made their bows to the chief mourner in the church¬ yard, they all filed oíf d i fie re n t ways, and our hero ande his two friends returned to Moat House in his chariot. The next morning Mr. Weldon proposed their proceeding to business, as the seals still remained upon every closet, cabinet, or desk, which contained papers or plate ; and every thing ought now, he said, to be examined and taken an account of. Though they found much useless lumber, the old gentleman's accounts were in the most correct order ; and there were more secu¬ rities for money than even Mr. Weldon had been^ aware of, or had had reason to expect, from what the old gentleman had told him when iu town. Having devoted two whole days to look¬ ing
ing over and destroying waste -papers though they had not completed their task, our hero said they must have a holiday on the third. Mr. Weldon was rather anxious to return to town, but as his assistants were so lazily inclined, he would take the op-- portunity to ride over to Stafford, where be had some business to transact, promis¬ ing to return to dinner, and to introduce them to- Mrs. Archer in the afternoon. No proposal could have been more agreeable to the young men, who set out, meaning to explore the environs, as soon as he de¬ parted* Kempthorne's curiosity fed him to ask the gardener which was the way to South Lodge ? and having obtained a direction, which he declared himself unable to com¬ prehend, as they were to keep along far¬ mer Nash's Jong field, and then to cross the wood close, &c. &e. if they wished to take the nearest way, Francis, therefore, said they had better take the carriage road,, since,
since, according to the old proverb— 4t The farthest way about was the nearest way home"—though he advised their not ap¬ proaching the Lodge sufficiently near to be seen or remarked by Mrs. Archer. Kemp¬ thorne assured him he had no such inten¬ tion ; therefore, having crossed a part of what was denominated the home farm, they reached the road they proposed going, and had not proceeded more than half a m-ile^ when they came to a fine river, or rather trout etream, which made a bend of some length, the road running by Ahe «İde ; and for the security of foot passengers, a slight single post and railing was carried along the whole way, being fixed within about a foot of the bank. Tuesday was remarkably fine and serene; scarcely a leaf appeared to move, and the current of the water was barely perceiv¬ able. The stream was so clear, that they could discern plenty offish. " I wonder whether we are upon y our- manor,"
manor," said Kempthorne ; ** if we are, vou need never be at a loss for fresh-water Jish, if you are fond of the diversion." ** I should never have the patience to follow it up," was the reply : tT this river, though narrow, seems deep ; in the win¬ ter, at all events, it must be so, as it is now full two feet below the surface/' " Why surely Air. Weldon told m/* re¬ sumed Kempthorne, if there was a beautiful stream ran at the bottom of the pleasure- grouxxib at South Lodge" " I recollect he did ; and if I mistake not, a few hundred yards farther on, it winds round to the right," pointing out the direction in which it seemed to flow ; and they stopped* endeavouring to disco¬ ver the house they wished to see. While thev remained stationary, a waor- »'O gon loaded with hay drove out of a field just before them, and took the sgtme road. they were going ; and as it kept near the foot-path, that being the best side> it totally prevented them from seeing far before thenu
them. They were slowly following it, when they heard some one call out ; and as the lad who was driving the team now broke the way, they perceived a lady, who had a little girl sitting by her side, and who was driving herself in a whisky, advancing towards them. A servant in livery had rode forwards to make the farmer's man break the way, or keep on his, own side, and he had readily obeyed his orders ; but as he was obliged to cross from a very good road into a very rough one, intersected with deep ruts,, owing to a sudden jolt, the axle-tree snapped, and down went the waggon, with a most violent crash, at the very moment the lady was driving past it. Though it did not absolutely overturn the whisky, it so frightened the horse, that with one plunge he broke down the slight railing already mentioned, and the next moment both horse, driver, and whisky were in the river, and at no great distance from the two friends, who sprang forward at the same moment to give their assist¬ ance,
ance; as the servant's horse, having fully participated in the terror of his companion, ran away with his rider, who was, for some time, wholly unable to put a check to his wild career, Having reached the spot, Francis, with¬ out reflecting that he was no swimmer, and that he had just been remarking that the river was very deep, instantly plunged in, and almost instantly caught hold of the child as «he rose, whom he. handed to his companion, who called out— ( ' For God's sake take care, since in another step you will be out of your depth." Kegardless of his caution, he pushed for¬ ward xipon perceiving the lady rise on the other side of the carriage, and he had the good fortune to catch hold of her cloaths; but had he not also been able to seize hold of the chaise with his other hand, he would very probably not have recovered his feet. Though this support was Only momen¬ tary, it enabled him to drag the lady to¬ wards the bank; and as, upon making an effort*
effort, he was able once more to stand, he laised the head of his nearly lifeless bur** then above water, and had drawn her suf¬ ficiently near the edge to receive the assist¬ ance of Kempthorne, when the poor fright¬ ened horse, being equally anxious to find hinuelf once more upon terni firma, made towards him ; and while he was making a last effort to lift the lady upon the bank, wholly unconscious of his own impending danger, the horse plunged against him so \iolently, that he actually beat him down under his feet, and in all likelihood he would have ferminated his existence, if the farmer's man, who at that very mo-j mex\i camie up, had not begun to Jay his loifîg whip about his head, which humane action probably saved our hero's life, who* thus released from the pressure of the ani T mal's feet, made shift to rise, and to era w J to the edge of the bank, being most dread¬ fully bruised abo, ut the left shoulder and side. Kempthorne, assisted by the carter, drag-r ged
ged him up, as he was unable to speak, and could scarcely move. The carter's h i II oas had summoned all the haymakers from the adjoining field, though they arrived too late to be of any very material service. The servant had also gallopped back just in time to hear the distracted Kempthorne, who had left the lady to assist his friend, ordering every one about them upon some expedition— fora carriage, a surgeon, &c. The child, who had never absolutely lost her senses, was the first that recovered, and ran to her mamma, who was now supported by two decent female peasants, crying be¬ cause she did not speak; but in a very few moments she opened her eyes, and the sight of 1 her child, whom she ferve&tly clasped to her bosom, appeared greatly to accelerate her recovery ; and when, upon looking round, she perceived our hero, pale and languid, sitting supported by his friend, she seemed to forget that any thing ailed her, no longer considering seifas of any importance, " Gracious
" Gracious Heaven !" she exclaimed, with the energy of real feeling, " what has befallen that gentleman, whose wet cloaths inform me that he was the preserver, of mine and my child's life?" again folding the latter to her bosom— " what has hap¬ pened, as I fear he has been a very severe sufferer, throuj his humanity to us, total strangers?" " Indeed I fear he is very dangerously hurt," cried Kempthorne; " pray direct some of these people for the nearest sur¬ geon." " Uun this moment, John Thompson, to Aír. Oakcs, and send him to my house," she exclaimed, starting upon her feet ; tc and do four of you," looking round her, " bear the gentleman thither, for he seems unable to walk—it is within a quarter of a mile, Sir," looking at Kempthorne. "He is not more than a mile from home, Aia'am," was the reply; "and I think he had better be conveyed thither," " Not
" Not more than a mile from home, and yet a stranger to me ! Surely------" " His name is Yates, Ma'am. Your friend Mr. Weldon ------" " Has already taught me to esteem him," interrupted Mrs. Archer, as we presume our readers have already guessed it was no other; " and Ishall insist upon his being conveyed to South Lodge. Moat House is more than a mile and a half from hence, and the Lodge is almost in sight. Where is Mr. Weldon ?" Francis looked at his friend, who had almost immediately suspected this was the lady they were so anxious to see—while she ordered the men to take a gate they were standing near off the hinges, and to make a bed of new hay upon it, when four of them could carry Mr. Yates to her house, without, she hoped, increasing the pain he seemed to be in ; and her looks so exactly corresponded with her words, while she intreated the suffering Francis would not object to her proposal, that he faintly articulated
articulated his acquiescence to her wishes, adding—" Since you and that lovely little girl are safe, I am perfectly reconciled to my own misfortune ; indeed I believe I am only rather severely bruised—that un- polite beast almost knocked the breath out of my body." " I shall never, however, forgive myself, if you are a very material sufferer in con>- sequence of my foolhardiness. I was ex¬ tremely to blame for attempting to drive past that waggon ; and I shall be miserable if Mr. Oakes does not give me a favourable account of you. Pray, dear good people, make haste." Her distress was so unaffected, and her sorrow so poignant, as she feared our hero bad greatly endangered his own life to preserve Iter's, that the youthful Elizabeth said— t( Do not cry; mamma; Ido not mind beirig wet, and I shall have dry things on When I get home, and so* will you." " Bless you, sweet innocent, we should neither of us have required dry cloaths but
5
hut for that gentleman," again pressing her to her bosom. Our hero, wishing to convince her hè was not so much hurt as she seemed to fear, made an effort to rise, with the assistance of his friend, as he thought the young wi¬ dow, even in such a dripping state, and with her eyes swimming in rears, looked very lovely; and as she was evidently grieving for him, he felt both pleased and flattered by the anxiety she evinced. He was not, however, able to walk many yanH though he endeavoured to make light of the hurts he had received, requesting she would compose herself, and intreating she would hasten home to change her cloaths. The gate being prepared, according to her orders, as she was extremely beloved^ Francis was placed upon it, and four men', one at each corner, carried him with appa¬ rent ease, Airs. Archer walking on one side, and Kempthorne, who had taken the child in his arms, on the other. The servant, having seen his mistress anà her daughter vol. щ, p were
were safe, had, with the assistance of some of the haymakers, rescued the horse from a watery grave ; and indeed neither he nor the chaise had sustained much damage. As the news of the accident had flown to the Lodge, every preparation was making against their arrival. Airs. Archer gave in¬ stant orders to have the best room pre¬ pared, which was frequently slept in, she observed, though it was impossible it could be damp at that season ; and while Kemp¬ thorne and the men-servants were undres¬ sing the invalid, Mrs. Archer having dis¬ patched a second messenger for the sur¬ geon, another for a physician, and a third to Moat House for a change of linen for its master, and one of his own servants to attend him, she consented to change her own wet cloaths, which she had scarcely done, while relating her, as she deemed it, miraculous preservation to her sister and maid, affirming, that had Mr. Yates had the least consideration for himself, he would never have run the imminent risk he did to
to save her and her child, even admitting that vile beast had not so greatly increased his danger. She was still dwelling upon his humanity, when the surgeon arrived, who, understanding that he was called in for the new master of Moat House, who must of course be a verv rich man, and the countryman who went in search of him pronounced him a very generous one, he of his own accord sent him to where, ac¬ cording to the time of dav, it was likelv he would meet with Dr. Malvern, a most excellent physician, in whose skill he knew Mrs. Archer placed the greatest reliance. That lady thanked him for having so speedily obeyed her summons, leading the way into his patient's room, who was al¬ ready in bed, and to whom she introduced him as a man of great practice, and allowed to be extremely skilful and very success¬ ful. She then, hoping she should hear a very favourable account of him, Ινΐχ tí,^ room, when Mr. Oakes proceeded to exa¬ mine his patient, whom he found drea Ί- * 2 fullv
fully bmìred from the shoulder to the hip, where he had evidently been struck by the horse's fore-feet, in his plunge to extricate himself from the stream. A copious bleed¬ ing was absolutely necessary, to prevent, what was most to be dreaded, an inflamma¬ tion from coming on, and also as a preser¬ vative against the inward bruises which he must have received. As he was unprepared with any other application, he made use of brandy to rub the affected parts, which he was still bathing, when Dr. Malvern arrived, who highly approved of all that had been done; and having given every necessary order, and very strict charges respecting the administering of the medi¬ cines, and his patient's diet, he left him to his repose, the loss of blood having in¬ clined him to sleep, and he wished to en¬ courage every thing likely to promote quiet. He told Kempthorne, and the even still more anxious Mrs. Archer, that he could not yet be answerable for the young gentleman's
gentleman's recovery—if his blood was in a good state., and his constitution unim¬ paired, he entertained great hopes of his doing well—Kempthorne assured him his friend had led a most regular life from his childhood, and had never experienced a day's illness. * f That was very much in his favour," the doctor declared ; " Air. Oakes had pur¬ sued every likely method to prevent an i n fiam mation from taking place, as in that case there would be much to apprehend—■ mortifications trod so close upon their heels; and he would pay every possible attention to Mr. Yates, to whom he felt himself, in common with all Airs. Archer's- acquaintance, greatly indebted ; he must be brought \ery low," repeating his orders- respecting diet, and promising to dine at the Lodge, as he wished to witness the effect of his first medicines. / Airs. Archer protested she should never forgive herself if he did not recover, de¬ claring she should hardly know how to- v S look
look Mr. Weldon în the face, after having, by her folly, been the occasion of his most favourite friend's meeting with so dreadful a misfortune; and as that gentleman, upon his return to Aíoat House, had been great¬ ly alarmed by the account the servants there had given him, he hastened to South Lodge, in hopes of having his fears pro¬ nounced groundless. This Dr. Malvern could not venture to do ; therefore, after condoling with his amiable friend, Airs. Archer, whom he, as well as Kempthorne, perfectly acquitted of having wilfully en-» dangered his young friend's life, he told the doctor that as Mr. Yates had a very hrge fortune to dispose of, independant of his estate in Staffordshire, he thought he ought not to be kept in absolute igno¬ rance of his danger. The physician assured him he vyould not trifle with him, if he found him worse the next day; at present he entertained great hopes that he would do well ; young people could bear up against what frequently destroyed those more
moire advanced in age ; and as Mr. Yates^ had. always led a very regular life, he was- inclined to place great faith in that circum¬ stance. When he awoke from a very comfortable nap of more than three hours, he seemed very much revived, and, upon the whole, better than Dr. Malvern had dared to have expected ; and to his still farther satisfac¬ tion, as he did not relish the idea of hint¬ ing to his patient the necessity there might exist for his settling his affairs, our hero> requested to be left alone with Mr. Weldon that very evening, whom he had appeared greatly rejoiced to see, and now told him that he was extremely happy he had, to oblige him, come into Staffordshire, «as he should have been very unwilling to have entered into the many necessary ex¬ planations to a stranger, had he, as he now thought proper, found himself inclined to make his will, since though he hoped to bo more fortunate than the late owner of Moat House, as he thought it very probable he r 4 should,
should live to return there, still he thought it would be prudent to settle his affairs, for that would certainly not hasten hÍ3 dissolution.— fe So pray set about it im¬ mediately, while I am in the humour," he continued, €( as I shall not give you quite so much trouble as Mr. Freeman did, ihough I have move to leave behind me. J merely wish to have it fully explained, that if I, the said testator, have any lawful heir or heirs, that they may enjoy my landed property, according to the esta¬ blished laws ; but if none such can make good their claims, I wish Aí oat House to revert, upon the same conditions it fell to mc, to my friend Kempthorne, and that my personals may be equally divided be¬ tween you and my friend Kalkrcuth. To Mrs. Jones and Mr. Moretón I bequeath ihe hundred pounds each; the same to Mr. Haslemere senior for a ring; and as I am very sure the Wheelers can never claim my estate, I bequeath two thousand pounds to the old man, to assist him in re¬ building
building his houses—and should my heirs chuse to come forward, Kempthorne musf share my personals with you and Kal- kreuth." " Except you were born in wedlock, and that can be satisfactorily proved, my dear generous friend, no one can deprive him of Moat House. Yon would have the servants remembered ?" * f Oh now write just what you please, ray good friend. I only hope you will soon have all ready for me to put the finishing stroke to my worldly concerns this evening, though my own feelings nei¬ ther lead me to fear nor to expect death." Mr. Weldon instantly set about the allot¬ ted task ; but though he would certainly have eventually been a great gainer by our hero's death, no one rejoiced more than he did when Dr. Malvern pronounced him, at the expiration of five days, out of danger, though he was extremely weak, and the doctor and surgeon did not suppose hs x- J would
would be able to return home before the expiration of a fortnight. Mrs. Archer, who fully participated in Kempthorne's and Mr. Weldon's feelings, assured the medical men she would not suffer htra to leave the Lodge till he was able to walk home, as* all she could do for him would be a very poor return for his having saved her life and that of her child, at such an imminent risk, repeating that had he died, she should have been incon¬ solable ; and as Dr. Malvern no longer prohibited her visits to his patient, her sin¬ cere congratulations, and the joy she evin¬ ced, induced Francis to feel that life was dearer to him than ever, while he assured her that he should ever feel grateful to¬ wards Heaven, for having rendered him instrumental in her preservation, inquiring after her daughter, whom he expressed a wish to scc, " When yon are better able to listen to her chatter she shall be indulged, as 3 she
Т1ШГЕ IS A SECRET. she is very auxious to see you; but I shall be called to order myself, if I intrude upon you much longer, as repose and per¬ fect quiet are still very necessary for you. To-morrow or next day Dr. Malvern hopes you will be able to sit up for a few hours ; and then I will introduce you to my sister, whom I consider as my eldest daughter, and to Elizabeth, and we will do our best endeavours to supply the place of your friends, who are both wanted in London ; but I trust their departure will not impede your recovery, as î assure you we will en¬ deavour to prove ourselves good nurses." " I am fearful you have already found me a very troublesome inmate." ·* Why, had you not, regardless of the c-onsequence, plunged into my favourite stream, which, by the way, has lost much. of its beauty in my eyes, you might have escaped so unpleasant a confinement; Only consider yourself quite at home, which will be the greatest compliment you can pay me, as 1 am resolved you shall not stir till ρ 0 1 think.
I think you are well enough to be intrusted to your own guidance." " Believe me I am in no haste to change my quarters, as I am well assured that your company and conversation will contribute more to my recovery than Dr* Malvern's prescriptions, though I give him due cre¬ dit for great skill and knowledge in Ы« profession." te Well, I am glad you have so high an opinion of him, and you may depend upon my seconding him to the best of my abili¬ ties; but I must now leave you with Air. Weldon, who I know begins to think the younger Elizabeth has inherited her love of talking frommer loquacious mother ; so fare you well—I hope to find you still bet¬ ter to-morrow." Mr. W r cldon smiled as she left the room, observing he wished every woman could talk as much to the purpose, asking the in¬ valid what he thought of her? " The little I have seen of her has great¬ ly impressed me in her favour. Kemp* thorne,
thorne, who has enjoyed much more of her society, speaks highly in her praise, and declares he is downright in love with Miss Melvin, though I believe he rather gives the preference to the young widow, only he dare not look so high for a wife, he modestly says ; and he considers Miss Melvin as more upon an equality w T ith him in point of birth and fortune." " Mrs. Archer makes no boast of her fortune," replied Mr. Weldon ; " but as you are her superior in that respect, and are certainly entitled to her gratitude, try if you cannot improve the esteem she avows for you into a more tender passion. You never can meet with a better match. To-morrow, or at farthest the next day, Kempthorne and I must return to town ; and surely you will soon be well enough to make love, which I advise you to set about in good earnest, if you see as much to admire in Mrs. Archer as I do." " I could easily convince you that I do that, my good friend; still, though Mr. Freeman
Freeman has rendered me her equal in point of fortune, there is such a blot in my escutcheon, I shall never dare propose myself to her acceptance." f( She is already acquainted with all you know yourself respecting your birth. To her I thought it my duty to be perfectly candid; and as she can esteem, you must discover whether she cannot love you under every disadvantage you labour under; therefore if you do not persuade her to dò the honours of Moat House for you before you leave the Lodge, I shall have a worse opinion than I now entertain of your eloquence." The entrance of Kempthorne broke in upon their conversation. He had been strolling round the fields> and freely ac¬ knowledged that he had never seen a more rural or a more delightful situation, or a house more suited to his taste and to his ideas of comfort. " Then shall I make love for you by proxy?" asked our hero, in a gay tone; t( only
f< only tell me to which of the fair inmates I am to address your vows?" " Oh to Aiiss Melvin; and should ycu, my dear friend, induce the- fair widow to listen to your suit, as I take it for granted she has made as favourable an impression upon you as you have upon her, why if she gives the preference to South Lodge, í will content myself with Aíoat House. You cannot mean to suffer it to stand empty, and the sisters will wish to remain neighbours." Francis laughed at the arrangement; and having promised to correspond af least everv other- dav, and to let each other know what was going forward in town and in country, Air. Weldon and Kempthorne, oil· the eighth day after our hero's accidenti set out for London, leaving their friend under the care of the amiable sisters, M*s. Archer persisting in. her declaration not to part with him till he could walk with ease to Aíoat House.
CHAP.
CHAP. XII. We will now return to the Wheeler family, of whom we have lost sight for more than a fortnight. They contemplated Air. Free¬ man's funeral procession from Air. East¬ wood's windows, that gentleman having invited them into the dining-room for that purpose ; and Cary asked him whe¬ ther Mr. Yates had any business to send his carriage, being no relation, in the procession ? " ï presume it is a compliment intended for the deceased, and, as Air. Freeman died at his house, not absolutely unpreceden¬ ted" " That
** f hat might be; but if she was related ш Mr. Freeman, she should think it an affront to have a player fellow's coach fol¬ low him to the grave." \U\ Eastwood agreed that Mr. Yates's was not a very honourable profession, complimenting Miss Caroline upon her innate delicacy, which had led her to re¬ mark an impropriety that he might have overlooked ; while Mrs. Wheeler said, the boy was so proud of keeping a carriage, that he was always anxious to have it seen, and was ready to lend it to any friend, for the sake of having it known tbat he, the bastard son of John Powell, had thus risen from a dunghill. She had never repented but once not having suffered him to go to the parish, a proud jackanapes, detailing to Mr. Eastwood, who was a very attentive listener, how wonderfully kind she had been to the base-born wretch. Her lodger gave her infinite credit for her philanthropy, agreeing that the young fellow verified the old proverb— " Set a beggar
beggar on horseback," Scc. ; however, as Mr. Freeman had chosen to notice him, why possibly his present endeavour to look great might pass unnoticed, as he presumed his chariot would not leave town. Caroline, in consequence of this hint, kept watch; but it did not return, nor was Mrs. Wheeler able to gain any information till John came home, on the second day after the body had left tow T n, when his fa¬ ther, as usual, enquired whether there was- any news? " I believe there is," was the reply, in a surly tone. "At all events it seems to have ruffled your temper," rejoined his mother; " but there never was the fellow of you for giv¬ ing way to ill humour. Why do you not satisfy your father, you pettish fool?" " Then I am the more like you," was the polite retort; " for you never will give one time to speak—but if you must know, why Kempthorne is gone into the country." " Ani
*' And what is that to you, pray f I sup¬ pose he is gone to Liverpool to see his relations." " Then you are mistaken ; for he h gone into Staffordshire with your bastard ne¬ phew." The old woman was thoroughly pro¬ voked; but being well aware of John's abominable temper, and not wishing to quarrel with him at a time when she wished her family to exhibit a picture of peace and harmony, she mildly replied— " Gone into Staffordshire with Yates !—you amaze mc!—though I suppose, as the old man died at his house, Frank was invited to his funeral ; but I am astonished Kempthorne went down with him." " I do not so much wonder," interrupted the old man. ' r Kempthorne has been working hard, and has been much confined of late. He required a holiday, and was glad of the opportunity of accompanying his friend, who will probably stand treat." *' Whether or not/' resumed John, " if I had
I had been Mr. Haslemere, no partner of mine should have so lowered himself—for pray, for all his money, what is Frank but a bastard, and a player fellow ?" " I only wish, much as you despise him, John," was the reply, íť that for your own sake you were blessed with his temper, ta¬ lents, and fortune, in which case I am much of opinion you would not have cared had you been the son of a chimney-sweeper." " Not he, truly," said his mother ; " and though he can boast of having been born of honest industrious parents, who have crumbed his dish ready to his hand, he cannot contrive to make himself as many friends as Francis has done. But pray who told you, savage, that Kempthorne was gone with Yates?—for it seems to have been a sudden thought." " That I cannot say. Moody was my informer. Not having seen him as usual at his desk, 1 naturally asked him where he was ?—and he told me he understood be was gone into the country for a week or
or ten da\ s. Of course I expressed my surprise, as he seems almost afraid to turn his back, for fear we should be losing time, when that fop Norton, who fancies he has a right to be my lord paramount when the other is out of the way, requested to know what there was so very wonderful in Mr. Kempthorne's having left town with his most intimate friend, at a time of year when every body who could afford it liked to breathe a little fresh air? * W r hy surely he is not gone with Yates?' said I ; * though I know they are sworn friends.' ' You have guessed very right, Sir; and I only wonder you and your family are not upon more intimate terms with so amiable a young man, as in your place I should be proud of the relationship.' " I told him I did not relish his sneering jokes ; and that if Kempthorne eould not have found a more suitable companion, he had better have remained in Austin Friar?. f Then pray tell Mr. Haslemere how much vou ir
you disapprove of the intimacy ; 1 hear his footsteps.' " Sure enough just then the old gent^e^ man came into the counting-house, which pleased Norton, you may suppose ; and while the governor, as we style hím, was giving some orders to Moody, he kept making me signs, till I could have thrown my inkstand at his head—but I affected to take no notice ; and when the old gentle¬ man had made himself scarce, I asked Brad¬ shaw, not chusing to apply to that upstart Norton, whether Kempthorne or Yates, as he had heard, had been any gainers by old Freeman's death, as t supposed they were gone to his funeral? He never knows any thing, but, ape-like, referred me to Mr. Kempthorne, whom I might question when he returned, or he believed he had left a direction, so I might write to him if I chose* I told him he was a low impudent fellow, and I did not stand in need of his advice : indeed Moody is the only civil man in the «counting-heuse, and the only one I tvill ever
ever speak to in future, except upon busi¬ ness, and when I cannot avoid it." " Oh, you great stupe!" cried the pro¬ voked old woman ; <f you are always fall¬ ing out with your bread and butter, and for ever quarrelling with your fellow clerks, though you cannot tell how soon one or other of them may have it in their power to do vou an ÎU turn behind vour back. If you had possessed common sense, you might now have been Mr. Haslemere's right-hand man, when they would all have looked up to yon, instead of making game of you ; but you will never gťow wise, if you live to the age of Matthew." " Of Matthew !" repeated John, in a scornful tone ; ** Methusalem, you ought to have said." % <( May be so. Had my parents spent half as much upon my education as we Have done upon yours, I should have done them more credit than ever vou will do us; however, though you hardly desene I should stir a step to serve you, why I do hope
hope you may yet look down upon all the Haslemere clerks. Hitherto things have gone on very smoothly—good reason why —you see it will be to your interest to be guided by me ; and so, in return for your news, which docs not concern any of us, I can tell you some that does—so only you take care you do not mar your sister's for¬ tune, since I have it much at heart to see you both comfortably settled, and no pains bhall be wanting on my side to bring mat¬ ters about. Mr. Eastwood sat and chatted with us this morning for an hour or more before he went out, and said manv civil things to Carv ; indeed he all but acknow- ledged his regard for her, and I suppose you would not dislike such a brother-in- law." " I believe not ; -and Cary must be a d —nd fool if she triti es with him." " She has always been a very good girl, John, and is no fool ; so only play your own cards properly, and 1 will be answer¬ able for Gary's securing so desirable a match.
• match. Mr. Eastwood promised to be home early, so I expect him every minute, and Cary is dressing, as I suspect we shall be invited to sup with him, for he sent home a beautiful lobster, and a couple of fine collared eels, about half an hour ago : and as he has heard me say I am remark¬ ably fond of lobster, and Caroline that she was very partial to eels, he evidently means to treat us both. You are going to Knightsbtidge, I suppose, or you might come in for a taste." ' c Well, do not devour all the eels—they will keep í ill to-morrow, as I must be oí**" taking up a paper parcel, which he had placed upon the table, and displaying a little pigeon-pie, which he bad purchased at a pastry-cook's, and two boiled sheeps* tongues, observing, that he had heard Мь$ Atwood say she was very fond of pigeon- pie, and he could be as gallant as Mr. East¬ wood, when occasion required. " Well, I am glad to find you are so thoughtful," said his mother; "consider¬ ar, ш. q in ff
ing your avaricious turn* 'tis more than I expected; but you should have bought two pies, as there is Mrs. Bever and her daughters, and they can put in a good word for you, so ought to be treated civilly— however you must say that was the only one you could get —so make yourself scarce, and put the question the first time you are alone with your mistress; women do not like to be kept in suspense, and a man may as well be too modest as too bold." " Mind that, John," cried his father ; " so speak your mind at once. Your mo¬ ther, I know, has boasted of more than 1 can do; but all stratagems are fair, the book says, in love or war—and I can do something handsome for you, 1 promise you ; for if I cannot call in my money to advantage, my credit is good for thousands, I bless God. I will furnish you a house completely, and can have twelvemonths credit of the upholsterer; indeed Mr. Oli¬ ver, who has always served Mr. Haslemere, is
is a warm man, and I know he will' use me well, for I have recommended him to many people—so only do you fix the lady, and then look out for a new house, if you can find one to your mind ; every thing will then wear together, and you will be at little or no expence for years." John was extremely w f ell satisfied with these promises, and set off in high glee for Knightsbridge, resolving, when mar¬ ried, to look down upon his fellow clerks with scorn, though he had it in contempla¬ tion to look out for a more lucrative situa¬ tion, the moment he could do so uncon¬ trolled by his weak-brained father. He did not, however, venture to dedare his pas¬ sion that evening, nor did a favourable opportunity occur before the twelfth even¬ ing after our hero's departure from Lon¬ don ; and as Kempthorne was not return¬ ed, John, who knew he had been expected home in ten days at latest, was very much surprised, but for once he adhered to his mother's orders not to ask any questions, Q 2 though
though he understood, from some few words which Norton dropped, that he had been detained in Staffordshire by some cir¬ cumstance which was not explained ; and though he would have given a trifle to have known, he did not chuse to inquire. On this memorable evening, Airs. Bever and her daughters beino; from home, he enjoyed a long tcle-à-tête with his fair mis¬ tress, and seized the opportunity to declare that words were inadequate to express the regard, esteem, and love with which she had inspired him, protesting that his fears of a rejection had alone kept him so long silent, requesting, upon his knees, having been properly tutored by his mother, that she would pronounce his doom, and ren¬ der him either the happiest or the most miserable of men. As our readers are already acquainted with the young lady's sentiments, they will readily suppose that she did not ïeel in¬ clined to drive so tender a swain to despair. They therefore plighted their vows in the most
most solemn manner; and the impatient lover hoped she would not long defer his happiness, boasting of having already more money than he was well assured he ever should have, and not forgetting to mention his father's intention of furnishing him a house in the first style, and he hoped very ьооп to keep a horse and chaise. Fortunately, as thev had much to sav to each other, Mrs. Bever and her daughters were detained, much against her will, till near midnight, as they had only been en¬ gaged to drink their tea out. This com¬ plaisant lady made a thousand apologies, though she was very happy Mr. Wheeler had dropped in so apropos. Miss Atwood was no less pleased that her dear friend had been so well amused, and John departed vainer than ever of his own acquirements. Miss Atwood, though absolutely her own mistress, did not chuse, in a matter of such importance, to omit consulting her friends; and as her brother-in-law was at such a distance from London, she requested the Q 3 sapient
sapient John would wait upon her friend Mr. Eggleton, who had always transacted all her business, and whom she had, of late years, looked up to as a father. As he had alwa}b promised to draw her marriage settlements grafis, and to give her away, she must pay him the compliment of con¬ sulting him. ' r Assuredly," ssid her admirer; " h was absolutely necessary to consult with that gentleman; indeed it had been his own intention, as he would settle every thing properly." Had he spoken his real sentiments, he would have told her, women ought to be dependant upon their husbands; but as he found he must abide by what she said, he chose to make a merit of his compliance. Both the old people were extremely re¬ joiced when he imparted his happy pros¬ pects to them the next morning at break¬ fast, the old woman taking no little merit to herself for having introduced him to so sweet a creature, highly approving of her having
having referred him to Mr. Eggleton ; hex fortune demanded an adequate settlement ; and many a man had been preserved from ruin, from having made a handsome provi¬ sion for his wife. €< True, dame," said the old man ; " and safe bind safe find, is a very good maxim —therefore I would have you call in the Adelphi, John, as you return home to din¬ ner; and should Mr. Eggleton be from home, you can appoint to see him in the morning, or when he can make it conve¬ nient to receive you, when you will hear what settlements are expected." John was all complaisance, and soon de¬ parted for Austin Friars. The old people sat some time rejoicing over his happv prospects, Airs. Wheeler declaring that she and Caroline would walk over to Knkhts- bridge in the afternoon, to thank the dear girl for her kind intentions in iiivour of John; and they were debating whether they ought not to make her some present u. 4 in
in return for her condescension, when Mr. Eastwood knocked at the parlour door, and being requested to come in, he told them that he should not dine at home, when the old woman, eager to impart her son's happy prospects^ entreated him to sit down for a few minutes, if he was not in great haste, adding, before she allowed him to speak— u We are going to have a wedding in the family very speedily." Mr. Eastwood started, appeared sur¬ prised, and looking anxiously at Caroline, said— t( Am I then to congratulate Miss Wheeler ? Who is the happy man that is to be so blessed ?" Mrs. Wheeler smiled, and Caroline laughed, exclaiming—" La, Sir, t'ant me that is going to be married, 'tis my bro¬ ther." Mr. Eastwood seemed greatly revived by this intelligence, and at last said, in an emphatic tone—" Now I breathe again. Mr. John is then going to enter the holy pale,
pale, and with every prospect of happi¬ ness, if, as I suppose, Miss Atwood is the bride elect." Mr. Wheeler nodded assent, and he con¬ tinued— " I was creativ alarmed at first, as I feared Miss Wheeler was upon the point of marriage." " La, how came such a notion into your head, Sir ? Me ffoins: to be married ! whv I have not even got a sweetheart." iC Do not talk nonsense, Cary/' cried the old woman, who thought she made her¬ self too cheap ; e ' when vou know vou have two, who would have you to-morrow, if you were not so difficult." '* Miss Wheeler, Ma'am/* rejoined Mr. Eastwood, i( may pick and chuse ; and I Lave heard of several young men who are now sighing for her—therefore how dare ï hope to obtain the preference 3 Though I have admired her from the moment of <■ our meeting, still î have nexer had-the courage to teil he r so; but my secret has now involuntarily escaped ше; therefore, c «i most
most amiable of women, decide my fate at once, as I dare not risk returning hither, should you deem me to a life of celibacy." This avowal of his passion was so sudden and so unexpected, that the old people hardly seemed to credit what they heard ; and Caroline certainly blushed very deep¬ ly while she looked him in the face half breathless with joy, and literally unable to utter a word, though she did make an effort to extend her hand, which her lover seized, exclaiming, in a transport of joy—" Speak, dearest creature î relieve my fears by pro¬ mising to be mine." Airs. Wheeler requested that he would spare her beloved Caroline, who was not prepared for so joyful a surprise, assuring him thr.t he had nothing to fear, the dear girl having acknowledged to her that Mr. Eastwood was the only man she had ever felt a preference for; and as she could en¬ tertain no hopes of his making her an of¬ fer, she had resolved to remain single ; ad¬ vising the fluttering, gratified girl to retire Slid
and compose herself. The ardent lover would not, however, suffer her to leave the room, till she had rendered him tbe hap¬ piest of men, by accepting his vows«; and he soon followed her, assuring the old people that he was too much agitated just then to enter upon serious matters. The joy and triumph of old Wheeler and his wife was now complete ; and when their dear Cary joined them again, they both embraced her, declaring they should die happy, since they should leave her under'the protection of so excellent a man, the old woman foreseeing that she would ride in her coach, which she considered as the ne plus ultra of human felicity. When John came home to dinner, forgeuing to enquire whether he had seen Air. Eggleton, the okl people eagerly im¬ parted what had occurred after his depar¬ ture in the morning. John swore East¬ wood uas a hearty fellow, adding—"Z—ds, Cary, let us try if we cannot manage to be noosed ori the same day."
" I am sure I shall have no objection/' said his obliging sister. u AndU should enjoy such a double ho¬ liday," said the old woman. " Well, but did you call at Mr, Eggle¬ ton's, John ?" asked his father. " To be sure I did ; and though that gentleman was engaged with a lord, when he was told that I was in the front office, he stepped out to speak to me. As the only time he can absolutely call his own is from eight to ten in the morning, as he never receives any body in the Adelphi before ten, and as he is extremely anxious so serve his friend Miss Atwood, he has invited himself to breakfast with us in the morning, and has promised to be here by eight o'clock at latest." They were all much flattered by such a mark of condescension ; and the old man said he had already settled what he meant to do upon the occasion. " Now do not be sneaking, father," cried John ; " do the handsome thing when you are
are about it; one is not married every day." Luckily his rude hint ivas taken as a joke; and when Afr. Eastwood returned home, he readily agreed to drink his tea below. As they were all eager to enter upon the subject nearest their hearts, as soon as the tea-things were removed, Air. Eastwood hoped his beloved Caroline had not repented of the promise she had made hím in the morning. Now possibly an unconcerned spectator would have won¬ dered that he had not repented having made her an offer of his hand, when she took upon herself to dispel his fears; he was,· however, delighted with her kind speeches, and entered into a few details respecting their plan of life, adding— fC My income is at present a clear fifteen hundred a-year ; the rent-roll of my Cheshire estate is about fourteen hundred, and a small farm I have in Wales, a recent purchase, brings me in about a hundred and twenty more. Afy house in the country b very well fur¬ nished,
nished, though not in the modern style, and I have a vast deal of old-fashioned fa¬ mily plate, which my dear Caroline may have modernised if she chuses ; hitherto it has served my purpose, as I am not in the habit of giving grand entertainments. I had also a few old-fashioned jewels, which had been my mother's, but those I disposed of, as being useless lumber, resolving, when I married, to decorate my wife rather more according to the reigning mode." The old people were in extacies while listening to these details, assuring him that Caroline had not been brought up with high notions, nor to despise old fashions, btrongly advising their continuing to*make use of the family plate, as it would cost a mint of money to have it rendered fashion¬ able ; and as for jewels, the old man saw no necessity for spending money to such a disadvantage. Air. Eastwood merely ob¬ served, that his wife must appear like other people of the same rank in society ; giving them fullv to understand that he had made many
many private enquiries respecting their family, which had proved so satisfactory, he had resolved f о connect himself with such excellent people ; referring them, in his turn, to his most intimate friends in town for the truth of what he had ad¬ vanced. The old people instantly declared that they should scorn to apply to any of them ; the old woman adding, she had lived long enough in the world not to be very easily duped, and she flattered herself that she knew and understood how to treat a real gentleman. The old man grieved that he could not be so liberal as he could have wished, since his son was also going to be married, and he could not call in his money immediately, except at a great disadvan¬ tage. He could, however, promise to lay down a thousand pounds on the wedding- day, and ñve hundred more at the end of twelve months, and he would also engage to settle fifteen hundred pounds more upon 4 hh
his daughter at his death, though his dame must enjoy the interest of it while she lived, if she survived him, and a thousand pounds more at her death, or in case he was the survivor, the whole sum at his de¬ cease ; and as Air. Eastwood had talked of taking a town house, though he might not be able to pay ready money, his credit was good—he would therefore undertake to furnish one, which he supposed would make a hole in another five hundred. Aír. Eastwood declared himself perfectly satisfied with these arrangements, observ¬ ing, that like him, owing to his law-suit, he had not much ready money at com¬ mand, but when once that was decided, he expected to be at least eight hundred a- year richer than he now was; and as he should come into the arrears of rent, he should then be able to assist Air. Wheeler with any sum he might require. Airs. Wheeler could only assure him that if her daughter did not bring him a large fortune,
fortune, she would save him one by her excellent management, expatiating upon her skill in cookery, and other rare talents. Mr. Eastwood was aware of the treasure he should possess iu having Miss Wheeler; and as Mr. Eggleion was to draw Miss At¬ wood's settlements, lie might as well do the same for Miss Wheeler. What jointure did they expect him to assign their daugh¬ ter? As had been previously settled, the old man replied, that they should leave that entirely to him, as they were well aware that Caroline's fortune did not entitle her to any large sum. Mr. Eastwood rather haughtily replied, that his widow should never disgrace the name sbe bore by liv¬ ing in obscurity. He had thought of set¬ tling half his fortune upon her; but at all events he should insist upon her having five hundred a-year. " Well, Sir, you must do as you please," said tbe old man. Thus
Thus that importau: motter was settled, perfectly to the satisfaction of the Whee¬ lers, when the old woman, who had been launching out in praise of real gentlemen, *aid— tf Dear me, how lonesome we shall find it at first, when our children are both married !" Mr. Eastwood hoped they would be hap¬ pier than ever, as their son was confined f о town, owing to his situation, and he was resolved in future to spend at least six months in London every year, therefore they could divide their time between their son and daughter—nay, if they preferred it, they should be his inmates, as he should take a large house, for he could not bear to be stinted for room. Mrs. Wheeler was profuse in her thanks for this considerate proposal, but said she preferred remaining where she was, as old folks and young ones did not always agree when they resided together, and Mr. Whee¬ ler was so infirm he was better bv his own m fireside;
fireside ; however she would be a frequent visitor, if they did not live at too great a distance. Thus were they settling their future plans, when John came home to dress for his diurnal visit to Knightsbridge. Having joined the party assembled in the parlour, he shook hands very cordially with Mr. Eastwood ; and the old people were so full of what he proposed doing for Caroline, that they could not refrain from repeating the heads of what had passed to their son, having a double motive for being so com¬ municative, as this was having another wit¬ ness to the bargain, and they could not suppose Mr. Eastwood was aware of their meaning. John swore he had been very generous, though he should have been equally so with the same means, as it was impossible to do too much for the woman of one's choice; and as they were now upon such friendly terms, Mr. Eastwood requested to know what Afr. John Whee¬ ler's present salary at Mr. Haslemere's might be ? -Oh.
" Oh, a mere trifle—barely a hundred and fifty pounds а -year (which was boast¬ ing of seventy pounds more than he re¬ ceived) but that will not satisfy me much longer, I have other things in view." " ï am glad to hear it," was the reply, t( as your present emoluments are veiy small indeed, considering your talents; however, if what you have in view should not answer your expectations, I have some influence with some of the great men in power; and as I have never yet put their friendship to the test, why I shall exert it in your behalf. A place of seven hundred а -year, besides perquisites, was once offer¬ ed me ; but I could not bear the necessary confinement, which to you will be much less irksome; and as Eggleton has also great friends, I think between us we shall be able to place you in a far more eligible situation, than in any merchant's counting- house." The Wheelers sat with open mouths list¬ ening to the brilliant prospects Mr. East¬ wood
wood held out, John, of course, snapping at the offer, declaring that a good situation under government had long been the height of his ambition ; but, as time w r ore, he could only hastily express his thanks for his dear friend's kind intentions, as he was fearful he should make it late before he reached Knightsbridge, when, to his increasing satisfaction, his fair mistress and Miss Bever gave him the meeting under the park wall; but as he had not slept much the night before, he took leave of his beloved soon after eleven. Airs. Whee¬ ler was sitting /.p for him, having been making her chocolate against morning, and was rejoiced to hear Aiiss Atwood was in such health and spirits, as she was fear¬ ful she would have been offended at her not having called upon her as she had in¬ tended, but please God she would walk over in the morning, and bring her home to dinner. John approved of the notion, and soon after they both retired.
CHAP.
SÄE
CHAP. ХШ. None of the family overslept themselves, so much had they thought of the morning appointment, and Mr. Eggleton's carriage stopped at the door before eight. Mr. Eastwood had requested, the over-night, they would all breakfast with him ; but to this Mrs. Wheeler would not accede, though she thankfully accepted the loan of his room, but took upon herself to provide the breakfast ; and the solicitor was receiv¬ ed with every mark of respect by the Wheeler family. Mr. Eastwood shook him by the hand, saying, " How are you, my good friend ?" and the salute was as cordi¬ ally returned, Every
Every thing being ready, Mrs. Wheeler requested they might breakfast, before they proceeded to business. Mr. Eggleton po¬ litely declared, he made it an invariable rule never to dispute the will of a lady, except in the way of his profession, and for her advantage. Caroline, as had been agreed, retired with the tea-equipage, and Mr. Eggleton's looking at his watch was the signal to en¬ ter upon the subject of his visit : he, there¬ fore, began by congratulating John upon his brilliant prospects, as Miss Atwood had every requisite qualification to render a sensible man happy, and he knew that she felt the most tender regard for him ; " in¬ deed, she wished to have trusted entirely to your honour; but that, you know, Airs. W'heeler, was merely a proof of her love, not of her prudence, and I must talk very differently : but, not to tire you with my preface, I must inform you, that her father left her two houses in Great Russel-street, Bloomsbury ; a very large one in Broad- street, St. Giles's ; another in Oxford-road, and
and also mortgages upon two in Golden- square ; and the net income is three hun¬ dred and thirty-eight pounds fourteen shil¬ lings and sevenpence, at least such was my calculation when I last cast χψ her income; and, in the course of a few years, the house in Broad-street, St. Giles's, will bring in, admitting there is a little money properly laid out upon it, at least an additional twenty-five pounds a-year : this is all Mr. Atwood left his daughter, my good friends; therefore now, Mr. Wheeler, what do you propose doing for your son, or rather, what settlements will you enable him to make upon his wife ?" John gave his father a look, as much as to sav^— (io not be mean, and his wife se- conded him. The old man paused, looked at Mr. East¬ wood, then said, " 'Tis an old custom, Mr. Eggleton, to do more for boys than for girls, though I never could tell for why." Mr. Eastwood, fancying himself rather called upon, declared himself perfectly sa¬ tisfied with what he proposed doing for his ţ 1 ••-írhfor ;
daughteť; proteting that, if he gave Mr. John ten thousand pottödä, he should not complain. " I cannot talk ûo laite," wai the reply —" first and last, Cary will hate four thou¬ sand pounds, and I am willirtg to dö âli in my power for John ; tobe sure, 1 have a life-annuity, but that may be withdraw!*/* " I do not wish you should straiten yourself, Sir," resumed the attorney— " İ have merely stated what your soft will come into immediate possession of> tffioh bis marriage, if you make ân adequate settlement upon his wife ; and it makes a man appear of more consequence to have it said, his wife's jointure is secured upon hts landed or funded property.** ** Very tme, Sir; but, positively, all the money I can immediately command h in the three per cents, which brings me in a hundred and twenty-five pounds a*year : to be sure, 1 have two houses now rebuild¬ ing upon Milbank, and I am ready, at mine and nrý wife's death, to settle them opon my son, or his wife ; and, as 1 have vol. nr. r promised
promised to furnish a house for my daugh¬ ter, İ will also furnish one for my son, and that will cost me át least five hundred pounds more ; and, when I die, John will come in for the principal part of what I have to leave behind me, which will not amount to less than four thousand pounds more, admitting no unforeseen emergen¬ cies occur to oblige me, or my dame, to dip into the principal." " No one can foresee what may occur," gravely observed the attorney, " and, I am sure, no one present wishes to place you in a disagreeable predicament, or to tie your hands; though, I understand, you are blessed with very dutiful children, and you will have a son-in-law, whose prudence can only be equalled by his unbounded benevolence." • " A truce with your compliments, I de¬ sire, Eggleton—I am no better than many others with equal means—so pray proceed to business." " Well, well, I commend your modesty ; and so, Mr. Wheeler, with your leave, the money
money you have in the funds shall be im¬ mediately settled upon Miss Atwood, and the houses you mention, at your dembe: you must favour me with the title-deeds to draw up the settlements, and they must then be placed in the hands of the trustees whom you and she may appoint—that, you know, is a matter of form, which the law cannot dispense with: Miss Atwood had requested me to act as one—you are to name the other, Mr. John," glancing his eye, while speaking, at Mr. Eastwood. John took the hint—it would be paying that gentleman a compliment, and no one could be more proper to act as his wife's trustee, than his sister's husband : the old people applauded the arrangement, and thus it was finally settled, to the satisfaction of all parties, Mr. Eggleton promising the lovers should not have to complain of his delay. They next reverted to Mr. Eastwood's proposals, who pointed out to the solici¬ tor, upon, what part of his estate he should wish his wife's, jointure to be secured ; to r 2 which
-which lie proposed making a handsome ad¬ dition, if he gained his suit; and this the solicitor was ready to insure for a very small premium, and Mt. John Wheeler and Mr. Eggleton were to act as Mrs. East¬ wood's trustees. The lawyer having taken down minutes of every thing, and received the title-deeds of the two houses upon Milbank, for which be gave the old gentleman a receipt in form, Mr. Eastwood asked frim if he knew of a good house to he let? After a few moments pause, he -said he did ; adding, " but I am fearful you will think it too large, and you may not like the situation— ît is upon the Terrace, in the Adelphi, and i should rejorce at having you for my neighbour." " Its vicinity to your house is a great re¬ commendation, though you are so taken up, I dare say I shall seldom see you ; how¬ ever, if it pleases my dear Caroline, it will be sure to meet my approbation, as it must be both quiet and airy, and I am very fond of the view from its windows; as for its size,
tize, some time hence we may require a large house." The old people thought that very pos¬ sible, and became answerable for their daughter liking the situation. Mr. Eggle¬ ton was, therefore, empowered to engage it immediately ; and Mr. Eastwood tokl the old man, that, as he did not expect to fur¬ nish such a house for ilve hundred pounds, he should make up the difference. That was talking like a gentleman, said Mr. Wheeler, who observed, that he must employ Mr. Oliver, his upholsterer. " By all means, my dear Sir," was the reply ; (t and the sooner he is set to work, the better :" so said the solicitor, as there might be many things to make up to fit the apartments: the house, he knew, was quite ready, having been very lately paint¬ ed and papered from top to bottom ; " and as the rooms are very Spacious," he went on, £i you will have an oppot tunitv of dis¬ playing your taste; but, mind, I am wit¬ ness that Mr. Wheeler h only answerable for iivc hundred pounds ; so, if you choose, r 3 you
you may expend treble that sum. My house, you know, is very inferior to the one you have in view, and is by no means expensively furnished, yet it cost me up¬ wards of a thousand pounds to make a little alteration and reform in "my chairs and tables." Mrs. Wheeler launched out in praise of his mansion, which, she averred, was fit for гпу nobleman. Mr. Eggleton again looked at his watch, saying, " A quarter to ten—oh, pretty well!" <f Yes," said Eastwood, " you may spare us another five minutes, and yet be at home in time, at the rate your coachman drives in general," turning the conversa¬ tion upon one of the Lords of the Treasury, saying, " gtrø a good look-out there, will you, as I wish to secure a similar situation, for a friend, to the one I so lately re¬ jected." ** Aye, I blamed you at the time—such another may not fall in this twelvemonth, as I told you then : you might have dis¬ posed
posed of it at any time, and have put a thousand pounds into your pocket ; but you are too modest, too unassuming : how¬ ever, I shall see the Earl in the course of to-morrow, upon particular business, and you may rely upon my bearing your hint in mind—not for yourself, you say ?" " No, but that matters not," glancing his eye towards John. " I comprehend, and you may depend upon my best endeavours: we are upon the eve of a general election, which is all in your favour—but I must be off." The bridegrooms elect, and the old wo¬ man, saw him to the door, where his car¬ riage was in waiting ; and no physician, who had been summoned upon life and death, could have dashed off at a greater rate : and as Caroline peeped out of the parlour, her admirer walked in. Mrs. W F heeler and John returned up stairs, when the latter strutted about the room, being, .in imagination, already first secretary to the Earl of---------, First Lord of the Trea¬ sury. The old man reminded him that it ** was
was Jate, md ífeat he ought fo have been in Austin Friars. John d — d the counting- house> and did not care whether he ever set his foot in it again ; but the old people flew out—he was mad with joy—hardly seemed to know what he was about—did he consider how much depended upon his leaving Mr. Haslemere's like a gentleman ? —was not his father receiving a hundred а -year for doing nothing, and held no se¬ curity Îor the paynienţ of his annuity ? This induced John to lower his tone, and to hasten away ; and the old man and wo¬ man resolved to impart their happy pros¬ pects, without delay, to Mr. George Hasle¬ mere, who had plc'dged his word to give their children ihe hundred pounds a-piece on their wedding-day : he was at this period at Brighton, but a ietter would soon reach him. Not liking, however, to boast too much to this patron of theirs, the old man ad¬ vised their merely informing him, that John and Caroline were upon the point of mar¬ riage ; since, if they mentioned Mr. East¬ wood's
wood's name, he might fancy they could not be straitened for cash. The old wo¬ man commended his prudence, maintain¬ ing, in answer to her husband's doubts up¬ on the subject, that the money would be forthcoming, if George borrowed it of a thousand people. The writing-materials being below, they ventured to interrupt the lovers, whom they found in excellent spirits ; and as Mr. Eastwood was engaged out to dinner, and had several places, to call at, he soon walk¬ ed out ; and Caroline was dismissed to dress for their intended walk to Knightsbridge, while the old people composed the rough draught of the proposed, epistle; and hav¬ ing, at last, compleated it to their joint istisfaction, the old woman left, her hus¬ band to write it fair, and net out for Knightsbridge with Caroline, whose weak brain, like her brother's, was nearly turn¬ ed ; and as they feared it would be too late, and they should be too- tired if they returned home to dinner, they bought a fowl ns they went along, and six three- « 5 реш*у
penny tarts, which they thought would make a pretty addition to Mrs. Bever's fa¬ mily-dinner; and most acceptable the pre¬ sent proved, that lady having merely some cold ribs of lamb in the house, and the re¬ mains of a fruit-pie—quite a make-shift repast, what she should have been ashamed to have set before Mrs. and Miss Wheeler; but Miss Atwood was so good, Aírs. Bever declared, she sometimes accused herself of taking advantage of her easy temper : she was above stairs, and alone, busily em¬ ployed in working a cap in satin-stitch for her dear Airs. Wheeler, who was all thanks and all politeness, relating what had passed in Marsham-street that morning, and enquiring where she should like a house ? She left that entirely to Mr. Wheeler's choice, telling Caroline, iu a gay tone, that she must not think of becoming her neighbour, as she did not wish for a house with more than six rooms, and as near to Austin Friars as such a habitation could be met with. The old woman told her, with a know-
ing look, that she hoped John would not be confined all his life to Austin Friars, as Mr. Eastwood hoped to procure hfm a gen¬ teel situation under Government. ín the mean while, Miss Atwood observ¬ ed, they had better set out in a style they were sure of supporting—they eould, at any time, remove into a larger house. " You are very right, my dear—1 com¬ mend your prudence—my son- will have a treasure in you; but 1 would have yoir settle with him this evening, where you should like to fix, whether in London or somewhere out the city way : I shall wait upon Mr. Moreton to-morrow, and I can take the opportunity to look about for you." Miss Atwood promised to do as she de¬ sired ; and, as John was to let her know the result of their debate, soon after tea, Mrs. Wheeler and Caroline took their leave, after making Miss Atwood promise to dine with them on Sundav: that lad ν had carelessly enquired, during their visit, whether Mr. Yates was returned ? ami в б they
they had assured her he was not, though they understood Mr. Kempthorne had been returned some days. This induced her to accept their invitation; and, next morn¬ ing, John informed his mother that they wished to fix their abode somewhere in the City-road, between the Finsbury turnpike and Islington, and she promised to look out that way; but, feeling very anxious to impart her happy prospects to her few friends, or rather acquaintance, she first proceeded to Airs. Jones's : she was not come home, nor did her maid know when to expect her: she therefore walked on to Islington, making herself sure of being in¬ vited to dine with Aír. Aioreton ; but Airs. Elliott, his old housekeeper, told her, in uo very dulcet tone, that her master was not at home, nor did bhe know when he would be, which was giving her pretty plainly to understand, that he never would be again to her; and Airs. Wheeler felt her meaning, and found herself both hurt and mortified, not so much at the loss of hib friendship, but the had boasted so much
much of their intimacy to Miss Atwood, she was afraid she should sink in her esti¬ mation, when she found she was. no longer noticed by this rich old fool, from whom, as well as from Mrs. Jones, she had ex¬ pected John and Cary would receive some very handsome presents upon their ap-, proaching nuptials, as they had, more than once, promised as much, and Mr. Moreton had once gone so far as to pro¬ mise, since Mr. Wbeeler was grown so in¬ firm, to give Caroline away. To be thus cast off by him, at such a critical time, was, therefore, very provoking, as such a friend would have appeared to advantage at the weddings; but, as she still hoped he bad made no discoveries respecting her finesse on Frank's benefit night, she trusted that matters might yet come round again, pru¬ dently resolving not to give up so valuable an acquaintance out of mere pique ; and, as she was out, she went forward house¬ hunting, and at last met with one, which seemed very likely to suit, upon Nelson 3 Terrace—
Terrace—there were eight rooms, kitchens included, and a very decent garden : she, therefore, requested to have the prefer¬ ence, promising to give her final answer by two o'clock the next day ; and it was settled in the evening, that John should meet her and his fair intended there at that time : and, as Mr. Eastwood was now ad¬ mitted to all the family-consultations, he took Caroline and the old woman in a coach to Knightsbridge, where they called for Miss Atwood, with whom they pro¬ ceeded to Nelson Terrace. John, who had hurried through his bu¬ siness at the counting-house, was in wait¬ ing for them; and, as both he and Miss- Atwood were delighted with the house, the bargain was soon closed ; and from thence they drove to Aír. Haslemere's upholster¬ er's, one of the first men in the line, to whom Mrs. Wheeler was well known, and who boastingly observed, that her word was good for thousands at Air. Oliver's ; and certainly that gentleman received them all
all very politely, led them over his ware¬ houses, where they ñxeá upon a variety of articles, and chose many more by pattern. John, who never lost sight of the main chance, thought his house might be hand¬ somely furnished for between three and four hundred pounds, meaning to expend the overplus sum in other necessaries ; and, as Miss Atwood gave him credit for his worldly wisdom, he went to work as cheap as he could. Mr. Eastwood appointed to meet Mr. Oliver, in ihe Adelphi, the next morning, as, in the house, they should be better able to judge what would suit the rooms ; and we must acknowledge, that the country squire was not sparing in the orders he gave. Mr. Oliver did not think, and he knew he spoke within bounds, that he could put in what he required for less than eighteen hundred pounds. Mr. Eastwood did not suppose he could, but desired he would not exceed two thou¬ sand. Mr.
Mr. Oliver assured him he woulď'iiot;. and went home to set his people to work, as every thing was to be compleated as soon as possible. In the evening, Mr. Eastwood accompa¬ nied John to. his father's ironmonger's, where he gave orders for very elegan r and expensive grates for all the rooms, and va¬ rious other articles. From thence they proceeded to Mr. Haslemere's china and glass man, where Mr. Eastwood gave a very krge order. John next took him to his taylor f s and bootmaker's; and as he was well known to each, and renowned, as well as his father, for his punctual pay men f> they were all very thankful for his reconv» mendatton. in the morning, Airs. Wheeler and Ca¬ roline accompanied him to Air. Haslemere's jeweller's ; from thence they went to or¬ der a few articles of modern plate at that gentleman's silversmith's, and to purchase what linen was required, of one. of the first men in that line, in Cheapsíde ; and, as Air. Eastwood afterwards recollected many more
more articles, he waited upon all the trades¬ men alone, and gave each orders to a much greater amount than he had done the first time; and, having made the old roan write him an introductory note to Mr. Hasle¬ mere's wine and brandy merchant, he gave that gentleman orders to the amount of five hundred pounds ; driving every where very hard bargains, as he proposed paying ready money, or within six weeks after the delivery of the goods, which was nearly the same thing ; and Mies Caroline, in eon- sequence of her approaching nuptials, gave- various orders upon her own account : it is not therefore to be wondered, that, amidst such a general and joyful bustle, our hero and his concerns should be nearly forgotten by the W f heclers. On the Sunday, however, John, having risen very early, went to fetch his mistress to breakfast : she was engaged to dine in Afarsham-street, and Airs. Wheeler had pro¬ posed their going to morning service at the Abbey. Aiiss Atwood was not, how¬ ever, quite ready when John arrived ; not feeling
feeling at all inclined to accompany the family to church, till she went there to plight her vows to Mr. John ; and as Mr. Eastwood, with whom they were to break¬ fast, also rather overslept himself, it was half past ten before they all assembled in his dining-room; and, when Jenny brought up the urn, she also brought up Bell's Weekly Messenger, the only paper Mr. Wheeler took in ; and John, ever partial to displaying his talents, and wishing to convince his brother-in-law bow compe¬ tent he was to read dispatches, or any thing else, aloud, began to read the news of the week, and had read the overnight's Ga¬ zette, and various other paragraphs, when stopping, be exclaimed, " What the d-v-I is all this!" of course, he drew all eyes upon bim. ť * Well, what is it?" cried his never- very-patient mother. Without heeding her question, he conti¬ nued reading with bis eyes, muttering, If Well, only think !—though, d -нпте if I can make bead or tail of it." " Then,
u Then, pray read it aloud," hastily ex¬ claimed Air. Eastwood. " Oh, pray do," no less eagerly cried Aiiss Atwood. John instantly did as they desired, read¬ ing, " We are very sorry to learn that the public are likely to be deprived of the vo¬ cal talents of their most distinguished fa¬ vourite, Mr. Yates, this season, owing to his praise-worthy exertions in the cause of humanity ;" proceeding to relate his recent misfortune, and concluding by lamenting that he continued in so dangerous and pre¬ carious a state, his medical attendants dare not suffer him to be removed to his own house, though it was in the immediate vi¬ cinity of South Lodge ; and, for the fur¬ ther information of their readers, his hav¬ ing very lately come into possession of the late Mr. Freeman's large estates in Stafford¬ shire, was very pompously enumerated. "Why, mercy upon me!" cried Mrs. Wheeler— « can they mean our Frank?" " To be sure they do—is not he the great singer?— D—mn the fellow! only think
think of his having come into that old Freeman's estate !— had the horse trod his guts out, 1 might have been his heir." if For shame, John, swearing so of a Sunday, and in ray presence !" John begged pardon, declaring he had been so taken by -surprise, he hardly knew what he said. " Mr. Yate* has been in amazing luck/' said Mr. Eastwood. " Aye, 'tis better to be born foriunate than rich," observed old Wheeler, sighing deeply. Caroline wondered whether his estate was as large as Mr. Eastwood's. " That we may easily know, my dear Caroline, as his will must have been prov¬ ed; therefore, for a shilling, we may be satisfied at Doctors' Commons." " A d-y-Ji&b good thought !" cried John —" and, if it please God I should live till to-morrow, I will know what Scapegrace has come into." Their intention of going to church was forgotten, such wa# the anxiety they all felt,
felt to know more respecting the hero of our tale. " Would he go upon the stage again," Miss Atwood wondered. ' f Not he—he will be too proud," re¬ plied the old woman. John hoped, if it would mortify htm, the managers would insist upon his fulfilling bis engagements; mentally praying that he might not recover, as he hoped, not¬ withstanding his mother's secrets that he might come in for something handsome, if he died. Having exhausted themselves in vain conjectures respecting our invalid hero, they prudently reverted to their own af¬ fairs ; and it was resolved, mm. con. to keep the approaching marriages a secret, as far as it could be effected, till the very 'dav. Miss Atwood had very adroitly made this, her private request, to John, and Mr. East¬ wood agreed to the propriety of the mea¬ sure, when it was publicly mentioned: and, in return for their compliance wifh her
her wishes, Miss Atwood remained all night in Marsham-street, and even ventured to admire the beauties of the garden ; and, next morning, Mr. Eastwood, who was both anxious and curious to learn in what degree this young Yates was related to the Wheelers, went to the Commons, and, hav¬ ing taken down the heads of Mr. Freeman's will in short-hand, he was enabled to gra- tify the increasing curiosity of all the Wheelers. " Well, God's will be done !" cried the old man—" Frank was born to be a great man." • ť An old fool has made him one," cried the old woman : ťŕ how high he will carry his head, I warrant me !" " Yes, he will be proud enough of his new name," said Caroline ; " though, after all, he may either die, or be a cripple." " Well, and what matters, child?" re¬ torted the old woman— if he has no one to lament his loss." ,f I should, for one, very sincerely," re¬ joined tbe old man. "You
' ť You were always wrapped op in him, Mr. Wheeler." " He is the natural son of a brother of yours, I think I understood," said Mr. East¬ wood, addressing the old man. " Yes, Sir—no—that is, Mr. Powell was my wife's brother." " Well, Mr. Wheeler, and was not my brother yours ?" quickly retorted the old woman— " yon do so stutter and stammer, at times, since your paralytic stroke, a body is puzzled to understand you." Mr. Eastwood said no more ; and, not¬ withstanding her present brilliant pros¬ pects, Caroline felt that she still gave the preference to her former playfellow ; and, had Miss Atwood entertained the most dis¬ tant hope of ever being noticed by him, she would have made a very great altera¬ tion in her future plans. John could only repine that a fellow, whom he detested, should have been so fortunate; but, wishing to hear what Kemp¬ thorne would say, he said, loud enough for Ыт to hear, addressing Moody, " So, I understand
understand the public will be great losers this winter, since my squalling cousin is «deuced bad—like to die, the papers say." <( I am happy I have it in my power to relieve your apprehensions, Mr. Wheeler," said Kempthorne, *' as Mr. Yates was pro¬ nounced out of danger before I left South Lodge; -end he has been mending ever since, he informs me, in a letter which 1 received from him yesterday." John made во reply, though he c-s-d the speaker in his heart, and repeated what he had said to his mother, who feelingly observed, that u nought was never in dan¬ ger."
end o* VÖÏ,. in.
«•чА»·«*. U»e, Duimt, щцй Co. UttJenhall-Stftct,
