Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
More ghosts
MORE GHOSTS!!! CHAP* XLI. EARLY in the evening the party ar¬ rived at the theatre ; and MiSs Mor¬ ney fhonc confbicuous in the Srout row of a front box, between Mr. Morney and Mr. Seymour, who was as entertaining and agreeable as on the preceding night; and if he did not win the heart of MiSs Morney, becauSe that was pre-engaged, he at leaft gained the old gentleman's completely, who wiihed within himfelf Vol. III. ? that,
that, fincc Grey had turned out Such a Scape-grace (as he thought) MiSs Mor¬ ney might make a conqucft oS this de- Serving young parSon. Thus were they Sor the firft two acts ** agreeable to each other, and happy in themSelves; when the doors Suddenly be¬ gan to clap, and large parties oS young men made their appearance in different boxes, and among others, Sacheverel, and the refi of Lady Trevor's Suite of the night beSore, entered the box next to Mr. Morney. They Soon fixed their eyes upon our little party, and recog¬ nized them by a loud laugh, interrupted by Some witty Sarcafms ; as, The par¬ fon was in the right box—That the par- Sons always had the fharpeft look out aSter
after a fine girl—Let petticoats alone— The parSon would come o\ r er old hunks; and others oS the Same kind. Moil oS the witticiims Avere long fince Sorgot- tcn by the perSons they were le\ r cllcd at ; indeed many Avere loft upon them, by not being underftood as any Avay con¬ cerning themfelves. TheSe beaus appeared to be rejoiced that Mr. Seymour had So vifibly ingra¬ tiated himSelS Avith Mr. Morney, only Sacheverel, who could not conceal his chagrin, and at laft refolved upon open¬ ing Mr* Morney's eyes, as a probable means oS obtaining his Sriendffiip. So reaching over towards him, he whifper¬ ed—" Take care oSthe parfon, oldboy; he means to cuckold you." ? 2 "To
" To whom, young man, do you ad~ dreSs your impertinent conversation ?" Said Mr. Morney, Avith an air of dignity that he knew how to affume. '" Pretty free, that too, ohi buck," re¬ plied Sacheverel ; " but it is yourfelf 1 mean. Dont you See the parSon is making love to your girl ? and I Sup¬ poSe you dont want to keep her for the Cantabs." " Young man," returned Mr. Mor¬ ney, " this place and this company is at prefjent your protection ; Sor though old, I am not Seeble ; and yet allow me to caution you not to proceed Avith your inSolence any Sarther, Sor by HeaA^ens, I'll trounce you, iS you ever dare to be¬ have
have again towards my daughter Avith diSreSpect." " Your daughter ! your daughter, daddy !" Said Sacheverel ; " did you Say that lady is your daughter ?"—" Why, what did you SuppoSe her to be ?"— " Your girl ; Lady Trevor Said So, or at leaft much the Same; and So I—I—I hope you will introduce me to her, that I may aik pardon Sor my miftake."— " We can forgive you Avithout that," Said Mr. Morney, coolly, " on condition that our acquaintance refis here." He then turned aAvay Srom the mor* tified beau, to attend to the laft act oS Every bne has his Fault; but his plea- Sure was fled ; Sor the wicked inSmua- ' ? 3 tion
tion of Lady Trevor íhocked his feelings fo much, that he could Scarcely keep from invectives; however, he reSolvcd to take her to talk Severely next day, and till then keep it from the knowledge of Mifs Mornev. * Mifs Morney's íatisfaction was much abated from the moment ihe beheld ¡äaeheverel ; her feelings were alarmed when ibe faw him addrefs her Sather ; ? and yet ihe thought to herfelS, " What Mid of persecution is this ! we defire to have nothing to do with this gentleman, and yet |ie will not leave us in peace." She begged to know what he had been Saying. Mr. Morney turned it off, by telling her that the gentleman wanted to be introduced to her; " But, my dear,"
dear," Said he, " I told him we did not chuSe to enlarge our acquaintance juft at preSent." Sacheverel watched till he caught her eye, and then made a proSound bow, which flie, actuated by the firft impulfe, only returned by a ScornSul glance. The Second impulfe was Self-reproof; might he not revenge himfelf by other inStances oS rudeneSs fimilar to what he had ihewn her in the morning ?—and would not had conSequenees be likely to enSue ? her father, her brothers, might be called upon in honour to aflert her --------- . She was interrupted there, by Seymour Speak¬ ing to her.
? 4
CHAP.
CHAP. XLII. ?^???? day Lady Trevor and Lady **· ^ Newet arrived, as expected, and Mr. Morney took care to be at home to receive them. When he introduced MiSs Morney, they Seemed charmed with their amiable relation ; and all con- deScenfion and affection, invited her to confider herSelS as if acquainted with them Sor years, and to become imme¬ diately oS their fet ; they would intro¬ duce her every where. -
«í
In
ft In what character?" Said Mr. Mor- τ ney : " You Sorget, coufin, that you pointed her out to Mr. Sacheverel as a very bad one." tc Oh Lord, coufin Morney!" Said Lady Trevor, 1 with an affected laugh ; " that was your own prepofterous doing. Who would have expected to See a young lady oS character brought out by her father, without the countenance oSa finale Semaie—not even announced to me or my daughter—what could I think ?" * t Very true, Mr. Morney,'p Said Lady Newet ; " my mother Said it could not he MiSs Morney, but that you wcr% treading in the Steps oS your Sather; ? 5 therefore
therefore no affront can he attached to her, as we concluded it Avas fome very diffèrent perfon." " No affront, indeed l'faid Mr. Mor¬ ney : " then it was nothing that you occafioned her being inSulted in the Park yefterday ; nor no affront to have my ears affailed laft night at the play- houSe, by the ribaldry oS a Mr. Sache¬ verel ?" "Oh, apropos!" Said Lady Trevor; " you muft Sorgive him ; the wretch is quite Sorry, I aflure you, to have been, though unintentionally, So impertinent to any of my Samily. He came to me from the play laft night quite diftrefîèd; we laughed a good deal—it Avas So co¬ mical
mical a miftake—and I undertook to make his peace. You will meet him at Lady Newets to-night ; and upon my Avord, Mr. Morney, it is your part to apologize, Sor it was your odd con¬ duct alone, that occafioned Such a blunder." " No, Madam," returned Mr. Mor¬ ney, " not my conduct ; but the readi- neSs with which you made a wrong con¬ struction : thereSore, Lady NeAvet muft have the goodneSs to excuSe us this evening." " You Avill come, my dear, Surely," Said Lady NeAvet, offering a card to MiSs Morney.
? ? " ExcuSe
" Excufe me, Madam," replied fhe, " if I feci So diftrefîèd and aftoniíhed at the character I have been represented in, that it is not poffible again to Sace that world that has been fo eafily deceived in me/' " Fiddle-Saddle, filly Solks !" Said Lady Trevor, laughing ; <e why don't you See, that making an appearance at either oS our parties Aviil at once clear up the matter. PoSitively you muft come ; but as you good country-bred Souls dont like to be intimate Avhcre you are not much acquainted, lll Send my Sellows to pay off all my vifits, Avhile I ftay here Snug by your fire-fide, in a friendly Avay, which you muft take as a monftrous compliment : hut really I like you al¬ ready ;
ready ; and you muft not be frightened at us. What do you Say, Newet ?" " Oh, / Say that I ffiall be extremely happy in an intimacy Avith So amiable a relation." MiSs Morney only boAved, but not in aftènt to theSe affectionate declarations. Her Sather had more courage ;—" La¬ dies," Said he, " Ave are relations, and undoubtedly much honoured in your ac¬ knowledgment ; but ?? to intimacies, and friendfhip^ Ave are not ib unreason¬ able as to exact it Srom you, and a? you mentioned juft now, one So country-bred as to prefer ftay ing at home, to going into- Such company as Mr. Sachevercl's."
" Lord,
" Lord, nephew ! Lord, coufin !" laid both at once ; " have you brought this Sweet girl to London only to See the Tower, gape at the giants, See a play, and So return, without Sonning herSelS, and making any refpectabíe acquaint¬ ance ? The dear creature had better have run away with the butler, than live with you in Such a ftyle. Poor thing! no matron to introduce her !" "Madam," Said MiSs Morney, « I beSeech you to form no more SurmiSes concerning me; this laft, oS my preSer- ing the butler's protection, or that oS any perfon, to my happy fituation with my Sather, is equally unfounded with your firß, which led Mr. Sacheverel to i n Suit me." "Oh,
" Oh, you dear reSentSul thing!" Said Lady Trevor» tapping her neck ; " no more oS that, iSyou love me; we'll Set every thing right this evening." At this moment Mr. Morney was called out upon bufineis ; and thefe good ladies, taking advantage of his ab¬ Sence, by their engaging manners, not¬ withstanding what had juft palled, quite ivón upon MiSs Morney, infomuch that ilie not only attributed their firft aiper- fions to the prevailing mode, but like¬ wiSe determined tò perSuade Mr. Mor¬ ney to take her to Lady Newet's, In¬ deed it was very natural Sor a young lady to wifh Sor Some companions oS her own Sex; and perhaps, had ilie been provided with proper Semaie fociety, it had
fiád: prevented her falling fo readily into this. However, it was upon condition that Sacheverel was to be refufed ad¬ mittance; which, after fome attempts ta controvert, both by ferious reafoning, and gentle ridicule, was promifed by the two ladies ; Avho' were aware of the ad¬ vantages that Avould accrue to their par¬ ties, by being able to produce Mifs Morney at them ; fuch as, they would be more numerous, and attended by the moft brilliant beaus, many of Avhom would, fall in love Avith her--,- and en- t deavour to ingratiate themSelves with her relations, by fome oS thoSe elegant affiduities, that old ladies look out Sor as well as their grand-children; They pointed out in molt lamentable tones the horrors of'her fituation—" For only think,
think, my dear," faid Lady Newet, " what people muft furmifc at feeing a pretty young woman fo totally unno¬ ticed by her own fex, as not even to be upon proper terms with thofe fo nearly related to her ; of courie all the reft will keep aloof: and» my dear, I muft ipeak the truth, your character hangs by a thread." " Does reputation, then, depend upon fuch trivial circumftances?" faid Miis Morney ; " and will not rectitude and unceafing propriety of conduct» com¬ mand a more favourable verdict ?" iC Dear child," replied Lady Trevor, " that is So like a country girl. Why, Lord bleSs me! who is to know any thing
thing about your private conduct, un!e& yon ihould have an amour > and then the gentlemen will foon be let into your feerets. It is your public appearance, upon which the jury of beaux, belles, and matrons will fit. But I hope that your fweet pliant difpofition will induce youtto be directed Jjy thoSe that have a knowledge of the world. My heart aches when I recur to the ihocking fate that attended your poor aunt: but I forefaw every thing that bcfel her in her contempt of my interactions. How haughty ihe was, and yet how low ihe ftooped ! The world has feen how dif¬ ferently ƒ have educated my daughter— and the world fees how differently flie has turned out." Thi*
This was an Unlucky firing to touch upon ; for though unacquainted Avith the Avhole of Mrs* Wellers's ftory, Mifs Morney kneAv enough to connect with it every idea of her former lov r er. Tears filled her eyes, and reflection heaved her bofom. Lady Newet kîfled her forehead, and exclaimed—" Amiable fenfibility !" then looking at her watch, found it time to depart.
trie
*
CHAP.
.·*■·<
CHAP. XLIII. MISS Morney prefled the point fo warmly with her father, reiterat¬ ing aH the arguments that had prevailed with herfelf, that he, who began to fee the want of female protection for fa young ? girl, after a few difficulties, yielded, fecretly hoping to felect from Lady Trevor's numerous acquaintance,. a few, that his Underftanding would ap* prove of, for companions to his daugh¬ ter ; for in fpite of the diffipation of the great world, there are characters to be found in it of ttie very firft water. Seymour
Seymour dined Avith Mr. Morney that day; and being aiked to accompany them to Lady NeAvets, declined it Avith a figh ; alledging that he had forborne going to thofe fplendid nocturnal aflcm- blies from his firft taking orders, as thinking them improper places for peo¬ ple of his profeflion to countenance ; the confiant turning of night into day, the licentious manners that often pre r vail—which it Avould be unpolite to re¬ buke, and improper to paSs ov r er—added to that deftructive love oS gaming, made it impoffible Sor men oSSuch Strict mo¬ rality as the clergy ihould adhere to, to appear at them. " I ihould either be an unhappy and unheeded ccnSor," added he, " or what is as probable, be gradu¬ ally draAvn into the vortex oS thofe Sollies,
follies, which I know, by experience, are SaScinating." <ζ You Srighten me," Said MiSs Mor¬ ney ; " Surely your picture is a carica¬ ture !" " It may be drawn in the higheft co¬ lours," Said he, Smiling ; tt4 but you will have the judgment oSMr. Morney, and your innate fenSe of propriety, to direct you. Befide, you muft witneSs thoSe feenes, ere you can know whether they ought to be courted or fliunned. I fliall think mySelS honoured, iS you ihould ever condeScend to give your opinion upon the Subject with the Same Sreedom I now deliver mine."
« Well,"
" Well," faid Mr. Morney, " as wc are forewarned, let us fulfil the remain¬ der of the proverb. I do not much fear that either of us will fall into the de¬ structive pit of gaming, as I never ac¬ knowledge mySelS clever enough to play at cards, and Molly is really ignorant ; for other matters avc muft take care." Early in the evening Mr. Seymour Avas called out to baptize a fick child ; Sor, uncommon as the circumftance may appear, he really did affift his curate in Sulfilling the duties oS the parifh, Avhich being a A T ciy populous one, Srequently kept them both employed, Avhile fome other clergymen were playing at cards, or fitting over their glafs.
Soon
Soon aSter Mife Morney, armed at all points, that is, drefled very magnifi¬ cently, Set out, attended by her Sather, for Lady Newets. It Avas Seven in the evening Avhen they arrived, and, to their aStonifhment, in¬ stead oS being uihered into the draAving- room, the fervant opened the door of a parlour, into which they entered, and found my Lady, Avith her Lord, fitting over the deSert. MiSs Morney attempted an apology; but Lady Newet ftopped her, declaring it to be an act oS charity to interrupt a matrimonial tête-à-tête*, " which," added flie, " is Avhat Seldom occurs in this Samily ; Sor there are a String oS people I can have Avhen ¡I pleaSe, and Some I ahvays have> only on theSe
theSe days my Servants are buiy, and my beil robins all fitted up Sor evening So I uSually beg my Lord to dine out thro' pure regard» as I know mySelS to be So fi upid in his company, but he would not to-day, becauSe one of the children has caught a little cold ; and do you know, î believe he will remain in the nurSery all the evening to dandle it. " Why," find Mr. "Morney, ima dry manner, that will be ufiirping jour" La- dayfhip's province." ·. * - *■ · * " What, to nurSe children t "exclaim¬ ed ihe—" No, Mr. Morney, that fort of thing is quite out* Some fãíhionable people, indeed, have tried it, but it won4 do ; it's a great plague, takes up much vol* ih. ? times»
time, and ruins the nerves. However, I aflure you I am a very good mother ; they are generally in the houSe with me, and I take care to have the moil SaithSul fervants to look aSter them, all Sorts oS mailers to accomplifh them, and every day I Spend at leaft halS an hour in the nurSery, unleSs Some particular engage¬ ment intervenes ; but as to my nurfing — Good Heavens ! it Avould kill mc, and that is to be confidered, I think." " So then, my Lady," Said Lord Newet, " you will not alloAv LouiSa to quit the nurfery." " Lord! what a queftion !—No, to be Sure, poor thing," Said my Lady, with a degree of tartnefs. "Had
<? Had you not better juft look in upon Georgette ?" Said Lord Newet. " She is really, unwell. MiSs Morney looks as i S flie would excuSe you, or, perhaps, accompany you, and I will take care oS Mr. Morney." <c Accompany ! moft certainly," Said Miis Morney, tc and rejoice to be intro¬ duced to my young coufins." " Ay, go go," Said Mr. Morney, ". I would not give a pin Sor a woman that would ftand upon a punctilio to prevent her Sulfilling her duties." α Duties," Said Lady Newet, " vary with your condition in liSc. IS my hui¬ band was a poor Subaltern, my duty ? 2 would
would enjoin that I ihould Suckle the children, mend his linen, and, perhaps, dreSs his dinner, becauSe it would not be otherwise performed ; but if I am in a rank, and pofieffecl, in my OAvn right, oS a Sortune Sufficient to pay largely Sor the attendance oS people, whofe conftitution and experience enables them to do Such things better than I could mySelf, Avhat more is my duty than to proexxxefuch, and fee that they Sulfil the bufineSs Sor which I engage them ?" MiSs Morney ventured to Say in a low voice—" Lord Newet looks So anxious about this vifit, that I Avifh you would take me to pay it, left he ihould think that I prevent it."
« Well,
" Well, come then," faid my Lady, i6 even the nurfery is not worSe than a ii upid fire-fide family party. I mean no reflection upon you, my dear» but really our two gentlemen are arrant quizzes. The Prince fays that my Lord Speaks and looks like the brazen head— Ha! ha! hal* l¿ Your Ladyíhip knows Lord NewetV qualities, and may give them what title you pleaSe," anSwered MiSs Morney; " but I hope you will find a more re¬ ipectful appellation Sor my Sather*" " Oh, certainly, if you defire it," íâid her Ladyíhip, leading to the nurfery, where Mifs Morney was aftoniflicd to fee, not children of two or three years of age, as flie expected, but four fine ? 3 girls,
girls, the eldelt about fixteen, the young- eft twelve." u I fee you are aftoniftied at the ap¬ pearance thefe girls make," faid Lady Newet, " my children are remarkably tall for their age. Louifa (pointing to the eldelt) is thirteen. Make a curtfey child. That is one reafon I do not take her into company, for people expect So much from them, and the poor things are fo aukward. Well, how is Geor¬ gette ?—Her father makes a terrible fufs about her; it muft be owing to the care- lefsnefs of fome of you that ihe has got cold ; or, perhaps, you, MiSs LouiSa, have taken her out at an improper time, and been leading her about in the dew."
" Yes,
" Yes, my Lady," Said the Governeis, " I believe it was what your Ladyíhip obServes ; Sor MiSs LouiSa does ftay out in the Square quite late in the evening ; and Avhen I cannot go mySelS, does not always come in So Soon as I wiih, and the nurSery maid, does not think oS it» and then the miSchieS is done." " How dare you beha\ 7 e So, MiSs Newet?" Said the tender mother. " Indeed, Madam," Said LouiSa, bluih¬ ing, " the evening AA>as fo pleaSant, and poor little Georgette So lively, that I did not perceive the lateneSs oS the hour." " You are certainly ftupid, child," Said my Lady, and ihe turned to the ? 4 GoverneSs
Governefs to give fome inftructions about Georgette, who appeared to be the moft diftinguiffied, perhaps for being the youngeft, unheeding the tear that ftood in poor LouiSa's eye, who was fhocked at being So roughly chid in preSence oS a ftranger. MiSs Morney converfed with her, and found her gentle and timid, but fenfible, and enthufiaftically fond of her father, who ihe defcribed as giving up molt of his time to conversation with his daugh¬ ters, and improving their minds ; and ffie alfo perceived that the oppofite con¬ duct oS Lady Newet made him very un¬ happy. She quitted the nurfery with. regret, to attend Lady Newet to the drawing-room, as noAv Some raps Avere heard 1
heard, announcing the arrival oSthe gay hour. There MiSs Morney was intro¬ duced to the innumerable throng oS vi¬ sitors, and received vrith particular marks oS attention by thoSe oS both Sexes, the behaviour oS Sacheverel having been re* lated v/ith many additions and annota¬ tions throughout the bale monde ; and- our heroine was So diftrefîèd by the eager boks pointed at her, accompanied witb So many whiSpers and Smiles, that ihe wiihed herSelf back at Morney again, and told her father, on their return home, She could not bear Such behaviour, and- that if the world noticed her fo much, ihe muft withdraw Srom it. It was agreed by all the Ladies, that fhe was very aukward, and amazingly ill ? 5 brought
brought up, as ihe was not only igno¬ rant of the fcience of card-playing, but refufed to take any bets, though Lady Newet and Lady Trevor both whifpered, ihat when at Romeße ought to do as they do in Rome. Lady Newet, who was one of the beft card women in the town, made it a rule to have fomething to fay to all her guefts, now approached Mifs Morney, who was furrounded by beaus, and after fome witty obfervations, which made them laugh, wondered what Lord Newet had done with Mr. Morney— " Sure," faid ihe, " they are not both in the nurfery ! «—What a riot they would make with my bantlings!—-But men do fpoil children fo by their foolifh endearments^-The little puppet»
puppets ought to have been fait afleep long ago." Lord Newet advanced juft as ihe was going to fay fomething fmart to another Lady, leading his daughter Louifá, not in the linen frock» as when Mifs Morney firft beheld her, but drefled in a becom¬ ing, yet fimple and elegant manner.— She caft a moft imploring look at her mother, who would have changed colour, had not her rouge been very good ; but her eyes fparkled with anger, which did not pais unobferved by Mr. Morney. « My Lady," faid Lord Newet, « I have brought your daughter to you ;; and as I believe you can introduce her to the company with more grace than I can ? ? pretend
pretend to, into your hands-1 refign my charge Sor the preSent." Lady Newet Selt that her daughter would now be recognized by the world» whether She refufed to introduce her or no, and that her belt chanee oS eScaping unceniured was to comply with rearii- neSs, which might hide her real reluc¬ tance. She, thereSore, preSented Mifs Newet {o the company^ who, poor girl, though fopporfeed hy the affiduities of MiSs Morney, and encouraged by the affectionate looks of her father, was often* near fainting, particularly at certain mo¬ ments, when Lady Newet would give- her a fevere pinch, and whifper SoStiy-— c * You ungrateSul wretch, that I have brought into the world, thus to join your
your father in oppofing my will."—At another time ihe would fay—" I will make you repent this evening's frolic, you viper, whom I have nouriihed in my bofom to fling me to the heart ; but then, theSe kind greetings were only en pajfant, for She Avould brighten up in a minute, and be all tenderneSs, while the company regarded her as the miracle of a good mother ; even Lord Newet gave her credit Sor a merit She did not pofieSs, and applauded himSelf Sor the trick he had played to Sorce her into a di Sch arge oS duty. He attributed Mifš Newet's embarraffment and SickneSs to her baih- Sul conSufion ; but, in truth, it aroSè Srom Sear, which was not ill Sounded ; for that night,, or,, more properly Speaking,, that morning, aSter the company departed,. the
the fender mother gave her a very fevere manual chaftifement. Meanwhile this occurrence made the time pafs over in an interefting manner, and the two girls, the two fathers, and one or two gentlemen, who were not wholly devoted to gaming, formed a little party in the midft of the great one, and was not the leaft edifying Spectaele in the roonu Lady Newet Sat down to play, but her inward rage, which ihe endeavoured to conceal, made her inattentive to what ihe was about ; the admiration her daughter excited, cut her to the heart, as iS a child could not be amiable without injury to the good qualities of her mother. At
At length, unable to bear So much torture, her Ladyihip called LouiSa to her, and gracioufly Smiling, Said— Ci My dear girl, you will hurt your health by fitting up So much beyond your uSual hour. Such young Solks muft be a little better attended to—Go to bed, my kwe, and, depend upon it, I will look in upon you beSore I retire." Mr. and MiSs Morney Soon aSter re¬ tired like.viSe.
4
CHAP.
CHAP. XLV. MR. MORNEY fo highly approved of Lord Newet's character, and became So interefted in LouiSa's Savour, that to See them oSten, he was obliged to connive at an intimacy Avith my Lady, who, by flattery, attention, and conceaU ing her own-Saults, had gained the efteem oSMiSs Morney, whoSc Sentiments ffie guided more than could have s^en ima¬ gined. Lady Newet was a Semaie philo¬ fopher ; that is, flic was not oS any reli¬ gion ; She called herSelS a citizen oS all religions. Her.
Her firft efíày to benefit Mils Morney was to make her ftudy Voltaire, Roufleau, Hume, and Gibbon, on pretence of get¬ ting well verfed in hiftory ; thefe writers having adopted that mode for diflèminat- ing their irreligious opinions. When any paffage occurred that íhocked our heroine's ideas, Lady Newet would rea¬ fon with fuch a volubility of words, de¬ duce fuch a variety of arguments, and relate fo many facts, to difprove what ihe called the prejudices of Mifs Morney*a education, as, in a ihort time, but too Successfully to poiSon the principles of our heroine. In ihort, Mifs Morney be¬ came as much the convert of her Lady- ihip's philofophy as her nice notions of propriety would alloAv; flie became a moral philoSopher, went to church to edify ther
the people, liftened to the Sermon in or¬ der to anSwer it; iS the parSon read prayers badly, he Avas compared to ' an aSs performing his daily drudgery ; if with animation, molt likely he was a hy¬ pocrite. . Grey Avas but feldom thought of, Seymour feldom feen, for it Avas noAv Xent, and he was occupied in fulfilling the duties of his function. Mr. Morney found out this change in his daughter, by her anxiety to convert him ; for though it may feem incontin¬ ent in people who aver, that one way of thinking (in religion only) is as good as another, yet are they themfelves zealous beyond others to gain people over to their opinions, without being able to point out any advantage that can accrue from
from it. This was the cafe one day with Mifs Morney, who, after taking fome pains to convince a young Lady, as ihe called it, , received the following Senftble anSwer— " MiSs, you are learned and I am ig¬ norant—But tell me what will you offer me in exchange Sor my hopes of Heaven, even ihould they prove nothing more than hopes ?—Or what ihall inftigate me to virtue after I have thrown off my re¬ ligion ?"—Mifs Morney was not pre¬ pared with anfwers to thefe queftions, and therefore failed in making a convert. Mr. Morney was quite petrified at his Molly's attainments, but, like many other fond parents, he blamed himfelf the molt. " Here," faid he, ff have I kept this
this poor girl immured in the country,. for the purpofe of forwarding a fooliib plan that has come to nothing. Next», I have plunged her at once into the vor¬ tex of London, without a female compa¬ nion of fiifficient fenfe and experience to* guide her. A father cannot do every thing for a daughter without fuch an affiliant. Here ductile mind was fiifceptible, and having met witb bad teaehers, íhe has imbibed pernicious maxims." After much consideration, Mr. Mor* ??? refolved to bring her to hear Mr. Seymour preach next day, thinking that, through fome predeliction for him, ihe would be more attentive to his doctrine; and in hope of rendering it more fer* Kİeeablc tOvher A the good gentleman Avent tliat
tíiat evening to Ms lodgings, and remain¬ ed there alone until Seymour's return from vifiting a fick neighbour. To him he opened the Sorrows of his heart, and Srom him he beSought afliftance in a caSc oS Such importance, and which came immediately within Seymour's line* The good Parfon was as much ihock- •ed as Mr. Morney, apd joined in throw¬ ing part of the blame upon himSelf.— « Why did I not," Said he, « watch more attentively over her youthful mind, which, neiijier fuSpccting nor intending harm, was more liable to be deceived from her own ingenuoufnefs. As I have neglected that part of my duty, I muft more Seduiouily Sulfil that which re¬ mains." Seymou*
MORE GHOSTS. "Seymour affiired Mr. Morney he Avould make every exertion in his power, Avho thereupon left him, fecretly praying that his daughter might reAvard his efforts by giving him her hand. " And then," faid the careful father, " I ffiall be eafy upon her account." Next day being Sunday, and Mife Mornéy ready, as ufual, to edify her neighbours, by going to church herfeIC ffie was furprized to hear her father or¬ der the coach to a diftant church inftead of their Own, but not forry, as ffie Avas above being attached to any particular paftor. She little thought any of them would create an emotion in her breaft. But, after being feated in the pew, and fettling the haflòck comfortably, upon calling
calling her eyes towards the reading- deik, her colour forfook, and then ruih¬ ed into her face, on feeing Mr. Seymour rife up by the fide of his curate, and fet the example of an attentive and fettled devotion whilft the fonner read the morn¬ ing fervice. Mifs Morney turned over the leaves of her book, and even joined in the re- SponSes for fome time ; but recollecting the dignity of a philofopher about the time the pfaims were half gone through, and what was more, feeing her kind in- ftructrefs in a feat oppofite, furveymgber with critical looks, ihe clofed the book with an affected indifference, which hurt her father, and was not quite unobferved by Mr. Seymour* He at length afcend¬ ed
ed the pulpit with calm dignity, and ?? arrected íerioufnefs ; every eye was fixed upon him, every ear attentive« MiSs Morney was again caught, and ffie lis¬ tened to his diScourfe from the beginning to the end, not fuppofing that it Avas compofed for her, which Avas the truth ; for Seymour, after Mr. Morney's depar¬ ture, felt himfelf fo animated by his fub¬ ject, that, knoAving there would not be time Sufficient to write his thoughts fully, and in a regular manner, juft pen¬ ned the heads of his chief arguments, and from them delivered one of the belt fermons that Jiad been cA r er heard, full of proofs in favour of religion, found divi¬ nity, and true morality ; then his elocu¬ tion was fo iublirae, and his action fo fhitable, that they added, if poflible, force
force to conviction; but fome people only harden their hearts in proportion as they fee reafon to foften them, which was the cafe with Lady Newet, who after church joined Miis Morney, and took her to the Park. " Did you ever hear íuch a fhapfody," faid my Lady, " as Seymour gave us to¬ day ?" " For my part," faid Mifs Morney, " I thought his difcourfe very good." " Why, yes, my dear, the young man's clever, and, confidering the fide he is obliged to take up, does A r ery well. But do you think he believes one word of what he teaches ?—No, my friend, de- voL. m. D pend
pend upon*tt he knows better. Can he be better inSonned than Doctor Beetle, |Or Archdeacon Weedle, or Mr, Seall ? And you know hoAV they live. Juft as much like heathens as the very worft of us can do Sor our lives, Avhich could not be the caSe, Avere they not certain oS their Safety both here "and hereafter. But he has ftruck into the pious mode, be¬ cauSe the King likes to promote good men to good bifliopries, that's all. Then Sor the Sermon, though Specious, it is Sull oS abSurdity. Can any ont oSgood SenSe believe in miracles and prophecies, and So forth ? Why do not they happen now ? Let me See him raife one dead man, or move one mountain out of, its place, or even tell me Avhat I ihall do this day next month, and I will fwallow all the reft." Mifs
Mifs Morney, who had ne ver been ac¬ cuftorned to controverfy, and whoSe late readings were all on Lady Newets fide, could not anfwer, thereSore concluded that nobody elfe could ; and with a Sew more Strictures equally conclufive, loft all the good impreffions that had been made in the morning ; though it is to be hoped ihe was better in her thoughts than her words would acknowledge, out oSan unwillingneSs to appear inferior in fenfe [and philofophy to that ftandard which her coufin had taught her to erect, ? % f CHAR
ι ι ι CHAP. XLIII. RETURNING home to dinner, ffie found Mr. Morney and Mr. Sey¬ mour together, waiting anxioufly for her company, which was equally prized by both, though at this time ffie gave therft fo much uneafinefs; but that rather feemed to encreafe the intereft taken in ber welfare by thefe worthy men, for ffie was ftill dutiful and amiable ; her philo¬ fophy was not reduced to practice, fo that their hopes kept up all their love for this charming girl*"
" My dear father," faid She, after pay¬ ing her compliments to Seymour, t( have I detained you ?—I hope not." " You have," faid he, " but I ihall not chide to-dav. even ihould the firloin be over-roafied. Know, my dear Molly» that I have retarded the ufual dinner hour, as Seymour will not be able to give us his converfation this evening, on ac¬ count of Sunday duties ; and as I never ftudied philofophy or controverfy, I have engaged him to anfwer you upon thofe matters which you have taken up in fo wrong a light fince you came to London, and to recommend to you books that may ferve as an antidote to thofe poifon- ous ones you have lately embraced.— Now, my child, I do not command, but D 3 entreat
entreat you to give every thing a iair hearing and reading, and I fhall not fear the refult. You fee I forbear throwing either my authority or my paternal for¬ rows into the fcale, as I only want you to act from conviction ; other motive* might induce you to proceed without it, and I do not want to make you a hypo* crite." Mr. Seymour now, in a kind tone ©f voice, joined in the converfation, gently leading the fiibject to fuch topics as he knew to be moftly dwelt upon by philo¬ sophers. But Mifs Morney was fo timid and confufed, that ihe could not collect her anfwers, and Seymour was obliged to fay for her what Lady Newet would have faid had ihe been at the conference, in
in order that he might deftroy the argu¬ ments they would feem to enforce, which he did with So much precifion and clear¬ ness, (as, indeed, any one may eafily do Avho has read a little) deducing Saets equally Srom prophane and Sacred hiftory, each to the other, that Mifs Morney, who Avas well read in hiftory, wondered the fame things had never ftruck her before. However, fearing that ; beîng fo eafily led from one belief to another would give her a weak appearance, 'ihe was prevented from declaring her fenti- ments ; and as her referve appeared to hav& Something obftinate and Sullen in it, Mr. Seymour, at la fir, Seemed as if his patience was exhaufted, and arofe to take his leave. D 4 When
MOES GHOSTS. When he was departed, Mifs Morney and her rather, as it were by agreement, forbore the fubject, but he drew favour¬ able omens from herthoughtfulnefs, and received with delight the endearing at¬ tention which ihe paid with more than common vivacity. , After dinner Mr. Morney went to church, unaccompanied by his daughter, judging, as likewife ihe internally did, that, though her going might, perhaps, edify her neighbours, her prefent private meditation would be more likely to edify herfelf. The refult of her evening's pri¬ vacy was more ikvourable» and ihe be¬ came more amiable, from a confcioufnefs of having erred ; more firmly eflabliihed in her religious principles, from the deep enquiry
enquiry ihe made into their veracity ; more gratefully fond of her father, from his care of her real good. This circum¬ ftance of her being, in fome degree, led into error would have been omitted, but as ferving to ihew that the beft difpofed minds may fometimes fuffer from the contagion of bad example, as our heroine was previoufly efteemed, in mental pu¬ rity hardly a w T hit behind Pamela, Har¬ riet Biron, &c. And ihe often mention¬ ed it herfelf, as an initance that no one ought to be too confident in their own wifdom. " Perhaps," Said ihe one day, " my arrogance may teach fome other perSon humility enough, at leaft to *fuf- pend their belief, or diibelief, of matters of fuch important moment, until they have fought for inflruction from fuch as D 5 are;
are competent to the taik, and until they have ftudied both fides of the queftion diligently. Befides," added ihe, " I ihall want to exculpate myfelf from infidelity in love. For, though I had reafon to be angry with Grey, yet it required the full extent of obligation to make me efteem another, and that too So Soon." Mr. Seymour continued his Sriendly vifits to Mr. Morney's Samily, and Avas affiduous and Serviceable to MiSs Mor- rfey in confirming her in her recovered religious principles, though Avithout any hope of gaining her heart, however ardent * his Avifhes. He conceived She would only view him henceforth as her Mentor, fbr he Avas very prompt in telling the truth, eA-en Avhen oppofed to her fentiments. Nobody,
Nobody» thought he, can expect her to love me after what has pafled, fo I muft refign mySelf to my untoAvard fate, which has rendered my duty fo incom¬ patible Avith my inclinations, But after all, it may he the moft fortunate circum¬ ftance that could befall me, as I fliall haA r e the luxury of knoAving myfelf en¬ titled to her efteem, nay, perhaps, be poflèffòd of a portion of it ; Avhile, at all events, I ought not to afpire to her hand, Avith nothing but my living* to cope with her great eftate. Impreffed thus Avith an idea that love muft be out of the quefiion, Seymour did not hefitate to beftoAV every attention his time would admit of, all Avhich Mifs Morney found So engaging, as eonfider- D ? ably
ably to add to the extent of her former obligations. She could not conceal frqm herfelf that Grey had no longer an advo¬ cate in her bofom, becaufe it was filled up with another; however, ihe deter¬ mined to hide her fentiments from the reft of the world, thinking it degrading to* her fex and character to love twice. — She was ignorant how many people there are in the World (not in novels) who love ten times before they βχ.
a
x
CHAP.
CHAP. XLVI. MR. Momey, both for his own and Mifs Momey's gratification, haf¬ tened to return to the Abbey. He pre¬ ferred the country and rural fports ; flie wiihed to ihun Lady Newet ; and fan¬ cied that ihe would. avoid Seymour, hoping that abfence might rettore her heart. She did not know of the invita¬ tion her father had given Seymour to the Abbey, which he promifed to avail himfelf of fome time not far diftant*
Mr.
#2 MORE GHOSTS. Mr. Morney did not chufe to oner his daughter again to any man ; but bad no objection to throw it in Mr. Seymour's way to make a propofal, which he hoped would be agreeable to all parties. In¬ deed the good gentleman's forte lay in forming excellent plans ; and jf fome failed, it was not through his want of diligence in endeavouring for fuccefs, or conftancy of mind to hold to his o\vn purpofe, but happily untinctured with obftinacy. It may be fuppofed that Mr. Morney now thought no more of Grey; hut that was not the cafe ; for he Avas ftill interefted, ftill anxious, about his wel¬ fare; but conceiving him to have de¬ viated fo far from the rule of right, deemed
deemed it proper tp withdraw his more immediate countenance from one, who would otherwife be a bad example to the younger Morneys; whereas fee¬ ing puniíhment annexed to guilt, he might ferve them as ä warning, and at the fame time recover himfelf. Such conduct in this worthy man could not be blameable ; for he ftill held out pro¬ tection to the young man, and even tacitly permitted a continuance of cor- rcfpondence betAveen him and Charles. Grey had lately done a bold thing : " I have loft (thought he) the love of him that was my more than father; but nature gave me no rights over his beft affections. I have my parent, and have a right to claim his advice and aflift¬ ance,
ance. Mr. de Burgh is a juft man ; ihould I, his Son, then be confidered as an alien by ?? the world ! Befide» I may get him to plead ibr me with MiSs Mor¬ ney, whoSe heart, I hope and believe, is as faithful as mine." The next hour produced a letter, written and directed as follows :— GEORGE DE BÜRGH, ESQ. " Dear and honoured Sir, " WILL you permit a fon, who has never before had it in his power, to pay that duty the relation between us de- Hiands ? Yes, my father, I now know who were the authors of my being; one, alas, is no more ! and is not the other doubly bound to protect me ? No doubt,,
doubt, my father, you have been in¬ formed of my unfortunate errors ; but I truft I can much extenuate the princi¬ pal of them ; though, through aggra¬ vated reprefentations, they have ruined me in Mr. Morney's opinion ; nor does he leave me any method of regaining his friendfhip, but that hard, I may fay, impoffible one, of wedding fo bad a girl as Mifs Bolton, whom I deteft. Oh, Sir, hear me ! give me a meeting, and I will undertake to clear myfelf of inten¬ tional wrong. Allow me to fee!, for the firft time within my remembrance, a pa¬ rent's embrace. I will be as fecret as you can defire ; all I wifh, is the liberty of ftyling myfelf to you, Your affectionate fon, Thomas de Burgh."
It is eafy to imagine what anxious feelingá agitated the mind of Grey, in the interval between his writing and the arrival of the anfwer. In the interim he received a pìcce of intelligence from the youngcft Mr. Morney which aftoniíhed him, viz. that Mifs Bolton was brought to bed at a fmall village near London, where ihe had been fent to avoid the ihame of Such an event at Morney. "My brother," faid be, " found out, by fome means, where the lady re- fides, and we went fee her. I expected to und a very melancholy reception; but never did I fee Betfey more chear- iui in my life. She will not break her heart,
heart, I find, even if you don't marry her. My brother had fome converfa¬ tion with her, but fo low that I could not hear any thing but your name ; to be fure it was natural to turn to the re¬ collection of you, and I don't know why I thought of the circumftance a Second time ; but perhaps it was, becaufe whif¬ pering implies myftery, and myftery I hate. " We are not likely to fpend much time in London this winter, owing to the avocations I mentioned in my laft ; but I find that my filter is very much admired there, and I believe you will agree with the London world, &c." Never did any man feel lefs joy at be¬ ing hailed father; however» as it was but
hut fix months from the time of his de·* parture from Morney, fomething like fatisfaction refulted from the idea that the ehild had a prior claim to fome other. In a few days he received the follow f - ing anfwer to his letter from Mr. de Bfcrgh. ·*' My dear Son, " IT is not in my nature to reject your petition ; and believe me, I often did violence to my own feelings when I reftrained thofe of affection for you, which I could not have perfifted in fo many years, only for the knowledge I had of my friend Morney's goodnefs to you. As he has thought it neceflàry to divulge the fecret of your birth» far be it from
from me to add to your prefent forrows, by keeping at a diftance from him I ac¬ knowledge to be my dear fon. There¬ fore, to act the part of a father, let me advife, nay, entreat you, to rettore your¬ felf to the good opinion of that belt of men ; which I would have you do, were it even by fome indifferent action ; but here you are called upon by every mo¬ tive of gratitude and real honour ; as I am fore you could not have feduced ib good a girl as Betfey Bolton has always been (only in this one initance) without gaining her love and belief of your's» moft likely too confirmed by folemn promifes; yet, poor girl, with a much finaller portion of guilt, muft ihe bear ^(in the world's eye) all the ihame, and certainly all the pain incident to a tranf- greffion,
greffion, to which, in forne fond mo¬ ment, you have led her* But that is not my only, nor even chief motive, for the advice I give you ; for your beha* viour towards Mr. Morney and his daughter is very culpable. Only reflect that in his houfe you feduced Mifs Mor¬ ney's friend» whilft pretending love to her : yet does he offer forgivenefs of that injury, if you will repair the greater ??? done to poor Betfey, whom you now feem to deteft for her kindnefs to you* Nor ought you to purfue any other line of conduit to her, than what fe dictated by tendernefs; for the fake of Softening the forrows of that worthy man, your tutor, who has not deferved Iuch d rccompence from- your hand as Ae has met with* «My
* ζ My AviSe and daughter are at Bath ; you may come here as a vifitor during their abfence, provided you intend to comply with the Avifhes oS all your Sriends, among the warmeft oS Avhom reckon Your affectionate father, N G. de Burgh."
I
4
CHAP.
CHAP. XLVII. JnpiHOUGH Grey was lefs than ever -*" inclined to comply with the de¬ fire exprefled in Mr. de Burgh's letter, he could not refift the invitation ; fo gaming permiffion from the College, íet out next day ; nor did he ftop on the road, more than was neceflàry for chang¬ ing horfes, until he arrived at the inn where he had parted from the young Morneys ; from thence he wrote a bil¬ let to Mr. de Burgh, only fignifying where he was, and his earneft requeft tø be admitted to his embraces. The
The anfwer was brought by Mr. de Burgh himfelf; who ruihed into the room, and taking Grey in his arms, prefied him to his heart. This was a neAv and powerful emotion for Grey, who forgot for the moment every other perfon, and every pail traníaction. It was fcarcely poffible to tell which was the molt delighted at this recognition of relationihip ; but Mr. de Burgh was the firft to recollect himfelf Sufficiently to order a poft-chaife to take them to his houfe, as he had rode on horfeback to the inn for the fake of expedition; " for, my dear fon," faid he, " you muft be fatigued with your journey, and in the chaife we can enjoy our converia¬ tion undifturbed. On the road no men¬ tion was made of Mifs Bolton. Grey < vol.iii. E ver»
,viery much dreaded the Subject; nor did .Mr. de Burgrj exprefs any eagerneSs about it; Sor the whole day flipped away without a word in Savour oS matrimony and MiSs Bolton. But next day aSter dinner, he opened the Subject as iS it were a thing not to be doubted oS; and waa much Surprised at Grey's pofuive reSuSal, though couched in A r ery reSpect- ful terms. « Well, Tom," Said he, " it is Sair to hear all your objections. The epithet oS bad girl, Avhich you are So liberal of, ought to have fome other foundation than her love for you. Open your heart to me, and rely upon my juftice; that though» for the Sake of a deServing oldrpan, I Avould wifh to fee his child re¬ ftored
ftored to refpectability, I would nek have my fon a victim to artifice." Thus encouraged, Grey related his ftory to his father, accompanying it with fo many lineere expreiîîons of love to Mifs Morneyy that nothing was wanting to confirm its veracity in the opinion of his auditor; who, taking his hand, af¬ fured lüm that he would undertake to procure him, not only Mr. Morney's pardon, for the fmali part he had in Mils Bolton'« tranSgrelfion» but even poor good Mr. Bolton's.—" For," faid De Burgh, " though my heart aches at the thoughts of the additional pangs that fuch a knowledge of her depravity will occafion to him, yet it is neceffary that he ihould be informed of the whole, E ? in
in order to guard her, if poffible, in fu* ture ; and I will go to him, and in as gentle terms as poffible, break thefe cir¬ cumftances, which your welfare is fo nearly concerned in divulging." Accordingly, that very evening Mr. de Burgh fet out to fulfill his promife, leaving Grey upon the rack of expecta¬ tion* At his return they returned their tête- à-tête, and Mr. de Burgh related the following particulars :— On his arrival at the parfonage, he defired to be conducted to Mr. Bolton, in order to converfe in private with him ; and was ihewn to his ftudy, where the
the good man was fitting, not as for¬ merly, engaged in fome ítudy or work with a chearful alacrity, that made every one happy around him ; he was now penfive, gazing at a book that it was evident he did not read—his arms fold¬ ed—his cheek pale—nothing like our old Vicar of Morney of a few months paft. —" Don't rife, my friend," faid De Burgh, feeing him move, " I am come to talk with you." Then fearing him¬ felf, led gradually to the forrowful lub* jed of Mifs Bolton. He found the good Vicar firmly im* prefled with an opinion of his daughter's integrity.—" Let us not, Sir," faid he, " fuppofe the poor girl capable of every enormity, becaufe ihe has been feduced E 3 into
into one. Her education was fo ílric\ and her mother's watchfulnefs, as well as mine, fo great, that if ffie had had any evil propenfities, Ave could not but dif¬ cover them ; and I proteft, Mr. de Burgh, that wc never knew her once guilty of even a prevarication ; but on the contrary, ihe always evinced an utter abhorrence of every kind of falfehood." « " There mult be deceit on one fide in'this affair," faid Mr. de Burgh ; " and confider, my dear friend, that Grey was your pupil likewiSe ; educated upon the ibme good principles, and thought to be as remarkable Sor veracity." " Ah, Sir !" Said Mr. Bolton, « one vice draws on another. It was not hy his
his veracity he Seduced my poor BetSey ; and having once overftepped the boun¬ daries oS truth, I SuppoSe he now finds \ T ery little difficulty in doing it, when it will Serve any purpoSe he may wiih Sor."" " At leaft," Said De Burgh, " let us endeavour to find cut which Speaks truth ; Sor at preSent we only go upon Suppofi- tion ; and I can think oS no other roe^ thod than conSronting them as Soon as MiSs Bolton can make it convenient. She cannot reaSonably object herSelf to iuch a propofition ; as ihe Should confi¬ der that, as yet, only her representation has been heard and attended to, and that it Ís not Sair to judge without proofs. If they are in her Savour, I give you my word that my intereft ihall be ? 4 exerted
exerted in order to procure what repa¬ ration can be made." « f Reparation, Sir !" Said Mr. Bolton. 4€ ??? there be any ? Has he not thrown her out oS the claSs oS the virtuous— pierced the hearts oS her parents worSe than with a dagger ? Has he not baS- tardifed his own child ? and talk of re¬ paration to her father, who had fixed his deareft, fondeft hopes upon the well¬ doing of his child !—What you men¬ tion, Mr. de Burgh, is humiliating— but be it fo—vicious or weak conceffions draw many puniihments in their train* My child ihall confront her betrayer, asyou obferve it will be juft. But, ? heavens ! how ihall /—how will her mo¬ ther, bear fo ihocking a icene !" Mr.
Mr. de Burgh endeavoured to fpeak comfort to the man who ufed formerly to diipenie confolation all around ; for he was a real paftor to his flock. He attended to all that was íâid, not only without any figns of impatience, but likewife without any manifeftations of hope ; and Mr. de Burgh at laft, finding he could not do any thing to further the matter, or confole Mr. Bolton, returned to relate the refult to Grey.
E 5 CHAP.
CHAP. XLVIII. f ABOUT a fortnight had elapfed, every day of which Mr. de Burgh's affection for Grey increafed. He oSten told him that it would he impoffible to part wkh him again, or conceal the ties that were between them. " My AviSe," Said he, " muft no longer exact Such Sa¬ crifices, nor has fhe any right to be jea¬ lous that your unhappy mother ihould give me a Søn, as if that w r ere her only charm—Alas ! ihe had more than half her Sex put together ; cand ' her faults were
were only the refult of a neglected edu¬ cation. I never open my mind to any one upon the fubject ; for it would only vex Mrs. de Burgh, whom I refpect very fincerely, to be told that I loved your mo¬ ther to the laft moment of her life, and Avould have refigned my high-flown no¬ tions of honour to have wed her a fécond time, at the death öf poor Wellers, had I. been free and fhe had lived. Oh ! how often I regretted the abrupt leave I took the laft time thefe eyes beheld her ; for She AA r as true to me, and I in time ihould have corrected her Saults by gentleneis and love." Mr. de Burgh was all this time walk¬ ing about. Avith agitated and unequal pace ; he ceaSed Speaking, but Seemed E. 6 abSorbed
abforbed in forrowfol reflections; and Grey felt a new pleafure on hearing his mother Spoken of with regard, and that too by the man ihe herfelf molt valued ; for it cannot be an enviable circum¬ ftance to the moft unfeeling minds to be iprung from perents that are held in uni¬ verfal deteftation. At the expiration of the before-men¬ tioned time, the Morneys returned to the Abbey, and De Burgh immediately wait¬ ed upon them, but Grey was interdict¬ ed: however, his father faid all in his fa¬ vour be could urge with propriety, but found Mr. Morney as much prejudiced in behalf of Miis Bolton as her father himfelf. They all agreed in the pro¬ priety of grving Grey a chance of excul¬ pating
pating himfelf; but this was more in ex¬ pectation of a happy iflue for the Lady than that it would tend to the eftaoliih- ment of his innocence ; infomuch, that after Mr. de Burgh's departure, Mr. Morney and his daughter congratulated each other upon jthe profpeét that was opened for poor Betfey, in which con- , verfation it was apparent that Mifs Mor¬ ney's affection for Grey was now at an end ; and yet, fo felfiih are the beft of us, that, though unknoivn to herfelf, ihe dreaded the thought of finding him quite blamelefs, left from that circumftance he ihould think he had a claim upon her. What was ungular, young Mr. Momey wore an appearance of referve to all that was faid, nor could they difcover hk real opinion ou the bufinefs. Fatigue
Fatigue made them Separate at an early hour» \yhen all the Morneys Avere wrapped in the arms of fleep, their do¬ meftics loudly fnoring, and only ghofts were likely to be met with walking in this regular manfion after eleven o'clock. Mifs Morney, indeed, flept but little ; her fituation was becoming rather criti¬ cal» ihould Grey be found deferving as beSore; ihe could not, as his recom- pence, devote herSelf to misfortune ; ihe wiihed him as Avell, and liked him almoft as well- as her brothers ; but ihe had now Seen the world, by being Sour months in London, and was Sure he was not the kind of man to make her happy. He was neither fo agreeable nor fenfible as Sey- mour : % but, indeed» Seymour could ne¬ ver be any thing to her, ihe only thought ^ of
oS him en paffant ; yet, from that mo¬ ment ffie could dwell upon no fubjeéfc that had not Some relation to him, and was not A T ery unpleaSantly occupied İîi re¬ collecting his words and looks, till at laft ffie was almoft afleep, when a ruftling noiiè in the room occafioned her to open her drowSy eyes. But, oh ! what a ter¬ rible fight to behold!—A tall figure, clad in white, with a black veil over its head, and a taper İn its hand, ftalked t acroSs the room, at the upper end of which were two Sull-length portraits, done Sor her and Grey a Sew yearjs back. At theSe the figure ftopped to gaze, and aSter a filence oS Some minutes, uttered, in a hollow voice, Not Grey, but De Burgh ; ill-fated, much-wronged youth. The Spirit then gave a deep %? almoft amounting
amounting to a groan» and departed, leaving Miis Morney motionlefs and fpeecblcfs. No fooner bad ihe recovered herfelf a tittle, than ihe rang violently for her maid, who pretended to be very found afleep, not liking to encounter the ipirits that ihe firmly believed ftalked about the houfe m the night-time, notwithftanding the love flic really felt for her miftrefs. Poor Mifs Morney, finding no afliftance likely to come, flipped on a wrapping- gown, and was going to find out her fervant's room, as being a fafer. place than her own, but had not got quite to the door ere ihe beheld the white figure again* This was too much, ihe uttered m loud ihriek, and fainted. The
The cry, and the noife of her tall, rouzed the women fervants, who, being protected by each other, ventured to look out of their apartments ; but judge of their confternation when they beheld their young Lady covered with blood, and apparently lifelefs. One haftily ran to call Mr. Morney, but, ftruck with ter¬ ror, as precipitately returned, afluring her companions that all the rooms on the north fide of the gallery were full of lights, and the doors opening and íhut* ting, as if nothing but devils were there· What was to be done~None would ven¬ ture through the haunted gallery. In the midft of their fearful delibera¬ tions, Mifs Morney came to herfelf; and they perceived with joy that the blood only
only proceeded from her nofe, which ihe had hit agajnft fomething in her fall. To return to her own room was impoflible, nor would ihe have her father difturbed, but refolved to lie down upon her own maid's bed, and there being another in $e ????, two of them were directed to lie there, that, ihould the fpirit again ap¬ pear, their numbers ¿night fupport their courage, for Miis Morney was not very valiant. After lying trembling for fome tíme» carefully covering their heads with the bed-cloaths, they fimk irito a pro¬ found fleep for the remainder of the night..
CHAP.
CHAP. XLIX. r Tp HOUGH the various circumftances ■*■ were faithfully related to Mr. Mor^ ney in the morning, he ftill remained in* credulous. The ftory of the noifes, lights, and even Mifs Morney's being frighten* ed into a fit, had no effect ön^he firm- nefs of his mind. Nay, he was, for the firft time, angry with her for her timidity» " Here/' faid he, " you run from one bad extreme to another. In Condon» you would not for a while believe any thing, now every thing obtains your cre¬ dit.
dit. You have had a dream that alarmed you, and ran for protection from the vi- iion your fancy had created. What won¬ der then that the light reflected from the lamp in your own room ihould difplay your ihadow ; there could be no other caufe for your terror. As for that of the fervants, your own example encouraged them in the weaknefs of their uninform¬ ed and fuperftitfous minds." They were all forry to fee Mifs Mor¬ ney io etìia; even her brothers, who had laughed at the relation of the bufinefs* feemed grieved when íhe íhed tears; however, they SoStened the good old gen¬ tleman in a twinkling, and he forgave her, and begged ihe would be comforted, for his anger was over* « Now,'*
*· NoAv," faid he, " I will take up my lodging for fome nights in your room.— If I expected to fee any thing I would not go to bed, as I ihould íhrewdly fuf. peel flefli and blood to be a more likely vifitant than a ghoft ; but as it is need- lefs to lofe my reft for nothing, I will be bold enough to fleep there, fo expect to hear my wonderful tale to-morrow." Mifs Morney begged her father not to fleep there by himfelf. Young Morney laughed again, and faid, that he thought his father ought to make the old houfe- maid or cook fleep in the room to guard him. Mr. Morney, however, refolved to be left alone ; and the fervants thought he deferved fome warning for his hardi- nefs, which was more than became a good Chriftian*
Chriftian. Mifs Morney had a frcond bed brought into the room ihe was to oc¬ cupy, in which two of the maids flept, to their great joy, for it was the fide of the houfe the men flept in; and they faid, * t that though MiSs Morney might Sec ghoßys, yet, being So good a young Lady, they would not harm her, So that, per¬ haps themSelves, being near her, though great finners, " as Heaven kneAv, would eScape through courtefy." During the day, Mr. Morney inspect¬ ed the room, but Sound no entrance to it but the door and windows ; there Avas no tapeftiy to conceal private paflages, fo - he was felf-convinced, if he faftened the door, tfeere would be no danger of in¬ terruption. There was little of any other bufinefs
bufineSs done that day, CA r ery body Avas occupied in conjecture about the ghoft, which MiSs Morney concluded to be her deceaSed aunt, come to reproach her with infidelity to Grey. At night every one was backward in parting, but as Mr. Morney became drowiy, he Sent each to their OAvn apartment, and he retired to his new one, where, aSter difiniffing his attendant, and faStening the door, he lay down, Avith an intention oS keeping Srom fleep, iS poffible, until twelve, that he might be the better enabled next morn¬ ing to filence all the credulous; but mark the event, he flept» and was awoke by a ruftling noiSe, when turning round» he Saw the white figure holding the ta¬ per clofe to the portrait oS Grey, and heard the hollow voice repeat— Ill-fated, nrnch-
much-injured Thomas de Burgh. Mr. Morney ftarted up in bed, and the fpirit turned round, and throwing up the long black veil, difcovered to his aftoniíhed view the very face of his deceafed lifter ! *—not, indeed, blooming with beauty and youth, nor infpirited by that air of dig¬ nity' íhe ufed to allume ; the fpirit ihew¬ ed her features, but as if altered by time, forrow, and death ! " In the name of Heaven, I adjure thee to fpeak," faid Mr. Morney ; but would no more. In a moment all was darknefs, fomething ruihed by the bed, and in another moment all was ftill.-— Now, what could any one think of all this !—Mr. Morney could not blame his daughter and fervants, yet ftill he felt a repugnance
repugnance at believing the intervention oSípirits in worldly concerns, and re- Solved to Search the Abbey next day, to diScover whether Such a fraud might be practifed ; but that was a very tranfient hope ; for who, thought he, could per- fonate the dead, or how fo clofely re- femble Mrs. Wellers, or for what pur¬ pofe ? Suppofing it to be what it purported to be, the Lady herfelf, it was evidently with a view to turn the balance in favour of Grey, who, being blamelefs, was cer¬ tainly wronged* u Poor lad," faid Mr. Morney, I will make it up to him. How glad I am that Seymour did not fpsak out. I ihould be in a molt unpleafant dilemma had I engaged my word and my vol. m. F child
child to them both. Still he lay on the Watch, in hope of beholding the figure once more, but it did not return ; and upon hearing the great clock ftrike Ιαα?, he juged it ufelefs longer to wafte the night in watching. Therefore, confcious of never having intended wrong, and confidently refigned to the will of Hca- v.en^ he compofed himSelf to fleep.
CHAP.
CHAP. L. ■ ? VERY living Soul at the Abbey was * ■* up early next morning, anxious to know how Mr. Morney had Settled with the ghoft. MiSs Morney, moft particu¬ larly So, was at the door by his accuftorn¬ ed hour of rifing, but Sound it Saftened; ihe Sat down in the anti-chamber, while her brothers and Some oS the domeftics came to enquire about the old gentle¬ man. At length they all became alarm¬ ed, having never remembered him to lie in bed So late ; and, at length, their ap- F 2 prehenfion
prehenfion of danger fpread tò fuch a height, that it was deemed necefiary to apply to young Mr. Morney for leave to break open the door ; however, not find¬ ing either of the young gentlemen, they having juft gone to a farm-houfe to breakSaft, Seeing but little chance oS any at the Abbey, MiSs Morney took upon herSelS to give the order, when the door was forced open with the utmoft facility. Mr. Morney was awoke from hi» flum¬ bers by the noife, and in a fituation that will hereafter appear ; for towards morn¬ ing he had had fome ominous dreams, only one of which he could remember, and that was as follows— He thought he was traverfing the gal¬ lery upon the ground floor, which leads to
to the Chapel, in the duik of the even¬ ing (as it appeared to him) he faAv a glimmering light iffue at intervals from the Chapel, into which he made halieto enter ; when there, he perceived a hand cut clofe to the wrift, and ftill bleeding, clofely íhut upon a little bit of candle, Avhich fometimes threw out a glare of light, and then feemed quite funk into ^ this horrid hand. By this dreadful light he diftinguiffied againft the north wall of the Chapel, a whole length picture of Mrs. Wellers, which had been de¬ ftroyed by his order fome years before. As Mr. Morney ftood wondering how it . could have been fixed there, and in fuch good prefcrvation, a voice diftinctly faid, It is not from your good-%vitl that I or mine have been preferved, and immedi- F 3 ately
ately the picture was no more a picture, but Mrs. Wellers herfelS, Avalking to- Avards him. Terror made him retreat precipitately; but preSently it Avas aS- Sailed as it were by a thouSand devils, and he was rooted to the ipot, when a loud craih, that Seemed more tremendous than all the Soregoing, made him ftart up in his bed in an agony of flight, and then he Saw his SaithSul fteward and but¬ ler, his own man and the houSekeeper, with other domeftics, headed by MiSs Morney, walk into the room, all gaz¬ ing with looks oS aftonifliment and joy, and all exclaiming at the Same time— " Oh! my dear, dear Sather is SaSe!"— " Thanks be to the Lord he is here!"— " Heaven be praiSed he is reflord to us !" with many other ejaculations, Sor they all
alî joined in the loudeft demonftrations oSjoy, Mr. Morney rubbed his eyes, and ap¬ peared more Surprized at feeing them ' than they w r ere at Seeing him. " Hey¬ day !" quoth he, what does this mean i'—* Have you all been dreaming of the pic¬ ture, and my fiuer, and the bloody hand?" " Sure as we are here, Simon," faid the houfekeeper, " mafter has been taken away, and brought back again in fpirit. They all nodded affent except Mary, who ran over to the bed-fide, and kifled her father's hand, bathing it with the tears of filial affection, which he as ten¬ derly returned by a paternal embrace.
F 4
"But
» " But come, my Sriends," Said he, " inSorm me what is the cauSe oS all this—Pray how got you here."—" I broke the door open, an' pleafe ???* worihip," replied the Steward. , " I ihould have been more thankSul, Mr. Steward," Said he, " iS you had been lefs officious. I do See it is beyond my uSual time oS rifing, but it is the firft time I ever heard of a gentleman's fer¬ vants coming in a body to break his door open, and force him from his bed." • « It is my fault, dear father," Said MiSs Morney, who never could bear to See any one chid, " I ordered it myfelf."—- " And pray, Molly, for Avhat reaSon ?— " Have the French landed at PortS- mouthj
mouths and on tbe road to Morney by Sorced marches ?" " No, Sir," Said one, " but we won¬ dered at your Honour's non-appear¬ ance."—" Yes, Sir," Said the houSe¬ kecper, Avho had read the Cattle of Adol¬ ph us, " and I Said that Smugglers, Sor aught Ave knew, might have come thro* a hole in your Honour's bed, and fo have carried you οίζ and forced your Honour to turn Smuggler in your old age, as Such things have been." " Indeed, my dear Sir," Said Mifš Mor¬ ney, " Ave Avere all aSraid Something had happened, by your ileeping So late, but noAv beg pardon Sor having difturbed you thus, though we are So happy in See- F 5 ing
ing you well, as hardly to be Sorry Sor what w r e have done." So faying, they retired, leaving Mr. Morney to drefe. They, however, had remarked the words Mr. Morney Spoke beSore he was perSectly awake, in the firft moments oS furprize, thinking they had Some remark¬ able portent, which would not be long kept a Secret ; but Mr. Morney kept every thing very cloSe that day, Seeming to, ponder much in his own mind, So that the Samily. were all in expectation of Seme great event, which might be pro¬ ductive of clearing the Abbey oS its troubleSome nocturnal vifitors.
CHAP.
*β·Χ'β<
chap, li; ? MESSAGE came Srom Mr. Bol- -^ ^^ ton, to inSorm'Mr. Mornev of tho arrival of his daughter, and to requeft that he Avould meet Mr. de Burgh and Grey at the ParSonage next day.— " PainSul," added he, in his billet, " Avili be the fight oSthe latter to me, even af¬ ter what Lmay call the trial of my>un-r fortunate girl Shall be over, and he diS- poSed to marry her. I fhall have to ßruggle Sor humility and patience, in order, to ^Support his preSence; but I be* F ? lieve
lieve it to be a duty, though a hard one, and I am now endeavouring to Sortify my SelS. Th e Su pport oS your Sriendíh i p, my worthy beneSactor, will likewiSe aS- fift my efforts ; but theSe ftruggles will Shorten my days." Mr. Morney was greatly affected at the Sufferings oS the good Pallor, and refolved to Support him as Sar as he ihould find it proper; but began to waver in the firm belieS he had given to MiSs Bolton's ftory oS innocence. Certainly he had Seen his filter's appa¬ rition, and as certainly flie had aflerted Grey to be wronged ; and every one knows that a dead man is always believ¬ ed in preSerence to a living one ; Sor, firft, the dead man muß know belt ; and Se¬ condly,
condly, what intereft can the dead have in deceiving the living. Mr. Morney had been Shut up alone in his library Sor Some time, confidering the affair, when Mr. Seymour arrived according to Ã/f invitation, though unex¬ pected by MiSs Morney, which was one of his Schemes.—" For," thought he, " the girl will be off her guard, and dis¬ play So much joySul Surprize, that Sey¬ mour will be a mere ninny iS he does not propoSe directly." The Scheme Succeeded à merveille. * For when he was announced, fhe was alone in the great parlour, and ran to¬ wards the door out oS breath with joy to receive him ; but no Sooner remarked / the
the delight fuch a reception filled him with, than íhe bluíhed and ftammercd in fuch vifible, yet agreeable confufion, that Mr. Seymour, who, though a parSön, was not a fool, fount! he was a happy man; and forgot himSelS So Sar that, without enquiring about even the maS- ter of the houfe, he Seized her hand» prefled it, and led her to the Sofa, purely for a pretence tokeep it in. his own all the way ; and then he purfued Such ani¬ mated, yet tender diScourSe, that MiSs Morney, who very unluckily had forgot Grey and her own good reSolutions, could not difguiSe the pleafiire fhe Selt in liftening to his honeft tale oS love, until he aiked Sor her acceptation, when flie ftarted, and endeavoured to recover Srom her delirium, which was excuSabie, as the effect of Surprize. Seymour,.
Seymour, who obferved her counte¬ nance vary its expreffion, miftook the. caufe, and Suddenly checking his own- transports, Said—" Will you, MiSs Mor¬ ney, at leaft pardon, and Sorget that I s have offered you a heart not worthy of your's, and a hand not enough loaded with wealth to entitle me to fo much preSumption," " Oh, Seymour, !" Said MiSs Morney, " now you are unkind. Can you efteem me, and yet SuppoSe it poffible that I could overlook your numberleSs good qualities, merely becauSe you are not quite So rich as I might expect a man to be, whom I fhould baSely wed Srom that paltry motive ? I think you worthy of a princefs, were ihe as eminent in me¬ rit
rit as high in rank, had ihe no impe¬ diment."—" Then," replied Seymour, " you SuppoSe your Sather Avould ob¬ ject."—" I cannot tell," anSwered MiSs Morney ; " I am Sure he would not a few.days fince; but I do not think my¬ felf at liberty to divulge the circum¬ ftances that may have induced him to alter his opinion ; if it is So, and he en- trufts you Avith his reaSons, you will, I know, coincide ivith tts, Sor I fhall abide by his decifion." The two young Mr. Morneys came in, and the conversation grew general, but uninterefting, which not Suiting the tone oS MiSs Morney's Scelings, ihe leSt them, in order to acquaint her Sather oS the arrival 4>f-Mr* Seymour. Mr.
Mr. Morney faw a great deal of emo¬ tion in the expreifive features of his daughter, which he eafily referred to the ♦right caufe ; and now again repented of the fuccefs oS a Scheme that he had * thought could have produced nothing but good.— cs I proteft," Said he, " with¬ in himSelf, "lama very Sir Hugh Syrold, blundering continually upon plans that produce nothing but difap¬ pointment and regret." " Well," Said he, to MiSs Morney, " I will go and welcome our gueft. Will you return with me ?"—" Why no, not yet ; I wifh to retire for a Sew minutes." —« For what reaSon fliould you thus appear to 111 un So kind a Sriend ? Come, Molly, I am not a Severe» morofe pa-» rent.
*4
rent. Something has affected you ; en- truft your father with the knowledge of it. Was it your unexpected meeting' with Seymour ?" With downcaif looks and crimforif cheeks» Mifs Morney told her father all that had paffed* " Ah !" feid be, " how unhappy ara I, that muft at leaft poffpone, if not en¬ tirely prevent, an union I fo much de¬ fired ! I need not tell you, Molly, that if Grey has been wronged, which is a very poffible fuppofition, confidering what you have feen and heard the other night, Avhich I begin to think has fome meaning, we muft reinftate him in all refpects ^ and you know that I wiihed to
to have him your huiband, and poflèflòr oS Morney ; you will oS courie rettore him your good opinion, and, I hope, be a very happy couple. And poor Sey¬ mour, who is a very fine, and a very good young man ■ but I hope he will not fpeak to me upon the Subject ; perhaps, as he is really a modeft young man, he will not. Well, do as you like about coming down."
CHAP.
CHAP. LII. SEYMOUR haviug fo far exceeded his intentions, ,was determined, as he law no appearance of unkindneíš in Mifs Morney, to proceed ; and more fo, as, after what had efcaped in the mo¬ ment of a joyful meeting, it would be next to impoifible to refrain from the fubject fo near his heart. Yet, to ge on clandeftinely, was what his principles re¬ volted againft. Therefore, after a very ihort common converfation, he requeft¬ ed to Speak to Mr, Morney alone, which the other, in a little confufion, granted. Seymour
Seymour ingenuoufly laid open his paffion for Mifs Morney, and ftated his own limited fortune and expectations on the other fide, lamenting his inferiority only as it gave the appearance of inte- reftedncfs to his foiicitations, which at the fame time he folemnly deprecated. Mr. Morney Avas noAv in the moft perplexed of all fituations; convinced that Mils Morney had a fincere and more ardent affection for Seymour, than that flie had imbibed, through habit and education, for Grey. Here was evi¬ dently a more fenfible character, and one who ought not to be peremptorily difcarded, while a hope remained for him ; neither would it be proper to con¬ tinue his pretentions, while it was fo very probable
probable that another muft in honour Supplant him. " I don't know," Said Mr. Morney, " what to Say to you."—" My dear Sir," replied Seymour, rather encouraged by theSe words and his manner, " I do not mean to aik a conSent contrary to Mils Morney's wifhes. Will you be fo good as to refer me to her anfwer ?"— " No, not at prefent ; She w r ou!d be in exactly the fame dilemma in which I find my¬ felf."— « Dear Sir," Said Seymour, "this is furely an uncommon mode oS refilling an anfwer; perhaps I muft be fo un¬ happy as to look upon it as a denial."— Ä No, indeed, you are not," faid Mr. Morney, warmly.—" You wiih to have time to make enquiries concerning me ; well»
well, be it So; I ihall be in anxious fufpenSe during the time my fate will be pending, but not through fear of your finding me a deceiver. But, Sir, may I not Speak to MiSs Morney all that time ?"—* c You are out again," faid Mr. Morney ; " I enquired about you enough when in London, and the reSult was always to your credit." * e Myr good Sir," Said Seymour, very earncStly, " what can I inSer, but that you wifli to amuSe yourSelS with my un¬ certainty. Ah ! iS you could but know the agitation oS my Soul, you would here end it." " I would, if I could with precifion ; but indeed, Seymour, you muft wait a day
day or two ; nor are you the only per¬ fon that will feel agitated during the time I mention. Diflike to you will not be a caufe, however ; for to deal fin- cérely, I regard you highly, but cannot give any farther proof than my words at prefent, perhaps not ever : fo endeavour to reft contented in uncertainty only two days." * Seymour could not but think that Mn Morney's looks implied encourage¬ ment, which enabled him to promife that he would endeavour \ aSter which he bowed and withdrew. In vain did he try to gueSs at any cauSe exifting now, that nevertheless would in two days al¬ ter So, as to put it in Mr. Morney's power then, and not till then, to give a definitive anSwer. MiSs
MiSs Morney only appeared at meals, and then much dejected, unleSs Sey¬ mour's conversation interefted her in what Avas paffing; flie had received an impreS- fion not eafy to ihake off, nor could flie contemplate Avith pleafiire the idea oS be¬ coming Grey's wife» though with little hope of aA 7 oiding it. She judged it ne¬ cefiary to behave with reftraint to Sey¬ mour, and this added to her diftreSs. Her brothers Saw that diftreSs, but conceived it aroSe Srom her concern Sor Grey. In this they Avere right, though from a dif¬ ferent caufe to what they conjectured. Young Mr. Morney thought proper to be in an ill humour, and his Sathc. waá thoughtSul, Avhile Edward, eA*er amiable and obliging, devoted his attention to their gueft. This Seymour would gladly vol. hi. G h^e
have difpenfed with, his mind being en- groifed, and his feeling conftrained, by the peculiarity of his fituation. After he had retired, MiSs Morney enquired where he was to fleep, and Selt much SatisSaction in heing told that the haunted chamber was fhut up, convinced therefirom that her Sather had more rea¬ fons for fo doing than merely to prevent her from being frightened in future. The tAvo young men obferved with Sur¬ prize their Sather's filence on a Subject whereon he uSed to be So peremptory. Charles jocularly Said, that he SuppoSed his father had been vifited by the ghoft. Mr. Morney only replied, that people ought not to be decided upon a Subject fo much beyond their comprehenfion. " I believe,
" I believe, Sir," faid Charles, " that the whole originates in fome of the foot¬ men's vifiting the maids in a white íheet."—" Good brother," replied Mifs Morney, " do not talk fo."' He laughed heartily, and even Edward fmiled. This, in fome degree, tends to proves Hobbes's hypothefis, that laughter proceeds from a fudden fenfe of our OAvn fuperiority to whate\ r er is at the time done or related. Thus thefe young men thought themfelves Avifer than their fa¬ ther. But he knew how to command their refpect, and by a ferious deportment filenced their profane mirth. Mr. Morney retired to his apartment, and Mary, at her own requeft, occupied G 2 a bed
a bed in the housekeeper's room, who flept in one adjoining. Moil oS the Sa¬ mily AAcre equally cautious oS not ileep¬ ing alone, as company/ not only gives Safety, but courage. However, nothing Supernatural Avas Seen at Morney that night, which the Servants thought partly r ovA'ing to the arrival oS a ParSon—" Be¬ cauSe," obferved the houSekecper, "theie ghofts are duced cunning, and knoAv very well hoAV foon a ParSon can Send them diving to the bottom oS the Red Sea, Avhich Mr. Sevmour could not Avell re- *■ SuSe to do, if Mr. Morney defired it.
CHAP,
CHAP. LIII. SUPPOSE that we have now collect¬ ed at the Parfonage the three Mr. Morneys, De Burgh, and young. Grey, and that all the forms of their reception have heen gone through with cordiality, except between Mr. Bolton and Grey, % not that it was the fault of the latter, as he, having a lineere A'cneration and re- ípect for his old tutor, fnatched hi» hand on his firft entrance, and prefied it affec¬ tionately, while a tear hung in his eye î but the Rector, regarding him fternly, G 3 dreAV
drew back his hand, and Said—" Mr. Grey, I only hold out my hand to Sriends —you are a SalSe one." Gre} r , who Selt extremely Sor the devastation grieS had made in the appearance oS Mr* Bolton, took the reproof^ though unmerited, in filence, and Sat down* Nobody, Sor Some time Seemed to know how to enter upon the .Subject which had „brought them to¬ gether, until the Rector, having taken a few minutes to collect himSelS, addreS- fed Grey in the following words : " Mr. Grey, would to Heaven that I might have been fpared this dreadful taik. This confronting of my child with fq diffionourable an accufer, nothing ihort of juftice would impel, or encou¬ rage me to go through with, but that requires
requires that íhe ihould be cleared from the obloquy you have thrown upon her. Poor loft girl, I thought her burthen of ihame and reproach Avas heavy enough, Avhen firit her fad condition was difco¬ vered ; but you have calumniated her in a manner that none but the molt aban¬ doned of her Sex could deServe. Young man, ihe had beSore the greateft ihare of the inSaray attached to your guilt, for our fex generally throAV the blame upon thofe leaft able to bear it ; you might, how¬ ever, have been íàtisfied to let her weep in peace over the faults ihe has commit¬ ted, nor thus rend her foul by charging her with crimes of fo bafe a nature.." - The good man attempted to fpeak with firmncfs, but he was unable to conceal his agitation. Grey wiihed he had him- G 4 felf
felf bore all the blame, rather than have thus diftreiîèd one he So much revered. Mr. Morney, and all preSent, teftified great emotions oS forrow, Avhich were ftill much heightened by the venerable parent introducing his daughter, Sollow¬ ed by her mottier* They both had hand- kexchieSs to their eyes when they entered the room» and ^liSs Bolton Sainted into the chair neareft Grey ; but he, inftead oS aiding the forrowSul girl, Itarted Srom her, on feeing her head incline towards him» and inftinctively as it Avere moved to the other end cf the room, Mr. Bolton attributed this to his conScioufheSs oShav- ing done wrong; and as Soon as her mo¬ ther, affifted by Mr. Morney, had reftor¬ ed her a little, he Said—" Daughter, I am not going to harrow your Seel ings Avith
with reflections on the looSe guard you held over, what women Should moft te- naciouily preServe— their virtue. Alas ! the humiliation to which you are re¬ duced, in vindication of your Same is a degradation Sufficient, the remembrance of which may prove an inftructive leftbn - Sor your conduct hereafter·—as, though^ you have once deviated Srom the paths oS virtue, I truft your heart is- not wholly contaminated by the impurity oS vice.—' You have been informed, unfortunate - girl, that Mr. Grey now declares^—Oh ! Mr. Morney, how can a father proceed ? Pray undertake my talk." Hé then feil* hack in his chair, and hid his face. " My dear MiSs Bolton," Said Mr. Morney, " as you know tbe allegation,, G 5 I will í
I will fpare the repetition—Can you con¬ vince Grey, that he alone has poflèflèd your affections, and is the father of your babe? Or, if otherwife, by a candid avowal, make amends for the mifappre- henfions Ave have laboured under?"— Here the Vicar groaned, as if in reproach of Mr. Morney's fuppofition. Mifs Bolton, with tears and fobs, re¬ plied, that Mr. Grey, in his own mind, muft be convinced of the truth of her al¬ legations, as to his being the father of the helplefs infant ; but, left he ihould now be doubtful of her affections, lhe protefted they were his as much as when he firft íèduced her from the path of duty. " What other proofs can I give," added íhe, " when the only witnefs of my
my error was my feducer, whofe oppor¬ tunities were but too frequent, from the manner in which we were brought up to* gether?—What more can I do to clear myfelf from the imputation, unlefs I take my oath ?'* " Take your oath!" faidGrey, "??? dare not, cannot."—"Dare not!" re¬ plied her father, raifing himfelÇ " who- fliall prevent her ?"—" She cannot/' ikid Grey, "human nature is not ib vile— Noj it is impoffible, infomuch, that I pledge myfelf to marry her the minute after." " Marry you! Mr. Grey," returned the father, " I hope not." Grey inftantly repented of his raffi fpeech, and conti- tinuecl in painful uncertainty aboÄ the refait. Mifs Bolton, turning to Mr; G ? Morney,.
Morney, faid, " Sir, you are a Juftice of the Peace, Τ requeft you will tender the oath."—" What!" faid Grey, " will you really be So wicked ? Confider the dread¬ ful confequenccs of a falfe oath. Is there any happinefs can recom pence you for fuch an enormity ?"—" Young gentle¬ man," feid Mr. Bolton, " my child ha& been taught her feveral duties before now ; nor is ihe a ftranger to thofe max¬ ims which come ivith So bad a grace from your lips. I neA r er kneAv her wil¬ fully utter an untruth, nor is it now to be Suppofed ihe would raihly commit per¬ jury."—"MiSs Bolton," Said De Bnrgh, " you are a little fluttered—Would ? it not be better to taie a fliort time to col¬ lect yourSelS?"—To Avhich fhç replied,. , tt The truth, Sir» will not be ajtered -by time:
time : I am in my SenSes, and know what I alledge. Mr. Morney, I am ready." The book was Sent Sor r to· the great confternation öS De Burgh and anguiih of Grey. He Smote his breaft in the ut¬ moft agony, his eyes rolled, and he could' Scarcely breathe. Mr. Morney knew not. how to proceed ; Something told him— " Grey is Avronged." His filter's words rung in his ears ; yet could he, or ought he, Srom his own conception, to reSuSe the only means by which MiSs Bolton could render herfelS juftice. The younger Morneys Seemed aStonifhed, particularly Charles, who was as anxious as Grey. When- the book was produced, Mr. Morney SaicTto MiSs Boltoji—*i" I am. now
134 MOKE GHOSTS. now going to fulfil that part of my func¬ tion to which too common refort is hadi But fince you require it, I will repeat the tenor of the oath you are to take."— Here Mr. Morney explicitly Stated the form, folemnly declaring, that Grey alone was the father of her babe, and that ihe never had had improper converfation. with any other man*. " Give me the book," faid ihe.—"Oh, no," cried young Morney, " don-t fwear, Betfey, that will be too bad."—She drop¬ ped the book, and turned pale— u Not fwear!" faid ihe, "you do not fay fo ?" " Indeed I do," replied he, " you have gone too far already. Let us make it up fop you as well as we can ; you could not expect me to fee you thus ferioufly in¬ jure V -*
jure another without preventing it."— "Ah! perfidious Charles!" cried ihe, burfting with reSentment, " my betrayer every way^—May diiappointment light upon your curSed head!" So Saying, ihe ruihed out oS the room, Sollowed by her mother, no leSs angry than herielS, while Mr. Bolton, with uplifted hands and eyes, prayed for patience under his calamities, and Avithdrew, covered with ihame, and funk with forrow. Grey, fpeechlefs with ecftaiy, threw his arms round Charles Morney, and prefled him to his bofom. De Burgh was glad in having his fon's innocence eflabliihed before his friends, and Mr. Morney at¬ tempted to congratulate him, but felt im¬ peded by his grief for Mr. Bolton's fuf¬ ferings,
ferings, and Sorrow to find his own Son implicated in MiSs Bolton's tranSgreS- fions. "Charles/' Said he, " I fed acutely Sor your ingratitude to my Sriend. Could you find no other object oS ruin than your young unSuSpecling play Sel low, your filter's companion, and my gueft. Oh, Charles, do I live to See my Son the in- dülger oS his paffions to the deftruction of our peace !" " Sir," replied Charles, " I acknow¬ ledge the juftneSs of your anger» and Seel ihame accordingly. My great regret is^ .that I fhould.be the inftrument through - which your Avorthy and reSpectablc Sriend has received Such a wound ; but alloAv me to Say, Sir, that there was no Seduc¬ tion on my part. Heaven is my witneSs, that
that until the fatal moment, I never thought of Mifs Bolton in a SenSuafI light, more than I now do oS my grand¬ mother." " Take care, Charles," Said Mr. Mor¬ ney, " how you endeavour to exonerate yourSelS at the expenee oS another." " Sir," Said Charles, " I will tell you the truth, and you ihall judge. Laft Summer, when I was at home Sor the va¬ cation, you may recollect that I had a flight Sever that confined me a few days» and rendered me afterwards rather lan¬ guid, which delayed my return to Col¬ lege, So that you Sometimes rode out accompanied only by my brother, while I remained w r ith the ladies, or elSe with- dreAV
drew with a book. One day I rambled into the little wood in the Park, reading that dangerous, infinuating, inflaming book, which is nevertheless put into the hand oS every boy, Ovids Art of Love. The more I read and dwelt upon it, the more my SenSes were allured, and I wiihed for an object to verify the ardours I experienced in theory, when Mifs Bol - ton herfelf called to me in a moft win¬ ning manner. I then beheld her fitting at the foot of a tree. She befbught me to fit by her, as my ftate of weaknefs would not admit of fatigue. I did fo, unfortunately. She too had been read¬ ing ; I fuppofe fomething as tender as Ovid ; for, I proteft, when I took hold of her hand, ihe prefied mine, and looked as if İhe bad divined the prefent ftate of ray
my thoughts. So, Sir, not meeting with any oppofition, the devil tempting, and opportunity Sair ---------Why, Sir, that's all. Only I muft add, that I was So much íhocked upon retrospection, that there it would have refted. I beg¬ ged BetSey's pardon, and vowed I would never repeat my audacious attempts ; though as to marrying her, which ihe urged vehemently, I flatly refufed, hav¬ ing feen a little too much of her difpo¬ fition. But I don't know how it was, ihe threAv herfelf in my way fo often, and had always fomething particular to íày, which * ufually ended in the breach of my vow, that I almoft forgot at laft having made one; until after I returned to College, a double portion of repen¬ tance was inflicted upon me, by a letter from
from her, with the unwelcome intelli¬ gence that ffie was pregnant, and im¬ ploring me to marry her, in order to· hide her ihame, and prevent her parents* knowledge of my cruelty to her. I re¬ commended to her to marry any one that might offer; promifing ncA'er to divulge her connection with me, nor to continue it,, and recommending to her more propriety and ftrictnefs in her fu¬ ture conduct, which in time might, in feme meafure, obliterate the paft. Her anSwer to me was, that fte had Sormed a plan, which ffie hoped would end in ma¬ trimony, conjuring me to keep my word hi regard to not betraying her, which I did fo long as conScience Avould allow. " On my return home upon quitting CoHe£e^Aidûch was. only^ three months from
from the time I have mentioned, I was furprized at hearing my father declare his intentions relative to giving my lifter in marriage to Grey, as a thing that had been refolved upon, but at prefent was undecided. I being fo little at home, had not before been informed thereof. " (C Now, Grey, I always liked you very well, but not as a man that I would be¬ llow my filter upon ; her beauty, merit and rank may challenge the beft match in the county : hut I know that when my Sather judges a thing proper, he will go on with it ; and I Saw that becauSe Mary had never Seen any other decent young man, and that you had been brought up together, and both oS good tempers, &c. I Saw that all theSe things combinjd
combined to make her Sancy herSelS in love with you. So that Avhen I became the confidant oS MiSs Bolton's Scheme upon you, (which AA r as not until the morning when I Sound you both toge¬ ther) I was not forry to have it produce the effect oS Separating you Srom my fiS- ter. But I always told MiSs Bolton that I could not allow of your being fo far her dupe as to marry her. I imagine that as the alternative feems to be between her and Mary, ihe thought I might ftill wink at her contrivances. She has of¬ ten reprefented to me, that your acquittal muft prove my condemnation ; and that you, father, who Avere So irritated with Grey on her account, Avould think your¬ SelS bound to be next to implacable to¬ wards me. I am aSraid I ihould have deSerred
deferred my explanation, had ihe not proceeded to fuch dreadful expedients." " Charles," faid Mr. Morney, " your behaviour is in my fight fo culpable, that I requeft you will not appear before me, until fuch time as I may be able to fea you Avith lefs indignation than at pre¬ fent. Your greateft crime is the con¬ niving as you did, by your concealment of the truth, at the injury done to an in¬ nocent perSon. What right had you to interSere in my plans Sor the diSpoSal of my daughter, by any means ; much more by fuch as you have thought fit to purfue ?" Mr* de Burgh and Grey joined Ed- Avard in intreaties in favour of young Morney ; but his father was inflexible. "For
Cí For you, my lad," Said Mr. Morney ' to Grey, " I hope to See you on the Sor- mer Sooting at my houSe, as Soon as De Burgh can Spare you. Molly was very angry with you, but we muft become friends again." Tom exprefled his gratitude in the warmeft terms ; and indeed was almoft out oS his wits with joy at the happy pro¬ spect that again opened to his view, in¬ stead oS the threatened burden oS an abandoned wiSe, and an inSant not his own. Charles, perceiving that affairs were not likely to turn in his Savour, took an abrupt leave ; and Mr. Morney called a fervant, to enquire about the Samily, who
who informed him that Mr. Bolton had (hut himfelf up to indulge in forrow; and that Mrs. Bolton was in the greateft rage with her daughter, who was pack¬ ing up every thing belonging to her, in order to bid a long adieu to the Vicar¬ age. The gentlemen thinking it would be improper at prefent to remain at a houfe where the appearance of fome of the party might be deemed an infult, agreed to go to the Abbey.
vot. ?. H CHAP.
MORE GHOSTS.
CHAP. LIV* MR, Morney was very thoughtful as they proceeded to the Abbey, whieh was miftaken by every one Sor rçgret at being obliged to refent the conduct oS his eldeft Son. It might have been So, had that been the worft event he had to think of; but it was a trifle in comparifon of the mortification that was occafioned bjr the reflection» that he now muß refufe hk daughter to a man fo de¬ ferving of her, to give her to one who was not his equal either in manners or abilities^ Being
Being arrived at Morney, his firft care was to prepare Mife Morney to receive Grey as a man who muft be her huS- band, by relating the circumftances of the laft chapter.—" And you know, my dear Molly," faid he, " fuch was my in¬ tention» before that fad girl induced u# both to have a bad opinion of the poor lad, which, as it proves to be falfe, we áre doubly bound to make him all the recompence in our power ; and I dare fay, Molly, you will be very glad to be on your old footing with him ; becaufe you know how melancholy you were upon his firft leaving the Abbey ; and again, how you grieved when Mifs Bolton alarmed us* all fo much about him." H a « Why,
" Why, yes, my dear father," faid Mifs Morney, " I am very happy to hear that Mr. Grey is innocent of fuch heinous crimes ; but if you pleafe, Sir, to remember that I then, for the firft moment in my life, found myfelf free, as I thought, from engagement, upon your own renouncing one you had made for me in childhood. Perhaps my inclina¬ tions may prevent my wiihing again to fetter myfelf; indeed, Sir, I wifh him all happinefs, and like him almoft as well as I ever did, but Seel agreat diflike to the thoughts oS wedlock." " But then, Molly, our honour is en¬ gaged ; Sor only SuppoSe that no miSun- derftanding had happened to occafion yourVapture with Grey, you would not hefitate
befitate to ratify your former engage¬ ments. We now find that he was in¬ jured, and ihall we take advantage of the Avrongs Ave have already been guilty of, as a pretence for adding worfe to them ? He had my word then, and your tacit confent ; So that I hope you will not re¬ fine to comply Avith his entreaties." " Dear Sather," Said MiSs Morney, is no allowance to be made for my want oS experience, my extreme youth, at the time you intended Mr. Grey Sor my huiband ? I had always Sound your commands So pleaSant, So judicious, that to object Avould have appeared to me an impoffibility ; was it a wonder that I ihould give mySelS up to your wifties ? but then, dear Sir, the caufe oS thoSe wifhes have been changed, and I looked H 3 around
around me, and find, that as a Sifter I can like him very much, but I ihould preSer a fingle life." " Molly," Said Mr. Morney, " did you not tell me that you had Seen a vi- fion the other night ?" " Lord bleSs me, Sir, yes, yes ! But what of that?" " Don't you think, that while we he¬ fitate about what is only juftice to Grey, we may be likely to See that vifion again ?" " Then, my father, you think Heaven points in favour of Grey. Well, then be it fo—I muft comply."
Mr.
Mr. Momey embraced his good girl, as he called her, and led her into the par¬ lour, Avhere all Avere aflembled, with the addition of Seymour, who did not feel much delighted at the animated manner ivith Avhich Grey addrefled Mifs Mor¬ ney; but it was Mifs Morney herfelf he watched moil clofely, and it Avas a cor¬ dial to his heart (fo ill-natured does loA r e make eA r en a good man) to obferve her conftrained looks and manner towards Grey, and that all her ftolen glances were directed to himfelf; and that Avhen Grey feveral times thought he was on the point of obtaining an opportunity for a little private converfation with her, fhe found fome means to elude it. Mr. Morney SaAv all this, and fighed at the reflection of Avhatpain he would be ob- H 4 liged
liged to inflict upon Seymour, who Avas abforbed in watching every motion and look of Mifs Morney. " In what words," thought the good gentleman, " ffiall I convey fuch bad news to him ? But he will not need my preparing him for it, as he will find ihortly that another has obtained the prize." Upon this laft idea Mr. Morney determined not to open the fubject with Seymour, but fpare himfelf, if poffible, the grief of immediately in¬ flicting pain to a worthy heart. The day palled at Morney as might be expected ; every body had an idea that they ought to be A r ery happy upon a joyful occafion ; and as, from various caufes, not above one or two were really fo, what they wanted in happinefs, they endeavoured
endeavoured to make up in mirth ; ib Mr. Morney ordered his Servants to re¬ gale their Sriends. He himSelf, after dinner, puíhed about the bottle and cracked jokes, at which every body, as in duty bound, laughed. Mr. de Burgh Avas happy enough ; but Grey, who at firft was burfting with joy, felt damped at MiSs Morney's behaviour, yet would , conceal Srom himSelS that he had any reaSon, Avifhing rather to attribute her coldneSs to an air oS dignity that ihe had acquired in London. As Sor the others, Seymour and MiSs Morney, the reader may imagine their fituation was not the molt pleaSant the world could afford; Seymour endeavoured tojóin with chear¬ Sul neSs in all Mr. Morney's fprightli- neSs, Avhich appeared to him genuine. H 5 He
He felt a great curiofity to learn who Grey was» to whom the whole family ihewed fuch marks of diítinélion. Mr. Morney, took an opportunity of giving him the outlines of the ftory, only fup- preffing the mention of Mifs Morney throughout. This very naturally turned the converfation upon MiSs Bolton ; Avhen Mr. Morney Said it aftoniíhed him that ihe ihould be So bad, or even bad at all, aSter the virtuous education ihe had received, and confidering the manners of thofe ihe aftociated with ; " For," added he, " I believe that none ©f us fet her any \ r ery bad examples." " Sir," faid EdAvard, ** I have often tøeard, and I think this a cafe in point, that allowing girls to read the Bible is a very
a very bad thing, as it teaches them the knowledge of vices that a young woman cannot be acquainted with and be called innocent." " Why," faid Mr. de Burgh, " I have been ihocked to hear my daughter read from the Bible things that otherwife ihe could not arrive at a knoAvledge of. When ihe was twelve years old, ihe aiked me how Sechem raviihed Dinah ; to íày nothing* of Potiphar's wife, David and Uriah ; Solomon's Song I think a great deal too warm a compofition to be put into the hands of a young perfon." " I imagine, gentlemen," faid Mr. Seymour, fmiling, " that your prefent converfation was begun through confi- H ? deration
deration for me, left I ihould not be able to join upon any other fubject than the Bible, which I muft neverthelefs take upon me to defend. I aver that it can never introduce vice into an innocent mind, as Mifs de Burgh's queftion to her father İs even one proof of. When¬ ever vice is mentioned, it is in terms of abhorrence or denunciation, without any of thoie intoxicating defcriptions to be met with in every other hiftory that treats of it. Is there any thing likely to allure a virtuous girl to imitate Poti- phar's wife, Dinah, or Bathiheba ? Does nót the ftory of -Tamar naturally make them dread incurring the fame danger ? The Song of Solomon, I need not Say in this company, is to be taken in an alle¬ gorical view ; but Setting afide the alle¬ gory,
gory, and Suppofing it a conjugal love poem, Surely that cannot corrupt inno¬ cence. It is not any part of the Bible can do that, unlefs to a perfon previ¬ oufly vitiated by Ioofe converfation or improper reading. Nor do I recollect that any one ever alledged that the Bible promotes robbery or murder, though fuch crimes are mentioned, forbidden and deprecated. Did any revengeful man quote Cain as an enticing example ? yet, methinks, it is related in as glowing colours as the frailty of Potiphar's wife. But I believe that many people now wiih to take the Bible out of female hands, merely as they find it Supplies them with arguments that all the fophiftry of the fãíhionable philofophers cannot re¬ fute. But they mult firft prove either that
^hat our grandmothers did not read the Bible, or that reading it, they were all corrupt and bad." " Well," Said Mr. Morney, " I be¬ lieve we muft continue the Bible, Sey¬ mour, until Tom Paine, or Some "other theologian, preSents us with Something better." " Which, my dear Sir," replied Sey¬ mour, " will be a labour not poffible Sor man to accomplifh ; Sor what Subftitute will he find Sor thoSe virtues inculcated in the Bible, that will make amends Sor the alteration ? Will atheiSm prevent crimes like religion ? Will licenciouf* nefs afford us the fame happinefs that we feel when fulfilling our various du¬ ties ?
ties ? Or when will they invent any thing equal to that univerfal charity which was firft inculcated by our holy religion ?" Here my daughter (who fays that íhe acts the part of Moliere's old woman) ftopped me—" Lord, father," lays ihe, " what are you about ? You might as Avell tranfcribe into your book the fer* mon Mr* Seymour preached laft Chrift- mas-day twelvemonth. Sure you will not write down all the fpeeehçs that were made about the Bible ; it will fuf- fice to fay, that Mr. Seymour defended it to the conviction of his auditors : or indeed I don't fee why it may not be entirely left out ; what has the Bible to do Avith " More Ghofts," excepting only the
the Witch of Endor raifing up Samuel ? People don't like to have Serious Subjects obtruded upon them in a novel, becauSe they know that there is a ieaSon Sor every thing." While ihe fpoke thus I wiped my ípeétacles careSully, all the while confi¬ dering upon the Subject, and in - the end: coincided, that this not being a pro¬ per vehicle for religious Subjects, I had better print Mr. Seymour's Speeches in a penny pamphlet Separately, and proceed in this with mere narrative.
CHAP.
CHAP. LV. "? ÆORNEY was no longer Morney, -LT -?. With an outfide appearance of mirth, there was no real comfort or foci- ability. MiSä Morney ffiunned all pri¬ vate converfation with Grey, though he hunted her unceafingly, dreading the eclairciflfement that would enfuc, which might expoSe her to a fécond and more binding engagement Avith the poor for» Saken lover, though, at the Same time ffie lamented her own inconftancy. Sey¬ mour Sought Sor Mr. Morney's promiSed explanation, which the latter as cauti¬ oufly avoided, in hope that Some other perSon
perfon would reveal the fituation of the family, and fpare him ib difagreeable a taik. But Seymour's information was not of fo politive a nature as to preclude all hope, and was rather furprized at Mr. Morney's apparent irrefolution, and be¬ came impatient under his ftate of uncer¬ tainty. Some days after, Mr. Morney -having retired from the breakfait-room into his Study, he was followed by Sey- anour» who requefted to know his doom. Mr. Morney, collecting all his fortitude, dfeold ???, that though he was obliged to refufe him, it was not from a diflike to himfelf or his propoíàls, but becaufe Molly had been engaged from her in¬ fancy. Seymour felt as if electrified, tho' he endeavoured to hide his confufion ; hut in a ihort interval of reflection, think¬ ing
ing he was not treated with candour, the blood which had forfaken his cheeks now remounted in double tides—" Pardon my obferving, Sir," Said he to Mr. Mor¬ ney, " that if Mifs Morney has been fo long engaged, I ihould have been ap¬ prized of it fooner."—" Very true, in¬ deed, my dear friend," replied Mr. Mor¬ ney, " but I did not know with preci« fion how it was when you addrefled me on the fubjeél." " Not know your daughter's engage¬ ment, though of fuch a long date, Mr. Morney. Excufe me, Sir, but until now I never found any thing enigmatical in your character, but this unexpected turn has—"< --------" Not too fait, my good friend," faid Mr. Morney. " Do not give
give me likewife reafon to change my opinion of your character. I never be¬ fore íàw you raffi, or hafty in judgment. Only hear how I have been eircumftan- ced, and then pronounce." Mr. Morney, ivith great good-nature» drew his chair clofe by Seymour's» and let him entirely into the hiftory of Grey's birth, &c. not omitting the aftoniihing appearance of the fpirit, and dwelling upon its non-appearance for the laft .three nights as if it were fatisfied, fince Grey was reftored to his former fituation. « Do not you now acquit me," Said Mr, Morney, prefling Seymour by the hand, of all intention of deceiving you ?" ------ " Oh, Sir," replied Seymour, " I im¬ plore your pardon for my warmth of expreffionj
expreffion, but could I fo fuddenly lofe my hopes of Mifs Morney, and remain cool ?"—« Why no," faid Mr. Morney, " I flîould fuppofe not."—" But allow me to fay," rejoined Seymour, " that there has been fome deception ufed, tho* I cannot difcern Sor what particular pur¬ poSe, as at one time the ghoft was Sor Se¬ parating Grey, happy Grey ! Srom MiSs Morney, and yet is now a principal agent in uniting them. Where there is deception, Something is always wrong at bottom. I would wifh you to trace the reality of the apparition beSore you diS- poSe oSyour lovely daughter." w Why," r arr . Mr* Morney, « un¬ til very lately, I was oSyour opinion con¬ cerning Supernatural appearances, but I could
could not be deceived in my filters Kkenefs."— ¿ ζ Not eafily^ Sir, t agree," find Seymour, " but to ari artful perfon, What is impoffible ?~*My wifhes were prefumptuous ; and when at a diftance from Mifs Morney, I ihall endeavour to conquer them» except for her happinefs ; but I cannot leave her with her fate thus clouded with myitery, Avithout an at¬ tempt on my part to develope it. Only •v allow me to trace the apparition ; it can¬ not be founded in good" " How would you proceed ?" faid Mr. Morney.—" You have informed me, Sir, that the haunted room is locked up ; my opinion is, that you ihould have it thrown open, and prepared as if for your own reception. The fuppofed fpirit may want
Want fomething more, and, ae it is a convenient apartment, -appear again, for cunning people Sometimes, by oveav acting their devices betray them. My plan is to remain in the room all night.'* " I will keep you company," Said Mr» Morney, " Sor, to tell you the truth, I am not quite Satisfied in my own mind, though I almoft thought myfelf compel¬ led to believe—but my dream too was very applicable."—My dear Sir," fáid Seymour, it could hardly be otherwife» with the very ftrong impreflion left upon your fancy." Both the gentlemen agreed to watch» but Seymour was to be admitted pri¬ vately, as they chofe to keep all the reft of
of the family ignorant of any plot being laid to circumvent the ghoft, left it ihould tranfpire, and be, as the proverb fays— fore-warned^ fore-armed. It was given out that Mr. Morney, concluding his departed filter was fatis¬ fied, and at peace, would of courfe give up the apartment, which would be want¬ ed, as he propofed enlarging the fociety at the Abbey ; but not wifhing to pro¬ pofe a difagreeable thing to any other perfon, he would be the firft to expe¬ rience the quiet of the haunted cham¬ ber ; fo fires were lighted, and the bed prepared. The houfekeeper, the butler, and the reft of the fervants» were all forry to find their mafter fo daring. The houfekeeper faid, " that lhe thought Mr. Seymour
Seymour might have offered to lay the ghoft in the Red Sea, being a Sriend. But the butler more Sagacioufly observ¬ ed, that though Sormerly that uSed to be the bufineSs oS ParSons, they could not go through it noAv; Sor that Parions, now-a-diys Avere no more in the fight of a ghoft than other men. " Nor, no won¬ der/' added he, " for only ice how they dreSs and Speak—not a word of Latin ever comes out of their mouths."------ " Ah !" continued the houfekeeper, " La¬ tin is the tongue thr mailers all evil fDirits!"
voi., πι. I CHAP.
ΟΗλΡ. LVI. MISS MORNEY, in fpite of her ftruggles to the contrary, found her admiration of Seymour daily increaSe. But now his conversation, heretoSore im¬ proving and agreeable, took a turn of fadneSs, which pierced her to the heart ; her repugnance to marry Grey oS courSe did not diminish, and he began to SuS- pect that her conftancy, which he had built upon in idea, was ihaken, but he could not fufpect Seymour to be the caufe oS İt, Sor Miís Morney contented herSelSto hear his conversation without joining in it ; nor would flie now truft her
lier eyes to look at him, making it a point oS duty to act as becoming the deftined wiSe oS,another. She inwardly dreaded Seymour's departure, though flie expect¬ ed it would Soon take place, thinkLg that when he leSt the Abbey, ihe ihould find it lefs difficult to receive the affi¬ duities oS Grey. Seymour was no leSs unhappy. He loved MiSs Morney fin- cerely, nor could he believe but She re¬ turned it. Mr. Morney hinted at tiieir morning conSerence, that had he made his propoSals earlier they might have been fucceSsfiil, and, in Sact, tint he had loft her through his own timidity. Sey-^ mour's Suspicions refpecting the appari¬ tion glanced towards Grey, and he trem¬ bled left MiSs Mornev ihould become •r the prize oSthe impofture, though nota 12 word
word oS the Sort eScaped his lips. Let the reSult be as it might, his hopes were crufhed ; he had no Selfifh views, no end but to ferve his Sriend, and his beloved Mary. At the bottom, however, it is probable, he might have a latent hope oS fome circumftance coming to light, that would reflore to him the hope oS SucceSs in an event on which his worldly happi- neSs depended. At any rate, he deter¬ mined to Spare no pains in the investiga¬ tion of the bufinefs, and with theSe thoughts in his head and heart, he repair¬ ed to Mr. Morney at eleven the Same night. . Mr. Morney lay down, and Seymour extinguiihed the candle, but would not undreSs himSelS. He Sat in an eaiy chair, clofe
cloSe to the bed, and converfed Sor fome time with Mr* Morney, Avho, ahvnys ac¬ cuftorned to early hours, and having ufed a great deal oS exercife in the courte oS the day, added to his not much expect¬ ing a vifit. firft drew drowSv, and next fell into a flumber, that Seymour would not diftjrb. So laying himSelf back in the chair, he delivered himSelf over to his own reflections, which were more di- ftreffing than diverting ; but fearce had he cloSed his eyes, when they were open¬ ed hy an aftoniihing appearance* All'at once he Saw a glare oS light proceed Srom the Avail oppofite to where he Sat, and a white figure with a black veil appeared, as iS come through the wainScot, but which Suddenly retreated, and as Sud¬ denly the light fled, and all was Solemn I 3 darknefs.
darkneSs. Seymour gently jogged Mr> Morney, and ruihed to the door, but without noiSe ; there while groping for the lock, he heard a Avhifpering in the next room, which encouraged him to proceed* At length the door was open, and he plainly faw the la4y in Avhite robes, who would have fwiftly eScaped had he not caught hold oS them. Her ftruggles were fo violent, that he would have found it difficult to detain her, had not Mr. Morney joined him in his robe de chambre, and feized her ihoulder* She then threw up her veil, and turning fud¬ denly towards Mr. Morney, almoft trans¬ fixed him Avith a look; he quitted his hold, and gazed for a moment before he could utter— " In the name of Heaven, who, and Avhat are you ?"— " Do not thefe features
features tell you avJio I am îî* returnf d ihe Spectre. " Have you baniihed all recollection of a filler, whofe wealth is in your poffeflion, and who is now re¬ duced to ikulk about her own houl£ fince you are mafter of it ?" Hoav can you be my filter?" ikid Mr. Morney. Did not ihe die in Vienna ?* Did not her own deareft Sriend witneß it?—And yet, who elSe can you be?" " Yes, brother," replied ihe, ** regard me well ; though my beauty has leSt me» I knoAv my Seatures are too remarkable not to ftrike you. But w r hy ihould you doubt, or I affért ?—I do not make any * claims, nor did I mean to diScover my*· fclf. Convinced that the only being I I 4 AVIS-
was anxious about in this world was fafe under your care, I did not mean to di¬ ffract my thoughts by recurring to earth¬ ly affedtions. To Heaven I am devoted, all my love is fixed there, and all my de- fires, in regard to this life, are to make atonement by a religious life, and works oS Supererogation, for my pail crimes; therefore now depart in peace, and be affured I will not difturb thee; Suffer me only to regain my afylum." To hear his filter Speak So^ devoutly, furprized Mr. Morney as much as her appearance had done, but when a little recovered, he Said— u My dear filter is not, ought not every room in this houfe to be an afy lum to you ?—But iS your devotion has gained Such an aScendancy over
over every thing belonging to this Avorld, yet deign to reflect, that the Author oS all our duties has allotted Some that are Sublunary. Is there nothing due to me —nothing to your Son ?"—" Urge them not. I am a religi euf e öS La Trappe, and have renounced all. Now let mc depart." " No, finer," Said Mr. Morney, " I will accompany you, fince you chooSe to go ; Sor though I See you are my filler, and that there wants nothing to my in¬ ternal conviction, yet it is too wonderful a circumftance not to require elucida¬ tion. A Small degree oS reflection will tell you that it is necefiary to clear every thing, Sor the Sake. oS preventing a poffi¬ bility of Suture diffenfions. Your duty as a nun does not oblige you to rcSufe I 5 vour
your teftimony of fuch particulars as are proper to convince the world of your not being an impoftor ; befide that, I ihall be unhappy while in ignorance cf your fate. I muft know your afylum, and that you haA r e every thing proper for your fituation»"—" My fituation allows only of bare neceflaries, and them I know how to procure at your expenee—My afyhirn is under your roof—Seek no further." " Sifter/' Said Mr. Morney, " I am refolved to be admitted to it. Having discovered you, it is neceffary I ihould fix upon Some meaSures which are there¬ by rendered expedient. You know that Svlorney belongs to you."—" I likewiSe know," replied flie, " your intention oS bellowing
bellowing that and your daughter upon my Son—that Son So much neglected and wronged by me ; but I perform a parti¬ cular pennance for that error, which is rewarded by Heaven in making you a parent to him." " But you are not now a nun ; all your houfes are demolifhed, y ourfelves· ' diSperSed, and your vows Soreibty difiolv- ed."—" Can man," returned fhe, "dil- Solve vows made to Heaven ?—The Ca¬ tholic religion Says No ; but, perhaps, this gentleman," turning to Seymour r whoSc proSeffion ihe guefìèdat, "teaches a different doctrine." " Pardon me, Madam," Said he ; bow¬ ing, " I think that voluntary vows made L ? to,
to Heaven by a Sree agent, and where notbing bad rcSults, are inviolable ; not eA T en the Pope, in my opinion, can can¬ cel them ; but I think the fevereft of your orders does not forbid your con- verfing with your brother, or giving final directions in affairs that concern the wel¬ fare oS your Samily."—" No, Morney," Said ihe» " I muft Avithdraw ; you may íiccoinpany me, fince I have no alter¬ native but that, or converting with a man no way allied to me, and avIio is, befides, a heretic prieft." She then led the Avay, when crofling the lobby, they came to the room where Grey had accompanied MiSs Bolton on a former occafion. As they marched Silently through it, the wind glared the taper
taper in various directions ; Sometimes it was almoft extinguiihed, eSpecialiy when She opened a door that discovered a ftair- caSê, ivhich wound up a confiderable height. Mr. Morney exclaimed------ tr Good Heavens I where are you going ? How did you ever find your way here ?" ft This chamber has been long known lo me," Said She, entering into one which contained a bed, a chair, and table, and an earthen mug. " Now I wifh you to return ; it is my hour Sor prayer; I con- Sent to See you to-morrow."—Mr. Mor** ??? was going to expoftulate about her being So comSortlcSs, but flie pulled out her crucifix and beads, and Sailing on her knees, Said, " I fhall now pray until exhaufted nature compels me to repofe. Mr. Morney then leSt her, as fhe began her
her prayers with enthufiaftic fervor, not feeming to heed what her brother faid. Returning to the apartment he had fi> lately quitted, he found Seymour occu¬ pied in a fearch;, that kd to the diScovery of the private paffage by which Mrs. Wellers had entered into the bed-cham¬ ber ; it Avas a Aiding pannel, partly co¬ vered by a picture, but which Shut So eloSe» that un lefs the place had been in¬ dicated, as it Avas when fhe appeared with the taper, nobody would have liiSpected it. " But," Said Seymour, " there is another thing to be clifeovered. I am convinced there is another perfon con¬ cerned in this plot ; flie could not whiS- per alone ; befides, as I opened the door, I íàw the ikirtof a man's coat, who fled with
with Such Speed, as to prevent my being able ta discriminate him." " I do not SuSpect any evil defign, my Sriend," Said Mr. Morney; " thereSore Avill wait until my fifler ffiall inSorm me of the particulars relating to her unexpected appearance. I am more concerned at the manner in which ffie conducts herfelS. Gracious Heaven ! that human nature ffiould be So prone to rufh into extremes. My lifter, who Sormerly laughed at all religion now Seems to be bigotted to the moil Superftitious oS all communions. I conSeSs it will make me unhappy to have her perfift in living in mifery. And yet you told her that her voavs are to be kept inviolable."
" Sir,"
" Sir," Sud Mr. Seymour, " I imagine her vows extend not to any thing* relat¬ ing to her ban i fli ment Srom the convent, as that was' totally unSorcSeen ; I yet think they hold good in the chieS points, but there are ways of rendering her leSs Scrupulous, and one that may be agree¬ able to herSelS. I am acquainted witii a very Avorthy French prieft, Father du Cage ; he will, I doubt not, prevail on her to act reaSonably, yet religioufly, ac¬ cording to the opinion ihe has embraced ; your difficulties will hence be removed, and her fituation meliorated." " What a good thought !" Said Mr. Morney. Ah ! Seymour, with Such a Son- in-law I fliould never be at a lofs in any difficulty." Seymour Sighed deeply at this
this kind and unexpected effufion, and Mr. Morney Avas vexed at the implica¬ tion his words conveyed ; but alter an interval oS filence, he adviSed Seymour to take a little repoSe» and requefted he would not mention what had palled to eny of the family, as he wiihed to open the matter gradually to Grey. Seymour withdrew, but not So much Sor reft as reflection. He acquitted Grey of every thing, and felt contrition Sor hav¬ ing fufpected him. He Sound that Mifs Morney muft be his, but refigned his hopes Avith IcSs regret to a man whom he could no longer think guilty of artifice.
CHAP.
?*?«
CHAP* LVII. SEYMOUR could not quit the Ab¬ bey without taking leave, wbich bu¬ finefs he refolved to make as fliort as poffible ; at breakfaft time he, thereSore, inSormed Mr. Morney of his krtentron, aad that his horfes would be ready in the courfe of an hour· Grey was pleafed with the intellrgence until he faw the effects it produced on MiSs Morney^ which at once alarmed Mr. Morney's tendernefs and Grey's jealoitìy—" Arc you well, Molly?" Said lier Sather, look¬ ing earneftly at her. " No, Papa," Said íbe A infFectually attempting to laugh, " only
only I mean«—that is to fay^—nothing but my head," putting her hand to it, " you know we women have a thoufand whimfical complaints." Seymour's looks indicated he was nei¬ ther blind nor infenfibîe to her diibrder. Grey arofe and faid—" As Mils Morney was ill, it would be better to leave her as quiet as poffible." She gave him a look of difpleafure, but in a moment changed into one of confufion. Fearing her weak« nefs was but too vifible, ihe alio rofe in her turn, curtfied to Mr. Seymour, wiih¬ ed him a good journey, and retired. Mr. Morney was occupied in confidering whether he had belt proceed without Seymour's afliftance, as he alone knew of his filter's being alive, and yet he thought there,
there was no advice So good as that of this valuable friend ;— " But I fear," faid he to himfelf, " I muft let him go ; my daughter will betray her unfortunate af¬ fection ; Grey already frets ; and we fhall all be in a ftate of con fu lion, Alas î we muft Sometimes give up prefent cafe in hope of future happinefs. He may prepare Grey for the news of his mo¬ ther; and that may bring a good un¬ derftanding between thcml' Mr. Morney queftioned Mr. Seymour about Father du Cage ; who anfwered, that he had already written to him on the Subject, and only waited at Morney for the purpoSe oS introducing him· ? " I believe, Mr. Seymour," Said Grey, fercaftically, " that while MiSs Morney inhabits
inhabits the Abbey, you will have no ob¬ jection to delays."—" Do you think io» Mr. Grey ?" faid Mr. Seymour.—" How can I think otherwise ?"— u And what do you deduce from it, allowing your remark to be true?"— " Simply this, Mr. Seymour; that men of your cloth ought no more to fall in love with a lady who is engaged to another, than with one al¬ ready married."-·*-" I allow, Mr* Grey, the folly of it in every profeflion ; hut may not even a parfon love a beautiful girl, unknowing her engagements ? And does the colour of his coat enable him to conquer that attachment ; the firft mo¬ ment that he difcovers his raisSortune, can he do more than fly the beloved ob¬ ject, even when ihe appears more charm¬ ing than eyer ? Or is it expected that priefts
priefts only bear the femblance of men, but are hardened inwardly to the flinti- nefe of ftones, and pofîèls minds in¬ fenfibîe of any impreffion ?"— « I don't understand irony, Mr. Seymour," faid Grey.— iu What do you underfland ?" aiked Seymour. Mr. Morney interrupted their fpar- ring, by telling Grey that he thought him wrong in beginning a converfation on which he could not bear jefting, * ( You fee," faid he, " how unpleafant it might become were I not here ; Sor you both at this minute look as iS each had received injury. We need not," added he, " quarrel for want of a fubject of dif- courfe, for Seymour has found out the reál ghoft.; and you are more interefted than
than I could have thought poffible in the bufinefs." " The real ghoft, Sir !" faid Grey, aftonifhed, tr and me concerned ! How is this ? Good heavens, what is to be my fate at lalt ?" " Why," faid Mr. Morney, " your ftory, or rather your mother's, is an un¬ common one, and promifes to be more eventful than I could forefee ; when I wrote her hiftory, I did not SuppoSe her to be alive." " And was it So, Sir?"— « Certainly." —" And the Spirit has thus inSormed Mr. Seymour," returned Grey ; " but to what intent ?— " Spirit !" Said Mr. Morney ;
Morney ; " we did not Say So. Your mother is now alive» and in the houSe ?" " Dear Sir," Said Grey, " inStruct me how I am to take this news ; may I give the reins to my emotions, and cali it joy ? Tell me, dear Sir, is my poor mo¬ ther happy !" * c I understand the meaning oS your words," Said Mr. Morney, " and am in hopes that your mother has fo conduct¬ ed herSelf, as not to have her liSe deem¬ ed a misfortune to her Samily. Sey¬ mour, will you tell oS our discoveries laft night?" Seymour would have preSerred ano¬ ther employment; but not choofing to reSuSe
reSuSe Mr. Morney, he with cool civi¬ lity began the narration, and was So much affected with the pungency of Grey's emotions, that his anger Sor- fook him, and cordiality took its place. Grey begged to See his mother; but Mr. Morney reSuScd, until ihe Should be prepared tor it. " Now," Said Mr. Morney, « my dear friend, you are leaving the Abbey, but let it not be Sor long. I will not dispute about your going, you are thebeSt judge oSthe exigency of your own affairs." Mr. Morney ihook him affectionately by the hand, and withdrew to attend Mrs* Wellers. Poor Seymour never felt a more pain¬ ful Separation ; yet he could not refill a vol. ?. ? fly,
fly, lurking, concealed hope : but when the unwelcome adieu was pronounced, and he turned to quit the Abbey, his heart, indeed, Avas nigh rent in tAvain. He had Sorgot that he was to A\ r ait Sor Apple^—I mean Père du Cage (my daughter AATİtet» the French Avords in general, but is at preSent upon a vifit) until after he had mounted his horfe, and then, though he wifhed to return, he would not, left it might Still more alarm the jealous Seclings oS Grey ; So he rode floAvIy out oSthe court, bidding adieu to happineSs and the Abbey. Grey obServed him Srom a Avindow frequently turn his head to take a laft look, which no Avay tended to leffen the agitation of his feelings ; and it is im¬ poffible to fay what they might have amounted
amounted to, had not their current been divided So much that he could not dAvell long upon any Subject, not relative to his mother, whom he wiihed molt ardently to behold, but Avhich at that period did not Seem likely to take place, Sor Mrs. Weilers poiîtively rcfuSed to conSent to any thing that promiSed her So much pleafiire. She received Mr. Morney Avith the utmoft Solemnity of manner, refilling all his entreaties to occupy fuch accommodations as were her due ; but ffie, ever in extrañes, AAOuld not yield in the leaft ; the only anfwer ffie repeatedly gave was, " You went on extremely well while thinking me dead, SuppoSe me ib ftill, and act as heretofore."
? 2
CHAP.
CHAP. LVIII. T^ATHER du Cage arriyed, and -*- charmed every body by the mild- neSs and humility oShis demeanor. Mrs. Wjeliers was rejoiced when Mr. Mor¬ ney introduced him to her ; he had pre¬ vioufly informed him how much he wiihed his fifter to relax a little of her aufterity. As Mr. Morney was about to retire and leave them together, flic put a packet into his hands— " There, my brother," faid ihe, u is the remaining pages of my hiftory, Sufficient at ieaft to account Sor my re-appearance in a land I had renounced, a country I hate. I feek to perform every pennance that is poffible ;
poffible; AATİting that was one. Adieu, leave me." Mr. Morney haftened to his own apartment, and read as follows :— " How different are the. Sentiments that now infpire me, Srom thoSe that dictated to my pen while recounting my Sormer liSe ! How haughtily and loudly I then defended or extenuated my crimes ! How I now deteft them *! My breaft then, hardened in unbelieS, or ra¬ ther in ignorance, but burfting with various pallions, Sought only revenge, by throwing Srom mySelS all blame, in hopes oSattaching it to others ; and as I always thought any reafon good, however Su¬ tile, that tended to promote my own de- fires, So I concluded that they ought to. ? 3 be
be as decifive in the judgment of ano¬ ther. How altered now that I fee my guilt emblazoned in the molt glaring colours ! But I Shall neither dilate my own Sentiments, nor anticipate thoSe of others ; more eipecially as he to whom I addrefs myfelf is an heretic, and can¬ not enter into them. Yes, brother, you are moral, charitable, and zealous in what you mifcall religion ; but it were better to be lefs So, as every act oS your heretical worftiip is a crime, wprfe Sar than any I ever committed ; and yet / repent, while you perSevere in wick- cdneSs. " You know I was at Vienna with Letitia for fome time, and that there I wrote fo much of my hiftory as i thought proper to acquaint you with. Upon my firft
firft reaching that metropolis, I affumed the character of a widow—Alas ! I felt my SelS one; Sor I had totally loft De Burgh—Letitia paffèd Sor my lifter. My grieS was not Soon abated, and pride alone Saved me Srom becoming its vic¬ tim. Seconded by the perSuafions oS my Sriend, I was thence urged to court relieS in the haunts oS amufement and diffipation, and hide the corroding pangs oS Sorrow beneath the diíTèmbling Smile oŠ SatisSaction. I made no attempt to get into private circles, as I dared not apply to any oS the ladies oS my own country, then at Vienna, to in* troduce me, left their knowledge of my ftory ihould expofe. rne to their rejec¬ tion and Scorn, Avhich, however merited, I could not brook ; but whenever I ap¬ peared, I was Surrounded by men, who ? 4 were
were either ftruck by my beauty, or in¬ terefted by the lonely unconnected ap¬ pearance I made. " A Balle Pare Avas given at Court, to which I procured admiffion ; and there I met the Marquis de Blairan, who had fcen me in Paris frequently, and then paid me very particular attention ; but arthat »linie I was occupied with my love for De Burgh, and my care to pre¬ ferve his for mc ; fo that I attributed the Marquis's attentions merely to the fã¬ íhionable gallantry of his country. Yet I thought Sometimes there was more than common ardour in the Marquis, befides that his attention was uniSormly bellow¬ ed upon me alone. He was an agreeable man, and, what is Surprizing oS any man, but molt in a French nobleman, was confiant.
confiant. His words and actions all ex¬ prefled an unSeigned joy at meeting me, certainly not the leSs lineere Sor hearing oSmy widowhood, for he previoufly knew that there was no chance oS making me Swerve Srom my conjugal vow to De Burgh. I was pleafed with his marked and faithful attachment, and give him no dis¬ couragement, though at firft far Srom in¬ tending to proceed the lengths I did ; but one Step leads to another. From barely Suffering the Marquis to talk oS love, I became interefted in his tale, and then, my parlions again excited, I rea¬ soned, as Sormerly, in their deSence, that I was dcSerted by the huiband oSmy riper age, and abhorred him who had taken advantage of an indifcreet engagement, ? 5 which,
which, but Sor a legal evafion, muft have jbeen deemed invalid by the laws of the land. Should I then confider myfelf bound to either ?—^-What advantage would refult either to them or mySelS, whereas by a little management I might render the Marquis and myfelf happy, and So Sar Srom injuring any one, Avould releaSe thofe connected with me Srom their Sears for my Suture and anxiety Sor my preSent ftate. Letitia, ever flattering, accorded with my Sentiments, and we laid our plan together ; the firft part oS it was to draw large Sums oS money until I knew I had obtained as much as I could expect, without occafioning enquiries from you concerning my mode of liSe, which I dreaded, as they might derange all my fchemes. You thought I was re¬ velling in extravagan.ee, but, on the con¬ trary
trary, I had adopted a different mode from Avhat I firft purfued at Vienna. Bleffcd by the fociety of the Marquis, I readily refigned public amufements more than ever, dreading the being recogniz¬ ed by fome perfon ihat ihould knoiv my real fituation. I need not relate the progreSs oS our love ; he very Soon pro¬ poSed marriage, nor did I decline his of¬ fers, only I informed hini that my for¬ tune wouid be leffened confiderably fhould I accept of him, it not being an uncommon thing in England to leave tlie widow an annuity during widowhood only. As I had forefeen, the Marquis was not lefs arduous, nor lefs perSuafive. I had the happinefs oS Seeing mySelS lov¬ ed Sor mySelS only. Still I went on draw¬ ing money Srom you, being reSolved to fecure my SelS an independency, and ta¬ ri 6 citly
citly refign the reft Sor my child. I 1?? ? - ed him, but not So well as to give up the Marquis ; and ihould I keep him Avith me, my plan would be effectually over¬ turned, unleSs he too fliould be SuppoSed dead, and in that caSe he Avould loSe all hopes oS an inheritance, Avhich I imagin¬ ed he would be endoAved Avith by either De Burgh or Morney. Letitia Sound me AvaA r er in this regard more than Avas com¬ mon to my decided diSpofition. My own gratification would have been Se¬ cured by keeping him, and reporting his death to my relations, but his intereft pointed quite a different Avay, nor would it have prevailed had not Letitia urged, that the Marquis would probably be in- quifitive about the difpofal oS the Sortune öS De Burgh, and furmiSe extraordinary things,
things, iS he Sound that I had little and my 7 fon nothing, " To finifh my accumulations, I pre¬ vailed upon a merchant to draAv up an account oS various large Sums againft me, Avhich I authenticated r We did not Sor¬ get Some Small legacies to Servants, as you may recollect, befides an expenfive funeral, that I kneAv muft be paid as foon as recognized. You know hoAV Letitia returned to England to act her part in the farce, by gÌA T ing an account of my death. She wrote me an ample relation oSthe manner in Avhich you received it, and oS your kindneSs to my Son. Then, indeed, I Selt hope as it Avere upon a fo- lid Soundation. I fhould never be enquir¬ ed aSter ; iS Seen by any Sormer acquaint¬ ance, they would not be able to believe the
the evidence of their own SenSes ; So I ihould poffefs my huiband without any fear. To guard againft detection, I wrote to Letitia, defiring her, in the name oS our pall Sriendfhip to guard my Secret, and not to think oS writing to me, left by Some accident I ihould be betray¬ ed. I Sound mySelS, aSter clearing my few debts, worth ûx thouSand pounds ; with this I purehafed an annuity Srom a company oS Dutch merchants at the rate oS ten per cent. Being in good humour ät my Schemes Succeeding So happily, I no longer delayed fixing the day So much wifhed Sor by the Marquis. I only de¬ ferred the nuptials until we were out of Auftria ; and then, at an inn in a fmall town, by a prieft who, I believe, did not know the meaning of one word he Uttered, the marriage ceremony was per- ■Tnvrinprí
formed, and we proceeded to France, which kingdom I reSolved never to leave. Was I now happy you will aik, when I had Surmounted difficulties that would have been insurmountable to a grovelling mind, as I then called Such as Avere re¬ ftrained by motives oS religion and piety, and, befides, married to an amiable huf¬ band, endowed with rank and Sortune, Avho was ignorant oS my crimes and blind to my Sailings, Avho never SuSpected that I had previoufly wedded two men as amiable as himSelS, and who were both ftill living, Sor aught that I knew, and miserable through my ill conduct ; that my child, who I pcrSuaded him was dead, was pronounced illegitimate, and that, fliould I have any by him, a diScovery of my true fituation would involve them in the Same calamity ; that lalt considera¬ tion
tion Aveighcd more Avith me than any other; and notwithftanding the mea¬ sures I had taken with So much caution, I never appeared in public but with fear¬ ful ápprehenfion. I Avas with child three times, but the violence of my agitations, which were then always encreafed, occa¬ fioned miScarriages. This I always griev¬ ed at, as, notwithftanding the bitternefs of my reflections, I wiihed to bring chil¬ dren to the Marquis, hoping thereby to gain a more lafting intereft in his affec¬ tions ; but happinefs that is Sounded upon the conftancy of man is infecure, and none but Sools will have reliance on it. I was no Sool, thereSore never truly happy ; and in time I met with grounds Sufficient to convince me I had not erred in*judgment,
" The
__ * " The Marquis, who had loved me fo well and fo long, before marriage, grew lefs tender in his conduct in a very few months after; ftill, however, he liked me too well to throw off at once the appear¬ ance of love. Perhaps the impetuofity of my paffions might have partly occafioned the change, added to the haughtinefs with which I often Supported my opi¬ nions. You will eafily guefs that we had Avarm contentions at times, where one party Avas inflexible and the other not al¬ ways cool. But his brother, the Abbé dé Blairan, as often interpoSed, and his élo¬ quence, aided by our OAvn imvard con¬ viction as Srcquently reconciled us, until; at laft, I had reaSon to SuSpect the Mar¬ quis oS an intrigue Avith a young mar¬ ried Lady in the neighbourhood. My ruge en this diScovery was as violent as if Ihad
I had been the nioft exemplary of womm. No interpofition could foften me, the Marquis ^refufed to give his honour ne¬ ver to fee Madame de Lillieure, and ï would accept of no medium, but in a raih moment quitted his houfe, vowing never more to behold him. The Abbé* ^rvho was the belt oS men and affectionate oS brothers, was highly afflicted at our feparation, and whatever time his clerical duties would permit was fpent in exhor¬ tations either to the Marquis or me, to bring about an accommodation ; but the Marquis appeared, by his conduct, as if glad of the ftep I had taken, for he openly attached himfelf to Madame de Lilli¬ eure,. whofe huiband was tenderly be¬ loved by another married woman, and was thereSore pleaSed that Blairan's at¬ tentions to Madame were accepted. What
" What irritated me moft was the character of the woman, who was hardly one degree from an ideot, and had no¬ thing to recommend her but a pretty face, with a perpetual fmile upon it ; and when chance has thrown me in company with her, I have indignantly exclaimed, " Am I neglected for the fake of that fimpering fool ?" It, however, had one good effect, for in confequence oS Such a dereliction, Such a Sail in Sentiment, as De Blairan betrayed in leaving me Sor Madame de Lillieure, I entertained a moil Sovereign contempt Sor him. Would that I had ftopped there, though I may rather re¬ joice at my next error, as it has finally led me to Salvation. Yes, I will grieve Sor all my other fins, but when in tbe aa
s¿l of pennance for this, I flill thank fhe good angel that allowed me to fwerve, in order that I might find a guide to righteoufneis. The Abbé de Blairan Avas handfome, perfuafive, and amiable, tho' 1 had never thought him fo until after my feparation from his brother; but now all his energies were called forth, all his eloquence' difplayed ; inScnfibly híä countenance aflumed the moil be- fetching expreffion, and his fine eyes Would be fixed upon mine, to obServc the impreffion his words had made. OS- ten have I wifhed he had been my huS- band mftead of my brother : that idea once obtruded into my heart Avas not to be expelled. The longer I dAvelt upon it the more fervently I beAvailed the ob¬ ftacles betAveen us, and again I' bitterly curfed the laws of man* I reSolved to make
MORE GHOSTS.'
Kiake my SelS agreeable to him, to allume any form, wear any maik, until I ob¬ tained his heart, and then I trufted in my power to perSuade him to fly with me to Some remote country, where we might live and love in Security ; nor did I think it any way criminal, wicked and flighted as I was ; for I looked upon the Marquis as divorced from me by his own eonduct, and what was much more heinous, dis¬ regarded the vows oS celibacy made by the Abbe as merely a eußom to utter, ne¬ ver adhered to, having heard prophane people relate many Scandalous ftories to that effect ; and who can wonder that I, who had no reSpect Sor the Sacred law r s oS religion, ihould SearleSsly break through thoSe oS the world. Every word he ut¬ tered commanded my attention, and made a deep impreflion on my mind, though
though unintentionally on his part. In a ihort time the difference of my beha¬ viour was too vifible ; he became more referved in his manner, and lefs frequent in his> vifits* When I complained of his withdrawing what I called my only con- folation under his brother's cruelty, he would anfwer, that while he had hopes of reconciling us, he had fpared more time in hope of compaffing that point, than was confiftent with the faithful difcharge of his clerical duties; and thefe he muft now fulfil with double diligence, to atone for the duty wherein he had failed thro* his fruitlefs endeavours to reflore the tranquillity oS his Samily, but that he ihould be ever happily employed in ren¬ dering meany efiential Servios.— fí Then beftow upon me," ibid I, u as much of jour converfation as I have of late been accuftorned
accuftorned to, left that IoSs, added to my other misSortunes, ihould make me, def¬ perate."—" What mean you, my filter?" íàid he, regarding me Avith a calm dig¬ nity that made me ikrink, and prevented my explaining myfelf " IS you want a Spiritual director, I am at your Service, though I had rather you v/ould permit mc to recommend another, left you might Sometimes think me biaflèd by brotherly affection."—" Another, oh, HeaA r cns !" Said I, " IS ever I conSent to hear a w r ord about religion, it muft be Srom you, Avho can make any Subject delightSul."—"Sif¬ ter," replied he, " then mark my condi¬ tions, Avhich iSyou break through, I Shall renounce my new office. Regard me as your Spiritual guide, and refpect me only Sor the Sake oS that holy character ; and in your Suture conduct Sorget not you are
are rhy brother's wife, and that being Se¬ parate from him does not give you a lati¬ tude for your conduct, but rather enjoins a nicer circumfpeclion than was neceflàry while immediately under his eye." *** Unable to make better terms, I com¬ plied with thefe, in hope of gaining his heart by my docility, and fecuring it by my other attractions. He fpoke to me of religion, concluding I had been an he¬ retic, and was charmed to find me only an infidel, and therefore probably not So obftinate in error. Yet I muft conSeSs, that nothing leSs than my finSul paffion would ever have conquered my reluc¬ tance to attend to a Subject that I had always taken pains to deSpiSe, and, never¬ theless, inwardly dreaded, left it ihould be that which priefts and pious people Seemed
feemed to believe—if fo, what was my cafe ?~Yet I was obliged to hear, and even take pains to underfland, left a dif¬ ferent behaviour fhould offend the Abbe, and not fuppofing I fhould ever be alter¬ ed, weakly imagining my principles were immoveable. Holy Virgin ! how foon wm I ftartled at his affecting representations, and with what difficulty did I harden my heart againft conviction, whilft outwardly I gave him the faireft profpects of my converfion. I often aflailcd his heart by looks, fighs, and tender prefliires of the hand ; but he repulfed me with fo much iteadinefs, yet without harfhnefs, that I could neither win him nor hate him; and the only way he took to ihew me that he perceived my drift was by an added fer¬ vour in his pious difcourSes, which at laft Softened me into that ftate of mind he vol. ?. L had
had So long wiihed Sor, and Srom that time I became penitent. At the Soot oS his eonSeffional I revealed all my tranS- greffions ; he learnt with horror that there Avere three men, in all probability living*, to whom I had been married, each one at the time believing me to be a fingle woman. He infilled upon my divulging that circumftance to the Marquis, as he Said it Avas not juft that he fliould ima¬ gine himSelf Settered to a woman who could not be his AviSe. I at ñr{i hefitated in acquieScing to this demand ; but his arguments and my conviction groAving every day Stronger, I reSolved to retire to a convent, under the name oS Morney, as I could never be discovered by it, my friends concluding me dead, and give my SelS up to religion Avith that ardour which had beSore been So differently di¬ rected.
refted. The Abbé approved of my refo¬ lution, and recommended me to one in Normandy, where, after paffing my no¬ viciate, I might by his intereft obtain a difpenfiition Sor taking the veil, which would be neceflàry as I was a married woman. I defired no more, for I could not be happy or rcSpectable in any part oSthe world. I could not return to my Sriends, aSter difgracing them, f ? I re¬ nounced all Soi Heaven. I Sound the AbbeSs a truly good woman, exemplary in her conduct and Servent in her devo¬ tion. The Abbé vifited me Sometimes, and Strengthened my mind even to ex¬ altation, but itili a too tender Sriendfhip cxiited Sor him in my heart; and when he came to take leave øf me the day be¬ fore I took the veil» as from that period the Confeflbr of the convent became my L 2 director,
director, I burft into tears and fainted; ?? did not leave me until I recovered, and then, in a pathetic manner, acknow* ledged his having long perceived my love for him. He applauded me for the facri* fice I had made of fo violent and ill- placed a paffion, and thanked me for the delicacy with which I had fpared him the pain he muft have felt in being obliged to notice it; he faid he had no doubt but my prefent virtuous refolutions would be crowned Avith happmeíš, and that after a life fpent in worldly trouble and anxiety, I ihould feel the blefiednefs ofthat peace which upon earth is only to be found in a convent. His laft advice I have treafur- ed in my heart to this day ; it was ac¬ companied with his benediction, and at length he leSt me. I took the veil, and found a refuge from my forrows in prac- tifing
tiling the aufterities of our order, and never-ceafing devotions, for I felt that if Ì allowed my SelS to fläcken in thoSe pious duties, that my heart was not inacceffible to thoSe Seelings I now only Sought to fubdue, but which were in a manner ha¬ bitual to me from former indulgence.-^ The Abbefs was really a mother to ua all* and took particular notice of my re¬ gular courfe of piety, often pointing me øut as an example to fome of my filters, who having* perhaps, lefs to repent of, were more indolent in their devotions ; at leaft I ¿¡farmed their envy by urging that plea for them. Indeed, I became the molt meek of all the nuns, never at» lowing myfelf to refent any little fpiteful word, or ill turn, that will fometiroea happen even amongft nuns. Every time I felt my φχη? rifing, I encreafed my L 3 efforts
efforts to Subdue it, and nevrer Sailed ob¬ taining ,a victory. Indeed, they were all· indifferent to me ; perhaps, had I Sound an object among the fifterhood, either oS love or hatred, I might not thus have tri¬ umphed over mySehY but Avhat was there interefting to me in their conversation t L „who had read, and Seen the 'world, could not but feel the deficiencies of my compaiiions* In general, the education pfi a Frenchwoman is fuperficial, but calculatedto*make them attractive, and eve&tûgive them the appearance of more fplidjendòwments ; but thefe nuns had not Such advantages, and their ideas of the'world refembled thofe imbibcdVby children concerning foreign lands; but, nevertheless, I had reaSon to be thankSul fere the afylum· I found amongft them; I was thankful, and had no other wiih for \ - ., this
■ ? this world, but that of fpending my life there, which could Scarcely be called a wijh, as a doubt did not exift to the con¬ trary. I Sometimes thought of my fa¬ mily, and put up many prayers that my fon might be Converted to thé Catholic Church ; but that I feared was too much to hope for,· confidering what obflinate heretics the Engliih are. Thus paflèd many years. But now, the Revolution of France has rendered me, and thoiifands of others, wretched, depriving us of our religious aiylum^ and dooming us to wander over a world to which we are fo much eftranged, that mixing in it feeme almoft a profanation. I am affiired of ilici ter, and of bread— but how many of my unfortunate lifters periih for want of necefîàrieSj yet know not hoAV to aik for them?—I know not the hiftory or ih- L 4 trigues
trigues of the Great World, iavmgas they have fallen upon our biefled Co¬ venant. Our Confeflbr, indeed, told us of terrible commotions, and feveral atro¬ cities committed in Paris ; but we hoped fuch violent acts would foon end, and not reach us. Latterly he told us, that fuch a fpirit of impiety had gone forth» that the National Affembly were delibe¬ rating about feizing the property of the Church, and aboliíhing tytheá. fí If tbey.are allowed to carry thefe points," faid he, " your endowments will go, as they bave long fince, in England, to pro¬ filane purpofes/' Still, as we were at a diftance, we hoped the danger would not reach us, and our prayers for the King 4ud Church were ceafelefs. One day we agreed upon having a religious proceffion, in order to imprefs religious ideas
ideas on the minds of the people, and accordingly, collecting all our facred relics, and ourfelves arrayed in mourn¬ ing, we marched from our convent, pro- poling to go to one about three mile» diftant. I carried Some of the hair of St. Peter's beard, another followed with a finger of St. Anne, and a third had a bit of the biefled napkin ; but I need not enumerate thefe precious things to you, who defpife them. Suffice it to fay, that we carried out pur whole ftock of relics, which was not inferior to that of any convent in the province : but, alas t the people's hearts were hardened, as a puniíhment, no doubt, for the wicked- neis of their representatives, and we were fhocked to fee. them omit their wonted genuflexions ; nay, they even flared at us with their hats on. » Holy Mary I" L 5 fáid
2£? MORB GHOSTS. faid the Abbeis, " is this the treatment nuns and relics meet in a Chriftian coun¬ try r" We ftopped, and were thunder- ftruck. One of us propofed a prayer, which being approved of by the Abbeís, we knelt down before our relics, and prayed devoutly for thefe poor, blind wretches ; arid, indeed» I muft own that they feemed as if they were affected, but did noHÍare to betray themfelves, and were flinking away, one by one, as if to efcape obfervation, when, on a fudden, feveral men (two of whom, I have fince been informed, were Commiflàries from the Convention) ran through the ftreet like madmen, crying out, "Aux armes Ci¬ toyens, aux armes —The Engliih are near us, tbey burn your hotifes, they ràvifh your wives, your daughters, they murder our bretbren—^Oh! the Engliih!"— Such
Such a fcene as I then faw, no Poet ever imagined ; the men with an impetuous rage burft into the houfes, and féized whatever they could find to arm them¬ felves with ; the women ran from their homes like furies, yet not knoAving where to be more fecure ; fome with children in their arms, and others in a ftate of di¬ ftraction, whofe frightful yells, accom¬ panied by the cries of numberleSs infants, added to the horror oS the Scene; Some, quite exhaufted, laid down their belpleSs* babes at their Seet, and ftood over them panting and trembling, in all the -painSul grieS oS paternal anxiety Sor the SaSety of their helplefs offspring, fearing every-mo¬ ment would he the laft in \vhich they might fee them ; and every word almoft they articulated, breathed an imprecation upon the Engliih. Our relics were over- L ? thrown
thrown and trampled upon, in fpite of our ¿eat to preferve them, wbile fome of their leaders deridingly called Us Arifio~ crats, and railed 'm fuch impious terms againft religion, that fear fuggeiting the means of fafety, we attempted to regain our convent. But, alas ! it was ffiut againft us ; the Commune had fent mu¬ nicipal officers to take poffeflion of it, under pretence that we had eflayed to prevent the people from arming in their own defence. Upon the threfhold were three mfirm filters, whom Ave were oblig¬ ed t& excufe from the proceffion, which t&eie faerilegious wretches had expelled« They were m their knees, imploring the afliftance of boly St. Francis, to estri* cate us írom our impending dangers.— We joined them ia thew grief and fer*· tent prayers. After a ihort paufe, tbe t Abbeis*
Abbefs, conceiving it impoffible that the Commune fhould mean to a& with íq much cruelty towards a Set of pious, in* noceut, and defencelefs women; ihe therefore knoekcd at the gate, and de¬ manded to fpeak to thofe who had the mandate againft our convent. A fat, red-faced, bloated, pimpled wretch ap* peared, and told us in few words, that alt Convents were Supprefied by the Njt* tional Affembly, but that ours wm pro* fcribed, in confequence of our treafprj againft the nation, by attempting to bring the people back to thofe ar'tfiocratk errors, which had cauied Frenchmen to groan under a double flavery fo many years. We ihuddered with horror ?? hearing this peremptory and unjuft de¬ cifion ; many burft into tears, and beat thek breafisin an agony erf defpair ; a s for me,
me, I felt indignation predominant ; and I believe, that had I had a weapon I ihould have chaftifed the impious mon¬ iter. " The AbbeSs, who Selt Sor us So much as to be almoft unmindSul oS herSelS, then beSought them to allot us Some part oS the convent Sor a preSent aSylum, and not Scandalize all Chriftendom, by turn¬ ing out So many women, Samou s for birth and Sanctity, into the ftreets, Avithout a place to ihelter them, or means to pro¬ cure any one necefiary oS liSe. " I am perfiiaded, Monfieur," added flic, " that you can gÍA T e no credit to that Sooiifh ftory oS our interSering about the arm¬ ing oS the people. Our proceffion and prayers were directed and intended Sor the welfare of France. Could we knoAv that
that the appearance of religion Avas be¬ come obnoxious in the fight of a people formerly fo devout, or that a religious proceffion ihould be deemed criminal by thofe Avho a Sew months ago joined them with So much Servor ?" " The Commiflàry flew into a rage at her laft words, and Said it Avas a lie, Sor that he had never joined in Such I cannot repeat his horrid expreilions. The AbbeSs only replied mildly—" Son, be not angry iS I thought you had once donc ib good a thing ; nor let it prevent your receiving theSe, my dear daughters, even iSyou exclude me." No, he Avould not let us enter, nor even ftay at our thrcfliold ; and the lamentations of the fifterhood were the molt moving you can conceive. The good Abbeis ftill wiihed
wiihed to parley. I ftepped up to her, and faid^-*" Holy Mother, I befeech you do not honour Such wicked wretches, nor profane yourSelf by any further conver¬ fation ; let us commit ourfelves to Hea¬ ven, with whom thofe people have no¬ thing do ; we ffiall find fupport, when they wiii not dare to look for it."— " Aye, aye, go your ways," faid he, ** and get a dinner out of your heavenly larder, if you can, for I begin to think of rummaging the refectory for my fup¬ port ; fo you had better begone." He called forne of his affiliants to aid in driving «s away ; fo to avoid their un¬ holy touch, we haftened as much as poS- fible. We found in the ftreet fome of the lay-fifters ; but ihocking to relate, three pretty young girls of them were detained by thefe abominable men for the
the worft of purpofes. I am fure they Avould not have fpared even us, at leaft thofe that were young and handfome, had ive been in the convent on their ar¬ rival. One of the lay-filters undertook to lead us to the houfe of the Curé of the parifh, a very worthy man, and really a paftor to his flock. We were too much troubled for ourfelves to mind the ap¬ pearance of the town at that time ; but I now recollect that it was deferted; the people that had been flying tumul« tuoufly about the ftreets an hour before, had all left the town to meet the Eng« îifh, the Avhole peafantry, all the fer¬ vants, mechanics, in a word, every man that ivas able to go. The women, the fick, and the children, had run into dif¬ ferent houfes,cluftering together as many as could get by one another. «We
" We Sound the Curé Surrounded by a number oS ladies, pale, trembling, and Some almoft dead with Sright ; So terri¬ ble an idea have the generality oS the French oS your countrymen* The good man did all he could to reaffure them ; and certai nly\nothing could fhew more clearly their Avant oS reflection, or edu¬ cation, than Such a terror, for we were in the molt inland part oS Normandy, where, unleSs Srom the clouds» it was im¬ poffible Sor an Engliih army to penetrate fo fuddenly. , I did not attempt to add my efforts to his, confidering their for¬ rows as imaginary, whilft mine and the reft of my filters Avere dreadful and real. His Servants w r ere gone en maffe, and his t\A r o rufly Swords were under requifition, fo that the good man beftirred himSelf to give us a welcome reception, and being aided
aided by Some ladies Avho Avere not ren¬ dered entirely helplefs by their terror, we Saw a cloth laid, and Some bread and wine put on it, Avhich moft of the guefts Avere glad to partake of; but not So the holy filters, inftead oS approaching the refections, AA r e related our difinal ftory to the aftoniftied company, Avho had beSore only SuppoSed that the general alarm had prevailed with us as with them, to feek SaSety any where but at home ; particu¬ larly as they SuppoSed the Engliih would violate all the nuns. I obServed that, upon hearing oS our proscription, many of the ladies Avho ihewed us refpect be¬ fore, Seemed now quite changed in their manner, and none exprefled compaffion Sor us, Save only the good Curé, who la¬ mented the outrages committed againft religion. " Ah !" Said he, " theSe are real
real calamities ; and they frighten us with ftories, to prevent us from obferving what is perpetrated under our eyes."— " Monfieur Curé," faid a littie, ugly, red- faced democrat woman, " wc all know that you priefts can never wifh well to the caufe of liberty, becaufe it hurts your trade ; and I believe you would ra¬ ther invite the Engliih, than repel them, in hopes of feeing defpotifm again tri* umph in France : but it never will ; w© have Louis and his infernal family in the Temple, and none of your miracles can draw them thence, Ca Ira, &c." No perfon feemed furprized at her faerile- gious words but us, who had not con¬ verfed with the Avorld for fo many years, and certainly we crofíèd ourSelves re¬ peatedly, and more than ever fighed Sor our dear convent to fhelter from a world fo
So wicked. The Curé made figns to us not to reSent what the little woman had foid, and he Spoke in a mollifying man¬ lier to her, but without any good effect, Sc fhe went on moil zealoufly brutal, gathering Srefh energy in each expref¬ fion : at length ihe wiihed our convent turned into a temple of Reafon, to which deity all princes, priefts and nuns ihould be Sacrili eed. What diScourSe torus in our bollicíela and alii idled fituation! " in the evening the mafs oS people re¬ turned, Satigucd and Spent with their warlike Search Sor an Engliih army r , which 1 need not add could not poffibly be in our part oS the province. The Curé aiked for his rufly Swords, and an old harquebufs, but the people would not return their arms, they Said that they would
would retain them to defend that ami¬ able goddefs Reafon, and aflert their li¬ berties : that was, I am convinced, the chief end propofed by thofe w T ho raifed the alarm, as being the readieft way of getting arms from people of property, and inverting with them thofe Avho had nothing to lofe. But Sor ourSelves, ?\ ? ? ' were ovenvhelmed at the Sudden and dreadSui tilow that had Sallen upon us ; and the poor Curé Avas not delighted at the honour Ave did him İn taking pofîèf¬ fion oS his houSe, Sor it was impoffible for him to think of driving us out ; but he hinted, that he was beSore in a dan¬ gerous fituation, and that affini ng us would ftill make it worfe. We grieved at that too, but Avhat could ive do? Next day our Confeflbr came to us ; he had a coufin in the municipality, and had
had been endeavouring, through him, to obtain us a rcSpite Sor a few days, until we ihould, by writing to our friends, or fome other meaSure, Secure at leaft a home ; but the cruel men would not grant any thing but our clothes, and Sor that wc Avere indebted to their coarSc- neSs and fimplicity ; Sor every thing that would Sell Avas torn away immediately, and our holy convent profaned by all Sorts of debauchery. The Curé gäA T e up his houfe to us, and went himfelf to fleep at a neighbouring farm. We Avould not lie in beds, but flept for a few hours only either in chairs or on the boards, for vre chiefly Spent our miserable hours in prayers, tears, and abftincnces rigid as human nature can practiSe and live. But Heaven did not grant our prayers. France was not worthy oS a blefling ; and
and we t Soon Avere ordered to march along with fome prisoners, guarded by a party oS national guards, to the next Sea¬ port town, in order to be put on board a fmall veflel that AA 7 as to carry us to Eng¬ land. Nor could we obtain any mitiga¬ tion oSthis cruel decree, which appeared AA'orSe than death ; Sor only conceive what we muft endure, travelling over rugged roads, without any Shelter Srom Sun or rain, and at night crouded together (in general we were) into Some room, co- veered with Straw, to Serve Sor one com¬ mon bed, though indeed that to a nun of our order Avas luxury, Avhich we ihould have fcrupled to indulge in, only for the amazingfatigues we Avcnt through during the day. Our condition Avas Sufficiently ihocking under what I haA r e represented, but to almoft all oS us the idea oS Eng¬ land
land Avas not one bit better than that we entertain oS Purgatory ; and to this un¬ hallowed land Avere AA r e deftined to com¬ plete the career oS our misfortunes. I fliall endeavour to Sorget what we Suf¬ fered through the medium of converfa¬ tion ; that of our guards Avas fometimes fo very horrid, that Ave ihould have re¬ joiced to have the earth open and- hide us from the obfcene monfters ; and in¬ deed it is almoft a miracle that they flopped at Avords ; but I SuppoSe that (though they Avould not have Such a thought entertained oS them Sor Avorlds) they could not help Seeling a Secret re¬ verence Sor our Sacred function, and that it proved a SaSeguard, where indeed it would not have been poffible Sor us to find another. Our poor Lady AbbeSs exhorted us to Suffer, and not murmur, vol. in. M Seeing
feeing that it would not alleviate our ca¬ lamities, and herSelf Setting a remarkable example, never once utteringa complaint *at the bad ufage Ave received, nor of the torments ihe was herSelS inflicted Avith, Sor the dear woman at laSt under them, and Avhen unable to Avalk, or even ftand, told the men that it was, unncceflary Sor them to take any more trouble upon her account, for the hand of death was on her. An Engliihman, though an heretic, would have been Softened at the fight oS a venerable lady dying in fo hor¬ rid a fituation. Not So a Frenchman. They curSed her for the delay ihe occa¬ fioned, and faid, that live or die, her body mull go on. Accordingly meet¬ ing a farmer, with a fmall cart, going to fupply the market at —~ with eggs» cheefe, fruits, &e. they feized the cart in the
name of the Nation, threw his wares about the road, and laid our holy Ab- befs in it, while we rent the air with our ihrieks, and took off part of our clothes, to lay under and cover her; and en¬ treated that one of us might be permit¬ ted to go in the cart, to fupport her head; but that was refuScd. Here again I find it impoffible to dwell upon a Scene So ihocking to humanity ; Suffice it to íày, that when Ave were certain that her troubles were terminated by death, we all Selt a degree oS joy that made our own appear lighter Sor a moment. We were thruft on board an American veS- Sel, and Srom thence landed in ~—-, No Sooner Avere the gentlemen oS the county apprized oS our arrival than they made a contribution towards our Sup¬ port, which was depofited with the chief M 2 magiftrate,
magiftrate, who had before ivith great humanity provided us Avith quarters, and immediate neceflaries, which did not Sur¬ prize me, Avhá know that the Engliih have Some points, indeed enough to ren¬ der them, were they Catholics, the belt and molt amiable people in the world. But the reSt oS the filters, Avho expected to die martyrs to their religion. Avere loft in aitonifhment at finding themfelves re¬ ceived Avith So much generofity and kindneSs in a land oS heretics. A gen¬ tleman among our beneSactors, who came frequently to con Suit upon Some means oS eftablifhing us, recollected me, though fo greatly altered ; but he had been my lover. Repeated observation made him more certain that he knew me, and at laft he aflted the queftion, which 1, furprized and unprepared, an¬ Swered
Swered in the affirmative. I fhall not lengthen my journal, by repeating his Surprize, and his arguments to prevail upon me fo return to my home. He Succeeded in convincing me that I was doing a prejudice to my filter nuns, by Sharing in the Sum allotted Sor their nie; and as he argued, my ret4irn to the world Avas forced, not the moft rigid Catho¬ lic would blame me for reafluminir. thofe comSorts that in the world were blame¬ leSs, and e\'en neceffary. He offered to Supply me Avith any Sum I choSe, and I borrowed ten guineas ; but bound him to Secrefy, for I wifhed to be as little known as poflible, and to that end form¬ ed a plan of concealment, which has been entirely Sruftrated. I took an aS- Sectionate leave of my fillers in religio n aud İn misfortune, who readily law the M 3 propriety
propriety oS Such a meaSure, when I ex- explained to them that í meant to Seek a reSuge in my own Samily, as preSer- ahle to Subfifting upon the benevolence oS ftrangers. Many oS them fhcd tears ; I was Softened, but never wept, and wc parted. " In purSuance oS my plan, I dis¬ charged my chaiSe when within a mile of Morney, and walked on Avith my Small parcel, containing a change oS coarfe linen Such as I wear, and my veil, which I was obliged to take off*and Sub¬ ftitute a Smaller one, not to be remark¬ able. I Avell remembered the road, and had great need oS all my Sortitude and oS many prayers, to calm thoSe emotions which the Scene called Sorth ; but it was one oS the Sacrifices I thought it only proper
proper to make, and thereSore per Si Sted to Avander as a ftranger over thoSe fiekls, and through the grove, oS Avhich I knew my Sel S to he the rightSul poflèflòr.— " For," Said I to mySelS, " I fliall only re¬ call my OAvn diSgrace and the grieS of my family to remembrance, by eftablifh¬ ing a claim given up voluntarily So long ago, and Avhîch, Avhen acknowledged, would not add to my enjoyments, as I now determine more than ever to keep all my A'ows, and practiSe all the aufteri- tics oSmy order, hoping that it will be more meritorious than beSore, as when once engaged in my r convent I had no/ means of* avoiding them, whereas now that I Avas torn Srom it, all obligation to adhere to them appeared cancelled to vulgar Souls; but I make it my only boaft to maintain a contrary doctrine, fo M 4 that
that my wants are bounded to a cover¬ ing Srom the world, more than Srom the inclemencies of the Aveather, and fuch I knew how to find at Morney So very pri¬ vate as to be unknown to all but me, unlefs Letitia were alive ; as 1 need not Say I meant the apartment once deftin*· ed Sor a different purpofe, now to be the Scene oS my devotions and never ending pennance. In a lane near the houfe I met an old Servant, whofe features ï re¬ membered, it Avas the gardener. I ac¬ cofted him, and Sound that by unfolding my SelS to him, I filled him with terror, Avhich it was long before he recovered Srom ; and when he Avas convinced of my reality, he betrayed no Symptoms of joy. I Sighed to my Self, and thought how diíhgreeüble muft I have been to my very domeftics, that when í Seem re¬ stored
ftored to them Srom the grave, even he that has carried me an inSant in his arms is not glad to Sec me ! This is the reSult oS pride. However, I made myfelf more' agreeable to John, by afluring him that í had no intention to difturb my brother or his Samily, if, as I concluded, he had my eftate. i£ All I want," Said I, " is a fhelter, and a very Small portion of nou¬ ri ihment, which, with your aid, I can eafily have at Morney, unknown to every other perfon." John Suffered him¬ Self to be perSuaded, and promiSed to ad¬ mit me through the garden to the houfe \\ hen it Should be quite duik, and when the Samily fliould be. difpofed ofin other parts of the houfe, which was not diffi¬ cult to manage, as you and your chil¬ dren were in London. I ihewed him M 5 the
the private paffagea, and was glad to hear that the rooms through which I fliould have to pafs were very Seldom uSed ; So it was agreed that to the room which opened into the ruined part oí the houSe John ihould by night bring my proA'ifion and candles, firing I do not uSe. He inSormed me of every particu¬ lar he had knowledge of relating to your family concerns, and above all, your goodnefs to Mafter Grey, as he called sny Son. I could not, though I ftrug¬ gled hard, keep down the mother rifing within me, which I conSeSs Avas impro¬ per, Sor I ought to have ftopped at thanking Heaven Sor providing him fo kind a guardian ; but I Seit too much, when he went on to tell me oSyour dif- pleafiire to him, which John imputed to Some
■ Some ridiculous ftory oS a ghoft, which I need not repeat to you. (I am Sure the pour child muft be to blame, or you would not condemn him.) (C Still," ad¬ ded John, " Mafter Grey was taken care of juft as if he were his Honour's Son, only not in the houfe ; when, Saving 3'our reverence, here it comes out, as how he has gotten the Parfon's daugh¬ ter's belly up, and they fay he rcfuies to marry her; So maftcr's in a fine pet; for certain he will not give him MiSs Mor¬ ney, nor will he give him this fine place Morney. So Matter Grey has boiled a fine kettle of fiih. And he is fo Sond of Mifs Morney too, that its a wonder as over he could go aflray with MiSs Bol¬ ton ; only young men Avili do Such things now and tan, as I knows by my¬ SelS; and MiSs Bolton is main cunning, M ? all
all the Servants agree to that, and So mayhap, Seeing as no man was willing to marry her, ihe could not rcSt without a Sweetheart in another way." " I had got inSormation enough, and thought it necefìàrv to Stop the good gardner, left he ihould exceed the bounds ib proper to be obServed in conversation. " I Sound the room in the Same con¬ dition as when I had firSt discovered it, damp and ruinous, but poffeflèd oS as many comSorts as I though fit to allow myfelf; and here I have refolved to com- pleat my pennance only with the end oS liSe, and find Something wonderfully pro¬ vidential in the idea that the Scenes oS my crimes, the abode oS my greatneSs, ihould now be thoSe oS my remorSe.— Oh!
Oh ! how that was awakenei, when one night John ihewed me the portrait of my child, So like thoSe oSmy Samily that I had Spent my belt days with ; So like my poor mother, whoSe death was acce¬ lerated by my levity, and So very like that portrait oS your daughter whicii hung near it.—" Oh ! my wronged Son," Said I, " it is your mother s conduct has driven you Srom Momey, and Srom hap- pineSs. Was you tbe acknowledged heir of your parents, a trivial or venial tranf¬ greflion would find an excuSe !—But the child oS charity has no pleader Sor him, and a Small pretence cauSes him to be rejected."—Forgive me, Mr. Morney, that thought; it pafled away inftanta¬ neoufly, Sor I know you to be a good moral man. Yet I returned to the room containing the picture every night, until of
254 MORE GHOSTS. of late that I had found it occupied ; and, indeed, was apprehenfive of a difco¬ very, which made me defift for two nights. John informed me, that So Sar Srom gueffing at the truth, the Samily had one and all taken me Sor a ghoSt, even you, Avho had treated all Such ftories as Sables, giving credit to it now ; and for the room, it Avas to be lpcked up in Suture ; So the night I Saw you, I reSolv¬ ed to vifit the portrait, in order to give poignancy to my remorSe, Avhich I eafily could accompliih by means of the Aiding pannel, that I had difcovered many years beSore, when exploring Sor a Secret place to conceal my unhappy fituation. I Avas, as you know r , Soon obliged to fly, and met John in the next room, Avith Avhom I w T as going to converSe Sor one moment only, when I Avas feized by that man whom
whom I regard with horror, but whom you call a prieSt. John fled, and I was known. " The greateft part of the above has been my work fince I came here, at in¬ tervals. I have now only made a few neceffary additions. I always meant that after my death you fliould be acquainted Avith my· real ftory, and to requeft your payment of a Small Sum in the manner I fliould Specify. I ftill pray to be left in peace Sor the preSent, that my thoughts may not by worldly matters be recalled from Heaven, where alone I defire to fix them."
CHAP.
CHAP. LIX. Ti, JTY dear Reader, I ihould have had -*-*-*■ a great deal more pleafiire in ad- dreffing you on my own account, than in tranícribing the lamentable ftory oS my old miftrefs ; but I was ordered to give it in her own words, and So you have it ; and it has already Swelled the volume to a tireSomc fize ; befides, I have enough to relate to Spin out a fourth, only my daughter Says, that as two vo¬ lumes are not enough, So Sour arc tGO many Sor a novel, unlefs when Mrs. Ben- net, Mrs. Smith, Mrs. Helme, or Mrs. Reeves, &c. &c. are the writers. And as to mine being all truth, ihe Says it is So
So much the worSe, being no better than th£Daily AdvertiSer, and nobody wants to read the truth now-a-days. " So, Sa¬ ther," Said flie, " fhorten your account as much and decently as you can, and look about Sor a good perSon to dedicate to."— « Oh !" Said I, " I have Set my heart upon the Public Character, which I love and admire moil in England."— So to haften to that, I will finifh tiring ?? Reader in as few lines as poflible. We had a great buftle at Morney upon the firft news of Mrs. Wellers being ar¬ rived, as tho domeftics concluded, to take pofîèffion of her eftate. Moil of thofe old ones who had been like cats, rather as attacked to the houSe than the mafter, now refolved to leave the place where
where they had been bred and fed ; and if Mr. Morney would not take them with him, even to venture upon a ftrange fa¬ mily, rather than live with Such an odd Lady as Madam. Mils Morney, ftrange to tell, Selt glad, not Srom efteem to the character oS her aunt, but becauSe, as love Ís quick-lighted, flie perceived Some of the motives vanifli which had induced her not to refufe Grey, whom fhe con¬ gratulated upon his future happy prof¬ pects, but in a manner that ftruck him as if fhe meant not to include herSelf in them ; he took her hand,- and Said ------ ** What does MiSs Morney mean by ????? proSpects, whilft her expreilions are So cool, and her looks averted Sronv ?? ?—" Why, Mr. Grey," replied She, " I mean, that though my Sather was, and is
is as fond oS you as iS he were your Sa- ther, yet you muft Seel happy in the proS- pect oS being received by a mother, who will certainly, at lair, give reins to the affection ihe muft Seel Sor you, and who will, in a proper manner, reflore you to part oS your rights."—" Will you regard me no more ?" interrupted he.— ci No,* indeed," Said MiSs Morney, neither more nor leSs. " Fortune is not neceflkry to gain my affections ; we were brought up as brother and filter, and have loved each other with that kind oSaffection. I have," added ihe, blufhing, " discovered, firflr y that it is not the love that ihould induce us to marry. You will, upon reflection» I am convinced, make the Same obferva¬ tion."
Reader,
Reader, you muff,'if poffible, guefs at what followed, for neither Grey nor Mifs Morney would give me more than the outlines of a converlaiion that Avas, per¬ haps, more interefting than any other in the book; but they do not like dwelling upon it, So I ihall conclude the Sifter.— Father du Cage Soon pcrSuaded Mrs. Wellers to rcfiimc her properly (whieh was readily reftored by her brother) as he affured her it would be a moSt meritorious act in the fight oS Heaven, to enable herSelS to affift the good nuns and prieft?, who were now in So much want oS it. He, like a true Frenchman, recommend¬ ed himSelf for the Suture Chaplain, and enjoined diffimulation Sor a ihort time, left her Samily fliould take fteps to pre¬ vent her from alienating her property, which
which was propoSed. Accordingly flie removed to a more convenient apartment, confented to See her Son, brother, and niece, and even appeared to like their So¬ ciety, Avhile every thing was in prepara¬ tion Sor their removal. MiSs Morney now publicly rcSuSed Grey, declaring, that as he Avould poS- SeSs the eState intended Sor her portion, her great moti\ r c, Avhich Avas that oS giv¬ ing it to him by wedlock, was at an end, more eSpecialiy as ihe could now credit her reaSon again, Avhich at one time had been deceived into a belief that Heaven had interfered to direct her choice by another way than that of her conScience. Nay, flie even avowed, Avhen vehemently urged
. urgeel by Grey» that her heart preferred another. We had a deal to do in the houSe, Mr. de Burgh came over, and had an in¬ terview with her in fiivour oS his Son, but it Avas oSno uSe. They upbraided her with fickleneSs oS temper. She Said it might .be fo, but fhe rather thought her ima¬ ginary paffion Sor Grey, was never more than the Sriendfhip fhe now Selt, added to Some romantic notions, Avhich a know¬ ledge oS the world had cured her oS; but added, that it was fortunate Sor them all that ihe had made the diScovery in time to prevent an union that could ne¬ ver have made them happy, or even com¬ fortable together. In
în fliort, Reader, her Sather, leaving her at liberty, fhe not only rcfuSed Mr. Grey, but Soon aSlcr, upon Mr. Sey¬ mour's renewal of his addrefîès, accepted of him. Grey remained Some time at Morney, which is a receptacle of nuns, as his mo¬ ther, hoped to make a convert of him* She has, ncvcrthelcfi, difpofed of her citate in truft for the Society/, which fhe (iocs not know is contrary to the law, nor is it any matter whether fhe does or does not. Mr. Grey is fince fallen in love with a very beautiful lady, and Mr. Morney and De Burgh intereft themfelves hear¬ tily in his behalf. Mift
MiSs Bolton flays at a Sarm-houSe in NorSolk, and her Sather has got over the violence oS his grieS. And oS the Mr. Morneys and MiSs de Burgh, I ffiall treat in three more volumes, as their hiftory was very re¬ markable. Adieu, my patient companion.
FINIS
4
