Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Manfroné: or, The one-handed monk: a romance
MANFRONÉ.
CHAPTER VIÎ.
*.* #***■<#>.#.
J Τ had been of late the duca de Ro* dolpho's custom to walk every evening, either in the wood iiear the castello, or on the banks of Ihe lake; in these excur¬ sions, he very frequently went unaccom¬ panied, or sometimes with the castel¬ lain, who, it has before been observed. was the repository of his secrets. It was on the evening following that on which Rosalina had obtained the voi,, ix. ? manu-
manuscript of the ill-fated Romellino from the abbot, that the duca, who was walking alone in the forest, observed at «ome distance behind him one " the fathers of Santa Maria : concluding that the monk was, as well as himself, enjoy¬ ing the refreshing shade, he still con¬ tinued his walk, and in the ruminations Avhich he was deeply engaged in he soon forgot that circumstance. The duca was reflecting on tiie situa¬ tion of the principality of Manfroné, Avhich, by reason of their being no regu¬ lar successor to the government after his decease, was now become a scene of contentious strife, the partizans of the^ prince declaring that they would not submit to another ruler, till more ao- thentic information could be obtained of his death; while another party, who wished to place on the regal seat a noble of their own election, sought to obtain
obtain their ends by acts of open vio¬ lence. Great had been the effusion of blood on both sides; but as yet no important advantages had been gained by either. Such was the present situa¬ tion of affairs, and the duca determined to enter into a private négociation with the noble, and to make him an offer of a large body of troops, in order to secure his election, provided he Avould, in that event taking place, cede to him a cer¬ tain portion of the domains attached to the principality. He regretted at this moment the continued absence of Mon¬ talto, which proved that he had no in¬ clination to be on friendly terms with him, and in all probability forbore at¬ tempting to resent his wrongs, out of the love he had for his daughter; for his valour and skilfiil conduct were well known, and to him he could have offered the command of the troops which he designed to send on the above-mentioned ? â scheme.
scheme. Or if the noble should reject his offers, he then determined to enter the province, and taking advantage of the disjointed state of the people, seize en the country himself. Such were the schemes of aggrandize¬ ment Avhieh now Avere planned by the duca de Rodolpho, when he Avas dis¬ turbed by a footstep which appeared close behind him, and turning round, again saw the mopk. 4 * A pleasant evening, father," said the duca; "the cool air that breathes amongst these woods is refreshing after the heat of the day." ** It is, duca," returned a sIoav deep voice, which made Rodolpho start, par¬ ticularly as the form beside him did not attempt to withdraw the cowl from his face, or to pay him that respect to whicii he
he was accustomed, and he almost be¬ gan to conclude that the person had some dchign on him, Avhich made him almost instinctively gras]) the hilt of his sword ; the monk, however, did not seem to no¬ tice the eflect his appearance had on the duca, and thus continued :*— 44 The air is cool, as you observe, but still there are hot conspiracies abroad, Avhich soon will burst into a flame." " You speak in such ambiguous teriius father, that I do not comprehend Avhat you would mean. Perhaps, indeed, you are alluding to the contentions about the prince de Manfronds vacant seat ?" re¬ turned the duca,- somewhat surprised that the unknown person should appa¬ rently allude to a subject so nearly re¬ lated to the ruminations he had just be¬ fore been indulging. ? .% "Xo,"
* t No," replied the monk ; " it is the duca de Rodolpho whom I would Avam of an impending danger." " Me !—What do you mean ?" said Rodolpho. ** What danger? I am tm- conseious of having an enemy." " But I," Returned the monk, ** know that you have one—one whom you have little conception of; and I have long sought you to caution you against him." " Your attentive kindness, father, jaierits my warmest gratitude. Who is this person ?" " I will shew him to you ; nay more, I will deliver him into your power." 44 Indeed !" said Rodolpho ; ? this is being a friend. And when will you perform your promise?" " Meet
ft Meet me in the northern cloisters at the hour of midnight" ** At midnight Γ said the duca, Avho began to suspect that some plan was forming against his safety ; and the more so, as his fears had been excited by the mysterious information of the unknown monk. " Why is so silent an hour chosen ?" continued he ; " in the north cloisters too ? To whom, father, am i in¬ debted for this information?" "It i.s of little consequence," said the monk, slowly moving from the eluca ; " your fears will unfit you for the part you have to act; my Avish to render you an important service has therefore been fruitless." " Stay,father," said the duca; "excu.w the apprehensions you have yourself been the cause of." ? 4 · 4 And
" And Avhat apprehensions could I be the occasion of? Had my purposes been of a sanguinary nature, the gloom and retirement of this forest would better have suited my purposes than tlie northern cloisters at midnight. You interrupted me in my discourse, duca — 1 was going to add, that it Avould be ne- eerily you took with you a domestic in whom you couki confide. One con¬ dition only shall 1 exact from you, as a return for my solicitude on your ac¬ count." *' Name it, father," said Rodolpho ; 44 1 av ill conform to your wishes," 44 When I entered the monastery of Santa Maria, 1 Avas disgusted with the world; I wished to fly from those parts where I had pissed my life, to where I should not be knoAvn. My own name is hateful to mc, as Avell as my features, whicii
Avhich remind me of mvself, for 1 wish to forget Avhat I was, and only to think on Avhat I now am—a poor monk of Santa Alaria. The abbot has my event¬ ful tale ; it was necessary that he should know to Avhom he had granted admission into the monastery. You have hitherto been the object of my care and atten¬ tion ; but if ever you demand to see those il al ures, whieh I myself abhor,.. that moment you lose a disinterested friend." ifc You may depend on my promise that í will not," returned the duca. ** Am 1 then to expect you to-night, in the north cloisters V * ( Most assuredly;' replied llodolpho. '* Forget not to bring with you an at¬ tendant, such as I described." JU 5 " I will
44 1 will not fail," returned the duca: and the monk entering another path, soon disappeared from his inquiringview· Although the duca had promised to be in the cloisters at tlie time appointed,. yet as he returned to the castello, his resolutions began to Avaver,— 44 Might it not, after all," thought he, 44 be only a scheme to entrap me—a plan, perhaps* of this very enemy against whose at^ tempts I am merely warned, to blind me from seeing the danger I am falling into ? Yet, certainly, if there had been such a scheme existing, it might, as the monk observed, have been as easily effected in this wood, which is so much more retired than the cloisters of the monastery : this singular affair I will entrust to Lupo, who, if I go, shall accompany me." Thus resolved, the duca, when he re¬ turned
turned to Colredo, ordered the castellain to attend him in his apartments ; when, having informed him of the events of the evening, it Avas resolved tliat they should attend tlie appointment well armed, and Lupo provided himself with a horn to alarm the soldiers who Avatched on the castle walls, in case their assistance should be required. The midnight hour Avas now near at hand, and the duca and Lupo, muffled up in their long mantles, which concealed their swords and other weapons of de¬ fence, entered the northern cloisters of tlie monastery. The waning moon's faint reflections* only allowed them to trace the path, and to disclose to their view the nearer ob¬ jects: beneath the cloisters all Avas shrouded in darkness, but at tlie fur¬ ther end a glimmering light directed Β β tlieir
their course : they concluded that when they were arrived at it, they should see the monk, but were disappointed, for the light proceeded from a small lamp which Avas fixed before the shrine of a saint, and the place Avas solitary. " Surely," said the duca, " it has struck the midnight hour ?" " I do not think it has yet, your ex- cellenza," returned Lupo, " but it cannot be far distant from it." At that moment the deep sounding clock of the monastery tolled twelve; the echoes reverberating among the cloisters alarmed the duca and his domestic : the place chosen for the meeting Avas at the farthest extent of the building, and per¬ haps seldom visited even in the day; the cold gales of night began to sigh amongst the columns that supported one side
side of the vaulted roof, and chilled the duca, who closely Avrapped his mantle around him. Some distant footsteps Avere noAV heard, but so much Avere they multiplied by the echoes» that the duca and Lupo, ima¬ gining that several people were approach¬ ing, dreAv their SAAOrds, and silently awaited the event. A sudden blast extinguishing the be¬ fore almost expiring lamp, left them in¬ volved in darkness; the footsU ps seemed nearer, till at length a light illumined the distant walls of the cloister, and the figure of the monk was shortly after visible. He seemed surprised at the hostile appearance of the duca and Lupo, for he started and drew back at beholding through the small aperture in his cowl their
their swords, on which the light of hig lamp gleamed. 44 This caution, duca, is needless,'* said he, "against an unarmed monk; your suspicions, too long continued, will hurt you in my opinion ; and I believe I need not add, after what I have told you this evening, that the consequences* of such a circumstance would be fatal to you." Theduca replied, "Your pardon, father; but implicit confidence is not the result of an acquaintance so short as ours has been ; I own I was wrong in my sus¬ picions, and I will from henceforth banish them." * The failings of human nature are manv," returned the monk : 4 * Avould that like you I had been of a suspicious disposition! lhad now been happy; but, credulous
credulous and compassionate, I became the tool of others ι all these are failings, though of opposite natures, when carried to extremes ; the suspicious infect others, making them deaf to compassion—blind to the calamities asr well as to the virtues,. good deeds, and good intentions of those who we>uid be their friends, while the too credulous and compassionate teach man¬ kind that foul crime, hypocrisy, in order to excite their feelings and attention, and thereby to obtain their ends. Hard and difficult is it to form a medium by which to regulate our conduct r but you, duca,, I trust, will, at least with respect to me,, divest yourself of suspicion ; consider for a moment, what end could it answer to one detached from the world, whom no ambitious motives of self aggrandize¬ ment can await, to deceive or lead you into any error?" ' 4 Your words," replied tlie duca^ " carry
" carry conviction Avith them; I am satisfied ; you shall not have cause again. of complaint." 46 You must iioav," said the monk* " accompany me to the altar, for though I have promised to deliver your most bitter, and, sorry am I to say, duca, your much-wronged enemy into your power, yet, witliout the most solemn assurances of his personal safety, I will proceed no further: as far as the detention of his person, whicii will ansiver every end, and insure your safety, I will alloAv you irce permission to act as you may eon- elude best; but as my motives are for your good, the crime of blood shall not sully even your thoughts. What is your auMver— Avili you accompany me to the chapel? or are you so fearful of your passions, that you Avaver between the giving of a solemn promise, and the eternal horrors of breaking it ? n 44 No/*
" No," replied the duca, (i as long as you make no restrictions respecting tlie detention of the person ivho, it appears, you are so Avell convinced is my bitter enemv« I will make you that solemn promise which will enable you to pursue your good intentions for my security, without the interruption of a moment's reflection on yourself for Avhat you have done on my account." 44 Recollect," said the monk, " that in our Avay to the chapel we must pass through part of the monastery; it will therefore be necessary that you keep a strict silence." Saying this, he slowly turned round, and the duca anet Lupo following him, they proceeded nearly the Avhole length of the cloisters, Avhen the monk, opening a small portal, entered a long narrow passage, which apparently was seldom used,
used, for the waib were green and damp ; at the extremity of this, ar ither door opened to a large corridor, on each side of which were many portals, which the duca concluded belonged to the chambers of the fathers, for here the monk softly trod, and the duca and Lupo followed his* example, till they entered the chapel, when the monk, who Avas some paces before them, stopped and motioned his followers to retire behind a long row of columns, between whose spaces some lofty tombs afforded a secure recess for concealment* 44 When I looked towards the altar,** said the monk, in a low voice, ** I beheld one of the brethren deeply engaged in prayer; Ave must therefore Avait here till he retires.* The clock of the monastery had some time announced the first hour of morn before
before the father had concluded Ins midnight orisons: the monk watched him till he left the chapel, and when he, accompanied by the duca and Lupo, had readied the altar, he thus addressed Rodolpho :— " Yon may now make that solemn promise respecting the person whom I shall put in your power. Swear then, that as you hope for Heaven's mercy, no circumstance whatever shall induce you to take aAvay his life, either di¬ rectly or indirectly ; and that the most horrible curses, continually increasing, may be your portion, both here and here¬ after, if you should break this solemn covenant" The duca and his attendant took the oath, and they left the altar ; but before they had got out of the chapel, the elock struck two—tlie monk stopped. "It
44 It is wow,'*, said he, "too late; in another hour my presence will be requir¬ ed; we must defer this important affair till the next night." The duca, whose curiosity, as Avell as desire to have his enemy in his power, was roused to the greatest extent, Avas vexed at the delay. ** Is there not time enough, father, for your puipose ? Consider Avhat bad consequences may be the result of putting off for a day my security." " You may depend," replied the monk, 44 that nothing shall happen during that time—I will w r ateh over your safety : be in the cloisters to-morrow night at the same hour—I Avili be punctual." While he was saying this, lie set down the lamp, and drew back the bolts of the outer
router portals of the chapel, through which the duca and his attendali í pabstd, and entered on the road leading to the castello de Colredo. The events of that evening crowding thickly on his recollection, deprived the duca of repose. The same question he so often put to himself still remained un- ansAvercd, which Avas, who the person could be that had fostered such bitter designs against him ? At times he con¬ jectured that it ivas the young marchese cle Montalto ; but that, however, he did not, on reflection, think probable, and the promise of the monk to put his enemy in his power made him certain that it could not be him. He arose with the elawn, and impatient for the return of the appointed time, its approach seemed every hour more distant. When at length it came, with all its train
train of gloomy shades, and night had resumed her sable empire over the silent hemisphere, tlie duca, with his trusty attendant, again repaired to the cloisters Avhere they found the monk Availing their arrivai. Ile did not speak, but slightly bent his head as the duca approached him, and immediately crossing an ancient courtyard, directed his steps to a solitary toAver Avhich stood at its farthest extre- mity. The portal was only secured by a latch, which he directed Lupo to raise, and the party then entered a ruined chamber; the casements were broken, and in some parts the mantling ivy filled the spaces where once the tinted panes Imd glittered in the beams of the sun. " In the next apartment, to which that door leads," sai \ the monk, 4€ is a concealed entrance to a subterraneous passage ;
passage; it is there we must descend, for there tlie object of our search re¬ sides." Lupo having opened the portal, the monk shcAved him a trap-door, which was so artfully contrived as not to be perceptible toa common observer; wlien tliis was raised, a flight of stone steps appeared, down which the party de¬ scended; they led to a long passage, which Avas apparently formed out of the solid rock, for at different parts were placed large mis-shapen pillars to support the roof. At the extremity of this passage, the monk pointed to a door, and in a low tone said—" In that place is your enemy ; perhaps he now slumbers—enter softly, and surprise him." The monk noAv shrouded his lamp Avith
Avith his long garments, and Lupo ??? ? - ing opened the door, listened, when both he and the duca distinctly heard the breath of some person Avho appeared to be asleen. JL Both drew theii- SAvords and entered tl e chamber ; the monk in the mean¬ time advanced to the door, and permitted a ray of light to fall on the countenance of the slumberer, Avhen recognizing his features, he started and dreiv back; Lupo, as terrified as the duca, hastily followed his master out of the chamber, whose countenance, as he leaned for sup¬ port agamst the Avail, shewed the horrible sensations that tortured his bosom* Ail tbis time the monk, who seemed eleeply involved in ruminations, took no notice of the agitation of the duca, Avho, scarcely breathing, directed his steadfast gaze to the interior of the chamber;
chamber; the slumberer,however,had not been disturbed. " You seem surprised," at length said the monk. " I expected it—it is no air* formed vision you have beheld; by what miraculous chance he still exists, I know not. You have every reason to think that his concealing himself here is to carry into effect his schemes of wenge. I know that it is so ; but you will be guided by your OAvn judgment what course you will now pursue. I have acted the part of a friend, and I am satisfied." The duca, during the speech of è the monk, seemed to haA'e recovered from his agitation, and to be debating with himself what he should do» " You are right, father," said he, at length ; " my astonishment had nearly vox., ?. ? over-
overcome my senses. A circumstance A\hich some time ago took place is now explained. Lupo, this is no time for ? ? ?? fears-^-Ave must seize him : the runaway shall at last be stopped, if the dungeons of Colredo are strong enough to hold him." " But how, your excellenza," said Lupo, "shall Ave convey him there? It is doubtless some distance from hence to the private postern in the wood." 44 That need not trouble you much," replied the monk, 4e for you are now, duca, in the subterraneous recesses of your castello," -" Is impossible?" said Rodolpho. " TiU now I never knew of this communica¬ tion wdth the monastery." 44 That knowledge is then confined to two,"
two," returned the monk— 4i myself and your intended prisoner." 44 Lend me your lamp, father," said the duca —" Lupo, you enter and secure his arms—what further assistance you may require I ivill give you." Alas ! their intended victim still slept : perhaps at the moment when his dead¬ liest enemies w r ere sloAvly stalking to¬ wards his lowly couch, fancy, with her gay imagery, was depicting to his mental vision scenes of happiness. He awoke, and found himself in the firm grasp of two men, his arms pinioned, and unable to make any resistance, for by the uncertain light of the lamp he saw the well-known features of Rodolpho and Lupo ; yet still, as he imagined his de¬ struction certain, he was resolved not to part with life without some efforts for hk deliverance, and seizing an oppor* e 2 timity,
•t uni ty, disengaged his hand, and felled Lupo to the ground; tlie duca spí^ug upon him, and the domestic quickly rising, he was again secured mid dragged out of the subterraneous apartment-— When in the passage, his eyes glanced on the figure of the monk x he started, and exclaimed—* 4 Haî I see my be¬ trayer ! tlie vindictive—But no, I will be silent, for that Avill be some revenge on tlie base duca di Rodolpho," The monk made no reply; he ivalked forward, and pointing out to Lupo a secret panel, said— 44 Now, duca, you remember your oath respecting tbe per¬ sonal „safety of your captive : that open¬ ing will bring you into the known pas¬ sages beneath your castello. I will await here your return." The duca aud Lupo then passed through the concealed entrance, and found
found themsehes in the vaulted cor¬ ridor beneath the eastern chambers;' they then secured their prisoner in one of the dungeons, and returned to the panel. " Have yon had any conversation with your prisoner?" said the monk, in u tone somewhat more hasty and dis¬ turbed. " No, father," said the duca ; " like has not spoke since," <· My vmh to render yon secure agaimt his attempts has at length suc¬ ceeded," returned the monk. " It has, father, and my gratitude is boundless for your disinterested kind¬ ness. I know not in what way to shew it. I am at present without a confessor; will you give mea further proof'of your ? 3 friend-
friendship, and accept of that situation ? That will give tne an opportunity of frequently conferring with you on vari¬ ous circumstances in wnich I need the advice of a friend like you." " My advice you shall ahvays have," returned the monk ; " but I must de¬ cline the situation you offer, though to be near you would perhaps lighten the load of care and anxiety that weighs me down to the grave's dreary brink : but I must then be exposed to the eye of in¬ solent cuiiosity; I should, perhaps, be induced to violate a sacred and soleiVin vow which 1 have made, never to par¬ take of the pleasures of society, and to cat by myself my scanty meals ; I should not then be able to wander for days and nights in the gloomy forest, to meditate on the instability of human happiness— on past joys never more to return—on those gloAving anticipations of felicity that
that onec occupied my thoughts, but Avhich now no longer occur, lor all my hopes of earthly comfort are for ever blasted." " If you will consent to reside in the castello, father, I will promise you that yon shall pass your time as you Avish. Whatever vows you may have made, it wil' be your own fault if you infringe on them. Your apartment shall be, if voit desire it, in the most retired part of tito building, from which, through' these vaults, you may at all times havd egress, Avithout being perceived by any one." 64 As long as you continue faithful to your promise, duca, I consent to reside τη the castello; but it is only under the hope that there I may have an oppor¬ tunity of being useful to you ; but if you will not allow me to act avS I please, ? 4 I shall
I shall in that case again retire to the monastery." The duca, pleased wdth having suc¬ ceeded with the monk, in whom he hoped to find, not only a friend and ad¬ viser, but also a confederate in his future schemes, again repeated bis promises that the monk should pas$ his honra agreeable to his voav. 44 1 am satisfied, duca," replied the monk ; « you will hereafter see that you should do so from motives of interest, for in me you wiU find an adviser avïio,, through mere accident, am intimately acquainted with your most private thoughts, and in particular with the schemes you are now forming concern-* ing the attainment of the ???? ipality of Manfron&l The duca started—" Every ?? -ord you utter"
fetter," said he, " increases my astonish¬ ment. That idea, which I OAvn I had formed, was known only to Lupo ; and he, I am well assured, would sever men¬ tion it to any one." " Nor did he," returned the monk, 44 and yet you see I am privy to that circumstance; and perhaps I may be able to advise you how to obtain that elevated post, but the time is yet too green—the eiffeumstances which will doubtless occur to render it feasible are not yefí sufficiently matured." They had, during this conversation, been returning through the passage that led to the flight of stairs, whieh as soon as they ascended, the duca, pressing the monk to take his abode as early as pos- vsible in the castello, added—'* Let me ex¬ pect you, father, to-morrow," ? 5 " I willr
44 1 avíU certainly be with you then,** said the monk : <s but there is yet one thing which, amongst many others, I wish to undertake myself and that is, the attendance on your captive. There is no one but your present domestic whom you can put sufficient confidence in, to undertake so important an office/' 44 Certainly," replied the duca; " I will deliver to you the keys when you come to the castello." 44 You will need my lamp to return through the passages, and I can find my way to my ceil Avithout its aid. Expect me to-morrow at sunset." This said, the monk closed the trap-door, and re* tired. Rodolpho and the castellain passed the remainder of the night in conjecturing Avho the monk eould be:—all their con¬ clusions
elusions Avere, however, unsatisfactory ; nor were they likely to.obtain the infor¬ mation thev so much desired, for the duca Avas restricted from makin«· anv inquiries by the promise he had made the monk to that effect, and he was obhged to be content with what he hael partially * related were his reasons for monastic seclusion. The next evening, agreeable to liis promise^ the monk entered the grami hall of Colredo, The domestics having been apprized of his coming by Lupo, from whom they had been instructed how to act, received hini witli the greatest attention and respect,and went instantly to the duca, to acquaint him with the arrival of the confessor. Kodolpho immediately requested hi*» presence in his apartments, and when ? (İ they
they were alone,, de&vered him the key of the dungeon» 44 The ??1???? ? father, lias not hem: visited as yet: will you go now,< or wait till it is later?* ** I think you told me r duca, that kr the apartment you had ordered for me r there ivas a communication Avith the dungeons; let your attendant, Lupo«. shew me them, and provide some pr©* visions in a basket. To-morrow I wilt confer with you at what time you may appoint." " Use your own discretion, father, ii* that respect. I will -give orders to Lupo to do whatever you may requite-4ie now Avaits in the corridor." The monk left the apartment, and as he was slowly pacing the corridor, in expec-
expectation of meeting the castellain. Rosalina, who was returning from her evening walk, Avas at that moment erossing it, in order to reach her apart¬ ments, when the unwelcome figure of the monk met her vieAv. She stopped, almost doubting tlie evidence of her senses, so little did she expect to find the padre Grimaldi in the casteUo., The monk bowed as she approached, and seemed m ì£ he meant to address her, but at this moment Lupo making his appearance, he passed on, and Rosa* fina proceeded to» her apartments. Anxious to know what his business* could be at the castello, she called for Carletta, but she was noAvhere to he found, and her other attendants could not give her the information she desired. After she had waited for near tAvo hours.
hours; the door jof her chamber suddenly opened, and Carletta, pale and terrified, entered. Rosalina f alarmed at the agitation of her domestic, repeatedly demanded what had occasioned it ; but all the information she could get was Cartetta's repeated ex¬ clamation of~** Oh, signora! signora! tlie monk ! tine monk !" 44 What of the monk,' Carletta?" de. manded Rosalina; ** what has he done to alarm yon ?" ? arietta at length replied—'* Oh, sig* nora, I saw him-—I saw his face. 1 never was so frightened in all my life : and he is to be the confessor to the castello — Oh, signora! I never shall he *i ble to confess to him, indeed I shall not." ••Confessor! indeed! has my father chosen
chosen that mysterious man to supply the place of the good Augustino?" said Rosalina. " Impossible ! it cannot be!" 44 Oh yes, indeed it is so," replied Carletta, * 4 and you shall hear all about it—Just before you went out/ signore!, 1 met Fietro. 4 Ah, Carletta,' said he, * have you heard the news ?'«—* What news?' said I,— 4 Why, about the con¬ fessor that is coming to the castello ?'—*■ So I replied, signora, that I had not," 44 Well, Cflfrletta," said Rosalina, im¬ patiently, * 4 you nee 1 not be so particu¬ lar in describing your conversation : do, pray, proceed to the circumstance that caused you so much terror." " I will tell you every thing, signora, but I shall not know where to begin, Avithout I relate the whole." " Do,
** Do, then, let me have your Avonder- fiil stoiy as quickly as possible, in your ^wn way." Carletta then proceeded-— " So, signora, when l· tola Pietre»' tliat I had not beare any thing about the confessor, he replied—* Then I will tell you :*—you muet know that no one knows any tiling about him—-wh<^ he is, ep where he came ftom : we Have aH. strict eiders to pay him the greatest re¬ spect, but we are never to look at him, for they say he does not like it ; ami¬ none of the monks, or any one else, have ever seen his feee r or scarcely heard him speak. Thi$ I heard from the old porter at the monastery,' So, »ignora, Avhen I found tliis, I felt curious to see him. 4 And Avhere will he live ? said I to Pietro. —' In some of the eastern chambers, I have heard Gtilieno say,' he
lie replied. Well, signora, I said nothing to Pietro, but ????? I Avent as soon as I heard he had arrived, to the corridor that leads to them, and concealed my¬ self behind some large pillars, vidiere I kneAv he would not see me. So, soon after 1 heard somebody coming, and sure enough it was the monk, and Lupo after him, carrying a basket full of some¬ thing, which I could not see, for it Avas covered ail over with a cloth. But the monk—oh, such a tali great ugly figure, Avith liis cowl all over his face. Oh, signora, I never was so frightened in all my life." " Indeed !" said Rosalina ; " you Avere then easily alarmed, for I cannot dis¬ cover the smallest reason you had for your fears," M Oh, but signora, I have not told you all. Well, as he was passing al¬ most
movst close to the columns, the cowl (tpcned, so that I had a sight of part of his face for a moment, for I had not courage to look at it any longer : and what do you ???, signora?» —it was all black !—and his eyes—oh! I never saw stich eyes in all my life !—--so fierce and fi-ightful." 44 You could lírírdly be a judge in the* momentary gli rupse vidiieh yon say you had of them," replied Rošaltím 44 Oh, signora, but indeed lam almost sure they were as I said ; and as to his face, I am certain of that, for T saw it plain enough," replied Carletta. * 4f * And when he had parsed, I rtirt as fast as ï Afras able,'and never stopped till I came· here." 44 As you do not seem quiie certain about hiš eyes," said Rosalina, sfnilmg, ' <s I con-
?% I conclude» that it was your fears, or the shade of the cowl, that darkened the fathers face, and as sueh I ivouid advise you to think it, and to compose your causeless alarm." Carlotta, however, did not seem to be of the same opinion as her mistress, and retired from the apartment» saying, as she went out, that she was sure his face Avas black, and she should never think other¬ wise till she had seen it again.
CHAP
CHAPTER VIII.
Rosalina, after the depicture of Car^ letta, sat some time ruminating on what she had informed her about Grimaldi. Her astonishment at his being appointed confessor to the castello w T as great, since it proved to her that he was known to the duca; and her desire to know who he was being greatly increased by that circumstance, she hastened to her cabi¬ net, Avhere lay, as yet imperii sed, the 44 History of the Älonk." She took it ou t, . and having unfolded it, read the follow- i«g lines:
" ?И? HISTORV OF ROMFXLINO. ^ My hand trembles as I take up the pen, as I anticipate the reneAval of tny sorrows, while I detail the events of a few past years. Angelica, dost thou liehold me from thy bright abode? Do thy beaming eyes gaze on thy Romel¬ lino? Perhaps thou art insensate to my %voes: happy if so, for it would pain thy tender bosom to know the grief that -swells that heart, whieh when thou didst inhabit this globe, Avas irrevocably thine —now insensible to love, it is alive only ίο unutterable grief. 4t In tlie principality of Otranto lived the compte Romellino, my father : brave and generous, every one loved him. His greatest friend Avas Tancredi, prince of Otranto. When Avar with its deadly breath convulsed the state, they fought tíde by side; each would gladly have opposed
opposed his bosom to receive the wounds aimed at the other ; and Avhen the trum¬ pet's shrilLekmgour no more Avas heard, Avhen peace dvvelt around, still they Avere inseparable, Death at last parteet them : my father, Avith his dying breath, be¬ queathed me to Tancredls care. I was then at that age when the boy verges to manhood—Avhen the heart, unadulter¬ ated Avith the vices of the world, begins to indulge in the unsophisticated de· lights of love. Tancredi had a daugh¬ ter: never did my eyes behold such perfect beauty—-such Avinning gentle* ness-— such attractive charms! Sure if a soul ever animated an angels form on earth, it Avas hers. Our love was mu¬ tual, and Tancredi beheld it with plea¬ sure. ' Yet a few years,' said the good Tancredi to Angelica and myself, as he placed my hand in that of his lovely daughter-«·
daughter—' yet a few years, and Ito- mellino shall be my son. But it is neces¬ sary that you should be known to the world: go, my boy; for awhile forget the<soft indulgences of love in the rough duty of a soldier. The Turkish con¬ federacy against our states calls forth our youth to repeli tlie fierce invaders : would that I could accompany you to the field ! but this arm is now enervated by age; I am but the shade of Avhat I was when, with your valiant father, hand in hand, we reaped the sanguine harvest of the field. Peace now suits Tancredls feeble years, and ???? the l^md of death will lull hum to repose: but before that happens, 1 trust 1 ehall see my Angelica thy bride/' " Thus spoke the parent of my love, and the fire of a warrior kindled in my veins, , * I go.
4 1 go, my prince ; I burn to shew myself worthy to be called your son, and to be blessed with Angelica. Where glory can be gained I will be foremost ; the danger of an undertaking shall be my greatest incitement to perform it.' 4 But do not be rash,' said Tancredi, 4 do not expose yourself more than your honour, your duty calls, lest I have to regret the loss of the son as Avell as the father: and who shall protect my Ange¬ lica when I am no more ?' 44 The prince sighed deeply Avhile me¬ mory recalled to his mental vision my father, and he left the hall, to indulge in private the rising sorrows of his bosom. 44 Angelica was in tears; she covered her lovely face with her lily hands, but the
the pearly drops of grief rolled from beneath them. I approached her; I knelt before her.—* My Angelica! soul of my existence!' I exclaimed, * why this grief?' * Romellino is false/ said the beau¬ teous maid ; ' he loves not Angelica ; gladly he leaves her to endure the toils and dangers of Avar. Go, then, ungrate¬ ful man, and forget me for ever !' * Forget you Γ I exclaimed. * Oh, Angelica! rend not my heart by «neh unkind expressions! In the hour of the battle, it is the thoughts of rendering myself worthy of Angelica that will nerve my arm. My Avatchword shall be Angelica ; the signal for the attack shall be the name of my love. Would the heiress of Otranto be united to one who, when his country was in danger, rushed not to its aid, but shrunk in· vol. ii. η glorious
glorious from the toils of war? Would she not rather see her ltomellino re¬ turning, honoured Avith the praises of the multitude, and hailed as the saviour of his country ? Oh, how Avould your bosom beat Avhen you clasped to your heart your Avarrior, and Avelcomed him back to your arm«! Such a moment would be Avorth ages of common life. 1 *<??, tlien,' «aid the weeping maid.: * your glory, Romellino, is far, far dearer to me than life; but when you think of your Angelica in the hour of danger, let not her remembrance nerv T e your arm to acts of desperation, but make you careful of a life she loves far ^dearer than her on n.' M I promised to comply ; I soothed the lovely fair ; I dried up the crystal sor- roAVs of her eyes. We passed the even¬ ing in sweet anticipations of future happy days,
days, for we little doubted but that when the war Avas over, Ave should be blessed in the possession of each other. u Soon the Avar-trumpet AA r as heard; its shrill blast animated each Avarrior's heart. The fields Avere deserted to fill the camps ; mothers sighed for their sons—- wives for their husbands—and children for their fathers. The martial prepara¬ tions were soon completed, and the gal¬ leys were croAvded with Avarriors. The day, the hour was fixed when we Avere to depart, and I came to bid adieu to Angelica. In spite of all my ardour for the field—in spite of all my wishes to render myself worthy of my love, my heart was distended with grief. 44 She saAV the settled sadness of my soul, and smiled on me through he^ fast-falling tears. She took an embroi- n % dered
dered belt, from Avhich suspended a costly sword, and placed it by my side. * Go, mv soldier»* said she, in a falter- ing voice; 'go—be brave», but remem¬ ber your life is not at your own disposal ; he careful of that, that you may bless your Angelica Avhen the dreadful busi¬ ness of the war is over.' *' She could not say more ; her grief impeded her utterance. Long Ave held each other in a close embrace, till the last moment arriving, I torc myself away. 44 On the beach stood the venerable prince Tancredi ; he saw the varying colour in my cheeks, and divining the reason, said—* Do not give a\ ay to grief, Romellino: the joys of your meeting will richly repay the pangs of absence. I AviU endeavour to comfort Angelica. We shall hear from you often—Ave shall hear
hear that you are acquiring glory and renown, and that will console her.' " Our banners now Avantoned on the bosom of a favouring gale. I embraced my future parent, and hastening on board the admiral's galley, Ave spread our canvas to the bree/e, and soon the loved shores of Italy lessened to the sight. 44 As long as they were visible*, I kept my gaze fixed on the part Avhere my Angelica dwelt, while deep sighs rose from my bosom ; and when at length Italy, dimhjishing to a speck, was lost in the clouds, still I could not turn ?????, but kept looking towards the sky-mixed Avaves. 44 Perhaps Angelica, from the towering turrets of her father s castle, had been watching my A'cssel—had seen the gilded n 3 hull
hull sinking, as it ivcre, in the Avatcrs, Avhich at length obscured even the tall masts* ' 4 The next morning we descried the enemy. Our hearts beat high for the combat—our bosoms panted for glory-— each warrior felt himself an host, and half unsheathed his SAVord, impatient for the battle. We urged the rowers, who, exerting their wdiole strength, the ocean foamed before the quick-gliding proAvs. f< The combat Avas dreadful. Many a turbaned head lay low, and.streams of blood flowed from our decks. Boarded by the Turkish commander on one side, and one of his captains on the other, hummed in betiveen the two vessels, our situation was desperate. Each moment witnessed the death of our people ; but they fell not mirevcnged, for tAvice their number
flumber of the Turks groaned out their souls. 44 Floreski, the admiral, Avas furiously attacked by the Turkish leader; but his strength Avas not equal to that of his fierce antagonist ; scarcely at length could he parry his reiterated blows. I saiv his danger, and rushed to his aid. Fortune attended my sword—the Turk fell, and his people seeing the death of their leader, retreated to their vessel. 44 Enraged at being indebted to me for his life, Floreski sternly demanded why I had dared to interfere? Surprise at such a question, when I expected to have received his thanks, kept me silent. He imputed it to fear, and openly cen¬ sured my conduct, and intimated, that wishing to acquire at an easy price the thanks of Tancredi and the prize of valour, I had stepped in, and by sub¬ ii 4 duing
duing the nearly vanquished Turk, had basely endeavoured to take from him the glory of the conquest. 44 My anger rose at his vile assertions ; but it Avas not a time to seek revenge, for the heat of the battle increased, and the rapacious tyrant Death was sated Avith the blood of thousands. 44 Victory at length smiled on our fleet ; the Turks fled, and we pursued. Three days Ave ploughed the liquid Avaves; on the fourth our enemies abandoned their vessels, and sought the protection of their own shores, Avhere, strongly en¬ trenching themselves behind their barks, which were draAvn up on tlie beach, they defied our force. *' While tliey Avere in this almost im¬ pregnable situation, the admiral Floreski, Avho had hated me from the moment that 1 had
I had interfered in his behalf, determined to put me in a situation from which it A^as scarcely possible I could escape with life; and on the fourth night I was or¬ dered Avith a party, scarce consisting of half the number of the enemy's forces, to land and attack them. 44 I saw the malicious intent of this command,asdid every one else, and I was repeatedly advised to decline it; but such advice I spurned at, and on the fourth night Ave steered for the shore. 44 The difficulty attending this hazard¬ ous undertaking seemed to make my people the more anxious to perform it, Wc landed, while a small party Avho Avere ordered to fire their galleys, having performed that duty, Ave attacked the astonished Turks by the light of their burning vessels—drove them from tlieir ? 5 Avorkáu
works, and before the morning dawned, the prisoners doubled the number of my party, and the ground was strCAved with the bodies of the skin. w Floreski maddened with vexation when the next morning he saw the ban¬ ners of Tancredi Avaving on the disman¬ tled Avails of the enemy's works, and heard my courage and good conduct extolled by all around; he landed, and as soon as I saw him on the shore, I determined on having satisfaction for his base conduct. On pretence of con¬ sulting him on some subject of impor¬ tance, I drew him away from his people towards a small wood, Avhere, when Ave had entered, I thus addressed him: * Noav, Floreski, I can in your face deny your base assertions, and dare you to repeat them at the risk of that life wliich you owe to my arm.' ** Floreski,
* Floreskìjdisdaining to reply, drew his sword, and suddenly aimed a thrust at my heart. Provoked at his treachery, f rushed on him. In my eagerness to be revenged I left myself unguarded —twice I Avas wounded: the sight of my blood provoked my anger, and llo- reski fell beneath my arm. 44 His wounds Avere, however, not mor¬ tal ; he Avas com r eyed on board his gal¬ ley, and soon after returned to Italy. 44 No doubt for a time the good Tan¬ credi Avas afflicted at the reports he raiseel to my discredit ; but truth is mighty, and aviU prevail. For near a year I Avas employed in difficult en¬ terprizes in Dalmatia, and in all I Avas successful, I Itoard by every oppor¬ tunity that occurred from iny adored Angelica; her letters contained protes¬ tations of her love—her anxious fears n 6 for
for my safety—and prayers for my speedy return. 44 Before the Avails of Scardona 1 reaped fresh laurels. On that dreadful night when the assault was made, I was the first that entered the breach, and stand¬ ing on a heap of the enemy who had fallen by my SAvord, I encouraged my men to perform those acts of desperate valour which gained us the victory. 44 It Avas shortly after this that I heard of the death of the good Tancredi, and that Floreski had succeeded him in the government of Otranto. My affliction at this intelligence was lost in the fears I entertained respecting Angelica, who was iioav without the protection of a parent, and I determined, the first opportunity that presented itself) to return to Otranto, 4£ Overtures made for a peace by the Turks
Turks afforded me a pretext for an im¬ mediate return: but, oh! what horror seized me—what agonies unutterable tortured my frame, when, on entering Tancredls castle, her weeping domestics informed me that Angelica had been missing for the last two days ! 44 All my inquiries were fruitless; no intelligence of my heart's adored could be gained. For many months I Avander- ed about in a state almost bordering on madness : night after night have I passed in a small Avood near the castle, where, in past happy days, I had often strayed with my Angelica, calling on her loved name, and listening to the echoes which mournfully repeated it. 44 My suspicions at length rested on Floreski. Without reflection I repaired to his palazzo, and, in the presence of the nobles, openly taxed him Avith it. He denied
denied the charge, and taking advantage of my threatening language, sent me to the galleys; and the son of the brave Ro¬ mellino, the bosom friend of Tancredi, the intended husband ofhis beauteous daugh¬ ter, was chained to the oar amongst the vilest and most abandoned of the human species ! 44 My desire of revenge alone made me endure life in such a horrible situation ; I panted for an opportunity to escape, when I intended to have imbrued my SAVord in. the heart's blood of Floreski. ** Near two years had elapsed since the time that Angelica Avas missed, and still she was unheard of,and I Avas still aslaA-e; Avhen one day, as the galley I ivas on board of was conveying some ransomed soldfers from the Algerine coast, I saAV one Avho had fought by my side at the ivell-recol- ïected night of the taking of Scardona. "In
44 In spite of my miserable appearance, and my haggard Avoe-worn countenance, the soldier, Avith an exclamation of as¬ tonishment, recognized in a galley-slave his former commander; but he sud¬ denly checked himself, as he ivas has¬ tening toAA r ards me, and Avithdrew from my sight, " This circumstance reminded me of the baseness of my situation, when even a common soldier seemed to disdain to be thought t ί have a knoAvledge of me. It Avas too much for me to bear.— Curses, deep and soul-breathed, on Flo¬ reski, escaped from me ; I gnashed my te^eth, and bit my arm so dreadfully, in the emotions of my rage, that the blood poured in a stream from the lace¬ rated limb. " The loss of the sanguine tide of life somewhat abated the violence of my passion,
MANFRONÉ.' passion, and I remained in a lethargic state the remainder of that day. 44 At night the vessel Avas anchored near the shore; and while the rest of the miserable wretches in my situation Avere slumbering after the toils of the day, I lay awake, sadly ruminating on my ivoes, when 1 heard some one approach tîie bench to which I was chained, and softly repeat my name. * Who is there,' said I, 4 that would noAv claim acquaintance ivith the wretch¬ ed Romellino ?' 4 It is Paolo,' returned the voice,— 4 Alas, that I should ever see you in this dreadful situation f But I Avas not sur¬ prised, after what I had heard from the princess Angelica.' 4 Angelica !' said I— 4 Avhat of her ? Say—
Say—tell me Avhat you do ? iioav of my Angelica?" * Be comforted, comte%' returned the man, * or wc shall be observed. It was the fear of that circumstance which pre¬ vented me speaking to you this morn¬ ing, I have a tale to tell you.' * lie quick, then,' I replied; ' for the name of Angelica has roused my utmost expectations!—Tell me, first, where is .she ?' 4 In captivity, near Algiers,' replied Paolo. * In captivity!' I exclaimed-—* my Angelica a slave ! exposed to Avorse than death!—Oh, Heavens ! be merciful, and let me die !' 4 Rather live,' said the soldier ; r ra¬ thor
ther live to rescue her, and reveuge yourself on your enemies«? * But how? see these galling igno¬ minious chains—there is no escape from them.' * Can you SAvim T demanded Paolo; ** I replied in the affirmative, and he seemed overjoyed. * Ever since I saw you,' continued* he, * I have been pondering Iioav I eould effect your deliverance: hy the greatest good fortune I found out wha had the key of your chains, and when he was asleep, I fortunately obtained it: I have now the watch, and if you. can swim as far as tlie shore, I will libe¬ rate you ; and happy will Paolo be, if he; can procure your liberty at the risk of his own/ 44 A gleam.
41 A gleam of comfort now began to illumine my sad thoughts. Faolo freed me from my fetters; I embraced the honest veteran, and, impatient to leave the vessel, I only contented myself Avith having obtained a trifling knoAvledge of the situation of Angelica's residence, and cautiously descending the galley's side, I committed myself to the waves, and soon reached the shore in safety. 44 1 travelleel the whole of that night as fast as the feeble state of my body would permit, in order to evade the pursuit that would doubtless be made as soon as it Avas known I had escaped. In the morning I lay down in the most retired part of an extensive forest, and rested myself till the shades of returning night enveloped the surrounding objects. 44 Where I had landed Avas on a retired desolate part of the Calabrian coast. I had
had not seen one cottage, nor indeed any signs of inhabitants, and I began to fear that I had only escaped from slavery to perish with famine : still the hope of rescuing my adored Angelica gave me strength to proceed, and ín the morning, when I had Avith excessive difficulty laboured up a steep moun¬ tain, I saw afar off a lew peasants' huts, and exerting my yet remaining strength, I slowly crawled towards them. They compassionated my miserable situation, and gave me food, 44 1 remained a short time Avith therøv and having recovered my strength, con¬ tinued my journey towards the opposite coast, where I hoped I should be able to find some opportunity of crossing the Mediterranean, and reaching Algiers. 44 In such an undertaking, whicii to others Avould have appeared the greatest madness,
madness, as it Avas hardly possible but that as soon as I came there, I should fe made a slave, I saw no difficulties ; it would even have been a mournful consolation to me to be a slave in that country which contained my Angelica. 44 From Calabria I crossed over to Sicily, begging a subsistence from day to day from the humble peasantry ; such Avere the painful means by Avhich I contrived to exist. Money I had none; for Avhen I was sentenced to the galleys, my estates and possessions were instantly confiscat¬ ed, and the vile Floreski enjoyed them. 44 After a long day's journey, towards the evening I came to the base of the fiery Etna : I had ascended halfway up its steep side, in order to view the coun¬ try I was going to travel, when, worn Avith fatigue, I sat down, and soon after fell into a deep sleep. About midnight I Avas
w r as awoke with the dreadful convulsion« of the ground on Avhich I lay : I could hardly stand, when a shoiver of hot ashes had nearly formed my grave. I looked towards the summit of the mountain, Avhich emitted volumes of flame and smoke, and oftentimes Avith hideous roar large stones Avere ejected from its fiery mouth, Avhich threatened destruction on all beneath them ; I thought that dread¬ ful night Avould be my last, and I offered up a prayer to heaven for my Angelica. " The love of life is, for great and ivise reasons, deeply implanted in our natures —miserable as I\vas, I still set a value on my existence : I endeavoured to descend the mountain, and had almost accom¬ plished it, when looking up, I saw a stream of liquid fire precipitately rolling towards the very spot on which I stood. α Horror-struck with the dreadful death that
thatawaited me, I Avas unable to move— every moment I expected to be annihilat¬ ed: in that case my Angelica Avould have had my last prayers. 1 besought Heaven to bless and to extricate her from her miserable situation: the torrent approach¬ ed me, when a gentle rise in the side of the mountain averted its course, and I escap¬ ed a death wliich I thought inevitable. 44 Leaving the mountain, I journeyed across the island with many a Aveary step, rendered still more fatiguing by the idea that perhaps after all my trouble I should not be able to procure a passage to Algiers : but, alas ! I was destined to more miseries, to whieh those I had en¬ dured were light in comparison. Oh, Heavens! when I reflect on the scene that shortly after I beheld, I wonder that my senses ever returned—that I did not dash myself to pieces, and enti a miser¬ able existence. 4 * I was
44 I was fortunate enough, Avhen I ar¬ rived at the coast, to obtain at the price of my labour a passage to Algiers, in a felucca which belonged to some Jcavs avIio resided at that place, which it seems they had left by stealth, in order to vend their merchandize in Sicily, a thing pro¬ hibited by the dey. I confided to them my desperate undertaking, and it seems that they had seen my Angelica, and told me the name of the Algerine merchant who had purchased her. " Alas ! do I live to Avrite that w r ord-— my Angelica purchased !~her beauties, no doubt, extolled by the savage wretch who sold her, in order to procure a higher price ! Years have rolled away since that period; but at the revived recollection my brain again maddens, and furies pos¬ sess rny senses. 44 A fter a prosperous voyage we landed at
uï Algiers. î had taken the precaution to disguise myself in the garb of a Moor, agreeable to the advice of the Jews, and without delay I proceeded through tlie city of Algiers, according to the direc¬ tions they had giveii me, and about mid¬ night arrived at the residence of Hamet P the name of the merchant avIio possessed the jeWcl òf my soul. ** Alas í when the motning daAvned, and í surveyed the building, I began to despair: it was erected on an island situ¬ ated in the midst of a lake, and the only communication to it 1tas by means of tAvo boats; these were ahvays kept at the island, artd when any of the people Who resided there had occasion to go mto the country, a Moot always waited in the boat that brought them over till they returned, or if their stay Avas expected to be long, tlie boat Atas taken tö the island agaiii. vol, η. ? « The
44 The dangers I ran of being disco¬ vered Avere great ; the Jews had given me a small sum of money, and Avith it I purchased provisions, which safety ob¬ liged me to procure only at those retired places where I had a chance of escaping if pursued. 44 Frequently did I pace the solitary shores of the lake, often directing my eyes towards those walls which enclosed the idol I adored, Avithout being blessed with a sight of her. At length, observ¬ ing that the Moor who always roAved the boat over would sometimes, Avhile waiting at the shore, land, and amuse himself with walking about till they re¬ turned, I formed in my mind a plan to secure it, and Avhich I effected in the following manner. 64 Concealing myself in a hedge near the waterside while he was absent, I softly stole
»tole to the boat, and contrived to bore a hole in its bottom unperceived; I then retreated to my hiding-place, and shortly after saw it fill with water and sink. 44 The Moor did not return for some time, and when he found that the boat Avas gone, he * concluded that some per¬ son had crossed the lake to his master's residence in it, and lie Avaited some time, expecting they would bring it back: meantime the persons he had brought over returned, and after repeated signals made by the Moor, the remaining boat was roAved across. " Their surprise at his account re¬ specting the loss of the boat was exces¬ sive; the shores of the lake were search¬ ed, but Avithout effect, and tliey returned to the mansion. " It Avas then late in the evening, and ? 4 l when
when it was sufficiently dark for my pur¬ pose, I approached the place Avhere the boat by, and stripping off my clothes, easily brought it to tlie surface of the lake; I then threw ont the Aväter that was in it, having stopped up the hole I had made, and dressing myself, stepped into it, ma paddled myself over to the Moor's haram. 44 The darkness of the night favoured my undertaking. I landed unperceived, and surveyed* as well as I was able, the place where my Angelica lived : it was a large palace, situated in the midst of a garden. I loitered about the place as long as I could with safoty, and when the crimson* tints in the eastern horizon shewed the approach of day, I returned to > the boat, and crossing the lake, sunk it in the same manner as before. ** That day I purchase! ^larger quan¬ tity
tity of provision than usual, and at night returned to the island ; I then sunk the boat^ and hid myself in the gardens. ** My hope Avas, that 1 might perhaps see Angelica, who, if she really Avas in the haram, would doubtless sometimes walk in the gardens. I had secreted my¬ self behind an arbour in an almost impe¬ netrable thicket, where, without the least danger of being discovered, I could see every one who entered the gardens. 44 The whole of that day passed, when, towards the evening, two females ap¬ proached mc: trembling At ith anxious ex¬ pectation 1 surveyed them, but neither was the loA-ely form I sought: they soon retired, and no one appeared after them. 44 The next evening í trusted I should be more fortunate: the two feiriales again entered the garden, and shortly after an- E S other
other followed them. How my heart beat against my side ! for soon I recognized in her my long-lost, my adored Angelica ! 44 1 could scarcely restrain myself from leaving my place of concealment and making myself knoAvn te ,er: prudence, however, had some influence on me. I observed that she did not join the t avo females who first came into the garden, but Avalked with a melancholy air by her¬ self; till at length she entered the walk which led to the arbour behind which I was concealed. I scarcely breathed —I could hear my heart throb. Fortune favoured me, for Angelica, approaching the arbour, seated herself in it. 44 The two females were at some dis¬ tance frorn me ; the present moment Seemed propitious, and I ventured, in a soft voice, to repeat her name.
Angelica
44 Angelica started up.— € Who is it that calls me?' she said, in a terrified tone. 4 Good Heavens ! how like it was to Romellino's voice.' 4 It is your Romellino,' I softly said : 4 do not be alarmed, Angelica; seat your¬ self again, or you may attract notice.' 44 Angelica, who seemed scarcely con¬ scious of what she did, sunk down al¬ most lifeless on the bench. * Where are you, Romellino?' said she, in a faltering voice. 44 1 put back some of the branches which formed the arbour.— 4 Here/ said I, 4 is what remains of your fond, your adoring lover.' 44 Angelica shrieked. Alas ! my mis¬ fortunes and Moorish dress had so al- E 4 tered
tered me, that no traces remained of what once she remembered was Romel¬ lino. At her exclamation the females turned round and hastily approached her. 4 Angelica,' said I, ( recover your ter¬ ror, or else my endeavours to release you will be of no avail, and you will cause my being discovered, and certain death will be the consequence.' 44 Angelica felt the force of what I $aid, and when the women came up, made some excuse for her exclamation» and they left her. « I uoav asked her if slie could not contrive to stay till it was dark in the gardens, as I had no doubt in that case but that we might escape? 1 Who are you l said she : * the voice is
is tlie voice of my Romellino, but the features I recollect not.' * I have disguised therm' said I. with a deep sigh, * to prevent my being known ; perhaps, too, my grief for the loss of my heart's adored may have brought on a premature old age. But perhaps Am gelica does not wish to remember me—» perhaps säie loves another?' * Cruel man l said the Aveeping feir : 4 no hour has passed wherein your image has not appeared to my mental view—> lio hour has passed in wliich my tears bave not flowed on your account, since that cruel day when Ave parted/ *· Forgive me, my angel,' said I, * my harsh language ! Happy days may yet aivait us : the moments uoav are precious; can you stay here Avithout observation a short time longer?' e 5 4 Yes/
4 Yés,' said Angelica, 4 Hamets ab¬ sence will enable me to do so. But how can you contrive to escape from this place, or how could you indeed enter it?' 4 You may, perhaps,' said I, 4 have heard of the loss of the boat ; that was effected by me: no one but yourself knows of my being here ; with its as¬ sistance Ave can leave this place, and I trust before this time to-morrow you will be in safety.' 44 The approach of the females now in¬ terrupted our discourse. I understood little of their language, for they were Moorish women; but I believe they asked her to go in, which, Innvever, An¬ gelica for the present deferring, they shortly after left her. " I did not dare to emerge from my place
place of concealment till it Avas quite dark, In embracing my adored Ange¬ lica, I almost forgot the perilous task I had yet to perform, and which, as my preparations required some time, I could not set about too soon. 44 Having learnt from Angelica Avhere the remaining boat was, I cautiously ad¬ vanced to the place, intending to have taken her aAvay in that, which Avould add to our security from pursuit, as Hamets people could not then leave the island; but to my mortification I found it Avas fast chained to the shore, and I was unable to loosen it ; I hoiv- cA'er found means to sink it, by which we should gain time, and then repaired to Avhere my boat lay. Some time elaps¬ ed before all was ready, when ivith An¬ gelica I left the island. 44 1 rowed, as swiftly as I was able, to e 6 the
the farther ççid of the lake, wliich termi¬ nated ajt th& foot of a chain of lofty fountains: amidst the obscure recesses which I doubted not were among them, I hoped to find a place of concealment for myself and Angelica till the search that would be made after us had ceased. 44 When we landed, I sunk the boat, le$t it should serve as a direction to ?? pursuers of the road we had taken, and we began our jpurney up tlie steep side of a hill which it was necessary ??? should cjross before the d#y breke. 44 With Angelica leaning on my arim, ï wat* insensible of fatigue, The noctur¬ nal lamp with her silver beao$s illumined our path, and directed us to avoid the crags and precipices which else Avould have menaced us with destruction* When Ave stepped to rest, we saAv be¬ neath us the lake¿ whom (toe bosom reflected
reflected the beams of the tnoon, and brightened the distant walls of Hamets residence. 44 At length we gained the summit of the mountain, and descending on the other side, the lake and island Avere soon obscured from our sighfe. The crimson streaks of approaching morn¬ ing were now visible m the east, and we hastened towards a forest which thickly shaded the vate below, where we hoped to conceal ourselves during the approaching day. Soon after Ave had gained it, the sun threw his broad beams over the world. I now opened before Angelica my small stock of pro¬ visions, which fortunately I had brought with me, and of which that loved pos¬ sessor of my affections thankfully par¬ took. 44 As soon as Angelica had recovered from
from her fatigue, I requested her to in¬ form me by what means she had been brought to the dreadful situation from which I had so happily rescued her, and she related her tale in the following manner : * Reports, sent by your enemies to your disadvantage, daily reached Otranto, and the good Tancredi sunk beneath the pressure of his cruel disappointment, in the sanguine hopes he had formed respecting you ; his health was gone, and he was apparently hastening to the grave. He often gazed on me with tears in his eyes, and Avould exclaim— 44 Poor Angelica! when I am gone, what will become of thee ? 1 thought, indeed, my aged eyes Avould have been blessed by seeing you united to a hero deserving of you; I thought, too, that a son, as well as a daughter, Avould have watched my sick couch, and when I sunk into the
the arms of death, ) r ou Avould have closed those sources of my grief: but Romellino is unworthy of Angelica, and all mv fond hones are blasted." * Such was often the tenor of Tan- credi's discourse, till at length the prin¬ cipality resounded your praise«, You? conduct and valour, in attacking and destroying, with a handful of men, the whole Turkish fleet, excited universal ad¬ miration ; but that glorious victory Avas sullied by the reports of your enemies, Avho represented your conduct Avith re¬ spect to Floreski in the light of a com¬ mon assassin, and asserted that you had decoyed him into a wood, and there had basely stabbed him. * The admiral's return, still suffering from those wounds, confirmed those re¬ ports beyond a doubt, and my father, ν exasperated, would have recalled ???? / from
from the army ; but in this he was op¬ posed by Floreski himself, who, with a generosity that excited admiration, be sought him to allow you to continue, extolled your gallant achievements, and publicly forgave your conduct to him. Tancredi, at his request, therefore per¬ mitted you to remain. Alas r at that time ì had my suspickum that there were some dark plots forming against you, and which, I found after, were^ fatally for me, but too Avell founded* J Your conduct, my dear Romellino,* continued Angelica, *in Dalmatia de¬ lighted every one. Floreski, who was »OAV recovered of his wounds r would often converse with me about you. The only one of the many invidious re¬ pons -which were raised against you, and in which I coukl place any credit, was that of your conduct with respect to him, since not only his wounds, but his forgiveness
forgiveness of the injury, confirmed it. I admired Floreski for the nobleness of his conduct, and I took a pleasure in his society ; but that pleasure was result¬ ing from my attachment to you, for you were the dear theme of our conversa¬ tion. Alas ! at that time I ????? little of his real designs ; I could not pene¬ trate into his motives : deeply versed in hypocrisy, he easily succeeded in gain¬ ing my esteem, ívho, ignorant of the wiles of men, was led by appearances, which, when too late, I found Avere de¬ ceitful. 4 The good Tancredi noAV drew near his end; his lamp of life Avas nearly exhausted, and the flame now doubt¬ fully hovered round the wick. On the morning of that day in which his soul winged its flight to regions of immortal glory, as I was sitting weeping by the «ide of his couch, the news arrived of your
your having taken Scardona; a mo¬ mentary smile Avas perceptible on his features, which before were convulsed with pain, 44 My dear Angelica," said he, 4e Ro¬ mellino is worthy of you : may you be happy together ! Tell him that I forgive him all the uneasiness he has caused me, and that had I lived I Avould have joined his hand with thine, Angelica, fareAvell !—my moments are numbered. Before the throne of Heaven shall I soon offer up an earnest supplication for your happiness. Angehca, adieu !" 4 Such were the last Avords of Tan*> credi : covered with years and honours, and lamented by his people, he sunk into the peaceful arms of death. To describe my grief at this event to you, Romellino, who know how much I loved my parent, wOidd be needless ; perhaps.
perhaps it Avould have been alleviated by your presence, but I had no one t9 pour the healing balm of consolation in l\\\r ì\QcntY\ · mv/ irripf WA4 ίίίςη mio-iTient- cd by your being so far away, and the uncertainty there was of my seeing you before the conclusion of the Avar. 4 The admiral Floreski was chosen to succeed my father in the government of Otranto ; and soon after I began to de¬ velope his real character and designs. 4 One evening he came to the palaz¬ zo, and to my repeated cpiestions w hen he thought there ni igl it be a probabi¬ lity of your return, he remained silent Astonished at this, and fearing that yoa had fallen a victim to your too-desperate valour, I demanded the reason, request¬ ing him to let me know the truth, Avhen, after much solicitation, he at length re¬ plied— 44 Perhaps,
'* Perhaps, fair Angelica, if I do not candidly declare what I am informed of concerning the comte Romellino, I shalt not act as a friend towards you; you knoAv how much I have interested my¬ self toAvards one avIio has acted so base¬ ly towards me—who has not only endea¬ voured to rob me of my glory, my renown, the greatest treasure in a sol¬ dier's estimation, but sought to deprive me of my life (Avhich indeed, without the other, Avould be of little no value): but that I have forgiven ; I scorn re¬ taliation ; I have endeavoured to Avash away the remembrance of those acts, not only from my own mind, but also from the minds of the people, lest they should imbibe any prejudice against him. You will judge from these circumstances how greatly it must pain my feelings when you force me to tell' all I know concerning the comte. To Otranto he never will return: fear of my anger, and
and of being obliged to perform his pro¬ mise towards you, Angelica, will keep him away; for sorry am I to say that #i»w\f Inti· ????????? lue «ιίΥ/»Γ»τ-?/4τ?ο itul ** «ΛΙ?ν/ΙΙ?ν t j/î/OUVOW41 *«lkJ UlllV-tU/iU'j utiu tt* Turkish lady of high birth, who be¬ came his prisoner at Scardona, now holds captive that heart which once was pledged to Angelica." e Though shocked almost to fainting at this relation, yet pride made me re¬ strain my sorrow before Floreski.— 4 * It is well," said I; 4i the comte Romel- lino's conduct has cured me of Avhat affection I might once have entertained for him ; he was then a man of honour, one whom I thought would ever have scorned to do a b;.r.s act; as sueh I lo^ed him, nor do I blush to own it, for a parent sanctioned such a disposal of my affections : now that he is no longer what he was, I regard him with that contempt which he deserves, as hav¬ ing
ing deviated from the paths of honour, und becoming no longer worthy my re¬ collection." 4 Floreski appeared delighted at my speech.—" Such a resolution," said he, " is worthy the daughter of prince Tan¬ credi: but I fear it was too quickly formed to lie permanent ; and should the comte return—should he be pre¬ vailed on by my assurances of his safety to revisit Otranto, perhaps the princess Angelica would forget her hasty resent¬ ment." *' Impossible !" í replied : " were he to arrive this moment, I would not see him; he should be denied admittance at the palace gates, and he might re¬ turn to his Turkish inamorata without causing one sigh to Angelica." 04 May I then," said Floreski, throw¬ ing
ing himself at my feet, 4i presume to hope that time and my unwearied at¬ tentions may procure for me that place in Angelica's affections, now vacant by the infidelity of Romellino ?" 4 1 started at his speech, for this sud¬ den declaration of Floreski's made me instantly suspect that what he had just said concerning you might be only to gain his own ends: a gleam of hope en¬ tered my breast that it might be so, for I could not bring that heart which had ever been yours to forget you in a moment; I could not think you Avere capable of such deeds as were attributed to you, yet I OAvn that Floreski told his well-concerted tale in such a plausible manner, that had he not acted as he did so directly after, it might in a short time have obtained implicit belief. 44 My heart," said I, t4 is too deeply af¬ flicted
flicted with the severe loss I hankis- tained, to be capable of admitting an-* otlier passion ; it is indeed vacant, and I tflist will ever remain so, for after Ro- mellino's conduct, in whom can I place confidence ?" 44 Promise me, at least"isaid Floreski, «till retaining his suppliant posture, "that should Romeffitto return, in spite of what he may urge in his defence of what I have imputed to him, that I shall not hive to teok on him as the ???? of An¬ gelica's detìyitìg my suit" ** No, ft I returned ; ** I cannot make such a promise, for perhaps you have been deceived respecting the comte's conduct : to give him an opportunity of declaring his innocence would be but just; should he sefck it, it will make me conclude that it is the base contrivance of his· enemies ta injure him still more in
in your opinion as well as mine ; and if he does not, it will be a tacit acknowledg¬ ment of his unworthiness." 44 But what 1 1?? ? ? told you," returned Floreski, Avhose anger I could Avell per¬ ceive was excited by my answer, for he hastily rose from the ground and bit his lips— 4< what I have told you, when I affirm that it is true, I conclude you will no longer doubt it; and lest you should, after Avhat I have adA r anced, give Romellino an opportunity to cheat you into a belief of his innocence, and, Avon over by his hollow protestations of affec¬ tion, consent to a union, I shall consider it as a duty I owe the memory of prince Tancredi to prevent such an opportunity, by banishing the comte Romellino from the principality of Otranto." 44 Such a conduct," I returned, 4t would ill suit with the kind intent you have vol. n. f pretended
pretended to take concerning the comte Romellino: a true friend Avould be happy both in giving him an oppor¬ tunity to rescue his character from the odium that hangs over it, and in the event of his doing so, to see him united to the object of his affections ; but you are actuated from interested motives, and your well-formed tale is, I trust,-not founded on truth." * Floreski's rage at my speech some¬ what alarmed me; he stamped on the floor, and seemed unable to give vent to his passion.-—" 'Tis Avell," said he ; 4t 1 recall my pardon of my injuries; I Avill have revenge, and you may perhaps feel the effects of the insult you have offered me/* * Having said this, he left the apart¬ ment, and me to my rummations. Not¬ withstanding my anxiety respecting you and
and myself, I felt happy in thinking that Floreski's assertions had no foundation, and that you had every reason to be as dear to me as ever, for I iioav Avas certain the well-contrived story of his wrongs Avas as false as the rest he had ad¬ vanced. 4 That evening a vessel arrived from the fleet, and by it I had the dear plea- sure of hearing from you. Your letters breathed the same expressions of love and constancy; and while I Avas assured that there was no alteration in your conduct or affection, I execrated the base de¬ signing Floreski I AA r as anxious about you when I found you intended coming to Otranto, for I feared that vour life AA*as endangered, and that your bitter enemy Avould himself commit the crime he had imputed to you, and seek an op¬ portunity to assassinate you, for I little feared his threat of banishment, being F 2 Avell
Avell assured that the nobles, who Avere A'our friends, Avould strongly object to such a measure, which might occasion a revolt among the troops who were under your command, whom you had so often led to victory ; and if it really had taken place, Angelica had too much love for Romellino to refuse sharing with him Avhatever hardships fate had destined him to bear. 4 Such was my resolution : anxiously did I each day, from the highest turret of the palazzo di Tancredi, gaze on the ocean Avhere the distant waves seemed to join the clouds. Sometimes I imagined that I saw the vessel which contained you—sometimes a distant wave, Avith its head of foam, I mistook for the white sails of your galley. I watched the clouds to see if the Avind was propitious to your voyage ; but your coming was delayed, and each hour I greAv more unhappy, 4 One
4 One evening, to dissipate my grief, 1 walked in that wood ivhere we had often voAved for each other eternal love ; I sat doAvn on the same bank AAdiich had often Avitnessed our protestations of the passion which occupied our bosoms; scarcely, however, had I seated myself, Avhen three men, each wearing a mask, rushed from a thicket, and before I could cry for assistance, one prevented my speech by putting his hand before my mouth, while another held me : after some de¬ liberation they carried me to a carriage, which Avas waiting in the wood, and 1 heard the voice of Floreski, directing the men to convey me to the beach.' 4 And Avas it then,' said I, interrupting Angelica, 4 the base Floreski through Avhose accursed arts you became a cap¬ tive slave to a Moor ? Oh, may Heaven blast him witli its deadliest fires ! But no—may I at least revenge myself on f 3 him !
him ! that Avili be some consolation, some retaliation for our wrongs.' 44 Angelica continued— 4 When I had arrived at the seaside, it was nearly dark: I looked around me, but no mortal was near whom I could implore for assist¬ ance/ I was put into a small vessel, which instantly proceeded on its desti¬ nation. 4 We had not, however, proceeded iar on our voyage before we ivere overtaken by a storm, and which the next morning increased to an alarming height: the black billoAVs threatened each moment to overwhelm us; the raging gusts of Avind had torn to pieces all our sails ; the Aväter entered the vessel, and we ex¬ pected every moment Avould be our last, Avhen a large galley, seeing our dangerous ¡situation, ventured near us, and scarcely had we got into her, Avhen the vessel we had
had been in was swallowed up b> ¿v: merciless waves. 4 1 now thought the moment of de¬ liverance was at hand ; and I determined, as soon as the galley Avas in sight of land, to make the commander of her acquainted Avith my situation^ and en¬ treat he Avould carry me to some part of the coast where I should be out of the poAver of Floreski till you arrived to protect me: but, alas! fate destined otherwise: the storm drove the galley far from the land, and Avhen at length it abated, and the mists that had obscured the view were dispersed, terror-struck, Ave discovered at no great distance from us an Algerine corsair. To escape this formidable enemy, and a fate Avhich to me was far worse than death, every ex¬ ertion was made use of by the creAV and some soldiers who Avere on board, but to little purpose; the corsair gained fast f 4t on
on us, and our people prepared to de¬ fend their vessel, as the only means of averting the horrors of slavery. 4 The combat was dreadful :—the cries of the wounded—the groans of the dying—the shouts of the men as they animated each other during the ac¬ tion—the sight of the miserable wretches Avho lay on the decks in the last agonies of death-~altogether was more than my senses could bear: I sunk lifeless on the deck. When 1 recovered, I found myself in the rough grasp of a Moor. I immediately conjectured Avhat my situation was, and rent the air with my screams.—Alas ! they Avere of little avail, and I was conveyed with the rest of the galley's crew who yet re¬ mained alive, on board of the Algerine, Avho immediately proceeded for Al¬ giers, having suffered considerably in the action. ' As
' As none of the Moors could make themselves understood by me, they suf¬ fered one of the soldiers to attend me, who knowing something of their lan¬ guage, was-my interpreter. To this man I disclosed the perfidy of Floreski, and conjured him, if ever he should escape, to seek you, and make you acquainted ivith the author of my misery. 4 Oh, Romellino, what were my sensa¬ tions when I landed at Algiers, and Avas exposed to sale!—do I live to mention it? —the daughter of prince Tancredi bar¬ tered for!—Hamet was my purchaser, and immediately conveyed me to his residence. For many months I lay m a state so nearly similar to one deprived of life, that they often thought I was no more. Hamet had every care taken of me that was possible, and at length my constitution triumphed over my miseries, which I hoped would soon destroy me, f 5 . and
and I began slowly to recover, Hamets treatment of me w r as such as I little ex¬ pected to find from a Moor : never once was his language such as could offend the most delicate ears : he seemed to re¬ spect my misfortunes, and execrated the conduct of Floreski ; and I once thought that he would have liberated me, on con¬ dition of my paying a large sum of money, but of late he has been silent on that sub¬ ject, and his conversation to me has been of love: he offered to dismiss all the Avomen he kept, if I would listen to his addresses. Latterly he has appeared ir¬ ritated at my constant refusals, and Heaven knoAvs what would have been the consequences, if Romellino had not come to my aid, for the daughter of Tancredi would sooner have perished than have suffered the smallest indignity.* " Such was the relation of Angelica, and which I often interrupted with exe¬ crations
crations on the villain Floreski, the cause of much misery to us both. 4 The time will come, lovely Ange¬ lica,' said I, * when we shall be reven¬ ged ofthat monster; at present we must tum our thoughts to our situation, which is replete with danger ; but Heaven, who aids the virtuous, will doubtless prosper our undertakings.' " The sun had sunk behind the wes¬ tern mountains before Angelica had con¬ cluded her narrative, and we now com¬ menced our uncertain course; anxious only, for the present, to increase our distance from Hamets residence, Ave continued advancing through the forest, and when we had emerged from it, by the light of the moon we beheld be¬ fore us a long chain of mountains, whose rugged sides were brightened by her rays. f 6 "A
" A thousand cares possessed my soul for my Angelica, when around us we listened appalled to the roaring of the savage beasts. I had no means of de¬ fence, for to have carried any arms, I well knew, Avould excite suspicion, and therefore we should have become an easy prey if Ave had been attacked. " Long before the morning Angelica, too weary to proceed, sat doAvn beneath a tree, and, whilst I watched, resigned herself to a short repose. Ah ! what hap¬ piness I then had in vieAving her beaute¬ ous face ! Her fatigue had stolen the roses from her cheeks, but her lips still retain¬ ed their lovely bloom. Little did I then think on what would so soon follow—that those beauties, those resistless charms— But I aviU proceed. " Angelica Avas refreshed by her slum¬ bers, and partook of the remainder of the
the provisions I had brought with me. A new and dreadful anxiety pervaded my mind, for as the rising sun dispersed the mists pf night, I looked around me, but nowhere could I discover any signs of human habitation, where we could procure a fresh supply. Angehca pressed me to eat ; but I refused, alleging that I had already taken some while she slept, for I was fearful that we should not meet with any village or hut that day, and, if so, there would not remain any for An¬ gehca : fortunately, not far from us Avas a stream, where I slaked my thirst, and the sweet companion of my toils did the same, and Ave again set forward. " In these deserted places we had little fear of pursuit, and we determined to proceed as far as we were able that day, in the hopes of finding a shelter for the night in some hut. Vain hope ! for as often, disconsolate, on the summit of some
some mountain, we ca$t our eyes on the valleys below, no sign of human habita¬ tion met our longing anxious gaze. A silence like that of the grave seemed to reign over the hills and vales : no distant watchdog, no lowing herds or bleating flocks, gladdened our ears ; but a con¬ tinued range of mountains appeared around us, whose summits closed in the horizon. "This day Angelica was often obliged to stop and rest, for her tender frame was unable to bear the dreadful fatigues she was forced to undergo. I did all I could to cheer her, but her spirits were gone. Still a small portion of the pro¬ visions was left ; I offered it to her; she ate a little, and entreated me to take the rest, which I promised to do while I as* cended an eminence whicii by before us, to see, before the night closed in, if there were any hopes of succour. 44 Deeply
" Deeply did I sigh as I gazed on the dreary prospect around me : a valley lay at the bottom of the hUl I was standing on, along which ran a stream of water ; I anxiously examined the banks where it appeared likely the peasant might have chosen to fix his residence; but still I was far distant from the busy haunts of men: that stream presented an obstacte not easy to be oveiamie, for as to cross it with Angelica was impossible, it re¬ mained for me to judge which way it would be best to direct our steps when we had reached its banks, As the river widened to the right, I resolved to pro, ceed in that direction the next morning, and then hastily advanced to Angelica, who was resting her exhausted frame on a small hillock. 44 She raised her languid eyes as she saw me coming; but, alas ! I had no pleas¬ ing intelligence to sooth her agitated mind.
* mind. I began to suffer myself from the want of rest ai food, and felt that I should scarcely be able to travel the next day : the scanty morsel of food that re¬ mained I treasured up for Angelica for the next morning ; that dear angel anx¬ iously demanded if I had ate it, which question I continued to evade, and en¬ treated her to endeavour to sleep. She rested her lovely head on the side of the bank, and I watched for a short time over her, but at length, worn out with fatigue, I closed my eyes, and for awhile forgot my miseries. When I awoke, I found Angehca sitting by my side : the moon was hid in clouds, and the morning was fast approaching. Ah, hoAv bitter were my waking thoughts !—no hope, no comfort, was near !—mournfully I arose, and my adored Angehca leaning on my arm, with many a weary step we gained the banks of the stream. It w r as here I entreated her to take the last of our pro¬ vision.
vision.— 4 No, dear Romellino,' she re¬ plied, in feeble accents, 4 1 do not need it; hereis my last resting-place on earth —I shall never proceed farther.' r My adored angel,' I replied, s do not rend the soul of your Romellino ! —Savage wretch that I was, to take you ????? to perish amongst these moun¬ tains !' 4 Do you love me ?' said the dear maid; 4 and is it possible you can regret taking me from the abode of infamy, where it is likely before this I should have been my own executioner? SAveet will now be my last moments, for Romellino will close my eyes.' 44 Oh God ! what were my sensations when I saw the once-beauteous eyes of Angelica, now robbed of that lively ex- pression they once possessed ! Pain sat upon
upon her brow—her lips were pale- tier cheeks salloAV,and her whole appear¬ ance indicating the truth of her speech, I knelt ; I entreated, Avith tears fast floAv- ing from my sorroAvful eyes, that she would take the remnant of provision. ' What purpose, dear Romellino,' she replied, 4 Avould it answer for me to eat? Would it not be protracting my moments of anguish for no use? for if I did take it, I should not have strength to proceed further, and perhaps too, I might then have the agora|g|^seemg you depart before me, ISoîrTSved of my soul, eat it ; it will give you strength to perform the last sad rites to your adoring Angelica ; and when I am laid in my humble grave, let my soul be Avafted to heaven on the tender sigh to my memory, which will depart thy quivering lips before the moment of thy dissolution arrives.' 44 What
44 What agonies seized me ! The poAvers of description are feeble to give an idea of Avhat I felt, Avhen I beheld Angehca lying almost motionless on the earth, her strength every moment de» creasing, and she evidently striving to conceal the pangs of death, lest she should add to my griefs. 4 Adieu, Romellino !' she Avith difficul¬ ty uttered, after a long afflicting silence; 4 let us bid each other adieu in this Avorld : it is but a few pangs, and our souls, divested of those earthly trappings, will again meet, never more to part, Death ???? hovers over me, eager for his prey : my love, stay not long behind rre, for my felicity will not be complete Avithout you.—Once more adieu !' 44 Angelica, groaning, sunk from my bosom, on which I had rested her head, and
and all that remained of that once lovely maid, adorned Avith every external and mental accomplishment Avhich adds dig¬ nity and grace to human nature, Avas now a lifeless pallid corpse. * Fair angel,' said I, * soon I trust we shal! meet again; the pains of death Avould be sweet in comparison to Avhat I iioav endure; may they be hasty in their approach! Thy sweet remains shall be entombed by my hands—I will form thy grave, and streAV it with the simple flowers of the field.' " With trembling hands I raised the earth, and gently laid her pale form in the shalloAv grave. I was astonished at myself; no tears came from my eyes— my brains appeared convulsed. When I had completed my mournful occupa¬ tion, I stood in speechless agony. Long ï sur-
I surveyed her pallid feature when the name of Floreski suddenly came to my tortured remembrance. * Infernal A f illain !' I hoarsely exclaim¬ ed, t may my curses Avither thy vile carcase I —This is thy doing—thou art the cause of that angels death—of my misery !—Eternal tortures be thy lot î — When I die, my last breath shall curse thee. Die, did I say? and Floreski live? No, I will ????? ; I will traverse the globe—hunt him to the verge of the world—revenge shall be mine !—I will mangle his limbs, and tear his heart in pieces!—Furies of hell seize on my senses—make me able to commit the most horrible acts to torture Floreski í —His dying pangs will be comfort to my soul, and it will then contented quit the world.' " My recollection extends no further, for
for my sewm forsook me : where I AA r ent, or Avhat I did for two years I ????? not; but about the end of that time I awoke, as if from a sleep, in Avhich I thought I had been dreaming of a scene similar to that I have noAV related. I was in a dark place, my feet and hands encircled Avith heavy chains, and my body fastened in a similar manner to a Avail. I groaned aloud—* In what place am I ? Ah, good Heavens! wasit then a dream? Pray Heaven it is! for I thought I Avas but this moment standing by the grave of Angelica, and imprecating curses on Floreski ; but ???? that I am ??????, I find myself a prisoner, more strongly bound than Avould be the most outrage¬ ous maniac.' " The sounds of my voice echoed through my dreary abode, and shortly after a door opened, and a man entered Avith a lamp. As soon as I beheld his features,
features, I instantly recognized one of the Jews in whose felucca I had sailed from Sicily to Algiers. * It is true,' said he ; 4 did I not hear you speak ?* t Why that question ?' I returned.— fc For Avhat purpose am I confined here ? Is it not sufficient that I have lost my heart's delight, my lovely Angelica ?— that the grave will for ever hide her beauteous form from my sight? But perhaps I am speaking to one of Flo¬ reski's agents. Yes, it must be so; this is his damned deed. But Avhy does he not put me out of my torture, and com¬ plete his villanies ?' * I am glad,' returned the man, * to hear you talk so rationally; I trust your senses are returning, for it is now near seven months ànce you Avere confined here,
here, during which time no other words have you ever uttered than the names of Angelica and Floreski' * Couple not that saint with that de¬ mon of darkness/ I replied. * Seven months, do you say? Is it seven months since Angelica perished ?' * It must, as I conclude,* returned the man, ' be nearer two years since we first heard that a person, whom we concluded by the description to be you, was wandering about the mountains. You lived on the grass, bark of trees, and what animals you could catch.— Twice you crossed the lake to Hamets residence, and twice escaped their en¬ deavours to seize you. We Avere fear¬ ful lest through you our voyage to Sicily might be discovered, and, after a great deal of trouble found you busily em¬ ployed in tearing to pieces a young kid, calling
calling it Floreski. Fearful of coming near you, we watched till you had con¬ cluded your horrid repast when you lay down and fell asleep ; we then cautiously advanced, and before fbu were sensible of what we were doing, secured, and with great trouble brought you privately to Algiers, and then concealed you in this' subterraneous place, which is be¬ neath our residence.* ** Such was the relation of the .Teiv, and which my lacerated form confirmed I trembled as I viewed the large scars which appeared all over my body, my limbs shrunken and hardly covered with skin^— 4 And thh,' I said, 4 is all Flo» reski's doing: does not this cry loudly for revenge ? Alas ! before this the mor¬ tal remains of Angelica are mouldered away—gone for ever! never Avili her beauties again glad my sight !' vol. ?. α " My
** My feelings were excited by these reflections, and for a long time I shed bitter tears. The man, leaving his lamp with me, went in the interim to call his companions, who entered and beheld my grie£ I found myself greatly re¬ lieved by the flood of sorrow, and an¬ swered all their frequent questions with that propriety whieh made them *con* elude that I was no longer deranged.; but when I entreated them to liberate me, they were fearful of my complaint returning, and requested that I would not deem it a useless precaution if I re¬ mained as I Avas a few days longer. To this I assented with a degree of willing- ness which made them the more ready to believe me entirely recovered ; and in order to make my situation somewhat bearable, brought me clothes and pro* visions, liberated my hands and feet, leaving the chain only which confined me to the Avail. In this state I con¬ tinued
tinned for four days, during which time they repeatedly visited and conversed with me; and at length, convinced there was no danger, set me at liberty ; and as I was urgent with them to procure me the means of leaving Algiers for Italy* glad, no doubt to be rid of sueh an in- eumbrance, they provided a passage to Calabria; and having furnished me with money, whieh I promised to return as soon as I liad reached Oteanto, I set out, gloomy and wholly intent on the revenge which I Avas determined to take of Floreski; and fearful of being disap» pointed, as soon as I landed, I trarelied with the greatest circumspection, lest he should have any intimation of my ar* rival: such a precaution was, hoAfever, needless, for misery had so completely disguised me, that my features Avere un· kno\#n even to myself. 44 At length I entered the principality G % Of
of Otranto, where I learnt that Floreski still held the reins of government, but that being the object of universal detes¬ tation, a revolt was every hour expected. He hadin the first instance incurred the people's hatred by his conduct with re¬ spect to me, and after that by repeated *afcts of cruelty and oppression. This in¬ telligence hastened my arrival at Otranto, and lurking about his residence, I soon learnt when it was likely I could surprise him. " It was his usual custom to repose during the heat of the day in a pavi¬ lion which was erected in the gardens of his palazzo, and that was the place I determined should Avitness my just revenge. ** With great risk of being observed, I at length contrived to effect an entrance into the gardens, where, concealing riiy- self
self near the pavilion, I awaited the coming of Floreski, 44 At length I saw him approach*—Oh, how my blood boiled in my veins! I could hardly prevent myself from spring« ing on him before he ?? teached the pavilion ; but as in that case he might have escaped, I waited impatiently till I concluded he was asleep, when with cautious steps I entered tlie building, and approached the costly conch on which reposed my intended victim. I could hardly speak, so great was my agitation when 1 had a sight of his fea¬ tures as I stood beside him ; at length I exclaimed—* Floreski, awake !' 44 He started up, and was going to call his guards, but I prevented him by placing a dagger to his throat.— 4 Dost thou recollect me?' I with difficulty de* manded. ? 3 4 No,'
1 Ko,' said lie, tremblings and locking at me; 'I never saAV you before.' * Villain, thou liest ! Look at me again, and recall to thy remembrance what comte Romellino once was, and behold what he is ????.' ° Floreski grew deadly pale as I de¬ clared myself. i * Angelica,' I continued, * is dead; she died in my arms; these hands form¬ ed her grave, and these hands,' I ex¬ claimed, Avhile furious rage nerved each joint, * shall sacrifice thee to appease her wrongs and my own.' 44 Tims having said, I cast aside the dagger, which would haA^e been too sud¬ den an instrument of destruction, and seizing him in my strong grasp, I dash¬ ed him on the floor, tore him almost ta pieces,
pieces, and glutted my eyes with the sight ofhis limbs yet quivering with Ufe. 44 ï then became calm ; my vengeance was noAv sated ; I left the gardens, and proceeded immediately to the residence of the noble who I had understood was likely to succeed Floreski as soon as he was deposed, and making myself known, avowed to him the deed. 44 Scarcely could he credit my relation, for he had not the smallest recollection of me : but soon the death of Floreski was known, and I was embraced as the deliverer of the people ; my estates were returned to me, and I was offered a post of high importance in the state. 44 But my mind was too miserable to alloAv me to think of life with any de¬ gree of comfort : Angelica dead, I was dead to happiness. I sought out the α 4 soldier
soldier to whom I was indebted for my deliverance from the galley, and amply recompensed him for that &ervice. I then left Otranto, with a resolution of never again visiting a place which recall¬ ed to my remembrance those days when I was happy, and which only added to my present soitoavs —to seclude myself in some remote monastery, where the tale of my woes was unknown, and where I determined that I never might be recog¬ nized by any one, and never again hear the name of Romellino—to hide ray features from Ariew, to live by myself, to dedicate my thoughtè to Heaven, and await with patient resignation my disso¬ lution, when I hope to be united to my Angelica in regions of eternal joys." Such was the conclusion of Romei- lino's misfortunes ; and Rosalina, when she had perused them, sighed deeply at the
the relation ; mimy parts of it indeed had so much aftected her feeling heart as to excite tears. She thought she could now account for the peculiarity of his con¬ duct, as resulting from the many cala¬ mities be had undergone. But that the duca should make choice of such a man for a confessor, or that he indeed would ??? ??? of such an office, appeared to lier a perfect mystery* Fatigued with th« perusal of the papers, and anxious to dissipate the me¬ lancholy ruminations they excited, she retired to her couch, where sleep soon lulled her senses to repose. The next morning she heard from Carletta, that Grimaldi resided in those chambers in the eastern wing of the cas¬ tello where her father had confined her, in order to force her to a marriage with the prince di Manfrond ? 5 She
She could not help smiling at the miraculous tales of her domestic, who related to her many wonderful stories concerning the monk, knowing Iioav void they Avere of truth; but the ser¬ vants had repeated them to each other so often, that at last they w r ere persuad¬ ed that the Aveak chimeras of their oavu brains Avere facts that really had occurred. She Avas anxious to see Montalto, to inform him of Grimaldls being appoint¬ ed confessor to the castello, since she had in a former conversation related to him the singular conduct of the father* and she determined to go to their usual place of meeting, namely, the chapel of Santa Maria, tlie next evening. The narrative of Romellino she im* mediately sent with many thanks to the venerable abbot, as from what he had said, and Avas expressed in the latter pages, she
she did not think herself justified in de¬ taining it after she had perused it. That her father either knew the monk, or had some private reason for his actions, she could no longer doubt, when she heard the singular stipulations he made (and Avhich were ???? no secret in the castello), of living so retired and apart from those whom it was his busi¬ ness to instruct. She pitied RomeIlino r s sufferings from the cruel perfidy of Floreski, but shuddered at the dreadful revenge he took of his inveterate enemy, which she thought ill agreed with \m pious inten¬ tions of devoting himself to religion ; for the heart which aspires to the service of Heaven must be free from all worldly passions—must be endued with charity, benevolence, and philanthropy ; but she feared that the monk had not yet forgot g ? the
.MANFRONÉ. the pleasure he seemed to reap from his horrible revenge, which she thought she should recollect Avhenever she saw him, and which could not fail to inspire her with unpleasant sensations, for when¬ ever he raised his hands to heaven, her fancy would depict them stained with the blood of Floreski, and him exulting with savage delight over his mangled form. When, however, Rosalina further con¬ sidered her father's conduct in offering him a residence in the castello, and the solitary way in which he was to pass his hours, she was certain it was not his in¬ tention that he should officiate in the religious duties daily performed in the chapel of the castello ; and in this idea she was confirmed by the attendance of the father who had officiated there since the death of the lamented Augustino : time, however, she trusted, would unfold the
the duca's designs, and the incompre¬ hensible motives of Grimaldi in being so particidar in his conduct toivards her·
CHAP-
CHAPTER IX. ?-? ** ??+ ø ** +r *■■+ φ* *»??
The marchese di Montalto had been unwearied in his endeavours to procure an interview with the mysterious monk, Avhose Avoids and actions had so greatly astonished him, and led him to suspect that he Avas privy to the death of his father : but all his solicitude was in vain, for he never could meet with him. He frequently inquired among the monks for a person of his description, but from none of them could gain any informa¬ tion. Grimaldi had been pointed out to him as the only one Avho seemed likely to
to be the person he sought, and AAdiose singular conduct made it a matter of probability; but Montalto, at the first «Tİnnc* wíic xvpAÌ ncfiiirpd flint ît ponld not be him, from the difference of his height and figure, though, like him, the other monk had concealed his features. He had frequently seen his adored Rosalina, and had as frequently lament¬ ed with her the impossibility of his visit¬ ing at the castello till the mystery ofhis father's death was unveiled, because all his suspicions, from many concurring circumstances, centered entirely on the duca ; he freely forgave the wrongs he had received from him, which, however, only served to strengthen his suspicions almost to conviction, that the duca was not entirely innocent,and that the consci¬ ousness of guilt had made him act as he did on hearing that he suspected him. Still, however, before he took any fur¬ ther
ther steps, he was determined to be Avell assured that his ideas were well founded. It was on the evening after the monk Grimaldi had taken his abode at the cas¬ tello, that Montalto, according to his usual custom, was pacing the long-drawn aisles of the chapel of Santa Maria, his thoughts intently fixed on what he had collected concerning his father's death, and all the meaning sentences which the monk had uttered, and scarcely consci¬ ous of his actions, he stopped opposite to a tomb Avhich bore marks of great anti¬ quity, and was perhaps coeval with the building itself: on it the sculptor had rudely endeavoured to portray a youth kneeling before an altar, clasping an urn; the inscription, Avhich had been designed to convey the meaning of the above to posterity, had been effaced by time: while Montalto was gazing at it, though perhaps,
perhaps, unconscious of what he was doing, it formed no part of his thoughts, he Avas suddenly disturbed by a deep voice uttering the following words :— 44 The monument, marchese, which seems to occupy your attention, was erected by a pious son to the memory of a murdered father." Montalto started, and turning round, saw by his side the tall figure of the monk Grimaldi; tbe words " a mur¬ dered father Γ hollowly vibrated on hie soul. " What father was murdered?' said he, hastily. " Was it certain he was murdered?" 44 Yes, signor, too certain ; and Avhen his son received intimation of it ------"
But
" But how was he assured that the in¬ formation was right?" said Montalto, in, terrupting the discourse of Grimaldi, his thoughts at that moment wandering on the Avoids of the mysterious monk. <c It was proved beyond a doubt·—the body of his father " ** Was never found," again uttered Montalto, still thinking of his own pa¬ rent. 44 You know the tele thai, signor?'* said Grimaldi. 44 What tale?" returned Montalto, Avho' now awoke from his ruminations. " The history that is related concern· ing that tomb." *' Your pardon, father, I do not; I was
was at that moment so deeply involved in thought, that I did not attend to what you were saying." " And yet your answ r ers were some¬ Avhat pertinent to the subject I was men¬ tioning," said Grimaldi. " Perhaps they might, father; yet ???? I remember you Avere talking about a murder." " And you, signor, doubtless were thinking about one." 44 What should make you suppose that?" said Montalto. 44 From your answers—nothing else, 1 * returned the monk: " but perhaps I am intruding upon your meditations—if so, I will withdraw."
44 Pray
" Pray stay, father," said Montalto; 44 from your behaviour I should indeed almost conclude that you knew the sub¬ ject that occupied my thoughts ; but that is hardly possible: you mentioned some¬ thing concerning that monument?" " I did," said Grimaldi: " from its an¬ tiquity you will easily conclude that the tale attached to it is traditional. It is, as I am informed, the first monument that v/as erected in the chapel; as long as the inscription was Adsible, it recorded a most horrible murder, and when that failed, memory has still retained the tale: " A signor and his son, travelling this way, were attacked by banditti; after an obstinate resistance, the signor, mor¬ tally wounded, fell, and his son long fought over the body of his expiring parent, till at length he was also over¬ powered, and both Avere left for dead. In
In this situation the bodies were dis¬ covered by a monk of this monastery, who, finding in that of the son some faint remains of life, had it conveyed to his cell, and his humanity was repaid by his recovery. Deeply did that son lament the loss of his parent; but he did not consume the time in inactive regret, for at the altar he solemnly swore to revenge his death ; and having raised that monu¬ ment to his memory, in which he is re¬ presented embracing the urn that con¬ tained the remains of his father, and offering up the vow, he set out, and hav¬ ing found out the haunts of the banditti, in a short time totally exterminated them, and then returned to this monastery, and havhîg taken the \ r ows, passed his life near the place whicii contained the ashes of his parenU 44 What a noble example," continued tbe monk, " of filial piety—a virtue now almost
almost dormant ! A son hardly dreams of revenging his parent's wrongs : a fa¬ ther Avho fondly Avatched over the infan¬ tine years of his offspring, Avho looked on him as a blessing—a comfort to his declining age—a protection when his frame, degenerating to second childhood, needed it, now anticipates in vain the fancied harvest ofhis anxious cares; and he is condemned to 4 feel how sharper than a serpent's tooth it is to have a thankless child/ Nay, there are even instances where murder has been com¬ mitted, and where the son has loved the offspring of the vile assassin." The feelings of Montalto, during the whole of the monk's discourse, had been greatly acted upon ; but when he utter¬ ed the latter part, his pallid countenance shewed how greatly he was agitated, and he exclaimed— 44 Ah ! your words are no Jonger riddles! I understand you, monk; you
you knoAv, then, that Rodolpho has murdered my father," 44 What,"said the monk, 4e do I hear? what words are those which have escap¬ ed you ? From what parts of my con¬ versation could you conclude that I at¬ tached any crime to the duca di Rodol¬ pho ? It is as yet a mystery to me ; but should it be so, can it be possible that the marchese Montalto, so famed for valour, benevolence, and philanthropy, can for¬ get that he was a son—can lack that feel¬ ing Avhich ought to be imbibed with his earliest sustenance? Alas! of what little avail are those virtues! they must be nominal—mere sounds, for filial pity is the basis, the sure foundation of all others," 44 Monk, you torture me ! you want to stretch my agonized feelings beyond their bearing, and then to smile over a being
being divested of reason by your insi« nuations—by your slow w r ell-framed dis¬ course. Tell me at once, while I have breath—Avhile I am able to ask it with¬ out playing the maniac—tell me, do you know aught concerning my father's death?" ** Meet me at midnight, and you shall ????? more." * More! Ah, it is then as I feared! Rodolpho, damned assassin ! midnight murderer ! thy heart's blood, drawn from thee by slow and excruciating torments, shall ascend to heaven as the sacrifice of a son to the memory of a murdered parent My father murdered 1 Where in that moEient slumbered the bolts of Heaven's wrath? where was a son, that he did not rush to a parent's aid, and inter¬ cept the blow of death ? My brain mad¬ dens ! At midnight, monk, did you say, I should
I should know more ? Where shall I meet you ?" ?? ansAver Avas returned, and Mon« ¿ n u(. a, ___ í ____ ι ___ «i ^.,„j i-i« n t. e»:»t A i^Î täll/O tUriHIlg aoout, iOUliu ιιιαινηωωωι w^ís gone. The tolling of the bell reminded him that it wanted tAvo hours to the appoint¬ ed time ; but those two hours Avere an age to Montalto. At one time he hastily paced the gloomy aisle of the chapel, then leaving it, walked on the banks of the lake. At times gazing on the towers of Colredo, silvered by the moon's lucid rays, while the determined intents of his soul appeared in his rageful eyes, Rosalina was forgot— Rosalina, whose re¬ membered beauties would have soothed his rage, and lulled the transports of fury which shook his frame, was distant from his thoughts. vol. ?. η At
At length the time approaching, he returned to the chapel, and throwing his harassed frame at the foot of a tomb, awaited the arrival of the monk. At length he came; the fight of his lamp gleaming on the countenance of Montalto, shewed it flushed with the emotions of his bosom. t4 You are come at last, father," said he : * 4 1 have been expecting you an age." 44 1 fear," said the monk, 44 my com¬ ing is of Httie use—you are too much the victim of rage to listen to the dictates of reason; and unless you will comply with what I shall exact, I shall depart." * 4 Any thing you wish I will do: be speedy in your determination; my anxiety to know my fathers fate in¬ creases with each moment." 44 You
44 You will hereafter, perhaps,own the propriety of the step I am about to take. Marchese, I must bind you, by a most solemn oath, that you will not divulge the events of this night to mortal, and that you will not take any measures which may to you appear right, without my sanction. Unless you do this, your father's fate shall remain a secret in my breast," Montalto hastily approached the altar, and bound himself, by a most solemn vow, to do. as the monk required: that done, Grimaldi conducted him through some passages, till they entered that chamber in which was the trap-door leading to the subterraneous passages beneath the castello di Colredo. Montalto having raised it, they de¬ scended the stairs, and having passed through the long passage to which they H % led,
led, he threw open the panel, and, guided by the monk, they at length arrived at the door of a dungeon. Here the monk set down his lamp, and taking a key from his girdle, he said —" Now, marchese, recollect your oath ; you will shortly have occasion for all your fortitude; you must be silent; per¬ haps my life at this moment depends on your conduct." 44 How you torture me by your de¬ lays, monk! Do not doubt me; I feel equal to any scene of horror—my expec¬ tations are wound up to their utmost pitch." The monk turning the key, softly drew r back the bolts of the lock, and opened the door; he then took up the lamp,—" Now enter," said he, 4t and be¬ hold, stretched on the floor, secured by massy
massy chains, that father you have long lamented as dead !" Words are vain to describe the feel¬ ings of Montalto as he leaned over his father, who, notwithstanding his miser¬ able situation, deeply slumbered. He spoke not: his hands were clasped to¬ gether, his mouth open, his eyes almost starting from their sockets, his knees trembling, and scarcely able to sustain the weight ofhis body. 44 There," softly uttered the monk, 44 there is a sight for a son ! for a child who loves his parent, to see the author of his being the sad inhabitant of a gloomy dungeon, in want of Uberty, of proper food—even the wholesome air but niggardly admitted to revive his fainting Avoe-worn spirits! Is not this worse than murder?—is not this a refinement on the momentary pangs of dissolution ? h å Can
Can Montalto see this, andnot seek re¬ venge?" Montalto started, but as yet he could not speak; he faintly groaned. u How is your generous nature af¬ tected í I thought it would be so," con¬ tinued the monk; " I thought the son could never be so recreant as not to feel for a father's wrongs, when even my¬ self, a stranger, and a monk too, who ought always to consider forbearance as a virtue, could almost have revenged them: but that satisfaction I reserved for you> as a treasure too inestimable to appreciate." " First let me liberate my father; let me restore him to liberty, and then I will dedicate myself to vengeance." " That must not yet be," returned Grimal· 15 -
Grimaldi; 44 but you may revenge your¬ self on the author of your parent's Avrongs this hour. See this dagger-it » a fit instrument for a son, whose father lies before him, chained to the earth, en¬ during all the horrors of imprisonment. Take it—it is tlte key by which you can free a parent." Montalto seized the dagger; he felt its point—it was sharp, and the blade glittered in the rays of the monk's lamp; a ghastly smile illumined his pallid countenance.—* 4 Lead me," said he, 44 lsad mç to him this moment; my father soon shall be restored to free¬ dom." 44 Unhappy prisoner!" said the monk, who seemed to gaze on the prostrate captive, " thy hours of misery are nearly concluded; sweet will be thy waking moments, when thou art clasped h 4 to
to the warm embracé of a son, at once thy avenger and liberator: and thou, haughty duca di Rodolpho, wilt from him meet thy due reward,-—I will now," said he, 44 lead you to his chamber, where doubtless he is enjoying soft re¬ pose; or, delighted with his well-con¬ certed plans of villany, is lying awake, contriving fresh planá to torment your guiltless father or perhaps to get you once more into his power." 44 But this night," said Montalto, 44 shall end at once his life and diabolical villanies —this night shall free the world of a monster who taints the air with his pestiferous breath." The monk now left the dungeon, fol¬ lowed by Montalto, impatient to revenge his wrongs. 44 Close the door," said the monk, 44 and
44 and give me again the key, or our be¬ ing in the castello may be discovered by the castellain, who sometimes visits these places." Montalto did as he was directed, though a deep sigh burst from his ago¬ nized breast as he drew the key out of the lock, and his hand still more firmly grasped the dagger. The monk, who seemed well ac¬ quainted with the passages, led Mon¬ talto to a flight of steps, which having ascended, he found himself in a small apartment. 44 We are now in the eastern cham¬ bers of Cohredo~shortly we shall be in those inhabited by the duca; collect, marchese, all your resolution before you proceed further, for perhaps your arm, when you are on the point of seeking a h 5 just
just revenge, may be enervated by your fears, and your father, in consequence, re¬ main a hopeless captive, calling in vain on a son who had not courage to do an act of justice to liberate him. Your OAvn life, too, may be the forfeit of your terrors, ac wrøll ao Wrtí-Tií* " 9 ITbU ?*«? MÍÍÍ?. '* You need not fear, father; my heart is steeled against reflection«»-! could wade in a sea of blood ; my passions are roused—my nature seems changed, and in the office of a midnight assassin, which at another time might strike me with horror, I now anticipate the highest satisfaction." Montalto looked all he said ; his brows lowered—his teeth fast closed-*»his eyes unsettled in their gaze-^his hand fast clenching round the hilt of the dagger^- his step unsteady~-and his whole de- ИИ ??„, tepung him bmt o» te accomplishment ofhis designs. Traversing
Traversila a foi}g corridor, the monk opened a small portal, and after crossing two chambers, he touched a secret spring in the wainscot, and a pane;l silently re¬ treating in its groove, discfossd a cham¬ ber, which was illuminated by a large lamp, which depended from the centre of the roof. At the further end was a lofty canopied couch. The monk listened—** Your inveterate enemy," said he, " slumbers ; heedless of the sighs and groans of his captives, he enjoys repose. Now enter, and release your father," Montalto advanced through the aper¬ ture, and Avith noiseless tread approached the couch; he drew aside the silken cur¬ tains, and beheld the countenance of the sleeper, when suddenly Rosalina, so long forgot, rushed to his recollection. His hand was already uplifted, but he paused H 6 before
before he did a deed which would for ever make him lose all hope of an union with the idol of his heart; for could he hope that Rosalina would ever wed the murderer of her parent, however great the motives might be which uiged him to such an act? Soon his arm, that was upraised, nerved with deadly rage, now hung motionless by his side; again he thought of his father, and feebly raised it—but love forbade the deed. " Infirm of purpose !" lowly whispered the monk ; ** are you a man—are you a son? No, you are degenerated from the noble stock you sprung from. Away then from this chamber, where the utmost danger awaits our longer stay- away, and leave your unfortunate father to breathe his last in the dungeons of yon sleej^r!" " Oh, Rosalina !" thought Montalto, "but
44 but for thee I could have given liberty to a parent; my love renders me incap¬ able of the deed by which it could be gained. How changed in a moment are my sensations ! Is it possible that I could be so base as to take advantage of the silent hour of midnight—*to descend to the conduct of an hired assassin! Montalto, thou art indeed degenerated." The monk had by this time left the chamber, and Montalto soon followed him ; he closed the panel, and silently returned through tiie diambers into the corridor whieh led to the eastern wing, Both occupied by their own reflections, for some time remained suent ; at length the monk said— 44 Your father then, signor, is to re* main in his captivity ?" " Oh no! for pity's sake release him! It
It must be so—he shall have his li¬ berty." 4 * It eannot be," replied the monk ; 44 tó that I reftise my consent: but per¬ haps you have forgot your oath, and mean to procure year father Ids enlarge¬ ment at the expence of forfeiting all hopes of îuture happiness?' 44 Ah, that oath !—Monk, how you have tortured my soul !" "Youhaveyouipselftoblame^retttrøed Grimaldi; w you are the victim of fear." 44 Of fear! No, father; but I love~I adore llosalina; it was the idea that I should forfeit her good opinion, and be¬ come the object of hex hatred, whieh first stayed my arm, and reflection on the unmanly act I was going to perform per¬ fectly rendered it useless " "And
* And could you indeed ever think of being united to the daughter of your father's persecutor? Unworthy son of an unfortunate sire!" The inqnk pausetl, for they were now descending the stains which com¬ municated with the dungeons £??? the eastern Aving. Montato often sighed·?*» the mock perhaps noticed it, for he satdw α It |s ? my pow^r, marchpse, to render the situation of your father ^????- what better than \t now is. I pity your situatio^you want resolution to baaisb from your breast a passion which your better reason pust disapprove ; perhaps, too, it is not mutual. Tell ??, does Rosalina favour you suit?" " it ? the greatest happiness of my life to think titøt she does," repIted Mon¬ talto;
taito ; " but as to a union-— the existing circumstances forbid it" " Marchese," said the monk, '* you have every reason to believe me your friend; perhaps I have it in my power to be essentially so : do not then under¬ take any thing without my advice» It was that you might liberate your father —that you might revenge his and your OAvn wrongs, that I afforded you an op¬ portunity to do it ; at that moment I did not sufficiently consider the strength of your attachment to Rosalina; it was, hoAvever, the knowledge ofthat circum¬ stance which made me require that solemn promise of you, fearing you might want resolution when put to the proof; my caution, I find, was neces¬ sary, and I trust you Avili most religious¬ ly observe it—much depends on your silence, which it is needless to unfold at present Had I for a moment re¬ flected
fleeted on the power of love, perhaps 1 should not have acted as I have : but it cannot be recalled ; you have, however, the comfort of knoAving that your father is still in existence, and that you have a friend in me Avhenever you need one." 44 You cannot give me a greater proof of your friendship," said Montalto, " than by alleyüírting the miseries of my father's confinement, and by advising me in what manner to obtain his release, con¬ sistent with my love for Rosalina, for, I blush to own it, she divides with him my fondest affections." 64 And I blush to hear you say it," returned the monk ; "for never was love so wrong placed. At present, and par- ticularly under those circumstances, I am not competent to advise you, but I ??? consider what can be done." They
They had now entered the chapel, and soon reached the outer portals, when the monk observing that he should, in general, he in the chapel either at or after the vespers, where Montalto might, find him, retired to the monastery, and Montalto proceeded to his OAvn resi dence. Miserable indeed he Ava$, c|iviçied ? ?- tween parental duty and his love for Rosalina, The one prompted him to de¬ mand instant satisfaction from the duca, and enforce the liberation qf his parent; to ???? knoAvn tø the world his base conduct, and to make ? him atone Avith his Ufe for the injures he had received from him. Memtalto størted from, his seat—* " This instant ??? I repair to the capital, and there dolare the vile uses which Rodolpho makes of his autho¬ rity.
rity. My father's captivity—my own treatment—" Montalto paused, for at that instant he remembered his oath, which pre¬ vented him from making known his father's situation. Restricted in that point, he found himself incapable of act¬ ing as he was instigated by his just re¬ sentment. On the other hand, what would Ro¬ salina think of his protestations of love, if he attempted any thing which could injure her father ? Would she not be¬ lieve him false, and as such, instead of loving, avoid him as her bitterest enemy? And such a conduct, how would it agonize his soul ? " The monk," thought he, «* may direct me ; for as to myself the more I reflect on my situation, the more I am incapable
incapable of action. Impelled by filial duty, and restrained by love, I ????? not what course to pursue, to rescue a parent and preserve Rosalina's affec¬ tion," A thought at length occurred, and this was to endeavour to persuade Ro¬ salina to a private marriage; her senti¬ ments might then be altered, and she would consider the persecutor of her husband's father with more abhorrence than she could be expected to do while he was no relation to her; he would too, in that case, be certain of possessing the treasure of his soul's adoration : he determined, therefore, the next evening, when he expected to see Rosalina, to entreat her consent ; and the monk Gri¬ maldi, he thought, might be persuaded to unite them. Such Avas, after many hours passed in debate,
debate, the resolution of Montalto, who ???? retired to rest, and his fatigued and harassed senses were at length lulled to repose by the kind influence of the gentle deity of slumbers. It will now perhaps be necessary to relate to the reader the circumstances which induced the duca di Rodolpho to conduct himself in so base a manner to the old marchese Montalto, in doing which, the history must go back to a short time before that period when the duca led his forces to quell the insurrec¬ tions of the northern banditti. In so doing, the pen traces with regret the page descriptive of the vices of man¬ kind. Much rather would it use its weak efforts to record to posterity those virtues which dignify human nature, which exalt the mind of the reader, and teach him to emulate whatever is praise¬ worthy :
worthy : the reverse is, alas ! the subject of these volumes; but may they inculcate an abhorrence of such deeds, and by shewing the true image of vice, and the baneful effects of indulging vicious pas¬ sions and inclinations, in their proper colours, disrobed of their deceitful garbs, present a picture to youth, from whose deformity they may start with increas¬ ing horror ! Such indeed is the wish with which these volumes are wrote ; and whether they answer that purpose or not, there is a consoling reflection which will ever remain to alleviate the disappointment, and which is, that their intent was good.
v/JuLA-A ·
CHAPTER Χ.
The duca di Rodolpho and the old marchese Mbntalto had been intimate friefids, till a short period before he lèd his forces against the northern insurgents, when the marchese dèhianding of him the payment of large sums of money, which the duca, in dôtisecliience of his military preparations, had not the abi¬ lity to restore, foulé 1 vvurds arose, which terminated in máný revengeful expres¬ sions on both sides; The duca feared the rage of the marchese, who being hi possession of* many'of his most im¬ portant seeréts, might, perhaps, be in¬ duced
duced to take that opportunity of vent¬ ing his malice by disclosing them ; and therefore he determined to get him in his power, mid, by a dsed of horror, free himself fiom farther anxiety on that head, at least as far as respected temporal concerns: as for the future welfare of his soul, the duca heeded it not, for his bosom» by the frequent repetition of deeds of darkness, was become calions to the stings of con¬ science. It was a matter of some difficulty for the duca to execute his designs so pri¬ vately as to elude the searching eye of suspicion, which, in consequence of the disappearance of the marchese, he was well assured would immediately glance at him. They were however effected in the folloAving manner: Lupo, his trusty agent in his iniquitous plans, watched in secret all the movements of the mar¬ chese ;
chese; and one evening, when his in¬ tended victim was riding by himself, as¬ sisted ?? a ruffian, w r ho was hired for the purpose, he attacked, and with little difficulty seized the unfortunate mar¬ chese, Avho was unprepared for such an assault, and secreting him in the woods till midnight, brought him bound to the castello, and entering the prÌA f ate pos¬ tern that communicated with the sub¬ terraneous passages, secured him in one of the dungeons, imd acquainted the duca with the success of their mission. The hired ruffian, as had been before agreed on, disguising himself as a pea¬ sant, immediately repaired to the late residence of tlie marchese, and related a fictitious tale of his having seen him struggling in the Avaters of an arm of the lake of Abruzzo, which he had rashly attempted to cross, This ac· count was credited, for the appearance of the horse he had rode, whose arri* vol. π. i val
-val at the mansion first created the alarm. for his safety, proved that he had been in the w r ater, and during their search, the baretté of tlie marchese had been found on the banks of that part of the lake Avhere the peasant reported he had seen him perish. Thus the duca securely triumphed over the marchese di Montalto, He liad him now in his power ; his life was at his disposal Avithout fear of detection, imd to rid himself of a troublesome charge, he resoWed to ensure his safety by the death jof his enemy. For this purpose hè one evening sent for Lupo, whom he wished to persuade to assassinate the marchese : he Avas at that time Avalking in the hall bf his cas¬ tello; it Avas nearly dusk, and no one hut* himself was in it when Lupo enter¬ ed. He thus addressed him— 44 Lupo,
44 Lupo, I sent for you about an affair of importance to my peace."^ 44 Your excellenza knows that I am ahvays at your service," said the castel¬ lami bowing obsequiously. 44 That affair of Astolpho was rather troublesome," said the duca. 44 Yes, your excellenza, he made a des¬ perate resistance," returned the castel¬ lain, 4e but it ivas to little purpose." 44 You took away the body, did you not ?" 44 Oh yes," returned Lupo ; " the fish in the lake will tell your excellenza that, if they could speak." 44 1 fear I shall not be able to reward you so much as I could wish," said Ro- 1 2 dolpho;
dolpho; 4t you have hitherto proved yourself faithful to my interests," 44 It is my duty," said the castellaiii, again boAving. ; ^ 44 In this purse are some thirty or forty ducats : perhaps tl*ey may be use¬ ful to you." 44 Your excellenza is ahvays too gene¬ rous," said Lupo, taking the money. "The marchese enjoys his health, I ♦hink you told me the other day, iiot- Avithstanding his confinement ?" " Yes, he does, atid talks in as high a strain as eves. This morning he said so many abusive things concerning your excellenza's conduct to Astolpho, and likewise about me, that I was almost tempted to ....... " "To
u Tö Avhat ?" demanded the duca, has¬ tily. 44 To put it out ofhis power to insult you," returned Lupo; " but I Avas fear¬ ful that you would not approve of it," " I wish you had done it," replied the duca ; " if he Avere dead, I should be at peace. This is the subject I wished to converse with you about : cannot you contrive it to-night ?" " What! in cold blood?" returned Lu¬ po. " I wish I had known your excel* lonza's intentions this morning ; but in cold blood to murder a man ! I never did it but once, and that was to------" " Well, it is of no consequence," hastily replied the duca, interrupting liim : " you are always harping on that deed. But Avith respect to the mar- 13 ehese*
ehese, am 1 to Avait in anxiety for my safety till your passions are roused ? 1 thought, Lupo, you had more regard for my feelings." 44 The marchese is safe enough in hia dungeon," returned Lupo; "but if your eccellenza really wishes to have it done, I am willing : but then------" (< What objection are you now going to make?" said the duca. " I should like to have some person to assist me; the marchese is strong/' " Who can you have ? Parozzi is by this time at Venice, and there is no one you can trust in the castello." ** If your excellenza Avoulcl but stay at the door while I went in, and in case he should make any resistance ------" H I understand
'* 1 understand you,'* replied llodol- pho ; '* be it ??. , Shall Ave go uoav, oi: w T ait till night?" ** Tlic night Avili be the safest, for then he will be most likely asleep," re¬ turned the castellani ; " besides, his cries- might be heard, and——" Here a sudden noise in' one of the" galleries which Avere erected on each side of the hall disturbed their conversa¬ tion ; they both instantly looked up to the place from Avhence the sound had proceeded, but no object met their view. u Our conversation has been over¬ heard," said llodolpho : * t hasten to the place, and endeavour to find out who* tlie listener was." Lupo, as anxious as the duca, in- 1 4 stantly-
stantly left the hall by the door which opened en tlie staircase that led to the galleries, for his discourse, he Avas well convinced, had not been such as would admit of being made public. The duca following 4 him, both arrived in the gal¬ lery at the same time, »and his astonish¬ ment can be better imagined than de¬ scribed, on perceiving his daughter Ro¬ salina lying motionless on the floor. He raised her up, but she was insen¬ sible, and Lupo summoned her attend¬ ants, who carried her to her couch, where, for a long time, all their en¬ deavours to restore her to life were without effect. The duca meanwhile had left tlie chamber, but remained in the corridor, Avhich he hastily paced, greatly agitated, for he feared that his daughter had become acquainted with his murderous intentions respecting the marchese Montalto. When
., When Rosalina that evening was re- turnmg to her apartments, she passed near a door that led to the galleries of the hall ; it was open, and hearing, the voices of some people hi conversation, * JL curiosity made her stop to listen, when she discovered tliat they were those of her father and Lupo the castellain, and iu that moment heard the duca's quet> tion respecting the body of Astolpho· Although slie had ever deemed it Avrong to pry into the secret conversation of others, yet aiv anxiety to ????? the pur¬ port of their discourse, created by her father's demand, surmounted ????? other consideration, and cautiously advancing, she entered the gallery, and trembling Avith indescribable emotions, heard their plans respecting the unfortunate mar¬ chese. It was with the greatest difficulty that for some time she could restrain 1 5 her
her agitated senses from deserting her, but when she heard Lupo coolly ob¬ serving that the cries of their unfortu- Aiate victim might be heaid, she Avas Ho longer able to support herself, but with a groan, sunk insensible on the floor. When she recovered, and found her¬ self in her oavu apartment, she began to ???? that what she had heard Avas in some dream; but when informed by her domestics that the duca and Lupo had found her in the hall gallery, alarmed lest she should incur his anger for listen* ing to his conversation, she determined, if possible, to conceal her knoAvledge of it Tlie attendants, according to the duca's order, now acquainting him with the recovery of his daughter, he instantly entered the apartment, and command¬ ing
mg tliem to withdraw» thus addressed ber— 44 Tell me truly, Rosalina, vyhat was^ the occasion of your being in the *gal- lery of tlie^ hall at so unseasonably· an hour? did you see any one in it that .excited your curiosity?* 44 Indeed t did not," replied Jlosalina, (which was the truth, for she Avas too ???11 acquainted with the vqices of her father and Lupo to render a sight of tiieir persons necessary) ; s * I Avas rather faint as I was crossing the corridor, and imagining the air of the hall, being less confined, might relieve me, I step¬ ped into the gallery, and almost imme¬ diately fainted," Though Rosalina Avas confused, a& he evaded acquainting her father Avith Avbit he Avasso anxious to ?????, yet the ¿??? ι ? imputing
imputing it^to her indisposition, Avas satisfied tliat his discourse with Lupo had not been heard, and shortiy after left the chamber. This then was the conversation so often alluded to in the first volume of these imperfect records, for though the name of the marchese had not been mentioned, yet she was but too well convinced it could be no other but him; and that her father could devise such a horrible act, was a circumstance which, whenever it occupied her thoughts, gave her the most lively sorrow. It was now near midnight t the in¬ habitants of the castello had retired to their apartments, and were sunk in sleep, and the blast of night howled mourn· fully along the battlements, when the duca, thirsting for the blood of his in¬ tended victim, grasping a dagger, de¬ scended
scended Avith Lupo to the dungeon of Montalto. Stopping at the door, they listened, «nd heard him still pacing its dreary confines. On evil deeds fear is the con¬ stant attendant, and though two to one, and that one unarmed, yet they hesitat¬ ed to enter his abode. Thus, while conscience makes cowards of the guilty, virtue clads lier votaries with impenetrable armour; peace and happiness await them, both here and hereafter. But the bosom stained Avith crimes never feds itself secure, though defended by thrice-tempered mail: iu every breeze they hear the voice of an accuser, and in every shade fear an avenging arm; peaceful slumbers are strangers to their pillows, for when sleep does close their eyes, their dis¬ turbed
turbed senses produce to their mentei vision scenes of horror and dismay*. . While the duca ànd Lupo were listen* ihg to the paces of the marchese, they suddenly ceased, and a rustling amongst- the straw convinced them that he had sought liis wretched pillow : they now Avaited some time longer, when, con* chiding that he was asleep, they slowly ©pened the door, and Lupo entering, stabbed the unfcrtun&te Montalto, *vho, though wounded, instantly sprung upon his intended assassin, and in a moment had wrenched the. dagger from hii? hand, and was going to avenge the blow he^ had received, when the duca's sword prevented him, and he fell. Lupo easily recovemd his dagger, and having again plunged it in his body, hastily left the dungeon accompanied by the
the duca, both pale and terriflfed, look¬ ing continually behind them, expecting to be pursued by the bleeding shade of the marchese. The duca did not stop till he had reached his apartment, where, having; fastened the door, he threw himself oi& a couch, and covering hi&.face with his hands, endeavoured to exclude thought, ás well as the surrounding objects—but in vain, for in imagination he beheld the bleeding body of Montalto^ while he thought he heard a voice say— " Tremble,, thou murderer ! nor hope nor comfort awaits thee ! Thine eternal jewel hast thou given to the common enemy of man, who will, before long, claim thee as his destined prey." The reader may, perhaps, be anxious to know who the unfortunate Astolpho was,
was, that fell a victim to the merciless rage of the duca. Perhaps Italy could not boast a more accomplished cavalier. His courage ivas proverbial—his generosity and humanity were not to be excelled ; but his posses¬ sions were small, and unequal to the wants of a liberal mind. His heart was tenderly alive to the soft emotions of love, but for one only did it ever vibrate, and that one was the lovely Constantia, and who was not blind to the perfections of the signor Astolpho. What happiness, what heavenly bliss emanates from mutual affection! The heart devoted to the object of its adora¬ tion swells with delight as it breathes forth the fond tale of love. Replete with joy were the days of Astolpho and Constantia ;
Cònstantia; but soon an en\dous lower¬ ing cloud darkened all their comfort in this sublunary existence. The duca di Rodolpho saAV and be¬ came enamoured of Constantia· Who could see her and not love? With heart-rending grief the hapless maid beheld herself about to be sacrificed to the prevailing power of gold and its glittering appendages, and tom for ever from her Astolpho, whom shortly it Avould be a crime to love. What pen shall describe the miseries of Astolpho when he heard the cruel intention of the parents of his adored ! Oh, Iioav his heart each moment throb¬ bed with increasing agony ! his respira¬ tion became difficult—his eyes poured forth no tears to relieve his bursting brain—his was not that grief which can alleviate its agony by the fast - falling drops
drops of sorrow; the fever ofhis misery dried up those sources. Often was tlie point of his sword directed to his heart— but Astolpho's reason triumphed oyer his wish to end his wretched life. Rodolpho knew the situation of the lovers; but so that hisoAvn wishes were gratified, he did not care how they were attained. He smiled Avhen he heard of the misery of Astolpho, and with cruel exultation led his beauteous trembling bride to the altar. Constantia, now the duchesa di Ro¬ dolpho, endeavoured to forget, in the duties of & wife, the love she had for Astolpho: her thoughts, hoAvever, too often for her peace of mind, dAvelt on. him ; she wished to hear of Mm, for he had absented himself some days before her marriage, and no one knew where the hapless wanderer was gone. In
In a lonely hut, concealed in the in¬ tricate bosom of a vast forest, dwelt Astolpho; there unseen he indulged in all the luxury of Avoe: insensible to the w r eather, in the most inclement night, Avhen the storm hoAvied through the branches of the forest, Avhen the thun¬ der shook the earth, and the frequent lightnings gleamed dreadful around, was he often seated on some rocky cliff, resting his aching head on his arm, and oftentimes repeating the loved name of Constantia, while the rising gale rudely bore away the sounds of his voice the instant they proceeded from his lips. Thus did Astolpho pine aAA r ay his ex¬ istence: he was beeome a living spectre; often had he watched the changing moon, and the sun had once encircled the world, when, feeling his page of existence drawing to a conclusion, he determined
determined to take one look at Con¬ stantia, hoping in that moment, w heh his ravished senses Avere contemplating her charms, that the delight AA r ould free his soul from its earthly mansion, Avhich then unconfined Avould hover round the dear object of its fond adoration. Hoav sadly beat his hear! Avhen front afar he beheld the loftv turrets of Col- redo, Avhere iioav dwelt Constantia ! As he approached nearer, he saAV the grey walls of the monastery of Santa Maria ; a sudden thought gave to his bosom the oniy gleam of comfort he had ex¬ perienced during so many long, long months of woe, and this Avas to fix his residence in its hallowed walls, to be¬ come a member of the church—" For then," thought he, '* I shall have often an opportunity of seeing the angel I adore : we shall together offer up our prayers ; 1 shall then be able to watch over
wer her, to intercede ivith Heaven for lier happiness." He was shortly after received amongst the holy brotherhood. He did not dare to ask after his beloved Contantia, for his confusion might have betrayed a more than common interest concerning lier, and now, tliat he had dedicated himself to Heaven, and that the span <q{ his existence was every hour con¬ tracting, to ??? ? ? made her acquainted ivith the fatal consequences of his love would have been to afflict her tender bosom with needless torture. The first day he attended in the cha¬ pel, as his eyes wandered about, dread¬ ing, yet wishing to behold Constantia, he suddenly started at seeing her enter, and amongst her domestics was one who carried an infant, At first oil his senses, save that of sight,
sight, seemed deserting him; his eyes, opened to their utmost extent, Avere ri- A'etted on the duchesa. There Avas an air of melancholy portrayed ??'?? her lovely features which somewhat pleased him, since he considered it as a proof that she was not happy, and that she had not transferred the love she pro¬ fessed for him to another. Strange sen¬ sation! but how tme! Astolpho would have Avith delight laid down his life at her feet, if by so doing he could have procured her a moment's happiness. It was his constant prayer that she might be happy; yet in her present situation to have thought she was so Avould have been daggers to him, and sooner could he have reposed on their sharp points, than have laid his Aveary frame on the thrice-driven bed of down with the thought that Constantia was made hap· py by another. But when the child met his view- when
when he thouglit to himself that it Avas the offspring of Itodolpho—jealousy, rage, and despair took possession of him; his senses, unable to support the dreadful conflict in his agonized bosom, happily deserted him for awhile, or reason might for ever have been hurled from her seat, and the unfortunate Astolpho levelled with the brute creation. His weak frame, however, Avas unable to support the sudden shock it had re¬ ceived, anel Astolpho, under th.e con¬ viction that his davs of life ????? nearly .ended, determined to see Constantia, that he might bless her before he died, and taking a pen, he sknvly traced the fol¬ lowing words ; " Before the attenuated thread which holds him to a mortal existence parts for ever, Astolpho, a monk of Santa Maria, earnestly entreats Constantia to see him:
him : to comply with his dying request-— to sooth the last pangs of mortality, can be no sin, though she is now another's." When the duchesa beheld the Avell- remembered writing of Astolpho, she trembled and turned pale ; all the love which she had so long strove to forget returned Avith increasing strength, and Avith an aching heart she left the castello, and soon arriving at the monastery, Avas allowed by the abbot to enter the apart¬ ment of Astolpho. Stretched almost motionless on his pallet lay the victim of love. Constantia, Avhen she recognized in the feeble form before her all that remained of the in¬ teresting» the handsome, generous, brave, and beloved Astolpho, could not restrain the impulse of her affection, which, so long dormant, now awoke with re¬ doubled force; she shed bitter tears over
over him, which to Astolpho were like the gentle rain to the parched drooping plarøt which began to Avitiier away, till the refreshing shower reviving it once more, its beauties gladden the eye, and its odours scent the passing zephyrs. " Astolpho !" she mournfully exclaim¬ ed, "land is it thus Ave meet? Oh, cruel parents ! avIio have robbed me of all my happiness—blasted all my joys, come, and behold your victims i My Astolpho, do not leave your Constantia ! Oh, Hea¬ vens, have pity on him ! How pale, how Avan he is! his eyes almost closed in death's eternal slumbers ! Look on me, Astolpho—bless me with the sound of your voice!" 44 My adored Constantìa !" Astolpho replied, in a feeble hollow tone, " thy dear solicitude has recalled me from the gates of death, that were opened Avide en vol. 11. ? their
their eternal hinges to receive me! Do you then still love me ?—is Astolpho still dear to you? Oh, repeat again those sweet words—they are a healing balm to my aching bosom !" ** As a dear friend Constantia must ever consider Astolpho: my heart has betrayed its feelings, but you know my situation—duty calls on us to forget our mutual affection; you are devoted to the service of Heaven, and I am a wife ; let us be friends, but let us forget that we Iiave been lovers." 44 You are right, Constantia," replied Astolpho, with a deep sigh, 44 we must indeed forget that; and should I re¬ cover—should health once more revisit my frame, will Constantia endeavour to make me wish to live, by letting me have the happmess of seeing her often ?"
" Indeed
44 Indeed I will, but on the condition I have mentioned," returned Constan· tia: ífi live then, my friend; we shall have the felidty øf offering up our prayersi togethei* to Heaven—of seeing and con¬ versing with each other." 44 Ah, that will be happiness indeed!* «aid Astolpho. 4< I will endeavour to live, that I may repay your intended kindness —that I may prove myself worthy of yotir friendship " After this conversation the duchesa «took her learre öf Astolpho, promising to see him again shortly, arid tritìi ai heart somewhat lighter than it had beert since her nuptials, she returned to Col¬ redo. How quick is the transition from joy to grief— ????? grief to joy! bøw closely me the extremes ο? hmmm passions eon·* ? a nected í
nected ! Astolpho, from being one of the most miserable of created beings, now on again seeing Constantia, on antici¬ pating the blissful hours he should pass in her society, was the most happy ; his health soon began to return, and in a few days he was able to leave that couch on which he so lately had expected to die- Constantia, according to her promise, had again se¿n him, and was delighted with the rapid change in his health; but she feared that she was doing wrong, for in spite of all her resolution of never feeling for Asjfcolpho any other sensation than friendship, she found herself un¬ able to forget that she had loved, and that, fatally for her peace of mind, she still preserved that affection for him. Astolpho, fearing that the duchesa would retract her promise of seeing him, ever
ever cautiously avoided any other than the most distant behaviour that common friendship would admit of: she did the same ; but alas ! their eyes disclosed the secrets of* their hearts, and both became unhappy. Each wanted courage to tell the other that they were acting Avrong—that they must part—that honour, virtue, duty, forbade their longer acquaintance : thus situated, Cònstantia was onen in tears, and Astolpho often sighed. At length heresolved to triumph over himself, and one evening, as they were walking near the monastery, after some hesitation, he thus addressed her— " We must part, Constantia —miser¬ able as it aviU make me, we shall be more so, if we do not : love cannot de¬ ie S scenei
ecend.to friendship, and in spite of aH our endeavours, we still love." 44 Noble-minded, generous Astolpho ! how much have you deserved my thanks ! Alas! my heart tells me the truth of what vou say—it must be so indeed; religion and prudence dictate the neces¬ sity of such a step." Hoav miserable were both Constantia* and Astolpho ! They had, however, one consolation, Avhich was, that they were acting right, and could with confidence pray to Heaven to strengthen them in their pious resolutions. Both wished to delay the moment of parting, but soon it arrived : Astolpho's eyes filled with tears, as kneeling he took the hand pf Constantia and pressed it to hp lips. 44 Adieu>
** Adieu, Constantia !" he mournfully uttered: " surely it will be no harm for us to remember each other, and to pon¬ der over the past in the hour of solitude r for though the recollection will occasion many a sigh, many a heartfelt regret, yet the fortitude we have evinced in this separation will doubtless extend itself to our future actions, and make us sup¬ port our hard fate with resignation." " Astolpho, farewell !" said the pale trembling Constantia : " in all my ori¬ sons you shall be remembered, and let us, on each new moon, when midnight has usurped her solemn silent empire over the world—let us employ some hours in prayers for each other's happiness; Ave shall pray with greater fervour when we reflect that both are engaged in the same pious office." Astolpho promised to comply with her ? 4t request,
request, and after many tears on both sides, these sad lovers parted. Constan¬ tia, pensive and melancholy, returned to Colredo, where she secluded herself in her apartments, and gave way to all the bitterness of grief, and Astolpho sought the most secluded part of the forest, to hide his agony from every eye. Unfortunately this last meeting was beheld by Rodolpho. Unable to divine the reasons of Constantia's holding so long a conversation Avith a monk, un¬ observed he dreAv near them, and, con¬ cealed by the thick underwood, listened to their discourse. He instantly recol¬ lected Astolpho, whom he had seen once before, and in tliat instant would have sacrificed him to his rage, but wishing to know how their meeting would ter¬ minate, he suppressed his horrible inten¬ tions for the present.
The
The noble conduct of Astolpho would have produced sentiments of esteem in any other breast than the duca's, but his pride was hurt by finding that the du¬ chesa had dared to retain her former sen¬ timents for Astolpho, and that he had sought an opportunity of seeing her. He smiled at their adieus, because he vowed to himself that they should be eternal, and Avhen they separated, he soon after repaired to the castello, Avhere to Lupo he entrusted what he had seen, and ?? intentions respecting Astolpho. Lupo, according to the instructions he had received, instantly repaired to the forest, and after watching some time saw Astolpho slowly returning to the mo¬ nastery. Lupo drew his sword, and rushed on the unarmed mourner, who, perceiving his intention, started aside, and avoided ? 5 the
the intended thrust, and at the same mo* ment seizing the castellain, soon disarm¬ ed him ; but Lupo, unperceived by As¬ tolpho, drawing a dagger from his belt, suddenly buried it in his heart, and put a period at once to the sorrows and life of the ill-fated lover. Lupo, fearing a discovery* then drew the body towards the lake, aad as he was going to plunge it into its watery tomb, he saw a miniature which was concealed in the bosom,which, when he had taken out, he found to be that of the duchesa; this he kept, and then threw the body into tbe wide-floating waters of Abruz¬ zo, which instantly closing over it, his murderous deed was concealed from the eyes of the world. The miniature he gave the duca, who, not long after, fotmd an opportunity of adding to the misery of the unhappy duchesa. Unconscious
Unconscious that he kneAv any thing concerning Astolpho, she endeavoured to conceal when in his presence the grief which sat heavy on her heart ; but this deprivation made her indulge it the more in private, and the duca had often sur¬ prised her in tears: this added to tlie rage which he treasured up in his heart against her, and which he determined at some future opportunity should burst at once on her devoted head. One evening, when Constantia, who for a long time had not left the castello, and in consequence had not heard that Astolpho was missing, was, according to her usual custom, walking on the ram¬ parts with the venerable father Angus¬ tino, in whose instructive converse, and her attentions to her infant daughter Rosalina, she passed the else tedious hours, the father mentioned the ex¬ traordinary circumstance of a monk of ? ? Santa
Santa Maria not having been heard of for some time, and that it was generally supposed, from some circumstances of his conduct wdiich had been noticed, that he had destroyed himself Constantia, whose ready fancy conjec¬ tured that the person alluded to could be no other than Astolpho, hastily de¬ manded his name, and en hearing that it Avas him, she turned pale, and seemed unable to support her trembling frame. 44 Holy Mother !" exclaimed Augus¬ tino, greatly alarmed; 4 * what is the mat¬ ter, duchesa—you seem unwell? Has my conversation affected you ? do you know the monk Astolpho ?" 44 Oh, father! too fatally for my peace of mind I do—he was my first, my only love. You have heard of that circum¬ stance, and may judge of my feelings Avhen
when listening to his supposed fate. Alas ! he has not been equal to the trial he so generously, so fatally imposed on himself." " My unfortunate daughter," returned the confessor, w how sorry I am that I should have caused you so much pain ! But do not unnecessarily afflict yourself for Avhat I said was only surmise; no traces of him have been found—he may have gone a journey to compose his sor¬ rows by change of scene." " Alas ! I fear he has indeed changed this earthly scene ! but let me hope he is now happy in realms of eternal bliss. To-morrow, father, I will make you ac¬ quainted with some occurrences that have lately taken place between me and the unfortunate Astolpho, but now I am not able: your arm, father—I can scarcely stand." Angustino
Angustino supported tlie duchesa to the door of her apartments, and then, having entreated her not to give way to grief, particularly as there was no reason tø make it supposed tliat Astolpho was no more, left her. Constantia's tears now flowed apacev unrestrained by the presence of any one* when unfortunately at this moment the duca entered the chamber. He started when he saw her grief, which she hastily endeavoured to conceal 44 Constantia," said he, in a stem voice,, 44 what is the reason of this private grief? A wife, I should imagine, ought npt to have any secrets from her husband," 44 A trifling indisposition," replied Constantia, rather confused; i4 I am better iioav."
**1 am
44 1 am glad to hear it," returned Ro¬ dolpho; w and that you may be quite re« stored," added he, drawing from beneath his mantle the miniature which Lupo had given him, ** the shade of Astolpho* sends you this!" Scarcely had the well-remembered painting met her gaze, thaa she wildly shrieked*— 4 * Oh Heavens! it is true then," said she, " Astolpho is no more Γ Her grief then prevented her further utterance. " Thou seest I have found out the cause of thy sorrow," continued the duca, regardless of her hapless state ; " I wit¬ nessed thy last meeting with Astolpho, and your tender fareAvell Avas not given in vain, for never more in this world will you see each other." Constantia was unable to reply, and the
the duca, exulting in his cruel revenge, left the apartment We shall draw a veil over the suffer¬ ings of Constantie, for though the duca had not confessed the horrid deed which had been performed, there was little doubt in her mind but that the hapless Astolpho had been sacrificed to appease his rage, for well she knew he would rather part with life than the miniature which she had given him long before her fatal charms had attracted the notice of the duca* Her child, the lovely Rosalina, alone reconciled her to existence; but her peace of mind ivas lost, and her constitu¬ tion evwy year felt the fatal effects of her secret hoarded sorrows, and at length she sunk into the peaceful arms of death. When she was gone, the duca felt the greatness of his loss : he then, though too
too late, repented his harsh behaviour to her ; but his repentance or his sorrows were of no avail—they were unable to eall back her immortal soul to its earthly mansion; and that beauteous ruin, be¬ dewed with the tears of her sorroAving domestics, Avas consigned to the silent tomb, whose sculptured marble told the stranger d her virtues. Such was the fate of Astolpho, and such was the termination of the life of Constantia. Rosalina had often, fiom the venerable Augnstino, heard the sad tale; but the real end of Astolpho, though she conjectured how it had been effected, yet never' was certain of the truth of her surmises, till she had heard the conversation between the duca and Lupo, as related at the commencement of this chapter. Rosalina, from that eventful night, could
could not look with that pleasure on her father which she had ever been accus¬ tomed to do ; for Lupo she felt an in¬ vincible abhorrence ; but feelingly alive to a sense of that duty she owed a pa« rent, she by degrees endeavoured to erase from her mind the deep impression made on per heart by her knoAvledge of his cruel deeds, and in part succeeded, so far as to feel sorrowful when he left her to engage the northern banditti, and was pleased bo see him return, though that pleasure was clouded by the event» thaf had occurred between her and the young marchese di Montalto, and which re* newed in her mind all the unhappiness she had experienced, and doubly so be-» cause she was indebted for her life to hím whose parent had been deprived of existence by her own father. Happily, however, the fates decreed «Aherwise, and Kodolpho had not his life
life to answer for among the many who, to appease his rafe, or who interfered in any favourite plans he had formed, be¬ eame his victims. *?1?> ãttnst AiA ?????" røm&idei* that the vengeance of Heaven is sometimes sus¬ pended only that it may fall Avith in¬ creasing weight on the ofïfending head, and give a« anrM lesson to a sinfúl world. He had plunged into a sea of guilt, and the more he struggled to dis¬ engage himself, the more he was en¬ tangled amongst its hidden quicksands, which to avoid he Avas forced to commit fresh crimes, fresh deeds of horror ; and ho at all times vainly hoped to ward off the unerring sword of retribution by future- acts of piety and repentance, Avhich, alas! were deferred from day to day, till his bosom became hardened to his crimes, and his ears deaf to the voice of con¬ science, and which made him forget all his good
good intentions; or if he did remember them, it was only to smile at liis former vain fears, and so long as he could hide his deeds from the world» he cared not the avenging eye of an offended Deity, to whom not only our outward actions, but the inmost secrets of our hearts, are known. In our next chapter we shall present our readers with the development ©f certain mysterious events Avhich were re* lated in the first volume of this work,
CHAP-
^?? a ^nr*«t? VT
The unfortunate marchése di Montalto, contrary to the belief of his dark assas¬ sins, was not inortally wounded, though the loss of blood had caused an instanta¬ neous and deathlike stupor, which had deceived them into that belief When he revived, he found himself alone, covered with his own blood, which now happily ceased to floAV from his wounds ; the door of his dungeon Avas open, and the hope of effecting his escape made him exert his remaining strength
strength to rise, and if possible to find his way through the subterraneous pas· sages to the postern by which he had «entered them. The glimmering light which entered the grating shewed the marchese that it was near the break of day, and he knew that the moments were now precious. supporting himself by the walls, after much pain he at length reached tiie outer postern, for he had taken particu¬ lar notice of the way by whieh he was brought to his dungeon, in the faint hope that should he have an otpportu- nity of escaping, his observations might be of service to him. The postem was secured on the inside by large bolts, which to draw out of the stone wall was an exertion beyond his present strength, and in the attempt tiie blood agam flowed from his wounds, as
■as every moment he now grew weaker, and 'his death more certain. He became desperate by his danger, and again mak¬ ing the attenrçpt, fortunately succeeded t the fresh breath of morningrevived him, and he sat some time on the rock to in¬ hale it, and collect strength to proceed as far as the monastery of Santa Maria, where he hoped to find a secure asylum till his wounds should be healed, and he was able to pursue measures for his safety, and also for the revenge which he was determined to take of his treacher¬ ous enemy, the duca di Rodolfo, Fortunately for 1dm he had not pro¬ ceeded far before he met one of the monks, whose surprise was excessive when he recognized in the wounded ob¬ ject before him the marchese di Mon¬ talto, who was supposed to have perish¬ ed in the lake.
The
The monk assisted him to the small tower at the extremity of the northern cloisters, Avhere, having placed him on a seat, he hastened to the monastery to provide the necessary bandages for his wounds, after being strictly charged by the marchese not to divulge the events of that morning to any person, lest it should come to the duca's ears, who Avould Bot fail to employ every means in his power to effect the work of death which he had fortunately as yet not succeeded in. 'ilie monk w T as faithful to his promise. The tOAver, being in a ruinous state, w f as scarcely ever visited, and promised to be a secure retreat for him till he should recover of his Avounds. The friendly care of the monk Avas unremitting, and the marchese began, though sknvly, to gain strength. During this time the duca left the castello on his expedition to
to the north, and the marchese, who was constantly brooding in revenge, de¬ termined still to remain in concealment till he should return, and his plans were ripe for execution. From the monk he learnt the arrival of his son from Padua to take posses¬ sion of his estates and title ; but he Avas disappointed to find that though he con^ stantly lamented the supposed loss of his parent, he did not take any steps to satisfy himself Avhether he came fairly by his death or not. He then determined to watch his steps, and whenever he had a fit oppor¬ tunity to do so without fear of being dis* covered, to upbraid him. His astonish¬ ment and angei were great when he one evening perceived him intently gazing (while concealed behind a hedge) on the daughter of the duca, his foul and bit- VOIm n. L f(t
ter enemy ; he then advanced, and con¬ cealing his features with his Cowl (for during his residence in the precincts of the monastery it Avas neecs°ary for him to Avear the dress of a monk, in order to escape being noticeel Avhenever he left tire tim-e*), upbraided his son with his conduct, and biddhig him shun the offspring of Rodolpho, instantly left the place, and, Avell acquainted with the mazy intricacies of the forest, effectu¬ ally eluded his son's pursuit. When« however, he had heard that his son and Rosalina had become acquaint¬ ed, his anger increased, and he sought an opportunity of again warning him, which he effected as described in the first volume, by secreting himself be¬ hind a panel in the chamber of the monastery of Santa Maria, whither his son had putfcued him, and denounced vengeance on Kosalina should he not instantly
instantly withdniAV his ill-placed affec¬ tion from her. Illness now for a long time confined the marchese to his apartment, and per¬ haps his anger at his son's conduct not a little delayed his recovery. It Avas during that period, that as he was one day pensively sitting by the casement with his eyes fixed on the floor, that he perceived the trap-door which commu¬ nicated with the vaults and subter¬ raneous passages of Colredo, Such a discovery greatly delighted him, for he could uoav at pleasure filter it, and thu* be enalteci secretly to prosecute Avhat- ever plans his desire of revenge should «lietate. By this passage, as has been before observed, he effected an entrance into tin» eastern chambers of the castello, whicii being remole from the inhabited parts L K À ot
of the building, he ran no risk in fre¬ quenting them. The return of the duca made him somewhat more cautious in venturing from his abode, and in order to divert tlie time, he visited the eastern cham¬ bers more frequently, and made him¬ self minutely acquainted with the sub¬ terraneous passages, wliich knoivledge might perhaps be of service to him when his plans of revenge Avere ma¬ tured. One day, as he ms sitting in one of the apartments, he heard several hasty steps advancing along the corridor, and had but just time to hide himself in the gloom of a deep recess on one side of the chamber, when the door was thrown open, and the duca di Rodolpho and llosalina entered.
From
From his discourse witli his daughter, he learnt the danger of his son, and that their love was mutual; and after the departure of Rodolpho, the declara¬ tion of Rosalina, that »be never Aveuld wed any other than Montaltor left not a doubt of it. Greatly enraged that his son, notwithstanding, tiie frequent warn¬ ings he had gwerjt him, should seek an union with her, he determined to end his solicitude on that head by the mur¬ der of Rosalina ; and he was also insti¬ gated to it, because by such a deed he revenged himself of the duca, Avhose ambitious prospects of an alliance with the prince di Manfroné Avould thereby ?? entirely frustrated» That horrible deed in his vindictive rage he would instantly have performed, but happily he had no instrument where¬ with to effect it; therefore* fearful cí being discovered, he contrived, while J- 3 Rosalina
Rosalina was examining the further end of the chamber, to emèrge slowly from his concealment, and reaching the pa¬ nel, which silently receding as he touch¬ ed the secret spring, he was soon out of the chamber. Rosalina, hoAvever, had in the mirror observed his figure gliding along the Wall, which had greatly alarmed her; but at length, after having surveyed the apartment, and becoming convinced that she was its only inhabitant, she concluded that it was the effect of her disturbed imagination, and by degrees recovered of her terror. The marchese, determined to com¬ mence liis work of revenge, resolved that night should be the last that Rosa¬ lina should know ; and as soon as mid¬ night had arrived, he silently entered the chamber where lay his intended vic¬ tim,
tim, and unsheathing his dagger, ap- proacned her couch. The bright beams of the moon dart¬ ing through the ivy-clad casements, shone on the lovely countenance of Ro¬ salina, and for a while stopped his sus¬ pended arm, till recalling to his too- retentive memory his injuries, he Avas about to complete his dreadful errand, when the tremulous sounds of Rosalinds voice supplicating for mercy, rendered him unable to perform it, and he retired from the chamber. The next night, greatly astonished, he saw Rosalina descending the stairs that led from the eastern chambers to the subterraneous passages. He watched her, for he instantly concluded that she was endeavouring to effect her escape, and to fly to his son for protection, when, greatly astonished, he witnessed . the
the scene between lier and his son, who till that moment he was ignorant was* Rodolpho's captive.* His hatred of Rosalina avos now turn¬ ed into admiration of her conduct ; tie beheld her ?? the* preserver of his son, and he blessed Heaven that he had not th" horrible crime of her destruction to answer for, and from that moment de- tern mied to take lier under his protec¬ tion as far as lie Avas able. Accordingly, Avhen tlie next night he distoA'ered tlie hapless maid Avandering through the caverns, be took an oppor¬ tunity of assuring her that she had a friend who would protect her. lie knew that father Augnstino was too ill to perform the ceremony of unit¬ ing lier to tii** prince, and he deter¬ mined, hazardous as the undertaking
w as,,
Avas, to attend himself; and he no sooner saw Rosalina conducted by the duca towards the chapel, than he hastened through the secret passage to the me> nastery, and met the messenger whom Rodolpho had sent for one of the fathers, and immediately folloAved him to the castello. The attempt was replete with danger, but the marchese was determined to as¬ sist Rosalina, as she had preserved the life of his son. His success has been re¬ corded. He trusted to the confusion and terror which the sudden vieAv of his features Avould cause the duca, and he hoped then he should be able to escape ; or if he could not, he had ready prepar¬ ed, beneath the folds of his garment, a dagger, which he would, on tlie instant of his being discovered, have sheathed in the heart of Rodolpho.
Some
chapel, he beheld the monk wdio had caused so much uneasiness to llosalina by his seemingly minute investigation of her features. Not knowing who he Avas, he watched his steps when he re¬ tired from the clmpel, and soon, un¬ known by Grimaldi, gained a glimpse of his features, Avhich he instantly avcü recollected. For Avhat purpose he could be there in that disguise (for the mar¬ chese Avell knew religion w f as not the motive that had made him take im residence in tliat monastery), he eould not conceive* unless indeed he was, like himself, seeking revenge Thus post the hours that brought on that memorable night when the mar¬ chese was surprised in his fancied secure retreat by the duca and the padre Gri¬ maldi. And tints have we wcuunted for the tnaiiy mysterious occurrence* which
Avhich had taken place as related in t}io first volume. The marchese, once more in the power of the duca, concluded his de¬ struction certain, and was unable to cím¬ ééivé the reason of the delay of his bit¬ ter enemy respecting his assassination ; but it will be seen that the padre Gri¬ maldi had other designs in view than his death, and which made him enforce from the duca that solemn promise to ensure his safety ; and though at first he was allowed no other provision than bread and water, and was cruelly chain¬ ed to tlie floor of his dungeon, yet in a short time those chains were taken away» he liad the liberty ofAvalking about,and liis food was of a better quality. II w gaoler was the mysterious padre Grimaldi, with whom, as he considered bini ai the author of his present situa¬ tion,
tion, he ????? exchanged a word, and the rnouk Avas equally as silent as his captive.
END OF VOU İL
Ibitloi 1^1. ????.* l*ïêàmtûîSum, lmêm<
