Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Manfroné: or, The one-handed monk: a romance
MANFRONE.
CHAPTER ?И.
OSALINA was almost as impatient to see Montalto, as he was to urge his fond suit. She was anxious to mform him what she.knew concerning the padre Grimaldi, of his residence in the cas¬ tello, and various other circumstances which Imd taken place since they had last met Montalto would likewise have wished to have related to her the miserable situation of his parent, but that he tvas restricted from so doing by his oath* VOL* IIL B Jt
?
It was not till the second evening after he had seen the monk, that Mon¬ talto could -fhid an » opportunity of ad¬ dressing, unseen, his adored Rosalina, when, in a retired aisle of the exten¬ sive chape) of the monastery, they contrived to escape observation; great was Montalto's astonishment on learn¬ ing the conduct of the duca towards the monk, particularly as he knew the part Grimaldi liad acted sipce tliat ¿Srcutnstátíôe had tarkén place ; and he saw at òrice, òr at léást thought hfe ?% his 'fautives for imposing «m'hita ilie tóïéhm pcfttãíe of nói ï^védttjg his parent's captivity; fór he began ? to întögîfte that there múktbe sofae secret "?? ágenst the dtars life, else wliy sïduld the ìiiótik bsare acted as hehad dóïie, in bringîtig him into ttie cHanu ber ôf fïodolpho, after having atbtied, hhn feith a dagger, and inflamai his mind to the perpetration of arty act, however
however dreadful» and which, indeed. nothing but the recollection of Rosalina had prevented him from performing? Still, however, tue motives of the monk might have been alone .confined to tlie wish of letting a son revenge his fa¬ ther's wrongs. At all events, he had every reason to consider tlie monk as his friend» in whom he could with safety confide tlie most important secrets of his breast. In the most tender and animated terms he urged Rosalina to make him the happiest of men, by consenting to a private union; but she thus addressed him ; '* To attempt to disguise my senti¬ ments < towards you, Montalto, or that a uuion with you Dvould not complete my happiness is alike unnecessary; ? 2 jfor
fcr you must be well assured of it Such a step as you wish me lo follow might, perhaps, in some measure, have been excusable, when the duca, my father, sought to unite me, contrary to my inclinations, tò the prince di Man* íroné; but now that he is no more, the situation ? far diflfêrent: tiitíe, per¬ haps, will bring about an event so much desired by us ; but without my fethers consent, Montalto must excuse my re¬ fusai,* ** Oh, say not so, my angel l* re¬ turned the marchesa ** Alas! did you know the fetal secret which throbs for utterance in ray bosom, you would ac¬ knowledge the necessity of guch a step : but that secret I am forbid to unfold. The least delay is attended with the most dreadful consequences — consequences which may separate Rosalina and Mon¬ talto for ever f «For
u For ever !" faintly returned Rosa« lina. " What have you heard—what new discovery—what dreadful secret is this which you dare not unfold ?" « I am bound by a solemn oath not to reveal it," returned Montalto ; ** *tis indeed ,a dreadful secret, and homble must be the consequences if you re* fuse to comply with my request; for I must commit a deed which nature's tie calls me loudly to perform, that will sever us for ever«—that wiU im¬ brue my hands in blood, whose stain my own will, haply, for the termina- tion of my sorrows, wash away; for never will I survive the deprivation of your society, nor shall I be able to re¬ sist the dreadful purpose of my soul, if Rosalina persists in her refusal. Oh, miserable wretch that I am! torn by conttading passions, whose despotic sway I am not able to control ! You, ? ? 3 Rosalina,
Rosalina, can avert this dreadftil horror that impends over all of us. Your duty» as a daugliter, compels you to grant my entreaty. Can I say more?" Dreadful conviction of his meaning: instantly flashed on Rosalina's mind í she trembled and turned pale.-—*' Com¬ plete," said she, * the dreadful sen¬ tence—unfold at once your secret, and tell me that Rosalina is the daughter of a murderer—of the murderer ofyour parent Alas ! I had always too much reason to suppose it. You have heard it. Leave me then, Montalto, leave me to my agonising reflections; but do* not, I conjure you, confound me with the guilty, for I am innocent of a pa¬ rent's crimes " M Perish that bosom that dare ? harbour any other opinion of my adored ' Rosalina !" returned the marchese : w the duca
duca is not quite so bad as you ima¬ gine; though, perhaps, death would have been better than ------" Here he paused, and Rosalina, who had eagerly listened to his last words, hastily said—" Complete your sentence; make ?? happy by exonerating my father of the dreadful crime which I have so long thought him guilty of." H I cannot, Rosalina —I am bound by tm oath ; suffice it to say, his deeds call for retributbn, and my arm must grasp. the sword—but Rosalina can avert its deadly edge," " Be not hasty, Montalto; you may have been wrong informed." # " No, lovely Rosalina, these eyes beheld—Oh, how horrible! how wud are my sensations when I reflect cai ? 4 what
what ï saw ! My brain seems on fire— delays are adding fresh torments^—this instant will I go—yes, this shall bc the hour of vengeance !" Dreadful was tlie countenance of Montalto while he uttered these dis¬ jointed sentences-—it bespoke the hor-* rible agitation of his mind ; he breathed short and quick, his eyes were dis¬ tended, his brows lowered, a dark gloomy hue overspread his features* his hand firmly grasped his sword ; al¬ ready had he started from his seat, which was tlie marble surface of a* tomb, when Rosalina, almost as agi¬ tated as himseif, hastily seized his arm. 11 Whither are you going," said she ; " what is your horrible intent ? Speak to me, Montalto ! My father is the ob¬ ject of your vengeance! Pause—re*-
fleet on the deed you would commit» and know that the hand which is raised against him shall never press Hline: Ult; u uw* umy mp guuly, ??? ira is Rosalina's father." Her voice seemed to allay the furi¬ ous rage of Montalto; he stopped and ga^ed on her, while his brows became less overcast, and his loeks more com¬ posed. " Too well I know that it wül be m you say, Rosalina —too well I know that the deed I would perform, that the blow I meditate, would make th^e fatherless, and would heavily revert øn myself; for never would I survive the loss* of thy affection, and the hor¬ ror of # reflecting on myself as the cause of your misery. Yet such is my si¬ tuation* I cannot avoid committing the. deed. Oh, Rosalina, were death to pay ? 5 his
his ehffimg visít tö my âgönked fcrrø~~ were heat thiø moment tø liberate my soul from earthty thought how great „ 1rouM be th^ Messing! I sh^B then* expire without forfeiting Rosalina's love, nor would a ----- ? Here be stopped, må striktog Msr forehead iwith his hand, «while .gure. way to ? the fòtee of his Heftrtftit agonies. Rosalina was deeply affected t she trembled, and the tears started from her lovely eyes. * What, oh ÎÎeafèns ? «aid the ter¬ rified Rosalia, * ívhat iWl I do to avert* the$e impendiug evils? ?? me, Mmh talto, tril me, I conjur you, white yeti âm abletoafikit?" " I have tcîd you," móutnfhlly re*- » tüftied the marchese, w the only ?? ?? ifrhich it Can be avoided. Let m ' ". . . unite
unite our destinies, and by tliat you will become the preserver of your father's and your tovers life, Refuse, and you are the executioner of both " *' Alas ! what shall I do ?* spid Rosa¬ lina. * Montalto, indeed you arf too precipitate, you $çt before yoi^ reflect· Wh#t secret is this which it appears has so lately been entrusted to, you ? How do you know but that your information may be ßdse-7-fabricated, perhaps, to an¬ swer some hidden purpose of my father's enemies?" α Alas Γ returned Montalto, " I was fptyself a witness of the ttutu of tlie sad information ; these eyes beheld the soul- harrowing sight, which, when but for a $^amei$ I reflect on, my senses wander» sud my blood Wk with rage against tho author," ¿6 «And
11 And how would my consent to' a secret union," said Rosalina, ** avert the dreadful tempest ofyour passions?" " Because it would be an excuse for my not doing an act of justice, and in time might happily reconcile the mortal enmity which otherwise must exist," returned Montalto. w Conde^ scend, my adored angel," continued he, throwing himseif at her feet, ** condescend to make happy your Mon¬ talto !" ** Heaven direct me !" said RosaUna* ·· I know not what course to pursue. Were my sainted mother living, I shoidd not want an adviser." %i AlasT said Montalto, w ??? not ihe existing drcumstances of sufficient moment to induce you to comply? I will
will not take you from your fathets abode; only consent to be united to me, and soon, I trust, the gloom that lowers* over us will oe dispelled, and days ©f happiness appear to our view." "On that condition," said Rosalina, faintly, " I yield to your request ; mìa in so doing, I am equally actuated by parental aifection, ás well as love for you ; and may Heaven forgive me if I am doing wrong Γ Montalto's countenance was illumined with the joy of his heart; for the first time he pressed the timid Rosalina to his bosom, while he said«— <* To¬ morrow night, my angel, contrive to lie here; before that time I will pro¬ cure one of the fathers to perform the ????????." 11 Be careful," said Rosalina, H in whom
whom you place confidence: above all, avoid Grimaldi—the- is the duca*$ friend." " I tbilik not," returned Montalto i " indeed I have every reason to suppose bim firmly mine. His conduct has evinced him suck" f' How then," replied Rosalina* u would he, in that case> have accept¬ ed' of apartments in tlie castello? Ue- sides, as I understand, the duca and he are frequently engaged in priyate converse:** * There is, most undoubtedly, some¬ thing truly mysterious attacked to his conduct ; but be is, perhaps,, at least as I have every reason to suppose, the ducä*s enemy: he indeed is the very person I meant to sohcit, for he is no stranger to ?? sincere attachnrøt- to ???."
" You know best," returned Rosalinar ** only be cautious whom you trust, for if you are betrayed, our ruin is in¬ evitable." The gloom of evening had long reigned in the aisles of the chapel, and Rosalina;, fearing her longer stay might excite suspicion, hastily bade Montalto adieu, and promising to be there at that time the next evenings hastened to the castello di Colredo, while the marchese, reflecting how he could obtain a conference with Grimal¬ di, had seated himself beneath the por¬ tico that was erected 'before tiie portals. of the chapel- He had not oeen there many mi¬ nutes, before his attention was roused by the echo of paces in the chape), the doors of which being open, he soon beheld a monk approaching the place where^
wdiere he was, and to his great joy, when he had advanced within a few paces, recognized the well-known figure of Grimaldi, whom he so much wished to see. His cowl was, as usual, closely draw» over his features,, his head bent towards the ground, and his arms folded and wrapped up in his long garments. Mon¬ talto, on perceiving that it was him, has» tily arose from his Seat u I wished much to see you, father," said he, " and but this moment was thinking how I might obtain an inter¬ view. You told me that in you I had a friend " " Have I not given you the most ample .proofs of the veradty of that assertion?" returned the deep hollow voice of the monk. " But you wouid not
not advantage ycurself of the oppor¬ tunity you had to revenge yourself on your enemy, and to liberate your pa¬ rent; and if I recollect right, your excuse w r as love—that you loved the daughter of the man who had so deeply injured you, and on that ac¬ count would suffer your father to Unger' in a wretched captivity! Such a tale would gain no credit, were I to rekte it to the world; no one would believe a son capable of acting as you have done." ·* Doubtless I merit your reproaches, father ; but spare them for the present. Alas! did you know how great is the power of love, you would find in that knowledge an ample excuse for my conduct." " You said you wished to see me," returned the monk, without appearing to notice his last words. « I did.
" I did, fether. I have made you ac¬ quainted, with my løye for Rosalind She has at length, confuted to a private union." " A private union !" hastily returned the monk : " what ! while the, march^se^ your fether—»-—»" w I know what you would sayV' re* plied Montalto. w Believe me, I have every wish, to liberate my parent; but as the steps I must take to do that would endanger, if not totally prevent, røy unipn with Rosalina, first let me secure that inestimable jewel* and then I shall better know how to act" The monk did not return any answer; he seemed to be deeply ruminating on what he had heard, and after a short pause, Montalto continued-* « Jîow, father, I hope to find in you
you that friend who would perfonn ???????????? which will make me the happiest of men. You may depend on my gratitude, for I am amply po&- sessed ef the means of recompensing you," u You forget" returned the monfc, t * that you are addressing yourself to* or»e who has bidden adieu to the world,- to whom riches are of no import. No, marchese, I have hitherto endeavoured to befriend you, not from motives of being rewarded, other than by that pleasing reflection which always accora* panies friendly actions." " Excuse my hasty speech—I own- myself wrong," replied Montalto. u May I then felicitate myself on your con¬ sent ? f> " You may,' 1 returned tho monk ? " but
w but remember you must be silent tì» the grave You know the duca— our lives would hardly appease his wrath. But when you are united to Rosalinai, what do you intend doing with respect to Rodolpho ? Is the sword of retribu¬ tion still to sleep, or will you not then sheathe its deadly point in his heart, and give a parent liberty ?— Rosalina, then indissolubly your ewn, cannot control your actions," " My resolutions are not yet formed/ returned Montalto ; u but as it was in hopes of averting my deadly hatred against her parent that she has consent¬ ed to our secret union* his Ufe at least must be spared." w I thought," returned the -mpnk, " that love elevated the mind—spur¬ red on the soul to noble achievements —gave each thought and each intent new
n ew vigour : but either I was misinform¬ ed, or in you its faculties are strangely terverted. So as that you can obtain the object of your wishes, « father may breathe his last in a dreary dungeon— his enemy proceed in all his dark and deadly deeds unhurt, and secretly tri- *imjfti in «all his plans Γ ' ' You do me wrong, father, to con- dude, that because I will not become the assassin of Rodolpho, I do not mean to pursue the proper steps to liberate my parent. The moment I am so hap¬ py as to call Rosalina roine, shall be the commencement of my plans." *' What] you mean tamely to request his freedom ? to beg of Rodolpho to let you have your father?" returned the anonk. ■*' Such a proceeding would tloubtless well become the haughty, ge- jierous, brave Montalto !" " Father,
to ?? soul ! Heed I repeat, that no¬ thing but Rosolina restrains *my re¬ venue? Yet, Ao not suppose that I would ßtoop to assassination. No, I Would Sate him to the field, and my arm would doubtless prevail against the base oppressor. But then Rosa¬ lina, the idol of my soul, would be bst to me! I know not how to act: justice mìa duty impel me—but love, more powerful than either, restrains me,." 44 î pity ym* n returned Grimaldi, after a pause, " sincerely pity you; the noble energies of your mind' are losfe. Rut your union witlvRosalina— when and where is the ceremony to be performed ?" u In tliis chapel, father? an hour after tomorrow's vespers die has pro¬ mised
tnised to meet me.. At that time there is little fatfeóf íntetTUptíön ; but should yúu think ît better, the time may te, delayed tifi tfie monks are #et *>d to *eät." « We tftist te guidai by eireum* stances äs to that " returned Grimaldi ** You ??, however, depend on seeing·^ ine beire át Veápérs. Rosalina of course de^iartswith you?*' t' * " Kb," returned Montalto, ** she Will temahí at Colredo, till the libera** tion of my parent, and ether ciretim* stârtces, render it safe for her to fetide Witii ??. Btit in all this 'time! have not asked after thy father. Have you, - as you jptomfeed, alleviated, as much * as you could, tte terroirs of his con¬ finement? have you informed him that his son was a wîtneâs ^f-his »miserable captivity?" "lam
^ I am incapable of such a refinement ion cruelty," replied the pionk. " It is sufficient for him to endure the hor¬ rors of captivity (which I have lately, according to my promise, endeavoured to rileviate), than to have tiie heart¬ breaking reflection, that he has a son who tamely bears the knowledge of his situation, and instead of avenging 3m wrongs when he had the jpoewer, as now on the point of being allied to his enemy] liow would Ihe curse the moment,of your birth! how would he curse himself fcr being the cause of your existence l-r~T8o> I would not add to your «oble fathers miseries by «uch an unkind disclosure, A mo* mcnt« ¿reflection, and you surely would not have put such a question to me. But enough W been smdiuid done to rouse the most lethargic bemg. Oa this sulýect Ishall not speak further: your futuie resolves will» doubtless» be
MANFRONc. S* be guided by RosaUna ; and thus your father has no prospect of release. In¬ deed I almost repent that I consenteu. to unite you to her; but my word is passed, and may not be retracted. Farewell, the night wears away·" So saying, he left Montalto, who, though happy that his wishes respect¬ ing Rosalina seemed so near tbfir ac¬ complishment, yet the reproachful words of Grimaldi, all of wiiich he felt he had deserved, sunk deep into his recol¬ lection, and marred his comfort. De- jected, and unlike a lover on the point of succeeding in his dearest hopes, he slowly proceeded to his residence, where, when he had arrived, he sat ruminating on what steps he should pursue ; but he rejected every expedient of releasing his parent, as often as they presented them¬ selves» for he could think of no mode of effecting it but what must deeply wound vol. ?. ? the
the bosom of RosaUna; nor could he ask her how he should aet, because his oath prevented him from disclosing his fether's situation. To request advice of the monk was useless, because he would doubtless urge him to perpetrate deeds which, should he listen to, then Rosa- Una's affections would be lost for ever ; and as he could not be happy without her love, so neither could he be happy while his fatter was wearing out his melancholy hours in the gioomy dun¬ geons of Colredo, from whence he could only be released by his means.
CHAP-
CHAPTER ??. Ψ** *****t*r+++*4f** ******
MoNTAi/ro's gloomy ruminations at length gave way to the lively imagery which hope formed before his mental vision ; but before this, the lark, soar¬ ing on the fragrant sçephyrs, with his early notes proclaimed the approach of morning. Clouds of golden hue float¬ ed in the eastern horizon; and as the radiant colours deepen to the view, and spread around their blushing crim¬ son tints, the nocturnal vapours begin to disperse, and the varied scenes of nature open to the view. At kngth ? 2 the
the sun, broad rising, with his power¬ ful rays chases away the shadowy veil of iiight, and nature, dressed in her golden beams, smiles in her renovated beauties. The choristers of the grove shake their variegated plumage, damp with the dews of night, which, resting on the leaves of the forest, they appear, in the refulgent rays of the sun, as if adorned with glittering gems. Night, that had' for many hours held her reign over the hemisphere, has taken her gloomy flight, and her solemn sister, silence, soon follows in her train, scared by the lark's unwelcome notes, or the song of tiie peasant, who gaily rises to his daily labour. The busy hum of the animated world increases, and sleep no longer rests on the eyes of mortals. He too seeks another hemi¬ sphere, where the sun has ceased to shire, and spreads his drowsy influence abroad. Montalto
Montalto watched impatiently till the shadows of the western hills in¬ creased upon the tremulous bosom of the lake, and the sun ceased to glitter on its wavy surface: he viewed with sensations of delight the pale moon slowly emerging, as if from the bo¬ som of a vast forest, which stretched its leafy tenantry on the sides of the mountains which skirted the western horizon, as silent and solemn it rolled along its mystic course, gathering its borrowed lumen from the declining sun. * " Thou bright planet," said he, ° who hast so often witnessed the tur multuous sorrows of my bosom, shalt witness also the happiness that this night awaitc me—shalt witness the vows of Rosalina and Mentalte И While indulging these reflections, ? 3 he
he had advanced to the chapel : he en¬ tered it; the last strain of the monks and nuns had ceased to vibrate in the air, and they were slowly retiring to their cells. He looked arotmd, but Rosalina was not there. He went to the porch, and cast his eyes towards Colredo, but beheld not the beloved object ho sought. He returned to the chapel, whieh w r as now empty, and a solemn silence reigned in its dusky aisles, which was shortly disturbed by the opening and ebbing of a distant door, which soon after Montalto found was occasioned by the entrance of the padre Grimaldi, agreeable to his pro¬ mise. 4 From the time that Rosalina had consented to become the bride of Montalto, her agitation had every moment increased: at one time she thought of retracting her promise, but then
then she recollected the danger that would in that case attend her father*, for the marchese had so repeatedly de¬ clared that nothing but a union with her could afford him a pretext to stem the torrent of his rage, and which she knew to be but too well founded, and which even had a virtue in it, since it was caused by, as she fiupposed, the murder of his father! She thought too, that it was a duty in her to be watchful of the safety of the duca, since, let his crimes be ever so dread¬ fui, it would nevertheless be a crime in her to folget that she was a daugh¬ ter: she might indeed refuse to com¬ ply with Montalto's request, and warn the duca of his danger ; but that could not be done without hazarding her lover's safety: there was therefore no choice left her; she was either to look upon herself as the cause of the de- c é struction
struction of the duca and Montait^ or else risk his terrible anger, should he ever know it while she was in his power, and be united to the man sb? adored= Rosalina had, therefore, little diffi¬ culty in choosing the latter, but she had great difficulty in allaying the fears that every moment took deeper root in her bosom, and which, the more she reflected on what she was about t€> do, the more they increased, and the evening had approached be¬ fore she had made her final resolution ; but, however, greatly as she dreaded her fathers rage, she dreaded still more the loss of Montalto ; and throw¬ ing her veil over her lovely but pale features, she arose to go to the monas* tery ; but her feeble limbs refused to support her, and she sunk on her seat, trembling
trembling with the indescribable sen¬ sations of anxiety and terror which per¬ vaded her bosom. She was fearful that her senses would give way to the agitation she endureci and that she should be obliged to sum¬ mon Carletta to her assistance, in which case she could not have attempted, without exciting suspicion, to proceed by herself to the chapel; and whether she yielded to Montalto's entreaties or not, she wished to see him, since he might conjecture, if she was to fail ? her promise of meeting him, that she had altered her resolution, and there¬ by might blow into a flame the kind¬ ling embers of his just anger. This reflection served to make her exert herself; and when at length she was able to leave her chamber, her fears of being observed and followed ? 5 Eave
gave her fresh powers to hasten through tte corridors and to cross the court¬ yard which led to the castie-gates. Fortunately she did not meet with a single person, and, somewhat comforted by this circumstance, she slowly pro¬ ceeded down the winding path which led to tte monastery, often stopping to rest her trembling limbs, which the nearer she approached the monastery, the more she feared would cease #cy support her, for her agitation and tér- lor momentarily increased. Her fears were indeed laot without foundation, for, after with tte greatest difficulty slie had succeeded in reaching the portico at the gates of the chapel, her eye& grew dizæy, the objects before her seemed to turn round, and she stagger¬ ed towards the stone seats whieh were on each side the portico, ? whieh she sunk, and instantly became, insensi¬ ble to all ter éares, tyhteh were far too much
much for her fragile frame to supports and which indeed had for a long time fatally warred with her tender consti- tutiort* Which they were rapidly under» mining. The monk, w r hen he entered the cha¬ pel, advanced towards Montalto. ** The signora Rosaiina is not yet come ?" said he. * No, father,^ returned Montalto, *' but the appointed hour is scarcely past.. I am not fearfiil of her neglect¬ ing her promise χ sinister events may indeed protract her stay at the castello* m she will of course be cautious of at¬ tracting observation." " I know not how this will end," returned the monk ; ** it is a rash un¬ dertaking, and pregnant with evil. What will the sensations of the old ? 6 marchese
marchese be when he hears of this union !" " Father» you mem to delight in unpleasant anticipations: surely the evils we have to encounter are amply suflicient, witbout creating imaginary ones to torture us. Let us rather felicitate ourselves on tiie enjoyment of happy days: such a hope will en¬ liven the prospect before us, however gloomy it may at present appear ; and our minds, instead of beiug weakened by moutmful ruminations, will be strengthened by our pleasing hopes, and be therefore better able to support the calamities which otherwise we must sink under." During this conversation he had ad¬ vanced along the aisle towards the grand altar which terminated it» when turning round in hopes of èeeing Ro¬ salina
salina approaching, he beheld lier tot* tering towards the portico, and soon after sink apparently senseless on one of the stone benches. He flew towards her, and found that his conjectures wer« but too true, for no signs of ani¬ mation were perceptible i» her pale mo. tionless form* His tender assiduities at length re¬ stored her; and as slowly she became sensible of the sound of his voke, f her eyes unclosed, and she fixed her lan¬ guid gaze on her lover; but the tall figure of the padre Grimaldi, who stood motionless before her, without offering to render tny assistance to Montalto, while it roused her to a re¬ collection of lier intended union, ne. vertheless filled her with alarms, for which she found it impossible to ac¬ count It was a sensation of fear, bor¬ dering on terror, which his appearance always
always excited, notwithstanding die had now every reascm to conclude, ftom his past and present conduct, that he was the friend of her lover. Comforted, however, by his presence, she endea¬ voured to banish her uneasy sensations respecting him, and which waa neces¬ sary to enable her to attend to the ce¬ remony which he was going to perform* which would unite her in tte indissolu¬ ble tenda of marriage to the inm she adored. Animated by this last reflections her strength returned, and leaving her seat^ she entered tte chapel, resting on tte arm of Montalto, preceded by the padre Grimaldi, who with his accustomed slow and measured paces,, advanced to tiie altar. < A cloud had raided its sabie fokk before tlie moon, aad obscured her sU- vcr
ver beams ; a gloomy horror seemed to enwrap every object in tlie chapel, that was rendered partially visible by the faint lumens of the twinkling stars ι the silence of the monk—the echo of their paces, which appeared to Rossdina as if they were whispered arotmd— and above all, the consciousness of the ceremony thai was going to be per¬ forated wanting a parents sanction, terrified her, rød once stie was going to request Mofrtalto to let her return to the castello, but she paused, for òhe feared to hear the sounds of her own voice* At length, when they approached the altar, the monk turning round, dc* sired Montalto to remain there while he went into the monastery to procure a lamp* The hollow tones of his voice startled Rosalina, and she watched his tall figure till it disappeared in the gloom,
gloom, and she remained silent till the sound of a closing door hollowly echo¬ ing through the vast fabric, .caused a sudden exclamation to escape her. Montalto, wha had been for some time engaged in pleasing anticipa¬ tions, now endeavoured to sooth, the perturbation of her mind, and those en¬ dearing expressions which came from a heart sp fondly devoted to her as y?m liis, had the desired effect. She now ceased to tremble, and exerting her¬ self, waited with some degree oí com¬ posure for the amval of the monk, who soon after appeared holding a lamp, the feeble rays of which darting through the gloom» rendered visible the sur¬ rounding objects. Both their eye« were ft&ed on the padre Grimaldi, but a low creaking sound in another part of the chapel made
made the fearful RosaUna look to the place from whence it seemed to pro¬ ceed, when to her astonishment she perceived in one of the side aisles a door slowly opening, and which disclos¬ ed the gigantic figure ef a man, who leaning forward through the aperture, seemed to watch their movements. Ro¬ saUna involuntarily dung to Montalto, who, surprised at her agitation, turn¬ ed round, when she silently pointed to the man at the portal ; but before he had fc?und cut the spot, tte figure had receded, and tte door was silently closed» '* My dearest Rosalina," whíspere4 Montalto, " why do you seek to alarm yourself by fancy-formed objects of ter¬ ror? What is it that you suppose you have beheld, which makes you trem¬ ble so?" "It
** It was no suppositions form that I saw,*" retunied Rosalina m a faint voice, ** Dear Älontalto ! dfmger is lurking around us: for Heaven's sake, let me re¬ turn to the castello î I shall faint with the terrible apprehensions which assail my bosom, if we stay here any longer ; anotlier evening I will come—believe me, I will indeed !" u Cruel Rosalina!" * returned Mon¬ talto, '* is it thus, when by your kind acquiescence you had elevated me to the summit of happiness, that you seek to hurl me from the fancied seat of bliss* and render me the most miserable of created brings?" " The construction you have put on my request is unkind," returned Ro¬ solina: "believe mte it is not with a view or wish to retract from my pro¬ mise,
mise, but I am overwhelmed by sen¬ sations which almost overpower my reason, and which indeed is occasioned by the certainty that we t are discover¬ ed," " A moment's reflection, my Rosa¬ lina, will convince you how ill found¬ ed sucfi an apprehension is, since ho one but the father GrimaicH is privy to our designs, and he, I am certain, Would not betray us to the duca, for his life is· in my p04veiy were I to unfold to Rodol¬ pho what 1 know concerning him—^t circumstance erf which he cannot be ig*. norant." Rosalina, somewhat assured by this last assertion, became more compos¬ ed; and now Grimaldi arriving at the altar, laid his lamp on it, when she again hearing the same noise which had alarmed her before, looked anx¬ iously
iously towards the aisle where she had seen the alarming figure; but the lamp was so placed, that its feint rays rested against some^ opposite columns, whose dark broad shadows obscured the recess where the portal was. The monk no¬ ticed her agitation« " You seem alarmed, signora," said he; " has any thing occurred that could give rise to your terrors ?" " Yes," returned Rosalina, who was on the point of relating to Grimaldi the figure she had seen, when Mon¬ talto suddenly interrupting her, saldir " The gloom of the place, father, and tbe noises occasioned vby the wittd, have alarmed Rosalina; hasten then, I entreat yoii, in the ceremony, lest her increasing agitation render i:er incapable of longer stay."
Tlie
The monk then turning to the altar, slowly opened his missal, and Mon¬ talto and Rosalina advanced nearer to him: but scarcdy had he repeated a few sentences, when an unseen hand struck Montalto, who staggered and fell back on the steps of the altar, and at the same moment Rosalina felt her¬ self seized in the strong grasp of a man, who bore her instantly out of the ehapd. Her terror depriving her of her senses, she happily was for a time ignorant of the horrible antici¬ pations of what might befall her ; and which, joined to the recollection of Montalto wounded, in the hands of his enemies, would doubtless have har¬ rowed up her senses beyond their bearing, and perhaps have affected for ever her reason. This calamity Was, however, for the present spared her, In
In the morning of that day, the du- «ca repaired at an early hour to the apartments where Grimaldi resided, and thus addressed him—"Wheu I first had the pleasure of meeting with you, fatiier, you told mc you w^re not ignorant of my views respecting the principality of Manfroue, vacant by his deatl»; hovv you came by that knowledge is not material; perhaps y#u knew that my mind was ambi* tious, and that I should not neglect so favourable an opportunity of aggrm- dizement; if such were your ideas, they were rightly formed. Sebastiano, the leadør rf the «adyerse paæiy, has re¬ fused jay oÄews of assistance, relying, as I condude, on some trifling suc¬ cesses which he has lately gained over the parfizuns of the late prince. Now, father, I wish for your advice: &hall I at the head of my forces enter the province,
province, aud under colour of aiding the adherents of Manfronl, attack Se¬ bastianos people? Our united force cannot fail of success, and of extermi¬ nating liim: stratagem wül likewise put the other troops in my power, and then the way seems easy to the regal seat*' **Your scheme is just such as 1 would Ipve proposed," returned the monk : " but you awst lie cautious— collect your forces within the castle- walls with as muqh privacy as possible, and in small detachments march to the capital, taking care that your peo¬ ple will arrive thero on a certain day : the astonishment ot ¡Sebastiano, wheu he hears of the numerous party that has thus in a manner invisibly col¬ lected, will spread itself throughout hie forces, and prevent the effusion of much blood ; fee the Joss of many vas¬ sals
«als will be severely felt by you, wheft you attain the sovereign power, and perhaps expose you to the attacks of the neighbouring potentates, Who-doubt- less are ¿mw on the watch, and only wait till the adverse parties have ex¬ hausted their strength, to faH on the conqueror, who, of course weakened by warfare, will be unable to make any op¬ position. You must therefore guard well against depopulating the terri¬ tories of the late Manfroné, for, Se- bastiano vanquished, ?? followers be¬ ing little better than mercenaries, will gladly fight /or iiim who pays them best. By these means you wiH not only be able to attain the sceptre of rule» but also to maintain it against all attempts that may at any future time be made." ** Your advice, father," returned the duca, w seems rather the result of
of mature deliberation, than of the idea of the moment, and gladly I shall fol¬ low it" " Your operations may be rendered still more easy, duca," returned Grimal¬ di, " if you have courage to grasp a dagger, and terminate at once Se¬ bastianos ambition with his life. You start! but I have said I was your fiiend; I did not mention this plan without intending to share your dan¬ ger." " Such a friend indeed as you," said Rodolpho, " is rarely to be met with. But in what manner shall this be per¬ formed? No one ever doubted my courage ; but this attempt seems to par¬ take of rashness—we may be discovered before the deed is done." vol. iii. n "I pledge
" 1 pledge my life for its success, if you ΛνιΙΙ be guided by me. I would not risk myself unnecessarily, and you will be no more endangered than my¬ self. This indeed is a subject on which I have bestowed much thought." " And I have too good an opinion ot your judgment," answered the duca, " to pause a moment in giving my con¬ sent. Shall I acquaint Lupo with this project? He is faithful, and may be serviceable in this affair." " I think you had better not," re¬ turned the monk, " and for this rea¬ son: while we ?? away, he must at¬ tend to your prisoner; and the more secret we are, the more likely of success. But while we are arranging your af¬ fairs abroad, there is a business of no small import which calls your attention at home." " How,
" How, father? at home! What is it your vigilant friendship has discover¬ ed ?" said Rodolpho. " Your daughter Rosalina is on the point of being married." " Married ! how ? to whom ?" ex¬ claimed the astonished duca. tt To your bitterest enemy, the young marchese di Montalto. ' " It is impossible! Rosalina never could consent !" tt It is but too true," returned Grimal¬ di ; "I have promised to perform the ceremony myself this evening." tí You, father ! indeed ! How would that act agree with your asseverations ? 2 of
of friendship?" returned the duca, ra¬ ther in a hasty tone, " The information I have given you is, î believe, a sufficient proof of them : it is true I have promised, but the reason I did that is obvious—that no other monk might be induced by hopes of emolument to undertake it : confid¬ ing therefore in me, they will not have an idea of applying to any other per¬ son. But it rests with you, duca, to pre¬ vent the nuptials." " Forgive my hasty expressions," re¬ turned the duca; " I was indeed wrong to harbour for a moment a doubt re¬ specting you. When then is this mar¬ riage to take place ?" " This evening, at an hour after ves¬ pers, in the chapel of Santa Maria," re¬ plied Grimaldi. "It
" It is well," returned the duca: " this evening shall be Montalto's last. As for Rosalina, she shall rue her dis¬ obedience in confinement till she weds a husband of my choice." " Content yourself at present," said the monk, " with confining the young marchese in your deepest dungeons, and restrict the signora Rosalina to the watts of the castello: for this I have my reasons, and you well know, duca, that all my plans are for your bene¬ fit." " Of that I am well assured," said Rodolpho, " and it shall be as you wish. To-morrow we will have another con¬ ference, for we must be hasty in our operations; and when I once am fixed secure in Manfroné's vacant seat, where will be the man more honoured, and n 3 possessed
possessed with more authority than yourself?" '* The pleasure of being serviceable to you," returned the monk, " is re¬ compense enough for me—I seek no other." They now separated; the duca, as¬ sisted by Lupo and two of the soldiers belonging to the castello, secreted them¬ selves in the chapel till the ceremony was begun, when having rendered Montalto incapable of resistance by a severe wound, they instantly conveyed him to the dungeon assigned him by Lupo. Rosalina, when she recovered, found herself in her own apartment, and Car¬ letta standing by the side of her couch : her first inquiry was concerning Mon¬ talto;
taito ; but her domestic could not give her any information of him; all she knew was, that the duca had followed the men who were conveying her to the chamber, and that he appeared to be greatly irritated, and desired Car- letta to acquaint her, as soon as she recovered, that he should expect her attendance the next m morning in his apartments. This was indeed a painful task for Rosalina to perform, and she trembled on hearing Carletta repeat the dread¬ ful mandate. The rectitude of her in¬ tentions in complying with Montal- to*s entreaties alone enabled her to sup¬ port the trying scene, which she was but too conscious, from her knowledge of her fathets outrageous passions, await¬ ed her. The morning was swift in its ap- n 4 proach,
proach, and the much-dreaded hour arrived, when Rosalina, whose coun¬ tenance shewed the agitated state of her bosom, with a stew trembling step, leaning on her attendant's arm, entered the duca's apartments. He gazed on her for some time with a stern malicious countenance, when at length, in a harsh tone, he broke his painful silence. " It was not suffident, Rosalina," said he, " that you shoidd attempt to dispose of yourself without the sanction of your father, but you must make choice of the man of all others my most implacable and bitter enemy, who, scoffing at the many advances I made to be on terms of friendship with him, even after he had dared to harbour suspicions injurious to my honour ! He thought, I conclude, to revenge him¬ self
sdf agamst me in the tenderest point, by seducing my daughter from her duty, in making her set at defiance her parents anger : this indeed would have been a triumph for Montalto, but thanks to my lucky stars, I have for ever pre¬ vented his designs !" " For ever!" faintly repeated Rosa¬ lina; " is Montalto then no more? —he who, at the risk of his own life, twice preserved me from the savage Manfroné— who rid you too of an ene¬ my you so much dreaded ? Surely you could not be so cruel as to commit so horrible a deed?" " And why not ?" returned the savage Rodolpho. " Do you think I would tamely bear so great an outrage—and from Montalto too ?" ** Then hear me," replied Rosalina, 0 5 whose
whose wildly-looking eyes shewed that her senses were disturbed— ?* hear my last words, for I feel that nature will before long sink under the pangs which rack my bosom. Montalto would liave been your friend, if you had not been the murderer of his father ! You start ! Alas ! what are my sensations when I am forced to tell a parent such a dread¬ ful truth ! And by all the blessed saints I swear, that never would Rosalina have consented to be united to him without your approval, much as she loved him, but she did it to stop the sword of re¬ tribution from shortening a parent's ex¬ istence : guilty though he might be, she could not forget that he was her father. You have completed the dreadful deed ; the father and the son both have winged their flight to heaven, where dreadful will be their evidence against thee. But there is yet one more victim, and that
.
that is your daughter, for never will I survive Montalto! No—life with¬ out him would be a blank indeed.— Did I not say I would not survive him? Is he then dead? The gener¬ ous brave Montalto, is he no more? Ah, yes! now I recollect I saw him, as bleeding he lay in the chapel. My brain, how it bums !—what a hor¬ rid scene was that ! Oh, misery ! mi¬ sery !" Here, with a long and mournful groan, Rosalina dashed herself on the floor, and raved in all the frantic ebullitions of insanity. The duca was moved by her sufferings : he had her conveyed to her apartment, and in order to calm her, repeatedly assured her that Montalto was still alive: but she no longer was able to comprehend him. She accused him of the murder d 6 of
of Astolpho the marchese, and his son. The pale attendant» gazed on each other as they listened to her words, and Rodolpho, to his astonishment, found that his dark deeds were not unknown to his daughter; he affected, however, to impute her exclamations as the consequence of the derangement of her senses, and desired all the do· mesties to leave the apartment except Carletta and a monk, whom he had sent for to attend his unfortunate daughter, and who vainly exerted his medidnal knowledge to calm the dread¬ ful perturbation of her mind. The duca shortly after left the chamber, and going to Grimaldi, re¬ quested he would endeavour to unde¬ ceive his daughter with respect to Montaito's dih, which the monk promising he would, instantly repaired to her. He
Hè found her in the same melan¬ choly state in which Rodolpho had left her, except indeed that her ex* ertions had considerably weakened her, and there were some hopes that the composing medicines which she had taken would have the wished effect: she still indeed raved, and accused her father; but her voice was some¬ what faint, and after a time sunk so very low, that her disjointed sentences could scarcely be understood. It was then that Grimaldi, who had not be* fore spoken, but silently appeared to contemplate the unfortunate Rosa¬ lina's sufferings, uttered in his deep hollow-toned voice —■ " Rosalina, do not give way to grief, for Montalto yet lives." At the well-remembered sound of his voice, she gazed on him f as if endeavouring to recall to her memory who he was, when he again repeated his former words, whidi she appeared
appeared to comprehend, for she shook her head in token of her disbelief of them, and as if impressed with the idea that he had betrayed her, waved her hand for him to quit the apart- ment. Grimaldi however still continued to speak to her, and to assure her that Montalto was yet in existence, and at length succeeded in making her believe him, which happily contributed, with the assistance of the medicines she had taken, to lull her troubled senses; and a powerful soporific being administer¬ ed to her, she at length sunk into a pro¬ found slumber. Grimaldi did not fail to be present when she awoke; but then her recol¬ lection having returned, she openly taxed him with having betrayed the confidence that the unsuspecting Mon¬ talto
talto had reposed in him, and ac¬ quainting the duca with the intended marriage; but after he had requested her to send the domestic from the chamber, he solemnly denied the charge; adding, that he was well as¬ sured that their conversation in the chape], when Montalto endeavoured to persuade her to a union, was over¬ heard, not only by himself, but also by another monk, who must have made the duca privy to it; and con¬ cluded thus—"You, daughter, have perused the eventful pages wlueh were traced by my hand, trembling with the agitation of a bosom torn by con¬ tending passions, but none of greater force than love: judge then, could I who have endured so much — who have been so greatly a victim to the tender emotions of my bosom—and who, to nurse my increasing miseries^ have entered on a Hfe of seclusion— do
do you think that I could be guilty of so great a cruelty as that of sepa¬ rating two fond lovers? (Mi no! at such an idea my heart recoils.—But that ï may prove to you the cer¬ tainty of what I advance, I will my¬ self convey á lettor to the marchese, who is confined in the castello: nay more, if you will but be discreet, I will almost promise that you shall shortly see him: but this must be kept secret from the duca, for though my existence И? cf no import—though life to me is now a dreary blank, yet I would willingly preserve it, that I may dedicate it to your service, and when I see you happy, death will be truly welcome." The hope of seeing Montalto con¬ veyed instant comfort to Rosalina's bosom. She felt hurt at her injurious suspidons of the monk, and no longer considered
considered him as her enemy, or the author of her present misfortunes. She conversed for some time with him respecting Montalto, whose wound, she was happy to hear, was of little consequence, and in a fair way of re* covery: she entreated the monk to name an eariy period for the desired interview, and he assured her that it should take place as soon as she should be abk to leave her chamber. With this promise he left her, having first, however, repeatedly warned her of the necessity of her silence, lest should it come to Rodolpho's knowledge, he might no longer be restrained from ter¬ minating his fears of Montalto in his death* Rosalina, assured of Montalto's be* ing in existence, soon recovered, and on the second day she was ??? to quit her couch, and to rit at the casement of
of her chamber, which commanded a view of the extensive courtyard in front of the castello, where, ignorant of the schemes of the duca, she was astonished to behold the military pre¬ parations that were going forward, and the armed parties that were con¬ tinually coming in ; while Carletta's relation of what she saw, and of what the domestics conjectured were the in¬ tents of the duca, instead of giving any idea of the reason of the troops being thus silently collected, only served to lead her still further from the real cause. The duca, busied in the prepara¬ tions for his enterprize, seemed almost to have forgot the late events: from Grimaldi he learnt that Rosalina was recovering, and, satisfied with his ac¬ count, he forbore to visit her —per¬ haps indeed the presence of his daugh-
ter, now that he found she was not ignorant of Astolpho's fate, was not capable of producing any agreeable sen¬ sations. At the close of the third day, the monk Grimaldi entered Rosalina's chamber; and having requested her to send away Carletta, thus addressed her — *' As this is the last evening, signora, that I shall be in the castello for some time, I will at midnight procure you the promised interview with the marchese Montalto, if you think yourself able to walk as fer as the east hall ; its remote situation will preclude the possibility of your meet¬ ing being observed, and by this act of mine you will doubtless be well assured of my wishes for your happi¬ ness." Delighted with the idea of seeing Montalto,
Montalto, Rosalina was not backward in expressions of her thanks and grati¬ tude for his kindness, and which indeed answered every end that the monk seem¬ ed to wish, for it entirely took from her mind the doubts which had still lurked there, that he was in some way concern- ed with having communicated the se¬ cret of her intended union. Whatever were the designs which thø monk had respecting Rosalina or Montalto, he seemed to be anxious that they should consider him as their friend, and certainly he couJ not have thought of a more certain me¬ thod than that which he was now pur¬ suing. In the meantime, the young mar¬ chese pined away tlie hours in his dreary dungeon. His suspicions of the author of his misfortune at first fell upon
upon the monk, but when he recalled to his mind what he had told Rosa¬ lina as a certain reason that Grimaldi would not betray him, he began to doubt that it could be him. He was more unhappy about Rosalina's fate- exposed to the fury of the relentless duca, than his own hapless situation, though he could hardly ever expect to leave his dungeon alive ; and indeed he wondered that Rodolpho did not ter¬ minate his existence, when he was ren¬ dered insensible by the severe blow which doubtless was given him by his perfidious enemy. It was while he was deeply immers¬ ed in these ruminations that the door of the dungeon opened, and the monk entered. *' Unfortunate man!" mia he, " how greatly I pity you, who are not only the
the victim of your own impetuosity, but also have so deeply involved the signora Rosalina." " Tell me, father," said Montalto, " before you proceed, how is that ador¬ ed angel? has the savage Rodolpho, unmindful of her tender frame, perse¬ cuted her ?" " It is impossible to say what he would have done," returned Grimaldi, " if the greatness of her sufferings, caus¬ ed by her fears on your account, had not caused her senses to wander." " Her senses to wander ! — Oh God!" exclaimed Montalto, " this is too much ! My own hard lot I could have borne, but to think of my love¬ lv Rosalina bereft of her senses—a raging maniac ! the reason that illu¬ mined the beautiful structure gone, and
and in its place a gloomy horrid void, like chaos before the world was formed !" " Do not distress yourself unneces¬ sarily," returned Grimaldi ; " it is true, for a time her state was melancholy indeed, but now she is better; her senses have returned, but their ab¬ sence, though short, has shook her deli¬ cate frame." "Go on, monk; I know what you would say; you are prefacing the sad tale of her dissolution. Go on, and an¬ nihilate me with the truth." " You are too impetuous, marchese," returned the monk : " had you been less so, your conversation in the chapel, when you pressed the signora Rosalina to give her consent to be united to you, would not have been heard, and at
at this moment, instead of being a pri¬ soner in the dungeons of Colredo, Ro¬ salina would have been your bride. I have exerted every means in my power to comfort Rosalina, and have in part succeeded, for she now j anxiously counting the tardy moments till mid¬ night, when, at the risk of my life, I have promised to procure her an inter¬ view with you." Whatever suspicions Montalto might have formed of the monk Grimaldi, all vanished when he heard his inten- tions. The blissful idea of again be- holding Rosalina was a soothing balm, which healed the deep sorrows of his breast; and when he had acknow¬ ledged his sense of his kindness, he in¬ quired how soon the happy time would arrive ? " It now wants an hour of mid¬ night,
night, tlie time J have fixed øn as being the safest ι but you naust pro- ??? me, signor^ that you will not advantage yourself of my wish to al¬ leviate the horrors of your .situation to effect ???· escape, a circumstance whidi would endanger my life ; for if it had not been for some services I have rendered the duca, you know him top weH to doubt but tiiat ?? punishment would bave been as severe as yours." t Montalto readily acquiesced with the monk's 4egirç, and faithfully promised to reten to lus dungeon as sooii as he should conceive it lueaessary. Gri¬ maldi then sayiag he would be with him in an hour, to conduct ??? to the eastern hall, proceeded to Rosali¬ na, who hayktg ordered Carletta to re¬ tire to jrest^ ¿sat {μΆ cf impayée for hw approach. ναι*, in· e ft Now,
" Now, signora," said he, « if you will follow me, I will conduct you to the place I have fixed on for your in¬ terview with Montalto« Be sure you tread softly along the comdors, or you may disturb the duca or some of the officers who now reside in the cas¬ tello." " I am ready, father," said Rosa¬ lina, who now, in compliance with his request, trod with caution tihe silent corridors as she followed his slow paces. The inhabitants of the exten¬ sive pile were buried in sleep, and unobserved Rosalina reached the east hall, where, on a table in a recess at the farther end, burnt a solitary lamp. " Direct your steps," said the monk, who had not spoke since he first en¬ tered Rosalina's chamber, ·« to that ?. lamp,
áamp, and remain there while I pro¬ ceed to Montalto's residence." Rosalina did as she was desired, arçd the monk crossed the hall in another direction. In the pleasing ^anticipation $f see¬ ing the object of her love, the fears whidi her present situation might naturally excite m a female breast were disregarded; the hall was situ· ated in a lonely and unfrequented part of the castello—in a part, too» where she, when confined there by the duca, had twice witnessed a fearful sight; but she did not aUow herself to be terrified either by the recollection of them, or the sounds of the midnight gale, as it rustled past the casements, or rushed along the passages in hollow gusts. This hall had formerly wit¬ nessed many a splendid spectacle, for e g the
the anoint possessors of tlie castello had gener^iy resided in the eastern wing; the lofty columns were still loadeà with the spoils of the field, and the torn banners waved silently to the wind. Rosalina seated herself near the marble table on which was the glimmering lamp, whose tremu¬ lous lumen die each moment feared would be extinguished by the passing ??????. At length she heard some paces ?? - preaching her, and beheld a lamp at tiie further end of the hall, which, as it ??? nearer, she found was carried by the monk, and gleamed on the loved form of Montalto, who accom¬ panied him. She hastily arose feem her seat, and ín a moment was dasped to hfe bosom; but the pleasure of thm meeting was greatly alloyed fey tiie change whieh ^ach femad m the other
Other since their unfortunate separa¬ tion. Montalto was pale, and his countenance was indeed but too ex¬ pressive of the pain and misery he had endured; white Rosalina still la¬ boured under the consequences of her severe illness* The presence of Gri¬ maldi was rather a restraint to their conversation, and after they had en¬ joyed each other's society till the rosy tinted morning glowed in the east» the monk reminded them tlmt they must part.— w I am now," continued he» " almost immediately going to leave the castello; you must, while I am absent, make use of your resolution and philosophy, and guard against the ill consequences of giving way to use¬ less regrets, and when I return, per¬ haps an opportunity may öfter of unit¬ ing you: meantime, Rosalina, you need be under no apprehensions re¬ specting the personal safety of the ? 3 marchese
marchese Montalto; but I charge you both on no account to let Lupo, the eastellain, know that you have ever met, or ever entreat him to permit you to do so, for you may rest assured that he is too faithful to the trust re¬ posed in him by the duca, and you will thereby expose yourselves not only to a refusal, but your request will be made known to his master, which ??? perhaps be attended with fatal consequences: against this I wam you as a friend, and if here¬ after you should neglect my admoni¬ tion, you will only have yourselves to blame." Rosalina and Montalto promised to comply with his advice, and now with many sighs they separated. Montalto repaired with Grimaldi to his gloomy dungeon, and Rosalina sought her own apartments, where, somewhat com¬ forted
forted by the promises of the monk, she resigned herself to the composing influence of the somnific deity till she was roused by the shrill tones of the trumpets and hollow cymbals, and hastily rising from her couch, she beheld from her casement, the duca in the courtyard, surrounded by his principal officers and attendants, sur¬ veying the troops who thickly thronged the spacious area; they were after¬ wards divided into several parties, and from the actions of the duca, Rosalina concluded that he was giving his final orders to the, officers respecting their future operations, which she could not avoid feeling anxious to obtain a know¬ ledge of. After some hours were passed, thç men were dismissed from the court¬ yard, and the duca still remained in earnest conversation with the offi- E 4 cer?,
cersy some of whom indeed looked rather like leaders of banditti than of regular troops, as indeed after¬ wards she found they were, fot Ro¬ dolpho had engaged a considerable number of those savage outlaws at a vast expence, and it was on their well-known despeíate valour that he placed hiar greatest reliance. Unlike the ethers, these mei Hstened with an air of lavage independence to his Or¬ ders, and frequently seemed by theif gestures to be debating among them« selves respecting them. RosaBna shud¬ dered as she viewed their ferocious features, and ooe m particular, who instead of attending to tibe conversa¬ tion of the others, leaning on his bat* tle-spear, gazed on the lofty towers of Colredo» and tte form of Rosalina attracting hûr notice, he fixed his eyes cm her till ¿he hastily retreated horn his rude observance. There was some¬ thing
thing ra the features of this man which was familiar to her recollec¬ tion, but at the slight glance she had of thera she could not at that moment remember where she had seen him; and when she ventured to return to the casement again, he was walking with some of his savage-looking com¬ panions at tiie further end of the courtyard» and the plumes in his military hat shaded his ikce· While she was looking at him, the door of her apartment opened, and Carletta en¬ tered. " Oh, signora ! at last I have heard all about tlie great preparations which have filled the castello with such a number of soldiers : the duca is going to make himself master of all the terri¬ tories which belonged to the printe di Manfroné, and they say ?? will then be a prince, and you, signora, will be E 5 a princess,
a princess, so Pietro says: but poor Pietro is going along with them to the wars ; now, signora, if you would but speak one word to the duca, I am sure no «r/-wt»l*l 1?* 1 rti«vt øfav KpVtiytrl " -.«v rt vuiu **^v ihut *?1?*\ Mviilliu,. ** If you were to consider one mo¬ ment of the circumstances that have so lately taken place, you would see the folly of making such a request," returned Rosalina; " I should not only risk a refusal, but perhaps my father would be irritated against Pie¬ tro, as concluding he wished to stay behind ; so you would have cause to repent my acquiescence. Do you know if the duca goes with the troops, and when they are to leave the cas¬ tello ?" " I believe to-night," returned Car» letta, in a mournful tone; ** there are great preparations for a banquet in the
the hall, where all the officers ?? to dine, and after that, Pietro says, they are to leave the castello, and tho duca——" Carletta's conversation was here inter¬ rupted by the entrance of an attendant, who informed Rosalina that the duca expected to see her in the hall at tjie banquet. Rosalina at first hesitated in her answer; she wished indeed to have been excused^ but m finding from Carletta that the duca meant to ac¬ company tlie troops, she could not refuse with any degree of propriety, and therefore desired the messenger to inform her feib*r she should at¬ tend- Rosalina was not sorry to learn that her father was going, because he» ? t> fears
fears fot Montaltds safety would cease when he was absent Fremi Carfetía she kamt that the fetter Grimaldi had quitted the castello early in the morning, and she hoped that he would return before the duca, for die was firmly persuaded that he was not only a sincere friend to faer, but also that by reason ef the influence he seemed to have over him, had it greatly in Ins power to be so. When tte houir appointed for tte banquet airived, RosaUna descended to tte hall: the confusion àie felt at being exposed to the gaze of m many strangert, with whom it wm crowded, increased the tint of the rose, whkb mcé bor late Utom bnt fabrtiy U» somed on her lovely cheek, and added to her charms. Her fine dark hair was braided, and otherwise fancifully ornamented aftar the Sicilian mode, and
and her Grecian robe was confined to her taper waist by a rich girdle which was richly studded with precious stones. Every eye was fixed on her as the duca introduced her to some of his particular friends, with whom he was in con¬ versation when she entered, £ind a ge¬ neral whisper of admiration ran round the liail. Rosalina hardly daiied- to raise her eyes during the repast, for whenever she did» she wat, sure to find herself the universal object of contemplation, from which her native modesty re¬ volted. The conversation turned un¬ ceasingly on the business which was so shortly to be commenced, and Ro¬ salina was shocked at ¿hø sanguinary schemes which were proposed by some of the leaders, and which appeared to gam general approbation. She
She found that the enterprize they were about to be engaged in, it was imagined» would be but of short du¬ ration, and that they expected to re¬ turn, crowned with victory, before a week had elapsed; for no one ap¬ peared to entertain even a momentary doubt of their success, and even de¬ rided the united forces of Sebastiano and the partizans of the late prince, so confident did they appear in their own strength. The duca di Rodolpho, as soon as the banquet was conduded, arose from his seat, and filling a large gob- fet with wirø, drank M to the success of the expedition," whidi was re¬ echoed from every part of the hali, and the hollow sounding cymbals and sonorous horns floated on the air their martial notes, which inspired eveiy bosom
bosom with military ardour. The ru¬ by-coloured vintage rose frequent in* the capacious vases, and the music and voices of the guests, which now' increased every moment, were far from giving sensations of pleasure to Rosa¬ lina, who found her situation becom¬ ing extremely unpleasant, for the lead¬ ers of her fathets forces, who had been before restrained only by their fears of attracting the duca's obser¬ vation in their conduct towards Ro¬ salina, now emboldened by the intoxi¬ cating juice of the grape, eyed her with such an appearance of insolent familiarity, and some even attempted to address her, that she hastened from the hall as soon as possible, and gladly sought the welcome retirement of her chamber. The sounds of mirth and rude merri¬ ment which prevailed for some time longer
longer in the hall, at length suddenly ceased, and. as soon as the shades of evenmg had closed in the views of nature, tiie trampling of steeds and seise ef men was heard in the court¬ yard, and Rosalina saw the troops collecting in it previous to thdr de· parture. Some of the officers appeared quite inebriated ^s well as the men, and in¬ creased the confusion and wild uproar that reigned, till the duca made his appearance, whieh soon silenced them; and when at length all was ready, the parties silently. marched through the wide-opening gates, and as soon as they arrived at the bottom of the hill, Rosalina discovered by the light of the mopn, which was reflected ,on their bright arms, that they separated, some continuing thdr course through the valley, while others wound along the
the patte made on tte steep sides of the mountains. The duca did not depart with them, but remained in the court* yard in earnest conversation with Lupo for some tàsm, when he returned to the castello. Tte beauty of tte mght, and tte various thoughts whicli agitated tef bosom, took from Rosalina all wish for repose, and she still remained at the casement, where obtrusive memory brought to her recollection past hours øf bbss enjoyed with Montalto, while to ber mental virion appeared hur fovea form stretched cm a miserable paUet, in a damp unwholesome dun¬ geon, without the consoling voice of a friend to cheer him under the unmerit¬ ed wrongs whfch were heaped on him by her father. Such were her sad thoughts, and the tears excited by them often rotted down her lovely cheeks; the
the beams of the moon glistened in tha pearly drops of sorrow, and alone wit¬ nessed her griefs. ** And thou, soft rolling planet/ thought she, ** illumine with thy silver radiance the drear abode of my love— comfort him under his sad captivity, and reflect in thy bright orb the sor, rowing form of his Rosalina, that he may view the object of ?? teve, weeping at his woes Í' These reflections were disturbed by a noise in the courtyard, and Rosa¬ fina looking down, beheld the well- remembered foym of the duca, though he was disguised in his dress, and by a large mantle chicii lie dosely drew around him. One attendant only was with him, and both mounting their horses, were soon far distant from the castello, ttic gates of whidi were closed, and
and silence once more resumed her me* lancholy reign amidst the lofty towers and extensive halls of Colredo. Rosalina was too welt convinced of the propriety ©f Grimaldi's advice to speak to Lupo respecting Montalto, and she waited with no small im¬ patience for the arrival of the monk» when she hoped that he might be persuaded to assist in procuring his liberty. Excepting the female attendants, and a few soldiers who were incapacitated either by age or wounds from being of any service, tbi duca had taken with him ev^ry one who was able to bear arms, the castellain excepted,. and who Rosalina rightly concluded was left at the castello to attend on the unfortunate victims of his deadly hatred. She
Siie would often, when Lupo was away, traverse the subterraneous pas¬ sages of (kArràc% and sigh feith the loved name erf Montalto, in the hopes of bei&g abb to discover where hia dun¬ geon was ; but her v efforts were useless, for Lupo, with hi* usual foresight, had taken eare to ???? up those passages that led to it Carktta wis fotte ??? to ¡ir&rä any comfort to her mistress, for she con¬ tinually lamented the dangers to which Pietro mm exposed, who it seems had long been the possessor of bet effec- tims* It was near the close of the fifth day from the departuie of the troope r that as Rosalina wag sitting pensively at her easement, watching tbe declin¬ ing rays of tim setting mn, wiiich now feebly darted on the earth, that she
she discovered a cloud ?* dust, risiilf amidst the passes of the distant moun¬ tains, and às jhe watefeed it, ????? or twine thought that ste mw the beams of the sun glancing on «ome bright object; at first «te imagined that it might be tiie forøks of the duca re¬ turning, but then, as the object she was viewing drew nearer» she could easily ^discover tiiat they were indeed armed troops, but the smallness of tiieir number convinced her tliat her conjectures were wrong; on fheir still nearer advance, however, she saw tfasrt ftiey waved oa high the banners of the duca. On this she immediately sent for the castellain, wh# having viewed tiie pmty, was unable to conclude what was the motive of their return, or the apparent haste they made to reach àie castello; ' but they soon un¬ fortunately found out the reason, for a second troop appeared, preceded by some
«ørne horsemen, who soon overtaking the first party, an engagement in¬ stantly took place, which was fatal to the soldiers of Rodolphe, for they betook themselves to night, and hav« ing dispersed, were no longer visible, while the victorious party still con* tinued to advance ; and the castellani concluding that their intent was to attack the castello, which, incapable as it was of making any resistance, must soon fell into their hands. He communicated Ms fears to the terri¬ fied Rosalina, and both awaited the result in the most anxious state of suspense, when the shades of night enveloped the enemy from their view, and rendered their situation still more distressing. Another hour had now elapsed, when the few soldiers that had escaped ««re eeen slowly winding up the path that
that led to the castello, their strength seemingly entirely exhausted; tliey were instantly admitted, and Rosa¬ lina, anxious to know the particulars of what she had partly been a spec¬ tator of, went down to the court¬ yard where she found Carietta, who was betraying the most extravagant emotions of dehght, for amongst the few who had returned was her dear Pietro. The account they gave was suffi- cient to excite thlgfeatest terror in the minds of the inhabitants of the castello. It seems they had, accord¬ ing to their orders, marched towards the capital, where all the parties were to meet on a certain day: but when within a few hours' journey of the appointed rendezvous, a, they were pSmg through a forest, they were suddenly surrounded, and it was with the
the greatest difficulty that a very small part of them escaped with life, all their officers having been skin, and ignorant of the *«Qad they should take, aï*d aniôoiis to avoid their enemies, who were, endeavouring to trace their «tep, tliey thouglit it best to return to Cofeedo, in 4oing which they were pursued, and in the last engagement màfeh Ressuna had beheld, many more perished, AM fksá night the inhabitants of tiie o&btdtte we^e ?? the watób, ^expecting ^very mømmt to hear their ene^nies at the gates; but their fears happily proved wem, for when the morning beams opened the surrounding coun¬ try to tbeir view, m traces of ??? were visible,; and irom the neigh¬ bouring peasantry they learnt, that after some conadtatiop they returned the way they ??? fwhably conclud¬ ing
ing that there would be danger in ap¬ proaching the castello, which they could hardly suppose would be left in so de¬ fenceless a state as it was. We will now return to the monk Grimaldi and the duca di Rodolpho, and endeavour to give a detail of their operations against Sebastiano; and in so doing, still more of the mysterious con¬ duct of the monk will be related, who, it will seem, did indeed only a^5t \ãe the religious habit he wore, as a cloak to the forwarding of his unfathomable schemes ; for the accomplishment of which, his re¬ morseless and cruel disposition shrunk not at the perpetration of the most hor¬ rible deeds.
vol. iil f CHAP-
CHAPLEE XIV.
Grimaldi, when he left the castello, proceeded with as much speed as pos¬ sible to the plain where Sebastiano and his people were encamped: arrived there, he demanded to have a conference witb. him, and was instantly admitted to his tent. As soon as Sebastiano beheld him, he ordered him to throw r back his cowl, but this the monk positively refused to do, and the haughty usurper was going to compel him, when he said—~ <f It is well, Sebastiano: if it is thus you
treat those who come to you with in¬ telligence of the utmost importance to your safety, may you never know- your danger till too late to guard against it, for I solemnly protest, that if you dare to offer violence to my person, I have not only an arm to re¬ sent my wrongs, but in one instant I would confound all your schemes. Now then I wait for your decision— treat me as a friend—give me a pri¬ vate hearing, and I will not withhold from you the important knowledge I possess." Sebastiano, awed by the bold deter¬ mined behaviour of the monk, and instigated by curiosity to know what was the purport of his coming, dis¬ missed the officers who were in his tent, and for a long time was in close conversation with Grimaldi: what the intelligence was that he had to unfold f 2 is
is unknown, but at parting, Sebas¬ tiano gave to him a ring. — " This," said he, " will at all times procure you instant admission to me, and whenever you may hereafter think proper to make yourself known, and I should fortunately succeed in my present attempt, which has hitherto been attended with success, you may depend on the most grateful return for the important service you have render¬ ed me." The monk took the ring, and bow¬ ing, departed; he then proceeded to the place where he had appointed to meet the duca, who travelled disguis¬ ed, both that he might not be known, and on account of his personal safe» ty, having only one attendant with him. The fourth day was the one ap¬ pointed
pointed for a general rendezvous in an extensive forest, near Casólo, which was within two leagues of Sebastianos camp. The duca and Grimaldi ar¬ rived there early in the morning of that day, and Rodolpho anxiously awaited the coming of the several parties which composed his army, for he meant the next morning to attack Sebastiano, whom he had little doubt of conquering, With the friends of the late Manfroné he kept up a cor¬ respondence, and their forces arrived in the wood at the appointed time; but none of his own people appear¬ ing, he began to be very uneasy, and towards midnight dispatched seve¬ ral messengers in quest of them; and as every moment increased his anxie¬ ty, sleep fled his eyes, though his frame was wearied by his late exer¬ tions.
f a Early
Early in the morning the messen¬ gers returned; bv* great was the surprise, terror, and confusion that their intelligence occasioned, for they brought an account that the several parties had been attacked by the ene¬ my, who, taking advantage of their knowledge of the country, had se¬ creted themselves in certain defiles through which they knew they must pass, and as they had no suspicion that any enemy was near, unprepared for resistance, they were easily sur¬ rounded and cut to pieces, very few escaping to bring the sad intelligence to Colredo, where Rosalina still re¬ mained, though in hourly expectation of an attack, and in a state of the greatest anxiety respecting her father's safety, of whom, or the padre Grimal¬ di, no one of the men who had escaped were able to give her the slightest in¬ formation. When
When Jtodolpho heard this afflict¬ ing intelligence, he remained foy & long tix3f? $peechtes$ with vexation ; a papié suddenly seized the forces that were *l with him, who, expecting every mo¬ ment to sharø the fat# of Rodolpho's pçoplç, consulted their own safety, and dispersing, hastened back to the capital» whfar? they awaited the com* ing of Sebastiapo's ???, who, flushed with victory, would pçjbaps have gain¬ ed m fasy çpflqu^ qyçt them, dis- pirited ??4 tetrifi^ ?И tlwár e^my'-s success. Th^ dmça still remahied ? the forest with Grimaldi and a few adherents; copious tba>t nothing could tww be done, he wa» m th^ ppint of return¬ ing to Colredo to cpjlect what yet re¬ mained of his scattered troops, and to stay there till ? could procure fresh levies, for he foresaw tbe streme dan« f ê ger
ger there was of an attack being made on that place during his absence; but the monk endeavoured to dissuade him from an immediate return. " How would you," said he, ff bear the disgrace of returning vanquished to Colredo, without having attempted to revenge yourself for the losses you have sustained, and which you may place to the imprudent steps you so very unadvisedly of yourself pursued, in endeavouring to persuade Sebas¬ tiano to admit you as a sharer in the spoil? It was this act which roused his vigilance, and from that moment he doubtless employed spies to watch your proceedings, whose faithful intelli¬ gence has enabled him to act so success¬ fully as he has done " M It is to little purpose now," said the impatient duca, «« to endeavour to find
find out the causes of the dreadful calamity that has befallen us, when the effects demand instant consideration: while we are thus inactive, Colredo may fall—Montalto and his son may escape—-their vassals will doubtless be added to Sebastianos forces, and thus, instead of gaining an increase of terri¬ tory, which I fondly imagined was within my grasp, I shall lose what I be¬ fore possessed." " Your anticipations are certainly founded in probability, and are, there¬ fore, not to be despised," returned Grimaldi ; ** but the means to avert so ruinous an event are perhaps not yet out of our reach : we must commence at the fountain-head— Sebastiano must die!" 41 And who is there so weary of ex- F 5 istence,"
istence," sidd the duca, " as to under¬ take such a scheme, when there is not the remotest hope of success, but cer¬ tain destruction? Sebastiano, in the midst of his people, need not fear the dagger of the assassin. If he were dead, I should indeed yet entertain hopes. Your project, father, is good in theory, but the practice, I fear, will surpass your ability." " Had that been my opinion," return¬ ed Grimaldi, " I should have restrained my speech. Are you willing to try whether it is possible or not to effect it?" '·' Certainly, in whatever way you pro¬ pose to commence your plan, you shall not find me backward," replied Rodol¬ pho. " I would this moment give half my dukedom that my dagger was plant¬ ed in Sebastiano's heart." «We
«« We will try if, it cannot be done on more reasonable terøig, ,, said Gri¬ maldi. * The shades of evening are now mantling abound 5 we will in¬ stantly depart, for the delay of an¬ other day may be attended with fatal consequences. Sebastiano is now at his camp, which we shall reach about midnight." ** But have you considered well what you are going about?" replied the duca; " such an undertaking re¬ quires much dreumspection and fore¬ thought." " The love of life is innate," said the monk, " and though mine has been only a series of increasing calamities, yet I shew that I prize it, by con¬ senting to prolong it The difficulties we shall have to encounter will great¬ ly depend on our own conduct, and if f ? you
you will be guided by me, I can promise, that if we do not succeed, that our lives will not be endangered ; the only risk is in effecting our escape after the deed of death is done," " All my alarms," said Rodolpho, " arose from the fear of being pre¬ vented, and ignobly perishing without attaining our ends; but Sebastiano no more, I care not for the consequences— my revenge will be sated, and ï should die happy " During this conversation they had be¬ gun their journey, and were traversing the extensive forest. Tlie few that re¬ mained with them after the desertion of the troops, had directions to repair in¬ stantly to Colredo, where the duca pro¬ mised soon tojóin them. It wanted near an hour to midnight when
when the^ duca and Grimaldi passed the towers of Casólo, which was dis* tant ftom the camp another houts jour¬ ney; and when they had arrived near it, they alighted from their horses, which they tied to a tree, and walked slowly forward to the first out-post, where, when they arrived, they saw the centinél fast asleep. The duca, unsheathing his sword, was on the point of perpetuating his slumbers, when he was restrained by the monk. " The death of that man," said he, " would be our certain destruction : we will awake him." α What !" returned the duca; " how then are we to enter the camp?" « Fear not," said Grimaldi, « that lean
1 ?? eflfect with ease atid security; btit be careful to preserve tbe atrietert silence; your voiee may be remem¬ bered," The duca promised tø comply ; and the monk, going to tiie sleeping soldier, awoke him. The man started up, evidently alarm¬ ed. " Ymi need nøt fear," eaid the monk ; ** none are here but friends ; we wish to pass into the camp—see, here is your commander's signet." The man having slightly viewed it, permitted them to go forward; and as they wem proceeding, Gri¬ maldi demanded if the count Sebas¬ tiano visited the guards during the « No,"
«No;* returned the soldier * "we are secure frotø any aptHrehwwnsof an enemy» Tø-mom>w we maroh in search oi the duca di Rodolpho, for the oount mean» to surprise Colredo as he has learnt to-day that it is but slightly guarded. Yonder is the path ; you will not meet another centinél. Good-night, friend." " This intelligence," said the monk to the duca, * is of no sonali import¬ ance ; it promise* success. You, doubt¬ less, are astonished at my conduct : know, then, that the reason of my early departure from the castello was to endeavour to obtain a sight of Sebastianos signet, which I knew would greatly tend to facilitate our plans ; øna m doing tliis, I was well assured 110 time shouhl be lost, for Sebastianos caution and vigilance would bc increased as soon as he should hear
hear ofyour preparations r happily I succeeded, and have obtained one so nearly similar to it, that there is Ut¬ tle fear of a discovery, and particularly during the night; but it is probable, from what the man said, that we shall not again want it" They now entered the camp—no sound was heard — sleep and silence prevailed aiound - Grimaldi silently pointed out the tent of Sebastiano, and the duca grasped his sword. It was at this moment that hasty footsteps approached them; the duca started, but Grimaldi in a whisper bade him te silent An officer now advanced with seve¬ rii men—" Stop," said he, "and ex¬ plain tte purpose of your traversing tte camp at this silent hour." "The
" The purport of my commg I shall explain to no one but your leader ; but to shew that I am no unknown in¬ truder, no spy upon your actions, the evidence of this ring is amply suffici¬ ent." The officer happened to be one of those who were in the tent of Sebas¬ tiano when Grimaldi first entered it; and instantly recognizing him, and see¬ ing at the same time his commandets signet, said—« Shall I conduct you to the tent of the count?—he now sleeps, but I will awake him if you have any thing of consequence to disclose." u It matters not till the dawn," re* turned Grimaldi, with Ms usual deli¬ berate and hollow tone; '* my business does not require haste, but to prevent observation, the covert of night was most apt foir my purpose. If you have a vacant
a vacant t&nU lead ?? to it, for niyself and my companion require rest," * t % fear I shall have some difficulty in doing that," returned the pfftcsr, " our prisoners are so numerous ; btit you are welcome to mine, father; I am going to visit the guards, to see that they aro vigilant, and th$t none of Rodolpho's vassatø ørøqis, rød pro¬ bably shall be abtrøt %? th¿ ?????* " Yomr attention I shall wt ?? to mention to tibe ???? ?? ????? " må I accept ???? eourtooua ofer." The monk, followed by the duca, who wae biwdly ablo to mttm his ??0 at ?? ???? ßf Φ® <?föoer f w«rf ??????1 to tji§ tout» wd %r# teft to reposa « Thm ftr wf haw su^o^d^* wd Grimaldi ;
Grimaldi ; " but I must own I had my fears, from my knowledge ofyour impe¬ tuous disposition. Every thing bids fair for the accomplishment of our pro¬ ject; the men will shortly be far distant, and then for revenge !" " Which I no longer doubt will be ours," said Rodolpho ; " yes, my friend, to your steady coolness, whieh, I must confess, filled me with wonder, have we evaded suspicion : the glory and credit of this enterprise *? be wholly yours. When Sebastiano is gone, cannot we endeavour to give freedom to my eap¬ tive troops ?" " The enemy's vigilance m that quarter wffl render it impossible; ?& sidas, they are unarmed; and while they were aeuuiig weapons of defence, supposing that we silenced the unwary guaifd, the camp would be roused, Se¬ bastianos
bastíanos fate would be discovered, and we should perish." "You are right, father; another time we may perhaps attempt this, when we have with us a few resolute auxiliaries—it would indeed be a glo¬ rious act." They now emerged from the tent, and cautiously looked around, but no human sound met their ears ; the moon brightly illumined the camp, and the breeze displayed the standard whkh distinguished the tent of Sebas- tiano. Leaving the tent, they cautiously ad¬ vanced, and when they had arrived at the door of his superb residence, they listened, but no sound was heard, and the duca slowly drew aside the silken drapery which concealed the entrance. A lamp
A lamp was burning within, by the light of which they discovered their in¬ tended victim lying on a couch in the soft and still embrace of sleep. " The moment is now fast approach¬ ing," said the monk, " which you would lately have given half your dukedom to have at your command; now then enter, and reap the harvest of your toils." The duca drew forth a dagger ; he felt its point —his countenance was ghastly pale, but it was deadly hatred, black and horrible revenge, which ba¬ nished the colour from his cheeks; he entered the tent, and at length held his naked weapon over the unconsdous Sebastiano. The monk stood by his side ; there was no danger of their victim escaping —his
—his life was in their power^the ir¬ resistible fiat of fete was for the duca to perfom, " Mark how securely he sleeps," said the monk in a low voice; w how changed is now his situation from what it was a few short hours ago ! Then exulting in hâs success, fancy had al¬ ready placed Manfroné's sceptre in his hand, and he conceived himself strid¬ ing in Colredo's lofty halls, and giv¬ ing ordes to the subjugated vassals of Rodolpho ; but soon the fond dream which spurred him on to deeds éf blood, which indted him to thin your territories of their most trusty defend- er,, wffl vanish with his existence. Thus it is with man, who, while he thinks himself at the summit of his wishes, is suddenly hurled from the as¬ piring pinnacle, and all his fond hopes in a moment blasted." "But
¿i But that," i^tu^ied thb duc», " at léždst ás fer ? jreápeets Saiy posent pur- mit, shall not be my lot—let what will happen, tìtìs revenge is ftoène." So laying, he raised Ms foind armed with the shining blade, and witli a black demoniac look, thrice pierced the bosotn Of the slumberer, whbse body heaved* With a slight cc^vulsftm^tlie kst effbm 1 of departing antø#tié*n, átid the sleep of life suddenly became tàie eter¬ nal repose of the grave. Both contemplated With stëtiëâtetion the bleeding corpse ; and whetø ??? had glutted their eyes witii tìie hoïrid spec¬ tacle, their own safety became their next object: they left the tent, and looked around; but the pale moon was alone conscious of their dark deeds— no mortal eye beheld them; but the angel, who in his salde vdtène marks the
the evil actions of mankind, started with horror as he noted down the dreadful deed of blood, and closing the eternal pages, dropped a tear, while look- in ff forward into foturity he saw the homble punishments that await the murderer. Silently they stole from the camp, and avoiding the spot where they had seai the centinél, regained their horses, and hastened onwards to Colredo. Soon the morning dawned; nature blushed as the early sun dispersing the blue mists, gave her beauties to the view; but little could ihey please men who delighted in the opaque shades of night to curtain their deeds ftom the world. Great was the confusion which reigned in ?? camp when the murder of
of Sebastiano was discovered. That it was perpetrated by the two men who had been seen wandering about during the night, hardly admitted a doubt and a search was instantly commenced after them, but without success. Thus situated, the troops dreading to be found in arms without the countenance of their leader, and no one appearing to supply his ylace, began to disperse, ¿nd in the cour e of a few days tliis formid¬ able army, who so lately had terrified the partizans of the late prince, totally disappeared, and their captives, freed from their chains, hastened back to Col¬ redo. Such was the termination of Sebas¬ tianos efforts to attain power; his ambition was fatal to him as well as the duca, who though he escaped with life, yet had to regret the loss of many of his best troops, and which left him vol. iii. g exposed
exposed to the attacks of the neigh¬ bouring potentates, who he well knew would gladly seize so favourable an opportunity of increasing their posses¬ sions. He arrived in safety at his castello, and Rosalina, who began to fear some sinister event had beiallen him, could not behold his return without an emo¬ tion of pleasure, and which was in- Creased by the amval of Grimaldi, whom she most anxiously wished to see, as she hoped by her entreaties to prevail on him to liberate Montalto; but he either was too much occupied with the duca's affairs, or else perhaps anticipated her request, and knowing his inability to accede to it, kept him¬ self from her presence. The duca di Rodolpho was gloomy and tortured ivith apprehensions for his
his safety ; it is true indeed he had re¬ venged himself on Sebastiano, but tiiat was little comfort when compared with his losses; and when tiie troops who had been taken returned to the castello, he busied himself in making prepara¬ tions for its defence. Hope alone aerved to support Rosa¬ lina, but tiiat was now becoming feinter every day: while Grimaldi was absent, it was hex certain consolation, for she looked to his return as a period when she trusted that Montalto might enjoy the blessings of freedom ; but now that the monk never approached her, she concluded that her hopes were delusive, and many were the sighs produced by that conclusion. From her casement she frequently saw the duca on the walls of the car¬ tello» directing tbe operations of the ? % workmen,
workmen, and with him sometimes, but very seldom, was the mysterious Grimaldi, whose actions were seem¬ ingly so contrary, as if formed on the impulse of the moment, without any future design ; but the monk was wrap¬ ped up in his own plans, which he sought to mature without the help of others, or rather perhaps, made others subservient to the accomplishment of his own schemes; whichever it was, the following pages will explain; but to Rosalina, his conduct was a mys¬ tery indeed. Such was the state of affairs at the castello when an event took place which created the utmost astonishment, but which, as well as many other circum¬ stances which we have related, could not in any way be accounted for, and filled the mind, not only of Rosalina, but also of the duca di Rodolpho him¬ self,
self, with an unspeakable dread, for it too clearly appeared that they had near them the most inveterate enemies, who, in their "various attempts, constantly evaded discovery.
g 3 CHAP-
CHAPTER XV.
The moon had some time emerged from the extensive forests of pines which skirted the eastern horizon, which now appeared a mass of indis¬ tinct foliage, and the breeze of night began to murmur around, but still Rosalina sat at her opened casement, pensively resting her beauteous head on her lovely arm, and often she raised her eyes and viewed the bright lamp of night encirded with myriads of scintil¬ lating stars. The padre Grimaldi had been now more
more than a week at the castello, yet Imí never had been near her, whom he seemed to have forgot, as well as his promise concerning Montalto. Rosa- lina seldom left her apartments, for the castello was filled with strangers, and the duca was too intently engaged in completing its defences, which the security they had hitherto enjoyed ren¬ dered requirite, for the slow-moving hand of time had made many breaches in the walls, than to think of his daughter. She was indeed, in one sense, pleased at his conduct, for she wished to avoid being exposed to the gaze of the warriors, whose manners were as rough as their profession. Thus she never had an opportunity of meeting Grimaldi, or she would have solicited a conference with him. Sometimes indeed she thought that her father liad terminated the life of her lover, and tliat the monk being privy ? 4 to
to it was the occasion of his avoiding her presence, as not wishing to have so horrible a circumstance to disclose to her. Thus was she tormenting herself with her gloomy apprehen¬ sions, when her attention was sud¬ denly excited by seeing three men slowly walking along the ramparts be¬ low, and station themselves opposite to the casement at which she was sit¬ ting. The moon shining brightly on them, she perfectly recollected one to te the man who had so earnestly directed his attention to her on the morning that the troops were collected in the court¬ yard, and of whom she seemed at that time to have an indistinct recoUection ; but the others were so completely muffled up in their long cloaks, that she could not distinguish who they were. They
They conversed for some time in low tones, and often directed their gaze to the turret which contained Rosalina's apartments, who, without knowing why, trembled with sudden apprehen¬ sions which assailed her : it is true, their long discourse, and the silent time of night which they had chosen for it, added to their frequent observance of her abode, was sufficient to raise sus¬ picions in her mind of their intents; but then she could have little to fear in her fathets castello while she was pro¬ tected by him. The men having staid a considerable time, during which they appeared to be debating some weighty matter, at length, with seeming caution, left the place» and turning round an angle of the wall, were hid from her view. Having sat some time longer, and g 5 finding
finding that they did not return, she closed the casement, and with a heavy tear! sought ter couch, and rested her weary ftame on it: but sleep was for distant from ter, with aö his com¬ posing tram of gentle slumbers »id pleasing dreams, to steep her ha¬ rassed senses into a forgetfulness· of woe. While she thus was passing tte hours of night, she was disturbed by hearing some dow and cautious foot¬ steps along the corridor to which her apartments opened. It was then past midnight; the moon was clad in mists, and her lamp was gone out; light clouds rolling before tte stars obscured their feeble lumens; it wm an hour too when visionary fears assail the bosoms of the superstitious; but Rosalina's mind was too well cultured to te alarmed at air-formed fendes, and
and Ae concluded the paces she had heard were caused by some nocturnal wanderers, whose intents were doubt¬ less as dark as tte time they had chosen for the execution of their schemes. Tte steps ceased when opposite the door of her chamber, and RosaUna, who had risen from her couch, plainly distinguished a confused noise, as if occasioned by low whisperings; these sounds, however, soon ceased, and again the low footfalls were heard traversing the corridor, and silence again resumed her welcome reign. What the views of those people could be in approaching her apart¬ ments at that hour she was unable to form an idea of; but that they were connected with her ste could not doubt, and she recalled to her mmd a 6 that
that night when the daring attempt was made on her honçur by the wretch, who, however, paid for his temerity in the loss of his liand: the ease with which he made his escape also occur¬ red to her, but she was well assured that it could not be him, but some in¬ habitant of the castello, for he would hardly dare to appear in public, but rather endeavour to*enter her apart? ments the way he formerly had done, which, however, was now impossible· as it was closed up. Her suspicions indeed all pointed at the man whom she first noticed intently gazing on her, and afterwards in close converse be¬ neath her casement only a few hours before she heard the sound of foot-paces „ in the corridor. At first she determined to acquaint the duca with that circumstance, and her suspicions of some plot being in agitation
agitation respecting her; but in pro¬ portion as the cheering light of day increased, her intentions and fears sub¬ sided, and she thought it would be better to wait till she had some cer¬ tain confirmation of them, for the du¬ ca's conduct of late had been such, that she almost trembled whenever she ap¬ proached him. The morning heavily dawned; a murky gloom veiled the lovely scenes of nature ; the clustering clouds moved heavily on, and the wind blew cold and comfortless. Rosalina's thoughts were as comfortless as the weather: she often sighed as she thought on Montalto, and her melancholy increas¬ ed till she relieved her swelling heart by a flood of tears ; an unusual weight of woe oppressed her bosom, and in oider to alleviate her increasing sad sensations, she opened a volume and perused
perused a few pages; but unable to give her attention to the subject, she closed the book, and taking up her hite, touched the responsive strings; but the sounds were discord to her ear, ana she hastily laid it aside. Sel· dom had she been so melancholy as this day; àie ascribed it to tbe wea¬ ther, and to her being disturbed in the night: but still she felt that nei¬ ther Ate weather, nor the sounds she had heard, nor even Montalto's un¬ certain fate, wore altogether the cause of her uneasiness ; for there was an¬ other sensation, an aecumulation of nameless fears, doubts, and surmises, without connexion—a mournful anti¬ cipation of some calamity, which, how¬ ever, ?? eould assign no reason for ex¬ pecting. Thus passed tbe day, which gbomily doaed in. Rosalina was happy at ite termination,
termination, «nd at an early hour re¬ tired to her couch, where her fatigued and harassed senses were soon lulled to repose by tibe welcome deity of slumbers. Her dreams were as gloomy as her thoughts had been the preceding day, and towards midnight her wakefuj senses were dreadfully oppressed; she seemed as if gasping for breath, and emy moment espeeting to empire* when she was awoke from tør unquiet dream by a sudden noise at the portal of her chamber ; and when sho opened her eyes, what was her horror at find¬ ing her apartment filled with smoke, ??! the fearful cry of fire uttered by many voices in tte courtyard below! Hastily she left her couch, and throw¬ ing on a few garments, approached the casement, when a volume uf fiâmes arase before it; må shriekmg with the most
most dreadful apprehensions of instant destruction, she flew to the door, which was at that moment burst open, and two men rushing in, one of them has¬ tily seized her in his arms, and run¬ ning along the corridor, the end of which was in flames, he bore her from the dreadful fate which she thought must inevitably be hers, and reaching some of the distant apart¬ ments, his companion throwing a large mantle over her, carried her down some steps; and Rosalina, who from her terror had been unable to speak, or even to think of any thing else than her fears, now began to have a new alarm, and faintly demanded the rea¬ son of their conveying her into the subterraneous passages of the cas¬ tello? " Because, signora," said one of the men, " the courtyard is full of the flaming
flaming ruins, and the duca ordered us to convey you this way, as being the safest." RosaUna's fears were somewhat ap¬ peased by this answer, but when they reached the postern that opened to the wood, as the man who carried the torch was drawing back the large bolts, she had an opportunity of seeing his fea¬ tures, when she recognized him to be the same who had so lately caused her so much uneasiness. It was now that she began to sus¬ pect that all was not right, and strug¬ gling to disengage herself from the man who carried her, she demanded to be conveyed back to the court of the castello. " You do not reflect on the danger ; in a few moments you will be in safety, signora,"
signora," said he ; " the duca's orders must be obeyed, and——" A loud and dreadful crash above prevented his further speech, and they hastily endeavoured to undose the door, but the bolts being rusted, they had great difficulty in drawing them back. " By St Dominic, if we stay here mucli longer," said one, (ζ the old castle will be about our ears—the tower has certainly fallen." The door being now opened, Rosa- Una beheld tbe country illumined around with the flames of the burning ?И?. The men stopped, and seemed to be searching for something which they did not see—" Plague on it !" said one, ** he promised to bring the mule here— what shall we dt) now?" Rosalina,
Rosalina, convinced by this tbat her fears were but too well founded, has¬ tily disengaged herself from the man? who but slightly held her, and throw¬ ing aside the mantle, fled towards the monastery erf Santa Maria; but her feeble limbs reftised to aid her wishes, and the gigantic ruffian soon seized her. The other man now came up, bringing with him a mule. Rosalina's screams echoed around; but at the castello they eould not be heard, for the cries of the røm assisting each other to extinguish tlie flames—the crack¬ ling noise of the consuming timbers— and the falling masses of the thick walls, completely drowned fcer fearful excla¬ mations. From the time that Montalto had last seen Rosalina, he had remained a close
close prisoner in his dreary abode, with¬ out ever seeing any other person than Lupo. He had, like Rosalina, look¬ ed forward to the return of Grimaldi, in the hope that their united persua¬ sions would induce him to make them happy, end restore him to the blessings of liberty ; but his hopes were vain, for the monk never after entered his dungeon. If Rosalina was unhappy, what must have been his situation, when, to the affliction he endured on her account, was added the confinement of his fe¬ ther and himself, by the cruel and vin¬ dictive Rodolpho ! The little Mght that was admitted to his abode came through a small grating which was placed in the wall, near the vaulted roof of the dungeon, the thickness of which prevented him from
from seeing through, as he could not raise himself high enough to be on a level with it. On that night when the castello was on fire, he was awoke by the ex¬ traordinary light which came into his dungeon, and from the exclamations he heard, soon conjectured the cause. How did he then tremble for the fate of Rosalina, particularly when he learnt that the flames were consuming that part of the castello where she dwelt, and which was above hi» dun¬ geon! The falling stones and timbers soon choked up the grating» which was filled with a stifling smoke, and Mon¬ talto breathed with difficulty; when suddenly the tower fell, and a large part of the roof of his dungeon gave way,
way, and admitted the ponderous ruins. The door was burst ???, and Mon- taitos who fortunately was standing near it, hastily ran out, and, lit by the burn¬ ing timbers, rushed through the pas¬ sage, and mounting some ruins, be¬ held the tower levelled to the ground. All hopes of his saving Rosalina were at an end, but he trusted that she was in safety t and mw he bethought himself of his father, whom he re¬ solved to restore to liberty, and then to leave the castello. As he was re¬ turning, he found several of the arms which belonged to the soldiers; and snatching two swords from the heap, hastened to the place where lüs father was confined, which was mt fer dis¬ tant from his own abode, both being beneath the burning tower. He easily forced away the door, and beheld his astonished paresit. There was no time for
for explanation ; he gave him one of the swords, and entreated him to follow in* stantly. " Another time, my dear father, I will explain every thing to you—at pre¬ sent tbe moments are precious; let us endeavour to gain our liberty, for Ro¬ dolpho's cruelty has been extended as well to the son as the fatiier." Well acquainted with the way that led to the postern, they soon amved at it. Both were surprised to find it open ; and concluding that tliey might possibly meet some of the duca's peo¬ ple, who would oppose their escape, they drew their swords from the scab¬ bards, which they cast away, and darted out of the postem, when both distinctly heard the screams of a fe¬ male, and forgetting the necessity there was for their instantly seeking their own
own safety, rushed forward in the di¬ rection of the cries, which Montalto soon distinguished were uttered by his adored Rosalina. Before the man who held her could take measures for his defence, Mon¬ talto darted on him, and soon his blood stained the garments of the ter¬ rified Rosalina, who retreated from his feint grasp, and beheld her well- known deliverer. The other man would have fled, but the old mar¬ chese stopped his intentions for ever; and thus freed from her enemies, she endeavoured to compose the terrors which her late fearful situation had excited. " To see you at liberty, Montalto," said she, " and to be rescued by you, is indeed a blessing which I was fear¬ ful it would never be my lot to enjoy, and
and repays all my sufferings and the horrors of this night: but to what happy drcumstance do you owe your liberty ?" " To yon flames," returned Mon¬ talto, " which opened me a passage in my dungeon, at a moment when I ex¬ pected tc be numbered with the dead. My escape was miraculous—the saints protected me, and this happy night has given to me a father, and made me once more the preserver of my Ro¬ salina." " Your father!" she returned— " Oh, repeat that again! The duca, then, was not so guilty as I feared. Is that the marchese who now ad¬ vances ? Lead me to him—But no—I fear to approach one so greatly in¬ jured." vol. m. h " Your
" Your fears are needless, fair maid," said the marchese, who had overheard her last words«—" you are innocent. I have long been a secret admirer of your actions; nay more, I am grate¬ ful to you for being the preserver of my son's life, when unknown to me, he was confined in the dungeons of Colredo, You seem surprised, sig¬ nora, but though you do not recol¬ lect me now, you have seen me be¬ fore. Do you not recollect the circum¬ stance of the monk who refused to unite vou to Manfroné?" " Perfectly, marchese," said Rosalina, greatly astonished. ** That monk was no other than mvself," continued the marchese: " at the hazard of my life I did you that service, as a token of my gratitude, though you then little imagined who your
your friend was: but the time is pre¬ cious, and must not be delayed in con¬ verse—we must depart." " And you, dearest Rosalina," said Montalto, " you doubtless will now accept of my father's protection, and avoid the many snares which seem to surround you.—Join with me in en¬ treaties," continued he, turning to the marchese ; ** for you that have been so near an observer of our actions, must doubtless know how great is my adora¬ tion for Rosalina." " Believe me, it pains me greatly to refuse your request," returned Rosalina ; " but my situation at present will not admit of my doing what perhaps for many reasons I might almost feel justi¬ fied in, but respect for your fair name prevents me." h 2 « How
" How is that, dear Rosalina ?" said Montalto mournfully. " When it is discovered," continued Ilosalma, " that I am fled with you, will not my enemies ascribe the flames that are now consuming the castello as caused by me, to facilitate the means of my escape and your libera¬ tion?—an event which indeed appears so wonderful, that the hand of Provi¬ dence alone was able to bring it to pass. Montalto, or I am greatly de¬ ceived in him, would ill brook such injurious reports of the woman he loves. No—suffer me to return to the duca; those ghastly forms of my con¬ quered enemies will tell the authors of this outrageous act, and if his heart is not formed of adamant—if he is not dead to the voice of gratitude—if indeed his daughter is yet dear to him, he will no
no longer refuse me the happiness of being united to one who has so well de¬ served me." " The signora Rosalina is right,'* said the marchese: " seldom have I beheld so much rectitude of conduct in one who, besides her youth, is doubtless swayed by love. Return then to the duca, and if he still re¬ fuses to consent to your happiness, but renders you miserable by his tyrannous and oppressive acts, then know that you will find in me a fond father, and in my son a husband, whose chief de¬ light I am confident will be to render you happy." " Oh, my adored Rosalina!" said Montalto, " and must we be again separated? Heaven knows what will happen before we meet once more, for you have too much reason to see that ? ? not
not even your father's presence is able to protect you against the secret plans of your enemies. Every moment I am from you will add to my misery; for independent of what further designs the duca may have respecting you, and too well I know him to doubt that he would to-morrow unite you to any one, if so doing would promote his ambitious or interested views—have I not then eveiy reason to fear that each coming moment may see me for ever deprived of all I love, of all I hold dear in the world ?" " You see, dear Montalto," re¬ turned Rosalina, " how greatly, in every situation where I needed his assistance, has Providence been my friend: dismiss then your fears; you have every reason to place the greatest reliance on my fortitude and resistance to any act of oppression which a pa¬ rent
rent is not warranted to use to his child; in such case indeed I do sin¬ cerely promise to accept the protection which the marchese so kindly offers me, and with it the hand of my loved Montalto. My longer stay endangers your safety. Do not let vain fears alarm your peace. If possible I will be in the chapel of Santa Maria in the evening of the third day from this, when I shall probably be able to in¬ form you who the authors were of this nights outrage." So saying she bade them adieu, and winding up the rocky path which led to Colredo, lit by the still burning ruins, arrived at the gates, through which she passed, and presented herself to the asto¬ nished duca, who imagined she had perished in the flames. For once he shewed that he had not H 4 quite
quite forgot the feelings of a parent, for he embraced her with real de¬ li »ht " When the fire is quite extin¬ guished, my child," said he, " I will listen to the mournful relation you have doubtless to tell me—But, Rosa¬ lina, that blood! Good Heavens! are you hurt ?" " No indeed," returned Rosalina— " that horrible stain is the vital stream of a wretch, whose base intents were punished with his life—but I will re¬ serve the relation till you are more at leisure." Thus saying, the duca bade some of his domestics to attend her to a distant part of the buildings, which was free from the disturbance the fire had created, promising to be with her as soon as pos¬ sible,
sible, and charging the men not on any account to leave the place where she was unguarded. The news of her arrival soon reach¬ ed the ears of Carletta, who was bit¬ terly bewailing the supposed death of her beloved mistress ; and she was soon joined by that faithful attendant, whose artless expressions of unfeigned joy, and the traces of the deep sorrow she had endured, greatly affected the tender heart of Rosalina. The efforts of the people who were in the castella soon reduced the vio¬ lence of the flames, but not till they had entirely consumed the tower, and the communication from it to the other parts of the building being pulled down, all apprehensions for the safety of the pile ceased; and the duca, anxious to find out who were the per- H ñ petrators
petrators of this act (fin- there was every reason to conclude that the fire was the effect of design, not of acci¬ dent, as the men who watched on the walls affirmed that it burst out from three or four places at once), as he concluded Rosalina might perhaps be able to solve the mystery, he was going to her, when Lupo coming up, acquainted him that he had ordered people to search the dungeons where the old marchese and his son were confined, who had found them empty, and that it was plain that they had escaped, because the private postern that led to the wood below was found open. " Escaped!" said the duca; " nay then it is plain that they were the vile incendiaries, and by that daring act sought at once to destroy both me and my castello, and to carry off my
my daughter. Go instantly and tell my people to arm themselves, for before the sun which is now rising shall have tra¬ velled one quarter of the hemisphere, their residence and themselves shall be a heap of ashes." The castellain departed, and soon the war-trumpet echoed around its hol¬ low-toned brazen notes. Every one started who heard the well-known sounds, and hastily arming, assembled in the courtyard, expecting to hear that an enemy was approaching to at¬ tack the castello, now that it was in a state of confusion. Rosalina had retired to an apart¬ ment in the north wing, and was sit¬ ting there with Carletta, while the attendants, as ordered by the duca, remained at the door to guard her during the disturbance, when she H 6 heard
heard the trumpet, and terrified with the idea that the castello was going to be attacked, she bade one of the atten¬ dants to learn the occasion of that signal for the troops to arm, who on his return, relating to her the inten¬ tions of the duca, she rushed out of the apartment, and, accompanied by the astonished Carletta, reached the courtyard, and falling, almost exhausted by her fatigue and fears at the feet of the duca, besought him to spare her preservers. " What preservers, RosaUna ?" said the duca ; " sure you cannot mean the marchese and his son, the perpetrators of this villanous act?" " Oh, if you knew what they have done, you would blush to suspect tliem. Tliey protected me at a mo¬ ment wlien I thought my destruction certain,
certain, and killed my enemies, whose blood has dyed my garments· Do not proceed further until I have related the whole. The wretches who would have torn me away (who doubtless set the castello on fire to render their at¬ tempts easy and unsuspected), you will find dead in the forest, killed by those whom you now seek to destroy, and through whose means I am restored to you." " Indeed, Rosalina, is this true ? But I cannot suspect you, since I ne¬ ver found you guilty of an untruth. Retire to your apartment; I will in¬ quire further, and before J proceed to acts of hostility which I might repent of, I will again see you and hear the particulars of this nights events," Satisfied with this promise, Rosa* lina, leaning on the arm of Carletta, left
left the duca, and again entered the apartment, where she staid in momen¬ tary expectation of his coming. Meanwhile the duca, attended by some of his people, hastened to the forest below, where they found the breathless bodies of the two men, whom to his wonder he recognized to be those of the leaders of the outlaws whom he had hired to increase the number of his troops. It was on viewing the ghastly wounds through which their dark souls had found a passage, that the duca, recalling to his mind the former acts of Montalto, felt ashamed of his conduct; he had persecuted the very man who had so repeatedly preserved his daughter, and he determined for once to do an act of justice, and endeavour to make amends for the wrongs
wrongs they had sustained: and in¬ deed in this there was great policy, for if he was once more on friendly terms with them, and his daughter was made happy by his consenting to the so much wished-for alliance, their vassals added to his own, would free him from the fears of being attacked, as he would then be able to defend himself. He now returned to the castello, and sending to the padre Grimaldi;, request¬ ed he would meet him at the apartment where Rosalina was, for he wished him to hear her account of what had hap¬ pened, that he miglit be the more able to advise with him what course had best be pursued, in order to und out whe¬ ther there yet remained any more of their secret enemies. The troops were now ordered to unarm and to clear away the ruins,
while the workmen had instructions to gebuild the tower. He entered his daughter's apart¬ ment a few minutes before Grimaldi, who when he saw Rosalina, evidently started. " You need not be alarmed, father," said the duca, observing his emotion, " the blood on Rosalina's garments is that of her enemies." " Of her enemies ! I rejoice to hear it, w said Grimaldi; '* I did indeed fear that she Iiad been hurt. Your escape, fair daughter, must have been wonderful indeed ; we thought you lost to us for ever. Who was it that protected you, for the duca spoke of enemies ?" *' Rosalina will relate the whole," said Rodolpho, M and you wül be no less
less surprised at her tale than myself, for what I already know has so much astonished me, that I could hardly have credited it, if I liad not been an eye-witness to the truth of her words." Rosalina then related every circum¬ stance which the reader is already ac¬ quainted with, and to which Grimaldi and the duca listened with profound at¬ tention; and when she had concluded, Rodolpho said—" Now father, what is your opinion ? there are doubtless more accomplices than the two wretches who are dead." " I should rather imagine not," re¬ turned Grimaldi : " if there had been» they would most assuredly have left the castello together, or indeed have been awaiting the coming of their comrades with the signora ; in such case,
case, they could not possibly have arrived at the castello without being observed; indeed such a step, if they had learnt the failure of their schemes, they would have feared to take, for the men whom the marchese and his son destroyed might with their dy¬ ing breath have disclosed who they were." " But Rosalina," returned Rodolpho, " seems positive that there were three men on the ramparts the night before the fire, and that one of them was the person who was killed as he was drag¬ ging her towards the mule." " Perhaps the men, when in the «ago¬ nies of death, might, to ease their guilty consdences, have disclosed to the signo¬ ra whether they had any accomplices or not, or what their views were in carry¬ ing her away ?" " No,"
" No," returned Rosalina, " I did not hear them speak one word." w Or the third person whom you say you saw on the ramparts might have been ideal—-some shadow perhaps ; or if it was a dark night, you might have been mistaken." " No, father," said Rosalina, " I am certain there were three, for I beheld them for more than an hour." Grimaldi now left the chamber, and the duca followed him. The monk did not utter a word till they had gain¬ ed a remote part of the walls, yet seem¬ ing by his gestures to have something to unfold, the duca stili continued walk¬ ing beside him. " I wish," said the monk, " tha I had
had not persuaded you to let the mar¬ chese and his son live." " How !" returned the duca : " in that case, what would have become of my daughter?" " My extreme anxiety," continued the monk, without seeming to notice what he said, " to preserve your peace of mind, has made me neglect the caution of a friend. And are you really so easy to be imposed on ? Rosa- Una indeed has been well instructed in her tale. How the marchese and his son contrived to set fire to the castello remains to be discovered; but their reason for so doing is obvious—they wished to ingratiate themselves with you as the preserver of your daughter, if you escaped the flames, and induce you in common gratitude to consent to the wished alliance: doubtless they were
were observed by the two unfortunate men, who became their victims in con¬ sequence. Reflect only for a moment, duca; those men in all probability had scarcely ever seen your daughter, and is it likely that they should en¬ deavour to possess themselves of her— men whose hearts are steeled by their profession against the tender emotions oflove, and whose whole delight is in rapine and plunder ? The idea of the third person was well imagined, because it was calculated to take away suspicion from your mind." " I scarcely know what to think, fa¬ ther," returned the duca ; ** but in this instance it is possible you may be wrong in your conjectures; Rosalina never could frame so artful a tale, so well cal¬ culated to impose." ** Supposing that she could not," said
said the monk, *' do you doubt the abi¬ lity of her lover to do it for her ?" ** Rut how could he leave his dun¬ geon ? observed Rodolpho. ** You seem to have great confidence in Lupo —are you certain he is worthy of it?" said Grimaldi. *' Do you think he could withstand the entreaties of your daughter, when I myself, so much attached to you, who made every wish of your heart my own, was not able?" " How, father, in what respect?" said the duca, rather surprised. " When Rosalina was so greatly disturbed in her senses, at the sup¬ posed death of Montalto, you may recollect that it was by your desire I visited her, in order to undeceive her in
in that idea ; it was then that, won by her prayers and entreaties, I gave a reluctant assent to her seeing Mon¬ talto, and this indeed I was led to do, in the hope that it would tend to re¬ store her health, so much impaired by her illness." " And she saw Montalto, did she not?" demanded Rodolpho, whose brow lowered as he spoke : " doubtless it was then that this scheme was plan¬ ned. As for LupoS obedience to my orders, I have known him long enough to banish the smallest suspicion of his fidelity." " No," returned the monk, " at their meeting, whicli was but a few short moments, I was present. I marked every word—every gesture, and could stake my life against the possibility of their even having an idea
idea then of what they have so lately done. You seem very positive about Lupo, but recollect the opportunity he had during your absence—no one to observe him; few in a dependent's si¬ tuation are insensible to the potency of gold." *' My opinion of Lupo is not easy to be shaken," said the duca; " but certainly, if they ever did meet, it must have been then—but no, it is im¬ possible." " It is a weakness to imagine our¬ selves in a state of security ; nay, it is dangerous in every sense. You are too confident of Lupo, duca, even though he was as faithful as you sup¬ pose. It is true, I have only observed what might have happened; I wish not to accuse the castellain, though indeed 1 should conclude his feelings more
more easy to im worked on than mine, since he is assailable by means which would, not avail witii me. Certainly I never have observad any thing in his conduct which couid lead to suspi¬ cion; but then how could the events of the last night have been so com¬ pletely arranged, and so well carried into effect?" ·' There is certainly," said Rodol¬ pho, " a great mystery, as well in this as in sevend other circumstances which have occurred. I think I told you, of the villain who found means to enter Rosalina's chamber, and to escape, though with the loss of his haml Might it not be him, think you, fether, who has contrived all thb?" 11 Simh an undertaking would be impossible;' returned the monk, <* be- voL. m. ι cause
cause he never could enter the castello without being observed: but did you examine the bodies of the men who were slain ? ~ ihat would convince you." " I did 5 father, but their limbs were entire ; the third person, however, whom Rosalina affirms she saw, might have been him." i{ Far be it from me," returned the monk, * t to set at variance the parent and the child. No, duca, I will ima¬ gine what I really and fervently pray may be the case, that Rosalina is can¬ did and sincere— that she is all you ean wish her — that even the most violent love could not induce her to perform any act contrary to the wish of her parent: I could even excuse her intended marriage wdth Montalto without your consent, and attribute it to
to what she declared it was—the desire of preserving the life of her parent, though indeed, surrounded by your friends and guards, the weak attempts of a single man must be obviously fu¬ tile ; but perhaps the eyes of love might magnify them to a host." ** Let a few days pass over," said the duca : " have a w r ary eye around you, my friend. I wish to think it was as Rosalina has told it, for you know my dangerous situation—nothing have I concealed from you. I have reflected about the probability of per¬ mitting this alliance; it would make Rosalina happy—I should also be able to increase my forces, and the count Floretti, the near relation of the marchese, would become my friend, and with their assistance, perhaps yet the principality of Manfroné may be mine." 1 % " The
fct The desire of increase of terato- ries and power is, I believe, general¬ ly predominai)^ in every breast; the count florelli may be equaUy as anx¬ ious as yourself ?> pr^s, the, vacaqt seat of rule: it is tf ue, sqch t an under¬ taking would be now dif^c^|t, for the death of Sebastiano has restored peace in the province, and those who enter it as enemies will have to encounter all its forces. But pardon, me f if in my zeal for your service I utter what may te displeasing to your ears, but you really have aston^she^ mç by your sudden intention. What ! is the dttta di Rodolpho sq lost ?, resources,— is he become so greatly the slave of ( his own fears—he who never treu^lffi— who dared boldly to enter an ???> ???? and terminato thjf Ufe^ of „an hostile lesder — sb^l te ? to gain a handful of vassj^ which ,%.1?^ sue, for, give his daughter to his deadliest foe?"
rt You are too warm, father—but it is caused by your attachment to me, and I excuse it': but Would it not be better for İne to consent to the union, than before tiie cloáe of this week, see my castello beöet by the united forces of Montalto aba Florelli, and dis¬ grace myself by a šititender, oì· perish on the walls? Think not t feai* to die; but the seat of Manfroné holds out those churins to me which make me wish to live. Tfeus you see it is not any other idea than ambition which góàds me on with its powerful impulse." " But I who Calmly look forward to occurrences that are foiiftded on prbbäbiMtý, see but little hope now of your attaining yótUr wishes. Might I advise, you would instantly march your troops against Montalto —- exter¬ minate both^— seke on their possessions, ι 3 and
and with their hoards of gold troops will never be wanting—men who set dangers and death at defiance — to whom the shedding of blood is a trade. But rather than tamely let Mon¬ talto be united to your daughter, I would sooner see Colredo in flames, and you, duca, a lifeless corpse on my expiring body." " Perhaps it would be more glori¬ ous—more worthy of me," returned the duca; " but our present forces—do you think thmk they are sufficient for the purpose ?" " Yes, if you march them instantly to the place of attack, there is little doubt of success," replied Grimaldi: " the marchese and his son just re¬ turned after so long an absence, all will be in a state of confusion; their troops will be few in number, and those
those probably without leaders; they will be surprised before they have time to collect. You need only send a detachment—remain yourself at Col¬ redo; but I repeat again, to ensure success, and prevent any serious loss on your side, you must be hasty in your resolutions." " They are formed—the death of both of them is resolved on, and with their possessions Colredo shall be rendered secure against any attack. Let us go and hasten the preparations : the night will be the fittest for the deed of death ; and before the morning dawns, I shall be secure from that quar¬ ter. Lupo shall command the troops; he is a man of courage and skill, and besides well acquainted with the weaker parts of Montalto's castello, having often been there with me, ι 4 and
and therefore the most proper to be employed." " If you sate confident you can «ely on him, he eertainly is," returned the monk; "but strictly caution him not to lot the marchese or his son escape ; and to urge both Lupo and the troops to exert their utmost, tell them that it was owing to their secret machinations that their lives were endangered by the intended destruction of Colredo." The duca and Grimaldi leaving tiie retired pteee in which they had been conversing, now advanced to the grand hall, where they found Lupo, to whom the duca issued his orders; and the men who were appointed to go, leav¬ ing their present ^employment about the ruins of the tower, hastened to re¬ fresh themselves, and make the neces¬ sary
sary preparations against the evening, when under covert ot the deepening gtoom they were to leave the castello. Carletta soon heard of the intended expedition from Pietro, and she hast¬ ened witii her sad intelligence to Ro¬ salina, wiio was dreadfully agitated on receiving the unwelcome news. To rembhstráte with the duca, she con- jectùred, wóídií be now of little use, as he seemed determined to put his present designs in execution ; and when slie round that he did not mean to ac¬ company the party, she was not long- before she resolved on doing an act, which would be some small return to Montalto for the many important services he had rendered her ; and this was, to acquaint him with the inten¬ tions of her father, that he might guard against them. It is true indeed, the mariner in which this was to be ï 5 done
done was as yet unknown to her, as a messenger must be found whom she could depend on, to carry the import¬ ant information to him. The possibility that she might per¬ haps be able to persuade Pietro now occurred to her. From Carletta she learnt that he was not going with the party, and she determined, at all events, to make the trial, trusting that the cer¬ tainty of the great reward which Mon¬ talto would not fail to make him would be a powerful inducement for him to be faithful to his trust. The greatest difficulty whicli ap¬ peared was, that as he was the ad¬ mirer of Carletta, she would object to his running any risk, particularly as it would not be safe for him to return to the castello, and she now resolved to put Carletta's attachment to her to the
the proof, since she was confident that it all depended on her. " Carletta," said she, " it is now in your power to render me a most im¬ portant service." " Ah, dear signora, name it ; how happy shall I be !" " That, Carletta, I much doubt— You seem to be very fond of Pietro." " Ye-e-s, signora, I will not deny it," said the girl, blushing ; " if it had not been for these disturbances, we meant to ask your leave to marry." * t Doubtless, then, you would be very miserable to be separated from him ?" " Oh, very unhappy indeed," sighed Carletta. 1 6 " And
" Afta 3?«t the service I wished of you would have been to persuade him to leave the castello on a business whieh it is of tbe greatest importance to ?? peace he should perform" " Ah, signora, how happy you make mei I ?i sure Pietro would do any thing to serve you, and your poor Ca». letta would part with life to make you happy." " Rut perhaps, Carletta, you might ??? swPtefao for aorøfc trøie." " But I shall see you? happy," re¬ turned the affectionate gM| " and! tha* will comfort me in his absence." * " Well the»," returned Rosalina, " tell Pietro to come to me imme- diatiejy ; and if ha consente to^ what I wish him to do, he will be ??? in¬ considerable
considerable gainer by it, and shall be further rewarded for his services with you, Carletta." Carletta now left the chamber in order to seek him, and Rosalina re¬ mained in a state of ???? and fear as to the success of her endeavours, which had the important intent of preserving her generous defenders ; and in acting as she did, été' tfelt â cóiisrdbttSheSs thát she was dbiflgí right Every minute that Carletta was ab¬ sent appeared 1 to ???? m* agè, for she fbrød tfrat the «????? delay Would rendbrMbnMto unaMe to fake tile pro¬ per steps for his safety, and in spíte of all her solicitude and anxiety, he would fall af tietim to the* üiíuCcoutitöble and cruel r^soltitfou df Her flitHer.
CHAP-
CHAPTER XVI.
After Rosalina had waited some time longer, Pietro made his appearance, ac¬ companied by Carletta. ' 6 I was informed you wanted me, signora," said the man. " I am ready to undertake whatever you wish me to perform." " I trust indeed you will, Pietro, but I am not without my fears; you must, however, promise, if you should not wish to do me the service I require, that
that you will not disclose it to any one." " You may rely on my fidelity," re¬ turned Pietro ; " let me then know, sig¬ nora, what I am to do?" " Oh, pray tell him," said Carietta; " I am sure he will not refuse—he pro¬ mised me he would not." " Well then," continued Rosalina, " you know, Pietro, the intentions of the duca towards the marchese Mon¬ talto and his son; their destruction is resolved on, and this night is fixed for it. At the hazard of their lives they have protected mine, and I think common gratitude obliges me to inform them of their danger, that they may avoid it. This is what I wish you to do, Pietro : hasten then, that my inten¬ tions may not be frustrated by the cau¬ tion
tion óf ttie ddcİL, wÈéí pi-céat^r inaý order the castle-gates to te closed, tò prevent the possibiUty of his designs being kíióWh ; âná if ybu tftink there ins^ fee' danger ík returning hère, I am certain you wiÉ te ^rotectédf, arid amply rewarded by the marchese ; and Cârlettá shall go tó you there. Are you no^ billing tó ürider¿áke this import¬ ant service?" " Yes, signotó," relurnèdf riétro, " and With 1 pleétìrè : ¿üt ? î do riot ¿?? it \? te éáée for me ä to Mimi, I hope you $? ribt object to letting Carletta còrife to mê" ú You need riot fear bitt I shall prove, in ??? wný ? possibly can, niý gra- titiide tb' you, Pietro ; arid let What will 1 Háp^éh tó riie," she added, witb a sipí d ? sbadì riot fotget your coniali: : iri thé îïfateliesfe tbo, yoü will find a generous
generous friend, or I am much mis¬ taken." " I shall instantly depart then," re¬ plied Pietro; " and, signora, you may set your mind at ease, for you need not doubt my fideUty " This having said, te hastily bade Car¬ letta adieu, and left the chamber, great¬ ly pleased at so good an opportunity of leaving the service of tiie duca, in which nothing but tte love he had for Carletta had detained hirti, for she was too much attached to her ndistress to leave her, even for Pietro. He con¬ trived to pass the caštle-gates without teing noticed, and soon was quickly proceeding towards the residence of the marchese. RosaUna Was now sotnewhat more composed,
composed, and in full confidence of Pietro's performing his mission, she lay down on a couch to give repose to her exhausted frame. The duca waited impatiently for the evening, full of the sanguinary pro¬ ject to which he had been excited by the deep-scheming Grimaldi, and in imagination beheld himself enriched by the expected spoils, whicii he doubted not of obtaining ; still, however, he was not satisfied with what the monk had asserted respecting Montalto's having, either by himself or his agents» set the tower on fire, in order to carry away Rosalina; he was indeed well as¬ sured that there had been a regular concerted plan, in which the two men who had attempted to carry away his daughter were accomplices, and the third she affirmed she had seen, in all probability was the principal, whom he.
he, however, trusted he should dis¬ cover. Night slowly drev/ her shadowy veil over the hemisphere, as the descend¬ ing sun diminished in his lustre. And now the brazen trumpet gave to the gale its martial notes. Rosalina started at the sound, and Carletta en¬ deavoured to compose her agitation by assurances of Pietro having long before that time acquainted Montalto with his danger. She slowly walked to the courtyard, which was now filled with the impatient men, who were eager to be gone on an expedition which promised both plunder and success. She ascended to the rampart, from whence she beheld them marshalled for tiie march, and at length saw them winding down the rocky path, and con¬ tinuing along the margin of the lake, till
till night hid them in her deepening glooms. When the marchese and his son ar¬ rived át their castello, great Were the rejoicings of their domestics, who scarce¬ ly could be persuaded at first that their long-regretted lord was yet in existence; but soon they crowded round him, and expressed then· honest joy in loud ac¬ clamations. The hiarchese, #te was hó stianger to tte vinàictivè špirit òf the dtìca di Rodolphe, wáéted rio titte in collect¬ ing and arming hife vassals, for igno¬ rant óf tlife låte evekfts, te thought he h$d every thing to fear, and that ? he had so greatly injured ; and he sent to the count FÍotelÍt, acquainting him with the läté events, atid requesting the assistance of his vassals, not to act
act against tjhe duca (for th^t he was determtttcd to fprbea?, in considera¬ tion of his son, ?? Rosalina), but to,4efend l(TO3çlf ? casç of neces¬ sity. Whilst in the midst of tli$se active prepajationsag^iust the expected efforts of RodolpİK),, the trusty Pietro arrived^ ?? reføteflj И? message h$ was thç, bearer o£ f tothe s irçsrchçse, wlw could not suf5cie i ntly / ????? tjie^ grateful attentioi^s oÇ Itosaljoa, ar^d &?? that moiçent determined to use + even force, rather than his soft shoulct be^ deprived of 8??? an inestimable» blessing. The weak stats of the du,cal troops, whicfi he t learnt froijni Pietro, ^ive, him no concern abput the meditated attack, for t^v^ssa^ he had sq hastily beeyi col¬ lecting far exceeded Rodolpho's whole force.
Montalto
Montalto was delighted with the dear attention of Rosalina, which he fondly attributed to her love for him. He instantly took Pietro into his own service, and in his liberality far ex¬ ceeded his most sanguine expectations. He was however greatly enraged with the duca's conduct, and requested to have the command of a party to op¬ pose his troops, resolved that none of them should return to Colredo, at least not till he pleased: for this pur¬ pose he posted two detachments, one at the entrance of a narrow pass through which the enemy must march, and the other about the centre of it : the first party had orders to secrete themselves, and to allow the duca's people to pass on, whiie he at the head of the second meant to attack them. Such was Montalto's plan, and when
ivhen the night had shaded all objects from view, he had prepared every thing that was necessary, and soon his scouts brought him intelligence that the duca's party were silently approach¬ ing. The moon partially gleaming through the trees that hung over the wind¬ ing path, at length shone on the arms of the hostile party, when Montalto and his men rushed on them and commenced the work of death. Con¬ fused and terrified by this unexpected attack, many of them fied, while those that remained made but a feeble re¬ sistance. Montalto soon found him¬ self opposed by Lupo, whose attack was furious at the onset; but his strength soon failed, and he was doom¬ ed never more to behold the lofty turrets of Colredo, for the sword of Montalto freed his soul, whicii flitted through
through his wide wounds to another world. Such was the termination of Lupo's sinful adstence. With all his sins un- repented of, he was sent to give an ac- count of them, and to *be confronted with the appalling spirit of the un¬ fortunate Astolpho, one of the many whom his muiderous arm consigned to the shades of death. Those who had hitherto resisted the attack of Montalto's people, learning the death of their leader, sought their safety in flight, but were met by the first party a»d made prisoners. Thus, of ?? the chosen troops which the duca had se«t on hb cruel errand, no more than two escaped, who, climb¬ ing up tbe rocky sides of the valley, hid themselves tül the victors ? retired from the. place, and ?? hastened
irøtened with the sad intelligence to Colredo. Frantic with rage» Rodolpho ïeamt the failure of hfe schemes—-the loss of Lupo, and of liie men. Hk eitu- ation waa »ow desperate *— every mo¬ ment he expected to røe the forces of hin justiy-ineena^u enemies at tte gates. To oppose their fntøanee was impossi¬ ble, and all hí* anticipation« of fu¬ ture greatness filed» never naore to re¬ turn. Unable to confine hk vcMtion, te vented his rage on all around, ®nd 80?1 found himielf ????, for the ter¬ rified d#meitic$ fled at ? approach. He then bethought himself of tte padra Grimaldi— 4w who had urged him, though ???&???? to his wishes, to attack Montalto; and with un- VQL. ?. E equal
equal steps he repaired to his apart ments. f * Confusion !" said he, as he entered. ** all is lost — two men or the party only are returned; the rest are killed or made prisoners. Lupo too is dead. Cursed fool that I was!—This is the consequence of following your counsel, Grimaldi : m every thmg you have ad¬ vised me I have been unsuccessful. What couid persuade me to listen to you I know not : had I acted as I had planned, I should haye evaded the cer¬ tain destruction that must follow—now I am ruined, totally ruined. With a handful of men in the castello, and those incapable of service, I expect every moment the victorious foDowers of Montalto i This, ¿11 this, is the effects of your advice " 4t And who," replied the monk, b* his
his usual tone of voice, unmoved by the agitation ^©f the duca, " who couid foresee what has happened? Do you imagine that I am gifted with the knowledge of futurity—that when I was advising you for your interest, your glory — for every thing that is dear to a man of honour and ambitious principles, that I could foresee that Montalto would have been so soon prepared? I merely spoke the words of friendship : but the duca di Rodol¬ pho is alone to blame, who, used to the wiles and intrigues of warfare, should have provided against a sur¬ prise." « It is well, father," returned the duca, " to heap on me the blame. You well know it was my wish to en¬ deavour to repair the breach between the marchese and myself, and wdiich, dirough Rosalina, might easily have ? 2 been
been effected: but, doubtless for some hidden views of your own, you worked on my feelings, and in fine hurried me to my destruction. Such is the result of your boasted friendship: would I had been without it!" ** I expected no other return," re¬ plied Grimaldi; " such is the fate of those who interest themselves for others. I am accustomed to ingratitude, and therefore fitter to bear it than many who unfortunately are in my situation : but though meek in spirit — though my passions ean be restrained by the powerful voice of reason, yet, duca, when you accuse me of having views of my own which instigated me to give you wrong counsel, I must assert my innocence, and declare your as¬ severations to be wrong founded. A worm when trampled on will turn on its oppressor, though it has no means of
retaliation; but your accusing me, and venting on me your anger, may J>erhaps tend to compose your spirits-** if so, proceed: but such a conduct—* how ungenerous, how ill does it agree with the exalted opinion I had formed of the duca di Rodolpho! When I delivered up to him his enemy who was planning his destruction^—when I prevented the well-concerted marriage of his daughter—when I shared with him ihe danger of being discovered when Sebastiano breathed his last-—had I any interest in all these acts ? Are my coffers fuU of your munificence? No, duca, you had my friendship ; all my powers, mental as well as corporeal, were devoted to your service. But now I shall mislead you with my advice no more; I shall again return to the mo¬ nastery, and to my other misfortunes add the ingratitude of the duca di Ro¬ dolpho," ? 3 " And
u And would you then desert me at the moment when I most need a friend?" returned the d.*ca. ** For¬ give uiy hasty expressions—I scarcely know what I sav or do; vou see the *f * *f distraction of my senses, and yet you make no allowances for me: you musl excuse me. What shall I do in this dreadful emergency ? A few hours, and all will be lost! Shall I consiím the towers of Colredo to the flames, and perish in them, or die in their de¬ fence ?" "I am always ready to forgive," re* turned Grimaldi, ** and your situation admits of many excuses, You are not entirely without hope : Montalto loves Rosalina— that will restrain his re¬ venge." u Do not you think I had better consent to flie alliance ?* " What !
u What ! and expose yourself to the scornful refusal of the old marchese ? He is not in love, whatever his son may feel; and though Montalto may prevent his father from any hostilities, through fear of hurting Rosalina's feelings, yet the marchese may disap¬ prove of the union. However, duca, it is time enough to treat when the enemy is at your gates, for by this time they are fully acquainted with your defenceless situation. Wait awhile; a few hours may bring with them ma- torer considerations ; you sec they had not resolved on attacking you, or they would have been here before this. But there is one thing, duca, which seems not to have excited vour attention—Have vou learnt how *f *, it was that Montalto became acquaint¬ ed with your schemes? Depend on it, he must have had early informa¬ le 4 tion»,
tîon, and that from some of your people." " You are right, father, it must have been so. ï will cause an inquiry to be made, and indeed my mind mis·* gives me that Rosalina is privy to that circumstance; if she is, there will be a victim to appease ray wrath* It may be rønrøibeined that the duca had ordered β guard to be stationed at the portal of Rosaline's apartment, in order to protect her during the confusion that reigned in tlie castello; that guard had not yet been removed, and tte duca, resolving to demand et them who had been with RosaHna during the day, left tlie apartment d Grimaldi, who, from hii last speech, seemed to dread his sanguinary intentions, for he said^— ** lletoilect
* Recollect, duca, that even should your daughter be guilty, it is only through her that you can hope to avert the wrath of Montalto; there¬ fore I conjure you to spare her life, for in so doing you will preserve your¬ self." The duca passed hastily on towards the northern wing, and when he was crossing a courtyard, absorbed in dis¬ tracting ruminations, he for the first time noticed that the morning had some time dawned, and that the mists of night were dispersed. Anxious to know if any more of his men had es¬ caped, he altered his intention of going to RosaliunS apartment, and went to¬ wards the castle-gates ; but no one had entered since the two fugitives, the bearers of the unfortunate fate of their comrades. ? 5 The
The duca ascended tte walls, and looked towards that part of the coun¬ try where lay the residence of tlie marchese ; but no human being caught his eve. and it was but too certain tliat ** all his men had either fallen, or else were captives to the hated marchese. Such a total annihilation of every hope he had formed was almost sufficient to deprive a man (of such violent pas¬ sions as the duca) of his reason ; aU his pecuniary resources had been expended in the endeavour to attain the sove¬ reignty of Manfroné, or else indeed he might have hired fresh parties of ban¬ ditti—but without money that was im* possible. He now indeed began to form some hopes that it w r as not the intention of the marchese to attack Colredo, or he certainly would not have let a moment pass without putting that design
design in execution, as he thereby would give him an opportunity to collect troops to enable him to make a resistance. After some time passed on the walls, and in giving directions to his people to keep a strict watch, he repaired to the apartments of Rosalina, and de¬ manding of the guard if any person had entered them during the preceding day, was infonned that no one excepting Pietro had been there, and that only for a few minutes. The duca then ordered Pietro to be sent for, intending to know what it could be that his daughter could want with him; but after his messenger had been some time absent, he return¬ ed with the information that Pietro was not to be found—that he had entered his apartment, where it ap~ ? G peared
peared lie had not been during the night, and that none of the domestics had seen him since the preceding morn. '™g· Rodolpho, now satisfied that Rosa¬ lina had betrayed him, opened the door that led to her apartment, which he entered, and beheld her reclining on a couch in the soft embraces of sleep» To him, whose mind atid whose in¬ tents were savage m the Hyrcanian tiger, and wild as the howling blast of night, the beauties of his lovely daughter were insufficient to stop tlie sabie purposes he meditated. Her head was reclined on her lovely arm, far whiter than the marble form of the Medicean Venus ; the leaf of the rose was on her cheek, its fragrance in her breath; the powers of fancy had de¬ picted
picted some happy vision to her men¬ tal view, for she smiled. Ten thou¬ sand furies seized his soul, as he rudely caught her by the arm. " Awake," said he, " thou serpent whom I have nurtured in my bosom to sting my heart! Tell me, where is Pietro? Quickly unfold the reason of his leaving the castello, nor seek to hide the truth, lest I instantly open a passage to your heart, and search it there." The terrified RosaUna grew pale as the lily, which, trod down by the careless traveller, withers in the cold hollow blast of night. She raised her timid gaze, and beheld the wrathful countenance of her parent, in which she read her own destruction, since she found that he knew of the cause of Pietro's absence: his lips quiver¬ ed—
ed —his hand was on his sword, and the pressure of his grasp increased. The horrors of her situation were be¬ yond her bearing ; she trembled—lifted up her clasped hands for mercy, but utterance was denied her: the duca grew impatient. " Answer me directly," said he, " lest I for ever render you incapable» for methinks your blood flowing from you would cool the fever of my rage/ r " Oh, my father !" said Rosalina, ex¬ erting all her fortitude, and which she found increased with her endea- -vours, " if it is your wish to murder your child, you are the author of my being, and I submit; but before you put your dreadful design in execution, hear me: it is true I informed Mon¬ talto of your designs, that I might preserve
preserve that life which had so often been endangered in defence of mine ; such was the utmost of my offence;. and if Montalto has escaped, it will be a comfort to me in the last agonizing; pangs of dissolution." " Montalto has then escaped," said the duca; " but mark the conse¬ quences of your information : all my troops are slaughtered — Colredo i& defenceless, and every moment I ex¬ pect to see its gates beset, and myself a prisoner in my own dungeons. Such are the consequences of your infor¬ mation. But, Rosalina, you shall not live, and united to Montalto, smile with him at the anguish of a captive father Í— No, that satisfaction you shall not have ; the present moment at least is mine, and I will employ it in re¬ venge." " Strike I
f « Strike ! Oh, my father," said Ro. salina, α end at once the life and suf¬ ferings pf the unfortunate offspring of Theodora ! Oh, my sainted mother ! too much do I resemble thee* in being so early the sad inheritor of thy sor¬ rows. May the dreadful deed which this hour will witness be forgiven thee, my father! but, oh, I fear that the blood of thy guiltless child will haunt thy sleepless hours !" " And dost thou really think, Ruh¬ salina, that Rodolpho will survive the ruin of his fortunes ? No, I will bury myself in the ruins of Colredo — its crumbling walls shall be my tomb as wdi as thine; and Montalto, when he cumes, shall stalk, full of love and revenge, over the smoking pile ; but neither shall liis love be gratified with the sight of thee, or his revenge he satiated
satiated with having his enemy for his captive. By Heavens, this is a noble thought—worthy of Rodolpho! it is I that shall then be revenged ; and thou, false dissembling wretch !—thou that art the cause of all this woe, pre¬ pare, for the moment of thy dissolu¬ tion approaches. Fury, rage, and de¬ spair, nerve my arm and seize my senses; my brain burns with agony, and I long to do the deed of death— and die thou shalt, with a fathers deepest malediction on thy devoted head !" "Oh, my father, do not curse me Γ said the almost inanimate Rosalina; " the horrors of death are sufficients without that fresh misery " Here she ceased —her increasing agonies held motionless the powers of speech; she sunk on her knees, and
and held the duca's trembling hand^ but he flung her from him, and with a look, dark and determined, drew forth the thirsty weapon of death. RosaUna closed her eyes and awaited the murderous blow, while her frame trembled, and cold drops of water stood at every pore, when suddenly a confused murmur, wiiich increased to a wild ?????, seemed approaching tlie apartment; the duca, whose arm was raised, stopped and listened, when repeated cries of " the enemy ! the ene¬ my !" and the trumpet's blasts being heard between the pauses of the dis¬ tracted shouts of the people, he rusted from the chamber, and hastened to the courtyard. The terror of the inhabitants of the castello had kept them continually on the watch, in expectation of the com¬ ing of the marchese and his troops; and
and that they might have the earliest information possible, a soldier was sta¬ tioned on the highest turret of Col¬ redo, who seeing a party winding among the distant bilk, blew liis horn, which instantly occasioned the dis¬ turbance that prevented the duca from doing the horrible deed he meditated, in imbruing his hands with the blood of his hapless daughter. As yet from the walls, the party could not be discovered; and the duca hav¬ ing waited some time, began to hope that the man had been deceived, when a distant horn was faintly heard, and shortly after, the sunbeams glanced on the arms of the men. The duca, whose feelings were not to be described, sent for Grimaldi, who soon after ascended the rampart where Rodolpho was standing, look* ing
ing towards the party who were ap* proachmg. " You see, father, it is as I said—- yonder is the marchese, and Colredo must fall." * * Where is the signora Rosalina ?" demanded the monk. '* You have not, 1 hope, duca, committed the fearful act you meditated?" ·* No," replied Rodolpho ; " but I have found out that it was owing to her that Montalto was informed of my designs, which in consequence he was enabled so successfully to frustrate." " I scarcely know how to advise you ; wait tiU they approach, and de¬ mand a parley, and when we know their strength, we can better deter¬ mine what should bc done. The party which
which I perceive does not appear to be veiy numerous." * r That doubtless," said Rodolpho, **is the vanguard; the main body are not yet in sight. Count Florelli's troops have joined the marchese before this; indeed his own forces are suflicient now to reduce Colredo. However, ' as nothing else appears better to re¬ solve on at present, I shall gain some time in the way you mention ; and if they persist in the attack, I will drag Rosalina to the walls, and they may pierce her body with their winged mes¬ sengers of death. Colredo too, shall tall, and with it Rodolpho " M The party is far distant from the vallies, and yet I do not see any more. Had you not better send one of the men to the loftiest turret, and lód him wind
wind his horn, if there are no more in their rear ?" The duca immediately commanded one of the soldiers to go up ; and when they saw that he had arrived, and was carefully viewing the country around, their suspense was great ; but at length, to their astonishment, they heard the welcome tones of his horn. ** There is yet hope, duca," said the monk ; * the party we see you have no reason to fear, for the number of your troops must yet surpass them." ** This indeed is an astonishing and unaccountable circumstance," said Ro¬ dolpho ; " Montalto must have been better informed of our situation, than to think Colredo would suirender toa mere handful of men." v anous
Various were the conjectures of the beholders as tiie party approached; but when at length they had arrived at the foot of the rocks on which the towers of Colredo rose, they recog¬ nized them to be some of the men who were supposed to be either dead or pri¬ soners. Great was the astonishment of the duca as he surveyed them. One per¬ son only was unknown to him, and he rode before the party; his vizor was down, and the bearings on his cloak denoted him to belong to the mar¬ chese. The party were instantly admitted into the courtyard of the castello. The by- standers, lost in astonishment, preserved the strictest silence, when the cavalier, without raisiog his vizor, thus addressed the duca :— "The
M The marchese Mrøtalto, unwill¬ ing to punish the men for the cruel intentions of their master, sends back the prisoners made last night, and the wounded shall, as soon as they are able, fellow them. Colredo might be- fere this have been in his possession, but he scorns to take advantage of the duca's weakness as much as he despises retaliation." This said, before the duca could m± ply, the cavalier had repassed the gates, and was m his way to the estates of the marchese. Rodolpho was some time silent; be was indeed ashamed of his past con¬ duct, and which was greatly excited by the generous forbearance of his enemy* At length he said to the monk *~ u It is resolved — Rosalina shall be united to Montato— sucli a conduct
conduct merits such a return from me. How happy am I that my arm was stopped ! Yes, father, another moment and Rosalina had ceased to exist. I cannot see her yet—go to her, and tell her of my new-formed determination." " Which perhaps you may yet alter," said the monk ; " and I should wish to preserve the signora Rosalina from the misery which such a step would cause her." " I am now, father," said the duca, * e determined to be guided by my own ideas ; and in resolving to permit the alliance, I am urged both by my for¬ mer wishes, as well m the noble con¬ duct of Montalto ; your advice is there¬ fore needless."
'* I will not pretend to advise you, duca," returned Grimaldi, " but I vol. ?? ? would
would caution you against being too precipitate. May there not in this wonderful conduct of Montalto's be some deep-laid scheme? I have my suspicions—but no matter, it is useless in mc to unfold them." " At this time it is» Grimaldi," re¬ turned the duca; "but how cold— liow unfeeling—how contracted must be the sentiments of your breast, when you view with suspicious frigidity the noble conduct of Montalto ! Indeed, fa¬ ther, I am often tempted to believe you have mme deep design in view, though of what nature I cannot pretend even to form an idea." ** I wish you were as suspicious of your enemies as you are of your friends ~~~but I have done. You will repent, duca, of your present intentions, when it is too late.* So
So saying, he slowly left the duca, who, eager to prosecute his plans of offering Rosalina to Montalto, went (though not without feeling conscious how dreadful he must appear in the eyes of his daughter after the late horrible scene) to assure her of his forgiveness—to endeavour to re-com¬ pose the cruel agitation she must have endured, and which he doubted not but that he soon would be able to effect, when she knew his present in* tentions. He now approached her apart¬ ments: the guard he had placed there were gone, for imagining that they would he required to defend the cas¬ tello, they had instantly obeyed the well-known signal of tiie warlike trum¬ pet. He entered Rosalina's cliamber, but she was not there: he called her L S repeatedly,
repeatedly, but no one answered ; and having entered all the apartments, and being satisfied she had left them, he returned to the hall and summoning the domestics, bade them seek for his daughter, and to tell her that he had some pleasing intelligence to commu¬ nicate to her. The domestics, delighted w r ith the fnessage they had to take to Rosalina, who was greatly beloved by them, hastened away, and traversed the cas¬ tello in search of her—but to no pur¬ pose; and greatly alarmed, they re¬ turned to the hall, and reported their ill success to the duca, declaring that the signora Rosalina was not to be found. " Not to be found !" returned Ro¬ dolpho : " hasten away, nor dare to return with such an answer* Go find Carletta,
Carletta, her attendant ; she will inform you where her mistress is." " We have also inquired after her, your exeellenza, but she cannot be found either." " Peace, fools ! she has ascended some of the turrets," said the duca; " she cannot have left the castello, for have I not been at the gates all the morning?—and Carletta is of course with her." The men now departed, and Rodol· pho, throwing himself on a seat in the hall, anxiously awaited the coming of his daughter, for he imagined that she had secreted herself through fear of liim, and he was very unwilling that his late conduct should be known, as he now wislied much to be on terms of friendship with her, that when th*p L S alliance
alliance between her and Montalto had taken place, she might be the more ready to interest herself on his account. After the men had been gone near an hour, they again returned, but with no better success. u Are you certain," demanded the duca, " that you have searched all the apartments?" ** We have indeed, your exeellenaa* an! we even got the keys which Lupo had left with Gomelli, and opened all the chambers in the north wing; but we could not discover any traces of the signora." " There was little occasion to ex¬ amine apartments that were shut up," replied the duca; u but, now I reflect, she
she may possibly have fled for security to the subterraneous passages when she expected the castello to be attacked; go and searcjb all of them, but be sure to tell her that there is no cause for fear, and that I wish anxiously to see her," The men again departed; and hav¬ ing entered all the passages, returned fully convinced that Rosalina was not in the castello. If Carletta had not been missing m ?? well as her mistress, the duca would have been alarmed lest in lier terror she had precipitated herself from the walls of Colredo to the terrific vallies below ; but the idea that her attendant was certainly with her served to allay his fears, and he trusted that she would soon be tempted to emerge from her L 4 place
place of conceahnent, of which there were many in the castello that ahnost defied the most vigilant search. But the whole of that day passed, and neither his daughter or her at¬ tendant made their appearance, and Rodolpho was now tormented with the idea that Rosalina had resolved rather to perish for want, than approach her father who had threatened her life; and he knew that Carletta was so greatly attached to her as to partake of her fate, rather than betray tlie secret of her present abode 9 which, if she appeared, would have been forced from her. The night came, and still Bosalma ivas absent from her apartments. Greatly perplexed, the duca deter¬ mined to see Grimaldi, if he still re¬ mained in the castello, for he was uncertain
uncertain whether he had not retired to the monastery. The monk, however, was btili in Iiis ?1????, and when informed of the wish of the duca to see him, followed the domestic ** My calamities, father," said Ro¬ dolpho, as Grimaldi entered his cham¬ ber, ** art, I think, never to have tn end : RoháBna, now that I intended to have made her amends for my harsh conduct this morning, is missing, nor ? there the smallest trace of her to be dis¬ covered. " Missing! did yon say ? Surt'lw duca, jou Urriiied the haplt^b maiti into mme rash act" ** I should almost fe.tr that navself/ *t returned Rodolpho; - but her domcs»tie is
is alm absent, and that circumstance í* a certain proof <at least I wish to con¬ sider it so) of her safety." ** I hope it is" said the monk, ·* Has every part of tlie castello lieer ι searched ? Perhaps she is concealed in the subterraneous recesses." * They have sum been examined,* returned tte duca. ** I indeed almost fear she tes been carried erf*: but then Caletta being absent ako ------* *' Is a sufficient reason to conclude that àie is not,* 1 returned Grimaldi. *' Perhaps, indeed, ihe may have fled to Montalto, and accepted of his pro¬ tection, when safety no longer existed beneath a father*· toot If riie had, then indeed he hm suflktetitly reven¬ ged himself of you* and ??? mre justly punished ??? rdmmg to ?? to røy advice
advice when I entreated you not to alarm your daughter." " I cannot but admire my own folly," said Rodolpho, ** in coming to you for consolation, for you seem to take a de¬ light in torturing me. You see then that I did not take your advice, which it would have been happy for me if I never had ; and perhaps Rosalina is in consequence of that gone to Montalto. All this I am aware of, and therefore could not come to you for information* What I wanted to know is, how to act; but you are content with reproaching me—with adding to my inquietude, without seeking to do any thing tiiat TOuld alky my anxiety." Thus saying, he left the apartment, enraged in the highest degree at the cool torturing conduct of the monk, and ? at ease, sought his chamber. He had
had no friend now to consult with : Lupo, his trusty long-tried confident, was no more; from the monk he met nothing but reproaches, and his own thoughts were far from being friendly to his peace. Such was now the situation of flie duca di Rodolpho, who, when he was his own friend, when his conscience dis¬ turbed not his repose, w r as blessed with the amiable Theodora, with power, rank, riches, and honour ; but when murder, with all its train of concomitant sins, increased the catalogue of his offences, tlien eveiy evil began to assail him ; the loss of his lovely wife—then gradual¬ ly of his possessions ; and, frustrated in every attempi, bewas at last reduced to the most hapless situation; and, in¬ capable of taking repose througii the long cheerless night, he paced his cham¬ ber, while at each hollow blast of wind that
that shook the easement or moaned in the galleries, he started and looked around, expecting to see the shade of some unfortunate victim to his cruel, revengeful, and ambitious pursuits. Wished-for morning came at length, and shed over nature a gay and joyous look, but it imparted no pleasure to Rodolpho. To the monk he disdained to speak, for he had not forgotten his late conduct ; he therefore sat alone in his chamher, gloomy and irresolute what course to pursue, wdien a packet was brought him, whieh he hastily opened, rød attentively perused. The contents did not appear, by his features, to be productive of pleasure, for he often turned pale, started, and having re-perused it two or three times, he arose and inquired where the mes¬ senger was who had brought the packet, and
and being informed he was gone, he instantly hastened from the castello without acquainting his people, and totally unaccompanied, was observed winding down the path, and hastening along the road, seemingly greatly agi¬ tated, for he often put liis hand to his forehead, and evinced other emotions of dbtress.
KND OF VOL. IIT.
? ¡ ju iii nj i ι, ii < M« |M . ^j!Mja i j i ^ .?? j i g i ι φ ι ι f i ji .???? ??»? by J. Daring, LcuJcnhaií-SHCíf, ï.ou don.
