Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The castle chapel: a romantic tale
THE CASTLE CHAPEL.
CHAPTER I.
+ ?+++* *·+*++*-* ? ? é*f m+*
•Sudden he starts,
Shook from his tender trance, and, restlen, rurs To glimmering bhades, and sympathetic glooms, Where the dun umbrage o'er the failing btream Romantic hangs; there, through the pensive dusí- , Stí ays, in heart-thrill] ng meditation lost : Or on the bank Thrown, amid drooping hues, swells the breeze With sighs unceasing, ami the brook with teats. Thus, in deep anguish, he consumes the day, lS'or quits his deep retirement till the moon Peeps through the chambers of the fìeecy east. Then forth he walks» Beneath the trembling languish of her beam ; Or while the world, And all the sons of care, lie hush'd ? bleep, Associates with the midnight shadows drear," W E left Eugene in a very awkward pre¬ dicament in England. What his agita- vol. in. ?
tion was, on jiositively ascertaining the nature of the place into which he Had been inveigled, may easily be conceived, Convinced, however, to give way to the feelings produced by the discovery, conld answer no good end, but quite the re¬ verse, He constrained Himself to appear composed, and in the course of a few days reaped the benefit of the circumstance; it being deemed Hardly probable that a per¬ son who appeared so collected, could be as described: the doubt led to a conversa¬ tion, that developing the treachery that Had been practised against him, he was forthwith released, with a firm conviction on His mind, that the person to whom he was indebted for what had lately happen¬ ed, was the same through vvhose machi¬ nations he had already suffered so mueh, namely, Wilkinson. His impatience to return home was so great, that he did not write another letter, and accordingly ar¬ rived most unexpectedly at St. Doulaglts, just five days after the departure of Grace for Strandmore.
As previously settled, it was intended to îiave kept í.im in ignorance of what had happened till she was sent for; but through the blundering of one of the ser¬ vants, this intention was defeated; and, on seeing the state to which Eugene was reduced by the disclosure, Mr. Hamilton opposed her being sent for, under the conviction that she could be of no imme¬ diate service to him, and the consequent cruelty therefore there would be in inter¬ rupting her present enjoyment; and ac¬ cordingly, in pursuance of his advice and remonstrances, it was determined that she should know nothing of the arrival of Eugene till her return home. From the absolute distraction of En- gene, on learning the untimely fate of her on whom his soul doated, it might well indeed be imagined that he was at present incapable in any way of being soothed or comforted—that, in short, till his grief had had time, in some degree, to spend or exhaust itself, it would not merely be ? 2
useless, but probably irritating, to attempt to argue vvith or console him. Thinking in this manner, Mr. Hamilton did not at¬ tempt to unite with his family in oppc ;ing his departure from St. Doulaglts, to the place where Rose had died ; more espe¬ cially as Mrs. Brady would accompany Him, under the pretext of His not being able to obtain access to her cottage, in which He purposed taking refuge from all who would be likely to intrude upon His sorrow, without her being vvith him. But little was Mr. Hamilton aware, in advising him to be left for a time to the unrestrained indulgence of his feelings. what those feelings were ; that it was not simply grief he felt—natural grief, for the death of one so young, so lovely, so fond¬ ly beloved—but grief Heightened by re¬ morse, by self-upbraidings, by the tor¬ turing thought of the grave having closed over the beauteous form of her he had wronged, vvithout His Having Had the power of speaking His compunction for that wrong, or making any kind of repa«
ration for it. Oh, if any thing can allay the pangs of a self-accusing spirit, it is the idea of having made some atonement for that which it mourns ! but without any hope oí ever being able to do tins, who ean describe the acuteness of its anguish ? Mrs. Brady, in her indignant resent¬ ment at the conduct of Eugene, had fully determined on revealing to him ?? ? ??? particular about Rose ; but ivhen she saw how completely he Avas overwhelmed by merely hearing of her death, without learning how she came by it, she began to feel a relenting towards him, that gra¬ dually induced her to give up this harsh intention; and well it Avas she did so, since, no eloubt, madness Avould have fol¬ lowed the disclosure of the truth. From ivhat lias been already stated of the habitation of Mrs. Brady, it must ap¬ pear that no place could be better adapted for the indulgence of such feelings as Eu¬ gene's than it was. Here indeeel was gloom and privacy, wildness and solitude— here he had no dread of intrusion, no fear
of any observation that could occasion ? restraint upon his grief. Mrs. Brady made a few ineffectual efforts to prevent its uninterrupted indulgence, and then íollowing the advice of Mr. Hamilton, left him to himself—advice, as already Hinted, owing to His utter ignorance of hh real iceiings. All the favourite haunts of Rose vvere pointed (»ut to him, for if any thing could impart a gleam of pleasure to his afflicted mind» it was the thought of threading in her footsteps, sighing vvhere she Had sigh¬ ed, and breathing Her name where His own Had been so often uttered Hy Her. Ilnable to taste the repose he was urged to seek, His restless pillow was often quit¬ ted for the monastery, where day's return¬ ing Hght frequently surprised Him ; hero too evening often stole upon him unno¬ ticed. But not to contemplate the re¬ mains of Gothic grandeur it exhibited, its clustering pillars, lessening in gradual per- .spective, or the pointed arches they sup¬ ported, did Eugene frequent it. No—
seated on the fragment of some old tomb, absorbed in one sorrowful contemplation, his eye ran, unconsciously, along the vhu of the chancel, green vvith the ivy that hung suspended from the arches, or were mechanically fixed upon some lofty door¬ way, or dilapidated window, through the liirht traeen of vvhich the distant moun- tains vvere beheld» low lit up with all the magic oi sunshine, now fading into the cold purple Hues ot closing day, while wild flovvers and long grass Hung stream¬ ing about it—no, he noticed not the grandeur, the sublimity, by which he was surrounded; he was alive only to one- idea, the idea of being in the place chosen by Her he lamented, for the indulgence oi that consuming anguish that Had weighed Her to an untimely grave. A mere worldling would Have advised His flying the dismal spot—would Have represented the folly of grieving so immo¬ derately ibr what, sooner or later, must Have come to pass—would Have recom¬ mended change of scene, and gaiety, and
amusement, as a means of relieving his sorrow; but, alas! those who prescribe such remedies for the cure of grief knovv little of the real nature of it ; that to a Heart wounded Hke His, nothing that is not in unison vvith its feelings, that does not actually seem to feed its sorrow, ean He of service ; that there is an absolute in¬ dulgence in the enjoyment of these—an indulgence that can only be experienced in the stillness of solitude, amidst the qui¬ etude and loneliness of nature. But as it is only in the Hour of affliction vve view the world in the light it merits, so in that hour vve naturally turn from it in disgust, to seek consolation whence alone it can be derived, in the Hopes and promises Held out hy religion. Iiow awful indeed is the visitation ot Heaven ! and how vain for man to strive to argue with us while writhing under it ! flow mournful to the soul, to think that those wc loved as life, shall no more re¬ turn to dry our weeping eyes—that the voice that was music to our ears is silenced
for ever—that the form it was rapture to o-aze on ? now eold, and shrouded, th.e prey uf worms, and crumbling into dust' What could support or console us under these heart-rend im»* reflections/ not the forevá condolence of pretended sympa¬ thies—not the bustle, and glare 4 , and glit¬ ter of public assemblies !~no, the hopes alone held out by Revelation, of a happy reunion hereafter vvitli those whom we here lament. But at times, either the reflections of Eugene vvere so intolerable, or else the necessity of making a stand against his piesent feelings so evident, that he now and then was led to try and make an ef¬ fort for diverting his thoughts, by explo¬ ring the romantic scenery that environed the monastery. Insensibly almost the contemplation of it would cali his soul abroad, and by soothing him, in a degree, permit him to attend to what he saw. In pleasing admiration he would then dwell on the woods that clothed the steep sides ? 3
of the mountains, as their sea of leaves waved in the breeze; hearken to the cheerful sound of woodland harmonv, that seldom failed to fill the vale below—the song of day's Harbinger, its several divi. sions, far above art, as it, a little spot, floated on the sunbeam; the restless pye, so pert and garrulous ; the cuckoo, mocking the vil¬ lage-bells ; the jay, a very termagant, that seemed to scold all day ; the glossy raven. in the grass, making rude courtship to his negro mate; the little goldfinch, plucking the groundsel's feathered seed, or war¬ bling, from some bough, its melodious song; the swallow, skimming the glassy pool, now dipping, then shooting, with rapid speed, along; the rook, winging his way to the high wood ; the smoothly-sail¬ ing owl, with His shrill to-whit i sending the wanton mouse scouring Home, from His gambols round the primrose-head— nothing escaped comment. Thus would He wander, like the melancholy Jacques, musing and moralizing on all he saw ·.
now lost amidst the gioom of woods, now seated beneath some social elm, or vene« rabie oak : and such is the turn that vio¬ lent grief and sorrow often take: the human mind must have something to oc¬ cupy it, and incapable, while under the influence of these feelings, of any serious exertion, is led to dwell on what, in other moods, it might hardly have noticed. His mind, on these occasions restored to a slight degree of composure, Eugene failed not to endeavour to argue himself into resignation, and call fortitude to His aid ; but in a moment, how would all His efforts for this purpose be overthrown, by the sudden recurrence of his though ? to the cause of Rose's death-—the secret sor¬ row, the internal upbraidings which He was convinced Had accelerated it ! instant¬ ly would the vehemence of sorrow he re¬ newed, and with precipitation Ik would fly to the dismal scene that was most con¬ genial to it ; not without keen reproaches for having tried, for having formed a wish to banish from His mind the idea of her
wdiose early death he was convinced was imputable to Him, and whose memory therefore he was doubly bound to cherish. — And was she really dead? he would sometimes demand of Himself, with a flood of tears—she whom He Had left so lovely, with life iust opening to Her view— was ? ?? she already cut ofi", like a flower untimely cropped? yes, like a dewdrop, as pure, as bright, as transient, she had sparkled for a minute, was exhaled, and gone to Heaven. Fain would He still have remain¬ ed in ignorance of Her, fain still Have be¬ lieved that they should meet again. As he sat one evening within the ruin¬ ed pile, dwelling, as usual, in bitter sad¬ ness on the irreparable loss he Had sus¬ tained, a rising moon, pouring a flood of splendour through the eastern window, and partially touching the surrounding ob¬ jects, so as to produce an indescribably beautiful scene of chequered light and shadow, gave a Heightening to the solemn grandeur of the place, that almost imper¬ ceptibly drew His attention,—"And sure/'
he cried, with emotions of suddenly kind¬ ling awe and admiration, " if permitted by Heaven to visit this nether scene, this is the holy place the angelic spirit of my Rose would choose to appear in. But no, she will not return to bless my sight again— bhe has reascendcd to her native skies, and all that occupied her here on earth is now forgotten. Since she will not come with¬ in the reach of my senses then again, why, Avhy should I not strive to banish her my minel? but what base ingratitude, to wish to detach my thoughts from her, Avho, through my means, has been hur¬ ried into the oblivion of the tomb ! No, I woultl not, if I could, be guilty of such ingratitude. The earth covers all that my soul held clear—but Avhilst I live she wili still live too in my heart Yet, e)h that I coukl behold her once more ! could catch a glimpse of her, as she now is, a beatified spirit ! But, no, no! vain is the wish—she has passed the bourne whence none return.—But, ge>od God! what is that I ???? do my eyes deceive me? h
my fancy exercising itself to mock me ?" he exclaimed, as with the wildest emotion he started up, at the sight of a figure, standing motionless beside the mutilated altar.
CHAPTER II.
Truly I'll devise some »landers; —-one doth not know
Hm\ much an HI woid may impotson hUng."' Delamere vvr.s heartily vexed by what had occurred, the mal-à-propos entrance of Grace into the drawing-room. He had begun to see a dawning of hope, a gradu¬ ally increasing kindliness of manner, a something, in short, that almost tempted or inclined Him to think, had they met before the writing of her renouncing let¬ ter, it would not perhaps have been couch¬ ed in such decisive terms. Imagining this, hovv provoking to think of any misappre¬ hension being created at her side, that per¬ haps, from what she had seen, she might be led to conceive He no longer Had a thought or wish about her, and according-
ly give up all further ones Herself about him! Could he have explained what the real fact was, that the young lady had actually been on the watch to follow him into the drawing-room, to express what she felt at the accident that was attributable to Her, and that of her own accord she Had, un¬ consciously of course he concluded, incli¬ ned against His bosom, and leant her fair cheek, moist vvith V ars of apprehension, and regret, and anxiety, to his——Hut this of course was quite out of the question, a thing not tobe thought of, or excused, or in any way justified, but by there being a positive claim to the disclosure of the truth. But Grace He well knew was not defi¬ cient in acute penetration, and by deter¬ mining to be no longer foiled in his at¬ tempts to pay her those attentions his heart dictated, He trusted he should be able to make Her quickly comprehend what He wished, namely, that there was at present nothing serious between him
and any other person, and vvhich indeed He was now beginning to thiniv there never would be, vvithout coming to a full explanation with Her, let that explanation be ever so long prevented. With all Her efforts to appear as usual, Grace still continued in a state of discom¬ posure, or emotion, that kept her from making Her appearance again amongst the party, till summoned to join them at din¬ ner. Light as Delamere made of what had Happened at the cove, his arm had really sustained an injury r , that rendered him un¬ able to use it again immediately ; in con¬ sequence his seat at the foot of the tabic was vacated to young Mayfield. Mrs. Mayfield no sooner perceived this, than she motioned him to one next to her at the head of the table. William, how¬ ever, feigning not to have noticed her in¬ vitation, hastened to place himself beside t r raee. M rs. Mayfield and her daughters invo¬ luntarily exchanged looks ; but they were
all adepts at self-command, so all was in an instant smooth and smiling ^s ever : and —" I shou'd reallv like, */*r. Mr. Dela¬ mere," began the eider lady, affecting ig¬ norance of the circumstance, for as usual, the moment she returned from her walk, Miss Myra had hastrneel to disclose all that occurred in the course of it to her mamma and sisters, " to knoiv how you came by that injury your arm has met with—I hope through no inadvertence of any one here ?" ** My dear ma'am, 'tis really so insigni¬ ficant a matter, 'tis quite ridiculous to speak of it," said Delamere. " Nay, I can't be persuaded 'tis of so very little consequence ; at all events, I know some one, 5 * and she glanced signifi¬ cantly at Myra, " that does not consider it so; but then, to be sure, a very little thing alarms and agitates her—she is so gentle, so timid, or, in short, has so much sensibility—too much, as I often think, for her happiness ; for if any thing hap¬ pens to afflict any one she regards, she is
so miserable : but then real sensibility gives so many charms to its possessor, and there is withal something so very delightful in it—for, as an elegant writer Has observed, k 'tis the source indeed of all that's precious in our joys, as well as costly in our sor¬ rows." Delamere had never so great an inclina¬ tion to laugh outright. There is such a thing as a person's making themselves too amiable, and this was the case with poor Mrs. Mayfield at the instant. He had not began absolutely to fathom the lady, but still at times he was beginning to think she was a little too sentimental, than which nothing possibly can either be more sickening or ludicrous. Whether Mrs. Mayfield perceived any slight working of the muscles, vve cannot pretend to say, but she gave a sudden, and quite an adroit turn to the conversation : proceeded, after a little general chitchat, to express Her Hope that the accident of the morning would not prevent his being of Mrs. Benson's party that evening.
Delamere hesitated. Grace had decided against being of this party, owing to her dislike to mixing in any very large onc, as she knew this would be, so immediately after the death of poor Rose ; and Wil¬ liam had heard her determination of re¬ maining at home*—and what might ensue from his doing the same, the opportunity it would afford for uninterrupted conver¬ sation, at once struck him; but then should she be disinclined to permit what he wish¬ ed—sliould his seeking it be a means of putting her on her guard to prevent it i But the impulse of inclination was too powerful for resistance, and he according¬ ly replied to Mrs. May fields question, by begging she would have the goodness, this one evening, to excuse his being her escort. Mrs. Mayfield became still more alarmed —not from the idea of his being-left têle-à~ tête with Grace, for that she at once resol¬ ved should not be the case—but the wish she thought his choosing to remain at home seemed to intimate for it, How*
ever, as Mrs. Hamilton said, vvho was ai- inost as great a quoter of proverbs as San¬ cho Panza Himself—" Troy was not won in a day ;" it eould not be expected that old impressions would be effaced in a mo¬ ment, and so trying to keep up her hopes, and to flatter Herself, that, by a little fur¬ ther management, all would yet turn out as she wished, she settled thnt Myra should not go to Mrs. Benson's, uneler the pretext of Her nerves being so affected by what had occurred in the morning, as not to permit her, not choosing t give up going Herself on account of the other girls. The looks and manner of Delamere du¬ ring dinner—his preference of a seat be¬ side Her, to the one to which he was invi¬ ted Hv Mrs. Mav field, at whose elbow Myra vvas always stationed at dinner, as a little young thing, still almost requiring to He under the paternal wing—above all, the earnestness with which He looked in her countenance, on Her entering to din¬ ner, Had given to Graee a surmise of the truth, and in consequence she would per-
haps have been quite as well pleased with a different arrangement about Myra. How¬ ever, whatever she thought or felt on the subject ofthis, she of course kept careful¬ ly locked up in Her bosom, and made tea for her companions, and laughed, and chat¬ ted, quite in her usual way, for somehuw shb felt a heavy weight suddenly lifted off Ler spirits. Myra, as usual, did all in her power to engross the attentions of Delamere exclu¬ sively to Herself, and for the purpose had recourse to a thousand little artifices ; but the gentleman was too polite, or too gal¬ lant, to permit Her to succeed in these, and their failure did not certainly tend to render her smiles more natural. At length, in Hopes of making a diver¬ sion in Her favour by the circumstance, she proposed a walk ; neither of Her compani¬ ons could make an objection to the propo¬ sal, the evening being delightful, and ac¬ cordingly cut they sallied, but in a differ¬ ent direction from the village, for, after sendin >' an excuse to Mrs. Benson, it
would not of course He the thing to have them seen parading about it. The road they took was bordered atone side by the sea, and at the other by heathy fields, on which the evening sun was now shining with a placid lustre ; the vil¬ lage murmur, intermingled at intervals vvith shouts of revelry and strains of mu¬ sic—for parties vvere continually taking place at Strand more—followed them as they proceeded, gradually of course becoming still fainter and fainter, and all was calcu¬ lated to attune the feelings to complacen* ey, and revive agreeable recollections, if any vvere to be revived. Whatever were the thoughts or recol¬ lections of Grace and William, there was an expression of serene pleasure in the countenance of one, of ineffable tenderness in ihe other, that certainly did not tend to Heighten poor My ra's enjoyment of the walk. They Had proceeded some way, vvhen a gentleman suddenly darted before them, from an adjacent field, and looking from
one to the other, discovered to the alarm¬ ed Myra the features of her lover Fal¬ kiner, but wearing a very different ex¬ pression to what they had heretofore done. Graee had a slight acquaintance vvith him, and distantly bowing to him, glan¬ ced at Myra. She saw Her pale as death, nor did she wonder at it, for the looks of Falkiner indicated absolute fury. Myra returned her glance, with a look which seemed to say she implored her to try and extricate her from the predicament she was in. Grace took compassion on her, and as the only method she could de¬ vise for doing what she required, imme¬ diately led the way to a cabin hard by, under the pretext of wishing for a glass of water. The cabin was empty, but voices were heard in the wild garden behind it, and thither Delamere went, to try if he eould obtain for Grace what she pretended to re¬ quire. The moment he had left them— 4( OH, if you have any pity on me," said the
trembling Myra, " youll go to that wretch vvithout, and endeavour to prevail on him not to expose Himself and me in the man¬ ner I see He meditates Γ " I should be very glad to oblige you," replied Grace ; " but if you Have given him any cause for reproach, is it probable that any thing I could say would have an efiect upon him?'' " Oh, try ! try !" cried Myra, in agony. " 1 am ruined and undone if he attempts entering into any explanation before De¬ lamere! Say, if he'll only forbear speak¬ ing to me, He shall either see or hear from me in the course of a few hours." Still Grace hesitated ; it w T as a matter in which she did not by any means like to interfere. Why should she lend Herself to the concealment of any thing that it was for the interest or Happiness of another to Have discovered ? Myra became almost convulsed vvith passion, or terror, perhaps both, at seeing Her reluctance to oblige her.—** 1 see, I vol. in. ?
see/ she said, " what your good nature is ! but if not on my account, at least to pre¬ vent the risk of any unpleasant conse¬ quences, do not hesitate any longer to comply vvith my entreaty. Should Fab ktner address me in the manner I appre¬ hend, 'tis not unnatural to suppose Dela¬ mere may resent the circumstance, ancl what then may not ensue!" Startled by the suggestion, Grace in¬ stantly hurried from the cabin. She found the incensed lover sullenly pacing to and fro, as if positively decided on car¬ rying into effect the purpose it was evi¬ dent he had come for. Graee beckoned him to a little distance from tho cabin ; but it was many minutes ere, vvith all her soft persuasiveness of manner, she could accomplish her object in speaking to him, that of trying to prevail on him to relin¬ quish his intention of exposing his jilting little mistress in the manner she merited ; nor could he finally be induced to do so, till she had given him My ra's assurance,
backed with her own, that she would see it kept. While she was absent with Hitn, Wil¬ liam re entered from the garden, and in¬ stantly missing her, inquired where she was? The looks of Falkiner Had not been lost upon Him, neither the glances ex- ehanged between the ladies, and altogether there was a curiosity, an anxiety excited, that made him ask eagerlv alter Grace. Í.7 m' Myra Hesitated : could she but induce him to believe that Falkiner was the lover of Grace, what a means might it not He of precipitating Him into some overture to Her! She saw that He suspected some¬ thing, and that probably nothing but a falsehood would prevent inquiries that might He injurious to Her. There eevtain- iy was a great risk of unpleasant conse¬ quences attached to the one she was con¬ sidering ahout ; but she felt persuaded something must be encountered to enable Her to get over Her present embarrassment ; and accordingly, relying on her further in-
vention, and the aid of her auxiliaries at home, to extricate her from any dilemma in which it might place her, she finally de¬ cided on venturing on it ; and accordingly, in reply to Delamore's interrogation of ivhere Grace was, told him, with a signifi¬ cant smile, not tei ask her. " But I must ask you," saicl DelamcTe, hastily setting down the cup of water he had procured, and making a step towards the door. Myra caught hold of him—" Nay, I must beg you not to go out," she said ; " I promised not to let youl' " Not let me !" exclaimed Delamere ; " on what account, may I beg to knovv ?" " Why, because—because Grace didn't like you shoulel see her speaking to that gentleman vve met iust now— ov rather that you should know she was acquainteel with him." " That gentleman ! ivho is he, pray?" " A—a Mr. Falkiner, I believe—do you knovv any thing of him?" " No, nothing—I know there is a fa-
mily of that name living in some part of this county, but I know nothing particu¬ larly about any of them. But why shotdd Graee dislike my knowing she is acquaint- ed with this gentleman ?" " Why, because He is a lover she wants to get rid of." * r A lover—a lover of Graces'" repeat¬ ed Delamere, in a tone indicative of the most violent emotion. " Yes, a lover of some standing:." u And why," asked Delamere, with a quivering lip. vainly trying to check the emotion he was in—* 4 whv trv to get rid of him ?" 44 Indeed I dont know—because, as some people at least say, she thinks she might have a more advantageous ofler.—But here you are making me tell things I knovv I shouldn't—indeed I wish you wouldn't ask me any more questions about the mat¬ ter." " But I must," cried Delamere. in am)- ny ; " if yon wish to relieve me from downright------if you wish to oblige me, '
a little recollecting himself, " you'll tell me all you know of the affair," " Well, I have gone so far, that I don't know how to draw back ; but may I be sure that you'll not mention to any one what I tell you ?" " Assuredly—rely upon it that no un¬ worthy use shall be made of anv confidence reposed in me," " Well, then, some people say ·— -but the fact is, I suppose, not to fatigue you with repeating what people said, vvho perhaps knew nothing of the matter, Grace took some sudden whim into her head respecting him, for after encouraging him for months, and engaging herself to marry him, on his coming of age, before whkh he couldn't marry without the con¬ sent of his parents, just about the period that your return to St. Doulaglts vvas an¬ nounced, she began to make an effort fbr breaking with him." tt And not before ?" " No, not befbre. And do you know
what the consequence of this has been?— Falkiner has got jealous of you." "Of me!" exclaimed Delamere again vvith emotion. " Yes, Grace told me so herself. He accuses her, she says, of trying to break with him, from a hope of your proposing for her, through the intimacy or regard that has always subsisted betiveen you; and that is the reason her apprehension of his accusing her of this to you, and thus injuring her perhaps in your esteem, that she is so unwilling you should know any thing about him. You must have seen how pale she turned on meeting him just now." " No, I acknowledge I did not. If either turned pale, 1 thought it was you that did so." « Me !—yes, I dare say I did ; indeed I felt myself turn pale, I was so agitated by the fright I saw her in: but, silence, liere she comes ! Don't stand so close to me —there, do move away-—lest she shoukl suspect we ivere talking of her."
Delamere did not require to be twice urged to do this ; He hastily turned to¬ wards the garden, as Grace entered, con¬ vinced, if their looks immediately encoun¬ tered, some suspicion must be excited in her mind of what lie had been listening to. But could he give credit to what he had Heard?—vet could He doubt it? —eould He give credit to what in a moment stripped Grace e^f all Her singleness of Heart—Her sincerity—her beautiful ingenuousness— of all that he Had loved and delighted in her for—that in a moment sunk her to the low level of the artful and the selfish ? yet How could he imagine that a tale, so well connected, was the invention ofa mo¬ ment? or, in short, that any one would Have dared to fabricate such a falsehood ? did not eaeh circumstance tend to confirm the truth of what he Had heard ? and in¬ describable was the agony of His soul at the thought—the thought of being disap- pointed ¡n the character of Graee—of her nature being perverted from what nothing
could convince him it was not once; com¬ pared with this, the pain of thinking that in disposition she was indeed an altered beino-, sihdit would Have been the pain of having Her at once come forward to open¬ ly declare she was on the point of giving herself to another. At length, making an effort to command himself, he inquired of Myra whether she felt Herself yet inclined to return home? Agaiu quite on the alert, Myra answered in the affirmative ; convinced, from the looks of Grace, that if she encountered Falkiner again, there was no reason now to fear any thing unpleasant resulting fmm the circumstance. The party accordingly left the cabin, Delamere Had now Hut one arm at His command, the other being in a sling. On quitting the Hotel, Myra had made an ef¬ fort to seize it, but which He adroitly eva¬ ded, for the purpose of making Grace take it ; Hut the case was now reversed—Mvra Had no occasion now to make an attempt ? 3
to possess herself of it—it was voluntarily offered to her. Grace was a little surprised; she saw there was something, but what, she could not possibly divine ; for though slie did not ¿rive Myra credit for all the virtues and amiable qualities she pretended to, she could not believe her capable of the base¬ ness of insinuating any thing against her. at the very moment that she was trying to render her a service. Yet something certainly must have occurred, to occasion so great, so striking an alteration as was visible in the looks and manner of Wil¬ liam. Could it be that there was any gentle reproach from Myra, for inattention to her during the preceding walk ' J in no other way could she account Ibi what slu noticed—no other cause could she assign for it ; and if this vvere the case, there must be a more serious understandiim- be- ? tw r een them than she had hitherto allowed herself to imagine. The incident of the morning recurred to her recollection ; after what she had witnessed in the drawing- ?
????, she now began to wonder how she could have doubted its being so; but she shoulu not, she was sure, but for the man¬ ner in which William Had conducted hioi¬ self to Her at dinner ; well, that was ow¬ ing to mere chance, she was now convin¬ ced, and she resolved not to let herself be deluded into a contrary belief) by any fur¬ ther attention she might accidentally re¬ ceive from him. For those He had paid Her, in the course of the day, He was now evidently trying to make amends to Myra. They laughed, and chatted, and whisper¬ ed, and seemed totally to forget there was any other person of the party, they vvere so entirely engaged and engrossed by each other. ei Ilovv little one can make sure of any thing in life !" thought Grace, as she silent· ly walked by them, or rather after them. Her pace unconsciously slackening, as is the case when vve fall into a meditative mood ; « there was a time when I little thought I should ever Have walked by the* side of William, to be neglected for an-
other ; and yet people are so attaehed to this vvorld, where such painfui changes are continually taking place—vvhere the heart is daily liable to be wounded by disap¬ pointments in friendship ! As the poet says— 4 the friend whose constancy we have put to the test, we should grapple to our Heart with Hoops of steel,' for How r invalu¬ able is such a one ! I Had such a one—so tried, so approved—Hut she is gone, gone to Her native sphere !" and involuntarily the Humid eyes of Graee were raised to the placid face of the evening sky. De¬ lamere chanced to turn his head at the moment; He started, at least Grace thought so, and seemed on the point of speaking to Her, but suddenly checking Himself, his eyes reverted to His companion. Well, this was a proof, a positive proof, that there Had been some little pique between him and Myra on her ac¬ count. Well, she should take care to pre¬ vent any thing of the kind again, for wil¬ lingly she would not be the means of un¬ easiness to William ; and for the purpose,
her best plan would he, she thought, to return home Avithout further delay; hut there was a pang at the thought of thu« entirely, unequivocally giving him up, that maele her shrink a little from it; but she woulel consider about it. and by the morning, perhaps, see fully what was best to be done. At the door of the hotel ^ho parted from her companions, and repaired to her own room. She had hardlv been liere a mo¬ ment, wlien she was followeel by Mvra. impatient to knovv vvhat bael passeei be¬ tween her and Falkiner. Graee informed her ; assuring her, that If the promise she gave him, by her de¬ sire, of hearing from her within an hour or two, was not kept, sbe might depend on seeing him at the hotel. "The wretch!" exclaimed Myra, '* 1 wish, with all my heart, he was in the Mvd Sea, vvith all the rest of the troubled and troublesome spirits eme has heard of' But if I must write, vvhat shall I say to him ?"
44 Thats a curious question," said Grace. " After the long correspondence, by his account, you have had with him, I should suppose you coulel be at no loss to know hovv to address him now." ** How r malicious !" muttered, or mur¬ mured, Myra between Her white teeth; *' but I shall Have my revenge yet for all this.—But then you knovv," she said aloud, " this is to be a renouncing letter, and that is so very different.'' " As you knovv what it is to be, I should presume," interrupted Grace, " you could he at no loss whatever about it ; Having read so much as vou have done, I dare say you recollect the observation, * that it is only when vve are sitting down to write, without being decided on our subject, that we are perplexed about language." Myra gave Her another look, not quite so amiable a one as lady Pentweazle culled up for the painter, and then turned to Her rosewood writing-desk. Her letter was of the most deprecating kind; she as¬ sured Falkiner that her heart was still his
as much as ever ; and in saying so probably did not say what was untrue, and that of course her promise of becoming his would never have been revoked, but for the po¬ sitive commands of her parents, vvho, per¬ suaded that their union would never re¬ ceive the sanction of his familv, had in- sisted on her acceptance of the addresses of Mr. Delamere; she therefore hoped. that since it was not from any abatement of afFection, but absolute compulsion, she broke vvith him, that h i would ttot at¬ tempt to aggravate her unhappiness, by unavailing reproaches or expostulations. The moment she finished it, she sealed it, lest (¡race should ask to hear it ; though if she had, she was quite prepared to give it a new reading. Having sealed, she ap¬ plied to Grace to direet it. u Excuse me/ was the reply ; * 4 I can¬ not possibly do such a thing." " Indeed but you must ; for 1 have burned my fingers in such ι way with the sealing-wax, that 1 ean't do *o myself," Grace still hesitated ; but a dread of
Falkiner s carrying his threat of coming to the hotel, if much longer delayed, and of what perhaps might be the result, at length induced her. The moment Myra Had succeeded in what she required, site ran off. She, at least, was a female that did not do things without Having a reason for them ; she had left Delamere in the drawing-room, and she now returned to him : in crossing the room, she dropped Her letter, but without, of course, appearing conscious oí Having done so. Delamere, However, was not slow in noticing the circumstance. He Hastened to take up the letter; the super¬ scription caught His eye, and he became transfixed with agony, itt the confirmation which all he Had heen trying to doubt re- ceived from seeing it. Yes, with a letter in his Hand, directed in the well-known handwriting of Grace to Falkiner, it was absolutely impossible to any longer dis¬ credit the statement of Myra, as He had every instant felt Himself becoming still more inclined, more tempted to do ; not
from conceiving it was a fabrication of hers, but merely the result of some mis¬ representation of facts from others. tt Dear me, what are you looking at?" exclaimed Myra, suddenly turning round from a window, vvhere something seemed to have attracted her regard for a minute; *' Grace's letter to Falkiner, and which I promised to send for her directly ! How could I be so careless as to drop it ! but you won't tell / and without waiting an¬ other instant, she snatched it out of 1? hand, and ran off to give it to a messenger. * 4 You know what that letter is about, no doubt ?" said Delamere again, vvith ra¬ ther a tremulous lip, on her return; " is— İs it to appoint a meeting?" t * I am sure 1 can't tell. I have only the partial confidence of Graee; that is, 1 know nothing about her aflairs but vvhen slie thinks 1 ean nerve her; but here she comes." A little consideration had induced Graee indeed to descend to the drawing-room ; by absenting herself from her companions,
she feared it might be supposed she was offended by Avhat had occurred in their wav back to the hotel, and not on any ae- count now, from the persuasion she had yielded to, ivould she have Delamere imagine she thought any thing about his attentions. The moment she entered, Delamere hastily turned away to the Avindow at Avhich Mvra had again sta¬ tioned herself. Not spoken to, Grace did not speak ; in silence she took up one of the many boeiks that were scattered about the room, and sat quietly down to read. " What a brilliant thought would it not be," said Mvra suddenlv to Delamere, " to surprise the^m at Mrs. Benson's ! after sending our excuses, our unexpected ap¬ pearance there Avould quite excite a sensa- tion." " No doubt. But then with my arm in a sling?" "Oh, the very circumstance tbat should make you anxious to go ! for you don't know r the interest imparted to the appear¬ ance by the arm being in a sling."
tt Indeed î Then since you assure me ofthis, of course I can't object to going" " Very well then, if you don't, the sooner wc set about preparing, you ado- nizing and I beautifying, the better, for quadrilles, I understand, vvili only be the order of the early part of the evening; and really one caitt endure the burnkin country-dances now, with their up-and- down, cross over, and so forth," " Why, no ; they nre not quite so well calculated for display as the others/ said Delamere, laughing, perhaps a little sar¬ castically. No notice whatever was taken of Grace ; indeed it seemed to her as if thev did not know she was in the apartment Well, no matter ; and she tried to fix her atten¬ tion on her book. In a very short time they returned, equipped for the party. Myra being too tearful of Delamore's changing his mind, to permit herself to lose any time in dressing, as vvithout him she would not go, for reasons, as her coun¬ tryman says.
Lights were by this time brought in, and as Grace glanced at Myra, she cer¬ tainly tliought she looked very pretty. Myra now chose to appear conscious that she was in the room.—" And What do you think of my dress ?" she demanded, as she twirled herself round to let her view it. " This rose-coloured crape h certainly, 1 think, beauteous!—But, dear me! after all, what's the reason you are not coming Avith us? 'Tis really quite stupid your staying here by yourself;" turning to De¬ lamere to let him throw her shawl over her as she spoke, and then seizing his arm, without waiting for any reply from Grace, she vanished. But all the gratification she anticipated to her vanity did not await lier at Mrs. Benson's; lorel Enniskerry, one of the most elegant Corinthians of the day, had put in the preceding one in his elegant yacht to Strandmore ; and as he was loi¬ tering about the walk leading down im¬ mediately to the beach, the little Steyne 1 of the place, he was attracted by our
party from St. Douhigl.V, he inquired who they vvere, and being told, in a gene¬ ral way, Mrs. Mayfield and Her daughters, of course concluded that Grace, vvho chan¬ ced this evening to join the set, and vvho was the person indeed that Had drawn his attention to the party, was one of the fa¬ mily. He knew Mrs. Benson; and on hearing of her party, put ofl* his departure, ibr the sake of obtaining an introduction to the dark-eyed beauty that had so charmed him. The moment he entered, at his particular request he was introduced to Mrs. Mayfield, and by her to her daugh¬ ters; but in vain He looked about him for the charmer of the preceding evening: at length, unable to control His «mxiety, to know whether He should see her, any longer, he inquired of Mrs. Mayfield whe¬ ther her other lovely daughter was not expected ? "My youngest girl?—my daughter Myra?" said Mrs. Mayfield, every feature beaming with delight, and casting her eyes round her, to see whether any one was
sufficiently near to have heard the elating inquiry—" you compliment her, my lord; but I am sorry to say she will not be here to-night ; she remains at home, out of kind¬ ness to a young friend who was prevented by indisposition from coming." " How amiable !" observed his lordship, but in a tone of evident chagrin; £e but while vve admire the motive that occasions her absence, vve cannot but regret the cir¬ cumstance." Mrs. Mayfield bowed; she was all rap¬ ture to be so singled out—Have sueh com¬ pliments paid ; really it was enough to elevate her. But how unfortunate that Myra did not come, distinguished as she doubtless would have been, from what had occurred, Ly his lordship. She did not ac¬ tually knovv whether He was a marrying man or no, but his evinced admiration, whether serious or not, eould Hardly have failed of leading to agreeable consequences —of making her more the fashion, and doubtless an object of still greater attrac¬ tion to Delamere; and, in short, she he-
<ntn to think she would dispatch her brother for Her, with instructions to let her know iier reason for sending for Her, Having made up lier mind to this, she was in the act of holding up Her fan to beckon Him to Her, when there was a flight Hustle, or pressure, near Ine door, md Miss Myra Mayfield and Mr. Dela¬ mere were announced. Was ever any thing so delightful! Had Mvra Had my secret intimation or whisper of being io much wished for, that she came thus unlooked for, and looking so beautiful? She instantly Hastened to meet ber, lord Enniskerry Having that instant left Her, to pay His compliments to some one else in the room, and proceeded to tell hereof all that Had passed, namely, Her own intro¬ duction to His lortlship, and His particular and flattering inquiries after Her (Myra), and the absolute agonv into which He was O m' thrown on hearing she was not expected. Myra listened to Her with greedy ears. —" And, dear ine," she cried, with a sim¬ per and side glance at Delamere, on whose
arm she continued leaning, to see how he was affected by hearing of the admiration she had excited, i( I am sure I never thought,'* trying to look bashful, " that lord Enniskerry Had noticed me in the least; or at least more particularly than " He's coming !" said her mother, touch¬ ing Her arm, and directly stepping for¬ ward to meet Him.— ít Well, my lord," she said, tí I am happy to tell you I am able to introduce my daughter Myra to you, whom you vvere so good as to Honour by your recent inquiries. She's just come in—most unexpectedly released from the restraint she Had imposed upon Herself.— Myra, my dear!" turning, to bring the young lady forward. Lord Enniskerry stared for a minute, with a vacant look, as if she had been say¬ ing something he did not clearly compre¬ hend ; he then bowed, and expressed, or rather muttered, his Happiness at the in¬ troduction, and, in short, did and said all that is usual on sueh occasions ; but that
was all—there was no look of rapture, no eager pressing forward to take the fair hand of Myra; and both mother and daugiiter were decidedly disappointed ; but after the manner in which he had expressed Himself about her, there could He no doubt but that He must be de¬ lit» h ted at the introduction; and under the idea of this, and the attentions it led Her to expect from Him, Myra began to recover from the damping effect which his little manifestation of emotion on her be¬ ing presented to Him, Had Had upon Her vanity.—" What an enviable Heing must )ou be considered, my dear madam," said his lordship, suddenly addressing Himself to Mrs. Mayfield, after a silence of a few minutes on His part, '* in being the mother of so many lovely daughters!" Mrs. Mayfield bowed, and smiled, and fanned berseli*, and looked at Mvra, and from her to Delamere, and from Him round the circle, and then again turned to the peer. VOL. IIL 1)
" But won't your other beautiful daugh¬ ter He" Here to-night?" His lordship pro¬ ceeded to ask. "My othei daughter!" repeated Mrs. Mavfield·—" I Have no daughter at Strand- more but what is now present." " Then of course I have been led into a mistake, and the Heautifui creature tlmt made one of your party last evening on the Steyne is not your daughter." " Beautiful creature!" cried Mrs. May- field, again involuntarily repeating His words. " Yes; the young lady I mean had a very large straw bonnet on, but which could not conceal, or rather prevent being discovered, one of the finest faces in the world; for a glimpse of it was sufficient tt) raise a curiosity thai could not be satis- tied without a complete view." lf any tiling could add to the mortifica¬ tion of finding, that alter all Graee was the real object of His admiration, it was the circumstance of Delamere also learn- in»* it. Mrs. Mayfield, with all her com-
mand of herself, trembled Avith passion, and the rosy lips of Myra became for an instant of a li viei hue; and well may we here exclaim, speaking, as we are, of the hideous effects of envy, " Oh, blest indee í ??? thev who can hear Sii»hs for anothei with unuouodul e.ti !" Careless of the mortification he occa¬ sioned, lorel Enniskerry quickly turned on his 1 1 eed : he was one of those indeed who haei a most happy indifference about every one's feelings but his own. Grace quite occupied bis fancy ; and having succeeded in learning all that was requisite of her, he m ide his exit from tbe assembly, to try whether he could not obtain another glimpse of her, or perhaps an opportunity of introducing himself to her, to the no small disappointment of many others there, as well as of the Mayfield party. Of course there was no counter attraction to detain him; for as for the pretty little pink and white girl, whom hen* mamma chose to suppose he meant by wbat he had said, ? 2
He would as soon Have made love to one of the wax dolls which she resembled, as to Her. He Had a delightful band on board his yacht. They were presentlv summoned, and took their station imme¬ diately opposite the windows of the apart¬ ment occupied at the instant by Grace at the Hotel. Grace almost directly threw aside the book with which she had been trvino- to divert Her thoughts, and removing the lights to the Hack of the apartment, step¬ ped out into the balcony, to enjoy the de¬ licious strains that met Her ear, little aware of their being solely intended for it, as a lure to bring Her forward. The lights be¬ hind ??? would have been sufficient to Have rendered Her figure visible ; but they were not required for the purpose, a full- orbed moon sinning full upon the spot on which she stood, so that she was entirely reveakd to the view ; and as she stood motionless for a few minutes, entranced by the delightful melody she lieard, with the silver light of tlie moon shed upon her
dress, the ardent and romantic imagina¬ tion of lord Enniskerry could almost have iancied she was a dei tv. to whom thev vvere offering up the incense of adoration, in strains of Heavenly Harmony. Groups soon became collected about the hotel ; but Grace hardly noticed any thing, so absorbed was she by the music—so per¬ fectly in union ; for, as may readily be imagined, the airs selected for Her ear were those of the most seductive, the most impassioned description, with the hour, the scene—now dying avvay, at intervals, upon the enchanted ear, so as to permit the heaving sound of the billows breaking upon the shore to be distinctly heard— then swelling a^ain into strains of ????- deur, calculated to raise the soul to hea¬ ven. So engaged, so engrossed, she H. ed- ed not the approach of any one, and, oi course, was somewhat surprised at sud¬ denly Hearing Delamere behind iier. He knew the character of lord Ennis¬ kerry, and on suddenly missing Him from the party, instantly conceived a suspicion
of the truth ; he tried to suppress the tor¬ ture it excited, but in vain. Lord Ennis¬ kerry was young, gay, handsome, agree¬ able; and, in short, Delamere could not rest vvithout going to the hotel. What he witnessed there was not calculated to allay the agitation of the moment ; he rushed up to the apartment vvhere Grace was ; the yellow-tinging plague was boiling in his veins, and had he yielded to the impulse of his feelings, he would instantly have drawn her in from the balcony. Not able, however, to entirely command him¬ self—** You are kind to lord Enniskerry/ he said, " by letting him see that his gal¬ lantly is not unnoticed." " Kind!" said Grace, involuntarily re¬ peating the expression, through her sur¬ prise at hearing him so suddenly, and half turning in from the balcony—** I don't understand you—who is lord Enniskerry ?" " You don't knovv !" " No." Delamere did not choose to explain. " If/ resumed Grace, after waiting a
minute for the reply she expected, " you mean to insinuate that the music here is intended as a compliment to me, whoever the person is that thought of such a one, they could not possibly have paid me a more agreeable one." "Indeed!" saiel Delamere; but not in a tone quite as complacent as His usual one. " Yes, I delight in music; and from its effeet upon my own feelings, can well give credit to all that Has been ascribed to its wondrous power. But vvere the re¬ verse the cast 1 , I should not like to ac¬ knowledge it, after what Shakespeare Has said on the subject, of those who have no taste for harmony. But you too are fond of the e concord of sweet sounds." " Yes, very—I believe so." " Believe so ! you must He greatly, and very suddenly altered too, ifyou are not." " Perliaps so------" but hardly knowing what he was saying, as He paced the room under the mosi" violent agitation— *' I hardly know what 1 ?;? tond of—what I ought to be fond of! would that I did'
it would be well for me—well for us all, in a world vvhere there is so much of de¬ ception, such constant deception, if vve eould at once ascertain what, or whom, were deserving of our regard and love ! Why—why have vve not the power of looking into the human breast? why of not detecting deception till the pangs it inflicts have fastened on the heart?" " Rather say/ cried Grace, vvho could not avoid thinking, from the manner in vvhich it was uttered, that something more was meant by this speech than met the ear, " why should vve be always in apprehension of it, as you seem to inti¬ mate vve should ? are vve not instructed— is it not onc of the most divine precepts of Christianity, to judge as we would be iudged? and hovv, confident in our own integrity, sliould vve Hke to be regarded vvith the scowling brow of distrust and constant misg; /ing ? Besides, to yield to buch fiVings—is it not to impoison happi¬ ness, and make this world a still greater wilderness than sorrow teaches us to con«
sider it? A suspicious temper is an anti¬ dote to all enjoyment, a blighting mildew, that despoils every thing of its natural beauty and fragrance, and then, so con¬ trary to all that wc conceive of real gene¬ rosity. No, let not man, 1 W ))ύ wears sweet smiles, .uni looks t-iect on ?????'--- let Him not wrong the nobleness of his nature, by giving way to so odious a feel¬ ing—a feeling calculated to deaden and destroy every sympathy ; in the conscious¬ ness ofthat nobleness, let him walk abroad with caution, but not distrust." Delamere Had involuntarily stopped to listen to her ; and as He listened to her, and gazed on her, she seemed to him, in what she was saying, to be unconsciously pleading her own cause.—" And sure," he cried within himself, " something holy must dwell within the breast from which such sentiments emanate!" and again a doubt of the truth, ol* the reality of all he had recently heard and believed, began to n $
suggest itself; and yielding to its influ¬ ence, he took her hand, and ivas gently drawing her away, out of sight of those who Avere still stationed outside the vvin- doAv, when in bolted young Mayfield, al¬ most breathless, upon them, dispatched hy his alarmed mamma after Delamere, on missing him from the room.—" Why, what a deuced fright you have given us all ,M he exclaimed, addressing himselt to Delamere; # * the moment my mother missed you, she conceived you ivere taken ill, and sent me off to leam." " I am much obliged by her anxiety about me," said Delamere ; " but, no, I was not ill.** " I am glad to hear it, both on your account and my own ; for youll have no objection then to return with me?" ** No, excuse mc, I'd rather not." " But I really can't—tlmt is, if I do, it must be at the expence of a most agree¬ able evening ; for it is tlie positive com¬ mand of our lady governante that I do not return without you," and he spoke
with almost a little degree of petulance; for amongst the beauty and fashion that night at Mrs. Benson's was a young lady, the heiress of a few thousands, wlio had smiled in sueh a way at his sweet no¬ things, as to induce him to think, if he did not neglect bib chances, there might be hope fbr him. Delamere hesitated, and looked anxi¬ ously in the eyes of Grace ; but there was nothing in them to induce, or rather, in¬ vite him to stay; she did not understand the capricious kind of manner in vvhich he had latterly seemed to treat her, and feel¬ ing hurt by it, could not avoid looking otherwise than cold at the moment, tt Very well," said Delamere to May- field,, seeing there was no relenting in her looks, " rather than you should be disappointed through my means------ " anel they left the room together.—" And hovv well it was I was interrupted as I was ¥* thought Delamere, as they pursued their way back to Mrs. Benson's ; *' for, but for it, in what a dilemma might I have placed
? myself, from the feelings I should pro¬ bably have given way to! Graee might, perhaps, have induced me to make some confession, that the reverting of my thoughts to Falkiner would not have per¬ mitted me to profit by. How could I forget—how could I suflfer myself to be so agitated, as to forget him? hovv allovv myself to give way to any jealous emotion, about a vvoman of vvhose indifference I was not only long since assured, but of Her having now an encouraged lover? Well, we shall not be much longer do¬ mesticated together, and I shall take care, vvhen we part, not to put myself again in the way of similar feelings." The same was Grace's resolve, for a mo¬ ment after His leaving the room, írom conceiving, as was the ease, that he had looked to her for some encouragement to remain. She regretted not having given it—but it was only for a moment: if he wished to converse with her, to have any private or particular conversation, he could easily obtain opportunities for the purpose,
she reflected, and therefore felt pleaded that she had acted as she had done: hut to shew him she was not to be treated itrîi-ll fliic rtnr\M/iiAii(î|iuoc tï'oe *ì/-»< out f-ìri-iun*· Willi tilia vuj/iiV/iMU^iivin ,.«»>? iiwi »?????, his present manner oí' conducting himself so agitated Her nerves, as to make her finally resolve upon no longer delayino her return home.
CHAPTER III.
Hear me a httle,
For I have onI\ bt*u» silent ?? long, And given wav unto this course of fortune, By notmo of the lady. I ha^e mark'd A thousand blushing apparitions To s'art into her ùica; a thousand innocent shames. In angel whiteness, bear away those blushes; And in her e^e there hath appear'd a fire, To burn the e t rors that ba\e been held Against her uuth." Delamere was woke the next morning to read a letter from Falkiner, requesting a few minutes* conversation ivith him as soon as he rose. The fact was, that com¬ pletely imposed on by My ra's letter, Fal¬ kiner took it into his head to make an ap¬ peal to the generosity of Delamere, be¬ lieving if he could be induced to give her up, he need not fear every thing yet turn¬ ing out according to his wishes. Delamere immediately rose to receive
him. But what could be the object of the required interview? He began to suspect the truth, and could not avoid wishing, in conseciuence, that Falkiner had taken some 1 ' other method of appealing to him, lest he should not be able to command himself suf¬ ficiently to avoid betraying the too great interest he felt for Her he anticipated his being about implored to resign : but he had promised to see Falkiner, and an in¬ terview being inevitable, He endeavoured to collect himself accordingly for it. Falkiner did not keep him long in sus¬ pense, as to the purpose for which he had solicited tiiis interview; he was agitated and confused, but still too impatient to be relieved from the anxietv He was under, not to come quickly to the point. After a suitable compliment to Delaraere, he frankly acknowledged his object in seek¬ ing him was, to endeavour to obtain his resignation of a lady to whom he had rea¬ son to believe they both aspired; but cer¬ tainly he was warranted in saying, not with exactly equal pretensions, her affec-
tions having been long his, and the pro¬ mise of lier hand only revoked through the authority of her family. Delamere started. This Avas letting in a new light on the subject. Was it really true then that her connexions had inter¬ fered in the matter, and that to their persua¬ sions, or rather, commands, it was, and not to any lessening suggestion of her own, that Grace had been led to endeavour to dis¬ entangle herself from the engagement she had entered into with this young man ? Well, this certainly retrieved her com¬ pletely in his estimation, and at the same time accounted for all those changes of manner that had alternately inspired him with hope and depressed him with appre¬ hension; yes, he could now account for Avhat appeared awaking tenderness over confirmed indifference ; love and duty had created a conflict in her feelings, occa¬ sioned a struggle in her heart; and to tliis was owing all that had so agitated liim : she wished to submit to the wishes of lier family, but her heart rebelled against their
authority. Yet, spite of her present in¬ voluntary opposition to it, might she not yet be brought to acquiesce in it, if she found nothing was done to render the fur¬ ther exertion of it useless, with regard to Falkiner, by iiis refusing to attend to his appeal? and could he think, could he pre¬ vail on himself to think of availing himself of such a circumstance to possess himself ofa cold, lifeless, heartless form ? cxnfid he, who professed to love Grace so tenderly— could he bear to think of being the means of planting a thorn in her bosom, never to be extracted ? Yet, to give her tip- to resign her irrevocably to another—tear from his İKMrt the hope so long rooted there, of yet calling her his—that hope, that had so grown up, and entwined, and intertwisted itself with every other, that in tearing it np he shoulel feel as if tearing away every other!—but it must be done, and after the pause of a minute, an una¬ vailing pause, to try and subdue the agony of his feelings, he gave Falkiner the required assurance, namely, that he need be under
no further apprehension of any disappoint¬ ment to his happiness through his means. Falkiner ivould have been profuse in his grateful acknoAvledgments, but Dela¬ mere, the tortured Delamere, could com¬ mand himself no farther; and the air of impatience ivith which he hastily, as well as involuntarily, ivithdrew from these ac¬ knowledgments, Avas a hint to the other to retire, Restless, and unhappy in her mind, Grace passed an uneasy night, and quitted her chamber in the morning with an in¬ tention of trying what a few turns on the beach would do for her. Just as she reached the hall, Delamere was coming out from the parlour where he had receiv¬ ed Falkiner. On seeing her, he was in¬ stinctively drawing back, unable to en¬ dure encountering her looks till he had a little better recovered himself, ivhen the voice of Myra w r as heard calling to him over the banisters, and glad of any pre¬ text for avoiding Grace for the present, he
directly darted past her, and up the stair¬ case. Feelings of the most painful nature transfixed Grace for a minute to the spot; his attempt to draw baek on seeing Her was not lost upon her; she might not, however, have imputed it to any positive wish to avoid her, but for his subsequent conduct vvith regard to Myra ; his joining her the instant she called to him, w r as a proof to Grace that his draw¬ ing back into the parlour at her sight was not owing to any sudden recolleetion of business within it, but entirely to a wish to avoid her ; and to speak the pang inflicted Hy the thought would be impos¬ sible. The purpose for which she had de¬ scended to the hall was forgotten—she re¬ turned to Her room in a state of confusion and distress, that obliged her to sit down for some minutes to try and recover her¬ self. Hovv did she regret not having had re¬ solution to leave S tran d more before! had she done so, she should Have saved Herself
the recent shock ; but she would not, by lingering any longer where she was, ex¬ pose herself to the recurrence of a similar one. No matter through what motive William wished to avoid her—whether for the purpose of letting her understand what his real sentiments for Myra were, from a dawning suspicion of what hers were becoming for him, or to humour some jealous whim of Myra's—she would not permit him again to let her see that he wished to do so ; she was decided on her immediate departure—that very morn¬ ing she would return home. Tears could not be suppressed ; she was weeping even bitterly, when she was sur¬ prised by Mrs. Hamilton, much alarmed by her sending down to excuse herself from appearing at breakfast.—" Why, what's the matter, my dear ?" she said ; " you are not ill, I hope ?" " No, not ill/ trying to hide her tears with her handkerchief, replied Grace, " only a—a—slight headach ; but I am glad you have come up, for I wanted to
tell you I am going Home this morning." " This morning !" repeated Mrs. Ha¬ milton in an accent of surprise; " why, vvhats the meaning of this? this is cer¬ tainly a very sudden whim ! ' u No whim," cried Grace; u I cannot think of being any longer absent from my father." " Pooh ! a few days more can be no great matter—vve shall all be leaving this now in a few more ; and your going avvay now vvill be quite a breaking up of the pleasure of the party." " OH, on that score we'll say nothing!" cried Grace, with a smile of bitterness. " Well, at least," said Airs. Hamilton, evincing by this expression that she per¬ fectly understood Her, " you won't pre¬ tend to doubt that your persisting in your resolution will be the occasion of pain to William?" " To Him! to William!" repeated Grace, in an emphatic tone ; " oh no, not to him i to Him perhaps least of any. No, no !" starting from her chair, and
pacing the room in irrepressible emotion, "William no longer cares about me—no longer cares for any of his friends at the castle I" tt Y'ou think so? Well, did I ever hear the Hke of this !" exclaimed Mrs. Hamilton—" to tell me that William cares no longer for you, or any of his other friends at the castle í what on earth has put such a thing into your head ?" " No matter—don't ask me !" cried Grace, in a voice almost choked vvith emotion. ** But I must ask you, because I don't like to have injustice done to any one." " Injustice!" (r Yes ; for in doubting the regard of William you are guilty of the greatest If I pleased, I could soon convince you of this : what would you say if 1 told you, that but for him you would not have had the happiness of embracing your brother so soon as you now expect ?" " What, is he the generous being to whom Eugene is indebted fbr his release
from thc horrors of perpetual imprison¬ ment ?" "■ Troth is he—I was enjoined to sc- erecv, but the truth will out. The mo- ment 1 found William had the povver of eloing what I wished, I vvrote him the whoie story, and, as 1 expected, he lost not a moment in hastening to release his friend; anel if this is not a prøof of re¬ gard------" " A proof !" repeated Grace, with her clasped hands, and streaming eyes uplift¬ ed to heaven, as if calling deivvn a bless¬ ing on him.—" But why, why allow mc to remain so long in ignorance of this? Oh, had I sooner known it, what cap- tiousness of feeling might have been pre¬ vented !—But my heart vvill burst if I longer delay to speak its grateful feelings to him !" and darting from the room, she flew down stairs, and meeting a waiter, sent a message to Delamere, requesting to speak to him for a few minutes. She had seen Falkiner then, and want¬ ed to express her acknowledgments to
him for the happiness he had afforded her, was the thought that struck Dela¬ mere the moment he received her mes¬ sage. Hovv could he bear these acknow¬ ledgments? but it was not to be avoided what she desired; and he accordingly pro¬ ceeded to the apartment vvhere he under¬ stood she was expecting him. tt I have disturbed you at your break¬ fast/ she said on his entering, " but I felt it impossible to control the impulse that has occasioned me to do so; but I cannot give utterance to the feelings that urged me to send for you ; it is but this instant I have learned what I am indebted to you for—the happiness------but you may, you must conceive what it is, and what my gratitude must ever be to him who has allowed me to experience such." Delamere tunu d pale —he had not ex¬ pected such an unequivocal acknowledg¬ ment of her attachment for Falkiner; for still labouring under his mistake about him, he referred all she said to hiir, and his emotion at th« 1 circumstance vvas hard-
ly controllable. Something, however, it was necessary to say, and he accordingly forced himself to articulate, that being the means of happiness to her must be a source of happiness to him. " Yes, I am convinced of that," said Grace ; " but I will not detain you longer, only just to thank you for your kind- nessess while Here, for I am about return¬ ing home ; my poor father can no longer spare me, I am sure. May 1 not," she added, a little anxiously, " give him the happiness of thinking He'll soon see you ?" " I know not," saicl Delamere, his feel¬ ings, spite of all his efforts at resistance, overpowering him—" I am undecided, unsettled, about every thing; perhaps I shall never return to St. Doulaglts." " Never !" echoed Grace, in a voice of dismay; "and------" but she checked the inquiry. He had made some discovery, she was sure, about Myra and Falkiner, and to this the pain, the shock, it occa¬ sioned, was owing the wretchedness he VOL. IIL E
betrayed ; and in her turn, she grew pale, and turned sick, at this evidence of strong attachment to another.—" That Avould be a terrible disappointment to many," after a long pause she added. " It might be so ; but with all my hopes, my plans of happiness, subverted, for what sliould I return to it? No—bet¬ ter for me to go to a place where nothing will remind me of the felicitv I have been disappointed of.—Oh, Grace!" suddenly seizing her hand, " you are not to be blamed for it, for the affections are not at our command ; but you have rendered me a miserable man." " I !" exclaimed Grace, absolutely elec¬ trified—" I render you miserable !" " You appear surprised—did you then imagine that my long-rooteei feelings for you had undergone a change, so sudden a change, that I could bear the disappoint¬ ment of the hopes, the wishes, they gave 4 birth to, with composure? 1 tried, I re M)lveel, to be silent on the subject, lest complaint shoulel be construed into re-
proach ; but the agitation of my mind has borne down all befbre it," " Oh ! if indeed any unhappiness you arc suffering is owing to me," cried Grace, in extreme emotion—" if to any doubt of my regard it is owing, what is there I would not do to convince you that in doubting it you wrong me? can I say more than that, if really essential to your felicity to possess this------" She paused, overpowered by her feelings, and halfaverted her looks, while involuntarily she stretched out her hand to him. Instead however of havino- it camdi t with the eagerness she expected, Dela¬ mere shrunk back —" What is it you want me to imagine?" he demanded, in a tone indicative of the agitation he was iu; '* do you want me to imagine, that for my sake you are ready to give up all your own hopes and expectations oí happiness? No, Grace, no! if such is your meaning, 1 have no claim to such a sacrifice; nor if 1 had, would I accept it, after wdiat has ι: 2
occurred ; with the knovvledge I have of your sentiments, the world could not now induce me to accept your Hand." The bright flush of joy, and surprise, and reviving hopes, faded from the cheek of Graee; she turned ofa deadly paleness, and Her heart, at the same instant, of an icy coldness. She had needlessly tormented herself about Him : His love, his affections, were still unalienated from her; but of what use to find she Had been labouring under a mistake with regard to His senti¬ ments, if He obstinately refused to be un¬ deceived vvith regard to hers? were Her looks, Her manner, so unintelligent as to give no indication of what these really were ? or was it, that his priele had been so seriously, so deeply wounded by the indifference intimated by the manner in which she had Heen led to express herself in breaking with Him, that no after re¬ lenting or retracting could be of any avail, or, in short, avowal or acknowledgment of reciprocal regard? What was to be done ? could she endure their both being
doomed to misery through this persistance in error or pique? Yet, Hovv could she argue the point with Him? hovv try to reason hirn into the acceptance of her hand ? Impossible ! such a thing was not to be thought of; the delicacy of feminine feeling, as well as manifold other consi¬ derations, revolted and militated against it : yet, to see happiness within her reach, and still unattainable, was a trial that in¬ deed required all her philosophy, her firm¬ ness, her strength of mind, to enable Her to support with calmness. Through the emotion she was in, Her hand got somehow entangled in the black ribbon to which was appended the locket containing the raven Hair of William, and drew it from its concealment. The quick eye of William was instantly caught by it—it was indeed well remembered by him, being sent to Her from Dublin, ?? his going up there to embark for Eng¬ land, there being no place near St. Dou¬ laglts to Have the hair set at.—" Well, this is kind, Graee," He said, taking hold
of it ; "I see you did not then altogether want to Hanish me your recollection. But you would have been ungrateful had you thrown this aside, for see hovv carefully I Have preserved and treasured this;" and He shewed Her her own long tress still wound round his wrist. Grace sighed involuntarily—" Ah, those vvere Happy days in vvhich that was given !" she as involuntarily said. " Yes," cried William, " for they were days in which I indeed looke 1 forward to happy ones." " Life was then just opening to our view, in all its freshness," again sighed Grace; "and, like children in a flower- garden, little a Wc t that all that is so de¬ licious to their senses will yet fade and die away : we looked round on its varied en¬ joyments with heightened delight, from our ignorance of their unsubstantial and illusive nature." " Illusive indeed !" sighed Delamere.— " But give me that locket, Grace ; you'll soon cease to value it any further."
" If you think so," said Grace, " you are right in asking it back; and if you really wish to have it-—" Her lip slightly trembled as she applied her hand to the ribbon. "Yet, no!" cried Delamere; "you'll not throw it aside—you'll not possibly be asked to throw it aside entirely, and it will sometimes perhaps be the means of calling a friend to your memory, who could ill bear to think of being entirely forgotten by you." " And yet you can talk of quitting us all !" said Grace, reproachfully ; " well, no matter. But whatever you may finally decide on, you will not—you cannot be so unkind as to—to------" her agitation became every moment less controllable— " without letting my father Have the hap¬ piness of thanking you for what you have done." " Your fii ther !" repeated Delamere, with a bewildered look ; for still in his er« ror about Falkiner, he knew not what it was he had to thank him for, since he
could not suppose, from what he had heard, that his appearing to aid the wishes of Falkiner, by resigning any pretensions it might have been imagined he had to Grace, could have obliged him. <f Yes," replied Graee, with a look of surprise at his expression of perplexity ; " it would be strange, I think, if he did not wish for a personal opportimity of ex¬ pressing his gratitude for so great an obli¬ gation as that of the restoration of his son to him." " His son ! what, is it to Eugene you have been alluding all this time ?" ít Yes ; to whom else did you sup¬ pose ?" " I thought------but how, or rather, by what means, have you discovered that I was concerned in the enlargement of your brother? but I think I ean guess." " And I think I can guess what your surmise is," said Grace; *' yes, it was through Mrs. Hamilton I discovered the circumstance—she was betrayed into the disclosure; and while I must admire, and
duly appreciate, the feeling that enjoined her silenee on the subject, I can hardly forbear being half angry with her for so long keeping us in ignorance of the obli¬ gation we owe you. Well," seeing hira look impatient, " I will not dwell further on it ; I may as well indeed be silent, for what I feel I cannot do justice to." " And you really will leave us this morning?" said Delamere. 44 Yes," answered Grace, w r ith a sigh, " I think I should not be any longer ab¬ sent from home." CG Of course you'll not depart vvithout first seeing------" He paused, unable to bring Himself immediately to articulate the name. " Who ?" demanded Grace, after wait ing a minute in expectation of His finish¬ ing the sentence—" without first seeing whom ?" " Need I say ? I thought you must in¬ stantly have surmised wdio I meant." " No, really I have not the least idea." e 3
" Then, of course, you have had no in¬ timation of what occurred this morning; if you had, you would have been at no loss to conjecture; but 1 conclude you'll not be allowed to depart vvithout hearing of it." " You are speaking in riddles to me,' said Grace ; " do be more explicit—what is it you seem to think I must hear before I depart ? or vvho the person I shall see ? For a minute William turned awa) impatiently from her—" Falkiner/ he then said; " with the communication he- has to make, of course he'll never let you leave this vvithout first seeing him." 44 Indeeel ! then I should think it a most extraordinary proceeding, his attempting to detain me for the purpose; for he can¬ not possibly suppose that 1 can feel any great interest in the conœrns of so sliglit an acquaintance." " So slight an acquaintance !" repeated Delamere, recoiling a few paces, as if to have a better opportunity of gazing in her countenance, to see whether she was jest-
ing in this assertion—" Falkiner a slight acquaintance !" " Yes ; so slight a one as hardly to re¬ ceive a recognising bow from me." " Am I to believe you serious in what you say?" cried Delamere, again ap¬ proaching lier ; " yet no, I cannot." " Yet I never was more serious in any assertion," saiel Grace. " May I really believe you ?" again de¬ manded Delamere, with increasing emo¬ tion ; " yet, after what I have heard, what I have seen—after holding in my hanel a letter directed to him, in yours—no!" with a flush of indignant feeling colouring his cheek—" no, it is impossible !" " A letter directed by mc to Falkiner!' exclaimed Grace ; " good Heavens ! can it be------" but checking herself—" let me know how that letter fell into your hanels and I shall then be better able to judge what I am to think." Delamere informed her; and in utter amazement at what she heard, (irace up¬ lifted her hands and eyes—" Well," she
said, " this almost exceeds belief! that any one, more especially one of my own sex, my own age, could be capable of such baseness, such deliberate treachery !" " Then all I was led to give credit to about Falkiner is false?" said Delamere. "False!" repeated Grace, vvitli almost a look of indignant anger at his Having a doubt on the subject. " How shall I command myself?" cried the agitated William ; " this is indeed ------" " The fact is simply this------" resumed Grace. " No, no !" interrupted Delamere, grasp¬ ing her Hand, " I can listen to no expla¬ nation; I must first be assured, beyond a doubt, that I am under no mistake, no delusion—that vou are indeed free—at li- m' berty to bestow your hand where you please. Yet, of what consequence to me, after all the assurance, after the avowal of vour eold, your icy indifference tovvards mc? OH, Grace! hovv could you write røe so mortifying a letter ?" Vexed at the sudden change in His
tone, his reverting to what she no longer desired to remember, Grace, a little im¬ patiently, tried to pull avvay her hand from him, as she tunied to a window. '* Yet, perhaps you did not mean 1 should put the construction upon it I did," he proceeded—" did you, Grace—tell me?" and he looked vvith the most anxious fondness in her face; "or say, if all was to do again, would you write me such a letter?" " What, a letter to give you up? to be sure 1 would !" said Grace. " You would !" cried William, drop¬ ping her hand, and again recoiling a few paces from her. " Assuredly, if matters vvere all now exactly as they vvere then ; for do you think I would stand between you and for¬ tune ? the only difference is/ slightly he¬ sitating, " that now perhaps I might not be so prompt or decisive," and she blush¬ ed, and smiled, and glanced half archly at William, and half bent her eves to the ground, " in writing as I was then."
44 Enough !" exclaimed the transported Delamere, catching iier to his breast Avith sudden ecstacy—-her on Avhom his heart had so long doated, to ivhom liis soul had so long cleaved, for Avliom liis love had grown with his growth, and strengthened Avith his strength, till it had become a feel¬ ing not to be subdued. " What is the Avorld to happy lovers ?" demands the poet, and he might have added, " time ;" for in vain Mrs. Mayfield sat, expecting William's return to break¬ fast, in vain Mrs. Hamilton Grace's to the chamber, from which she had fled so pre¬ cipitately. At length the patience of the latter ex¬ hausted, or rather, not being under the restraint which policy obligeel the otlier to impose upon herself, siie sallied forth in quest of the young lady : a Avaiter in¬ formed her where she might find her, and Avithout ceremony she entered the apart¬ ment. But though she could not ima¬ gine that by either she would be consi¬ dered as an intruder, yet there was a
something that convinced her slie had been an interruption to a most interesting tête-à-tête. The persuasion naturally led to the conclusion of an agreeable under¬ standing having taken place between the lady and gentleman, and the consequence instantly anticipated from this filled her with delight, there being hardly any thing she had more at heart than a union be¬ tween Grace and William, from the ma¬ ternal affection she felt ibr both.— "θο here you are," she saiel, " quietly seated together, whiie we have been all wonder and astonishment to think what had be¬ come of you both ! But come, 1 won't set an example of scolding, for by this time," glancing at William, " I suppose there is a fine one in store for me, for the discovery I made to Grace.™ " No," replied William, " I am at this instant in that complacent state of mind, that I think it would be hardly possible for any thing to provoke me to any thing like ill-nature—just in that happy humour Avith myself and all the Avorld, that Yo-
rick describes himself to have been in whe» he says, had he been king of France, it would have been just the minute for an orphan to have asked him for his father's portmanteau/ * t Well, I am happy to hear this/ said Mrs. Hamilton ; " it quite dissipates the terror I was in of having incurred your highness's displeasure : and Grace, I hope she's in a not less agreeable mood ; since, if so, she'll not refuse staying the few days longer vve have to remain here/ William took Grace's hand. i( Well, yes, perhaps I may be prevailed on/ she said, half laughing, and colouring, and attempting to withdraw it ; " but go, it is really quite time for you to finish your breakfast, or, at least, to allow poor Mrs. May field to finish hers, vvho all this time has, I dare say, been waiting for you/ " And you/ cried William, " won't you come too ?" " Oh no/ said Mrs. Hamilton, inter¬ posing, too impatient to learn hovv matters had been brought about again between
them, to let Grace join the party ; " on her refusing to come down to breakfast, I ordered it above for her, and there it is now waiting." " Very well, I must go then by my¬ self: but remember, I give you timely notice, if you keep long away, you may expect to have me seeking you," " Well, now tell me all about it," cried Mrs. Hamilton, as she hurried her up to the room Avhere breakfast Avas waiting her. " About what?" said Grace, Avith a sly smile, affecting not to understand her. " About what !" repeated Mrs. Hamil¬ ton, her very cheeks colouring from impa¬ tience—" Avhy, how this happy reconcili¬ ation has been brought about between you and ?\ ? illiam ? But I see you knew well enough what I meant ; it is only to amuse yourself you pretended ignorance." ** Well, you shall hear," replied Grace ; " but you'll be surprised when you learn all I have to disclose." " Not quite so much perhaps as you imagine, ibr I guess what you allude to.
I have latterly begun to suspect that------ but come, vvhen I hear your story, you shall hear my surmises." Graee could not bring Herself to trifle any further with an impatience originating in the most affectionate feelings. When Mrs. Hamilton Had Heard her to ί close 1 —" Well," she exclaimtd, " I did ^ay I should not be quite as much sur¬ prised perhaps as you imagined, at the explanation jou had togive; but I con¬ fess myself infinitely more so than I con¬ ceived I should Have been. There is an old proverb------but 'tis vulgar to quote such things; I shall therefore merely say, that I certainlv did latter! ν beo-in to think m' m' C^ that Mrs. Mayfield was not exactly what at first might be imagined, and that therefore it was not altogether impossible that there might be a little underhand work, or, to express myself in a more modern and fashionable manner, manveuv- ring, to keep you and William asunder; but any thing like the treachery practised for the purpose I had no conception of,
However, since defeated, let us rest satis¬ fied vvith that; since, to express the in¬ dignation it has excited, could answer no other end than to prevent ones living in that peace with one's neighbours that must naturally be wished." " Assuredly," said Grace; " and not for any consideration would í have any no¬ tice taken of what I have revealed ; the disappointment of such schemes as vve have been speaking of must be a sufiicient punishment, without the utterance of the contempt and indignation they excite; besides which, respect for the husbantl of Mrs. Mayfield, if no other motive, should prevent reproach to her." " Still, however, it will be a difficult matter for me to keep up appearances to¬ vvards her/ rejoined Mrs. Hamilton; " though I know, to be sure, by doing so, I shall have a better opportunity oi mortifying her than if I was to flame out at once." "Mortifying her!" repeated Grace, in a tone of alarm. " Oh, don't be alarmed/ said Mrs. Ha-
milton, laughing, " I shall do no harm by any thing I intend—only evince a little malice.—But you have entirely given up your foolish whim of going avvay this morning ?" " Yes, I believe so." " Oh, to be sure ! I wouldn't for the world you went, because it would be such a triumph to the party below; for you knovv, I conclude, that William, to please them, has invited the whole set, lord En¬ niskerry, and all that he met at Mrs. Ben¬ son's last night, here this evening, and it would be such a gratification to have you fairly out of the way ; but their being dis¬ appointed in their wish, or expectation, of this, is not the only one they'll meet with this evening, if I am not mistaken." " Then you have some scheme in your head," said Grace, shaking hers at her. " No matter/ laughing ; " at least, let me blab on whom I will, I won't blab on myself—and there, I hear William's step/ and jumping up, she. ran to open the door for him, and while he was in the act of advancing to Grace, quitted the room.
CHAPTER IV.
14 If ??? go ofi thus, vou will kill yourself; Ami 'tis not wisdom thus to second grief Against yourself." ??? though the figure he imagined he had seen standing by the altar vanished like a shadow at his approach, still Eugene would not permit himself to think his fancy had deceived him ; and the excite¬ ment given to his feelings by this inci¬ dent, hardly allowed him to pass a minute out of the ruin. Again alarmed by what seemed to her this pertinacious indulgence of sorrow, Mrs. Brady remonstrated more seriously than ever with him on the sub¬ ject ; but her counsel fell as profitless on his ears as water on a sieve, and she was induced again to leave him to himself, but with a determination, if some speedy al¬ teration did not take place in his manner
of conducting Himself, to write to his friends on the subject. A week elapsed without any thing again occurring like the recent incident, to revive the agitation it Had occasioned him, when, one evening, just as He was Heginning to admit an idea of Having deceived Himself hy the belief he Had yielded to, His eyes suddenly encountered again a figure stand¬ ing on the selfsame spot on which he had before imagined He Had seen one. He started up, Hut checked Himself from springing forward, as His feelings nearly impelled his doing, lest the movement should occasion it, as before, to vanish from his sight. As eagerly He gazed on it. the feature^ graduallv became more re- vealed, and at length He Heheld the per¬ fect likeness of his Mose. At this sight there was an end of all further command over Himself: vvith a cry that echoed through the vaulted arches of the building, He rushed forward ; the phantom instantly shrunk ????, hut still not with such quick¬ ness as to prevent Eugene from perceiving
that it was into a narrow, dark passage, contiguous to the altar, into wliich it had retreated. Down this he pursued it, now prevented seeing it by the pro¬ jections in the walls, now again allowed to catch a glimpse of it, still appearing to illide, vvith shadovvv lightness, before him. At length he found himself bevond the building, in a wild and solitary spot, over¬ run vvith briers and brambles, amongst the hills. He looked round liim vvith bewil¬ dering sensations, and at some distance again espied the object of his pursuit ; he again rushed forward, the figure still keep¬ ing in sight, till it reaehed the desolate court of nn old ruined buildimr on the coast, about half a mile from tho vale in which stood the monastery, when il en¬ tirely disappeared. Eugene knew not what to think; that what had happened seemed for the pur¬ pose of alluring him to this dismal place 1 , he could not avoid thinking; yet for what could he be enticed to it? If any injury—any violence were medi-
tated, it could quite as well have been perpetrated in the place where the figure had appeared to him, as in tlie one to which it liad been the means of drawing him. He drew back, to take a better sur¬ vey of the building ; it was one of consi¬ derable extent, and shattered and rifted as it was by the hand of time and the fury of the elements, to which it had been so long exposed, and streaming as it was with grass and weeds in every direction, presented a complete picture of desolation to the view. He listened, but heard no¬ thing, save the hoarse murmur of the waves, as they broke upon the shore, thc cries of the gulls tliat thronged the ad¬ jacent cliffs, and the rustling of the owl in her ivied lodgment on the battlements, welcoming the glad return of night, for by this time the last ray of sunset had faded from the hills, Eugene felt himself strongly tempted to pursue the adventure, by entering the building: but if indeed he belieA r ed he was purposely allured to it, was there not
rashness in thc thought? While he stood hesitating, a light flashed on his eyes from the loophole ofa tower ; he could no longer command himself—he would endeavour to solve Avhat appeared so mysterious, and accordingly rusheel in : hardly had he done so, when he heard some one behind him softly bolting the door that had given him admission to the place; he instantly turned, and with a mingleel sensation of surprise, indignation, and alarm—for with all his fancied loathing of life, the idea of murder, whieh instantly occurred to him, was hor¬ rible to his imagination—beheld Wiikin- Nein, his mysterious and, as it seemed to him, implacable enemy, revealed to view- by a light in a contiguous apartment.
vol. m. f
CHAPTER V.
+■*·*■+·+-+*■*·+*·+*.· ***-?*4-?*
I do beseech you,
Let me the knowledge of my fault bear with ?? : If with myself I hold intelligence, Or have acquaintance with my own desires— If that. I do not.dream, orbe not frantic (As I <h> trübt I am norj, then, Never so much as in ? thought unburn Did I offend you." But though Rose, the beloved and la¬ mented Rose, was torn from her friends, it was not by the Hand of death. On re¬ gaining her senses, after fainting in the monastery, some time elapsed ere she could credit their evidence, on rinding Her¬ self in a place utterly unknown to her, a rude chamber, or cavern, reclined upon a straw pallet, illumed by a dull lamp, stuck against the wall, immediately opposite to her. W 7 Hen, at length, convinced that she was under no illusion, it at once struck
her that she 'had been carried off by the contrivance of Mordaunt ; she felt a per¬ suasion of having seen him turning to catch her, at the moment she felt herself fainting away ; and, in short, had not a doubt of being right in her conjecture. From the morning of their unfortunate recognition of each other in the castle of St. Doulaglts, she haei experienced a fore¬ boding dread of him. To the fears ex¬ cited by this recognition she of course im¬ puted what had now happened : but what did he intend to do ivith her ? not destroy her certainly, else that ivould at once have been done. No—he had merely carried her off, she concluded, for the purpose of ascertaining ivhether, as yet, she had made any disclosure that could be injurious to him. This idea tended in a little degree to tranquillize her mind; but when mi¬ nute after minute passed avvay, without bringing him to receive from her, as she fully expecteel, the satisfactory assurance he required, her heart again began to fail f 2
Her, and quitting the couch, she took down the lamp, vvith a determination oí exploring the place. Aware of there being many secret vault.) and passages belonging to, and connected with, the monastery, she would probably liave imagined Herself in onc of these, but for the sound of dashing water, resembling that of the sea breaking on a rocky shore, and from which circumstance 1 , be vvhere she might, she was convinced it was not in iy place connected vvith that build¬ ing. On looking about Her, she soon per¬ ceived she was in a cavern, evidently con¬ structed by the Hand of Nature, Heing en¬ tirely formed of immense rocks, that Hung in Huge masses, menacing from above: whilst those beneath, that composed the floor, rendered slimy to the foot hy the distillatious from the roof, caused Her ad¬ vance to be both slow and dangerous, Her feet continually slipping from beneath Her; while, from the wavering light thrown upon the rocks, by the flickering blaze of the lamp, often made to fancy she saw
them trembling, she was continually start¬ ing back, with a scream, under the hor- rible idea of being crushed to death. At length, after Having g"t to some distance, as she conceived, from the spot on which she Had found Herself, she became tho¬ roughly convinced, if indeed till then in a doubt on the subject, of being removed from the monastery, by plainly distin¬ guishing the noise of the sea, and at the same time the sound of various rivulets dashing through the rocks at the bottom of the cavern, and whicii, Here and there, as ifin furious indignation of the impedi¬ ments they met with, threw up a thick spray around. Dismal as was the place, yet nothing, altogether, couid be more romantic-—fan¬ tastic as vvere the forms of the rocks, and decorated as the cavern was with sparry substances, that from their various curious shapes, Rose could not but Have admired, and been infinitely amused vvith, at an¬ other time; but now the state of the un¬ fortunate girls mind was such as to ren-
der her but ill qualified to view any thing with the eye ofa naturalist. That the sea made its way at times into this dark abode, was evident from the quantity of sea¬ weed and shells that were scattered almut —perhaps entirely filled it up; and asthe Horrible thought occurred, Rose felt a gasping sensation, uncertain as she was whether she might not Have been left there to perish in this way. She knew— she felt she merited punishment ; she had suffered herself to be led astray, and in¬ stead of endeavouring to expiate her er¬ ror by penitence, Had dared attempting to brave the wrath of Heaven, for the pur¬ pose of saving Herself from worldly shame: but yet to meet with such a punishment as this—to see the wave approaching that was to overwhelm her—to recede but to be overtaken by it—to die, in short, with all the horrors ofdeatii before her, Human nature eould not endure the thought, and she shrieked aloud at the horrible ideas conjured up by her disordered fancy. There was now a new stimulant to make
her persevere in her efforts to get on ; Having succeeded in advancing a few yards further, she espied a small chasm, resem¬ bling a low arched door, at the side of the cavern ; she directly crept through it, and ascending a few steps, found liersclf in a large chamber; she elevated the lamp, and as she stood looking about her. she fancied she saw r something flitting across the further end of the room ; she instinc¬ tively called out, and hurried fbrwatA— but no one replied to Her call. Seeing another door, she proceeded to explore; and advancing down a long pas¬ sage, began to ascend the spiral stairs of an old tower, constructed within the thick walls, and vvith openings from the diffe¬ rent landing-places into the successive chambers they wound round. They vvere so extremely steep, that Rose was often obliged to pause for breatii, hut was still encouraged to go on, from a hope, that if she once gained the summit of the build¬ ing, she should be enabled, perhaps, to ascertain where she was.
At length she succeeded in ner effort for this purpose, but not vvithout the ex¬ tinction of her lamp-—a circumstance that would have filled her vvith horror, but for the clear bright sky she caught a glimpse of, jb she approached the battlements. From these she had a full view of the ocean ; but though a full-orbed moon, rising over tho restless waves, permitted her to see far around her, she could not discover any ob¬ ject that could give her an idea of where slie was ; for more than once she had been prevailed upon hy Mrs. Brady to take a drive towards the sea, so that, whether stili in the vicinitv of her late residence, or removed to a distance from it, was more titan she eould determine. A consider¬ able part of what had been the main body of the building, she saw still remain¬ ed attached to the tower; eould she mako her way into this, it struck her she might perhaps be able to find an outlet from it ; but as she contemplated it, there was some¬ thing so dismal, so desolate, in its appear¬ ance, that lier very heart seemed to dit;
within her at the thought of exploring it by herself. As she stood leaning against the moss- clad battlements, undecided whether to continue where she was till daylight, in Lopes of seeing some passing stranger, or endeavour at once to find her way to th** other part of the building, she could not avoid contrasting the tranquillity of all around her, with the tumultuous state oi* her own feelings at the moment, or reflect¬ ing how much the passions, and follies, and errors of mankind, mar the benevolent ¡nientions of the Deity. The night was blight and calm, so calm lhat there was hardly breath enough to stir the sedge oí the rock—the glittering waves broke vvith a drowsy murium amongst the pebbles on the shore— " — — - l lie ihit i oí '? m ι VV as t hit k mí ι d w th ( m ns ol h Jit 2 »Id ' amidst which the moon was now >een walking in all her brightness; and all, m 1 3
short, was a scene of beauty and repose, well calculated to impart additional repose to a bosom previously at peace with itself. The building stood upon a green cliff, in the indented part of a small bay, form¬ ed by far-projecting headlands, against the furthermost parts of which the waves con¬ tinuais broke in foam, that as it now caught the rays of the moon, had the ap¬ pearance of so many broken masses of sparkling silver. " There is/ says Rous¬ seau, " extreme satisfaction when eleva¬ ted on the highest point of the circumja¬ cent country-—the air is more pure, the body more active, and the mind more se¬ rene; lifted np above the dwellings of man, we discard all grovelling and earthly pas¬ sions, the thoughts assume a character of sublimity, proportionate to the grandeur of the surrounding objects, and as the body approaches nearer to the ethereal re¬ gions, the soul imbibes a portion of their unalterable purity." So Rose might have thought and felt in happier moments ; but uncertain now
what ?? had to fear, trembling at every sound, lest it might be the precursor of an approaching enemy, the present scene, with all its beauty, all its grandeur, was unable to fix Her attention above a few minutes. At length, summoning all her courage to Her aid, she decided on endeavouring to make her way into the other part of the building, and accordingly began to de¬ scend the stairs. Having got Halfway, she turned from the landing-place into a small chamber, at the opposite side of which she observed a door. After some efforts, it gave way, and she beheld a spa¬ cious gallery before her. With palpitating Heart she ventured forward, but Had not advanced l.u, when her further progress v/as obstructed by an¬ other door, which, Hke the on' 1 she Had just passed through, was also fastened vvith a bolt. For a moment she again became irresolute How to act ; then forcing back the bolt with a trembling Hand, she found herself at the Head of a broad staircase,
After listening a minute, she ventured down, and entered a large dreary apart¬ ment, that, as well as she could see about her, she judged to have been one of the state rooms of the castle, in its pristine days, a range of painted windows, lighting it on either side, giving it the appearance ofa Gothic hail, and between which she could perceive some pieces of old armour gleaming in the twilight, while high fold¬ ing-doors of carved oak shut it in at the end, over which, in niches, were figures of grim warriors cut in stone. Rose made a useless effort to open these doors ; and was repeating the attempt, when, with a sensation of terror that made her fly from the place, she suddenly de¬ sisted, on fancying sbe discovered that they were lield by some one at the other side. Having regained the stairs, she again paused to listen, almost expecting to see some one mounting them after her; but she neither saw nor heard any one, anel in a few minutes became again a little recom¬ posée! in consequence. She had not ????
rage, however, to venture down again ; there Avas something in the depth and pro¬ fundity of the gloom below that was ap¬ palling to her imagination, and according¬ ly giving up her intention of exploring any further for the present, she decided on returning to the tower, and watching there for day ; but what was her consterna¬ tion, when, on attempting to open the door leading into it, she found it fastened on the inside ! Her blood ran cold, as if she had seen a ruffian stealing out upon her at the moment from some dark recess through the apprehension inspired by the circumstance of there being some one in- visiblv watching her : but might not the closing of the door be owing to the wind v yet, in that case, woukl she not have hearel the noise occasioned by its being forced back into its fastenings? Holding in her breath, she applied her ear to the crevice, but without being able to distinguish any sound that could justify the fear she was in. However, to repeat her efforts to iorce the door was more than she had courage to do,
and accordingly she turned into an adjoin¬ ing chamber, into vvhich the moon wasshi- niug brightly at the moment, thus permit¬ ting her to satisfy herself that there was no one concealed within it. The room was large, and in a few chairs and a bedstead still contained some arti¬ cles of furniture ; but that it Had not been very recently inhabited, Rose was rather inclined to imagine, from the bedstead being destitute of every thing but curtains, of a dingy stuff, that gave to it something of a funereal appearance. She made Her way to a chair by one of the windows, and in impatient longing for some indica¬ tion of the dawn, raised her eyes to the sky, yet not vvithout a shuddering sensa¬ tion at the thought, that she perhaps might not be allowed to Hve to witness it. But the building might be a deserted one —under the persuasion that she might not, or rather could not be able to make her way out of the cavern, those who Had car¬ ried her off might perhaps have quitted the place directly after securing her with¬ in it.
She tried to derive Hope and confidence from the thought ; yet at the slightest sound that met her ear she started and irembled. lest of its being the announce¬ ment of approaching danger. But loathing life as she did but a few days before, liow inconsistent, it may be remarked, w f as the alarm now experienced with that feeling! but in reply, vve knovv not ourselves, till actually put to the test, our real strength or weakness ; and, at all events, the most despairing, the most indifFerent about life, would probably shrink at the thought of encountering the actual glare of a mur¬ derer's eye. Worn out with agitation, a kind of stupor was at last stealing over her, wdien she was again completely rous¬ ed by Hearing the creak of an approaching footstep ; she started up, and looked wild¬ ly round the room for sotne way of Hiding Herself. The bed was the only means of concealment it afforded, and she accord¬ ingly darted to the other side of it ; hard¬ ly had she done so, vvhen she perceived, through the curtains, an old hag-like look-
ing vvoman enter, wdio, after looking about her, vvith evident indications of surprise, began advancing towards the place vvhere Rose had concealed herself, that is, be¬ tween the bed and the wall. Rose at this could no longer command herself; a shriek escaped her, and rushing out, she attempted to make her escape from the chamber , but was prevented by the old vvoman, vvho, notwithstanding her age, was quite as nimble, at least on this occasion, as she was. —" Ah ! thin vvhats the matter vvith you ?" she cried, holding her fast bv the arm, bv whieh she had m> ' m' seized her. " Sure then, my jcxeel. nny how you don't take me for a witch, or a banshee, or a ghost—blessed Mary pre¬ serve us!" crossing herself, " or a fairy, that you look so scared ? Faith and troti ι gra, though there's plenty of them about this ould building, 'tis myself that's good flesh and blood, atid has been so, any how, these seventy years !" i( Then I hope your age will induce you to act vvith honesty and humanity; ifyou
have any Christian feelings, relieve me from the terror I am at present in ; in a word, out of compassion to a miserable fellow-being, suffering under the most ter¬ rible apprehensions, let me know for what purpose I have been torn from my friends, and brought to this dismal place?" " Ah then upon my conscience, and that's as gooel as if I had bibleel it, 'tis the first time Kate Cavanaglts good nature was ever doubted ! but dear, I dem't won¬ der at your being in grief, for you'll never see tbe friends you have been taken from again." " Never see my friends again f who has a right to detain me from them ?" " Troth gra, I know* nothing more of the matter, than that the master means you slutn't return to them." " The master ! and who do you mean by the master? is it Mr. Mordaunt?" " Ah then see how'cute you are!—- troth, and it is himself, jewed." " it is by his means, then, I have been kidnapped from my friend*?"
" By who's else? sure, honey, this is His castle—one of the fine ould places His fa¬ mily got in this part of the kingdom, vvith many others, in the time of Crom¬ well; and a great and a rich man He is, who can do what He pleases." " What, because he's rich ?" " Exactly so, gra l " If He thinks so, he may find himself mistaken, However," said Rose — " find that His riches cannot set Him above the laws of his country. I advise you there¬ fore, for your own sake, as well as mine, not to lend vourself anv longer to his vil- lány ; for, depend upon it, it will not es¬ cape punishment." " Sure, honey, He says he Has plenty of cause for keeping you Here; so whether He can He punished or not for doing so, is more nor I knovv ; but at all events, what need he care for the laws, when He Has plenty of money to fee the lawyers if any one spakes against him? but be that as it may, troth, jewel, if I wished it never so much, I couldn't any hovv be after letting
you go, for I have my husband here to ivatch over me; but all I can do for you I will, by making you snug and comfort¬ able, if tis not your own fault; for our orders are, if you got obstropolous, to put you back again in the ??????, out of which vou contrived to make vour wav so cutely." " Then it was not intended I sheiuld be left there?" " Left there !" repeated Kate, with a scream, as if horror-struck at the thought, " is it to be drowned alive ! why, jervel, sure the tide flows in there at times. No, it was only inteneleel vou should be kept there till you got a little quiet, after find¬ ing yourself carried off' from your friends." " Quiet ! and could it be thought I should readily become quiet, after finding myself torn away from my friends?" " For all that, jewel, it vvill be the best thing you can do to try and become se>, for sorrow /iit of you, by hook or by crook, vvill be able to get out of this, as long as Darby and I live/'
" And are you and Darby, by whom you mean your husband I suppose, the only inmates of the place?" " The only living sowls here ; 'tis many a long day since the master Had any one but ourselves Here." " And are you not afraid obeying His orders about me, if I can prove that he Has no right whatever to detain me Here, and that I have friends who vvill not rest till I am discovered?" " Troth, gra 9 there's no use in your preaching or coaxing ; I as good as took my oath to the master, that Hand or fut you shouldn't stir from this, without his lave; and any Hovv it's not at this time of day I am going to perjure myself" Rose's Hlood ran chill, Her limbs trem¬ bled, and ere Kate could make an effort to catch Her, she sunk at her feet. On recovering Her senses, she found Herself on the chair by the window, vvith Kate hanging over her, chafing her tem¬ ples, and Darby, as she at once conjec¬ tured the man to be she beheld, standing
near, with a bottle and glass—a great, tall, gaunt-looking Irishman, with no other marks of age about him tban tliose indi¬ cated bv his eleen wrinkles anel changing hair: his athletic form still appearing to retain ail its original muscular strength. The momenit Kate saw her unclose her eyes, she ?????! to Darby for a drop of whiskey, whicb giving her, slie offered to Rose, with an assurance that she v.ould find it the right sort—the true Inİüionc, and the best thing in the world for wann¬ ing and comforting her poor heart; but notwithstanding this assurances and the preceding recommendation, tbe glass was pushed away, to the no small surprise of Kate, who, as she swallowed the ki cordial drop 1 ' herself, exclaimed—" Well, to be sure, to sec the difference there is betwixt people ! but feel her hanel, if she is not as cold as clay.—Ah then, Darby dear, since we ean't get her to take a drop to warm her, blow up a sod or two, and put down the kittle, that I may get her a dish of tay. And, jewel" she proceeded, address-
ing ; herself to Rose, while Darby retired to obey her orders, " while I'm getting breakfast, wouldn't you be after trying to get a little rest? I'll get the bed ready in a minute for you, and a little rest vvill do you great good I think." Exhausted by fatigue, anxious to be at liberty to try and collect her scattered, or rather bewildered thoughts, Rose made no objection ; and vvith all the alacrity of a young person, Kate set about preparing the bed for her, continuing to assure her, while busied in doing so, that if not her own fault, sbewould be comfortable enough, as the best of every thing would be hers, and the range of the fine grand ould apart¬ ments of the castle, and plenty of good clothes, that had already been sent for her by the master. Rose could not sleep, but felt it a re¬ freshment to be able to recline her -ex¬ hausted frame. After giving vent for sometime in tears to the feelings of her surcharged.heart, she began to recover some little degree of composure, through the arguments she made use of vvith her-
self; she saw there u^as no longer any cause for personal apprehension, and that even if her gaolers could not be won over to set her at liberty, there was "still,* from their man¬ ner,· nothing particularly terrible to be dreaded from them. In addition to these sources of comfort, she deemed it hardlv possible that the efforts she was well aware Avould be made to ascertain her fate, should not be successful ; and, in short, hope, that springs eternal in the human mind, began again to exert its buoyant in¬ fluence over hers. But whatever was the good nature of Kate, on which poor Rose built not a little, it certainly was not ofa description that could induce her to do any thing likely to be injurious to her own interest; as far as words, and attentions to lier comforts ivent, she was kind to Rose, but no further ; to all she said or urged on the subject of letting her depart, she Avas as 1 deaf or insensible as a post, neither entreaties, promises, or threats, having the slightest effect upon her; nor with all her address could 1 Rose betray her into any
intimation of where she actually was ; so that whether removed to a distance from her late residence, or still in its vicinity, she remained as ignorant as ever. Three days elapsed in this way, during which she experienceel all the agitations of alternate hope and despair—now deem¬ ing it most unlikely that her frienels should not succeed in tracing her—-now tearing, from not alreaely having heard something of them, that their search woulel prove fruitless, from the precautions taken in carrying her awav. On the evening of the- third day, as she stood almost unconsciously gazing on the rippling waves, from a window in her chamber, she saw a small vessel standing in for the bay, that from its gay streamers she judged to bea pleasure-yacht, iier heart throbbed tumultuously—coulel she but attract tbe attention of those within it! but even if they landed, she should be at such a distance from them; and then the windows of the room were so deep sunk within the walls, that except she
eould gain the summit of the tower, which from the precautions of Kate she now knew to be out of the question, she had but little hone of being able to obtain their notice; she remained, how¬ ever, immovably watching the vessel. At last it cast anchor, and a gentleman, fit- tended by a servant, landed, and begau to ascend towards ihe castle ; but whether with an intention of entering it, she couid not ascertain, the court that gave imme¬ diate aduibsion to the building being screened from lier view by high masses of wall, overrun with weeds and brambles.
N OL. UI.
a
CHAPTER VI.
" Seems ho a dove ? his feathers are but borrow \( ; For he's disposed ?? the hateful raven. 1? he a lamb? his skin is surely icat hnn; For he's inolm'd as ib the ravenoib wolf' Who cannot steal a shape that ????? deceit ?" If Kate saw or knew any thing about the strangers, Rose conceived it not unlikely her being able to learn the circumstance irom her, and accordingly, under this idea, waited vvith extreme impatience for the hour that usually brought her with her supper to her: vvith this Kate did not make ber appearance till considerably be¬ yond the usual hour this night. * t Why, I thought/ said Rose, fasten¬ ing her eyes on her with intense anxiety, " that 1 should not have seen you to-night, Kate ·/ but determined to try what the effect of taking lier by surprise might be,
" I accounted for your delay by your hav¬ ing visitors." "Ay, visitors indeed—the deil wel¬ come them !" cried Kate, in a muttering voice; " their room would be more wel¬ come than their company ; not to be sure but that one must allovv the son has a right to be welcome to His father's house." " What, is young Mr. Mordaunt the person I saw landing from the vessel?" eagerly demanded Rose. Kate raised her twinkling Httle eyes to her, with a scowling look—** Well, musha, and what then?" she said, in a tone evi¬ dently indicative of vexation at Havang be¬ traved so much. ml " Oh, nothing!" replied Rose, endea¬ vouring to still the perturbation of her Heart; "only what brought Hitn here, I wonder, as the place does not seem exact¬ ly in a state for visitors ?" " Old Nick, I suppose/ cried Kate ; * 4 I'm sure it's myself that had a plague of Him, two or three years ago, when ? ?
he took it into his head to come over with a set like himself, turning every thing topsyturvy, till one didn't know whether they stood upon their head or their heels." " Well, and is he now accompanied by any one?" asked Rose again, in spite of her wish to appear unconcerned, in an eager tone. Kate looked at her for a moment with¬ out speaking, and then—" Well, what's the signification whether he is or not?" she said ; " but anyhow I can tell you, Darby says, that if he finds you put hand or fut beyond the gallery whilst he is here, he'll make you go back to the cavern," " Well, I am in your power/ said Rose, " and must therefore submit to your ty¬ rann v ; but I trust it vvill not be fbr a much m' ' longer time." Policy prevented her saying more on the subject; if any benefit could be de rived from what had occurred, it would probably be by her not seeming to be aware of the likelihood of any thing of the kind, and accordingly, influenced by this
idea, soon appeared to think no further about it. That Mordaunt was not in the confidence of his father was evident, else would there Have been no necessity for concealing Her from him ; could she but once make known to him the way in which she was circumstanced, she hardly permitted herself to doubt obtaining f rom Him the interference she required, more especially if she did not permit Herself to disclose His father being the person she Had to complain of; but Hovv to obtain an opportunity for imparting to Him what she wished, she saw would perplex Her not a little. Of Mordaunts readiness to become her champion, if acquainted with His charac¬ ter, she would not Have entertained even the shadow of a doubt, being exactly of a description to render such an adventure agreeable to Him; but though he might vie with the knights-errant of old in real bravery and rashness, He assuredly could not compete with them in real strictness of principle, or, in other words, disinter·
estedness of motives for what he did—in short, he was a gay, fashionable, dissipated young man, brought up as the heir to an immense fortune, in the lap of luxurious indulgence, and allowed to become his own master ere he knew what the govern¬ ment of passion was; his mother was a beautiful Italian, of whom it was reported his father Had become enamoured ere his first marriage, and with all her beauty, her son seemed to inherit all her haughtiness of character : He Had, however, his redeem¬ ing qualities—he was generous to what the worldly-minded would have consider¬ ed even a fault, kind in his feelings, and, in all Hut affairs of gallantry, strictly Ho¬ nourable. His coming over to Ireland at this period was unknown to all at home: but He very seldom condescended, or ra¬ ther took the trouble of making his move¬ ments known there ; a friend of his had become attached to a young heiress be¬ longing to the Emerald Isle, at one of the fashionable bathing-places in England; his passion was not unpleasing to the lady ;
but as soon as they saw she encouraged it, lier friends hurried her away, his fortune not being exactly what they considered they had a right to expect for her : but the gentleman was not so easily to be disap¬ pointed, and on receiving a letter from her, intimating that if on the spot, she thought she might be able to manage an elopement with him, Mordaunt, his confidant in the affair, undertook conveying him over in his yacht; and having landed him near her residence, which happened to be in this part of the kingdom, steered forth¬ with for the old castle of the cliff, there to wait the issue of the adventure. A day passed without Rose seeing, or hearing any thing more about him, when, on the decline of the second, as she was standing at the window, now her almost constant station, she suddenly observed him loitering before it : she instantly at¬ tempted to raise the sash, but, to her utter dismay, found, that while asleep in the ad¬ joining chamber, to which, at her degire, the bed had been removed, in order that
she might have the outer one for a sitting apartment, advantage Had been taken of the circumstance to fasten both it and the other, in such a manner as to render im¬ practicable any effort on her part to open it. Finding this the case, she would have forced out a pane, but at the instant she was muffling up Her hand in her Handker¬ chief for the purpose, she heai d the step of Kate, and instantly retreated from the window', lest of exciting any suspicion or alarm in her mind. Just as she was drawing back from it, Mordaunt, happening to turn, caught a glimpse 1 , or rather fancied He caught a glimpse of Her—for he was not quite cer¬ tain whether what He saw was a shadow on the window, or in reality a human figure. Λ summons to elinner prevented His making an effort to satisfy himself on the point; but just as Kate was retiring from the room where he dined, after in¬ quiring with all obsequiousness whether all was to his Honour's liking, he carelessly
demanded who she had got in the castle beside Herself and her Husband? Kate was a little startled at the ques¬ tion, but concealing Her emotion under a vacant look, with Her usual cunning she inquired why He asked ? " Why, Hecause I imagined," replied Mordaunt, in a still more careless tone, *' that I saw some one at one of the win¬ dows." " Oh, then the sorrow one your honour eould Have seen, for sorrow one but my¬ self and the ould man live Here; I got mv niece, Biddy Connor, to come here last winter, but she thought she saw a ghost one night in the Hall, and so off with her the next morning, in spite of all I could do to keep her, nor could all my coaxing ever get Her back again." Mordaunts valet, vvho stood high in the confidence of His master, was in attend¬ ance on Him at the moment. On Kate's retiring, He proceeded, evidently laughing, to satisiy himself that the door was closed. ci 3
" You seem amused, sir," said his mas¬ ter, happening to glance at him ; * pray w f hat Has diverted you ? rt " Faith, sir, the ready invention of that old hag," <c What, is it a falsehood then she has told me ?" tí As great a one as ever was invented— there's some one here she wishes to re¬ main undiscovered." 4C Indeed í and pray how may your sa¬ gacity have enabled you to find out that ?" tí You shall hear, sir—about three hours ago, chancing to stroll into the kit¬ chen, I saw a nice dinner there, eon- risting of a chicken, and vegetables, and I don't know what, nicely dished out on a tray, as if just about being served up; upon which, of course concluding it was for you, sir — * Pooh, pooh!' I said, * Hovv ,stupid to get my master's dinner ready so early, when He won't dine these several hours !'—* Well, what then ?' was the exclamation, in rather a gruflish tone.—' What then l I repeated
* why, of course, that dressed so long be¬ fore he wants it, by the time he sits down to it, it won't be worth eating.'—* Ah * we'll see that,' said the old hag, * for all that your master won't be finding fault vvith his dinner vvhen He gets it;' and so saying she threw a cloth over the things, as if to Hide them from my further in¬ spection, and whipping up the tray, march¬ ed off' with it. I couldn't Help being cu¬ rious to see what she was about, and ac¬ cordingly stealing after her, followed her through tvvo or three dark passages, to the entrance of one of the towers, whence about midway up the spiral stairs, she crossed one of the small apartments to a door communicating with the adjoining gallery, and disappeared: having taken the precaution of locking the door as she passed t brough, I, of course, could follow no furtb r ; but pausing to listen at it, 1 heard the voice of a lady, I'm certain." " Young or old—couldst thou make out ?" said his master, 44 Young, I think."
<t Tant mieux ! I am the Hero then for the adventure; but contrivance, I pre¬ sume, vvill be requisite; for Her priest alone, I conclude, could extort a confes¬ sion of the truth from this Hecate," " If even He could, if she deemed it her interest to conceal it." Mordaunt, who was literally beginning not to know what to do vvith himself, was not a little pleased to meet with some¬ thing to divert and occupy him ; He Had a lively imagination, that was easily ex¬ cited, and became, in consequence, quite impatient to know more about the person of whom he Had just Heard. Kate was called back, for the purpose, as she was led to believe, of receiving some directions about supper; but just as she was again leaving the room, Mordaunt stopped her, to ask if there was not some part of the castle locked up that He Had not yet seen. " Och, no, your Honour! that is, yes, to be sure there is, to keep in the rats ; its ourselves that would Have been kilt long ago by them, they swarm so in theso
ould rooms, if vve didn't keep the key turned upon them." " Well, that's a good joke r ' said Mor¬ daunt ; " as if the rats, if inclined to pay you a visit, would be kept away by a locked door! Despite of their inmates. I choose to see these apartments." " Is it to be poisoned with dust, your Iionour? why, its many a long day since mAiy thing was done to these rooms; and then it's full of Holes the floors are." " No matter, see them I will ; I don't knovv but 1 may have some part of tlu. castle fitted up, and I choose to see the entire of it before I give any orders fbr the " purpose." " To be sure 1 , your Honour; but musha ifi can tell, ifi was hanged for it, where the key is; I never could make it out, High or low, since that jade, Biddy, was Here ; but I'll be sending to her to-mor¬ row, and then I'll try if I can hear anv thing about it." " No, don't give yourself that trouble— I dare say vve shall be able to manage vvith-
out any thing of the kind.—So, do you hear, sir,'" turning to Johnson, (i be in rea¬ diness to assist in forcing the door." " Oh no, for the Lord's sake !" scream¬ ed the terribly-alarmed Kate; "forsure, if there's any mischief done, it's kilt my¬ self will je by the master for it, for all the blame will be laid to my door. If your honour vvill have but a little pa¬ tience, ΙΊ1 try if 1 cant make out the key for you, vvithout sending to Biddy for it." " Well, away with you ; but remem¬ ber, if not back in a few minutes, I shall assuredly break open the door/ Kate withdrew, but in a state of per¬ plexity that kept her for a few minutes motionless outside the door. Siie knew not but what Darby's assistance might be requisite in getting Rose out of the way ; but then, siie was equally uncertain that the determination of Mordaunt might not be imputed to some carelessness or inat¬ tention on her part, for Darby was not the most loving husband in the world, and accordingly sImì finally made up her
mind to runnmg all risks, rather than most likely incur abuse from him. Hast¬ ening to Rose the moment she had de¬ cided on this, she told her, in few words, that she must accompany her to another part of the castle, seizing her by the arm as she spoke, to conduct her to a room beneath the ones she occupied, and to which a flight of stone steps, concealed within the walls, and unknown to Rose till this instant, led from the chamber she slept in. Convinced from this, and the perturba* tion of her manner, that some dbcoverv relative to herself haei taken place, Rose resolved not to let her succeed in her ef¬ fort to get her out of the way ; disen¬ gaging her arm from her, she perempto¬ rily refused to stir from the apartment where she ivas. The eyes of Kate abso¬ lutely sparkled with rage at this declara¬ tion ; after surveying her for a minute, witli all the supposed malignancy of a witch, she again seized her arm, to try and force her away, but Rose resisted with
all her might. She could not, However, immediately free Herself from the grasp of the hag ; while struggling for the purpose the door opening from the tower into the gallery was burst open, and the voice of Mordaunt, who, perfectly aware of what the intention of Kate was, Had followed close on Her steps, vva.s heard. Foiled in Her plan of getting Rose out of the way, Kate no sooner distinguished the accents of Mordaunt than, with a loud scream, she rushed out of the apartment, and with outstretched arms opposing his immediate entrance into it, besought Him to listen to Her for a minute ere He pro¬ ceeded.—" It's no use for to go to deny any longer," she said, " that there's some one Here; and it's myself that never would Have thought to deceive your Honour about it, only for feard of the master." si Why, you old witch !" exclaimed Mordaunt, " you don't want to insinuate that my father is in any way concerned in Having a person confined Here?" '* Is it myself," exclaimed Kate, vvith
a scream of well-counterfeited astonishment at the supposition—" is it myself say any thing disparaging of his lionour? sure and that's the last thing I should be after thinking of!" " Then why say it was out of fear of him you told me the falsehood you did ?" " Why, because the young lady that& here," replied Kate, determined to perse¬ vere in this story, let Rose say Avhat she would in contradiction to it, under the hope, that if she concealed Mordaunts being the person through whose means she was con¬ fined in the castle, he might be induced to forgive the discovery of the circum¬ stance, " is the niece of an ould frienel of his, who, to keep her out otthe way of a scapegrace she wanted to run away with, asked the master's leave to lock her up here." Mordaunt would not suffer himself to be detained another minute; a young lady locked up on the score of love was an ob¬ ject tex) interesting to his imagination not to render htm impatient to see her. He rushed forwarel Rose heard him ap-
proaching, and, as well as she could, tried to collect herself to receive him, vvith a determination not to attempt any contra¬ diction to the statement of Kate, since she felt indeed that it would be an aw T kward and embarrassing thing to accuse the fa¬ ther to the son. To a young lady so romantically cir¬ cumstanced as she was, a romantic imagi¬ nation always attaches the idea of beauty; but for beauty such as met his eye on en¬ countering Rose—beauty so replete with all that grace and elegance that charms and inspires love, that expression of senti¬ ment that at once affects the heart, and seizes on the impassioned soul, he was not by any means prepared : his start of sur¬ prise, his sudden stop, his eager gaze, all proclaimed the feeling of the moment. He was indeed transfixed for an instant, so much was he taken by surprise. Quick¬ ly, however, recovering himself, he ad¬ vanced towards the fair object of his ad« miration, and, vvith the elegance that was so natural to him, apologized for the re-
cent disturbance, but which he expressed his hope she would excuse, from tlie con¬ sideration of its being a means of intro¬ ducing a person to her who only wanted to know How he could serve her to devote Himself to the purpose. Rose unhesitatingly informed him, from the moment she knew of his being in the castle, she had been on the watch to ob¬ tain his interposition, and now imploring his protection, besought him not to let a moment be lost in restoring Her to her friends. This was a request, However, Mordaunt could not think of complying vvith ; what he Had Heard of a lover entirely militated against His acceding to it, so completely was He charmed with Her Himself; but, of course, his motive for not attending to it was not to be suspected. After the hesi¬ tation of a moment, He assured her he should instantly do as she required, Had He the power of seeing Her himself from the castle; but He was just then so pecu¬ liarly situated, that this was a happiness
He could not immediately give himself. and he much feared, from all he had heard and seen, there was no one else to vvhose care she could safely commit herself—a duel, which threatened to be attended with a fatal result, and in which He had unfortunately heen a second, compelled him to a temporary concealment; but, one wav or other, He should shortlv, He was convinced, be out of suspense as to what He had to apprehend, and the moment He was, (till when He trusted she would re¬ main satisfied in her present situation,) she might rely on His being Her escort. Upon Hearing this, Rose immediately decided on writing to Mrs. Brady, as she could neither bring herself to think of re¬ maining any longer in the castle, nor yet of leaving it without protection she coukl depend on. Having decided on this, she made known ??? intention to Mordaunt, in order to ascertain whether He would undertake Having a letter conveyed for Her, and vvhere she actually was. Happy at finding her still ignorant of
this, he had no hesitation in deceiving her on the subject, mnking her not only be¬ lieve she was several miles distant from Mrs. Brady's, but in a part of the country so wild and dreary, as to render it unsafe for any onc to travel who thought they had an enemy. The moment the letter was finished, it was consigned to him. With eager im¬ patience, the instant he received it from her fair hand, he withdrew, conceiving it might be a means of enabling him to judge hovv far matters had proceeded be¬ tween her and the envied lover. Rose, however, lest of accidents, had worded her letter with such caution, as to prevent his deriving any kind of gratification from its perusal. From the moment she believed it pro¬ bable it might have been received, she became all restlessness and perturbation, frotn the hourly expectation she was in of seeing her friend; but when three days elapsed, without either seeing or hearing from her, hope and expectation began to
give place to a misgiving of treachery, and vvhich she disclosed to Mordaunt. With a well-dissembled look of regret, since she had revealed her apprehension about the fate of her letter, he would not deny, he said, being under a similar one himself, in consequence of having been compelled to intrust it to a messenger of Kate's recommending, adding, that since it was very unlikely one to be depended on could be procured, it was his advice, to save herself needless trouble and anx¬ iety, that for a few days longer, when he fully expected he should be at liberty to act as he pleased, she should endeavour to make herself easy vvhere she was. Rose reluctantly consented, believing it indeed useless to write again, and want¬ ing courage, from what she had heard, to depart from the castle by herself. Having prevailed on herself to acquiesce in this insidious advice, she set about endeavour¬ ing to calm her agitated spirits. This was what Mordaunt wanted: so long as she remained under her recent agitation, or
excitement of feeling, he knew it would be useless hoping to engage or attract her attention in the manner he wished; but once sufficiently composed to permit of a tranquil association, and he flattered him¬ self his attentions would not be without effect. Of his personal advantages he was by no means ignorant—the success that had hitherto marked his cftorts to please did not permit him to be so; and aided, as his seductive arts would now be, by the peculiar situation of the fair object against whom they vvere directed, he entertained but little doubt oí ultimately triumphing as he wished. To the admiration she had inspired Rose could not be blind, but she trusted the statement of Kate would operate in repressing any indications of this that could be displeasing to her. But this was a hope she soon saw was an idle one: Eu¬ gene had taught her the language of pas¬ sion, and the feelings of Mordaunt were but too soon understood, notwithstanding the caution with which he wished to veil
them for the present, lest of prematurely alarming Her. She tried to hope, How¬ ever, that by not seeming to understand them, she might check them, and accord¬ ingly, forced herself to meet His burning glances, to hear His sighs, and feel the trembling pressure of his hand, without any apparent emotion, but at the same time, tried to gradually withdraw Herself from his society. With Kate for His friend, however, her efforts to absent Herself from Him proved ineffectual. Kate was otic of those beings who made her own interest her paramount consideration; and finding it would be for this to please young Mordaunt, she soon became as completely subservient to him as she had ever been to His father. Some Hooks, that the yacht contained, were brought on shore, for the purpose of being read to Rose—works of some of the most celebrated poets of the day; they vvere well calculated to have a softening effect upon the feelings; and thejustice that was done to them in reading by Mor-
daupt, was not of a description to lessen this : his finely-modulated tones were the very ones indeed for passion to breathe itself in; and Rose found it difficult in¬ deed, while listening to him, to maintain the semblance of that cold composure she had deemed it expedient to assume. If for a moment, however, by a stealing tear, a quivering lip, a sudden suspension of the work she affected to be engaged on, she forgot herself, it was only requisite for Mordaunt to turn his penetrating eye on her to see hovv she was affected, to recall her to recollection. At length, his pa¬ tience exhausted, his vanity mortified, Mordaunt could not forbear, one evening, on her complaining of her cruel detention at the castle, from bitterly reproaching her for the indifference vviiich this complaint was indicative of tovvards him—*' Was there any sympathy in our feelings/ he cried—" could you complain of what al¬ lows us to enjoy the society of each other vvithout interruption ?" vol. ?. H
" I don't comprehend you," replied Rose, with cold gravity ; " it would be strange, I conceive, if I was not in some degree impatient, under a circumstance that keeps me away from my friends." " Yes ; but when you knovv your resto¬ ration to them will be a means-----but you say you do not understand me ; can I believe this ?" " At least believe," answered Rose, " that I wish to understand nothing that can make me regard you in any other light than that ofa person I can place con¬ fidence in. I hoped—I imagined, that what the vvoman liere gave you to under¬ stand, would have checked the expression of any sentiment I should be disinclined to listen to: let this however suffice, if any further attempt be made to intrude upon me subjects that are disagreeable, I shall permit no consideration of danger to detain me longer Here." Mordaunt, not without a secret execra¬ tion against hitnself for Having betrayed His feelings, till first assured of Having ex-
cited some little interest in her heart, en¬ treated forgiveness, assuring her if she would but strive to forget Avhat had dis¬ pleased, he Avould not offend in this way again. On this condition, Rose promised what be requested, feeling still fearful of de^- parting vvithout his protection. From what had now occurred, Mor¬ daunt saw clearly, that to hope to win her so easily, or, in other words, supplant an¬ other in her affections, as from his high opinion of himself he had conceived likely to be the case, was out of the question ; and as remaining much kmger where he was, was, on many accounts, a thing not to be thought of, he decided on a plan for ta¬ king her away with him ; but which, for fear of exciting suspicion, he determined on not being precipitate in carrying into effect.
J l 'VI
CHAPTER VII.
" Vice is a monster of such frightful miexf. As to be hated, needs but to be seen ; But seen too oft, familiar witli her face, VVe first endure, then sufíer her embrace." While young Mordaunt was revelling in the indulgence of guilty anticipations, his father was experiencing all the dis¬ quietudes of an alarmed spirit. On con¬ veying Rose to the castle, he gave Kate to understand he was about returning to England ; but such was not his intention, the intimation being merely given for the purpose of ascertaining how those in whom he was compelled to place confidence would act, if they thought him out of the way, and thus whether they vvere indeed to be depended on : that he previously had proof of this was certain ; but then he knew not what alteration or change time might have
effected in their principles or feelings ; and, in short, felt all that fear and suspicion that still tortures the wicked. He soon con¬ trived to learn the horrible surmise Rose's strange disappearance had given rise to in the mind of Mrs. Brady; but the assu¬ rance of all further inquiry after her being suspended for the present, in consequence of the belief of her having destroyed her¬ self, afforded him but little relief, vvhen he reflected hovv immediately in the vici¬ nity of her late residence she was. Aware of all the danger of allowing her to remain there, he would speedily have removed her from the castle, had he known how immediately afterwards to dispose of her. But this was not the case ; his plan relative to her was a hasty and ill-digested one, and had consequently placed him in a dilemma respecting her, from which he knew not how to extricate himself. Un¬ expectedly, however, he was relieved from this by the information of one of his agents, that a vessel was about sailing from a neighbouring port for Portugal, the mas-
ter of which, for a certain sum, undertook to take charge of, and place her in a con¬ vent there. Something of this kind was what Mor¬ daunt had had in contemplation; of course he reeeived this intimation with no small pleasure, and all requisite matters being quickly arranged, proceeded to the castle for the purpose of giving up Rose to others. On coming within sight of the building, he was somewhat startled by the sight of the vessel in the little bay before it; it struck him as bearing a strong resemblance to his son's yacht. But, no—surely no demon had driven him over at such a pe¬ riod !—In no slight agitation, however, at the bare surmise, he hurried forward, im¬ patient to be out of doubt on the circum¬ stance. The actual appearance of one of those ghosts or banshees she so often pretended to see or hear, could hardly have startled Kate more than did his at the moment, so entirely unexpected was it, and so much
was there to discover in the castle she wished to keep from his knowledge. " Why, Avhat the deuce, you have al¬ most deafened me by your scream at see¬ ing me!" he exclaimed, as he stole in upon her in the kitchen. " Scream ! ah, then, no Avonder," cried Kate, making an effort to recover from the confusion into iviiich he had thrown her, " Avhen from thinking your honour Avas in England, I didn't know but that it was your honour's fetch I saw !" " Well, you are now satisfied tliat it is not,—But Avhose vessel is that down in the bay ?" " Vessel—vessel !" repeated Kate ; " ah, then, isn't it lord Belturberts ?" she added Avith ready quickness. " His ! And what brought it here?" " Troth if myself know*s: but it often puts in here." " Oh, then there's nothing particular in the circumstance now ?" " No, sorrow thing." Satisfied by lier answers that he had
alarmed himself without cause, Mordaunt presently became sufficiently composed to inquire about her charge. Kate, in reply, with her usual cunning, to make the most of her own conduct, made the worst of Rose's ; protesting there Avas no one knew the life she ied with her, she was so violent at finding herself con¬ fined. " You would be glad to get rid of her then ?" " Troth and that's no He, your honour.' " Then I am happy to tell you that will be the case to-night;" and he proceed¬ ed to inform her, that about ten or eleven that night, a boat would be in the bay, to take Rose aivay. Kate, after affecting great joy at hear¬ ing this, suddenly asked whether his ho¬ nour wouldn't be pleaseel to take a seat by the fire, drawing forvvard one for him as she spoke, while she went to get a more 1 dacent place ready for him. Mordaunt did not refuse ; and having seen him seated, she hurried off to ap-
prize young Mordaunt of what had hap¬ pened. Little dreaming of any thing so malà-propos, He was sitting at tea vvith Rose, indulging Himself in the dangerous contemplation of that loveliness that was every moment gaining still more upoti hiin, insomuch as to confirm him in his determination of running all risks rather than resign her. Kate Having succeeded in giving Him a wink, as she called it, unobserved by Rose, instantly after withdrew, and was quickly followed by him—" Well, what's the matter," he demanded, " that you gave me to unelerstand you wanted to speak to me ?" " Matter !" she almost screamed— u och ! and its ali over with us, that it is !" t * Why, what lias Happened—is captain Rock below?" " Och ! and I am sure, bad enough as myself would like to see the face of him, its that I'd rather be after seeing than the face of Him that's below now. The mas·* ter is come." ? 3
44 The devil he is !" exclaimed Mordaunt, starting. " Oh ! sorrow word of lie in it—he stole in upon me like a ghost, vvith a fine scheme in his Head ------ that is, I mean," she added, recollecting herself, " acquainted with a fine scheme of the crature's uncle here, to have her carried off in a boat to-night, the Lord only knows where !" " Indeed ! then we must be beforehand with him; so send Johnson directly to me, that I may give orders for having every thing got ready for sailing as soon as it gets dusk." Kate hastened away to obey Him, and he returned to Rose, to acquaint her with what He had heard, and his determination to run all risks rather than let her be car¬ ried off in the way that 4'as intended ; he mentioned the orders he Had given about getting the yacht ready directly ; and Rose, dreadfully alarmed by the informa¬ tion she had received, believing, asshe did, his father capable of any villany, rea-
dily assented to his proposition of availing herself of it to effect her escape. Kate, it must be allowed, had now a busy time of it ; from the son she return¬ ed to the father, to try and keep him in play, till the other had got oflf with his prize. Mosdaunt was in that kind of state, that her fidgeting about, under the pre¬ text of her getting supper ready for him, was extremely troublesome. He did not like, however, to affront Her, by telling her at once to quit the room, and had re¬ course therefore to the pretext of wanting to write a letter, to get rid of her. She no sooner left him, than he went out ; he Had no doubt of the truth of her state¬ ment respecting the yacht; but own it who might, it was a very awkward cir¬ cumstance being stationed where it was, just at this critical time, when any disco¬ very relative to Rose might not only be the means of defeating his present scheme concerning her, but of involving him in the most terrible predicament. After
much perplexity on the subject, the only plan He could devise for relieving himself from this, was to watch for the boat, and see whether it could not move lower down the beach, out of sight of the vessel, to take Rose in; and in pursuance of which plan it was he went out, on being left to himself. In order to avoid the chance of being encountered by any one from the vessel, He took a straggling path to the beach. He had not advanced far dovvn it, when He heard himself followed ; He turned with quickness, and, to His utter amazement, beheld His son, with Rose leaning on His arm. Rose, with a faint scream, attempted to draw back, but was prevented by Her con¬ ductor, who knew there was nothing now for it, but to brave out the matter. " So, sir," said His iather, first regaining the power of speech, " this is a rencontre I indeeel little expected ! Hovv vvill you account for all this?—But why allovv my¬ self to inquire of you," He added, with a
contemptuous expression of countenance, i( after the shameful imposition you have allowed to be practised on me ?" Young Mordaunt was not of a disposi¬ tion to bear scorn, even from a father. tamely ; His dark eye kindled vvith answer¬ ing scorn, and—" I shall not attempt to deny what I Hold myself fully justified for," He said. tí Whatever I may Have to repent or regret in this life, it will not be any thing into vvhich I Have been led for this lady." " That lady !" repeated his father, turn¬ ing of a Horrible paleness; and, " what— what"—with evident difficulty he articu¬ lated—" Have you to say to that kdy ? what right, I «ay, sir, have you to inter¬ fere about Her ?" " The right which Her meeting vvith cruelty and injustice gave her. Every one has a right to interfere where these are practised. She required my protec¬ tion, and she shall have it, in spite of all opposition." " And in conveying Her hence, is it
your intention to restore her to those from whom she pretends to be torn ? No, no —I knovv you too well, to give you cre¬ dit for such disinterestedness; you may have deceived her, but me you cannot de» ceive ; and I swear you do not triumph in your duplicity !" Y r oung Mordaunt became terribly agi- tated^—it was evident his utmost efforts were requisite to enable him to keep his struggling feelings under any control.— " I should be sorry, sir/ he said, vvith forced calmness, " to seem to forget for a moment the respect you claim as a father, but what I promised this lady, I will ful¬ fil at all hazards." " Wretched young man !" exclaimed his father, " hovv can you persevere in this perfidy? Do I not knovv, that in what you are now doing, you are actuated by any thing but motives of purity ? But to punish you for it—to put an end to the hopes in which you are now rioting—to stop the rovings of that licentious fancy™ knovv/ he paused for a minute, and then ?
not without difficulty, added, ? that girl is your sister !" Rose, with a shriek, involuntarily re¬ peated the word. Young Mordaunt, evi¬ dently trembling, and with a countenance of dismay, looked at her.·—" Oh no !" she cried, interpreting his look, " it is not—it cannot be so! Were I his child, could hv have abandoned me to others—could he have treated me as he has done? no—I do not—I cannot credit the assertion." " I breathe again/ said young Mor¬ daunt ; " yes, I see how it is ; and had any one but a father had recourse to so shallow an artifice, to try to prevent what I was determined on, I should have known how- to resent the insult accordingly." " By earth, by heaven, I have at¬ tempted no imposition on you !" exclaim¬ ed his father, rushing before him, as he attempted to move on, vvith Rose still supported by his arm, or rather clinging to it ; " as sure as you are my son, that girl is my daughter!" Young Mordaunt involuntarily paused ;
the asseverations were too solemn for de¬ rision— u Why then this long concealment about her?" he demanded; " why------" " Ask me not," interrupted his father, with a frantic look, and in a corresponding tone, " ask me not, here at least—perhaps you'll too soon hear all." " No, impossible!'' retorted young Mor¬ daunt; " for I cannot hear too soon, as I hope I shall, that you are able to vindicate yourself of the cruelty of whieh you are now suspected." " Oh, let us return to the castle/ said Rose; "for i feel myself sinking under the overwhelming effect of this disco very.^ Ey the time she regained it, she had a little recovered herself and vvith intense anxiety turned her eyes upon Mordaunt, as did his son, for the promised, or at least expected explanation of his motives for so long disclaiming her; but this coukl not immediately be given—it had never been contemplated; and vvith so much to con¬ ceal as there was, so mueh to abridge or gloss over, Mordaunt eould not think of
venturing on it without some considera¬ tion-—** No, no, not to-night," he cried, in a hurried accent, as with feverish im¬ patience he paced the room, distracted at the dilemma in which he found himself, <( not to-night," fuììy understanding the looks that vvere directed tovvards him ; " my feelings are too agitated to permit what is desired immediately ; but by to¬ morrow I hope I shall be sufficiently com¬ posed to account for what now appears so extraordinary—till when I wish to be left to myself." Rose, vvith a deep sigh, immediately quitted her seat to withdraw' ; but too well conjecturing his motive for not coming to an immediate explanation of his couduct, and from which she could not help feeling a sensation of horror at the recent disco¬ very, to find herself so closely connected vvith a being of vvhotn she hatl conceived sueh terrible suspicions, was indeed a shock bhe could scarcely support.
CHAPTER VIIL u He that once sins, like him who slides on ice, Goes swiftly down tlie slippery paths of vice ; Tho' conscience checks him, yet these rubs got ?'?? ? He sins securely, and looks brick no more." Mordaunt could have gnashed His teeth —could almost have torn the quivering flesh from his bones, at the thought of the disclosure into which He had been betray¬ ed. Yet was it not one to which con¬ science had been long goading him? but in reply, had not the danger which He was aware must attend it, decided him against it? He trembled—he shuddered —His blood ran cold at the thought of what he might perhaps Have incurred by it. Was there no way of relieving him¬ self from the Horrible apprehensions under vvhich He now laboured ? could He not re¬ fract what he had said? but, no—the use-
lessness, the folly of such an attempt, was too evident to permit him to dwell on the idea : he had betrayed himself to those who were too much interested in ascer¬ taining the truth, to allovv any further ef¬ fort at deception to succeed, and by at¬ tempting which he should, in all proba- bility, only add to His difficulties, and finally provoke what He now might per¬ haps by a little address avert. Whatever were the surmises or suspicions of Rose, once positively acknowledged as his daugh¬ ter, could he suppose she would give ut¬ terance to them—utterance to any thing that could affect His safety or character? but again disclaimed, what was there to withhold or prevent Her from publishing them? and once published, what had he not to dread ? Besides, supposing He could hope to succeed in inducing it to be believed that his recent assertion was an idle one, the mere suggestion of the mo¬ rnent, would it not be only to free himself írom one dilemma to plunge himself into another? for hovv slight was the authority
he knew he possessed over his son ! it was therefore absolutely expedient, his best and safest policy, that he should not at¬ tempt to contradict himself. But shoulel lie be mistaken in his opinion of Rose— should the name of father be no protec¬ tion from the resentment lie must have excited in her mind, or rather sliould she conceive it but a duty to the memory of her otlier parent, to inquire further into the particulars of what he told her—in short, resolve on what he would, he found himself tortured by apprehension ; but it Avas right, it was proper it should be so ; he knew, he felt he merited still greater sufferings than his alarmed conscience now inflicted on him—that he deserved to be dragged forward to condign punishment, an awful warning to mankind of the fal¬ lacy of hoping to elude the recompence clue to sin—a terrible proof of the Divine vengeance, however long delayed, being yet sure to 0A*ertake us. Having finally decided on the confirmation of his asser¬ tion, he at length began to try anei recall
iiis scattered thoughts, in order to consi¬ der what statement he shoulel make: that the correctness of it might be suspected by Rose, he was not without an apprehen¬ sion ; but he relied on her natural feelings for him for not revealing this. His late wife's fatlier was his uncle, and the representative of the family. At an early age Mordaunt was thrown, an un¬ provided orphan, on his protection, his own father, calculating upon a long life, having made no effort to save any imme¬ diate provision out of the profits of a high official situation, which he held under go¬ vernment, for a family. Mr. Mordaunt ivas a man of an austere temper, who did not confer kindnesses or obligations vvith¬ out making them felt; and while he gave to his nephew all the advantages befitting his rank, he made him perfectly under¬ stand, that the slightest provocation would deprive him of his favour. Impressed with this conviction, young Mordaunt seion became anxious to render himself in some degree independent ; anei
accordingly, at a very early period, ex¬ pressed a wish to be allowed to enter the army ; but this was at once negatived, nor would any other profession be Heard of; and what he meant to do for him, or how dispose of Him, He could not possibly con¬ jecture; his having a daughter of course precluding ail expectation of any consi¬ derable provision being intended for him. After going through the routine of edu¬ cation usual for young men of rank, his uncle sent him to travel, under the care of the gentleman who had been His pri¬ vate tutor at the university. To the lively and inquisitive mind of young Mordaunt, nothing could be more agreeable than was this. After visiting almost all the places of note on the Con¬ tinent, he at length arriveel at Venice, where, as usual, through the letters of intro¬ duction his uncle had procured him (anxi¬ ous that by mixing in the first society of the respective places he visited, he should profit as much as possible by his tour), he
soon became acquainted with the most dis¬ tinguished families there. It was just at this period that the young heiress of the ancient and illustrious house of Barberini had made her début in life. Previously to seing lier, Mordaunt had heard a great deal about her; but all that he heard, or all that he in consequence imagined, fell far short of what he con¬ ceived her, when at last he actually beheld her. To all the natural lovelii ess of early youth, she united all those fascinating at¬ tractions for which the Italian females have been celebrated—the Juno-like air— the exquisite contour—the check of rich carnation tint—the sparkling eyes, saying perhaps too much—above all, the voice of siren sweetness, that, as a late elegant tourist has observeel, would of itself alone be sufficient, without the aid of any other charm, to render a Venetian lady capti¬ vating. Mordaunt did not attempt, per¬ haps couid not, to disguise the admiration he felt ; he soon became the shadow of the enchanting Elenora; and to all, as well as
to Himself, it was evident that his homage at her shrine was neither unpleasing to Herself or family. Handsome, lively, and accomplished, as Mordaunt was, that to Her it should not lie unpleasing, could not possibly have excited surprise; but that her family, with their religious prejudices, should appear to encourage, or in any way sanction it, was a matter of some little remark ; but in the apprehensions to which Her father the duke had for some time been secretly giv¬ ing way, these were now lost : the revo¬ lution was now at its Height in France- he foresaw all that was likely to result from it—and to avoid the storm he be¬ lieved impending, the outrages and ra¬ vages he anticipated on the Con tiner t, and in the adjacent states, had Had it for some time past in contemplation to trans port Himself and family, with all of his property that vvas transportable, to Eng¬ land, vvith no other Hesitation on the sub¬ ject than what resulted from the conside¬ ration of the insulated state in which He
should find himself there. So painful was this idea to a person vvho had hitherto lived in the midst of a numerous connex¬ ion, that he could not help now and then experiencing something like a dawning wish for an alliance between his daughter and some one of the Englishmen of rank ? that still visited the place—a wish the reality of vvhich he could no longer deny to himself, vvhen from the assiduities of Mordaunt to his daughter he beheld a possibility of its attainment, and to his inability to repress vvhich Mordaunt was indebted for the encouraging condescen- sion of his manner towards him. Hovv Mordaunt was exactly circum¬ stanced was not known ; nothing had oc¬ curred to call for an explanation on the subject, and that there was any obstacle to his union vvith his daughter, from the want of an independent fortune, the duke therefore remained in ignorance of. To exist witliout Elenora, Moi daunt soon began to think impossible ; yet that vol. ul ι
he should ever possess her, he conceiv¬ ed most doubtful, fbr except his uncie could be induced to sanction his addresses to her, by giving him an independence sufiicient in some degree to entitle him to her hand, hovv could he possibly imagine, that her family, distinguished as they had ever been for pride and ambition, would bestow her on him ? But with his uncle's pride, the wish he had always evinced to aggrandize his family, would he not he delighted at the idea of his forming so il- lustrious an aliiance? and under the per¬ suasion, he was at length on the point ot addressing him on the subject, uhen he received a letter from him, commanding him, in the most peremptory terms, to re¬ turn to England, without a moments de¬ lay after the receipt of ii. ? little recovered from the shock at¬ tendant on the tiiought of so sudden a se¬ paration frotn his mistress, Mordaunt knew not how to regret a circumstance that woukl be the means of sooner termi-
nating His suspense about Her, than a let¬ ter could possibly Have been. Immediate orders vvere given for his departure ; and in His farewell visit at the Barberini palace, He informed them there, that they might rely on either soon hear¬ ing from or seeing him again, an intima¬ tion which He trusted would make them understand what he wished, namely, his Hope of being considered a pretender to the hand of the lovely Elenora. His tmcle was by no means a man of gracious Habits; Mordaunt therefore could not Help being a little surprised, notwith¬ standing the prompt obedience he Had shewn tohis commands—His consciousness, indeed, that as yet He merited nothing un¬ kind from him, at the reception He now met from Him; it was absolutely affection¬ ate; and with the natural sauguineness of youth, Mordaunt allowed himself to augur from it every thing that was agreeable tt) his wishes. But He was not long allowed to remain iti a sfate of delusion ; the pe- l 2
riod for understanding the real views and intentions of his uncle respecting him had now arrived, and with vory little delay he was given to understand, that for the sake of aggrandizing his family, by keeping his fortune entirely in it, his unele had long contemplated, and absolutely decided on, a marriage between him and his cousin. Mordaunt was thunderstruck ; ho could not immediately speak, nor if he could would he have done so—for how could he express joy, expres-» gratitude, at what his very soul shrunk from ? yet neither eould he his real feelings, convinced as he was, í huí to disclose them would be his instant ruiu. But an answer must be given—thero wa·* no alternative; he too well knew his un¬ cle was a despot, vvho was not to be oi¬ fended vvith impunity, and in fal terin» accents he at length forced biniseli to ex¬ press all he saw he expected him to sa) on the occasion. The die was east : his mind was strong and vigorous, and having acquiesced in his uncle's plan, as soon as he had a little
got over its first overwhelming effect upon him, he began to do what good sense dic¬ tated, by endeavouring to make exertions to reconcile himself to it. As yet he hael not seen his destined bride, or at least since they were both mere children, im¬ mediately after the death of her mother, which happened when she was little me>re than a mere infant, the young lady being committed to the care of an aunt, at some distance from her paternal home, by whom she was brought up. But an introduction between them was now no longer delayed ; and if Mordaunt had had a disengaged heart, it is hardly possible but that it must have been resigned to her; yet perhaps there could not be a greater contrast than siie was to the enchanting being that had already captivated it: the one was the brilliant meteor, flashing upon the eye in all the dazzling radiance of unrivalled beauty—or rather the glowing reise, impos¬ sible to be overlooked; the other the meek lily, liable to escape casual observation from its concealing foliage, but when once
discovered, detaining the fascinated eye it seemed anxious to avoid, from the charm of its exquisite delicacy. Elegance was indeed the eharm of Miss Mordaunt, and Had Mordaunt heen a painter, while the enchanting Venetian would Have been his model for the queen of love, the other would Have Heen so for one of Her atten¬ dant graces. Her manner corresponded with her appearance—gentle, retiring, un¬ assuming : Mordaunt could Have fancied, at times, there was an air of melancholy in it—but what could Have given rise to such a feeling in ??? young bosom ? and as often as the thought occurred it was dismissed, as a most improbable conjec¬ ture. Preparations for their marriage imme¬ diately commenced. Proud, Haughty, as¬ piring, fonti of the glitter and parade that the generality of mankind are attached to, Mordaunt sought, in the splendour of these preparations—in the idea of the affluence that was about being secured to him, to lose or stifie His regret for the loss of the
beautiful Venetian, but in vain—his heart still clung to her idea with passionate re¬ gret; and at length yielding to the un¬ pardonable, the cruel selfishness of that heart that would be remembered by her, though but too well aware to be so must be at the expence of her tranquillity, ho addressed a letter to her, explanatory of all that Had occurred^—his feelings, his sen- Jments, his disappointed wishes, his frus¬ trated intentions, the cruel circumstances that had compelled him to act so contrary to the real dictates of his torn heart ; and vvhich concluded by a passionate entreaty to be allowed to retain a place in her me¬ mory, as a being that, whilst life remain¬ ed, must continue to worship and idolize her idea. The marriage feast was hardly over when the bridal festivities vvere exchanged for lament and mourning; his uncle, inthe midst of liis rejoicings at the completion of his long- contem plated plan, suddenly expiring in a fit. Had his marriage been but a little longer delayed ! was the invo-
lun tary reflection of Mordaunt at the moment; yet he Had no right to com¬ plain of his destiny; he was united to a lovely woman, whom every body admired —He was possessed of a fortune that ren¬ dered Him at once envied, caressed, and followed—-and He Had a long perspective of years before him for its enjoyment. Domestic life was not the kind of life that his proud and ostentatious spirit could take pleasure in ; yet He was not altoge¬ ther inattentive to His vvife, till by chance, or at least seeming chance, He discovered that she had been fondly, firmly, with the sanction of Her aunt, attached to another, and that Her acquiescence in Her father's plan for their union Had Heen, like His, the t fleet of fear, not choice. He immedi¬ ately choíc to imagine Himself an injured man from the circumstance, forgetting that it was one he Had no more right to complain of, than he would Have permitted Her to think she Had of His previous attachment to the Venetian ; but we are seldom as unjust to ourselves
as we are to others. Mordaunt was too selfish, Had too much pride and vanity, not to make Him wish to be the first in every one's regard and estimation; and from the moment He Had reason to ima¬ gine, though certainly not from her de- meanour or conduct, that He did not oc¬ cupy the Heart of his wife, from that mo¬ ment He became utterly neglectful of her. Just about this juncture the Barberini family arrived in England. Mordaunt could not resist the impetuous impulse that urged him immediately to throw Himself in the svay of lady Elenora ; Her manner soon reassured him, soon convinced him that he had not addressed Himself to her feel¬ ings iu vain. His Handsome person, his animated and accomplished manners, the numerous advantages he was possessed of) Had, in short, completely subdued Her Heart; ancl such, in short, was the force of her attachment for hitn, as to render it next to impossible that a letter, artfully worded as His was, should not have had ι 3
the desired effect—that of quickly ap¬ peasing any indignation his relinquish¬ ment of her might have provoked, or, in other Avords, making her view him as a being more deserving of commiseration than of resentment. But for what was he now pursuing her, hound, fettered, as he ivas? Supposing he were capable of the baseness of medi¬ tating to take advantage of the confidence she reposed in him, must not her rank, the powerful protection she enjoyed in her illustrious family, pnrve an insuperable obstacle to the atrocious design ? But all was not vague—there Avas a glimmering of hope for him—the constitution of Mrs. Mordaunt was certainly delicate; she was in a situation too that was e)ften attended Avith peril, particularly to a frame of de¬ licacy ; and should it be, as it seemed to be far from improbable, what then was to prevent his possession of the enchanting object of his adoration, except—except (what a check to the revellings of his fan¬ cy the possibility !) the unfortunate off-
spring should survive its mother, in which case her fortune would immediately be taken possession of by trustees, according to the irrevocable settlement of his uncle, leaving him what could scarcely be called a slender independence. With what intense anxiety was every look of Airs. Mordaunts now watched ! but through what different feelings and motives than those to which they vvere naturally imputed! Yet not vvithout a sensation of absolute abhorrence against himself, did He at times think of the mo¬ tive for this watchfulness—not vvithout shrinking within Himself at the light in which he should be regarded—-the Horror, the detestation, vvere His Heart now open to the view of mankind. In a word, he hated Himself, yet He made no effort to overcome the cause of this hatred—instead of yielding to com¬ punction, he rather sought to stifle it—in¬ stead of fleeing temptation, to court it; and the punishment due to His obduracy was yet his.
He gradually became moody and re¬ served—without allowing himself to define, or perhaps well knowing if he could de¬ fine it, he felt as if there was some¬ thing gloomy, something terrible, in contemplation ; his musings were all to himself; suddenly he declared that the declining state of Mrs. Mordaunts health was such, that it was absolutely requisite ίο convey her to a milder clime. Some vvere surprised, and some at¬ tempted to oppe>se the measure ; amongst the latter was Mrs. Mordaunt herself—but in vain. We shall not enter into the te¬ dious details of liis arrangements on this occasion; suffice it, that instead of taking her to the Continent, as he gave out, he conveyed her to St. Doulagh's—but with a silence, a secrecy, a caution, that pre¬ vented the circumstance from being known, or even, fbr a time at least, suspected, by any one but those whom he had found it requisite to take into his confidence. He had previously been over, in his boyish days, and liad, at that period, formed an
intimacy with our old friend, Barney O'Rooke, that he now turned to account: in short, he had a private conference with O'Rooke, with whom His intimacy had been kept up, by many subsequent favours conferred on him ; and having proved to Him that it would be for his inte¬ rest to serve him in the present instance, informed Him that a strong suspicion of Mrs. Mordaunts fidelitv Had induced Him to determine on secluding Her for some time from Her usual associates; and that on Him he relied for managing matters in such a way, that no suspicion of her be¬ ing at St. Doulagh's should be entertained. In doing this there was no great difficulty; Darby and Kate, afterwards transferred to the castle on the cliff, vvere then the persons in charge of St. Doulaglts, and, of course, it was their interest to remain silent on any thiug the person in vvhose service they vvere chose to conceal ; and he (O'Rooke) Had a relation of his own, whose services He knew he could readily command in attending on the lady.
Whatever was the surprise of Mrs. Mordaunt at what her husband pretended to be the sudden change in his intentions, she gave no utterance to any displeasure on the subject. The vietim of parental tyranny, torn from the object of her ten¬ derest affections, she was in that frame of mind, in that state of feeling, that ren¬ dered all places almost alike to her, or if one preferable to another, that which was most retired, most secluded : but even if inclined to be angry at the apparent ca¬ price of Mordaunt, the specious reason he assigned for it would perhaps have pre¬ vented any expressions of displeasure at the circumstance—" It suddenly occurred to him," he said, " that a journey to the Continent would be too much for Her, and that His best plan would be, to take her to St, Doulaglts, wiiere she would be sure of all that quiet her present situation and delicate state of health required." Meaning that their being in it should remain a profound seeret, of course Mor¬ daunt took care that neither should be seen
beyond the Avails of St. Doulagh's; How ill, from the horrible feelings that tor« mented him — that made him anxious to fly from himself, could he bear the gioom, the solitude, to Avhich he had now condemned himself! but they would not be of long endurance : Mrs. Mordaunt ivas near her confinement, and as tliere must consequently be speedily an end to all further irresolution about her, lie should not much longer be under a neces¬ sity of remaining wiiere he was. With Avhat eager, what intense anxiety, was he now continually demanding of Mrs. Cor¬ mack, the person procured by O'Rooke to be lier immediate attendant, what lier real opinion of her was—whether she in¬ deed thought that the hour of danger that was approaching would be one of more than usual danger to lier! Of course, imputing this solicitude to feelings very different to those to which it was in reality owing, Mrs. Cormack coukl hardly help wondering at what she ivas told of the suspected inconstancy of Mrs.
Mordaunt towards a husband so affection¬ ate, as well as handsome and engaging in every respect. Yet notwithstanding the opinion she was leel to form of her, she felt it impossible not to be interested for her; there was an uncomplaining sweet¬ ness in her manner, an air of resignation to every thing, that imperceptibly gained upon, and attached her to her, rendering iier at times incredulous of what she heard —since it seemed to her hardly possible that a creature so apparently heavenly-minded, looking, speaking, so like an angel, could be guilty of what she was accused : once she ventured to hint this belief to Mor¬ daunt ; but the reception it met vvith si¬ lenced her ever after on the subject.
CHAPTER IX.
. _------------__.------------------Retake thee ?? nothing hut despair: a thousand knees, 'leu thousand yeais tout ι her, naked, fasting, Upon a barren mount. tiu, and -till winter, Iu '•tunu perpetual, could m>t move the gods 'L ? look that w a j thou wont." At length the hour so anxiously, or ra¬ ther perhaps fearfully, looked forward to by Mordaunt arrived : and after remain¬ ing some time after its announcement in a state of conflicting feelings, to vvhich no language coulel do justice, Mrs. Cormack abruptly entered the chamber vvhere he was shut up, to inform him that he was the father of a lovely girl, likely to do well, as she also trusted was the mother. Mordaunt gnashed his teeth—"Both— both—likely to do well !" He cried, ab¬ ruptly turning round on Her, for he had involuntarily sought to avoid Her looks on
Her.entrance; " are you certain—are you positively sure—about the mother at least?" No—she could not be positively certain of any thing of the kind, was the reply ; but, with the blessing of Heaven, she Hoped there was no danger. Mordaunt waved her from the room. Should he then be forced------but the re¬ flection was too terrible to be pursued. He positively refused seeing the infant; and, on being urged, sternly declared he never would, from his conviction (deter¬ mined now on bringing matters to a close) of its not being his. Still, though he felt himself meditating some dire deed, he had not regularly planned, or decidedly settled, any thing in his own mind. At length, one evening he cautiously placed a bottle of laudanum amongst the other things deposited for her use, in a closet adjoining the bedchamber of Mrs. Mordaunt, but vvith a self deceiving per¬ suasion that it was with no sinister hope. He strove to forget, to divert his thoughts from, what he had done, but in vain ; and
after a useless struggle vvith himself for some hours, he suddenly rushed out from the place where he Had shut himself up, to remove the drusr ; but it was gone. His lifeblood seemed to curdle round his heart at the instant; but it might not be too late to prevent what he dreaded, and suddenly reviving at the thought, he was Hastening to the chamber of his wiie, when, wildly calling upon His name, he encountered Mrs. Cormack coming out of it.—Mrs. Mordaunt was dying; she was suddenly seized with convulsions, and no¬ thing could save Her ! Mordaunt rushed past the nearly-dis¬ tracted woman into the chamber: the first thing that caught His eye was the fatal bottle; he snatched it up—it was empty of its contents, and the dreadful fact was evident. OH, the horror of that moment ! the Horror of feeling vve Have commitcd a crime beyond recall! He shrieked in the frenzy of the thought—he rushed to the bedside.—Was there no way of saving her ? But, no—no—that moment she ex-
pired, and he was, to all intents « and purposes, a murderer in liis own sight, and that of Heaven—stained indelibly, everlastingly, with human blood ! tiie ele- stroyer of the fragile flower, that had beeu intrusted to his care, in full security of its being ever fondly cherished by him ! the murderer of his near kinswoman—the daughter of him to whom he was indebt¬ ed for education ancl support—of his wife —the mother of his chilei ! Oh ! ivhat was all that the world could now offer him, guilt-stained, loaded as he was with crime? But he was soon checked in gÍA r - ing utterance to his anguish by alarm for his safety : the change that took place, al¬ most instantly after her deatli, in the as¬ pect of Mrs. Mordaunt, ? 1 her attendants to suspect what had happened, and both, almost in the same breath, pretested their belief of her being poisoned. "Poisoned!" repeated Mordaunt, reel¬ ing back through terror ; then, in a mo¬ ment, through absolute desperation, re¬ covering his self-possession, and seeing at
once the course He must pursue—" Yet it must be so," He cried ; " there is no other way of accounting for this frightful change. Unhannv being F she coidd not bear herown upbraidings, and so------But, my friends, this is a thing I must expect your inviolable secrecy about—the honour ofour faniilv is involved in it. Should St be disclosed, the cause of it must be also known; and, out of reverence to the me¬ mory of the good old man Her lather, not merely my relative, but benefactor, 1 would not, exclusivo of every other con¬ sideration. Have Her descend into the arave with a stigma on her name." It was an ugh' affair—a very awkward one to He concerned in; and this convic¬ tion prevented there being any Hesitation in his obtaining the promise He so artfully required. The purty Having a little collected themselv t s, it wat» settled, that a conve¬ nient spot ahout the castle should be sought tPtt for the interment of the body , immediately after whicii Mordaunt de-
ascertain the truth of the conjecture, and for the purpose of being enabled to do which, decided on calling at an hour vvhen, from not heing expected, there would be no precaution, of course he concluded, to prevent his doing so. Darby, however, was properly instruct¬ ed in the part allotted to him ; and in re¬ ply to the blunt demand of—" Was not Mr. Mordaunt then in the caMle?" ex¬ pressed his wonder, rubbing his eyes all the time, as if just roust I from his bed, at what could have given rise to such a thought, the master being neither then at the castle, nor, for what he knew, ever ex¬ pected to be at it again, but then far avvay vvith the poor dying mistress. tt Very extraordinary ! very extraordi¬ nary !" cried the disappointed Mr. Burke ; " very extraordinary then that such a ru¬ mour should have got afloat ! however, I suppose'tis a lie !" and so saying, he sprung into his saddle, and galloped baek vvith as much haste as he had galloped for¬ ward.
That a rumour had indeed got abroad, of his being at the castle, was now evident to Mordaunt ; his consternation at the conviction was unutterable. His only plan, he saw, was to depart as speedily as possible ; and Barney agreeing in the ex¬ pediency ofthis, no time was lost in Vue final arrangement of all matters between them. After some consultation, it was finally settled that, for the present, lest of any watch being set upon the present move¬ ments in the castle, a circumstance that Barney deemed by no means improbable, the body should be allowed to remain vvhere it had been so hastily deposited ; und in short, hefore daybreak, the party liad dispersed: Mordaunt, so disguised as to have rendered it next to impossible for any one to recognise him, was miles off; Harney again in his own home, congratu¬ lating himself oti having so far got out of the scrape, in vvhich, to his great regret, he saw he h id involved himself and Mrs. vol. in. ?
Cormack on her w r ay back to hers with the deserted infant, whom pity was every mo¬ ment more strongly attaching her to. She was a kind-hearted, excellent woman, incapable of voluntarily becoming subser¬ vient to anv thing that was base or cruel. She wanted not discernment, and the re¬ sult of her recent observations was, to ex¬ cite the most fearful imaginings in her mind concerning Mordaunt, such as pre¬ sently determined her on not giving up the poor babe to him, as he gave her to understand he should expect she would, as soon as he reached a place whence he might with safety send for it. No, both out of pity for it, as well as for the sake of its angelic mother, of whose purity she had by this time no more doubt than she had of that of the patron saint at whose shrine she knelt, she firmly resolved, let what would betide her for keeping it, not by giving it up to let it, ** Wi'h th<* innocent milk in its most innocent mouth," be haled out—she could make use of no
other expression—to murder ; for the dis¬ position old Mr. Mordaunt had made of his fortune was well known, and of course she was aware, that this poor infant was the only bar to its father's becoming sole possessor of the family property. But her husband was of a very different nature to hers; and to prevent any opposition to her plan, she was obliged to impose upon him the belief, of being assured of a hand¬ some recompence for taking charge of the child, the real parentage of vvhich she af¬ fected tobe ignorant of; and taking an opportunity shortly after of having a pri¬ vate conference with Barney, she positive¬ ly declared to him, that if he attempted to contradict the statement she meant to make of the child's death to its father, she would, without further hesitation, reveal all that had taken place at the castle, let the consequence of such a proceeding, and bad enough she had grounds for believing it would be, be what it might, to those concerned in the transactions there. ? 2
This threat w r as quite sufficiënt to in¬ duce the acquiescence she required from Barney—he took the solemn oath she de¬ manded, to keep secret what she desired ; and on receiving a letter from Mordaunt, instructing Him to send Her, with the in¬ fant, to him, returned for answer that the child was dead. "Whether Mrs. Cormack purposed to al¬ ways deceive its father, as to its existence, vve cannot pretend to say. She died in the course ofa very short time after being at the castle, and on Her death the child was consigned to the care of Mrs. Brady ; and from Her, as has been already stated, was taken under that of a lady, in the neighbourhood of its supposed father, the miller Cormack. Although the intentions of Mordaunt vvere not quite so fell, perhaps, respecting it, as Mrs. Cormack allowed Herself to ima¬ gine, yet he heard of its deatli with joy. There was now nothing to impede the ac¬ complishment of His wishes, relative to tiie beautiful Venetian; and after Hearing
about for the usual time the moekery of wo, He made an open tender of His Hand, and was accepted. To judge from external circumstances, and what an object of envy was He now ! and yet the poorest wretch that walked the earth was not more deserving of com¬ miseration, for he Had in His bosom " the worm that never dies." Go where He would, a pale and mournful image was ever present to His view. In the enjoy¬ ment of the pleasures, the luxuries, He had so amply the power of commanding, he strove to banish reflection, but in vain. From his outward show, however, none knew His inward torments—his personal safety demanded their strict concealment. In clue course of time a son was bom to him, shortly after whose birth the whole of the Barberini property centred in lady Elenora, from the death of the duke her father ; but all would not do—nothing could extract that from the overflowing cup of prosperity, which completely em¬ poisoned it to Him.
The stings of a guilty conscience vvere not, however, all he had to render him unhappy; He soon discovered that the real temper and disposition of lady Ele- nora w r ere calculated for any thing but do¬ mestic bliss ; that from her no soft com¬ pliances, no endearing attentions, were to be expected; that, in short, beauty- beauty that «---------------Soon grows familiar to the lovu, Fades od hi> c\e, aud palls upon the ?????," was her only recommendation and claim to love ; and for her, a being with whom he now saw happiness was not to be en¬ joyed, he had sacrificed His souls repose. the------but the reflection was one of too much horror to be pursued. Contrary to the arrangement made with O'Rooke on quitting it, a feeling not to be subdued withheld Him from returning to the castle, to remove from it the evi¬ dence he had left within it of his atrocious guilt; and to this feeling of invincible re¬ pugnance to entering it again, was owing
his stipulating, on disposing of it to the O'Neil family, for permission to still re¬ tain a chamber or tvvo locked up in it. It may seem extremely improbable, his acting in this manner, by his not doing all that lay in his power to prevent any risk of danger to himself; but Avhat ut¬ terly inconsistent and improbable things are continually occurring in real life—and by what a strange infatuation is it, that we frequently hear of the guilty actually leading to their own betrayal! Be this as it may, ivhether ivhat Ave have stated be declared beyond belief or not, yet so it was, a positive fact ; and Iioav much lon¬ ger the castle might have remained the repository of the fearful secret that, in the alarm of fear, had been intrusted to its keeping, we know not, but for the cir¬ cumstance tlmt compelled Mordaunt to at length revisit it. Guilt is generally over cautious ; and so terrific to the imagination of Me)rdaunt was the thought of removing the chest by daylight, that, concealing his arrival in
the neighbourhood, he entered the cham¬ ber vvhere it lay in the dead of the night, and, vvith the assistance of Darby and O'Rooke, removed it to another place, there to remain till taken, the ensuing evening, to the place fixed on for finally depositing it in. What occurred on that occasion is al¬ ready known, as also the ensuing morning, vvhen repairing at early dawn to the cham¬ ber, so long locked up, in order to care¬ fully examine it, ere it was thrown open to every one vvho chose to enter it, Mor¬ daunt encountered his daughter; but not entirely to the circumstance of encounter¬ ing any one there prior to his ow r n careful examination of it, though sufficient cer¬ tainly to have excited no inconsiderable degree of alarm, was owing the agitation into which he was thrown at the instant, but by the belief, that in the figure before him he beheld the apparition of his mur¬ dered vvife, so exact was the resemblance be¬ tween her and the person whom he now saw. Some minutes elapsed ere, notwithstand-
ing his natural strength of mind, and the derision in whieh he had always uniformly held every thing that bordered on super¬ stition or credulity, he could not entirely divest himself of the idea. Who it was he actually saw—what their motive for vi¬ siting the chamber—or hovv they got admis¬ sion to it, vvere, of course, all matters of intense anxiety to him ; but vvhich, except as far as it regarded the first, he was not destined to be relieved from. His extreme emotion, on again beholding Rose, from the still more powerful likeness than even before he conceived he traced in her to the departed, is already known. Alive he again beheld the every look and feature of the latter; the only difference between them, that one had looked the drooping flower, the otlier the bright glowing one, over vvhose young head no blighting mil¬ dew had yet shed its malignant influence : in short, the resemblance was so strong, as gradually to lead to an idea of some de¬ ception having been practised on him. ?. ?
Barney was in consequence strictly inter¬ rogated, and the result was, a reluctant confession of the truth ; for cunning as he was in his own way, yet for the deep, the wary, and penetrating Mordaunt, he was no more a match than a feather would be for a post. Mordaunt was terribly agitated on dis¬ covering he had been deceived, involving, as did the existence of his daughter, so many consequences of fearful import to himself: his first measure, on ascertaining it, however, was to assure Barney, whose first consideration he had by this time learned was for Himself, that if, by any chance, directly or indirectly, he betrayed to any other the secret he had extorted from him, he might rely on heing instantly de¬ prived of the annuity that had Hitherto been allowed Him, to the exempting him from any anxiety relative to His means of living. This threat would have indueed O'Rooke to silence to the pope, had His Holiness been his confessor. He readily promised not only the inviolable secrecy required
by Mordaunt, but to do all in his power to aid him in getting Rose out of the way, that is, avvay from St. Doulagh's ; Mor¬ daunt artfully pretending, that though, from a conviction of her spurious birth, he could not bring himself to own her as his, yet, from the consideration of her being still allied to him, he would gladly rescue her from her present state of dependence, and remove Her to some place abroad, where she might be introduced in a different manner into life. Finding that nothing could induce her voluntarily to give up the protection she enjoyed, he decicled on having recourse to stratagem, for the purpose of tearing her avvay from it ; for to let her remain quietly undisturbed, now that he knew who she was, was out of the question ; but in the furtherance of his plans, to prevent any suspicion attaching to him, it was requi¬ site that he should seem to depart from the place ; accordingly every thing neces¬ sary to induce belief of his positive depar-
ture w 7 as done, when in reality he was se¬ creted in the House of Barney. Continually hovering about the castle, in hopes by so doing of at length obtain¬ ing an opportunity of surprising Rose, he at length diseovered the attachment be¬ tween Her and Eugene, a circumstance that threatened to render so still more dif¬ ficult and perplexing his efforts to get her into his power, as to occasion Him to Have recourse to not merely dangerous, but even almost absurd measures to prevent a final engagement between them ; but He was defeated in these; and at last con¬ vinced that fbr the present He could not succeed in his plan respecting her, with¬ out running a risk he shrunk from, he de¬ cided on its temporary relinquishment : and turning all his attention from her to Eugene, who, as a person but too much interested about Her, ifin existencie, or at liberty, wotdd suffer nothing to oppose His inquiries after her, if carried avvay from St. Doulaglts, he saw it was expe¬ dient to get out of the way. How, under
an assumed name, he introduced himself to him, and obtained his confidence, is al¬ ready knovvn, as also the progressive steps he tooK ior involving ium in ucstruction. But his poisoned arrows fell short of their mark ; thero was a shield interposed be¬ tween him and the apparently undefended bosom of innocence that he could not pe¬ netrate; Eugene still escaped uninjured, both out of the lion's den and from the fiery furnace ; and enraged as well as alarmed at the circumstance, Mordaunt believing, after his repeated disappoint¬ ments concerning him, that it was useless to attempt any thing further against Eu¬ gene, hastened to Ireland, vvith a deter¬ mination of running all hazards to get Rose into his power, persuaded, that if a marriage once took place between her and Eugene, O'Rooke, notwithstanding his solemn oaths of secrecy, would, from the regard he had for the O'Neil family, dis¬ cover vvho rhe was; but the bird was flown ; he proceeded from St. Doulaglts to the place to which it was supposed Mrs
Brady had taken her; but only to find there was some deception in the affair, and his rage at the circumstance was unutter¬ able. Nothing could induce him to be¬ lieve but that Mrs. Brady either suspected, or had discovered, her claim to fortune and right to another name, and that she had taken her off in the manner she had done, for the purpose of taking some ad¬ vantage of the circumstance. O'Rooke trembled for his annuity, which Mordaunt deeiared he would not continue to him if Rose was not speedily disco¬ vered. How she was, through means of the exulting O'Rooke, is already known ; but notwithstanding the large portion of the leaven of selfishness that was mixed up in his nature, vve must do him thejus¬ tice to say, that if aware of what the real in¬ tentions of her father were respecting her, he would have kept the discovery that so delighted him to himself. After all his turnings and windings, to find himself betrayed into a disclosure he had taken such pains, incurred such risks,
such danger, to avoid, was indeed a cir¬ cumstance that required more command over himself than he at present possessed, to be able to think of with any thing like calmness ; yet when he reflected on the ap¬ prehension that had hurried him into it— that but for it, nothing perhaps could have prevented a crime, at the very thought of which He involuntarily shuddered—he could not accuse himself of folly. When he thought of his own guilt, and reflected on that which he Had every reason to be¬ lieve He Had been so near betraying others into, and for which, of course, he must have been answerable—could there be any merey for such a wretch ! He franticly ex¬ claimed ; could forgiveness be extended to crimes like His? But He Hatl involved Himself in a dilemma, from which no time was to He lost in endeavouring to extricate Himself, if he valued His personal safety, to say notlnng of his name or character. He was too much accustomed to contri¬ vances, too keen and quick in seeing, in all times of perplexity, what was best to
be done, not shortly to arrange within himself how he should act on this occasion. Accordingly, convinced that to attempt deceiving her with regard to the fact, tliat is, that she had a real right to his name, vvas useless, Rose was informed, after a night passed by Iiim in intense delibera* tion on the subject, that a suspicion of her mother's fidelity had occasioned liis un¬ willingness to acknowledge her for his daughter; but which suspicion having at length, by never-ceasing exertions to ascer¬ tain the truth, been discovered to be ill- founded, he had acted as he had done to¬ wards her, for the express purpose of re¬ vealing to her vvhat had at last been so abruptly disclosed—as soon as the requi¬ site arrangements for putting her into pos¬ session of the fortune to wliich, in right of her mother, she was entitled had taken place. Whether his son had any doubt of the truth of this statement, we cannot pre¬ tend to say, but seeming credit was all that coulel be given to it by Rose; there
were too many circumstances to contra¬ dict it—to prove it the fabrication of the moment, to permit it to have any weight with her ; but she would not—she dared not give utterance to her real sentiments respecting it ; if they vvere known—if they could be torn from her, oh, what might not the fate of him be whom she was now to consider her father ! But regarding him in the fearful light that she must ever do, from the suspicions that had been excited at St. Doulaglts —regarding him, in short, as she was compelled to do, from what she had been witness to, as a blood-stained being—the destroyer of her mother, how did she wish she had been allowed to re¬ main in ignorance of the connexion be¬ tween them ! How did she feel that the rank, the fortune, to which the discovery of it was the means of raising her, would be but a poor recompence fbr the constant fears with which, knowing but too well what he had to apprehend, she must be tortured about him—the horror with which his sight must ever inspire her ! but
it was the will of Heaven, that through her, justice should at length be rendered to the injured dead; and while her heart was prostrated in gratitude to that divine Power which had guarded her from the evils to which the cruel abandonment of her natural protector had rendered her lia¬ ble, she humbly implored that its mercy might be extended to the wretched sinner for whom she was so much interested; that at length repentance might touch his hitherto evidently obdurate nature, and that, awakened to a full conviction of His atrocities, he might throw himself upon him who died that he might be a ransom for many. With the consciousness he had of what his real intentions respecting her had been, young Mordaunt could not bring Himself to endure the idea of immediately encoun¬ tering the looks of Rose again, and would, in consequence, have probably departed, as he decided on immediately doing, with¬ out seeing her, but for the consideration that she might impute the circumstance
to his regret and indignation at the di¬ minution of fortune Avhich the recent discovery must occasion him. According¬ ly he forced himself to send a message, begging to be alloAved to take leave of her before his departure ; and as lie bade her adieu, assured her, with a warmth that permitted no doubt of his sincerity, that to find slie indeed regarded him as a bro¬ ther, by applying to him if ever requiring any service, Avould be a source of greater happiness to him than he could express. Acknowledged as his daughter, of course his name would immediately be assumed ; and what strictures, wliat com¬ ments, what dangerous inquiries, might not the, consequently from this circum¬ stance, still greater publicity of the affair occasion ! To prevent what he so greatly dreaded, Mordaunt conceived the best and only plan that could be thought of, would be to promote an immediate marriage be¬ tween her and Eugene. He wondered that the thought did not immediately
suggest itself to him, more especially when on its occurring he reflected that probably nothing else could prevent the natural re¬ sentment of Eugene, at the sufferings to which, it could no longer be concealed, he had been the means of subjecting him, from leading to alarming consequences. The torturing anxiety under vvhich Rose naturally concluded her friends must be about her, induced an immediate wish for some communication vvith them ; but this was opposed by Mordaunt, who wish¬ ed, if possible, to prevent any thing of the kind, till her marriage had taken place, on the grounds, that in the first place there was an end to this imagined anxiety, in consequence of the belief occasioned by her sudden disappearance, and in the next, that till every step necessary fbr putting her in possession of her fortune was taken, he did not wish her to be knovvn under her new name. Rose did not oppose him; but her anxiety about Eugene was so great, from the terrible effect she feared her imagined
death might Have had upon him, that at length Mordaunt was induced to acknow¬ ledge his arrival at Mrs. Brady's, and the grief to which He had abandoned himself To knovv she might indulge herself with seeing, with Hearing Him again, and resist the impulse that U4,ed her seeking the gratification, was impossible ; and accord¬ ingly, unable to control Herself in this in¬ stance, or rather feeling that she should Hardly be able to persuade herself that she was not actually in a dream, till she had seen him again, she suffered herself to steal one evening, at dusk, to the monas¬ ter)', the melancholv scene of her recent lamentations, and now the lonely haunt of Eugene, where, in the impassioned accents of despair, He now ealled upon her name. With difficulty, as she listened to Him, could she forbear revealing Herself to him ; but various considerations compelled her to let Hitn remain yet a little longer under His cruel belief concerning her. On ven¬ turing again to the ruin, she did not es-
cape however as she had done in the first instance, and finding she was followed, she deemed it expedient to acquaint her father with the circumstance, lest of any thing untoward happening, in consequence of trying to conceal it from him. Mordaunt having by this time made all the arrangements he deemed requisite ere any disclosure to Eugene, or in other words, settled exactly hovv he would act, was not disconcerted by her information as he might otherwise have been. Till the explanation however, vvhich on many accounts he still persevered in choosing to make himself, had taken place, he ex¬ pressed a wish to Rose that she would not appear, and by himself repaired to meet Eugene. ** I cannot wonder/ he cried, on seeing Eugene instinctively recoil at his sight, as already stated, u at the feelings your looks evince; but whatever cause there may be for indignation,, there's none, I so¬ lemnly protest, for alarm in the present instance."
" What," exclaimed Eugene, with a burst of indignation and scorn, i( attempt to assert this, after having had recourse to stratagem to get me into your power !" " To convince you then of the truth of the assertion, you are again free to depart the moment you please/ said Mordaunt, unlocking the door behind him as he spoke. Eugene hastily turned to it, but sud¬ denly checking himself—" Can you deny/ he demanded, " that you have been the means of inveigling me here ?" k · No, I don't attempt it." 4 * And fbr what purpose ?" '· For one that I mean to explain, if you vvill permit me." " And can you, or rather will you/ cried Eugene, vvith heightening indigna¬ tion, as all he had suffered through means ot this unprincipled man recurred to his thoughts, naturally recalled by his sight, ** can you, or rather vvill you also, I re¬ peat, account for your unprovoked enmi¬ ty towia-ds me—explain to me the cause of your seeking me out, as you did, like
a persecuting fiend, to lead me to destruc¬ tion?" " Yes," repHed Mordaunt, with all the coolness of a collected person. " G@od Heaven ! and do you dare to tell me this?*' exclaimed Eugene, with flashing eyes—" do you dare, vvith this coolness, to acknowledge yourself the vil¬ lain I suspected—the villain through vvhose means I was near suffering all the horrors of an ignominious death—the almost equal horrors of lasting imprisonment—the vil¬ lain through whose cruel machinations I was separated from my family, till the Happiness that might Have blessed my ear¬ lier return to them was lost for ever ?" * t Yes—all this 1 dare confess : but is there not inconsistency in this conduct? you accuse me, with a full conviction on your mind of the faet, of my being a villain ; and yet, because I do not deny thejustice of the accusation, you burst into invec¬ tive." " No, no—you mistake—it is not that ; but the coolness, the insulting coolness
with which you acknowledge the fact, that works me up to this frenzy/ invo¬ luntarily applying his handkerchief to his brow as he spoke, rendered damp by the violence of his emotions. " You can utter no reproach/ saie 1 the other, *' that can awaken resentment, be¬ cause you can utter none that I am not conscious of meriting ; but fbr all you have suffered through my means, I have the power of making reparation ; had not this been the case, I never should have sought this meeting." " You !" exclaimed Eugene, in a tone of scornful incredulity, and again recoiling —" you the power of making reparation for what you have made me suifer ! no, mock not your guilty spirit with that hope —lay not that flattering unction to your heart. I knovv not your means, your for¬ tune, your real rank in life—I am ignorant of all concerning you, but thai; you are a cool,deliberate,mysterious villain; but vvere the mines of eastern riches yours, and eould VOL. III. L
you turn out all their coveted contents be¬ fore me, I would spurn them with contempt, if offered by way of atonement for the in¬ jury you have done me ! My minds repose, the quiet of my soul, is lost for ever, through your means ; but for you, I feel a firm persuasion I should not have to de¬ plore tjie loss of her on whom my soul doted with all the fondness of early attach¬ ment ; and yet you—you—the blaster of my earthly happiness"—vvith a burst of sorrow crieel the anguished youth—" you. talk to me of reparation for the wrongs you have done me, the sufferings you have entailed upon me! To raise my bride from her cold earthly bed—to give her back, palpitating with life, to my ea¬ ger arms—that, that could alone make amends for your conduct." " I know not hovv to attempt the ex¬ planation that will prove I have not mock¬ ed, 1 have not trifled with your feelings, by the assertion I have made," cried Mor¬ daunt, " while you thus continue agi¬ tated. Endeavour to compose, to collect
yourself—to prepare yourself for a sur¬ prise almost exceeding belief—in a word, for a restoration to happiness, that will have the semblance of a miracle r . ,1 Eugene started, and turned round vvith quickness on the chair on which he had thrown himself.—" Whither would you lead my imagination ?" he cried ; " but, no, no," again covering his face with his hand, 4i have I not vvept over her grave —do I not knovv but too well that she is gone for ever ?" " You are mistaken—you have been led astray/ said Mordaunt. " How ?" exclaimed Eugene, starting on his feet, his eyes almost bursting from their sockets. « Yes—that is, I mean, in imagining you vvept over her grave- —the rites of se¬ pulture vvere never paid to Rose; but to keep you in ignorance of this, Mrs. Brady deemed it necessary to point out a parti¬ cular spot to you as the one she was laid in-^there was no other way of avoiding a dreadful story." L 2
Eugene turned of an ashy whiteness— he gasped—" You do not mean," with difficulty he articulated, " to intimate------" Mordaunt saw him staggering, and has¬ tened to support Him; but the horrible fear that was awakened — the dreadful thought that flashed across his mind, com¬ pletely overcame him—his senses forsook Him fbr a minute or tvvo. On regaining them—" Have I beer dreaming?" he cried, raising His Head from the shoulder of Mordaunt, on which it had fallen ; " but J ' OBelser no—I see you still before you ; but f thought—I fancied I had a glimpse of another—that I Heard the murmur of an¬ other voice!'' Whilst speaking, his eyes roved round the room, and through a Half-opened door in a distant part of it, He beheld another figure. He burst from the Hold of Mor¬ daunt, and rushed to the door; the figure attempted to recede from it, dovvn the dusky passage Hey ond it ; but this was prevented Hy Eugene ------but to the ima¬ gination of the reader we must leave the
subsequent scene—all that followed—when, in the trembling form he cauglit hold of, Eugene discovered that it ivas his Rose, his lamented Rose, he had cauglit to his breast.
CHAPTER X.
" LfL (liei ? be a net «sjuead lor theni; tbo ^poi t »ill in, wlitn tl o\ hold ,\\\ ' jdiimii ol one uiioiliciS mtonuunut , jiid «a) such in.tfcis : flint's thr -i £ ικ tint I »ould » ι*-' ι to ·"", «hub »ill he meicly dumb sho»." We left Mrs. Hamilton busy in planning a little innocent scheme of mortification s? against the Mayfields, vvhose recent con¬ duct merited some little punishment of the kind she conceived. Convinced, how¬ ever, that Grace, notwithstanding the pro- vocation she had received from them, would lend her no assistance in the affair, she took special care to keep her in igno¬ rance on the subject ; and the manner in vvhich William contrived to keep Grace to himself during the morning, quite ia¬ vourcd her efforts for the purpose. Ever) one of fashion in the place was, as already btaîed, invited ior the evening to tho
hotel, by Delamere, out of compliment to his fair friends; auel amongst them lord Enniskerry, who had purposely delayed his departure, in hopes of again seeing, or obtaining an opportunity of being intrei- duceel to Grace. Knowing hovv much the Mayfields de¬ pended on their advantages of dress for eclipsing Grace, she maliciously determin¬ ed on letting them enjoy, and exult in the idea of doing so on the present occasion, till the last moment, in order that the dis¬ appointment and surprise she was prepa¬ ring for them,might be heightened as much as possible. For tlie purpose of completely deceiv¬ ing them—of letting there be nothing to prevent their triumphing in the hope of completely outshining Grace that evening, she had recourse to a little artifice. By some means or other, she rummaged out an old yellow crape dress, and a large wreath of flaming poppies, and taking ad¬ vantage of Grace's absence, laid them out
upon her bed, as if intended for her dress that evening. The trick took. Miss Myra, who with her sisters had been sitting in close divan in her mother's chamber, on tlieir own costume for the evening, stole up to Grace's, to try if she could discover what she meant to wear. The wreath of pop¬ pies and the yellow dress instantly caught her eye, and she flew back in ecstacy, to tell them of the fright Grace meant to make herself that evening. " Such a hideous dress !" she said ; " but I suppose she depends upon candlelight for making it appear new, for by daylight it is quite soiled ; and then so old-fashion¬ ed in its make, vvith a waist, I believe, not two inches long. If she had any taste, plain as they are, she would prefer, I am sure, one of her white muslin frocks ; but having worn nothing else since she came here, I suppose she wishes to appear in something else to-night ; and fancies be¬ sides too, I suppose, from the ridiculous admiration Mrs. Hamilton is always ex-
pressing of her, even to her face, that let her wear Avhat she vvill, she must look well." " Well, love, you have no right, at all events, to be angry with her on this occa¬ sion," observed her mamma ; " for its not possible that she could have chosen any thing that could more set off the delicacy of your and your sistets beautiful dresses of lilach, than the one she has chosen to ex¬ hibit herself in. Poor thing! I suppose indeed she has no great choice ; and really I cannot help thinking there is great un¬ kindness in the friends of a girl, circum¬ stanced as she is, without the ???? ? ?? ot procuring those adornments of dress that in a certain rank are noAV indispensable*. in dragging her forwarel in the manner she has now been. HoAvever, I suppose they concluded it was only for her to he seen to be sought ; but I rather imagine they may or will finel themselves mis¬ taken." Mrs. Mayfield took upon herself gi\ ng L 3
all the requisite orders for the entertain- menr^pf the evening ; and, in short, from the manner in vvhich she conducted her¬ self it was evident that she conceived, or at least renose to have it conceived, it given entirely out of compliment to her and her daughters. At the usual hour the party began to assemble; but Grace was purposely pre¬ vented, by Mrs. Hamilton, making her appearance, till the arrival of all the ex¬ pected guests. Just as she was about ta¬ king out one of those white frocks of which Miss Myra had spoken so contem ptuously 5 Mrs. Hamilton informed her of having bespoke a dress for the evening for her, which she protested she would never for¬ give her if she did not wear, from the sweet little milliner from Dublin, and which, she pretended, would not be ready fbr Her till rather a late hour. At length, in the midst of Mrs. May- field's exultation at the admiration she con¬ ceived her daughters receiving— ? -tlie com¬ plete triumph she anticipated their having
that evening over every one eke, the fold¬ ing-doors of the apartment vvere thrown open, and—" Here come the poppies Γ in a tittering whisper cried Miss Myra to her mamma, concluding it was Grace that was about entering, from knowing all the ex¬ pected guests were by this time arrived : it was Grace indeed that entered, preceded by Mrs. Hamilton—but hovv different in her appearance from what was expected! instead of the yellow old-fashioned dress of crape, vvith a head making her look like a repre» sentation of Ceres, with its decorations of poppies, she wore one of white crape, tastefully decorated round the bottom vvith bunches of lily of the valley in white satin; while the pearl ornaments previous¬ ly rejected from William, but whieh Mrs. Hamilton kept by her, in the hope of something like what had now actually taken place occurring, adorned iier dark hair and white neck, that, without any hyperbole, might have been said to rival the pearls in whiteness. That a person must have been altogether destitute of
personal attractions who would not have looked well in a dress of this simple ele¬ gance, vvill readily be allowed ; hovv then a person possessed of the advantages of Grace—that native elegance that nothing could disguise or conceal—appeared in it, with her bea itiful cheek tinged with the bright glow of those delicious emotions that had been awakened in her bosom that day, may easily be imagined. The Mayfields were absolutely petri¬ fied—they doubted the evidence of their eyes, or rather wished they could find they had deceived them ; and their rage at the surprise occasioned them by Graee, vvas heightened by believing, judging of her by themselves, that they had been pur¬ posely led astray by her vvith regard to her appearance in the evening : but hovv little did they know Grace, when they imagined such a thing—how little the dis¬ dain she would have felt at the idea of what they imputed to her ! The real con¬ triver otthe trick, however, quite enjoyed the sensation she saw it had occasioned»
there beingnothing that more delighted her than to see malice mortified, and the envi¬ ous compelled to feel their own inferiority. With that look of ineffable sweetness that was alone sufficient to render her en¬ chanting, Grace advanced into the room. Every eye was turned in admiration on her, and all who Had not previously seen her, were now eager in inquiring who she was. This was soon known. William, the enraptured William, involuntarily Has¬ tened to meet her, and leading Her for¬ ward into the circle, introduced Her to all those vvho were still strangers to her. Of this number was lord Enniskerry, who the moment she was sufficiently dis¬ engaged to attend to Him, requested her Hand for the ensuing dance. Grace hesitated — feelings already ex¬ plained opposed her granting this request; but since she had been induced to mix in such a scene, the affectation she might render herself liable to be accused of, by declining to participate in its gaiety, oc¬ curring, finally induced her to accede to it.
Lord Enniskerry, who, previously to her entrance, had been amusing himself at the expence of Mrs. Mayfield, whose charac* ter he by this time perfectly comprehend¬ ed, by pafying attentions to Miss Myra, had no ears, no eyes, for any one but her, from the moment she made her appear¬ ance. Grace could have excused this proof of his admiration, smce the manner in which he strove to engross Her attention entirely to Himself, prevented her from Having al¬ most any opportunity of even conversing for a minute with William. But though William could have wished it otherwise, lie was in too happy a frame of mind, his heart had its content too absolute to per¬ mit any thing like vexation or ill-temper. Assured of the affections of Her on whom the recent struggle with his feelings had convinced !him his own were unalterably fixed—secure of the hand of a woman calculated to shed lustre on any rank, and give happiness to any station, whose out-
ivard graces, transcendent as they were, were fully equalled by those placed (i About the thoughts and counsels of her heart,'* and possessed of an independence suffici¬ ent for ali that Avishes not unbounded could desire, lie conceived himself one of the most enviable of mortals ; and the grati¬ tude and complacence natural to the thought were fully experienced by him. Nothing that could render the evening agreeable to his guests Avas omitted by him, and in addition to what lie contrived fbr their amusement, the gallantry of lord Enniskerry led him to order a grand dis¬ play of fireworks from his yacht in the bay, Avhile his delightful band took their station opposite the hotel, filling up all the intervals in the dancing, and playing during the time tiie company were at sup¬ per : but envy and mortification took from the Mayfields all povver of enjoying the evening; thus indeed proving, that the hearts tliat admit the influence of malig¬ nant feelings, are as great enemies to their
own enjoyment as they wish to be to that of others. But for what she suffered this evening, Mrs. Mayfield strove to console herself by the reflection, that she could speedily put an end to the triumph of Miss Grace, by returning to St. Doulaglts when she pleased ; and on this she accordingly de¬ cided the ensuing morning, trusting that by hurrying Grace so precipitately away, ere it became absolutely the fashion to ad¬ mire her, she might soon be forgotten, Her intention of quitting Strandmore that day, under the pretext of having received a letter from home, requiring her imme- diate presence there, was announced at breakfast, to tbe secret joy of Graee and William, from their impatience to rejoin the friends who would so sincerely partici¬ pate in their present happiness. Lord Enniskerry quickly heard of the intended departure of the party, and no sooner heard it, than, impetuous in all his feelings, he obtained a private conference with Grace; and having expressed to her
the sentiments she had inspired him witH entreated to be allowed to wait upon her at home, for the purpose of explaining them to her friends. Grace thanked him for the honour done her by those sentiments, but begged to be excused granting the permission he re¬ quired ; and on being urged on the sub¬ ject, candidly acknowledged herself al¬ ready engaged. She had none of that ridiculous and de¬ grading pride and vanity that could urge her to make a boast of any thing of the kind ; and accordingly made a request to Mrs. Hamilton, who, from being in an adjoining apartment, overheard the whole of the conversation between her and lord Enniskerry, to say nothing of the matter to the Mayfields ; for as to William, vvho was present when his lordship's message, requesting to see her alone, was delivered to her, she neither could nor desired to keep it a secret from him ; perhaps pleased, since an attachment so quickly formed she eould not but imagine would be as
readil) r got the better of, at the opportu¬ nity afforded her by the affair, of proving to him the sincerity of her regard for him. But the silence whieh she wished to impose on Mrs. Hamilton relative to it, it was impossible for Mrs. Hamilton to ob¬ serve to the Mayfields, such an addition¬ al source of mortification was she convin¬ ced it would be to them. For a minute they vvere indeed utterly astonished on hearing of it, but it was only for a minute ; still ignorant of the explanation that had taken place between Grace and William, and disengaged as they consequently be¬ lieved her, and destitute as they knew her to he of fortune, that she should reject such an offer, was a thing too incredible for belief; and a smile, or rather sneer of scornful incredulity, quickly testified to Mrs. Hamilton that the only credit she obtained from them in this instance, was that of being the inventor of what she had told them. Still, however, notwithstanding what thev chose to doubt or disbelieve, there
Avas great secret dissatisfaction at the re¬ sult of their visit to Strandmore not hav¬ ing been more satisfactory than it ivas with regard to their views relative to De= lameré, affording him, as it iiad done, such facilities for paying court to Myra. They strove, however, to believe that this was entirely owing to tlie artful management of Mrs. Hamilton, of ivhose Avish for an union between him and Grace they Avere not ignorant ; and accordingly decided, on their return to St. Doulaglts, on endea¬ vouring to disentangle him from her, or, in otlier words, get him to themselves en¬ tirely. On arriving at tlie rectory, William having handed the ladies out, that is, Mrs. Mayfield and her daughters, and received the acknowledgments of the rector for his polite and kind attentions to them at Strandmore, was about making his part¬ ing bow, when Mrs. Mayfield, seeing what ills intention was, ivith a quivering lip, interposing between him and the door,
protested they could not think of losing him, as their guest, so immediately. William expressed himself infinitely obliged for the kindness that would have detained him longer under her roof; but his old room at Mr. Hamilton's being by this time again ready for his reception, he could not think, he added, of any longer intruding on her. In vain the lady protested it ivould be a kindness, an absolute obligation, his again becoming their inmate, they had so many delightful schemes in contemplation for the remainder of the summer, which they wished him to be immediately at hand, to consult him about. William continued inflexible, and finally made good his retreat to the carriage, in Avhieh he had left 1\l^ Hamilton and Grace waiting for him. From the rectory they drove straight to Mr. Hamilton's, where, however, all that Mrs. Hamilton did Avas to drop her trunk, and take up her husband, so impatient was she to reach the castle, from the joy she knew the commu«
nication of what had taken place at Strand- more would impart there. Nothing indeed could exceed the de¬ light occasioned by it to the anxious heart of the poor lieutenant, sunk as he was in absolute dejection, through the overthrow of all his fond parental hopes and expec¬ tations respecting Eugene, and tortured as He was with solicitude about Grace ; for worldly crosses had begun to force worldly considerations upon his mind, and he was beginning to see the evils attendant on ? ÍJ destitution. The happiness of his sister on the occasion was not less, though per¬ haps not quite so vehemently expressed ; but it would not have been consistent with Her dignity to have appeared over¬ joyed or much elated at any circumstance, at least such a one as the present, lest it should lead to the conclusion of her not having expected such an alliance for Grace. But the anxiety of Graee about Eugene soon interrupted those feelings. His re¬ turn could no longer be concealed, neither the state of mind in which he had depart-
ed from tlie castle ; and Grace instantly decided on repairing to him, not without being almost tempted to utter a gentle re¬ proach at his arrival not having been im¬ mediately made knoAvn to her, conceiving, as she did, that her sympathy in his deep affliction, her soothing tendernesses, might, ere this, have had a soothing effect upon bim. Of course, that William could not be induced to suffer her to depart ivithout him, may readily be believed ; and ac¬ cordingly, accompanied by him and Mrs. Hamilton, prompt at every call, from the real benevolence of her nature, to weep Avith those that weep, and rejoice with those that rejoice, it was finally set¬ tled that she should set off the next day, to join the poor mourner ; but a letter in the course of the evening, by express from Mrs. Brady, containing an explanation of all that had occurred relative to Rose, caused this intention to he a little longer deferred, (irace no longer opposing the entreaties of Delamere, backed as they
were by those of tlieir mutual friends, to permit the ceremony that ivas indeed to unite their fates irrevocably, to take place ere she proceeded on her short journey. We slightly pass over the feelings occa¬ sioned by Mrs. Brady's letter, because a- Avare of onr inability to do them justice ; hut Ave have already mentioned the grief excited by the supposed death of Rose, and equal to what that grief was, it may readily be supposed, Avas tlie joy of finding her stiil alive. But this was not the oniy source tif gratulation —her marriage with Eugene was of course considered as a certain mat¬ ter, and in giving herself to him, she gave back to the family the property they had been so long deprived of.—" Wonderful," exclaimed Miss Agnes Flora Judith, "the suelden turn matters sometimes take ! to think that at the very moment I gave up all hope of our ancient house being re¬ stored to its original splendour, the cloud that so long obscured it should be dis¬ persing !" " Ves," cried her brotlier, making an
effort tö cough avvay the emotions that had nearly overpowered him, " 'tis, as you say, Agnes, wonderful to see how sud* denly the wind veers about, driving us at last into the very port vve had long des¬ paired of ever making." That all was happiness in the breasts of those she expected so soon to join, Grace could not doubt, or if she did, it w r as through her knovvledge of what the sen¬ timents of Rose vvere, respecting Mor¬ daunt, prior to the discovery of her rela¬ tionship to him. Still, however, suppo¬ sing her mind disturbed on this account. she could not bring herself to imagine, that with the prospect of an immediate restoration to the friends she so fondly loved, and with the power of rewarding the disinterested attachment of her lover, she could long remain completely unhap¬ py ; and perhaps she would have been cor¬ rect in this conjecture, had Rose had no¬ thing to reproach herself for; but that she had, she felt with all the bitterness of repentant anguish, Restored to all her
natural correctness of judgment, from the effect which recent events had had in compelling her to recollect herself, she could no longer gloss over the conduct of which she had been guilty ; when she re¬ flected on this, her utter forgetfulness of, and aberration from, all she ought to have held sacred, such vvere Her overwhelming sensations of shame and remorse, that to fly to solitude became Her fixed determi¬ nation. She was unworthy of associating vvith those she loved—sunk, abased, degraded, in her owrn eyes, How could she endure the thought of encountering theirs ? No, the thing w r as impossible : it was only by withdrawing from them, by renouncing their kindness, their endearments, that she could obtain an uninterrupted opportuni¬ ty of pouring out Her tortured soul in pe¬ nitence before Her Creator, and expiating Her transgressions in his sight. Couid an error, that had been so nearly fatal in its results-—an error that had tempted her to VOL. UL M
think of rushing uncalled into His awful presence, be ever sufficiently regretted 01 atoned ? OH no, she felt not ; and that, from the horror vvith which she reviewed the feelings it Had led to, she must despair of forgiveness for it, but for the gracious, the benign, the blessed assurances of mer¬ cy held out by faith to the wretched sin¬ ner. The erring daughter of a guilty fa¬ ther, what indeed so fitting for her as se¬ clusion from the vvorld ? Thinking as she now did, How did she wonder that she could ewer have contemplated. a union vvith Eugene—eould ever Have permitted Her imagination todwell upon the thought? but it was entirely through the temporary derangement of her mind ; now that she Had regained all Her wonted clearness of percep¬ tion, Hovv very different were her thoughts' But would she Have resolution to endure the sight of the anguish which the over¬ throw of his fond hopes must occasion Eu¬ gene ? to sustain the severe, the cruel trial she Had decreed for herself? Oh yes, she would, she must—she would pray, fervent-
iy pray to Heaven, to be supported under it, as the only means of evincing the sin¬ cerity of her repentance. She wouid explain her feelings to Eu¬ gene, and throw herself upon his love, not to add to their anguish by opposing her intentions. Ah! had she remained stead ν in the path of virtue—had she resisted the voice of the charmer, and tlie still more treacherous pkadings of her own heart, how different would have been her present sensations her present prospects! she would not then have had to weep in unutterable anguish over the dreary thought ofa last¬ ing exile from those she loved, the dear, the domestic circle, where all her earthly happiness was centred—would not have had to deplene the thought of causing, perhaps, lasting misery to him who was dearer to her than life !—but she had erred without an excuse from igncnnce of her duties for that error, and the only way to prove her contrition for her offence was, by voluntarily renouncing what she was m 2
unworthy of enjoying ; in short, she felt that— '* When lovely »oman stoops to follv, And finds too late that men betray, No iirief can sooth her melancholy, No tears can wash her gunt away." But it was not through Eugene's means alone that she expected her resolution to be the occasion of the most arduous con¬ flicts ; her father had evidently decided on their union, and it did not require much penetration to see that he was not a per¬ son that could readily be induced to re¬ linquish any thing he wished accomplish¬ ed. Besides, 'vhat plea could she urge for opposition to his wishes in this instance, not merely surmised, but positively ac¬ knowledged as her attachment to Eugene was ? hovv couid she account for her sud¬ den determination respecting him ? hovv avoid incurring the imputation of the most degrading fickleness and levity from the circumstance ? how prevent its being ascribed to the sudden change in her for¬ tune? and would not, must not this be the
conjecture of her friends at St. Doulagh's ? and when she thought on this—of the light in which there was hardly a doubt she must be considered by them, from what she had decided on, when, after se¬ cretly permitting the addresses of Eugene 1 , she, now that she had the power of amply rewarding his disinterested attachment, and by so doing, requiting her manifold obligations to liis family, cast him off, re¬ fused, rejected him—her very soul sickened within her, and she felt almost tempted to give up her resolve ; but the more severe the trial, the more she was bound to en¬ dure it, for her transgressions were not of a nature to be lightly expiated. Yet, to be accused of the odiousness of ingrati¬ tude—suspected of having been all the time she was in the castle an artful dis¬ sembler, feigning what she did not feel, in¬ sensible of the kindnesses conferred upon her—-not even the apprehension of the suf¬ ferings of Eugene at the resolution she had taken, was so painful, so afflicting to her imagination, as the thought of this.
All that was requisite for Him to know ? or rather that eould be explained to Eu¬ gene, being explained to him, Mordaunt intimated His wish for the marriage be¬ tween Him and His daughter immediately taking place, being impatient, on many accounts, to quit Ireland, yet convinced He eould not with any propriety take his departure, till He had first seen all matters relative tt) His daughter finally concluded* Since it was evident Her father meant their marriage should be solemnized where they then were, would she not wish Grace immediately sent for? was the fond in¬ quiry of Eugene, on the retiring of Mor¬ daunt from the room, after the intimation of the wish just mentioned, to leave them M liberty to arrange all matters connected with the ceremony as they pleased. Rose tried to answer, but coukl not im¬ mediately ; the moment, the dreaded mo¬ ment of explanation, was come, of open¬ ing Her tortured Heart to His view, anel tor an instant her feelings overpowered her.—" No," she at length said, in a voice
scarce articulate, " no, Grace must not be sent for ; already had she suffered too much e>n her account, to voluntarily per¬ mit her to suffer more." Then, ivith a sud¬ den burst of anguish, uncovering her face, which her streaming tears had made her bury for a minute in her handkerchief; and turning her eyes full upon Eugene— " is it possible," she demanded, in accents half reproachful, half teneler, " oh, Eu¬ gene ! is it possible that you have really 'w mistaken my character and feelings, as to permit yourself to imagine that I could think of acceding, of consenting to vvhat is now proposed? No, Eugene, no! re¬ flect on the past, and then tell me—-is there any thing for me but seclusion, utter and eternai seclusion from the world?" " 1 do not comprehend you," said Eu¬ gene,; but with a degree of agitation that appeared to contradict the assertion : iv what is it you would have me under¬ stand?—what is it you would intimate J " " Must I then have the pain of being more explicit ? of plainly stating, that
' " S48 THE CASTLE CHAPEL. from the light in which I consider my past conduct, I can in nowise be recon¬ ciled to myself, but by withdrawing from all that would have constituted my felici¬ ty here?" " Am I to understand," exclaimed Eu¬ gene, vvith emotion no longer controllable, " that it is your intention to tear yourself from me? that the cup of felicity has only been raised to my lips, to be dashed away by the hand I thought least capable of such cruelty ? Rose, you do not, you can¬ not intend what you have intimated !* after being restored as it were by miracle to my arms—raised as it were from the very grave to bless me—you cannot have the barbarity to think of separating yourself from me—of making me suffer still grea¬ ter anguish than that which has already rent my heart on your account, by ma¬ king me, in addition to grief for your loss, endure the still more torturing pang of be¬ lieving myself not dear to you ?" " Not dear !" repeated Rose, in anguish¬ ed accents ; " oh ! of being but too dear to
me, what fatal proof have I not already given ! but, Eugene, on your pity—on the love you profess for me —on all that's gene¬ rous, that's manly in ypur nature, I throw myself, not to aggravate the misery I am enduring by further reproaches or com¬ plaints ï I have offended against virtue, against my own intuitive sense of right, and nothing can reconcile me to myself, no¬ thing in any degree restore my lost peace, but the voluntary expiation of my offences." " Rose, you drive me to distraction !" exclaimed the almost frenzied Eugene. " If such are your sentiments vvith regard to yourself, what must they be of me—of me, the cause of all you reproach yourself for—the villain vvho took advantage of your unsuspecting, your generous confi¬ dence in his honour, that holy innocence, incapable of a thought of harm, to lead you into error ? ' Oh, richly do I deserve to meet the wretchedness vvith which you threaten me ! to have my reviving hopes of earthly happiness for ever blasted ! but MS
as mine's the fault, * so well iny life shall pay,* for I swear, if you persevere in your resolve, never to know a home again !" 4t Unkind, inhuman Eugene, to torture me in this manner ! but you will not, you dare- not keep your rash vow ; it is not possible you can forget that there are others to live for, as well as me—friends, connexions, vvìiQ have claims upon all you can do for their comfort, in requital for the unhappiness they have suffered on your account. You are not free from blame— I would not, if I could, deceive you, by asserting that I thought you undeserving of censure ; for you could not have be¬ lieved what you sought to induce me to credit, that your family, regardless ofour then supposed disparity of rank, and my want of fortune, would ever have sanc¬ tioned a -union between us. But your of¬ fence is light, when compared with mine, for to the violation of my sex's delicacy I was guilty of in meeting you in the man¬ ner I did, I added the sin of ingratitude, by encouraging a passion that I knew
but too well those to whom I was under countless obligations, the friends, the pro¬ tectors of my youth, would never sanc¬ tion; vvhen I reflect on all this, I feel that I am unworthy of the title you would be¬ stow on me—unworthy of being pressed to the pure bosom of my Grace as her sis¬ ter—unworthy of being received into the family, vvhose confidence I so abused, as a daughter. You, Eugene, you, from the world's latitude, may be able to retrieve yourself in your own estimation ; but never, never can this be the case with me !" and again gushing into tears, she Hid her face in her handkerchief. " And this is the happiness that, but a few short liours ago, I was so certain of !" cried Eugene, in a tone indicative of all the bitterness of his heart. " I vvill not torment you, Rose, by argument or en¬ treaties ; no, I will prove the truth of my love for you, by quietly consenting to be¬ come your vietim—for as your resolve is taken, so is mine. With the conscious¬ ness of having driven you, from life, could
you possibly imagine I should continue in what is called the enjoyment of the vvorld ? The claims my family have upon me neither shall nor could be forgot¬ ten ; but in dooming yourself to the re¬ linquishment of domestic happiness, you doom me also to the renunciation of all that Has hitherto been precious to my lieart, or delightful to my imagination !" Rose was about replying—was about remonstrating on the cruelty of such a de¬ claration, when she was prevented by the abrupt entrance of Mordaunt, who, feel¬ ing as if he stood upon the edge of a yawning gulf, or tottering precipice, while He remained where He was, could not restrain his impatience for bringing whatever retarded his departure to a con¬ clusion. As he entered at one door, Eugene rushed out by another, unable, from the state of agitation He was in, to endure en¬ countering him. His precipitate retreat struck Mordaunt as somewhat extraordi¬ nary, and he was on the point of inquiring
into the cause of it from Rose, when his utter amazement at the state he saw her in, her quivering lip, iier swoln eyes, for a moment checked liis utterance. What was he to infer from Avhat he witnessed? could it be that any misunderstanding had taken place between her and her lover? but no, he deemed this next to impossible, after their recent restoration to each other. Ever alive to his own safety, he became alarmed ; could it be tbat Eugene, after all, notwithstanding all the advantages with which it teemed to him, had drawm back from the proposed alliance? if he liad, to vvhat could the circumstance be owing, but to some injurious suspicion, threatening perhaps his character, his safe¬ ty ? Tiie idea no sooner occurred, than almost frantickly he demanded of Rose the cause of what appeared so strange? Rose endeavoured to collect herself; she answered evasively, that an unwillingness, or rather determination, not to give her hand so immediately to Eugene as liad been expected, had occasioned remonstrances
from him her spirits were too weak to per¬ mit Her to listen to with composure. And was this all-—was this really the truth ? but no, Mordaunt did not, could not, bring Himself directly to believe it was ; her Half-averted looks, Her hesitating accents, led to a very opposite conclusion. Could it be that the sudden change in her fortune, Her unexpected elevation to rank and consequence, had occasioned a revolu¬ tion in her sentiments, awakened a vanity and ambition that rendered Her unwilling to adhere to her engagement to Eugene? From the light in which he regarded Her sex in general, the levity He ascribed to them, he did not deem the circumstance by any means an improbable one. Nor would he Have cared about it, but that he conceived his safety involved in her final determination. Should Eugene have heard any rumour to his prejudice—any hint or whisper ot the dark transactions of other years, Hovv could he Hope that, already exasperated against him as he was, he would keep si-
lence on the subject, if any trifling on the part of Rose towards him gave him cause to consider himself still further injured and aggrieved ? and in a transport of min¬ gled rage and alaim, at the thought of the mischief she might be the means of draw¬ ing on him, if permitted to swerve from Her engagement, he sternly demanded whether such was her intention—whether indeed she had determined on giving up her present lover—Him for whose sake, but a few Hours back, she had averred there was no privation she would not cheerfully undergo ? Rose again hesitated to reply ; resolved as she was to give up Eugene, still she'in¬ voluntarily recoiled from avowing this de¬ termination, as if in Her inmost Heart she still entertained a Hope that something might occur to forbid such a sacrifice. Be¬ sides, what plausible reason had she to assign for what must appear so sudden a resolve ? how avoid, by yet disclosing it, either be¬ ing betrayed into a confession of the ter¬ rible truth, or else of exciting some pre-
judice against Eugene? At length she falteringly said—" All she had at present decided on was, to retire to some place where she should be out of the way of seeing any one, tiff she chose it herself; the effect of recent circumstances upon her health and spirits, rendering quiet ab¬ solutely indispensable to her." Still Mordaunt looked incredulous— still as if he doubted her sincerity to him ; but on his putting her truth to the test, by saying, that if her wish was really for retirement at present, he could, by her ac¬ companying him from Ireland, introduce her to a place where it would be gratified., ancl finding that she did not shrink back from the proposal, he became better satis¬ fied, though not by any means so much so as if she had consented at once to give her hand to Eugene. At length the unhappy Rose withdrew to her chamber, where the feelings of her anguished heart again burst forth with violence.—" Had she then so far commit¬ ted herself, as to render it next to impos-
sible that she eould avoid immediately se¬ parating herself from Eugene? but for what purpose should she linger longer in his society ? had she not solemnly decided on an eternal separation between them ? and why then unnecessarily torture both, by delaying it? Yet was there noway of avoiding the dreadful sacrifice she me- ditated—the cutting herself off from the happiness of belonging to Eugene, and in¬ curring the hateful suspicions of baseness and ingratitude from his family, which she but too well knew her conduct in giving him up would excite ? If delicacy and repentance on one hand demanded her acting as she intended, on the other, did not honour and justice require, that, pos¬ sessed as she was of the power of making restitution to his injured family for what they had been so cruelly deprived of, she sliould avail herself of it by giving him her hand ?" She started-—a sudden light seemed let in upon her benighted soul—she wonder¬ ed the reflection had not before occurred; wlmt tears, what anguish, v/ould it have
saved her, by the pretext it afforded for yielding to the wishes of her Heart ! in pity to Her anguish, it seemed to Her as if Heaven had now suggested the thought, But short was the cessation of sorrow, transient the relief from despair, when inquiring from Her father, she learned, that Her fortune was absolutely in Her power to do what she pleased with. There was then no excuse for acting as she wish¬ ed. Oh, the sinking of her Heart at the conviction, at finding that she must then, after all, rend avvay the ties entwined round it! since, without becoming the wife of Her-beloved, it was in Her power to make restitution to His iamily of their long-alienated property ; and if she wished to prove the sincerity oi' Her repentance to Heaven, she must part from Him—but this was not all—if she wished to save Herself irom the torture of continual apprehension ; for should she not live, if she became His, in constant dread of the discovery of that seeret, that must sink Her for ever in the estimation of those she loved—that must
convert all her delight in their society into shame, confusion, and terror?—yes, the die was cast; and to avoid the risk of what she could not support«—to satisfy her own feelings, and reconcile her to herself, there was nothing for her but to withdraw from the vvorld. So great was the distraction of Eugene on learning her determination of departing vvith her father, that in order to sooth, and prevent any absolute resistance on his part to her intention, she was compelled to temporize with him, by leading him to brieve that her object in quitting him at present, vvas to have an uninterrupted op¬ portunity of deliberating on her future conduct, thus indirectly insinuating that her mind was not yet made up irrevocably on the subject. Biit his importunities vvere not all the unhappy girl had to contend with, or dis¬ tress her—Mrs. Brady, of vvhose being summoned to her the moment she was permitted to acknowledge herself still in existence, vve have deemed it unnecessary
to speak, ceased not pleading for Eugene. Her resentment against him long since subsided ; and convinced of the sincerity of his attachment to Rose, by the manner in vvhich he had mourned her supposed death, she could not endure the thought of his fond hopes of an union vvith her being disappointed. She was the last be¬ ing in the world wdio could think of ex¬ cusing error, or glossing over any thing that was w r rong; but all circumstances taken into consideration, she could not avoid thinking the scruples of Rose in this instance too rigid: but in vain she represented this—in vain what the pro¬ bable consequences of driving Eugene to despair might be—Rose was inflexible ; there was but one way in vvhich she could be retrieved in her own estimation, and considerations of higher import than those of mere worldly happiness decided her on being steady on the point Of course Mrs, Brady accompanied her ; and eould any thing have imparted h gleam of consolation to Eugene, it would
have been the consideration of having such a friend vvith her as he knew this kind- hearted vvoman to be to him. Hose knew not exactly the place to which her father purposed taking her. At first Eugene conceived her ignorance on the subject affected ; but on receiv¬ ing an assurance from her, that he should hear from her as soon as she had reached her destination, was induced to relinquish this belief, This promise, however, was not given without a previous stipulation, that, vvithout her permission, he should not attempt to avail himself of her com¬ munication. The presence of her father was, in some degree, a restraint on his feelings at the moment of parting ; but vvhen she was positively gone—when he could no longer discern the vessel that bore her from hhn, they burst forth vvitli a violence that de¬ fied control. lie became distracted—he raved with all the violence of despair—he had consented to his own misery, in let¬ ting her depart, Oh, why, why had he
acquiesced in sueh a cruel measure—why had he not opposed, or rather steadily re¬ sisted it ? Had he compelled her to re¬ main, he should have succeeded in his ex¬ postulations vvith her; but by giving her up to her own suggestions, he had sealed his doom. But no, he would follow her— he would assert, in the sight of the world, his right to her hand, and force her to be just to her vows to him. Force! hovv did the expression grate upon liis ear, coupled with the name of Rose! Alas 1 let him think or decide as he would, he felt him¬ self miserable. He ranged through the deserted apartments—hovv chilling the sensations excited by their desolate ap¬ pearance ! it seemed to him as if İt vvere the silence of death that pervaded them, He forgot every thing in his abstracting wretchedness—his home—his expecting friends—the letter, which, in the moment of departing, Mrs. Brady had informed him of her dispatching to St. Doulaglls, till recalled to recollection by the abso¬ lute arrival of the bridal party from it.
Convinced of the conjectures, the tortu¬ ring inquiries Avhich the discovery of his anguish must occasion, nc immctiiatcjy forced himself to make an effort for dis¬ sembling it, pretending that the depar¬ ture of Rose was in conformity to the ivish of her father, for her passing a little time with him ere she gave herself up entirely to another. Grace could not, of course, excluded as sbe had been from his and Rose's unre¬ served confidence, discredit this state¬ ment ; but never, she conceived, were feelings anel looks more at variance than his ; fbr while his bosom, as she believeei, ivas the seat of happiness, bis countenance bad all the haggard ness of wo. For re¬ maining in the dreary abode where thev found him, there was no inducement now that Rose had left it; and accordingly, the morning after their arrival, accompanied hy him, (but hovv reluctantly') the party returned to St. Doulaglts. Their return was the signal for the com¬ mencement of those festivities that are in
general the attendant on happy bridals. Mrs. Hamilton, who took upon herself the arrangement of every thing, was now in her element, distributing gloves, &c. The Mayfield family were not the last who received the compliments usual on such occasions. Till the absolute an¬ nouncement of the event that had taken place from Mrs. Hamilton, they vvere ig¬ norant of it, owing to the marriage hav¬ ing been solemnized, at the express re¬ quest of Grace, at a retired church, in ¿he way to Eugene. In the first transports of her mortification, at the disappointment of the hopes she Had persisted in encouraging, though certainly vvithout any sufficient reason, Mrs. Mayfield protested she would never more notice any of the O'Neil fa¬ mily ; but cooler thoughts soon prevailed— the consideration of the conjectures which an adherence to this resolve would pro¬ bably occasion, united to the reflection of the many pleasant opportunities it might also be the means of losing her girls of exhibiting themselves to advantage, now
that such a change had taken place in the affairs at the castle, soon succeeded in ma* king her relinquish it, and gilding her face with artificial smiles, and crying content to that which grieved her heart, she pro¬ ceeded in all due form, with the young ladies, to pay her compliments to the bride. Yet it was a most provoking thing, that the substance should be lost for the shadow, for no artifice coulel allure Falki¬ ner back to the soft bondage of Miss Mv¬ ra, for Avhom he Avould have been a most adA r antageous alliance. By some means or oilier he discovered the double part she had been playing : vain therefore were alî her efforts to induce the renewal of his addresses ; and now that the bandage of love had slipped from his eyes, he could not help Avondering Iioav he could ever have seriously admired such a trifling little butterfly of a thing as she was. The Langrishes, about this time, joined the party at the castle; and soon after had the pleasure of meeting with a residence VOL. IIL N
every w&y desirable in the neighbourhood; their regard for Delamere, and the plea¬ sure they took in the society of the new friends to whom He introduced them, be¬ ing too great not to make them feel hap¬ py at tlie thought of settling at St. Dou¬ laglts. All about Eugene wore the smile of content ; but what they felt, he only feign¬ ed. Benevolent and sympathizing as the mind may be, still there are moments when it cannot help being depressed at the thought of only looking at happiness through the medium of others. He re¬ joiced with all the warmth of friendship and fraternal affection at the felicity of His .sister and Delamere; still there vvere times when the sight of it, from the despair he Had ) ielded to, nearly overpowered him. Nothing but a dread of exciting strange speculations, couid Have detained Him at the castle, from the agony, too great al- Liost for suppression, He felt at being drag¬ ged inio *c^nes cf festivity, in which he e uld not baitieipate—at His misery being
mocked by congratulations on happiness that he felt not, that he dared not now cherish a hope of ever experiencing. Oh ! this, this was indeed to drain to the verv dregs the baleful cup of misery, vvhich he had, by his own imprudence, prepared for himself. With difficulty eould he retain the mask of dissimulation he had assumed to de¬ ceive his friends, to prevent his operating as a blighting mildew npon their enjoy¬ ments: there were moments when no¬ thing but a precipitate retreat from the beloved circle at St. Doulaoh's eould have prevented the discovery he dreaded—■ when nothing but the power of giving utterance to the anguish of his oVr-fhuiirht heart could have saved him írom madness; of weeping unrestrained over his poisoned bliss, amidst the softening scents that brought the image of his love to his view, in all the angelic beauty of her happy days of innocence. Could he have open¬ ed his wo-fraught bosom, he felt as if the N 2
pressure on it would have been lightened ; but he did not dare to touch upon, to hint at his wretchedness, lest of causing inqui¬ ries that must embarrass. In the mean time the poor self-exile írom all she loved had arrived at her des¬ tination—a ready-furnished cottage, that by chance her father had obtained a know¬ ledge of, in one of the wildest and most romantic parts of North Wales, ivhere en- A ironing mountains seemed completely to shut it in from an observing world. Could the quietude of nature have soothed the feelings of Rose, she would have been tranquillized ; but the conflicts of her mind were too great, her wretchedness too in- ttme, to permit of the effect of any ex¬ ternal influence. Besides, considering her¬ self but a transient tenant of the place, she did not allow herself to pay any par¬ ticular attention to its situation, the mo¬ ment she had executed the necessary deed» te r securing her fortune to the family at M. Doulaglts, it being her intention to sick some solitude in Switzerland, where
well her life should pay the forfeit of the error of her youth. Hardly had her father seen her settled here, ere he took an abrupt leave of her, vvith something like a promise of shortly seeing her again, but which he never meant to keep. Full of fearful misgi v ings, from not being able to confide ¡n the fide¬ lity of those to whom he had been com¬ pelled to intrust the fatal secret of his life, he quitted his daughter, with a determi¬ nation of immediately hastening to the Continent, tliere to remain under an as¬ sumed name; but hardly had he carried this intention into effect, ere he was seized vvith an illness, chiefly brought on by the dreadful agitation of mind he had lately gone through, that quickly threatened to have a fatal termination. That in tiie aw¬ ful hour of approaching death he was awakened to a full sense of the enormities of his conduct, we must hope, and may believe, from the following lines, address- ed to his daughter, in his almost expiring moments, and which, from the unx'ict>
she had every way suflered on His account, were some relief to Her feeHngs. ** Your mother was an angel, pure in thought and unsuspected by mor¬ tal—cherish her memory ; and should you be tried vvith affliction, endeavour to imi¬ tate her example of patience under it, while you implore of Heaven the exten¬ sion of its mercy for the wretched sinner who was u Youit Father." But though it was some ease to the heart of Rose, to think that he had en¬ deavoured to make His peace with his of¬ fended Creator, and was beyond the reach of those worldly inflictions she felt that, while he existed, she should have lived in constant apprehension of His being be¬ trayed to, she still was miserable. Immediately after His departure, Rose proceeded to take the necessary steps for
the conveyance of her property. Some time necessarily elapsed in the execution of the deeds requisite for the purpose, and during this interval, what vvere not the mental struggles of the poor penitent! how often did she falter in her resolution f how often feel tempted to forego it, and seek refuge from further struggles in the fond arms of him she loved ! But still was the impulse of affection checked, by the reflection of what she ought to suffer, of what she must suffer, if yielding to the weakness of her soul, she found her¬ self yet an object of scorn, where scorn or slight could not be endured. Yet was this probable—was it probable that Grace, with her affection for her, her tenderness of na¬ ture, her benevolence, would ever treat her with scorn ? Ah ! let her not deceive herself on the subject-—she was convinced she could not, would not; but yet, that with a knowledge of what had occurred, she eould ever regard her as she had once done, she felt to be equally impossible. Or sup-
posing it were not, could she imagine that Delamere would, in that case, ever permit their intercourse to be what it was? No, no. she felt assured he would not ; and that to save Herself from pangs still more intoler¬ able than those now endured, she must He steady in Her purpose. Yet to Have happiness within her grasp, as it were, without being able to attain it-—to be¬ hold Herself, like a shipwrecked mariner, within sight of the very haven, towards which every fond wish had pointed, yet without a hope of ever finding herself within it—oh ! was not the misery endu¬ red by this thought indeed an expiation of her error ! Every day she became still more sunk in wretchedness. The sweets of morning, the balmy dews of evening, in vain shed their influence around ; she Had no longer eyes for the rich garniture of the fields— no longer a spirit to be moved by the kindling azure of the brightening sky, or the soft shadows of the closing day ; Hope,
all hope of earthly happiness was relin¬ quished ; and who can speak the desola¬ tion of the heart from Avhieh this is ba¬ nished ? Who that had beheld her, buried in pro¬ found solitude, shunning, as it seemed, the very light of day, could have imagined that she was in possession of all that coukl command what are called the enjoyments of life? Youth, beauty, fortune, talents, and accomplishments, were hers indeed ; but a consciousness of error—a convie- t ; on that it is not an unaccompanied prayer for mercy will obtain it, rendered nugatory all those advantages, ali those blessings. At length Mrs. Brady became so alarm¬ ed, that she resolved on summoning Eu¬ gene over, still conceiving it next to im¬ possible that he could persevere in im¬ ploring her to give up the resolution that was attended with such misery to both, without finally succeeding, and flat¬ tering herself that, with the removal of
the regrets that now pressed upon Rose, avould be removed every alarming symp¬ tom. Hardly, however, had she earned her sudden determination into effect, ere she became so terrified at the thought of the aibchief that might ensue from any sud¬ den surprise to Rose, in the weak state to which she w/as then reduced, as to be in¬ duced to disclose to her what she had done. The communication vvas a renewal of all ihose agonizing conflicts that had already m ¿battered the frame of the unhappy girl. For a minute she hesitated, whe¬ ther -he should not avail herself of the circumstance, to gratify herself with an¬ other meeting vvith Eugene; but no— ft n what purpose -should she permit berseli this indulgence 1 , but to render still more insupportable the measure she had de- cidcd ??? and accordingly she decided on flying him, by an immediate juumey from the cottage; and from w I m to ver phice she stoppal í.t, writing to him ati
explanation of her motives for this con¬ duct. Mrs. Brady saw her too much agitated to venture to oppose her ; but still hoping that, as her emotion subsided, she would relent, and suffer herself to be prevailed on to turn back, she privately left a let¬ ter for Eugene, for whose reception in¬ structions were left with tliose that re¬ mained behind, indicative of this hope, or rather completely deceiving him as to the cause of Rose's sudden departure, by an intimation of its being owing to a neces¬ sity for meeting the professional gentle¬ man, to whose care the papers appertain¬ ing to her estate liad been consigned. Thus deceived, the first shuck of the disappointment attendant on not finding Rose at home to receive hiin, Eugene quickly recovered the spirits to which the summons to Wales Had restored him. It had indeed operated like magic apon him, rousing him from nil the gloom and chill* ness of despair, iu liuht and cheerfulness
again. It could not be—he would not fbr a moment permit himself to imagine it had been Avithout at least the indirect knoAvledge and approval of Rose ; and the conclusion from this belief was oí course that she had relented of her cruel resobre, and that, as lie had long consider¬ ed her his Avife in the sight of ???? ? ??, **o she Avould soon become in the sight of man, and that in the smiling future there AVOuld be ample compensation for the dis¬ tressing past. Thus soothed into a persuasion of all he Avished, Avith all his impatience for the re¬ turn of Rose, his meditations were too de¬ lightful to permit the passing minutes ap¬ pearing tedious ; besides, there were many objects in the vicinity ??' the elastic to in¬ terest and excite his curiosity; but aftera casual surA'cy of these, his favourite spot became the ruins of a lone dilapidated castle, on the ? ? ??? peak of the mountain that OA'erhung the cottage». Hence the views were incomparably grand : the eye
took in successive ridges of those moun* tains that Had been the fastnesses of an¬ cient valour, interspersed with many ? smiling vale of pastoral beauty, and an ex¬ tensive view of the Channel, vvith its ro¬ mantic bays and bold headlands, vvhich he soon expected to recross, vvith His Rose in¬ dissolubly united to Him. Here, on a fragment of the wall that Had enclosed the now silent and gra&v grown court of this mouldering edifice, now abandoned to all the injuries oí the weather, the raving winds that moaned mournfully through its melancholy cham¬ bers, or raged round its grassy battlements, as if impatient to complete 1 the work o! time, he wis sitting one evenmg to¬ wards simset, vvhen from the waking dream in whicii he was ¡ndulgmg, he wa* suddenly roused by the rolling of carriage wheels. The place was so completei) out of the beaten track, that this was a sound rarely Heard ? it ; imd it instantly struck him, that it was Rose that was ap-
proaching: his Heart beai tumultuously—- but how great was His disappointment. when, after staining his r*ye* tor a fev\ minutes in the direction in which th* soumi approached, He Hchdd, instead oi the carriage he expected to see. ? ?????? followed by a mourning coach, muwIv turning round thr corner of tlie mmm tmi tliat had pn v ioii^ly impeded His v» w of it' Well, it could iun be* long now en i&o^e retu med, for he hnd now heen neai a week at the cottage; and trying to con- 4rfe hjiuedf Ιψ this hope for tlie disap¬ pointment just sustained, He resumed tht M*t, from which, iv the agitation of ix- (ìeetatioiì, he had started . but he did ?.? fong retain İt —the etnotiun just excite* 1 had disarranged his thoughts iuid he de¬ cided on ? nimble. Jim a& he entou d the cottage at tlu rem^ he j>ctoeived th«· hearse drawing up to the frontdoor; ho rushed forward·—hi- tyt*s darted mt<· the mourning coach—*
they w 7 ere met by the streaming ones of the wo-fttruck friend of lus Rose. Ques¬ tion was unnecessary—the dreadful truth at once flashed upou His mind, and all was a chaos of darkness and distraction for hours after to him. The violent agitation occasioned by the information of Mrs* Brady, the agoni¬ zing feeHngs excited by the thought oi what Eugene's would be, at finding she had fled Him, were too much for the pre¬ viously exhausted frame of the unhappy Rose. Ere she reached the place at whieh she Had given her companion to understand it was her intention to stop, the fever of Her mind Had pervaded her trame, antl Her senses wandered. Ilovv, tu this hour of Heavy calamity, did Her afilicted nurse deplore what she Had done ' Nothing probably saved her from distraction, but the skilful aid she Had the power of immediately obtaining for the pour sufferer. But all was unavail¬ ing—the li^í'^t of the patient was of a de»
scription to which no human skill could minister—a broken heart. A few hours preceding her dissolution, the sufferer regained her senses ; she was grateful to Heaven for their restoration, as enabling her to testify the holy faith in which she died, and impart consolation to the mourner that hung over her. Oh, to what a blank, what a cheerless vacuity, did Eugene awake to, from his state of insensibility ! and how did he shudder at the thought of the careless manner in which his eye had glanced at the hearse that contained the remains of her on whom his soul had so long dwelt for happiness ! Incapable of any exertion—widowed in every feeling—insensible to all but the greatness of his irreparable loss—what a shock would have been experienced by the family at St. Doulaglts, from the ar¬ rival of the remains of Rose, for inter¬ ment there, being the first announcement of what had happened, but for the con si-
deration of the gentleman she had ap¬ pointed executor to her vvill, and vvho, at the first intimation of her danger, had been summoned by Mrs. Brady. Yet, with all the preparation for the melancho¬ ly circumstance, Hovv nearly overwhelmed vvere they by the sight of the coffin of Rose, instead of Rose herself—beautiful, blooming, happy, as, but a few short days before, they fondly expected to have seen Her ! how overwhelming their sensations, that for her the bridal chamber had been decked in vain—the Halls of her fathers, the followers of Her family, prepared to receive Her—that to the smile of welcome, the voice of friendship, she could no more respond—that a pillow of earth, a sod of the valley, was all she now required! It was her dying wish that she should He conveyed to St. Doulaglts for inter¬ ment; perhaps she may be condemned for the wish, aware, as she must have been, that obedience to it would be a means of keeping alive the grief her death occa-
sioned ; but perhaps few can so totally ab¬ stract themselves from self, as not to wish to be laid where their cold remains will he venerated—for, as the poet says, u ------wtu to dumb foi!4<4fulnr*s a pre), Tin 4 · pleasing, anxious beintt ere reMgnM, Left the wann precincts of the cheeriul da), Xor ta4 onc long'ng, hi gYniL; look behind ? '* Incapable of consolation—of dissem¬ bling his wretchedness—of evincing any present sympathy in the joys of others— the bereaved Eugene was not long in de¬ ciding how he would act. Convinced of the effect which the sight of his soitow must have upon the social enjoyments of those he loved, he determineel on bidding farewell for a season to St. Doulagh's. His friends rejoiced at his determina¬ tion ; and to render the change of scene still more salutary, as they hoped, Dela¬ mere and Grace offeree! to accompany him abroad ; but he declined their offer, from the unbearable restraint which iheir company, with all his affection for them,
would have been upon his feelings. He passed to the Continent—nor did they Hear more of him, till a letter was received, informing them of his having joined the patriot cause of Greece. But for Her sympathy in his sorrows, How pure would have been the happiness of Grace '—indeed, she often thought, al¬ most too perfect, if every thing had turn¬ ed out as she once fondly Hoped and ex¬ pected. Two years Have elapsed since the me¬ lancholy event that forced Eugene from his native country ; yet still is the me¬ mory of the d.ear departed as fondly che¬ rished as ever : but remaining in the place where they grew up together—where to look around without being reminded ot Her was impossible, it could not be other¬ wise; nor woultl Grace, if she could, have ceased to think of Her—for the bitterness of grief assuaged, there is a pleasure in the tender regret vvith which vve dwell on the recolleetion of those vve have lost.
that soothes the heart that cherishes it, in the idea that those we lament are now bright inhabitants of illimitable space, vvhere, in the course of a few short years, the mourned and the mourners vvill be reunited, no more to be separated.
FINb
P». ied by J. UdTİing, U iL·: t.&l -?1««??, L>· *«··-
