Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Clermont: a tale
CLERMONT.
CHAP, I.
«»«--«--«-«««-.—.Somt4hing itili there lt< In í L aveu's dai к volume which I read thu. gh mills* \J^N defcending to the breakfaft parlour, ihe found her iather already there ; he ftood with his back to the door, and fo deeply engaged in contemplating a large picture, that he did not hear her enter. Made¬ line approached him foftly, and could not help being ftnick with horror on perceiving the picture was a reprcfentation of the mur- vol. iv. л cler
der of Abel. It was fancy, no doubt, which at that moment made her imagine, in the features of the agonised and afliigl ted Саш, there was a w femblance to her fathu4 A flight noife flie made roufed him ; a^d, fta;ling, he turned with evident confuiion to her. He had fcarcely rceowred írom it, when the Marquis entued the room. Con¬ trary toki, uİLı.ıl cuftom, he had brfiken h/> bed at an early hour, anxiou c , by e\eiy :i ť tentic4i in his power, to make amends to Ins ion ior his lone, nc'-fled. Alter the ufual t alutat'ions were owr,-— £( ΐ was fony to hear (faid he, as th' y ka' eel themfehes at the table), that }our reft was tliíl ii»*bcd к Л night; Lafroy infoi med me of the noife which alarmed you ; I can no ofl егл ays account for it, than by fuppofing fome ill-mi /.ded perion refide s in my fa- mi! v who wifhes lo overthrew/ ite tranquillity by exciting tuperftitious fear*. ï have hcaid more 1 1 an once oí fuch trkhs being played in other houles, by people who imagined they
thev fliould reap advantage -ι от the general confuiion that was the confetjuence of them. Itone к practikd here, Iwi.i if poflible de¬ tect it : tliis very morning 1 am determined to examine the chamber, to tr\ ii th *re is any other entrance to it than by the gallery ; though that examination will be attended with the utmoft pain, as ï have never vilited it fince the death of my Philippe." kord St. Julian inform:d him he had fecured the key for that ригреЛе. As foon as brcakfaft was over, tlie у accordingly re* paired to it, accompanied by Madeline. The door was clofed i mır, celiai elv on their en¬ trance ; and while the Marquis, overcome by afflicting recollections, fat almoft motion¬ lefs on the bed, the tapeftiv was raifed, and the wail critically infpcčted, but without difcovcring any other crevices in it than thole which time had made. £i 'Tis ftrange (cried the Marquis, alter the fruitleís examination was over), I cannot в ¿ now
now poflibly conjecture from whence the noiie could have proceeded:—what did it found like *" έί kike the groan;, or rather yells, of excruciating diftrefs (rerlied St, Julian); never before did founds io horrible pierce my ear." " 1 íhall place fome of the fervants I can depend on in the gallery а> а watch upon this door to-night ; and if any villainy к pračtifed, I think (faid the Marquis), by that mean* it will bc detected. Thoudi this О room (continued he) affect , it alfo picales me; it feemb tome a plate peculiarly con- fecrated to my Philippe, as fince his death it never has been inhabited, nor never ihall whilft I live. Will you indulge me by remaining a little longer in it with •ι »J mer St. Julian and Madeline mftantly feated themfelves.
After
Afta - fome further convellanoli, the Mar¬ cus lequetled to hear the paUkukb of hib ion's hfc. St. Julian feemed fomewhat emb irraifeel : z.fter л little hefitation, however, he gave the drfin 1 ree kal. But how great was the ?'!onilkmcnt of Madeline to find it differ efíenti -llv from the one he had gken her ·„ every ciicumihnce relative to his brother was now iupprefícd. On finding his expectations of fortune blafted, he had fet out for Italy, he faid, with an intention of cultivating a tafte for paint¬ ing ; truft ing, fiom that fource, he fhould be enabled at leak to derive a iupport. " I had not proceeded far on my joui ney (con¬ tinued he), ere an accident introduced me to the hofpitable Lord Dunlce : he then gave the fame account of that nobleman to the Marquis that he had already done to Maceline ; and concluded by faying, he had loft: his wife, and her father, in conlequence в 3 of
ot their gm f ior the prematüre death oí hk lovely hike ii.-iaw : after which he had tor¬ iakén their 1 abitation, unable to bear the ioeiu of hi · лиг j 1\ъ, and retired, chajig- ίι g hk ncjic, to ;; lonely cottage, amidtt '/>me ot ıh" iiioft wild and i-jmanti: ¡noun- la ils ' 4 ί kau ph i' ее. The ľvkrquk was afkeiecl by the fufkr- in r ; of his fon ; but at the fame time plukri io hear hc had been united to а wo¬ man of rank and virtue: it gratified his pride to find the heircfs of his fortunes could boaft on every fide of illuftrious con * nedtons, But how different were the feelings of Madeline from his, on hearing this fécond narrative from her father : fhe was fliocked to find fo great a difference between the one he had given her, and the one he had given the Marquis. " Ah, why (cried flie to her¬ felf) conceal the generofity of his noble bro¬ ther!— Yet, perhaps (continued flie, after fome
fome minutes' reflection), he only forbore mentioning him, from a fear of awaking painful emotions in the Marqüs's breaft." Soothed by this idea, the compofure of her mind was returning, when again it was difturbed by the Marquis's fuddenly enquir¬ ing on what part of the Alps the habitation in which Lord Dunlarc had lived was fituated, and by the agitation her father betrayed at the queftion : ín faltering accents he anfwered it, and the Marquis inilantly exclaimed— " Oh, God ! it was there my Philippe fell !—You refided with Lord Dünlere at tliat time (continued he, after the paufe c f a moment), and you heard perhaps of the murder ?" " A rumour of it (replied St. Julian), but without knowing the fufterer's name." " You knew not then, till lately, that the vengeance of Heaven had overtaken me : the offended Majefty of Heaven could not in¬ deed have inflicted any puniihment upon mc half fo feverc as that of depriving me of в 4 my
, my fon. Oh, ]·ί.;,':τμΐ kvk/ к,. d U - loved ! day% yt..r.° i'ue ckpfee! n.i.t v<:.* death,— but \;ith'Uii witncfikig ui^ c'ííiv- riUtion Oí lliV grief! --- H ..d, 1 i..C",cd \-нл laft figh— kid i pa'd the kikr i io vy'r^ to your remiin-, iti ρ ц'\;;:о. I thi;¡L \ν,·^\1 have been :·bated : o u í ίαί fiom \ nr kin¬ dred you fell!--and newr .'.iii Lhe tomb of your forefathers receive you." cc You have heard, perhaps {continued the Marquis), from your vicinity to the fpot» where he fell—that the bod}' could never be found. At the time he received his death wc and, he was on his way to Italy, and had ftopped for the night at a little obfeure inn ; from whence, tempted by the fubhmity ot the fcene, H> had wandered lo an adjoining mountain, to pak an hour or two, attended by a favourite fervant : both were unarmed ;, and the moment his mafter was attacked, the fervant fled for afli (lance ; but, alas I ere he returned with it, the murdered end the murderer were gone. No doubt the body was dragged into forne recefs, a prey for
for the ravenous wolves which inkil that part of the country ; and even now, perhaps, his bones, unburkcl, lie bleaching in the mountain blaft. Oh ! never may my eyes be clofed till they have icen vengeance fall upon the head of his murderer ! accurfed may he be ! may his days be without сопь fort—his nights without rc./ofe!—and may his pangs, it poflible. be more intole¬ rable than thole he hu^ infiicled cm my foul !" " Perhaps (cried Madeline, in a faint voice), he doeb not live." 4< Suggell not fuch an idea again (ex¬ claimed the Marquis, with a kind of favage fury in his countenance) ; the hope of ytt bringing him to puniihment has hitherto, more than any other circumftance, Iupported me amidft my fufferings ; to relinquiih that hope, would be to relinquiih almoft all ι hat could coniole me.—Still then wil; I retain it ; ftill then will 1 truft, О God! that fomc heaven-directed hand ihall point out the murderer of my fon." * б 5 Tlie
The Marquis and the Count kit on the fame fide, and Madeline direclly oppofite to them. As her grandfather uttered the laft worck, flie withdrew her eyes from his for tiie purpofe of ikuling a glance at her father - s but as ihe was turning to him, they were fuddenly arrefted b\ a fight which ill иск her with horror. She beheld a hand thruft through the i .p; kry behind him, extended and pointing tohim. Shrieking aloud, flie flirted fram her ieat, and, ^ kh a d operate réfolution, v/ľs fl} 'hig to the wall in order to exa¬ mine if, и lien hei ftrength and ienies fud- deoiy :ч ecded, and ilie fell fa'ntkg oa the floor. Alarmed b\ h л· tuo evident terror ancl ИкеЛ, Sí. Jukm ík* .v to her aflïflance ; n h! Ill íhe Marquis (care v ly lek afľcčlcd Ovm lir: fuller, run¿ :k. bell with violence. Somu oí the íeivanís iiumedi.ttc'y haflened i о * tu- л i r. ; and Гч. florai i vc being procured, Madeline
Madeline foon revived. The moment flie opened her eyes ft> c raifed her languid head fu>m the ihoulcler of her father, and turned them to the fpot irom ν lienee íhe had feen the dreadful hand extended, But it was gone ; and flie then begged to be carried to lier chamber. St. Tulian would not permit any one to continue in it with her but himfelf He had iome fecret realons for wifhing no one at prefent to -liften to their converfation. He tried to footh, he tried to tranquilli/e her, but without effect ; and he befought lier to acquaint him with the caufe of he. iihiek. Unwilling to tell a falfehood, yet unable to declare the truth—Oh! my rather (cried ihe, bathing his hands with tears as ihe prefled them between hei's), а ík me no far¬ ther queftions on the íubječt; place the iaine confidence in me now you inve hi¬ therto done, and believe that your Made- в ó Une
hne wiľ never have any concealments from you which )ou сал ch lappro ve : you fem ül }ourfelí," obfeiviiig his pale and haggard looks, " At my being difordered (cried he), you cannot winder after what has pafled." "Pafled!" repeated Madeline, recoiling. with horror at the idea of hk having feen ihe hand. *' Tes (replied St. Julian), after what has pafled,- rdtcr being curkd by my fathei." *' Curkd .'" cried Madeline aghafk 4i Did 5 ou not hear lum curie me ?" ·* No, iurelv not (anfwered Madeline) , 1 ík aid lum curie, but-— íhe paufed—ihe hefitarcd. " But whom ?" demanded St. Julian im¬ patiently. " The minderer of his fon," i epi ied Ma- duine ina kmt \oice, and turning her t\e- from her fath.r.
^u
St. Julian groaned ; he clafped his hanek upon his breaft and traverfed the apart ment. " True (cried he, fuddenly flopping, and flinging himfelf upon a chair); true, it was not me he curfed. I believe my reafon is difordered by the fudden change in my fitu¬ ation. Ah ! would to heaven (faid he in a half-ftifled voice), fince fo long delayed, that change had never taken place !" " Would to heaven it never had !" laid Madeline. " Oh ! my child (refumed St. Julian, rif¬ ing and embracing her), you have no reafon tojóin in that wifli ; the Caftle of Montino· retici can lead you to no dreadful retrofpec- tions, can awaken no torturing recollections in your breaft." £t Alas! my father (replied Madeline^, if it has that effect upon your mind, mine mult neceflarily be diftuibed : ihe whom you nurt med with tendernek, the child of г vour
your hofom, cannot, without the moil ago¬ nizing forrow, behold your diftrefs." At this moment a fervant rapped at the door to announce dinner. Madeline de¬ clared herfelf unable either to go clown or take any ïefrefhment ai prefent. But flie promi fed her father ihe would exert herfelf to be able to attend him and the Mar¬ quis in the evening, ancl reluctantly he kit 1 er. But how vain were tho. efforts fhe made to fulfil the promile flie had given to her father; as well might ihe have attempted to itili the wild waves of the ocean as the agita¬ tions of her breaft, proceeding as they did fıom her newly-revived fufpicions concern* ing him. She hefitated whether five fliould difciofe them or not. <έ Shall İ throw myfelf at his feet (cried ihe, t ra\ erfing her chamber with hafty fteps), and entreat him to confian my horrors.
horrors, or dirupate my fears ? Ah ! what rapture to think he could do the latter! —but, alas! his unguarded expreflions, the myfterious circumftances that have happened fmce our arrival at the caftle, leave me little reafon to imagine he can." Abforbecl by the dreadful ideas which had taken poffeflion of her mind, Madeline heeded not the pafling minutes, and was fur¬ prifed by her father in a fituation that made him ftart as he entered her apartment. Never indeed was anguifii more ftrongly depictured than by her; her hakjdiflievefied, fell partly on a bofom whole tumultuous throbs indicated the diforder of her heart ; and the wildnefs of her eyes declared the agitation that had mantled her cheeks with a fe veri fli glow r . " Madeline (laid her father as he ap¬ proached her\ is it thus you have kept your promife with me ?" 4 She
She lighed, ct Your countenance (returned he in a fo¬ lemn voice, and taking her hand), renders concealment with you impoflible ; 1 fliall not thereiore aik what has dilordcred you». for your looks have informed mc." Madeline involuntarily averted her head. " Yes (continued he), í know your pre¬ fent idea*ï. But, Oh, Madeline! reflect on the tenor of my conduct, on the precepts I inftilled into your mind, and then think whether you have done mejuftice or injuftice in harbouring them ?" Madeline withdrew her hands,and covered her face. 44 í forgive you, however (proceeded St, Julian), trom my foul í forgive you. 1 know a ftrange combination of cireumitanecs ex¬ cited your iufpicions—circumftance which I may yet perhaps iahsfadoriiy account for :
at any rate, be allured, at fome period, per¬ haps not far diftant, I will elucidate all the njyiteriebofmy life, explain my realons for finking to the Marquis, and not to )ou,my intimacy with my brother." Oh! my father (cried Madeline, throwing herfelf at his feet), how can I ever fufliciently evince my gratitude for your forgi venefs—a forgivenefs which cannot be followed by my own. True, a ftrange combination of cir¬ cumftances Jed me into error} but nothing can now juftify røe in my own opinion for İt. Ah 1 never can I reflect without horror, that then* were moments in which I doubted your integrity,—ah ! never can I think my¬ felf pun if hed enough fordoing fo ; though my feelings, in confequence of fuch doubts, were fuch as almoft to annihilate exiftence. You fay you forgive me ; but ah î my father, can I hope that you will ever look upon me again without internal refentment ?" " Without a trace of it ihall I regard you (cried he, raifing her from the ground) : had our fituations been reverfed, I make no doubt
doubt î fliould juft have thought as you did: let us now endeavour to bnniih all that is difagrceable from our recollections." " With ecftafy (faid Madeline). Oh í never, my father, fhall my faith in your vir¬ tues be again fliaken. Ah ! happy thouid I now be, could I bc reconciled to myfelf. Your words have removed a mountain from my breaft ; and all the horrors of doubt and fufpicion are over." " My happinefs depends on your's (faid St. Julian); the beft proof, therefore, you can give me of your regard, is by endeavour¬ ing to recover your fpirits." " Every eflort then íhall be made (replied Madeline); and eflbrts in aright caufe are generally fuccefsful." Her father then led her to the apartment where the Marquis fat, who expreflcd much pleafure at feeing her better.
CHAP.
CHA?. IL
How wou Ki PhiJofophy enjoy tins boar/ Old not grief's an ow in berblcedmg iidc Deep, ileep infix'd, at every painful itcp Pierce to the heart, and pohon aH her blifs» Ev'n this calm folitude, this iî ill ferene, Tranquillity, that to internal views Recalls our fcatterM thoughts, and from the brow Of ruflfľd paillon fteals its gloomy frown, Is now my gentle foe j provokes the tear From the pale eye of forrow, and reminds Defpairing Friendihip of its lofs.—— West. x\S they were drinking their coffee, Ma¬ deline was agreeably furprifed by hearing there was a connection between her family and that of her departed benefactrefs :—the father
father c f Yiokk ini fti and vv\i:· a near relation of the Marquis and next heir to iu, titles if lie died vvithout ilfue. S4 As foon as Τ difcovered î had a fon in exiftence (laid the Marquisi, I write ro Monfieur D'Alembert, whofe chateau к about four leagues from this, acquainting him with the joyful event, and requeiling his immediate prefence, well convinced, from the generofity of his difpofition, that he would rather rejoice than g-ieve at the dif¬ covery, though the means of destroying his profped of my title and fin-tunes. I re¬ ceived a letter from him, breathing the warmeft congratulations ; and afluring me he would inilantly have obeyed my fum· mons, had not domeftic calamity interpofeci to prevent his doing fo. A difpatch had juft arrived from his fon, he continued, in¬ forming him of the illnefs of Madame D'Alembert." * c Her illnefs !" cried Madeline, turning pale. «Yes*
* ť Yes (refumed the Marquis), an illnefs which threatened to end in a decline, and for which the was ordered diredly to Bareges, whither Monfieur D'Alembert determined on accompanying her and his foa." Madeline, though incxpreflibîv fhocked, was not lurprited to hear this account of Madame D'Alembert, whofe health fhe had long beheld declining. Almoft confident, from the charader of young D'Alembert, that he would not pay thufe attentions her fituation required, Madeline could not for¬ bear oivine; vent to lier feelings and ex- O O cJ claimed with energy— ίς Would to O od ί was now with her ! would to God ϊ was now permitted to pay to the daughter the debt of gratitude ϊ owed the parent !" £t impoflible (cried the Marquisi ; Ma¬ dame D'Alembert, accompanied as (he is, cannot require additional attendance : be- fides, your prefence in the caftle is abfo- luteiy rcquifite, as an entertainment is already planned, and will be given in a few days, in
in honour q( you and your father, at which you muft prefide Of the travellers we thai! receive the eai lieft intelligence, as Monfieur D'Alembert promifcd to write immediately on their arriving at Bareges : iet this pro¬ mile therefore contribute to quiet your mind." Madeline bowed, and endeavoured to ap¬ pear compofed ; but her heart fwellecl with forrow at the idea of being ieparated from her friend, at a time when her attentions would have been fo acceptable, perhaps ne¬ ceíľary; and with difficulty flic fuppreíTcd her tears. When coffee was over, the Marquis and St. Julian íat down to chefs, and Madeline withdrew to the court, from whence flie was foon tempi cd to wander into the foreil. It was now the ftill, the dewy hour of eve, an hour in whicli fhe particularly loved to walk ; and fhe proceeded, thinking of the happy
haopy period in which ihe had wandered, devoid of care, through the wild- vood walks íurrounding her native valley; and fight n tr at the idea, tliat felicity fuch as flie then experienced would never» never more return. Unheeding whither or how far flie went, flie rambled on till her progrefs was unex¬ pectedly ftopped by the monumental pillar of Lord Philippe, A kind of awful fear now took pofleffion of her ; a fear, which the idea of the diftance ihe had wandered from the chateau, the latenefs of the prefent hour, and the deep gloom íurrounding her, infpired ; a 1 ........'- ■■' —bug cathedral aifie of' iliade led to the pillar, around which cluitered C)prdsand buy, Funereal, penfive birch, its Jan^ind arms That droops, with waving willo.vs, deem'd to weep, Antl fliivVJiJíj aipins-*— «?
The
The yellow radiance, diffufedover ihe tall í rees and the antique turrets of the caftle, at her firil let! ing out, was now entirely with« drawn, and fcarcely a ilar- light ray pene¬ trated to the fpot on which flie ftood ; whilft ά brec/.e fwept through the foreft with a hok low murmur, that to her ear founded like the Limes it ings of л troubled fpirit. The drc/kkl fate of him to whom the pillar was dun rated, ruihed upon her recoi- h kkm ; nnåf íhuddcring, ike was moving tiom ir W'Ìuaì a deep groan arrefted her fteps. ku* pai'tect,- —ihe tiembled ; the furround- uvy ireos ta (i .My milled; a figuic flowly emerged irom them, :aid gliding by her, gave a, tt pkk'd a look at once tender and n.oumiul—a look which prelentcd to lier vie.v the e.vki features oi ck Sevignic. " Oh, (ίοιΐ! ¡cried flie, retolîeâing the jikoî'tf between him and the picture of Lord Philippe), is it de Sevignie 1 faw, or the Í; :nt oi the muidcľed Philippe?" The
-5 1 he pale and hollow cheek prelentcd to ncr view, the melancholy eye that beamed upon her, inclined her to believe the latter ; ?nd while a cold perfpiration burft from every pore at the idea of having feen a fuper- natural being, ihe fled trembling up the long avenue that led from the pillar : at its termi¬ nation flie paufed, uncertain which way to go, for the paths were here wild and entangled ; but as fhe despairingly ftruck her breaft from a fear of not finding her way, fhe beheld a light iuddenly glimmering through the trees : írom the caftle ihe knew this muft proceed ; darting forward therefore, ancl itiU keeping It in view, flie foon found herfelf at home. She flopped for a few minutes in the hall in order to regain her breath and fome de¬ gree of compofure ; flie then repaired to the parlour, where ike found the gentlemen juft riling from cheik in anfwer to their enqui¬ ries as to where flie had been, flic briefly replied, rambling about, but did not inform 'лет how ihr or whither. Her palenel's ioi. i\. i' ftruck
ftruck both ¿he Marquis and St. Julian t both however imputed if to her grief for the ilinek of Madame D'Alembert. On retiring to her chamber^ Madeline was noi forry to find forne of the fervants fta¬ tioned outfide the chamber next to her's, for the purpofe of apprizing the Marquis and his fon if títere was any return of the noife that had alarmed the family the preced¬ ing night* Her fpirits weakened by the idea of having feen a being of the other world flie could ili have borne total folitude. Unable to Леер, flie ilood a confidérable time at the window, contemplating that part of the foreit where ihe had been terrified % yet without flmddering fhe could not look upon íáiofe trees, beneath whofe covert flie imagined the troubled fpirit of Lord Philippe wandered.
CHAP.
CHAR III.
Why í can fmue, and murder while I frmľc r And cry cpnîcnt to that which grieves my heart j And wet my cheeks with aitiñctal íearst And tramt my face to all occafions. О noife this night difturbed the tran¬ quillity of the caftle ¿ and the terror which had marked the countenances of the domef¬ tics began to vanifh. The Marquis had mentioned to Madeline his intention of giving an entertainment in honour oi her and his Son ; and prepara¬ ci ä tio.iß
N
lions were now making for It—preparations which were unexpectedly interrupted by a letter from Monfieur D'Alembeit, con¬ taining the melancholy intelligence of the death of his daughter-in-law on her way to Bareges, Though this event was communicated in the moit cautious manner to Madeline by her father, ihe fliock it gave her nearly de¬ prived her of her fenfes. Unwilling to dif¬ trefs him by the fight of her grief, yet unable at prefent to item it, íhe requefted permik fion to retire to her chamber; a requeft which he inilantly complied with, from a hope that the unreftrained indulgence of lier forrow would abate its violence, and contribute to tlie restoration of her tran¬ quillity. In the folitude of her chamber fhe gave free vent to it. " But is not this a íèififli forrow r (flie exclaimed, whilft tears trickled down her pale cheeks) ; do I not weep alone for
for the lofs which the death of my friend will prove to me ? for am I not convİRced that death to her was a paflport to unutterable felicity,—to that glorious world, where the cares, the difappointments that embitter this, can never obtrude—where all is hap¬ pinefs,—and where the kindred fpirit of a Parent welcomed her pure and difembodied foul to that happinefb. Thefe ideas, however, had not power to mitigate her feelings. Befides the tears flie fhed for the lofs, the irreparable lofs ihe fuf- tained by the death of her friend, flie wept from a fear, which the account fhe had re¬ ceived of the difpofition of D'Alembert in¬ fpired, namely, that his wife had not in her dying moments received thofe attentions that foot h thelaft ftrugglcs of nature ; flie feared that no Soft complaint, no kind domcftic tear PJeas'd her pale ghoft, or grae'd her mournful bier.
с 3 " Would
ťt Would to heaven ! (flie faid) I had con¬ tinued a little longer with her; it would have comforted me to have known that the kindneflcs, the attentions, the namelefs little offices of love, which főtten the pangs of iicknefs and of death, had been paid to her." From her melancholy meditations flie was îoııfed by a knock at the chamber-door. She ftarted ; haflily rofe, and opening it, beheld her father. *' I hope, my dear Madeline (cried he, taking her hand) that the long and free in¬ dulgence of your grief has lightened your heart, and enabled you to make exertions againft a forrow, not only ufclefs, but inju¬ rious, í hope (continued he, obferving her trickling tears), that in the giave of your friend you have not buried all confidération for your father's peace—a father, who can know no happinefs but w lut W derived from witnefling your's." ·« Oh,
« Oh, my father (exclaimed Madeline, unfpeakably afleded by his words), every exertion you defire I will make." Ever taught to confider her promife as facred, flie no longer gave way to her grief, and foon recovered, though not her cheer- fulnefs, her compofure. The death of Madame D'Alembert caufed the doors of the caftle to be again barred ao-in.fl company, and an almoft un- interrupted ftiìluefs once more reigned within it. Madeline rather rejoiced at than re¬ gretted the total lolitude in which flie lived ; the fpints, the hopes, the expedations which vvould once have inclined her to gaiety, were fled, and flie no longer wiflied to fee or to be feen. Nor did her father appear lefs pleafed with his feclufion from the world; a deeper gloom than Madeline had ever before obferved upon it, now almoft continually clouded his с 4 brow i
brow. Hib vvandermgb from the caftle be¬ came frequent ; And were often prolonged till the curiofity of his father, and the fear* of his daughter, were excited. Tortured by beholding Im mereafing me lancholy, Madeline v^aь oí ten tempted to implore him to rjveal ita fouue, tiom a hope that ihe might then bc able to o tilr fome confolation ; but whenever íhe fek herfelf on the point of doing íl\ the folemn promife ihe had given her depaitcd friend of never attempting to raife the veil which concealed the former events of his life, recurred to her recolledion, and made her fli rink back ap¬ palled from the idea. ·* But has he not promifed (flie would then cry, endeavouring to ftrengthen her reiolu¬ tion), has he not promifcd, fmce his arrival at the caftle, that he woukl himfelf raife r hat veil, and elucidate every myftery ; Oh ! let me then terminate my incertitude, my fufpenfe
fufpenfe, by now imploring him to fulfil his promife." Still however, whenever her lips opened for that purpofe, a íècret dread would again clofe them $ and flie was foon convinced that Ike could not fummon réfolution to urge the difclofurc ihe fo ardently defired. About a fortnight after they had received the intelligence of Madame D'Alemberťs death, a letter arrived from the elder D'Alembert, acquainting the Marquis with his intention of being at the caftle that day. He arrived a fhort time before dinner, and paid his compliments to his newly-difcovered relati /es with the utmoft warmth and affec¬ tion. The prejudice Madeline had con¬ ceived againft the fon extended to the fa¬ ther ; and, notvvithftanding the warmth of his manner, flie faw, or fancied flie law (which had juft the fame effect upon her mind), in his countenance a ditľatisfačtion that de¬ noted his not feeling what he piofefled ; c 5 hk
his e}^e, ike thought, often faftened upon her father with a malignant expreffion, as if the foul that animated it inwardly curfed the man who had ftepped between him and the fortunes of Montmorenci. After the firft compliments were over, taking the hand of Madeline, he afiured her that nothing but bufinefs of the moil perplexing nature could have prevented his fon from accompanying him to the chateau. ** He is impatient (continued he) to be in¬ troduced to hk amiable relations ; above ali, he is impatient for an opportunity ofexpref- İng to you his heartfelt gratitude for the attentions you paid to his wife." The heart of Madeline was too full to permit her to fpeak : fhe bowed, and haftily averted her head to wipe away the tears which fell to the memory of the unhappy "Viola.
Her
Her father, perceiving her emotion, led her to a feat, and changed the difcourfe, D'Alembert now informed them that his daughter (of whom Madeline had before heard the Marquis flightly fpeak) was at the Chateau de Merville with her brother " In about a month I hope and exped (continued he), they will join me here." tť I hope fo too (faid the Marquis) ; for 1 think it is the want of fociety that lowers the fpirits, and hurts the bloom of Made¬ line." " Ah! (thought Madeline) 'tis not the fociety 1 am now debarred from, but the iociety í have loft, which deadens my cheer- fulnefs, and fades my cheek." ίς I ihall infill (refumed the Marquis) on her father's taking her ín the courfe of the winter to Paris; 'tis time for her to be in¬ troduced to the circles her rank entitles her to dľociate with,"
с 6 " D'Alena
D'Alembert by a bow fiiently affen ted to what the Marquis laid. From this period Madeline had but few opportunities of indulging her love for foli* tude; D'Alembert either was, or pretended to be, 10 delighted with her fociét), that he could not for any lengthof time endure her abfence. Complaifance compelled her to humour a relation advanced in life, and alfo the gue ft of her grandfather ; but the inter¬ ruption he gave to her favourite inclinations, together with the extravagant eulogiums iie heftowed upon her perfon and ali flie faid or did, heightened, if poflible, the diilike fhe had conceived againft him from their fi ift interview—a diilike, however, which flie í lid not reveal ; yet not without uneafinefs could fhe hear her father declare he thought him a man worthy of eiteem. With the uimoft pain flie thought of the approaching vilit frum his fonane! daughter, * i Ah! never (takí ike to herfelf ), ah ' never, without
without íhuddcring, without horror, fliall í be able to* look upon the man whofe ill con¬ duct I have reafon to think occafioned the death of my beloved friend." Within a week of the time flie expected him, as flie was walking one morning in that part of the foreit which immediately fur- rounded the caftle, ihe beheld her father and D'Alembert at a little diftance from her, apparently engaged in a deep and intereftmg difcourfe. · Their eyes encountered her's al¬ moft at the moment flie faw them ; they inilantly ftopped ; and, after Converting to¬ gether for about another minute, D'Alem¬ bert entered the court, and her father ad¬ vanced to her : the gloom on his brow was fomewhat leflened, and a languid fmilc faintly illumined his features. " Madeline (faid he, taking her hand, and talking on with her), D'Alembert ancl I have been talking of you." " Ofme !" cried Madeline, " Yes
α Yes, we have been fketchmg out a piar of felicity for you." Madeline fighed, and looked carnei! ] y at her father. " A plan (refumed he) which I truft will meet your approbation." ** Explain yourfelf, my dearefl father (crkd Madeline), lam all impatience." " To bc explicit then (faid St. Julian), D'Alembert has propofed an union between you and his fon." *' Between me and his fon 1 (repeated Ma¬ deline, involuntarily drawing her hand from her father's, and ftarting back a few paces)—· between me andhis fon! —and you approved of the propofal'—Oh ! my father, is this the felicity you planned for me ?-—fooner, Ш1 thoufjnd times fooner, would I immure my¬ felf for ever within the walk of a cioifler, than become the wife of D'Alembert." " Compofé yourfelf (faid St. Julian), you have no caufe for the violent emotions you betray. 5
betray, You have always, I hope, found me, 'in every fenfe of the word, aparent; you fliould therefore have reftrained your apprehenfions, by being convinced I never would urge you to an ad diredly contrary to your inclinations. But whilft I give this aflurance, í aliò declare that I will not, by rej ed ing every overture which may be made for your hand, iandion your attachment to an object who ought long fince to have been forgotten." ťí T folemnly declare (cried Madeiine 5 clafping her hands together), that my re¬ pugnance to the union you have propofed, proceeds not entirely from the attachment you allude to." ** From what other caufe (demanded St. Julian), can it proceed ? you cannot have conceived a diilike again tt a man you never faw." " 'Tis true (replied Madeline), í know not the perfon of D'Alembert, but I am ac¬ quainted with his charader." She then briefly related all ihe had heard concerning him
him from Floretta and Agatha, the favourite and confidential fervants of the Countefs tie Merville. íS I am fhocked, I am aftonifhed (cried St. Julian), at what you tell me; and with you I can readily beiieve, that the knowledge of his depravity accelerated the death of the mother, and occafioned that of the daugh¬ ter." " But had 1 never been informed of that depravity (refumed Madeline), I fliould have conceived an unconquerable diilike againft him for his indelicacy in propofing for me fo foon after his wife's death, and without being in the leaft degree acquainted with me." 4( I own that part of his condud appeared reprehenfible to me (faid St. Julian), and I gave my opinion of it to his father. He at¬ tempted to juftify it by faying, that it was natural fo young a man, and one of fo domes¬ tic a turn as his fon, fliould foon make ano¬ ther choice."
u But
«* But why let that choice devolve upon an object hc had never beheld ?" afked Ma¬ deline. " Becaufe a prepoflefiion had been excited in her favour by the eulogiums of his wife ; and he entreated his father to haften to the caftle, in order to pave the way for his ad¬ drefles," St. Julian replied. 44 Oh, my father (cried Madeline), I truft you will not delay declaring my utter repug¬ nance to thofe addreifes." u Depend.on me, my love (he faid), for taking the earlieft opportunity of informing D'Alembert they never can be fuccefsful : your grandfiither, I hope, will be ecpially inclined to let you reject them." " My grandfather! (repeated Madeline) ; was he tben confulted on the fubječl ?" " So I underiland from D'Alembert, and that he highly approved of the projected alliance : he vviflies to have the fortunes of the family united." "The fortunes of the family ! (Madeline repeated) ; and are fuch the confidérations that
that fway rbe great world ?-—Ah ! no won« der, if the union of fortunes, not of hearts, is alone confidcred, that mifery, vice, and dii- íipation frem fuch connections ihoukl enfue." ** I am almoft convinced (refumed St. Julian), that the Marquis will not attempt to controul your inclinations. But, my dear Madeline, though ail idea of a connečlion between you and D'Alembert íhall on my part be iv lhiquiihed, from a conviction that it never could promote your happinefs, do not flatter yourfelf that, if a propofal came from an unexceptionable character, 1 would fančtioii a fecond rejection ; kis not, be af¬ iured, from a vain pride of defiring an illuf¬ trious name to be continued to pofterity, that I wiih you tobe married—no, 'tis from a wifli of enfuring you protection when I fliall bono longer able to extend it. í long to lodge my treafure in faie and honourable hands, ere I vifit that country, from whofe bourn I never fliall return/'
The
The words of her father opened a new fource of difquietudc to Madeline, who had flattered herfelf that her attachment to a fingle life wouid never be oppofed : and ftill flie tried to footh her uneafmcfs by think¬ ing, notwithilanding what he iaid, herfather would never exert an arbitrary power over her« They continued to walk till dinner time. At table Madeline turned with difguft from D'Alembeit, whofe looks exprefled the utmoft exultation. She withdrew al¬ moft immediately after dinner, and re¬ paired to the garden, where ihe continued a confidérable time uninterrupted, and deeply meditating on the converfation of the morning. At length flie beheld D'Alem¬ bert approaching ; and the alteration of hk countenance convinced her that her father had communicated her fentiments to him
She
She would have pafled him in filence, but he prevented her by catching her hand. ** 1 came hither, Madam (faid he in a füllen voice), on purpoie to converfe with you ; I cannot therefore let you departs abruptly." " Well, Sir (cried Madeline), í ara ready to hear whatever you wifb to fay." ť< But will you promife not to hear with¬ out regarding it ?" demanded hc in agentler tone than he had before ufed. tc 1 never make promifes I am not certain of fulfilling," replied Madeline. " 'Tis impoflible (laid he) to exprefs the mortification, the diappointment, I feel in confequence of your rejection of the propo¬ fals which I made this то» ning·, propofals approved by услдг father, and alio labčtioned by the Marquis. Surely (he continued), you fliould not have rejected them, without being afiured that their acceptance never could have contributed to your happinefs ¿ an
an aflurance it is impoflible you can have from your total ignorance of my ion." * e Hopes which cannot be realized, cannot be too foon fupprefled," exclaimed Made¬ line. " And why, without knowing him, can you be fo determined on deflroying his hopes ? (aiked D'Alembert). Only fee him —only hear him,—and then rejed, if then you can difapprove." ťC Was your fon (faid Madeline) all that the moft romantic imagination can conceive of perfedion, I would rejed him." " You would !" (exclaimed D'Alembert) dropping her hand. " I would," repeated Madeline. " Did you ever hear aught againft him ?'* demanded he, again catching her hand, and looking fteadily upon her. " Even fupjggjsng any thing could be al* ledged agai^"1íľm (replied Madeline, wiib« ing to evade this queftion), in the family of his wife and mother-in-law, was it likely, do
do you think I fliould hear any thing tø his prejudice ?" i4 'Tis evident (faid D'Alembert, after muling a few minutes), that your heart is pre-engaged ; nothing elfe could account for your abfolute rejection of a man you never faw." * £ Nothing elfc," repeated Madeline invo¬ luntarily, and looking in his face. ie No ! confefs, therefore that what I fay, is true." ** Well (cried Madeline), if î do confefs that my heart is devoted to another, will you drop all foiicitation for your fon ?" ** No, never,** exclaimed he in a furious voice 4 and with an inflamed countenance. Madeline now attempted to free her hand. * r I infifl, Sir (faid flie), upon your releafing me immediately." ** I will, if you firft; promife to let my fon plead his own caufè on coming to the caftle/* <s Never," cried Madeline with vehe¬ mence, and ftruggling to difengage herfelf. " Are
<e Are you then indeed inflexible ? does that foft bofom really hide an obdurate heart ? can no pity influence you to compaf- fionate the pangs my fon will feel when he hears of your rejection ?" " I never can feel pity for the pangs of difappointed avarice and ambition ^replied Madeîine) ; and avarice and ambition, I am convinced, alone influence your fon's ad¬ drefles to me ; for how can he love or ad¬ mire an object whole virtues he never knew, whofe form he never faw ? Your perfec¬ tion, Sir, has forced me to be explicit : drop it, if you wilh me to conceal my opinion." " infolent girl 1" cried D'Alembert, fling¬ ing away her hand, and ftamping on the ground. A kind of terror pervaded the breaft of Madeline at his violence ; and flie was hur¬ rying to the caftle when he overtook, and again ftopped her.
** Infolent
" Infolent girl ! (he repeated, grafping her hand, and looking at her with a fiend-like countenance) ; but fuch is the effect which unexpected elevation ever has upon little minds, raifed from a cottage to a palace* Your head grows giddy, and you think you may with impunity look down upon the reft of mankind with contempt ; you imagine there's nothing to fear;—but beware of in¬ dulging fuch an idea, left too late you fliould find it erroneous. The pinnacle of greatnefs upon which you ftand, already totters : be· ware left by your condud you provokig tiie breath which can in a moment over¬ throw it." So faying, he once more flung her hand from him ; and, turning into another path, ¡tft her abruptly, fo much thunderftruck by his words, that for a few minutes flie had not power to move. At length recovering her faculties, flie condemned herfelf for weaknefs in permitting his expreflions to aíľeči. her ; expreflions which flic could only impute to malice
malice wnd rc fent ment for her rejection ot his ion. fcC He wiflied (laid flic), by ålänn¬ ing me, to be revenged in fome degree, or elle he imagined n^e weak, and hoped, by railing bugbears to my view, to terrify me to his purpofe." Her contempt and diilike were both in- created by theie ideas ; and fhe reiblvcd never more, if poflibie, to avoid it, to liften to his particular converfation. She haflened to the caftle, and in the gal» lerv adjoining her chamber, met her father. " λ Veil (afked he), has D'Alembert declared his diiappointment to you? he fought you I know for the purpofe of doing fo." iC He has (replied Madeline) ; and I fi li¬ ce rel y hope for the laft time." She then enquired how her grandfather bore the rejec- ilon of his relative. tf As ï expedeci (anivvcrcd St. Julian) ; he declared his reiidinefb to reliiiquiih any alli¬ ance that accorded not wii h your inclination." vol. iv. d Madeline
Madeline, without repeating all D'Alem¬ bert had faid, now acknowledged that fhe fek herfelf too much agitated, in confequence of his converiation, to be able to miiiirle in fociety again that evening. Her fathei ac¬ cordingly promifcd to apologize for her ab·* fence below ftairs ; and the remainder of the evening fhe pafled alone,
CHAF.
CHAP. IV,
' ľ'was nt an hour when bufy Natuie lay DifiblvV in (lumbers from the noify *.hy } When gloomy fiiades ind duiky ntouu ipread A darkneis o'er the umveriai bed, And aii the gau-ly beams of light \\ cie fled. A HE enfuing day Madeline was agaiu leafed with the importunities of D'Alem¬ bert : in vain flie allured him her reíblution was unalterable, in vain declared, that if his fon came to the caftle but for the pur¬ pofe of addrefling iier, as he intimated, flie would confine herfelf to her cham* her. He ftill continued to perfécute her. r> % Finding
Hndi'.g her ол'п a'gununts indkwual, f hí ipokett^liei f.tlui to tryl r ínfl-icjjCe. ile 'U'-oidmgh renu nfiiated with D'A'em- lurt, and ι eque fk d him, in rtílur a pe- 4 111JÍÍU1) ташчт, to dro]) a iubjeel ίο un- '.krifiM'. In confi quence of this reqneii, ihe was uumokíkd with any ioih nation the nv\\ h\yy but whein v : her e\cs encounhred D'Alembert, an ii.w>lunlan teiroi jeivecfid fitr 1 cart at beholding the d ¡к imci mfik- Iianf t \'ud\ííS \\ Ah whit h he leg.irckd 1 er · flu fl ι ow, but iti \аш, to re aion hei u li с .it oi it у and fifi, without Lno\i:, 0 wh\, л> Л /lu was in hk power. When the hour for refl an ived, fhe difinifl- cd her attcuda nt ; hut (he, inftead of rej an¬ ing îo bed, took up a book, with a h \ oi being enabled, through its meai ι ·, 'o.tiiiuie and compo.c her thoughts. Ί he\ were too much difluí bed, howcwi, to permit this
ajiví . ' l - ол'сл'а- к г .л < /íme, unacquainted л . i ılı IkYkikfw' aimoi. till ι h, с preient day, what ;d;e j'Âcî k "'j.:, t.ym<· to reafon aw iv i ,; 'e.ri. , .iave i t * kar frem him ľ J з ík ч ,ι :;.ì ν a ал .:.t. — ^lepacu/; il . műidéi :oi* a i. ν /aimite. ). ibi mv í t the-r—.Jiie trjmbkd, and ftvirted 4 ,— I know not the mykenes of hk life ! D'Alembert mav n it be eq viali y ignorant, arai tl rough bis heirt peihi.p" im« n k to aim at mine." Thi recolk'ku; threat of D'Alem'ei t ren¬ dered this idea but too probable ; and ago¬ nies which no tongue could exprcls directly feized her foul. For ibme minutes the powers of articula¬ tion were fuipended. At length, with a deep figh and uplifted hands, the implored the protection of Heaven. íť T rulling in ihat protection (cried ike), which can defeat d 3 the
the malice oí the moit vile, OL ! let me aga n endeavour to regam ionie compoíure ; iet me alio endene ur not to bc too icady m anticipating evii.'* She felt ftill diiinclk^l ίο fl« ep, \cfc giaci!) woukl íhe have clofed her e} с » upon the f ко o oí hei ch unbe/ — :\ yl om, ien- к md η,ηιο awful by the pıofouncî ill I hie is <r th.c c^idc, ;uid which was ck uîıtcıl to n ij/i.4* к.,у 1 liv -ι tidily to be rehikd in the pre'eci itateli her minde în fhort, imaginary honors foon began to fucceed the rerl ones that had lately agi¬ tated her; yet fcarcely was flie infected by them em flie bluflicd from a conviction of weaknefs, and refolved on going to bed. She began to undrek, though u ah a trembling hand; n >r could ι efi ai n fıom fiai tin > as the low munnurs or the wind (which now, in the clct line of autumn, fre¬ quently giowied through the toréit, and fliook
fhook the old battlements of the caftle) founded through her chamber. Siie had not proceeded far in undreffing, when ihe was fuddenly alarmed by the fliaking of the tapeitry which hung behind the table at which flie flood. Appalled, flie ftarted back; yet at the next inftant was returning, under the idea of its having only been agitated by the wind, when again ihe faw it railed, an I could then perfectly dif- tinguiíh ahuman form behind it : with a wild and piercing fliriek ike inilantly fled to the door; but ere hor trembling hand could withdraw the ruil y bolt, flie was rudely feized. Hopelefs of mercy, fhe attempted not to fupphcate it, but cloied her eyes, unwilling to behold her executioner ; for that a ruffian had fecreted himfelf in her apartment, for the purpofe of robbery and murder, ihe could not doubt.
»4
From
From agonies, which only thofe who hau. been in a fituation of equal danger can ima¬ gine or defcribe, fhe was foon however ι e^- lieved by the voice of D'Alembeii. 14 Möhline fhe cried, as he iupported hc lipon hb brunt , π \ke ; f еоте not to m- ..ie, bue to cnli\ at." " Oh, heavens! v kel flu, op. п. j, hei H r ^, a.id vuldly ga/ing on lum), do 1 hear, d.) i Uho 1 d aright ?" " Be compofed (exclaimed he', I agkr. entreat you; you liave nothing to feai." * c Nothing to fear' (repeated Madeline .*s ike difengaged hei felf tioai h'm ), ifi ha\e nothing to te:<r, 1 have at leaft much to be offended at. Whence this intrufion, Sir ?—■ Ts it light, к it honouiable, to fteai like a midnight aflaifin to my chamber ?" ** You yourfilf have compcikd me to this condud (he icpliedi; you lefufcd to hear me, and coniequently forced me to elevile a fcheme to make you liften— —-"
"To
" To make me liften ! (repeated Made¬ line with haughtincfs) ; no, Sir,—no fcheme, no ftraugcm fliall eff-d that purpoie. Be¬ gone ! (cried ihe, laying her hand upon the door) if you wiih to avoid the puniihment your temerity deferves." " Supprels this haughtinefs (faid he, feiz¬ ing her hands, and dragging her from the door ere lhe had ρ nver to open it) ; believe me, like your threats, it is unavailing. Hear me you muft—hear me you fliall : nay, more, you ihall comply with what 1 defire." íť Never!" exclaimed Madeline in a refo- Jute voice, and ftruggling to free herfelf. " Then you ihall tremble for the fafety of a father," cried D'Alembert. Madeline trembled ; her heart grew cold ; flie ceafed her ftrugglcs, and looked with mingled terror and melancholy upon him. 41 Yes ; I repeat (faid he), you fliall trem- ble for the lafety ofa father: I am the mk nifttr ot iate to him ; and only your accept- ο ς ance
ance of the propofals of my fon can fave him from that which novv hangs over him." " What fate that is not happy can he have provoked r" afked Madeline in a faint voice. " í will not fliock your car (he replied), by divulging to you the one he merits ; be fatisfied, however, that all I know concern¬ ing him, and with the moft important events of his life I am acquainted, fhall be care¬ fully concealed, if you fwear folemnly, fwear this minute to accept the hand of my fon." * 4 No, (cried Madeline, after a moment's confidération, during which an idea ftruck her, that his infinuations againft her father might be falie, invented merely for the pur¬ pofe of terrifying her into a promife which could not afterwards be cancelled), I will not fwear ; I will not take an oath my foul revolts againft fulfilling." " You are determined then." faid D'A¬ lembert with a forced calmnefe, while an afliy palcnefi» itole upon his cheek. " Unak
« Unalterably determined," replied Ma¬ deline. *' But your réfolution could be fliaken, if you believed my allegations againft your father." " I truft I never fliall have reafon to be¬ iieve them," laid Madeline. " Unhappy girl ! dearly will you pay for your want of faith in me." As he fpoke, he put his hand into his bofom, and drew forth a filiali dagger. Madeline recoiled a few paces, and invo¬ luntarily dropped upon her knees. " Oh, D'Alembert ! (cried flie with a quivering lip), have mercy upon your own foul, and fpare me !" " Be not alarmed (laid he), I mean not to harm you ; the blood ot innocence fliall not again, at leaft by my means, pollute this dag¬ ger : receive it (continued he), as a preient for your father ; when he looks upon it, )ou d 6 will
will be convinced î fpoke but truth this night." ic Oh! in pity tell me (faid Madeline with clafped hands), what you know con¬ cerning him, and terminate the horrors of fufpenfe." íť No; the events of his life will come better from himielf; events, which his knowing this dagger comes from me, will convince him I am acquainted with ; events, which fliall be buried in oblivion, if you remain no longer inflexible. To-morrow I fhall again enquire your determination ; if unpropitious, the long-iufpended fword of juftice fhall at length ftrikc Farewell î your own obfbnacy has provoked your pre¬ fent pain. 3 ' So faying, he abruptly quitted the cham¬ ber, notwithilanding the entreaties of Ma¬ deline to remain a few minutes longer^ and explain his terrifying and myfterious language.
left
Left to the dreadful folitude of her cham¬ ber, ihe continued a confidérable time longer upon lier knees, with her eyes fixed upon the dagger, which lay at a little diflanc? from iier. At length, flowly riling, ihe ad¬ vanced to it, and taking it up, brought it to the light to examine it; the hilt was cu- rioufly iludded with precious ftones, but the blade was almoft entirely covered with ruft. " He faid (cried Madeline in a hollow voice), that the blood of innocence polluted it. Oh, God! (continued ike, letting it di np w ith horror from her), in whofe hand was it clenched at that fearful moment : !> The fufpicions, which had agitated îıcr on lier firft entrance into the caftle, again ruihed upon her mind ; but when near!)· finking beneath them, the aflurance her father had given her of being utterly unconcerned in the fate of Lord Philippe recurred to her recollection, and cheered her fainting heart. 3 ' "He
$i He faid hc was innocent (exclaimed fhe), and to doui t his truth were impious j what then have I to fear from the threats of D'Alembert?" But the cairn produced by this idea was of fhort duiation. Though aflured of his innocence relative to Lord Philippe, fhe recolleded flie had never received an aflur¬ ance of his being equally guiltlefs with regard to every other being : ike recolleded alio the uords of her departed friend, that the characters of his life were marked by horror, and ftained with blood ; and ike fliuddered at the too probable fuppofition of his having been involved in fome deed as dreadful as that which ihe at in ft fufpcded—a deed with which it wa* evident D'Alembert was too weli acquainted. u Oh, let me then no longer hefitate how to ad (exclaimed flie),—let me no longer delay devoting mylelf to fave my fa¬ ther ! and yet (continued flic, after the re¬ fledion
fledion of a minute), how am I convinced that my father is in the power of D'Alem¬ bert ? may he not have faid fo merely for the purpofe ot frightening me into compliance with his wiflies ? fliould I not therefore be rafli in the extreme if î doomed myfelf to mifery without a convidion that my lather's prefervation depended on my doing fo ? But how can 1 doubt his veracity (proceeded flie, wildly ftarting from the chair on which ihe had flung herfelf), how imagine he would ever make allegations he could not fupport ? and yet, perhaps, he made them under the idea that 1 would never enquire into their truth : but fliocked, appalled at the firil intimation of danger to my father, promife at once to become the wife of his fon: í wilí not then make tliat promife, till aflured there is a neceffity for doing fo.' y But how was flie to receive this aflurance ? how—without enquiring from her father concerning the former events of his life ? and, in making thofe enquiries, what pain¬ ful
ful recollections might not be awakened * what horn uie i cars mi&ht not be fue- geílecl ? e£ Oh, CïOd f (cried fhe, kneeling upon the ground, half diílračted with her inevrti- lude how to ad), teach me what 1 ought to do! Oh, let me not, in trying to avoid miiery mylelf, draw miiery upon him for whom I would willingly lay clown my life." The night pafled away in a ftate of wretchednefb which cannot be defcribed, and rhe morning fui prifed her ftill unde¬ termined. The bufile of the rifing do¬ meftics at length maile her recall her feat¬ ured thoughts, and recoiled the neceffity there was tor appearing compofed. She ac¬ cordingly adj u ileti her lıkır, put on a mom- in^-ckeis, and feated hei felf at a window with a book. Never was diíiimulatíon io painful i agonized by conflicting terror , icarcelv
fiebre -к* could ihe prevent herfelí kom tiu- velli. -g ί:.ι ieo;n y. itli a ckliaJUel \\p. At th. rr\ \ eir, a k-Kant ci л t'ì in- io.-m h.r h.-'h.Jl "-ь ге.л1у. "'kdjhne detıVvHİ 1кг ;.; h.r "\ , up a ecp < i с Α.ν л·. Ike ЛЬ 1JÍ..LÍ i' h¡i Ot^el ; 1 Lit k-\'_íd hv.'', t .t íhe ihn. у ¡i,l·. " 't t. 'kr t . ' e ,.Ι , -.pho er herí. iker. Λ fi. η ¿,.ν ν r¿rr } Mace¬ llile ten)k up the Jeg^e/, wh.eii the ¿kirt of her rc^be ha i c íC/eakd, and went into lier dreflhtg-room, with an intenti mof locking it up in -л cabinet; rcieiviiig, in the courie of the шип. ing, to haw another converiation with D'Alembert, and determine by that ho.v ike fliould act. S 'ne had juft unlocked 'he cabinet, when flic felt her arm fuddenly graíped. She ftarted j and, turning with quickncls, be¬ held her taiher. The dagger inilantly chopped from her trembling hand; and, recoiling a kw paces, ike flood motion- lek, gazing alternately at it and St. Julian, With
With the quick nefs of lightning he fnatched it from the ground : but fcarcely had his eye glanced on it, ere he Jet it fall ; and, turning with a death-like countenance to her, demanded, in a faltering voice— from whence, or from whom flie had got it ? " From D'Alembert," replied the almoft fainting Madeline. f( From hhn! (repeated St. Julian, ftrtk- ing his breaft, a id ftaitiug); Oh, heavens! by what means did it come into his poflek fion ?" 6t I know not,** faid Madeline. <{ But }Ou know the fearful ftcry with which it k cenne ud." 44 Oh ? my f ther! (cried Madeline), do not queftion rae." ίε This mitant (еч laì.ued he in a frantic mannei, advancing to her, and gia'ping her hands), declare what D'Ai mbcit laid ; with¬ out hclitation, without equivocation, let me l- now cdl he tHd you." " Oli, my tuhu ! (faid Madeline finking лп her ki4es), d x not be thus agitated." 4i Once
*« Once more (cried lie), I command you to tell me all that pafled between you and D'Alembert ; if you longer delay, you will w oik me up to frenzy." Thus urged, Madeline, in fcarcely intelli¬ gible accents, ar.d ftill kneeling, revealed the dreadful converfation. After ihe had con¬ cludevi, Sl. Julian continued fomc minutes filenk immoveable, and in an attitude of horror which almoft froze her heart. He then knelt befide her; and, wiapping his arms round her, ftrained her in convulfive agitation to his breaft, and leaned his head upon her flioulder. At length, raifing it, he looked up to heaven— Vk A!mi 0 hiy God ! (lie cried) 1 bend before thy will; thy chifti eme л t ıs jult, though dread fu" ; a'-ci vai .ι а e Uie а. t by which we wouid Juue iu The horn of re¬ tribution, thoiign kmet hues delayed, is Lever foi gölten. Oh, my child 1 dearpluLc of a tender, though diiaftrous love ! i weet image
linaje oí the moft lovely and injured of wo- men ! cuDiciouo í lun 1 me: ii·. cl the vem- giunco of Heaven, not on m\ own account, but thine, с : ч1 i wiih t; ward off the blow of juftice ; I wiihed to 'ave thy gentle v. i- tuic from the bitter pangs of feeing th\ fa¬ ther dragped t> torto, e, and the yet bit- to er plľo > (A i ■ '. 1. ^ 'ne dele« Vt d u. Lût th. i . .ili is fruii еле ! at the v..;y lime uhen ib fiuíliation uai 1 ait exp '6ted ; no doubt for the uifcíl purpoíb, to pro*'e to mankind that guiit can never hope for lafting con¬ cealment. How my unfortunate ftory be¬ came known to D'Alt mbcrt, I cannot con¬ ceive , but that it is, that fatal inftrument of death too plainly proves. Yes, he fpoke truth when he faid the blood of innocence had pollu¬ ted it ; it did, and now cries aloud for mine.'*" "Oh, horror!" groaned Madeline. ** In mercy, in pity to mc (exclaimed St. Julian, again ilrainint her to his bofom), try to compofe your feelings! Oh, let me not have the excruciating miiery of thinking I ckftroyed my child ; exert your réfolution» Щ
την Madeline, and live to recon^le man¬ kind, by your virtues, to the memory of vour father." " But though D'Alembert (cried Made¬ line, whofe recollection fudden liorror had fora few minutes fuipended), is acquainted with }our ftoiy, there is a method (ihe con¬ tinued, rifing from the floor), to pre\ail on him to conceal it." *' A method which I will never fuffi. r you to ackpt (e\claimed St. Julian^; Oh, ík ver íhall my c.iild be iacrificed to lave my lne/ ? í: Ah, little tb τ · 41 know the foul of your cl ild, ¡t)ou iv ¡ χ ο. e lhe will leave untried aii) exjeunnt tiiat may ihvc jou. He r 1кг lo e bh i 'л 'Mi [tirA ile, <\упп kuce.- in 0 , by tint ii mg ihe weiiihips— b) tie i t kii oí her motltvi*—by a,l that is holy in hk iig' î, 'j become the wnie ^f )C-np D'A lemlv, ι. η b_. doing fo ihe can buio his kiLiici' to inviohu l· Ikcrci v. ' ' k M\ uk luiKb.e ehi a 1 ('aid St. Julian, rakmg uiid cmb.acing Ler); akui what л wretch
wretch am I to think 1 have doomed you to mifery!" £e No (cried Madeline), you have not j my fate cannot be mifcrable if I know it has mitigated your's." 4€ i will i о longer delay revealing my fad ftory to you (faid St. Julian) ; perhaps after hearing it, fome other expedient than a mar¬ riage with D'Alembert may ftrilce you for preferving me. " You exped, no doubt (refumed he after he had fecured the doors, and feated himfelf by her), a tale of horrors ; alas ! that expeda» tion will be but too dreadfully fulfilled ľ*
CHAP.
CHAP. V,
Prepare ¿o hear A ftory that ihall turn thec into itone. Could there be hewn a monilrous gap in Nature t A flaw made through the centre by lome god, Thro' which the groans of ghofts might ftrike thine eai> They would not wound thee as this ítory wüí, * 4 ÄJJQ not be too much fhocked, my love (cried St. Julian) on finding that I deviated from truth, which in the courfe of this nar¬ rative you muft difcover; ihat deviation was occafioned by tendernefs for you ; for I was well convinced of the mifery you would feel if í confeflľed the involuntary fufpicions you 5 entertained
entertained cf mc on our firft coming to the caftle were well founded ;— alas ! they were too juft!" He flopped for a minute as if overcome by agony ; then again addreffing her— ťt you recollect,! fuppofe (laid he) all the particulars I informed you ofin our journey hither?" "ido," faid Mulelinc. " I told you (rcfumed lie) of the letter 3 received from my brother, requeiling me to leave my cli/.ium on the Alps and of my meei ing him in purfuancc of it in the foreit of iMontmorcnci. Ие was fomuch altered, that had I met him elfewhere by chance, I fliould fcarcely have known him. He told me he had been long indifpoied, and that it was in ccnfequjiice of his indiípofition ancl the languivi ľude oí his fpirits, that he had Kquefled to fee me, certain that my pre¬ fence wonld operate li'^c a rich cordial upon him. " In the cottage where he had lodged me on the commencement oi our acquaintance, lie again procured a chamber for me ; it flood at
at the extremity of the foreft, aied belonged lo a brother of Lafroy's, who was then valet to Lord Philippe ; and by him I was intro¬ duced at it as an unfortunate young man taken under the patronage of his Lord. ' c Every morning í met my brother, but met h.im without having the pleafure of fee¬ ing his health in the leait amended. My regret at the continuance of his ill neis, joined to my uneafinefs at being abtent from home, rendered me extremely unhappy. I had been about a fortnight at tlie cottage, when one morning as I was preparing to walk out as ufual to meet Lord Philippe, a letter arrived by a ftrange fervant from the caftle, informing me that he was fo extremely ill he could not leave his room ; and therefore requefted, ач the length of his confinement was uncertain, I would no longer delay re¬ turning home on his account. " Notvvithftanding this requeft, notwith- ilanding my ftrong anxiety, my ardent wifhes to be again in that dear home, which contained a being moie precious to me than vol. iv. e exiftence,
exiftence, î could not bear the idea of de¬ parting, till afl" ι red he was at leaft out of danger. " 1 wrote to this purpofe, and entreated to hear from him as foon as poflible. The day wore away, however, without any other tid¬ ings from the caille. As ï fat, at its clofe, in a melancholy manner in my little cham¬ ber, ruminating over paft feenes, and fome- times trying to cheer my heart by anticipat¬ ing the happinefs I fliould experience in again folding my Geraldine to it, I was fuddenly ftartied by a loud knock at the cottage-door. Full of the idea of receiving a letter from the caftle, I was milling ali impatience from the room, when the found ofa ftrange voice arrefted my fteps, and I was foon'convinced that the man whom my hoft admitted had no bufinefs with m' " I thereiore returned to my feat, and was again finking into a reverie, when a few words from the next room, which was only divided from mine by a thin partition, com¬ pletely
pletely roufed me, and made me, I may fay, become all ear. 4 Well, Claude (aíked my hoft in a fami¬ liar voice), what journey have you been tak¬ ing this time ?' * The old one (replied Claude); I have been to fee my godfather who lives upon the Alps ; he always makes me a handfome pre¬ fent when I vifit him.' * So he fliould, I am fure (faid his compa¬ nion) ; vifit ing him muft be plaguy trouble- iome, confidenng the long and dangerous vay you have t с go.' ' Who do }ou think I mei travelling that wa} thk morning?' cried Claude. ť I am fure 'us impoflible for me to guefs,' u plied Jofephe, the name of my hoft. 4 Noother than our young Lord the Mar¬ quis of Montmorenci's ion,' faid Claude, poking away as if the devii was at his heels.' i Our young Lord ! (repeated Joibphe in a tone oí afloniihment), no, I'll be fworn you did not meet him ; why, man, he is at this E 2 very
very moment confined to his room by a violent iihicft.' ' \Vcll у ill, I fay 1 met him (vociferated Claude, as if angry ot being doubted;, and your brother Laiioy along .ith him/ й Your eyes certainly deceived you (faid Joibphe) ; what in the name of wonder fhould induce him to report he was ill ex¬ et pt he really was fo, or bring him the way you ίά'ά you methim/ ζ I certainly cannot affigli a reafon for his pretending illnefs (replied Claude) ; but I can ; kc a vcrj' fuilicicnt one for his jour¬ ney tti the Alps ; has Lairoy never informed you ?' * No, never. * * Ah, he is a clofe dog; hc could have told }ou a great ека! if he had had a mind, for lie is quite in the confidence ot ins mat¬ ter. But to my ftory ; 3'ou muft know near the cottage of my godfather there (lands a fine old cattle, n w inhabited by ai. lriih- imn »f niftifkiion, who was driven from his own country by fome troubles in thç fiate. On
On the two daughters of this nobleman the daughter of my godfather attends. About live months ago I was at his cottage. One eveii'ng, as the fun was letting, 1 attended him to coliéit his flocks which fed upon the heights íurrounding the caftle, and pen them for the night. While thus employed, from the court of the caftle the moil enchanting mutic ftoíe upon mine car : delighted with the founds, ï inilantly paufed, ancl turned to the place from whence they proceeded.' ť Tis the two young ladies you hear (faid my companion) ; they both fing, and plav upon the lute divinely ; it often docs my old heart good to hear them.' * Lord (cried I), f wifli { could have a peep at them.' i You may eafily gratify ihat wifli (rcpJieJ he), ihe wali about the с url is клоке iu many peaces* ' I mikmlly ilew to İt, \.v¿ Leheld two of the moil iuvei) createne» ímaghoíaon can conceive. Aiier leeft ni n y ey s fome mi¬ nuses, I carele ffly cak í c¿a opon fw.^n- fc 3 i.eam
tleiren vt ho fiit bcfide them ; guefs the aílo- niílimtnt ofthat moment when I difcovered one of thufe gentlemen to be the Count St, Julian/ * I diredly haftencd to my godfather; in¬ formed him of the difcovcry Γ had made; and enquired from him whether he knew what had brought the Count to the caftle, ť He imiled, and fliook his head inniifi о cantly. * Chance (laid he) firft brought lum to it, and hu lination made him afterwards repeat the vifit ; he is a great friend to the family; he lias lately provided a hufband for the younger daughter.' * He л as iecure of the eldeft himfelf then I fuppofe (faid 1) ; for faith I think no man of any feeling could give up one hand fome girl till fure of another to fupply her place.* c My godfather fmHed; and fome cxpref- fions dropped from him which excited my curiofity : but I queftionecl him in vain ; like your brot her Lafroy, he was aclofc codgeiî,' and leiuied to gratify me. I then determined to apply to his daughter : ihe came generally every
c\cry morning to pay her duty to him. If a real woman (faid î to my felf), fhe will be «lad of an opportunity to communicate a ilcrct. I accordingly watched for her the next day : ihe came as í expeded ; but, in¬ ftead of letting herenter the cot 1 age, i { re- vailed on her to take a walk w ith me. I íbo n introduced the fubjed I vsiihed to convene about. * Your father, my dear (faid ï), informs me that my Lord is a great friend to the family you live with.' « Ah, Mr. Claude (cried ihe), thofe who imagine he is a friend to the family are fadly miftaken ; it would have been a happy thing he had never entered it.* « Win, my foul (aíked I), has he itole away the heart of one of the voung ladies?* She ih ook her head ;— s It does not be¬ come me to tei', family ( ecrets.' f No, to be iure (faid I), not toftrangers ; but to a perion )ou know fo v. eil a-, yoa do me, there is not tlie leali harm in the world in telling them.' E 4 * Ah,
s Ah, n vou coulai ìfi't m-ikc mc be heve t « it, 1'· ulo ^ d loa ¡ОАъ^и'гуу would aib'- î h ' u/ ' Wk iî . v ma-; n -e Ι ι .J·", ίο \\,u\:, ^· ί 1 ^ Ι'-.· s 1 f ы r>4 \ : ι í b: n ρ: e v áh d 'n tvv i 'l'e (... j .1 ,:'■:! ic eq^.^i her „h le ! P, , t ' I y. ¡ l " 1 î ι· - -y ' .me г,и ; ih^ ki ! fl .ei._e ι .. ( ..t k j'fi . , (hk e .:... ; ! ed uir ic. : r A\y. Ьл tiu ìì: n 7 from bah. he nui win an atcicknt :>e"ir it vhich mdueed !>iy ï/iid í > <■ . r r him α lodging tih al ie to cuiriubt' hi joLüiey. Tlie mement he and my Lady Oeiakline beheld each other, they were rnuuiidly imilteii; and, in conlequence r f iiii .utad. ni-ni, they both deviled a thou a ; d ечеи es for his ila} ing in the caftle l· ng ah er he wis expedcel to leave it, At )eii t) th he depa ied. Never lhall I forget the w.aiin& and wotpn.g his going occafioned ; my Lady Gere lehne bec ime but ihe íha- dow ot luríeif, and wandered about Üke a ghoft. < One
« One morning íhe called me ir. to her chamber; and, after locking her door, ' My dear Blanche (faid ike with a Hood of tears), İ am now going to place the great eft confi¬ dence in yon ; a confidence which muit con¬ vince you i thmk you. a prudent, ienfible, clever girl, one quite above the lower как/ ť í was quite roikked by her ρ raí fe 0 , and could oni) courre v, and fay î hoped ike never would have reafon to repent any confidence flie repofed in me. • Slie then proceeded to fiiy that the Count St. Lilian hau not only en^arred her affections, but injured her honour ; a.id that ike was now hi a fituarion th.l mult loon expofe her to oprn difgrace. £ 1 dare not tell mv father or my filer (cried flie) ; counfel me therefore, my dearefl girl, how to a4 ; th mgh, alas! ï have little hope that any advice will ben« iit me, as the filence of the Count fi лее his de¬ pan ure inclines me to beheve hcwiilne\er fulfil his prjmifes oi marriage.' e 5 6 You
* Tou muft try ifim, Ma'am (faid I as foon as I had recovered from my aftonifh- ment, and collected my wits together); write him one of the moft cutting letters you can think of; and tell him you exped, as a man and a gentleman, he will make you immediate reparation tor his injuries, by giving you lik hand in marriage. s She accordingly wrote a Icttcr to this purpofe ; and, at the expected time, an iinlwer arrived, in which iie informed her he ftill loved her to diffraction ; but that as to marriage, it was quite out of the queftion on account of his lather, who would, lie knew, if he fo united himfelf, deprive him of all provifion. lie bid her, however, keep up hei İpi rits, adding he would foon be at the caftle ; and had clevifed a fcheme for preferring her from the indignation of her fiuher, fliould her fituation be difcovered to lyn. 1 Well, you may be convinced, we waited moil impatient Iv for his arrival. He came tuoa kk; the receipt of his letter, accompa¬ nied
nied by a very fine young man, the fame you faw with him in the court laft night ; and my young lady was all anxiety till the fcheme he had hinted at was difclofed to her. A villainous fcheme, you will fay,— no other than to have a marriage made up between my young lady and Monfieur Lau¬ fane, his companion. ( Pie is a natural fon of my father's (faid he to mylady; for I was in a clofet adjoin¬ ing the chamber in which they fat, and con- fequently heard all their converiation) ; and I mean, as foon as 1 come into pofleifion of my paternal fortune, ίο make a handfome provifion for him ; this i fhall mention to the Karl as a means oi' inducing him to confent to your union with him—an union, by which you will be guarded againft your fa¬ ther's indignation fliould he ever diicover our connečlion, as he muft then know the dreadful confequenccs that would attend its expofure ;■—an union alio, wntch will give mc a pretext, from our ivliUioiiíh:;\ <·( r (ι ~ , ' : ι " н
í ifi t ing you much oftener than I could other- wife do/ c It was long, however, ere he could prevail on my poor lady to agree to his propofal ; and nothing at lait could have extorted her conient to it, but the hope of being fliielded by her marriaac from the rase of her father. Her conient once obtained, every thing was foon fet tli d according to the Count's wifhes. it v.as with difficulty (continued Blanche) I could prevail on mvlelf to keep what í knew a feci α fr -m Monfieur Laulane ; it grieved my \tiy heait and foul to think fo fine a young man fliould be fo impofed upon.' 4 But, B.anche (iaicl I), did you not fay tl at Lady Gciald.ne was in a certain fi ma¬ tion, and will not a premature birth open the eyes of her hufband to the deceit that has been practifecl on him?' « Οίί, we have guarded agauft all that (re; 'ieel ili* ) ; about the time fhe expeds to be coľfincd, the Count St. Julian is to feign iľ-f's at the caille of Montmorenci, and WKtc to hib brother to pay him a vifit. He
is then to keep him there till my lady ík recovered, and the child fent out of the way, whom he has promifed to provide for/ " How fhall I defcribe the feelings that rofe in my foul (proceeded St. Julian), as í liftened to this horrible narrative ? Not a doubt could í entertain of its authenticity; every recollected circumftance—the fudden friendihip of my brother, notwithilanding the prejudices inftilled into his mind againft mc by his father—the ready compliance of Lady Geraldine with my wiflies, notwith¬ ilanding the íh ort time we had been ac¬ quainted, and lier knowing that I was an outcatt from the houfe which fliould have flickered mc,—altogether proved that I was a t lupe to the moft perfidious art. íť Yes (I exclaimed within myfelf), my credulous nature has been impofed upon ; and thofe whom 1 moil loved, moít t rufted, have undone me. in the language of a poet oí a mk-r count iv 1 mkht have faicl— Two
Two, two fuch, (Oh I there's no fui ther name), two fuch tome, lo me, who lock'd my ioul within your breaft. Had no ileHre, no joy, no life, but you, м.«--».««»««« —™— «Ϊ had no ufe, | No fru î of ai', but you i'—^i friend and miftrefs Was a'I the wot ivi co <ld g. ve. Oa I— 9~>m*m*~mnatïtiW COllKt VOU ЫиГЯу This tender heart, wh.ch, «ith an infant fondnefs, Lay lull' d between yourboiom, and »here flept Secure of injur' d faith. I can forgive A foe, but not a mifticfs and a friend j Tieaion is there in its moft horrid 111 ape Where truft is gt eitten, and the- foul rchgn'd Is Itabb'd by her own guards. u I could only reftrain myfelf till the nar* rative was concluded. The tempefl in my bofom then broke forth, and, rufhing into the next room, with the gripe, the fury of a lion, ï feized the narrator, and bid him, as he valued his exiftence, 'inilantly prove or difprove the truth of his aiiertions. * By what right (cried he), do you defire this ?' «By
" By the right of Lauføne,'* vociferated I, in a voice of thunder. e Laufane ! (repeated he, looking fteadily upon me) ; ah 1 'tis but too true ; I now re¬ coiled your features. Well, it can't be heip'd ; the mifchief is out, and iheie*s an end of it. If it will give you an tisfac- tion, mafter, I will folemnly fwear^ what I have told my friend Jofephe hert heard from Blanche, and ihe, I am fure, v ild not utter a falfehood : people ieldoni .nmit a fin without intending to derive lome benefit from İt ; and what could accrue to her by defaming her miftrefs ? I will alfo fwear, that í met your brother this morning af- cending the Alps ; and that, while I was at the cottage of my godfather, Blanche told me that you had left home, and that her lady had lain in two days after your depar¬ ture of a fine boy, who had bee» 1 u moved by her to a neighbouring cottage 4i Ere í go in quell of vengeai;' . cried, relinquifhing my hold), I will afi ч whe¬ ther the Count has left the caftle, «I
" I muffled myfelf up in a large cloak, and directly haflened to it. I thought my heart would have burft my bofom while waiting to have my enquiry anfwered. * My young Lord (faid the porter) de¬ parted this morning, attended but by one fervant ; where he is gone, or when he will return, is not known.' " Never will he return to thefe walls, exclaimed I inwardly as 1 turned from them» " I re-entered the cottage merely to pro¬ cure a horie from Jofephe, in order to expe¬ dite my journey to the foot of the Alps ; he tried lomake me delay it, and endeavoured to allay my fury ; I curfed him for the effort. 4 You only aggravate the poor gentle¬ man's feelings (faid Claude to him) ; Lord! who can wonder at his beinß; enraged at the vile impofition pračtifed upon him ? for my part, í think him ίο injured, that i am deter¬ mined he fhall have my fervices, if he will accept them, to the laft drop of my blood ; 1 would
] would affili him in punifliing his perfidious bro t li er.' " í extended my hand. í accept your proffered fervices (cried 1) ; not to puniih my deceiver, but to trace out for me every minute particular of his guilt, ere my ven¬ geance fails upon him. " He accordingly accompanied me to the Alps. We travelled with almok incredible expedition, and the fecpnd evening I found myfelf near that fpot which but the day be¬ fore I had thought of as a paradife. Unable to iupport the fight of it, I ftopped, and, feat ing myfelf in tlie cavity ofa rock, defired Claude tc pi occcd, and gather what particulars he could from Blanche concerning the vifit of the Count ; charging him, at the fame time, carefully to conceal my return from her, alio my knowledge of the bafe deceit which had been pradifed on me, left her regard ior her miftrefs fliould make her infoi m her of the whole, and thus, inali probabili tv, by put¬ ting her and my betrayer upon their guard, bailie the revenge I meant to take—a revenge which
which to hear of will make you tremble ! I rc- folved on murdering my brodier ! after which it was my determination to haften to the caftle, acquaint the Earl with the baienefs of his daughter, and terminate my exiftence ici her fight. " To his own ingenuity 1 left Claude to account for his unexpeded return to the Alps; the minutes feemed hours till he came back to me. ** At length he appeared, and with a face full of importance—* Well, mafter (iaid he), I have i'eca Blanche. I fhall not tire you by mentioning the exeufes I made to her for my fiidden appearance ; furfice it to fay, they were received in the manner I wiflied.' " The Count," cried í impatiently. 4 Arrived a few hours ago (faid he), and is now in the chamber of Lady Geraldine, to which he was privately conduded by Blanche, who, in confequence of her lady's letter, was on the watch for him. 4 She
4 She afligned a reafon for what ap t ^ i- ed fo ftrange to us, namely, his having requefted you to return home. He told Lady Gerak dine hc did fo, fearful that, if you longer continued in the vicinity of Montmo¬ renci Caftle, you would difcover his ab¬ fence from it, and well knowing that here he could bc concealed from you. He is now about leaving her for the night.' " And whither does he go ?" cried I, ftart· ing from my feat. * He is to lodge in the cottage where his child is, (replied Claude); it ilands upon yonder acclivity, and this is the way to it/ " Enough (faìd I), retire/' " He began to entreat permiflion to re¬ main with me, but I haftily interrupted him, ťť I muft not be oppofed (cried I) ; my con¬ verfation with my brother will not admit of witneífes. Farewell ! retire to repoie, and accept of my thanks and purfe for your fervices." « Neither.
* Neither, mafte» ^'cpncel lu ; ι i ».". Ir г was i or ìu.i.i ihtcreíted motives but α ΐ .ее wiih of ha·. i:^g p. in '^ punuhed.' t<: i Ρ i¡ ; V'vM' :hv. ; un» he i 4 .;d iv,.eu ·, and v, ú 'ivv! h'"! to tkput, 4< 'i;, * i nt he w.o' l.t 'Г!к;Л, k.,v, tort: a Jajaer ν,ΐι' , лу h Ì А\.Хъ i:i".J'ed, the jne wi.iJi lì с hither о: k,\ua hed ι iven me, л» id íl,' I rúe w, Ji л h vh í kul .lumpt- ed my : r!e m th^ iu?eíl <A jMontaurenri í a r clj italu v ng mykií behind a prokctkg iragiuvjiií ot lock, imi ati^ntly matched юг ii y e^iliiu i vietim. "i hc phice in wlncli í íl * íd, kernel p'rtií uîvitly adapted for a a kciie ot liorror . it wà-> a iitt'e gloomy va.C;, iunk between iluj>eridous mountains, bkak and bare ot \egct.uio»i, ciovvnul witii fiw», ai.d lull of hLyjtfui c.tvitie , through which die wind rrumbkJ with a drca iiul violence. Ai laft Le,; d Pi iihpe appeared. Kotwithíki .chi g thedeteílation with which i tuen regard, ed km, never liad he appeared ίο η. urdí mg to me; hk jx.ee was m^ u in ful uid ílovV ; and ever and anon he paufed, and
and looked back, as if, infipired by íurne pro* phetic fpirif, he was bidding wi.aL he knew would bea laft ad;·. u to the manfnn he bad quitted. As he drew near, í faw his cheek was pale, and the naces of tears upon it : — tear?, iaid 1, which he Ьаь iliaci ove. his Geraldine, ar the rehu ion of the dangers ihe has paflld. " When he was within a vard of my con¬ cealment, I fprung out. He flatted La~k afliuiiflied, and furveyed me fora minute with that kind of expretfion which feemed to lav he could fcarcelv credit the evidence of hib су ť> ; then approaching me with extended arms, he exclaimed, * Ah, my brot her ! w hat—-* 44 I interrupted him : ς 1 diichiin the title (cried Í, ftepph»g up to him, and rudely idling his arm) ; villain ! I am well ac¬ quainted with thy perfidy ; and this to thy heart to reward thee for it r ' Madeline at thofc words inftine^ivclv caught hold of her father. She panted (or breath
breath, and her changing colour (hewed her ftrong emotions, " My fears were but too juil (faid St. Ju¬ lian) ; I was alinoli convinced my talc of liorror would overcome your gentle na¬ ture." s No, no (cried Madeline, after the paufe of a few minutes), my fortitude will not again droop, for I have now furely heard the \\ oril ; go on therefore, my dearcft father.' u The unhappy Philippe inflantk fell (re¬ lumed St. Julian) ; h c writhed ior a moment m agony, and then expired with a deep gr0an ' Ĺí There is fomething dreadful in the fight of human blood to a heart not entirely cal- lou«. As his flowed at my feet, a fain t neis itole over me, and I leaned for iupport „igáink the projecting fragment which had before concealed me. The fcene in the fo¬ rett of Montmorenci ruihed upon my recol¬ lection. He could not bear to behold my blood (iaid I), and yet í ipilled his without mercy.
mercy 1—Mercy! (repeated I ftarting) what mercy fhould I have extended to him who preferved my life but to entail diihonour upon it? I have taken but a juft revenge (continued i) ; and my fpirits were re-ani¬ mated by the idea. " Calling a look of lavage triumph upon the body, I darted a rofs it, and fled almoft with the velocity of lightning towards the caille. As I was entering the court, I met a holy man, who lived in a neighbouring monaftery, the confelTor of tiie Lai I and his family, coming out ý I would have puflied by him, but he caught my arm. * Alas, my fon ! (laid he, in an accent of pity) your diibrdered looks too plainly prove your knowledge of the faci cvtnt which has happened in the caille during your abfence. Mow unfortunate that you could not be found yefterday when your brother wrote to infoi m you of it, andrequeft your company hither y your prefence might have mitigated his tranfports.* «λ
*' A convulfive laugh broke írom me at the idea of deception having alfo been prač¬ tifed upon the old man ; yet, at the next inilant, it ftruck me as fomething ftrange that he fliould know of my brother's vifit to the caftle. " You fpeak enigmatically, holy father (faid ϊ); í know nothing of any letter my brother wrote, nor of any fad event that—-—, tc I fuddenly paufed ;—the dying groan of Philippe again, methought, founded in my ear, and ftopped my utterance. * If the meaning of my words is incompre- henfible (iaio the monk, regarding me with mingled horror and iurprilc), fo is alfo the meaning of your looks : explain what has di forde ied you.' u Firft fay (cried I), what you know about my brother's vifit to the caftle ; explain the reafon of it." * Concealment is no longer neceíľary (faid he); the Count came to the caftle to receive the laft íigh cf his wife.'
<l I-Iis wife !" repeated I, ftarting and flaring wildly. ť Yes, the lovely РЛепога.' "Elenora the wife of Philippe ! no, kıs not to bc believed (exclaimed 1) ; I fee (en¬ deavouring to fliakc him from me) you are but a fandified villain, and in league with the reft to deceive me !" * I know not what you mean (faid he) ; ï к no л' nothing of anv deceit that has been I -.akiiud on you. Lienora was. by the holy crois I kuar, and he touched that which hun« befide him, the wife of vour brother/ " í couid no lonper doubt his truth : a conluie J idea of treachcrv, ofa finare having been í]) read to im olve my unhappy brother and klfi in deftrii'ftion, dirted into my nu id ; all hell iec.ned opening to my view ; 1 gre.v giddy, лпЛ w >u!d have fiilen, bue tor the lupporting -\rm of the monk. ζ You arc ill (iaid he) ; let me call for uihiUncc.' ' c No (replied Í, exerting myfelf), T am now better. Tell mc, ere í enter the caftle» voi., iv. f what
what has happened fince my departure from it ; and why the marriage of the Count with Elenora was concealed from mc." * It never was the wiih of your brother to have it concealed f nom you,' faid the monk, fitting down on the pavement, where I had ieakd myfelf unable to ftand. * 'Tis now near a twelvemonth (continued hc), fince it took place ; the ceremony was pei formed by me. The accident which ш- tioduccd your brother to the caftle you already know 7 : almoft from the firft moment he and Lady LJenora beheld each other, they became mutually enamoured ; the watchful eyes of a parent eafily difcovered their attachment ; and the Eail foon de¬ manded an explanation of }our biothcik intentions. ' It was his moft ardent wifli, the Count faid, to be united to Lady Eleno r a ; but it was a wiih, he candidly coniefled, which he dm ft not icveal to his father, whofe avarice and ambition he knew, notwithilanding his txtravagint partiality for him, would forbid δ. hib
bis union with any one who could not in¬ creafe the confequence, and add to the opu¬ lence of his houfe. « Upon hearing thh, the Earl, though gently, blamed him for having encouraged a tenderne'" for his daughter, and explicitly defired him to leave the caflle. The Count, inftead of promifing to do fo, fell at his feet, and befought him not to banifh him from the woman he adored. ' Suffer me to marry her (cried he), and whilft my father lives to conceal my marriage.' ' The pride and rectitude of the Earl for a long time refilled this entreaty ; but the repeated fol ici tat ions of the half-diffracted St. Julian, and the tears of his daughter, at length extorted a confent to their union. * On St. Julian's return to the habitation of his father, he met with you. Soon after that meeting, he planned a fcheme for again vifiting his lovely bride ; you were the com¬ panion of liis journey. Ere your appearance at the caflle, the family were apprized of }our intended vifit and conncdion with him. f г * In
* Ϊη his letter to the Earl, acquainting him with thofe particulars, he alfo faid-—* Againft the lovelinefs of уош Elenora I have guarded my Laufane, by informing him flie was al¬ ready engaged ; but to the beauties of Geraldine I hope he will be as fufceptible, as I wiih her ro be to his merits.' * You came ; and his willies were accom» pfifhed by the attachment that grew be¬ tween you. * The Count mentioned to Lord Dünlere his intention of revealing his marriage to you ; but the Earl oppofed it. A long mtercoude with the world had rendered him fuipicious; and he feared your knowing of the affair, left you fhould betray it to the Marquis, from a hope of benefiting by the refent¬ ment you would excite againft your bro¬ ther : * and little pleafure (added he), fhould I derive from having one daughter enriched at the expence of the other.' * Though the Count would not ad in oppofition to him, he refented the fufpicion he harboured of you. * In doubting the u honour
honour of Laufane (faid he), you are guilty of the greateft injuftice ; no nature can be more noble, more pure than his -, and I am confident he woukl fooner lofe his life than hamı me.' ťť Oh, Philippe !" I groaned aloud. " The monk looked earneftly at me. * You are ill my fon/ faid he. tc Dear father (cried I), do not mind me - 9 I am all impatience for you to go on." ť About the time you were married to Lady Geraldine, the Count beheld a pro¬ fpečt of ι increafe to his felicity ; Elenora was with child, fn puriuance of the Earl's advice, it was fettled that when the period for her confinement arrived, your brother, pretending illnefs, fliould invite you to fee him, and keep you away till flie was reco¬ vered. It was alfo fettled, that the child fliould be nurfed at a neighbouring cottage, and, when weaned, be brought back to the caftle as the deferred orphan of fome poor peafant.
f 3 * About
* About ien days ago, almoft immediately after your departure, Elenora lay in of a lovely boy. She continued as well as could be expected for a few days ; a violent fever then feized her, and in a fhort time her life was defpaired of. She retained her fenfe?, and, fenfible oilier danger, begged her huf¬ band might be fent for, that fhe might have the pleafure of prefenting her child to him, and breathing her kíl figli in his aims. * An exprefs was accordingly difpatched ; Geraldine and 1 met him upon his arrival ; on not feeing you, as flie expected, with him, ihe wildly demanded where you were, He replied, that the moment he had finifhed perufing the Earl's letter, he had fent İt to you with a few lines, imploring your pardon for having had any concealment from you, and requeiling your immediate attendance ; but, to his great mortification, you were ab¬ fent from the cottage ; nor did the owner of it expect you back for a confidérable time, as you had told him, he faid, that you were going out
out upon a long ramble ; to wait for your re¬ turn was therefore, in his fituation, impoflible. * He was conducted to the chamber of his Elenora ; the agonies of death had al¬ readv feized her; and he arrived but in time to receive the laft figh of her fleeting fpirit. She has been dead fome hours, but it is only a few minutes ago fmce he could be tern from her remains ; nor could he then have been forced from them, but by the mention of his child ; he is gone to weep over the poor babe, and í am now about following him.' *' You will wonder, no doubt, my d care ft Madeline, how I could liften with cal m neis to this recital ; you will wonder that í did not flart into inftant madnef?, and with a deiperate hand, terminate my watched ex¬ iftence ; but horror had frozen up my blood, and lufpended every faculty; my filence aftonifned the monk, and he looked fteadily at me. At length I fpoke— 4 bat lier (laid I, in a hollow voice), do you not believe that ť 4 evil
ťvil ípirití arc fomctimes let bofe upon thk world, to plague the fons of men, and tempt them to ekítruéftion ?" s Heaven foibici I fliould think fo (he re¬ plied) ; the Almighty has declared his crea¬ tines never íhall be tempted beyond their krcngth; 'tis not the minifters of darknefs, but their own impetuous paflions which hurry them to deftruction.' 44 I ftarted up ; farewell ! (I cried) ; re¬ member mc 'm your prayers, and bid Geral¬ dine not forset me in her orifons." * Whither are you ntoiiisr ?' iaid he. ** Tojóin my brother," replied 1. i£ No doubt I looked wild. Ik feized my arm— ς Your brother!' repeated he. *' Yes, to accompany his feul in its flight from this woi Id.— Flis foul! (I repeated, ilarting and finicking aloud wiih agony) Oh, no' heaven opens to receive his fpirit, but the ckepJt aby fi» in heil now yawns for mine i" * Sonic
s Some dreadful myftery lurks beneath thofe words (cried he) ; tell me, my fon, what has diftrcflcd you ?' tê To tell you my dklrek is ufelefs, iince you cannot relieve it." ť Tliouoh not able to remove, I might at leak be able to mitigate it,' laid he. fcS No; except you could ie animate the dead ;—except you could raife Philipps from the bloody turf, and bid him Ike again !" 4i I tried to kifeimacc mvfeif, but he held me f\fl : in the conflict my ilrcnath and fenfes tailed, and í feil fainting to the earth. 44 When í recovered, [ found myfelf in the hall of the caille, iupported by my wife and the monk, and fimounderi by the do¬ meitics, amidit whom the Eail flood. The minute! îe^nincd my Ienies the monk d'f- nulicd the krvarus, and none remained with me but Geraldine, her father, and himielf. " Hc then befought me to reveal the vauíe oi in\ diíticís. Geraldine and the r 5 Earl
Earl joined in his fupphcation. ï raided my head from his fhoukler, and withdrew myfelf from the arms of my wife. I knelt down : the fury of my foul had fubfided.— "Oh! my friends (I cried, while tears gufhed from me), ï am unworthy of your tendernefs—I am unworthy of the light of heaven— ΐ am the deftroyer of your peace-— the murderer of my brother!" * impoflible ľ cried Geraldine, whilft the deadly palcnefs of her cheek proved that her heart felt not the doubt her tongue implied. * He raves,' faid the Eari. * Alas! (exclaimed the monk) î fear he utters a fatal truth. Ik explicit (continued hc, laying his hancı upon my head), and (port not with the feeling 4 · or your friends. 1 «« He raifed mc to a feat. líe again urged me to ipeak ; and in lake ring accents Ì began my taie of horror. As I ended it, Gerald hie dropped, to ail appearance lifekfb, гдг my kel. I í 'mew ni) leli befide her. Oh, Philippe'
Philippe ! (I cried) is the fife of my wife re¬ quired as an expiation of my crime r' " Pier wretched father hung over her.— ť She dies! (faid he) ; childkfs and forlorn I am doomed to defcend to the grave!' " The monk was alone collected; he railed her from the ground, and chafed her hands and temples ; in a few minutes flie (hewed figns of returning life. At length fhe opened her eyes : I was the firft object they fell upon. ' Unhappy man! (ihefighed) how could you doubt me ?' ťC Thus humbly kneeling, let me implore forgi venefs for doing fo (faid Ï). Oh 1 am¬ ply, amply ihall you be avenged ; I fly this inftant to throw myfelf into the arms of oñcnded juftice ; and, by an ignominious death, atone for my wrongs to you and Philippe." * And deftrc>y your wife and her uuuom infinit,' cfied flic. " This was the firft tini,, I had heard there was aprofpečt of my becoming a father ; an idea of the felicity which but a few days be- F б fore
fore 1 fliould have received fıom fuch an in¬ timation miked upon my mind ; and í funk groaning to the earth at the contnft i now drew between it and my preient feel¬ ings. ' Do not, by \i kbng to í his urctchedfiek fiaid lhe monk b aeravate tlieibiúi^ ol your wife and her bulier ; 'ıh- the guilty luart, not the guilty hand, m v io;, фгиае led he, ti') mg io compose my mind \ v, biki melata ihe ven¬ geance oí heaven; }uui" hand, not }oar licait, к gui llv : tlie v i'eil re;P could alone hau tinned jl agaihk your Ivot her; and upon rhe conti ivei oí tuch diab'-hcal iehemer, im blood muft cei tainly reft ; coupulejour- klk thcrrfoH', ар. ! )ou may agam expviiviice ionic di grec of happineh.' u l ibi ted up; * repeat that word no moie ,u"iul í with АсчсепеЫ ; 1 aj>piiieib and I muft hcnccijith be a¿ datant irom each otlu ι a·^ heaven ai.d heli/ ' i iomile ^kivi kkıaidine kneeling b.'fuie fie, and hiving he: cold aud trembling hands uu< „ ibcj, promife that you w'Ai be guided
bv the holy kuher, and try to fave a life upon which mine depends/ " í fnatched her to my breaft. And can you wiih to have the being faved (i aiUu\ who doubted your purity ?—-Ah ! iuıeîy the kveľeft puniíhmcit is r.ot more than lie merits for having done fo: yet, as you delire, hc wiii ас; here my trkntk [\ comiiiued, relinquiihii r ý her), I ftmd, the veri-, it wreteh upon са. th , death woukl bea rde a fe írom tortüie; but ao with me as you pleaie; as you wifli, Ì will either tiy to live, or prepare to die.' J My ion ч laici the monk;, you muft retir? immediately to your chamber: night draws on apace; a^ foon as it к dark, t w ¡h repair to 5 ou, and rifornì you of t Ik p km i have conceived for your avoiding the tidehcrv by whi 'h 1 icar you are kirounckeV * May I not accompany him ? ' laid Ge¬ raldine, catching mv kmd :ъ he wvu ieadin ,r me from ík; 14.0:0. 4 No ; ΐ w ku tor у шг p; elenco va order io cenk-i with ν αϊ as to th: bv.it nuxk c-f
fecuring his fafety.' This reafon for pre¬ venting lier attendance conquered ail oppo- iition. Ét I ihall not dwell upon the minutes I pafled alone. Tlie monk came according to his promife as foon as it was dark ; he opened the door fioftly, and held a glimmer¬ ing lamp in his hand. ' Follow me, my fon/ faid he. se I implicitly obeyed, and purfued his cautious fteps through winding paflages, and down innumerable defccnts of fteps. At length we flopped, and I found myfelf in a f рас tous and gloomy vauit. " Have you changed your mind (demanded I, after looking tound me for a minute) ¿ have you at laft thought, me defcrving of punifliment, and brought me hither as to a prifon." * You wrong me by the fuppofition (faid be) ; í have brought you to this vault but to fecure you from danger; your deftrudion î have no doubt was intended as well as your brother's; the motive for fuch an intention I can-
ï cannot conceive, nor perhaps may never bc able to difcover. Blanche has d ιί appeared : I have every reafon to believe ihe has joined that villain Claude, The moment I re¬ turned from your chamber, I fent for her, determined on trying to extort from her a confeflion of her guilt, but fhe was juft gone out. On hearing this, i diredly repaired to her father, a fímple íhepherd, long known ίο me, and one whom I have ever f mnd con- ícientiouíly juft in all his dealings. I en¬ quired for his daughter ¿ he had not feen her the whole day he faid. í then in a care- lefs manner aiked him if he knew a perfon of the name of Claude ?—No, he inilantly replied, * From his cottage I haftencd to tlie val¬ ley where you laid your brother had fallen ; but the body was gone. Struck by a cir- cumttance fo ftrange, I flood as it were transfixed to the fpot for a few minutes ; at laft I was turning away, whtn deep groans pierced my ear, and made me again paufe.'
4< As
* е As the monk uttered thofe words, í fli ricked aloud—* Oh, God ! (Í cried), is it poflible r —could I be miftaken ?—■ does Phi¬ lippe liver' " The monk ih ook his head ; € would to heaven he did !' faid he. But to proceed ; the fhades of night fell thick around me, and prevente! my feeing to any diftance; the groans ftill continued;—-in the name of God (cfied 1), I conj uie you, whoever you are, fıom whom thofe groans proceed, to fpeak, and dired me to your affiftancc.' 'Ah! father (faid a voice, which 1 in- ftantly recoüeded to be that of Lafroy, your brother's valet) heaven furely fent you hither.' * Direded by his voice, I went up to him and found him fitting behind a low mound at a little diftance from the fpot on which I had fii ft heard him. 1 enquired into the taufe of his prefent fituation ; he burft into tears—' Ah 1 father [laid he), do you not know what has happened ? ao you not know oi tlie horrid murder that has been com¬ mitted?
mitted ?—Ah ! who could have thought that the hand ofa brother could have perpetrated fo cruel a deed!' 4 1 was wounded to the heait (faicl the monk) at hearing he was acquainted with the dreadful affair, f afked him what he knew concerning it.' 4 1 left the caftle (anfwered he), a confidé¬ rable time before my Lord, in order to ap¬ prife the nurfe of his intended vifit to the child. Tired at iaft of waiting for him, or rather apprehenfive, from his long flay, that he wás taken ill, and could not coirle, í was returning to the caftle to terminate my fuf- penie, when, in this very fpot s I was fuddenly ftopped by furprife at feeing Monfieur Lau¬ lane a few yards before me, with a dagger in his hand, and an expreflîon of the moft vio¬ lent ragéin his face. 1 will not deny that I was panic-ftruck and unable to move even when I faw my Lord approaching. Oh! never fliall 1 ceafe to regret my want of cou¬ rage ; though, alas! nothing but thegreateft, the quickeft exertion of it could have iave J his life ;
life ; for fcarcely had his brother cafl. his eyes upon him, ere he flabbed him to the heart I Honor overcame me at that inilant, and f fainted away, nor recovered my fenlls till a few minutes ago : when 1 recovered, 1 had not however power, or rather reiolution to move i I reared beholding or (tumbling over the body of my dear and murdered Lord/ * I dreaded Lafroy's tcftimony againft yon (continued the monk) ; î therefore endea¬ voured to extenuate your conduci, and ex¬ cite his pity by relating the artifices which had been pračtifed on you. What í faid had the defired efľečl ; he no longer, he de¬ clared, confidered you guilty, and, of his own accord, took a folemn oath never to give information againft you. * I afked him whether he had any know¬ ledge of Claude, and alfo whe* ,ι: he did not think his brother in league with him? He had no perfonat knowledge of the villain, he replied -, all he knew concerning him was that he was a vine-drefler, who lived a little way
w ay írom his briber's cottage. A- :o his brother, in the moft empaflioned m-" ncr he protefted a heart more noble, more : imane than his never lodged within a breaft.j confe- quently it could not be iuppofed he had entered into fo horrible a plot. * I enquired whether he could t 11 any conjedure about the firft contrivi к it ? None, he replied in a folemn mannt .. 1 then told him of my not being able tu rkd the body : this renewed his grief, aik ny the fitil dawn of day, he find hrr \ν·*ν -ика- vonr to difcover it. As to Claude, -greed with me there was little probabilii uf any fearch after him being fuccefsful. * I bid him return to the cottage, nor come to the caftle unlets fent for. I think his fidelity may be depended on ; but I fliall not put it to the teft byentruíling him with your fituation. * The domeitics are at prefent ignorant of the caufe of your diforder, as well as of the death of your brother ; there is no doubt but what they will foon be acquainted with the
the latter—they may then perhaps fufpect the tor mer ; there is no knoivine how thev would -ла. I ihall therefore, as foon as I leave you, inform them that you liave been compelled to quit tlie calile, in order io alterni a moft particular friend to Italy j this will change the fearch, fliould one be made after you.' i( But think you not (cried I), that death would be preferable to a confinement here, which will deprive me of the fociety of ali I 1UVC : ŕ Your confi.' emerit here will not fubječl you to fnd\ a bk v he rcphed) ¿ a confiant intercoune can eafily be kept up between you and your Geraldine - y and every thing that can poflibly be brought hither for the purpole of adding to vour comfort, fliall be conveyed by me ; the caflle-vaults commu¬ nicate with f hole belonging to the monaftery — I dull therefore have free accefs at all times to you/
a 1
* ζ I fhall 110 longer dweil upon the con¬ verfation that pafled between us, neither upon the agonies I feil into on being left alone ; pity for Geraldine only prevented me trom daibing my delperate brains out. " The next day the monk came to me fooncr than 1 expected. * Alas 1 (exclaimed he as he advanced), the unhappy father of }Our uife has not yet drained the cup of mi¬ fery !' í thought of no forrow but that which the death of Geraldine could occafion. Starting, therefore, I wrung my hands, and cried—* She is dead ! my w ife is death and I have murdered her î ' * N0 (replied he), 'tis not his Geraldine. but the babe of his departed Elenora he has loft. ' On coming to the caftle this morning, I was furprifed to ice Lafroy juft entering the hall before me. ï accofted him in rather an angry tone, and aíked what had brought him to it without my permi ifi on ? lie foon afligned a fufficient reafon ior hr unex¬ pected appearance. On returning to the cottage,
cottage, he faid he had thrown himfelf acrofs a bed, where, overcome by grief and fatigue, towards morning he had fallen afleep. - From my repofe (he continued), I was foon roufed by piercing flirieks ; I inilantly jumped up, and darted into the outfide room, from whence they proceeded. Flere I found the woman of the houfe alone, and almoft in a ftate of diftraition. It was fome time ere flie could fpeak and explain the caufe of her diforder : at length ihe faid the infant flie had received from the caftle was fiolen whilft flie was out. milking her goats. That Claude was the author of this new mis¬ fortune I couid not doubt ; and I deemed it my duty to loie no time in informing the Fari of what had happened.' £ Alas ! (icfumed the monk) it was a heavy ilroke to him ; through the child he hoped to have received ibme little confolation for the death of the mother. This very day it was his intention to have written to the Mar¬ quis of Montmorenci to acquaint him with tiie marriage of his fon, and implore his protedion
protection for the offspring of it ; an in¬ tention he has now laid afide as unne¬ ceflary, except the child is found, to fearch for whom I have difpatched fome agents I can depend upon. The death of your brother is now known throughout the caftle ; I invented a plaufible ftory for La¬ froy to repeat, which he did with little hefi¬ tation ; and it is believed that your brother fell by the hand of a ruffian belonging to one of the numerous gangs of banditti which infeft thefe mountains. Lafroy fets out this day for the caftle of Montmorenci ; and lias folemnly promifed to adhere to my in- ílručlions in announcing the death of his lamented mailer.* * ť I aiked the monk whether the body of tlie unfortunate Philippe had been difco¬ vered ?—he replied in the negative. " What he told me, if poflible, increafed my anguiih. I then enquired when I fliould behold my Geraldine ?■—' At night,' he re¬ plied. I counted the tedious moments till ihe appeared. Ah ! how pale, how languid, how
how different from the Geraldine I had left 1 She wept bitterly ín my arms. ' Oh ! my love, I exclaimed, your tears diflraft me : yet I cannot wonder at your íhedding them; you have reafon indeed to weep the hard fateovhichunited you to a murderer!* * Ah ! never, Laufane (faid íhe), fliall I lament the fate which bound me to you. Exclufive of } f our misfortunes, have I not reafon to weep for the lofs of my Elenora— the fifter of my love—the fweet play-fellow of my infancy—the dear, the ineilimable friend of my youth ? Ob ! Laufane, the moil exalted profperity with you could not have filenced my grief on her account.' " A month paíľed away without any inci¬ dent occuiring to alarm my friends, and without any determination being formed re¬ lative to my future deftiny- At the expira¬ tion of that time, the monk came to me one night at a very late hour ; his countenance was difordered, and for a few minutes he could not lpeak. «My
< My fon (faid he at length), Tis well that we took the precautions we did.' " What has happened ?" demanded I eagerly. * To-night (refumed he), as I was return¬ ing to tbe monaftery, 1 heard, from behind a low rock which lies at a little diftance from the caftle, a low murmur of voices. I paufed and liftened, for I thought I diilinguifhed your name : I was not miftaken ; 'm about a minute after I ftopped, it was repeated. I then crept to the fpot determined to run every riík rather than not try to difcover any plot that might be forming againft you. As I ap¬ proached, I beheld two men, from whom a projection of the rock concealed me. ( To Italy (laid one of them), you fay he is gone.— ť Tis fo reported,' replied the other, c Well, it fliall be my bufinefs (again fpoke; the firft), to difcover what foundation there is for that report ; —earth lhall be fearched for Laufane; for, whilft he lives, my wilhci can never be accomplifhed.' VOL. IV. G < I fiev
fi They then walked away (continued the monk), and I haftcned back to the caftle to confuí t with your wife and her father about you. We foon agreed that a report of your death could alone, in all probability, lave your life. í flialľ thcreíorc fend a young man, whom I can depend upon, to morrow to the caftle, for the purpole of declaring that you are no more. He fhall fay that a in a fmali town in Italy, from whence he is juft returned, he met you ; that fliortly after that meeting, you were taken ill ; and, knowing whither he was bound, in your laft moments had requeued him to call upon your family, and inform them of your fate. ' This report will put a flop to all en¬ quiries ; and, as foon as your Geraldine has lain in, I will aflift you in cfcaping with her to a part of the world where there can be 1 10 fear of your ever being difcovered. To prevent any fufpicion, Geraldine is to de¬ clare a réfolution of renouncing the world as foon as her child is born ; and, under the pretext of entering a cloifter, flie is to quit 6 the
the caftle : when fettled in the manner you wilh, the Eari and the infant are to follow.' " 1 attempted not to oppofe the fcheme of the monk; any fcheme, indeed, which flat¬ tered me with a hope of again enjoying the company of my Geraldine without interrup¬ tion, was to me acceptable. 'Tis unnecek fary to lay the anxiety with which flie longed formy reléale from confinement-—a confine¬ ment which ihe endeavoured to foften by the moft unremitting attentions. Oh', with what agony have I gazed upon this match» iefs woman in my dreary dungeon! pale, weeping, emaciated, finking with horror, yet trying to conceal it' Oh! iurely the wretch extended upon the rack could not have felt greater tortures than I at thofe moments ex¬ perienced. " The period now arrived for making me α father : my Geraldine did not come near me one entire day, and my heart throbbed with tumultuous fears on her account. The monk came at night ; with an eagernefs < ; ? which
which fliook my frame, I enquired for lier. c She is well (faid he), but the Lari is indif¬ poied ; and, wii hout exciting fufpicion in the fervants, flic could not leave him :'— this excufe pacified me. Another day ar¬ rived without bringing her; two more fol¬ lowed, and ftill I faw her not, ! then again began to be alarmed : ' 1 have bem deceived 1 fear (kid I); if Geraldine was well, ihe woukl iurely have connived fomc method for fecm^ me: to night, though f rufli into tlie irnľj of deftiučlion by doing fo 3 I will termin' í e my íulj cule.' " Accordili:' 1 *' aa foon as the monk came, ï told him my ck termination of feeing her; he locked fliocked, and endeavoured to op¬ pofe it ; I hailily interrupted him— 4 No ţ cried T, I am refolved tins night to know whether or not í have been deceived.' As 1 ¡poke, 1 ruined bv him; and, with a velo¬ city which mocked purl uit, fled through ihe intricate paflàges of the caftle, nor flopped till I reached the chamber oi Geral¬ dine, which I gained without meeting with a being.
being. ï flung open the door—Ah, heavens what a fight preiented itfelf! on the bed lay the iifclefs body of Geraldine, already pre¬ pared for the grave, and bending over it the nir. ofl equally lifelels form cf lier fittheH Fora minute 1 flood motionlefs; thuifhiver- ing, flirieking with defpair, I fprung to the bed, and fell fainting upon the clay-cold bofom of my love 1 —Short was the priva¬ tion of my mifery. When I revived, I found myfelf fupported by the monk. I ihall not attempt to defcribe the extrava¬ gancy of my grief, nor repeat the frantic re· proaches I uttered at the deception pračtifed on me. c Oh ! cruel, cruel (I cried), t^ deny me a laft embrace ! had the laft beam of her eye fallen upon me—had her ìaft figli been breathed in my arms, I fliould not have been fo wretched !* 'Miftaken idea! (faid the monk) 5 your wretchednefs muft have been augmented by witnefling the agonies of а creature fo be¬ loved. It wmì by her command alone any deception was practiled on you. She knew g ς her
ber danger from the moment (ht hy in ¿ and fhe knew, if acquainted with it, you would have infilled on feeing her. She charged me, therefore, not to acquaint you with her fate till her interment had taken place. And (he charged me alfo to tell you, that if the love you profeffed for her was fmcere, you would endeavour to combat your affliction, in order to fupport her father, and fupply to her infant the lofs fhe would fuftain by her death/ 4t Does my child then live ?" faid I. 4 Yes (replied the monk) ; Providence is Idnci, and itili reíèrves fome bleílings for you ; forfeit them not by murmuring at its decrees. Look at that miférable old man (continued he, pointing to the Earl), and learn from him a leflon of fubmiffion to the will cf the Almighty. Think you the anguifh which wrings the heart of a hufband can exceed that which rends the bofom ofa pa¬ rent ? no—believe me it cannot: and yet, notwithilanding his deprivation, no loud complaint, no impious murmur, breaks from him ;
hitnj he bends before the ftroke without repining, confident that it proceeds from a hand which cannot err/ c< The language of the venerable man al¬ layed the tempefl of my foul : 1 fuffered him to lead me to the Eari, at whofe feet 1 funk. He turned from the bed, and attempted to fpeak, but his voice was inarticulate, and tears burft from hîm. ï almoft envied him the tears he fhed ; they relieved his oppref- iion; but mine I could not lighten in that manner; mine was that deep, that filent grief which whifpers the o'er-fraught heart, and bids it break« c They are gone ! (faid he at length, and extending his trembling hand, he laid it on my flioulder) ; the pillars of my age are gone ! No more fhall the foft accents of my children attune my foul to peace! no more fliall their bright eyes be opened to infpire mc with gladnefs ! the fliroud already covers g 4 bothţ
both, and on the cold bed of Elenora my Geraldine will foon bc laid ľ ÍS I groaned—grafpcd his hands convuk lively in mine, and, iu frantic exclamations, cxprtffed my grief. The monk endeavoured to moderate my tranfports, and the Earl made a feeble effort to aid him. ( Oh ! my fon (faid he), in pity to me, in pity to your child, exert yourfelf; let me not defcend forlorn to my grave, neither let her bc caft without a friend upon the world 1' <c I ftarted from the ground, and de¬ manded to fee my babe. You were laid in a cl illant chamber, and the monk inilantly proceeded thither to difmifs the attendants, after which he cautioufly conducted me to \l. Oh, my child ! how utterly impoífible го defcribe the feelings which pervaded my breaft as I gently raifed the mantle that covered your flccping face, and finì caft my eyes upon you ! I longed to ftrain you to my
my breaft j yet ϊ feared to breathe upon you left I fliould injure you, I kneeled clown, and gazed upon you till my fight grew dim ϊ With difficulty the monk could tear me away. When he did, he would have re¬ conducted me to my dungeon, but I puflied him afide, and again ruflied to the chamber of death, For a long time I refilled his en¬ treaties to kave it ; nor fliould I at hfl, I be¬ lieve, have 1 cen prevailed on to do fo, had not the kail at length bent his knee tome: I could not lvfiife the kneeling father of my í kilidine j aud half-dragged, h al f- iupported b 'v the !ΐκ»;ι\, I defcended to my prifon. Oh ! v. \уг л night was that which followed the k.u.wkJge of my (kraldine's ckath : on the damp ground 1 lay ft retched, and the gloomy echoes of the vaults were awakened bv my moaib ! <c iiut lwiľ nor, by any longer dwelling on my teeliugs, lengthen out my kory. It was determined ihat ï fliould remain in my pre f jnt flaiaiion during the life of the Karl, and, afier hk ckceafe, lock another aiylum о 5 with
with my child. Contrary to all expedation, the Earl furvived the lofs of his Geraldine two years ; during which period no occur¬ rence happened to difturb the melancholy quiet of the caflle. As the infirmities ot Lord Dünlere prevented liis coming to me,- î was frequently conduded to him by the monk, who, whilft I continued with him, always remained near the chamber to prevent our being furprifed. " Never fliall 1 forget the laft hours ï paíľcd with the father of my love at the de¬ cline ofa lovely funimer's day ; I was brought to him to pay my then almoft daily vifit ; î found him feated near an open window in¬ haling the fweet breeze which played around, tvhilil the fetting fun beaming through it, caft a kind of luminous glory on the por¬ traits of his daughters, before which, ex- haufted by play, you had fallen afleep. 4 Ah ! (faid he, motioning for me to fit near him) how much fhould 1 have enjoyed thecalmnefs of this delightful evening, had the
the bleflîngs î once poflefled been ftill mine 1 but let me not murmur at the decrees of the Almighty j iomething whifpers to my foul I íhall foon be re-united to thofe I re¬ gret. Oh ! my fon (he continued, obferving a tear ftarting from me), do nei too bitterly mourn my death -, rather rejoice at what to me will be a releafe from mifery as incurable as unfpeakable : fink not beneath afflidion at the very period your exertions will be moft requifít?. Oh! rouie your fortitude for the fake of Geraldine 's child, and live to preferve one relique of the noble houfe of Dünlere ! Yes, I repeat, noble was the houfe of Dün¬ lere : and fliould any chance ever lead you to the ifle in which it ftands, you will find í have not been a vain boafter in calling it fo. True, Its honours are departed, its pof- feiïions are divided -, but though its glory has fet, it has fet like yon bright orb, leaving a long trad of radiance behind it : 'tis on the floweiy banks of the Shannon you would hear of the fame of my anceftors; 'tis there you would hear that they were ever '"· 6 foremofH
forcmoíl in the ranks of virtue ancl of valour ; that their arms were never ftretched againft the feeble, nor their fwords ftained with the blood of innocence.' His eyes Iparkled as hcfpoke,and the vigour of his foul feemed revived; but, aks! his was but the ema¬ nation ofa departing fpirit. í£ ľkrlv the cnfuine; morning, contrary to his ufual cuftom, the monk came to me. His unexpected vilit, and agitated counte¬ nance, inilantly alarmed me; and, in falter¬ ing accents, I pronounced your name. 4 Your child is well sfilici hc) ; the Earl too •b well—he ileeps in peace; his foul has this day been called to heaven." <ť í could not refrain my tears on hearing oi this event ; in loting the Earl, 1 loft the friend who foothed my forrows by talking to me of my Geraldine. * ЛИ then that now remains to nie (cried I), of the friends i adored
adored, (the wife I muft eternally regret) is a poor helplefs infant!' c For her fake (faicl the monk) you muft now exert yourfelf. Oh ! roufe yourfelf (he continued, feeing medefpondcntly fliakc my head) to guard her tender years from the cruelties and finares of the world! Ah, let not the fwcet bloflbm, which gives fo early a promife of perfection, fade untimely for want ofa paternal flicker!' ec By degrees his language re-animated me to exertion, and we began to arrange plans for the future. He enquired to what part of the globe I was inclined to bend my fteps ? My broken fpirits, ï told him, rendered me, not only unwilling, but unable, to acquire new habits. I had, therefore,» an uncon¬ querable averfion to any ftrange country ; and thought, from being fo link known in my own, that 1 might, particularly as the ftory of my death was credited, remain in it with fafety. The monk expreflcd his regret at my difmclination to quit France, but did not
not attempt to oppofe it. After fomc con* ííderal ion he mentioned the place he hac* come kí u, asa fituation weli calculated for retirement. ï was enamoured of it from Iks defcription ; and he aflured me he would difpalch a confidential perfon that very day to procure a refidence in it for me. He had already, he iaicl, prepared the fervants for dif- miffion ; and, before others came to fupply their place, from the real owner of the caftle, who had only lent it to the Earl as a tem¬ porary afylum, ct my meflenger (iaid he) will be returned, and every thing prepared for your departure, I have (continued he) prevented all enquiries as to the deílination of your child, by declaring her fotely com¬ mitted to my charge : and when the hour for your quitting the caftle approaches, I fhall fend the woman who now takes care of her after the other domeftics.' u Every thing fucceeded accoiding to out wiflies. Atthí expected time the meíTenger Ar¬ ri \ ed, after having taken the cottage for mein which
which you were brought up, and I fťt out for к a few days after the interment of the Earl, At the moment İ was bidding a laft adieu to the caftle, the monk put you into my arms in order to revive my réfolution, which he faw drooping. 'Tis faid ihat our firft pa- rents lingered as they were qnitting parad ife; fo ï lingered as ï was leaving what to mc had been a paradife-~~fo I paufed and caft my tearful eyes upon it. With difficulty the monk could prevail on me to proceed ¿ he infilled on accompanying me to the place, about half a league from the caftle, where a guide and mules were ftationed for me. As we proceeded thither, he exhorted me to patience and fubmiffion to the Divine will. Our farewell was folemn and affeding f I ftrainedhim to my breaft,and attempted to exprefs my gratitude for all his kindnefs* * Oh ! my fon (cried the holy man, while tears bedewed his venerable face), I do not merit fuch thanks; I but performed my duty in the fervices I rendered you and the family of the Earl ; for am ï not the femnt of a God
God, who pilier tlie fjaütıcs oí his cuntiire", and ρυιιι^ balm upon the wounds w huh 1Гь pillice lees j)ıopeı t > inflict : ' I ie ¡Jionukd tn keep tp ^ con ι i mt с ol и ipomknee with me. * \λ'!ΐιη İ e< ,tk lo w utw ţkud he), }ou тел becomiWe^l ihat cither p л íaeultie^ hm inled те, сл~~-1 au no m(î,e/ * ¿ Oui ifíuun'v cornu cr.ecd at n^í.t, the t.jíning dav we k\ ln m m ob'ei-ic cottage, and thehJl'iwiig night ι .к hed ouï hab'- tntiuii λϊ) doiiicil ν auangements wete foon nride. I changed mţ ivme, and, fıom the n tın ην nt ut nn houle, and ıı r being entlieh out < 1 ik ЬеаЧп tiack, had rol a hai ot heim;; cliko\eied. ikic had iii\ boíom bten (ке fıom the plings of on- lerníe, I might again have, experienced iome inull degree oi j eaee , but hoiror and 'cnioik hid taken poíkíhoii of me, and the ijjiut oí the nuudeie 1 Philij)pe continually haunted in\ fteps; Ijfi was ib great a burthen, thai οίί ι η ihoiiìdl hi\u hevn 1ст]Лес1 toiaiic д fktpLi.ite hand s^a.ift it but fui \ош lake, « lo
<c 1Ъ hide fr«>m you an anguifh which í t ould not at time- fupprefs, have 1 frequentsy wandered away to the wikleft and moil to;* lorn ipotj ia our neighbourliood. No wea¬ ther, no circumftanee, couKl at s heie pe- liods j^revent thole rambles; the di ws of fummer, tlie rams of winter, the cloilng hour of day, the midnight one of da. к refs w ? erc alike difregarded by mc. Oh ! how often have ï ítictched mvíelf upon the damp eartn, whilft the bleak winds of winter have whif¬ tlecl round me, to deprecate the wrath of Philippe's angry fpmt ; c 1 plead not on my own account (Í have cried), Oh ! my brother, 'tis for the fake of my child I plead , in pity to her let noi the thunders of vengeance burft upon my head! m pity to her, kt me fink without infimi) to ui} grau 4 , that, аз (he bends cnu" it, ílu miy tooth the sorrows ot lur h мп by Ĺr ч\у My fathei wa-» \irtuoib, and hb muinon íl« ıh hve íor ^\e>\' " When 1 told }ou I wouM at fome ре - nod or other elucidate tîıe m\fLne¿ of my lile, I find ίο but ior the puipofc of allay-
ing your fufpicions, hoping that, in confe* quence of iuch a promife, you would no longer imagine I had any dreadful fecrets to· difcloft. " Exclufive of the mifery I felt from con* fcious guilt, í felt a confidérable portion alfo from refleding on the diftreffes to which, in all probability, you would be expofed after my death, as I could not hope that the farm would then, under the fuperintendence of a lefs intcreftcd perfon, yield fuch profits as it had be'oie done ; and í knew the lmall re¬ mainder of your grandfather's wealth, which the monk had depofited in my hands, and which I had moft carefully hufbanded, would be quite inadequate to your fupport» áť From this uneafinefs I was relieved by OurbleiTed friend the Countefs de Merville. I fhould previously have told you of her fee- ing your mothc the vifit I paid her on my way to Montmorenci Caftle, was cjifcovercd hy her guardian, and awakened his apprehen¬ fions. He wiib ed fo unite her to his fon-, and, ignorant of my fituation, he imagined I had
had come back to the neighbourhood for the purpofe of difappoiming that wiib, and pro¬ fiting by the afcendancy he knew I had over her : he therefore, in order to baffle what he fuppofed were my defigns, immediately determined on taking her to Italy. As he did not affign his real motive for this fudden journey, of courfe he received no explanation from her relative to me. They (lopped for refreihment near the caftle, and ihe contrived to efcape to it to pay a vifit to my wife 5 a vİfıt, however, little attended to by Geral¬ dine, who was then nearly diftraČted by the danger of her fitter. (i In Italy the Countefs firil faw the Count de Merviile, a French nobleman of amiable manners and iliuftrious defcent ; reafon had conquered her hopeieis paflion, and in his arms (lie gladly fought a fhelter from the ty¬ ranny of her guardian. They remained abroad fome years after their marriage ; and when, on their return to France, they flopped at the caftle for the purpofe of en¬ quiring after me md mine, they could only receive
receive a confufed account of the forrows and death of the family from an old woman who then took care of the man fion, " To the Countefs, on our unexpeded meeting, 1 imparted ali the particulars which I have related to you. She beau! diem with horror, grief, and aíloniíhmcnt ; and, her emotions a little abating, bitterly regretted my not having applied to her iriendfliip for protedion ; the reproaches fhe uttered for my not having done fo, í at length flopped by reminding her of the danger which would have attended an application. " She told me of the marriage of her daughter, and her conncdion in confequence of it, with the Houfe of Montmorenci. * But though allied now in fome degree to the Marquis (cried ihe), I never could pre¬ vail on myfelf to fee him, fo abhorrent to my foul has hi-» cruelty to you and your mother made him : yet diel I imagine that i could, by peiionaliy imploring his protedion for you and your child, obtain it, 1 would in¬ ilantly conquer my repugnance to an inter¬ view ;
view ; but I am well convinced, that ail fup¬ plications for juftice would be unavailing, as 1 am confidently aifuied by thofe I cannot doubt, that he execrates the memory of thofe whom he has injured.' ' How much was ihe deceived when flie believed that aflurance" ! (exclaimed Made¬ line); my grandfather's acknowledging you as his rightful heir almoft the momcu he c4l- cover^d ) our ivfidenee, proves he ipoke truth when he aflured us that his penitence for the injuiies he had committed wa¡> extreme, and tliat his (oui rejoiced at an opportunity oi doing juftice. The unworthy huiband .ind father in-kuv of her daughter were, I fear, the wretches who impoied upon her. But í interrupt your narraris c.' ťC The Coiinteis (icfumed St. Julian) ak fui cd me that, fmce ncr child was to be en¬ riched by my birthright, ihe woukl take care to guard mv daughter againft the i'ls of po¬ verty. IIow this generous intention was fruftrated you beft know, 4 * You
<ť You may imagine í was not a little confounded when, on arriving at the caftle, the firft object almoft I beheld was Lafroy ; tiie alarm of my Umi, which my countenance i believe too faithfully de] i&ed, he however tried to diffipate by a fecret look, and a flight preffure of his hand upon his heart, as if to aflure me of his fidelity. "At night, when I was und re fling, he entered my apartment— c Pardon my intru¬ fion, my Lord (faid he), but 1 could not re¬ frain from coming to exprefs my joy at feeing you, as I may lay, rifen from the grave ; for the monk afiured mc you were dead. He might have confided in me ; I pledged a fo¬ lemn oath never to betray you ; and, though but a fervant, I have ever been taught to conficler a promife as facred.' *' Excufe the caution of old age, Lafroy (replied 1) ; 'twas not by my defire the monk deceived you." c Certainly, my Lord (faid he) ; ï allow toomuch caution could not be pradifed then, nor is there lefs occafion for it now ; as I am con¬ vinced.
vinced, if the Marquis knew you were but ac« ccflary to the death of Lord Philippe, he would puniih you with the moft implacable ven¬ geance. For my part, I think you more to bc pitied than condemned ; and that thofe who mitigated you to the deílručlion of your brother, alone merit puiiifliment,' c< Did you ever (^fked Ï) difcover any clue to unravel the 1 honid myiteries which in¬ volved me in guilt ?" c I once (cried Lafroy) had an opportu¬ nity of doing fo, but, alas! I loft it.' u Loft it ! (repeated I); explain yourfelf." * About feven years ago (refumed he), as I was attending the Marquis to a feat of his near Paris, at a poft-houfe, to which I rode before the carriage for the purpoie of fecur¬ ing horfes, my eyes encountered that villain Claude : I inilantly feized him by the armj and,dragging him into aroom, bolted the door—* Accurfed wretch ! (cried I) the long delayed puniihment of heaven has at length overtaken you ; the Marquis of Montmo¬ renci approaches, and into his hands I (hall conlign
confiim you, as the immediate caufe of ins ion's death.' * Oh! have mercy (he exclaimed, and diopi cd upon his knees) i J am not quite ίο guilty as you imagine : my poverty expoied me to temptation, and a bafe enem}' of Lord Philippe's, by lavifli promîtes, feduced me to evil. J have already made a full confef¬ lion oí every circumikince to a iektion of the Marquis's ; and İ am ready to repeat the knie to 3'ou, if you but promile not to give me into his power.' 4 Well (iaid I, after fome minutes of con¬ fidération). on this condition I give the promife )ou defire.' I accordingly raifed him from the ground, and uub an impa¬ tience which made me tremble, ie-ited 1115 felf near him to hear his narrative. I Ie had juft opened his lips for the pui pofe of begin¬ ning it, when a violent knock came to the door, and ihe poft-mailer bid me come out dircčllv, ior the Marquis oí' λίοιη morenti was dying. All horror and confternation, 1 obeyed him, and found a fellow -ferva 11 1 in
in the hail, w· ho told me hi- Lord was 'm \iolciit tiîï.' ' Secure the man in the pai lour (cried í to the poft- mafter as J fprung upon my horte to ride oif to the carriage, which the fervants had flopped for fear of rendering their Lord worie by the motion. It was long ere he regained his feni'esj, We then flowly pro¬ ceeded to the poft-houfe ; but think of my rage, my regret, when, upon enquiring ior him, I learned that, during the bufile in the paflàge, Claude had flipped from the par- Jour, and cicaped from the houle by a back way, fearing, no doubt, that î would not keep my promife to him. 'Tis a true fay¬ ing, my Lord, that a man generally judges of the difpofition of others by his own, lb Claude, being himielf a deceiver, feared de¬ ception from me.' 4t Lafroy then proceeded to inform me, that he had, ever fince the death of my bro¬ ther, been immediately about the perfon of the Marquis, and ended his converíation vol. iv. u with
with affurances of being ever fanhfuî to me and mine." iť It muft have been to D'Alembert thai Claude confeflľed his guiit," faid Madeline. " vSo I think (cried her father) ; I know of no other way by which he could have at¬ tained a knowledge of my life." " Ah! what а bafe advantage does lie fake of the fecret repofed in him!" iaid Ma¬ deline. " A bafe one indeed (repealed St. Julian), Oh 1 my child, never can I confent to bribe him fo filence by faci ificingyou. What, to fave a life upon which mifery is entailed—a life already in its decline—-lhall I devote my heart's beii treafure to wretcheclnels ?—no, Made¬ line, no ; fooner will I brave the threats will I meei the vengeance of D'Alembeit, than confent to fuch а meafure." "Ándelo you think (cried Madeline), in an union with D' Alen ■ bcrt 'ь fon I could fed half the wretchednefs I muft experience if, by perfevering in your p.eient intentions, you provoke his refentment, and become its victim ?
vietiin ? no—believe me I couid not. But 1 havelvvorn(continued fbe,wildly ilarting from her ieat), í have fworn ίο become the wife oí D' A lembert, ir by no othermcanslcan prevail upon his rather t j keep fecret the fätal events of your life ; the oath is recorded in her.vcn—» what mortal then fhall be daring cr.ough to bid me break it ?" (< My Madeline î my love ! (cried lier father, tcrriñcd by her ílrong emotions» and catching her hand), a thought has juft druck me, which may perhaps extricate us from our prêtent trouble ; 'tis evident that neither D'Alembert nor his ion would defire an union with you, but for the fake of the for¬ time you are to poifefs." <£ Evident indeed,' repeated Madeline. 4t 1 think then (reiimied St. Julian), that if we were to promile to rcllgn thai fortune to them, they would ceaie ali furtl.cr iontiia- tions io,: your hand," " A merci tul God hab fu rc! y i n fpi reti ven with the idea (laid Madeline, while tears ui joy fell from her). Oh, 1 have no doubt but и z cur
ourperfccution wouki immediately ceafe, if their avaiice was once iatisfied." " Send then for D'Alembert (cried St. Julian), аьс1 tell bun, if he vows inviolable fecrccy with regard to me, and promifes to relmquifh all ickas of an union between you and his fois both you and your father will, without deh), fign any paper he may pleaie lo draw up, refigning to him and his heirs for ever all right and title to the fortunes of Montmorenci." " I will iene] for him directly," exclaimed Madeline. " Ah! my chikl ^fiiid St. Julian, itili de¬ tailing and looking mournfully at her), muft I then bid you fign away your birth-right ? muil my ciiaies doom you to obiburity?—- for me muft you forfeit that wealtk, that rank,you are entitled to?-—" tť Taik not to me of wealth or rank 'faid Made! r.c) ; what happinefs have I expe¬ rienced irom thè poííbffion of either ?— Oh 1 m\ father, never did I know real peace fince İ kit the dear cottage where I was brought
brought up ; to be again its humble inmate is fhe ikmmit of my wifhes/' " (τΙ -idlv indeed ík*r* 1 Ì 1 r-^P-.n nil nr*" tei'-· fions to rank and fplendour (cried St. J ulian) ; gladly ihall I quit this maniion, where the fpirit of a murdered brother takes its nightly rounds to fill my ioul with horror. Yes, Madeline, in the dead of che night, when all but mifery and dei pair are iunk in repoie, my cars arc otten pierced bv ckeadiu! groans and melancholy cries, fuch as d "¡ft m bed the tranquillity of the family the firft ifijht we entered within thefe walls." "Oh! would to heaven (exclaimed Ma¬ deline, fliucidering and ap; aľ.ed), that our departure from the caille immediately fol¬ lowed our renunciation of the fortune ap¬ pertaining to it." "Would to heaven it did ! ^ kid St. Ju¬ lian) ; but to quit it during the lite-time of the Marquis is impoflible." " Let me no longer delay fending for D'Alembert," cried flie. As flie fpoke, fhe difengaged her hand, and, flying to the bell,
luughtincfs flic could not reprcb), sou are come to pronounce my do лп. I cannot (eon- tmutd ihe, riling and tlofingthe dooi), deny tl ar yon have my hither, confequcntl) me, completely in ycur power; I ili all thuetoie no longer attempt tu reíuic·— 1 fhall oni) at¬ tt mpt to tittieat." Ki You already kno'v my refolutu n 'faid IVA'embcrt, loii-ig all the geníLnofb with which ¡it hid cnteicd íle apaitiv.ent , \trgc, theieíoie, no entreaty v\h¡eh 1 mull refufe " *' í t ruft I íliall not (faid Madeline), my entreaty is, that, inftead of my hand, you would accept ofa title to the fortunes I may poftefsfor your fon." '* I do not undeiftand you," cried D'Alem- beit, looking fteadily at her. " I think my meaning is obvious (faid Madeline) ; 1 öfter to your fon the charm which attracts him to me. Yes, D'Alem¬ bert, I am convinced that had I ftill been Madeline Clei mont, the humble inmate of a lonclr
a lonely cottage, he r.ever would have de¬ fired an alliance with me. Gladly, there¬ fore, will I refign all that can now render him felicitous for that alliance ; and am autho¬ rized by my father to tell you, that pro¬ vided you promife, folemnly promife never to divulge the events of his unhappy life—■ events which,, if properly flated, you muft more compaífionate than condemn him for, and withdraw the addrefles of your fon, he will, jointly with me, fign any paper you may pleafe to draw up, refigning for ever to you and your heirs the fortunes of Mont¬ morenci." " Both you and your father are certainly en¬ titled to the thanks ofme and my fon for your generous intentions (cried D'Alembert,, bow¬ ing, and fcornfully fmiling). I will not pre¬ tend to fay that either he or I are infenfibie- of the value of riches, but we are not quite fo interefted as you imagine. The fortunes of Montmorenci would, ίο him, lofe half their cftimation, if the lovely Madeline was not attached to them. His therefore fhe h 5 muft;
muft be, if flie wiihes to prefervc the exift¬ ence of her father, for on her compliance my íècrecy depends." Madeline dropped on her knees— ci Kneel by me then (fhe exclaimed), and fwear, if I promife to fàcrifice myfelf, that that fecrecy will never be violated." " I fwear (laid D'Alembert, bending his knee to the ground), that if you become the wife of my fon, all that ï know concern¬ ing your father fliall be buried within my breaft." " Diipofe of me then (cried Madeline) as you pleafe. Yet, Oh! D'Alembert (flie continued, in a voice of agony, and raifing her eyes to his face), if you value the happi¬ nefs of your fon, give not to his arms a re¬ lu étant wife— -coki and joylefs muft be fuch a gift! In pity to him therefore, as well as mc, gke up all idea of our union." <l Never, (faid D'Alembert, as he raifed hei from the floor) ; though you may marry vv ith indifference, the tendernefs of my fon will foon -
foon, 1 am confident, convert that indiffer¬ ence into love." " Love!" repeated Madeline. She in¬ voluntarily caft her eyes upon the portrait, which bore fo ftrong a refemblance to de Se¬ vignie. it was her difordered fancy, no doubt, which made her at that moment imagine tlie eyes regarded her with an expreflîon of the deepeft melancholy ; every tender fcenQ flie had experienced with him ruflied to her recollection. She felt ihe could never ceafe to adore him; flie felt that, in the arms of another, fhe muft ftill figh for him: and, fhuddeiing, almoft fli ricking, at the idea of the d read iul defti ny which would foon render fuch fighs a crime, flie fell in convulfive agitation upon the bofom of D'Alembert. He iupported her toa window, and m a few minutes flie began a little to revive. She then difengaged herfelf from his arms. " You are ftill ill (faid he); permit me therefore to fupport yon." и 6 " No,
** No (replied flic, withholding the hand' hc attempted to take) ; upon the bofom which cannot pity me, I will not lean." iS You aiî now prejudiced againft me· ¡faid D'Alembert) ; my profeffions, there- tore, you would dilregard ; but I truft the period will lhortly arrive in which you will believe me fmcere when í fay, that the efteem, the tendernek, your virtues merit, 1 feel for you. Will you now permit me (cried he, after a paufe), to go and acquaint the Mar- quk with the happinefs which awaits mv fon?" Anxious fo be relieved from his prefence, Madeline defiled him to do as he pleafed, and he diredly left her. The agonies of her foul then burft forth, and in tears and broken· exclamations fhe vented her feelings. In this fituation herfather furprized her:— Рак, trembling, the very pičlure of melancholy and deipair, he approached her.
" D'Alembert
ť< D'Alembert was then inflexible (faid he). He has juft annnounced to the Mar¬ quis and me your acceptance of his fon. Oh! my child, can you pardon the father who has doomed you to wretchednefs ?" Madeline flung herfelf into his arms. She would have ipoken—fhe would have aflured him, that the wretchednefs of her deftiny could not bc as great as lie imagined, from knowing that it had mitigated his ; but fighs and fobs impeded her utterance. At length, raifing her head—Oh ! my father (flie faid), do not torture mc by fuch language; ftrengthen, inftead of weakening me ; aid me—advife me ; enable me to ^perform the duties of the ftation ï am about entering, into. That God (cried flie, lifting her ftreaming eyes to heaven), that God whom we both woifhip and adore, delights not in the miferies of his creatures : when, there¬ fore, acting right, we may furely hope that he will mitigate our forrows."
A fum-
A fu m mons to dinner ρ· e . uitcd all further con vei fation. Madeline declared her utter inability of obeying it, and enti eat ed İrer father to apologize ior her abience. Reluctantly he left her. Nothinţr coulei have prevailed upon him todo :o,but afear of diftreifi.ig the Marquis il he ablented himfeii from the table ; and he pio:ì»i ed to return as foon as he poflibly could to her. During his abfence, Madeline determined to exert herfelf i u ortkr to regain fome de¬ gree of compofure. " But little lhall I ferve him (cried ihe), by tlie ftc ri fice of m} felf, if î let him know the anguifh excited by thai fàcrifice." He had been gone about half an hour when íhe heard a gentle knock at the drei- fing-room door. She flatted, but inilantly recollcding hcrielf, and fuppuiing it to come from fome one of the í er vants, ihe defircd the door to bc opened. She was obeyed diredly,
directly, and a man, whom ike had never fem before, made his appearance. Madeline rofe from her chair, and fur¬ veyed him with aflonifliment. He ap¬ proached her with evident diffidence and agitation, and oíľered her a letter. " From whom does it comer" faid Madeline with¬ out taking it, " From a friend to virtue (he replied). Delay not to read it (continued he, dropping it at her feet, for fu rp rize rendered her un¬ able to extend her hand) : obierve its advice, and avoid deftruction," So fit) ing, he rufhed from the room, and cloied the door after him. Madeline remained many minutes without motion. She then repeated his words— "Andvvi'l this letter (cried ike, taking it up) pomt out a way by whi· h I cm avoid ^eilru&ion ?" She broke the feal with a trembling hand, and read as follows:—
f :*
u Lady,
ťŕ Lady, " The unhappy wife of young D'Alembert ftill exifts -, the ftory of her death was in¬ vented for the vileft purpofes—purpofes which, under Providence, I truft î ihall be the humble inftrument of defeating. Too long have I been the flave of vice-—too long an acceflary in all the horrid fchemes of an iniquitous father and fon ! but heaven has at length awakened me to remorfe ; and, if the fmcereft penitence for pail enormities, and moft ftrcnuous endeavours to undo all the mifchief í have done, can expiate error, 3 hope to be forgiven. í am now haftening to the place where the moft lovely and moft injured of her fex groans in captivity! but,. till her liberation is effeded, as you value her life (my w r orthlefs one I will not mention), keep fecret the contents of this letter ; were they prematurely known, there is no doubt but her death ivould be the immediate confe¬ quence. Oh ! Lady, pray for her ; pray that the efforts ofa forro wing and repentant wretch may be fuccefsful in refcuing virtue, and pre-
preferving innocence : and may that heaven, which muft ever regard purity like thine, ever render abortive all fcheme:» that wicked- ciefs may pian againft thee !"
No language could do juftice to the fed ings of Madeline on perufing this letter ; but the aíloniíhmcnt, the ecftaey, with which the knowledge of her friend's exiftence in- fpi red her, fooii gave way to apprehenfions for her father. She trembled to think of the horrors which D'Alembert might entail upon him in revenge for the d ; {appoint men t of his hopes. %< It will gladden his cruel and malicious foul (cried flie) to plunge my fa¬ ther into the gulph of deftruction—that gulph, into which the difcovery of his own crimes muft precipitate himfelf.** Her heart throbbing'with impatience, flie anxioufly liftened for her father. The mo¬ ment he appeared, flie flew to him, and put the teUer into lib hand. Her looks pre¬ pared
pared him for fomething wonderful, and lie eagerly caft his eye o\er it. *' Oh, v'liains! (exclaimed lie, ere lie had luk perufed ii) Miat puiiifliment can be adeouaie to your спл.сь! My child ¡'re- i\\\\fi\ he, afier fmiíhing the letter, tenck: 1 }· embracing he as he ip-oke), thou art indeed, as the good muft ever be, the peculiar care of Providence. Oa ! with the moft heart- fek uatitude do 1 acknowledge its good nefs in ; "derving v ou from the ih ire which u аз fet for you :— ibis infla: t v, o,; ld I expofe the execrable cont rivets of it to the fate they merit ; this inftant, notwithilanding the power which treachery has giicn them over me, brand them with infamy, did í not tear, in confequence of fonie part of this letter, taking any ftep of the kind till after the libe¬ ration of thcunhippy Madame D'Alembeit k effected. It viouid be an ill ic.jintal for the kindnefs of my dear lamented friend jf, to gratify myfelf by punifhing immediately an jp'ury
injury med ; ŕ ned againft my child, T occa¬ fioned thechiiuKtioii other's." " Oh! my father {еЛга Madeline, whoíê heart w a- now iokk occupied by fears on hk account), think n )t of pumihing the monile rs—thmk only how y^u may avoid their malice." li Avoid it ! ^exclaimed St. Juliin, look¬ ing fterniy at her) ; no, I will brave it, 1 will brave their threats-—! will brave the horrors they may draw uţpn mc, to have the itis- fadion of punifliing myfelf their meditated injury aga i nit you." This v\as what Madeline had dreaded; his indignation at their defigns againft her would, flie feared, tranfport lum beyond all confidération for himfelf. She threw henelf at his feet, and with tears beibught him to fàcrifice his relent· ment to liis lafety. " You have ever told me, ever taught me to believe (flie ex- ck.iiKcd), that you tenderly regarded your Madeline';
Madelin«· ι Oh l now, my hither, prove that legarei by eitdeavouriniľ to prekrve a lite wiih iv hic h her's ib entwined/' f 1er ent ι cu ics had at length the defircd fffed ; paflîon g } w \\ ay to pitv; and, rait¬ ing her i îom the ground, while he prefled her to his heait, St. Julian told her that the value ihe iet upon hib life made him in iome degree value if himfelf. '* 1 will therefore yp (faid he^ to Lafroy—he is faith¬ ful and clever, and couiult with him how I ma) beft brave the coming fiorai : for ? like you, I am convinced tliat, when once the villainy of D'Alembert is difcovered, and conféquent ly his hopes relative to you over¬ thrown, he will levcal all he knows concern- ing me." *' Oh, go—go (cried Madeline, difengag- ing hcrielf from his arms) ; go diredly to La¬ frov., and be quick, 1 entreat you, my father,, in your return."
She
She followed hi.11 to the gallery, deter¬ mined to wait there ι i li he came back. A confidérable time elapfed vvithout bringing him; and the fearsof Madeline were at length fo excited by hi? long abfence, that ihe was juft going in quell of him, when ihe iaw him and Lafroy approaching. r ' I fear} ou liave been uneafy at my not reluming iooner (_laid he\; but it icqu.rul time to deliberate on what was to be ď me " " What have you determined on ?" laid Madeline as they entered the drefling-room, did «lofed the door. " On parting," replied he, in an accent oj f hr deepen ioriow. ^ On patting!" repeated Alide line, fiep pi 1: g back, and looking wildly at him. " Yc->; toicmain in the caftle, would be ¡о await quietly the fate to which D'Akm- bert will expofe mc." *' it would indeed (faid Lafroy) ; í bue¬ no doubt but that the moment hii balenefs ь difcovered, Monfieur D'Alembeit will rc- 4 veal
veal every particular he knows concerning you : and I am forry to ík}', from my know¬ ledge or the Marquis's di í pofi tion, I am ikre lie will admit of no circumftance as a palliation of the murder of Lord Philippe." Madeline fliuddered at the word murder, and involuntarily averted her head from Lafroy. " Murder founds harihly in my daugh¬ ter's ears," cried St. Julian in rather a refent- fui tone. " ï beg your pardon, my Lord (faid La¬ froy) for having fpoktn unguardedly ; no¬ thing, Ì can aflure your Lord ih ip, would dif- treíš mc ib nmch as to offend or pive pain to either you or Lady Madeline; 'tis my moil ardent wiih to ferve you both." " And whither (cried Madeline, turning to her father), Oh ! whither, if you quit this caftle, can vou betake yourfelf ?" 8 * With the moil wild and romantic folk tudes oí the Alps I am weft acquainted
•fiaid he), and amongft them I mean to feek a fhelter." ic 'The. holy man, who was fo kind to my mother and her unfortunate family, may then again befíicnd you," с ned flie. " Aias! (exclaimed St. Julian) he is gone Ion« fince to receive the blcfled reward his virtues merited . about eight years ago I was aflured of his death, bv the termination of our correspondence." " Oh ! my father (cried Madeline, graft¬ ing his arm), may í not accompany you r" " Lord! mv Lath' (exclaimed Lafroy), fu rely you could not think of fuch a thing ; iurely you could not think of abandoning all profped of rank and independence?" " Yes, ('replied Madeline) ; to have ihn power of mil ¡gating a father's diftreffes, î would abandon every profped this world could prefent." " But by accompanying him you would rather increafe than mitigate his diítreíiês, Situations which, on his own account, he would not mind, he would then tremble
at on your's. Betides, you would retard the expedition it is neceíľary for him to make, a-nd prevent his exploring the places bcft calculated for affording him an aiylum." " What reafon can be afligned, what ex¬ cufe offered to the Marquis for his quitting the caftle, clandeftinely quitting it s " de¬ manded Madeline." " He muft write a letter to the Marquis (refumed Lafroy), to be delivered the day after his departure, informing him that the misfortunes of his early life had given him fuch a d i italic to fociety, that he had formed the reiolution of renouncing the world ; a réfolution which, for fear of oppofition, he would not acquaint him with till he had put it into execution." " But when he finds, as no doubt from D'Alembert he will, that this was not his real motive for quitting the caftle, how—how (cried Madeline), fliall I bc able to fupport his reproaches ?" " You muft fummon all your réfolution to your aid (iaid Lafroy), and brave the ftorm
florm from a certainty of having it foon over. The Marquis is old ; he cannot pu ni fli you ibr an action committed by your father; and, after his death, if the Count is ftill com¬ pelled to fecludc himielf from a fear of the conned ions of Lord Philippe, you may vifit him without controul." ' £ Well (faid Madeline), I will exert my¬ felf; and, confiding my father to the mercy of a God whom he never wilfully offended, look forward to happier days. When muft we part r'/ cried ike, turning to St. Julian, who had thrown himfelf upon a fofa. " To-night," replied he in a melancholy voice. "To-nkht !" repeated Madeline, ťí Ho muil go while the coaft is clear (iaid Lairoy); you know Monfieur D'Alemberťs fon İs now lhortly cxpeded ; and were he and his numerous retinue of fervants once ar- 1 ived, it would be impoflible for my Lord the Count to ekape without obkrvation," " Was it from a fervant of уошш D'A« kmbertk í received the letter ?" VOL. iv. 1 "Yes;
** Yes, from an old confidential fervant, well acquainted, no doubt, as he himfelf has faid, with the villainy of his mailer." " How does my father travel ? (afked Madeline), or how, or by whofe means am I to hear from him ? for except I do hear, I íliall be d i ft raited." t( It fhall bc my care to fettle every thing to his fatisfačtion and your's (faid Lafroy) : as foon as it is dark, I will conduct him to the houfe of a friend lean rely upon, a little beyond tlie foreft, from whence he can pro¬ cure a conveyance to tiie Alps, and tc which his letters can be directed ; by the fame channel too you can forward your's, and alfo remit any fupply of money he may want." s( Your ingenuity has obviated all our diffi¬ culties (laid St. Julian, rifing from the fofa). I truft 1 may yet have power to icward you, my good frieiid, for your zeal and fidelity ; but if not, my beloved child'will, 1 am con¬ vinced, readily pay off any debt of gratitude ï may incur." Every
Every plan relative to him being now ar¬ ranged, and the day declining, St. Julian fat down to pen his letter to his father, whilft his agonized Madeline hung over him, and Lafroy retired to pack up a few neceffaries for him. The letter concluded, he devoted the little time he had to remain in the caftle to the purpoie of confoli ng his Madeline, ancl ex¬ horting her to fortitude. She promifed to exert herfelf, but it was a promife given in fuch a manner, with fuch tears and fobs, as gave her father little hope flie would ever be able to fulfil it„ With ftreaming eyes flie watched the laft lingering beams of day, and fancied that darknefs had never before been fo quick in its approach. At length Lafroy appeared ¿ he carried a, glimmering light, which he laid upon a'table, and told the Count, in a whiipering voice, that it was time to depart. He inilantly arofe—" Farewel ! my child, ¡daid he, flraining his Madeline to his heart), •ι ζ foul
foul of my foul, life of my life—farewcl !— Oh! for the fake of thy wandering and ex¬ iled father—Oh ! to bc enabled to give him future ccmfort, fuch comfort as fliall repay ■ him for pail troubles, exert l hy felf ľ* " I will, 1 will (cried Madeline) ; when the bittcrnefs of this moment is over, i fliall be better." " Do not longer delay, my Lord (faid La¬ froy); 1 fear if you do, fome interruption from the fervants, who will foon be bufy preparing for fupper." St. Julian gently withdrew his arms from his daughter. She did not attempt to de- tain him ; and yet her very foul feemed fleet¬ ing after him as hc turned from her, " La¬ froy (cried fhe, following them to the gallery), the moment you return to the caftle, you mufi come up to me." " You may depend on my doing fo," faid he. " And you, my father, flie refumed, muft write to me without delay, if you wilh to fave me from diftradion.", " The
" The very minute I arrive at a place of lafety, í will write to you," he replied, again embracing her. Once more Lafrov coifiured St. Tulian to. haften with him ; and, fieri line out another cdieu, ilic unhnpipy father turned irom his weeping child. When (lie could no loimcr hear his fteps from the gcilcry, flie flew to her chamber, and, flinging up the íaíh, bent from the window to trv if flie could hear them in the foreit; but a cold wind whiftlecl through it, which prevented anv other found than that of its own murmurs from being diftinguiflied ; yet, tnough fhe could nei¬ ther fee nor bear him, flie continued at the window till a fiidden light flafhing behind her, made her ftart from it ; and, turning round, ihe beheld one of the iemale fer¬ vants. " I hope T have not frightened your Lady- fliip (faid th. girl, curteiying); I have brought you fome refreihments from Mrs. 1 3 Beatrice^
Beatrice ; and fhe defircd me to lay that Ihe would have ient fomediing before, only ihe heard you were engaged with my Lord the Count, ami aho that ihe would have come herfeif only the was unwell." " I am ioiry to hear ihe is ill," cried Ma¬ deline, unking into a chair. " She is indeed ; but bìefs ine, your Ľadv- íhip looks vei y ili too ¿ h; : .d you not better take fomething, for you fecm c|uitc faint ?" Madeline was quite overpowered by weaknefs, and gladly took a little bread and wine to try and fupport her finking eí The cold wind w'· deh comes through this window, is enough to pierce your Lady- fhip," fai d the maid. <* It does (cried Madeline to herfelf, and fighi ng heavily), it does indeed pierce me to the heart, becaufe I know my father is ex~ pofed to it. Good night, my good girl, (laid ihe, addrcfling her attendant), good night ; lav
CLERMONT. ï 75 íav nothing of my indifpofition ; 1 am fure I fliall be better to-morrow." "Your Ladyfliip will not then come down to-night." 44 No;—who is with the Marquis?" " Monfieur D'Alembert -, mv Lord the Count I underiland is out. 'Tis very bold to be fure ofme to fpeak on the fubjcct, but I cannot help faying I wonder how he can like to ramble through the foreft after it is dark." Madeline rofe İn much agitation—" I fup¬ pofe the Marquis (faid flie, wifhing to change the converfation), will foon go to fupper." " Oh yes, Ma'am ; jou know, fince my Lord the Count's cuilom of rambling has been known, the Marquis never wai i s for him after a certain hour." " True," cried Madeline. She then repeated her good night, and the maid retired. Alternately travelling her chamber, alter¬ nately looking from the window, Madeline 1 4 pafled
pafled two tedious hours ere Lafroy ap¬ peared. He then knocked gently at the door, which fhe eagerly opened, and as eagerly en¬ quired about her father. íť He has begun his journey (laiu La¬ froy) ; ï readily procured the afilftance of my lricncl, who will bc his companion fome part of the way.'* " And can your friend really be depended on ?" a iked Alad el i ne. " I can as fafely anf wer for his fidelity as my own (replied Lafroy) ; and mine I hope you do not doubt," ê£ No (cried Madeline), ifl did, í fhould be completely wretched. Oh! Lafroy (ihe continued), how f dread to-morrow j í trem¬ ble to ihink of the interrogations of the Mar- quid % as long asit is poilibie to do fò, pos¬ pone the delivery of the letter." 4t You mav be allured 1 fhall not dei i ver i v t till there is an abfoiute nece.ffity fordoing io (he replied), and then 1 ili a 11 pretend í found it in the chamber of the Count/* ;i 1 íliall
" I fliall keep out of the Marquis's way till he has read the letter," iiiid Madeline. " Τ think vou will be ridit in doi г g fo (cried Lafroy) ; you can plead indifpoíuion, and confine yourlelf to your chamber entirely to-morrow ; and depend on my ingenuity for deviling fome fcheme to prevent your being difturbed either by the Marquis or the fervants, even after the difcovery of the Count's departure has taken place." 44 Alas \ (falci Madeline) how trifling will be allí fhall perhaps endure after tins difco¬ very, to what, in ali probability, I ihall fu fler when the real caufe of his departure is known !" "You muft onlv (cried LnfrovV as I faicl before, brave the ftorm, írom a hope of hav¬ ing it foon over. Tlie Marquis no doubt *r> i will be violenr, and endeavour to wre ft from you the fecret of your lather's refidence; you muft thereiore deny your knowledge of it." ib No (exclaimed Madeline), l diidam a ia'lchood ; to dei-.y it would bc to duiiht 1 'y \ii\
my own réfolution of keeping it. After all (continued ihe), upon refledion î do not think the Marquis can be fo violent as you imagine; he muft be convinced, and that convidion muft furely mollify his refent¬ ment, that, had interefted motives caufed the death of Loid Philippe, my father, in¬ ftead of retiring to obfeurity, would have made ibme effort to obtain his favour." ** But to refute that idea, may it not be faid (cried Lafroy), that he remained in ob¬ feurity fo many years but to avoid fufpicion» which hc feared mío ht be excited if hc fooncr threw himfelf in the way of his father ?" " He never threw himfelf in the way of the Marquis," interrupted Madeline, " No, but he threw you, which was juft t\m fame thing -, that is, I mean it may be faid he did -, it may bc faicl that clefign, not chance, brought yeu to the caflle , D'A¬ lembert ib equal to any falfehood." " Heaven defend us from his machina¬ tions !" cried Madeline, " I will
" I will now leave you to repofe (faid Lafroy) ; I am fure you need it, for the events of this day muft certainly have agi¬ tated vou not a Jittle." Madeline conjured him to come to her as foon as he poflibly could after the delivery of the letter, which he promifcd to dc, and then retired. Kneeling clown, Madeline then implored the protedion of Heaven for herfather, and its fupport for herfelf through the numerous t riah fhe feared flie had to encounter ; after which, faint and exhaufted by the agitations ihe had experienced, fhe went to bed. Her mind was too much diftuibed to permit her ílumbers to be tranquil -, and ihe arofe un- refrcíhed at the dawn of day. At the ufual hour, a fervant (the fame who had attended her the preceding night) appeared to inform her breakfaft was ready. Madeline iaid flie was too unwell to go down, and defired her's to be broughr to her drefling-room. Ske 1 6 w'as
was accordingly obeyed ; and, as the maid was laying the table—" The Count has gone out to ramble again this momma;, Madam (laid flie) у Lafroy went to call him to breakfaft, and found his chamber - door locked on the outfide." The converfation her attendant was in¬ clined to enter into was truly diftrerfing to Ma¬ deline, and flie foon difmiifed her. in a ftate of perturbation which rendered her unable to read or work, or do any thing to try and aniufe her thoughts, the heavy hours wore away without any creature coming near her till dinner time ¿ Nannette then again ap¬ peared, und defired to know? whether ihe would come down. Madeline replied in the negative, and dinner was brought to her. '* 'Tis very extraordinary, Madam (cried Nannette as flie ftood behind tlie chair), very extraordinary indeed tliat the Count has not yet returned ; don't you thi:ik fo r" " You
ss You may take away the things (faid Madeline) ; and, Nannette, you need not come again till I ring for you." " Very well, Madam. Ľut dear lieart ! my Lady, you really have eaten no dinner ; í am afraid you are fretting about the Count." Madeline macle no reply, but took, up a book to fignify her wiih of being alone, and Nannette left her. The moment flie had retired, Madeline threw afide the book, and walked about the room in an agitation which fliook her frame. í* The hour approaches for the delivery of the letter (cried ihe); Oh! heaven forbid the Marquis fliould coime to mc after peruf- ino; it ! this evening I could not fummon *,У* *~A> fuilicient fpirits to iupport an interview." She now every inftant cxpeded Lafroy ; but two hours palled aw .y without brinoino· him, during which ihe frecmcntlv ft ole to the gadp-y to try if ilie could hear him ap- 3 p roaching
proachiııg. Tired at length of ľťflening for him, flie threw herfelf on a chair by the window, and gave way in tears to the op¬ preflion of her heart. Never had flie before experienced fuch a degree of wretchednefs j flie felt neglected, abandoned b) r all ! the gloom of clofing day, the cold wind which milled t h rough the foreil, bringing the leaves in fliowers from the trees, and bearing to her ear tlie difmal tolling of a diflant convent bell, heightened if poflible her melancholy. " Oh ! my father (lhe cried), to what mi¬ fery have you left your Madeline!" The door creekcd upon its rufty hinges ; flie ftarted, and beheld Lafroy, ** Ah ! (flie excfaimed, rifing to meet him), í thought you had forgotten me." " Forgotten you !" he repeated as he eau· tioufly clofed the door. " Has the Marquis received the letter ?" eagerly interrupted Madeline. « Yes." 4 Î' Well*
" Well, and what (cried flic, gafping for breath) ch)es he fay r" " Ah ! my dear young lady, î have bad news for you," exclaimed Lafroy. ť£ Bad new r s 1 what—-does the Marquis iufped the truth ? Has he fent to purfue my father?" " He has not yet fent any one to purfue him (replied Lafroy), but he foon will; for—- D'Alembert has difcovered all," The ftiock which thoíê words gave to Madeline, w f as almoft more than flie couid fupport, ancl ihe funk, nearly fainting, againft; the flioulder of Lafroy. " Do you think (cried flie, raifing her head in a few minutes from it), do you think that, my father can baffle the pur« fuit ?" " I truft he may have a fafe retreat fe¬ cured ere it commences. But you muft not turn you thoughts entirely upon him; you
you muft now think of yourfelf—think of efcaping from the caftle/' " Of efcaping!" repeated Madeline. " Yes, if you wifli to avoid cruelty and oppreflion." 4i Explain yourfelf,*' faid Madeline. " 1 will if you promife to compofe your¬ felf—if you promife not to interrupt me—■ briefly and explicitly inform you of the fuf¬ ferings which await you if you continue in the caftle." ** 1 promife," cried Madeline. - " To begin then (iaid Lafroy). After I had delivered the Count's letter to the Mar¬ epus, ï fkpped into an adjoining room to liften ίο the converfation which would enfue between him and D'Alembeit in confequence of it. Long I had not remained in my con¬ cealment, ere my ears were fliocked by hear¬ ing D'Alembert derìde the aflerrion con- tained in the letter, and bea.ina horrid nar- raí ive of ali he knew concerning your father. 1 »vill not pain you by repeating what the Marquis faid j fuflicc it to fay, he vowed the
the moil implacable vengeance againft the Count, and fwore the world fliould be fearched to difcover him. * His daughter to be fure (cried D'Alem¬ bert), who 'tis obvious w i ibes to have you, as well as your father, put out of the way in order to gain, without dhifion, tlie fortunes of Montmorenci), İs acquainted with the fecret of his retreat.' 4 No doubt (replied the Marquis), and I will obtain it from her.' 4 1 have little hope of your being able to do fo,' cried D'Alembert. ' If gentle means will not prevail on her to reveal it (cried the Marquis), other me¬ thods fliall be tried ; every torture, every fuffering, which can be clevifed, fliall be prač¬ tifed upon her in this caftle to wring it from her.' iC On hearing this (continued Lafroy), I haftencd to you to apprize you of your dan* ger, and aflift yon in efcaping it." ki This inftant let me go (cried Ma¬ deline), this inftant let me fly from thofe hated
%
hated walls—let me purfue the fteps of my father." * 4 To do fò would be madnefs (replied Lafroy) ; to follow his fteps, would be to give a clue to his puriuers to difcover him." " Then ffuidc me to a convent," cried Madeline, " No ; for a convent would bc the wor ft afy lum you could enter. The Marquis's power is great ; on mi fling you, he will na¬ turally conduele you have taken ilici ter in оле, and will, I am confident, immediately set himfelf authorized to fearch throughout the religious hou fes for you, in order to get you again into his hands." " Whither then (faid Madeline in an agony), Oh ! whither ih all I go ?" " J have a female relation in Paris (cried Lafroy), who 1 am fure would be happy to afford vou an afy lum. She is far advanced in life; a woman of an amiable difpofition, and houfekeeper to a gentleman of large for¬ tune, who, on the death of his wife, which happened fome years ago, betook himfelf to travel,
iravel, and left his houfe, a very fine one, tj the entire care of mv aunt ; to her I can-pet my friend (the fame who affi fled your father in efcaping) to convey you, and alfo a letter • to her, imploring her protection for you." iS What reafon will you affigli for my inquiring that protection ?" demanded Ma¬ deline. " ï fliall fay (I truft you will excufe me for it, cried Lafroy), that your father is л particular friend of mine, who, from em- barraíľed circumftances, has been compelled to quit his refidence near the caftle of Mont¬ morenci, for the purpofe of feek ing one elfe¬ where, and that, till he procures it, he has configned you to my care." Madeline felt truly grateful to Lafroy for the readinels with which he offered his fer¬ vices, yet at the lame time molt unwilling to accept them ; and again (he exprefled a wiih to retire to a convent—a wilh, which was again oppofed with vehemence by Lafroy, who allured her he was confident, if flic went
went to one, that in a few clays flie wnfid be draped from it by the Maniuis...... " By this (he continued)» 1 dare lay everv plan relative to vou and vc.ur father ia ibttled ; no time, thereiore, is to be loll, for if the Marquis аьс! DWiembert once feize Y¡..u, to eiu^ne will be beyond your у * í. tf . : ì ■V , ţ■*"гчлΓ l '|' ,, ~ψ % Λ ¿U Al ì Li».4İ ) iwikl.1 iVlviVíluuV * i m t л v İ ^~*Л, > this moment to fly." À fearf huns; upon the back of a chair, which Lafroy took up and wrapped about her ; he then drew her trembling, hand under * ^r his arm, and with light fteps they itole down a flight of back flairs, and through a back court entered the foreft. They proceeded a confidérable way through the foreit before Lairoy would permit Madeline to ilaçken her pace for the purpofe of aiking whither they were now gokg. When
When at length flie had power to make the enquiry, "■ wc are going (laid he in reply to it) to the cottage of' my friend, where every tiling relative to vour iourncv can be admitcd, and where it never will occur to the Marqms or D'Alembert to ie.irch for voue'
•CHAP,
■tp* . ^^№*»atv<*mmwtfâfi$gSm^ о - *<
v.- Iíj li < τ!
<jp *á?**¿?**0*^&
W i LI hur r y in ff tliüx^hts Starí fv^y v^-.y íiOi) 1 my c 1 ί Γι rafted foul To iind cui nope j ги .i onîy meci dcíjKur·
Γ"1Γ η 1
Jj
HL habitation of Lakov's friend flood about half a league from the foreft ;·—it was a lonely and iccjuellered cottage, built by ilie üde of a river, and ikaded by fine old trees, above which а пише of lofty moun- tains raifed their proud heads. On reaching it, Lafrov feated Madeline «α· alitile bench before it, and defired her to continue there till he had fettled every thing relative to her Tourner with hk friend ; he then unlatched the
ihe door, and entered the cottage ; in lefs than half an hour he returned to her, ac¬ companied by an elderly man. " Well, Mjckmoifeilc, (faid he, as he approached her) 1 have fettled r very thing, I hope, to 3'our hitisiaction. My friend has kindly promiieel to attend you to Paris, and is now going to L ------, whicli is about two leagues ofl', to procure a proper conveyance for you." u You muit thank vour friend for mc (faicl Madeline, rifing) for I have not lan¬ guage to exprefs the Gratitude ï feel for his promifed protection." " My friend Oliver is a good foul (cried Lafroy), and does not require thanks." iS No! (exclaimed Oliver) I do not, in¬ deed !" íť 1 think you had better now retire to a chamber, and try to take fome repofe, ere you commence your ioumev/' faid Lafroy. u Do, Mademoifelle (cried Oliver), my daughter will be happy to attend \ou." *' I have
bt 1 have taken care (find Lafroy, in a vvhkpering voice to her), to guard you acrahiíl all impertinent curiofity. I told a auiiblc iloiy about you, and exprekiy .■fired (hat no one but Oliver's daughter yr> lould attend you ;-— ike is a good girl, and i ¡as promifed to make up a bundle oi her clothes for vou to take to Paris ; when once there, you can eafily procure others.—- Excufe me if I aik, whether you do not want your purfe replenflhed r" 4i No, (replied Madeline) I do noi; f liave money enoneh, I am fure, to dei ray the cxreno of mv iournev, and the iale ot fome valuable tijnkeis 1 have about me will, I hope, enable mc, without inconvenience, to rejoin my fu her." iC As to the expences of your prckr.t iournev, thev are already defnred (faicl Lafroy) j do not, my dear young lady, ipeak upon the fubjcct ; the money 1 acquired in your family can never be better expended i kan in thcicrviccofanyonebelongmgto it." " 1 cannot
'·'■ ί cannot exprefs my feelings, (cried Madeline, melting into teai'o) ; 'tis only Heaven, Lafroy, that can properly reward vour huimmitv." " 1 mull now bid vou tarewel!, mv dear lady ι laid k.áro) ) ; it ϊ flay much Jonger írom ihe Caflle 1 icar being milled, and my abt. nce at tk> juncture would, í make no eh.ubt, exeiie iufpiciou.—kaivwell 1 May I (-.aven and all ite. holy angels ior ever watch OVer \OW !" ic Slop ior one inilant ¡cried Λ í ad e li ne, с. .ichin«; hk armi. Oh! Lafrov! İ entreat ■- I colture you-~~the moment a letter :.vnves Irom m\ iat'ner, to fcrwanl ir lo me. 1 Ikdl be ali jmp.iiitnce — eli r^eny—alJ c.idraelíon ...... riil I hear of hh fafety, and kieew wheic vM' wiien î may rejoin him 1" ts Reft allured (faid Lifroy) ilau. 1 lhall ch) every thhv;? vou can wilh, O: ce mort\ n.y dear young k.dy, farewell ! Oliver has а ¡eiber ro deliver to mv aunt, which í wrote iii uie cottage; I am coiiikkmt ine will do every {Isiiig in her power ίο make you happy." VOL ) s , κ MaUeiMlC
Madeline mournfully fliook her head.— * e Alas ! (flie cried to herfelf ) any effort to moke me happy will now, I fear, be una¬ vailing." о il Coree, Mademoiselle (faid Oliver, as Lafroy turned from her), you had better ftep into the houfe." 4< 1 wiii (leplied Madeline, as with flrcam- ing eyes fhe kill purfued the fteps of Lafroy); but firft tell me how long you think it will beere you return with a carriage." 4< About three hours, 1 think, (faid Oliver) ; I ihall ride to L —■—, шла will, you may aflure youriclf, make as much hafte as poflible." Tie now led her into the houfe, and con- dudeci her to a chamber, at the door of which he 'eft lier, teifins; her, as he retired, that he fliould feml his daughter Therefa to her with a light and fupper. Left toherfeli, Madeline, inftead of indulging tears and lamentations, tried to fiupprefs k>th, and regain fume little degree of compofure. —· " I am
'·' 1 am embarked upon a ftormy fea (fifici íhe), and 1 muft. reibiutcly brave its dangers ii i. hope to gain a port of lufery." She every inftant cxpeded There.'a, but the minutes patted away without brimrinç her j this was a circumikince Madeline did not by any means regret, as folitude and filence beft fuited her prefent feelings. She continued a confidérable time deeply rumi¬ nating over pail events, when ike was iud¬ denly awakened from her reverie by ftrains of loft mufic from without the houle ; they were drains at once tender and folemn, and while they delighted, afleded her to tears.— She went to a window, but juft as ihe had gently opened it, for the purpofe of moie diilindly hearing; them, thev entirclv ceafed. The beautiful profped, however, which the window commanded of the op-polite moun¬ tains and the river, prevented lier withdraw¬ ing immediately from it. it was a profped to which the beams of a rifun»; moon, and the ilillncfs of the night g.-.wx additional X 2. Chirul a,
. c] ¡arms—a ftillnefs which (to borrow a dc· icnption from a much-admired work) ren¬ dered the voice of tlie mountain waterfalls í remendou?, as they ¿ill, in their variety or' founds, were re-echoed from every cavern» whilil the fummits of the rocks bepan to receive the rays of tlie ri fing moon, cml ap¬ peared as if crowned wilh turret-; cf fil ver, írom which the ilars depart ed for their n'ghtly round. iC Ah İ (cried Madeline, to whole recol¬ lection the prefent fcene brought thole ihtì had been accuflomed to) perhaps at this very moment my father gazes upon a land- fcape as fublime and beautiful as the one í now behold., with iadncfs, at the uncertainty of his Madeline ever again enjoying with him the works of nature." She ceafed, for again fhe heard the foit breathings of the oboe, though at a con- tide rable diitanccfrom the houle. q 'Ih ^
Т!,!ч.' рЫе< anJ pìuamstbc iv.:R?,ľd meníurc ftoie, í);' o" c r ίΌΐΤΊί' hkiLiteJ ih'tanU: w\ih íc-nJ ΐ,Κ'1 'jy, K ou rul an !io!y calin ;НКикпп у Love oí ]к\;сс, and к>ье!у nıulıîi j f Irt aol! ow murmurs ¿ieJaway. Ihhc penfive jileafurc which communicated İLİclf to the feelines of Madeline, as with dee}> attention ihe liftened to the enchanting drains, was foon interrupted by the now unwelcome appearance of her long expected vifiter. " Dear Mademoifelle ! (cried fhe, as Madeline turned from the window to receive her) dear Mademoifelle 1 (as fhe laid down я little tray with refreihments) I hope you will have the good nefs to excufe my not coming to you before, but 1 would not come to you till I brought you iomething to eat ; do pray fit down and try this omelet 1 I flatter myfelf you will find it good." " I am afraid í faid Madeline), 1 have been the caufe ofa vail deal of trouble to you." κ * " Of
*'* Of pleafure, inftead of trouble (replied the lit de voluble Therefa;) but, Lord! Ma¬ demoifelle (continued ihe, going to it, and putting it down), how could you bear the window up fo coki a night?" 44 I opened it (íitid Madeline, as flie feated herfelf at the table) for the purpofe of liften- ing to the moft enchanting mufic I ever heard. Pray who plays fo divinely on the oboe r" ** My brother," replied Therefa. ** Your brother! (repeated Madeline, fomewhat furprifed), why he feenis a perfect mafler of mufic." " Yes, that he is (faid Therefa), and of many other accomplifliments too. Lord ! if I had but the key of that cabinet ; for you muft know, Mademoifelle, we are now in his room ; it being the beft in the houfe, my father procured it for you, I couid fhew ycu fuch drawings of his as would I dare fay aflonifh you : there is one hangs juft over your head, a view of fome fine place he law, forhc has been a great traveller." Mad eline
Madeline flood up to examine it ; but, Oh ! what was her furprife, what the feelings of that moment, on beholding the landfcapc which de Sevkmie had sketched of her native valler. " Are you fure (cried Madeline, koking wildly at Th^refif, are you fure ycur bro¬ ther drew this landicape—are you fure it is not a copy inftead of an original r" " Very fure indeed (replied Therefa) ; he told me himfelf he had drawn it, and I know he-would not utter a falfehood." " Yes (cried Madeline to herfelf), 'lis evident de Sevignie is the fon of a cottager, and every thing which before appeared ftrange and myfterious in his conduct, is now ex¬ plained- Oh! de Sevignie, had no falfe pride reftrained yon—had you candidly, explicitly confeflcd your fituation, what hap¬ pinefs might now? have been cur's ! for well am I convinced that neither my father nor my friend would have objected to our union к 4 w lie n
-'Ow> when once thoroughly aflured of your worth." *' What is your brother's name ?" aiked Madeline, wifbing to remove everv doubt. us to what (he fufpcded, from her mind. " I ienri de Sevignic Mclicour. Melicour .»s the name of his family, and he was called Hem i dc Sevignie after a great gentleman who it cod godiHihcr to him, and by whole dit.. с he rec^i w d io duf, ient aii education Ί -У, lhe reir of his family." " And did he elo uuiuìnp. more than de- ihvhnii to be well educated :" faid Madeline. {i Why—}€?.-—he made him handîomc ptvíents at time¿, and enabled him to travel »nd l:tLp line company ; :u;d í belleve that J.ıteîy he would liave made a certain provi- fv.jn for hiu:, but that thev have diiàfíxced." " Difagreed i : ' repeated ľv iadeline, in an agitated vuicc. ** Yes—Henri's patron wants him to marry fome great young lady, who has fallen defperately in love with him, and he has pofitively refined to do fo. " Who
¿í Who is the lady ?" aiked Madeline, m a voice fcarcely intelligible. " i really don't know, Ma'am ; if I did, I would tell you ; but my father never entrufts me with л fecret, left I fliould blab it ; thourh I am fure I lbouid never think of О doine; fo ; atid fo 'tis onlv bv Jiitcninff here, and liftening there, 1 ever come to the know¬ ledge of any thino;. Poor I ienri ! my father has allò e]uarei led with him, becaufe he has rejected this ereat oíľer : 'tis a cruel thine; to do fo ; for, to be fure, it is but natural to fuppofe he would accept it, if he could ; bur whvii a perion is already in love, what can one do ŕ" ťí In bee î (repeated Madeline) do you think vour bivther is in love ?" ίζ Yes, 1 am iure he is." ' c But hovv fure ; did he ever tell you lie was r " No—but one can cafily guefs he is, by the alteration in his looks and manner.— Lord, he is grown lo pale, and ίο melancholy, he mopes about the whole day by hinueii; ; κ ς aud
and at night he wanders away to the bleak mountains, where he pafles whole hours playing that melancholy mufic, which almoft breaks one's heart to hear." " It does indeed," faid Madeline with a. deep figh. " Biefs me, Mademoifelle, how pale you look; let me give you a glafs of wine." Madeline felt almoft fainting, and took one in filence ; after which, recovering a Jittle, flie begged Therefa to leave her— $i I will lay clown upon the bed (cried ihe), and try to reft myfelf till your father re¬ turns." ** Weli, Manrfelle (faid Therefa), fince you defire it, I will bid you good night ; but had I not better draw the window-curtains, and leave you a light ?" " No, (replied Madeline), I prefer ihe fhadowy light of the moon îo any other ; good night, as foon as your father comes back, let me be called." Therefa
Therefa promifcd ihe fliould, and retired. cs Ohi de Sevignie, dear, unhappy de Sevignie 1 (exclaimed Madeline the moment íhe was left to herfelf), what an aggravation of my mifery is the knowledge of your wretchednefs—is the conviction of its being experienced on my account r —Yes, I well recollect your telling me, that it was on my account your youth was wafted,, your hopes o'erthrown, your profpečts blafted î —Yet, notwithilanding your fufferings, I could cruelly, unjuftly condemn you, and expofe you to the cenfure of others - s faliely and raíhly I judged your conduct, and for ever ihall I regret my doing fo. " It was him no doubt (flie continued), whom I beheld near the monumentai ikllar of Lord Philippe; kom his vicinity to the caftle, he muft have heard of the occur¬ rences whid : i took place there, and he wan¬ dered to the foreft perhaps from a hope of feeing me. к ó ^ What
u What would hc feci if now acquainted with the reverfe in my fituation ? what will he not feel when he hears it—when he hears that his Madeline was flickered beneath the roof of his father? But perhaps the latter circumftance he may never learn ;—if it would add to his miibry, Oh! may he never hear it !—-Oh! may forrow and unavailing: regret be removed írem his heart;—may his hopes be revived, his proípečts rebrightencd, and may------!" She paufed—ike could not brine; herfelf to wifli him united to another—* could not bring herfelf to wifli that he fliould take another to his heart,and expunge her ior ever from it. " And yet am I not fel fiih (cried flie) in ftill defiring to retain his re¬ gard ? our union is now impoflible ; for was he even to fee me again (which 'tis very im¬ probable lie ever will), and offer me his hand, I would reject it ;—reject it, becaufe I could not now in dowry with my heart, bri up any thinsr but fimple wiflies for his happinefs. My deiiiny is fixed ; the lonely lolitude of my father fliall be my home : a nJ
ind fliould he defcend before me to the ?rave, the remainder of my days I'll pafs .vi thin a cloifter." Exhaufted by fatigue and agitation, flie threw hcrielf upon the bed, but fleep was a 'tränger to her eye-lids : flic wept bitterly-»· ivcpt o'er her misfortunes—yet wept with a kind of pleafure at the idea of her tears fall¬ ing upon the pillow on which, perhaps, Líe Sevignie had often fighed forth her name. The day was íuft dawninçr, when flie heard the rumbling of a dikant carriage, She directly ftarted from the bed, and the next inftant Therefa entered the chamber. " My father is come, Mademoifelle (faid flie), and impatient for you to be gone ; í have brought you а hai, and given him a bundle of things for you," Madeline, as ihe tied on the hat, thanked her tor her kindnefs ami attention.; and t 'κ n
then with a fervent, though filent prayer for the happinefs of de Sevignie, whom íhe never more expeded to hear of, or behold, flie quitted the chamber. Oliver was waiting for her in the hall ; he told her he had left the chaife at the oppofite fide of the river, but that they had only to crofs the bridge, which was but a little way above the cottage, to reach it. He offered her his arm, which, weak and trembling, flie accepted, and in a few minutes found her¬ felf within the carriage. From their quitting the cottage to then- arrival in Paris, nothing happened worth re¬ lating ; they were three days travelling to it, and entered it when it was almoft dark. The dejedion of Madeline was not in the leaft abated ; nor could the bufy hum of voices, the bufile in the ftreets, or the rat¬ lins: of the carriages, for a moment divert her attention from her forrows. After
After going through а confidérable part of the town, the chaife ftopped, and Oliver exclaimed, " W r e have at length reached the habitation of Madame Fleury." Ma- deline diredly looked from the window, but could only diftinguifli a black wall. Oliver defired the poftillion to alight, and knock at a iniall door he pointed to :—the poftillion accordingly obeyed, and in a few minutes the door was opeued by a female ; but what kind of female it was too dark for Madeline to perceive* " Is Madame Fleury at home ?" afked Oliver. " Lord, that flie is (faid the woman) ; it is many a good clay fince my miftrefs has been out at fo late an hour as this." £e I'll ftep in before you (cried Oliver to Madeline), and prefent Lafroy's letter ; as foon as ilie has read it, I will come back fox f j
He accordingly loft the carriage. In about fifteen minutes he returned to it— " Madame Fleury (faicl he, as he opened the chaife door), is impatient to fee you/* He handed Madeline acrofs a fpacious court ; and they entered a hall fo long and badly lighted by one fmali lamp, that Maden¬ line could not perceive its temiination. Here Madame Fleury waited to receive her. She took her hand, ancl as flie led her into an old fafhioned parlour, icarcely lefs gloomy than the hall, welcomed her to the houfe. " f ilifdl be happy, my dear (faid flie), to render you every kmdnefs in my power, not only on my nephew's account, but your own ; for your countenance is itfelf a letter of re¬ commendation." Madeline attempted to exprefs her thanks, but an agony of tears and fobs—an agony excited by the idea of the forlorn fituation which had. thus caft her upon the kindnefs of ftrangers, fuppreiled her utterance ; and, finking:
linking upon a chefir, lhe covered he ľ faca with her hands. u Come, come ('aid Madame lrieury, tippinä: lier upon the flioulder-, vou muil not sive wav to kr.v fifirifs. Come, come (continued ihe, going to the fide-board ancl blinking lier a it! afs of wine^ you muft take tins, and kii anfwer for it you'll be better." It was many minutes, however, ere her emotions we*e in the leaft abated. As foon as Oliver faw her a little compofed, he de¬ clared he muft be gone. Madame Fleury afked him if he could not flay the night ? he replied in the negative, faying he had iome relations in Paris whom he wiflied to vifit ; and as he meant to leave it the enfuing morning, no time was to be loft, Madeline conjured him to remind La- troy of his promite, which he folemnly al¬ fu red her he would ; and ihe iaw him do- part, though the father of dc Sevignie, without
without the leaft regret -, for neither in his looks or manner was there the leaft refem- blance to his ion, or any thing which could conciliate efteem. As her compofure returned, ihe was able to make obfervations apon her companion— obfervations by no means to her advantage; and ihe felt, that if fhe had bee« at liberty to chufe a protector, Madame Fleury would have been thelaft perfon in the world thechoice would have devolved upon. Like Oliver, nei¬ ther her looks or manner were in the fmalleft degree prepoífefľing; the firft were coarfe and afluredj the latter bold and vulgar. Almoft immediately after the departure of Oliver, fhe ordered fupper \ and as they fat at table, attended by an elderly female fervant, dirty and mean in her appearance, Madame Fleury tried to foice confolation ш well as food upon Madeline.
" You
vi , " You muft not, my dear (cried flie), as 1 have faid before, give way to low fpirits ; there is nothing hurts a young perfon fo much as melancholy—it deftroys all viva¬ city ', and what is a young perfon without vivacity ? why a mere log. You muil re¬ flect, that when things are at the woril, they always mend ; and that a ftormy night İs often fucceeded by a fine day. Come, take a glafs of wine (continued flie, filling out a bumper for herfelf, and another for Made¬ line), it will cheer your heart. Nothing does one fo much good when one's melan¬ choly as a little wine : ϊ fpeak from expe¬ rience ; I have led a difmal life, one that has hurt my fpirits very much for fome years paft. My nephew, I fuppofe, told y on about the gentleman to whom this houfc belongs." Madeline bowed, u Well, upon his quitting it, for the purpofe of travelling, all the fervants were d i fch a rged ¿
d i (charged ; and ever fince, that poor wo¬ man and 1 i'pointing to the fervant) have led the moit iolitary ike imaginable, juft like two poor lonely hermits." (Madeline could not forbear fmiling at thofe words; very like heimits indeed, thought ihe, as ihe caft her eyes over the table, which was covered with delicacies).—" Jult like two poor lonely hermits, failing and praying," faid Madame kieury, with a deep figh. It may eafily be fuppofed tkat Madeline foon grew tired of converfation of this kind¿ her timid heart flirunk from the attentions of Madame Fleury, inftead of expanding to receive them ; yet flie condemned the ftrong prejudice which flie had conceived againft her.—" I will try to conquer it (faid fhe to herfelf), becaufe it is unjull —unjuft to dif¬ iiké a perfon merely becaufe they have been caft in one of the rough moulds of Nature, and their manners, in conlequence of the difference of education, are unlike mine." Madame
'Aíadame Fleury feemed inclined to lit up to a late hour, which Madeline perceiving, ihe pleaded fatigue, and begged permiflion to retire to her chamber. Madame Fleury in¬ ibì; tly rifing, took up a light, and laid ihe would conduct her to if. Madeline fol¬ lowed her down the hall, at the bottom of w iiich was a í old ing door, that on being opened, difcovered a fpacious ilair-cafe.— ςί This appears to bc a very large houfe, 1 " faid Madeline, asa(ccndin:r theilairs- the be- held numerous paflVjesand doors 4i Oh, quite a wildernefs of a houfe (re¬ plied Madame Fleury^ ; 1 am fomeiimcs a year without feeing hah the apartment;;." " I wonder you are not afraid to live in it .{faid Madeline) without more lcrvants.'* " Why all the valuable t hi nes were re- moved from it on the delcriion of its maker, ίο that prevents my having many fears ; be¬ sides, I take cood care to fee all the doors iccured before i go to bed." »"14 i he
The room allotted for Madeline was fpa¬ cious, but dirty and ill furniflied ; nor was there aught within it that gave evidence of better days, except a few faded port raits, large as the life, which ftill hung againft the brown and duf İ y wainfcot. " is your chamber near this ?" afked Ma¬ deline, as flie caft her eve around. ζί Oh, yes, ϊ iliall be your neighbour ; fo don't be uneafy," replied Madame Fleu.y. Madeline aflured her flie would not ; and then, anxious to be alone, begged ihe might no longer detain her.™" Good night then, my dear (faid Madame Fleury): í fliall call you when it is time to breakfaft." Madeline looked behind the window-cur- tpin ere flie locked the door -, fhe then recom¬ mended hcrielf to the protection of Heaven ; and, worn out both by bodily and menial fa¬ tigue, repaired to bed, where flie flept tül her ufual hour of ri fine. ÁL· When
When dreíľed, flie drew up the window curtain ; but how different the profped flie beheld from the profpeds ihe had been accuftomed to ·/ inftead of fublime moun¬ tains towering to the clouds, or rich mea¬ dows, fcattered over with flocks and herds, flie now beheld high and dirty walls, which completely enclofed a fmali ipot of ground planted with a few ftun ted trees. She fighed , and a tear itole from her to think flie might never more enjoy the fweets of Na¬ ture, or mark .»m и.!— — . ...ii... H .ho\v Jprirtg the tended plants, How blows the citron grove, what drops the myrrh, And what the balmy reed—-how Nature paints Her colours—-how tlie bee fits on the bloom Extracting liquid fweets. Her melancholy reflections were foon in¬ terrupted by the voice of Madame Fleury -, flic immediately opened the door, and, after the ufual falutations of the morning were ever, accompanied her to breakfaft, which was laid out in the room where they had fu p» pec
hrppcel the preceding night, and which, lihc the chamber of Madeline, looked into what Akidame kieury called the garden. After breakfait the roie, wrl told i\fade- line flic muil leave lier- - u í «о everv morn- Ing to church (cried flud; while Ì агл a«)fent, you can amule yov.rkif wirii readiiig ; you'll find ibme books in that clofet,'' pokiini?; to one at tlie e:id ot the roo:::. M .uk 1 к с th о u 2,1 u it oe hi h ; r n ·- > t be i n τ aikeel to accompany her to c! ¡uťe h ; α r, hí íhe was juft on tlie point о: iw^uJ.Îkgpcùî.h'k):! to do fo, when flie recollected, that peihaps Madame Fleury might ha\e ibme phue. After the fervice was over to call at, whkh ilie did not wiih to brin;; her to; flu. ι he, e- fore timely checked hcrielf, and ».-id ihe would either w aik in the garden, or reach As í oon as ¡he was a.one, flie examined the books, but íhe iounJ. none that pleated iier, and even A ihe had, her mind was too ! Π lib 1^
much difturbed to permit her to derive amufement fron; them ; flie therefore went into the garden, where, deeply ruminating o'er pail events, flie heeded not the lapfe of time, and was aftonifhed when the maid came out to inform her that her miftrefs had been returned fome time, and dinner waited, Madeline haftily followed her into the houfe, but on reaching the parlour, flie involunta¬ rily ftarted back on perceiving a young man with Madame Fkurv. 44 Eiek my foul (faid Madame Fleury, laughing immoderately), blefs my foul (cried ihe, taking the hand of Madeline), you look terrified. Well, you are the fir ft girl 1 ever faw frightened at the fight of a young man ; let me introduce my nephew to you, and you'll find you have no reafon to be afraid of him ;— Dupont, this к Mademoifelle fer- пас, the aflumed name Lu fro v had chofeii for Madeline." vol. xv, ι Dupont:
Dupont faluted Madeline with much po¬ fi tenels, and exprefled his regret at having cauferi her any difagrecable furprife : fhe bowed, and endeavoured to recollect herfelf, in order to avoid the coarfe raillery which her confufion excited in Madame Fleury, and permit ι ed him to kad her to the table. When í hey were feat eel at it, Madame Fleury began to lound the praifes of her nephew;— 4i 1 can aflure you, Mademoifelle (cried flic) when you know him better, you will like him much ; he is a good foul, I cannot help ikying fo, though to his face : he is fecrctary to a nobleman of high rank and confe¬ quence ; and, though from his fituation he might be conceited andcliflipated, he is nei¬ ther the one nor the other, nor difdains to come now and then, and take a ihug dinner with his old aunt." While {he was fpeak· ing, Madefine eould not help attentively re¬ garding Dupont, whofe face appeared fami¬ liar to her ; but where or when ihe had icen the
the perfon whom he refembled, flie could not poflibly recoiled. Dupont was young, handlbmc, and rather elegant ; yet almoft the moment Madeline beheld him, flie conceived a prejudice againft him ;-— his gentlenefs feemed aflu med, and there was a ficrccnefs, a bőidnek in his eyes, which at once alarmed and confuted her. When dinner was over, Madame Fleury propofed cards. Madeline immediately rofe, and, declaring ihe ne\er played, defired leave to retire to her chamber. " No, (cried Dupont, alfo rifing and tak¬ ing her hand, whilft he gazed upon her with the moil impaflioned tendernek), we cannot: let you go ; we'll give up cards ; we'll not think, not act, but as you like." " I fliould be lorry, Sir (cried Madeline coldly, and withdrawing her hand), that the inclination, of any perfon was iacrificed to mine ; at prefent 1 am much better caleu- ľ n hr^i* »^ «** ili* Ì. V. \·κ
lated for folitude than fociety, and muft therefore again entreat Madame Fieury's permiflion to retire to my room." i( Then you wiU entreat in vain i aflure you (cried ihe) ; I have no notion of letting you go to mope about by yourfelf." " If you thus reftrain me, Madam (faid Madeline, who cvçry moment grew more anxious to quit Dupont), you will pre¬ vent me from having the pleaiurc of think¬ ing myfelf at home." ** True (cried Dupont), where there is re¬ ftraint, there can be no plea! ure ; permit MademoifeUe Jernae, therefore, Madame (ack dreflinc: his auntì to leave us, fince fue is fo O f cruel aş to defire to do io ; perhaps our ready compliance with her wiflies will at fome other time incline her to bc more propitious to our's." *« Well, you may go, child (faid Madame Fleury) ý but indeed 'tis oni j to oblige my nephew that î let you." Dupent
Dupont kd Madeline to the door, where, m fpi te of ail her efforts to prevent him, he imprinted a kifs upon her hand. Her heart throbbing; tumultuoufly, flie haftily afcended the ftairs ; (he faw, or fancied the law, boks exchanged between the aunt and nephew which terrified her : ftories ot defi? ning men and deceitful women ruflied to her recollection ; and flic trembled at the idea of her forlorn fituation —at the idea oi beina; folelv in the power of Uranger?, with- out a being near her to protect her, if pro- lection fliould be neceíľary. She wiflied to know whether flie was in an inhabited part of the town, which the darknefi; of the hour fl^e had arrived at Madame Fleury's pre¬ vented her aiecrtainkg, that in caie there was a neceffity for quitting her pielent refidence, fhe rniodit have a chance oí cali!y ¡ roeurino- О / í О another; and accordingly determined to avail hertel: of the prefent opportunity, and explore her way, it poflible to the kont of the houle. The gallery in which her cham- L 3 ber
ber flood, was terminated by a door, which ihe fofily opened, and difcovered a winding paftage : without hefitation flic entered it, and proceeded till ftopped by another door ; this ihe opened with difficulty, for the key was ruily, and fora long time refilled all her eflbrts to turn it : when at length ihe had fucceeded, ihe found herfelf in a chamber as fpacious as her own, but (tripped of all the furniture ex¬ cept a bare bedftead. She ftepped lightly to a window, and to her great mortification, found hcrielf ftill at the back of the houfe ; fhe directly turned away, and was haflening from the room, when, cnreleflly glancing her eye over it, a (lain of blood upon the floor filled her with horror, and rivetted her to the fpot. ie Oh ! God, (ihe cried, while her arms dropped nervelefs by tlie fide), what dreadful evidence of guiit do 1 behold !" A heavy hand fell upon her flioulder ; ihe fh ricked—and, ftarting, beheld Madame Fleury-— " What, in the name of wonder, broucht you hither ?" demanded flie in ra- I her an angry voice, a í ρ:.!
« I did not conceive there was the leaft impropriety in examining the apartments,''' laid Madeline." " Impropriety, why no ; but then you might have told me you were curious. Come, let us quit this chamber ; I hate it." '· Have you reafon to hate it ?" afked Madeline, her eyes ftill fiiftened upon the blood-ftained floor. She felt the hand of Ma¬ dame Fleury tremble.—" Why to tell you the truth, (faid flie, going to the bedftead and fitting down) my nephew, Dupont, (fpeaking inan agitated voice), once met with an ugly accident in it ; hc fell and hurt himfelf fo much, we thought he never would have re¬ covered ; L ne ítains of his blood are ftill upon the floor ; nothing would take them out." " Blood finks deep!" faicl Madeline in a hollow voice, and raifing her eyes, ihe fixed them upon Madame Fleury. ** Pray let us leave tliis chamber," cried her companion, rifing in vifible confufion. Slie íeizcd the arm of Madeline, and drawing L 4 her
her from it, locked the door, and put the key into her pocket. " I came up (faid íhe, as they proceeded to the chamber of Made¬ line), to aik you whether you would not. chufe a book, and if I fliould not fend you iònie coffee.'* " No (replied Madeline), neither a book npr coffee ; all I defire is to be left without interruption to myfelf to-night." " I am afraid you are a fanciful girl," faicl Madame Fleury. " Would to Heaven I was only affečied by fancies 1" exclaimed Madeline with fer¬ vour. ** Well, fince you wifli to be alone, ï will leave you (cried Madame kieury), nor ihall you again be interrupted." " In doubting Madame Fleury (faid Ma¬ deline, when left to herfelf), do I not doubt Lafroy, of whole fidelity í have received fuch prooís, that to harbour a fufpicion of him, makes me feel guilty of ingratitude. Oh! furely (flie continued, and her mind grew compofed by the idea), he never would have
have confided me to the care of his relation, had he not been convinced fhe was worthy of the truft ; and, in giving way to my pre¬ fent fears, 1 torment myfelf without a caufe. Every thing may be as Madame Fleury has ftated ; her nephew may have been hurt in the chamber; and his attentions to me may bc didated by what he imagines politenefs. I will then exert myfelf (flie cried) ; I will combat my fears, nor to the preffurc of real evils add thofe of imaginary ones." To reafon herfelf out of her fears was not, however, as eafy as ike imagined ; they flui clung to her heart, and flie wiflied, fervently wifhed, that flie had never entered the refi¬ dence of Madame Fleury. She determined the next morning to aik to accompany her to church—" 1 fhall then (faid fhe) know what kind of neighbourhood 1 am in. and whether there is any convent near the houfe, to which ï could fly in cafe any thing difagrecable again occur red in it." L $ As
As foon as İt grew dark, the maid brought her a light, which fne kept burning all the night. She was fcarcely dreíľed in the morn« ing, when Madame Fleury tapped at the door to inform her breakfaft was ready. Ma¬ deline immediately opened the door, and. attended her to the parlour, where, to her great vexation, fhe found Dupont. " So, fo (faid his aunt, as ifa little fur« prifed by feeing him), you are here ! what,, I fuppofe you could not reft till you had paid your devoirs to Mademoifelle r" " I fliould bc forry (iaid Madeline, with fome degree of haughtinefs), to place to my own account a vifit which I neither expected гюг defired." " And yet you would be right in doing fo,'* cried Dupont. Madeline made no reply, but addrefled. herfelf on fome indifferent fubjed to Ma* dame Fleury. p, Яу t ί Щи ί
After breakfaft, which was rendered ex¬ tremely difagrecable to Madeline by the looks and attentions of Dupont, Madame Fleury rofe, and faid it was time to go to church. " I hope, Madam (cried Madeline, alfo rifing), you will permit me to accompany you this morning." " No, indeed I lhall not (exclaimed fhe)¿ you can be much better employed at home,, for my nephew will flay with you." There was fomething in thofe words which fliocked Madeline fo much, that for a mo- ment ilie had not the power of utterance.— "lean aflure you, Madam, then (faid Ihe) that if you do not let me go, I will confine myfelf to my chamber until your return." " That is, if my nephew, is fuch a fool as to permit you." Madeline could no longer reftrain herfelf. " if this is the manner in which you mean to treat me, Madam (flie exclaimed), you cannot be iurprifed if my continuance with you is of ihort duration. 'Tis not {ihe eon- L ó tinned)
tinned, with increafing warmth) the mere fhelter ofa roof that I require— 'tis kindnefs, kis protection, 'tis the attentions which footh the forrows of the heart, and lighten the pangs of dependance ;—except aflured of my receiving thefe, your nephew, Lafroy, I am confident would never have entrufted me to your care ; and candidly and expli¬ citly I now tell you, I fliall withdraw myfelf kom it, if longer fubječtcd to freedoms I abhor." Madame Fleury only replied to this fpeech by a contemptuous fmtle ; then turning on her heel, file darted out of the room, and fliut the door after her. Madeline at¬ tempted to follow 7 her, but was prevented by Dupont, who, feizing her hand, dragged her back to a feat. She grew terrified, but tried to conceal her terrors. " I infiil on your releafing me immediately, Sir," faid ike. " I cannot (cried hc), I cannot be ίο much my own enemy," Thou ah
" Though Madame Fleury has forgot what is due to her fex, 1 hope (refu med Ma¬ deline) you will not forget what is due to your's ; to infult an unhappy woman, is furely a degradation to the charader of a man." " I do not mean to infult you (replied Dupont) ; my honourable addrefles cannot iurely infult you ?" " Your honourable addrefles!" repeated Madeline, furveying him with mingled fur¬ prife and contempt. « Yes-— í love, I adore you ; and now en¬ treat you to accept my hand and heart." ťe I ihall not fay I rejed them (replieel Madeline), becaufe í do not think you ie- rious in oifering them ; I cannot believe that any man in his ienies can offer himfelf to a woman he fcarcely knows." " I am ferions, by all that is iacrcd !" cried he with vehemence." " Then believe me equally fericus (iaicl Ma¬ deline) when I aflure you, t hat couid you with your hand and heart ofler mc the wealth of tlie un ive rie,
univerfe, i would reject them. You are, no doubt, acquainted with my unhappy flory—- Oh ! do not, therefore (flie continued), do not render unpleafant the afylum your aunt has afforded me, by perfevering in attentions which never can have the defired effect." ct Perfeverance does much (faid Dupont) ; I will trv it." " To my torment then,, and your own. diiappointment you will try it," cried Ma¬ deline. " How can you bc fo inflexible ?" faid he,. looking on her with tlie moil paffionate ten¬ dernefs. Madeline grew more alarmed than ever by his manner. " If you have gencrofity, if you have companion r (exclaimed flie), you will now let me retire." * £ Well (faid he), to fliew my read U nefs to oblige you, however I may mortify myfèlf by doing fo, I will now let you leave me ; but ere you go, fuíľcr me to fay I never will drop my fuit." Anxious
Anxious to leave him, Madeline made no reply. Her firft impulfe on quitting the parlour, was to fly directly from a houfe in which flie was expofed to infult and perfe¬ ction ; but a moment's reflection convinced her of the impracticability of'fuch a meafure at prefent, when in all probability Dupont was upon the watch : fhe therefore determined not to attempt efcaping till a more favour¬ able opportunity for that purpofe offered. Still anxious, before that opportunity oc¬ curred, to difcover in what kind of neigh¬ bourhood fhe was, inftead of repairing to her chamber, flie haftily turned into a long paf¬ fage off of the great ftair-cale, in which feve«« ral doors appeared.
ъОд Ik
CHAP* VIII.
Ob ! take me în з fellow-mourner with thee; 141 number gioan ter gvoaa> and tear for tear ! And '.vhen the fountains of thy eyes arc dry, IMine fli f ü' fupply the ftream, and weep for both
JL VA ADELINE tried many doors, but found them faftened. She refolved, however, not to return without attempting alfi and was juft laying her hand upon another lock, when a dreadful »roan from the bottom of the pafìagc pierced her ear, and penetrated to her heart. She hefitated whether fhe ihoukl advance or retreat ; but at length humanity triumphed over fear, and ihe de¬ termined
termined to go on, and try if fhe could be of any fervice to the perfon from whom the groan proceeded. At the bottom of the paflàge fhe perceived, what the darknefs it was involved in had before concealed from her, a narrow ilair-cafe in the fide of the wall : t'fis flic eagerly afcended, and came to a fmali door half open ; here flie paufed, and looking in, beheld, with equal horror and aftoniihment, an old woman wretchedly clad, and worn toaikcleton, kneeling in tiie cor¬ ner of an Ш -furniíhcd room, before a wooden crucifix. tÉ Oh 1 heavenly father (the miférable object exclaimed, almoft the moment Madeline had reached the door), may I, dare I, hope for thy forgi venefs !—-Oh I no, 'tis impoífible thou canil ever grant it ;—thou never canft fork» ve the wretch who caufed the anguiih of the moil amiable of women—the mifery and death of the moil noble of men ! Yet, if ikileri ng could entitle me to mercy, I might hope for it.—Oh! if my blood can atone for that I caufed to be fhed, thou, thou ihalt have it !" So
So faying, flie feized a knotted cord that lay befide her, and ftruck herfelf with it : Madeline inilantly fprung forward—" Have mercy upon yourfelf (ihe exclaimed, as ihe caught her emaciated hand) ; God only re¬ quires real contrition as an atonement for error." The miférable wretch looked wildly at her for a moment ; then uttering a pierc¬ ing fliriek, flie convulfively wreftcd her hand from her, and fell fainting on the floor. The fituation of Madeline was dLftreffing in the extreme ; flie feared calling for affift¬ ance, left the knowledge of her having difcovered the miférable objed before her fliould be produdive of unpleafant confe- quences j and yet flie feared her own efforts would never recover her. She knelt down and chafed her temples ; but İt was many minutes ere flie fhewed any figns of return¬ ing life. At length opening her eyes,fhe again faftened them upon Madeline with the wildeft expreflîon of fear, and in a feeble voice ex¬ claimed a,
claimed, " You are come then, come from the realms of blifs, for the purpofe of fum - moning my foul to that tribunal where it muft anfwer for all its crimes?" <c I know not what you mean (iaid Made¬ line, endeavouring to raife her head, and fup¬ port it upon her breaft) ; the voice of dif¬ trefs drew me to this apartment, not from idle curiofity, but from a hope of being fer- viceable to the perfon from whom it pro¬ ceeded ; and my motive will I truft excufe any intrufion I may appear guilty of." " From whence, or from whom do you come?" demanded the unhappy woman* " Alas 1 (replied Madeline), I have nei¬ ther ftrength nor fpirits now to enable me to relate my fad ftory ¿ all I can tell you is, that I am an unfortunate girl, without any friend, î fear, to aflbrd me the protedion I require." " Perhaps I may be able to ferve you (faid the ftranger) ; that voice—that look— Ah ! how powerfully do they plead in your behalf !
behalf! What part of the houfe do you inhabit ?" " í am fb little acquainted with the houfe (cried Madeline), that perhaps I may con¬ found one place with another ; my chamber is at the end ofa great gallery." * ť What kind of a chamber is İt ?" ** 'Tİs wainfeoted, and ornamented with faded portraits." " Amonp-ft which is there not a remark- О able one of a ladv b mournine with a drawn dagoer?" " Yes." ** Well, fince I know your clumber, I will, if there is a poiitbiiity of getting to it, pay you a vifit, and tell you of a plan I have thought of for your efcape. Madeline, in an ecftafy of gratitude and hope, caught iier hand, and was raifing it to her lips, when a fudden, though diflant, noiie made her drop it. "Oh*
cť Oh ! heavens (cried the ftrangcr), if we are difcovered, we are loft !—Fly—regain your chamber, if poflible, without delay ; and as you value your fãfety, as you value your life and mine, keep íecrct our inter¬ view." Madeline ftarted from the ground—- (i Oh ! tell me ere 1 go (flie cried), when I may exped you." " Away, away (faid the ftrangcr), a mo¬ ment's delay may be fatal !" Marie!ine could no longer hefitate about departing, and fvviftly and lightly flie de¬ fcended the ftairs ; at the bottom flie paufed to liften and look do.vn the pafiäge, but flic neither heard any noife, nor beheld any ob¬ jed : fhe was therefore proceeding with quicknefs, when fuddenly flie heard an ap¬ proaching itep. From the words of the ftrangcr, flie be¬ lieved deftrudion inevitable if difcovered in her prefent fituation , ibe therefore deter¬ mined
mined to try and gain admittance into one of the adjacent chambers, and fecrete herfelf within it till all danger of detedion was over. She accordingly tried the neareft door, and, to herinexpreiîible tranfport, the lock yielded to her firft effort. The inftant ihe entered the room, fhe bolted the door, againft which ihe then leaned to try if ihe could hear the approach of the ilep that had fo much alarmed her; but all again was profoundly flill. Somewhat compofed by this, íhé ven¬ tured to turn, and to her infinite amaze« ment, beheld hcrielf in a moil magnificent chamber. * s What new myftery (faid ihe), is this ? Madame Fleury aflured me her chamber was near mine ; and yet who but Madame Fleury can occupy this room ?" This was a myftery foon explained ; for as flie was ftealing from the door to the win¬ dow, fhe beheld the clothes which Dupont had on the preceding day lying upon a chair. — iC Ah î heavens (exclaimed Madeline, re>· coiling with horror, as if it was Dupont him- A felf
felf flie faw) ; Dupont then is the inhabitant of this chamber ! Oh ! for what vile purpofe is his refidence here concealed ? Oh ! Lafroy, you were either deceived yourfelf, or bafeiy deceived me when you fent me to this houfe ; uew horrors every moment open to my view, and my fenfes are fcarcely equal to the con¬ flicts I endure !" She was returning to the door for the pur¬ pofe of endeavouring to quit the room, when fome letters fcattered upon a drefling-table caught her attention : flie darted to them ; but how impoflible to defcribe the horror fhe experienced, when upon all the hated name of D'Alembert met her eye. She fnatched up one, and while the blood ran cold to her heart, read as follows :— " The lovely Madeline will foon be in your power ; Lafroy has completely fecured her for you : may you profit by hisftratagems ! Adieu!—Believe me ever vour affectionate father, « G. D'Alembert." Not
Not when fhe trembled beneath the poig¬ nard of a fuppofed aflaflm—when íhe ihud- dered at the idea of having fcen a being of the other world— when fhe groaned from a conviction of her father's being a murderer-— did Madeline receive fuch a fliock, did flie experience fuch horrors as flie now felt on dii- covcring Lafroy to be a villain ! She dropped upon her knees, and raifed her eyes and trembling hands to heaves though unable to articulate a prayer. She had not been in this fituation above two minutes, when aloud knock came to the door. Madeline ftarted wildly from tlie floor, and looked round to fee if there was any place which could afford her conceal¬ ment ; but no fuch place prcfented it felf to her view. The knock was repeated with increafed violence ; and fcarcely could flie prevent the wild fliriek of defpair from burftmg from her lips. Her filence, how« ever, availed her but little ; for the knock was repeated, and the moment after, lhe door с burft
buril open by Dupont ; the room rung with the fliriek which ihe uttered at that inftant. ■** Well (exclaimed he), by coming to my chamber, you have faved me the trouble of going to your's." As he fpoke, he attempted to catch her in his arms, but fhe eluded his grafp, and fpringing paft him, fled towards her cham¬ ber ; he purfued her, and, overtakk g her j lift as flie had reached the door, rufhed into the room along with her. She now threw herfelf upon her knees—· " 1 am in your power (fliid flic, in almoft brcathlefs agitation) ; bc generous, and uf: it nobly." " And do you defervc anv thing like ge* neroli ty from me ť (cried he) ; do you not merit the fevered puniihment for havim* cíandeftinely entered my chamber, and trea- cheroufly examined my letters." vov iv. m The
The fear of Madeline gave way to in¬ dignation ; her eyes flaihed fire ; ihe rofe, and looked upon him with fcorn. " And what puiiifliment does the villain merit who forced me to fuch actions ? (fhe exclaimed). What puiiifliment does hc me¬ rit who aífumes a name but for the purpoie of deceiving, who ipreads his fnares for the friendless and unhappy ?" <s ka compelled me to affume another name (faid he), becaufe you objected to me for bearing that of D'Alembert." Madeline turned from him with con¬ tempt ; he followed her. ** Madeline (cried he), let all trifling ceafe between us : you are, as you have yourfelf obferved, completely in my power ; be poli¬ tic therefore^ and no longer reject my over¬ tures." " Moniter 1 (exclaimed Madeline), do jou ¿nfult me by itili pleading for my hand, know inu:
knowing, as you muft, that 1 am acquainted with the exiftence of vour w ife ?" w' " I do not plead for your hand (replied he with the moil deliberate coolnefs), 'tis for your heart : content to be mine ; con fent to accept the only propofals I can now make you ; and, ín return, I will not only iecure vou an independence and a delightful afv- Jum, where vou can fear nothing, but io- lcmniy premiti.·, if ever í have power rodo ίο, to make vou niv wife." <{ I will not attempt (laid Madeline; to cxprefs my indignation and contempt—I hull content myfelf with mcrelv favini, that. were yon even dear to mv heart, I would re- jed offers which could entail iniainy upon me : think, therefore, whether there is a probability of my accepting them, when í tell you, tliat, united to mv horror at vour bafenefs, is an averfion to vou too lirons for any language to d e feri be." и« 7. The
The moft: violent rage took pofleffion of D'Alembert at thofe words ; but the terror which his rage infpired, was trifling to the ihock which Madeline received, when in hiă inflamed countenance ihe traced the dread¬ ful countenance of him beneath whofe poni¬ ard flie had trembled at midnight in the ruined monaftery of Valdore. €i Oh î God (fhe cried, ftarting back), do ï behold the murderer of the Countefs ?" The crimfon of D'Alemberťs cheek faded at thofe words ; his eyes loft their fury, and he trembled, but in a minute almoft he re¬ covered from his confufion. " infolent giri ! (cried he, ftepping fiercely to Made¬ line), of what new crime will you next ac¬ cule mc ? Beware how you provoke me ; do not so too far, left you tempt mc to reta- liate— retaliate in a manner moil dreadful to you—-on your father." " He is beyond your power (exclaimed Madeline, with a wild feream, and clalping her
her hands together) ; he is fafe, he is fe¬ cure." s * As Γ could wifb," cried D'Alembert, ■ith a malicious fmile. An idea of treachery having been prac- tifed upon her father as well as upon herfelf now ftarted in the mind of Madeline, and hex heart almoft died away, " My father is fafe!" fhe repeated, with a quivering lip* and a fal terina: voice. " Yes—beneath this roof." ** Oh, God!" cried Madeline as flie funk upon the floor. D'Alembert raifed her, and ufed every method in his power to revive her i it was &¿H7 minutes, however, ere ihe was able to iland or fpeak Ai length, finking from his arms—" Forgive me (flie ex¬ claimed, as fhe knelt at his feet), Ohi for¬ give me ifl have faid aught to oifend you ; make allowances tor my wounded feeling?, for my diftrefs, my irritation at finding my- μ ς felf
felf deceived where I moil confided, and <.!. op all relent meni ; be noble, and give up every kicntion hoftile to my father's peace and mine; reib ire mc to his arms, and í uf¬ fer us ro depart toiiethei" to iome dikant I кУ fpot, where, m iecuritv and lolitude, we may ink our davs :—do this, and receive from mv fie.· moil folemn aAurar.c·.") of our never fiiflnibinr vour tranc:uilii!v, or uKerinii ¿n cy*-reifion whicli can be unp] call nil to you. 11 D'Alembert raifed and prefled her to his heart -j Ihe trembled--flic relented. ts But I am in the erafp of the lion (laid ihe to heríeií ), and 1 mull try by gentlenefs to dif* engrape myfelf fixáin it." О %0 А u You plead invaili, Matklme (cried he) $ t have run every riík to keure you, and never will give you up. But while í lay this, let me quiet your appreheniions K y a Ι¬ ί uring you, that though kkly iu my power, İ never will make an ungenerous ute of that power bv ikkui any vioknee \ I will not force
vou to return mv iove : but if vou continue much longer to difckun it, 1 lhall not hefk tate to kirrender your father to the fate he merits." 44 Hc is not, he is not in your power (ex- clrimed Madeline) î you have faid fo but for the purpofe of awaking my fears, from a hone cf beins; able to take a bafe advantage of them," " Well, though you doubt my words, I fuppofe you will not doubt the evidence ot your own eyes." Madeline trembled 5 the faint hope which had juft darted into her mind, of his alfer» tion relative to her father being merely for the purpoie of terrifying her, now utterly died away. " I will this inftant, if you pleafe, (faid D'Alembert), condud you to the chambei of your father ¿ but ere I take you to it, I muft prepare you for the fituation in which you will find him." m 4, ;ţ ТЬ«
* s The fituation!" repeated Madeline, ftarting. '* Yes ; í had an idea J fliould be com¬ pelled to bring you to him, in order to con* vince you he was in my power ; and there¬ fore ordered an opiate to be given to him this mornhig, which has thrown him into a ftate of inienfibility, and thus precluded all poffibility of his either hearing or uttering complaints." " The car of the Almighty will be open to his complaints and mine (¡aid Madeline) ; they will reach the throne of Heaven, before which you muft one day anfwer for your crimes." ** Do you chufe to fee him ?" a&ed D'A¬ lembert. Madeline made no reply ; but, breaking from his arm?, fhe moved towards the door; he followed her, and, taking her trembling hand, kû lier in filence to the end of the gal¬ lery, from whence they turned into a long paifage, terminated by another door. D'A¬ lembert
iembert took a key from his pocket, and unlocked it-—" We are now (faid he) in the chamber of your father." The curtains of the bed were clofed ; Madeline fnatched her hand from D'Alem¬ bert, and pulling them back, beheld her iii¬ ther extended on it—thin, ghaftly, to all appearance dead. She fhrieked aloud— ** He is dead í (cried flie), he is dead !—Oh I moniter, you have murdered my father 1" " No, (faid D'Alembert) ; you frighten yourfelf without a caufe ; the ghaftly look of his countenance is occafioned by the opiate." Madeline laid her hand upon his lieart ; fhe feit it faintly flutter; and a feream of joy buril from her lips. " Yet have Ì rea¬ fon to rejoice at his exiflencc (ihe cried', when 1 rcikkt upon his nidation r" 'Tis in your poser {faid D'Aiembert·, t.; change that fituation—to reliure him i¡ li¬ berty, to free him írom danger, ь erkue him protection."
" In my power!" repeated Madeline. " Yes ; accept my offers, and all that the moft duteous, the moil tender fon could do for a father, I will do for your's." " And think you (faid Madeline), my fa¬ ther would thank me for freedom and fecu- rity, if purchafed by diihonour ? no, beiieve me he would not ; I know his foul too well— know that death, in its moft frightful form, would not be half fo dreadful to him as the knowledge of his daughter's infamy :—never then will that daughter deviate from the path he early in life marked out for her to take :—never then, though furrounded by dangers and difficulties,—the dangers, the difficulties of him who is dearer, infinitely dearer to her than exiftence, will ihe act contrary to the principles he implanted in her mind, or forego her hopes of Heaven's protection, by ílriving to attain fafety at the expence of virtue.*' * f Your réfolution is then fixed," faid D'Alembert. " Jt is," replied Madeline in a firm voice. ς " Mine
" Mine is alfo fixed," cried D'Alembert. As he fpoke, he approached her—" You con¬ tinue no longer in this chamber," faid he. Madeline retreated. " You cannot, you- will not furely (ihe cried), be fo inhuman as to force me from it ? Oh ! let me watch by my father !—Oh ! fufľer me to remain with him I entreat, I conjure you !" " in vain," faid D'Alembert ; and he again advanced to feize her. Madeline fcrcamed ; and, tli rowing herfelf upon the bed, flie claiped hcrarms around heriathcr— te Awake, awake (ihe cried), my father, awake, and hear, Oh! hear the agonizing flirieks of your child I" " It will be many hours ere he awakes. (exclaimed D'Alembert, as unlocking the hands of Madeline, he raifed her from the bed) ; and when he docs, it will be in aa apartment very différent from his prefent one, except you relent." She forcibly difengaged herfelf from him,. and funk at his feet—" Have mercy (ih- exclaimed, with dreaming cye¿ and uplifted m ó handa )>
hands), have mercy upon my father and me, and entitle yourfelf to that of Heaven 1 Oh ! let thofe tears, thofe agonies, pitad for us ! let them exprefs the feelings which language cannot utter !" " I have already told you (faid D'Alem¬ bert, with favage fury in his contenance), that my réfolution is fixed ; I now fwear it— fwear to give up your father to the offended Jaws of his country, except you confent to return my love." He caught her in his arms, from which flie vainly tried to difengage herfelf, and bore her flirieking and ftruggling to her chamber, " Now, Madeline (cried he), fpeak~-but ere you fpeak, deliberate ; for on your words depends the fate of your father." " Wretch ! (exclaimed the agonized Ma¬ deline), you already know my determina¬ tion." í 4í Farewcl!
C€ Farewel ! then (faid he), I go for the officers of juftice." " Ohi D'Alembert (cried Madeline, wildly catching his arm as he was about quitting the room), you cannot be fo inhu¬ man ; you cannot furely think of giving up to death a man, who has been bafeiy betrayed into your power—a man, infinitely more unfortunate than guilty !—Again I kneel before you to fupplicate your pity for him. Oh ! could you look into my heart, could you afcertain the dreadful feelings which now pervade it, I am convinced you would be foftened to compaflion." " My compaffion can eafily be obtained (faid D'Alembert)— your love." " Villain! (exclaimed Madeline, rifing from the floor), begone! never more will I add refs you : to God alone will I look, up to him, whofe power can in a moment defeat your purpofes ; he has promifed to proted the innocent ; I will think of that promife, and fupport my fainting heart." if Again
u Again then (faid D'Alembert), I bid you farewell you have yourfelf provoked your father's fate." With feelings which can better be con- ^ ceived than defcribed, Madeline law him quit the chamber. " He is gone then (faid flie, as ihe heard him clofe the. door), he is gone for the minuters of juftice!" The dreadful and approaching fufferings of her father ruflied to her mind ; flie law the tor¬ turing nick—flie beheld his mangled form upon it—ihe heard his deep groans, exprei- iive of excruciating agony, and the loud fliouts of the rabble mocking his pangs, and applauding the hand which inflicted punith- iiient upon the fratricide. She flirieked aloud ; flie flew to the door, but it was faftencd on the outfide : flic called -upon D'Alembert ; flie conjured him to re¬ turn—to return to afftirc her he would have mercy upon lier father; but ihe called in vain. She then attempted to force the ÜÜ01>
door, but her ftrength was unequal to the effort. The agony and difappointment ihe experienced were too much for her ; her brain maddened ; and wild as the waves which deftroy the hopes of the mariners, flie raved about the room, till, utterly exhaufted m by the violence of her emotionr. ine dropped upon the floor, where her flirieks funk h -to groans, which by degrees dixi away in hol¬ low murmurs, and a total infeniibility came over her. In this fituation ihe muit have continued many hours; for w lien flie recovered, flie found the gloom of doling day had already pervaded the chamber. Lier ukas at firft felt confufed ; but by decrees a perfed recol- lcdionofall that had paiied relumed, and clalping her cold and trembling hands toge¬ ther, the called upon her fat lier. As ihe called upon him, Πιο heard a faint: nolle ou t fide the door ; fìi e ftarted, but had not power to rite ; and almoft immediately it
it was opened, and the miférable woman ihe had íèen in the morning entered. " Rife (exclaimed ihe in a whifpering voice), and follow me," «' Whither?" faid Madeline, without obeying her. " To your father ; he waits to conduct you from this déteftable houfe. I releafed him from his chamber, in the door of which D'Alembert left the key when he dragged you from it. But aik me no farther ques¬ tions ; D'Alembert but deferred 201112; for the officers of juilice till it grew dark -, a moment's delay may thereiore bc fatal, and cut off all opportunity of efcaping." " Oh ! let us fly, let us fly then," faid Madeline, ilarting from the ground Softly and fiiently they defcended to the hall, and turned down a long pafiage, termi¬ nated by a flight of ileep itone ftairs ; thefe they alio defcended, and Madeline then found herfelf in a iubterraneous room ; a faint light glimmered írom a recéis at the ext ren fit y
extremity of it, which ftartied her, and íhe caught the arm of her companion. ** Her terror, however, was but of íhort duration -, almoft inilantly the voice of her father reached her ear, and ihe faw him ap¬ proaching with extended arms; ihe fprung forward, and flung herfelf into them. " Oh I my child (he exclaimed, as he clafped her to his heart), in wha%a fituation do I behold you! " My father, my dearefl father (cried Madeline), do not let us complain of our fituation ; Oh ! rather let us exprefs our gra¬ titude to that Being who has alleviated it, by giving us a friend who will extricate us from this abode of terror and 01 ítčídň ;-*» but the moments are precious ; we ihould Jofe no time." " They are precious indeed (laid the old woman) ; that door (pointing to one in the recefs) opens upon a flight of fteps which afcend to the court ; here is the key of it," continued flie, prefenting it to St. Julian. " But
25$" C L ERMONI. cs But how fliall we efcape from the- court ?" demanded Madeline. ** Your father will be able with eafe to unbar the door; and as Madame Fleury always fits at the back of the houfe, there is no danger of your being difcovered." " Oh ! let us be quick," exclaimed Ma¬ deline. St. Julian advanced to the door; but icarcely had he attempted to open it, whea а violent tumult was heard without the court, and immecîiately after the fteps of many people entering it. He paufed·— liftened—and looked at his daughter. Hor· ror almoft froze her blood— u They are come (cried ike), the minifters of death are come/* " I fear fo (iaicl the old woman). Hark ! they have entered the houfe» and are now ranging through the apartments!" w Is there no hope—is there no way of efcaping ?" aiked Madeline diftractedly. " None (replied the old woman mourn· fully) but through the court," "is
i( h there do place of concealment ?" » No." iS Nor any faftening to this door?" ad¬ vancing to the one through which t they had entered r" " None, except a weak bolt that could bc burft in a moment." " Tlien all hope h over (cried Madeline^ turning to her father* Oh 1 God (the con- tinued, looking up to heaven), take me, take me from this fcene of horror ! let me die within the arms of my father !'*— Alinoti fainting, fhe funk upon his breaft. The tumult within and without became every inftant more violent -, and it Vvus evi- dent that one parry lurrounGed tne nome iCľ the purpofe of guarding every paiiage, whilft another fearched throughout it. Madeline fuddenly ftarted from the arms of her iather, and cxtinguilhed the light. " Let us go within the recefs (cried flic) ; if they do
do colare down, they may not perhaps do more than merely look into the room.'* They accordingly crept into it, and placed ihemielves as clofe as they poíľibly could agai nil the wall. They had not been in this fituation above two minutes, when they heard defcending fteps. cc They are coming," cried Made¬ line, with a panting heart, whilft a cold dew buril from every pore. She had fcarcely ipoken, when a light glimmered through the room, and a party of men ruihed into it. *' He is not here, 0 Vociferated one.— u Let us fearch elfewhere then," exclaimed another,-—» - —(Heaven hears our prayers, thought Ma¬ deline).—'* We will firft examine this room (faid a third); thefe iubterraneous chambers arc generally unrounded with places for con¬ cealment ·" The
The heart of Madeline died away at thofc words j and with a faint cry ihe iunk to the earth. c< Have pity upon my chikl (exdaimed the wretched St. Julian, bend.ng over her, whilft the fliouts of the men pierced his ears), and re-echoed through the cham¬ ber) j have pity upon her, and aid me in recovering her ere you tear me from her!" " Tear you from her ! (repeated a voice which made him ftart from his daughter— the tender, the well-remembered voice of de Sevignie)—Oh! never (cried he, darting from amidft his companions, and fnatch- ina; the ftill fenfelefs Madeline from the ground), Oh ! never flialî Madeline be torn from the arms of her father!" Something like a ray of hope gleamed upon the mind of St. Julian—" I am all amazement !" exclaimed he. " You
<fi You are free—you are fafe (faid de Sevignie); 'tis friends, not foes, tte.. you behold ; but 1 can give no explanation till this fuffering angel is revived," His promifed explanation we iliall antici¬ pate in the following Chapter.
*
CHAP,
CHA?, IX.
Endure find conquer : Jove will foon difpofc To future good your paft und prefent woes» Refuine yoiu courage, an i dlfmîfs your care ; Лп h-ur will come, with pleafure to relate Tour furrows pnft ; аз benefits of fate Endure the hardships of your prefent ftate; Live, and referve yourfelves for better fat«. A HE elder D'Alembert was fon to the Marquis of Montmorenci's fifter, and heir to his titles and fortunes if he died without children. He was brought up with a tafte for pleafure and extravagance «-a tafte which, on becoming his own mafter, a circumftance that took place at a very early period in liiè, h,e
lie indulged to the utter derangement of his paternal income. From the diílreíľeä which he was confequently involved in, and which his affumed character of fteadinefs and pro¬ priety prevented his difclofing to his uncle, he extricated himielf by an union with an opulent heirefs, whom the elegance and infi- nnation of his manners captivated, and was thus enabled again to fet forward in the ca¬ reer of diflipation which his embarrafiments had a little interrupted. Lafroy, the fon of his nurfe, his companion from the cradle, and attendant from the time he required an attendant, was the confident of all his pro¬ fligate purfuits, and aflifted him in the ex¬ penditure of iuch fums as materially in¬ jured his income, and again plunged him in diftrefs. To reveal that diftrefs, he was now more unwilling than ever to do, from a conviction, that now more than eyer he fliould be con¬ demned for the diflipation which had in· volved him in it. he therefore fet his wits to
fupplying his emergencies* and concealing it. Knowing as he did, that if the Marquis of Montmorenci was without a fon, he ihouid, as his heir, gain what credit he required, he could not look upon the young Philippe but with eyes of envy and malignancy—as upon a perfon who prevented his being extricated from his difficulties. Philippe, however, was of a delicate conftitution ; and he in¬ dulged a hope, that if he once entered the world without the watchful eye of a parent over him, he might be led into iuch courfes as would eventually deftroy his health, and ter¬ minate his exiftence : it was a hope derived from a felf-experience of the dangerous fitu¬ ation in which a young man of rank and faíhion ilands when unacquainted with the world, and unguarded by any friend. As a means of poifon ing his mind, he had often wiflied to get Lafroy into his fervice j he knew of no perfon better calculated for fow- ing the feeds of vice, and leading the un- vol. iv. n wary
wary into the flowery paths of diflipation. Accordingly, on a continental tour being fettled for Philippe, he offered Lafroy to the Marquis for his fon : having already made that tour himielf, he faid he knew the ne- ceflity there was for a young man being ac¬ companied in it by ibme perfon on whom he could depend ; he therefore recommended Lafroy as iuch a perfon, as one whofe prin* ciples no temptation could warp, and whofe integrity would be a guard for him againft the defigns of the artful. The Marquis, who believed the ofíèr of D* Alembert (as he himfelf indeed declared it) to be fuggefted by the pureft friendihip, accepted it with the moft heartfelt grati¬ tude, and Lafroy was taken into the iuite of his fon. From Italy Lafroy wrote an account of all his operations to D'Alembert; and with the utmoft chagrin, one declared, and the other heard, that the mind of Philippe was too
too well fortified by virtue and reflection to be led aftray. Notwithilanding the ill fuccefs of his plan, and the inconveniences he was often fubječted to from the lofs of Lafroy, D'A¬ iembert would not recall him, ftill truftmg that time and perfeverance would fap the foundation which had hitherto refilled all the attacks that were made upon it. So filent, fo imperceptible were thofe at¬ tacks, that Philippe never was alarmed by them ; they were like the Hing of the afp, That belt of thieves, who wiih an eafy key Doit open life, and «npeiceiv'd by us, iEv'n ileal us from ourl'elves, discharging fo Death's dreadful office better than himfelf f Touching our limbs fo gently imo (lumber, That Death ftands by, deceiv'd by his own ¡mage 5 And thinks himfelf but fleep. Lord Philippe returned to France with¬ out the fmalleft alteration in his principles ; n z and
and the hopes or D'Alembert died away— hopes, however, which revived on Philippe's declaring his réfolution of going back to Italy, when he had been but a few months returned from it. Something more than a mere inclination to travel he w r as convinced attracted him fo immediately from home ; and he gave the neceíľary inftruČtions to Lafroy to watch him narrowly* Lafroy fufpečted an attachment between him and Lady Elcnora Dünlere ; and his fufpicions were confirmed by Lord Phi¬ lippe's paffing that time at the caftle of her father, which, on quitting his own home, he had declared he would fpend in Italy. To know the nature of the attachment, what kind of connection it had formed, or was likely to form, between them, he laid him· felf out to gain the confidence of Blanche, with whole perfect knowledge of all that pafled in the family he was acquainted. Ignorant, innocent, the very child of fimpli- city, Blanche was not long proof to his arti¬ fices—
4
fices — artifices which were aided by every blandifhment that had power to touch a fuk ceptible heart, and her virtue and promifed fecrecy to her ladies were foon facrificed to him» From being taken into the family of the Earl when quite a child, and brought up in a great degree with his daughters, Blanche was treated more as an humble friend than fervant, and entrufted with the moil impor¬ tant fecrets* Her protecVr;; uoubted not the principles which they had implanted, nor the fincerity of the attachment which their tendernefs deferved, and flie profefíêd. With the marriage of both her ladies, with the relationfhip between their hufbands, and the concealment of Lord Philippe's marriage from hiß brother, flie was acquainted, and all thofe particulars ihe communicated to Lafroy, who tranfmitted them to his em¬ ployer. Scarcely were they known to D'Alembert ere they fuggefted a moil horrid and compli¬ cated fcheme of bafenefs and cruelty to him j n 3 a fcheme
a fcheme of which there appeared every pre- b^bility of fuccefs. That Laufare, the in¬ jured" fon of the Marquis, could eafily be worked up to the deftruction of a brother, who deprived him of his right, he could not doubt 3 and if Philippe fell, it would furei) ·, he thought, be an eafy mitter to get rid of Laufane. On Lafroy's return to the Caftle of Montmorenci, he finally adjufted and ar¬ ranged his plans. The manner in which they were executed and accomplifhed is al¬ ready known. Jofephe, at whofe cottage Laufane lodged, was, as has been already mentioned, the brother of Lafroy, and Claude was a companion and particular friend, whom D'Alembert, on parting with him, took at his recommendation to fupply his place. D'Alembert charged Lafroy to fecure Blanche, left any after-repentance fliould tempt her to betray them : he accordingly inveigled her from the caftle, by reprefenting the delights íhe would experience if ihe went to Paris -, and immediately after the fatal
ikta! rencounter between the brothers, he put her into the hands of Claude* who conveyed her thither to the houfe of Madame Fleury. D'Alembert alfo charged him to deftroy the fon of Philippe, whofe exiftence interfered as much with his profpeČts, as that of the fa¬ ther's had done. Lafroy promifed obe¬ dience to all his commands ; but the lait was one he never meant to fulfil. He was fo great a villain himfelf, he could place no confidence in others ; and therefore believed, that if he had no tie upon D'Alembert, he never fhould receive the rewards he had been promifed, and thought his fervices entitled to. He therefore determined to preferve the infant ; nor was he ftimulated to his prefervation by a mere diftruft of D'Alem¬ bert ; another motive equally powerful in¬ fluenced him, namely the aggrandizement of his own family through his means. Proud, ambitious, and difdainful of his dependant fituation, he refolved on bringing up the fon of Lord Philippe as his own nephew, the N 4 child
child of his brother Jofephe ; and at a pro« per age, infilling on an union taking place between him and the daughter of D'Alem¬ bert j " when fuppofed to be allied to the proud Houfe of Montmorenci (faid he), 1 ihall no longe* be permitted to be a depend¬ ant in it j the family will then enrich, will then ennoble me and mine.*' As foon as he had fecurely lodged the child in the hands of Jofephe, who, imme¬ diately after the departure of Laufane from his cottage, repaired to the Alps for the pur¬ pofe of receiving it, and eafily prevailed on his wife to acknowledge it as her's ·, he dif¬ clofed his fcheme to D'Alembert, folemnly declaring at the moment he did fo, that if he did not acquiefce in it, he would betray him to the Marquis. This threat—a threat which, from the difpofition of Lafroy, D'A· Iembert doubted not his putting into exe¬ cution if incenfed, conquered all oppofi- hn to it j and he agreed, at a propeF age, to
to give his daughter to the iuppofed fon of Jofephe. But he was flill more in the power of La* froy than he imagined : Lafroy and Claude had watched the meeting between the bro¬ thers ; and on Laufane's flying from the bleeding body of Philippe, they haftened to it. As they bent over it with a kind of la¬ vage triumph at the iuccefs of the execrable fcheme they had been concerned in, they fuddenly beheld it tremble; Lafroy was ftartied, and laid his hand upon the breaft \ he felt the he¡ut faintly flutter : " Laufane (he exclaimed ) r has but ill-performed the work we gave him ľ* " ГИ try if I cannot do> it better/* faid Claude, and he fnatched up the dagger, with which Laufane had flabbed Lord Philippe, and which lay befide him. " Hold ! (cried Lafroy^ catching his arm as he raifed it for the purpoie of ftriking Lord Philippe to the heart), a thought ftrikes me—we had better endeavour to pre- n 5 ferve
ferve than deftroy his exiftence ;—the life of his fon is precarious ; if our ichemes relative to him are accomplilhed, we can eafily de¬ ftroy the father ; if they are difappointed, our declaring his exiftence will ar all timet compel D'Alembert to comply with our de¬ mands, be thev ever ίο extravaeant." " True (cried Claude) ; but how will you conceal him, or manage about his wounds ?" *' There is an extenfive cave (replied La- froy), contiguous to the vaults (if the caftle, known but to Jew, and which Blanche ihewed to me ; the former inhabitants of the caille tiled it as a place for depoliting trea¬ fure in, and accordingly fortified it with iron doors. Thither, with vour affiftancc, I can now convey him ; and, as I have а know¬ ledge of kirgery, 1 fliall dreis his wound, and from the caflle bringr whatever I deem necef- iàry ior him :—for the purpofe of attendino him, I lhall continue here till Jofephe has lelt i\ie child with his wife ; hc íhall then return to fupply my place; and as his л aífmit v
affinity к me is not known, his appearance can excite no fufpicion." <c But inhabited as the caftle is (laid Claude), you cannot, without danger of de¬ tection, fecrete him Ions within the cave." 44 No (replied Lafroy), I cannot ; as loon, therefore, as he regains fufficient ftrength to enable him to bear the fatigue of the jour¬ ney, I fliall return iiither, and with your affiftance and joiephe's convey him elfe¬ where." This cruel fcheme, which doomed the un¬ fortunate Philippe to worie than death, to lingering miiery, was put into practice with¬ out f irther hefitation ; and Claude was then difpatched for Blanche, who waited impa¬ tiently to commeace lier journey with him to Paris, No fooner was D'Alembert informed of tlie death of Philippe, than lie devifed a ichenie for the deftrudion of Laufane. This, ¡t may be fuppofed, he meant eafily to effekt M õ bv
by accufing him of murder, and confequcntly drawing ut)on him the vengeance of an en- ragred and afflicted father. But this was not by any means his intention ;—an open accu¬ fation would, he knew, occafion a public trial, at which there could be no doubt but Laufàne would declare the artifices winch had miiigated him to the deftruction of his brother—a declaration that might, that. wfiiki i ne red, in all probability, D'Alem¬ bert feared, rake fufpicions againft himielf. To prevent, therefore, all danger of fuch fufpicions, he determined to have him pri¬ vatfly deftroyed ; for which purpole, he meant to dhpatch fome of his well-tried í mifíãries· *o the habitation of Lord Dün¬ lere, habited as officers of juftice, to de¬ mand Laufane as a murderer ; whom, on getting into their hands, they were to convey to a proper place for fuch a deed of horror, and put to death, but in iuch a manner, that his death Ihoukl fecm the effect of iome fud¬ den diforder. To aid in this diabolical plan, he himfelf travelled in difguiie to the Alps,
Alps, with ìli» emiliane? ; ι·ο.ΰ he uns the perion who alarmed the g-> r -d monk :o nmch by declaring his internila of fearchmc; every where for Laufane. The йоту invented in confeoucncc of that declaration, comi>ietelv fruii -ated his def. »η? , лш! he returned not \ little delighted Ui hv hom., at tlie i-iea oí Death's havira pi-ovt-d iuch a friend ť> hım, bv fiveinji him burli from the troubl·: and danfer tf DiitíinĽ La ufa- ;c ol t oí tí:, way liiniicif. λ Vit h him .lied awav ail ai>pre ■ he-mjon of th'íejnon, anda.i fear.: oi wiíap- poinrmer.r Γι 'ative l·- íhe eftares cf Mont- nı*i5'.-*r:ci ; and lusdiflipinion, iri uK^aiucuu' ji the terlaini v of hi? e.xpc"tat:oi:S bein:, realized, w;ií ımboıır.üeu. Lafrov ílill remriined in the fervice of tlie Marouir, who teli itroiviiv attached to him horn an idea or hb havine, been a faithful and atiedionate iL vant to hb fon. That unfortu¬ nate ion recovered from his wound ; and, as mon as he was able to bear a removal, was con¬ veyed in the dcv.d ufilu* night by Jofephe, JL л i » * i \^гУ > м
Lafroy, and their partner in in'quky, Claude, to a lonely cottage at iome diftance from the caftle, and well calculated, troni its frkht- r^} fui iblitude, for tlie purpole for whu.h it was taken» Here, under the care of Jok-phe, he remai nevi t iii after tl·.^ death of Lord Dunkre; lu- wis then rc-cenveweel to the caftle, vvhkh Lafroy hae! art enouüh to pre· л уЛ\ j í ι \. .S * ti * . * fc t ^ j dh lhi /м ^ ^ f^i,™ ΐιί^ ; ·;Η' k íkíuUi ''»(-r îi 'Í4.4 л k» iui e habi¬ tation. İn 1'v.aliiv, he knew n * [>lace ío well calculated iui conceding the unfiaj py Phi¬ lippe, no place in which hc could io eaíily make awiivw.th hirn, when he fliould find his exidenee ;,o Ь;.£ег neceíľarv. As it was Hft jjtíiiilik- lu keep Jo.ephc longer from his heme withoui v xeïting luipicieiis and enqui¬ ries he uiiL.iuheei \.\rn to к, and placed in ι ht- caille a ihlef oï the irk a. αϊ her huiband, whofe thlpofitions too much refembled )ık own iu muke him leax any thing from t*»/ * ■ ΐ i. Ever/
Every thing now went fmoothly on with D'Alembert : his wife, whom he had never loved, died ihortiy after the fuppofed death of the t ao brothers, ancl every one confi¬ dcred, and treated him with additional re¬ fpcct in confequence of that confidération, as ihe heir of Montmorenci. Theunhappy Mar¬ quis, tortured with remorfe, and anxious to expiate his crimes by atoning to thofe lie had irmired, made the moftdilkent cnouirie.* alter his eleiéit ion—enquiries in which D'Alem¬ bert, with ihe warmeft zeal appeared tojóin, but which in reality he baffled, wiihinsr, for obvious realons, to conceal from the Marquis every thing relative to him. The only drawback he had upon his happineis, was the idea of the degradation he fliould lufter by the union of his daughter with the fuppofed fon of Jofephe, a peafant upon the Montmo¬ renci eftate. But as he knew this was a meafure which couid n^ ¿ be avoided without the expofure of his iniquities, he tried to re¬ concile himfelf to it by a hope, that his rank and fortune would iti tie at leaft the open cenfures
cenfures of the world. The confequence which he knew he fhould lofe by his daugh¬ ter's conned.ion, he determined to try and re-acquire by the marriage of his fon ·, and for this purpofe, looked out amongft the moil Hluftrious ior a partner for him. His choice foon devolved upon the young and lovely hei refs of the Count de Merville, who was ι hen juft prefent ed at the French Court by ht.· r mother, aud \v:ii- s the moil admired ob» jed at it. Her heart was not gained with¬ out difficulty ; but when gained, her hand foon followed it. The prize attained, the tendcrnefles and attentions by which İt was won, were foon difcontinued ; and the malk of gentleneis and fenfibility caft afide, difco- vered to the unhappy mother and daughter features of the utmoft deformity and horror. To reform, inftead of reproach, was however the ardent wifli of both—a wilh which they were foon convinced was not to be accora» phfhed ; and with unutterable anguifh, the Coiinteis beheld her amiable and beloved child united to a hardened libertine. To try
try and alleviate her bitter deftiny, ibe re¬ mained with liera confidérable time after her marriage, till driven from her refidence by the infulting treatment of D'Alembert, whofe expences far exceeding both the for¬ tune of his wife, and the income allowed by his father, made him demand fupphes from her, which ihe refufing, provoked him to language and conduci not more wounding to her as a woman to receive, than degrading to him as a man to ufe. She refufed thofe fupplies, not only becaufe (he thought it a fin to furnifh vice with the means of gratifying itfelf, but becaufe flie wifhed to referve fomething like an independence for her daughter, in cafe fhe was ever plunged into pecuniary diftreffes (of which ibe beheld every probability) by the thoughtlefs and unbounded extravagance of her huiband. During her own life this independence could only be acquired, for at her death her fortune, which, in right of her father ihe enjoyed, was entailed upon her daughter ;
and would, fhe was convinced, on devolving to her, be fwept, like all her other pofleffions ? into the vortex of diffipation. To avoid the infults of D'Alembert, and to diminifh her expences, flie was haftenmg to her chateau at the time fhe met with the accident which'introduced her to the cot¬ tage of Clermont. No fooncr was fhe ac¬ quainted with his fituation» than fhe formed the réfolution of taking his daughter under her protection, and dividing with her what¬ ever fhe could fave, and meant to have ap¬ propriated foicly to Madame D'Alembert^ Uiv« Her departure from the habitation of D'Alembert did not exempt her from his folicitations, or reproaches on finding thofe felicitations ftill unfuccefsful. A letter from him, couched in a more infult ing itile than any fhe had before received from him, was the occafion of tne illnefs and dejedion which fhocked and alarmed Madeline fo much
much on her return from Madame Chatte- neufs —an illnefs and dejection, for which the Countefs would never aflign the real caufe. To conceal domeftic troubles— troubles which could not be remedied, flie always conceived to be the wifeft plan 5 rightly confidering, that the world always took a divided part j and, though convinced one fide was culpable, never exempted the other entirely from blame. Enraged, difappointed, and diftreffed by her continued refufaìs, D'Alembert formed the horrible réfolution of aflaflfmating her—- a réfolution which he fcrupled not to avow to his father, who had ever been his abettor in all his villainous fchemes and profligate purfuits. His father did more than fanction it by filence -, he commended it as a proof of real fpirit, which would not quietly tub- mit to ill-treatment ; and recommended Claude, who ftill continued in his iervice, as a proper perfon for affifting in fuch a fcheme : of this young D' Alembert was already con¬ vinced,
vinced, having before tried his abilities în one fcarcely lefs iniquitous than the prefent, Difguifed, they both travelled to the cha¬ teau, and in the ruined monaftery aded the dreadful fcene which has been already de« fcribed. Not withíland ing her injuries,, the juft refentment fhe muft have felt for them, the Countefs determined never to reveal their author ; the confequence of doing fo would, flie was convinced, be either death or diftradion to her daughter. She died, imploring heaven to forgive him as fhe had done, and for ever coaceal from his wife her having fallen by the hand of her hufband. Her folemn injundion to Madeline upon her death bed, not to continue in the houfe if he came to it, was occafioned by her per· fed knowledge of his libertine difpofition. Beauty like heťs could not fail, fhe was fure, of exciting his regards : fhe was equally fure that he would not hefitate going* any length to gratify his paflions. She therefore, though without informing Madeline of the danger flie
fhe dreaded on her account, earncftly con¬ jured her to avoid it. Of his bafenefs and profligacy ihe had had a fatal proof during ber refidence beneath his roof. Soon after his marriage, ere they were thoroughly acquainted with his difpofition, íhe and Madame D'Alembert took under their protedion a young and lovely girl, the orphan ofa noble but reduced family, with whom they had been well acquainted. They took her with an intention of amply provid¬ ing for her, and ftill keeping her amongft the circles ihe had been accuftomed to. Long flie had not been under their care, ere her charms attraded the admiration of D'Alembert ; and, in defiance of the laws of hoípítality, honour, and humanity, he in- fulted her with the bafeft propofals, and threatened revenge when he found them treated with the contempt they merited. Tendernefs for her patmnefíes made her long conceal his conduct : at length flie grew alarmed, and revealed it. In confequence o t
of this difclofurc, they determined to fend her to a convent in Dauphine, ancl lodge her there till they could hear of a refpedabie family who would receive her as a boarder, and under whofe protedion flie could with fafety and propriety again enjoy fome of the pleafures of life. Under the care of proper attendants flie commenced her journey; but how great was the horror, the confter¬ nation of the Countefs and Madame D'A¬ lembert, when thofe attendants returned to to inform them, that from the inn where they had flopped for the night, fhe had eloped. The idea of her having eloped was not for an inftant conceived either by the Coun¬ tefs or Madame D'Alembert; they knew the innocence of the unhappy girl—they knew her total ignorance of all with whom they were not acquainted, and fufpicion im¬ mediately glanced at D'Alembert : they he¬ fitated not to inform him of that fufpicion ; they did more—they declared their pofitive convidion
conviction of his having had her carried off by means of fome of his agents : he denied the juftice of the charge—he refented it ; and, in reply to their threats (for fupplications they foon found were unavailing), faid he was ready to deny before any tribunal they might cite him to, the crime they accuted him of. His declarations of innocence gained no credit with them ; they were convinced of his guiit, but could not prove it ; and the unfortunate Adelaide, who had no friends out of their family interefted about her, was never after heard of by them, not« withilanding their diligent and unceafingr enquiries, and promifes of liberally rewarding any one who could give the fmalleft intelli¬ gence concerning her. As fearful as her mother of having Made¬ line feen by her hufband, yet unwilling to relinquiíh her fociety, Madame D'Alembert determined, inftead of fending her from it, to fecrete her in the chateau when Monfieur D'Alembert fo unexpectedly announced his
his intention of coming to it, for the pur¬ pofe, as Agatha fufpečted, of feeing what part of the eftate would be the beft to dif¬ pofé ofi Amongft the domeitics who at¬ tended Madame D* Alembert to the chateau, was a young female, whofe principles her mafter had entirely perverted. His impro¬ per influence over her was, however, care¬ fully concealed from her miftrefs, over whom he placed her as a kind of fpy, an office fhe too faithfully executed. She overheard the converiation between Madame D'Alembert and Madeline, and communicated it to D* Alembert almoft immediately after his arrival at the chateau. Eager to behold beauty fo extolled, he refted not till he had gained accefs to the chamber in which Ma¬ deline was concealed, and which he effeded by means ofa fliding-door in the clofet, with ivhich fhe was unacquainted. The moment he behekî her, he was cap¬ tivated by her, and determined to leave no means untried of fecuring charms which he had
had never feen equalled. For the purpoie of concerting a pian for the accomplifliment of his wifhes, he appointed an interview in the ruined monaftery with his female confi¬ dant. The ftiock which Madeline received in confequence of that interview, is already known. As ihe lay fenfelefs at his feet, in¬ ftead of being moved to pity by her fitua¬ tion, he conceived the horrid idea of availing himfelf of it ; and determined to fend to the chateau for fome of his emiflaries to cany her off", when the unexpected approach of his wife and Lubin fruftrated this intention. Not knowing who were approaching, he and his companion fled at the firft found of their fteps, and thus loft the converfation which took place between Madeline and her friend. He returned the next morning to the mo¬ naftery, and explored every part of it for her; the chateau next underwent a fearch. When convinced the was gone, his rage knew no bounds ; he openly accufed his wife of per- VOL. iv. о fid у,
fidy, of mcannefs ; infilled flie had infringed her duty in having had any concealment from him ; and peremptorily commanded her to tell him (if flie hoped for his forgive* nefs), whither flie had fent her lovely charge ; this ihe as peremptorily refuted doing. Words, in confequence of that refufai, grew high between them ; and the party which had ac¬ companied him to the chateau, were dif· miffed abruptly from it by him. As a jufti- ficationof his condud, and an excufe for it, he aflured them that his wife's temper would not permit him to have them with pleafure to themfelves any longer under his roof. When freed from their obfervation, and the little reftraint which they had impofed upon him, he treated the unhappy Madame D'Alembert with the utmoft brutality. To avoid his inhumanity, flie never ftirred from her chamber, except compelled to do fo by his commands; and now endeavoured to b:guile her wretched nefs by beginning her poaiifed narrative to Madeline—a narrative, however.
however, which fhe doubted ever having the power of fending to her, as D'Alembert fo- lemnlv fwore fhe never fliould be permitted to leave the chateau, or hold converfe of any kind with any perfon out of it, till flie had communicated to him all he defired to know concerning her lovely friend. His temper, it may be fuppofed, was not improved when his father arrived at the cha¬ teau to inform him of the exiftence of Cler¬ mont, and his being acknowledged as the fon and rightful heir of the Marquis of M ntmorenci. This was a blow not more unexpeded. than dreadful—a blow which / completely demolifhed all his hopes of inde¬ pendence, ail his hopes of being extricated from his difficulties. He raved, and impre¬ cated cu r fes upon the memory of thofe who had deceived his father relative to Clermont. His rage and regret at not having fecured Madeline, were augmented when he under- flood that flie was the daughter of Cler¬ mont ; and refleded, that had ihe been o z carried
carried off by him, the difcovcry relative to her father would never, in all probability, have taken place. €i How unfortunate (exclaimed old D'A¬ lembert, in reply to what he had faid con¬ cerning her), how unfortunate that you are not at liberty to offer your hand, and thus gra¬ tify your love and your ambition. Were you free, I am convinced I could foon effect a marriage between you and St. Julian's daughter.'** His fon ftarted ; a fluiti of lavage hy overfpread his countenance—" I can eafily regain my liberty (faicl he) ; ] have long fighed for it ; a noble foul will ever try to break chains which are oppreflive. My wife is but a mortal ; the hand which gave a quietus to the mother, can eafily give the fame to the daughter. We can manage the affili r between us fo fecretly, that no foul fliall know of it, no eye behold it." H i s
His father fighed heavily, and fliook his head, Remorfe had lately begun to vifit his breaft; and he trembled to think there was pn eye over all their actions— n n eye which could not be deceived. u I like not the fliedding of blood," faid he. * c You were not alwavs averie to it," cried his Ion with a malignant fncer. ťí True, becaufe my defigns could be by no other means accomplifhed ; where mercy can be (hewn, 1 wilh to bc merciful ; vou can set rid of vour wife without deilroyini; her : the report of her death will as effectu¬ ally ferve your purpofes as if {lie had really died ; and in the caftle on the Alps flic can be too fecurely lodged ever to have an op¬ portunity of proving the fallacy of that report." D'Alembert detefted his wife ; and could not, without the utmoft reluctance, think of fparing her life ; when his father at length prevailed upon him to promife to do ib. They foon concerted their fchemes relative о 3 to
to her. It was determined that he ihoukl apologize to her for his unkindnefs ; and, as an atonement for it, infill upon her accom¬ panying him to Bareges, in order to try and recover her health, which to herfelf alone he fliould acknowledge his fearsof having injured. Their plans arranged, they immediately Iepa¬ rated. Old D'Alembert was in halte to re¬ turn to his houfe from whence he had pri¬ vately departed for the purpofe of confulting his fon on the fudden change in their pro- fpečts , Claude alone к new or his departure, and was ordered to detain the Marquis's meifenger, and invent a plaufible excufe for the letter he brought not being anfwered directly. The purport of the letter which D'Alem¬ bert wrote in reply to it has been already mentioned. After writing ii, he had a pri¬ vate interview with Lafroy, to whom he im¬ parted the new leene of cruety and bafenefs he and his fon were about acting; and gave fuch inftrudions as he deemed neceíľary. Thefe
Thefe ínftručtions were merely to do every thing which could gain the favour and confi¬ dence of St. Julian, and render him unfuf- picious of the defigns upon his daughter. To forward which defigns, it was determined that all the horrors of fuperftition fhould be awakened in his breaft ; when once infected, once enervated by them, he might eafil) r , D'Alembert believed, be made the dupe of art and villany. For the purpofe of excit¬ ing thofe horrors, Lafroy fecreted himfelf in the chamber of Lord Philippe, to which he gained accefs by a way not known to many of the family, and forgotten by thofe who did know it, from its being long difufcd. Immediately behind the bedftead was a fmali door which opened into a dark clofet, com- municati ng with a flight of back ftairs ; thofc ftairs, and this clofet, previous to his refi- derce at the caftle, had been fliut up, and chance firft difcovered them to him. A valuable ring of his Lord's was miilaid one day, and, in fearchingfor it, lie puflied afick the bedftead, and perceived the door ; curi- o 4 ofi t y
ofity made him eagerly unbar it, and explore the places beyond it. Of thofe long de- ibted places hc determined to avail himfelf when the plan of alarming St. Julian was ti rd íuggeíted, and his was the hand which, extended through the tapeitry, had fo greatly fhocked and terrified Madeline. The rage of D'Alembert at lier obftimtte refulai ot his Ion, was even greater than he exprefled ; he foon found that folicitatioiis were vain, and that ftratairem alone could effect hi 5 purpofes. The knu agem he cailed in to his aid is alreadv known ; but whilft ex- uiting at the idea of the iuccefs with which there was every appearance of its being crowned, he was fuddenly ¡/kinged into de¬ fpair by the intelligence of his daughter-in- law's exiftence beina; difcovered to Made- line and her father—a defpair, however, from which the ready genius of Lafroy foon relieved him. The letter which Madeline received rela¬ tive to her friend, was written and delivered by
by Claude. A fit of ülnek, which endan¬ gered his life, effected a thorough reforma¬ tion in his principles ; and he rofe from the bed of ficknefs refolved to make every atone¬ ment in his power for his former enormities. To openly declare the exiftence of Madame D'Alembert and the unfortunate Philippe, would be ? he was convinced, to occafion their immediate deftručlion ; for ib well was he acquainted with the hardened wiekedriefs of D'Alembert, his fon, and Lafroy, that he doubted not their declaring fuch an afltrtion the aflerrion of a madman, and inftantlv .ľ difoatchiiip· fome of the well-tried and dia- i О boiical agent?, by which they were fur- rounded, to deftroy Philippe and Viola ere any perfon from the Marquis could be de¬ puted to fearch for them. He knew the neceffity therefore there was for going fecretly to work, and, having once gained acceis to the caille, to warn Madeline of her danger, dete: mined to fet out alone for the Alps. He learned from a domcflic of D'Alem- beiťs who was fent home, that Madeline 0 ; confined
confined herfelf to her chamber ; and, ac¬ quainted as hc was with every avenue in the caftle, he found it no difficult matter to ileal to her unperceived by any of the family. His letter, which St. Julian, in the full convidion of his fidelity, imparted to La¬ froy, was immediately ihewn by him to D'Alembert. Fer leaving him fò abruptly, Lafroy apologized to St. Julian by faying he wiihed to be alone in his chamber, in or¬ der to confider what was to be done. D'Alembert, on reading the letter, ftruck his forehead in a frenzy, ami exclaimed that all was loft. Lafroy, however, foon convinced him to the contrary. The converfation which pafled between him and Madeline, and which has already been related, fuifi- ciently explains his plot. St. Julian, inftead of meeting a friendly guide at the extremity of the foreit, as he 2 had
had been taught to expect, was met by two ruffians, who rudely feized him, and forced him into a chaife, in which he was conveyed to Madame Fieury's, where too late he dif¬ covered, that by the perfon in whom he had moil confided, he had been moil deceived, Jofephe, Lafroy's brother, was the perfon who accompanied Madeline to Paris, under the aflumed name of Oliver. An exprefs from the Caftle of Montmorenci informed young D'Alembert of all the transactions at it, and of St. Julian and his daughter being configned to the care of Madame Fleury till he had determined their fate. He imme¬ diately conceived the idea of pafling himfelf as the nephew of Madame Fleury, and un¬ der that aflumed character, offering his hand to Madeline, falfely imagining her friendlefs fituarion would make her readily embrace any offer which gave her a promife of pro¬ tedion. When tired of her, which he doubted not being foon the cafe, he refolved on deftroy ing her, as a fure method of pre- 0 ó ventina'
venting another diiappointment relative to the fortune of Montmorenci : her father's death he would not have delayed an hour, but that he was withheld from it, by confi¬ denng, if artifice failed with Madeline, fears for her father might accomplifli his defigns. In the houfe of Madame Fleury, he knew any fcene of iniquity might be acted with impunity. She was a woman of the moil iniamous defcription, and avowedly kept a houfe for the encouragement of vice. Be¬ neath her roof the innocent and lovely Ade¬ laide loft her life ; bribed to the borri·'' deed by D'Alembert, the owner of the inn at which flic flept put her into his power, and, on finding no other way of efcaping his violence, ihe flabbed herfelf to the heart with a knife which flie concealed about her ; her body was thrown into a vault beneath the houfe; and it was the traces of her blood which had fo much alarmed Madeline. Blanche, the once faithful fervant of her mother's, was the unhappy penitent ihe dif¬ covered before the crucifix : the feeds cf virtue
virtue which had been early implanted in her mind, the artifices of Lafroy had not- been able entirely to deftroy ; and ere flie was many months with Machine Fieury, Blanche bitterly regretted her mifconduel, and wifhed to leave her. This was a will), however, which Madame Fleury was pe¬ remptorily commanded by D'Alembert not to gratify, left her releafement fliould occa¬ fion the difcovery of his crimes. The refembiance which Madeline bore to Lady Geraldine immediately ftruck her ; the effect it had upon her has been already defcribed. On Madeline's quitting her, (he followed her to the head of the gallery, and heard the fcene which pafled between her and D'Alembert. Whilft he was purfuing Madeline, ihe ftepped into his chamber, and read his letters, which clearly explained the real name of Madeline, and the fitua¬ tion of her and her father—a fituation which, on difcovering who they really were v Blanche was determined to run every rifk to refcue them
them from. She was acquainted with all the paflages in the houfc, and knew flic never 'was fui peded of leaving her chamber ; ihe therefore flattered herfelf flic could ealily cfied their delivery. As foon as it grew dark, flic unlocked the door of St. Julian's prifon, who had by that time entirely reco¬ vered from the effeds of the opiate, and briefly informed him of her wifhes and in¬ tent ion to ferve him. He heard her with grateful tranfport; and was concluded by her to the vault communicating with the court, from whence flic attended to bring his daughter to him. During this tnmfadton D'Alembert was feated quietly wilh Madame Fleury, exult¬ ing at the probability there was of his fchemes being now iuccefsful in confequence of the. terror into which he had thrown Ma¬ deline, whom lie meant lhortly to vifit, and inform that the officers of juftice were coin- in» to the houfe to feize lier father. But ï?rcat as was his exultation, it was trifling compared
compared to that which his father expe¬ rienced, who, on the removal of St. Julian and Madeline from the Caftle of Montmo¬ renci, had not alear remaining of any future difappointment* Till Madeline was fecured, he deemed it unfafe to fay any thing about her father to the Marquis ;. he therefore made him believe, till flie had departed, that his unfortunate fon. oppreiied with the Vk deepeft melancholy, wandered about the foreft to indulge it the whole day, and only returned at night to take fome trifling re¬ freihment, and go to bed. As foon as Madeline was configned to the care of Jofephe, a letter was preferiteci to die Marquis, which exadly imitated the writing of his fon, and was figned with his name. This letter contained a full confef¬ lion of tiie murder of his brother, and went on as follows :—" It was a murder to which I was ftimulated by revenge at the uíurpa- * tion of my rights, and a hope, that if he was once out of the way, you would not be averie
averfe to doing me juftice. That hope has been realized, but without yielding me hap¬ pinefs. Since my arrival at the caftle, re- morfe has been awakened by means not more awful than myfterious, in my breaft ; and, in conlequence of that remorie, I have determined to reikn all claim to tlie for- tunes of Montmorenci, and fecludc myfelf for ever from the world, Nor flial! my dauph- ter enjoy them; they would entail mifery inftead of happinefs upon her; a convent is her doom; to her God I fhall devote her; the offering I truit will bc acceptable, and caufe him to look witli an eye of compaf¬ fion and forgi venefs upon my miieries and crimes." The feelings of the Marquis on perufing this letter were too dreadful to be defcribed ; he accuted himfelf as the caufe of death to one fon, and guilt to the other ; and all idea of vengeance for the murder of Philippe was loit in the refledion of his having occa¬ fioned that murder himfelf. Hb life, in all
all probability, would have been terminated in a few days by the anguiih he fuffered, had not that Being, who accepts our penitence as an atonement for our errors, unexpect¬ edly relieved him from the horrors of d el pair. D 1 Alembert difpatched two emiflaries after Claude fkr the purpofe of deilroxing him. Fatigued by hk exertions, he had ftepped afide to reft himielf in a little grotefque hol¬ low at fonie d.ftance'from the road they took, and thus efc aped falling into their mercilefs hands, From his concealment he had a perfect view of them, and the moment he beheld them, he corjvčtured their hor¬ rible defigns. All hope of fuccouring Ma¬ dame D'Alembeit now died away ; a¡l hope of efcaping the vengeance of her hufband and his father ; for whether he ab vaneed or retreated, he was confident equal danger awaited him. Ovens helmed wi'h kar and anguifii, h:. flung himiell:defpainngly on the ground, determined rather to die there, than by
by ftîrring írom the fpot, expofe himielf ta íhe hand of an aflaifin. in this fituation he heard a party of travellers approaching; he was in that delperate flate which tempts a man to achenture every thing. Pie ac¬ cordingly ftarted up, and relolved on ap* plying to them for protection for himfelf, and affiftancc for Madame D'Alembert. The inftant they drew near, he threw himfelf before them, and in a fupplicating voice, be« fought them to flop and liften to a ftory cal¬ culated to awaken all the feeitne;s of com- paflion, and to intereft every generous heart. His words and manner claimed immediate attention, and he began his ftrange narra¬ tive. Scarcely had lie concluded it, when a fudden exclamation of mingled grief and in¬ dignai ion burft from fome of the party, whicli convinced him he had applied to the friends of Machune D'Alembert in her be- hah. To her moil tender, moil affectionate friends he had indeed applied—to Madame Chatteneu. anei her daughter, who were re¬ turning from Italy to France, accompanied
bv an Italian Nobleman, 'to whom a few davs before the commencement of her jour- ney. Olivia had given her hand), his friend, and a numerous retinue of fervants. To the dreary caille they immediately bent their courfe, and ref cued the unhappy VioU írom vvorte than death—from lingering miiery I Her fafety enfurecí, Claude mentioned the imprifonment of Philippe. His reafon for not declaring it to Madeline was owing to h.s doubts of the exiftence of the unhappy captive at the time he iet out for the Alps, having heard a few days before that he was in fo weak a Rate, his life was defpaired of: he therefore feared railing expectations in the breaft of .Madeline which might be dif- appointech being well convinced, that if îmıiippc died ere he reached the caille, the aifortion of his h.-ning liv^d to that period, would be co· f i dered as ι lie mere fabrication of his br iin. To the O loomy tOvver in which he was cornin;*!, he led the way, and found lum, as lie had been taught to exped, on the
the very brink oí the grave·—that grave to which he had long wiflied himielf conligned ; for, torn as he was from all that could ren- cler life definable, life was a burthen which he ardently wiflied to rcfiga ! But with the change in his profpeds, an immediate change took place in his lentiments, and the foot hing attentions of compaffion·—-atten¬ tions to which h' had been long a ftrangcr ; the ¡oy of unexposed deliverance, and rap¬ turous idea of beholding his forii foon ef¬ feded fuch an alteration in his appearance, as not more deliy : ted than afton i fh ed his friends, gave them every hope of his fpeedy recovery, and en foled them, even fooner than they had cxpeded, to proceed to the caftle of Montmorenci. Within a little way 'of it, all the carnages but Madame Chat- teneuf's, flopped and, accompanied by her fon-in-law, flie proceeded to it, and de¬ manded a private interview with the Mar¬ quis. After the firft ceremonies of meeting were over, íhe told him ihe had fomething to relate to him not more afteding than interefline;;
íiereíling ; but declared fhe could not с ¡mence her relation till he had given or¬ ders for Monfieur D'Alembert and Lafroy being fecured. Strange as was this defire, the impreflive manner in which it was delivered, would not permit the Marquis to hefitate about obey¬ ing it. He accordingly fummoned fome of the domeitics he moil confided in, and gave them a ftrid ckvge to have an eye oveľ D'Alembert anei Lafroy, and inform him if they attempted to quit the caftle, Madame Chatteneuf then began her pro¬ mifed narrative;—not hing but the knowledge which the Marquis had of her charader, could have prevented him from interrupting her in the midft of it, and declaring his doubts of its truth. When ihe had con¬ cluded the recital of the injuftice which had been done to Madame D'Alembert, and her fufferings in confequence of it, flie paufed— paufed from the emotions ihe experienced at
at the idea of thofe which the fond father would feel when informed the long-lamented darling of his heart was about being reftored to his arms. She approached him with eyes fwimming in tears, and taking«, his hand, prefled it between her's. " A yet greater, a yet more affecting furprife than that received by hearing of Madame D'Alemberťs exift¬ ence, awaits you (cried flie) ; Oh ! endea¬ vour to bear it with compofure-—endeavour to hear with moderation—that he, whom long you have mourned, ftill lives—lives to demand a father's bleflìng, and récompenfe the bitter forrow he has occafioned.** Great joy and great forrow are often alike in their effects. Madame Chaftencuf had fcarcely utteced the laft word, ere the Mar¬ quis fainted in her arms. She directly de¬ fired a fervant to be difpatched for the reft of her party 5 and the firft object the Mar¬ quis beheld on recovering, was his long-loft Philippe. The fcene which followed can better be conceived than defcribed ; it was fuch
CLERMOKT. 3 ι1 fuch as drew tears from every fpedator. Yet amidft the Marquis's raptures, the keeneft pangs of anguiih feized his heart at beholding the devaftation which fuffering had made upon his fon ; no more he beheld eyes darting fire, cheeks painted with the livelieft bloom of health, and a form graceful and elaftic. " But happinefs (he exclaimed) happinefs never is perfed in this life !" When Philippe grew a little more com¬ pofed, he mentioned his fon, and befought him to be fent for. This was a new fur- priiè, a new fource of delight to the Mar¬ quis ; and an exprefs was diredly difpatched to the cottage of Jofephe for him. Orders were alfo given for the confinement of D'A¬ lembert and Lafroy. Ignorant of the late tranfadions at the caftle, de Sevignie, whilft he obeyed the fummons to it, could not otherwile account for that fummons, than by fuppofing his re¬ fidence near Madeline had been difcovered by
by her father, and awakened his apprehen¬ fions of their attachment b'fing renewed in confequence of their vicinity to each other; to prevent which, he had fent for him to requeft he would go elfewhere. " If he makes fuch a requeft, I will obey it (cried de Sevignie, as in a melancholy manner he fol¬ lowed the meíľenger) ; go where I will, I fhall ftill retain the idea of Madeline ; and, though my fituation cannot gain the appro¬ bation, my conduct fhall merit the efteem, of her father." Oh ! how impoflible to defcribe the feel¬ ings of Philippe when he prefeníed himfelf to his view ? How equally impoflible to do juftice to thofe of the Marquis, when, in the youthful Plenri, he beheld the exact re- fcmblance of his beloved fon— his refem» blance, when all the graces, all the charms of elegance and youth were his. Surprifed by the reception he met with, by the emo¬ tions with which hc was alternately clafped to the bofom of Lord Philippe and the Mar¬ quis,
quis, de Sevignie looked the very picture of aftonifhment. He was not permitted to remain long in ignorance of his real fitua¬ tion ; and with a delight not inferior to that experienced by his new-found rela¬ tives, he knelt to receive their blefïïng. But fhort was the duration of his joy when in¬ formed of Madeline and her father having been fpirited away from the caftk ; in¬ formed of the too probable dangers which furrounded them, the moil dreadful an¬ guifh pervaded his íoul ; and ftriking his hand diftractedly againft his forehead, he exclaimed, that happinefs was ioft for ever ! D'Alembert and Lafroy had been brought into the apartment, taxed with their guilt, and ftričtly interrogated concerning St. Ju¬ lian and his daughter ; to which interroga¬ tions both had hitherto obferved a profound filence—a filence the former determined to perfevere in, from a fiend-like wiih of ren¬ dering others as mifcrable as himfelf; but vol *\\ p which
which the latter refolved on breaking if he could, by doing fo, efcape the puiiifliment he merited. In reply, therefore, to what de Sevignie had iaid, he declared there was ftill a chance of happinefs being reftored to him. ťt If (cried he) the Marquis will promife to pardon me, and not caft me without pro¬ vifion upon the world, I will, without delay, reveal the place to which the Count and his daughter have been taken." " Oh ! promife him all he aiks (exclaimed de Sevignie, grafping the arm of the Mar¬ quis) j promile him pardon—promife him wealth, protedion, if he but declares the fituation of Madeline and her iather." " Solemnly I promife to grant him all he defires," faid the Marquis. ** May his information come too late î (cried D'Alembert, who, finding his bafe¬ nefs could not even be palliated, determined no lonper to conceal the deformity of his foul); may his information corne too late ! ere this, I truft, the fate of the father and daughter
daughter is decided—the dreadful file to which they both were doomed." ťť Internal monflcr! (exclaimed de Se¬ vignic, catching him by the brcati, then iud« denly flinging him from him) ; yen arc a defenceleis man Hie exclaimed), that confuL- ration alone fa ves you from my fur v. Villain as you are, I will not ilrike where there can be no réfiftance. Oh! tell me fhe continued, turning to Lafrov), Oh! tell me whither í can fiy to refeue Madeüne and her father." Lafroy, having made his conditions, in- formed him without hehtation, and the Count Manfredonia, the hufband of Olivia, anel his friend C>unt Duraflb, both de¬ clared their retblution of accompanying him directly to Paris. Whilft the carriages were preparing, the Marquis wrote a hafty letter to a nobleman oí high rank and power there, requeiling him to give whatever authority was neceflary to do SevjVriie for fearchinç the h oufe of Madamu
л
г I 7 leu rv.
Fleury, De Sevignie never ftopped till he reached Paris, except when compelled to do fo for the purpofe of changing horfies. The moment the nobleman to whom the Marquis's letter was addrefled, had perufed it, hc procured proper officers to accompany de Sevignie to Madame Fieury's. She and D'Alembert were immediately fecured, and the houfe fearched for Madeline and her father. But when de Sevignie found it fearched in vain, no language could defcribe what he felt ; he flew to the prifoners, and implored them to reveal the place to which they had conveyed the unfortunate St. Jib lian and his daughter. They heard his fup¬ plications unmoved : what he aiked they could not indeed liave granted ; yet, in or¬ der to torture him, they pretended that they could. Though unable to account for the efcape of St. Julian and Madeline, they yet believed they had effected it, and rejoiced at the idea, not only on the account of the anguiih which they perceived the uncertainty of
of their fate gave to de Sevignie, but from a hope that they might be able to extricate the miei ves from his power, and regain the fugitive?. De Sevknie was finking beneath the hor- rors of deibair. when the iubterraneous chambers were mentioned bv the officers ; thither he directly fled, and there difcovered the objects of his fearch ; from thence he bore the fenfelefs Madeline to the parlour, which was cleared for her reception. Ohi how utterly impoflible to defcribe her feel¬ ings when, on recovering, flie perceived de Sevignie—when, as he prefled her to his throbbing heart, from his lips fhe received an aflurance of her fafety and her father's: but great as was the rapture of thofe feelings, it was faint compared to that which flie experienced on being informed of the exift¬ ence of Philippe. At firft ihe doubted the reality of what the heard, and accufed de Sevignie of an intention of deceiving her ¿ then befought him, if he wiihed to be ere- f 3 dited,
elited, to give a folemn aiľurance of the truth of his dïertion. This folemn affur¬ ance was inftant ly given, and received by Madeline with a wild feream of joy : then, flying to her father, who, on the firft men¬ tion of his brother, had funk motionlefs upon a chair, fhe flung herfelf into his arms ; her careffes reftored him to fenfibi« lity. He difengaged himfelf from her, and knelt down-—" Oh ! God (he cried, his up¬ lifted hands folded together), accept my thanks—-accept my thanks for preventing roe from being in reality a murderer, a fra¬ tricide. In adverfitv I befought thee to give me fortitude to bear it ; in profperity I now befeech thee to give me moderation ίο fuftain it ; Oh ! teach, teach me to fup¬ port with compofure this fudden reverfe of fituation!" u Oh ! ecilafy (cried Madeline, kneeling befide him), to know your guiltlefs brother lives ; to know you have nothing more to fear, repays me amply for all my fuffermgs," Whea
When they grew a little compofed, dé Sevignic continued his narration. ί£ The web of deceit is at length unra¬ velled (faid St. Julian, as foon as he had concluded it), and the ways of Providence are juftifkri to man. We now perceive, that however iuccefsful the fchemes of wick¬ ed nefs may be at firft, they are, in the end, completely defeated and overthrown. We now perceive, that God wounds but to heal, ftrikes but to fave, puniflies us in this life, but to correct our paflions, and render us defcrving of happinefs in that which is to come." Blanche, who had followed them to the parlour, iharecl their traniports, and now made herfelf known ; for time and forrow had fo altered her, that St, Julian had not the fmalleft recollection of her. He freely granted ílu 1 pardon ihe afked for tiie part ihe had had in his fufferings, and he promifed to lend her to the place of her nativity, p 4 where
where íhe earneftly wiflied to end her <lays. Anxious, to terminate the anxiety of his friends, it was determined that the journey to the Caftle of Montmorenci ihould be commenced at the dawn of day. Accord- ingly at the fettled time they left the de¬ ttata manfion of Madame Fleury, leaving her and D'Alembert in it under the care of the oflkers of juftice, tillit fliould be known whether the charges againft them would oc¬ cafion their being confined elfewhere. They travelled with the utmoft expedition, nor iiackened their fpeed, till within a fhort diftance of the caftle, in order to fend for¬ ward a fervant to inform the Marquis of their approach, left their appearance, if un¬ expeded, ihould affed him too much ; but, notwithilanding this precaution, the emo¬ tions he felt on beholding them—on behold¬ ing the long feparated brothers folded in the arms of each other, were fuch as nearly over¬ came
came him, and * £ fhook his frame almoft to diflolution." In the moil affecting language St. Julian implored Lord Philippe's pardon, which he, in terms not lefs affecting, granted. " My fons (fiiid a reverend Monk from a nciehbourins: convent, the fame to whom. the Marquis had given fuch particular di¬ rections about his eldeft fon before he was difcovered), take my advice, and let a veil be drawn over pail traníačtions, never to be raifed except it is for the purpofe of inftručt- ing youth, by difplayingto them the fearful feenes which uncontrouled paffions may oc¬ cafion—uncontrouled paflions I repeat, for to fuch were all your miieries owing. The Marquis, by gratifying ills love at the ex- pence of honour and humanity, entailed re¬ morie upon himfelf, and ail the horrors which mufi ever attend our conviclion of bein^ under the immediate difpleafure of heaven :■ and you (addrefling St. Julian), by madly в с following.
following the bent of refentment, plunged yourlelf, to 'all appearance, into an abyfs of guilt, from whence you icarcely dared to iuifc your eyes to heaven to .implore its protection againft the defigns of the cruel, and the puniihment you thought you had merited; whilft your brother, by gratifying the impulfc of inclination, without obtain¬ ing, or trying to obtain, the iinction of a parent, left himfelf expofed to the moil bafe defigns, and, by pračtifing deceit himfelf, taught others to praéliíe it upon him. In the courte oí ycur milering 1 ·, t dare lay jou have often accu fed fate of being the occa¬ fion o^ them; when, in reality, had you properly reflected, you would have found they entirely originated with yourfelves : that they are terminated can fcarcely excite more pleafure in your hearts than in mine : may your happinefs never again know dimi¬ nution, and your paft forrows, ii mentioned, only be mentioned for the purpole of keep¬ ing alive a fervent gratitude to that Being who fo wonderfully difperkd them! From
ťt From your ftrange and eventful ftory, the virtuous may be convinced that they fliould never defpair—the guilty, that they fliould never exult, as the hour of deliverance to one, and retribution to the other, often. arrives when leu ft expeded : both fliould alio learn by it, that a merciful God makes allowances for human frailty, and accepts fi licere repentance as an atonement for error." ín the words of the poet the holy man might have concluded, Heaven has but Ош· fnows for our fins, and then Jelights To jv.u'.on ening man. Sweet mercy imns Its dî*ilr.î"r attribute, which limits indice» As ifihere w л с Hegaus ¡n Infinite, And infinite wouki rather want perfeftioa Than puniih to extent* u The affection fubfiffcine between mv О j ions (faid the Marquis), prevents my feeling that uneafinefs I fliould otherwife experience at the idea of leaving one aîmoil wholly de¬ pending upon the other," p 6 " Wo
** W r e will know no difference of fortune (exclaimed St. Julian) ; all that I could do for my brother, all that í could beftow upon him, couid never be a fufficient recompence for the f ufferings I occafioned him." ** Moil amply can you récompenfe them," faid Philippe. se In what manner ?" cried St. Julian with eagernefs. ,** Need I explain my meaning? (faid Philippe, and he glanced alternately at Ma¬ deline and de Sevignie, whofe attachment he had been previouily informed of ) ; need I fay that it is by giving your daughter to my fon, you can make me amends for all my forrows." " That I fhall readily make fuch amends, you will believe (cried St. Julian), when I tell you, that by fo doing, I fhall enfure my own happinefs ; in feeing the precious off- fpring of Elenora and Geraldine united, the moil ardent wifhes of my heart will be ac¬ complished : in giving her to de Sevignie, I give her to a man, in whofe favour I felt a predilcdion
predilection from the Erft moment I behekî him—a predilection, excited not only by his manner, but his ftrong refembiance to you. Take her (he continued, preienting her hand to de Sevignie^, take her with the fond bleffing of her father; and may the felicity you both deferve, be ever your's ľ' The feelings of de Sevignie and Madeline were fuch as language could not have done juftice to; but their eyes, more eloquently than any words could have done, exprefled them. Sorrow now feemed removed from every heart but that of Madame D'Alembert к ;. with the deepeft melancholy ihe ruminated over her fad profpečts> and relolved to re- tire from the caftle of Montmorenci to a convent, as foon as fome feulement had taken place relative to her hufband and his iniquitous lather. On. her account (well knowing, notwithilanding her abhorrence to them, ihe would fenfibly feel their expofure to
ms to public difgrace), the Marquis deter¬ mined not to givf. them up to the punifli- ment thev merited, provided ihev folemnlv jjromiled, ere he liberated them, never more to moieft her, or attempt injuring the pro- pcrtv ihe inherited in right of her mother. He had already Ipoken on the fubjed to 'D'Alembert, but could not extort a reply from him ; he thcrefoic rei òì ved on í ending auexpreíš ίο the fon, to inform him of the conditions on which he would reflore hun to liberty. On the evening of the happy day which reftored them to the Caftle of Montmorenci, de Se\ ignie and Madeline wandered into the foreil, and there he informed her of all he had íufíered on her account. iS In a man¬ ner very different from the family to which I' was fuppofed to belong (laid he) ϊ was brought up, by the defire, it was faid, of Monfieur D'Alembert, my godfather. Not qualified irom my education to partake of the amufement: - , or join in the purfuits oí mv
jVj. my family, ï found home unpleafant, and early conceived a paflion for wandering; about ; which paffion the prefents I received fiom D'Alembert, and the indulgence of my father, permitted mc to gratify. In the courfe of my wanderings, 1 beheld and be¬ came acquainted with you : the feelings you infpired, what followed that acquaintance muft have already explained. Though formed to adorn the bighe t ftation, I yet- flat ι cred myfelf the unambitious dilpoiition of vour father would incline him to beftow you on me, provided I could prove myfelf poiieikd of a competency, and worthy, from my pail conduct, of his approbation. To do the latter would, Ì knew, bc eafy ; and to do the former would, I trufted, be fcarcely more difficult, for D'Alembert had always promiicd to iecure mea hand forne eílabliíh- ment, and I now hoped he might be pre¬ vailed on to fulfil his promifes. I wrote to my father, opened my whole heart to him, and befought him to apply to D'Alembert in my behalf I received an immediate л η Over
anfwer [о this letter, in which my father charged me, except I wiflied to incur his fevered malediction, never to think more about you, declaring that my fole profpe¬ rity in life depended on my union with D'Alembert^-, daughter, who, irt my vifits to the chateau, he faid, had conceived a partiality for me, which her father, rather than deftroy her peace, had determined to gratify. My réfolution, on perilling this letter, was inilantly formed : I refolved never ťo marry a woman I dtfliked, nor unite my¬ felf to one I loved, except aflured I could add to, inftead of injure, her happinefs* Notwithilanding my determination, I lin¬ gered in your houfe till the altered looks of" your father plainly convinced me he wiflied for my departure : the pangs which rend foul and body, could not, I am fure, have been CTcater than thofe I endured on tear- О i nc myíelf from vou. ' ** I retured to my father's houfe ; he treated mc ill, and í refumed my wanderings, with a hope that change of fcene might alleviate
rileviate my angu i fli ; but this hope was difappointed ; no change of fcene could change the feelings of my foul ; no company could amule, no profpečt delight ; upon the lovelieft productions of Nature I often gazed with a vacant eye— profpečb which, in the early days of youth, when expectation fat fmiling at my heart, I had often contem« plated with a degree of rapturous enthufiafm which feemed to raife me from earth to heaven, and infpiring me with a fublime de¬ votion, made me look up through Nature's works to Nature's God. " Not all the attention, the hofpitality î received at V-----, to which chance alone conducted me, could diflipate the thoughts that corroded my peace ; but, as ifl had a prefent ime ι it of your coming to it, I could not bring myfelf to leave it. Strange and incontinent vou found me ; that ftraneenefs. W j/_J ' that inconfiftency, was owing to a paflion which I wiflied to conquer, yet could not forbear nouriíhing— which 1 wiflied, yet dreaded, to have returned, confeious as I was
.·; was l hit that return would plunge the objed ot my ¡ove in forrow. <c kut how weak is the mind of man, how íraii his bell refolves ! When I found Ì had an interdi in that tender heart, every idea but of Mkity fled from mc ; and I was tempied to aik you to unite your deftiny to muie : a ludden interruption to our conver¬ iation alone prevented my doing fo; Scarcely however, liad I ¡eft your prefence, ere Rea- ion relumed her empire, and reprefented the baienefs of what í had intended. Siiall I then perfevere in fuch an intention ? (1 cried) ; ihall î" take advantage of her tendernefs?— íhall J requite it by plunging her into difik culties—by tranfplanting her from the genial foil in which fhe has flou ι i ih ed, to one of pe¬ nury ?—fliall í fink, inftead of exalting, my love ?— íhall í requite the humanity of the father, by bJafting the hopes he entertains about his child?—Oh! no, f I exclaimed, maddening at the idea), i will not be iuch a villain.; í will not, Madeline, merit your after-reproaches and my own by fuch con¬ dud ;
-касс ; every hope relative to you—iiopes which but now raifed my ioul to heaven, I iv i U relinquiíh. How ΐ acted in confe¬ quence of this determination you know; but you know not, nor can 1 give you any adequate idea of the anguilh which 1 en¬ dured in confequence of it—the anguiih which I felt at obferving the refentment that glowed upon your cheek, and fparkied in your eye at the idea of my being either de¬ ceitful ov capricious ; fcarcely on witnefling it, could i withhold myfelf fiom kneeling at your feet, and fully explaining the motives of my conduct. You may wonder, perhaps, nt my not reveaUng myfelf on hearing of the Countefs de Merville's kind intentions to¬ wards mc ; I was prevented doing fo, by an idea of her being;, notwithftandine all her worth, too proud, like the reft of the French Ncblefle, to think of bellowing her Ma¬ deline---ihe, whofe graces, whofe lovelinefs fitted herfor the moil exalted ftarion, upon the ion of a peaľ.mt, when once flie had difco« vered liis origin * to difciofe my fituation I therefore
therefore deemed unneceflary. After our parting I lingered fome time longer at V——, and might not: perhaps have left it fo foon as I did, had I not received a pofi- tive command from my father to return home :-—on doing fo, he renewed his impor¬ tunities for а marriage with D'Alemberťs daughter; I told him my pofitive determi¬ nation relative to her, and he behaved with outrage* I fliould immediately have quitted home, had he not aflured me, if í dici fo, his curfes would purfue me. Though I confidcred his conduct u njufti fiable, I ihrunk from his malediction, and accordingly obeyed him. Chance firft produced the difcovery of my vicinity to her who engrofled all my thoughts. Ah ! little did 1 think, when í firft heard of the newly-acknowledged fon of the Marquis of Montmorenci, that Cler¬ mont was that fon : Ah 1 little did I think» when I heard of the beauty, the good nefs of his daughter, that it was to the praifes of Madeline I was likening. " I faw
4ί I faw you one day in the foreft ; fur¬ prife rivetted me to the fpot, nor had J power to move till you difappeared. A do- mcftic belonging to the caftle was pafling me at the moment ; I enquired from him about you, and heard your real fituation, From that period í haunted the foreft in hopes of catching a glimpfe of you ; and you may recollect feeing me one evening near the monumental pillar. " Great have been my fufferings, but amply are they recompcnfed ; my prefent fèlicitv к fuch as, in the moil fan^uine mo- ments of expectation, 1 never could have thought of experiencing. To find myfelf allied to beings congenial to my heart—-to find myfelf on the point of being united to the woman I adore, is a happineis which requires the utmoft eflbrts of reafon to bear with any moderation." As he fpoke, they heard an approaching ftep, and the next mitant St. Julian appeared be¬ fore them ;—he looked agitated ; and Ma¬ deline
beline, in a voice of alarm, enquired the caule ofthat agitation ;— ke briefly informed her. An exprefs, he faid, had juft arrived from Paris to announce the death of young D'A- iembert. Maddened at finding his ichemts difcovered, and his hopes defeated, in a pa- roxyfm of fury he had flabbed himfelf; but fcarcely had he committed the rafli act ere hc repented it, and implored immediate affiftance ; this affiftance was procured but to confirm his apprehenfions of the wound beine; mortal. After fufterinff excruciating pangs of body and mind, hc endeavoured to cafe the killer by a full avowal of all his enormities. He accordingly coniefled his having occafioned the death ofa young girl, called Adelaide St, Pierre; his having a fi¬ fa flina ted the Countefs de Merville, and poifoned her houfe-keeper, Agatha, for fear of her betraying him ; after which confeflion he fliortly expired. Madeline
Madeline was to fliocked by hearing of his crimes, that it was many minutes ere flie had power to move. At length the fond cardies of her father and attentions øf de Sevignie, reftored her in fome degree to herfelf. Her father then informed her he had fought her for the purpoie of bringing her to the caftle, in order to aflift him in breaking theaflair to Madame D' Alembert, " Though all affection for her hufband muft long fince (ci jed he) have been deftroy ed by his unwor¬ thy conduci', I am yet convinced, from her feeling?, fhe will be fhocked to hear of his dying bv his own hand. His confeflion I mean carefully to conceal from her; for to know her mother was murdered—murdered by her hufband, vvould, I am confident, entail horror and wretchednefs upon her days." "Madeline now haftened to the caftle, and D'Alemberťs death was communicated with the utmoft caution to Madame D'Alem¬ bert ,
bert s— it filled her with horror ; but, as Su Julian had faid, all affection for him having long before ceafed, every hope was entertained of the melancholy impreflion which it made upon her mind being foon erafed. On his father it had the moil dreadful effect, the moment he heard it ; the proud dif¬ dainful filence which he had obferved from the firft difcovcry of his bafenefs, vaniflied, and he vented his mifery in groans and ex¬ clamations, accufing himfelf of being the caufe of his fon's deftruction. Every at ten- tion which humanity could dictate was paid л him, but paid in vain. Attentions from thofe he had injured, rather aggravated than foothed his feelings ; and in about two days after his fon's death, he declared his reiolu¬ tion of renouncing the world. He accord¬ ingly withdrew from the caftle of Montmo¬ renci to La Trappe, the moft rigid of all the religious houfes in France* where he ibon ended a miférable exiftence. Imme¬ diately after his departure Lafroy was dif- mified, having firft, according to the pro« с raife
mife that was made him, received a hand- fome provifion, which, by giving him the power of gratifying his inordinate paflions, foon occafioned his death. Jofephe, his ini¬ quitous brother, was compelled to retire from the vicinity of the caille ; but though he deferved puniihment and miibry, the Marquis was too generous to permit him to feel any inconvenience in confequence of this meafure. Claude and Blanche, alike peni¬ tent, were, by their owrn defire, fent to the places from whence they originally came, amply fecured from the ills of poverty. Thus did the Marquis and his fons fulfil every promife they had made, and by the mercy they extended to others, proved tiieir gj atitude to heaven for that which they had themfelves experienced. As foon as tranquillity was reftored lo the inhabitants of the caftle, the nuptials of de Sevignie and Madeline were folemnized ; after which they accompanied Madame D'A¬ lembert, (who with her friend Madame Chat- vol, iv, o^ teneuf
teneuf and her party, had only waited to ice them united,) to the Chateau de Valdore. Without mingled emotions of pain and plea¬ fure Madeline could not re-enter it, nor could <ie Sevignie, without experiencing fum¬ lar ones, behold the walks where he had often wandered to watch for Madeline, and de- fpairingly figh forth her name. A confiant intercoune was kept up between the families of Madame D % Alembert and Madame Chat¬ teneuf, in the courfe of which Count Du¬ raflb, who from the ri rit inrervicw had been captivated hy her graces, made the im prel - fion he wiflied upon the heart of Mola. To the foft nefs oi the kalian he united the vivacitv oí the Fnmch, and was m everv re- fpeft worthy of her. Till die happy period which united them, de Sevignie and Made¬ line divided their lime alternatelv between the Caftle of Montmorujci and the Chateau de Vaklore. With Duraflb, Viola enjoyed a long courk of urmitermptedhappineis—iiappincis which с could
could only lie equal led by that which her beloved friends Λν Se\i«nie and Madeline experienced. Having now, to ufe the won k nf" Ada-n, brought ťí my ftory to the lum of е-шМу blifs," I fhall conclude with an humble hope, that however unworthy of public favour к may be deemed, its not afpiring to farno will guard it from feveritv.
ť l N 1 < .
