^./ 




^^r'rj /■//// yr/^/// 




L\ E) R.AR.Y 

OF THE 

UNIVLRSITY 

or ILLINOIS 



R583a 



THE DISCARDED SON 



A TAIP, 



Lane, DarHng, and Co. Leadenhail-S'icc*. 



THE 

©ISCAKBEB SON| 

OR, 

HJUNT OF THE BANDITTL 

IN FIVE VOLUMES. 
BY 

REGINA MARIA ROCHE, 

Jt>TnOR OF THE cniLDREN OF THE JBBEY^ S^'C, 



Thou hast been 
^s one in sufTering all, that suffers nothingj 
A n;an who Fortune's buffets and rewards 
Has ta'en with equal thanks: and blest are they 
Whose blcod and judgment mingled are so well, 
That they are not a pipe for Fortune's finger, 
To souod what stop she please. 

SHAKZSFEARK. 



VOL. II. 



LONDON: 
PRINTED AT THE 

yOR LANE, NEWMAN, AND CO. 

1£AD£NH ALL-STREET. 

1807. 



8£3 
K5S5d 

THE BISCAKBEB SON'. 



CHAP. I. 



*' Under how hard a fate are women boml 

Priz'd to their ruin, or expos'd to scorn. 

If we want beauty, we of love despair. 

And are besicg'd, like frontier towns, if fair." Wal: 



fLIZABETH could not conceive "vvhat 
could be the cause of the malignant and 
disdainful glances she received from Mrs. 
Ruthven and Miss Rae. She had been 
introduced to them in a way to entitle her 
to their respect^ and was fully sensible 
there was nothing in her own manner cal- 

voL. II. B cvilatecJ 



2 THE DISCARDED SOX. 

culated to offend. If the rest of Mrs. 
Dunbar's visitors deported themselves in a 
similar manner^ she felt she should not be* 
very desirous of prolonging her stay un- 
der her roof. 

But of total neglect §he had not long 
reason to complain. Mr. Ruthven was 
charmed with her appearance^ and lavish 
in his eulogiums; nor rested until he had 
introduced himself to her particular notice. 

This gentleman, beneath the semblance 
of the most thoughtless good humour, 
concealed a disposition not inferior in 
point of art to Lord O'Sinister's, and was, 
if possible, a still more dangerous charac- 
ter than his Lordship, as, unlike him, he 
was possessed of all the advantages of 
youth. In his admiration of beauty, he 
was enthusiastic, nor ever permitted any 
consideration whatever to prevent his pur- 
suing the object he admired. He knew- 
this was Elizabeth's first visit to this part 
of the Highlands, and led to a conversa- 
tion, by asking her opinion of the scenery. 

His 



THE DISCARDED SON. 3 

His manners were agreeable, and Eliza- 
beth^ besides, was too well pleased to be 
relieved from the aukward situation which 
being unnoticed by all made her feel her- 
self in, to discourage the inclination he 
manifested to pay her attention. 

The rage and jealousy of Miss Rae- ex- 
ceeded description ; she trembled at the 
idea of her hopes respecting him being 
disappointed through her means, and, in 
the bitterness of her heart at their appre- 
hended annihilation^ curst, as fervently 
as he blessed, the chance which had thrown 
her in the way of Mrs. Dunbar. She left 
no art unessayed, to try to detach him 
from Miss Munro, but in vain. He heard 
not her sighs — he saw not her frowns or 
smiles — he had, in short, no ears, no eyes, 
but for the lovely creature with whom he 
was then conversing, and whose equal in 
beauty he thought he had never seen. 

Mrs. Ruthven wished to see him enoajrcd 
in some affair that might justify, or, in 
some degree at least, excuse the step she 
B 2 herself 



* THE DISCARDED SON, 

herself meditated taking ; for through the 
artful instigations of her unprincipled con- 
fidant, she had come to the resolution of 
no longer resisting the dictates of inclina- 
tion: still, however^ notwithstanding this 
resolution, and the above wish, she could 
not help being mortified at his conduct to 
Elizabeth, so malignant were the feelings 
with which her charms had inspired her. 

Elizabeth, prevented by the conversa- 
tion into which she had entered with Ruth- 
ven from further noticing the scowling 
glances of his lady and her friend, and 
alike unconscious of the envy and admira- 
tion she had excited, soon regained her 
wonted ease and animation. 

On the announcement of dinner, Ruth- 
ven took her hand to lead her to the dining 
parlour. In their way thither, her atten- 
tion was suddenly diverted from what he 
was saying to her, by hearing Lady Loch- 
iiess enquiring of Mrs. Dunbar, whether 
she did not expect Captain Delacour to 
dinner ? 

Capt. 



THE DISCARDED SON. 5 

*'Capt.Delacoiir!" (it ma} be recollected 
he had not mentioned to her the name of 
his relation,) repeated Elizabeth involun- 
tarily, and with a glowing cheek, turning 
her eyes full upon Ruthven — " Does he 
visit here ?" 

'' Why, do you know him ?" 

^' Perhaps not the Captain Delacour 
that visits here,'' returned Elizabeth, he- 
sitating a little, and blushing Jtill more 
deeply at the look with v/hich this enquiry 
"was accompanied. 

" What kind of person is t\ie one you 
know }" 

'' Oh, a very handsome man,'' said Eli- 
zabeth, again speaking in t\\e fulness of 
her heart. 

'' A very handsome man !" echoed Ruth- 
ven, in an arch accent, and with a cor- 
responding look. " Upon my w^ord, this 
will be flattering information for Delacour. 
I see, when ladies are taken by surprise, 
they will sometimes speak their real senti- 
ments/' 

b3 ^^Nay/' 



€ THE T)ISCARDED SON. 

'' Nay," cried Elizabethj greatly con- 
fused, " I only meant to say, that — *' 

'' He was reckoned handsome by every 
one you knew, and that you subscribed to 
the general opinion : but \.o reply to your 
question. From what you have said of the 
Captain Delacour you know^ he is the same, 
I fancy, who is now on a visit here, the 
nephew of Mrs. Dunbar's late husband.'* 

The pleasure which this intelligence 
afforded Elizabeth she endeavoured to con- 
ceal under an air of indifference, in order 
to avoid giving Mr. Ruthven fresh cause 
for raillery ; but in vain she strove to 
divert his conversation from what she had 
just said. He continued to revert to it, 
till at length the pain he caused her became 
too obvious to permit of his continuing it. 

During the whole of dinner, to the un- 
utterable mortification of Miss Rae, his 
attention was almost entirely engrossed by 
her. 

A short time after they were seated at 
table^ Elizabeth was again attracted from 

him. 



THE DISCARDED SON. / 

him, by hearing Lady Lochness asking 
Mrs. Dunbar, whether she knew the reason 
of Captain Delacour not dining at home? 

" No, indeed/' replied Mrs. Dunbar ; 
*' I only know that he came into my dress- 
ing-room about an hour ago, to request 
I might not wait dinner for him, as he was 
going out immediately, and it was very 
uncertain when he should return.'*" 

'' An hour ago," Elizabeth repeated to 
herself; then, in all probability, he al- 
ready knew of her being an inmate under 
the roof of his aunt. Oh ! if he did, and 
his feelings at this juncture at all corre- 
spond with her's — she could not help flat- 
tering herself they might. 

'' What curiosity !" cried Grant, alluding 
to Lady Lochness's enquiries concerning 
Delacour ; '' but I never knew a woman, 
at least a woman of fashion, v*:ho did not 
like to pry into the affairs of other people. 
Hence, to their inordinate curiosity about 
these, the little attention they bestow on 
their own.*' 

B 4 '^ Why 



THE DISCABDED SON. 



*' Why you good-for-nothing creature/' 
returned Lady Lochness, " if we had not 
curiosity^, where would be our knowledge ?'* 

" Better be without knowledge, than 
such as your curiosity leads you to acquire, 
the knowledge of your neighbour's faults, 
for the sake of publishing them/' 

'' You are a downright slanderer, and 
as such I believe I shall be tempted to erase 
you from the list of my favourites/' 

*' The list will be but a small one I am 
afraid, if there are none upon it but such 
as merit not the appellation you have be- 
stowed upon me/' 

*' 'Tis too bad, indeed," said Hume, in 
an affected tone, ^' to rail at the loveliest 
part of the creation, without whom, ai 
the poet elegantly says — '' We had been 
brutes/' 

" Yes, and whom you admire so much," 
rejoined Grant, "that you endeavour to 
imitate them as much as possible. But, in 
reply to your observation, 1 always rail 
egainst those who are most deserving of 

censure. 



THE DISCARDED SON. 9 

censure. There was a time, indeed, when the 
women of this country were better than 
they are at present, but now they are quite 
as bad as any of their neighbours on the 
Continent — as well skilled in making for 
themselves other faces than those which 
Nature has made for them, in jigging, am- 
bling, lisping, and nicknfiming heaven's 
creatures/' 

'' 'Tis a sure sign the days of chivalry 
are past, else you would not,'' said Lady 
Lochness, '' be allowed to vent your spleen 
against us with impunity." 

'* The ladies need no champions now," 
remarked a gentleman ; " they only re- 
quired them in those dark and barbarous 
ages, when they were too much confined 
to allow of their merits being fully known/' 

'' Your railing against the sex, \tt me 
tell you, Grant," said Ruthven, '' is a sure 
sign of your having met w^ith a grievous 
disappointment from some fair lady/' 

" A most indubitable one, indeed," ut- 
tered Hume/' '' Yes, 'tis clearly evident, 
B 5 Grant, 



10 THE JDISCARDED SO??. 

Grant from your invectives against " Hea- 
ven's last, best work/' that you have worn 
the willow in your day ; but I suppose 
you were not aware of the construction 
your sarcasms were liable to, or you would 
not have uttered them. You see what it 
is not to have reflection." 

'^ Yes, and h^ar what it is whilst I listen 
to you/' 

The entrance of Captain Delacour with 
a hurried step interrupted this conversa- 
tion ; and, as soon as he had paid his com- 
pliments in a general way to the company, 
with all of whom he seemed perfectly well 
acquainted, he approached a chair, which 
had been kept vacant for him, between 
Mrs. Ruthven and Miss Rae. 

'' You told me, my dear George," said 
Mrs. Dunbar, and, by a glance of her ex- 
pressive eyes, directing his to •Elizabeth, 
whom he appeared before not to have 
seen, '^ that yon had the honour of being 
acquainted with Miss Munro," 

*' I did. Madam/' replied he, smiling 

and 



THE DISCARDID SON. 1| 

and bowing to Elizabeth, '^ and trust I 
have the happiness of now seeing Miss 
Miinro well/' 

Elizabeth replied by a bow, too much 
confused, and perhaps agitated at the mo- 
ment, to speak, owing to the scrutinizing 
earnestness with which she saw herself re- 
garded by Ruthven, from the moment Dela- 
cour entered the room. 

The conversation now became more 
general. Delacour supported his part in it 
with the utmost animation, but did not 
again particularly address himself to Eliza- 
beth, .a circumstance she did not, in con- 
sequence of the manner in which she was 
then situated, regret, especially as from 
the glances she from time to time caught 
from him, she had reason to believe it 
was not for want of inclination. 

The looks of Ruthven were not more 
closely watched on this occasion by Miss 
Rae, than were those of Delacour by Mrs. 
Ruthven, he being the object of her 
heart's present devotion : their acquaint- 
B 6 ance 



12 THE DISCARDED SON. 

ance had commenced in London ; and it 
was the knowledge of his paying a visit to 
her aunt, that had induced her also to 
do so. 

Delacour, though possessed, perhaps> 
of as little vanity as any of his sex, could 
not help, from the conduct of this lady, 
beginning at last to suspect what wa« 
passing in her mind, a suspicion which^ 
from the manner in which she was situated, 
afforded him great uneasiness ; nor would 
it have given him pleasure, even though 
she had been single, as she was by no means 
the kind of woman he could admire^ 

Of the person of Delacour, a descrip- 
tion has already been given. He was at 
this period in his seven-and-twentieth year, - 
and already high in his profession, the navy. 
From nature he inherited all that generous 
openness of soul, that contempt of every 
4hing mean and sordid, that careless pro- 
digality, which in general characterizes 
those belonging to his profession. Of him,, 
with truth, his father might have predicted 

whftt 



THE DISCARDED SON. 13 

\vhat the father of the gallant but unhappy 
De Moor did of his son— ^' From that spirit 
of fire, which sparkled forth even in his 
boyish years, which shewed itself in an ex- 
quisite sensibility to every thing that w^as 
great or beautiful, that generous openness 
of character, the soul which spoke forth 
in his eyes, that tenderness of feeling, 
that manly courage, that youthful thirst of 
honour, that inflexible resolution, and all 
those shining qualities that adorned him^ 
— that he would one day be the delight of 
his friends, and active supporter of his 
country/' 

His mother was the sister of Mr. Dunbar^ 
and died whilst he was quite an infant. His 
father, the descendant of a noble house, 
and brought up, like himself, to the navy, 
had the happiness of living long enough 
to see his name enrolled in the list of the 
valiant. He was a good and gallant officer, 
and would, in all probability, have been 
able to have left him a handsome fortune, 
but for an unfortunate intimacy he con- 
tracted 



14 THE DISCARDED SON. 

tracted with Lord O'Sinister^ who took ad- 
vantage of a naturally careless and unsus- 
picious temper^ to draw him into errors^ 
that ultimately occasioned a considerable 
derangement in his affairs. A small inde- 
pendence was, however, secured to his 
son, but which he, v/ith true filial piety, 
in order to prevent any obloquy resting 
on his memory, surrendered to his cre- 
ditors, until their demands were satisfied, 
contenting himself till then with merely 
the emoluments of his profession. 

His late uncle, Mr. Dunbar, as well as 
his lady, had always paid him particular 
attention, insomuch that he had ever felt 
for them the sincerest affection, and gladly 
embraced the opportunity, which the re- 
fitting of the vessel he commanded at 
Portsmouth, and preparing it for a long 
voyage, afforded him, of paying a visit to 
Black Crag, the seat of the latter. 

The ladies had scarcely returned to the 
drawing-room, ere a large party, invited 
for the evening, began to assemble ; and 

Elizabeth 



THE DISCARDED SON. 15 

Elizabeth soon understood that a dance 
Avas in agitation for the younger part of 
the company. A handsome suite of rooms 
was thrown open, through which they pro- 
menaded, in detached parties, during tea, 
and previous to the commencement of 
cards and dancing. Every one looked 
gay, every one looked happy, and the 
cheerfulness of the scene could not have 
failed of exhilirating the spirits of Eliza- 
beth, but for the cruel damp thrown upon 
them, by the neglect she experienced, 
in consequence of the conduct of Mrs. 
Ruthven. 

Busy in arranging the card-tables, Mrs. 
Dunbar left to that lady the receiving her 
guests, and introducing Elizabeth to them, 
of which she entertained not a doubt. But, 
instead of paying her the attention she 
knew her aunt both expected and wished, 
and also what politeness demanded, she 
permitted Elizabeth to remain totally un- 
noticed in a corner of the room ; and, in 
reply to the aatural enquiry of who she 
4 " "wa*. 



16 THE DISCARDED SON. 

wa'^, maliciously insinuated, for the pur- 
pose of having her entirely nefrlected, that 
she v/as quite an intruder upon her aunt, 
"svho meant, as soon as possible, to get rid 
of her, lest the family at Glengary should 
be offended at her being harboured so 
Dear them. This information had the effect 
she desired, as the only circumstance which 
could have induced any of the party then 
assembled to hra^'e incurred the risk of 
offejiding Mrs. Munro, by noticing a per- 
son so obnoxious, as it was justly concluded 
Elizabeth must be to her, would have been 
the idea of pleasing Mrs. Dunbar, whose 
entertainments were equally delectable. 

At length, the sound of music in a 
remote apartment caused every one but 
Elizabeth, and those who v^ere at cards, 
to hasten thither; and she ^vas shortly 
compelled to follow, in consequence of 
Mrs. Dunbar's perceiving her sitting pen- 
sively on a window by herself. 

With the greatest reluctance, and no 
little confusion^ she entered the dancing 

room^ 



THE DfSCARDED SON. 17 

room/ fearful of being reckoned an in- 
truder, it being evident to her, that the 
mortifying neglect she experienced was 
premeditated. She found the party quite 
in a gay tumult, and only waiting for the 
gentlemen from the dining parlour to 
commence dancing. 

At length they began to make their ap- 
pearance. Ruthven was amongst the first 
who entered, and instantly espying Eli- 
zabeth, who, finding a vacant sofa near 
the door, had seated herself, approached, 
and took a seat beside her. 

Ere he had well opened his lips Delacour 
also entered, and bent his step^ towards 
the seat occupied by Elizabeth. But, in- 
stead of stopping as he had done, glided 
past with a slight bow, and going up to 
Miss Rae in a moment after, led her out 
to dance. 

The pang which seized the heart of Eli- 
zabeth at the instant was too great for de- 
scription. The pleasing hopes and ex- 
pectations, which had again sprung up in 

her 



18 TH« DISCARDED SON, 

her mind;, directly vanished^ leaving it a 
prey to shame and regret^ for ever having 
given way to such ideas. '' And yet, had I 
not some cause ?" she said to herself; '' but 
nO;. my vanity misled me, and perhaps to a 
suspicion of its having done so, is owing his 
not having treated me even as a common 
acquaintance/' 

In the confusion and disturbance of her 
mind she forgot who was sitting by her, 
till restored to recollection by a rallying 
speech on her silence, and the sudden 
change that had taken place in her coun- 
tenance. This remark so terrified her, with 
the idea of what was really passing in her 
mind at the moment being suspected by 
Ruthven, as to cause her to immediately 
endeavour to collect her thoughts ; and, 
though never less inclined to gaiety, she 
permitted him, for the purpose of better 
deceiving him with regard to her feelings, 
to lead her to the dancers. 

Mrs. Ruthven, although much dissatisfied 
at her hand not having been solicited by 

Delacour, 



THE DISCARDED SON. 19 

Delacour/ Still derived some consolation 
from his having selected her confidant^ 
little aware that Miss Rae was so much 
engrossed at the moment by her own con- 
cerns, as to be utterly incapable of attend- 
ing either to her's, or any other persons. 
Apprehension was now beginning to be 
converted into certainty. In the looks, 
the attentions of Ruthven to Elizabeth, 
Miss Rae saw every indication of his feel- 
ing that passion for her, which but a short 
time before she hoped she had herself in- 
spired. If she could not recal Jbim, she 
determined at all events not to sit down 
quietly under the disappointment he had 
inflicted on her, but to endeavour to make 
him experience in his turn something like 
what he had made her suffer; and this 
she flattered herself she should easily 
be able to do by means of his wife^ 
who, if once assured there was a like- 
lihood of discovering something in his 
conduct to excuse her own, would, she 
made no doubt, be too vigilant a spy upon 

his 



20 THE DISCAllDED SON. 

his actions to permit his having^the oppor- 
tunities he might wish for with Elizabeth. 

The set being nearly completed by the 
time Elizabeth and Ruthven joined it, 
they were almost the last couple, a circum- 
stance of which Mrs. iUithven, intent upon 
-wounding the feelings of Elizabeth in 
every instance, took advantage to cause 
them to be left almost entirely by them- 
selves, w^hen it was their turn to lead off. 

This rudeness determined Elizabeth on 
letting nothing again induce her to join 
t!ie set ; she could not conceal the indig- 
nation it excited in her bosom, an indig- 
nation in which her partner pretended to 
participate; although in reality he re- 
joiced at the circumstance that awakened 
it, since the greater the neglect she expe- 
rienced from others, the greater would be 
the value, he flattered himself, she would 
set upon his attentions. 

He resisted her importunities to leave 
her, that he might not on her account 
lose the amusement of the evening; and 

his 



THE DISCAKDED SON. 21 

his attaching himself entirely to her being 
imputed by Elizabeth, in the purity of her 
heart, to good nature, she forced herself 
to appear pleased with his conversation, 
in order to evince to him her gratitude for 
his attentions. 

Ruthven, almost as vain as he was de- 
signing, quickly began to ascribe to the 
motives most flattering to himself, the 
smiles and seeming pleasure with which 
she listened to and conversed with him. 
The idea of having already made an inte- 
rest for himself in her heart gave a flow 
to his spirits, that rendered him really en- 
tertaining — '' the very soul of whim and 
spirit of variety/* 

But, notwithstanding his amusing versa- 
tility, the eyes, as well as the thoughts of 
Elizabeth, frequently wandered, but never 
for any length of time, delicacy making 
her shrink from the idea of being sus- 
pected of an attachment to a person who 
appeared so totally uninterested about her. 

There was no regular supper, to the 

great 



f2 THE DISCARDED SON. 

great joy of Elizabeth, as she felt she 
should have been painfully embarrassed by 
the observations being stationary for any 
time, might have subjected her to. To her, 
whose cheek, till the present moment, had 
never been dimpled by a smile that did 
not immediately emanate from her heart, 
the assumption of a gaiety she did not 
feel was too painful not to induce her to 
seize the first opportunity that occurred 
for withdrawing for the night. 

In the solitude of her chamber, the feel- 
ings she had with such difnculty restrained 
€Ould no longer be controuled; alternate- 
ly her heart swelled with indignation, and 
sickened with regret. 

She wondered whether Mrs. Dunbar had 
noticed the supercilious treatment she had 
experienced from Mrs. Ruthven and Miss 
Rae ; but no — when she retrospected her 
conduct, and reflected on the character 
Mr. Beerscroft had given her, she felt con- 
vinced if she had she would have in- 
terfered; and to this conviction was alone 

owing 



THE DISCARDED SON. 25 

owing her not resolving to depart from 
her mansion t-he ensuing day. 

A critical review of the conduct of De- 
iacour confirmed her belief of his indiffe- 
rence, which, 'ere long, however, she 
trusted she should think of, without the 
chilling sensations it at presenf gave her. 
Yes, she trusted her exertions would 
enable her to overcome a passion so 
inimical to her peace, and which both her 
pride and^reason stimulated her to conquer^ 
^ince it was revolting to every feeling of 
delicacy, to think of cherishing a par- 
tiality that was not reciprocal. 

She did not quit her chamber in the 
morning till summoned to the breakfast- 
room, where she found a large party assem 
bled, amongst w^hich was Delacour; and 
Ruthven, under the expectation of her ap- 
proach, was loitering near the door. Ihe 
-instant she appeared, he took her hand, 
and leading her to a chair, took one beside 
her, and recommenced those attentions he 

had 



24 THE DISCARDED SON. 

had paid her the preceding day. During- 
breakfast^ a lively and pretty general con- 
versation was supported^ and various ar- 
rangements made, for passing the morn- 
ing. 

^' Which party do you intend to join. 
Miss Munro?'' asked Mrs. Dunbar with a 
smile ; and after she had informed her 
she would not invite her to be of her's, as 
she was going to pay some stupid visits in 
the neighbourhood — 

^' I don't wish to go out, Madam/' re- 
plied Elizabeth (but timidly )j convinced 
that she should not be a welcome addition 
to any one of thcm^ yet fearful her re- 
fusab as she could not think of assigning 
the proper reason for it^ might be imputed 
by Mrs. Dunbar to an unsocial or capri- 
cious disposition. 

" And pray, my dear/' returned Mrs. 
Dunbar, in an accent expressive of sur- 
prise, *' what do you mean to do with 
yourself?'* 

'' I have 



THE DISCAKDED SON. 25 

'^'l have found some entertaining books 
in my chamber^ with which I can amuse 
myself, Madam/' replied Elizabeth, with 
still greater timidity. 

'' So studious/' said Mrs. Dunbar ; " but 
do as you please my dear; I always wi^h 
my guests to follow their own inclination^, 
that they may feel themselves at home.'' 

As the party were separating after break- 
fast, a servant whispered Mrs. Dunbar; 
upon which she beckoned to Elizabeth, and 
in a low tone of voice, told her she 
would find some one waiting to see her in 
her chamber. 

Elizabeth instantly guessed Vt'ho she 
meant; and hastening thither, found, as 
she expected, Mrs. M^Tullogh, the Irish 
housekeeper, from Glengary, of whom 
mention has been already made, impa- 
tiently awaiting her approach, Mrs. Dun- 
bar having good-naturedly sent to inform 
her of her being at Black Crag. 

Her joy at beholding the daughter of 

her dear young master, as she still conti- 

voL. II. c nued 



$6 THE DISCAHDED SON. 

nued to style Captain Munro^ filled her 
eyes with tears, and affected the grateful 
heart of Elizabeth not a little. 

As soon as their mutual emotion had a 
little subsided, Mrs. M'Tullogh gratified 
her with some particulars of the family of 
Glengary. 

'^^ Both by his looks and manner, the 
old gentleman/* she said, *' now appeared 
to be, what he was in reality, well stricken 
in years ; but notwithstanding which, still 
led a bustling life, Mrs.Munro never being 
happy but when in a crowd. But not 
satisfied with his letting her go where she 
pleased, and see whom she pleased, no- 
thing would content her but his permit- 
ting her to render him ridiculous ; as a 
proof of which,^' the housekeeper added, 
'''-he was now getting by heart, or at least 
trying to do so, some speeches for a cha- 
racter she had persuaded him to appear in 
at a masquerade she was about giving the 
ensuing w^eek, in consequence of hearing 
such entertainments were quite the fashion 

amongst 



THE DISCARDED SON. £7 

amongst the fine folks in London, and for 
which great preparations were making. 

" I don't well understand the rights of 
the charactv-r/' continued Mrs, M'Tullogh, 
^' in which the poor foolish old gentleman 
has been thus persuaded to expose him- 
self; but/ as well as i\\e servants who have 
heard them conversing about it at table 
can make it out, 'tis that of a king — the 
king of Morven, I think — a king that's of 
great note in a book that was written in 
these parts by a man of the name of 
Ocean — a queer name, is it not, Mis3 
Munro, for a man ?" 

Elizabeth merely smiled, and she thus 
went on : — 

'' Mrs. Munro, for herself, has fixed 
upon that of a great favourite of this 
old king's, the white-armed daughter of 
Toscaii whoever Toscar was; but how 
she will make herself pass for the white- 
armed daughter of Toscar^ or Foscar, or 
any other person, I cannot conceive for 
i'aQ sou] of me, except she keeps her 
c 52 white 



^ THE DISCARDED SO'N. 

^hite leather gloves on the whole evening, 
since her arms are as red as a milk-maid's of 
a frosty morning ; and no wonder, after 
all they have gone through, to be sure. How 
any one could take a fancy to her, and 
others so infinitely preferable in the way, 
(taking a sly peep at a glass she was sitting 
opposite), will never cease to surprise me; 
but there is no accounting for taste." 

AVhether she had succeeded in getting 
the, old gentleman to secure his property 
to her after his decease, Mrs. M'Tullogh 
was not able to inform Elizabeth; but 
from the ascendancy she had obtained 
over him, it was rather to be apprehended 
she had. 

Amongst other intelligence, Mrs.M'Tul- 
logh told her Sir Patrick Dunboyne, the 
brother of the late Mrs. Munro, and of 
course her great-uncle, was expected over 
every day from Ireland, to spend some 
time at Glengary, which he was often in 
the habit of doing. 

'' He has not behaved kindly to my 

' father,^' 



THE DISCARD-ED SON. 29^ 

father/' said Elizabeth, with some little 
emotion. 

His not appearing to have done so, 
Mrs. MTiillogh immediately assured her 
with w^armth, was owing not to want of 
regard, but power to render him any essen- 
tial service, in consequence of the embar- 
rassed state of his finances; besides, which, 
(proceeded she) he knew if he took any 
notice of his nephew, he should be pre- 
vented visiting at Glengary, which, on his 
account, he was anxious to persevere in 
doing, hoping by such means to yet ob- 
tain an opportunity of serving him with 
his father; that he held Mrs. Munro in the 
most sovereign contempt was evident, both 
to herself and every other person, not- 
withstanding which she was too much gra- 
tified by the notice of so near a relation 
of her predecessor's, not to pass over the 
slights she met with from him. 

Elizabeth was pleased to hear this, be- 
cause she knew it would give her father 
pleasure to learn that the neglect he expe- 
c 3 rienced 



50 THE DISCARDED SON. 

rienced from so near a relation was not 
owing, to want of affection. 

In reply to her wishing to see the 
ancient seat of her forefathers^ Mrs. M'Tul- 
logh assured her, if an opportunity for 
gratifying her curiosity occurred whilst she 
remained at Black Crag, she should be ap- 
prised of it. AHera little further conver- 
sation she took her leave^ but net without 
begging permission to repeat her visit. 

Elizabeth's chamber opened into a closet, 
which by a flight of steps communicated 
with a green-house, opening into a retired 
garden. The day was a lovely one, and, 
as soon as she was left to herself, she re- 
paired thither. 

As she was slowly paci'ig a shady path, 
20L rbed in the reflections her recent 
visitor had inspired, she v>as startled on a 
sudden, bv beholding Ruthven at her side. 

Perceiving her emotion, '^l fear 1 have 
alar?red you," he cried, smiling. 

" No/' answered Elizabeth, recovering 
LerseiC *' only surprised me a little, as I 

supposed 



THE DISCARDED SON. §1 

supposed you had joined some one of the 
parties that were formed at breakfast/' 

'*^What/' in- a tone of tender reproach, 
''after hearing you avow your determina- 
tion not to do so/'* 

Elizabeth, thinking these merely words , 
of course, only laughed. 

After a little conversation — '' There is a 
beautiful and rom.antic spot/' said he^ " a 
little distance from this, which, I thinks 
you would be highly delighted with — will 
you permit me to be your guide to it?'' 

Elizabeth made no objection^ — being a 
married man, and so near a relation of 
Mrs. Dunbar, inducing her to believe there 
was no impropriety in acceding to his re- 
quest. 

They accordingly quitted t^egardert, by 
means of a wicket at its extremity, and 
sweeping round some noble plantations, 
entered upon a shelving path, bounded on 
each side by high shrubby banks, in many 
places overtopped by clustering elders and 
hollies. The balmy sweetness which the 
c 4 wild 



32 THE DISCARDED SON. 

w'ild plants and flowers that bespread these 
l)anks gave to the air^ the melodious carol- 
ing of the birds that filled their brakes/and 
the incessant humming of the busy insects 
that swarmed the adjacent shades^ rendered 
this walk delightful. After proceeding some 
distance, the banks suddenly cleared away 
on one side, and disclosed to view a beau- 
tiful river, just where a ridge of rocks im- 
peded the current, and produced a most 
picturesque waterfall. Across these rocks 
was a passage to the opposite side, where 
on the top of a steep cliff stood a beautiful 
fancy cottage, shaded in the rear by a 
complete grove of lilac, inclosed within a 
light white paling, which added much to 
the rustic appearance of the place. The 
summit of the cliff was covered with the 
finest verdure, and tufted with shrubs, in- 
terspersed with knots of flowers, myrtles, 
geraniums, and all such exotics, as during 
the heat of summer can bear the open 
air. The descent, was rendered easy by 
flights of steps cut in the rock in various 

directions^ 



THE DISCARDED SON. 33 

directions, and here and there deviating 
into little wildernesses, in which seats 
were placed for repose and recreation. At 
the base, and close to the water's edge, 
stood a small octagon temple, command- 
ino: most extensive views on either side of 
the river. 

In this little rustic villa, which owed its 
existence entirely to the taste of Mrs.Dun- 
bar, Ruthven informed Elizabeth she fre- 
quently entertained her friends with pic- 
nic dinners and rural balls. 

Elizabeth was too much charmed to re- 
sist his importunities to take a nearer view 
of it ; they crossed over, and on gaining 
the summit, Ruthven threw open one of 
the windows, which were all of fine plate 
glass, extending from the cieling to the 
ground, and answering the double pur- 
pose of doors and windows, and admitted 
his fair companion into a spacious room^ 
but fitted up with a simplicity that m.ade it 
perfectly accord with the exterior of the 
building. The floor was covered with 
c 5 India: 



Si ' THE DISCARDED SON. 

India matting ; the chairs, of cane, were 
exactly in the cottage style ; a dresser, of 
snowy hue, was furnished with a variety of 
curious Tunbridge ware; ^he-walls, of a 
greyish colour, were hung with a varfety 
of prints, chiefly taken from the Seasons 
of Thomson ; and the windows orna- 
mented with a drapery of brown silk net- 
ting, in imitation of that made for the 
preservation of fruit. This apartment 
opened into a smaller one, called the tea- 
room, and furnished in rather a more 
showy manner^ the window-curtains and 
chair-covers, of slate-coloured calico, were 
edged with a deep border of roses ; the 
rustic mantle-piece was decorated with a 
variety of fine old china ; and the walls^ 
instead of being adorned with pictures, 
were painted in imitation of trellis-work, 
with natural shrubs and flowers breaking 
through, 

Elizabeth was in raptures with all she 
saw ; and Ruthven professed himself equal- 
ly delighted, at having been the means of 

affording 



THE DISCARDED SO NT. o3 

affording her so much pleasure. While she 
was looking about her he sh'pped awa\% 
but shortly returned with a basket of 
strawberries and bov/l of cream^ which 
he had procured from an old woman, who 
w^ith her husband occupied the back part 
of the cottage, in order to take care of it. 

Elizabeth, still imputing his conduct to 
her to benevolent motives — to his per- 
ceiving the neglect she experienced from 
others, and wishing to do something which 
should prevent her feeling it sensibly — 
received his attentions with a sweetness 
and pleasure, which still further strength- 
ened his hopes of having already made a 
favourable impression on her mind. 

This idea, unjted to the tempting op- 
portunity he had for revealing his senti- 
ments, emboldened him by degrees to be- 
tray them. At first Elizabeth treated as 
a jest what he said to her; but by. degrees 
the encreasing warmth of his language, his 
jstill more impassioned glances, and some 
G G liberties- 



56 



THE DISCARDED SON. 



liberties he attempted to take, made heir 
drop her rallying manner, and determine 
on leaving him immediately ; but, on her 
making an effort to quit the seat in the 
inner room, with a kind of gentle vio- 
lence he detained her. 

'' Mr. Ruthven/ cried Elizabeth, as she 
struggled to free herself from him, '' I — 
I insist (almost panting with anger and 
alarm) on your instantly releasing me. 
Do -not, by persevering in this audacious 
conduct, make me repent having formed 
a better opinion of you than you de- 
serve.'' 

'' If I have been so fortunate,'' returned 
he, in a most insidious tone, but still pre- 
venting her quitting her seat, '' to inspire 
you v/ith a good opinion, surely my only 
yielding to the feelings inspired by your 
resistless charms — to the impulse of ado- 
ration, of admiration, cannot — or rather 
ought not, to rob me of it : — come, my 
adorable girl^, do not look upon me witK 

such 



THE DISCARDED SON. 57 

such an indignant aspect — believe me^ you 
could not find a more grateful admirer 
than I shall be/' 

" This language. Sir, is as unbecoming 
your situation, as it is insulting to me." 

'^^ And why unbecoming? nothing can 
be unbecoming that is not unnatural ; and 
surely it cannot be reckoned unnatural for 
a young fellow like me to speak of love 
to a beautiful w^oman/' 

" And why ! what a question," repeated 
Elizabeth ; '' is it for you, a married man^ 
to speak in such a manner ?" 

'' A married man ! my dear angel (with 
the most libertine air imaginable) : who, 
for heaven's sake, do you think would ever 
marry, if they did not suppose they would 
still continue at liberty to follow their own 
inclinations? true, I am married, but ma- 
trimony has neither destroyed my taste for 
beauty or pleasure ; in short, to come to 
the point at once — for I am no hypocrite^ 
and, besides, consider life too short and 
precarious for any of its precious mo- 
ments 



38 THE* DISCAIRDED SOI^T. 

ments to be wasted in reserves and scru- 
ples — I adore you ; and if you will turn a 
propitious ear to my vows, swear to you, 
that all I command, which, thank my 
stars, is sufficient to satisfy any w^oman at 
all reasonable in her wishes, shall hence- 
forth be at your disposal.'* 

''^ Away!" cried Elizabeth, with an indig- 
naticn that agitated her whole Hame. ^'That 
you have strangely misconceived my cha- 
racter, I must suppose, or that you would 
never have insulted me in the manner you 
have done ; but this is no extenuation of 
your conduct, since, out of respect to 
Mrs. Dunbar, I should, as h:r guest, have 
been treated very differently. Unhand 
me this moment^ Sir, or you will oblige 
me to expose your conduct, which, on 
her accorrt, I wish to bury in obii\ion, 
by calling to the servants." 

*' My angel, to r>ievent your fatiguing 
yourself with such an exertion, know that 
the good dame and her husband are gone 
out into the neighbouring fields^ so that 

neither 



THE BISCAKDED SON. 59 

neither obtrusive eye^ nor listening ear, 
need we dread/' As he spoke, he at- 
tempted again to strain her to his breast. 

'' Listen to nie, Mr. Ruthven/' cried Eli- 
zabeth, endeavouring to check the terror 
his conduct inspired, emphatically laying 
one hand on his arm, and with the other 
parrying off the efforts he made to kiss 
her. 

What further she intended to say was 
prevented by the siidden opening of the 
door communicating with the two apart- 
ments, and the entrance of Mrs. Ruthven 
and her un faithful friend. 

By persuasions of Miss Rae, she had fol- 
lowed them to the cottage, judging of 
others by herself, as the depraved heart is 
ever apt to 6.0. Miss Rae, on Elizabeth's 
declining to join any of the parties at 
breakfast, immediately conceived a suspi- 
cion that it was owing to some agreement 
between her and Ruthven — a i.uspicion in 
which she was confirmed, when^ in conse- 

5 queuce 



40 THE BISCARJ5E1> SON. 

quence of having staid at home to watch 
their motions, she beheld them quitting 
the o-arden to«:ether. vShe directly hastened 
to Mrs. Rnthven, who, owing to Delacour's 
having excused himself from riding with 
her, had also, in a fit of sullenness, re- 
fused going out, and informed her, if ever 
she hoped to make a discovery, that might 
excuse the step she meditated, now was 
her time, information which quickly in- 
duced Mrs. Ruthven to oblige her. There 
was another, though more circuitous, way 
to the cottage, than the one Ruthven and 
Elizabeth had taken, and this they pur- 
sued, to surprise them, as above related. 
« Ruthven started up on the entrance of 
the unwelcome intruders, and his exam- 
ple was followed by Elizabeth, but neither 
attempted to speak ; anger tied the tongue 
of one, and confusion that of the other. 

" Upon my word, a charming spot 
this for the perusal of a tender tale, so 
quiet, and so romantic/' said Mrs. Ruth- 
ven^ 



THE DISCARDED SON. 41 

ven^ after enjoying for a few minutes^ in 
malicious silencC;, the evident distress of 
Elizabeth. 

'' Or for the disclosure of one/' added 
Miss Rae, still more maliciously^ and glanc- 
ing her flashing eyes at Ruthven. 

''' What a delightful thing is a good in- 
vention !" rejoined Mrs. Ruthven : " who 
could, have suspected that some people 
(and, with a supercilious smile, she di- 
rected the eyes of Miss Rae to Elizabeth) 
had other motives for staying at home 
this morning than the ones they avowed!'* 

'' Smooth water runs deep/' replied the 
elegant and gentle Miss Rae. 

'' Yes, so I now find ; but we intrude — 
come, my dear," taking her arm, ''let us 
be gone — studious people, like Miss 
Munro," smiling ironically, '' don't like 
to be broken in upon/* 

Miss Rae hesitated about retiring, but 
finding Mrs. Ruthven was determined, and 
fearful, from the turn of his countenance, 
if she shewed any inclination to remain 

behind^ 



42 THE DISCARDED SON. 

behind^ Ruthven would betray her to his 
wife^ and thus occasion the complete frus- 
tration of every scheme she had forned;, 
she forced herself to refrain making any 
objection to tVie proposal. 

On their leaving the roonri, El'zabeth 
recovered the faculties wliich the shock 
she had received from their unexpected 
appearance^ or rather conduct to her, had 
suspended, and attempted to fly after tliemj 
but was prevented by Ruthven's catching 
her robe. 

" For heaven's sake, my angel/' cried 
he, perfectly recovered from his recent 
surprise, being too hardened to care either 
what bis wife, or any other person, might 
say concerning him^ " what are you 
about?" 

*' Let me go — ]€t me go," exclaimed 
Elizabeth wildly, and struggling with him ; 
*' or, ir you wi^h me to forgive your con- 
duct, wish me to believe you not lost to 
every feeling of honour and humanity, 
hasten after your wife yourself, and excul- 
pate 



THE DISCAKDED SON. 4B 

pate me from the suspicions 'tis plain she 
entertains." 

'^ My lovely girl^ think no more of her 
— envy^ pure envy alone, caused her to 
say what she did; she and her companion 
are two of the most malicious creatures in 
the universe, and you cannot gratify them 
more than by suffering them to believe 
you mind them; only reflect, if they were 
not, could the simple circumstance of see- 
ing us seated fiere, v/hich was all they saw, 
have induced them to act as they have 
done ?" 

^' Wretch I" exclaimed Elizabeth^ burst- 
ing from his grasp, and escaping fr jm the 
room, almost maddened at the thoughts of 
the irreparable injury her character might 
sustain, if it was known that she continued 
another minute with him after what had 
past. 

Ruthven pursued her till she gained 
the passage across the water, when he 
paused, lest otherwise her safety might be 
endangered. 

Oa 



44 THE DISCARDED SON. ] 

On reaching her chamber, which^ owing i 
to her swiftness, she did without further 
molestation from him, her first impulse 
was to seek out Mrs. Ruthven immedi- i 
ately, for the purpose of clearing herself ! 
in her opinion ; but when she came to re- ■ 
fleet on the consequences that might ensue 
from such a measure, that she could not 
justify herself without villifying Ruthven, | 
and thus, perhaps, occasioning an eternal | 
breach between them, she relinquished it 
altogether, trusting her subsequent con- i 
duct would remove any unfavourable ideas j 
that might at present be entertained of her. \ 

It may here, perhaps, be remarked, that \ 
the most prudent step she could have 
taken, would have been to have quitted -; 
Black Cracr immediatelv. Of this she was j 
well aware, and accordingly would not ^ 
have delayed her departure, but for a letter 
received from her father that morning, - 
acquainting her that he and her mother ' 
were gone on a little excursion for a 
week or a fortnight from Heath wood — in- 
formation ' 



THE DISCARDED SON. 45 

formation which;, owing to the terror 
she was under of Lord O'Sinister, ren- 
dered her unwilling to proceed thither, 
till apprised of their return. The in- 
stant she heard of that, she resolved 
on bidding adieu to Black Crag ; and 
even sooner, if she found she could 
not awe Ruthven into decorum, or had 
any reason to imagine that her protracted 
stay gave uneasiness to his lady, or that 
she had injured her in the estim.ation of 
Mrs. Dunbar. 

She shuddered, when she reflected on 
the lengths to which jealousy and miscon- 
ception often lead people, and could only 
alleviate the anguish the idea gave her, by 
deciding on coming to a candid explana- 
tion with Mrs. Dunbar respecting the con- 
duct of her nephew, should she have any 
grounds for believing she had been misre- 
presented to her by his wife. 

With mingled horror and astonishment 
she revolved his conduct, the vile and un- 
generous advantage he had taken of her 

confidence 



46 THE DISCARDED SON. 

confidence in his honour to inveigle her 
into solitude. That he was a hardened li- 
bertine she could not doubt; and who 
knowSj thought she^, but that to a con- 
sciousness of his being so — to a mind soiired 
by disappointment and suspicion — may be 
owing the asperity^ and seeming malevo- 
lence of his lady. '' Oh, if I thought so/' 
she cried with energy, '' how readily could I 
—how readily would I excuse whatever ap- 
pears unamiable in her disposition, since I 
can easily picture to myself (and for an in- 
stant her thoughts rested on Delacour) 
what a heart of the least sensibility must 
feel, at finding itself deceived by the ob- 
ject of itrs love and confidence, compelled 
to lead a life of jealousy — ' to follow still 
the changes of the moon with fresh sur- 
mises.' To such a state how preferable — 
how infinitely preferable, that of 

*' the barren sister, 
** Chaunting faint hymns tn the cold fruitless moon.'* 

Solely engrossed by the recent incidents, 
she thought not of dressing till a late hour; 

in 



THE DISCARDED SON. 47 

in consequence of whxh she received a 
summons to dinner ere her toilet was com- 
pleted. 

Distressed and confused, at the idea of 
occasioning the company to wait for her, she 
hurried over the rest of her dress, and, wdth 
trembling steps, repaired to the drawing- 
room, scarcely able to make the apology 
she deemed necessary to Mrs. Dunbar. In 
reply to this — " Oh, pray say no more on 
the subject, my dear," said this lady; " when 
people are agreeably lengaged, I know they 
are apt to forget how time passes." 

Elizabeth looked earnestly at Mrs. Dun- 
bar, and almost started, for she fancied 
these words were uttered with an ironical 
air. She quickly, however, endeavoured 
to subdue her ladings, and resolved not 
• to be too precipitate in giving way to the 
apprehensions this idea excited. 

To her unspeakable indignation Ruthven 
made an eflbrt to take her hand to lead her 
to the eating-room. With a look expres- 
sive of the feelings he had inspired, she 

shrunk 



48 THE DISCABDED SON. 

shrunk from hlm^ and contrived, though ' 
not without some difficulty, to get a chair 
at a distance from his; but which/ h'ke the - 
one she occupied the preceding day at - 
table, was again exactly opposite Dela- 
cour's, \ 

Thus situated, it was impossible to pre- j 
vent their eyes continually meeting; and, ^ 
with a sensation of surprise, Elizabeth still j 
read, in the dark expressive ones of Dela- j 
cour, a language very different from that I 
of indiiTerence. She would not suffer her- \ 
self, hovv'ever, to dwell upon this pleasing i 
idea; his cold constrained air towards her 
plainly evinced his wishing her to believe ' 
he felt nothing more for her ; and she ac- i 
cordingly determined to force herself to ■ 
think so. V i 

Malicious and disdainful as were the ; 
looks with which she was regarded the pre- \ 
ceding day by Mrs. Ruthven and Miss Rae, i 
they were tender and complacent, com- ' 
pared to those she now received from ' 
them. 

But 



THE DISCARDED SON. 49 

But not sufficiently gratified by giving 
her silent indications of their hatred, they 
began to speak at her in a manner that 
crimsoned her cheeks with the blushes of 
shame and indignation^ and would com- 
pletely have overwhelmed her^ but that, 
as from time to time she cast a timid 
glance round the table^ she had the happi- 
ness of perceiving none of the party but 
Ruthven appeared to understand them. 

Their conversation was a little diverted 
from her at length, by Lady Lochness en- 
quiring whether they had yet begun to 
make preparations for the approaching 
entertainment at Glengary ? To which, 
replying in the negative — ^'Come, Grant," 
added she, slapping him familiarly on 
the shoulder as he sat beside her, '^ I 
know you to have a good invention, 
so do help us to a few good charac- 
ters.'* 

" What, for the purpose of cutting up, 
as is your custom, when any fall in your 
way ?" 

VOL. II. JBk << No, 



60 THE DISCARDED SON. 

'' Noj you wretch, but for the masque- 
rade ; I want to go in one that won't easily 
be found out/' 

'' Then you must go in one not at all 
like your own." 

" And I too/' cried Hume, " I wish 
to do the same, for of all things (most 
affectedly) I like a character that's not 
easily developed." 

*^' Yes — by a strange perverseness, we 
often like that which is most opposite to 
our own." 

''Indeed! you think then (still in an 
affected accent) that I am easily read.'* 

" Yes — with more ease than pleasure." 

" How vastly polite ! but you improve — 
yes, you improve daily." 

" I zm concerned truth will not allow 
me to return the compliment." 

*' Don't minxi^Jjim, Hume," said her La- 
dyship; ''he only serves you as he does 
every one else ; he really grows such a 
savage, I shan't be surprised soon to hear 
of his digging a cave, and retiring to it 
like another Timon/' 

" Since 



THE J&ISCARDED SON. 51 

'^ Since so devilish fond of correcting, 
why don't you," cried Ruthven, '' turn 
your eyes inward, as Hamlet says?'* 

'' Because 1 should see there greater 
compassion for the vices and follies of 
mankind than they merit/* 

'^ Come, come, a truce with these vices 
and follies/* said Mrs. Ruthven, a little 
impatiently, ^' and let us return to the 
masquerade, as a much more delightful 
theme ; what a charming taste does Mrs. 
Munro display in the entertainments she 
contrives for the amusement of her friends 1 
but really altogether, (and she looked 
spitefully at Elizabeth) she is a most de- 
lightful w^omaQ, and, if ever she quits this 
neighbourhood, we'll all have to* complain 
of a serious loss; but I trust there is no 
chance whatever of her doing so ; I hope 
Mr. Munro has done justice to her merits, 
(and again she glanced at Elizabeth), by 
securing the whole of his property to 
her.'* 

This speech was too evidently aimed at 
D i^ Elizabeth 



UNIVERSITY OF 

II I (Mmo I ion n n\* 



52 THE DISCARDED SOX. 

Elizabeth not to occasion every eye to be 
turned on her. The emotions it excited, 
united to the embarrassment caused by this 
general observation^ nearly overpowered 
her ; her head drooped upon her bosom^, 
and a scalding tear of indignation dropped 
Upon her varying cheek. 

Delacour, who till the present moment 
had been nearly silent, and apparently un- 
interested in what was going forward, now 
seemed hardly abje to command his feel- 
ings. 

*' In such a hope," exclaimed he, with 
the greatest warmth, and turning his eyes 
flashing with anger and scorn full upon Mrs. 
Ruthven, "I am persuaded, Madam, you'll 
find but few persons. If any, to join you." 

'' Indeed, Sir 1 and pray why so ?" turn- 
ing pale with rage at the look with which 
he regarded her." 

"Why so .^ Oh Madam, (with con- 
temptuous indignation), what a question ! 
excuse me for entreating you to recollect 
yourself," 

'' No, 



THE DISCARDED SON. 53^ 

" NO;, Sir/' every feature swelling with 
passion, '' 'tis you that require to recol- 
lect yourself; I could not have supposed 
that you would have spoken in the man- 
ner you have just done/* 

" Then, Madam/' bowing to her, with a 
sarcastic smile, '' we have equally surprised 
each other." 

'' Com.e, come," interposed Mrs. Dun- 
bar, '' as lady president, I desire a new 
subject may be started; come, Mr. Grant, 
a song or a sentiment" (the cloth was by 
this time removed. ) 

'' With all my heart. Madam, the latter — 
May innocence," and his eye glanced at 
Elizabeth, ^^ never want a friend, nor ma- 
lice," and he turned towards Mrs. Ruthven> 
but as if involuntarily "an enemy." 

The warmth with which Delacour had re- 
sented a speech so wounding to her feel- 
ings, would have given birth to the most 
delightful sensations in the bosom of Eli- 
zabeth, but that she could not help think- 
ing, from the coldness and reserve with 
D 3. which 



54 THE DISCARDED SON. < 

which he now treated her, that humanitjr 
was his sole motive for having clone so. 

The whole party quitted the table pretty 
much about the same time, and repaired 
to a spacious gallery, the grand rendezvous 
of the family in general, and furnished at 
one end with billiard-tables, and at the other 
with musical instruments. Round the for- 
mer all the party but Elizabeth, and such 
as preferred cards in an adjacent room with 
Mrs. Dunbar, immediately collected, the 
gentlemen to play, and the ladies to bet. 

Elizabeth, alike neglected by all, for 
Ruthven had stationed himself at a bil- 
liard-table, seated herself in a remote 
window, commanding a full view of the 
sea, now tinged with the most vivid 
hues by the setting sun. as were also the 
stupendous cliffs that extended in a wild 
series along the coast — the haunts of gan- 
nats, shags, grey gulls, kittiwaks, razor- 
bills, and guillamots. 

This scenery, so wild, yet magnificent, 
too^ether with the monotonous sound of 
the waves breaking on the rocky shore, 

and 



THE DISCARDED SON. 55 

and the plaintive cries of the birds, now 
beginning to repair to their nests, gradu- 
ally inspired a tender melancholy, sooth- 
ing to the agitated feelings of the har- 
passed Elizabeth. She became by degrees 
so completely absorbed in it, that she 
could not forbear starting^, on feeling her 
arm touched by the tea-tray, which a ser- 
vant had brought her. 

Whilst helping herself, Ruthven also 
approached, and took a cup of coffee. 
" For I must,'' said he, giving her a look 
expressive of his libertine wishes, '' have 
the happiness of being helped off of the 
same board with Miss Munro." 

ff Wretch \" inwardly exclaimed Eliza- 
beth, averting her face with unaffected dis- 
dain from him. 

'' Now why so cruelly coy ?" cried he, 
seating himself with an air Oi the greatest 
assurance on the wiudow-seat beside her ; 
'^ upon my soul, you'll quite annihilate my 
happiness, if you persist in being so.'* 

'' Coy!** repeated Elizabeth, with the 
D 4 greatest 



56 THE DISCARDED SON. 

greatest indignation;, and involuntailj rais- 
ing and turning her e3^eS;, sparkling with 
anger and scorn on him. '' Good hea* 
vens, Sir^ how can you have the auda- 
city to speak to me again in such a man- 
ner ?'' 

Without the least alteration of counte- 
nance, he was about replying to her^ when 
a summons to the billiard-table, where the 
game he had begun w^as not yet finished, 
prevented him. 

The train of reflections he had inter- 
rupted were too cruelly disturbed by 
his effrontery to be renewed. Shocked 
and disgusted, Elizabeth turned from the 
objects that had awakened them, in order 
to be on her guard, in case he again 
attempted to join her. Soon after, a 
number of additional visitors entered; 
and with these some musicians, whom 
Mrs. Dunbar kept in constant pay, made 
their appearance ; and arrangements for 
dancing immediately commenced. 

Elizabeth, 



THE DISCARDED SON. 57 

Elizabeth, however, moved not until 
she at length saw Ruthven again ap- 
proaching her ; she instantly vacated her 
seat ; but her effort to avoid him was fruit- 
less — he suddenly threw himself before her, 
and, catching her hand, would have led her 
to the set, but that she forcibly drew back. 
—'' What ! don't you dance?" demanded 
he, with the most impenetrable assurance. 

" Not with you. Sir, assuredly," replied 
Elizabeth, with all the haughtiness she 
could assume, and struggling to free her 
hand. 

'' Then by heavens you dance with no 
other person to-night," cried he spitefully, 
not a little piqued by her manner, relin- 
quishing her hand as he spoke, and throw- 
ing himself full length upon a sofa, in 
order to watch at his ease her motions. 

Elizabeth retired to as great a distance 

as she could from him, and also kept 

away from the rest of the party as 

much as possible, lest otherwise it might 

D 5. be-^ 



58 THE DISCARDED SON. 

be surmised she wished to obtrude herself 
upon their notice, which they appeared 
quite as little inclined to bestow upon her 
this evening, as they had done the pre- 
ceding one. 

Dancing, however, had scarcely com- 
menced, w^hen a young gentleman, who 
bad but lately entered the room, ap- 
proached her seat, and begged the honour 
of her hand. vShe was on the point of 
granting his request, when Ruthven, who, 
in consequence of seeing him approach 
her, had darted to her side, whispered in 
her ear, but in a voice too low to permit 
what he said to be distinguished by any 
one else, '^ Remember my declaration ; 
by heavens, if you give your hand to that 
puppy, rll tear it fi'om him^, and then kick 
him from the room/' 

Apprehensive of his doing what he 
threatenedj and trembling at the bare sug- 
gestion of a disturbance on her account, 
Elizabeth immediately declined dancing, 

though 



THE DISCARDED SON. "59 

though not without the greatest reluc- 
tance, so much was she vexed at the 
thoughts of doing any thing that could gra- 
tify him. 

'' What ! not dance, my dear," said 
Mrs. Dunbar, in a tone of surprise, and 
who, having left cards for a few minutes, 
in order to take a survey of the dancers, 
w^as now at her elbow. 

'' No, Ma'am,'' timidly, as well as hesita- 
tingly^ said Elizabeth, " 1 — I have got a 
head-ache, that — " 

'' Oh, my dear, 'tis not necessary for 
you to make any excuse to me on the 
subject ; I always wish people to follow 
their own inclination.'* 

'' Then, I believe. Ma'am," returned 
Elizabeth, who clearly saw that she should 
not else be able to free herself from the 
persecutions of Ruthven, " since you are 
so good, I shall retire to my room." 

" As you please," was the reply, but 

delivered, Elizabeth fancied, with a cold 

constrained air, '' as I have already told 

D 6 you. 



'60 THE DISCARDED SON. 

you, 'tis my wish that my guests should 
always feel themselves at home/' 

With a slio-ht bow she then left her. ac- 
companied by the gentleman she had been 
compelled to refuse. 

"Why surely/* cried Ruthven, who con- 
tinued by her side, the moment they were 
left by themselves, '' you can't be serious 
in thinking of going immediately to your 
room ?" 

Elizabeth turned from him without re- 
plying, and instantly retired. 

She found her chamber illumined by 
the pale and silvery beams of the moon, 
already risen high in the firmament; its 
mild light was too pleasing to her to per^ 
mit her to think of calling for candles di- 
rectly ; she seated herself in an open win- 
dow fronting the sea, and as she contem- 
plated, with that admiration it was so w^ell 
calculated to inspire, the shadowy scene 
without, rendered still more impressive by 
the sound of ocean's heaving wave, and the 
wailing of the owl from the grass-fringed 
3 battlements 



THE DISCARDED SON. 61 

battlements of the castle, again felt the 
perturbation of her spirits subsiding, and 
involuntarily thought, as she felt its tran- 
quillizing power, how much kinder Na- 
ture is to mankind than in general they 
are to themselves, since in the scenes she 
furnishes for their recreation, unlike those 
they too often contrive for themselves for 
that purpose, nothing is ever found that 
can give rise to unpleasant reflections, or 
debase their minds. '' Oh, never," cried 
Elizabeth, as she pursued this reflection, 
^^ may I suffer myself to be led into any 
pursuits that can destroy my taste for her 
sublime works, or prevent my gazing on 
those spangled heavens, with the sweet, the 
extatic, the holy hope, of yet becoming 
a bright inhabitant of them/' 

But the quietness she so much needed 
she was not suffered long to enjoy. She 
had not been above half an hour in her 
chamber, when her meditations were sud- 
denly interrupted by the creaking of the 
closet door, and instantly after perceiving 

a man 



62 THE DISCARDED SON. 

a man advancing from it : that the intruder 
was Ruthven she could not doubt, and 
with a shriek of terror she started up^ and 
sprang towards the door leading into the 
dressing-room. Rutliven, however, for it 
was him, was too quick for her; he gained 
it before her, and turning the key, took it 
out, and then hastening back to the oppo- 
site door, did the same. 

Elizabeth, on finding her escape thus 
prevented, made towards the bell ; but 
was hindered reachin^j it by Ruthven 's 
catching her in his arm^. 

" Villain ! monster !" exclaimed she, as 
almost breathless with terror and indigna- 
tion, she struggled to burst from his grasp^ 
" are you then lost to every feeling of 
shame and honour?'" 

'' To all but love," cried he, straining 
her still more closely to his bosom. 

Unable to disengage herself from him, 
and too well apprised of the remote situa- 
tion of her chamber to hope the exertion 
of her voice would obtain her any assist- 



THE DISCARDED SOK. 63 

ance, terror now completely overpowered 
Elizabeth. The dropping of her head up- 
on his shoulder, and the cold dampness 
of her lips, against which he audaciously 
pressed his, apprised Ruthven of the state 
to which he had reduced her ; he bore her 
to the window, where by degrees the air re- 
vived her. But just as she was regainino^ 
her faculties, they were again nearly sus- 
pended, by suddenly hearing herself called 
upon by Mrs. Ruthven from the dressing- 
room, and Miss Rae from the closet, to 
admit them imm,ediately into her chamber. 
On missing her and Ruthven from the 
gallery, who, bold and presumptuous as 
he was deceptive and designing, had sud- 
denly conceived the project of following 
her to her chamber, it occurred to them, 
that they had retired for the purpose of re- 
nevving the tete-a-tete which had been in- 
terrupted in the morning ; and no sooner 
had this thought struck them, than they 
decided on besetting her, as above de- 
scribed^ ill order to prevent the escape of 

Ruthven^ 



64 THE DISCARDED SON. 

Ruthven, whom his wife had now a double 
motive for wishing to surprise with her; 
the warmth with which Delacour had no- 
ticed the efforts she made at dinner-time to 
wound her feelings having stung her to 
the quick, and added jealousy to her other 
causes of dislike towards her. 

'' Oh ! good heavens^ I am lost — irre- 
trievably ruined !" cried Elizabeth^ in a 
low voice, and wringing her hands. 

^' Compose yourself^ my angel/' said 
Ruthven, vvhisperingly, '' and nothing that 
you apprehend will ensue ; the projec- 
tion beneath this window, permit me 
to make my escape by it, and thus dis- 
appoint the malice of those two fiends, 
whom the devil confound.'* 

Then returning her the keys of the re- 
spective doors, and snatching a hasty kiss, 
he stepped out, and in a few minutes 
reached the ground in safety. 

In the meanwhile the two ladies kept 
thundering for admission. 

*' Open the door, I say. Miss Munro," 

vociferated 



THE DISCARDED SON. 6a 

vociferated Mrs.Ruthven^ '^immediately, or 
I'll call up the servants to break it open/' 

" If you keep me another minute here/' 
almost screamed the enraged Miss Rae^ 
*' depend upon it. Miss Munro, you shall 
have cause for repentance/* 

At length they were admitted by the 
trembling Elizabeth. 



CAHP, 



(f6 THE DISCARDED SON. 



CHAP. II. 



•» Her look was so artless, her accent so mild, 

" Her candour so sweetly express'd, 

1 gaz'd on her beauties, as blushing she smil'd. 

And clasp' J the lov'd maid to my breast. 
The primrose in clusters breath'd fragrance around. 

And witness'd the vows that were given j 
The lark that sat listening soar'd swift from the ground, 

And warbled the contract in heaven." 

Macniell's Poims. 

^' 1? INE doings there must have been car- 
rying on in this chamber^ to have it barri- 
caded in such a manner/*' cried Mrs. Ruth- 
ven, the moment she gained admission, 
glancing eagerly round it as she spoke, 
in hopes of espying Ruthven. 

'' No doubt/' rejoined Miss Rae, also 

looking 



THE DISCARDED SON. 67 

looking about, and then running to the 
bed, to try \vhether Ruthven was not con- 
cealed behind the curtains. 

" Pray, Madam," with a bullying air, 
demanded Mrs. Ruthven, enraged beyond 
expression at not finding her husband, as 
she expected, '' what reason can you as- 
sign for locking yourself up in such a 
manner ?'* 

" I deern it quite unnecessary to assign 
any. Madam,'* returned Elizabeth haughtily, 
her spirit proudly rising at this contume- 
lious treatment. 

'' Because you have no good one to 
give." 

" Whatever was the cause, this intrusion 
proves I was but right in doing so.*' 

" You insolent little hussey, is it by 
impertinence to her relation you manifest 
your gratitude to Mrs. Dunbar, for per- 
mitting you to come under her roof?" 

" In reply, permit me to ask you. Ma- 
dam, whether it is by insulting her guest 
you evince your respect for her ?** 

^' Insulting ! 



68 THE DISCARDED SON. 

" Insulting ! — insulting !" in accents of 
fury ; '' why, if I did insult you, have you 
not given me cause ? — have you not 
wounded me in the tenderest point P — have 
you not alienated the aflections of my 
husband from me through your artifices ? 
— are you not now carrying on a shame- 
ful — ?" 

'^ Hold, Madam !— -hold !'' cried Eliza- 
beth, with still greater vivacity, " for 
your own sake, as well as mine, I cau- 
tion you to silence, for be assured I am 
neither so destitute of spirit, or of friends, 
as to allow my character to be attacked 
with impunity." 

"Monstrous ! I protest," exclaimed Miss 
Rae, perceiving Mrs. Ruthven appeared 
somewhat awed by this speech, " I never 
heard such assurance; if I was you, my 
dear friend, I'd instantly go to Mrs. Dun- 
bar, and make it a point that she should 
be turned from the house." 

" Tis quite unnecessary. Madam," re- 
plied Elizabeth, with a look of ineffable 

scorn. 



THE DISCARDED SON. 60 

scorn, '' for her to take that trouble, for 
after what has just passed, nothing should 
tempt me to prolong my stay in it/' 

"^ Oh yes — you mean to leave it, to be 
sure/' cried Mrs. Ruthven, sneeringly ; 
'' but come, my dear,** taking the arm of 
her confidant, '' let us leave her to her 
agreeable reflections, for her assurance real- 
ly agitates me in a way that cannot but be 
injip'ious to me.'* 

" The time will yet arrive^ I make no 
doubt, M^dam," said Elizabeth, '' in which 
you'll be convinced I merited not such 
treatm.ent from you.'* 

The moment she found herself alone she 
rung for lights ; and as soon as they were 
brought, and the servant dismissed, she 
carefully locked the closet door, and then 
repaired to the dressing-room, with a de- 
termination of passing the night there, 
her mind being too disturbed, and her ap- 
prehensions of Ruthven too great, to per- 
mit her to think of retiring to repose. 

Never, indeed, had she been so sliocked, 

as 



70 THE DISCARDED SOK. 

as by the cruel suspicions it was but too 
evident Mrs. Ruthven entertained of her. 
The hope, however, she indulged of her 
departure the following morning from 
Black Crag removing those entirely, was 
some little mitigation of the anguish which 
they now gave her. 

She shuddere<:l, and was truly grateful 
to heaveU;, when she revolved the narrow 
escape her character had ; for had Ruthven 
been detected in her chamber, she felt 
almost convinced, from the violence and 
malignancy of his lady and her friend, that 
she should vainly have attempted its justi- 
fication. 

That women brought up in the manner 
in which she took it for granted they were, 
should yield to such degrading violence of 
temper, was a matter of astonishment to 
her. 

" Of what avail is education,'' cried she, 
*' if it does not teach us to subdue our- 
selves — of what avail its boasted advan- 
tages, if it does not enable us to resist the 

tyranny 



THE DISCARDED SON. 71 

tyranny of our feelings, since, in the mo- 
ment of passion, there is no more diffe- 
rence between the elegant and vulgar 
mind, than there is between the cultivated 
plain, and steril rock when inundated by 
the sea." 

The consolation which the idea of being 
speedily restored to the tranquillity of her 
own beloved home was so well calculated 
to afford her, the apprehension she was un- 
der of Lord O'vSinister being now at Fir- 
grove, rendered her incapable of feeling. 
She tried to hope, however, that, by un- 
remitting vigilance on her side, she should 
be enabled to prevent his taking any ad- 
vantage of her return to Heath wood during 
the absence of her father. 

For some time she meditated seeking an 
immediate interview with Mrs. Dunbar; 
but at length the reflection, that Mrs.Ruth- 
ven might not after all touch upon the oc- 
currences of the day to her, determined her 
also on silence respecting them^ except 
she had reason to believe, from the con- 
duct 



73 THE DISCARDED SON. 

duct of Mrs. Dunbar, that they had been 
mentioned to her prejudice. 

After a watchful and most uncomforta- 
ble night, she threw herself upon the bed 
in a wrapper, just as day-light was begin- 
ning to dawn through the window-shut- 
ters ; but though fatigued in the extreme, 
the discomposure of her mind was too 
great to allow of her enjoying much rest. 
At an earlier hour than usual she arose, 
and was dressing herself, when Mrs. M'Tul- 
logh entered her chamber to pay her re- 
spects, and enquire after the Captain, as 
she still continued to call Munro, of whose 
wound Elizabeth had informed her. 

After Elizabeth had answered this en- 
quiry, and mentioned the excursion on 
which her parents were gone, the house- 
keeper proceeded to say, that, in the 
course of the ensuing week, she hoped to 
have an opportunity of shewing her the 
interior of Glengary. 

Elizabeth thanked her for the kind soli- 
citude she manifested to gratify her wishes, 

but 



THE DISCARDED SON. 73 

but added with a sigh, she was about quit- 
ting Black Crag that day. 

" What ! and the dear Captain and your 
mamma from home !" said Mrs. M'Tullogh, 
in accents indicative of surprise. 

'^ Yes/' answered Elizabeth, in a languid 
tone, her sleepless night, and the dreadful 
agitation she had experienced, having com- 
pletely sunk her spirits. 

''Why sure," cried Mrs. M'Tullogh, after 
looking earnestly in her face for a minute 
— '' sure it can't be possible that Mrs. 
Dunbar has done any thing to affront 
you?" 

^ Oh, no,'* eagerly replied Elizabeth, 
'*■ Mrs. Dunbar," and unconsciously she 
laid an emphasis on the word, '' has done 
nothing to offend me." 

'' But some one else has," with quickness 
rejoined the housekeeper ; ''yes, yes, I see 
plain enough by your looks that you are 
vexed ; and I think 'tis quite as great a 
shame for Mrs. Dunbar to let you be af- 

voL. II. E fronted 



74 THE DISCARDED SON. 

fronted under her roof, as if she had done 
so herself" 

" She's not to blame — she had nothing 
to say to the affair/' cried Elizabeth ; " if 
her niece bore any resemblance to her — '* 

'•' Her niece !" interrupted Mrs. M'TuI- 
logh, ^^ so it is she who has vexed you in 
this manner, and caused you to think of 
going away in such a hurry V* 

Elizabeth, finding she had gone too far to 
recede, frankly related, but not without a 
flood of tears, occasioned by the depression 
of her spirits, to Mrs. M'Tullogh, on whose 
prudence and secresy she was well aware 
she might safely rely, all that had happened 
to her at Black Crag, as well as the circum- 
stance to which her introduction to it 
was owing. 

T\\e. housekeeper was all astonishment 
and indignation at her recital. 

'' Here's a young villain for you, as well 
as an old one !"she exclaimed ; " a pretty 
scape-grare Mrs. Dunbar has got for a 
nephew, but heaven knows good enough 

for 



THE DISCARDED SON". f5 

for the minx he's inarried to. Ah, I wish 
to the Lord some folks I know had caught 
him in your chamber, they'd have put a 
stop to his pranks for a while at least ; 
but, my darling, you mustn't think of 
going home till you are certain the dear 
Captain is there, lest that big rogue of a 
Lord, the devil run away with him — God 
forgive me for saying such a wicked thing, 
but 'tis enough to make one mad to hear 
of such old fellows as he running after 
the girls — should take it into his head to 
contrive another scheme for getting you 
into his power. No — no, that would be 
like getting out of the frying-pan into the 
fire.'' 

'' What am I to do then," asked Eliza- 
beth anxiously, '^ for to continue any 
longer here is utterly impossible ?'* 

-' Yes, yes, I know that well enouf>-h : 

but I'll tell you — you shall come to Glen- 

gary with me, where I have apartments of 

my own, into which no one can enter with- 

e2 out 



70 THE DISCARDED SON. 

out my permission^ and where you'll be as 
snug and as easy as you can wish/* 

'' Could I do so without the knowledge 
of Mrs. Dunbar, I would embrace your 
proposal with as much pleasure as grati- 
tude/' 

'' Nothing easier — do you only tell her 
you have received a letter from home, 
which makes you anxious to return there 
directly, and, instead of accepting her 
carriage for the whole journey, which of 
course she'll offer, merely take it to 
the first stage, where I'll m.eet you, and, 
as I am very intimate with the people of 
the inn there, be able to manage matters 
in such a way that no one shall discover 
more than you wish to have known/* 

To this arrangement Elizabeth made no 
objection; and being anxious to depart as 
soon as possible, she left to Mrs. M'Tul- 
logh, who volunteered her services, the 
employment of packing up her things, 
whilst she repaired to the dressing-room 

of 



THE DISCARDED SON. 77 

of Mrs. Dunbar^ to announce her inten- 
tion of quitting Black Crag immediately. 

The hour was earlier than she imagined, 
and instead of finding Mrs. Dunbar in the 
apartment^ she only found her woman^ 
who informed her her lady was not yet 
up;, but she expected she would be in 
a few minutes. 

This apartment opened to a noble ter 
race extending to the cliffs; and hither 
Elizabeth now bent her steps, to await a 
summons to Mrs. Dunbar. 

" The freshness of the morning air. 

Which nimbly and sweetly here 

Did recommend itself unto the gentle senses," 

was truly delightful to her after the fa- 
tiguing night she had passed. She strolled 
on till she came to the cliff that termi- 
nated it; here she paused, and leaning 
against a fragment of the rock, as her ad- 
miring eves wandered over the restless sur- 
face of the deep, glittering in the expand- 
ing sun-beams, and traced the faint out- 
E 3 line 



78 THE DISCARDED SON. 

line of some of the romantic islands of the 
Hebrides in the distant horizon^ 

*< Like clouds 
Blue floating on the verge of ev'ning slcies," 

her hearty notwithstanding the disquie- 
tude that pervaded it at the moment;, ex- 
perienced a sensation of rapture^ such 
as the sublime and varied works of Nature 
never fail of awakening in a mind of taste 
and genius, a heart of piety and feeling. 

On a sudden the sound of voices on the 
beach made her advance nearer to the edge 
of the ciiiT ; and looking over, she beheld 
at anchor beneath it a beautifully-deco- 
rated vessel, into which several of the ser- 
vants of Mrs. Dunbar were busied in assist- 
ing the sailors to convey baskets of pro- 
visions, a circumstance w^hich gave Eliza- 
beth to understand that a party of plea- 
sure was at hand. As she drew back, and 
was retracing her way to the house, a 
quick footstep behind her caused her agaia 
to glance round, and she saw Delacour. She 

started. 



THE DISCAKDED SON. 79 

Started, but instantly recollecting herself 
moved on, as if she had not perceived 
him. The agitation which she thus tried 
to conceal was quickly rendered more vio- 
lent by his joining her. After the usual 
salutations of the morning — " By your 
being up so early, Miss Munro/' said he, 
v/ith something like the air with which he 
had formerly addressed her, '' I am in- 
clined to hope you intend being ont of 
our party to-day on the water/' Elizabeth 
slightly bowed — 

*' No, Sir/' with forced coldness, she re- 
plied, '' I have no such intention." 

" Indeed ! — well, I am sorry to hear you 
say so, though, if wise, I should rather re- 
joice, since the more I see of Miss Munro, 
the more I must regret the — ." He paused, 
but only for an instant — the involuntary 
look of surprise he caught at f.ie moment 
from Elizabeth caused him to proceed. 

'' Ah, why — why," in the most impas- 
sioned accents, he cried — '^why so cru- 
elly disappoint me ? — why raise expecta- 
E 4 tions 



so ' THE DISCARDED SON, 

tions yoii never meant to realize ? — why. 
not at once ingenuously confess the re- 
quest I made you was disagreeable ?" 

'' The request!'' repeated Elizabeth, in- 
volujitarily, and with a bewildered look ; 
" I know not what you mean — I know not 
what disappointment you allude to/' 

'' Why surely you cannot forget your 
having granted me permission to visit 
you/' 

'' Assuredly not." 

" Then surely you cannot be ignorant 
that the disappointment I allude to, was 
being denied admission after having ob- 
tained that permission." 

'' I never heard that you called upon 
me/' returned Elizabeth, with forced calm- 
ness, and still an air of coldness. 

" Never heard that I waited on you the 
morning aAer I had the unexpected plea- 
sure of meeting you in this neighbour- 
hood !" 

" No, never." 

*' Gracious heaven !" exclaimed Dcla- 

cour. 



THE DISCARDED SON. 81 

cour, in a tone indicative of the greatest 
agitation^ " are you really serious? — do 
you solemnly assure me you heard not of 
my visit? — desired rae not to be informed 
that you could neither see me then, or at 
any other timx, and therefore begged I 
might not repeat it ?" 

" Yes/' answered Elizabeth, with a total 
change of voice and manner, the cruel 
deception which had been practised on her 
relative to him by the vile Mrs. Elford, 
lest, through his means, she should have 
discovered the dangerous situation she 
was then in, now flashing full upon her 
mind, '' yes, I do assure you all this — ■ 
assure you I left no message for you^ 
■ — never heard of your visit — if I had 

'' If you had,'' cried Delacour, in a 
transport, catching at these w^ords — '' if 
you had — oh, say — say, dear Miss Munro 
' — would you have refused it?" 

'^ Would I," almost unconsciously re- 
E 5 peated 



82 THE DISCARDED SON. 

peated Elizabeth, hajf raiising her fine 
ejes to his. 

*^^ Oh, transport!" exclaimed the im- 
passioned Delacour, snatching her hand 
and pressing his lips to it, ^' what a weight 
has not this explanation removed from my 
heart ! — what delicious moments have I not 
lost, from its not sooner taking place, by 
yielding to the pride which forbade me 
ever thinking of it ! In the pique and re- 
sentment of my heart, at your supposed 
ill usage, I vowed to maintain the most 
inflexible silence towards you — a vow 
which, but for the happy and unlooked-for 
meeting of this morning, I might, per- 
haps, have kept to my own eternal cost". 
Since you will not be of the boating party, 
v/ouid [hat I could disengage myself from 
it, that I might not lose another moment 
in. pouring out at your feet the fulness of 
my soul — revealing the feelings with which 
you have inspired me; but as I cannot 
disengage myself from it, I shall endeavour 

to 



THE DISCARDED SO?^. 83 

to console myself by reflecting, that per- 
haps in the course of a few hours I shall 
have an opportunity of fully disclosing my 
hopes — my wishes \" 

At this instant^ Grant and Hume, who, 
like him, had been down to the beach to 
witness the preparations making for the 
party, and, like him, ascended the ter- 
race by means of steps cut in the cliff, 
made their appearance; upon which Eli- 
zabeth snatched aw^ay her hand, though 
most reluctantly, and hastened to the dress- 
ing-room of Mrs. Dunbar; she found it 
empty, and from the emotion she was in 
at the moment, was pleased at the circum- 
stance, since, till Delacour had fully ex- 
plained himself, she wished no suspicion 
to be entertained of their attachment. Was 
it then reciprocal — was the indifference 
which had lately marked his conduct to- 
wards her butaffected — the warmth, the ten- 
derness it now manifested, real ^ — oh, yes 
—yes, the explanation that iiad just tai.en 
place permitted not a doubt of its being 
E 6 so 



84 THE DISCARDED SON. 

SO to obtrude or rather linger on her 
mind. 

Deliohtful thoiio-ht ! — but ah. how sel- 
dom is happiness unalloyed ! The trans- 
ports of her heart \vere quickly damped 
by the idea of her approaching departure 
from Black Crag, and consequent sepa- 
ration from Delacour, Ah, what a mo- 
ment was this to leave it, when he, for 
•whom the secret sigh of her soul was 
breathed, had proved to her that that sigh 
had not been breathed in vain ! But she 
«ndeavoured to console herself, by re- 
flecting that he was not chained to it — 
that if his sentimer's for her were really 
such as he ^vowed, her quitting jjlack 
Crag at this crisis would not prevent 
his seeking another opportunity of recur- 
ring to the conversation of that morn- 
ing. 

The entrance of Mrs. Dunbar interrupted 
her reflections on the .subject. Elizabeth 
delayed not acquainting her with the cause 
of her wishing to see her so eai'ly. 

Mrs, 



THE DISCARDED SON. 85 

Mrs. Dunbar expressed surprise and re- 
gret at her determination, but attempt- 
ed not to oppose it: as Mrs. M'Tullogh 
had foreseen, she made her an offer of 
her travelb"ng chaise, and also the at- 
tendance of her woman to Heatbwood. — • 
Elizabeth positively declined the latter, 
and only accepted the former as far as 
the first stage, making a plausible ex- 
cuse for not taking it the whole way. 

Every thing being settled for her de- 
parture, she repaired to her chamber 
to acquaint Mrs. M'Tullogh ; and on 
her departing, which she did almost im- 
mediately, in order to precede her to 
the inr^, hastened back to the dressinsr- 

o 

room of Mrs. Dunbar, where breakfast was 
served, at which Lady Lochness, who^ like 
the mistress of the mansion, was not fond 
of aquatic excursions, joined them. By 
the time this repast was over, the chaise 
was ready for Eh'zabeth. On parting, Mrs. 
Dunbar again said something indicative of 
regret at the shortness of her visit, and 
^ charged 



86 THE DISCARDED SOK. 

charged her with her best wishes to her 
father. 

On aligliting at the appointed place she 
was ushered into a vacant aDartment. where 
she continued by herself until the carriage 
of Mrs. Dunbar had driven off^ when Mrs. 
MTullogh made her appearance ; they did 
not, however, quit the house until it be- 
gan to grow dark, when a chaise was pre- 
pared for them ; they were set down at a 
lonely, and for some time past disused, 
lodge in the park, where the trunk of Eli- 
zabeth was deposited, and from whence 
they proceeded to the house. 

A private door, of which Mrs. MTul- 
logh had exclusively the key, gave them 
admission to the apartments she called 
her's, in one of the towers that flanked 
the building, consisting of a sitting-room 
and chamber, communicating with a spa- 
cious gallery, leading to the part of the 
mansion occupied by the principal per- 
sonages belonging to it. 

Here the housekeeper left Elizabeth, 

for 



THE DISCARDED SON. 87 

for a few minutes, for the purpose of 
procuring lights and tea. On her return, 
Elizabeth enquired whether the circum- 
stance of her bringing these to this place 
would not be apt to create some un- 
pleasant suspicion ? To which enquiry 
she replied in the negative, adding, that 
as she was in the habit of often entertain- 
ing her acquaintances in the neighbour- 
hood, nothing of the kind could excite 
surprise, or consequently suspicion. 

In the course of the evening, Elizabeth^ 
as she thought on her present situation^ 
could not help reflecting on the strange 
vicissitudes of this life — how little her 
father, at one period of his, would have 
believed it possible that a child of his should 
be under the necessity of entering the man- 
sion of his forefathers, without the know- 
ledge of its possessors, and indebted to a 
domestic for an asylum in it ! 

The preparations now making at Glen- 

gary for the approaching entertainment 

frequently obliging Mrs. jVrTullogh to 

5 leave 



88 THE DISCARDED SOK. 

leave Elizabeth for long intervals by her- 
self, she endeavoured to prevent her feel- 
ing the dreariness of solitude, by supply- 
ing her with entertaining, or, as she styled 
them, handsome books. Fond, however, 
^s Elizabeth was of reading, the occupa- 
tion of her thoughts at this crisis, by recent 
scenes and future prospects, wauld have 
made her prefer seeking amusement in 
rambling about the delightful grounds sur- 
rounding her, but for fear of being disco- 
vered by some one of the inhabitants of 
Black Crag, still in its vicinity, than which, 
the idea of being, nothing could be more 
terrific to her imagination, from the sus- 
picious light in whrch she was well aware 
such a circumstance would make her ap- 
pear — there would then, she was convinced, 
be no bounds to the malice of Mrs. Ruth- 
ren and her friend^ nor any possibility of 
refuting their slanders against her. 

Nothing short of this fear could have 
withheld her from obeying the ardent wish 
ghe felt, for exploring the scenes rendered 

interesting 



THE DISCARDED SON. 8^ 

interesting to her by the knowledge of their 
havino: been the favourite haunts of her 
father — 

" The scenes of his youth, when every charm could please." 

'' Ah ! how little^ in the gay morning of 
that youth/* she more than once cried to 
herself, '' did he imagine, that ere the 
evening of his days had well arrived, he 
should find himself an exile from the de- 
lightful shades amidst which it opened I 
Oh ! if it be sharper than a serpent's tooth 
to have a thankless child, surely it must 
be equally agonizing to have an unnatural 
parent/' 

But, exclusive of the considerations 
which rendered them so interesting: to her, 
she would, on account of their romantic 
beauty, have been pleased to have felt 
hei*self at liberty to explore the green 
solitudes of Glenaarv. 

A greater variety of enchanting scenery 
than irs spacious park exhibited, could 
scarcely anywhere be seen — hill and dale, 
wood and water, were here intermixed in 

the 



90 



THE DISCARDED SON. 



the happiest and most picturesque manner; 
through shroudin<^ woods, the growth of 
centuries, views of the distant country- 
were caught, and of '' the fiat green sea/' 
with the islands that diversified it, dawning 
through the mist of distance: the gran- 
deur of the building perfectly accorded 
with the magnificence of the scenery ; of 
antient date, it still retained the gothic 
appearance it had worn on its fii-st erec- 
tion, and was esteemed altogether one of 
the finest monuments then extant of the 
taste of former times, a building well cal- 
culated to revive the memory of other 
ages, to send the soul back to the days of 
old, when in its stately halls bards sung the 
exploits of the valiant, and on the clouds, 
on the wings of the wind, the dim ghosts 
were supposed to come from the place of 
their rest to hearken to the sound of their 
praise. 

The exercise w^hich apprehension pre- 
vented Elizabeth from taking without 
doors, she sometimes ventured to take ia 

the 



THE DISCABDED SON. 91 

the gallery adjoining her apartments, as 
though it contained a suite of elegant 
chambers, these were never occupied, ex- 
cept when the house was crowded with 
visitors, which at present was not the case, 
nor expected to be, till within a day or 
two of the masquerade. 

Here, at the closing hour of eve, when 
that soft and shadowy light alone pre- 
vailed within it, which, 

" disarray'd 
Of all its gorgeous robe, with blunted beams, 
Thro* windows dim with holy acts pourtray'd, 
Along some cloister'd abbey faintly gleams, 
Abstracting the rapt thought from vain earth-musing dreams/* 

she loved to wander, '^ indulging all to 
thought;'' or sometimes pausing at the fold- 
ing doors at its extremity, to listen to the 
sounds that prevailed beyond it, which 
she could here plainly distinguish; and not 
unseldom did she catch those of 

" Riot and ill-managed merriment" — 

a circum- 



y^J THE DISCARDED SON. 

a circumstance, however, that did not 
surprise her, when she considered who was 
mistress of the revels. 

On the very morning of the day 
fixed for the masquerade, Mrs, M'Tul- 
logh brought her a letter from her father, 
left, like his preceding ones, at the post- 
office till called for, and which informed 
her of his and her mother's return to 
Heathwood — information that would have 
induced her to set out immediately, but 
that on enquiring she found it impossible 
to procure any kind of conveyance till 
the ensuing day, owing to the great de- 
mand for carriages, in consequence of 
the crowds that were coming to the mas- 
querade. 

Her curiosity excited by the prepara- 
tions she had heard making for this enter- 
tainment, and anxious besides to see Sir 
Patrick, who by this time had arrived at 
Glengary, Elizabeth, since thus compelled 
to stay another day at it, suffered herself 
to be prevailed on by Mrs. M'Tullogh to 

take 



THE DISCARDED SON. 95 

take a peep at the gay assembly in the 
evening. 

For the purpose of enabling her to do 
this, she procured her a mask^ and about 
twelve o'clock, after her ears had been long 
assailed by the rattling of carriages, and the 
shouts of the rustic mob assemWed with- 
out to view the characters, conducted her 
by private passages to a small do!^r, com- 
municating with the apartments laid out 
for the company, and to which she de- 
sired her to return, as soon as she saw 
them unmasking, thyt being the signal 
agreed on for the throwing open of the 
supper-room. This door opened into an 
anti-chamber, commanding a full view of 
the extensive suite of rooms fitted up for 
the occasion, and exhibiting a scene of 
the most splendid kind, such as brought to 
the recollection of Elizabeth the descrip- 
tions given in the romances of the Arabian 
writers of enchanted palaces. Music lent 
its powerful aid to heighten the fasci- 
nation; which still further the fine per- 
fume 



^4 THE DISCARDED SON. 

fume of the aromatic shrubs and flowers 
that were intermingled with the other 
ornaments encreased. 

Dazzled by the glare^ and somewhat 
agitated by her novel situation, Elizabeth 
could not for some minutes summon suf- 
ficient courage to move; at length, her tre- 
mor a little subsiding, she ventured forw^ard, 
and soon found herself in another apart- 
ment, exhibiting a very different appear- 
ance to the one she had first entered, that 
being quite solitary, and this much crowd- 
ed ; it represented a gothic hall, furnished 
as such apartments generally are, with 
shields, spears, and coats of armour; at 
one end was an elevated seat, resembling 
a throne, on which a mask, habited as an 
ancient chieftain, was seated ; and a step 
or two below him. sat a lady, dressed in a 
loose kind of robe, with a fillet round her 
head, and a harp before her. These masks, 
from the information she had received 
from Mrs. M'Tullogh, Elizabeth knew at 
atice to be her grandfather and his lady, 

and 



THE DISCARDED SON. 95 

and she accordingly stopped to observe 
them. 

They appeared to have excited much at- 
tention^ and to afford no little amusement 
to the company assembled round them. 
At length, after some little tossings and 
bowings of the head, the white-armed, or 
as Mrs. M'Tullogh would have styled her, 
white-gloved, daughter of Toscar, began 
literally to strike the harp, for more she 
could not do. She continued to do so 
for several minutes, till at last she was 
completely interrupted by the convulsive 
laughter and mock applause which her per- 
formance excited. On the subsiding of 
this boisterous mirth, the king of Morven, 
bending towards her, gravely exclaimed — 

" Pleasant is thy music, oh daughter of 
streamy Lutha \" 

'' Aye, aye," nodding to him, and then 
looking round at the company, '' that's I — - 
1 am the daughter of streaming Lutha.'* 

" I thought you were the daughter of 

the 



9(5 THE DISCARDED SON. 

the mighty Toscar/' cried a mask beside 
her. 

'' Oh, well it's no matter, 'tis all the 
same thing, and so — ,'* in an expecting 
tone, again turning towards the king of 
Morven. Ijjl 

'' I will reward it with a story," his ma- 
jesty replied: ''thou must know then I 
once was young — '' 

" Yes, but you are now old, and de- 
vilish foolish,** interrupted a gaunt-look- 
ing figure close to him, dressed like a Spa- 
niard ; and from this circumstance known 
by Elizabeth, in consequence of the house- 
keeper's previous information^ to be Sir 
Patrick Dunboyne. 

The king of Morven, instead of reply- 
ing to this, it must be allowed, not over 
polite observation, suddenly began to 
brandish his spear, the generality of the 
company hoped with an intention of re- 
senting it ; instead, however, of realizing 
this good-natured hope, he started up, after 

a few 



THE DISCARDED SON. 97 

a few flourishes^ and, in a threatening at- 
titude, looked up at the ceiling, as if he 
had seen something there that displeased 
him. 

'' The king of Morven is getting mad !" 
exclaimed some of the masks laughing, 
and with well counterfeited terror, making 
a feigned effort to get farther from him. 

'' No/* cried his majesty, '' but the spirit 
of Loda frowns upon me, but he frowns in 
vain ; the sons of the wind shall not frighten 
the king of Morven :" and again he began 
brandishing his spear, with greater vio- 
lence than before, at the ceil in o^ ; in doinof 
which his foot slipped, and he fell prostrate 
on the ground : he was almost instantly 
raised, but so hurt by his fall, as to be in- 
capable of resuming his seat, and was ac- 
cordingly therefore carried off to his cham- 
ber by the servants, who had been called 
in to his assistance. 

- As soon as the alarm and tumult occa- 
sioned by this accident had in a little'de- 
gree subsided^ the lovely Malvina began 

VOL. II. F to 



98 THE DISCARDED SON. 

to Utter some not very gentle invectives 
against the unfortunate king of Mor- 
ven. 

'' Was ever any thing so stupid V she 
exclaimei '' after all the tnouble I have 
had, in making him and myself perfect in 
our characters, to have him not know what 
he was about." 

'' 'Tis a long time since he has known 
that/' cried the Spaniard, or as, for the 
sake of brevity, we shall in future call him. 
Sir Patrick ; " when men suffer women to 
make asses of them, they seldom have the 
right use of their senses ; by the Lord, if I 
had unfortunately been buckled to one, and 
she had endeavoured to persuade me to 
make such a fool of myself as that poor silly 
old man, Td have blown her to Mount 
Atlas." 

'' Well, the further you blew her from 
yourself, the better pleased, I dare say, she 
w^uld have been," rejoined the fair Mal- 
vina, a little spitefully. 

*' We are always valiant till we are 

tr>ed/' 



THE DISCARDED SON. 9§ 

tried/' cried a mask, somewhat sneeringly, 
lA the character of Moody, in the Country 
Girl. 

'' Yes," returned Sir Patrick, '' and wise 
in our own conceit, till, from the laughter 
of those around us, we find some fool hag 
made an ass of us: you thought yourself 
equal to the management of a seraglio of 
such simpletons as Miss Peggy, and. yet 
what a pretty trick she contrived to play 
you/* 

Elizabeth all this time was leaning against 
a pillar near the vacated throne, so shocked 
by the accident her grandfather had met 
with, and the ridicule and contempt he 
had exposed himself to — his grey hairs^ 
notwithstanding his inhumanity to her fa- 
ther, having impressed her with something 
like veneration for him— that but for a fear 
of not being able to find her way back to 
her chamber by herself, she would have 
made an immediate effort for regaining 
it. She was now compelled by the moving 
of the crowd to quit this situation, and 
F 2 the 



100 THE DISCARDED SOX. 

the vicinity of her uncle ; and by degrees 
the music, the sprightly sallies of the 
company, and the gaiety and brilliancy of 
al-1 around her, dissipated the unpleasant 
feelings, that had been thus excited in her 
mind, and reanimated her spirits. 

She had nearly taken the circuit of the 
rooms, when her further progress was im- 
peded by the crowd two very voung girls, 
habited as Savoyards, had collected about 
them on their pausing to play. 
^ Scarcely, however, had they begun' to 
tune their guitars, and make preparations 
for singing, when one of them, owing to 
the heat of the room, diffidence, or per- 
hai>s both together, became so ill, that 
she was obliged to resign her guitar and 
unmask. Instead, however, of getting bel- 
ter for having done so, she grew so m.uch 
worse in a few minutes, notwithstanding 
the instantaneous aid of smelling-bottles 
and fans, that she was obliged to be car- 
ried from the room, in a state that left but 

little' 



THE DISCARDED SON. 101 

little reason to hope she would be able to 
return to it again. 

Her companion, who had been all anxiety 
about her, but who had not made the 
smallest eflfbrt to follow her out, now began 
to cry most bitterly. • The company, of 
course, attributing her tears to the most 
amiable feelings, those who were nearest to 
her exerted themselves to console her ; she 
soon, however, with very great candour, gave 
them to understand that she should not 
have regretted what had happened, at least 
as much as she did, but for its threatening 
to prevent her keeping up the character she 
had thought proper to appear in, and which 
she protested she had been endeavouring 
to fit herself for upwards of a month. 

'' If she had only sung one or two of 
the duets we have been so ' long prac- 
tising for this occasion, I shouldn't have 
minded so much her being obliged to re-^ 
tire so soon ; ' but to have all this trou- 
ble for nothing,'* proceeded the poor 
little girl, ''Oh, dear! Oh, dear! 'tis too 
F 3 bad 



.10!2 THE BISCARDID SON. 

bad indeed. If any one can play/' tendering 
the guitar of her companion to the circle, 
'' let them take this, and they'll oblige me 
for ever."' 

Her prayers and supplications, for som« 
time, answered no other purpose than that- 
of encreasing the mirth which her distress, 
as soon as the real cause of it was known, 
had excited. For this Elizabeth conceived 
ber extreme youth so sufficient an excuse, 
that she could not help taking compassion 
on her ; and after a little irresolution, and 
reflecting that as they knew nothing of her 
musical abilities, her now obeying the inj- 
pulse of good nature could not possibly be- 
tray her to any of the Black Crag party, de- 
cided on making an effort to prevent her 
being totally disappointed ; and accordingly 
drawing nearer to her by degrees, touched 
her arm, in order to obtaiii her attention, 
and then whispered to her, that ifche would 
detach herself from the present crowd, she 
would endeavour to assist her in a duet or 
two. 

'^ Oh, 



THE diS::arded son. J 03 

'^Oh^ dear I oh, dear \*' cried the poor 
little Savoyard, in low but joyful accents, 
^^ how delightful ! whoever you are, you 
are a charming creature for your good na- 
ture ; yes, yes, I'll soon get away from 
this crowd ; I'll go to a seat, as if I didn't 
mean to play or sing, and then they'll mind 
me no longer.'' 

t)lizabeth nodded significantly, and the 
little girl requesting she would keep her in 
sight, soon made her way to a seat, where, 
as she had predicted, she was shortly left to 
herself. Elizabeth then took a seat beside 
her, received the instrument, and was 
instructed what duets to sing. Every ne- 
cessary preliminary being adjusted between 
them, the little Savoyard having previously, 
however, examined her dress, to see that it 
was not tumbled, or injured in any man- 
ner by the pressure of the crowd she had 
just escaped from, set forward for the ad- 
jacent room, with a firm step and confident 
air, followed by h^rnew associate : as soon 
a^ she had penetrated some way into this 
F 4 apart- 



J 04 THE ftlSCARDED SON- 

apartment, which was also full, she began 
to touch herguitar^ and motioning to Eliza- 
beth to take her station beside her, com- 
menced that beautiful duet in the Stranger 
of 

* There is a ^ief that lodges here, 

* It breathes no sigh, it sheds no tear'— — 

It has already been said^ that Elizabeth 
touched the guitar with inimitable taste — 
that her voice also was soft^ tender, and me- 
lodious : that the room, therefore, rung 
with applause on her ceasing to sing, cannot 
be wondered at, especially when 'tis added, 
that she sung and played with her usual ex- 
cellence, the concealment of her face pre- 
venting her feeling that confusion she must 
otherwise have experienced at performing 
before so large an assembly, and which 
could not have failed of preventing her 
from doing so. But the admiration which 
was excited was not confined solely to 
her musical talents; — the harmonious sym- 
nietry of her graceful form, rendered 
strikingly conspicuous by the lightness and 

simplicity 



TirE DISCARDED SON. 105 

simplicity of her dress, consisting of a fine 
^vhite muslin jacket and petticoat, cut as 
low on the bosom and back as modesty 
would permit, and ornamented with a rich 
wreath of roses fastened on one shoulder^ 
and hanging low at the opposite side ; 
the fine redundance of her glossy hair; 
twisted into loose tresses at the top of her 
head, the beauty of her arms and hands, 
^vhich she had uncovered, in order to be 
better enabled to play— rendered her alto- 
gether so attractive, so captivating an ob- 
ject, that every eye was fastened on her^^ 
every tongue busied in enquiring who she 
was. 

The little Savoyard was applied to for in- 
formation on this subject; she, however, 
could give none — and quickly tried to put 
a stop to these enquiries, by calling upon 
her again to sing, the applause with which 
the room had echoed, and half of which at 
least she took to herself, having rendered 
her impatient to give another specimen of 
her musical abilities. In vain, however,, 
F J she. 



106 TTHK DISCARDED SON. 

she called upon her. The observation she 
had attracted was too evident to Elizabeth 
not to confuse and alarm her. She dreaded 
its occasioning her steps to be watched, and 
under this dread, could r$ot forbear now 
doing what she had never before done — 
namely, repenting her having obeyed the 
impulse of good nature ; a5>^ but for having- 
done so in the present instance, siie per- 
suaded herself she should have been able to- 
have glided about without attracting any 
particular notice. To subject herself any 
longer to what was so extremely embai*- 
rassing to her, was not to be thought of ; 
she, therefore, spite of the entreaties and 
almost resistance of the company, and the 
supplications, nay tears of the little Savoy- 
ard, laid the guitar on a bench contiguous 
to where she was standing; and immediately 
endeavoured to make her way into another 
room. Vain, however, would have been^ 
her efforts for this purpose, so closely 
was she surrounded by her admirers, but 
for the interposition of a mask in a black. 

domincy 



THE DISCARDED SON. 107 

domino — " See/' cried he, in an animated 
tone, on succeeding in the efforts he made 
to extricate her, '' what it is to be too 
attractive/' 

Elizabeth started ; for in his voice she 
fancie:. he recognized that oftheaudacious, 
the detested Kuthven ; nor was she mistaken ; 
it was Riithven indeed himself, the unprin- 
cipled Ruthven, whom beauty or elegance 
never failed of attracting : but though he 
had thus attached himself, as he imagined, 
to a stranger, the passion he had conceived 
for Elizabeth still existed in full force, 
and he only v,'aited until the night of the 
masquerade was over, to set out in pui-suit 
of her. 

Elizabeth immediately endeavoured to 
separate herself from him, but to no purpose; 
his eves were never turned from her for a 
moment; and the pain this circumstance oc- 
casioned her, was aggravated by the efforts 
he made to engage her in conversation.—^ 
Nothing, however, could induce her to re- 
ply to him^ so fearful was she of her voice 
F (3 be- 



108 THE DISCARDED SOX, 

betraying her; and at length he asked her, 
whether, like the nightingale, she could 
.only sing, not speak ? 

But great as was the agitation which hi& 
noticing, or rather persecuting her in thi* 
manner, caused her, it was faint compared 
to that she felt on perceiving the company 
beginning to unmask, without seeing any 
possibility of her withdrawing unobserved 
by him. A faint sickness, owing to the ap- 
prehension she was in, stole over her, 
which for a few seconds rendered her scarcely 
able to resist the efforts he made to remove 
her mask after he had taken off his own. 

^' No, no," she at length exclaimed, in a 
low trembling voice, such as she trusted 
would prevent his recognizing her, and 
stopping his hand with hers, '^ it must not 
^come off/* 

''Must net — and why, my angel ? surely 
you will not be so cruel, so tantalizing, asr 
to keep on this invidious shade all 
night.- 

'' Let me go, let me go/' cried Elizabeth, 

al- 



THE DISCARDED SON.^ 109 

aTmost gasping through agitation, and trying 
to disengage herself from him. 

Her supplications^ however, to him ta 
felease her, had the very contrary effect to 
what she desired ; the motive to which they 
were owing being too obvious not to awaken 
a degree of curiosity, that made him resolve 
to persist in endeavouring to discover who 
she was. Accordingly^ he held her firmly 
by the hand, and spite ofher resistance and 
continued entreaties, drew her into the 
supper-room, where he took it for granted 
the sight of every other person without a 
mask would occasion her to throv; aside hers. 

The Goddess of Luxury herself might 
have enjoyed pleasure at this banquet, no- 
thing that could possibly gratify her, or 
her votaries, having been omitted at it. — 
The apartment in which it w^aslaid out v/as 
of immense length, and proportionable 
breadth ; the ceiling lofty, richly embel- 
lished, and supported by pillars of the most 
exquisite workmanship, entwined on this 
occasion with v/reaths of flowers, and fes-r 
3 toon* 



no THE DISCARDED SQN. 

toons of variegated lamps, the spares 
between each filled up with lemon and 
orange trees in full blow, and now scenting 
the room w^th their delicious sweetness. — 
At each end was an elevated gallery, bril- 
Uantly illuminated, and each containing an 
excellent band ; and, immediately beneath^ 
magnificent transparencies — one represent- 
ing the Gods and Goddesses, in the midst 
of golden clouds, at a banquet on Moun-t 
Olympus; and the other, Venus, in her 
chariot, attended by sea nymphs and tri- 
tons, flying over the waves to meet Aurora 
rising in the horizon. The supper was laixl 
out on detached tables, and every one, as 
they entered, seated themselves promis- 
cuously at them. 

The splendour of this scene was nearly 
lost upon poor Elizabeth ; ^till, however; 
a faint hope of being able to make 
her escape unobserved, on the thinning 
of the crowd about the entrance, kept her 
from sinking beneath her agitation ; but 
wheu in the course of a -few minutes she 

per- 



THE DISCARDED SOH- 111 

perceived this rather increasing than les- 
senings and that of course there ^vas no 
chance whatever of this hope being rea- 
ILzedj her feelings became nearly uncon- 
troulable, and compelled her to accept the 
seat the persecuting Huthven had for some 
time been pressing her to take ; but not all 
his solicitations or arguments could prevail 
on her to unmask. 

The seat he procured her happened to 
be at the very table where Mrs, Munro was 
seated — a circumstance that did not tend to 
qiminish the agitation of Elizabeth ; espe- 
cially when on timidly glancing rounds she 
also beheld Mrs. Dunbar and Delacaur at 
it, and^ to her unutterable surprise^ Lord 
O 'Sinister. 

•' Good heavens ['' she could scarcely for- 
bear exclaiming aloud at sight of hisdeceitr 
ful visage, '^ there seems to be a combina- 
tion of circumstances this night to distress 
me.'' 

Still, however, she endeavoured to sup-^ 
port her spirits, and thus avoid betraying- 

her- 



112 THE DI.5CARDED SON. 

faerselfj by reflecting on the chance the 
dispersion of the company after supper 
would again aiTord her of making her 
escape from the rooms in the manner she 
■wished; but all her efforts for this purpose 
were rendered abortive^ by her at length 
perceiving herself an object of general at- 
tention to every one at the table, and 
hearing the most invidious remarks, ac^ 
companied by sneers, shrugs, and titterings, 
on her acting so indecorously as to keep 
on her mask when every other person had 
laid aside theirs; and overpowered by shame 
and confusion, she fainted away. 

Ruthven, perceiving her dropping from 
her chair, caught her in his arms. Her 
mask was immediately removed, and to the 
unutterable astonishment of all at the table 
who knew her, her features presented to 
their view. 

Mrs. Dunbar's involuntary exclamation 
on the occasion betraying her name to Mrs. 
Munro, that lady, in great wrath and agi- 
tation of spirits, at finding a person whom 

she 



THE DISCABDBD SON. 11'^ 

she liacl so many powerml reasons for wishing 
to keep at a distance from it under her roor> 
followed her, after apologizing to such 
of her guests as were immediately in her vi-- 
cinity, for leaving them thus abruptly, from 
the supper-room, whence' she was carried 
byDelaeour andRuthven into one adjoining 
the hall, in order to enquire by what means 
she had gained admission to her assembly. 

Mrs. Dunbar also did the same, anxious 
to hear what reason she could assign, for 
continuing in the neighbourhood of Black 
Crag, instead of returning home, as she 
concluded she meant immediately to have 
done oh leaving it. 

The room into which Elizabeth was con- 
veyed happened to be the one to which Sir 
Patrick Dunboyne had retired a few minutes 
before — disgusted at beholding such parade 
and ostentation, while the rightful heir of 
the family, for aught he knew to the con- 
trary, was languishing in obscurity. He 
had just taken a sandwich, which his man 
Mr. 0*Grady brought in to him, and was 

wash- 



114 THB DIoCARDED 60K. 

washing it down with a tumbler of wineand 
water, when he was thus broke in upon — > 

'^Soj so/' cried he^ on perceiving Eliza- 
beth^ ^^ this comes of people cramming 
their rooms in such a manner that one can't 
breathe/'* 

*' Kg, it comes of no such thing/' replied 
Mrir. Munro itialiciously^ or rather furiously ; 
'' so I beg; Sir Patrick, you raay cease your 
remarks on tha subject." 

The coolness of this apartment, together 
with-. i^Q aid of » smeHing-bottle^ speedily 
restored Elizabeth to her senses ; but the 
shock she received nearly deprived her of 
them again, when on rccovering and en- 
countering the eyes of Delacour, she caught 
from him a glance of mingled tendernesSi 
pity, scorn, and regret, and saw him, im- 
mediately after, vanish from the room with 
an upraised hand, as if bidding her an eter^ 
nal farewell. 

'^They have prevailed then- — the mac hi*- 
nations of my enemies have prevailed," she 
mentally exclaimed to herself, at the mo^ 

menta 



TilE DISCARDED SON. H5 

ment, in an agony to which no language 
could have done justice; '' this unfortunate 
incident has confirmed the slanders^ it is but 
too evident^ from the conduct of Delacour, 
the contemptuous looks ofhisaunt^ they 
have propagated against me, and my pros- 
pects of happiness are destroyed for everJ* 

Her head sunk on her bosom, and a 
shower of tears fell from her. 

Unmoved by the sight of her distress, or 
rather more irritated by it, from the effect 
she thought it calculated to produce ou 
others, Mrs. Munro caused her quickly to 
raise her dowjicast eyes, by now demanding, 
in the most authoritative tone, to what cir- 
cumstance w^as owing her introduction ta 
her assembly ? 

Elizabeth started ; the consequences which- 
might result to Mrs. M*TulIogh, fix)m hen 
candidly answering this question,, became 
too obvious to her, not to cause her to hesir 
tate for a moment, and then- cast a timid^ 
but beseeching look at Mrs. Dunbar, to ex-- 
tricate her from her present, difficulty— x 

k).ok: 



116 THE DmcAv.m'.D so?r. 

look io which that lady replied by another, 
that harrowed up the very soul of Elizabeth. 
Then turning to Mrs. Munro-^' Though from 
the manner of Miss Munro^ you might be 
led to imagine the contrary^ believe me, 
Madam^ I can give you no information on 
the subject ; all I can tell you concerning 
the young lady is, that about three weeks 
ago, she came into this neighbourhood; 
and owing to a circumstance, not necessary 
to relate, became soon after my guest, but 
only for a few days, owing, she said, to 
her wish to return home ; why she did not 
do so, to what motive her remaining con- 
cealed in the neighbourhood, and appearing 
here this night, is owing, she must herself 
explain ; but as I have no w^ish to be present 
at the explanation, I must now beg leave to 
retire/' 

" Stop, Madam, stop,'* cried Elizabeth, 
wildly springing from her chair, and 
catching the arm of Mrs. Dunbar, as she saw 
her about withdrawing ; " 'tis requisite — 
^tis essential to my feelings that you should 

hear 



TflE DISCARDED SON. 1 17 

hear It ;" yet suddenly reflecting on the 
mischief that might ensue from avowing be- 
fore Sir Patrick, (whose "" antique sword 
had not yet/' she was convinced^ '' grown 
rebellious to his arm'*) the indignities she 
had met with from Ruthven ; " that one 
which, I flatter myself, will restore me to 
the good opinion, I am now but too appre- 
hensive of having lost, I could wish, on 
account of others, to give to you alone ; 
favour me, therefore, I entreat, with a few 
minutes conversation in private, and, I 
make no doubt^ I shall be able to exculpate 
myself in your eyes/' 

Mrs. Dunbar shook her head, with an air 
of mingled incredulity and scorn — then 
'^. the imprudent are ever apt to arrogate 
too much to themselves/* she said, '' I will 
however believe that you would not speak 
with the certainty you do, of being able to 
regain my good opinion, if I listened to 
your defence, but that you are unacquainted 
with the circumstances I have learned re- 
specting you/* 

'' Then 



118 THE DISCARDED SON. 

'' Then my conjectures of having been 
slandered are not erroneous/' cried Eliza- 
beth, with a look of horror. 

'' If you call accusation slander, they are 
not ; but whilst I acknowledge this^ let me 
also say, that so high was the opinion 
I conceived of you^ from your apf>ear- 
ance and manners — so high also was that 
of Captain Delacour*s — (Yes,'* perceiving 
Elizabeth start, and look at her with still 
greater earnestness, "his sentiments for you 
wxre not concealed from me) that nothing 
but the positive demonstration we have had 
this night of your unworthiness, could have 
made us believe aught to your prejudice. — 
Farewell,'' forcibly disengaging herself from 
the almost convulsive grasp of Elizabeth ; 
"^ for your own sake, I advise you to make no 
further efforts to impose on me, since such 
can answer no other end than to render me 
still more exasperated with you. iMy anger, 
however, does not deprive you of my good 
wishes : I shall not c^ase to hope that you 

may 



THE DISCARDED SOX. 119 

may regret the past^ and speedily endeavour 
to regain the path you have so lamentably- 
strayed from." 

With these words she retired, closing the 
door after her — '' Oh;, agony!" exclaimed 
Elizabeth, clasping her hands together, and 
dropping nearly senseless, at this confirma- 
tion of her fears respecting Delacour, upon 
the chair nearest to her. 

'■'Why, what is the matter?" cried Sir 
Patrick, whom surprise had hitherto kept 
silent, rising as he spoke, and approaching 
Elizabeth ; '' did I hear anght ? did Mrs. 
Dunbar really call you Munro ?'* 

''Did she V* repeated Mrs. Munro con- 
temptuously, ( owing to its having suddenly 
occurred to her, that Sir Patrick himself 
had been the means of bringing Elizabeth 
to Glengary, for the purpose of endeavour- 
ing to introduce her to her grandfather.) 
" Oh ! to be sure you are quite ignorant 
that she is the daughter of your hopeful 
nephew, the disgrace and plague of his 
poor father." 

'^ The 



120 THE DISCARDED SON. 

'' The daughter — the daughter of my dear 
Robert r\ exclaimed Sir Patrick, turning 
from Mrs. Munro, whose eloquence had for 
a minute suspended his movements, and in 
his eagerness to embrace Elizabeth, pushing 
aside the audacious Ruthven^ who, the mi- 
nute Mrs. Dunbar disappeared, had hastened 
to her assistance : '' mv sweet ofirl,*' folding 
her to his bosom, and kissing her tear-be- 
dewed cheek, '^ how much am I rejoiced to 
see you !" Then glancing at Mrs. Munro — 
^' Woman, woman," with an uplifted hand, 
and in a voice of thunder, he cried, '' repeat 
not the words you have just made use of 
lest vou should occasion me to fonjet vour 
sex and my own. — Come, my dear girl," 
again directing his regards to Elizabeth^ 
" come," gently raising her from her seat, 
and leading her to the one he had just occu- 
pied, ^'^ compose yourself; whilst I am by^ 
no one shall insult you with impunity ; and 
when you are a little recovered, perhaps 
you'll oblige me by letting me know to 
what circumstance your being under this 

no 



THE DISCARDED SON. . - 121 

no longer happy, or respectable roof, is 
owing." 

" Pretty language/' Sir Patrick, " pretty 
lan^uaoce," in a voice almost choaked with 
passion, cried Mrs. Munro. 

'^ 'Tissuch language,*' returned hecalmlv;, 
'' as you have not lately been accustomed to^ 
else you would not be so ridiculously vaia 
as you are — the language of truth." 

'' Oh, let me not, I implore," cried Eliza- 
beth, coming a little to herself, and in the 
most supplicating accent, as she gratefully 
and affectionately kissed the hand of her 
uncle, '' be the occasion of any disturbance 
here." 

'' Then this instant confess by what means 
you were brought hither. Miss/' vociferated 
the enraged Mrs. Munro. 

Elizabeth trembled: — she dreaded the 
disclosure required of her causing the dis- 
mission of Mrs. M'Tuilogh ; but finding it 
impossible to evade it, endeavoured to col- 
lect herself to make it. But at the instant 

VOL. II. G her 



THE DISCARDED SOX. 

lips v/ere opening for the purpose^ she 
caught a glimpse ofRuthven ; and reading, 
in.his countenance, an expression of the 
greatest anxiety to hear what she would say, 
her unwillingness to gratify him, united to 
the detestation in which she held him — 
him, to whose conduct was owing all her 
present distress and confusion, she paused, 
until, at her express request, SirPatrick had 
desired him to leave the room. She then, 
as briefly and collectedly as agitation would 
enable her to speak, informed Sir Patrick, 
that not having met with the politeness she 
had a right to expect from some of the 
Sfuests of Mrs. Dunbar, she could no longer 
think of remaining in her house ; but being 
disinclined to return home during the ab- 
sence of her parents, had availed hei-self of 
Mrs. M'Tullogh's offer of an apartment at 
Glengary till she heard of their arrival. 

On her ceasing to speak — ''Oh, my dear 
sister," exclaimed Sir Patrick, with hands 
and eyes uplifted, '' how little did I once 
imagine I should ever have heard of a grand- 
child 



THE ,DISCAnDED SOK. 125 

child of ycur's being indebted to a servant 
for an asylum in this house \" 

'' You should rather say/' cried Mrs. 
MunrOj with the most malignant aspect, 
*' that you little imagined you should ever 
have heard of her son^ acting in such a man- 
ner as to cause him to be an exile from, it." 

'' 'Tis false— false as hell [" cried Sir 
Patrick; '''tis not the manner in which he 
acted;, but his father acted^ that has caused 
him to be so — Woman/' again giving her a 
glance of fury, '' once more I caution yoii 
to have some command over yourself ; for I 
am not, by any means, in a humour now 
to bear your insolence, when this child 
brings so forcibly to my mind the wrongs 
you have done her father/' 

"Wrongs \*' reiterated Miis. Munro ; "but 
I will not waste any words on you ; I will 
no longer delay letting Mrs. MTullogh 
know what she has to expect, for bringing a 
person she well knows her master would 
never have admitted into it," — and she 
darted a dread fullv malii^nant fiance at 
G 2 ' Eliza'* 



1^4: THE DISCARDED SON. 

Elizabeth, '' to this house." She rang the 
bell as she spoke, with violence, and com- 
manded the housekeeper (who, alarmed at 
not finding Elizabeth at the appointed place^ 
had just entered the hall, to try whether she 
could gain any tidings of her from the ser- 
vants) immediately into her presence. 

Accordingly Mrs. M'TulIogh made her 
appecii'ance in a few minutes, and to the 
great consolation of Elizabeth, stood the 
brunt of the storm that directly burst upon 
her, without shrinking. She ceased, how- 
ever, to derive pleasure from this circum- 
stance, on finding it only served to render 
Mrs. Munro more furious. 

With a violence appalling to Elizabeth, 
she said, or rather swore, that Mrs. Mac- 
Tullogh should the next morning quit 
Glengary. 

Agonized at the idea of her losing a situa- 
tion on her account, for which her parents, 
she but too well knew, had not the power 
of making her any recompence, Elizabeth, 
with tears, endeavoured to get this sentence 

revoked ; 



THE DISCARDED SON. 125 

revoked ; but in vain — Mrs. Miinro contr- 
nued inflexible — till at last^ as a dernier ef- 
fortj she promised^ if she would comply 
with her entreaties on the subject, to quit 
Glen2;ary by the first conveyance that of- 
fered, without making the slightest attempt 
to introduce herself to her grandfather^ 
which^ she plainly saw^ Mrs. Munro was in 
dread of her doing. 

This promise was eagerly caught at ; 
Mrs. Munro greatly fearing, notwithstand- 
ing her influence over the mind of her hus- 
band, that he could not behold such a de- 
scendant as Elizabeth, without feelings that 
might ultimately hurt her own interest. 

Sir Patrick, who had meditated bringing 
Elizabeth into the presence of her grand- 
father, opposed it, as did also Mrs. M'Tul- 
logh, but to no purpose. She could not be 
persuaded to make an effort to serve 
herself at the expence of another person; 
and the latter was accordingly, in con- 
sequence of it, forgiven. This matter ar- 
rangedj she quickly withdrew from the 
g 3 malignant 



1^6 THE DISCARDED SON. 

malignant and haughty glances of the un- 
worthy mistress of the mansion. 

Sir Patrick accompanied her to her cham- 
ber, where a long and circumstantial con- 
versation took place between them,* in the 
course of which she gave him a particular 
account of all that had lately befallen her 
father, and slightly touched on the pros- 
pects of her brother, but with an involun- 
tary sigh, owing to the apprehension she 
was under from her discovery of the real 
character of Lord O'Sinister, of these not 
being realized ; and he, in return, detailed 
to her the embarrassments he was then un- 
der, and bitterly lamented the imprudence 
which had occasioned them, since the means 
of preventing his doing what his heart 
dictated for her father and his family. 

'' How severely am I now punished for the 
errors of my youth," proceeded he, '' by 
the reflection, that but for them, I might 
now have been able to serve the descendants 
of a sister I adored ; yes, yes, only like a 
cursed fool as I was, I neyer rested till I got 

poor 



THE DISCARDED SON. 127 

poor Poiilsaloiigha completely in the mud, 
what a comfortable home should I have had 
for them." 

He assigned the same reasons for the 
cassation of his correspondence with her 
father, and the continuance of his visits 
at GlengarVj that Mrs. MTullogh had done ; 
and finally removed from the mind of Eliza- 
beth every doubt of the sincerity of his re- 
gard for him. 

On his rising to take leave of her, which, 
late as the hour was, he would not have 
done as soon as he did, but that he under- 
stood from Mrs. M'Tullogh the carriage she 
had engaged for her would be at the house 
as soon as it was light, he tried to force a 
purse on her. She was too well apprized, 
however, of the state of his finances to suf- 
fer herself to be prevailed on to take it ; 
but at length consented to oblige him by 
the acceptance of a ring, as a token of his 
regard for her and her family. 

The rest which he had left her for the 

purpose of permitting her to enjoy, her 

G 4 mind 



J 28 THE DISCARDED SON. 

mind was too much disturbed to let herthink 
of; and even if she had had an inclination 
for it, she would still have resisted taking 
it, in order to avail herself of the present 
opportunity for writing an explanatory 
letter to Mrs. Dunbar. So hopeless, how- 
ever, was she of this having the desired ef- 
fect, that but for the consideration of per- 
forming an incumbent duty, in doing what- 
ever had a chance of clearing her character 
from the aspersions cast upon it, she would 
have thrown aside her pen ere she had well 
commenced her self-enjoined task. — This 
letter, blistered in more than one place 
with tears of indignation and sorrow, she 
committed to the care of Mrs. M'TuUogh, 
with an injunction to deliver it, herself, 
into the hands of Mrs. Dunbar — an in- 
junction she promised to observe, adding, 
she should take care to corroborate its con- 
tents, by detailing all the particulars she 
had previously learnt from Elizabeth — an 
assurance which afforded her some comfort, 
as she was well convinced she cculd not 

possibly 



THE DISCARDED SON. 129 

possibly have a warmer or more faithful 
advocate. 

In reply to the information which Eliza- 
beth gave her respecting Lord O'Sinister^, 
she assured her she knew nothing of his 
being amongst the guests invited to Glen- 
gary. It was impossible^ indeed, sheshould^ 
as his appearance there this night was 
owing not to invitation, but to the impor- 
tunities, or rather threats, of the lady who 
had been the means of bringing him down 
to Firo;rove ; and who, from motives of 
pride, as well as interest, wishing to retain 
him iri her chains, had insisted on his giving 
her a m.eeting at the masquerade^ under 
pain of their intimacy being betrayed, and 
he thus exposed to the vengeance of her 
relatives, the idea of which, at this junc- 
ture, was too disagreeable to his imagi- 
nation, not to induce him to do what she 
required. 

Nothing but policy prevented him from 

following Elizabeth from the supper-room^, 

as neverj in his eyes, had she appeared 

G 5 more 



150 THE DISCARDED SON. 

more beautiful than at the moment he sa 
unexpectedly discovered her; he therefore 
still resolved on persevering in his designs 
against her, trusting, if by fair means he 
could not get her into his toils,, he should^ 
by imprisoning her father, which he had the 
power of doing whenever he pleased, 
having had the bond for the five hundred 
pounds he lent him made payable on de- 
mand, instead of by instalments, and mak- 
ing her compliance with his wishes the 
price of his liberation. 

At the expected hour the chaise arrived 
for Elizabeth : on descending to the private 
door at which it was Tirawn up, in order to 
avoid the crowd of carriages assembled 
round the public one, ihe found her uncle 
waiting to hand her into it, and Mr. 
O'Grady, his man, already on horseback 
to attend her to Heathwood — an attention 
which she was not only grateful for, but 
well pleased with, as the terror she was un- 
der of Lord O'Sinister and Ruthven would 
have made her feel uneasy at travelling with- 
out 



THE DISCARDED SON. 131 

out protection. Sir'Patrick's farewell to 
her was truly affectionate, and such as drew 
tears into her eyes. 

As the chaise drove on, she involuntarily 
turned her eyes towards Black Crag^ and 
throuo'h the mists ofmornins: endeavoured 
to descrv its '^ castled cliff" — but the hazi- 
ness of the morn completely veiled it from 
her sights and^ with a desponding sigh at 
the idea of never^ perhaps, again beholding 
it, she at length sunk back in the carriage. 

As she drew near home, she began to be 
agitated with fears of not getting collectedly 
through the story contrived to account, in a 
plausible manner, for her changes of resi- 
dence since she had left it. 

But these fears were unnecessary ; the 
strict examination which might have created 
a confusion, that would probably have pre- 
vented her retaining the composure neces- 
sary to carry her through her fabricated tale, 
did not take place ; for as the mind, devoid 
of suspicion, is seldom over minute in its 
enquiries, so her parents, not having the 
G 6 smallest 



132 THE DISCARDED SON. 

smallest on the present occasion, did not 
perplex her with maiiy questions. 

Not being prepared for her return, they 
Were most agreeably surprised at it, and 
were not a little gratified by htr relation of 
the kind attentions shewn to her by Mrs. 
Dunbar, Sir Patrick, and the good-natured 
Mrs. M'TulIogh. 

For those which she experienced from 
Mr. O'Gradj on the road, he received their 
warm acknowledgements, and would have 
received more substantial proofs of their 
gratitude^ but for his positive refusal of any 
present : with the chaise which brought 
her to Heathwood, he quitted it, charged 
with the thanks and compliments of the fa- 
mily to his master. 



CHAP. 



THE DISCARDED SON. 133 



CHAP. III. 



*' Was it his youth, his valour, or success ? 
These might perhaps be found in other men : 
'Twas that respect, that awful homage paid me ; 
That fearful love which trembled in his eyes, 
And with a silent earthquake shook his soul. 
But when hes spoke, what tender words he said ! 
So softly, that like flakes of feather'd snow. 
They melted as they fell." 

Dryde^c. 



ESTORED to the tenderness of her be- 
loved parents^ and the soothing tranquillity 
of their peaceful home, Elizabeth trusted 
she should soon be able to recover the se- 
renity recent occurrences had so cruelly in- 
terrupted, but which she was conscious she 

had 



134 THE DISCARDED S.ON. 

had done nothing Jo deserve losing. Vainly, 
however, did she endeavour to regain it, by 
trying to banish these occurrences from her 
thoughts; she could think of nothing else, 
of nothing but the unworthy light in which 
she had been made to appear to Delacour — 
the destruction of her fond, her flattering 
hopes respecting him, and the consequence 
Wcls, her mind continuing a stranger to quiet. 

Ill at dissembling, the efforts she made 
to veil her unhappiness from her parents 
were unsuccessful. They soon discovered 
it, and as she had mentioned having met 
Delacour at Black Crag, and as they knew 
her previous opinion of him, did net hesi- 
tate placing it to the account of a hopeless 
passion — an idea that gave them no little 
anguish, as they well knew her's was not a 
heart capable of a slight or transient 
attachment. 

Without distressing her, however, as they 
were conscious they should do, by ap- 
pearing to notice what she so evidently 
wished to conceal, they did every thing 

they 



THE DISCARDED SON. 135 

they thought calculated to divert her mind, 
and give a turn to her thoughts ; and for that 
purpose courted the society of their neigh- 
bours, of v/hich they had some that were 
highly respectable and agreeable^ and pro- 
moted her going out, as much as possible, 
amongst her young acquaintance. 

A suspicion of the motive that occasioned 
them to do this, and, of consequence, the 
pain they would feel if she did not comply 
with their wishes, made Elizabeth cheer- 
fully acquiesce in them, though solitude at 
the moment was w^hat she sighed for. The 
benefit, however, which they hoped and 
expected she would derive from change 
of scene and amusement, she evinced na 
symptoms of experiencing ; on the con- 
trary, she daily appeared more languid and 
melancholy. Snll, however, they deter- 
mined to persist in the measures they had 
adopted for her cure; believing, that if any 
thing could enable her to overcome the 
feelings that now preyed upon her, it w^ould 
be innocent recreation. 

5 But 



156 THE DISCARDED SON. 

But tlioiigh reason and filial love in- 
fliienced Elizabeth to embrace every oppor- 
tunity that offered for trying the efficacy of 
these n-ie^i aires, she could not, sometimes^ 
resist the temptation of doing what she was 
but too well aware was calculated to counte- 
ract any good effect they might have had;, 
nam.ely, sequestering herself in solitude, 
where, unseen of all, she could give vent 
to the anguish that oppressed her heart. 

"^^Oh, my parents !" she more than once^ 
on these occasions, exclaimed to herself, 
'^ you would not deem me perverse, if you 
knew the real cause of my unhappiness — if 
you knew that to injurious suspicions, even 
more than to hopeless love, it was owing; 
but never, never may you obtain a know- 
ledge of this — oh, never may you be 
wounded where most vulnerable, by know- 
ing that the blighting mildew of slander has 
fallen upon the reputation of your child, 
that reputation which you value more than 
her existence.*' 

The autumn was by this time far ad- 
vanced, thai season so delightful to the con- 
templative 



THE DISCAHDED SON. 137 

templative and melancholy mind — when^, 
in the fading scenery, man sees an emblem 
of the evening of his days, and, in the scat- 
tered leaves, a picture of his dissipated 
hopes — that season in which 

—————'* In every breeze the power 
Of philosophic melancholy comes ! 

Inflames imagination ; thro' the breast 

Infuses every tenderness ; and far 

Beyond dim earth exalts the swelling thought. 

Ten thousand thousand fleet ideas, such 

As never mingled with the vulgar dream. 

Crowd fast into the mind's creative eye. 

As fast the correspondent passions rise. 

As varied, and as high : devotion rais'd 

To rapture, and divine astonishment ; 

The love of nature ui.conftn'd, and chief 

Of human race, the large ambitious wish. 

To make them blest ; the sigh of suiTcring worth 

Lost in obscurity ; the noble scorn 

Of tyrant pride ; the fearless great resolve ; 

The wonder which the dying patriot draws. 

Inspiring glory thro' remotest time ; 

Th' awakened throb for virtue, and for fame ; 

The sympathies of love, and friendship dear, 

With ali the social ofl'spring of the heart." 

Eliza- 



138 THE DISCARDED SON. 

Elizabeth's passion for solitude was 
heightened by the season ; the incessant 
rustling of the trees^ the silence of the sad- 
dened grove, where scarce was heard 

** One dying strain, to cheer the woodman's toil j** 

the calm, the quiet, that seemed to invest 
every surrounding object, shed a soothing 
charm over her feelings. 

More than usually oppressed one morn- 
ing, she stole away from the house soon 
after breakfast, and hastily traversing the 
garden, plunged into a wood that skirted 
it, where, throwing herself upon a little 
mossy hillock, she freely indulged her tears. 
The scene by which she was surrounded was 
but ill calculated to stay them ; and perhaps 
it was from knowing this that she sought 
it : the trees, in every direction, presented 
only leafless boughs to her view, through 
which the wind already began to ^ make 
wintry music, the summits of the congre- 
gated mountains looked cold and dismal, 
the grass in the vales had assumed a mourn- 
ful 



THE DISCARDED SON. 139 

fill hiie^ and the fine verdure of the shrubs 
was lost, whilst 

'* Haply some widowed songster pour'd his plaint 
Far in fiaint warblings, thro' the tawny copse. 
While congregated thrushes, linnets, larks. 
And each wild throat, whose artless strains so late 
Swell 'd all the music of the swarming shade, 
Robb'd of their tuneful souls, now shiv'ring sat 
On the dead tree, a dull desponding flock — 
With not a brightness waving o'er their plumes, 
And nought save chatt'ring discord in their mouths," 

" Yet a few months, and this scene will 
regain its wonted charms/' cried EIiza.beth, 
as she pensively viewed it ; " but the hopes, 
the flattering expectations of my heart — 
will they revive ? oh that I had never gone 
to any distance from ray home, and then I 
should not have had to mourn over their 
overthrow.'^ 

A gentle sigh immediately behind her 
caused her to start, and hastily turn round ; 
and, with emotions impcssible to be de- 
scribed, she beheld Delacour bending over 
the seat she occupied. 

A shriek 



14^ THE DISCARDED SON. 

A shriek of surprise involuntarily es- 
caped her^ aSj scarcely conscious of what she 
was aboutj she started up, and ran towards 
the house. Her agitation, however, rather 
retarding her speed, Delacour easily over- 
took her, and gently seizing her hand, ar- 
rested her flio:ht. 

'' Am I then so hateful, so very hateful 
an object," said he, with a look of mingled 
tenderness and reproach, '' that Miss Munro 
should fly me with terror and disgust ? or 
does her wish to avoid me proceed from 
resentment ? oh, if to the latter, let her 
only suffer me to explain what my anguish 
has been at the thoughts of having incurred 
that resentment, suffer me to explain the 
circumstances that caused me to do so, and 
she will, I trust, in some degree, forgive me/' 

Elizabeth bowed — she could not speak at 
the moment, So great was the tumult of her 
heart, at the delightful hoj^e which these 
words inspired, of the injustice that had 
been done her being at length detected, 

Delacour, construing her silence in the 

manner 



THE DISCARDED SON. 141 

manner most agreeable to himself, and pas- 
saonately kissing the fair and trembling hand 
he detained in his, led her back to the 
seat she had started from, where^ throwing 
himself on the sod beside her, he quickly 
entered upon the explanation he had taught 
her to expect, but which, as delicacy in- 
duced him to omit some particulars re- 
quisite to the illustration of this story, we 
shall give in our ow^n words, instead of his. 
One of Lord O'Sinister's emissaries 
having overheard the conversation that 
took place between Elizabeth and her pre- 
server Beerscroft, in the chapel, his Lord- 
ship was, by this means, apprized of her 
becoming the guest of Mrs. Dunbar. To 
attempt to wrest her from such protection 
was not to be thought of; but he did, if 
possible, worse, by immediately setting 
about endeavouring to poison the mind of 
Mrs. Dunbar against her. 

The agent he employed for this purpose 
was Lady Lochness — a lady, whose extra- 
vagant, or rather vicious propensities, had 

reduced 



142 THE DISCARDED SON. 

reduced her to so low an ebb of fortune, 
that she was as greedy after gain as an 
usurer; of which her avarice^ LordO'Sinister, 
who knew her well, and was informed 
of her being at Black Crag, previous to 
his arrival in its vicinity, took advantage, 
to make her one in his schemes against the 
innocent Elizabeth. He easily contrived 
to obtain a private interview with her Lady- 
ship, in which he fully explained these 
to her, and, by means that may be guessed, 
obtained a positive promise from her, to 
do every thing in her power likely to fur- 
ther them. 

The high opinion which she knew Mrs. 
Dunbar, owing to her plausible mannei-s, 
and total ignorance of her real character, 
entertained of her, made her flatter herself 
with succeeding as she washed, in her ef- 
forts for this purpose. 

After artfully introducing a conversation 
relative to Elizabeth and her family, by a 
warm panegyric on her beauty, she pro- 
ceeded to ask Mrs, Dunbar if she knew 

aught 



THE DISCARDED SOK. 143 

aught of her mother ? and^ on her replying 
in the negative^ according to her expect- 
ationSj hesitated not to inform her^ but 
under the seal of secresy, agreeable to the 
instructions of his Lordship-, who dictated 
to her all she was to say on the subject, 
that she had heard^ from undoubted au- 
therity, but which she was hot at liberty to 
mention, that Mrs. Munro was a woman of 
very light character, and, notwithstanding 
the vigilance of her husband, had contrived 
to instil her own principles into the mind 
of her daughter. 

'' x\s a proof of which," continued this 
most artful and abandoned woman, '' is the 
encouragement the young lady gave, or 
may now be giving, for aught I know to 
the contrary, to the libertine addresses of 
that profligate, LordO'Sinister. He saw her, 
by chance, at Firgrove, which is, as I sup- 
pose you know, in the neighbourhood of 
her father's residence, and immediately be- 
came enamoured of her ; but, concluding 
that the daughter of such a man a? Captain 

Munro 



144: THE DISCARDED SOK. 

Munro must have been brought up vir- 
tuously, and, of course, not to be won by 
any thing but the semblance of honour — 
instead of having recourse to any of his old 
arts of seduction, he contrived a scheme for 
getting her father out of the way, anjd in- 
troducing himself to her, under a fictitious 
name, in order to be enabled to oiTcr her 
his hand. Of his being a wolf in sheep's 
clothing, the young lady soon received in- 
formation from a secret friend. The dis- 
covery of his baseness, however, caused no 
alteration in her conduct towards him ; she 
was too anxious to obtain the independence 
and gewgaws he had promised her on be- 
coming his, to let it have any influence 
over her, especially when she reflected that, 
on matters being cleared up, instead of 
being sunk in the estimation of the world, 
she should merely be regarded in the light 
of a poor betrayed innocent, and, of ct)n- 
sequence, not refused admission into the 
circles she sighed to shine in. In short, 
but for the unexpected return of her father, 

she 



THE DISCARDED SOK. 14.5 

she would have become the self-devoted 
victim of his Lordship, under the idea that 
all blame would attach to him ; for she is^ 
I understand, extremely tenacious of her 
reputation ; owing, no doubt, to her 
knowing an untainted one essential to fi- 
guring in life. What turn the afiair has 
since taken, I know not, neither what 
brought her into this neighbourhood ; all 
I know, from the authority already alluded 
to, is, that she has art enough to deceive any 
one, since, notwithstanding her real w^ay 
of thinking, no one can appear more grate- 
ful for good advice, or terrified at any dan- 
ger to her reputation, or impropriety in 
her conduct being pointed out to her. She 
is so young, however, that I think one may 
reasonably hope she is yet reclaimable. — 
'lis the idea, indeed, of the benefit she 
might derive from advice from so respect- 
able a quarter (bowing, as she spoke, to 
Mrs. Dunbar) that has induced me to make 
you acquainted with what I heard of her; 
for though I have not any personal know- 
voL. II. H ledge 



14t3 TIIE DISCARDED SOX. 

ledge of her father, I yet know siifliclenl. 
to interest me greatly about him ; and, ot' 
course, cannot avoid feeling anxious about 
what so nearly concerns his happiness, as 
the conduct of his child/* 

'' If the precepts of such a father have 
failed of success, I cannot hope that mine 
would succeed,** returned Mrs. Dunbar, at 
once shocked and astonished by the relation 
she had been listening to. As soon, how- 
ever, as the subsiding of the emotions it 
excited permitted her to reflect coolly, she 
ceased giving implicit credit to it. 

Not that she doubted the veracity of 
Lady Lochness, neither the motive to which 
she had ascribed her giving utterance to 
such a tale of scandal against poor Eliza- 
beth, but that she thought she had been im- 
posed upon ; since, when she considered 
the youth of Elizabeth, and the sequestered 
life she had heretofore led, shecouldscarcely 
think it possible that she could be the art- 
ful, the depraved character, she had been 
represented. Stilly however, she reflected 

that 



THE DISCARDED SOS. 147 

that she might be so ; but at the same time 
decided^ though not without inany de- 
batings with herself on the subject, on not 
letting any alteration take place in her con- 
duct towai:ds her, except convinced, be- 
yond a doubt, of her depravity. 

This decision greatly disappointed and 
mortified Lady Lochness, and her infamous 
employer, as they had fully expected tliat 
their base allegations against Elizabeth would 
havebeen followedby her immediate dismis- 
sion from Black Crag; and thus a speedy op- 
portunity afforded his Lordship of endea- 
vouring to get her into his power again. — 
In a short time, however, they trusted, il 
they persevered in their attempt to injure 
her character, they should accomplish their 
wishes. 

The disappointment of Delacour, when, 
on his return from the boating party, he 
found Elizabeth gone, and the anxiety he 
evinced to know the cause of her sudden 
departure, first betrayed to Mrs. Dunbar 
the nature of his sentiments for her. 

H 2 Alarmed 



14 S THE DISCARDED SON. 

Alarmed by the discovery of these, ia 
consequence of the suspicions which had 
been introduced into her mind respecting 
Elizabeth, and which her so precipitately 
quitting her roof had not tended to lessen, 
she deemed it an incumbent duty to counsel 
him not to be too hasty in his plans 
concerning her. 

Her ''ambiguous givings out" (for a 
fear of doing injustice made her unwilling 
to speak explicitly) so agitated the soul, 
and inflamed the curiosity of Delacour^ 
that he rested not till he had extorted from 
her all she wished to conceal. He listened 
with mingled astonishment and indigna- 
tion — the respect in which he held Mrs. 
Dunbar, and which he was perfectly sen- 
sible she was entitled to, alone withheld 
him from reproaching her forgiving credit 
for a moment to the slanders which had 
been uttered against her whom he adored. 
He pledged himself to prove that they were 
the vilest slanders, originating in envy, or 

the 



THE DISCABDED SON. 149 

the wickedness of Lord O'Sinister, with 
whose libertine turn he was well acquainted, 
in consequence of being on very intimate 
terms v;ith his brother-in law Mr. Beerscroft^ 
who^ but not out ofany revengeful motive, 
but merely to prove to the world that the 
coolness which subsisted betvveen his sifter 
and her Lord was not owing to any defect 
in her temper, as he tried to insinuate, for 
the purpose of endeavouring to have his 
own conduct excused in some degree, 
never hesitated, to those with -whom he 
w^as on terms of friendship, to reveal his 
atrocities. 

As a proof of his believing her to have 
been most cruelly traduced, the impetuous 
Delacour would instantly have set out for 
Heathwood, to have made her a tender of 
his hand, but that this very day, the old 
Admiral, under whose command he had 
first served, and who for some time past had 
been on the superannuated list, had come, 
in defiance of gout and rheumatism^ from 
his seat, forty miles off, to Black Crag, pur- 
II 3 posely 



150 THE DISCARDKD SON. 

posely to pay him a visit, and pass some 
time in his company. 

This attention, which, as a proof of the 
regard and esteem of a noble heart, would, 
at any other time, have been most grati- 
fying to the susceptible one of Delacour, 
novv^ put his patience to the severest test — 
so anxious was he to give utterance, at the 
feet of Elizabeth, to the feelings with which 
she -ind inspired him, and by so doing, a 
death blow to his aunt's doubts respecting 
her ; [or he vvas \'^el\ convinced her opinion 
of his principles was too exalted, to allow 
her to imagine his vows v;ould be offered 
to any other than a woman of the most un- 
blemished honour. 

The beauty of Elizabeth, whom his stop- 
ping at Heathwood, in his way to Black 
Crag, for the purpose of calling on a person 
who had formerly been in the service of his 
father, first gave him an opportunity of 
seeing, made an instantaneous impression 
oti him — such as on discovering, by means 
of the person above mentioned, who she 

was. 



THE DISCARDED SON, 151 

was, induced him to determine on endea- 
vouring to introduce himself to her notice. 
In pursuance of this determination, he 
haunted the walks he understood she fre- 
quented, and hovered round her habitation 
until he had succeeded in his wish, but with- 
out ever encountering Lord O'Sinister^ 
owing to the great caution of his Lord- 
ship. 

To him, who, from the innate purity of 
his taste, the tenderness of his feelings, a 
blush, a phrase of aflability to an inferior, 
a tear at a moving tale, were (to use the 
words of an elegant writer) like the Cestus 
of Cythersea, unequalled in conferring 
beauty, the unaffected simplicity of Eliza- 
beth's manner, her sweetness, her gentle- 
ness, so indicative of a 'heart capable of sym- 
pathizing with every child of sorrow, had 
inexpressible charms — such as rendered re- 
sistless those with which Nature had be- 
decked her external appearance, and quickly 
changed the passionate admirer into the 
adoring lover. 

II 4 The 



152 THE DISCARDED SON. 

The morning after the occurrence which 
introduced him to the r.otice of Mrs. Munro, 
he meant to have disclosed his sentiments 
for her lovely daughter; but^ as may be re- 
collected, had no opportunity of carrying 
this inteiition into effect, by being de- 
nied admission when he called. Incli- 
nation prompted him to remain in the 
village till he had obtained an interview, 
but he knew he was expected that day at 
Black Crag, and could not, therefore, think 
of obeying its dictates, on account of the 
pain and anxiety he knew he should give to 
his aunt, if not punctual to the time he had 
promised to be with her. 

On the rapture with which he looked for- 
ward to returning to Heathwood, 'tis un- 
necessary to expatiale ; or on the damp 
that rapture received, when led to re- 
linquish his intention of paying ano- 
ther visit to the mansion of Munro, 
owing to the deception practised on him 
by the vile Mrs. Elford, respecting Eliza- 
beth — either on the extacy he felt at the de- 
tection 



THE DISCARDED SON. 153 

tection of that deception : suffice it to say, 
that the old Admiral having quitted Black 
Crag, he proposed also leaving it the day- 
after the masquerade, for Heathwood ; but 
again resigned all intention of ever more 
visiting that spot, on discovering Elizabeth 
and LordO'Sinister atGlengary. After prac- 
tising so gross a deception, as he was led, 
from a variety of circumstances, to imagine 
she had upon his aunt, he could no longer 
think her innocent, no longer injured by 
the charges preferred against her. Yes, it 
now seemed evident to him, that she me- 
rited the imputations cast upon her by 
Lady Lochness — that she was the guilty 
creature she had represented her — had 
left Black Crag, and concealed herself in 
the neighbourhood, solely for the purpose 
of carrying on her shameful, her degrading 
correspondence with Lord O'Sinister. — 
'' And yet, if the testimony of looks could 
be relied on," he said to himself, as, whilst 
spite of his resentment and indignation, he 
was assisting in conveying her from the 
H 5 supper- 



154 THE DISCARDED SON. 

supper-room, his eyes dwelt with even in- 
tense admiration on her face, '' I should;, 
notwithstanding appearances, pronounce 
her guiltless/' 

Doubtful of himself — fearful if he re- 
mained much longer near her, he might be 
betrayed into some proof of tenderness 
that w^ould give him cause to reproach 
himself hereafter, with having acted con- 
trary to the dictates of pride and jealous 
honour, he precipitately quitted the room, 
as has been already mentioned, on her re- 
covering ; but not without an involuntary 
farewell glance, expressive of the feelings 
then agonizing his soul ; and from that 
moment exerted himself to the utmost, to 
try and banish her from his remembrance. 

Mrs. M'Tullogh, as she had promised 
Elizabeth, repaired the next day to Black 
Cragi in order to deliver her letter to Mrs. 
Dunbar, and undertake her defence. But 
the arguments she advanced in her favour 
were disregarded — Mrs. Dunbar looked 
upon the story she told her as a fabricated 

one 



THE DISCARDED SON. 155 

one — an idea that made her feel still more 
exasperated with Elizabeth : a short time^ 
however^ sufficed to make her change this 
opinion^ and do that justice to Elizabeth 
she m.erited. 

By degrees she became struck with the 
particularity of her niece's conduct to De- 
lacour (of whom^ however^ she had too 
high an opinion to fear, for a moment, his 
taking-^ advantage of this too evident predi- 
lection in his favour), and equally so with 
the encouragement which Miss Rae, by her 
conversation, gave to the criminal weak- 
ness of her friend. 

What this young lady's motive could be^ 
for wishing to see involved in ruin and dis- 
grace, a person for whom she professed so 
high a friendship, was for some time un- 
fathomable to Mrs. Dunbar. At length the 
mystery became elucidated, and with it the 
injury that had been done to Elizabeth. 

Ruthven, discovering that Elizabeth had 

set out for Heathwood the morning after the 

masquerade, took horse the moment he re- 

H 6 ceived 



156 THE DISCARDED SON. 

ceived this intelligence, for the purpose of 
pursuing her, and endeavouring to re- 
commend himself to her favour. 

His career, however, was soon stopped ; 
he had not got a mile from Black Crag, 
when, owing to the impetuosity wi4h which 
he rode, he was thrown, and taken up with 
a fractured leg. About a fortnight after 
this accident, as Mrs. Dunbar, according to 
her daily custom, was entering his chamber 
one morning, for the purpose of making 
personal enquiries after his health, she was 
a good deal surprised at hearing his voice, 
and that of Miss Rae's, loud in argument 
together. Curiosity, perhaps suspicion, 
caused her to pause at the door ; and she 
soon heard sufficient, to make her clearly 
understand how grossly she had been de- 
ceived in a recent transaction. 

Miss Rae, enraged at the continued cold- 
ness of Ruthven, was saying every thing 
which jealousy and malice could devise, 
for the purpose of retaliating on him 
for the mortification he made her suffer ; 
5 at 



THE DISCARDED SON. 157 

at once reproachins; him with his in- 
constancy towards herself, and assuring 
him his libertine passion for Elizabeth 
would never be successful : and he^ in re- 
turn, irritated by these observations^ and 
bodily sufiering, was reviling her for the 
baseness of her conduct Vvith regard to his 
wife, and protesting tliat nothing earthly 
should keep him from pursuing Elizabeth^ 
the moment he was recovered. 

In short, their secret views, and the machi- 
nations these had given birth to, became fully 
developed to ?vlrs. Duiibar, by the conver- 
satfon she had thus unexpectedly overheard. 
The result was^ her insisting on the imme- 
diate departure of Miss Rae from her man- 
sion ; and directly after, sending for Dela- 
cour, to acquaint him with the discovery she 
had made. Aware, however, of the impe- 
tuosity of his temper, of what his feelings 
would be on the occasion, she would not 
do more than hint to him, that she had 
joyful tidings to communicate, until she 
had received a solemn promise not to 

let 



158 THE DISCARDED SOK. 

let indignation or resentment transport him 
into any hostile act. In a triumphant mo- 
ment she revealed to Delacour what she had 
heard; an open letter, which he had picked 
lip in one of the apartments, a few minutes 
before he received a summons to attend her, 
from Lord O'Sinister to Lady Lochness, and 
dropped there by her Ladyship, having 
proved to him, in the most satisfactory 
manner, the allegations against Elizabeth 
being all without foundation, and unfolded 
to him, besides, the motives to which they 
were owing. 

How extatic would have been the bliss of 
Delacour at this juncture, at finding the 
woman, whom he had vainly tried to forget, 
the pure, the faultless being, he had at 
first considered her, but that he feared the 
pride of injured innocence would induce 
her to reject his renewed addresses; and 
knew, even if they v/ere accepted, he 
could not, for some time, make her his 
wife ; his paternal inheritance not being 
yet cleared, without the entire possession 

of 



THE DISCARDED SON". 359 

of which;, (a perhaps too generous spirit 
having involved him in some pecuniary 
difficulties) he could not give her an esta- 
blishment of her own ; and till he had the 
power of rendering her completely inde- 
pendent of her family^ he could not think 
of their marriage taking place. A voyage^ 
however, which he was on the point of 
going to the East Indies^ would, he trust- 
ed, enable him, on his return, to arrange 
his aflfaii-s ; and, of consequence, gratify 
the wishes of his heart, should he be so for- 
tunate as to remove the resentment, he 
made no doubt, Elizabeth now harboured 
against him, and, on a candid explanation 
of hisaituation, obtain apromise of herhand. 
He was not of a temper voluntarily to 
submit to suspense ; besides, he was now 
under an absolute necessity of beine at 
Portsmouth in a very short time. From 
the dressing-room, therefore, of Mrs. Dun- 
bar, he hastened to give orders for imme- 
diate preparations to be made for his de- 
parture 



IGO THE DISCARDF'D SON. 

partiire from Black Crag ; ancl^ owing to 
the velocitv with w^hich he travelled^ found 
himself at Heathwoocl in less than four hours 
after he had bidden it adieu. 

The feelings which his departure gave 
birth to in the mind of Mrs. Ruthven, 
threw her so entirely off her guard, that all 
she wished^ and had meditated "vvith respect 
to him, became known to almost everv in- 
dividual under the roof of her aunt. The 
consequence was^ that on his recovery, 
which was slow, and ended in a confirmed 
lameness, Ruthven took advantage of her 
guilty passion, to make it a pretext for 
doing what he had long desired, namely, 
separating himself for ever from her, and 
under the conviction that his pursuit after 
Elizabeth would be unavailing, retiring to 
the Continent, where we shall drop him 
entirely ; nor say more of his lady, than 
that after remaining some time longer with 
her amiable kinswoman, a torment to her, 
as well as to every other person about her, 

she 



THE DISCARDED* SON. 161 

she thought proper to withdraw from Black 
Crag, and join Lady Lochness, who^ on 
the discovery of her baseness relative to 
Elizabeth, had been obliged to quit it, and 
with her repaired to London ; where, after 
a series of dissipated pursuits, she sunk into 
an early grave, the victim of unruly passions. 

Delacour, alighting at the mn, pro- 
ceeded straightway towards the habitation 
of Alunro, with an introductory letter from 
his aunt, expressive also of the happiness 
she should derive, from an alliance taking 
place between their families. 

His shortest path was through the wood 
at the rear of the garden ; and, by takmg 
this, he surprised Elizabeth in the manner 
above related. Ere he had gene through 
the particulars he had to reveal to her, his 
fears of finding her inexorable to his sup- 
plications for forgiveness, vanished. The 
timid glances of her now downcast, now 
half-averted eves, the warm blushes that 
mantled her cheek, the tremor of the soft 
hand he pressed to his throbbing heart, 

all 



162 THE BISCARDED SON, 

all convinced him he 4iad no reason to 
despair. 

At length he had the happiness of re- 
ceiving from her lips the confirmation of 
his hopes. — '' And yet/' cried Elizabeth, 
"vvith a look of ineffable sweetness, and in 
a voice that perfectly accorded with it, on 
pronouncing the pardon he so earnestly 
implored, '' how can those forgive, who 
have not been offended ? for a moment I 
never ceased to believe, that to the vilest 
artifices, was owing the prejudice you gave 
me reason to think you had conceived 
against me, and of course, could not con- 
sider you to blame/* 

"How poor, how inadequate is language 
to express the feelings this goodness in- 
spires me with \" returned Delacour, in the 
most impassioned accents; "the study of 
my future life, if so blest as to obtain a fa- 
vourable answer to my suit, will be to 
manifest the grateful sense I entertain of it/* 

A full disclosure of his v.'ishes followed 
this declaration. Elizabeth was not sur- 
prised — 



THE DISCAHDED SON. 163 

prised— but she was agitated and confused ; 
and, for a few minutes, literally lost in a 
sweet confusion, that precluded her re- 
plying to him. On recovering the power 
of utterance, she referred him to her father 
for the answer he required. 

''But should he — should your mother — 
should they be disinclined to bestow you 
on me," and his hand trembled almost as 
much, at the moment, as the fair one it 
enclosed. 

'* My parents have hitherto been most 
indulgent to my wishes,*' replied Elizabeth, 
but in a timid accent, and with, again, a 
downcast eye. 

*' But if they should not be so now,*' 
cried Delacour, his eyes eagerly pursuing 
hers, and his arm involuntarily circling her 
waist, '' for I will, I will, my Elizabeth, 
put the most flattering construction on 
what you have just said." 

''Why then," returned Elizabeth, but 
still shunning his ardent glances, " I will — 
supplicate them to be equally so now." 

'' This 



164 THE DISCARDED SON. 

" This instant must terminate my sus- 
pense/' cried Delacour, starting up ; ''if not 
fortunate enough to find your father within, 
I trust you will be able to direct me to him/' 

Elizabeth could only blush — a few mi- 
nutes brought them to the house. They 
found her father and mother in the parlour. 
They knew not what to think on beholding 
Delacour^ but, whatever might be the pur- 
pose which had brought him to their house, 
they conceived the hospitality which Eli- 
zabeth had experienced from his aunt en- 
titled him to their attention. Accordingly 
they invited him to spend not only that day 
with them^ but to make their house his 
abode as long as he remained at Ileathwood 
— an invitation w^iich, it may readily be 
supposed, he did not decline. After a little 
desultory conversation, and his informing 
them that he should be able to enjoy the 
pleasure of their society only another day, 
owing to the necessity there was for his 
beiiig immediately at Portsmouth, he re- 
quested the favour of a few minules pri- 
vate 



'Hie discarded son. 165 

Tate conversation with her father^ and was 
accordingly conducted, by him, into his 
study. 

Delacour was not more tedious in ex- 
plaining his wishes to the father, than he 
had been to the daughter, and had the su- 
preme happiness of finding them equally 
pleasing to both : his character for bravery 
and worth, the gallant manner in which he 
had, on several occasions, signalized him- 
self in the service of his King and Country, 
was previously known to Munro, and had 
excited a prepossession in his favour, which 
his appearance confirming, rendered him 
delighted at the thoughts of an alliance be- 
tween him and his Elizabeth ; more espe- 
cially when he reflected on the pangs, he 
had so much reason to believe, she had 
sulfered on his account. The letter of 
Mrs. Dunbar was liighly gratifying to his 
feelings. The eulogiums she bestowed on 
his beloved child, and the sanction she gave 
to the wishes of her nephew, were alike 
flattering to his pride and tenderness. 

Mn 



It56 THE DISCARDED SON. 

In a word, he rendered Delacour as happy 
as Delacour had rendered him, by assuring 
him his daughter had his free consent to 
engage herself to him. " But bless me/* 
added he, as if suddenly recollecting him- 
self, and with a laughing air, '' here have I 
disposed of my daughter, without ever once 
consulting her mother on the subject ; well, 
I don't know that she will absolutely in- 
sist on my retracting my promise, but if 
she should — " 

'' What, what, my dear Sir," demanded 
Delacour, in an agitated tone, all eager- 
ness and anxiety, and catching, as he 
spoke, his hand. 

" Why, we'll then try ^vhat coaxing will 
do; and, if that don't succeed, we'll (still 
more gaily) — but 'tis time enough to 
threaten when we see cause." 

From the study they repaired to the par- 
lour, where they found Mrs. Munro, but 
no Elizabeth — she had slipt away to her 
chamber, whilst her mother, surprised, or 
rather agitated at the request of Delacour, 

was 



THE DISCARDED SON. 167 

^as gazin<2: after him and her husband, 
there to remain 'till obliged again to make 
her appearance. 

'' My dear,** said Miinro, addressing his 
wife, as he stirred up the fire, '' I have been 
doing something, which entitles me to 
\yhat, I confess, from you would be a no- 
velty — a lecture.'* 

" Indeed ! — and pray," smiling, "" what 
may that be V' 

'' Giving away something very precious 
to you, without asking your permission ; 
but, ifdissatisfied with my conduct. Captain 
Delacour, on whom the gift is bestowed, 
will, perhaps, out of consideration to my 
domestic tranquillity, permit me to recal 
it." 

Mrs. Munro looked earnestly in the coun- 
tenances of both for a minute. " Ah V 
she then exclaimed, '' if it is what I ima- 
gine, with my whole heart I confirm him 
in the possession of it." 

Her hand was instantly locked between 
Delacour'Sj and raised to his lips. '' Yes," 

cried 



16S THE DISCARDED SON. 

cried he, in accents which spoke the fulness 
of his heart, '' Mr. Munro has permitted 
rne to look up with hope to your Elizabeth ; 
may I flatter myself that my assurances, of 
endeavouring in every instance to render 
myself deserving of her, will induce you to 
be equally kind ?" 

" Her father's fond wish and mine/* re- 
plied she, '' has ever been, that the filial 
piety which has always marked her conduct 
towards us, might be rewarded by her union 
with a person of congenial disposition. In 
you, I am inclined to believe she has met 
a kindred spirit ; you may readily, there- 
fore, judge whether you have any thing to 
fear from me.'* 

As soon as the grateful transports excited 
by this speech, in the mind of Delacour, 
had a little subsided, Mrs. Munro, at his 
earnest request, wxnt. in quest of her 
daughter, with whom she returned in a 
few minutes. Munro advanced to meet 
them, and taking the hand of the timid 
and blushing Elizabeth — '' Captain Dela- 
cour, 



THE DISCARDED SON. . 169 

E>elacour, your hand/* said he — after he 
had briefly explained to her the conver- 
sation that had just passed between them. 

The hand of Delacour was instantly pre- 
sented to him, and as instantly joined to 
Elizabeth's. '' In the sight of Heaven/* 
cried Munro, folding their united hands 
between his, and looking up, while his wife, 
at a little distance, with tears not to be 
suppressed, stood contemplating the inte- 
resting group — '' I solemnly betroth you to 
each other ; as Heaven attests the contract, 
so may it also bless and render happy your 
union. Captain Delacour, I give you my 
daughter, with no other regret, than that 
which originates in my inability to prevent 
her going to your arms a portionless bride.'* 

'^ Touch not on such a subject,'* cried 
Delacour, impatiently, and with a glow 
upon his cheek, which heightened the ani- 
mation of his fine countenance ; " she is a 
treasure in herself — in giving her to me, 
you render me not only one of the hap- 
piest, but most enviable of men.** 

VOL. II, I '^ trust 



170 The discarded son. 

" I trust she "will ever prove deserving of 
your disinterested afTection ; but, indeed, 
I have but little, or rather no apprehension, 
that she will not, for never yet has she 
disappointed any expectation I formed 
of her. Take her. Captain Delacour," re- 
signing]^ her hand into that of her lover, 
'^ take her with my blessing — my best wishes 
- — my prayers for your mutual hajjpiness : 
should I not live to witness your union, I 
shall nevertheless die^ rejoicing in the idea 
ofit.'^ 

Of this scene enough ; — sufTice it to add, 
that, for a few hours, a happier set of- 
beings, than were now collected under the 
roof of Munro, could not have been found ; 
but then the idea of Delacour's approaching 
departure recurring to their recollection, 
threw a damp on their spirits. 

The interest which Delacour had excited 
in the minds of Mr. and Mrs. Munro, was 
not inferior to that which they had given 
birth to in his. Although care for years 
had pressed heavy upon both, and, for a 

considerable 



THE DISCARDED SON. 171 

considerable period, t^ey had withdrawn 
from the hainils of fashion, neither anxiety 
nor seclusion had impaired their powers of 
pleasing — -the polish of high life was still 
discernible in both, now united with a 
pleasing familiarity, ana simplicity of man- 
ners, perfectly accordin;^ wiih, and. ap- 
pearing, indeed, to be the result of their 
present situation. 

Munro coiild stiU at tiines exercise that 
playful hiunuur, wiiich, in tlie days of his 
vouth and prosperity, had often enabled 
him to set the table in a roar ; and ?slrs. 
Munro could still laugh at, and take plea- 
sure inlic^tening to, anecdotes of (he great 
world. To the abl^.oneuce in which Dela- 
cour had always held the inhuman conduct 
of old Mr, Munro, was now added astonish- 
ment , at liis being capable of discarding 
such a son — so every way calculated to ren- 
der him happy, and do hor.our to his nan^e, 
as was the father of his Elizabeth; and 
stiil further, if possible, was his wish for, a 
union with her heightened, by tae amiable 
i 2 relati\es 



172 THE DISCARDED SON. 

relatives he saw he should acquire by it. 
He anticipated the delight he should ex- 
perience, if ever in his power, to com- 
pensate them in any degree for the injus- 
tice of fortune; and, in his solicitude to 
do this, found a new stimulus for his adhe- 
rence to prudence in future. 

A party of young people were invited 
for the evening, and again Munro and his 
wife had the exquisite felicity of behold- 
ing their Elizabeth participating in their 
amusements, with that cheerfulness which 
was natural to her. 

'' Oh, joy, how magical is thy influ- 
ence!" silently exclaimed the delighted 
father, as he contemplated the alteration 
which a few short hours had made in the 
beloved of his heart — the rich glow which 
a2:ain suffused the cheek that had so latelv 
worn the sickly hue of melancholy, and 
the liquid lustre that darted from the eyes, 
but a few minutes back heavy and dejected. 

Munro recollected how he had felt when 
a lover, and in consequence of tliis recol- 
lection. 



THE DISCABDED SON. 173 

lection, left the lovers to themselves a con- 
siderable part of the ensuing day. How 
supreme would have been the happiness 
of Delacour during these hours, in which 
he was thus allowed to engross exclusively 
to himself the attentions of his gentle mis- 
tress^ but for the thoughts of the separa- 
tion that was to take place that night ! He 
verified, by his feelings on this occasion, 
ihe remark, that 

*^ Of all the creatures that exist, 

Man only clogs his happiness with care, 

And while he should enjoy his part of bliss 

With thoughts of what may be, destroys what is." 

The morning was fine, and great part of 
it was spent in rambling about the envi- 
rons of the house, through those haunts, 
endeared by the recollection of having 
been the scenes where thev first met. 

On returning from this, it is presumed 

needless to say delightfrd ramble, they passed 

through the chapel, fitted up in the house 

for the accommodation of Mrs. Munro ; 

I 3 it 



174 THE DISCARDED SON. 

it was of spacious dimensions, its form O'. ta- 
gon, and covered with a soft thick rnatting; 
in a deep recess at the farthest end stood 
the altar, between two gothic windovss, 
chiefly composed of stained glass, and 
which, from tl\e shadow of intermingled cy- 
presses and willows, nourished by a irmr- 
niuring rill that crept round their feet, 
cast on them, only admitted a softened 
light ; all around were vases of rich flow- 
ers, shedding an exquisite perfume, and 
forming a beautiful contrast to the sombre 
hue of the grey walls. 

Delacour involuntarily paused to look 
about him, remarking as he did, that he 
had no where seen a place better adapted 
for ihe purposes to which it was devoted^ 
namely, prayer and meditation. 

" Her?,'" cried Elizabeth, resting her 
hand upon the low railing which enclosed 
the 'dh'dv — " here," turning a look of in- 
efable tenderness upon him, '' will the 
safety of Delacour often be prayed for." 

" And here," returned he, rapturously 

seiiiing 



THE DISCARDED SON. 175 

seizing her hand, and dropping on one 
knee^ " let him pray that he may never 
cease to merit your supplications to Hea- 
ven for him ; but with your image, my 
Elizabeth, enshrined in his heart, it is 
impossible he shonkl^ — for, like the angels 
that lacquey> we are told, the couch of 
innocence and virtue, it is calsulated to 
keep far off all thoughts of harm and 
sin." 

As he knelt, Elizabeth dre\^ from her 
pocket a long plait of her own hair^ 
united with a small heart of agate, and 
with a smile threw it over his neck. 

" This goes with me to my grave," cried 
Delacour, as, after holding it for some mi- 
nutes to his lips, he concealed it in his 
bosom. 

At ten o'clock at night the chaise, which 
was to convey Delacour away, drove to 
the door — till then the party within had, 
by struggling with their feelings, main- 
tained an appearance of cheerfulness, but 
14 on 



176 THE DISCARDED SOK. 

on its stopping each countenance was in a 
minute overcast. 

Mrs. Munro was the first whom Delacour 
approached to take leave of; as he affec- 
tionately pressed his lips to h*er hand — '' Re- 
member/' she softly whispered^ " whose 
happiness you have in your keeping, and 
lei the recollection prevent you from need- 
lessly exposing yourself/' 

A look of eloquent gratitude was the 
only reply Delacour was able to make to 
this speech. 

^^ For once, for once, my Elizabeth/' 
he softly cried, after pressing her cold 
trembling hands for some minutes in 
silence to his heart, a silence, perhaps, 
more expressive than language could have 
been, " let me be blest by hearing you 
call me your Delacour.'* 

'' My Delacour," faintly articulated Eli- 
zabeth — then, after a short pause, '' Be — be 
careful of yourself, for should this be our 
last meeting, never, never will happiness 
again be known to Elizabeth/' 

Delacour 



THE DISCARDED SON. 177 

Delacour caught her to his bosom for an 
instant — he strained her to it — then relin- 
quishing his hold — '' Angels watch over 
you/' he cried^ and darted from the 
room. 

In the hall he found MunrO;, who^ in 
order to be no restraint upon his feelings 
on this occasion, had repaired thither ; he 
could only, however, wring his hand in 
silence — his heart was too full to permit 
him to speak, and to hide its emotions he 
hurried to the chaise, and in a few mi- 
nutes lost sight of the habitation of his 
beloved. On reaching London he merely 
stopped there for the purpose of visiting- 
Mr. Beerscroft, in order to inform him 
of the engagement between him and Eli- 
zabeth, and conjure him to keep a watch- 
ful eye over Lord O'Siriister. '' After telling 
you she is now my betrothed bride," added 
he, '' it cannot, I am sure, be necessary to 
expatiate, or even point out the conse- 
quences that must ensue from her being 
!• 5. again. 



178 THE DISCARDED SON. 

again annoyed by that villainous brother- 
in-law of yours.'* 

Beerscro ft gave him every assurance he 
could desire on the subject — assurances 
which Delacour knew him too well to 
doubt his not attending to. 

The tender attentions of her parents^ 
and the correspondence she carried on 
with Delacour till his ship had sailed, gra- 
dually softened the sorrow of Elizabeth 
for his departure. If at times the thoughts 
of the dangers he was exposed to became 
too powerful for her feelings, she always 
sought retirement until she had regained 
tranquillity, or at least the semblance of 
it, that thus her parents might be spared 
the pain of witnessing her unhappiness, 
7\ud which, just at this juncture, she was 
well aware, from a pressure of domestic 
cares, they could ill have supported. 



CHAP. 



THE DISCARDED SON. 179 



CHAP. IV. 

** A sudden storm liid frcmtthe south arise. 

And horrid black began to hang the skies ; 

By slow advances loaded clouds ascend, 

And cross the air their lowering front extend j 

Heav'n's loud artillery began to play, , 

And wrath divine in dreadful peals convey ; 

Darkness and raging winds their terrors join. 

And storms of ram with storms of fire combine } 

Some luii ashore upon the shoaly land. 

Some perish by the rocks, some by the sand.'* 

Dkyd. Virg. 

JL HE wound of Miinro at length assumed 
so alarming an appearance, that he deemed 
it expedient to obtain the advice of a pro- 
fessional man of greater celebrity than 
the one who attended him at Heathwood, 
I 6 and 



180 THE DISCARDED SON. 

and accordingly^ for the purpose of pro- 
curing this^ took an excursion to _, 

while Elizabeth was at Glengary, when it 
was discovered that the bone of his leo; 
was materially injured — a discovery which, 
destroying his hopes of speedily, if ever, 
recovering the entire use of it, reduced 
him to the necessity of relinquishing his 
adjutancy, as a situation requiring greater 
exertions than he was then capable of 
making. 

His resignation of it afforded Lord O'Si- 
nister no little pleasure, as it salved him 
the trouble of planning a scheme to in- 
duce him, in one way or other, to give it 
up, in consequence of his determining 
not to allow him to retain a situation, 
calculated to enable him to free himself 
from the pecuniary obligations under 
which he had laid him, and thus put it out 
of his power to pursue the only measure 
by which he now thought there was a 
chance of succeeding with Elizabeth — 
namely, imprisoning him, and making heii; 
3 compliance 



THE DISCARDED SON. 181 

compliance with his wishes the price of 
his enlargement. 

Munro was grievously disappointed at 
finding^ the resio^nation of his latelv-ob- 
tained situation;, on which he had built so 
much;, accepted by his Lordship without 
any offer or promise of another^ the sup- 
posed benevolence of his Lordship's dispo- 
sition, united to his knowledge of the dis- 
aster which had occasioned him to relin- 
quish it, having induced him to believe he 
should receive either the one or the other. 

He endeavoured, however, to check the 
feelings this disappointment gave rise to>, 
by reflecting on what his Lordship had 
promised to do for his son, and the proba- 
bility there was of his having, from his 
high rank, and, he concluded, well-knov;n 
philanthropy, so many, at this juncture, 
on his list to provide for, as to deprive 
him for the present of the power of doing 
any thing for him. 

'' Yes, I make no doubt," cried Munro 
to himself, as he mused on what he ima- 
gined 



182 THE DISCARDED SON. 

gined the disposition of the peer to be, 
*' this is the case ; neither that should an 
opportunity again occur of serving me, 
whichj from the situation he holds in life, 
one may reasonably hope there will, its 
being eagerly embraced by him ; till then 
I must be patient^ for however pressing 
my necessities may be, God forbid I should 
either attempt or wish to have any one of 
his claimants displaced on my account. 
No, no, I know too well, from painful ex- 
perience, what the pangs of disappoint- 
ment are, voluntarilv to do any thing 
likely to entail them upon another/' 

Yet, notwithstanding his hopes of fu- 
ture friendship from Lord O'Sinister, his 
firm confidence in his sincerity and bene- 
volence, he could not help at times sink- 
ing ahnost into despondency ; nor can 
this be wondered at, when it is stated, 
that just at this period his affairs wore a 
very unpromising aspect, owing to the 
long neglect which his farm had experi- 
enced in consequence of his absence from 

home. 



_ THE DISCARDED SON. 183 

home, and the state in which he had re- 
turned to it. He now beheld no proba- 
bility of being able to discharge any part 
of his pecuniary obligation for a consider- 
able time to his Lordship ; and although he 
had not the most distant apprehension of 
his ever distressing him on account of it, 
yet he considered life was precarious — his 
noble friend might suddenly be snatched 
from this world to the enjoyment of that 
happiness in the next he so truly merited, 
and the bond might in consequence de- 
volve to some person^ not inclined to shew 
him the same consideration and forbear- 
ance he would have done. 

These forebodings of evil, however/ 
were not usual with him; he justly re- 
flected they could answer no other end 
than that of dismaying and dispiriting him 
from making exertions to ward off what 
he dreaded; and besides, that to doubt the 
goodness of Providence is assuredly to de- 
serve not to experience it. 

But that calmness and cheerfulness w^hich 

his 



184 THE DISCARDED SON. 

his arguments with himself sometimes failed 
of producing, the consideration of his 
childrens* now smiling prospects, in a mo- 
ment restored him to; and ''how can I 
feel unhappy?'' was a question he still 
asked himself whenever they recurred to 
his recollection, '' how^ complain of the un- 
kindness of fortune, w^hen in their assured 
happiness I behold my fondest wishes ac- 
complished ?'' 

The prospects of poor Osmond^ how- 
ever, w^ere but fair in appearance. Lord 
O'Sinister having decided, from the mo- 
ment of his exposure to Elizabeth, 027 
not putting him in possession of the pro- 
mised living. Av/are, from the unity which 
subsisted between him and his family, that 
to render him independent would also be 
to render his father so, beside, judging, as 
the vilhiin ever does^ from the distrust 
guilt engenders in the mind, of the truth 
and sincerity of others by his own, he had 
not the smallest doubt that Elizabeth 
would without hesitation expose him to 

the 



THE DISCARDED SON. 1S5 

the scorn and resentment he merited, if 
her brother was once rendered indepen- 
dent of him ; he therefore positively de- 
termined that he would not render him 
so^ and also on sending him out of the 
kingdom^ if poss.ible, that he might have 
nothing to dread from his interference or 
indignation relative to his sister. 

Had he done what he wished^ he would, 
immediately on his return from Glengary, 
have contrived a pretext for removing him 
from college, and sending him out of the 
kingdom; but persuaded, from the light in 
which he was convinced Elizabeth must now 
view him, that he could not be too wary, too 
circumspect in his conduct towards her re- 
latives, he decided on controlling his im- 
patience respecting her, and letting mat- 
ters proceed as he intended they should 
have done, when he had nearly made up 
his mind to giving Osmond the living, 
trusting that by acting in this manner he 
should divest her mind of all suspicion of 
his still harbouring any improper views 
concerning her, and thus be enabled with 

ease 



1S6 THE DISCARDED S(7N. 

ease and safety to entangle the innocent 
Osmond in his snares. 

Accordinglvj in piin:iiance of this de- 
cision, Osmond remained the usual time 
at college, was ordained on leaving it, 
and invited immediately after his ordina- 
tion to spend a few weeks with his noble 
patron in London, previous to his induc- 
tion to the living, which just about this 
period the public papers had announced 
being vacated by the death of its old in- 
cumbent. 

The affectionate heart of Osmond turned 
at the moment towards home, which he 
had not visited since the period he quitted 
it for college, owing to his inability to 
incur the expence attending a journey to 
it: concei\ing, however, that it was his 
duty to obey the wishes of his Lordship, 
that he should act both ungratefully and 
disrespectfully, if he did not embrace the 
opportunity thus afforded bv his invita- 
tion of paying him his personal acknow- 
ledgments for the obligations conferred 

on 



THE DISCARDED SON. 187 

on him and his family^ he proceeded to 
London, and met witli a most gracious re- 
ception from the peer. 

His Lordship's residence was in Arling- 
ton-street, a sumptuous mansion, and fitted 
up with all the luxurious elegance of mo- 
dern times. 

But though Osmond was little accus- 
tomed to any scenes of splendour, but 
such as his lively imagination had pictured 
to him, there was nothing which so en- 
grossed and fixed his attention, as the 
kind and unassuming manners of his pa- 
tron, his ready acquiescence* to the wishes 
of others, his apparently incessant and 
anxious solicitude to render every one 
about him happy. 

As he was one of the most wicked, so 
indeed was he one of the most artful of 
men, since to have seen him in his own 
residence, one might well have mis- 
taken him for a benignant spirit, looking 
about for opportunities of doing good. 
As Osmond, before he saw him, conceived 

him 



I 88 THE DISCARDED SOX. 

him to be one of the best, so nov/ he 
also considered him one of the most 
fascinating of men, a man to whom, from 
the estimation in which he concluded him 
held, it was an honour to owe an obli- 
gation.* 

Lady O'Sinister and her daughter were 
both from home ; they were seldom, in- 
deed, inmates of the same mansion with 
his Lordship; their absence, for which he 
assigned a plausible reason to Osmond, 
did not prevent his frequently entertain- 
ing large parties of both sexes ; to these 
Osmond was introduced in the most flat- 
tering manner, as a young gentleman 
whom he had taken bv the hand, for the 
express purpose of ushering into life ; he, 
besides, took him everywhere with him: 
and thus, from the elegant society in 
which he now mixed, Osmond soon ac- 
quired that complete polish requisite to 
appear to advantage, and which, indeed, 
can only be acquired by a constant in- 
tercourse with polite company. 

He 



THE DISCARDED SON. 1S9 

He was at this period in his two-and- 
Iwentieth year ; Nature had been as prodi- 
gal of her gifts to him as Fortune had been 
sparing of her's; his heart was the seat of 
every virtue^ his temper even and com- 
placent, his understanding excellent, and 
highly cultivated; his genius and dispo- 
sition naturally inclined him to study; and 
he was still further stimulated to the pur- 
suit of literature, by the consideration of 
a good education being the only fortune 
his father had the power» of bestowing on 
him, and that too not without inconve- 
niencing himself greatly. 

In figure, he was tall, slight, and ele- 
gantly formed ; his features were of the 
Roman cast ; his countenance open, lively, 
and intelligent ; his smile full of sweet- 
ness, his dark eyes of sensibility ; yet 
mild as was their general language, they 
could gleam with indignation at insolence^ 
or presumption of any description. 

Such was Osmond Munro, when he fell 
into the hands of this arch-deceiver. Lord 

O'Sinister: 



1<50 THE DISCARDED SON. 

O'Sinister; his letters to his family were 
filled with eulogiuins on hh Lordship ; he 
spoke of him in the exaggerated^ the en- 
thusiastic terms which gratitude ever makes 
use of, when lodged in the warm, the 
glowing heart of youth. Their transport 
at finding their confidence in the good- 
ness, the friend^vhip of the peer, justified 
by his conduct towards him, was unspeak- 
able ; and Elizabeth, the amiable Eliza- 
beth, with the credulity natural to youth 
and innocence, gave him credit for what 
he knew not, repentance, and persuaded 
herself, by his conduct to her l:rother, he 
wished to make atonement t"or his tres- 
passes against herself. 

A happier being than was Osmond Mun- 
ro at this period, it would have been a 
difficult matter, pei-haps, to have found; 
he saw himself not only introduced into 
life as the protegee of a man whom every 
one, he imagined, valued and respected ; 
admired and caressed wherever he went, 
his gentle find unassuming manners, his 

5 innocent 



THE DISCARDED SON. 191 

innocent and ingenuous countenance, hav- 
ing done that for him in many instances, 
which the recommendation and notice of 
Lord O'Sinister would have failed of doing ; 
but secure of a handsome independence, 
he believed, and consequently of the 
power of rendering the future days of his 
family happy : it v/as his intention to in- 
vite them to take up their residence with 
him in the parsonage-house, of which he 
thought himself so certain, and which, 
from the information of his Lordship, he 
understood to be a most delightful re- 
sidence, a little terrestrial paradise, situ- 
ated in the very heart of a luxuriant 
couilty, and in the midst of an excellent 
neighbourhood. 

Greatly as he enjoyed the parties he at 
present mixed in, he not unfrequently 
stole away from these, for the purpose of 
indulging the agreeable reflections to wlii ch 
the expected meeting between him and 
his family gave rise to, of dwelling unin- 
terruptedly on the happiness he should ex- 
perience^ 



.192 THE DISCARDED SON. 

perlcnce, when he found his beloved pa- 
rents safely housed beneath his roof^ di- 
verted from the bitter remembrance of the 
past, and compensated for the many years 
of anxiety they had suffered on his ac- 
count, by his attentions. 

'' Six vv^eeks, six little v/eeks^ with wings 
of down had o'er him flown/' when Os- 
mond found himself alone one clay at din- 
ner with Lord O'Sinister. The conversa- 
tion, after the withdrawing of the atten- 
dants, happened to turn on the subject of 
patronage. 

" I confess/' cried his Lordship, with the 
&oft insinuating smile he generally assumed 
when about practising any gross decep- 
tion, as was the case in the present in- 
stance, " there is nothing lam more tena- 
cious of, nothing I more highly value, 
than that which, by one means or other, 
has been thrown into my hands; but not 
from any gratification it affords my pride, 
but simply from the power it gives me of 
aiding modest merit, of making amends, 

in 



THE DISCARDED SCN. 193 

in some degree, for the injustice of for- 
tune, of redressing the injuries which^ 
while she retains the bandage on her eyes, 
the good and the brave will ever have rea- 
son to complain of sufferin^^: through her 

M O CD 

means. 

'''But, my dear Osmond,'* perceiving X\\t 
credulous and delighted youth, from the 
fullness of his heart, ready to burst forth 
into eulogiums on him, '' I deserve no plau- 
dit for acting in this manner, since, in 
doing so, I study my own gratification ; 
and he v/ho, in the actions he performs, 
has a selfish end in view, merits no eulo- 
gium, however meritorious these may be. 
• '•' Tastes and opinions differ — some men 
place their delight in public spectacles, in 
splendour and ostentation, others in sen- 
sual gratifications, and, again, some in the 
intrigues of cabinets and courts; mine con- 
sists in trying to promote the happiness of 
all around me, in endeavouring to prove 
that Heaven has not bestowed its gifts on 

VOL. II. K an 



1^4 THE DISCARDED SON. 

an ungrateful object— in seeking out objects 
impelledand driven backward by the adverse 
hand of fate, and restoring them to their 
proper places in society — in supporting 
drooping and persecuted merit, beneath 
*' the proud man's contumely, the law's 
delay, the insolence of office," and finally 
affording it the means of triumphing over 
its enemies. Omy dear young friend," he 
continued, fixing his eyes upon the swim- 
ming ones of Osmond, '^ I could relate 
such anecdotes, describe such scenes, as 
would convince you beyond a doubt, had 
you one on the subject, which, however, 
from my knowl'^dge of your disposition, 
I am convinced you have not, that my 
pursuits have led me into the right road 
to happiness/' 

*' Assuredly,'* returned Osmond, ''lam 
jndeed well aware of the transport a heart 
like your's must experience from contri- 
buting to the welfare of others. The 
greatest object in the universe, says a cer- 
tain 



THE DISCARDED SON. 19j 

tain philosopher, ' is a good man scitig- 
gling with adversity;' but I perfectly agree 
with him who says, there is a still greater — '• 
the good man who comes to relieve it/' 

'' Come, come/ 'tis an awkward thing," 
said the peer, filling his glass and pushing 
the decanter to Osmond, " for a man to 
sit quietly listening to his own praises; I 
don't know how it was we got into this 
conversation ; let us cliange it — here's a 
toast for you, ''May the honest heart never 
be w^ithout a friend to relieve its dis- 
tress.' 

'•' Amen," silently but fervently ejacu- 
lated Osmond, as he emptied his glass. 

" And now, young man," resumed his 
Lordship,, putting on one* of his most fa- 
miliar smiles, " permit me to tell you, I 
shall expect you to use your gun some- 
times for me when you go lo the rectory, 
which, if not situated in a country over- 
flowing with rnilk and honey, is at least 
in one abounding with oame of everv de- 
K 2 scription. 



196 THE DISCARDED SON. 

scription, against which I presume ere this 
you have been taught to wage war." 

'' I confess I have/' replied Osmond. 

" I am very partial myself to the sports 
of the field/' rejoined the peer; ''but 
apropos, whether do you prefer making a 
longer stay in London, or going down next 
week to take possession of your living?" 

'' Since your Lordship allows me a 
choice^ I confess I prefer the latter, so 
great is my anxiety to see my family/' 

Lord O'Sinister nodded, and was about 
replying, when a servant entered with a 
letter to him ; he immediately broke the 
seal, but had scarcely done so, when his 
countenance underwent a total change — 
he bit his lip — started — rose from his 
chair — resumed it instantly — in a word, did 
every thing, calculated to excite a be- 
lief of his being under the most violent 
emotion. 

Osmond involuntarily dropped a news- 
paper, which he had taken up whilst his 

Lordship 



THE DISCARDED SON. 197 

Lordship was looking over his letter^ and 
almost unconsciously rivetted his looks^ full 
of alarm and anxiety, upon him, convinced^ 
from his seeming agitation, that something 
most unpleasant had occurred. " And 
what a pity is it that so good a man should 
meet with anything to trouble him/' he 
said to himself. 

After a silence of some minutes, his 
Lordship raising his eyes from the letter^ 
turned them upon Osmond, " I see," cried 
he, " that you are astonished at the emo- 
tion I appear in : peruse that," handing 
the letter to him as he spoke, '' and you 
will then cease to wonder at it ; in the 
meanwhile excuse me for withdrawing; 
whenever disturbed, I always retire to 
solitude till I recover myself 

He accordingly withdrew, and Osmond 
read as follows : — 



k3 ft 



lOB THE DISCAHDED SON. 



To the Right Honourable Lord Viscount 
O' Sinister. 

*' My LokDj 

'' It grieves me to be the 
herald of ill news^ but duty often com- 
pels us to act contrary to inclination. 
A few days ago a law process was served 

on me by the Bishop of 's solicitor, 

staying your appointment of the Reve- 
rend Mr. Osmond Munro to the living of 

-, in consequence of his Lordship^s 

laying claim to the patronage of it as his 
rio^ht. I immediatelv set about investigating: 
the grounds on which he founded this 
claim. The result of which investigation, 
I am truly concerned to state, proved to 
me beyond a doubt the justice of it, and 
that therefore to attempt any litigation on 
the subject, would only be to involve your 

Lordship 



THE DISCARDED SON. 199 

Lordship in unnecessary expence and 
trouble. 

'' I have the honour to be, 
*' My Lord, 
" Your Lordship's 
*' Most obedient humble servant, 

^' Al£X. M'Law." 
Lincoln's Inn, 
Thursday afternoon. 



A dimness came over the sight of Os- 
mond as he perused this letter, and ere he 
had well concluded it, it dropped from his 
hand. All the pleasing anticipations, the 
delightful hopes in which he had been in- 
dulging, were annihilated by it, and for a 
few minutes he sunk beneath the shock 
their demolition gave him. 

When a little recovered, through the 
unrestrained indulgence he gave his feel- 
ings, he began to accuse himself of weak- 
K 4 ness^ 



SCO THE DISCARrVED SON. 

ness, in having suffered hjmself to be so 
completely oveipov/ered by his disap- 
pointment. 

'' True/' cried he^ '' it is a most 
grievous one^ for vv^bo can deny that it is 
a grievous thing to be disappointed of the 
power of rendering a service to those 
whom ^\^e value more than life? but still it 
is only such as we are all liable to in thii 
chequered state. Shall I then^, knowing 
this to be the case, dare to murmur at 
experiencing but the common lot of hu- 
manity, as if I had a right to expect some 
peculiar exemption in my favour; shall I 
attempt to enjoin others to patience and 
i^esignation under adversity, as is one of 
the most sacred duties of my profession 
to do, while I suffer mvself to sink be- 
Heath it.^ No — no, to be satisfied with 
Hiyselfj my precepts and practice must 
ever agree. Hen^ eforward, therefore, in 
order that I may be enabled to fulfil my 
duty properly, it shall be my study to ac- 
quire such a command over myself, ns 

shall 



THE DISCARDED SON. gOl 

shall enable me to meet with fortitude 
and calmness whatever may ensue. How 
much do I rejoice that Lord O'Sinistei* 
did not witness my recent agitation, since 
I am convinced the sight of it would have 
considerably encreased his ov/n ! Goo(J 
and benevolent man, how much does he 
feel for others ! by this time I dare say 
(and as the idea occurred^ his heart, which 
had felt chilled and heavy, began to re- 
gain its wonted heat and animation), he 
is planning how he mav make amends for 
my present disappointment. Yes, I make 
no doubt he is/' added Osmond, startin": 
from his seat in an ecstacy of revived 
hope and expectation, and pacing the 
room with hasty steps — *' yes, I feel assured 
he will not let me launch into the wide 
ocean of life, without providing me with 
some certain port to steer to." 

His Lordship at this moment re-entered 

the room, his cheek flushed, and from this 

circumstance his countenance wearing a 

Still more insidious expression than usual. 

K 5 '/ Well, 



202 THE mSCAHDED SON. 

'' Well, my dear Osm nd/' cried he, 
hastily approaching him, and extending 
his hand, '^ how goes it with you ? — have 
you yet got over the shock that con- 
founded scravsd," glancing at the fallen let- 
ter, "must have given you?" 

Osmond bowed expressively. 

^*^ Well, I am happy to find you have/' 
resumed his Lordship, " since it proves to 
me your's is no common mind ; for from 
what T have just felt myself I can easily 
conceive what you must have felt : but 
come, let us resume our seats, for I never 
stood so much in need of a little of the 
juice of the grape as I do just now, so 
much am I cast down and mortified at your 
being disappointed of a living I had set 
my heart on seeing you in possession of, 
not so entirely on account of its intrinsic 
value, as the comfortable asylum it would 
have enabled you to afford your family; 
but let us speak no more of it — to dwell 
on what we cannot remedy, is, by height- 
ening our vexation, only to render bad 

worse ; 



THE DISCARDED SON. 203 

worse ; since the bishop has rnade out so 
good a title to it, let him e'en keep it 
quietly, for there is nothing I so abhor as 
litigation ; all I shall further say relative 
to it is, that I trust, since he has deprived 
me of the power of bestowing it on a 
worthy man, he will mitigate the pain his 
having done so occasions, by conferring 
it on one himself 

" It is needless, I presume, to say (conti- 
nued his Lordship, after swallowing a 
btmper of burgundy), that I should not 
have suffered what I have done at its being 
wrested from me, had I any thing of equal 
value at present in my gift ; if not or- 
dained, I could have provided for you in a 
thousand different advanta-jeoiis ways, but 
I never had much interest in the church ; 
still, however, I am not quite destitute of 
the power of serving you " 

At these words the solrits of Osmond, 
which had begun to droop, became again 
reanir ated. 

''A particular friend of mine'* proceeded, 
K G the 



204 THE DISCARDED SON. 

the peer, "residing in Jamaica, and possessor 
of considerable estates there, has a living 
of some value at his disposal ; for which I 
lately received a letter from him, request- 
ing me to look out for a person worthy 
of being appointed to ; I obeyed him, 
"but without being successful in the enqui- 
ries I made for the purpose, a circum- 
stance which never occurred to my recol- 
lection, till a few minutes ago, when it 
struck me, you perhaps might have no 
objection to accepting it, rather than 
continue in a state of idleness, or hunt- 
inof after a situation/' 

He paused for a reply, but a reply was. 
not immediately in poor Osmond's power 
to give, since his feelings alike revolted 
from ac( epting this offer, and expressing^ 
his repugnance to it, lest his doing so 
should subject him to the imputation 
of tears he was a stranger to ; not the cli- 
iT'atc, \ji\t he manners he in general un- 
de tood prevailing there, and the great 
unwilliii^iiess he was convinced iiis family 

would 



TllE DISCARDED SOiNf. 205 

would feel to his going thither, rendering 
him averse to the thoughts of visitiiior 
Jamaica. 

'' I perceive, my young friend/' re- 
sumed Lord O'Sinister^ after the silence 
of a few minutes, and with a look of ap- 
prehension, (Osmond mistook it for one 
of ten-ier anxiety) '' that you do not relish 
the proposal I have just made you ; sin- 
cerely sorry am I that I cannot at present 
make you a more agreeable one, but 
since I cannot, I think it would be ad- 
visable for you to try and combat your 
feelings in the present instance: if vour 
objection to going to Jamaica results 
from any apprehension of the climate, I 
take upon myself to assure you, that, by 
adhering to your present regular and tem- 
perate mode of living, you may bid defi- 
ance to it/' 

" No, my Lord, no," eagerly and warm- 
ly, replied Osmond, " 'tis not any thing 
of that natu -e that renders me averse to 
doing SO;, but the uneasiness I am aware 
5 the 



206 THE DISCARDED SON. 

the circumstance would occasion my fa- 
mily." 

^' I cannot see why it should/* said his 
Lordship, '' since I think they must be too 
well informed, at least I am convinced 
yo\ir father must, not to know as well as I 
do, that provided you act in the manner 
I have just mentioned, you will be as 
safe there, with regard to health, as you 
could possibly be here; however, if this 
is your only objection to proceeding 
thither, I promise to take upon my- 
self reconciling your parents to the mea- 
sure — so come, be candid, my dear fel- 
low ; I am obliged to urge you to an ex- 
peditious decision, a fleet being on the 
point of sailing for the West Indies, by 
which I think it incumbent on me to send 
out to mv friend, who, by the bye, I 
should have told you is one of the most 
amiable of men, in whose society it is 
utterly impossible a person of any mind 
can feel otherwise than happy and com- 
fortable ; a candidate for his living, which, 

should 



Tilli: DISCARDED SON. 207 

should you make up your mind to accept^ 
I beg leave to add, it is not my inten- 
tion or wish you should retain longer than 
is necessary for you to save sufficient 
money to purchase one here, should my 
exertions to procure you one prove un- 
successful, tind which I make no doubt, 
from what I have heard of it, you v/ill in 
a very short time be able to do/' 

This latter argument had the desired 
effect upon Osmond ; the hope it suggest- 
ed of his being shortly enabled, by ac- 
cepting the present proposal, to acquire 
the means of settling himself comfortably 
in his own country, induced him without 
further hesitation to accede to it, to the 
inexpressible joy of the peer, who, in re- 
moving him from the kingdom, flattered 
himself he should remove one of the chief 
obstacles to his designs on Elizabeth. 

The friend, in whose praise he was so 
lavish, was a gentleman of the law, who, 
for certain mal-practices he had had recourse 
to in the service of his Lordship, was 

obliged 



208 THE DISCARDED SON. 

obliged to make rather a precipitate re- 
treat from his own country. His Lord- 
ship, as in duty bound, furnished him 
with the means of settling comfortably in 
another. Jamaica was the place he fixed 
on for his future residence, and where he 
had not been long, when he succeeded in 
obtaining the haiul of the widow of a rich 
planter, possessed of large estates in a re- 
mote part of the island The correspond- 
ence he kept up with Lord O ''Minister 
convincing his Lordship his disposition 
had undergone no change, he decided on 
throwing Osmond into his hands, with in- 
structions never to let him escape from 
thei^i to his native country. 

His second prospect of preferment did 
not afford to Osmond the happiness his 
first had done, since, unlike that, it afford- 
ed him no hope of being able to do any 
thing immediately for his familv, or enjoy 
their society. The idea of h's now pro- 
bably long separation from them of the 
anxiety he was convinced they would suf- 
fer 



THE DISCARDED' SON, 209' 

fer while he was away, hung like a dead 
weight upon his hearty, totally depriving 
him of his spirits. 

Lord O'Sinister, but without appearing 
to notice his melancholy, did every thing 
in his power to divert it, and prevent re- 
flection, lest it should lead him to retract 
his promise. 

About this period Delacour returned 
from the expedition on which he had 
gone to the West Indies. While there, the 
officer to whom he was next in command 
died, of course he took posse^^sion of his 
ship, and was confirmed in the command 
of it an his arrival in England ; but at the 
same time received orders to hold himself 
in readiness to go out convoy with the 
East India fleet, then almost ready to sail. 

These orders, united to the still de- 
ranged state of his affairs, precluded all 
thouo-hts of his vet marryins^. 

Elizabeth, in her reply to the letter he 
wrote, announcing his return to England, 
informed him of her brother being then 

in 



210 THE DISCARDED SON. 

in London, on a visit to Lord O'Sinister, 
information which afforded him no little 
pleasure, as he was at that moment on the 
point of setting out for the metropolis, 
and had long, from Osmond's near rela- 
tionship to Elizabeth, and the amiable 
light in which he was represented, been 
anxious to become acquainted with him. 

Accordingly, he lost no time on his 
arrival in town, in hastening to pay his 
compliments to him, more anxious now 
than ever for an introduction to him, 
from the solicitude he felt to obtain some 
intelligence of Lord O'Sinister, which 
now, except through his means, he des- 
paired of gaining, Beerscroft being ab- 
sent at this juncture on a visit to a friend 
in a remote part of the kingdom. 

He longed to know whether any thing 
like repentance had yet touched the hitherto 
obdurate heart of his Lordship, and which he 
flattered himself he should be able to ga- 
ther from the information of Osmond. 

Not finding him at home, he left a note, 

requesting 



THE DISCARDED SON. 211 

requesting his company the ensuing day to 
dinner at the Salopian coffee-house. 

Osmond was agreeably surprised by this 
billet^ as, from the period he knew of the 
engagement between Delacour and his 
sister^ he was solicitous for his acquaint- 
ance. At the appointed time he waited 
on him^ and met with a reception which 
at once conciliated his regard^, and con- 
vinced him his sister had been most happy 
in her choice. 

Delacour was equally pleased with him, 
pleased to find in the brother of her he 
loved the very kind of being he would of 
his own accord have selected for a friend, 
from the exquisite sensibility, yet spirit 
and firmness, which it was evident he pos- 
sessed. 

Dinner was served in a private room, 
that they might be under no restraint. As 
soon as it was over, and they were left to 
themselves, Delacour indulged himself 
with a long conversation about Elizabeth, 
and then gradually introduced the name of 

Lord 



212 THE DISCARDED SON. 

Lord O'Sinister, and congratulated Os- 
mond on the fulfilment of his Lordship's 
promise respecting him. 

Osmond received his congratulations 
with a dejected look and a melancholy 
shake of the head : the alarm of suspicion 
instantly took possession of the mind of 
Delacour. 

^''What!*' cried he^ fastening his dark 
and keenly penetrating eyes upon the sud- 
denly clouded countenance of poor Os- 
mond^ while the muscles of his face be- 
gan to work^ '' has he then disappointed 
you?'* 

'' No, good man, he has not disap* 
pointed me/' returned Osmond; '*' yet ne- 
vertheless/' deeply sighing, as he folded 
his arms across his breast, "" I have met 
with a disappointment." 

^^ Relative to the living he so long 
assured you of?" demanded Delacour, in 
an agitated tone. 

" Even so," replied Osmond. 

^' And by what other means than his 

could 



THE DISCARDED SON. 51$ 

could you have experienced a disappoint- 
ment respecting it?" asked Delacour; 
'^ you really, my friend/' he added, with a 
forced smile, ''are a little paradoxical; 
may I entreat you to be explicit t" 

Osmond immediately complied with his 
request. " So you see,'' continued he, 
after he had explained the way in which 
lie had been deprived of the long-ex- 
pected living, '' I have been disappointed, 
but not. through Lord O'Sinister's means. 
I cannot do justice to the regret he felt at 
being robbed of the power of fulfilling 
his promise to me, neither to that he ex- 
perienced at not being able to offer me 
at present any better compensation for the 
provision thus unexpectedly wrested from 
me, than a living in Jamaica." Here Osmond 
disclosed all that had recently passed be- 
tween him and his Lordship. 

Ere he had well concluded, the abomi- 
nable deception which had been practised 
on him, together with his Lordship's mo- 
tives for persuading him to quit the king- 
dom. 



214- THE DISCARDED SON. 

dortij became obvious to Dclacour ; he 
clearly saw that Lord O'Sinister still me- 
ditated the destruction of Elizabeth, and 
had decided on getting her brother, if 
possible, out of the way, in ordei^ to pre- 
vent any interference from him respecting 
her. 

Delacour could not hear of the injuries 
of a stranger without the liveliest emo- 
tion; whathis feelings, therefore, were when 
he beheld any one dear to his regard im- 
posed upon, or in any way ill treated, 
may easier be conceived than described; 
the resentment, the indignation, the rage, 
with which the particulars he heard from 
Osmond inspired him, were almost too 
great for controul. Nothing hindered his 
immediately hastening to Lord O'Sinister, 
and in the face of day taxing him with the 
enormity of his conduct, but a dread of 
the catastrophe the exposure of his guilt 
might occasion in the family of -Munro. 
What this dread, however, withheld him 
from doing publicly, he resolved on doing 

privately. 



THE DISCARDED SON. 215 

privately, and in the meanwhile on taking 
immediate steps for rescuing Osmond from 
the snares of his Lordship. 

'' You asked me just now/' said Osmond, 
on concluding his short narrative^ " for a 
worthy man ; I will^ therefore, if you 
please, give you my noble patron. Lord 
O'^Sinister." 

" D — n him !" involuntarily exclaimed 
Delacour, striking the table as he spoke, 
with a violence that caused the glasses and 
decanters to tingle, and the table to be 
floated with wine. 

Osmond, instantly starting from his 
chair, retreated a few paces from it, sur- 
veying Delacour with an inquiring look 
of astonishment and anger. 

Delacour, immediately recollecting him- 
self, also arose. " My dear fellow,'' cried 
he, approaching Osmond, and extending 
his hand, '^ I ask ten thousand pardons; 
the truth is, at the moment you gave Lord 
O'Sinister, I was thinking of a most exe- 
crable villain, and so transported out 

of 



213 THE DISCARDED SON. 

of myself by certain recollections that just 
then obtruded, that I knew not what I 
was saying." 

Osmond accepted his apology ; a waiter 
was summoned, and the table being re- 
stored to order, they resumed their seats 
at it. 

^^ So you say/' cried Delacour, again 
turning his penetrating eyes on Osmond, 
'' you do not relish the thoughts of going 
to Jamaica ?" 

'' By no means," replied Osmond. 

'^ Why then go ?'* 

*' For a very sufficient reason, because 
I have no other alternative." 

"I beg your pardon, you have; the 
chaplaincy of my ship is not yet filled 
up, and if you will accept it, till some- 
thing better offers, which I trust may soon 
be the case, as my cbnneciions neither 
want inclination nor ability to oblige me, I 
take upon myself procuring it for you." 

A more agreeable offer than this could 
scarcely have been made to Osmond, from 

the 



THE DJSCARDP?) 30>:. 917 

the prospect it afrbrdcd of his being for 
some tiine associated with Delacoiif. Not- 
withstanding this, however, he hesitated 
accepting it, till he had consulted Lord 
O'Sinister on the subject, lest otherwise 
his Lordship should consider himself ill 
treated. 

Delacour, suspecting to what his hesita- 
tion was owing, questioned him on the 
subject, and finding he was not mistaken 
as to the cause he imputed it to, said he 
would not press him for a decisive answer 
till the next morning, when he meant to 
have the honour of waiting on Lord O'Si- 
nister, for the purpose of removing any 
objections his Lordship might ha^ e to his 
accepting his offer. 

Osmond v/as pleased to hear this was lils 
intention, as he was not without an appre- 
hension that his Lord!>hip might, in conse- 
quence of his not having any great time 
to look out for another person for the 
living, be urgent v;ith him to proceed to 
Jamaica. 

vor,. IT. L TIic 



2 IS - THE DISCARDED SON. 

The new friends did not part till a late 
hour; Osmond returned to Arlington- 
street;, in a much happier frame, of mind 
than when he had left it — again alive to 
hope and pleasing expectation : he and 
his noble host did not meet until the next 
morningr. Just as they were seated at break- 
fast, and Osmond v;as beginning to intro- 
duce the subject so near to his heart, De- 
lacour sent in his card, witli a request for 
a private audience with his Lordship. 

. Lord O'Sinister gave orders for his being 
shewn into the library, and immediately 
repaired to him, not in the least doubting 
his visit being for the purpose of solicit- 
ing a favour for some friend or acquaint- 
ance, an idea that was highly gratifying 
to his pride, from the light in which he 
regarded Delacour. 

Expecting this, how great was his mor- 
tification and surprise at learning the real 
purport of his visit! 

Delacour, but without betraying Beers- 
croft, gave him quickly to understand he 

knew 



THE DISCARDED SOlv. ^{9 

knew the whole of his conduct towards 
Elizabeth, as well as the detestable pro- 
jects his designs respecting her had caused 
him to form against the re:it of her family, 
mentioned the situation he had himself 
offered to Osmond, for the purpose of 
rescuing him out of his hands, and finally 
the engagement subsisting between him 
and Elizabeth. 

" She has been betrothed to nie bv her 
father/' ^aid he, '' in the sight of Heaven, 
and with the consent of her own heart, 
of course any insult or injiiry to her^ I 
shall resent as if offered to myself: but 
even if this .were not the case, still would 
tl>e knowledge of her being the daughter 
of a brave and worthy man, and innocent 
and virtuous herself, be sufficient to arm 
me in her cause. Oh, my Lord!" v>ith 
increasing emotion, he added, '' when I 
think of your being a father you^^elf, and 
- yet meditating such a blow against the 
peace of a father, as the ruin of his daugh- 
ter, and the eternal banishment of his 
L 2 son. 



S20 THE DISCAI^DED vSON. 

sorij would have been to that of Mimro, 
I cannot find terms adequate to express 
the indignation, the horror I feel at your 
conduct." 

'' Upon my word, I — I do not know 
what you mean/' said his Lordship, but in 
a faltering voice, and with looks half 
averted. '' I do not know why you should 
suppose that Mr. Osmond Munro's going 
to Jamaica should occasion his eternal ba- 
nishment from this." 

." Oh, my Lord!'* still more indig- 
nantly, cried Delacour, " do not flatter 
yourself with a hope of being able to im- 
pose on me : I have been more than once 
at Jamaica, and know perfectly well the 
character of the gentleman to whom you 
intended to send Osmond Munro ; know 
well, that he has no such living in his gift 
as you speak of. I advise you, therefore, 
for your own sake, to urge his going 
there no longer, since, should you conti- 
nue to do so, I shall assuredly wave the 
considerations that at present withhold me 

from 



THE DISCARDED SON. 221 

from holding you up to the scorn and ab- 
horrence you merits and which you would 
doubtless experience, was your real cha- 
racter known ; for dissipated as the world 
may be, it still is not so depraved as to 
look with coolness upon crimes like yours : 
the premeditated destroyer of domestic 
happiness is, and ever will be, I trust, an 
object g[ general detestation. Unhappy 
man^ instead of any longer indulging your 
vicious inclinations, set about the task of 
reformation; it is time for it to commence; 
dismiss your parasites; look in your glass — 
like your conscience, it will tell you truth 
— it will shew you grey hairs and wrinkles^ 
that should warn you to repentance, by 
convincing you the hour of retribution 
cannot be far distant." 

The confusion and dismay which had 
seized Lord O'Sinister at the commence- 
ment of this harangue, subsided sufficiently 
ere it was over, to permit him to recollect 
himself, and enter into a kind of expostu- 
lation with Delacour relative to what he 
L 3 had 



S2S THE DISCAP.DED SON. 

had said; he assured hiin he did him the 
greatest injustice;, in suspecting him of 
the enormities he accused him of — tried 
1o persuade him that it was owing to 
his being over righteous, not over wicked, 
he had been so aspersed, '' since envy does 
merit like its shade pursue;'' and concluded 
by saying, Mr. Osmond Munro was at 
liberty to do whatever was most agreeable 
to himself. 

" Then this point being settled/' said 
Delacour, '' I shall take my leave, with 
assuring you, that the recent conversation 
could scarcely have been more disagree- 
able to you than to me : for the sake of 
many individuals, I trust one of a similar 
mature may never take place between us." 

He then withdrew ; but being a good 
deal agitated by the recent scene, instead 
of desiring to see Osmond, ]eh a note, 
requesting his company as soon as conve- 
nient at his lodgings. 
- Never had any circum.stance so morti- 
fied, humbled, and enraged Lord O'Sinister, 



THE DISCARDED SON. 223 

as Delacoiir's lecture ; yet not so much on 
account of the light in which it made hirn 
view his character^ as the v/ounds it inflict- 
ed on his vanitV;, wounds which the pangs 
of jealousy rendered still more corrosive^ 
and the absolute despair he felt of ever 
possessing Elizabeth^ till he recollected the 
length of time Delacour would be absent 
from England. 

Not doubting his being able in one way 
or other to elude his vengeance^ he re- 
solved on availing himself of his absence 
to prosecute his designs against Elizabeth, a 
resolution to which he was now^ if possible,, 
more stimulated to persevere in, by a wish of 
being revenged on Delacour for what he had 
made him suffer^ than even passion for her ; 
he also decided, lest he should not be able 
to baffle two champions, on doing some- 
thing calculated to give him such a hold 
over Osmond, as should prevent his being 
molested by him, if, on his return from 
the East Indies, he discovered his conduct 
towards his sister. 

L 4 Accord- 



224 THE BISCAEDED SON, 

Accordingly^ in pii]*suance of this latter 
resolution, on rejoining Osmond in the 
breakfast-parlour, he insisted^ after he had, 
with a smooth brow, and smiling aspect, 
congratulated him on meeting with a situ- 
ation so preferable to the one he had of- 
fered to him in Jamaica, on his accepting 
from him a sufficient sum to equip him- 
self for his intended voyage. 

" Nay;, don't let your pride or delicacy 
"be alarmed/' continued he, with an in- 
sidious smile, observing the cheeks of Os- 
mond crimson : '•' I see you are the ditto 
of your father, too proud to owe a pecu- 
niary obligation to any man ; in order, 
therefore, to quiet your scruples in this 
instance, I shall not object to your giving 
me your bond for this trifle,'' handing 
notes to him as he spoke for three hun«» 
dred pounds. 

Osmond was all gratitude for this loan ; 
it had relieved him indeed from a most 
painful arjd av/kward embarrassment, as he 
knew not, from the low state of his finances, 

how 



THE DISCARDED SONC 225 

how to procure the necessaries requisite 
for his voyage 

Lord O'Sinister^ apprehensive, if this 
transaction was known to Delacoiir, he 
might suspect his real motives for the loan, 
and in consequence occasion^ perhaps, its 
immediate return, extorted a promise from 
Osmond to be silent v/ith regard to it. 
for which desiring him to be,, he made his 
own delicacy the pretext. 

Osmond eriClosed a hundred pound note 
to Heathwood, in a letter explanatory of 
all that had lately occurred ; but was pre- 
vented expending much of the sum that 
remained, by Delacour informing him he 
could get the things he required just as 
well at Portsmouth as in London; and 
where they were no sooner arrived, than 
he told hirn he had already proviled him 
with whatever he wanted from his own 
tradespeople. 

The ensuing day the signal for weighing 

anchor was given ; and, in the course of 

L 5 some 



^26 TTIR DISCARDED SON. 

sortie hours after, Osmond found himself 
in company with a numerous fleet, at some 
. distance from the white cliffs of Albion. 

Though Osmond had not admired Dela- 
cour before, he could not possibly have- 
avoided admiring him now, to such advan- 
tage did he appear in discharging his pro- 
fessional duties, his natural spirit and 
urbanity, all the shining qualities of his 
niind^ having in his present situation ample 
field for exercise ; in a word, he was in 
every instance what a commanding officer 
should be, mild but fiim, courteous yet 
reserved; his officers esteemed him, his 
rnen adored him, and peace and good fel- 
lowship prevailed throughout his ship. 

The season being, mild, and the weather 
remarkably fiue, a pleasant intercourse 
"was kept up amongst the fleet : they entered 
the Bay of Biscay, and Osmond and Dela- 
cour were going one day to dine on 
board one of the East Indiamen, when a 
homeward-bound vessel coming in sight,. 

Delacour, 



THE DISCARDED SOK. 297 

Delacour, anxious to send dispatches by 
it, declined keeping his engagement, but 
insisted on Osmond's going. 

After passing a pleasant day^ Osmond 
was thinking of returning, when a sudden 
change in the weather compelled him to 
give up that intention for the present. 

The storm, instead of abating, gradu- 
ally encrensed, till its violence became 
tremendous, and from the mischief it did 
the vessel, universal terror began to 
prevail, aggravated by all hope of re- 
ceiving succour from the rest of the lleet„ 
should it be required, being precluded by 
the darkness of the night : at length, after 
several hours of horror, day began to 
"dawn, but only to increase the general 
consternation, by permitting the vessel to 
be seen dismantled in every direction., 
separated entirely from the rest of (he 
fleet, and driving rapidly tov/ards a rido;e 
of rocks on the Spanish coast; and in 
a short time there were but fev/ on 
board who did not think their death incvi- 
L 6 table. 



22S THE DISCARDED SON. 

tabic. Of this Ruinber was Osmond^ and 
with fervour he recommended his spirit 
to the mercy of Ilim who ^ave it^ and in 
whose auful presence he imagined himself 
on the point of appearing; a few tears 
dropped from him at the moment^ for in 
imagination he heard the frenzied shrieks 
of his mother and sister, the hollow groans 
of his father, when tidings of his disas- 
trous fate should reach them. 

^^ Oh, God I" he mentally exclaimed, as 
his soul sickened at the thoughts of what 
their sufferings would be on receiving the 
iTJuiancholy inteli!Q;ence, *' support them 
in the trying hour that brings it to their 
knowledge; ]et thcr^: not, I coninreyou, too 
acrtely feel- — too deeply p^ourn my fate." 

The horrors of the scene surpassed any 
his imagination had ever pi? tured to him; 
the sea rolled tremendously high, the heav- 
ing liHlows, that da:<hed against the sides of 
the labouring vessel, threatened every in- 
stant to iijguiph it; the mingling sor.nds. 
of the angry elemenUi /esembled the dole- 
ful 



THE DISCARDED SON. ^29 

fill shrieks of unquiet spirits ; and issuing 
from heavy and portentous clouds^ the 
blue and forked lightning now gleamed 
upon the surface of the troubled deep, 
now quivered round the vessel, or darted 
past it, like a threatening meteor from the 
angry heavens. 

At length the ship struck ; the boats 
were immediately launched, and quickly 
filled; but Osmond was not among those 
they bore from the wreck ; he v/as an ex- 
cellent swimmer, and, on finding it im- 
possible to gain a place in either of them, 
resohed on committing himself to the 
deep, and accordingly plunged into it. 

After contending some time with the 
waves, his strength became exhausted, and 
he was quietly resigning himself to th-^ hte 
that seemed inevitable, when a wave oud- 
dcnly raised him up, and threw him on a 
rock For a fev/ minutes he lay incapa^ le 
of n:oiicn, then coming a little to him- 
self, and perceiving the dangerous situa- 
tion he was in, he made an efibrt to clam- 
ber 



230 THE DISCARDED SON. 

ber higher up, and, though not without 
the utmost difficuhy, succeeded in nearly 
reaching the summit. 

Here he again lay some time outstretched 
and motionless, completely overcome by 
fatigue and agitation. When again able 
to raise his head, he casta look of mingled 
hope and apprehension towards the sea; 
the wreck was still in sight, but no other 
vessel ; and in which many of the crew and 
passengers still remained^ for whose safety 
the heart of Osmond became a^^onized. 
■ ^^ Good God !'* he almost franticly ex- 
claimed. '' is there no . way of savingr 
them ?" He looked eagerly towards the 
land, but though he beheld an exten- 
sive tract of country, he saw not a human 
being. 

That therewere inhabitants near the coast, 
he could not, however, avoid thinking ; 
and flattering himself he should be able 
by his supplications to induce them to 
make an effort for the preservation of his 
i^ellow-suffererSj he descended the rock as 

speedily 



THE I>ISCARI>ED SON, 251 

speedily as possible, and on getting, though 
not without very great difBculty and dan- 
ger, over some shallov^^s and sandy ridges> 
which divided it from the main land^ struck 
into a path that appeared to be a bealen 
one, and was separated from the opei> 
beach by a series of beetling clilTs, iu 
which a yawning chasm here and there 
afforded him an ODportnnitv of stiil seeins: 
the element^ which was so near becoming 
his tomb. 

'' Can 1 better manifest my gratitude for 
my narrow escape," he said to himself, 
as humanity ancj benevolence, spite of 
^ bruises, sickness, and weariness, impelled 
him forward, " than by straining every 
nerve — nay, risking life itself, for the sake 
of so many of my fellow-creatures/' 

He tried for his purse, and had the sa- 
tisfaction of finding it still within his 
pocket, as, by having the means of re 
warding in some degree the exertions he 
required, he trusted he should not solix;it 
them in vain. 

The 



252 TriE DISCARDED SON. 

The signals of distress, which the vessel 
had commenced firing from the moment 
it was in danger, now became more fre- 
quent ; but in vain did the flash of the 
guns gleam upon the waves — in vain did 
the hollow clifis reverberate their loud re- 
port — no one approached the shore. 

At length, a long interval ensued with- 
out their being repeated, and despair, 
equal to that which he imputed their ces- 
sation, took possession of the heart of 
Osmond — he dreaded glancing towards the 
sea ; his incertitude, however, in a little 
time became too agonizing to be borne 
— he rushed forward to an aperture in the 
rocks — he shrieked — the vessel was scarcely 
perceptible— and the next instant two tre- 
mendous waves came rolling towards it — 
they met, they mingled, and overwhelmed 
it for ever from his sight. 

'' Oh God V exclaimed Osmond, as with 
a deep groan he sunk fainting on the sand. 

On regaining his sensibilitv, he invo- 
luniarily raised liim;self from the ground^ 

and 



THE DISCARDED SON. £33 

and was somewhat pleased and surprised 
as he did so, to perceive a little sun-burnt 
black-eyed boy, about six years old, stand- 
ing beside him, with a countenance full 
of curiosity. 

Osmond had learned a little Spanish 
from his mother, and, as he patted the 
head of the smiling child, addressed him 
in that language, desiring to know whether 
there was any habitation at hand. 

The child listened to him attentively, 
but, on his ceasing to speak, gave him to 
understand he did not comprehend him, and 
thus caused Osmond to recollect^ that the 
Spanish tongue in its purity v^as but little 
known in the province of Biscay, in which 
he then was — recollecting, however, at the 
same time, the constant intercourse that 
was kept up between the Biscay ners and 
the inhabitants of the other side of the 
Pyrenees, and conceiving from this cir- 
cumstance he might know something of 
French, he tried him in that language. 

Again, 



S34 THE DISCARDED SON. 

Again;, however, the child shook his 
head, but at the same moment laughed and 
clapped his hands, as if much delighted ; 
then suddenly laying hold of Osmond's 
arm, pointed to a little distance from them; 
and Osmond pursuing the direction of his 
finger, beheld an elderly man, among 
the rocks drawing a net to shore. 

He immediately approached him, and 
inferring, from the significant gestures of 
the child, that he understood French, ac- 
costed him in it, and had the happiness 
of not finding himself mistaken. 

The man returned his salutation with 
much courtesy, and suspending his labour, 
turned an attentive ear to the relation 
Osmond proceeded to give him, of the 
dreadful catastrophe which had thrown hiin 
upon his coast; and on his concluding, 
said, with a melancholy look, ^' that he had 
the heartfelt anguish of witnessing it;" 
adding, '' that if any hopes had been en- 
tertained of being able to save the suf- 
ferers. 



THE DISCARDED SON. 255 

ferers^ efforts would have been made for 
the purpose/* 

'' I see, my friend/' cried Osmond, '' I 
have been fortunate in meeting with you ; 
after what I have told you, I arn convinced 
it is unnecessary to tell you I need repose^ 
either, from the manner in which you have 
expressed yourself, to use. entreaty with 
you to assist me in obtaining it/' 



CHAP. 



£S6 THE DISCARDED SOW, 



CHAP. V. 

** Since every man who lives is born to die, 

^ And none can boast sincere felicity, 
"With equal mind what happens let us bear, 

" Not joy nor grieve too much for things beyond our care. 
Like pilgrims to th' appointed place we 'tend. 
The world's an inn, and death 'hejourney's end. 
Ev'n kings but play, and when their part is (^rnc. 
Some other, worse or better, mount the throne." 

Dry». Pal. and Art. 

" Ji RUEj Signer/' replied the fisher- 
marij after what you have gone through, 
you miist^ indeed, stand in need of rest, 
and God forbid that I did not render vou 
every assistance in my power. The nearest 
inn is at Santillana, about three leagues 
from this ; but if you can put up with 

homely 



THE DISCARDED SON. 237 

homely accommodation, I can give you a 
lodging in my cottage hard by, as you 
may perceive, the smoke which rises above 
yonder clump of chesnut trees proceeding 
from it. 

Osmond, gladly as well as gratefully, 
accepted this offer, there being an air of 
good-nature and honesty about the man, 
that rendered him pleased at the thoughts 
of obtaining shelter from him. 

As he stood waitino- beside him till he 
had hauled in his net, he enquired, but 
with fear and trembling, wiiether he could 
tell him any thing of the boats that had 
been launched from the wreck ? 

*' Don't ask me, Signor," was the reply. 

'' Ah, then,'' exclaimed Osm.ond, clasp- 
ing his hands together, '' I see how it is." 

" We must submit to the will of Heaven,'* 
returned the other. 

'' Tell me — tell me," cried Osmond, 
grasping him by the arm, " are you po- 
sitive of their fate ?" 

*' Well, Signor, since so anxious to 

know. 



238 THE DISCARDED SON. 

know, I will tell yon, though sore against 
my inclination, for I see you are in suffi- 
cient trouble already ; the boats bulged a 
little way from the wreck, and all on 
board perished." 

''All! — all!" repeated Osmond, in a 
deep and hollow tone, and with a death- 
like paleness — '' all ! — all !'* recoiling a 
few paces. 

" Come, come. Signer,'* said the fisher- 
man, in a soothing voice, '' you should be 
all gratitude for your own escape."' 

'' I am — I am truly grateful for it, my 
friend ; but,'' with a burst of sorrow, '' I 
should deem myself unworthy of the life 
which has been so wonderfully preserved, 
did joy for its preservation prevent me 
feeling what I now do. Those whom I 
mourn I was yesterday rejoicing with. 
Brave and generous spirits !" he exclaimed, 
with hands and eyes upraised, '•' happy be 
your rest, glorious your memories ! may the 
divine Being, who has so suddenly snatched 

you 



THE DISCARDED SON. 239 

you hence, shed consolation over the 
hearts of those you have left to mourn 
you!- 

The fisherman having by this time drawn 
in his net, now took him by the arm, and 
led him to his cottage, to which his grand- 
son, the little boy, who had pointed him 
out to Osmond, tripped before, to apprise 
his grandmother of the guest she was 
about having. 

Osmond's reception from her was of the 
most hospitable nature ; he was too much 
exhausted, however, to be able to partake 
of the food she set before him ; and as 
soon as he had taken a little diluted brandy^, 
as a restorative, requested to be shewn to 
a place where he might lie down. 

He was accordingly conducted by his 
host up a few stairs to a bed-chamber, 
where, as soon as he was accommodated 
with dry linen, he was left to his repose ; 
fatigue soon closed his eyes ; but though 
his sleep was long, he awoke from it, 

owing 



240 THE DISCARDED SON. 

o^ving to the anguish of his mind, without 
being in the least refreshed by it. 

Besides being impressed with the deepest 
grief and horror by the recent catastrophe, 
bis mind was agonized with apprehensions 
for the safety of Delacour. Unable to en- 
dure his torturing reflections, he hastily 
arose, and dressing himself in the dry 
clothes which his host, the good Guipus- 
coa, had left beside the bed, descended to 
the lower apartment, where he found him 
and his wife busily employed preparing 
supper. 

Though still disinclined to food, he was 
so thoroughly convinced, from the man- 
ner in which he was pressed to partake of 
their fare, he should give pain if he refused, 
that he forced himself to do so. While 
at table, he enquired of Guipuscoa the 
likeliest place for obtaining a passage to 
England, to which kingdom he resolved 
on returning as soon as possible, and"was 
informed Santillana : he then entreated 
5 him 



THE DISCARDED SON. 241 

him to add to the obligations he had al- 
ready, by his kindness and hospitality, con- 
ferred on him, by sending some one there 
the next morning, to enquire when a vessel 
would sail, and procure him a few necessa- 
ries ; and becoming still more pleased v^'ith 
him and his wife, proceeded to ask, whe- 
ther, if unable to obtain an immediate 
passage, he would have any objection to 
letting him remain under his roof till 
then ? 

/' Not the least," was the instantaneous 
reply of both Guipuscoa and his wife, who, 
as well as her husband, pretty well 
understood him; on the contrary, they 
should be happy to have him remain with 
them, as they thought he would much 
sooner recover his strength and spirits in 
their quiet cottage, the only inmates oi 
which consisted of themselves and their 
little grandson, than amidst the noise and 
buotle of Santillana. 

Osmond having previously given Gui- 
VOL. II. . M puscoa 



^42 



THE DISCARDED SON. 



puscoa ten guineas for the purchases he 
required at Santillana, retired to bed 
someVvhat composed, from the hope he 
now entertained of being speedily on his 
way back to England^ and the arrange- 
ment he had made with Guipuscoa ; it was 
soothing, it was consolatory to him^, to 
think he was with beings appearing to 
take an interest in his fate. Hitherto accus- 
tomed only to the soft and gentle offices of 
friendship, the tender endearments of love^ 
to attention, and affection on every side, 
he was well aware how dreadfully the an- 
guish of the present hour would have 
been aogrravated, had he been cast anions: 
strangers incapable of sympathizing in his 
sufferings. Since destined to meet with 
such a misfortune, he blessed Providence 
that it had befallen him in a place so 
famed for hospitality and humanity as Bis- 
cay ; in short, by reflecting that his situa- 
tion might have been much worse, he re- 
conciled himself to its not being much 
better. 

The 



THE DISCARDED SON. Xi<y 

The next morning, just as he opened 
his eyes, Guipuscoa entered the chnmber, 
with the things he had procured hirn at 
Santillana, and the transporting tidings of 
the fleet he vras so interested about being 
seen by a brig just come into port there, 
steering in safetv through ihc bay. 

This intelligence had an iininediate efiect 
upon Osmond — an oppressive vreight was 
instantly removed from his heart — the ashy 
paleness of his cheek vanished — his heavy 
and half-closed eves brightened and dilated 
— his step again bccar:"5e firm and elastic. 

As soon as the extacy it occasioned him 
liad a little subsided, he learned that no 
vessel was expected to sail from Santillana 
for England in less than a month. 

This information would have chagrined 
him much, but for that which had pre- 
ceded it; rejoicing as he did at the re- 
moval of the apprehensions he had enter- 
tained for the safety of Delacour and his 
brave companions, there was nothing 

almost at the moment immediately con- 
M 2 



244 THE DISCAnDID ^-ON. 

cerning himself, which could materially 
have affected him. 

Guipuscoa delivered him the purchases 
which had been made for him, and which 
came to a less sum than he had received ; 
Osmond, hosvever, not only refused the 
overplus, but insisted on his acceptance of 
five guineas. 

Guipuscoa expressed himself greatly sur- 
prised at his thinking so much of the 
kindness he had experienced from him ; 
^' for surely, Signor/' observed he, '' 'tis 
only such as a poor shipwrecked stranger 
might be sure of meeting in any part of 
the civilized world.*' 

" For the sake of humanity I will hope 
so, my friend," replied Osmond; " but the 
idea, that elsewhere I might have met with 
similar kindness cannot lessen my gratitude 
for that I have experienced from you ; he 
would be unworthy of a favour, who made 
Ugii^ o^ one, from the consideration of its 
being only such as another might have 
conferred on him." 

The 



THE DISCARDED SON. 245 

The revolution in his feelings enabled 
Osmond to do greater justice to his break- 
fast than he had done to his supper ; and 
in the course of another day, owing to the 
kind and unremitting attentions of his host 
and hostess^ and the tranquillity diffused 
throughout his mind by the knowledge of 
Delacour's safety/ and the pleasing hopes 
he entertained of finding Lord O'Sinister 
as well inclined as ever to serve him on 
his return to England, found himself suffi- 
ciently recovered to take a ramble about 
the environs of Guipuscoa's cottage. 

He was an enthusiastic admirer of the 
scenery of Nature, particularly of such as 
displayed those bold and prominent fea- 
tures, that at once arrest the attention, and 
furnish the imagination with new images. 
The grand and the sublime, however, did 
not entirely engross his admiration — the 
lowly violet shared it with the branching 
tree, whose root it tufted— the sterile 
rock, with the cultured hill, bedecked with 
flowering umbrage — the winding valley, 
M 3 with 



246 THE EISCAKDED SON. 

with the cloiid-capt mountahi fading into 
ether. 

In all he saWj he traced a hand divine^ 
and was therefore furnished by all with 
" food for meditation/' with incentives to 
praise and worship him, the lowest of 
whose works proclaim his goodness be- 
yond thought and power divine. 

How any mind in the least enlightened 
could contemplate the wonders of crea- 
tion, the various blessings with which it 
abounds for Hjan, without feeling gratitude 
and devotion to the Creator, was a Insting 
source of astonishment to Osmcnd^ such 
as sometimes inclined him to believe this, 
could net be the case; yes, often, from 
the elevated feelings of his own mind, he 
was almost tempted to think it impossille 
that any being endued with intellect could 
gaze upon the glorious canopy extended 
over him— could tread upon the verdant 
carpeting spread beneath his feet—could 
partake of the manifold fruits of the earth — - 
could rest beneath the shadow of the trees, 

nourished 



THE DISCARDED SON. ^'17 

nourished-, as if purpagely to afford him 
shelter, by the dews of heaven, and lux- 
uriate, in the grateful changes of the sea- 
sons, without thinking of and magnifying 
the Author of all. 

Osmond was, in short, one of those for 
whom 

•' Lo, not an hedge-row hawthorn blows, 

Or humble harebell paints the plain, 
Or valley winds, or fouutuin Hows, 

Or purple heath is ting'd in vain. 

For such the rivers dash the foaming tides. 

The mountain swells, the dale subsides j 

Even thriftless furze detains their wand'iing sight, 

And the rough barren rock grows pregnant with delight." 

Though naturally lively, and animated 
in the extreme, he nevertheless v;as at 
times inclined, as characters like his, en- 
dued with exquisite sensibility, almost ever 
are, to melancholy and lonely musings; he 
delighted sometimes to abstract himself 
from society, to plunge into the gloom 
of vast embowering shades, for the pur- 
M 4 pose 



248 TEE DISCARDED SON. 

pose of indulging in those waking dreams, 
at once so clelieioiis and peculiar to feel- 
ing and to genius. 

The scenery by which he was now sur- 
rounded was perfectly adapted to his taste 
— a happy mixture of sea and land, hilt 
and valley, wood and water, wearing just 
a sufPicient air of wildness, to excite ideas 
of the sublime. 

The hamlet in which hehad found refug**, 
consisted of a nuirsber of cottages scattered 
amongst deep hollows, and o'er the hilh 
they intersected, and which enclosed for a 
considerable way on either side a broad 
deep road, open to the beach, and wind- 
ing away amidst gradually aspiring moun- 
tains, crowned with stately forests, or co- 
vered with cantabrian heath, gorze, and 
impenetrable thickets of the shrub called 
argoma, into the heart of the country: 
an old gothic-looking church, in the midst 
of aspacioi s grass-grown enclosure, was the 
only edifice of any consequence in it ; 
neatness and simpliv Ity alone distinguished 

the 



THC DISCAP-CED SON. 249 

the others, truly gratifying to the eye of 
benevolence^ from the assurance they gave 
of the comfort and happiness of the inha- 
bitants. 

From all he sa\v% from all he heard;, 
Osmond was convinced that here, if any 
v/here^ both were to be found without 
alloy. But how could it be othervN?ise, he 
considered J where nature and reason were 
*the guides/ where enervating lu?airy and 
frivolous dissipation still remained un- 
known ? 

In the hamlet where he lodged, and he 
understood the same to be the case through- 
out the province, the hour of labour over^ 
the youi>g men and women^ ihe former well 
built and active, like all mountaineers, the 
latter tall, light, arrd merry, their garb neat 
and pastoral, their hair falling in long plaits 
down their backs, their heads ornamented 
with a veil, or handkerchief, twisted round 
them in a very coquetish and becoming 
manner, assembled upon some pTeasant spot 
amoBg the rocks, to dance to the sound of 
M 5 the 



250 THE DISCARDrD SON. 

the pipe and tabor, while the more aged 
amused themselves with looking on, and 
preparing refreshments. 

Osmond more than once accompanied his 
host to be a spectator of their amusements, 
and more than once was invited by the in- 
telligent dark eyes of the young female 
cottagers to join in the dance, but from 
which he was still withheld by painful re- 
membrances; though he could return their 
smiles and their glances, worlds could not 
have induced him to dance within sight of 
the Vvraves which had proved fatal to so many 
gallant spirits. 

Not unfreo.uently the sight of the waves 
awakened reflections that obi iored him to steal 
away from the crov/d. On those occasions 
he generally wandered up the road amidst, 
the mountains, or struck into some of the 
rich and variegated woods of oak, beech^ 
and chesnut, which shaded their acclivities^ 
and partially screened the corn fields, that 
extended in various directions o'er their 
summits. 

Eul the gaiety which he was thus at times, 

owing 



THE DISCARDED SON. 251 

o\ving to the sudden obtrusion of painful 
thoughts, compelled to fly from, was not- 
withstanding delightful to him, from the 
proof it afibrded of the happiness of so 
many of his fellow-creatures ; with an ex- 
quisite sensation he listened to its softened 
sounds, and hoped such might ever be the 
prevailing ones in this happy quarter. 

He had been about a week an inmate of 
the fisherman's cottage, and was returning 
to it one morning from a long ramble, 
when his attention was attracted by a num- 
ber of both sexes assembled in the middle 
of the village, evidently in great conster- 
nation. From his ignorance of the lan- 
guage, however, not being able to make 
out the cause of this, he proceeded home- 
ward, after pausing for a minute or two to 
observe them, and was followed by Ines, his 
hostess, who, from the midst of the crowd, 
had espied him. Of her he enquired the 
cause of the tumult; and, in her broken 
French, received the following particu- 
lars: 

M G *' You 



252 THE DISCARDKD .SON. 

'' You have taken notice, I presume. 
Signer, of the great mount in our chapel- 
yard?" 

" Yes, I have not only noticed, but 
rf.ore than once clambered up it, to have dt 
better view of the adjacent country; 'tis 
a place of interment, I presume?" 

'' It has been. Signer, but not for a con- 
siderable period: it is, as you imagined^ 
not only hollow within, but of immense 
depth.-— There came, as the story goes, a 
hundred or two years ago, two famous 
warriors to this village, for the purpose 
of sea-bathing. They had not been long 
here, when one of them sickened and died. 
On the day on which he was to be buried, 
a large body of soldiers made their appear- 
ance, and broke an opening into the cave, 
iov the purpose of interring the body 
there. 

"' Amongst many other strange things 
they did on this occasion, the country peo- 
ple were not a little astonished at seeing 
them bury a quaatity of provisions, 

both 



THE DISCAHDED SON. 95 3" 

both for man and beast, along with 
the body; and still more, as you may sup- 
pose, at seeing the ether warrior, armed 
eap-a-pee, and mounted on his horse, de- 
scend into the vault, and immediately 
after the entrance was closed up. 

" For this strange and unnatural act, 
the soldiers accounted by saying, that, 
awing to some particular circumstance, 
the two warriors had many years before 
taken a solemn vow, whether living or 
dead, to be interred at the same moment; 
and that the provisions which had been 
deposited in the vault, were for the pur- 
pose of keeping the survivor alive for a 
certain time, and thus enabling him, like 
an honourable Knight as he was, to v/atch 
over, and prevent the body of his friend 
from being entered by any one of the evil 
spirits, or enchanters, against whom they 
had both been so long waging war, lest^ 
if possession was taken of it by one of these, 
it might be made to undo all the great and 
glorioi!t things it had achieved in life, 
5i Y/hile 



254 THE DISCARDED SON. 

while animated by its own f^ood spirit. — 
The soldiers moreover commanded that the 
vault s'^ould not to be opened again, 
threatenirjg the inhabitants of this hamlet 
with miserv of every description, if they 
ever permitted it to be so. 

*' This threatening had the desired efTect. 
Generation after generation has passed 
away, without any one thinking of acting 
in defiance of it. The villagers, therefore, 
can no otherwise account for the doleful 
cries which, in the course of this morn- 
ing, have repeatedly been heard from the 
tomb of the warriors, than by supposing 
some one or more of X\\e evil spirits, or 
enchanters,, they so annoyed while living, 
have at length obtained access to it, for 
the purpose of being revenged for all they 
made them suffer." 

''What, revenged on a parcel of bones!" 
demanded Osmond, laughing at the sim- 
plicity and superstition of the good woman. 

" Yes, Signor,'' she replied, '' by 
taking possession of them; for the bones 

may 



THE DISCARDED SON. ^OJ 

may still be siifTiciently connected to aflord 
them a habitation; at least, such is ihe 
opinion ( f an old woman, who lives in 
yonder wood; and she advises, in order to 
have an end put to ihe wickecl projects of 
these said evil spirits, or enchanters, that 
some one should enter the cave, for the 
purpose of dismembering the skeletons, in 
such a manner that nothing could lodge 
within them; but as yet, no one has been 
found hardy enough to undertake the 
business." 

"Well/' said Osmond, not doubting but 
that some unfortunate creature had faliea 
into the cave, to whom, if immediate assist- 
ance was not rendered^ death might be 
the consequence, '' I have not the least 
objection to volunteer my services on this- 
occasion." 

'' Is it possible. Signer?'' cried Ines, in^ 
a joyful accent. 

'' It is very true," replied Osmond. — ■ 
** Where is your husband?" 

" With the rest of the villa oers, Sisrnor." 

'' And 



556 TliE DISCARDED Sf>?I- 

'' And is he entirely of their way of 
thinking with regard to the present a fTair?" 

" Whv, I don't know, Sionor. I rather 
believe he is at a loss what to think/' 

'' Well, hasten," said Osmond, '•' and 
make known my offer.'* 

Ines obeyed, and presently returned with 
Guipuscoa^ and several of the other vil- 
lagers, equally surprised and delighted at 
having found a voluntary champion, since, 
in the light of one they could not help 
viewing the person who consented to enter 
the cave, from the sirsart scuffle, t\\e\ were 
convinced, he would have within it. 

Osrnond having provided himself with a 
bottle af vinegar and another of brandy, 
proceeded to the cave, and descended into 
it by means of a ladder, passed through 
an aperture, discovered towards the sum- 
mit, followed by Guipuscoa, who, notwith- 
standing his disinclination to the adven- 
ture, could not think of letting a pei-son^ 
so immediately under his protection, as he 

conr- 



THE DISCARDED SON. 25T 

conceived Osmond, enter into any danger 
he would not himself share. 

Osmondj on reaching the bottom of the 
cavern, paused, in order to look around 
him; but the light emanating from a Ian- 
thorn he carried, was too faint to permit 
him to see to any distance. He therefore 
began slowly to advance, closely followed 
by his host. 

After proceeding some way, he was be 
ginning to imagine himself mistaken with 
regard to the conjecture which had in- 
duced him to enter it, in consequence of 
neither hearing or seeing any one, when 
a faint moan reached his ear, to the infi- 
nite terror of Guipiiscoa, as w^as evident 
from his crossing himself, and making an 
immediate movement towards the ladder; 
whilst Osmond hastened to the spot, whence 
the distressing sound proceeded, and dis- 
covered a man stretched upon the ground, 
with his face upwards, and from the deadly 
paleness of which, united to his eyes 
being closed; Osmond at the first glance 

would 



258 THE DISCARDED SON. 

have been tempted to believe him dead, 
but for a quiverint]^ motion he saw about 
his lips. 

Having, by the coldness and dampness 
of his forehead, ascertained his being in a 
swoon, and at the same moment perceived 
one of his hands bleeding, he called to 
Guipuscoa for assistance, which, his super- 
stitious terror being somewhat subdued 
by learning the object for whom it was 
required, he approached to give with great 
readiness. 

While he bound up the wound, Osmond 
rubbed the temples of the poor sufferer 
with the vinegar he had so luckily brought 
with him, rmd occasionally held it to 
his nostrils. In a little while he had the 
satisfaction Oi perceiving Tiim move, and 
open his eyes, but which he almost instantly 
closed again, as if completely overcome 
by weakness. It now occurred to Osmond 
that he had probably been a long time in 
the cavern; and that from the consequent 
exhaustion of his frame, owing to want of 

food. 



THE DISCARDED SON* 259 

food^ fatal consequences might ensue^ if 
removed thence, till he had, in some degree, 
been recruited by nourishment. 

This surmise being communicated to 
Guipuscoa, he produced some biscuit^ 
which being sopped in brandy, and gra- 
dually insinuated between the lips of the 
stranger, by degrees had the desired effect 
oi restorintj him to some deo^ree of warmth 
and animation: in a little while he aoain 
opened his eyes, and after wildly staring 
about him for a minute, enquired in Ita- 
lian, in which language Osmond was per- 
fectly conversant, where he then was? 

'* Till you obtain the repose you so 
much require, be satisfied, I entreat you, 
with knowing," said Osmond, '' that you 
are in safe and honourable hands." 

The stranger slightly bowed his head, 
and being raised from the ground by Os- 
mond and Guipuscca, was, between them, 
assisted up the ladder; but great as was the 
difficulty they found in getting him out of 

the 



260 TfTE DISCARDED SON. 

the tomb, they found still greater in get- 
ting him through the crowd assembled 
round it, so anxious v/ere the villagers to 
learn who lie was, and what had brought 
him there. 

That he was a person of no common 
note, Osmond was convinced from the 
richness of his habiliments. He appeared 
about his own age; ar>d though not re- 
markably handsome, hi\d something ex- 
trem.ely interesting in his looks. 

- On reaching the ha- ilation ofGuipuscoa> 
Osmond put him into possession of Iiis own 
bed; and after giving him a little warm 
and diluted brandy, left him to his repose. 
On descending to the lower apartment, he 
felt himself so oppressed with a head- 
ache, owing to the foul and damp atmos- 
phere he had breathed in the cavern, that 
he was under the necessity of going into 
the air, but informed Ines of the road he 
meant to pursue, that in case the stranger 
awoke ere his return, and wished to see him, 
there might be no delay in finding them. 

He 



THE DISCAr.DED SON. 261 

He was absent about an hour, during which 
his thoughts were occupied in reflecting on 
the strange incidents that sometimes occur 
in life, when he heard himself called by 
his hostess: he immediately hastened to 
her, and learned that the stranger had risen, 
and enquired for him. 

'' 'When first he began to speak to us, 
Signor," said she, " we did not under- 
stand him, which perceiving, he had re- 
course to French. lie told us a great deal 
about himself, but \vhich, as he will doubt- 
less tell you the same, I shall not repeat. 
He also asked a number of questions about 
you, which we answered to the best of 
our ability, and beseems quite impatient 
to see you, which, to be sure, one can't 
wonder at, since, under Heaven, you have 
been the preserver of his life. Poor 
gentleman, what a piteous death would 
his have been, had he been left to perish 
in the tomb o^ the warriors! '* 

On entering the cottage, Osmond found 

the 



26% THE DISCAPvDED SON. 

the stranger seated at a table, with re- 
freshments before him, and Guipuscoa at- 
tending. 

'' Noble, Sir," cried Ines, hastily advanc- 
ing before Osmond, and curtseying low, 
" here is the gentleman you v/anted to see.'' 

'' Ah! how unnecessary to tell me so,'' 
returned the stranger with vivacity, yet ail 
the characteristic softness of the Italian — 
^' ah ! how unnecessary," rising as he spoke, 
^' since I vvell recollect, and ever shall, that 
face of true benevolence! O, my dear 
Sir," advancing to Osmond, and taking him 
by the hand, '' words are inadequate to 
express my feelings on the present occa- 
sion — the gratitude I feel for the exer- 
tions vou made to restore me to mvself; 
but for vou, 1 should, in all probability, 
have fallen a victim to the lingering tor- 
tures of famine. What will not be the 
gratitude of my relatioiis and frieiids, 
when. they learn the obligations I owe vou: 
add to these, I implore you, by giving them 
a personal opportunity of testifying the 

same. 



THE DISCARDED SON. 263 

same. These worthy folks/' glancing at 
Giiipuscoa and his wife '^ have informed me 
of the misfortinie you met with; accom- 
pany me^ therefore, J entreat you, from 
hence, and remain with me till you can 
conveniently return to your own country. 
In the name of my family, I invite you to 
the Castle of Acerenza, taking upon my- 
self to assure you, that as the preserver, 
the guardian angel of its heir, were you 
less qualified than I nov/ perceive you are, 
to conciliate esteem and admiration, still 
would every attention, calculated to render 
you happy, be paid you there. You may 
possibly have heard of the ancient and 
illustrious house of Placentia, in Italy: — to 
prove to you, that with respect to rank, I 
am not unworthy of the favour I solicit, 
permit me to inform you, I am the repre- 
sentative of that house.'* 

Osmond bowed, and expressed himself 
highly flattered by the anxiety his Lord- 
ship manifested for his company ; and w^hich 
nothing, he assured him, but his own 

to 



^64 THE DISCARDED SON. 

to return to his native country, should have 
prevented liis gratifying. 

" Nay/* replied the Count, '' that cannot 
possibly be an obstacle, for I have enquired 
into all matters, and learnt that you cannot 
obtain a passage from Santillana for Eng- 
land in less than three weeks at soonest; 
so that there is nothing but want of incli- 
nation to prevent your passing a little time 
'with me in Italy: perhaps you m.ay be in- 
duced to do so, when I inform you that 
Acerenza, whither I purpose returning by 
sea, in order to avoid tire trouble and 
fatigue of a land-journey, is contiguous to 
the Bay of Tarento, w^hcnce there are con- 
tinual opportunities of embarking for Eng- 
land." 

This latter assertion had the wished- for 
efTect upon Osmond ; when he found his 
return home would not be retarded by his 
accepting the polite and pressing invita- 
tion of the Count, he ceased to have anv 
hesitation on the subject. The prepos- 
session 



THE DISCARDED SON. 265 

session he had conceived in his Lordship's 
favour making him anxious to enjoy a little 
of his society, and the descriptions he had 
received of Italy, to seesoinethins: of it. 

His compliance with his request threw 
the Count into raptures .that were abso- 
lutely extravagant; and Osmond soon per- 
ceived he was one of those characters that 
feel nothing in moderation. His animated 
looks on the occasion formed a striking- 
contrast to the clouded ones of Guipuscoa 
and his wife/owing to tncir chagrin at the 
thoughts of losing their young guest, so 
great a favourite had he become with them. 
Osmond made a remark in Italian to, 
the Count on the circumstance. 

*' Ah, dear, worthy, precious, inestimable 
souls!" instantly exclaimed the Count, 
turning with quickness from Osmond, and 
placing himself between them: '^ yes, I 
confess," addressing himself to them, and 
taking (having but one hand to use) first 
Ines's, then her husband's, '' I am about 
robbing you of your amiable guest ; to 
reconcile you to such a measure is not, I 
VOL. II. N am 



266 THE DISCARDED EON. 

am certain, in my power; do not therefore 
be offended, by supposing I offer you this 
( pulling out a richly decorated and weighty 
purse) from any other motive than gra- 
titude/' 

Guipuscoa, wrth a shake of the head^ 
positively refused accepting the proffered 
gift, and Ines followed his example. 

" Very well, very well/' cried the County 
^' I shan't press the matter. I shall only 
say that you accept it, or the next minute 
sees it committed to the waves." 

*^*' Why, to be sure your Lordship could 
never think of such a thing/' said Ines, but 
in rather an apprehensive tone, and side- 
linjr towards the door. 

'' As sure as I have just risen from the 
grave," returned the Count. 

'' Oh then, if that be the case," cried 
Ines, " why, Guipuscoa, rather than let him 
fling it to the fishes, to which it can do no 
good " 

" You would have him fling it into your 
lap/' interrupted her husband. '' Well, 
well, if he must fling it away^ why, let him 

do 



THE DISCARDED SOX. 2G7 

do so; but I would much rather see it re- 
turned to his own pocket; for I see nothing 
we have done to merit such a reward as 
he offers." 

'^ Every thing ! every thing, my noble 
fellow!'* exclaimed the Count, first drop- 
ping his purse into the hand of Ines, and 
then clapping him on the back. ''In the 
first place, were you not kind to my guar-^ 
dir.w angel here? and, in the second, did 
you not exert yourself to prevent my soul 
flying away, and leaving my body to be 
returned to the tom.b of your warriors — 
which, by the bye, I wish^ my good friend, 
had been transported to the top of Mount 
TenerifFe, ere I came into its neighbour- 
hood ? for, deuce take me if I believe 
Apollo himself received a greater shock in 
his tumble from the celestial regions above^ 
than I did from mine into the infernal re- 
gions belovv\" 

He then, on Osmond's expressing a wish 

to be acquainted with the particulars of his 

recent disaster, proceeded to relate, that 

N 2 he 



268 THE DISCARDED SON. 

^.e left Santillana, where he had been lodg- 
ing some time, the middle of the preceding 
day, for the purpose of taking a stroll 
about its romantic environs; that charmed 
'With their beauty, he wandered on almost 
unconsciously till he came to the church- 
yard, and in scrambling up the mount 
where the old warriors were interred, in 
order to have a m.ore extensive view of the 
adjacent country, either stumbled upon, 
or made himself a chasm in it, through 
which he fell ; that, for a considerable while 
after, he was so stunned by his fall, as to 
be unable to make any effort to have him- 
self extricated from his disagreeable situa- 
tion ; and that soon after he had regained 
the use of his faculties, he was again de- 
prived of them, by pain and weakness. 

His short story finished, he again ad- 
dressed Guipuscoa, intreating him to have 
the goodness to send some one immedi- 
ately to Santillana, for the purpose of 
procuring a carriage, and quieting the 
apprehensions of a servant, whom he had 

left 



THE DISCARDED SON. §69 

left there^ and, by this time, supposed 
in absolute despair about him. 

The good-natured Guipuscoa lost no 
time in complying with his request. On 
his return from procuring a messenger, he 
assisted his wife in preparing dinner, of 
which the Count partook, with Osmond, 
conversing all the time with a vivacity that, 
all things considered, caused a degree of 
surprise to Osmond, which he could not 
forbear expressing; but in terms whicix 
evidently proved his supposing it to pro- 
ceed from the Count's possessing a more 
than ordinary steadiness of mind, and com- 
mand over his feelings. 

" Ah, my dear friend," cried the Connt 
in reply to him, '' I would give half of 
what I am master of, to merit the flattering 
opinion you have conceived of me, so 
essential to happiness is, I am convinced, 
the ascendancy you allude to over one's 
self; but the truth is, instead of being 
exactly w4iat you suppose, 1 am rather too 
much governed by circumstances; but 
N 3 whether 



970 THE DISCARDED SON. 

whether owing to my being generally un- 
prepared for those that occur^ or to more 
than usual delicacy of nerves, or suscepti- 
bility of disposition, I cannot positively 
determine; I, however, rather think xo the 
former; and this inclines me to believe. 
for I have deeply considered the subject, 
that we should be not only happier, but, 
in general, more rational than we are, v.as 
our knowledge of events not limited to the 
present moment; by foresight, by being 
permitted to see the course that destiny 
will take, we should be prepared for the 
various vicissitudes of this life, and of 
course enabled to support them with 
propriety: for the light that comes upon 
us by degrees does not dazzle, neither does 
the storrn that gives intimation of its ap- 
proach appal us, like that which bursts with 
sudden fury o'er us. With what modera- 
tion would he enjoy his prosperitv, who 
beheld a dismal reverse approaching ; with 
what diligence be prompted to improve 
the flying hours, by seeing the inevitable 

term 



THE DISCARDED SON. 271 

term drawing near which was to finish his 
career ?'* 

'' Pardon me, my Lord," said Osmond, 
*' for acknowledging a difference of opinion 
in the present instance. ^Vas this (by many 
coveted) fore-knowledge granted, it is my 
firm opinion, that it would prove the most 
fatal gift the Almighty could bestow upon 
us. If the successive scenes of distress 
which we are all more or less destined to 
go through were laid before us in one 
view, perpetual sadness would overcast our 
lives ; hardly would any transient gleams 
of interposing joy be able to force their 
way through ihe dark and portentous 
cloud ; faint would be the relish of plea- 
sures of which we foresaw the close. Ask 
your own heart, my Lord, did you 
ever thoroughly relish a happiness, the 
termination of which you foresaw ? — 
Insupportable w^ould be the burthen of 
affliction, with which we should find our- 
selves oppressed by the union of present 
N 4 with 



272 THE DISCARDED SON. 

with anticipated sorrow. Friends would 
commence their intimacies with lamenting 
the hour that was to dissolve them^ and^ 
with weeping eye^ the parent would every 
moment survey the child whom he knew he 
was destined to lose. In shorty was that 
mysterious veil that now covers futurity 
lifted up, all the gaiety of life would in- 
stantlv, I am confident, vanish — its flatter- 
ing hopes, its pleasing illusions, and no- 
thing but its vanity and sadness remain." 

''By Heaven!" exclaimed the County 
rapturously, and after listening with the 
most profound attention to him, '' you 
have thrown a new light on the subject. 
Ah ! I now see — yes, I am thoroughly con- 
vinced; my ideas on it were erroneous ; 
and were it possible to wish for your society 
m.ore than I previously did, I should now 
do so, from the arguments you have just 
advanced ; for, be I what I may, 1 have 
still ever deli^jhted in the converse of the 
wise and virtuous." 

Osmond 



THE DISCARDED SON. 273 

Osmond bowed and smiled. '' To some 
speeches, my Lord/' said he^, " there is no 
making a reply." 

Soon after the arrival of the carriage the 
Count had sent for to Santillana, he and 
Osmond took leave of the good fisherman 
and his wife. At thfe moment of parting, 
the latter slipped five guineas into the hand 
of their grandson, aware that to have offer- 
ed it to them would have been useless. 

During ih^ short ride to Santillana, 
the Count, notwithstanding the languor 
his recent accident occasioned, continued 
to converse with the same vivacity he had 
displayed in the cottage of the fisherman. 
He was so exhausted, however, by the 
exertions he made to do. this, that on 
reaching the inn at Santillana, where he 
lodged, he was compelled to lie down. 

The evening not being far advanced, and 
the next morning fixed for their departure, 
Osmond availed himself of the opportunity 
this circumstance aflbrded him to view the 
town^ accompanied by Antonio^ hisLord^ 
N 5 ship's 



274 THE DISCARDED SON. 

ship's valet, in the capacity of guide, and 
whom, as the Count had predicted, the re- 
appearance of his master had rescued from 
absolute d-espair. 

On returning from his ramble, which 
afforded him much amusement, Osmond 
found the Count up^ and awaiting him to 
an elegant supper. That it was com- 
plaisance alone, however, which had in- 
duced him to rise, was so evident to Os- 
mond, that he did not suffer him to con- 
tinue long at table. 

The next morning, after an early break- 
fast, they embarked for the Castle of 
Acerenza. The Count had engaged a vessel 
to himself, and nothing was omitted that 
could render the voyage pleasant. 

Both his companion and every thing on 
board ohip must, however, have been the 
exact reverse of agreeable, to have pre- 
vented Osmond from enjoying a voyage 
that afforded him an opportunity of view- 
ing the varying and enchanting shores of 
the Mediterranean. 

From 



THE DISCARDED SOX. 275 

From objects without, his attention^ 
however, w^as soon, in a great measure, 
diverted by that which the conduct of the 
Count excited. He had not been many 
days on board ere he began to evince a 
variableness and inconsistency in his man- 
ner and actions, which greatly surprised 
Osmond. 

From being all life and spirits, he w^ould 
suddenly fall into fits of deep musing, as- 
sume by degrees a vacant air, and prove 
that he was indeed abstracted from all sur- 
rounding objects, by the wild emotion he 
betrayed if suddenly addressed. At first 
Osmond imputed this changeableness to 
caprice, but minute observation shortly 
convinced him 1!^iat he was wrong in having 
dene so, that to some secret sorrow it was 
alone owing; but what the origin of this 
sorrow could possibly be, he was at a loss 
to conjecture, since from appearances, as 
well as the Count's own assertions, he was 
led to imagine him in possession of all that 
is generally reckoned essential to felicity. 
N 6 '' But 



276 THE DISCARDED SON. 

"But SO it is/' said Osmond to himself, 
as he mused upon the subject, " by one 
means or other we are all brought to a 
pretty equal level with regard to happiness; 
the poor have their comforts, the rich their 
cares; and much seldomer than it is, would 
envy be excited, did we more narrowly 
examine into the condition of one ano- 
ther." 

With respect to himself, the Count's be- 
haviour knew no variation ; for an instant 
he never relaxed in his attentions to him^ 
nor ceased repeating that, for a long, long 
period before, he had not been so happy 
as since he had had him for a companion. 
'' But in this, as in every other instance,'* 
said the Count, following up this assertion^ 
'' one day, 1 make no doubt I shall find my 
happiness as fugitive as it has hitherto 
been. Ah ! my dear friend, how dreadful 
is the destiny of some men ! how dreadful 
the reflection, that when once planned, it 
becomes immutable !'* 

" I hope 



THE DISCAEDED SON. 277 

*■'! hope you are not a predestinarian^ 
Count/' cried Osmond ; '' since from the 
%vretch8dness I am persuaded he must feel 
who is^ the erroneous ideas he must har- 
bour of the goodness and justice of Provi- 
dence, I should regret to think you were. 
We are led to believe we must hereafter 
answer for onr actions, but how could we 
bring ourselves to think our doing so just 
or reasonable, if, in our journey through 
life, guided by fate, not inclination ?" 

*"' Assuredly, assuredly," exclaimed the 
Count, with quickness, and starting from 
a thoughtful attitude, '' my dear friend, '^ 
grasping the arm of Osmond; '' how just 
are your sentiments on every subject! 
Uncommon pains must certainly have been 
taken w^ith you. I have received a 5^ood 
education myself — indeed, the first Italy 
afforded — but still, compared with you, 
find myself extremely deficient/' 

But only owing, Osmond was convinced, 
to there having been no certain rules laid 

down 



S78 THE DISCAP.DED SON. 

down for his guidance. To the want of 
these he imputed the fluctuating state of 
his opinions^ manifested by his ready ac- 
quiescence to tho'.e of others^ the sudden 
changes in his temper and transitions in 
his humour— like a ship which, when turn- 
ed adrift, rides at the mercy of the wind 
and tide, he saw him, in consequence of 
being untaught to govern him.self, the al- 
ternate sport of fancy and passion, now 
magnifying a mole-hill into a mountain, 
now sinking a mountain into a mole-hill. 

More than once Osmond thought he 
seemed inclined to repose riulimited confi- 
dence in him; but though, as may naturally 
be supposed, not without curiosity to know 
the cause of his uneasiness, he made no 
effort to encourage him to do so, con- 
ceiving their intimacy not sufficiently long- 
to warrant his m.aking an attem.pt to pry 
into his secrets ; and besides that, nothing 
could justify a man*s seeking to discover 
the concealed sorrows of another, but a 
thorough conviction^ on his part^ of hav- 



ing 



THE DISCARDED SON. 279 

ing- the power of administering consolation 
to them» 

They were seated, one evening, in the 
cabin, at an open.windoW; which afforded 
them an opportunity of seeing the '''Queen 
of the silver bow*' rising high ,in the hea- 
vens, and silvering with her bright beams 
the swelling waves^ when the Count, after 
a thoughtful pause o^ some minutes,, siid- 
denlv exclaimed — 

'' llovi delightful is this scene! — and 
hark, the m.ariners begin their evening 
hymn to the Virgin, as if, Chevalier, like 
your poet, Shakespeare, they thouorht 
''silence and night become the touches of 
sweet harmony/' I forget whether I have 
or not already told you that in your lan- 
guage I have made some proficiency." 

Osmond, by a bow, signified he had^, 
and the Count proceeded to descant upon 
the tranquillising effect which a scene such 
as they were then viewing v^as calculated 
to have upon the mind, " an effect which 
convinces me/' he added, " that for a 

woundtfd 



280 THE DISCARDED SON. 

Tvoiinded mind there is nothing like the 
quietness of solitude/' 

'' Excuse nie, my dear Count/* said Os- 
mond, unwilling to miss any opportunity 
that occurred for endeavouring to correct 
his new friend's erroneous way of thinking, 
'' for confessing I do not aoree with you 
in thinking so. . The situation that permits 
our fulfilling the incumbent duties of life 
with propriety, is one that is infinitely 
better adapted to heal and renovate the 
wounded mind ; since, in the first place, 
it imperceptibly abstracts it from the con- 
templation of its sorrows, and, in the next, 
affords it opportunities of obtaining its 
own plaudits, than which surely nothing 
can be more sweet, more cheering, or more 
consolatory. But were it even otherwise, 
still a man could not be excused for with- 
drawing from society, while conscious that 
his continuance in it could be beneficial to 
any individual, which he who possesses 
health, strength, understanding, and for- 
tune, assuredly must be. Permit me to 

give 



THE DISCARDED SON. 281 

give you the sentiments of that elegant 
"writer, Doctor Zimmerman, on the subject. 
''Those who have passed their lives in 
the domestic privacies of retirement, who 
have been accustomed but to friendship 
and love, who have formed their notion of 
virtue from those bright images which the 
purity of religion^ the perfection of moral 
sentiments, and the feelings of an affec- 
tionate heart, have planted in their minds, 
are too apt to yield to the abhorrence and 
disgust they must unavoidably feel on a first 
view of the artificial manners and unblush- 
ing vices of the world. Issuing from the 
calm retreats of innocence and simplicity, 
and fondly hoping to meet with m.ore en- 
larged perfection in the world, their amia- 
ble, just, and benevolent dispositions are 
shocked at the sour severities, the sordid 
selfishness, the gross injustice, the base ar- 
tifices, and the inhuman cruelties; which 
deform the fairest features of social life, 
and disgrace the best-formed fabric of hu- 
man happiness. Revolting, however, as 

ibis 



S82 THE DISCARDED SON. 

this disappiiir^tiijent must certainly be, and 
grievously as .such characters must be 
wounded on entering the world, it is a 
cowardly desertion of their dvA'^r to shrink 
from the task, and withdraw thei'- services 
from their fellow-creatures/' — Besides, I 
am thorough] V convinced/' continued Os* 
imond, '' that he who should, in the morn- 
ing of life, retire into solitude, would soon 
be« ome the victim of regret and repentance, 
sinc*^ the buoyant heart of youth can never 
long be the seat of ennui or disgust, can 
seldom long feel satisfied without moving 
in an active sphere ; it is only in the de- 
clining period of life^ when those who 
cheered, assisted, and supported us in our 
progress through it, have one by one dis- 
appeared from its busy scenes, or disap- 
pointed the confidence we fondly reposed 
in their affections, that we can, if ever, feel 
a permanent wish for entire seclusion." 

*^' My dear friend," cried the Count, with 
the animation with which he was w^ont to 
speak whenever he was pleased^ '•' in how 

different 



THE DISCARDED SON. 2S3 

diflferent a light do you make me view things 
to what I did before ! I candidly confess^ 
for some time past^ I have been thinking of 
quitting the world, and deliberating whe- 
ther to throw myself into the monastery of 
La Trappe, a hermitage on the Apennines, 
or one on Montserrat ; but now, in conse- 
quenge of your arguments, I entirely aban- 
don the idea, and decide upon maintaining 
my post in the busy world. -Yet, my dear 
friend, I believe you would scarcely won- 
der at my having almost resolved to quit it, 
did you know all I have gone through. If 
you have no objection, I will give you a 
sketch of my story; indeed, lam anxious 
to do so, in order, by accounting for the 
reveries into which I so frequently fall, to 
obtain your forgiveness for them/* 

Osmoild bowed, and said he should 
conceive himself honoured by his Lord- 
ship's confidence. 

Accordingly the Count began as follows. 



CHAP. 



284 THE DISCARDED SON. 



CHAP. VI. 



** The Gods are just.— 
But how can finite measure infinite ? 
Reason, alas! it does not know itself: 

But man, vain man, would, with this short-IinM plummet^ 
Fathom the vast abyss of heav'nly justice. 
Whatever is, is in it causes just: 

But purblind man 
Sees but a part o' th' chain, the nearest linkj 
His eyes not carrying to that equal beam 
That poises all above," 

Dryoen Oimrf 

" 1 HAVE already told you that I ain the 
heir of the Placentia family: at a very 
early period I succeeded to my paternal 
titles and estates; my mother dying in giv- 
ing me birth, and my father soon after fall- 
ing in the field of battle. By his will^ I 
v/as placed under the guardianship of my 
maternal uncle, the Marchese Morati, who, 

havin<r 



THE DISCARDED SON. ^S5 

having no children of his own, adopted 
me as his son, and treated me in every in- 
stance, as did also his amiable lady, as if I 
had been so in reality, 

^' My education was suitable to my rank, 
and happily did my days glide on, until I 
completed my nineteenth year; from which 
period (continued the Count, casting his 
eyes towards heaven, and heaving a deep 
sigh) I may date the commencement of all 
my sorrows. Gracious God! had it been 
thy will to have snatched me hence at that 
time, what misery should I have been 
spared! But to proceed. — Among the 
many young men I became acquainted 
with, on repairing from the Castle of 
Acerenza, the residence of my uncle, to 
Naples, for the completion of my educa- 
tion, there was none I so much admired, 
or became so strongly attached to, as the 
Count de Molina, only son of the Duke of 
that name, a nobleman then high in the 
confidence of his Sovereign, and Mlling 

th^. 



288 THE DISCARDED SON. 

the principal employments in the state,, 
but whoe hereditary fortune, through va- 
rious causes, was much impaired. 

*' De Molina returned my regard, and 
shortly becomi^\g almost inseparable, I was 
introduced to his family, and thus obtained 
an opportunity of beholding his sister, the 
heavenly Elizara, about thirteen, when first 
she m< t my ardent gaze. To see, and not 
tc ^ ye her, was impossible; and ere I was 
wr: ] sensible of being herslaye, I found, on 
being united to her depended my future 
happiness; but that I should find no diffi- 
culty in accomplishing my washes relatiye 
to her, I confidently assured myself, my 
rank and fortune entitling me to an alli- 
ance with the most illustrious. 

" Conceiving- that my uncle, as my 
guardian, was the properest person to dis- 
close those wishes, I hastened to Acerenza, 
and flinging myself at the feet of the good 
man, implored him to repair without delay 
to Naples, and be at once the revealer 
and advocate of my passion for the beau- 
tiful 



THE DT?CA1?DE1^ SON. . S3 7 

tifiil Elizara. He heard the aiknowled'^-- 
ment of it with satisfaction, her connec- 
tions being such as to render an alliance 
with her truly desirable. Accordingly;, he 
had no hesitation in complying with my 
request. In full assurance of succeeding in 
his embassy, he set out for Naples^ leaying 
me behind him, for the purpose of accom- 
panying my aunt thither, as soon as we re- 
ceived a summons from him to follow\ 

'' I will not dwxll on the delightful re- 
veries in which I indulged after his depar- 
ture, since, alas! they were fall of antici- 
pations of happiness I was destined never 
to experience; suffice it to say, that never 
was a wretch fated to disappointment, less 
prepared for it than I was; for oh! my 
friend, I was doomed to experience the 
most severe, the most excruciating one, 
doomed to hear that Elizara was engaged — • 
engaged tcro, as if to aggravate the anguish 
imparted by the circumstance, to an enemy 
of my house, the Marchese Salvilina — more^, 
that she loved him, that she had given him 

posses- 



^88 THE DISCARDED SON. 

possession of that virgin heart for which I 
sighed! Gracious Heaven, what were my 
feelings on being, informed of this by my 
uncle ! I raved — I wept — I abandoned my- 
self to despair^ and during its first parox- 
ysms^ might have been tempted to have 
raised my hand against my life, but for the 
vioilance of those bv whom I was surround- 
ed ; and if I had, seeing I w^as utterly lost 
to hope, should I have been much to blame, 
my dear friend?" addressing Osmond with 
peculiar earnestness 

" My dear Count," returned Osmond, 
'^ your putting such a question to me, con- 
vinces me you never consulted your rea- 
son on the subject, since, had you done so, 
it must have convinced you that the Divine 
Being, who sent us into this w^orld, only 
has a right to recal us from it; that trials 
are incidental, to this life; that to shrink 
from those we meet with, is to betray a 
want of due confidence in the goodness of 
the Almighty, which merits not his forgive- 
ness, and fastens a stigma on our characters 

nothing 



THF. DISCARDED SON. 2S9 

nothin<j^ can remove, sucb. as {he SGlaier 
would incur, whoj firicling himself on a post 
ofdangerj meanly deserted it. * By suffer- 
ing well,' says the poet, 'our fortune we 
subdue.! But even, allowing we should 
not all be happy enough to experience 
some lucky revolution in our fate, surely 
we should derive consolation and firmness 
of mind -from the conviction, that in })ro- 
portion to our sufferings here will be our 
felicity hereafter, provided those sufferings 
be borne with patience and fortitude." 

'*" Always right, always right," exclaimed 
the Count, with his usual versatility, imme- 
diately giving into the opinion of Osmond. 
'•' My dear friend, if long blessed with your 
society, I clearly perceive I shall become 
quite an altered man : already, through your 
arguments, and the example of moderation 
and calmness you set mc, I find myself 
acquiring a greater command over • my 
feelings than I ever before possessed; once 
able to subjugate them completely, and from 
the state of calmness I should of consc- 

voL. ri. o quence 



290 THE DISCARDED SO^. 

quence find my mind in, I should be able 
to reason and reflect as you have done, 
and, of course, see all in a right light." 

" If we early attempt the conquest of 
ourselves, we may rest assured we shall find 
the attempt neither a very painful, nor yet 
an unavailing one," returned Osmond. 
'^ Man against his fellow man may put forth 
all his strength in vain ; but never shall he 
do so in a combat with his own passions, 
provided he delays not too long taking the 
field against them. But come, my dear 
Count, the beauty and serenity of the 
evening invite us to take a promenade on 
deck; when we return hither, we will, if 
you please, resume the game of chess we 
commenced this morning, for I perceive 
you- are agitated, and cannot therefore 
think of allowing you to pursue your nar- 
rative this evening/' 

" You are all kind consideration, my 
friend," said the Count, as he followed him 
up the cabin stairs. 

The 



THE DISCARDED SON. 291 

The next morning, as soon as breakfast 
was over^ he thus continued his story: — • 

*"*■ My uncle took me to different parts of 
Italv, triistinofchanoje of scene would divert 
and finally expel the corroding grief that 
had taken possession of mv hearty and which^ 
with deep regret, he perceived materially 
affecting my health; he, bcoides, inces- 
santh' represented to me thederogatory light 
in which 1 should make myself appear, by 
conti^iuing to pine for an object I could 
not possess, and who had never entertained 
a tender sentiment for me; the foolish, 
the ridiculous part I acted, in wasting my 
days in vain regrets for such a being, while 
so many fully equal, if not superior to her, 
would be delighted t j receive my addresses : 
in short, nothing that tenderness and wisdom 
could suggest, as likely to cure me of my 
unhappy passion, was omitted by him : I ut 
to no purpose did he exert himself to era- 
dicate it — which perceiving, and that I grew 
rather worse than better for being hurried 
about, he at length hearkened to my ar- 
o 2 dent 



292 -THE DISCARDED SON. 

dent solicitations to return to Acerenza, 
for the delightful solitudes of which, thaa 
which nothing perhaps can be conceived 
more enchanting, I absolutely longed. 

'' Their tranquillity had soon a salutary 
effect upon nie; by degrees the agitation 
of my spirits subsided. The anguish of 
my mind abated sufficiently to permit the 
renewal of my former studies, that in 
particular of the English language. In 
the poetry of your country I frequently 
found a softness, a tenderness, not rival- 
ling, 'tis true, but certainly, in some in- 
stances, not inferior to that for which the 
Italian poetry is famed. The dramatic 
writers, in particular, I found to excel in 
both; hence they became my favourite 
authors, insomuch that I was seldom with- 
out the works of one or other of them 
about me, especially when I quitted the 
Castle, for the purpose of wandering 
amongst the awful shades embowering it, 
and which at this period I much delighted 
in. 

'' After 



THE DISCARDED SOM. 2§3 

'^ After a long and solitary ramble one 
evening, feeling myself somewhat fatigued, 
I seated myself upon a verdant bank, with- 
in the shelter of a richly variegated and 
extensive woody then glowing with the 
refulgence of the setting sun. Charmed with 
the awful tranquillity of the scene, so sooth- 
ing and so well according with the feelings 
then prevailing in my mind, I could not 
forbear, in the enthusiasm itexcited, repeat- 
ing aloud, from a volume of your poet 
Shakespeare, which I had just drawn from 
my pocket — 

*' This shadowing desert, unfrequented woods, 
I better brook than flourishing peopl'd towns. 
Here I can sit alone, unseen of any. 
And to the nightingale's complaining notes 
Tune my distresses, and record my woes." 

Scarcely had the sound of my own voice 
ceased to vibrate on my ear, er^ another, 
softer and more sweet than any I had ever 
before heard, saluted it, chaunting a simple 
melody. It seemed to be near; but in 
o 3 \ain 



;294 THE DISCARDED SON. 

vain did my eyes wander around^ in eager 
quest of tlie object from whom it came : 
at length, on its ceasing, 1 arose^ and cau- 
tiously advancing towards the spot whence 
I fancied it had proceeded, espied, through 
the trees, a young lad, sitting on a mossy 
bank, clad in a shepherd's habit, his face 
entirely concealed from view by a large 
hat. 

'■ On my approach, as if alarmed by the 
rustlino[ noise occasioned by mv makinsr 
my v»ay through the thickets that inter- 
posed between him and me, he started 
up, and fled v/ith precipitation. The ele- 
gance of his figure, which his flight displayed 
to the greatest advantage, struck me with 
admiration; and I continued gazing after 
him till he was completely lost to my view 
in an immensity of shade. He did not, how- 
ever, as quickly vanish from my mind as he 
had done from my sight. Never had I 
seen any thing equal to the grace and sym- 
metry of his form; and but perhaps ow- 
ing to my imagination being a little heated 

at 



THE DISCARDED SON, 9^5 

at the moment by the studies I had for 
some time been pursuing, I could not divest 
myself of the idea of his present dress and 
occupation being such as he was not accus- 
tomed to; in short, that misfortunes had 
compelled him to conceal beneath the 
humble garb of a shepherd, one who had, 
as the divine Poet, from which I have just 
quoted, says^ — 

*' Seen better days, 
And had with holy bell been knoU'd to church j 
And sat at good mens feasts, and wip'd his eyes 
Of drops that sacied pity had engender'd." 

This idea induced me to form the reso- 
lution of seeking him out, that if my con- 
jecture was right, I might have the happi- 
ness of serving him. The following day I 
repaired to the wood, but in vain did I 
explore its beaten tracks. No shepherd 
was to be seen. I passed the ensuing one 
in the same manner, and to as little pur- 
pose. Neither were the enquiries I caused 
to be made after him throughout the nei,i;h- 
o 4 bourhood 



^96 THE L-ISCARDED SON. 

boiirhood rr;Ore successriil than my own 
researches, and at last I began to despair 
of ever beholdino: him as^ain, or obtain- 
ing an opportunity of carrying into effect 
the many projects I had formed for his 
advantage. The relinquishment of these 
cost me no small pain, so thoroughly had 
[prepossessed myself with the idea of His 
being a person in misfortune, needing the 
services of a powerful friend; had I been 
inclined to superstition, I should probably, 
from the suddenness of his disappearance, 
and the ill success of my enquiries after 
him, have been tempted to have taken hint 
for a creature of the other world, dispatched 
to this on some gracious errand: as it was, 
J confess I gave way at times to very fanci- 
ful ideas respecting him. 

'^ One morning, about a fortnight after 
I h^d seen him, as I was reading in my 
sfudv, a servant entered it, almost breafh- 
Ies«, to inform me he had just seen the 
young shepherd in an adjacent woodi i 
directly hastened thither, and on reaching ^ 

the 



THE DISCARDED SON. 297 

the spot where I was told he had been seen^ 
had the satisfaction of findtTig him there. 
On first catching a glimpse of him, his face, 
as in the first instance, was concealed from 
.me, but as I drew near, he raised it, and 
distovered to my view — think, my dear 
friend, what my feelings must have been 
at tiit^ moment — the features, the heavenly 
features of Elizara de Molina! — Bolts and 
bars could scarcely have impeded my pro- 
gress at the moment — in an instant I had 
her clasped to the heart which had been sa 
long tortured with despair on her account. 

Oh, mv dear friend, imas^ine 

" But have you ever been in love," cried 
the Count, with a sudden change in his 
voice, and giving Osmond an anxiously 
enquiring look, " for if you have, you can 
of course so well picture them to yourself, 
that it wiil be quite unnecessary for me ta 
attempt describing the raptures I experi- 
enced, at finding that had the divine maid 
been at liberty to obey the dictates of in- 
o 5 clination> 



293 THE DISCARDED SON, 

clination, I never should have felt a pang 
on her account,'* 

Osmond laughed. — '' As yet^ I confess/' 
said he, " I am a stranger to those agonies 
the poet styles charming/' 

'' Well, well, your time is yet to come," 
cried the Count. — '' But to proceed — My 
joy at discovering I was beloved by my 
Elizara was as extravagant as my grief had 
been when I imagined the reverse: scarcely 
could I credit the evidence of my senses^ 
scarcely think myself awake, when I heard 
her melodious voice murmuring in my ear 
th^ acknowledgment of a reciprocal- pas- 
sion. The purport of her story to me was 
as follows: — 

*' The Duke, her father, who had for a 
long time been a widower, became ena- 
moured, about the period I first saw her, 
of a blooming girl, under the guardian- 
ship of the Marchese Salvilina, but who 
refused him her hand, except, in return, 
he bestowed upon him that of his daughter. 
The Duke, whose principal study had ever 

been 



THE DISCARDED SON. 299 

been his own gratification^ v>'as not so re- 
gardless of it now as not readily to promise 
this, a promise which not all the solicita- 
tions of his daughter could induce him to 
retract^ though she repeatedly assured him 
death would be preferable to an union with 
Salvilina, even though her heart had not 
been engaged to another^ his age, appear- 
ance, and character beino- all aoainst him. 
He. knew his cwvn v/ishes could not be ac- 
complished except the Marchese's were, 
and this consideration efTectually hardened 
his heart against her. Convinced, at length, 
that he was completely deaf to the voice 
of nature, Elizara conceived herself fully 
justified in flying, from .his tyranny, and 
endeavouring to ensure her own happiness, 
by undeceiving me with regard to her sen- 
timents. 

*' Accordingly, a few days prior to the 
one fixed on for her nuptials with Salvilina, 
she unbosomed herself to her woman, who, 
fortunately for her, had beenrthe favourite 
attendant of her deceased mother, and was 
06 by 



300 THE DISCARDED SON. 

by her not only provided with a disguise, 
that enabled her to escape unmolested from 
the Palace of Molina, but accompanied 
from it. 

i' Previous to herelopement, she heard 
of my being at Acerenza, and thither there- 
fore decided' on immediately bending her 
steps, to which her faithful companion being 
related to a person in the neighbourhood, 
was an additional inducement. On her ar- 
riving, however, in it, a thousand fears, the 
Offspring of delicacy, started in her mind, 
and finally determined her on leavins: it 
to chance to acquaint me with our vicinity 
ro each other. In the meanwhile, in order 
fo be enabled with still greater security to 
resort to the solitudes, she understood, I 
frequented, she laid aside the disguise in 
which she had escaped from the palace of 
her father, and assumed that of a shep- 
herd's boy. 

"Two tedious weeks passed away with- 
out her seeina: me: at leni^th she beheld 
me, but her joy at the moment was damped 

bv 



THE DISCARDED SON. 301 

by hearing me speak, as from that circum- 
stance she concluded I could not be alone, 
without beinp; assured cf which, both mo- 
desty and apprehension forbade her letting 
me see her. The day ensuing the one she 
saw me, several suspicious locking men 
were discovered lurking in the neighbour- 
hood, whom, not doubting to be emissa- 
ries of her father's, or disappointed lover, 
she resolved, till informed of their depar- 
ture from it^ not to venture out again: 
hence, to this resolution was owing the 
fruitlcssness of my search after her. 

'/ When the transports excited by this 
meeting and cdaircissement had suffici- 
ently subsided to permit us to think and 
speak in a rational manner, my lovely 
mistress consented to take up her resi- 
dence at the Castle of Acerenza, and ren- 
der me the happiest of men, provided my 
uncle and aunt invited her to it, and still 
ssnctioned my addresses to her. 

'* Impatient to see her beneath their 
3 roof, 



302 THE DISCARDEI> SON. 

roof, and have her receive from them 
the assurance so essential to my feli- 
city, 1 was parting from her sooner than I 
could otherwise have brought myself to 
do, when, pity me, my friend — pity a man 
who on the very brink of happiness — hap- 
piness which he had been long languishing 
for, saw himself suddenly precipitated 
into misery. Savilina, with several ruffi- 
ans, stood before us. I was unarmed; the 
eftbrts, therefore, which I made to prevent 
my-Elizara from being torn from me were 
ineffectual: she was forced from my arms, 
and at the same moment the cowardly and 
detestable Saivilina, enraged by the open 
avowal of her passion for me, and dread- 
ing the fury of my resentment, stabbed, 
me twice in the side, and left me to all 
appearance dead. My non-appearance in 
the banquetting-room at the usual hour 
occasioned a search for me : for many hours 
after I was brought home, I remained sense- 
less, so completely was 1 exhausted by loss 

of 



TITE DISCARDED SON. SOS 

of blood, and the dreadful agitation I had 
undergone. 

^' As soon as I regained the faculty of 
speech, I accounted to my nearly distracted 
relatives for the situation in which they 
found me, but not so much for the 
purpose of awakening their resentment 
against the perfidious Salvilina, as for that 
of stimulating them to make immediate 
exertions for the recovery of Elizara: so 
thoroughly persuaded, however, were they, 
that the moment he had got her into his 
power, he had forced her to become his, 
that they made not an effort for the pur- 
pose; which at length discovering, through 
means of my valet Antonio, I resolved, 
though still extremely weak and ill, on 
immediately quitting the castle, in order 
to attempt her rescue myself; or, if too 
late to prevent her becoming the wife of 
my foe, to take signal vengeance on him 
for having robbed me of her, and thus 
blasted the felicity of both our lives. 
'' Aware that to have mentioned this re- 
solution 



304 THE DISCARDED SOxNf. 

solution would have been to cause its frus- 
tration, I merely confided it to Antonio^ 
whose assistance was requisite to enable 
me to carry it into effect. At the midnight 
hour I stole from the castle^ attended 
by him; nor until the halting of the 
carriage the next morning, which he 
had procured to tak^ me from it, once 
thought of the consternafion and agony 
into which mv flight from it at such a 
juncture would throw my affectionate rela- 
tives; no sooner, however, had the reflec- 
tion occurred, than I sat down to implore 
their forgiveness for the step I had taken^ 
and assure them that I should not be un- 
mindful of the life on which I knew they 
set so high a value. I dispatched my letter 
bv a special messenger, and then with all 
possible expedition pursued my journey to 
Naples. 

'' On my arrival, I hastened to the Pa- 
lace of Molina, and was at once surprised 
and agonized by hearing of the sudden 
death of the Duke, and that a rumour pre- 
vailed 



THE DISCARDED SON, 305 

vailed throughout the palace of my Elizara 
being privately married to the Marchese 
Salviiina; but where thev were, or her bro- 
ther, the young Duke, the porter either' 
could not or would not inform me. I will 
not fatigue you by detailing the various 
methods I had recourse' to for endeavouring 
to discover the 4'etreat of my abhorred 
rival, and whether indeed he had deprived 
me of all hope of possessing my Elizara. 
All proved unsuccessful, and at last I began 
to think my wisest way would be to try and 
throw him off his guard, by ceasing for a 
time all pfiblic enquiries^ at least, and as- 
suming an appearance of gaiety; this I 
accordingly did, and for the better sup- 
porting thQ deception, began to frequent 
the di^erer.t public places, though, Heaven 
knows, with a heart little disposed for 
amusement. 

'' I renaired one evenino: to a gamblinjr- 
house, with a party of young noblemen, 
with whom I had dined. My joy was un- 
speakable, when on entering a billiard- 

room^ 



S06 THE DISCARDKD SON. 

room^ the first object I beheld was the bro- 
ther of my Elizara. It was a short-lived 
joy^ however^ for, on flying to him^ and 
attempting to take his hand, he drew back, 
with a cold and repelling air; and after 
surveying me for an instant, with a haughty 
and indignant look^ turned away in con- 
temptuous silence. Astonishment at this 
conduct rivetted me for a few seconds to 
the floor;, to let it pass, however, without 
enquiring into the cause of it, was not to 
be thought of; as soon, therefore, as T re- 
collected myself, I again approached him, 
and having obtained his notice by gently 
pressing his arm, for he kept his looks 
studiously averted from mine, I begged, 
in a low tone, to know to what I was to 
attribute the extraordinary reception I had 
met with from him? At this question he 
turned upon me a look full of fierceness, 
and bade me ask my own heart. 

^ It cannot enlighten me on the subject/ 
I replied, ' since it has ever been faithful 
to the friendship it vowed to you/ 

' Tii 



THE DISCARDED SON. 307 

' Tis false/ he exclaimed with encreasing 
fui-y; ' had it been so, the honour of my 
house would never have been injured^ by 
the seduction of my sister from her family/ 

'' I started ; in this accusation I clearly 
recognised the infernal n^achinations of 
Salvilina. 

' By Heaven/ I passionately returned, ' I 
have been unjustly accused: but this is no 
place for an explanation; let us retire, and 
I trust I shall soon be able to convince you 
that I have been so/ 

' Take this/ he cried, in a voice of thun- 
der, ' for so impudently avov;ing to me 
your belief of being able to impose 
upon me/ and as he »poke, he struck 
me across the face with the back of his 
hand. 

'*^When I tell you that at this very mo- 
ment my blood boils with indignation at 
the recollection of this injurious treatment, 
you may easily picture to yourself, my 
dear friend, mv feelinsjs at the instant of 
receiving it. I directly drew. I no longer 

thought 



308 THE DISCARDED SON. 

thought of his bein^ the brother of Elizara 
• — I thought only of reverge. But even 
though my feelings had been less out- 
raged than thev were, sfiil I could not have 
acted otherwise than I did, without having 
had mv name branded with eternal infamy, 
seeing we were sun\>unded by a crowd of 
the most distinguished men in Naples. 

" The Duke followed my example ; a kind 
of desperate fury nerved my arm^ and at 
the first pass he fell lifeless at my feet. 
With his last sigh vanished my last linger- 
ing hope of happiness; for that Elizara, 
be her situation what it might, would ever 
consent to a union with the destroyer of 
her brother, I could not flatter mys&lf. 
Horrible reflections overwhelmed me, and 
rendered m^ unable to think of, much 
less make, an effort for my safety, 

'' The friends, however, who had accom- 
panied me to the biliiard-room, were not 
uninterested about it; they hurried me 
away, and caused Antonio to set out with 
me directly for Rodez, in France, where I 

had 



THE DISCARDED SON. 305 

had some relatives residing. After being 
there a few Hays, I awoke, as from a 
lethargy, and recollecting, the very morn- 
ing of the day on which the fatal rencontre 
took place, my having heard that Salvilina 
had been, recently seen atOvideo, in Spain^ 
I determined on proceeding thither imme- 
diately, for the purpose of endeavouring to 
ascertain the fate of Elizara; but no longer 
from any selfish motive, being thoroughly- 
convinced, as I have already said, that 
nothing could induce her to become the 
wife of him, by whose hand her brother 
fell, even though she might be inclined to 
allow the provocation he had received 
suffkient to excuse the conduct it led to. 

'' Distracted as my mind was, however, I 
did not entirely forget the dear friends at 
Acerenza. Prior to ray setting out for 
Spain, I dispatched a long explanatory let- 
ter to them. 

'' I commenced my journey over the 
Pyrennees with no other attendant than 
Antonio, conceiving my having more might 

pre- 



SIO THE DISCARDED SON. 

prevent ray travelling with the expedi- 
tion I wished. We reached the borders 
of Spain in safety, and night approach- 
ing, were pushing forward with all our 
might for a hamlet, where we purposed 
sleeping, when we were suddenly attacked 
by a small party of brigands. We were 
both armed, and fired. The mule on 
which I rode, terrified by the report of the 
fire-arms, broke from the ruffian who- had 
seized her bridle, and set off with a speed 
that was truly alarming, considering the 
dangers of the road. From being dashed to 
pieces, I was in all probability only saved 
by the intervention of some soldiers ad- 
vancing in the direction my unruly beast 
had taken. They soon succeeded in secur- 
ing her, and being briefly informed of what 
had happened, accompanied me to the spot 
where I had \ek my poor Antonio, whom 
the banditti having first rified, had left for 
dead upon the ground. - My horror, while 
I imagined him so, was inexpressible, as, 
exclusive of the regard I felt for him on 

account 



THE DISCARDED SON. 311 

account of his long and faithful services, I 
considered myself the cause of his death, 
by having had the temerity to undertake so 
dangerous a journey, without the usual at- 
tendants. Thank Heaven I was rescued 
from the pangs which the idea of being so 
would have entailed upon me. 

'' The soldiers conveyed him to the 
nearest village, where, ovi^ing to the prompt 
and skilful assistance he received, he speed- 
ily recovered. 

'' As soon as he was again able to bear 
the fatigue of travelling, I recommenced 
my journey; but vain were all the enqui- 
ries I set afloat after Elizara and Salvilina 
on reaching Oviedo; I could learn no tid- 
ings of either; trusting, however, that by 
continuing some time in it, I might, at 
length, be fortunate enough to do so, I 
resolved on a lonoer stav there than I at 
first intended, a resolution which a letter 
from mv aunt, the Marchesa Alorati, ac- 
quainting me with the death of my uncle, 
and entreating me to return immediately to 

Acerenza, 



312 THE DlSCArxDED SOS. 

Acerenza, as from my presence she cguW 
only derive consolation for his loss, induced 
me to give up. Accordingly I hastened 
from Oviedo toSantillana^ where I was in- 
formed I should be more likely,, than in 
any other place on the coast, to procure a 
speedy passage for Italy; this, however, on 
arriving there, I found I could not do for 
a few days. I tripd to while away the in- 
terval, and beguile my mind of the melan- 
choly reflections that oppressed it, by 
rambling about the countiy, 

*' The result of these ram.bles you are 
acquainted with; permit me, however, to 
observe, that had the accident they occa • 
sioned me to meet with been attended 
with infinitely more serious consequences 
than it was, 1 should nevertheless have re- 
joiced at it, since the means of introducing 
me to your acquaintance — to you, to 
whose arguments I shall ever consider my- 
self indebted, for not having acted in a 
manner derogatory to my character, as, 
but for you, I should assuredly, after pas> 



THE DISCARDED SON". <^ i-' 

sing a little time with my aunt, have thrown 
myself into a religious solitude, owin<T to. 
itiy despair about Elizara, a measure, I new 
clearly perceive, that could not have failed 
of drawing upon me the imputation of 
weakness. Yet^, oh my dear friend, can 
you wonder that I should be sick of life? 
robbed as I have been of all that gave it 
value in my eves, surely no one can deny 
that I am the most unfortunate of m.en? 
Yes, as one of your elegant poets says — 

** Time gives irxrease to my affiictrons*. 

The circling hours, that gather all the vroes, 

Which are difFus'd chro' the revolving year, 

Come heavy laden with the oppressing weight 

To me. — With me successively they leave 

The sighs, the '(.ears, the groans, and restless cares. 

And all the damps of grief that did retard their flight; i 

They shake their downy wings, and scatter all 

Their dire collected dews on my poor head. 

Then f?y with joy and swiftness from me." 

'' Tell mc, my dear friend," he conti- 
nued, looking anxiously at Osmond, '- do 
VOL. II. p vou 



314 THE DISCARDED SON. 

yo\i not think I have a right to exclaim 
against fortune? Do you not think I liave 
met with more than common calamities, 
that lam one of the most singularly unfor- 
tunate of my species?'* 

'' Since you press for my opinion, I 
trust, my dear Count,'' replied Osmond, 
" you will excuse me for saying that I see 
nothing in what you have met with, that 
differs from the ordinary lot of man, since 
we are all liable to trials, to misfortunes of 
various kinds — all doomed, at some period 
or other, in a greater or less degree, to 
experience the uncertainty of worldly pur- 
suits, doubtless to prevent our attachment 
to this transitory state being too great. 
Complaints may aggravate, but m^ost cer- 
tainly can never alleviate our afflictions — 
afflictions which are as often, if not oftener, 
brought on by our own misconduct than 
by circumstances we could prevent: in 
either case, however, they should be borne 
with patience, from the conviction that 
they could not have befallen us without 
5 the 



THE DISCARDED SON. SI5 

the permission of the Most High, and the 
consideration that the attainment of our 
wishes might not by any means have been 
instrumental to the furtherance of our hap- 
piness. Yet think not, my dear Count, 
from what I have said, that I do not sin- 
cerely feel for your sufferings. They have 
h^pn <crrpat. thouofh not singular— such as 
entitle you to, and must ensure to you, 
the sympathy of every feeling heart: in 
time, I trust the painful impression they 
have made upon your mind, will lessen 
sufficiently to allow of your enjoying the 
happiness still withirr your reach. Your 
own exertions will do much towards over- 
coming it: and to these I think you must 
feel yourself stimulated, by the expecta- 
tions you must be conscious your friends 
have formed with respect to you, from 
the understanding you possess, and the 
regard you have ever professed for them. 
Perseverance in a hopeless passion nothing 

p 2 '^Except/' 



316 THE DISCARDED SON. 

" Except/* eagerly interposed the Count, 
"^ the impossibility of conquering it." 

'' Pardon me/' rejoined Osmond^ *' I can 
admit of no such impossibility. You are 
fond of quotations from the English poets; 
hear what one of them says on the subject: 

*' Rouze to the combat. 
And thovi art au.fc tu conqucf J wars snail restore thee — 
The sound of arms shall wake thy martial ardour. 
And cure this am'rous sickness of thy soul. 
Begun by sloth, and nurs'd by tooirauch ease. 
The idle God of Love supinely dreams 
Amidst inglorious shades of purling streams, 
la rosy fetters and fantastic chains 
He binds deluded maids and simple swains; 
"With soft enjoyments woos them to forget 
The hardy toils and labours of the great: 
But if the warlike trumpet's loud alarms 
To virtuous acts excite, and manly arms. 
The coward boy avows his abject fear, 
On silken wings sublime he cuts the air, 
Scar'd at the noble noise, and thunder of the war,'* 

'' By Heaven/' exclaimed the Count, start- 
ing from his chair with wildness in his eyes, 

'' I would 



THE DISCARDED SON. 317 

^'J would not if I could be cured of mine ; 
and well it is for me that I do not wish to 
be so, since I know it to be perfectly im- 
possible that I should ever conquer a pas- 
szon such as mine ! 

** I have no reason left that can assist me > 

And none would have. My love's a noble madness. 

Which shews the cause deserves it. Moderate soirow 

Fits vulgar love, and suits a vulgar man : 

But I have lov'd with such transcendant passion^ 

I soar'd at first quite out of Reason's view. 

And now am lost above it.'* 

Osmond could not forbear smiling both 
externally and internally at this rant: his 
■smile, however, was quickly succeeded by 
regret, for the unsettled, and of conse- 
quence unhappy state of the Count's mind, 
but notwithstanding his little hastinesses 
and foibles, he could not avoid admiring, 
as well as loving him, so amiable were his 
manners, so liberal his sentiments, so bene- 
volent his heart. 

END OF VOL. II. 

Lane, Darling, and Co, Leadenhall-Strcet. 



WORKS 

jprinteti at tl;c ^inzrU^Wnfus, 

With the Revieuers' Opinion, 



THE MYSTERIOUS FREEBOOTER i 

OR, 

THE DAYS OF QUEEN BESS. 

BY FRANCIS LATHOM. 

4 vols. 20s. sewed. 

♦* This Tale is a pleafing exception to the general opinion 
of critics that all novels are nonfeufe. If the de\ elopement 
of interesting situatior.s, or the inculcation of bores: and ho- 
nouijbie .'tioiaiity be norf nfej ifnonienfe confilf in the dif- 
play of a livtiy conception, and the ir.reitigatien of the hu- 
m-inmind b*i nonfenie j then in.'ttd the Novel before us is 
entitled to the name of nonfenfe. But if tl-.e lofibn of exam- 
ple can inftnifl our undersi an. lings, or the adniiniflration of 
poetic-rtl juftice cone£t ovn- hearts, the Mjfterious Freebooter 
will be read ^^ ith fatisfacticn by a coniiderabie portion cf the 
public. It has aire^Jy been thrown into a pantotnime b;.IIct 
by ihe proprietors of the Circus ; and we dcul t not it will be 
as great a favourite in the clofet, as it is upon the srage." 

Monthly Mirror, for Majy 1806. 

«< The author of Men and M-nners is no inferior novelift ; 
nothing uught more to furprife than liis unrivalled fertility : 
fev authors hc.ve wiitten io niuch who repeat thcmfeives fo 
/irtle : this is the privilege of thofe who draw lei's from prece- 
dent th^n imr.gination ; who liudy books little and nature 
much. Of the plan of a romance full of incident, it wouM be 
laborious to give the (tory in epitome; and would increafe the 
reviewer's trouble only 10 decreale the reader's gratification. 
Suffice it to fay, that tenonfm is the predominant imprtiTion j 
that this is a produftion of the RadcIiiTe school, ^nJ perhaps 
the bell domeftic imitation which has yet appeared; and that 
it h full of intereft, of invention, and of eloquence." 

Amiual Ri^vieiv^ 



New Worksy S^c. continued. 



THE INVISIBLE ENEMY j 

OR, 

THE MINES OF WIELITSKA. 

A POLISH LEGENDARY ROMANCE, 

BY T. P. LATHY. 
4 vols. £l sewed. 
** This ftory feenis calculated to afford rather more enter- 
tainment th.in the author's Paraclete, of which we took iomQ 
notice in our laft year's Jouinal. The lovers of myfterious 
horrors cannot fail of being amply gratified, for our author 
has contrived a mode of keeping his readers in the dark, the 
novelty and ingenuity of whicli we are not able fufficiently to 
praife." Literary Journal^ Sept. 1806. 



THE BRAVO OF BOHEMIA j 

OR, 

THE BLACIC FOREST. 

A ROMANCE. 

A vols. 18s. sewed. 
*< The Bravo of Bohemia is entitled to confiderabJe priife. 
The incidcnis are vveil managed, and calculated to fix the at- 
tention. The chara6li.rs, though not very prominen^, prefent 
nothing that is glaring and unnaturally inccnfiftiint.'" 

Literary Journal^ OSiober 1806. 

" The fiiuations in which the hero of this romance i? 
placed are new and interellirig. In it fewer dungeons and 
gholts are introduced than has of late been the cafe. The 
fentiments are virtiious, and the language tolerably good j 
altogether it is much better than the uCual w< rksofthis kind." 
Monthly Lit. Recreations, No'V. 1806. 



M O N T E I T H. 

BY MRS. RICE. 
2 vols. 7s. sewed. 
" This is an interefting and anuifing novel. The wonder- 
ful mingled with it does not dcftroy the etfeil of its more 
meritorious parts." Monthly Mirror, Dec. 1806. 



New JVorks, ^c, continued. 



THE NUN AND HER DAUGHTER, 

A NOVEL. 

4 vols. 18S, sewed. 
** The Nun and hei D lughier is iuperior to nioft publlca- 
tii>np of this fort. I'he ftory is toll in a manner that indicates 
a fertile imagination, and excites a great deal of inteiell.'" 

Monthly Epitome, May, 1805. 

ESSAYS ON THE ART OF BEING HAPPY, 

BY EUGENIA DE ACTON, 
2 vols. 8V0. 7s. sewed. 
*' So great a variety of fubjects is confidered in thefe .two 
volumes, that it is difficult for us to give any general account 
of their contents, without entering into a moit minufe detail 
thnn our limits allow. We i^lamly perceive, in the fenlible 
refit ^^ion's which thele edliys convey, that the favourable 
opinit'n, which we have already exprefled concerning the 
production of this Lady's pen, arofe not from any partiality, 
buf.tiom the juit and real uefercs of the wi iter ; and we have 
pieafure, on the picfent ocLaHon, in adding another tettunony 
to the meritof a pleafmg and uUvHigent moralilt.'" 

Mcntklj Re'vie-iV) March y 1805. 

THE HOMICIDE, 

A NCVEL, 

BY MARY CHARLTON. 
2 vols, 9s. sewed. 
" The Homicide is an intereding ftorv. The characlers 

?re ftionglv d.-av. n, and the incidents fellow each othei in a 
natural manner. An exemplary wife is the princip"d cha- 
rnfter of the tale, and tlie reader follows her with uniforrri 
iniertil through the different fcenes thru flie encounters" 

Monthly Epitome, June, '805, 



DCMESTIC. SCENES, 

FROIVI THE GERMAN. 

3 vols, price 13s. Cd. sewed. 
" This is a colle(5fion of (lories introducing domeftic fcenes 
of various forts. The incidents are, for the moft part, natu^ 
ral, and are, at the fame time, wrought up with fufEcier.c. 
flcdl to render them in manv indances conliderably intrrelf- 
'"g»" Critical Rfvieiv, March, iSo'i. 


