Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Nocturnal visit: a tale
THE
NOCTURNAL VISIT. CHAP. I. u Unskilful he to fa\\*n, or seek for powY <ť By doctrines fashioiťd to the varying hour 4 *' Far other aims his heatt had learn M to prize, " More bent to raise the wretched than to rise.'* Goldsmith· Jn a little hamlet called Wyefieid, situated between Chester and Holywell, ami about two miles from the great road, there lived, many years ago, a Curate of the name of Greville, whose memory is still loved and venerated by all who had the happiness of knowing him: like the 'good pastor so beauti¬ fully described in 'Goldsmith's Deserted vol. ι. n . Village,
Village, he was, though not " passing rich," dear to all the country round, from his " unaffected sanctity*' and simplicity of manners. Л1е practised what he preached ; and though a narrow income sometimes ^compelled him to bound his charities, his benevolence knew no limitations. "With cheerful alacrity he visited the sick and the afflicted, administering to their wants, and calming their pertur¬ bations. He divested death of its ter¬ rors ; he alleviated the horrors of guilt ; he comforted and supported the dis¬ mayed, by dAvelling'upon that passage in the sacred volume of heaven, whieh says, a broken and ,a contrite heart shall not be rejected : *' At liiscoiitioul " Despair and anguish fled the struggling sou!, ·* Comfoit came down the trembling wretch to taise, <* And his last fah'jjng accents vthbpei'd praibe."
Previous
Previous to his becoming an inhabit¬ ant of Wyefieid, he had mixed a good deal in the busy world, and from what he had seen and suffered during his intercourse therein, he was happy to find himself far removed from it. Few men indeed had ever experienced greater deceit, cruelty, and ingrati¬ tude ; and, independent of the disgust his injuries naturally inspired him with against it, he deemed himself totally unqualified for it, from wanting that i( patient merit," so necessary for the indigent and dependant to possess, in order to enable them to bear, with some degree of calmness, the * l oppressors ^uong," the proud man's scorn, ťk the Indolence of office, 5 ' and the various ills and indignities which the unworthy and unfeeling arc so apt to heap upon the children of adversity. For a wounded spirit and contracted income, no place could be better в Q adapted
adapted than Wyefieid; its inhabitants, with very few exceptions, were simple and good-natured, and its luxuriant soil, and vicinity to Chester, rendered the necessaries of life easily attainable ; it consisted of houses chiefly in the cottage style, built upon a verdant green, or rather valley, Avhich lay bc- tAveen pleasant hills of easy ascent, and was beautifully planted Avith elms and chesnuts, round many of avIiosc pon¬ derous and moss-covered trunks, benches Avere placed for the accommo¬ dation of the village politicians ; the venerable Avoods of GAvytherin-Hall, Avhich completely embosomed a stately mansion, the ancient seat of the noble family of that name, to whom the ham¬ let, with an immense tract of adjoin¬ ing land, belonged, terminated it at one extremity, and at the other it Avas crossed by a fine trout-stream,-
" In
·* In which the w Ula ws dipt 44 Their pendant bought, stooping as if to drink ¡" and o'er which a rustic bridge was thrown, that led into the heart of a highly cultivated country, where neat farms, handsome mansions, rich pas¬ tures, and fine woodlands presented themselves in. charming variety to the €ye. The appearance of Wyeiield was alto¬ gether neat, cheerful, and picturesque; its cottages peeped amidst tufted trees, or rose amidst gardens, rich in the trea¬ sures of the ilowery as well as vegeta¬ ble world ; and the hills being in many parts too low to exclude the prospect of the adjacent country, it commanded several fine and extensive views, parti¬ cularly of the sea (enlivened by the beautiful and e ver- vary ing scenery of the waters), and of the mountains of North Wales—those almost inaccessible в 3 retreats;
retreats of tlie ancient Britons, dark,, congregated, and piled upon each other, in rude confusion, like the <li>- jointed fragments of a demolished world. The dwelling of Mr. Greville wa% only distinguished from the habita¬ tions of his neighbours, by the pecu¬ liar taste with which the ground be¬ longing to it was laid out ; it stood in the midst or a large garden, which was enclosed from the green by a low hedge of hawthorn, kept in the nicest order; and behind it rose the hill, upon whose summit the village church was built, and up whose gentle acclivity aged trees formed a long cathedral walk; shading with their spreading and intertwisted branches the grass- grown graves of many of the rude forefathers of the hamlet.
Flaunting
Flaunting honeysuckles crept oer the Avhite Avails of the cottage, Avan- toncd upon its roof, and in summer cast a delightful shade upon its little casemented Avindows, before Avhich clumps of floAvering shrubs, and beds of delicious flowers Aveçe raised ; here roses and lavender emitted their choicest flagran ce; ťt I Icre soft carnations shower'd their br.Iiuy dtw?, ' f í Jere lilies smil'd» in virgin robes of white* ** The ihin unárcâs of superacid] lights* The luxuriant shades ofGwvtherln-Ilall v' Avere immediately stretched before it ; and through the parted trees, it com¬ manded seAxral fine and romantic pro¬ spects, especially of a noble sheet of water (dotted with small picturesque islands), Avhich serpen tized to a consi¬ derable extent between banks of the most beautiful \ T crdure, till it appeared lost to the admiring eye, in the dark в 4 and
and tangled mazes of a distant gro\*e which skirted the old mansion. This charming seat, notwithstand¬ ing the many beauties it possessed, had long been neglected by its owner, Avho led, as common fame reported, a life of unbounded dissipation and ex¬ tra vagance on the Contiuent. His desertion had caused "it to be almost to¬ tally neglected,* so that many of the ornamental buildings, the proud boast of former days, were falling to decay, and most of the shrubberies Avere о er- groAvn with weeds and rank luxu¬ riance. Though the inhabitants of the ham- let had free access to the demesne, few aA'ailed themselves of the privilege of walking in it, preferring a ramble round their OAvn cultivated fields, or the cottages of their neighbours, to its nearly ruined and solitary grounds. Not
Not so Mr. Greville; he delighted r in the solemn grandeur of its woods, the soothing murmur of its falling; waters, the deep retirement of its twi¬ light groves, so well calculated to tran* cţuillize the passions^ and to peace un- felt before, 11 To purest harmony attune the soul,. i " Wean it from earth, and wing its flight to heaven. %r , Yet was the pleasure resulting from? profound quiet and uninterrupted me¬ ii itat ion frequently imbit tered by sad¬ ness and regret, at beholding ^tíie ruin into which all around seemed hasten¬ ing, and'" indignation at the taste- lessncss of mortal men, who, in their race through life, oerlook the real en¬ joyments of it/' Such tastelcssncss, such folly, he thought; could only be occasioned by &5 a con-
r W\ NOCTüRÑAb VISIT;. a constant residence amidst scenes cf dissipation. f - " Oh ! happy am I, " he Avould ex¬ claim, Avhenever such an idea occurred, *\ Oh ! happy am I at being far removed from s uchrs cenes, from a Avoild Avhose spells, like those of a fell enchantress, haA r e power to blind the judgment, vitiate the taste, destroy the health, and weaken the understanding ! Mis¬ guided by it, its votaries forego real enjoyments, such as exalt the soul, compose tlie feelings, and in- A'igorate the constitution ! Of the truth of this, the owner of this lovely and neglected seat is a strik¬ ing example. Where could he expe¬ rience such pure and permanent plea¬ sures as-Avould result to him from dwell¬ ing among his own people, "enquiring. into their Avants, relieving their dis- 4 tresses,, I \
> tresses, and encouraging then* industry ? Or Iioav could his pride be more nobly gratified than by supporting the honours. of his ancient House with becoming dig¬ nity, and keeping alive the generous, spirit of hospitality Avhich once distin¬ guished it, and made the Avayfaring; and indigent rejoice Avhenever they ap¬ proached its towers? Or where, if he merely consulted the gratification of his senses, could he behold a place „ more calculated to delight and please them?" The family of Mr. Greville consisted of a Avife and four children, a young* man who had been consigned to his care till he became of asce, and a vounsr girl who had been brought up by him and his Avife, as their daughter. There was a mystery attached to the birth of this girl, which Mr. Greviiie в 6" Avould
\
tf Aroîild tiot even explain to his Avife ; and in conseqnehce of his profound 4 secrecy on the subject, nothing could have induced Mrs. Greville to take her under liér -protection, but the advan- tages Ári th which the measure Avas at¬ tended to herselC «Neither she nor Mr. Greville Avere * by any means in affluence at the time of their union ; and some circumstan- ces took place soon after that event, Avhich considerably augmented their pecuniary distresses. They A^ere, in short, in the most deplorable and melan¬ choly situation, Avithout a hope or pro T spect of relief, Avhen Miv Greville ap¬ peared héfore his Avife one morning with a cheerful countenance, and told her Providence had at length gİAen them an opportunity of retrieving their affairs. Mrs. Greville joyfully started •at this intelligence, and eagerly begged an
im expîatmtion, which he gavé her to the "following effect. ; A particular friend, he said, well ac¬ quainted Avith his misfortunes, had found means of informing, him. that if he chose to accept the entire guardian¬ ship of a female infant, who could never, from some circumstances of a peculiarly delicate and distressing na¬ ture, be acknowledged, or publicly protected, by those to whom... she be¬ longed, he should receive with her оде thousand guineas, provided he bound himself in a solemn manner, to bring lier up as his own child, faith¬ fully preserve the secret of her birth, and rest satisfied with the sum received with her, which was all he must ever expect on her account. * \ I would not, " continued Mr. Gre¬ ville, " return any answer to, this pro¬ posal till I had consulted you; should you
you accede to it, comfort and happi¬ ness may, I thmk, again be our's; but should you object to it, be assured I shall not murmur." % To do this, however, was not by any means the intention of Mrs. Greville,; there were few things, indeed, to Avhich she would not have agreed in order to extricate herself from her present em¬ barrassments. She accordingly con¬ sented to take the little offspring of sorrpAv and imprudence to her arms, hinting, however, at the same time, that she did not suppose her husband meant to include her in the number of those from whom he was bound to pré¬ seivé the secret entrusted to him. On this point he instantly undeceived her, declaring, in the promise expected from him, no exception Avould be al¬ lowed; and that as all enquiries rela¬ tive to the parentage of the infant Avould
would be Trui tless, lie trusted she would neither teaze herself or him by making any, once more assuring her, if she did not thoroughly approve of his becom¬ ing the guardian of the child, he would without hesitation refuse bemg so. Mrs. Greville eagerly repeated her consent, hoping and believing she „ should at length win upon the confi¬ dence of her husband, and obtain the information she so ardently wished for;. not so much from curiosity as from some secret suspicions she entertained. The child, who then appeared about a twelvemonth old, and was as beauti¬ ful as a cherub, was brought to her one night by her husband, and with her the sum which had been promised. Freed from, the load which. had so long oppressed thern^ Mr Greville was enabled
enabled tø make such exertions, as soon procured : hhn the Curacy, of Wyefieid, whiţher. he directly repaired, and his , little family, with feelings similar to those which the fatigued- and weather- beateri ч sailor * must experience, who, after a dangerous , and tempestuous voyage, finds himself at length in a haven of security and rest. In this peaceful retirement he. be- came the delighted father of four lovely children, a girl and three boys, be¬ tween whom and the little foundling. (whatever his secret feelings might have been), he made no distinction« But not all the happiness she enjoyed through means of the little Jacintha, her infantine endearments, or affec¬ tionate manners, could attach the un¬ feeling heart of Mrs. Greville to her. The suspicions she entertained concern-? ing her birth, which the obstinate silence
silence of Mr. Greville respecting it tended to strengthen, together Avith the jealousy his fondness for the child in¬ spired, and the envy she felt at her ex¬ panding charms, Avhich threatened ata very early period to totally eclipse tuose of her OAvn daughter, made her hate her Avith the most inveterate rancour. She was mistress of too much art, however, not to be able to conceal this hatred from her husband, before whom she generally assumed a · smiling and tender aspect to Jacintha, Avhich com-* pletely deceived him, and made him, readily believe, Avhenever he heard of her being treated Avith harshness, that she deserved it. 'S 4 ^ Unchecked, therefore, in her cruelty, Mrs. Greville took every opportunity, of mortifying her, as often as she possi¬ bly could, Avithout exciting a şuspi- cion of her oavh malevolent disposition», She
She debarred 'her of the amusements and enjoyments adapted to her age; she made her almost a household slave ; 4 and insinuated to her intimates that she was a girl of a most fro war d and unruly temper; thus endeavouring to excite a prejudice against her which might counteract the effects of her dreaded beauty. * Jacintha had a proud spirit and a feeling heart, and not only lamented but murmured at the inhuman and un¬ merited conduct of her mother; she was too noble-minded, however, to prefer ahy complaint to her father, though she had reason to imagine, from his uniform tenderness towards her (a tenderness which she amply returned), that he would take her part. She was happily of a cheerful disposi¬ tion; her regrets, therefore, though deep,,
deep, Avere not permanent ; and her face,. like to an April mopping, Avas one hour bedewed Avith tears, ,and the next irra¬ diated Avith the sunshine of good- humour: In consequence of this dis¬ position, she grew up, notAvithstanding the severity of her fate, Avith all that sweetness of temper, and loveliness of person, of Avhich she gave so early a promise. Hers Avas
" the faultless form,
«' Shap'd by the hand of Harmony j the cheek, * « Where the live crimson» through the native white * f Soft shooting, o'er the face diiFuses bloom, " And every nameless grace ţ the parted lip» " Like the red rose-bud moift with morning dew, " Breathing delight ; and under ■ ■—> « —. sunny ringlets,' ■ <* The neck slight shaded, and thè swelling breast, «' The look resistless, piercing to the soul, '* And by the soul înformM." The continued or rather increased severity of her mother, Avhich she had hoped,.
hoped, by uniform respect and uncom¬ plaining submission, to subdue, or at least soften, at length began tG exhaust her patience, an4 undermine her re¬ pose; and, in all probability, the wishes of Mrs. Greville would have been acr çomplished, which were to drive her to some act of desperation, but for the in¬ terposition of some unexpected circum¬ stances, which changed the colour of .her fatcj and gave a value to her exist¬ ence she had never before attached to iL·
CHAP.
^■^MM^^WØkMM^""***
vIaaİI * XX·
" Hi? kïndîy ačb bespoke him vvcll» ** To please the gentle maid ; ** Whom a virgin*s soul-fraught sigh u His manly warmth repaid"
9
T Aras the custom for Jacintha and Gertrude to pass a month eA r ery Christ¬ mas at the house of a gentleman, some miles on the other side of Chester^ He had formerly been an inhabitant of Wyeiield; and his daughters, the com¬ panions of their early youth, made it a point* on quitting the hamlet, that they should be indulged απ th ah annual visit from their young friends at that seasons a seasoÄ
a season so particularly devoted, in the country, to pleasure and festivity. Accordingly at the appointed time* the travelling chaise of Mr. Frankland regularly came for the two girls, who always set out upon their little journey with eager delight and expectation. ti From this pleasurable excursion Mrs. Greville would willingly have kept Jacintha, could she have done so with¬ out betraying her malevolent motives for such a measure; but as that was im¬ possible, she was of necessity compelled to submit to it. Among the guests who were assem¬ bled one Christmas at Mr. Frankla nd*s, was the Honourable M<·. Oswald, a young man of high fashion, and emi¬ nently gifted by Nature, both in person and understanding; and who, to intel¬ ligence, animation, and elegance, united tlu»
\
the most captivating manners and in¬ sinuating address. íle soon'distinguished Jacintha by the particularity of his attentions— attentions not a little gratifying to her pride, and highly mortifying to Ger : trude, who did every thing in her power, though without effect, to de¬ prive her of them. * Gertrude at this period was about sixteen (a year younger than Jacintha), and, like her mother, was vain, ambiti¬ ous, seliish, and designing; she was very pretty, perfectly conscious of the power of her charms, and could not bear to have their influence diminished by any rival beauty; she therefore detested Jacintha, by whose superior charms she had often been deprived of that homage she deemed only due to her own, and readily concurred in any scheme which the malice of her mother could su«·- О gest to mortify or distress her. Her raire
jage and envy at the notice Jacintha attracted from OsAvald could Avith dif¬ ficulty be confined to her bosom, and her letters toher mother Avere filled Avith complaints upon the subject. * She was not the only person to Avhom his attentions to Jacintha guA r e un¬ easiness, though from а > т егу different cause. Mr. Frankland quickly obser A r cd them, and knew not Avhether to rejoice at or regret them,. doubtful as he Avas Avhether a man of high birth and for¬ tune would ever think seriously of a girl whose only dowry Avas innocence and beauty, and fearful that they might make such an impression upon her heart, as Avould prove highly detrimental to its peace, if the hopes they Avere calculated to inspire should be disappointed. His perfect esteem for her father made him truly solicitous for her welfare; his present anxiety about her imbittered the
tlie happiness he avo uld o t henvise; lia ve experienced from beholding' his family and friends rejoicing around him.; and lie watched her and Oswald Avit h avi&i* lance which neither amusement nor bu¬ siness could relax. f At length, perceiving; tlţe particula¬ rity of Oswald every -day increase—a particularity Avhich, it Avas but too visi¬ ble,, Avas highly pleasing to Jacintha, he t determined to speak to him upon the subject, and if he found he really had no serious intcutions concerning her, at once to terminate it. In conse¬ quence of this determination, he invited him to his library one morning:, briefly ь \У* * ť explained his reasons for doing so, and entreated him, if his attentions to Mbs Greville were merely dictated bv coni- mon placc gallantry, not to persevere in them, as her heart was too suscepti¬ ble to be trifled with. — " You must be aware," said he, in a good-humoured V0L · *· c mim ner,
ρ- k -V manner, ^ that the impression a dash* ing young fellow like you is calculated to make upon an inexperienced country lass of seventeen, is not very likely to be erased ; I must therefore, my dear young friend/' proceeded he, with a greater degree of gravity, íť request you to desist fiom any further particu¬ larity to her, if mere amusement is your aim; nay, I must do more—I must insist upon it. , She has been con¬ signed to my care by her father (a sa¬ cred trust), and on that account, ex¬ clusive* of any other consideration, I hold myself bound to watch over her, and prevent any conduct under my roof which has a tendency to injure her repose." Oswald, M'ho had not heard him to an end without evincing the utmost > impatience, and making many efforts to interrupt him, now hastily exclaimed, he should consider himself unworthy of the
if w the name of man, if he was capable of trifling with sensibility, or gratifying his vanity at the expence of an inriocent believing girl. In suspecting him of snelt inhuman, such despicable conduct, he protested Mr. Frankland had done him the greatest injustice ; he declared liis intentions relative to Miss Greville were of the most serious, thé most ho* nourable nature ; her artless manners, her bewitching beauty, her seeming unconsciousness of charms which daz¬ zled every beholder, had captivated him almost the first hour he became acquainted with her; Sind he protested he had only delayed informing hér friends of the sentiments >vith which she had inspired him, till he had been more explicit with her concerning them. ·.·..·- Mr. Frankland begged him to consi- - der, ere he went too far to recede with honour, whether herthought his mother c Q would
would appro ve of liis attachment, or giye „it that sanction, Avithout which he Avas ? >С^Д vinced Mr. Grèyjlle avo uld ПеАШГ perinit an union beţAveen him and his daughter. rľOswáld, Avith all the impetuosity of y^nthful passion, eager to remoAT every obstacle to. ¡its happiness,, assured him he-hadnot a doubt of receiving her ap- pr<)feation to:'any measure calculated to promote his felicity. . Ψ , ŕ î * î, ' 1 ' .- -. î ÍJ" "г . ;î< S^ţ}sfîejd on, this head,; Mr. Frankland no longetf-opposed his attention s to Jacinth a ^ <>^ \thfs- con trary, he rejoiced at beholding them, .feeling the purest satisfactioil· qglber happj^ prospects, not ¿>rdv on her oM^accountu but on the ac- count of her family, avIio he hoped and believed Avould be essentially benefited by her union Avith a man so generous and noble as Oswald. ' ....,♦..'. , ι » ,·..-■. v Oswalds
Osvald-s explanation to Mr: Frank- land, was followed by anopenavowahof his passion to Л acinth ι i and an eiitreaty* for permission to wait lipon herîatheıv This Aras a request which it did ivot re¬ quire much eloquence to preA-ail upon her to grant; the impression which-she had made upon Oswald,. Avás not greater than that which hè had madeupoáiíherí 4 heart ;; and, · amidst her most sanguine^ hopes; of'happiness*' (those hopes so na-> t u ra 1 in t lie early season. * of -■. jl ou 1 1) , ; Avhen all, like the luxuriance of шп\- mer, ■ · ^p^ElWfltb fflsb^ fifl&gfiiiäta-ön^Tight and-glowing)^ ^he^hädl tidvé^l fVriWd^ an idea Ш sfielii ^íquisi^ f 1lMöityíW she noAv looked^' fòi%àré tö^ önjt^Äg^ät Ьег-лшШшАА^кЬ^Ыт. t oiív/ ,фт^ги) vi -ud nil. í,.- n - . y Jo« Ы;.-»э ^^îÎ'vuï ív '. Ъ Oswald Avas!? otoligé-J to^atftèndi hist mother, Lady H^nrydOsAV^d^dÉo¿ieí diíifeèly in; Lottäpn,v for* thee purpşsdxitî escorting her LaäyshipíídowÄ^tó^Mr:! FrankJi!|nd^,houiè, lArheroïfiho дгаа ^к^ i - >'i:iy:ú с 3 pected:
L pectedîtp remain till she could provide herself with a suitable mansion in the neighbourhood, it being her intention to reside in future in this part of the country ; his visit» therefore, to Wye- field, was necessarily deferred till his return f rom town ; and, whenever it took place, Mr. Fmnkland promised to be his companion. He and Jacintha departed from the hospitable mansion of this good man, at the same hour, upon their respective routes. Jacintha was deputed by Mr. Frank- land to bø the herald of her pwn good fortune at home ; bvit the particulars she mča|it to içQnimuniçate, rnier^ anticipated by Gertrude, who* inìiber narrative to: her mother, could npf conceal the bit¬ ter! regret she felt at the prospect of Jacintha's happiness—a regret which had poisoned every pleasure -at Miv FrankJanďs, and made her long to.re- turn homcyin order/to,.vent, the,Dvetr; b* i)î / flowings
îloAvings of her malignant and envious heart. The rage and mortification of Mrs> Greville aţ hearing of Jacintha's con^ quest, Avere too violent for description ; - she execrated her mvn folly for ever haA 7 - ing permitted her to quit Wyefieid, and, unable to support the idea of her being so greatly elevated aboye Gertrude, re¬ solved to leave no means untried to ruin her hopesy and destroy her expected happiness, even though at the risk of censure and disgrace to herself. Ύ r *- '■ 4 ^ % t" ^ ' τ * "■ - -í * i ч f Notwithstanding the, superior affect tion she felt for her father, Jacintha thought she coutd be* more unreserved in her communications to her mother^ concerning Oswald, than to him. Mrs. Greville could not resist the opportu¬ nity, which her speaking on the sub¬ ject gave, í)éÍ gratifying hi some de¬ gree her malice ; she treated all she V с 4 said
." Vo^Wŕ^vl Vïsî-r. ^áM^Tittí^ťemp tand -ridicule, affected to doubt thè truth of every assertion, protested she was r sure her vanity had ui- teıTy inisied feeŕ} ámlpímälly; concluded -by iaughîïig ^lèucl mrîfeheîTiGfst sarcastic •т'аЩе^ '' at thè ЙаЫ^яв«^ Mid, òf the ífttóiserrienť it'miisťa#brdbMr:; Oswakk ¿ - ' *' ' и * M he ever utidetetoöd <swe* had beent so .'.£ idS&ilous *as то^ЬеКе vé hi|^ sárioits '- in the áttentíorís-heéaitl héR^b 7 I: ί> "* X ^ ; Г JäcíhthaHfe^^in^ tôthesoiii by this ^htânt>tibuártt^lbefii{^th^' glow; of HidigläW^itô^^^ and she hastily quittedlthe room in or- ~*åØtoWi№&& iMÍ^ea^J^id^void using ^fty^pre^tón%*hich might be ťinplea- kfagjtø&w?m$tih&fi -3?rom this moment ^ha^^âsc^èd^iHa^iteH^^àk-'-î to any ohé of -thé fáitóljH акйёШщ Oswald ; * &ЪеЩ№ røgrettecH Шт ШтЫ miam * si- leiiče^elative^to hh% butsoonMosţthat T%ré^iu§aftti(%iiii^iÆh» triumph sh% * j · l*i ' ■* ! - , - f t ^ л v*- * * .*»■ * »· i : с ■ ή ."· ulirku im ¡тя
should havey lupon lds ; arrival, ; oyer^ malice and illknaturen > ' I y·- To that arrival she looked > forward^ with m i η gled; joy an d exid tarimu ¿Country ingV with: the most resttess impatiences the intervening day sv>:;EÍOm-&r father's total siieuce about him, it was evident tohrjr that horr. mother :hadríetthef'¿ot meiïtioirted him attaH, , orľin \saé'a mariner ? as к made h im. : appear a mere trifleiv In thb>! latter supposition sho - wals not wrong; Mrs. Greville-·had in¬ deed mentioned him to/.her husband/ but in such awav, as led him to believe he Avas more gallant than sincere, and Jacintha one of the vainest and most credulous îçirl-s in the world, for bavin<r attended to his*prbfession& . Had she not dreaded 'an cxplauatoiy letter from Frankland,' which mi<dit lead to a discovery of lier keeping the affair a secret from her husband, and < ■' - ■ ■* с 5 : ' conse-
consequently excite unpleasant suspi¬ cions, Mrs. Greville would have been silent respecting him ; as on his igno¬ rance of Oswald's intentions, principally depended the hopes she entertained of being able, through her machinations, to defeat those intentions. t Ere wè proceed farther in our story, it may be necessary to introduce Oswald more particularly to the notice o£ our readers than Ave have yet done ; this Ave shall- accordingly do in the fol- lowing chapter.
CHAR
»
CHAP. III. ** With such unshaken, temper of the sou!, ** To Ьс -ãv the swdHngïîde of prosperous fortufie^ ^ Is to deserve that fortune* îi* adversity u ТЫ mind grows tough by bui&ttihg the tempest ^ if But in success dissolvings sinks to ease,. u And. loses all her amines**" Egbert Oswald, the professed admirer of Jacintha, was the son of lave'and sorrow* At a very early pe¬ riod his father, the second son of the Marquis of Methwold„ embraced a military life, and, through the interest and opulence of hk family, soon rose high in his profession* In the course с 6 of
of time he was quartered with his regi¬ ment at a fort in Scotland, commanded by an old and particular friend of the arquiss. Major Kirkaldy had passed the best part of his life in the service of his country; but his good fortune bore no proportion to his merits : and, in all probability, -he would have experienced the severest pressure of poverty, but for the interference of the Marquis, whose generous- exertions'in his favour pro¬ cured him the situation he'now eh- joyed. ; Delighted at behèklma' so-near a re- lation of his benefactor's, he took eveiy opportunity of evincing his gratitude to the father by his attention to the son; and Lorcl Henry scarcely knew aııöther hoiňe than his. *'.-·* , . . ...- ■' ... ' But for his frequent visits to the ? " . house
house of the Governor, there wás'.-at stronken .inducement thaıiî the; kindness. and hospitality of th© öld man;: Major ι Kirkaldy had a daughter, vounsr, inno- cent, and beautiful, whom Lord Henry could not behold without, emotion» mu know. Avithout. loving.., "·;·'·;· , ■ - -, * * - .- * - f · * Í Nature liad not. heen - less liberal of her mental and personal-gifts tò him, than to /the- charmi n g;Itosalme;;- and they soon became mutually and passion¬ ately enamoured of each other. More incautious, perhaps, before others .than before her father, their attachment was pretty generally known ere he had an idea of it; but no sooner was-he con¬ vinced of its existence, than he took Lord Henry to task, and entreated him, in the most urgent manner, not tö entail sorrow upon him and his child by perse¬ vering in his attentions to her, except he could prevail .upon the Marquis to sanc¬ tion them;; of which he had.¿himself, but
but little hopes, and without Avhich he sderrittly· vowed never to permit a Con¬ nexion between them. Lord Hetíry was too noble, too inge¬ nuous", :to attempt to deceive h i m .. by saying he had any expectation of ob¬ taining his father's consent to his union Avith Miss Kirkaldy ; on the contrary, he confessed he Avas certain all applica¬ tion on the subject would be unaAľailing; : as he Avell kneAV his father had already fixed upon an alliance for him, on, Avhich his heart Avas bent.— iC Through. means of me or mi ne· then, 7 ' cried ; Major Kirkaldy, * l he shall not be dis^ appointed ; I will not, viper-like, sting the bosoni Avhich has fostered me, or return, kindness with perfidy and üıgra- titude. n Lord Henry argued and entreated;: he endeavoured to prevaU où hjnï to. consent to his mai^iage with his daugh-
ter, by trying to convince hiin that/ however displeased the Marquis might be on first hearing* öf it, the uselesMe^s of such displeasure would soon irtduce him to forego it. -№fr displeasure, however, was but a secondary consideration with Kirkaldy.-·;» he thought infinitely more of the dis¬ honour and ingratitude with which he should be branded, if he encouraged clandestine proceedings, and consented ■ι. to an action so contrary to the wishes of his patron. The eloquence afMkord Henry was therefore ineffectual iş and Kirkaldy at length silenced him by declaring that, dear as his daughter was to him, though all his hopes of hap¬ piness centered in heiy he would ţather s<ee her dead, than aBbw her to act in any mannet which could draw censure upor* her and himself and injure a cSa^ nactec whichi i thrjough all his misfor* tunes, it hfldfltaen hiš study and pcicb
saidfhis< ^Lordship ,miust>i s щ ■ future,· 1 ■ ber satisfied -tø bei reeei yeduierelyas a com- moa visiter atvhis house ; aridi; prötestecb evén those casual vbits yvoiiid be^rorí * hibited, if he ever discovered that he. spoken to his daughter „upon the forbid- denİ5$ul)jirct.b ^; ;* '^-* ■--, : i í :CTø :bér/Ké: was-riot less, explicit than. he hatlrbeen ito her·-lover.;, and,.-with* inexpressible anguish^ iie saw that her- distress fully eqnailed his.. She did not. indeed^ ~ like the i rø pet uo u s Hen ry 5 en -·- treat oťíremoňstrate-;, blither tears, her bitter tears; evinced her feelings, and- affected- thei heart' of *her4l¿ther more» forcibly thah any .language could tiave done. Too laté he regretted the error' he had committed^ in permitting an- intimacy between two beings so formed* to captivate each other » by their congei^ nial loveliness ; and to ithis regret "was* * united a degree of %onder at 'his not : : -^haying'
having before reflected upon thé impru¬ dence of such a measure. * To remove the : mihäjppiness he had been so instrumental in creating,' was now "'his-'most fervent wish-; for Û\İ4 purpose he watched over the lovert and tried, by tenderness and reason;- tó reconcile them to the disappoiùtitien^ öf -their wishes. ! 1 í e scarcely félt indrb oň his daughter's ďďcouitt thãn^on ĹOltl Henry's,- whose ingenuous manners ha# strongly attached hiin to hiš interests^I and whose faded cheek, «whose languid; eye, whose altered mien 3t©0 evktehtlyl . denoted his %vretchedness ; he still con¬ tinued to visitM?at the Governor's, thoLigh not in the mănher he had for¬ merly done, nor was he ever admit¬ ted ¿except other company was pre¬ sent ;: but, notwithstandingi alLthisi caution; and the vigilant eye that was kept upon him, he contrived to address his Rosaline; on the subject nearest his, *■-'*·-*- -·· v ' - heart...
heart. This being cjbcovered by her rather, he was absolutely forbidden any further visits. Still, however, he found means to see her ; those stolen inter¬ views could not long be concealed from her forties ^ud, finding ail his efforts to- prø^e^t^theni ineftectiialf ^ re- solved oá senáhig Rosaline aWäy; and keeping her in* the closest retireineat» till changé of quarter» ^should oblige her lover to quit the fort. This was the only method he cpuld devise to prevent a measure he dreaded, and sup¬ press a flame which coukl only destroy . tie hearts that nourished iţ. Ile accordingly sent Rosaline to & considerable distancé from the fort* with ä caution and secrecy which he trusted would baffle my search or în- ,quiries that might be made atter her. But what can escape the vigilance of love? Lord Henry sooii discovered thei place to which she was conveyed, andi determined
determined on pursuing her thither, and exerting all his eloquence to pre* vail ön her to consent to a clandestine union. The impetuosity of his disposi¬ tion would have made him follow her directly, but that he dreaded exciting suspicion by doing so, and thus defeat¬ ing'his intentions; he therefore re¬ mained a fortnight in the fort after her removal from it, at 'the expiration of which period, under the pretext of m> gent business that required his inune* diate presence in London, he quitted it, having completely deceived Kirkaldy by his conduct, and, accompanied by; a brother officer high iu his; esteem and confidence, proceeded in disguise to the retreat of Rosaline. . . . . < - t .. This was an ancient castle, built upon tlie edge øf an extensive ^яке, environed with high and gloomy moun^ tains, \ and belonging to an old. female relation of Kirkaldy is, who, being of . a most
a most -unhappy;temper, readily under» took the charge of Rosaline* as it gave herran opportunity of seeing another as miserable as she felt herself. Lord, Henry >wus greatly disappointed -'oii reaching this abode, at the very littlb probability there appeared cf having a speedy intervie w with b i& inistrcssi v í 'í- 5 Neither? dèlaysmòr dán gera^libwevcry eoťdd discourage I,ord r Henry ,·^ he took up his abede atı the hut of a peasant,, whoin ; he ^bribed to beenecy i concemaiïg> his guëstsj and, · Щкк - his companáon^ contrøiually hoverad about the cástle r fiieqiiehtly afe; night going upout the water,, which j he understooô ι írom h fe* host,. the windows^ of · Rosaline s/ chains ber overlooked., ,;ι».. ( ϊί· :УЮ İn,-:') ι.-} ľ,~1 Г. 1 .. Г /Mİ. Rosaline^ilr^ the; ^ mean tiráe, írg^ioraut* of the intentåcaibiöf i^herl lever, ignorant of hislvicinity tò her, arid fekrful that? äav eternal separation í had tâkeiù plače* : :; ;; . between:
■between· them, abandoned herself to the most exquisite sorrovy^a sorrow which was not a little heightened by the malice of her cousin, who. perpe¬ tually accused her of folly and indis- cretion ; and not only forbade her from going beyond the precincts of the castle, but prevented her from reading, writing, or, in short, doing any thing which had a tendency to alleviate the wretchedness of her feelings. She received a letter from her father one day, couched in the most affec¬ tionate terms ; but the pleasure his ten¬ derness was calculated to give her, the intelligence he communicated relative to Lord Henry's departure for London completely counteracted. This journey appeared to her a foe it acknowledgment of his determination №;í" ür get;bcr;. and the hope that till then had secretly lurked within her b icast,
breast, now became extinguished. The anguish which she had kvitli difficulty suppressed befóte her unfeeling rela¬ tive, who, she knew, would triumph, ■■í ■* at beholding it, wns freely indulged in the privacy of her chamber. Unable to sleep on rétiring to it for the nights she stationed herself at an open win- dow, from » whence she could observe the waves of the lake, now silvered by the beams of a full-orbed moon, rolling towards the rocky shore, against which they broke with a melancholy murmur, ! not undelightful to thé pensive mind, whilst, with a sound not less dismal, the cold breeze, which lifted her long tresses from her breast, whistled through the dark heath of the surrounding mountains, Tliis wild and solemn scene was per¬ fectly suited to the feelings of the un¬ happy Rosaline.—" Here," cried she, " amidst
" amidst this solitude, once so hateful tome,; I could now-wish for ever tore- main ; for .the gaieties of life can retain no charms for. a heart lacerated by sor¬ row aiid disappointment." Whilst thus indulging her melancholy, she sud¬ denly heard the dashing of oars, and the next instant beheld a boat approach¬ ing the castle ; she лгав somewhat sur¬ prised on observing the rowers pausing for some minutes as if in consultation, and felt still more so at perceiving a man leap from the boat the moment it drew close to the shore, and hastily approach her window, Rosaline in vol untarily retreated, now recollecting, for the first time, that her white dress rendered her a conspi¬ cuous object; but she was soon re¬ called—recalled by the voice, the im¬ passioned voice of Henry· The rap- tures of that moment cannot be describe«! ;
described ; she bent from the window, she breathed forth the tenderness of her heart in language scarcely less ardent than his own, and gave him every as- ^ sürance he could desire of her love being unabated. These assurances however, could not satisfy the ena¬ moured, Henry ; he_ implored, he in¬ sisted upon her giving him a convincing proof of her regard, by her putting herself immediately under his protec¬ tion. * Theinelmation of Rosaline seconded the entreaties of Lord Henry ; but she shrunk, trembling and affrighted, from the-idea.of disobeying her father, not but that she thought his notions of ho¬ nour much too ritrid. Lord-Henry, finding she hesitated, and maddened at the thought of losing her, knelt down, and took a solemn oath to quit tlie regiment he then served in, and exchange
■-■ 'No.çA^AbtV^siT^-r'' ;. 'l - f " ' - ''i-'- ""л--' ex elmuse ihto one which -.-should be constantly upon ^ordgi^;søryite,v- : .йсЛе. did höt comply with í Bis! wishes; * %-
llosaUiie/krïèw his disposition well ; 'şhş-:bţ^^..^ţ r ^%ţ. he^ had so solemnly voweďŕ , he would i às strictly^^ perforine: this thi^éat; thérèroìe;: vaiiquished lier respliitMi, fe ;ete^oally-;øjpaø hinij; ; ^eyery '. .c-t^^ail^^ Щп1Т лшШ hot регШЙ^^ her to defer .v her él^^en^l^^ hŕesent mo- mehť!; Jhe ^íttdow was ťoo ίύφ to admit ^^^ th^ugbíhjŕdOors of the castìé were locked, íhf keys rerøajne^vf iţlriu tì^> . μΐ; д few îniniiites, therefore, shç reg^iť- r éd her liberty, ancí found herself withm the arms of! her ;1qv№ She was inn^eçUatè^r cíonveyed to the cottage where he bdğedi Ίώ(ί the hdrses¿ M Ayhicji he!and Jils coin^anlon. tráyèlJed thi^ër^ being ^irectty s^t off to att inn near the; fort. To vol. ι. β i> 'this-
'- I \.,I^
this the Chaplain of the regiment received a private summons from Lord Henry; and, as soon as the marriage ceremony was over, he waited upon Kirkaldy, by his Lordship's desire/ to acquaint him with the event which· had taken place. , Kirkaldy received this intelligence 4vith regret and indignation,, and was deaf to every solicitation in behalf of his daughter. Rosaline was deeply affected by his resentment, notwithstanding Lord Henry repeatedly assured ha\ he was convinced her father would not long remain inexorable. Happy would he have felt himselr) could he have said the same of his oy*~n parent ; but, alas î he had soon reason to fear ail applica¬ tions to him for forgiveness would prove unsuccessful—a fear which time too * fatally confirmed. Tlie Marquis, though capable of generous
generous and even noble actions, was selfish and obdurate in the extreme; 1 whatever services, therefore, he ren* dered to others, he took care should be such as could not interfere with his own interests, to which, at any time, he would unhesitatingly have sacri¬ ficed his dearest friends. His ambition Was not inferior to his avarice, and his pride surpassed his obduracy ; nor was there any thing short of a dishonoura¬ ble action, which could prevent him from gratifying his ruling propensities. He was, besides, a man of the most implaca¬ ble disposition ; and of him, with truth, it might be said, as At \vas of the cele¬ brated Sixtus, that he never forgave an injury, nor forgot an obligation. His eldest son, in conformity to his wishes, had formed an early alliance with a lady of high rank and considerable fortune, and he hacì long meditated a connexion equally splendid and advantageous for ids second ; great, therefore, was his d S3 disap-
disappointment on hearing of Henry's , imprudent marriage—a disappointment which some particular circumstances considerably heightened. The young lady destined for the partner of Lord Henry, had been left under the sole guardianship of the Marquis by her father, with his express wishes to have her married into the fa¬ mily of his Lordship. These wishes met the warm concurrence of the Marquis, who only waited till she had attained a proper age, to settle all the preliminaries of her union with Lord Henry, of whose ready acquiescence to such a measure he had not the smallest doubt. In consequence of his confidence on this head, and k nov; ing, as his son was wholly dependant on him, л he could make what terms with him he pleased, he had not scrupled to make use of a large
large portion of his destined daughter- in-law's fortune, for the purpose of purchasing a fine estate in his neigh¬ bourhood, belonging to a ruined family, by the possession of which his influ¬ ence would be greatly increased in the county. The marriage of Lord Henry compelled him to the disagreeable ne¬ cessity of parting with this highly valued acquisition, in order to reim¬ burse his ward. His regret, vexation, and rage, at being compelled to do so, were too violent for description ; in the bitterness of his soul, he renounced Lord Henry, and imprecated the hea¬ viest curses upon his own head if ever he forgave him. Not satisfied with wreak¬ ing his vengeance upon his son, by withdrawing the income he had allowed him from his entrance into life, he resolved on punishing, to the utmost of his power, the unhappy Kirkaldy, whom he considered * the treacherous abettor of his son's disobedience· To . d 3 do
do this he accordingly set his -wits to work, and soon succeeded in getting hini deprived of his command, which depri- * vatjon left him utterly destitute of pro-.. vision. V The ruin which she had drawn upon tlie grey head of her father, over¬ whelmed Lady Henry with all the hor¬ rors of despair, and her life was endan¬ gered by her anguish. 'Solicitations were now unnecessary to obtain the for¬ giveness of her father—he knew the dis¬ position of his child too well, not to con- 4 ceive-the wretchedness she must feel at the Mea of having injured him ; he therefore hastened to her, to comfort, to revive her, to assure her, ás he folded hér to his forgiving heart, his sufferings woiild be cheerfully borne, if he might hope to see her yet in the possession of the happiness she merited. Young» inexperienced, and therefore sanguine, Lord Henry flattered himself he
.. he should be-able, through the interest of his friends, to procure Kirkaldy a situation equal to that which he had lost through his means. But, alas ! he soon found' his expectations were fal¬ lacious, soon discovered that the dis- ' carded son of the Marquis of Mefh- wold was a veiy different being in the estimation of the world, from him who had been his avowed favourite. All he could therefore do, was to allow him a stipend from his pay, on which the old man retired to a remote farm-house, with content in his countenance, but anguish in his heart—anguish not щ- spired by his own misfortunes, but those he saw impending over the bejngfc he most lovede í In less than a year after his mar* riage Lord Henry's regiment was or¬ dered to America, where the flames of war then raged with violence ; thither he and liis wife accompanied it, and о 4 there-
i- .-;_,, ¿¿Ж·**; _ v„ - - - , — t ...... " , . -ч_*>- there he experienced many hardships besides those attached to his profession, \ and had the misery of burying several lovely children ; Egbert, of a nume¬ rous offspring, alone survived, and from this circumstance, was perhaps doubly endeared to his parents. At length an unfortunate wound compelled Lord Henry to abandon a military life; and, having retired on half-pay, he re¬ turned to his native country, consider¬ ably injured in his health. Ti . Kirkaldy immediately repaired to his unhappy children, determined, let " weal or woe betide," never more to leave them. The heavy expences which attended the re-establishment of Lord Henry s health, involved him so deeply in debt, that, in order to avoid a prit· sön, he was reduced to the sad alterna¬ tive of disposing of his half-pay. " Want,, worldly want," now''menaced the wretched couple with all its horrors ; , nor
nor did they see any means of avoiding the " meagre fiend," Lord Henry's re- ncAved applications to his father and brother haAİng proved as fruitless as his former ones ; Avhen Providence, that ever Avakeful eye Avhich looks with pity on the feeble toil of mortals lost to hope, relieved their distress. As Lord Henry Avas Avalkİng in a me¬ lancholy manner one day through the Park, ruminating on his deplorable situation, he was suddenly accosted by a gentleman Avho had been a school¬ fellow, and a favOurite companion of his in the early part of his life, and who, at the time he was soliciting his supposed friends in behalf of Kirkaldy, was absent in a diplomatic capacity j He Avas a man of the most amiable dis¬ position, and strongly attached to Lord Henry ; tire delight lie expressed at their unexpected meeting, and the de¬ licate inquiries he made into his ρ ã situation,
situation, sooii drew from the o'er- W' \ ' ,, fraught heart of his unfortunate friend, a full disclosure of his griefs. His looks more than his words evinced his sympathy, for real sensibility is never verbose or ostentatious : but in a few days he gave a convincing proof of the interest and compassion the narrative had excited, by getting Lord Henry appointed to a very beneficial employ¬ ment under Government, and in the office over which he himself presided. Fortune now seemed inclined to re¬ compense Lord Henry and his family for all her former unkindness to them ; arid to crownTiis happiness, his son grew up iri mind, person, and manners, all that, his fondest wishes could desire. Lord Henry, who, to the knowledge ot the scholar, united the elegance of the courtier, superintended his education himself, and gave to it that complete finishing
it finishing which common tuition calk never effect. All uneasiness relative to the future- destiny of this beloved son was done away by his generous friend,, who, un*- asked, gave a positive assurance of pro¬ viding; for him in the civil line.. This, destination was highly gratifying to the tenderness of Egbert's family, who. could ill have borne the idea of a sepa¬ ration from him :. but how uncertain i& human happiness ! In the midst of his felicity, the noble patron, the disinte¬ rested friend of Lord Henry was, snatched from the world, leaving un¬ fulfilled his intentions in favour of Egbert. Ere Lord Henry or his family had in any degree recovered from the shock occasioned by his sudden death, a message came to inform him his ser^ vices were no longer required by Go-* vernment. This unexpected dismission from an office, which he had filled with J> 6 such
ч. stich honour to himself, and benefit to others, Lord Henry could only impute to the inveterate rancour of the Mar- quis, whose malevolence, he had reason to believe, time had rather increased thandiminishc'l, and"whoni he knew to be intimately acquainted Avith the successor of his lamented friend. Be¬ neath this stroke—a stroke which level¬ led all his hopes and expectations in the dust, his spirits utterly failed; a deep and corrosive melancholy fastened upon his soul-^that silent, that affecting melancholy which, instead of venting itself iň sighs ör exclamations, "whis¬ pers the о er-fraught heart, and bids it break." -■ The endearments of his wife and son, far from allaying, rather added to his misery ; as every proof of their love heightened his affection for them, and rendered more poignant his regret at being unable to administer to their comforts.
periods Шз in hiä twentieth year
f r Öf fresh Jind statnïess*youth y
** İn voices well divuîgM j irte, learn't!, aritî valiant $ *.« And in dimension» and the shape of nature, ** A gracious perion. ** Thouglï Lmâ Henry could not shake off tlie gloom wbiclx oppressed him, he ínade severy exertion in his power to procure a provision for his family : but, alas 1 all liis a^ tual, though made reason to hope they would prove suc¬ cessful-— t о those whom i n the zenith of his prosperity he had ser yed— -to thöSjB whom he had lifted írom indigence and obscurity into ease ща afìluence. * Those early in s tances of perfidy and ingratitude gave Egbert (whose notions of irieridshrp and honour were ¿nth şiastic) a disg^
he could not overcome without tlie greatest difficulty; and increased the predilection he had always felt for a country life. Like the poet, he thought— * € Oli ! knew he but his happiness—of men " The happiest he, who far from public rage, u ..... .·.·*♦· With a choice few retired, €€ prinks the pure pleasures of the rural life/* Some pretended friends,, more cruel: than others (for to keep alive expecta¬ tions, which wé never mean to realize, is of all cruelties.the most atrpcious), de¬ luded Lord Henry with, false hopes ; and in attending upon them, the sum he had saved while in office, dwindled away almost unpeEceived., •r Debts weise·. -then unavoidably con*« traeted, and a prison at last became his home ! Despair now took entire possession of him,, and he rapidly approached that goa£
г goal whieh wus to terminate his misfor¬ tunes* The anguish of Lady Henry at this period was too great for description. Ths misery of IosmHI the man she adored—a misery of itself sufficient to overwhelm her, was heightened by her inability of procuring him the necessaries he required ; she shrunk with horror from his ghastly looks, and with diffi¬ culty could prevent the wild screams of sorrow and despair from bursting from her heart, Egbert struggled with his feelings in- order to support her, and sooth the last - moments of his father ; these moments were spent in fervent prayer for the wel¬ fare of his family ; and with the sigh which released his suffering spirit, he feebly articulated aJblessing on them.— * ' My dear child, " cried the venerable Kirkaldy to his daughter, when all was over, " let the idea of the happy ex¬ change he has made, reconcile you to * 6 his·
'V his loss. Think of the happiness he * now enjoys in the mansions of hea> r en— in the bosom of his God; and cease to regret his release from want, pain, and confinement. " The unhappy Rosaline Avas conveyed from the prison to lodgings almost as wretched as her destiny. As soon as the first transports of grief Avere over, she recalled her scattered thoughts; and, reflecting on the duty she owed her son, resolved once more to try and soften the heart of the Marquis, to whom she had written several times, though without effect, during the fatal illness of her husband. She accordingly Avrote a most affect¬ ing letter, describing the sufferings of the unfortunate Lord Henry, and the deplorable situation of herself and son ; and concluded by entreating hini, in the most energetic, manner, to extend the
the hand of pity and compassion to them in this their deep distress, and surler the death of her lamented hus¬ band to expiate the offence which had provoked his resentment. In due time she received an answer, which she opened with mingled emo¬ tions of hope and fear : but,, alas 1 how soon did every pleasing idea va¬ nish before its contents, which briefly stated, that whatever the sufferings of Lord Henry had been, he had richly de¬ served them ; this consideration, there¬ fore, precluded the commiseration which a reflection upon them might otherwise have excited. All solicita¬ tions on her own behalf, she was posi? ti veiy assured, would for ever prove unavailing, as he (the Marquis) had solemnly determined never to relieve the being, to whose artifices he imputed the destruction of a son, who never in the slightest instance had infringed the
'"•'oŞ Ί -y--; -щ^щЩАъ^Хе-рк''' the duty $nd respect he owed Ыт г tilt his unfortunate acquaintance with her commenced* : * - v ш T - f ^ 1 Eut, as he thought it a pity the in¬ nocent should suffer for the guilty, he consented to také her son undernis pro¬ tection, provided he bound himselfân a solemn manner never more to have any intercourse with her : but except he agreed ; to this measure—except they both subscribed to the arti¬ cles of án eternal separation, -and rigidly observed them, he declared his unalterable resolution never to notice or befriend him. He desired them both* bot espeeiaUy Lady Henry, to deliberate ere an answer was returned to his letter,, as by that answer his future conduct towards her son would be irre- 1 ŕ- '' vocãbly determined* u Oh monster of barbaritv !" cried f- > ^ tlie agonized Rosaline, as she dropped the
- ^ ~- - " jť , , ' - the lefter from her treinbling hands, ť< will nöthiiïg appease thy ^unrelenting vengeaneej but my draining the cup of sorrow to the very dregs?"-—Her soul recoiled from the idea of parting tfith Egbert, her joy, her hope, her comfort: but when she reflected on the ipisery-r-the obscurity she would doom him to by retaining him, she re¬ solved, like the scriptural mother, to resign her child, rather than devote him to destruction. When the letter of the Marquis, and the determination of his motber, were made known to Egbert, grief, indigna¬ tion, л ап4 surprise for a minute sus¬ pended his faculties ; then suddenly falling on his knees, he grasped the hands of Lady Henry with vehemence, and with uplifted eyes, called upon God to renounce him if ever he deserted her, Kirkaldy,
■\ f ι * T Kirkaldy, in a transport öf joy, em· braced him, rapturously exclaiming-*- 'f Ί knevý, I knew how my boy would act V' while his mother, falling upon his bosom, wept aloud, and with her tears mingled prayers to heaven for his preservation. Egbert insisted upon answering the Marquis himself, which he did to the following effect.
to" the; marquis of methwolu. " Η Γ LORD, Л* Itdoes not require the least deli- T г" * * beiútiön to answei' your letter ; the feel¬ ings of nature prompt an immediate reply> and urge me to tell you that your piOtectibn^ on the terms it is offered, I utterly reject. íť Could I accept it upon such terms, I should be unworthy öf a much higher / protection
protection than your sr— the protection of a j ust aiid 'merciful God, who pu¬ nishes, not rewards, the violation of duty. To him, to that gracious Being, €l Who doth tlie ravens feed, * c Yea, providently caters for the sparnnv/' I «commit mv cause/ not doubting his -especial care. J ___ i. " Rest satisfied, my Lord, with an assurance of never more being troubled with solicitations on my account. ** The spirit of my father» which» I think, " Is within me/' prompts me to exertion, not entreaty ; it points out tlie road of virtue and honour as the only road to happiness, and makes me think lightly of anJrtoiP which can conduce to the ease of a parent,
parent, whose virtues render me proud, and give me a passport to* the favour and countenance of the world. ei EGBERT OSWALD." " All hope of succour from the Mar¬ quis beŕng at an end, and extreme dis¬ tress urging an immediate exertion, Egbert sallied forth one morning to the house of a merchant whom his father had essentially served; and who, though he had never in any degree returned the obligations conferred upon him by Lord Henry, had never wholly declared a disinclination to do so. Egbert now resolved to put his sin- ccrity to the test ; lie was received in a, manner which gave rise to the most flattering expectations. But scarcely had he entered upon the pur¬ port
- -■ ™* ^ ŇOCTO акл L '- vrši*· 71 port of hisVisit, when the merchant inteiTUptóá hím to say be had for ale¬ rai days been making a strict inquiry after him, as he had something of Ш- portancc to communicate.' He then briefly informed him, that by the last packet from Jamaica, he had received - ¿- an account of the death of Colonel JVţorelaiid, together v.ith his will,, to Avhich he himself A\ r as appointed sole executor, and by AVhieli Egbert became entitled to the sum of ten thousand pounds; two to be paid immediately from a deposit in one of the English banks, and the remainder as 'soon as the Coloneľs afíairs Avere finally settled in Jamaica. This gentleman, from whom Egbert received so unexpected a bequest, Avas the identical officer avIio had assisted Lord Henry in carrying off Rosaline. In the course of time he accompanied his regiment to the *Yest Indies, where he
.'72- : hé spori Jformed a matrimonial con- nexion with thè i#idow of a rich planter. Upon her demise, which xas not till mapy years aftef their mar- '?iage¿ he was preparing to return to England, when an illness seized him, which the physicians at once pro- '* nounced mortal. \ '- " He gave up, therefore, all hopes of ever revisiting his native country, and immediately set about arranging his worldly aöairs. , The merchant whom he had an- ; pointed his executor, was the person who transacted all his affairs in Eng> land, and to whose care his letters to Lord Henry, with .whom, he kept up a constant correspondence, were coh- ■ signed—letters expressive of the warnir est friendship, and sttongest^ anxiety about Egbert, his godson and пщтге- JS íl K t» : , " .:. Not
Not so much on his own account, as on his mother's and her venerable father's, did Oswald rejoice at this sud¬ den .reverse of fortune. The feelings of Lady Henry on hear¬ ing it, can better be conceived than described; yet, amidst the happiness it imparted, a sudden pang of sorrow seized her heart at the idea of its com¬ ing too late to be shared by her hus¬ band. She soon, however, recollected herself, and, checking the tears of use¬ less 'regret, bent with gratitude and resignation to the will of Heaven. It was her ardent wish to quit Lon¬ don immediately—the scene of her most exquisite miseries, and which continually revived the keen remem¬ brance of them. The merchant, who was now become her zealous friend, no sooner learned vol i. e thb
· vTstf. " this wish; and that slie J)referred a residence iri one of the remote counties to any bordering upon the metropolis, than he proposed giving Egbert an in¬ troductory letter to his brother-in-law, Miv Frankland, who lived in Cheshire, and in whose neighbourhood'he under- stood there were some pleasant dwell¬ ings to be let. This proposal was ac¬ cordingly accepted, and he arrived about the commencement of Christmas at Mr. Frankland 's, who received him with the utmost courtesy and polite¬ ness. to Tlie pleasures of his hospitable man¬ sion did not render Oswald forgetful of the purpose for which he had visited the country ; but he remained so un¬ decided in his choice of a habitation, that he at length determined to leave the decision to Lady Henry. This de¬ termination being declared to Mr. Frankland, he invited her and the Major
Major to his house in the most pressing manner ; and Oswald, as has been already mentioned, went up to London to attend them in their journey from that capital. Lady Henry was neither selfish not aspiring ; she had suffered indeed too severely from the passions of avarice and ambition in the bosom of another, to give any encouragement to them in her own, and had consequently no objection to her son's union with Jacintha, but that which arose from the extreme youth of both parties ; this, however, he contrived to over-rule, . and it was agreed his happiness should not be deferred. On arriving 1 at Mr. FrankhuidV. they found him confined to his bed by the gout. Oswald, too impatient lo wait for his recovery, set out for Wye* field with his servant, lie stopped at R 2 the
■г the imi, from whence he wrote ashore letter to Jacintha, acquainting her with his arrival, and begging lier to 1ix an hour for his waiting upon her father. Mrs. Greville and Gertrude were - both* upon the watch ; the latter received the letter from his servant, whom she immediately dispatched, in order to prevent his being seen by any •of the rest of the family, with a verbal message, importing that a written an¬ swer would be sent after him. She and her mother then retired to a cham¬ ber, where/ locking themselves in, they contrived, according tö a pre¬ viously concerted plan, the following letter.
то
ΊΟ THE HON. EGBERT OSWALÛ. ťí SIR, f< Trifling as this letter may make me appear in your eyes, I prefer the imputation of lightness or inconstancy, to the still more shocking imputation of perfidy or ingratitude. " In short, Sir, to be explicit, I must inform you that I deceived both you and myself when I imagined I re¬ turned your passion ; time and reflexion have since convinced me 1 never did—■ never can make such a return to it as it merits. ťť Regard, therefore, for your own happiness (for surely very little, if indeed any, can be expected in a mar¬ ii 3 ried ¿w
ried state Avithout mutual affection and good-will) will, 1 doubt not, in¬ duce 3 T ou to exonerate me from- every promise I made you. u But from your generosity I expect even more than this—I expect you Avili keep the contents of this letter, anil your visit to Wyefieid, a profound se¬ cret. Were either known, I should be overwhelmed with the resentment and reproaches of my friends, whose anxiety to see me advantageously settled, avo uld never permit them to pardon my rejec¬ tion of proposals so infinitely superior to any they had a right to expect for me. "'When you reflect upon the can¬ dour Avith which I have dealt towards you, I am sure you Avili alioAV I have some right to expect your compliance with my wishes in this respect. "How
. <i How many of my sex, situated as I am, would have yielded to the allurements of your wealth, and with¬ out eve α feeling for you those sentiments of esteem which I must ever entertain, have accepted yom hand, and thus en¬ tailed upon you the exquisite misery a mind of sensibility must ever expe- - ricuce in an union where love is not reciprocal L " But I scorn duplicity, and have solemnly determined never to give my hand unaccompanied by my heart. Could the impulses of that heart be re¬ gulated by the judgment, be assured you would have received a very differ¬ ent letter from me : but, alas ! incli¬ nation, like imagination,, is uncon* troulable. " I cannot conclude without en¬ treating you to make Mr, Frankland (ta whom, upon consideration, I can- £ 4 not:
not object to your shewing this letter) promise not to mention to my parents any thing relative to the sentiments with which you honoured me, or the intentions- whieh you formed in conse¬ quence of those sentiments ; as his drop¬ ping a hint upon the subject would involve me in the greatest wretch¬ edness.. ťí Poor Gertrude, by my desire, has carefully kept the secret. Oh ! would to heaven she had been the object of attraction, then— r But I forget what 1 am saying; the confidence of a sister should be as sacred as it is dear. u Farewe!, Sir!—Accept my wishes for your happiness, and do me justice in believing them sincere. I had nearly omitted saying, that had I known where to address you, I should not have deferred to the present moment ι , , . t\\%
the explanation I have uoav givenjrou ; and notwithstanding which, I trust you will believe I must ever remain * ' Your obliged and obedient servant, <c JACINTHA GREVILLE^" Feb. 6, 17—.
This letter Avas so nice an imitation: of Jacintha's hand, that had OsAvald even been Avell acquainted Avith it, he could not have detected the forgery. Mrs. Greville dispatched it by one of her sons, Avhom she bribed to silencer concerning it. í * л * щ t- Oswald perused it with emotions which shook liis frame. Rage», disap¬ pointment, and regret raised ...a whirl¬ wind in his bosom Avhich nearly mad¬ dened his brain. He called Jacintha cruel, inconstant, deceitful, jilt,-triflcjv £ & coquette ;
coquette; in short, by every term which indignation or resentment could sug¬ gest In the height of his passion he resolved on going to the house, and openly upbraiding her with the perfidy and fickleness of her conduct : but pride interposed to check this resolve, by representing the probable triumph it might afford her to witness his distress. He raved about the room ; he tore from his neck a locket containing her hair, and flung it into the fire ; this was fol¬ lowed by a miniature of himself, which he had had drawn in London to present to her : and had some other ornaments . he brought down on purpose for heiv been within his reach, there is no doubt they would have shared the same fate. The violence óf his feelings at length exhausted him, and he flung himself' nptm a chair completely overpowered. ffîıe frenzy of passion now began to subside; and în proportion as it x diminished,.
diminished, reason returned, and repre¬ sented to him the superior misery be* must have felt if Jacintha*. swayed by interested motives, had yielded to* his addresses without being able to* return his affection« He dwelt upoa her words ; he considered how many of her sex, if in a similar situation to Iter's, would have acted,, as she herself' said, ina very different manner; and. to a love of pleasure, so natural for the* young and beautiful to experience,. have sacrificed their feelings, regard¬ less of the miser ν such a sacrifice m i ah U entail upon hearts more susceptible than their own.. He began to think her conduct, far from meriting his censure* or reproaches, deserved his praise, lib. gratitude, his admiration;. thi& idea, however,- though it subdued his resent¬ ment, did not lessen his unhappincss:. for the more amiable he considered the object whom he had lost,, the more poignant liis regret for that loss became. E 6 Oni
■fl^ŕ*· - ··. * . On a sudden he bethought him o€^ trying; what time and perseverance would effect ; but this was an idea not more hastily conceived than repelled, as one bordering upon meanness, and which, would justly, expose him to con¬ tempt and ridicule. Starting up with all his former violence, be solemnly vowed to make every effort in his power, to drive her from his remembrance*;. and as a proof of his sincerity, snatched up her torn and trampled letter, and thrust-it into the fire. : He now,. for the first time, thought of the strange, remarks which might· and would in all probability be made,, when the settings of the lockets were found. No sooner, did this idea occur, than he resolved to regain them; and for this purpose had nearly raked the whole fire out, when the landlord entered to lay the cloth for dinner (.which Oswald had ordered, on . ,' « receiving
receiving no immediate invitation to Mr. Greville's).. In utter amazement and dismay at the strange employment,' and disordered looks of his guest, the landlord retreated instead of ad vancing, staring Avildly all the time· OsAvald blushed excessively at being discovered in such a situation ;. and covering his face Avith his handker- chief, said, in a voice scarcely articu¬ late, he had dropped something into the fire. The landlord upon this A T entured to come forward, and offered his ser» vices; but as quickly retreated, on Oswald's again seizing the poker, which, like himself, was a little heated by the exercise it had undergone ; and, de¬ scending to the kitchen, enquired from the groom Avhether his master Avas a gentleman in his right Avits ? This inter* rogation being ansAvered to his satisfac¬ tion, he once more ascended the stairs. By this time Oswald had recovered the settings fi
\
*
settings, and flung them into a pond beneath the window of the apartment he occupied ;— dinner was served with¬ out his touching it ; and the landlord, from this circumstance, and his taking a wijd and solitary path across the fields at the back of the inn, in preference to the high road, began again to be a little doubtful about him. Frankland was not more astonished than irritated on hearing of the con¬ duct of Jacintha. It was some minutes- ere he could give credit to it ; and the invectives which Oswald uttered against her, in the first paroxysm of rage and disappointment, were not more violent; than his. He cursed her for a j ilt ; swore she deserved to be held up to public scorn and contempt ; prayed fervently she might never be married, except it: was to age* decrepitude, and ill-nature ; and finally concluded by protesting: he would let her father know how she
had acted, that she might in some degree he punished. Here Egbert inter¬ posed, and preA'ailed, though not Avith¬ out difficulty, on the old gentleman to. drop this resolution. Oswald could not disclose the con¬ duct of Jacintha to his mother Avith¬ out the utmost pain and reluctance. He had represented her as not more amiable than tender, nor less Avarmly attached to him than he Avas to her ; and now to retract this assertion, to acknoAvledge he Avas either deceÍA*ed himself, or had attempted to decch-è others, was a humiliation he could scarcely support. The indignation and resentment which Lady Henry felt on hearing of Jacintha's rejection, exceeded even her * surprise, as she could not help believing it occasioned by a superior offer. Ä short time, however, served to convince
4 ¡V j i V her this opinion Avas erroneous ; and she then began to think of her in a more favourable light. While Oswald Avas relating the con¬ duct of Jacintha to his mother, his pride impelled him to assume an air of composure : but, notAvithstanding this appearance of-serenity, she had suffi¬ cient penetration ţo perceive he Avas deeply affected by it ; and that it Avould require time, as Avell aş the efforts of reason, to heal the Avouncls Avhich his disappointment relative to her had inflicted. She pretended, howeA r er, to believe the contrary, and that it would be an easy matter to conquer an attach¬ ment which Avas hopeless : thus stimu¬ lating him to the exertions she deemed necessary, by declaring her conviction of his being equal to them. Happily for Oswald, Mr. Frankland had not mentioned his proposals-to JacinthiL
Jacintha to any one of his family ; it being a maxim with him never to speak on such matters till they came to a final issue. No ridicule or ill-natured remarks upon his unexpected disap¬ pointment, were therefore to be dreaded. While he was makin«: every effort to forget Jacintha, she was dwelling upon his idea, recalling every word which had passed between them, and count¬ ing with restless anxiety the minutes which were to bring him to her. When three weeks elapsed without her either seeing him, or hearing any tidings of him, she began to grow uneasy: but when another fortnight wore away without bringing any intel¬ ligence respecting him, her disquietude became almost intolerable, aggravated as it was by the malice of her mother and Gertrude, who took occasion from time
time to time to advert upon the errors and mistakes into which vanity and self-conceit are apt to lead one. To terminate her suspense concerning Oswald, Jacintha would have written to one of the Frank lands, could she have sent or received a letter without the knowledge of her mother ; but as that was impossible, she was compelled to remain in ignorance of the cause which made him procrastinate his visit. She was sitting at work one morning with Mrs. Greville and Gertrude, when one of the boys came running in with a letter for her. The moment she cast her eyes upon it, she saw it came from Miss Frankland, and instantly became agitated ; scarcely knowing what she did, but unwilling to betray the emo¬ tions it might excite, she started up> and was hastily quitting the 1001% when
when the stern voice of her mother oblhred her to resume her seat. * Still, however, she hesitated to open the letter, which Mrs. Greville per¬ ceiving, told her, if she did not chuse to take that trouble, she would herself doso, pretending to be anxious to know how the Franklands were. Jacintha accord¬ ingly broke the seal with a trembling hand; and, with a throbbing heart, read to herself the following lines.
" DEAR JACINTHA, 4 ť 'Tis really quite provoking that vour visits to our house are limited to so short a-period as a month ; had you staid a little longer, you would have been quite delighted with the agreeable addition which was made to our domestic circle. Lady Oswald arrived exactly ten day»
days after your departure ; she is a eharm* ing woman,; notwithstanding the deep- impression which sorroAV has 4 made upon her mind as Avell as countenance. But I need not descant upon her praise, as. I Гансу you have already heard her panegyric from lips A r ery eloquent upon the subject, and, if I do not mistake,, upon many other subjects also. . * ť В ut I cannot say too much about the t avo Miss Merediths ; they come from, North Wales, and are young, lovely, acéomplished, and lively : I assure you Mr. OsAvald does ample justice to their charms, particularly to those of the eldest, who is quite the object of his idolatry. I attacked him about this the other day, and asked him how he could so soon forget my little village- friend ? I assureyou he appeared greatly confused by my question, and blushed to the very eyes ; but soon recovering from
• /
NOCTUlťtf^L visit! 93 .r-rf" from his embarrassment, he said, in that soft and insinuating manlier, Avhich he knows so Avell how to assume, them Avere-some remembra ncesftoo dangerous to peace to be encouraged. " In short, like too many of his sex, I fancy novelty has resistless charms for him: butenougliofaperson Avhom I have no reason to inumine mv friend thinks of hut as an agreeable man :—were the case otherwise, I flatter myself she would not haA'C concealed the secret from me. " I should haA r e Avritten sooner but for the continual hurry and bustle in which I hav*e been „kept e ver since your departure; you Avili therefore, I hope and- believe, excuse a silence Avhich did not proceed from any diminution of regard or friendship : and as a proof of your doing sOj ansAver this letter directly, as we are all anxious to hear how
how our friends aţ Wyefieid are, We beg them to accept our united regards, and best wishes for their health and lıappiness; and believe me, dear Jacintha, ever yours "a. frankland." Februari/, -——.
The shock this letter &ave Jacintha, was too great to be expressed ; but the reelings it excited she endeavoured to stifle, in order to. avoid the ill-natured sarcasms she knew they avo uld give rise to. Assuming, therefore, an air of composure", she put the fatal letter, Avhich had annihilated every flattering ¿hope and expectation, into her pocket, with¬ out speaking, * and took up her Avork, though her hands trembled so she could * scarcely hold it. * . " Well, Miss," said Mrs. Greville, '- 6 after
after enjoying her too evident 'distress and emotion for some minutes in silences <ч since vou are not obliging enough to let me know how Mr. Erahkland's family arc, I desire you may give me that letter to read. " ť< All the family are well, Madam," replied Jacintha, determined if possible not to let her see the letter. ■ Mrs. Greville, however, was resolved to have it; and accordingly desired, or rather commanded her to give it that instant, in a tone which enforced immediate obedience. Most reluctantly, therefore, Jacintha presented it to her ; but in the very act of doing so, her feelings overcame bet ; and bursting into an agony of tears, she fell back upon her chair, unable to move. Gertrude,
llNAíi^ vis IT. Gertrude, as regardless of her dis* tress as Mrs. Greville, jumped from hei: chair with eager curiosity, and leaning·- over her mother's shoulder, perused the letter, which imparted to both their hearts the most malignant satisfaction, by convincing them their perfidious scheme had succeeded accordine: to their wishes; and though Oswald's admira¬ tion of Miss Meredith seemed rather inimical to their own designs upon him, their disappointment on that head was entirely overlooked, in the joy they felt at the disappointment of Jacintha. ťí You see, Miss," cried Mrs. Greville, her eyes sparkling with plea¬ sure, the consequences of vanity, " if you had not indulged' y our's, and given way to idle expectations, you never would have felt your present pain ; but you are rightly punished not only for youf vanity, but your obstinacy innot believing what I said. I knew, too 4 much
much of the world to think Mr, Oswald would ever bestow a seiious thought upon such 'agirl as you." (< Aye, so I imagined too," exclaimed Gertrude ; £t I saw all along she thought too highly of the power öf her charms.'* " Oh Gertrude!" said Jacintha, tť how can you speiik in^uch a manner ? How can you, who witnessed the parti- cularity' of his attentions to me; insb n uate that it was only my vanity led me tq imagine him sincere ?" s (C I really did not perceive any ( ;j£feat particularity in his attentions to #you," replied Gertrude, with a toss of her head ; " and since we are upon the subject, I must tell you, Jacintha, that I am sure he never would have paid yon even half the attention he did, had you not compelled him to do . so, by continually throwing yourself vol. ι, ΐ in I
in his Aväy, and trying to engross him froriiall the rest of the ¿iris." ■ ■ ,y j ' ^ " ч "I see," cried Jacintha, " I am not happier in the affections of my sis- tciv than of ч my mother." r " No reflections upon either, Miss, I desire," cried Mrs/ Greville, in an imperious töne ; " you are treated much better by both than you deserve tobe." ΐ ť M am happy I can't agree Avith you in thinking so, Madam," replied Jacintha, Avhose spirit Avas roused by this cruelty: " for if I estimated my OAvn worth according tö voür tender- ness and Gertrude's, I should have a very indifferent opinion of it indeed." i i f " No more insolence, I desire, ' f Miss," cried Mrs. Greville; "I shan't suffer
-". ^оС^^№А^''^1з№ suffer any impertinent observations or complaints, I assure you." : <c You need riot fear any complaints from me, Madam," said Jacintha ; " I have acquired sufficient philosophy not to complain of evils I cannot remedy. " i. ť< Lét me hear no more of your philosophy, nor let me see any more crying. Go on with your work; and don't imagine your sister and I will make ourselves slaves, in order to permit you to wail about the house, like a tragedy queen, for the deser¬ tion of your supposed lover. " ч "'Л * The tears which indignation had siippressed, again burst forťh at these words ; and springing from her chair, Jacintha flew out of the parlour ere her mother could stop her; and running up to her own chamber, locked herself v Ü in,
■of her heart. t Л^Ьеп somewhat relieved bv the tears ,ehe shed, she reproached herself for weakness, in lamenting the loss of a man whose- conduct had proved him imworthy of her affection. So con-
-^
« . ·
scious Avas she of his not mentina; tobe regretted, that she strove to deceive h ei^ self into a belief her aneruishAvas lexcited more -by the humiliating circum¬ stances Ávith which'his inconstancy Avas attended to her, than by that incon-
»ЛТ 1T€l·
" Certain it Avas, thcKC с i rc urn- stances considerably heightened her distress;.and scfdreadfuh so inšupport- -, able Avas the idea of being continually subject to the sarcasms, the taunts, the upbraidings, and <ty*anny of her mother and sister, that only for the ardent affection she felt for her father^— ihe
the strong sense of proprieţy^which she- entertained, she Avould in all probability have forsaken her home, and thrown her¬ self upon her OAvn exertions for support - r encouraged as she Avas to do so by the success Avith Avhich such a measure had been attended to a young girl, Avho, under similar circumstances, had eloped from the village to London^ about a twelvemonth before. Filial tenderness and native delicacy, hoAvever, preA r ented her from forming. any rash resolves ; and since compelled to bear her mother's ill temper, and sis¬ ter's ill-nature, she resolved to try and endure both Avith a fortitude and patience Avhich should in some degree defeat their malice, by concealing the miseiy it inflicted : however torn, hoAvever lacerated her heart might be by their unkin 4 dness, she resolved never to utter an expression Avhich could create a sus¬ picion of its sufferings. f 3/ Int
In pursuance of this resolution, she . assumed an appearance very foreign to her <real feelings; and frequently mortified and provoked both her mother and sister by the seeming indifference with which she hear¬ kened to their ill-natured remarks and insinuations concerning Osţvald. But in the privacy of her chamber, she made herself ample amends for the- restraint sii e imposed upon her feelings before them ; she there wept over the idea of her unhappy situation ; she there shed tears, even more bitter than those drawn from her by reflections upon that situation ; for Oswald, who, notwithstanding all her efforts to forget him, her resentment, her indignation at his conduct, still maintained his empire over her heart. She felt greatly hurt to hear he was still entertained at Mr. Frankland's. When we are injured, we naturally wish
'i all our friends to espouse our caus~e, and resent our injuries. Upon consi¬ deration, however, she could not doubt that Mr.- Franklàiid, who Avas a man of the nicest honour himself, highly condemneïl the manner in Avhich he had acted; *but that he deemed it more advisable, qn her account, to let the affair sink into oblivion, ч than make it public by expressing his dis¬ pleasure. She noAV rejoiced she had not been more frank in her communications to his daughters, and that consequently very few were acquainted with the humiliating treatment she had received.
f' * CHAP.
^^^ДД^уЯ**^Я?Р*Я Й ^пИ8Й
,СНЛР. IV.
** Fancy pours *' Afresh her beauties on his busy thought ; * f Her first endearments twining round the soul, *' With ail the witchcraft of ensnaring love." v/SWALD'S efforts to conquer his attachment for Jacintha, were not more successful than those she made to sub¬ due her affection for him. Like her, however, his priete stimulated. him to hide his feelings, and carefully conceal from his friends the severe pain inflicted by his disappointment.
In
Frankland there were no houses suited to the taste of Lady Henry ; but within two liıilçs of Wyefieid she heard of one, which, as far as she could judge- from description j was exactly thè kindi of resitlence she wished for.. ä She had strong objections to it,, however, on account of hdr son^ as v slie feared its vicinity tb Wyefieid might: strengthen unpleasant remembrances,., and, perhaps, 'counteract all the efforts of' inason and resolution. Oswald, guess--, ing the motives which made her hesitate about it, exerted himself to remove· her "apprehensions.; and, finally, pre¬ vailed upon her, to take it, as they found,, upon a visit to it, that description, had but done it justice.. It was an old mansion, perfectly commodious notwithstanding its anti- quity ; and had it even>been less pleasant 't' к 4 within,,
within, the almost boundless prospect it "commanded of an enchanting co un- try, would have rendered ita desirable habitation. The Court in which it stood, was planted with oaks, whieh appeared aš ancient as itself, and which, when in full foliage, completely shaded it from the road ; a fine wood bordered it at one side, and at the other stretched luxuriant meads, diversified Math little groves and cottages, beautifully watered by winding rivulets, and terminated by the picturesque village of Wyefieid, towards which the eyes of Egbert were not directed without emotions he could not always conceal. In this quiet and delightful retreat Lady- Henry might again have been happy, could she. ha ve obliterated the bitter remembrance of past events from her mind ; but the idea of a beloved husband, sunk to an untimely grave by the weight of accumulated misfor- с? tunes,
tunes, Anis a never-failing source of 'affliction, Avhich time could not dimi¬ nish or assuage. Her sorroA\ T s, how¬ ever, like her charities, were silent and unobtrusive; and her forced com» posine often led her friends to belieA'e she Aras in some degree happy, at the very moment her bosom AV 7 as heaving: with the pang of anguislu Conquering her love for solitude on her son's account, she resolved to cul¬ tivate an intimacy Avith all the'respect¬ able and agreeable families in the neigh¬ bourhood. She knew the youthful mind must be amused, and considered an agreeable home as often a better preservative for virtue,, than any moral doctrine Avhatsoever. Her intention of residing near Wye- field, Avas knoAvn throughout the village previous to her arrival at her nev/ habi¬ tation; and Mrs. Greville, delighted ľ б to
- vrsrr. to think she should at length have an opportunity of becoming acquainted with a lady of quality, determined to be among the first who should pay their compliments to her. Her pleasure indeed at this idea would have been superlative, but that she feared an explanation might now take place between Egbert and Jacintha, which would defeat all her schemes, and expose her treachery ;—in consequence of this apprehension, she resolved to keep a more vigilant watch than ever over Jacintha, prevent her, - if possible, from having a private conference with Egbert, and 'do all in her power to increase the resentment her arts had already inspired them with against each, "otheţ.- By this management, slie hoped not only to remove every cause foiv fear, but forward her schemes in favour of Gcfctnide. She had already found means
means of learning that no attachment existed between Egbert and Miss Meredith, and consequently flattered herself there was nò further obstacle in the way of her'wishes, than what pro¬ ceeded from (as she trusted) the trifling remains of his passion for Jacintha. In order to try and terminate the incertitude which she could not help feel ins: on this 'head, she resolved on letting Jacintha accompany her İn the first visit she paid to Lady Oswald, flat- terins: herself she should be able to asccr- tain the sentiments of Egbert respect- * ihg her, by the manner in which he acted upon this visit., : Jacintha received permission, to accompany her in it with a palpitating heart ; a thousand agreeable hopes and expectations had been revived on hear¬ ing of Egbert's coming to reside in their neighbourhood, and she looked forward to
NOCTURNAL to this expected interview- Mİth trem¬ bling emotion, as to an event which was finally to confirm or crush those hopes. , Lady Henry was scarcely settled in her new abode, ere Mrs. Greville and Gertrude, dressed out to the best advan¬ tage, and accompanied by Mr. Greville and Jacintha, set out to pay their respects to her. Her Ladyship and her father were' sitting together when they were announced. The Major instantly rose tó quit the room, nor without, the utmost difficulty was prevailed upon to remain in it; as he declared, the sight of the little crocodile, who had acted so perfidiously to his dear boy, "would. be quite intolerable to him. Lady Henry received her visiters in the most gracious manner ; and the , . Major,
Major, notwithstanding his resolution to dislike the whole family, gradually recovered his good humour, and began to enter into conversation, but stu- diously avoided paying any attention to Jacintha ; and in order to render his neglect of her more striking, and he hoped more mortifying, he singled out her sister by a number of little gallan¬ tries, not unbecoming his time of life, and paid her the most flattering compli¬ ments upon her beauty. The pleasure which Lady Henry's reception gave Mrs. Greville and the girls, was somewhat damped by the absence of Egbert ; they had not sat - long, however, before she sent a ser¬ vant to search about the grounds for him, and in a few minutes he entered the room animated, unembarrassed, and -'r . apparently unagitated. lie had indeed, on receiving his mother's summons, called all his pride to his aid to suppress >
every emotion which could give either her or Jacintha an idea of the conti¬ nuance of liis attachment ; and so Avell did he act his 'part, so completely did he counterfeit composure and indif- ferences that the latter, at least, was perfectly deceived, and Mrs. Greville almost coiwinced that she hâd succeeded in making an eternal breach between; them. Ihe joy, the delight Avhich this supposition afforded her, could scarcely be concealed ; she triumphed; » åt beholding the too Aİsible distress of Jacintha, and nothing but the presence; of her husband, prevented her from; turning it into ridicule on their way. home.. Her thorough conviction of Egbert's, indifference—a conviction attended by floods, of tears,, and. the most bitter anguish, strengthened Jacintha's deter- mination of endeavouring to expel him * fiom her heart. She reproached herself & forr
for weakness, in having for a moment indulgeeľ any flattering hopes concern¬ ing him ; and accused herself for want of proper pride, in having desired the realization of such hopes after his unworthy conduct towards her- Hence¬ forth she resolved to avoid his com- + pany ; „ too well assured, notwithstand- ing all her indignation and resentment against him, that it was only by shun¬ ning his society, by sedulously flying from his idea, that she could ever hope to conquer her attachment. Her efforts to avoid him, it may , readily be believed, were not counter¬ acted by Mrs. Greville ; and were so obvious to Egbert, by her being fre¬ quently out of the way when he came to her father's, and almost continually declining to accompany her .mother to Lady Henrys, which Mrs. Greville always took care to mention, that not a doubt of her total disregard could be entertained ;
entertained ; but whatever pain a con¬ viction of it excited, he took care to confine to his own breast. The mild and unaffected deportment of 3ir. Greville, and the cheerful and obliging disposition of his wife, who> when she chose to please, was perfectly capable of doing so, gained so much ibon the esteem of Lady Henry and her father^ that an intimacy was soon established between the two families— an intimacy productive of greater gra- ·' tification to Mrs. Greville than she had ever before experienced ; ~as Lady Henry, in pursuance of her resolution, cultivated an acquaintance with ail the respectable families in her neighbour¬ hood. Still, however, she saw nothing like particularity in Egbert's attentions to Gertrude : the hint, indeed, which had been dropped in the supposed letter from Jacintha, respecting the favour-. able sentiments that young lady enter¬ tained
*,*
tained for him, made him very cautious in his conduct to her, as he was by no means ambitious of exciting a passion which he could not return. The most pleasing intimacy which Egbert formed at Wyefieid, was with a young man of the name of Woodville. Frank, generous, and animated like himself, in consequence of the mar¬ riage of a relation of his with the sister of Mr. Greville (both then absent in the East Indies), he considered him¬ self in some degree connected with that worthy man ; and from this considera¬ tion felt quite as easy and familiar at his house as his own. His long intimacy with the family made him perfectly acquainted with the dispo¬ sition of every member of it; and tiie high eulogiuïns he bestowed upon Jacintha, whom Egbert, notwithstand¬ ing his positive determination never, if possible, to think about, frequently-made' the
«
the subiect of conversation, but with- 4 out hinting at his» attachment, did not by any means lessen the impression she had made upon his mind, or abate the regret he felt at his disappointment concerning her. Nor were the many instances which Jacintha daily heard of his charity and benevolence, less calculated to keep -- alhe his image in her bosom; and she sighed to think that only to her^she had reason to believe he had ever acted unworthily. Oh ! how often has the resentment inspired by this fancied unworthiness fled from her heart, as she has listened to the warm plaudits bestowed upon him by gratitude and esteem !—Oh ! how often in these moments, when she has witnessed the change effected by his means from misery to gladness, and heard not only his eulogium but his mothers,
mother's, Avho avvis neither less feeling nor less beneficent, has she secretly exclaimed—" My happiness Avould have been too, too great, had I been allied to such beings ľ* A < The attentions Avhich she receİA-ed from Lady Henry upon cAcry occasion, gained as much upon her affection, as her vfitues had done upon her esteem. Her Ladyship regarded her indeed with the fondest partiality and admiration ; the prejudice she had conceived against her from her rejection of OsAvald, or rather the motives which she supposed had led to that rejection, vanished on obtainiim* a knowledge of her disposition, Avhich convinced her, . in her conduct tb him, she could never have been influenced by any other mo¬ tives than those alledged in the letter ; and she sincerely 'regrettcjfrthe termi¬ nation of all hopes of an union between them. The
«
Ί The summer passed away without any thing material happening; Lady Oswald still maintained а -combat witli her feelings, in order to appear com¬ posed and cheerful ; but her smothered anguish soon began to prey upon her health, and by the latter end of autumn she appeared in a most alarming state. Still, however, she tried to quiet , the fears, and sooth the anxiety of her friends : but the severe shock she received from the sudden death of her father, who was found dead in his bed one morning, when the servant went to call him to breakfast, by dissolving every hope of recovery, made her at length assume a very different conduct, and instead of flattering her friends, endeavoured to prepare them for an event which she now saw rapidly approaching. To that event she would have looked forward with the most perfect compo¬ sure,
sure/ but for the apprehensions and soli¬ citude she suffered on her son's account. She feared the melancholy and soli¬ tary situation in which he would feel himself upon her decease, might induce him to fly to the metropolis, where she trembled -to think of the snares which., unfriended and un- ■ffiiarded as he was either bv ag^c or experience, he might be entangled in— snares which the vicious and designing, she knew, were ever on the watch to spread for the young, the innocent, the credulous— forthose who, like him, were too amiable to be suspicious, and too impetuous to be considerate. After much reflection, she deter¬ mined to disclose her disquietudes respecting him to Mr. Greville, who ■was now her constant visiter; and entreat that good man to take upon himself the office of friend, adviser, and
and guardian to Egbert, when 5 she was nò more, and permit him to reside under his roof till he was of age, where she knew he wou,ld enjoy thè same kind of rational society, the same domestic comforts, he had ever been accustomed to, and con¬ sequently feel no necessity to search for amusement or happiness elsewhere ; by the time he was of age, of which he now wanted somewhat more than a year,· she trusted his mind would be so per¬ fecţi ν restored to its usual cheerfulness and tranquillity, that he might be able to return to his own habitation, where it was her ardent wish for him to fix his future residence, as she utterly abhorred the idea of a town life for him. Mr. Greville heard her fears without surprise, and granted her request with¬ out hesitation. " Oh î
> 4í Oh mv dear, ша^ Avorthy friend í" bhc cried, in the fulness of her heart, <s at this moment language is too Aveak to express the obligations you haA'e laid me under by your compliance Avith my wishes ; by accepting the care of my sole treasure, you haA r e smoothed my passage to the crave— a ; ou ha ax- divested глу soul of everv uneasiness." Egbert Avas sent for, and informed of what had oasscd between his mothei and her friend. He was too much affected by this .striking proof of her soli eit tide and regard for him, to be able to speak for some minutes, or give that solemn pro¬ mise to comply with her Avishes which she cancri у demand eti. Vt She took his trembling hand, and putting it into Greville's, pressed them both with fervour between heťs voi, i. o "Hence-
Î23 NOCTURNAL VISIT. " Henceforth, my dearest Egbert," she exclaimed, " look up to this Avor- t h A' man as to a friend—a father : in that light I once hoped, I still wish——" ,. Here a glance from Egbert checked Avlrát she Avas about saying, and after a momentary pause she continued : " rav him the obedience of a son, let \j' y his precepts Avarn you, his example ¿uide vou, his tenderness console vou ; T > t, 7 V' ' &ηά Oh î never, never let him have reason to regret his compliance with the request of thy adoring and dying mother," Egbert, still unable to speak, from the emotions she excited, 'laid his hand in" expressive silence upon his heart, while Greville turned aside to wipe away his startins: tears. Egbert had frequently importuned his ni'other to try Avhat change of cli¬ mate might do for her ; and as soon as a he
he had recovered some degree of com¬ posure, again spoke to her on that subject. She stopped him short, hoAvever, by assuring him in a more serious—a more solemn manner than she had CA'er done before, that she Avas firmly persuaded no climate, however genial, could noAv effect the restoration of her health.— "'The awful summons has arrived," cried she, " which must be obeved : here then let the short residue of my days be passed ; in no other spot could they close with so much tranquillity and happiness, as here among my real Mrs. Greviiie Avas extremely well pleased at the idea of Egbert's becom-" ing an inmate of her hoAe ; for, as she believed his attachment to Jacintha utterly obliterated, she flattered herself liis being constantly under the same O í¿ rOOf
roof with Gertrude, might at length hung about the event she had so long wished and projected* I Both she and Gertrude redoubled - their attent ions to Lady Oswald, not however, we believe, from the most 1 '-disinterested motives : Jacintha, from real regard, would have been happy to have united her services to theirs, but yras not permitted. They were preparing to follow Mr. Greville one morning to her Ladyship's, when a messen srer came from her house to inform them all was-over with Lady Oswald, who had breathed her last sigh, about ten minutes after the arrivar of Mr. Greville, in the arms of her beloved я on ! "· Poor clear woman !" cried Mrs. Greville, returning into the parlour, and pulling out her handkerchief, <ť I am
NOCTURNAL am » really veiy sorry ; but I thought indeed she could not last long." ζί No, to be sure," exclaimed Ger¬ trude, as she folded up her cloak, " she looked shockingly last night Lord ! I think her death must be a very happy release to poor Mr. Oswald, as well as to herself, since there were no hopes of her recovery." (C Yes indeed, I think so too*" replied Mrs. Greville. Here Jacintha, who was at work in , tlie parlour, hastily rose, and quitting the room with indignation—an indig¬ nation she did not attempt to conceal, repaired to her own, where she gave vent to the sorrow inspired by the death of Lady Oswald : but she did not weep for her aloné; pitv for the son was 4 intermingled with regret for the mother, g 3 * She
She ceuld easily pieture to herself what his feelings must be at losing such a parent, stich a friend ; and she shed as many tears, perhaps, at the idea of his sufferings, as at the melancholy event which caused them. If She was not long permitted to indulge her dejection; Mrs. G reville soon called her from her chamber, to desire she would see the apartments destined for Mr. Oswald prepared immediately for his reception. Per¬ haps this was the only order which she could at that moment have obeyed without reluctance: for though con- vinced his residing under the same roof with her, would make her be more narrowly watched than ever, and oblige her to observe the greatest cir¬ cumspection in all her words, her koks, her actions, lest the secret of her heart should be discovered, she could not avoid being pleased at the. idea of it. Not w ith* i
Notwithstanding immediate prepara¬ tions were made for him, Egbert did not remove to Mr. Greville's till the Jast mournful 'duties had been paid to the remains of his mother ; his own house was then shut up, and all the servants except one, who accompanied him to his new abode, were dismissed. But neither change of residence, nor the attentions of Mr. Greville's family, could dispel the gloomy sadness which took possession of his mind from the moment his mother expired. In losing her, he lost not only the tendereit of parents, but his only natural friend, the only relation whom his heart acknowledged ; and he could not help considering himself as a dreary, soli¬ tary, unconnected being, without a claim upon the attentions of any human creature, but what common friendship gave him. \ g 4 lie
v n;octur&al' vršit.. '' He brooded over this' idea," of all others perhaps the most afflictive tø a heart of sensibility, with the "deep¬ est anguish ; and his health soon began to sulfer from the depression of his. mind. Woodville, who felt deeply interested about him,- uniteti his efforts to those Mr. G re vi ile used, to try and rouse him from it. lie at length prevailed on him to take an excursion in his company into North Wales, Con¬ stant exercise, change of scene, and the agreeable society he was led into, had the happiest effect upon Egbert ; and at the expiration of two months, he returned to Wyefieid with renovated health and spirits. Jacintha, who had not more secretly than sincerely lamented the declining state in which he left hér father's, rejoiced aţ beholding this happy change ; in
in the sympathy, the pity his melan¬ choly excited in her bosom, her resent¬ ment against him had been utterly for¬ gotten ; nor could-she so far revive it, as to overcome her tenderness, even when he had ceased to affect her sen¬ sibility.' Her efforts, however, to conceal that tenderness, were not so difficult as she had at first dreaded they would prove ; pride lending its aid to strengthen them, in consequence of the coolness, the indifference of Oswald's manner to her upon every occasion. Encouraged by this cold and negli¬ gent behaviour to Jacintha, Mrs. Greville and Gertrude began their long meditated attacks upon· his heart, Oswald, however, aware of their designs, though without appearing* to be so, always stood upon his guard, and took care neither b v words nor о 5 looks
■/ 'irfi^äateaV!^'-.* ^ ^^УУг^^ру[^^^у'Х'^' -^''\" ;V v' r looks to give them the smallest hope of eyCr succeeding in* such designs : but in defiance of his caution and reserve, they resolved on persevering in them; for time and perseverance they knew had „often effected wonders, and on these they relied to bring about the accomplishment of their wishes. The return of Christinas revived, or rather rendered more acute a thousand painful remembrances in the mind of Jacintha; and she Mas compelled to struggle with her feelings, in order to be able to preserve any appearance of cheerfulness. The visit which she and G ertrude had been so long in the habit of making to the house of Mr. Fra n klanci, was this season prevented by the removal of his family to Bath ; a circumstance which would have mortified and disappointed Gertrude very severely, but for the amusements
amusements shepartook ofin the neigh¬ bourhood» From these, as well as from every other pleasure, Jacintha was, almost entirely excluded by Mrs. Greville, who always contrived, how- ever, some plausible pretext to Mr. Greville for leaving her at home. To impose upon him, indeed, was a very easy matter, as he was so completely deceived by her artful conduct and pretended virtues, that he submitted almost entirely to her judgment, and seldom interfered in "the management of her family. During the holidays he went with Mrs* Greville and Gertrude to pass a day at the house of a farmer who lived about three miles from Wyefieid ; and that very morning Egbert set off with Woodville to a gentleman's seat at the other side of Chester, where they intended staying a week· с 6* Jucin ıha
j , Ϊ32 NOCTURNAL VISIT. Jacintha spent a lonely and melan¬ choly day; the pointed neglect and imkindness of her mother in thus excluding her from society, and con¬ fining her to home* weighed heavy upon her heart, as well as many other circumstances. About evening the weather became so tempestuous and severe, that she began to be doubtful of the return of her parents that night ; she resolved, however, on sitting up for them while- there was the least likelihood of it. The maid iind the boys went early to bed ; and Jacintha took up a book in order to beguile the tediousness of time, and divert her reflections, which became more sorrowful on being left to herself. The pathetic play of Tancred and Sigis- munda was not calculated, however, to dispel the melancholy of her thoughts;
and her tears sooií beffàn to stream for her OAvn soiTOAvs, and those of the amiable and unfortunate lovers. For many minutes after she had con¬ cluded reading, she remained in a mournful reverie, contrasting her pre¬ sent feelings Avith those she had expe¬ rienced at this season the preceding year ; and, like poor Margaret, she was ready to exclaim, as she thought upon the cruelty of Egbert's conduct— ' *« How could you say my face was fair* ** And yet that face forsake ? *' How could you win my virgin heart, "Yet leave that heart to break ?" She was roused from her melancholy meditations by the increasing fury of the storm, which howled Avith savage violence around the house, drifting the snow in heaps against it, and fre¬ quently shook it to its A r ery base. She
' VISIT. She now relinquished all .hopes of seeing her father and mother that night, for none who could obtain shelter from such a storm would, she imasriued, if K«~r brave its violence ; and, with a sigh of compassion for those whp might be exposed to the inclemency of the pre¬ sent hour, she was about retiring to her chamber, when, between the pauses of the wind, she fancied she heard voices. She instantly became alarmed ; and hastening to a win¬ dow, and half opening the shutter, by the light whieh was reflected from the parlour upon the garden, beheld two men within a few paces of the house. With trembling hands she fast¬ ened up the window ; but ere she had well closed it, au unsuccessful effort was made to open the hall-door, which was followed by a loud knock. She now thought of flvimr to the chamber of the maid ; but recollecting that pre¬ sence of mind often prevented danger, she took up a light, and softly ascend-
ing the stairs, opened the window, and ûemanded who required admission ? u Friends," replied a voice, which she instantly knew to be Oswald's» Jacintha nearly screamed from sur¬ prise; but without stopping to enquire the cause of his unexpected return, she flew down to admit him and hU servan t. ■ The moment he entered, he ex¬ pressed hjş fears of having'alarmed her, and assured her he should have* slept at the inn where he stopped to have his horses put up, had he not perceived a light glimmering through the parlour windows. Jacintha endeavoured to hide the flutter his sudden return had thrown her into, by busying herself in procur¬ ing him such refreshments as he seemed to require. Egbert
Egbert gave her a thousand thanks for her kind attention, and also informed her that his coming back so soon, was owing to the illiless of the e-entleman whom he and Woodville had~gone to visit. * ' Woodville proposed, "said he, c ť my accompanying him a little further, to the habitation of another friend ; hut I was not in a humour to relish festi- > vity, so turned homewards in spite of wind and weather." Jacintha having stirred the fire into a cheerful blaze, and laid wine and other things before him, wished him good night, and was retiring, when he suddenly caught her hand. " In such a hurry to leave me?'" cried he, reproachfully. Jacintha said she had merely sat up for
for her father and mother, whom she had now given up all expectation of seeing that night. * fC I hope," cried Egbert, ci you will not deem me impertinently curious, if I ask whether any thing has happened to distress you ; for I cannot behold the traces of tears upon your cheek with¬ out making the enquiry ?" " Nothing new" replied Jacintha, laying an involuntary emphasis on the last word ; then suddenly recollecting herseifj and blushing at the surmises which her manner of speaking might excite, and alarmed lest the real cause of the tears she had been shedding might be suspected, ¿»he hastily added, she had been reading a melancholy book, which had affected her spirits, (( You can feel then for fictitious woes," said Egbert, "while- you dis¬ regard real ones." ( 4 I hope
<ť I hope not," cried Jacintha, with much resentment both in her voice and countenance; "I should be sorry to think I had any false sensibility in my disposition. " ■¡f- ' ( Permit me to try, " said Egbert ; *■' permit me to try whether a narrative of real sorrows will affect you as much as one of imaginary woes has done?" " What narrative—whose sorrows do you mean ?" demanded Jacintha. r "My own," replied Egbert, in-a 'serious accent, and looking steadily at her as he spoke. " Excuse me," said Jacintha, affect¬ ing a careless and unconcerned man¬ ner, in order to hide the confusion ■r created by his looks; * ť I never wish ^to hear sorrows, to which 1 cannot administer some consolation. " « But
ί r. / л ' ' But if you were assured you could administer consolation, " cried Egbert, eagerly, " would you then refuse fo hear them ?" ť í Yes, any thing to-night, " replied Jacintha; " for 'tis far beyond my usual hour of sitting up. " " I should be extremely sorry, Madam," cried Egbert, dropping her hand, and visibly piqued by her seem¬ ing indifference, " to break in upon your rest. " He then presented a light to her, and opening the parlour door in a very ceremonious manner, wished her good night. ct Ah !" cried Jacintha, as she slowly ascended the stairs, half glad, half \ sorry she had left him, ťť you little know how much you have disturbed my rest—how greatly, how fatally you have injured my happiness and repose !" The
The'moré she reflected upon his words—his manner, the more agitated she felt- herself; and it required all the efforts of reason to repel the sugges¬ tions of hope : but she had suffered too severely from recent disappointment, to permit herself again to yield to its flatteries ;. vet, notwithstanding all the calmness, the indifference she tried to assume when she thought òf Egbert, she could not think of meeting him in the morning without a fluttering sen¬ sation of delight and expectation* Restless and perturbed* she rose at an early hour. Iniier way to the stairs she was obliged to pass Oswald's study ; the door was open, and to her extreme surprise, she beheld a breakfast tabic laid before the fire, and Oswald himself, booted, spurred, and completely equip¬ ped for going out, looking very atten¬ tively over some papers at a desk* Its
It instantly occurred to. her he was *>OÍng upon some excursion ; and the conjecture was attended by a pang, which convinced her, notwithstanding all her resolution to the contrary, that she had listened rather more believingly to the whispers of hope, than she should have done. Oswald caught a glimpse of her as she was passing ; he hurried after her, and taking her hand, entreated her to come in, and take a cup of coffee with him.—" I did not imagine, " cried he, " that you would forsake your pillow at so early an hour, and there¬ fore ordered breakfast, as I have a long journey before me to-day, to the house of Mr. Meredith." At the mention of this name, which she could never hear without- uneasi¬ ness, the heart of Jacintha almost died away, and she felt her colour change ; she
Jr she wished to quit Oswald, lest her painful emotions, or rather the cause of these emotions, should be disco- vered ; but ivas too much agitated tq make an effort to do so. He accordingly led her into the study ; and having placed her beside the fire, begged she Avould be so obliging as to pour out the cpfree, Avhile he put' up the* papers he had been examining. ,- . - \ Jacintha's eyes Avere involuntarily directed towards him : amongst the scat- tered papers Avhich he Avas now busy in collecting, she perceived an open casket containing some A r ery valuable orna¬ ments (the identical ones Avhich had been purchased for her acceptance). At this sight, all her apprehensions con- * eerning Miss Meredith were confirmed ; she could not doubt that OsAvald was going to make final proposals to her, and
and that these ornaments were intended for a nuptial present. . 1 V She trembled—she could scarcely breathe from ihe agony occasioned by « this supposition ; and with difficulty prevented her tears from falling. Egbert, turning with quickness from the desk, perceived Ker eyes fastened upon tjic casket ; he directly caught it up, and closing it in an agitation which surprised Jacintha, flung it from him, exclaiming, " What painful remem¬ brances does this excite 1" Jacintha averted her head, and began 'to pour out the corree ; but spilt more than half of it in doing so. " Oh God!" cried Egbert, clasping his hands together, and traversing the room with a disordered step ; * ť when first that casket came into my possession, what
what hopes, what prospects of felicity were mine ! How great a change has since taken place in one short year î How haye all these hopes, these pro¬ spects been blasted—been utterly anni¬ hilated !" Jacintha, no longer able to controul her feelings, burst into an agony of tears, and started up in order to quit the room. 4 ' G ood Heaven Γ' said Egbert, hastily placing himself between her and the door, and catching her haml, " what is the matter?" " Nothing," replied Jacintha, in . extreme confusion ; " I am not verv 7 v well, my spirits are low; pray, Mr. Oswald, do not detain me." *: Has any thing I have said, " asked Egbert, with trembling eagerness, " affected
** affected you? But no,' 1 he conti¬ nued, in a melancholy tone ; " I can- not flatter myself it has. Some secret grief—some unknown sorrow, causes this emotion. Oh Miss Greville ! could you look into my heart, could you conceive the strong 'anxiety it feels—the interest it takes in Avhatever concerns you, you would not deem me impertinently curious if I desired to know the occasion of your tears? ' iC You anxious ! you interested about me !" exclaimed Jacintha, with invo¬ luntary warmth, no longer able to sup¬ press the resentment, the indignation Avith which his supposed perfidy had inspired her ; " you anxious ! you interested about me 1 ." she repeated, half witlidraAving the handkerchief which concealed her face, and darting a look of inefîabie disdain and scorn upon him; « Oh! Mr. OsAvald, such vol. í. h . ' ад
árt assertion from you is like mockery and insult. " " Mockery and insult !" cried у Egbert; '/''good heavens I Miss Gre¬ ville, hoAv have I merited such Ian- guage—such reproaches from you ?" Ψ " A little reflexion upon your own conduct will inform you, " replied Jacintha ; ť f but 1 be»* you'll let me go ; 'tis a subject upon which I never meant to speak—Avhich I reejct having been so unwaiily led to touch upon." " Let yòu go!" repeated Egbert, passionately, his eyes sparkling, his checks glowing; " no, neA'er, by heavens, till you explain the meaning of A'our words !" "'Since you force me then to speak," said Jacintha, Avhose' efforts to clisen- i*a<ze herself Avere utterly uiíavailiní>', i( I must
i ζί I must inform you that after what passed at Mr. Frankland's—" " True, Madam," cried Egbert, Avith increasing* \-ehcme-nce„ ť< true, Madam/' said he, on finding she paused; "after Avhat passed there, I had a-right to expect veiy different conduct from you, after Avhat passed there, I had a rmht to accuse vou of cruelty, perfidy, deceit !" £i You kiat," interrupted Jacintha. 4 Ci What!" exclaimed'he, " do you not allow me a right to complain? After giving me such encouragement, after accepting my addresses, after per¬ mitting me to come to Wyefieid for the express purpose of being introduced to your family, and having every thing settled for our union—after all these circumstances, does not the letter you mit me------" n 2 "Isent
" I sent you!" cried Jacintha, " I know not what you mean; I never wrote to you, I never heard of your coming to Wyefieid on such a purpose as you mention !" " Never !" said Egbert, grasping both her hands ; " swear all this to me ľ* " I do," cried Jacintha; " by all my hopes of happiness hereafter, I never wrote to you—never heard of the visit you allude to !" è " I can no longer doubt you," said Egbert ; ' ' some vile scheme has been contrived to separate us, which I trust this explanation will render abortive ; for may I not------" Here Jacintha, trembling, almost fainting, motioned for a chair ; Egbert supported her to one ; he knelt before her, his arm cir- eled her waist, and he repeated the question
question which she had interrupted— " May I not believe," cried he, "that, but for the detestable artifice which has been practised, I should long ere this have attained the summit of my wishes ?" Jacintha could not speak, but her looks rendered language unnecessary ; and Egbert clasped her to his bosom in a transport of joy and tenderness. " This moment, this blissful mo- ment," exclaimed Egbert, " makes me ample amends for all my sufferings. Oh my Jacintha î words are faint to express the feelings I experience at again holding you to my heart, with a full assurance *9£одиг returning its affection." " And yet, considering that affec¬ tion," cried, Jacintha, half smiling, h 3 " you
" you seemed to sit very easy under your imaginary disappointment. " " My pride stifled my complaints," said Egbert ; " I could not bear the idea of incurring that ridicule which a despairing .lover too frequently excites > ; and as to importuning you, it was quite out of the question ; for as I then believed you totally indifferent to me, I did not desire your hand;—the warmth, the ardour, the jealousy of my disposition, not permitting me to entertain a hope of happiness with the woman I loved, except convinced her heart, as well as person, was mine. Like the poet, I may say> *.'. In all my ЕппаЧ beauties blest, cf Amidot profusion still I'd pine, ** tf, when she gave me up her breast* ,*« Its panting tenant was not mine." , * Egbert now enquired whether she had' a suspicion of the hand from whence the letter
letter came, chicli had giyen him such wretchedness? ; < Jacintha started, and blushed at this question. It was 'too evident to her who the fabricators of it were ; too evi¬ dent that it was the hand of a mother and a sister which had aimed such a * - » blow at her peace. Unwilling, however, to expose them to the shame, the contempt, the detes¬ tation they merited, she implored Egbert, with much earnestness, not to make any further enquiry upon the subject. " Rest satisfied," said she, " with detecting the falsehood, and trouble not yourself about thé con¬ trivers of it." " I see, I see how it is," cried Egbert, with the quickness of light¬ ning; " 'tis to domestic treachery we owe all the misery we have suffered. h 4 Gracious
how shocking !—But they shall not escape the reproaches they deserve !" ^ - <É Dearest Oswald," said Jacintha, alarmed by his violence, " for my sake let the affair sink into oblivion. Ohi do not damp the pleasures of our recon- ciliation, hy doing or saying any thing which can create unhappiness m my family. ** "ЛУеИ," replied Egbert, " I can¬ not give you a more convincing proof of my iove, than%y curbing the strong resentment I feel against some part ©fit." "I accept it as such, " said Jacintha j " and be assured I shall not be un grateful for it. " ■r Egberťagain caught her tobis heart·— 1 ágain held her there as a long lost treasure,
treasure, which had been almost mira- "■ Г \ ^ ь 7 T ' У** ciilöusly restored. (
When their mutual agitation had a little subsided, Egbert declared his intention of speaking without delay to Mr. Greville on the subject of his attachment to Jacintha, and proposing an immediate union« This Avas an intention which met with uo opposition from Jacintha; on ihe contrary, she did not, she could not deny that it gave her pleasure. Too agreeably engaged to notice the progress of time, they were at length surprised by the entrance of the groom, who, having been roused by his master at the first dawn4>f day, to get every thing ready for his journey, was not a little astonished at his delaying it so long, and accordingly came to say the horses were waiting. Egbert ordered a 5 them
them to be put up ; but the servant had scarcely quitted the room before Mrs. Greville's voice was heard ' below. Jacintha instantly Аелу down to receive, hér; and Mrs. Grevilleand Gertrude, according to their usual custom, were beginning ; to give an exaggerated account of the entertainment they had been at, when the sudden entrance öf Egbert put a total stop to their elo¬ quence.—" Bless me !" exclaimed Mrs. Greville, after a momentary silence, during which she eyed him attentively, 4 ' I did not expect to find you here-, Mr. Oswald." Egbert carelessly recounted the cause of his unexpected return.. The triumph,' the animation of his looks, together with the sunshine whieh illumined the countenance of Jacintha, and a kind of trembling confusion in her
- ' j - -V. her manner, gave rise lo very, urmiea- sant suspicions in the îiiind of Mrs. Greville. . . Though jthe day луаз intensely cold, her faee began to glow from agitation ; and scarcely knowing what she did, she fanned herself with the corner of her apron. Her alarm was not by any means diminished, when Egbert, after, chatting a few minutes, requested Mr. Greville to accompany him to* his library ; a request which the good man directly complied with. 'Mrs. Greville now endeavoured to terminate her suspense, and leaim whe¬ ther the explanation she dreaded had taken place between Egbert aiid Jacintha, by putting many artful ques¬ tions to the latter, which she, however, found means to evade; determined not to satisfy the curiosity of her mother, и 6 till
■* ŕ "-' tílf йе knew how Egbert's proposal» iŕéré received by her father. To these proposals Mr. Greville list¬ ened Àvith his usual calmness. When Egbert had ceased speaking, he said M considered his daughter highly honoured by his addresses, and can¬ didly confessed she could no where form an union more pleasing to him ; but at the same time declared it was an imion which he could not permit to take place till Egbert was of age. m Egbert tried to combat this resolu¬ tion by all the eloquence in his power to exert ; but in vain. Mr. Greville con¬ tinued inflexible ; and he was compelled to reconcile himself to present disap- pointment by the prospect of future happiness, and permission to pay to Jacintha the open attentions of a sanc¬ tioned lover. , 5 , % Though
NOCTURNAL ISIT. > v >»- - Though Jacintha did not as openly acknowledge it, she felt scarcely less regret at the determination of her father than Egbert The tyranny of her mother, the ( malice of her sister, rendered a residence under the same ■v- roof with them, at least while she con¬ tinued in their power, almost insup- portable. l'' * The mortifications, the humiliations she had before suffered from them, were slight compared to those she endured in ^consequence of their rage and envy, at finding their schemes to separate her and Egbert were defeated. Had they beheld him the professed lover, the husband of any other woman, though the hopes of Gertrude would have been equally disappointed/ they would not have been half so much afrected ; and though policy, perhaps, dictated á very different conduct to Jacintha, from the prospect of her being
being soon independent, they could % not so far overcome their hatred towards her, and evil propensities, as to prac¬ tise it. t Egbert upon every occasion took her part ; and at these times nothing but a fear of offending him, prevented Mrs. Greville from venting her ill-humour and indignation upon him, as well as Jacintha *. but the very great advantages she derived from his being in her house, made her cautious not to speak in such u mann er as should drive him from it. But though she curbed her temper, she could not, or rather did not attempt M to controul rhe inclination she felt to vex him by her actions; she accord¬ ingly thwarted his-wishes to the extent of her power, by preventing almost any intercourse between him and Jacintha; still contriving to impose upon Mr. Greville, by making him believe, in this
this respect, as wlril as in evc/y other, she was influenced alone by propriety and.prudence ; any interference from him, therefore, was not to be expected, Egbert and Jacintha, perceiving their mutual uneasiness at the unplea- sant restraint imposed upon them, only gratified her malignancy, determined at last to suppress all appearance of it, seem to submit patiently to her con¬ troul, and rest satisfied with conversing in private. The pleasure experienced in these stolen interviews, amply compensated for the difficulty with which they were procured. But those hours were not devoted entirely to love ; Egbert spent many of them in-instructing Jacintha in such accomplishments as he wished his* wife to possess, but which Mr. Greville had not
ч not considered it necessary for his daughters to acquire ; thinking (justly perhaps) that girls destined as they wergi in all probability, to an humble sphere, required only an useful educa¬ tion. * Jacintha's progress in her new stu¬ dies exceeded the expectations of Egbert ; and the expanding beauties of her mind heightened that admiration and esteem, which the charms of her person, and the sweetness of her dispo* sition had first inspired. '
V«Jii#lJL f
>
CHAP. V.
" The«« are the matchless joy· of virtuous lore; « And thut their moments fly
4%
T* IME rolled on without making any alteration in the conduct of Mrs· Gre¬ ville : but in proportion* as they drew nearer to the happy period which was to unite them, Egbert and Jacintha became less affected by it. About the beginning of summer, it was rumoured throughout the village, that Lord Gwytherin was expected home· Mrs. Greville felt particularly anxious
anxious to know whether there was any truth in the report ; and she was soon gratified on this head by Mrs. Conway, the housekeeper at the Park, who came in one evening, just as a little party of her neighbours were sitting down to Pope-Joan. " Cotpless my soul !" cried Mrs. Conway, who was a little bustling Welch woman, and considered of very great importance in the village, " I am in such a flutter, and such a com¬ motion——" ■t i ■ * What ! is your Lord really coming down ?" demanded Mrs. Greville, eagerly interrupting her. ' * Yes, he returned to England about a fortnight ago; and a messenger arrived this morning at the Castle, to say he would be at it in a few days. I am
l»
NOCTURNÌlTì* am sure I don't know;-how we shall ever be able te get eveiy thing in order agàitìst hé comes." ·. . \ " 1 thought," said Mr. Greville, Avho was playing chess with Egbert, but had stopped to listen to Mrs. Comvay, <ť that his Lordshijp had bidden an almost eternal adieu to his ancient home. " " Aye, so we all thought," replied the housekeeper; " but I suppose he began at last to consider it Avas a sin and a shame to be spending all his money in foreign parts." " Well, I am sure I am glad he is coming to the Park," said Mrs. Gre¬ ville; " it Avili enliven the village a little. " " That it will, " cried Mrs. Conway ; " we shall have rare doings, I prqmise you ;
: ;' you ; røy Lord is to bring a power of company with him, antf Robert, who brdught the news, says there ! is wine enough coming down to float all the cellars in the Castle, and a great deal of new furniture, and fine asiotks for the hot-houses, and heaps of curiosi¬ ties which my Lord purchased abroad, but which, by the bye, Robert says are the greatest rubbish in the world, being nothing more than rusty coppers, and old pictures, and statues as halt and as maimed as some of the Greenwich pensioners. \ АЛГ' /УУ " ■ " I told Robert I?> ψ as isurprised my Lord, who was a man öf sense, would lay out his money upon such trumpery. But Robert said, if he had not done so, he would not have been reckoned a man of virtue abroad ; and it seems in foreign parts gentlemen pride them¬ selves in being men of virtue, which is more than they do at home ; though how
. t . , ,-,-χ.,-- , - , ,. Λ - t ^^ = ο ,' ■ , r NOCTURNAL УШТ. Лб5 how a person can be thought more vir¬ tuous for buying old coppers, and faded pictures, and broken statues, I can't conceive. " " Nor I indeed, Mrs. Conway," said Mr. Greville, smiling, as well as some more of the party, at her simpli¬ city; " 'tis neither á proof of virtue or wisdom, in my opinion, I assure you. " <c And so your Lord is really coming among us again ?" cried Mr. Jones, the old apothecary of the village, who, with his dame, was of Mrs. Greville's party ; " Ah ! he was a gay one in his youth; and if not much altered, we shall indeed, aš you say, Mrs. Con¬ way, have rare doings. " "'Why, I believe he is not much altered, " said Mrs. Conway, ť ť from what I could gather from Robert. " " lam
" I am sorry his Lordship has not benefited by time and reflection, " cried Mr. Greville; u the greatness of his 1. understanding renders errors in him inexcusable. " " You'know something of his-Lord- ship, then," said. Jones ; " I thought * he had left Wyeiield before you came toit." " True," replied Mr. Greville, " but the fame of his Lordships was not^con¬ fined to the narrow limits of a village ; and though I saw not, Г heard of "him —heard that, had half his outward graces been placed about the thoughts and counsels of his heart, he would Ht- have been one of the first of his sex." " Your information was just," said Jones; " had-his, mind been half aš perfect as his form, half as amiable as, his manners, he would have been unequalled«
ι Л ' unequalled. But, sorry am I to say, that was not the case (we are among friends—at any rate his character is pretty generally known) ; many, many , are the hearts upon which the libertin¬ ism of his principles has entailed anguish."'' " Aye, Cot forgive him !" said Mrs. .Conway, "'tis all very true ; he never could see a pretty woman, without try- ing to jnveigle her in some way or other." c e Heaven have mercy upon you then, Mrs. Çonway, 5? 'dried Jones ; " I should not be surprised if you and your Lord went in pilgrimage to the Well of St, Wincfredc. " ■í " Cot give us all grace to resist temptation !" said Mrs. Conway, direct¬ ing her eyes towards the glass. " Well,
... <ί Well, don't bé too much alarmed, ' ? exclaimed Mr. Jones; ·* I fancy the whole of his battery will not be directed against you; " The glance with which these words were accompanied to Jacintha, made her laurii, Γι * * Egbert, at this instant, rose abruptly, and snatched up his hat. * 4 *' Won't you sup at home, Mr. Oswald ?" asked Mrs. Greville. L. İ , '* I don't know— í can't tell—'tis very uncertain—but pray don't wait a moment for me :" so saying, he quitted the room. Jacintha felt greatly hurt and dis¬ concerted at his going out ; in spite of her reason, she could not help being uneasy at the idea of her spending the evening
eA"ening Avuţii Woodvdle¿ or rather thè sister of Woodville, a A^ery lovely girl,« who had lately come from London (where she resided Avith an auiit^ both her parents being dead) to passsome time with iier brother. Her beauty as well as A T ivacity had d raAvn A ? ery Avarm plaudits from Egbert ; and Jacintha began to fear, in conse¬ quence of his conduct this evening, that they had made a greater impression upon him than he Avould alloAv; else Avhy prefer Miss Woodville's company to hers? and,only to this preference could she impute his going out, parti-. eularly as she had promised to meet him* after supper in the garden. Her mothers visiters spentale even¬ ing at the house ; but their gaiety:could neither amuse Jácintba, nor induce her to remain long in the parlour. She withdrew to her chamber almost imme- ,WL. ι. ι diately
diately ^ferter the removal of the cloth; and putting out her light, placed her¬ self at an qpèh window, to watch the return öf Egbert. Л -bright-'moon-silvered the finna- ment, and cast its shadoAvy beams upon the high Avoods óf GAvytherin Park, Avhich gently rustled in the breeze, while, from their deep recesses, the nightingale poured forth the softest strains of melody. But neither the beauty nor serenity of the scene could divert the thoughts of Jacintha from the object upon which they were fixed, or calm her unea¬ siness. ŕ jThe guests withdrew, the family retired to restai but still no Egbert ■■i appeared, . ; í' HoAV pleasantly engaged he-rrinst fee/*
ful öf time î But no wonder^the polished graces, the шкЖескеа viva^ citv öf Miss Woodville cannot fatl of makihg hours appear as minútese^
ч
At length she валу him crossing the green ; she directly started from the window, for not for worlds would she Ъ have had bini know how she had been employed Her heart, indeed, began to tell her she had injured him by har¬ bouring for a moment a doubt of his constancy ; yet, ч notwithstanding this pleasan t assuran ce, sh e could not over¬ come the resentment she felt at his going out, after the promise he had received from her. 4 Her averted looks, and tlie coldness x>f her manner, struck Egbert the instant he beheld her the next morn¬ ing; and he only waited till the boys, 'Фо whom she was giving their breakfast, - i S had
had quitted the parlour, to enquire ^whether the alteration in her conduct was owing to the cause he sus¬ pected. Jacintha would not confess . the truth ; but Egbert at length saved her the trouble, by declaring he plainly perceived what was the matter: " And only I think you have some little reason for your present humour," said he, with affected seriousness, " be assured I should be very much displeased at it; for Л detest any thing like caprice. To apologize, however, foi* my conduct Jast night, without which I perceive I -cannot regain your Ladyship's smiles, I must inform you that 1 went out because iL was vexed and irritated." ;· ι, " Vexed and irritated !" repeated /Jacintha, in extreme surprise ; "about what?" t <c Well, to Confess my weakness, though yçm would not make a,siinila;r L ... „ confession
л confession to me ahout Lord GAvytHèrify I felt utterly disconcerted at the idea of his approaching visit to Wyefieid. " ; t * <ť On what account ?" eagerly demanded Jacintha. I ■ у 6 * Need you ask ?" said Egbert ; " the miser watches his treasure with iiiícéásmg anxiety ; and the lover, wjbh no less disquietudes fancies every eye directed,. r ;every>heart^attracted to the shriné at which he worships, Avith the moştîperhieious designs,; against his peäceÄr;-: í , : . -, ..· ·.■:"· r -·. 'l· i ií* 1 v' .4 ■■ « * İ. "" , S'" ι. " *» - ' ί1 (' - f * " ί Γ 1 * 0 „ Ч ■■ ^ . * ^ ; ' * >. f , , , ţ ^ - Ч. ţ - ί " * ţ ' 4 ť< But surely/ V cried, JaQipţha,witţ| something like reproach in her voice, : <4 7οη,^η4ρ$^Α^1>ϊ·^^' , ;··.ν : ;л >» íť 'YoIum ţniţky -jout , constancy,^ eagerly. luterruptçd ligbert;; "Olirno.l-r^ could I harbour, or rather had I reason to harbour such a doubt, I should he ι 3 of
erf all men the most miserable ; but the character of Lord GAvytherin, the*—- In short, let us speak no more upon the subject I*was very angry-with myself for permitting my tranquillity to be dis- tuŕbed about him. Half the wretch¬ edness of our lives indeed, I believe, proceeds from giving Avay to our imagination, which, Avhen, unrestiain- еф * is apt tó ' raise a/ tibousand fright^ fui images to annoy us. Would your t father, however, consent to fmt immediate ; union, * I - should cer¬ tainly feel happier than j I do at pre* sent. Like Altamont, I should then be able to exclaim, * * Begone my cares, I give you Ю the urøids î" u Oh^Egbert ť* ша Jacintha, from whose mind every trace of resentment was ohliterated, ^can you indeed sup¬ pose that union would make you dearer tome than.you are at present? No; be
could not." ? " Egbert was prevented making any reply to this speech by the sudden entrance *of Mrs. Oreyilk, whose clouded countenance and »uilen maft» ner were яр acxtrérhely dùsagreeaible to hin;, $haţ he quitted the room in mast to br^alrfşsi; wkh hisftóe&4 Wcmd^Stte· Ť ' ? ' - " Tri ; , ,. ' «",ΐ . , * - < * The mpment tø h&4 witíidrawn, *Λρ venífcedà as щда!,? her ill-burøour цреда Jacmtha. She asked heríbow stoe αϊμγ#4 to spend her time in .such a rklicu- loujs, not to .say shameful жапдег?-^ *' I wondered," crkd she, *· whai røade Air Owysdd ftø uery e^iiy ι riser ; but now 1 have diacowred îthe cause. I shall take care, however, in future to let you have some other employment than that of flirting with him. î'll let you see you shan't eat the 1 4 bread
bread of ¿idleness, or commence fine lady before your time. " * , %. ΐ I s The appearance of Mr. Greville silenced his wife; and Jacintha now learned that ;he ^vas going to pass the dayiwith a ¿friend near Holywell, and that her *motfeer and Gertrude were alsó g&ing upbft^ pàrïidular business tb ílfeesWi ^rílch ^díl detain 'thèm there till night. Jacintha's looks testified 3Éë plmnt^'šbb^Ml Mt tîyg^idea of ¿betøg tmífeséámêd î b^ their- рЫепее tøOKfagfottto ^iho4%^č°Bdť this ¡llêösure i^aá^ôf short dupâJtion^* 'oniHebiŕatJier 's leávmgTthe J>¿rlom^A|rs. Grőville told líeť'Shé had lefi тъ some^workfor her todo, which she should expect to ! find finished on aer rcturia. -' ь -ί ;■»?:■-: *ί ^ / *t : ■ ' ϊ *. ί - - * * * ν î ϊ * ι t - S ν ì « - Ť - , - '- *'> Tjdţfj Esmember, li í ^.rieä оЙкг,»1^«'1-йЬ .boys ; will he kt iïxDkrie,i^akid> will г^еЦяйб áciioiv .-hö w lýo u p^ssyoui^t 'tàúel v í- Jaciàt ifchaiéould not wfcliout difficulty sup¬ press
press the resentment and indignation with which this treatment inspired her. 4 ' I trust, Madam, " cried 'she, \vith a heightened colour, "-.Ί- shall never pass my time in any way chicli can be disgraceful to myself, or which conse¬ quently should be displeasing to my menas. ťí Ohi to be sure; but your fine speeches won't impose upon me: so remember I shall expect you to observe my directions. " - -ĺ · Jacintha made no-reply,, fearful of saying any thing which «might raise a storm that could not easily perhaps be laid. . : . Immediately after breakfast Mr. and Mrs. Greville set out upon their respect tive routes; he on foot, j and she in a, one horse chaise belonging to ¡tbe jandr ~ ι 5 lord
- lorď öf rthè mn, a vehicle in much use and estimation amongst the villagers. ; Jacintha began Jier task with very great reluctance; but she strove to banish unpleasant feelings, by looking forward to the happy period which would emancipate her from domestic bondage. She had nöt sat long at her work, when Egbert and Woodville came to the house, ţo inform her they were going upon a pleasurable excursion ftm the day to the Park* with Miss Woodville and sothe other friends, and expected she would join their party, as the absence of her mother, they supposed, had left her at perfect liberty. Jacintha immediately undeceived them ; and they undertook to remove the obstacles to her going out, Wood¬ ville declaring his damsels should finish her
her task, : and Egbert bribing the boys to silence; Every thing being settled, Jacinths accompanied the gentlemen to the Park, near the entrance of which Miss Woodr ville, with two other ladies and gentler men, waited for them. . ..t * " '' The whole party then proceeded to the river, where a pleasure boat was prepared' for their reception, into which they instantly stepped ; and the gentler men, exchanging their coats for nan-- keen jackets, alternately rowed and steered. The day was delightfully fine ; not a cloud veiled the blue vault of heaven ; and only a soft breeze prevailed, suffi¬ cient to curl the water, and temper ч the intense heat of the air. The most perfect harmony reigned 1 6 among
íapiéng the paırty ; \ andthe enchanting prospects they every Adhere ^behelíb» added not a little to their pleasure. f . ./ t ■ * ' ч ι " >* - ^ *. t , , - ; Λτ ' ' * ' * '' * ' .„ . τ * í * * ч ■ ţ "The banks on one side consisted of level and luxuriant meadoAvs, divided by'>i hedge -голу elms, and alleys green, scattered over Avith .flocks andheixls ; and extending to a range of gently swelling hills, watered -byia.:thousaud crystal rivulets, fantastically fringed with trees, and planted with little groves; which admitted through their: natural vistas a view of the distant and aspiring mountains which bounded the horizons ■, ; - · '- „í «i This soft and pastoral landscape, enlivened by groups, of hay^makcrs, was finely contrasted by the pomp and grandeur of the opposite shore, where hills,- or rather mountains, rose in bold and projecting majesty above the water* cloathed to their very base with shades of ancient growth and solemn verdure. Amidst
tAraidst í these , #c^ds llabyrinţhiaUr ayé- ;n nes . were, icni, ; which led · to ;-all ibe enchanitniehtsof thu place^rtìie noble terraces, margined with flowering shrubs and choice parterres, the long cathedral walks, the romantic buildings, the velvet slopes, embroidered with such flowers
í T J'
ÍC
'f As Proserpina, • frîgbted, thou let's t fall
** From Dis Y waggon J daffodils - * ^ _ . Ч ^ ŕ- ·4 'y , , " That come before the swallow dares, and take " The winds of March with beauty ; vîolttsdimj ie But sweeter than the lids of Juno's eyes, * l Or Cythereat breath j pale primroses, ■s " That die unmarried ere they can -behold 11 Bright Phoebus in liis strength j—· " '■ " 'gold ox-lips, and · ' » " The cròwn-imperia?, lilies of all kinds, ** The fleur de Ш teiňg one î Shakespeare. , Egbertj as well as his companions, frequently laid aside the oar to take up the flute or hautboy, upon which he in particular
'" τ - ·' У'-' * ' " ' " ч , ЧШ arOOTüRNAL VISÏT. ŕ ■particular played with exquisite taste and scientific skill; the ladies were not exempt from taking part in *he con¬ certs , + ' л „ H And melting music stole upon the sky, " And softenVl sounds along the waters die/* They rowed about till three o'clock, when the heat becoming intense, and , the breeze which had refreshed them dying away, they gladly landed to shelter themselves amidst the emboAver- ing gloom of the mountains. The place to Avhich they repaired Avas a pavilion, midway, up one of the most lofty of the ascents; it looked down upon the river, Avhose windings it commanded to a considerable extent, and which hereabouts was dotted with small islands of singular beauty ; and upwards to a noble terrace, backed by ^ the far-stretching walls of what appeared an ancient fabric, a miniature resem¬ blance
the gréy walls w*erè nearly covered with ivy, stonecroft, and moss;· and above them rose a dark wood, too ОДек to per¬ mit Ψ the eye to penetrate beyond* it in search of any other beauties than those so profusely scattered around. This building, which was intended more for ornament than use, was the residence of the boatman and his wife ; and this was the only part of the domain to which any attention had been , paid since the departure of Lord Gwytherin ; all the rest exhibiting wildness, confusion, and neglect. The servants, who had followed from Woodville's, had prepared dinner against the landing of the party in the pavilion. ,.4 Jacintha had often contemplated the lovely prospect it commanded, but 5 - # never
noyer before j had she thought it sø chaining; for never liad she viewed it f with a mind so truly serene ahd happy as at, tl%e f 'present moment - <■ * x -' ΐ ι i j r " 'Tis strange, yet true, that accord-« ing to our feelings we behold external objects ; by a kind of wonderful sym¬ pathy, it seems as if inanimate nature participated in our joys and griefs ; when we are pleased, we think, as * Milton says, that the earth gives sign of gratulation. But when black melancholy sits within our souls, " She round us throws u A deathlike silence, and a dread repose ; ** Her gîcomy* presence saddens all the scene, u Shades evVy flow'r, and darkens evYy green j ** Deepens the murmur of the falling floods, «' An J breathes, a browner horror o*er the woods« ' · I Pope· The
The same gőod-humour and spright- liness which had rendered the preceding part of the day so delightful, still pre- Availed ; and a more convivial party, than that now assembled in the pavilion, could no where perhaps haye been found. ; v »··- :
They dici hot quit it till the impur- pling glow óf evening Avas beginning to reppae upon the landscape, and, a géntle bi\èéze had again sprung, up, impi^griated yvith the perfume of neAV- mown ííay and wild floAvers. Thèyrretwrn^l to the boat, and ¿oňt#- Шшеа eoàstingi about %ìll tm light grey Iliad in her sober ihaniSe щ\1 Мща ®Ш]? the Jfówfer&ofteniŕestmg uponitheö· oarsi toiisfèri to the breathings of жтеЩт -imm^fiom a rièighbóurtng wèöd-*- r
" By
«By distance made more swret, f * Which o'er the stream, with fond delay, *f Rcund ah holy calm diffusing» * f Xrdve of peace, ami lonely musing» 11 In hollow murmurs <Jy41 away· 1 * "j' The refreshing coolness pf ihe woods upon their landing would have tempted them to prolong their ramble, had not Jacihtha been anxious to return home on account of her mother. " Oh ! how do I long, " cried Egbert, softly whispering to her as she leaned upon liis arm ; " Oh ! how do I long for the period which shall deliver you from this unpleasant restraint! How Jm*a y ¿ how rapturously has my togi- nation heen empbyed thrøuj^oufc ihe day in picturing the felicity that will then be our's I Like the smooth stream upon which we have been gliding, Z have-said ito myself our lives will pass-»- calm» serene, unruffled·" " Heaven
u Heaven grant they may !" exclaim^- ed Jacintha; <e Happiness is indeed ä little in arrears with us both, and I trust she will at length* discharge her debt." .*>'-- ; " Doubt it not," said Egbert. *,- -* — ŕ í- > _ ' ". I do not," relied Jacintha ; " 'tis by looking forward to future pleasures I háve been enabled to bear present ills ; without hope, I fear none of us could boast of enduring spirits to support misfortunes." .'í ». Woodville, unwilling to separate at so early an hour from the friends .with whom he had spent so pleasant a day, proposed collecting a party м Ш house, and makkig up a dance j-f-thi* was à proposal too agreeable not to be em¬ braced ; but as ¡t was impossible ^topro- cure Jacintha's company without Mrs; Greville's and Gertrude s, it was settled - that
tiiat as - soon as they returned home, .Woodville should go for them. - \ ' '."j'- 'i Jacihtha;- quitted the party outside thé park palings, and, accompanied by Egbert, directly proceeded home, where she was happy to find her mother not yet ащ vecí. She put her bonnet and cloak out of the/way^ and desired Egbert to leave ber; -but *he- still lingered, and lingered, till at length the -chaise with ;Mrø.> Greville and Gertrude stopped at the [фюг,о so-stuffed with bundles, ¡ that it was an absolute labour» to unpack them. r j * Mrs. Greville's real business to Ches^ ter wa»^ not, ras she pretended to her büsbabd^ to »buy Irish cloth ^foi .¿ thç Ьоущ butto purchasea variety of thing» føn hérself? her house, and. Gerti:ud^ imf articular; in consequence of. Lord Éi#ytberiíťs expected visit to the Park. * - ; » ■> * ч. ,г* These
These purchases she had been enabled to make, by the generosity of Egbert ш thou t thekno wledge or cone urren ce of . Mr. G reville, who, however indfilgen the might be in other respects, would never, she knew, permit her to gratify her vanity in the manner she desired.* By dressing out Gertrude tó the best advantage, and by distinguishing her* sel£ both in her own appearance and house, from the rest of her neighbours, she hoped she should create such an opinion of her superior consequence and importance, as would enable her to accomplish her fervent wishes for an < introduction to the fashionable folks, who were expected to accompany Lord G wytherin, amongst Ivhom she could not doubt her déuightor v making a conquest with facility; nay, so highly did sbßi think of lier Charms, especially as she meant* to leéep Jacintha as much as possible in the background, * and
and also mention publicly her engage¬ ment to Egbert, that she was not with¬ out hopes of Lord Gwytherin himself becoming a captive to them ; and such was the opinion she entertained of her own address, that she flattered herself, if such should be the case, she should be able to convert his admiration, notwithstanding the libertinism of his character, into an honourable attach¬ ment. - Full of these projects, en which she and Gertrude very freely descanted, she returned home in a humour very different from that in which she had set out in the morning. Jn the highest spirits imaginable she began to open the bundles,' the con-, tents of which she was eager to re-exa^ mine, 'particularly as she did not expect her husband in for some tiine.? ι . ί , t ~ 1 ί ' _ ΐ " ... (. - * Long
Long as Jacintha had been accus¬ tomed to her neglect, she could not help being wounded at this new instance of it, her mother not having remembered her by the slightest pre¬ sent ; she checked, however, the sigh which was ready to rise, lest her emo- tion should tempt Egbert to animadvert top severely upon the occasion of it. In the midst of Mrs. Greville's unpacking, Woodville made his appear¬ ance, liis invitation was instantly accepted ; Mrs. Greville adding, " If your company will excuse my dress ; for I really am so fagged with my ride to Chester, and walking about there, that I cannot possibly change it. * ■ > -■ î Woodville made a proper reply ; and Mrs. Greville hastily bundling op her things, prepared to attend him; not making any effort, whatever her secret wishes
wishes might have, been, to prevent Jacintha's being of the party. ť í. » ъ ^ J . They found a much larger company assembled than they expected ; and the village musician, an old harper, who seldom went beyond its precincts, being already provided, they repaired to the hall, ť ' with woodland honours decked, " and commenced dancing. Woodville, in order to keep alive the good-humour of, Mrs. Greville, paid her particular attention, and opened the little ball with her himself; after which he resigned her fair hand to Mr. Jones, who, hearing: that there was some merriment going on at the house of his neighbour, stole from his own in order to partake of it; not having yet forgot the ť c joys of his dancjng days," much to the displeasure of his lady wife. ,.-,·,:..-.. .....
Mr. Greviiie also came in a little before supper, and Avas a delighted spectator of the amusement going on. In the happiness of his family he found his own felicity; and Avhen he beheld content and gaiety sparkling in their eyes, he raised his OAvn Avith gratitude to HeaA'en for thus giving pleasure to him and his;*and, bv 'an evening: of repose, rewarding the numerous trou¬ bles of his earlv day.
Vo и ι. κ CHAP,
r
i
I
CHAP. VI. €l He had been taught the art of Courts, ** To gild a face with smiks, and ker a man to rum.'* DYER. LORD GWYTHERIN'S approach¬ ing \ r isit to his seat· created a general bustle throughout the village. All the inhabitants were desirous of attracting his notice by appearing to the best advantage : but their preparations were slight compared to those which Mrs. Greville made, though in such a man¬ ner as could not engage the observa¬ tion of her husband ; and her heart swelled with delight at the pleasures she anticipated.
anticipated. She Avas someAvhat mor¬ tified, however, on finding Mr. Greville absolutely determined not to let her pay a formal visit (which she had hinted to be her intention) to the ladies, avIio, she understood, Avere to accompany Lord Gwvtherin to the Castle. " "D ^proportioned acquaintances," said he, " are never pleasant; and, * besides, by attempting to put your¬ self on an equality Avith the society at the Castle, Avhich your visiting them would plainly demonstrate, you*Avould expose yourself, in all probability, to ridicule and derision." " Lord ! Mr. Greville," said she, extremely A r exed, and utterly unable to conceal her A r exation, " Iioav you talk ! I really can't agree avi th you in think¬ ing there is such a mighty difference between me and the company Lord Gwytherin has invitedj and certainly к 2 Ave
we should give Gertrude a chance of being as well settled as Jacintha," ■ ' »■'■'..·'' >■ ' ť< Why, surely, my dear, " exclaimed Mr> Greville, in some surprise, and looking earnestly at her, s ť< 'tis not amongst a set of fashionable, dissipated men of fortune you would either seek, ór expect to form a connection for your daughter ! Beware how you encourage^ such an idea, beware how you suffer it to take possession of Gertrude's mind; to such hopes, such projects, may often be attributed the destruction of inno¬ cence and domestic peace." * Mrs. Greville, anxious to do away the suspicion she had excited of her .designs, lest, if retained, it should be fhe means of having them-defeated*- pro¬ tested to her husband he had quite mis¬ taken her meaning ; and artfully chang¬ ed tbe subject on which they were dis- coursingý resolved never again to renew it,
it buttrast to chance to bring about an introduction to Lord Gwytherin. This she "felt the more inclined to do, in consequence óf WòodyilÌeV declar¬ ing his í intention of giving a ball shortly after the arrival of his Lordship^ to which. entertainnient she was con- vincedbMr, Greville would not attempt to prevent her going. / * t , ( ι ■ - -Í 'χ ί , 't " ' ^ '*"-*»'' * About the expected time his Lord¬ ship arrived, accompanied jby : a large arid convivial party, composed of bot^ sexes, and attended by a numerous, and splendid retinue. - A, - - . J* Within a few miles of; the Са^Йе^ h^ was met by a number of his tenants,: who escorted him to it лукЬ pipes and tabors, bearing rural banners « before him; the bells fang throughput the, day, iu the evening the village blazed^ with bonfires, and as many of the тЬач к S tótants*
. -'v ^ . J9B nocturnal visít. bitants as pleased, were entertained at the Gwytherin Arms at his expence. Mrs. Greville . and Gertrude полу - became all büstte and expectation ; but forbore doing any thing to attract the notice of his Lordship, or his party, though 'they-"frequently passed their house, until the night of Woodville's ball, for which cards were issued the very clay after his arrival ; deeming it better, .since prevented from paying a ceremonious visit to the Castle, Ъу the obstinacy and queer notions of Greville, not to make their appearance to its fashionable inhabitants, till they should be dressed, as í hey hoped and believed, to the utmost advantage. ■л л Time had neither effected a change ňi the disposition nor person of Lord Gwytherin ; he still retained all the profligacy of the one* and all the capti¬ vating graces of the other—graces which
4 which rendered but too successful his artifices and designs. So persuasive was his eloquence, so polished his man¬ ners, so brilliant his understanding, so universal his knowledge, so general his accomplishments, that it was utterly impossible to con verse ţ with him with¬ out being amused and instructed, and gradually losing that prejudice which his character inspired against him, or, rather, being led to believe it was a character he had not deserved. Thus formed to allure and to deceive, thus uniting to all those mental advantages, a most attractive appearance, for, to use the words of Milton, " His large fair front, and eye sublime, declar M '* Absolme rule,'* * ■ - it could excite no surprise that Lord Gwytherin found few unable to resist his wiles—-wiles which he was seldom without sòme temptation to practise ; к 4 for,
for, as he mastered others, so his passions mastered him ; nor could any tie, however holy, any confidence, however sacred, induce him to give - tip, if possible to obtain it, any thing which he thought could contribute to their gratification. In the Course of time, his fortune became materially injured by his dissi¬ pation and extravagance; and he at length determined upon a matrimonial connection, as the easiest method of retrieving it, notwithstanding tlie abhorrence he felt to part with even the shadow of his liberty ; but desperate disorders must have desperate reme¬ dies, he considered. If V ^ In consequence of this determina¬ tion, ·> he returned to England, from whence he had been absent many years ; the gay and voluptuous manners of the Continent being more consonant to his inclination, * '- s ■4 *
'ι ψ * inclination, than the moťe sober arid decorous customs of His own country.; In hopes of accelerating bis scheme by such conduct, introducing himself agáin to the laotice of the public with some degree of éclat, and completely deceiving it as f о his real situation, he re- sol vedon being more expensive than ever in his entertainments ; and conceiving he could no where commence the career he meant to pursue,, so well as at his. own mansion, he accordingly repaired to it, bringing with him a chosen party,, in whose society it was impossible to? find the moments heavy ;. " lu Kis train " Came MJr;h, thaï wrinkled Care derides j, ** And Laughter, holding both her sides.!'' Amongst his LordshipV guests were: tűi ree or four young men, whom Egbert had known very intimately in London ; upon meetingai.- Wyefieid, this intimacy Ki was.
■вой- ť was renewed with much pleasure on both sides; and'an introduction taking place between him and Lord Gwytherin, he became a pretty constant visiter at the~Castle;i the society there being too agreeable-to permit him often to decline the invitations he received to it.
v^J.l*Vx ♦
pa
CHAP. VII.
*' As pirates all false colours wear, ** T' entrap th* unwary- mantíer j « So women, to surprise us, spread " The borrowed flags of white and red i " Lay trains of amorous intrigues, u In tow'rs, and curls, and perriwigs." HUDIBRAS« / UN the day of Woodville's ball, Egbert dined at the Castle; from whence he went to it, accompanied by a large party, leaving Lord Gwytherin, who made it a rule seldom кб to
iT to go to any amusement until a very laté hour, behind, with several gay companions.. - To describe the bustle and flutter of Mrs. Greville and Gertrude throimh- out this day, would* be utterly impos¬ sible.. On this important occasion, the former took from her chest a blue tabby, which had not been exhibited to public view for many years before ; her head, like Mrs., Hardeastle's, was dressed after one in an old memorandum-book, by the village barber ; and upon it she wore a small gauze cap, ornamented with red ribbon, which vied ia bright¬ ness/ with the full-blown roses in her bosom;, this cap, together with a fine furbelowed apron, treble ruffles, and laced handkerchief she procured, as also? Gertrude's- di:ess, from a milliner at Chester, who assured her every thing was rnade up in the most fashionable style,, ад
style, and after the newest patterns from London, ч Gertrude's dress consisted of a deep 3 7 ellow, or rather Aurora coloured mus¬ lin, vandy ked with purple, and confined to her waist by a sash of the same colour, which,, like the gown itself, trailed to an immense lengtb upon the ground. - Her hair was loaded with a profusion of feathers and flowers-;, and in her bosom she wore a very large bouquet of hot-house plants, obtained from the gardener at the Park. 4 Jacintha, who had neither the power nor inclination to make herself as ridi- eulous as her mother and sister, and who felt greatly hurt at the idea of the remarks, she was confident they would excite, was ¿imply habited in a white muslin robe ; her bright and redundant hair
hair merely ornamented with a light wreath of artificial flowers, and her fair neck adorned with a chain of pearls, the gift of Egbert. * But lovely as she looked, Mrs. Greville did not entertain many fears of her eclipsing Gertrude this evening ; so greatly did she think the charms of the latter heightened by the style in which she was dressed. Both she and Gertrude wisely forbore giving a complete finishing to their dress, till Mr. Greville went out to take his customary evening's walk ; certain it would not have met his approbation, and scarcely less certain that he would either have insisted upon their changing it, or continuing at home. By this manoeuvre they were detained till a late hour, so that most of the company were assembled before they reached « Woodville's..
Woodville's. On entering the house, to which they went in his chaise, though but a few yards from their own¿ Mrs. Greville having requested it, lest her dress or Gertrude's should be dis¬ composed by walking to it, the nume¬ rous attendants, the brilliancy of the lights, the bustle below, and the con¬ fusion of voices from above, increased the flutter of Mrs. Greville's spirits to such a degree, that she could scarcely breathe ; and on reaching the ball-room, was obliged to pause for a minute, to ,try to recover her composure; then assuming the most graceful carriage she could command, she made her entree. The party whom Egbert had accom¬ panied from the Castle, and among whom he was now standing, were instantly attractedby her appearance and Gertrude's. A kind.of stifled laughter prevailed
prevailed forsorne minutes, followed by remains not very pleasing to the ear of Egbert ; for though he neither esteemed Mrs. Greville nor Gertrude, he felt huit at "^hearing such near connecttc>ns of Jacintha'å turned into ridicule; arid had she exposed herself to similar deri¬ sion by dressing, as they had done» he neither would nor could have refrained from expressing his displea¬ sure. The ladies having satisfied thek curiosity as tö Mrs. Greville's situations in lire, again laughed,, and protested she answered exactly the ideas they had formed of a country parson's wife. <ť What immense pains the poor woman has taken to make herself ridi- eulous ! ,J said one ; " I dare say herr husband never took more to compose a
seriuon.-"
ík
Nor
у ~' Л и "Nor rieyer felt more şatisfiedţ with his work when finished, ţha^ifsjţf appears ţo be with herself j"cried a § second. "It may be amusing ţqhayc her broughtto the Castle ; ţ'll certainly deşire my Lord to in vite her thither, " - » . » " * ; * - s „, * ' '"í" " But the daughter is still mors absurd ! " exclaimed a third ; "the girl must undoubtedly have sketched that dress while watching tlie 'performance of some strolling actress in a barn. I wish some one would prevail upon her to dance a minuet, that she might fully exhibit herself to the whole com¬ pany." v * !■ ' ' ' -i % f - Jacintha did not entirely escape their satirical remarks—remarks which were 1 - in a great measure provoked by tap eulo¬ giums bestowed upon her by the gemtie* men. The simplicity of her dress they imputed 's
imputed to affectation, not to taste; for how was it possible to suppose a girl brought yp in obscurjty, as she was, cötild ¡possess any elegant ideas ? nay,- ityráà obvious, from the rusticity of her appearance, notwithstanding her efforts to seem easy and unembarrassed, that she did not/ i > Not more unconscious of deserving, than unsuspicious of the ridicule she excited, Mrs. G re ville proc eed ed nearly to the top*of the room, paying her com¬ pliments as she passed, in a very cere¬ monious manner, to such of the com¬ pany as she knew ; hoping, by ân exact adherence to all the rules of what she, considered punctilio and good breeding, to convince the fashionable folks she knew something of life, and was not utterly unworthy of'their notice. Havin»
Having áéàted hersèlÇ and a little recovered from the flutter caused by her entrance, she cast her eyes round the assembly, vl aiid a cloud instantly overspread her Countenance at finding Lord Gwytherin was not present ; this, however, was soort dispelled by Miss Woodville's informing her that he was expected in the course of the evening. The ball was opened by Egbert and Miss WoodVille. The heart of Mrs. Greville again began to beat with redoubled violence, as the gentlemen began to chuse their partners; at/length, , to her inexpressible pleasure, she saw a young officer, a visiter of Lord Gwytherin's, approach Gertrude, and take her out ; and s almost at, the same moment, the hand of Jacintha was requested by a young Baronet, also a guest at the Castle, though the least agreeable of the party assembled there. Vain,
'''"%\ţ ■ ''•/■N^CTUIİNAL -.VISIT. ■ Vám, arrogant, and sejf-conceited, he thought Iıimş^ homage from his rank and fortunei Itn4 to universal admiration from hb J r ^ . ' " f' V personal accomplishments. .Fe^women, he believed* could resist the united atlaacţionş ]he 4 imagined he possessed ; and he had not a doubt of making an , * '- · , '' " ' * C7 easy conquest of the heart of Jacintha, whose beauty had fixed his attention the moment she; entered the room, and to whom he resolved to attach himself throughout the evening ; pleasing him¬ self with the idea of the envy he should ► ja, excite, by engrossing to himself tb^ prettiest girl in the assembly, and, perc¬ ha ps, bearing her off, a * some future period, in triumph from her native plains. He pictured to his unagination the flutter into which the* attentions of a man of his consequence could not fail of throwing a girl unaccustomed, as he
• \-~ 'S ' ' ^ * / he concluded she had ever been, to any tli Írig like brilliant society ; arid also tlie: soft conftision, ; the bashfol simplicity with which she would receive his compliments, and betray the admi¬ ration he inspired. 'ŕ г Full of these ideas, his disappoint¬ ment was .extreme^^ when, after veuy little conversation, he perceivéd that she was neither elated by'his notice, nor delighted with his attentions ; neither overwhelmed with confusion at his com¬ planen ts, nor unable to teply to them with spirit ; and that though brought up in the country, she had not been brought up in rusticity. Qn making this discovery, he assumed a still greater degree of affability than he had done before, in order to melt, instead of awe her info admiration, as he had at first intended. By degrees he* became so extremely troublesome»
troublesome, so free in ' his discourse, extravagant in his compliments, and presuming in his looks, that Jacintha sincerely repented having stood up with him, though, by. refusing to do so, she should have been compelled to sit the whole even i n sr ; and resolved to leaA r e him the moment the dance was over. This she accordingly did, but Avithout being able to get rid of him ; for, hastily following her, he placed himself at her feet, since he could not procure a seat by her on the bench she partly occupied, declaring it Avas a situation Avhich Monarchs might КЛ eiiAy, aiid desiring her to consider her¬ self engaged to him for the third set. ** Indeed I shall consider no such thing," replied Jacintha. " You know the penalty then," said he; " as I have asked you to dance, you must either accept my hand,
NOCTURNAL A r ISIT. Ülő hand, or sit the remainder of the even¬ ing,; and, upon my soul, I would much rather you Avould do the latter, as I should then have a better opportu¬ nity of breathing the sentiments you have inspired." Confused and proAoked by his belia- viour, Avhich attracted general obser- A'ation, Jacintha rose, and desired him to let her pass ; but this he absolutely refused, and, to her infinite vexation, she was compelled to resume her seat. From this disagreeable situation she was soon delivered by Egbert; the Conduct of the Baronet during the dance, no more than at the present moment, had escaped his notice, and the instant he led his partner to a seat, he hast¬ ened to Jacintha; and pushing him, not verý gently, out of the Avay Avith his foot, he took her hand, and con¬ ducted her to another part of the room. Exasperated
χ Exasperated by ' this treatment, the Baronet at first resolved on following Egbert, and demanding satisfaction - for it; but suddenly reflecting that any noise about a little insignificant country girl would be highly deroga¬ tory to a man of his consequence, he dropped this design, and formed the less dangerous determination of reveng- ing himself upon Jacintha, by tor¬ menting her to the utmost of his power ; and against whom he felt the highest degree of spite and malice, in consequence of the severe mortifica¬ tion she had given to his pride and vanity, by the contempt and dislike she had manifested/ contrary to his hopes and expectations, aţ his assi¬ duities. This resolution he had no opportu¬ nity of putting into practice till about the beginning of the third set ; Egbert having danced with her the second, and
and continued Avith her till the gen de¬ inen were again called -upon to rise ; but no sooner had he quitted her, than the Baronet, who had Avatehed all his motions from an inner room, darted into his vacant .scat; and at the same instant a gentleman approached to request Jacintha's hand. Jacintha gave it without hesitation ; but, m she Avas rising, the Haronet ел tight hold of her gown, and told her she was already engaged. ík Engaged, Sir!" repeated Jacintha, much surprised; " to whom, pray?" i; Tome; and vou either dance or İr* t >ix with me the remainder of the eveu- mg. *'* I will neither do one nor the other/* replied Jacintha, indignantly. > 0J * U L u Just
VISIT. (i Just as you please; but positively you shan't dance with any one but mc." . The irentlcman who still retained her haïid, now began to remonstrate, but without effect; and Jacintha, fearful of the consequences that might ensue from an altereation whieh the Baronet seemed so inclined to encourage, at last begged him to excuse her, as she did not mean to åauce ar»y more that evening ; upon which, after some polite expressions of regret, he went to seek another part¬ ner. Extremely provoked, Jacintha would nov/ have left her seat, but was still prevented by the Baronet, who, seizing her hand, swore she should not quit him. She was remonstrating with him on tlie rudeness of his conduct, when Egbert, 'who still contrived to keep a watchful eye upon her, perceiving how
how she was situated, apologized to his partner for leaving her for a minute, and approaching Jacintha, enquired the reason she did not dance, as he had heard Mr. Cresfield requesting her hand ? cť Because she is better engaged," exclaimed the Baronet. ч íf What do von mean. Sir?*' de- man ded Egbert, fiercely. Here Jacintha hastily interposed, to prevent a reply, which she dreaded might be productive of unpleasant con¬ sequences, and said a hcad-ach had prevented, her dancing with Mr. Cres¬ field. u Then I hope,*' cried Egbert, who at this moment received a summons to liis partner (easting a look of indigna- tion at the Baronet as he spoke), L Q u youll
u you'll chuse another situation than your present one. " Jacintha assured him she would, -. and accordingly started from her seat at the instant he was turning from her; and going directly to her mother, declared her intention of departing, if it met with her approbation, assigning as her reasons for doing so, the fears she entertained of some disagreeable altercation taking place between Egbert and the Baronet, if she continued much longer in tlie room, as she perceived , the latter was determined to teaze her. Mrs. Greville protested she was quite right in her intention of leaving the assembly. She was indeed not a little delighted at the idea of her quitting it before the entrance of Lord Gwytherin ; - still dreading the power of her charms, notwithstanding
notAvithstanding the high opinion she entertained of Gertrude's. . Jacintha accordingly left the room without being observed by the Baronet, whom some gentlemen stepped to speak to, as he Avas following her.
1 3 CHAP.
<*»«™^i'^^SiSSS^S!S5SSíÍ Zí^HM iiHSMSSi^^S5SShSíy
CHAP. VIH.
*' He saw her charming." Thomson. J UST as Jacintha had descended to the hall, congratulating herself upon having thought of an expedient for preventing any quarrel between Egbert and the Baronet, yet highly provoked at being compelled to give up an agreeable amusement by the imperti¬ nence of a coxcomb, Lord Gwytherin and his party entered. Jacintha stepped aside; and the gentlemen, Lord
Lord Gwytherin excepted, rushed tumul tuöusly up the stairs with¬ out· perceiving her, eager to partake öf the gaiety Avhich Avas going for-· ; Avard ;—he alone remained behind his . companions to give some directions to a servant; and as he Avas s then fol- lowins: them, the ligure of Jacintha caught his eye, and he directly paused to иже iu silent admiration imon her. Confused ·' b ν his ardent «¿aze. Jacintha averted her head ; and hiá Lordship, recovering from the sur¬ prise which the unexpected sHit of so lovely an object had-caused, approached her Avith that insinuating- smile "which he knew so we'll ho* w to assume, and which he h я d so. offen found resistless, and said he honed lie was not so unfortunate as to enter the house at the very moment she was quit'« ting it. Jacintha boAved, but made no reply ; L Щ and
^SM'V- •'^'KÔ 0ï.lT-jA f ÎÏÀ'É.''VIS№ ■'" ' •and', perceiving ' : his Lordship about addressing her agpn, she hastily turned into aû^atyoinlng^arfa^eut, where tlie housekeepers and some othei female ser- - * vants were Ävin & ; out r ef reshm en ts ; aïKÎ gently çlosiiig thé door, resolved t ón waiting there until he had left the hali. - . ■He lingered for some minutes in it, in hopes of her coming out, during which he таДе many minute enquiries of one of Woodville's servants concerning her ; and was delighted to find her situation in life was şuçh as, he flatterpd him- self, would be favourable to any designs. he might form against her. Full of herHdea, he ascended to the ball-room, and having taken a general survey of the company, and a few'-turns about the room, he seated himself by Lady Levally, one of his visiters, a lady more distinguished for beauty and wit, than
1 than Virtue or decorum. From her satirical remarks upon the assembly, he expected to derive much amuse¬ ment ; nor was he mistaken. His atten¬ tion, hoAvever, Ayas not entirely fixed, un¬ til she began-to speak of Mrs. GreA'ille ; at the sound of this name/* his eyes eagerly pursued the direction of her • Ladyship's ; aňd^ having fully con¬ vinced himself the Avhimsicál figure he. gazed upon Avas the mother of his neAV divinity, he resolved on losing no time iii introducing himself to her notice. " Bellamy," exclaimed her Lady¬ ship, " has made himself quite ridicu¬ lous Avith one of the daughters, " point¬ ing, as she spoke, to the spot Avhere he stood flirting with Gertrude; " and Ashton not less so with the other. She did not seem, however, to relish his attentions quite so much as her sister 1ш done those of the Captain, from a L 5 dread,
dread, I suppose, of exciting the jea¬ lousy of Oswald, to whom, I under¬ stand from Miss Woodville, she * is • engaged, and to be united as soon as he is óf age. 'Tis really astonishing a yoiihg man of his birth and fashion * should sequester himself in such a little obseure villag as this, or think of connecting himself in such a nian- ner." i " The girl İs exquisitely beautiful ľ' cried his Lordship with involuntary warmth, and utterly forgetful of the rule he had laid down—never to praise one woman to another, from the illiberal ideas he entertained of the sex. 1 ( Why, pray, where did you see her ?" *asked Lady Levally with a disconcerted, air, and violently flirting her fan. His Lordship satisfied her on this head;.and her Ladyship allowed the girl
girl Avas pretty Avell, vainly trying to hide the chagrin, Avhich his Avarm caco- mium upon her had occasioned.—"But she Avants grace, she Avants ease, she wants the polish of high life," added she. " True," said Lord GAvytherin {rising as he spoke), " those nameless elegancies whieh adorn Lady Levally, and so eminently distinguish her from the rest of her sex ; but Avhere can we hope to find another perfect as she is?** With a smile and a bow he then left her, and proceeded to Mrs. Greville, Avho still continued in the seat she had occupied on first entering the room, Avatching every gesture, every look of Gertrude's, and those Avhich Avere directed towards her. Lord Gwytherin easily procured a seat beside her, and Avith the sanie L в facility
-fÜF''- , facility entered into conversation. Tlıç ecstacy, the triumph of Mrs. Greville ^t this instant cannot be described,; she sinijecl, she boAved, she blushed/ and looked round the room to see Avhe- tliel' the company observed the honour Avhicli Avas done her, Avithout Avhich the pleasure it gaA r e her Avould have been incomplete. ■ Not more skilled in turning the foibles of mankind to his OAvn advan- tage, than in discerning them, Lord OAvvtherin soon discovered the, ruling* passiens of Mrs. Greviiie, and regu¬ lated hiš words and actions accordingly, trusting: the favour of the mother wonld> ensure insoane degree that of tha daughter. After some general discourse he sud-* denly paused, and after looking some .minutes at the daţiicers, begged to know Avhether Mrs. Greville could iiiform
that had s just then cominenced the dance?· ■■■ ./-..-»■-> ƒ' Who, Avhere ?" eagerly demanded Mrs. Greville, following the direction of hiš eye. ťí I mean the young lady in yellow,'* replied his Lordship. u Oh my Lord !" cried Mrs.. Gre¬ ville, "you make me proud." " What, is that young lady any relation of your's ? Ah ! now I see how it -is," continued he, looking with pretended earnestness at Ger¬ trude, and then at her mother; "I see the strong resemblance. Oh Madam ! what a happy woman you should consider yourself, in beins: the mother of so lovely a creature !" " I protest, my Lord," exclaimed the 4 - \
, the enraptured Mrs. Greville, " you are quite too polite ; your praises of my girl will really make me vain. " " You Avrong your good sense in saying so> my dear Madam," replied his Lordship ; "Vanity and you, I am convinced, Avili ever remain strang¬ ers to each other. " ŕ L ^ In this strain of flattery he continued to pay his court to Mrs. Greville ; not in the least degree scrupulous qr inti- midated from perseA'ering in his designs upon Jacintha, from hearing of the engagement between her and Egbert ; haAİng often dissolved engagements more sacred than any now existing between, them, and surmounted diffi¬ culties, more perplexing than any now presented to his A r iew b ν this circ um- stance. He dexterously drew from Mrs· Greville
Greville every particular he wished to know respecting her family, and also the cause of Jacintha's quitting the ball, whom he acknowledged having mét in the hall (before any of the rest of the company), but whom he ceased to praise, on finding liis, eulogiums were received by Mrs. Greville with every mark of coldness and disapproba¬ tion ; thus silencing the sudden alarm they hati given her, and still suffering her to believe he was the captive of Gertrude. He expressed his regret at not having sooner known his vicinity to so charming, so. amiable, so inte¬ resting a family as her's, and declared his intention of paying his compli¬ ments to her the next morning.— 4< How highly delighted should I feel, " said he, ** if 1 could flatter mvself that the iuti- macy 1 then hope to commence, would be attended with reciprocal pleasure!" The first opportunity that offered,
~%Ш ■" -' ' NOCTURNAL Mrs. Greville beckoned Gertrude to her, in order to introduce her to his Lordship; a ceremony he would, very readily have dispensed with, as he felt it quite a sufficient task to flatter Mrs. Greville herself. ; i Captain Bellamy, however, to his infinite satisfaction, rendered any great exertion of politeness, on his part, to Gertrude unnecessary, by* the very great attention Avhich he paid her. This young officer, being quite a stage- struck hero, could make love, and pay compliments, in the most tender, senti- mental, and sublime stvle imaginable» with very little trouble to himself^ and to the very great delight, and oftentimes surprise, of young ladies, Avho, like Gertrude, were not-extremely well read, and, consequently, ascribed the eloquence which charmed them to the talents, and not to the memory of their lover. ê Lord
-XOCTUffŠPAb Lord Gwytherin completed the farce he was acting by handing Mrs. Gre¬ ville to the supper-room, seating himself beside her, and devoting almost hfe whole attention to her, to the great amusement of some of the party, ; -лгЬо fancied he was merely quizzing the Curates wife. He insisted on settiniz: her and Gertrude down in his own coach, and left them the most elated and happy of their sex. In dreams of bliss they passed the remainder of the night, or rather early part of the morn¬ ing; as "the'lark, the herald of the day, " had long begun to proclaim its approach ere they returned home. Jacintha, having retired to rest nearly at the usual time, was consequently able to rise at the accustomed hour next morning. On descending to the breakfast parlour she found her father there, and was almost immediately joined by Egbert, whose anxiety to learn
ŕ kam the real cause of her quitting the assembly (which lie imputed to the con¬ duct of the Baronet, and not the cause 1 Vi j assigned by Mrs. Greville), would not permit 'him to enjoy any repose, though he had staid out as late as the rest of ■· the party. Jacintha evaded all his enquiries, and finding them useless, he at length desisted from them ; but with a pas¬ sionate declaration to watch the Baro¬ net, and chastise him upon the smallest provocation^ " 1 hope," said Mr. Greville, " the propriety of Jacintha's conduct will ever repel impertinence in that of any other person; I have ever thought that it is by the behaviour óf a woman our sex regulate their"s to her. " "■.'Yes,-" replied Egbert, warmly^ " except
ťí except "when she meets with fools and coxcombs."; u True," said Mr. Greville; "the seldomer, therefore, females of mo¬ desty mix in societies where they are liable to encounter such beings, the better." He then desired Jacintha to make breakfast, as he did not suppose her mother or sister would vise for some time. " Such are the effects of dissipation, " said he; " it deprives its votaries of the power of enjoying the real plea¬ sures of life, the loveliest charms of nature, the sweets of early day, « When every muse, *« And every blooming j»!easure wait without» ·' To bless the wildly devious morning walk.*' From their feverish couch, their wild and distempered dreams, they rise, when
/ '' -'l· 1 ' when perhaps""half the day is over, pate/ languid, and unrefreshed ; ho*V differ¬ ent in feelings, how different in appear¬ ance from those, who obey the - " ** The breezy call of incense*breathing morn/"
and taste its verdure !
^>
Egbert, who was in the habit of *< Brushing with hasty steps the dews away, " To meet the sun upon the upland lawn," acknowledged the justness of what he said. Greville made some enquiries concerning the ball ; and, among other questions, asked Jacintha whether she had seen Lord Gwytherin ? - " For an instant," she replied· J . i Mrs. Greville and Gertrude made their appearance sooner than was expected ; but Lord G wytherm's promised visit had
fed-made them rise earlier than they İ к* would otherwise haye done, in order to prepare for it. They had scarcely entered the par¬ lour, when one of his Lordship's ser- vants .appeared, with cards, inviting Mr. Greville, the ladies, and Egbert, that evening tò the Castle. " I am sure," said Mr. Greville, as his wife read their card aloud, ťc 'tis an invitation I will not accept ; and I hope, my. dear, you don't intend to do so. " Indeed, my dear, but I do," replied she, (i that is," softening the peremp¬ tory tone in which she at first spoke, " if you will permit me. I imagined у oh had no objection to my visiting at the Castle, provided, which you see is the case, the first advances for an inti¬ macy came from thence. " u Indeed
, ťť Indeed I have an objection," sakt Mr. Greville ; ťť but since you seem so bent upon going this evening, I shall not prevent you, upon conditions ^ that you do not stay oiit late, nor 'encourage any ideas öf an intimacy with the fashionable folks at the Castle ; they are not by any means the kind of acquaintance I should chuse for. you and the girls." " No, I suppose not," muttered Gertrude, with a dissatisfied air; ťí ? tis only with the old-fashioned humdrum folks of the village you would wish to have us acquainted. " Mrs. Greville readily subscribed to the conditions of her husband, promis^ ing to do whatever he wished ; but, like manyòther people, promising what she never meant to perform. Tlie good man soon after withdrew to his
his study, Avhere the boys Avaited to receÍA r e their daily lesáon. Mrs. Greville and Gertrude then Ьрсгяг! to speak, Avithout restraint, of ail that had parseti the preceding even¬ ing. In the mid^t of this (to them) most delectable conversation, Lord GAvytherin entered ; on hb appearance their hearts flutteud, their cheeks glowed, they looked in the glass, and then cxultingly at each other. He apologized i\ v coming at so early an hour, feared he had intruded imon them; but declared he found it utterly impossible to delay another moment paying his compliments. Äírs. Greviiie curtsied and sim» pered ; and his lordship having taken the chair which she ofí'ered him át the breakfast-table, accepted from the fair hand of Gertrude a cup of tea; glad of any
in hopes of being able, in the course of it, to attract the regard of Jachvtha, 4vho appeared this morning still more beautiful than the preceding evening. 1 ■*«' ft' s's To gain her, he thought no difficulty too great or painful to undergo. He saw, however, that he must act with the greatest« caution, tiot only on account of her lover, but her mother, and that ere he deceived her, he must ŕ, deceive them ; but to all this he thought himself fully equal, nor had he many doubts of completely triumphing over Egbert. After seducine; the tender and once faithful wife from the arms of'an ador* ing husband—after estranging the doting and once exemplary mother from a family of helpless innocents (and thesTe enormities he had committed), he could not think it would be a very difficult
lover | npr did he feel the least degğş§ of remorse áť the idea of the bricht J ч ^'^ ,- ^, ^ i^ -ч^^. ^ ^ .jL ^ \ ^^^ ^ ^ ν. ^ ^, . ΐ^ ν ^'^^ .^ J y rm ' prdépeçt of felicity he shouW Ш^лЬу' such a measure, or the smallest com- pımction aţ the idea of * ' ï *' Cropping this fair rose, "To rifle all it* s vecí n« s j then cast it, *' Like a loathsome weed, away." But though, in pursuance of his reso¬ lution not to pay Jacintha any atten¬ tion till he could do so unobserAX<l, lie commanded his words, he could not controul his eyes, nor forbear directing some glances at her, which heightened her colour, and disconcerted Egbert, Avho felt extremely pleased when his Lordship departed, and still moiy pleased when Jacintha declared it would he disagreeable to her tc? go tö the Castle that evening; á declaration which proceeded from her fears of again voi.· ir м meeting
к '*-■* 'v^-^J,^ *1 : · -У* l -А -*'. 'Ул^ л - Ч . ^Ч ^ / ^ л м .^ _\ у
гЛйсЖ^!^* 4 . BibjbtfçV '?1«β ¿Kb ЛоиШ ■ ¿t^^hcV ^'Йте -.ìrn^ -'fi^.^bich^^^ot - éui of provpkii% afeih^ßei^ou^te^ Her methet ai she imagined, did not айШр^ to f oppose her inclination to stay at home; on the contrary, she couídnot con^> pleasure I gave her. Egbert now mentioned his inten* Mrs. Greville so earnestly importuned him to chaperon, her and Gertrude, ih this their first visit"to the Castle, to give it up.. i* Mr· Greville luckily dined abroad this day ; so that Mrs* Greville and her daughter had again an opportunity of decorating their persons / according to their own taste* They made them selves, therefore, quite as ridiculous as they had done the preceding even^ ing, notwithstanding a hint upon the API ^ ' Ψ t subject
was a governing principle with botíb. _ ' „ f " ' b , -/ In the course of the day Captain ìtellamy calledì at the house; and Mrs· Gi*e^ilie Avas somewhat alarmed by* л- т т^ ŕ Gertrude's confessing'she thought him the most charming of men, Her alarm« boAvever, was transient, as Gertrude, after a short pattse, added, Avitlť thé most languishing. air imaginable, her eyes all the time fastened upon the glass, that though the secret sigh of her soul must evfer be breathed for him, she would hot be so great an enemy to the interests of her family as to discourage the attentions of Lord G wytherim About seven his Lordship's cMch came for the ladies ; and Jacintha, on being left to herself retired with a book into un inner narlour Vhich opened into the garden шш Mere
was deeply engaged in ú very interest¬ ing story, when a slow and cautious step behind het made her hastily turn round, and to her unutterable asto- níshment she beheld Lord Gwytherini His Lordship could not resist making use of the opportunity, which the absence of her lover and mother gave him, of addressing her as he wished. The idea of the advantages he might derive fVoin it, completely reconciled him to her not coming to the Castle, as he had at first hoped and expected, since even there he did not think he could have found so favourable a one for disclosing his sentiments ; he accord¬ ingly contrived to leave his company without exciting any observation, and hastened to" her by apri% r ate path, fur¬ nished with a plausible excuse for doing so, if her father should be at home«
book, and stood gazing at him, almost without power to sp«* ør &Щ : /* I fear, Miss Greville^'* said he.» advancing to »her, ■" I have alarmed youv" ' '.. . / / ■ *' NO* tXfy: Jj0t4 9 . Only SlltprİŞf4 ' me, '* replied Jacintha, a little ref^- vered from the disorder ptø which ¿is unexpected ^ а|^^^ л ' her ; but without offering him a:&Jfe ; . , as she neither liked his visit, nor wish- . eå him to continue a moment with hér. : -, Ť J ' í- "laúicomt" said he f taking her hand ere she was aware of bis design» "to reproach y ou for your cruelty in not coming to the Castle; surely» Wmy eyes; hold any correspondence with my heart» they must have told you í lived but in hopes of seeing yon again«" m 3 Jacintha,
Jacintha, without seeming to notice these last Avords, thanked him for the obliging solicitude he expressed for her- company ; and believing, or at least aflfečting to belie\?e, that he merely came for the purpose of bringing her ta the Castle, assured him it Avas not in her power to go out that evening, and therefore begged she might no longe? detain him, ' - ; . ΐ , Са' · - ΐ , ' ■,. - ,· , ^ Λ - >-***** Detain me Γ' repeated he, with all that warmth so natural to him, all, thär insinuation he could so readily ássuhiei " Oh, would to Heaven yöı* Avould permit me to devote not only this, but every succeeding hour of my life to you i Oh where, with whom could they be spent so rapturously !" " I am not accustomed to such com«* A plimentary language, my Lord, '' cried Jacintha, " and, perhaps on that account, do not greatly admire it. '* " Comply
*VÍ$ilT¿ ť 4 Gòrrmlimentary^ do you call it ?" exclaimed:he; "Heavens, what a ter^n foE 3uch í language as mine! language Which Г Ι;·,%'\ : · -ľ;-;. . \^У .\ "' ' t : -;■ -У .''*', ''F V'* * r Вге? г Ье% What tove inspirés, « Wärm fronrthe soul, ahd true to all its fíres ç* ν " ŕ л 1 , :, if 't -* j í ■ ^ , # > t,' ft-t^ii^fc«— ■■ v* ŕ ■ * language < which cannot speak* which cannot |>aiht half thč admiration, chalf the adoration with which you have inspired me f Never was I so charmed, never tøas I so enamoured ; but at this lîcannöt wonder, for neveri before did ;L ^behold such consummate beauty ísiich matchless perfection." : · ' :¡ V! m < * Y This is gomg Éootďar^my Lord,r €rÍe4 Cí JiaííiÄthaI$i *Мгг.еа11у cannot per> mit you to amuse yourself, at, mf expence any longen. You must allow me; to tell yo«f, I have neiťherthe folly moi \ simplicity which I am confident yoç iiriputetdlim^ :or you woulcţaot iuldæéi mehi sucha п|апвег J*, л. r -·: же u Good
vìsw:
/
u Good Heäyensy how you' injure yourself and me by such asuppöisitiöá ! I swear by all that is saered/ I; speak but what I feel, but what I think; your image, your idea,.have occupied my whole heart from the first instant I beheld you ; and if you do not relax a -little from this coldnesá, this severity, I shall become the most wretched of meu
**4i
i : »
*\î, must insist, my Lord," said Jacirxtha, ymnly endeavouring to with¬ draw her hand, "on с your from such language; and excúsenme for telling you, that, considering the difference in our situations,; your pre¬ gent conduct appears like presumption tome." » л .
r >
u Does this; look like presumption ?" cried rè, sinking on his knm befó« her; И Oh Miss Greville! could you read my heart, you ¡, would find it&át, * 4- i though
t ' / >' '» though I aspire to your favour, ? tisiritb lowliness, with respect ϊ" i ' *· ϊ ' ν " ' "" . - ," - ' "■ ,J '^ My Lord," said Jacintha, whose rising colour evinced her displeasure almost as forcibly as her words, %i \ must plainly inform you, you cannot alledge any thing which can either excuse, or render your present conduct agreeable to me; and positively, either your Lordship or I must quit this room immediately." He was beginning to remonstrate, when a sudden stop \vas put to his elo¬ quence by the entrance of Mrs. Greville. » She had lost all her money at a whist- table, where she had hoped to come off as triumphant as she generally did at her own house, and the houses of her neighbours ; but she had now to do with people infinitely more experienced in 3i ã the
wiťh> and consequently was compelled' 4Ş> paý v iş, handsome tribute to their Superior mL She lo8t ¿ however, witb 1 good grace ; and Lady Levälly, who was mistress of the ceremonies, or rather revels, at the Castles having intimated to her that she expected her to čut in again, she invented a pretext for getting home, in order tö replenish» Mr purse from a private hoard she kept for her own use and Gertrude's* unwil¬ ling, or unable, to find an opportunity of borrowing from Egbert, who was^ engaged with a large party in the musiø** room; .* Lotd Gwytherin hastily rose, upon her entrance, in manifest confusioni and Jacintha, the instant she, regained ber; liberty, ran out of the room, too much provoked with his Lordship to continue
■ eóntinue 'ahother moment in ¡гш#сот рапу.-^ л ' : ,'У- : -■ ,V.'.;- ■
.. - . ___ --s
^ -"- V„ 5 ŕ H- j'wŕ
<* <~Л τ\
1 £4
Well to)be;sure Г exclaimeÆMrs.v Greville,, as soon as the ? violent Äoctó she had received fromil^l]iolding; íhe| destruction of all her hdpesi,* her airy? castles ;; for?it was now too eviderlttfafo Jacintha had made^hat.eonquest* whichc she had flattered herself the charms? óf Gertrude had effected. : "Well to bet surel" said she, as soon as it would permit.her to speak, looking all the^tmie at Lord Gwytherin, " I never should- . -· 'V f · haye thoughtof such a thing, ,ş e t
> V
<ť I am extremely surprised,f*; criedv Lord Gwytherin,, who by this time had recovered from his embarrassment, and who always madeit a-rule tò confess) when he could nofc deny;* <ť lani ex- i tr<;mely surj^isàl^;îWbfc^Jo htøryou<i say so; I imagined a lady of your penest tration would at once have perceived the oďú ш6> impression
ч
v'- *' * - ri' ' , ' impression ýour lovçly. daughter made upon me.". - ■ if I perceive it, my Lord !" cried Mrs. Greville, her face all over scarlet. and fanning herself with violence ; * ' I perceive it ! No indeed, I had no ¡dear of such a thing ; and I hope, my Lord, you have not gone and talked a heap of extravagant speeches to the girl, to turn her brain." " Ah, Madam!" said he^ with a melancholy air, ' ť I fear I can neither affect her head nor her heart, except indeed I may hope to obtain your interest." " My interest!" repeated Mrs. Greville, seating herself^ in an agita¬ tion she could not hide ; * * my interest, my Lordi" and she suddenly began to muse. * - : . v; e' > '' * f ' . ' fj She
She clearly perceived that every hope of obtaining him for Gertrude was at an end; and she began to reconcile herself to their disappointment, by reflecting that his passion for Jacintha, might, if not opposed, lead to an event which wOuld arľord her scarcely less pleasure than she should have derived from his union with Gertrude, namely, the destruction of Jacintha. r With the libertinism of his character, the perseverance of his disposition, the insinuation of his manners, she was well acquainted ; and from all these circumstances she could scarcely doubt, thai if allowed to carry on his machi- . nations against Jacintha, he would, from her youth, and consequent inex¬ perience, notwithstanding her purity, and attachment for Egbert, \iltimately entangle her in his snares. Delighted at .e veţi the remote idea of her destruc¬ tion, at the idea of removing from her daughter
f' i- , " ^ 4 daiighţer a person who sjö continually,. and so completely Counteracted all the designs she formed for her, she resolved on fonvardihg to the utmost of her powe-the schemes of Lord Gwytherin, which, she was well aware, were of the- most dishonourable nature;, in such a: manner, however, as should prevent him from thinking she had a suspicion; of their being so. Her passion, entirely subdued by herr deliberations, and the resolution she had formed in, conséquence of them, she looked up with a smiling counte- nance, and said, * ' I am sure, my Lord, I should be very happy to do- any thing to oblige your Lordship ;, but indeed I have very little influence* with my eldest daughter; besides, there is some kind of a foolish attach- merit subsisting between hér and Mr. Oswald. However, all I can do, 1 will i * -v do; ! asíam'éoíífident your views are : honourable,
her heait, you'll declare yourself to¿ her father* " . ϊ " Doubt it not," cried Lord: Gwytherin, in a transport; ***Ьу all the saints, I swear to —^— 9r " Hold, my Lord Γ interrupted Mrs. Greville ; ťí ,from the opinion I entertain of your Lordship, protesta¬ tions are to me unnecessary. " *■* Ahd you promise to do all in/ your power to serve røe with your angelic daughter?" "> All," said Mrs. Greville.. ** Thus let me thank you then Í" he exclaimed,v kissing her hand with as· much transport as, perhaps, at that moment he would have kissed the hand of Jacintha;,and* at the same & time
S66 NOCTURNAL VISIT· timé forcing upon her finger a very finci brilliant arid valuable diamond ring, taken from his own for that pur- pose. Mrs. Greville now hurried-him back to the Castle, lest her husband should surprise them together. Though she faithfully kept the pre¬ mise she had made him, and endea¬ voured as much as possible to throw Jacintha in his way, he could scarcely ever procure an opportunity of con¬ versing with her; whenever such an opportunity did occur, he made the best use of it, but, to his infinite mortification* without being able to effect the least alteration in Jacintha's conduct, who, upon all occasions, treated him with the most frigid cold¬ ness and indifference. This behaviour, however, instead of checking his designs, or abating bis passion, rather increased
NOCTURNAL VISIT; increased thé one, arid rendered him more resolute in persevering in the other. '- - * ŕ - The subject upon which Ы conversed with her, as well as his yîsjt, was care¬ fully concealed by Jacintha from Egbert; but his own observation partly discovered what she would have hidden, and he frequently enquired what Lord Gwytherin said .'.tó her. Those enqui* rieş she constantly evaded, though it required the utmost address to do so ; but she well knew that the smallest hint of hk, Lordship's avowed attach* ment to her, could not fail of exaspe¬ rating Egbert, and would in all proba* bility be attended with the most unplea¬ sant consequences ; as he had fre¬ quently declared, that, as their mutual engagement was publicly known, Ы should consider the man who now addressed her upon any tender subject, guilty
MS NOCTURNAL Visit- г guilty of as great a breach '' of, honour and decorum, as if r sW was Ък Avife . Á month passed aw^y, Avithout Lord G-wythérin?r perceiving: himself in kny değime awarded fot his attentions to JaLtha, His .atiehçe being ,ow yearly bfc^aïisted, he ' deiermined on calling stratagem to hisaid ; he accord¬ ingly issued inyitatiönbT4fcr an enter* tainmenti which; updn his arrival at the Park^ he had promised to gtA^e in a yery short time to his tenantry, and:all the · families of any consequence or respectability in the vlcinitýl of the CaStlC .·.·,:■■* :: li í. This entertainment was to consist of a feast to the tenants, and a sump* tuous breakfast and dinner to his own party> vtiih a masquerade ia tho evening. ч j. ; > * W M * tbe Greviltes were among the first wbo>
- . -' ' - ' i „ - , ííoeTUftííAL visit^ S5ö ivho received an invitation ; but to the unspeakable mortification of the re^ m ale.pa rt of the family, Jacintha not excepted. Mr. Greville absolutely protested against their accepting it. Such scenes of luxury and dissipation, he did not think by any means cal* culáted to improve the minds of hia daughters^ besides, he ,had long medi¬ tated breaking thç, intimacy which t had take» .place between hisfermly and the inhabitants of the Castle f to his veiy - great annoyance, and, as he dreaded* their very great prqudice ;; and he thought he could not have- a better opportunity than the present* for beginning to puţ this design into exe¬ cution. Tears, prayers, ahd expestu^ lations were therefore unavailing; md Mrs* Greville found» that when¬ ever she didt rule her busband» føwas, only when his reason was on her side*
$& ^m ^-^ЩЩщь *fr
tó^
BHIJJl 1 ,, 1 , 1 , fr', -ν
"*V
L/Jrli\ir* Ι Λ<
«' Coraetotbèbsnij'jîtaLb « And rml ош the day— 'ti» my commifld î «* Gay м the Periıian god ourwlf wilï »tand, <f With a crown'd goblet in our lifted hand i - « Wliîk antič iDtatur« beat ui burdens ground, ' " And İp the vaulted tJűet our clangor* wund." f в 1 ^ Å НЕ mortification which Lord Gwytherin experienced, on first hear- ing of Mr. Greville's absolute prohibi* tion against any of the female part of his &шНу accepting the invitation to the J$te% was by no means inferior to that which they themselves felt in con¬ sequence of it ι but his brain was fertile ш
in expedients, ; and he soon contrived a scheme, which promised fair to prévent his being ultimately disappointed by the obstinacy of the Curate. On the day of the entertainment, Mrs. Grevilleand Gertrude shut them¬ selves up in utter disconsolation ; nor could any endeavours on the part of Mr. Greville re-animate, or restore them to good humour. Egbert accompanied the Wood villes to the Park; the company met ¿n',a superb pavilion шша upon the edge of the water, and amused themselves till dinner time by viewing the rustic sporte of the tenantry who were assembled in the opposite meadows, where they feasted in spacious tents gaily deco¬ rated ; and in the evening commenced dancing, to the rural sound of the pipe and tabor« No
No urt or expence that could contri* bute to render this etitettainment delightfuli, had been spared ; thé fame of it Lord GAvytherin trusted, nay determined, should reach every part of the kingdom, not doubting it would accelerate his matrimonial projects in Avhich he still persevered, notAvith* standing his passion for Jacintha* r The dinner, of the most luxurious kind, Avas served up, witlţ the most costly magnificence, in the banqueting loom of the Castle, the Gothic decora* tions of which added considerably to the splendour of the feast ; music re* echoed through the vaulted roof, and *# With WRSieî, mirth, and revelry* ■ŕ ** The Caule rung iœuad. % * » JU a late hout the company sepa- luted to prepare for the masquerade ; in the interim some young men f desirous bf
NOCTURNAL VtSÏt.' 263 bî amuşmgthemselves with thé sitopli» city and astonishment òf the country people, disguised themselves, and went into the village. Among these was art Autolicus, who excited much mirth by his pleasantry, and still greater satis* faction by a generous distribution of his wares; after parading about some time, he approached the house of .Gre* ville, and soon attracted Jacintha and <3ertrudeto the window, notwithstand¬ ing the ill humour of the latter. On theif approaching it, he displayed the contents of his basket, inviting them to purchase; whilst Gertrude was pretending to make bargains, he slily touched the hand of Jacintha, and slipped a folded papei* inte« it. Astonished by this action, and still more by the significant glance which accompanied it, Jacintha knew neither what to think nor what to do ; her mother at this moment coming forward, she retreated from the win¬ dow, and casting her eyes «ροή the
paper, perceived it directed tò herself in what appeared the writing of Egbert. She could no longer hesitate to examine it, and eagerly opening it, read aş follows :
9~*ттт0ШЕЕт—*т
Ci
DEAR JACINTHA,
** The ardent desire you expressed to witness the entertainment of this evening, has induced me to procure you a dress for the purpose. Do not hesitate to make use of it ; H yon do, I shall be inexpressibly disappointed, as I have proposed to myself the highest pleasure from your company ; and beholding the delight and surprise Avith which a «cene so brilliant and so new cannot fail of inspiring you. I would have returned to the house, in order to remove any scruples that you may, perhaps, feel against coining out, but that
„'i* NOCTURNAL VISÏT. U6Š that I feared my real motives for doing so would be suspected, and eònse- quently my wishes frustrated, as yont father če%id not grant that permission to you, which he refused to your mother and sister. As there cannot, however, be even tl,e shadow of impro- priety in putting yourself under my protection, I shall certainly expect you ;—arrange matters with the ser¬ vant, so that she may let you in; and as "soon as*the family have re¬ tired to rest, make the best of ybnr way to the chestnut-walk, about the # middle of which you may depend on meeting u E*~OSWAtI>»"
Jacintha felt highly delighted at this attention from Egbert» and extremely pleased at the idea of having her curio¬ sity gratified. At the appointed hour vou ι. n she
-í- ^
U6$ NOCTUENAL VISIT. shfi repaired to the garden, where sb found the promised bundle, Avhich she directly carried to her chamber with- out being observed, and there examin* inff it, found it contained a Ions: black silk domino, a mask, and a Spanish hat She then spoke to the maid about sitting up for her, though not without very great reluctance, as she could not help reflecting, not¬ withstanding her situation respect¬ ing Egbert, that she was not acting right in going, even with him, to any place prohibited by her father ; and as this reflection became every hour stronger, she would, in all probabi¬ lity, have relinquished the design entirely, but for the unwillingness* she felt to disappoint Egbert, whose heart, by his letter, seemed set upon her company.
■*■ *
As soon as she had reason to think the family were at rest, she equipped herself
'r NOCTURNAL VİSdtİ. -вб/ •herself in the masquerade habit ; and stealing down, with a light foot* but a trembling heart, угцз let. put by Gillian. She hastened to the place of appoint¬ ment, terrified lest she should eneoun- ter any wandering mask, and in the spot that had been mentioned, met, as she expected and imagined, Egbert; for both the face and figure of the person, who stood evidently waiting ■ŕ her approach, were completely hidden. " Jacintha!" exclaimed he, darting forward the moment he beheld her, * 'how impatiently have I waited for you !" Jacintha, trembling from a variety of amotions, gladly accepted his proffered arm ; and her agitation being obvious, he tried to ге-деиде and compose her. * f Good Heaven*!" said Jacintha» suddenly ink r rupt mg him» él how greatly your' voice is altered î Tis к S well
■r well you were so particular in let* ting me know wheie I should find you, for I should never have known you from it*** Egbert informed her he had altered it on purpose, and advised her to disguise her s as much as possible. % ν ** Oh î as to mine, M replied Jacintha, " 'tis of very little consequence, for I am sure 1 shan't make much use of it this evening; I shall be too much 4«kd aJWised to do any thing but look and listen." Her astonishment and admiration on entering the ball-room, far exceeded what she had pictured to herself she should feel ; it presented a scene, indeed» of the most brilliant magni¬ ficence and gaiety» a scene of which her imagination alone could never have given her an adequate «dea* The mom t of ш nuble siie t was hung with rose- coloured
coloured silk, embossed with silver, and decorated with wreaths of laurel, which appeared suspending the supert» lustres that illuminated it; various coloured lamps ornamented in a fanciful manner the balusf rading of a light gal¬ lery which went round it; and large fold¬ ing doors, thrown open at each extre¬ mity of the room, discovered an exten¬ sive suite of apartments, fitted up with scarcely less taste and splendour, than were conspicuous in the bail-ruom. The sudden panie which seized Jacintha on her first entrance amidst so crowded, tumultuous, and motley an jrsembly, by degrees subsided, and she soon joined in the gaiety and amuse* ments of the place« After ranging about for nearly two hours," and joining in several dances with Egbert, who took care no one should separate his fair companion from
NOCTURNAL VISIT. him, he proposed her viewing the illu¬ minations in the Park. This was a proposal very agreeable to Jacintha, as the increasing heat and noise of the rooms were becoming extremely unpleasant to her. They met a number of masks in the Park, wandering about the illuminated arches, bowers, and temples, which were erected on every side, and produced a most beautiful effect amidst the dark foliage surrounding them-an effect considerably heightened by the melody of wind instruments. ir By degrees Egbert drew Jacintha ňom the wandering crowd into a little shelving path, overshadowed by thick trees, and leading to a retired building, called the Druids Cave; a few scat* te f*å lamps now feebly lit this build¬ ing, which was'so remote from every other; that scarcely any other sound
than the low ánd mtírrhuríňg^ "tidmècóf ã neighbouring waterfall сои# B^dØ tinguished from it: * * M " ? ' ; J^ec^Îţ " Here," criéd Égtet^áidtfcffff| Jacintha to a seat, aftd jplëclfi| IrÛH* self by her, ' É here Ave shall eir^ ¿Sd# ness and quiet." * ' * Л -'î *ih»iod < ζ Come now," said Jacinth^ фш ingolf her own mask as she ¡фоЩ у remove ¿that cloud from your face? and speak-in your own voice; fori detest any ihmg artificial from Egbert^ Without obeying her request, Egbert caught her in a transport to his boson. — <4 My love, my tenderness/* 'tufai mured he in broken accents, "are not artificial. " . f He continued to speak in tiie moat enthusiastic manner of his passion, his adowtîon. Jacintha at first laughed
at this extravagance, and rkiiculed it ; but by degrees she became not only dis¬ pleased, but alarmed by -the increasing freedom of his language, and still- greater freedom of his actions. She tried, but in vain, to disengage herself , from him, nor were her efforts to make . herself heard, for some minutes, more successful; at length, bursting with indignation, she exclaimed, " I see you are determined to make me repent my having acted contrary to my sense of what was right ; this instant let me go, or, depend upon it, I will never forgive your present conduct," Egbert, however, instead of releasing, held her more firmly to his breast ; and Jacintha, being now convinced he was in a state of intoxication, for only to such a circumstance could she impute such language and actions as ф§ had never before heard or witnessed* !.jrø#f before thought him capable of uttering or
v or committing, determined, instead of exhausting her spirits in remonstrances and reproaches, which she had now every reason to believe would prove unavailing, to collect them in order to try and free herself from him. Her violent efforts to do so, caused his mask to fall to the ground ; and Jacintha beheld—not the features of Egbert, but-----of Lord Gwytherin ! The frightful snare spread for her destruction, instantly presented itself to her view—the snare into which her own imprudence had precipitated her ; and she now perceived that a devia¬ tion from propriety scarcely ever escapes punishment·
n 5 CHAP. ♦
CHAP: X-
" Restim his feet« distracted was his walk, "Mad Were his motions, and confus'd his talk
** »
JtiORROR, for some minutes, sus- pended the faculties of Jacintha, dur¬ ing which period, Lord Gwytherin, kneeling at her feet, his anns still encir¬ cling her« waist, tried to extenuate his conduct, and soften her in his favour. As soon as she could speak, Jacintha, assuming an air of composure, though her heart panted with terror, represented with calmness to Lord Gwytherin the : . -. jr Ä enormity
enormity he had been guilty of, in in¬ veigling her from her hôrne ; but at the same time assured him, if he would let her return thither directly, she would bury all that had passed in eterilal oblivion. ι " Impossible !" exclaimed Lord Gwytherin, É i I adore, I die for you ; he whose name I have assumed, feels nöt half the passion, half the admiration I feel for you ; my life, my fortune are devoted to your service, and be assured, since 1 have gone thus far, I will not recede. r At these worçls he started up, and darting to the door, hastily locked it Jacinthanow shrieked aloud.—"Listen 1 to mc, Lord Gwytherin," cried she; " though no reeling of humanity or virtue can sway you, yet let consider¬ ation for yourself, a reflection upon the punishment you must draw upon your n в own
own head by oifering me any further violence, deter you from it. " " I am well aware of the dangers Γ iaçur on your account," replied he, with calmness; " and from the risk I run, I think you must be convinced of the violence of my passion. '*—Then, again throwing himself at her feet, he exerted all his eloquence to try and melt her into tenderness; he again assured her Egbert did not feel for her half the adoration hè did ; he made her th«! most splendid offer, the m ost solemn promises—promises which he said he would bind himself in any man¬ ner she pleased to fulfil ; he represented how superior the advantages she must. derive from a connection with him, would be to any she could expect from an union, with Egbert ; ίφ hinted tlie probability there was of bis marrying her himself, if he could perceive he had any interest in her heart; and, finally, *
finally, proposed her setting off with him immediately for London, where a magnificent house, equipage, and ser-/ vants waited her reception; vowing she should never have reason to repent the loss of that protection she exchang¬ ed for his; and that she had better entitle herself to those proofs of his s .j m regard by a relaxation in her severity, than forfeit them by à coldness arid contempt, which, though mortifying to his feelings, could not warp him from his designs» Jacintha, stifling the terror occa- sioned by this declaration, looked upon him with scorn and disdain· í " I cannot think you* my Lord,'* said she, " so abandoned as you would wish to make me believe ; I see your motive for doing so—you want to inti* mídate me; but know, all your arte upon this head are unavailing ; it will, therefore,
therefore, save both your Lordship and me a great deal of trouble, if you will now permit me to retire : for of thi» be assured, that were your proposals as ^honourable as they are the reverse, I would reject them with the same firmness, nay almost the same abhor¬ rence 1 do at present." /' ; ' ť Then I will no longer delay availing myself of the happy opportunity which a well-concerted stratagem has given me," cried he. At these words Jacintha again shriek¬ ed, and burst from him ; he again seized her, and she was raising her hands in supplicating terror, when the door was forced open with á violence which rent it from the hinges, and Egbert, wild, raging, foaming, rushed forward. About two o'clock he had returned home,
home, and was let in by Gillian ; he was ascending the stairs, when she suddenly stopped him by exclaiming— " La,'Sir! isn't Miss Jacintha come back with yòu?" * * Back with me ľ* cried Egbert, turn¬ ing round, and staring at her; " are you mad ?" " Now, laide, Sir," said thè simple Gillian, " don't go to frighten me by saying you know nothing about her." t( Explain yourself," cried Egbert, with a sudden sensation of terror. This Gillian did as concisely as iţ was possible for her to do ; the horror and distraction of Egbert's soul at her information, can better be conceived than described. That Jacintha had been decoyed from her father's house for the vilest ' purposes—that Lord Gwytherin
Gwytherin-was the contriver of the л execrable scheme, which had but too wellsucceeded, he could not doubt; and ere Gillian had nearly concluded/ he sprang to the hall-door in frantic haste ;·—then suddenly recollecting that the assistance of Greville might be necessary in searching for Jacintha, he flew up stairs, and flinging open the door with a violence which ,not only woke, but alarmed him and his wife, he exclaimed—" She is gone, she is lost, she is deceived, Lord Gwytherin has deceived her 1" " Deceived whom ?" asked Greville* trembling. *' Jacintha," cried Egberts u and even now ——" Then, without finish¬ ing the sentencCy he darted from the chamber, calling upon Mr* Greyille to rise immediately, and foEow hmV to the
NOCTURNAL VIŠIŤ» SŠ1 f' the Park, and was out of the house in , an instant. -·■.·''-> He paused not till he reached the Castle ; his paleness, and the wiidness of his looks, attracted general observa¬ tion on re-entering the ball-room ; for f upon quitting it to return home, he had thrown aside both his mask and * ' i masquerade habit; and Woodville» who stillW-damidst the -gay aesem- bly, directly coming up to him, enquired what was the matter ? -' * '* -ΐ In accents scarcely articulate, Egbert informed him« ~ r ^ ' - ■"■■ * ϊ - ŕ * ¿ í€ This is no place to search for k them," said Woodville; "'tis in the Park we must look/' They hastily descended. to the hall, and enqukedfrom the servants whether they ·
they knew any thing of their Lord ?*■■» They replied in the negative. * f Here then let us »separate," cried Egbert,^ motioning for Woodville to take a contrary direction to hiš. 1 - 1 " к - Agonized, and almost despairing, he wandered about for many minutes ; at length, the remote and solitary situ¬ ation of tm Druiďs Cave recurring to his recollection, he flew to it, and arrived in a moment most critical to Jacintha. - . " * * * t " Villain, monster !" exclaimed he, as he tore Jacintha frorn the grasp of Lord Gwytherin, and hurled him to the other extremity of the room ; 4 6 how hast thou dared ———" But need I ask, can I wonder-—thy life has been a con¬ tinual round of infamy, and there is no deed, no crime, too black for thee to perpetrate. " " Insolence ľ*
* " Insolence î' ? cried Lord GA\y therin, who burned at that moment Avith m fury as ungovernable as* Egberťs^~a ; fury occasioned by his unexpected dis¬ appointment ; " but 'tis puerile to talk in this manner; I do not, like a hot- headed boy, vent my passion in Агойк**-* I let my actions speak !" . >. .. > ί , I , at \ - Λ * л-" İT γ *' This instant then," said Egbert, his eyes flashing fire, " this instant then I demand satisfaction for thy atrocious conduct ; if indeed the chance of taking ам4у ţhy worthless, thy pol¬ luted life, that disgrace to thyself» that curse to others, can be any satisfaction » for the insults thou hast offered» the injuries thou hast meditated. " " FoUoav me then," cried Lord GAi?ytherin, turning upon his heel with affected calmness. "Oh
S84? KOCTOHNAL VISIT. " Oh' no! for Heaven's sake, for mercy's sake !" exclaimed Jacintha, clinging to his arm ; "do not, dearest Egbert, think of such a measure; be satisfied with knowing the wretch's designs have been defeated, and leave him to the punishment of Heaven." * f ** ír Egbert endeavoured to compose and prevail upon her to return home ; but nothing except an absolute promise from him not to persevere in any hos¬ tile intentions against Lord Gwytherin, could calm, or induce her to comply with his request Lord Gwytherin, who had paused at the door, now suddenly exclaimed, unable to endure with any degree of patience the tenderness and solicitude which Jacintha expressed fot Egbert, " Am I to suppose, Sir, from this delay, that you are satisfied with the vent
■■' vent you have already given to your passion?" / At those words Egbert bnrstfrom the Aveak grasp of Jacintha, anel conjuring her to return home, rushed after his Lordship. They walked together with precipitation to an opening among some trees, at a distance from the cave; here Lord GAvytherin desired Egbert to stop till he had procured pistols from the Castle. At this instant Greviiie and Wood¬ ville appeared ;~~the former, in his way to the Castle, whither he was hastening Avith trembling expedition, encountered Woodville; and learning tropi him that neither Lord GAvytherin nor Jacintha had yet been disco\ f ered, he betrayed symptoms of the deepest horror, and joined, if possible, with increasing eagerness in searching after them«
-, " Is she safe—^is Jacintha safe ?" he wildly demanded, on darting to the spot where Egbert and Lord Gwytherin stood, attracted by their voices. -a '"Thank Heaven she is!" replied Egbert. Greville raised his eyes in grateful transport ; then looking with severity #t Lord Gwytherin, who had involun¬ tarily paused—" Oh my Lordi" he exclaimed, ť< upon what a dreadful pre¬ cipice have you stood ! You do not know, you cannot picture to your¬ self half the horrors you have escaped, by the providential frustration of your black designs ; to conceive them in their full extent, were sufficient to ** Müke thy eyes, like ftars, ¿tart from their spheres " Thy knotty аш! combined locks to part, ** And each particular hair to ftand on end» « Like quilU upgn the fietful txtfcupint." The
The solemn voice in which these words were pronounced, rnade Lor^ Cr%vytherin turn pale.—" Had yon succeeded," continued Mr> Greville; " but the idea," cried he, shuddering* " is too dreadful to dwell upon. Oh my Lord ! be well advised ; profit bythe past, and never again spread snares for others, lest, in doing so, you yourself should be entangled in one that might occasion your irremediable ruin !" * É Your advice is extremely good, " said Lord Gwytherin· * * and as such I shall pay it all due attention ; but really, my dear Bir," he continued (wishing to give another turn to the affair, and pre¬ vent the disclosure of a scene which he feared might retard, or frustrate the plan he had formed for the retrieval of his fortune), ** you think quite tm seriously of an innocent frolic»" " An innocent frolic, do yon call "it Γ
ZSS ^OCTUfiiÍAL VISIT. it ?" said Egbert ; ť ť add not to your øtMr vices the vice of falsehood, nor hope to appease the resentment you have inspired, by denying your of¬ fences." 4 * If you follow me, Sir," cried his Lordship, haughtily, ·'* I shall prove to you whether 'tis by words I desire to appease your resentment " + *' What do you mean, my Lord?" ťbwaldj whiter are yon f going? You are not so mad, you are not so rash, 1 hope, as to attempt risking your own life, nor so inhuman as to attempt risk¬ ing the life of a fellow-creature.—And you, my Lord, ean you, indeed, who are the aggressor—can you, who are so totally unfit to appear before the awful tribunal of Heaven~-can you, I say, с α courage such a design ?" * l Sir, n
m " Sir," cried Lord Gwytherin, endeavouring to Avrest his arm from Greville, " did you not think your pro¬ fession would protect you, you would never have dared to provoke my anger by the language you háve just used." " I fear not your anger, my Lord,** said Greville» with a smile of scorn ; " had I entertained such a dread, I should not have spoken as I have now done, convinced as I am that to my pro¬ fession you pay not the least regard, except it is from external appearances. Tlie man who can violate the laws of virtue and hospitality, Avho can pre¬ tend good-Avill and friendship to an in¬ nocent family, at the very moment he is aiming a destructive bloiv at their peace aiid reputation—the man who can offer violence, and use deceit towards a Avoman—he, 1 say, and $m are he, who Ы% committed all these enormities, can respect »o profirió» vou iv о however
-.jr however sacred, no age however, reve¬ rend î What mockery in such a one to say he respects the Ministers of God, at the very moment he is breaking the commands ofthat God ! and what folly in any one to credit such an assertion ! what still greater weakness in any one to hesitate tellin or such a man his real r opinion of him ! He, who could be inti¬ midated from doing so, from bokling up the mirror to him which would re¬ flect all his deformity, however great his prowess, or elevated hb rank, would deserve to suffer by his vit es. Of yours, my Lord, I ha\*e freely spoken ; and if that freedom has inspired you with resentment instead of compunction, ? tts not, I am convinced, any internal or external respect for my profession which prevents your giving way to it, but the still smiill voice of conscience, which tells you what I have said is I»
<<
Follow
u Follow me, Mr. Oswald!" said Lord Gwytherin again, trembling with passion, and attempting to go on. " Good Heavens, my Lord ! are you still so obstinate ?" cried Greville, again interposing; " must I repeat that you owe this young man obliga¬ tions of the greatest magnitude ? He has saved you from the perpetration of a crime, which, but to think 1 on, fills me with horror; and instead of seeking his life, you should almost kneel with grateful thankfulness before him. * f " Not for obligations of which I am not aware," said Lord Gwytherin, indignantly. " My Lord/* cried Greville, " I conjure, I entreat you to lend me your attention a few minutes longer,—And remember» Mr. Oswald," turning to him m he spoke, " if 1 cm persuade о ж Lord
Lord Gwytherin to give up his hostile intentions, I shall expect you to do the same." He then Avalked to some dis¬ tance, sufficient to prevent any thing he- sai d from being overheard ; and his Lordship, impelled by a secret impulse, followed him, though with apparent reluctance. Their conference was short ; but when they returned, it was visible that both Avere extremely agitated by it. " Mr. Oswald," said his Lordship, in accents scarcely articulate, while every feature was expressive of horror mingled with astonishment, " I submit to the guidance of Mr, G reville. " " And he must follow your exam¬ ple," exclaimed G reville. " What, Sir ! do you then wish to let the mm who meditated so great an injury
injury against you, escape punish¬ ment ?" said Egbert, with asperity. " He does not escape punishment," replied Mr. Greville, in a solemn voice. " Escape it Γ repeated Lord Gwytherin, raising his eyes to heaven, and striking his breast. " The hand of man cannot punish like the reproaches of conscience, "con- tinned Mr. Greville. Woodville now interfered ; and Egbert at length yielded to the united arguments and influence of hi» friend*· But nothing like a reconciliat ion took place between him aod Lord Gwytherin; na his sotd utierlv abhorred and recoiled front the idea of ever more h Editig intercourse \\ ith а регшп, who had ш nearly tifcetcit the di^trnetioit of all hi» happiness. о В u Капеш*
" Remember,"cried Lord Gwytherin to Mr. Greviiie, as lie turned to depart, ** I shall expect you in the course of the day, according to your promise ; as you have raised a storm in my breast, so, perhaps, you may be able to allay it"
CIIAE
CHAP. Xi
f
" He fméïf meut mä warmly prítí'íf, ·* То ш» b«f ta lii* rnißd*" JL HE moment Lord G wytherin retired Egbert flew to' the place Arhere he had left Jacintha, and found her lying sense* less upon the ground within a few paces of it ; the terror she had suffered on her own, and now felt on his account, so completely overcame her» that in attempting to follow him,she bad tainted . away.
His efforts, together with those of her father and Woodville, who had fol- loAved him, but still more the sound of Ids voice, and the assurance* of his safety, by degrees revived her ; and as soon as she could move $ she was con¬ ducted home, Mrs. G reAİlle Aras already în the par¬ lour, and also Gertrude, whom she had routed up ;-—Mr. Greville, judging of her anxiety by hi* own, and perceiving she looked extreme! ν agitated, lta*t- eiied to her, and taking her hand, beg¬ ged her, in the tendercst manner, to сот|кне herself, as Jactntlia l;ad liap- piiv been rescued from nil tbe dangers which environed her, ** Tis more than Ле deserved then,** mid Mrs. Ctievtlle» unable fo ctmtwnil tite malignant ¡amitin into wh irli »lie was thrown, by the mortification «lie experienced at finding, contrary t» all
her hopes and expectations, the strata¬ gem of Lord Gwytherin had not suc¬ ceeded ; ** such imprudence as she has been guilty of merited a severe punish¬ ment." ** It ba<* not gone unpunished, my dear/* replied Mr. Greville, who im- puled the warmth of İm wife to the cm- pleasure she felt at Jaeintha*» conduct; ** voit voiîrscH" must allow it has not* when vou reflect upon the terror she ba$ undergone·** 46 I only wflvct/' ried Mrs. Gre- ville« и that »he has before been «idk- l# How* Madam i'* md Egberts dart- in*y a (ieree anil imb^fiaitt gianre upo» lier ; * 6 b it î« having per mit ted her¬ self before to lie deeeivetl ? Bui coiim* iler» Madani, tiimit liwoeeiiee b the »bler of Credttlif r z mud liat Lurd о å Gw) thvriu
Gwytherin is not the only plotter in the workl·—the only persón capable of using an honourable and virtuous name for the blackest purposes." Neither those words, nor the look which accompanied them could be misunderstood. Both Mrs. Greville and Gertrude at once perceived that Egbert alluded to the letter they had fabricated. Shame, apprehension, or conscience, or, perhaps, all united, ¡n&antly died their cheeks with blushes; and Mrs. G revise, fearful of exasperating Egbert any further, lest lie should be more explicit, directly assumed a milder aspect, and apologfeed in some inanner for her expressions, iry declaring she scarcely knew what she mUU &be wa* s*» bewildered by the ilioek she liad received about Jacintha, She then* in a tonder acectit; ad viml kt to go to her chamber, aod try to take
„NOCTURNAL take some repose; advice which Jacin¬ tha did not hesitate to comply with.. Woodville, almost at the same moment, departed to seek after hk sister, and Egbert repaired to 1ш room, but not to rest. * ' s liis mind was too perturbed to admit. of his taking any :. he still burned with indignation against Lord Gwytherin ; and almost condemned Mr. Greville for his interference, who, bethought, had borne too calmly the injury meditat« ed against hi* daughter. A thousand disquieting ideas occurred, mid he felt that nothing but an immediate union with Jacintha coitili testore hî§ trait« qiiittoy ; in consequence of thb eon* vietion he determined to ime no time· in trying to prevail on Mr. Greville to· accede to his wfches. lie accordingly røtmtcd,aimogt immediately tolhe par· lour, and, as *ош as breakfast w&§ over, requested а prívate conference о Ь тш
j -r with him ;—with this request Mr. Greville directly complied ; and, 'pro¬ ceeding together to the garden, Egbert explicitly acquainted him with his pre¬ sent unhappincss, and the only means hy which he was convinced it could be removed. But on this'head Mr. Greville was as inflexible as ever;—he again repeated hbs positive determination not to per¬ mit an union to take place between Eirbcrt and Jacintha till the former was of age ; and Egbert, having in vain exerted ail his eloquence, parted. from him abruptly, in high and mani¬ fest displeasure at what he deemed his unreasonable caprice and obstinacy. The day was far advanced before Jacintha quii tell her chamber. On returning to the parlour she found her father there alone,* he immediately began to enquire into the particulars of
the artifice which had inveigled her from home ; and, from what she told him, it was evident that Lord Gwytherin, under the disguise of Egbert, had 'hoped to take advantage of her ten¬ derness and credulity, not doubting' but the gay, dissipated, and volup¬ tuous scene, into whieh he introduced her, would have melted her to his pur¬ pose. ťí 1 hope," said Mr. Greville, with a ff ravit v of voice and countenance bordering on severity, " I hope the remembrance of the dreadful dangers you incurred by a deviatiou from pro¬ priety, will gua Al you in future from a similar error. • .. " From the engagement existing be¬ tween you and Mr. Oswald, you may say, perhaps, or at least think your conduct excusablc*in accepting an Invi¬ tation supposed to come f rom him ; but this
г > this I can by no means allow. No consideration, no inducement should •influence us to act contrary to our sense of right ; and that you did so İn going to an amusement 1 forbade, in stealing clandestinely from your home at mid¬ night, I have not a doubt ; nay, that blush convinces me, that at the very moment you were obeying the dictates of inclination, you Avere acting coii- trary to those of prudence. *' Pain and remorse- almost ever attend the triumph of the former; and; of this be assured, that deception and dissimulation never go unpunished; and also that, in trying to outwit others, we frequently outwit ourselves.. Had not'Mr. Oswald interposed, what a miserable, what a wretched creature at tliis moment might you have been, from having suffered vourself to be allured into indiscretion ! But I will not shock you or myself, " he continued, perceiving
perceiving she grew pale, and shuddered* * ŕ by dwelling upon the dreadful Idea of such misery. " Be Êcrateful to Providence for vout presentation ; and still continue to de¬ serve its protection, by a strict adhe¬ rence to Avhat is right·" j- _ -4 The heart of Jacintha acknowledged the justness of what her father said ; and it tended to heighten .the horror Avith Avhich she reflected upon an impru¬ dence, that hatl so nearly proved fatal to herself, and injurious to others. Egbert could not banish the nneasv reilcctions Avhich had obtruded upon his mind ; and they at length deter» mined him to try hi» eloquence with the daughter, since it had proved una¬ vailing with the father, and endeavour to prevail on her to accompany him im¬ mediately ţo Scotland». for
Tor the purpose of making this pro¬ posal, he returned from Woodville's, 'where he had dined, at an early hour ; for he felt too much irritated with Mì*. Greville to continue at home, *av1io neither had, nor could, he believed, assign any satisfactory or sufficient reason for the delay of his nuptials, and Avhom he consequently accused of caprice. He contrived, in thet course of the evening, to obtain a private conversa¬ tion Aťith Jacintha in the garden. ' She heard his proposal with astonishment, and endeavoured to rally him, but* to no effect, out of the ideas Avhich had caused him to make it ; she then expli¬ citly declared she could not accede to it. " I cannot, I durst not, dearest Egbert," said she, endeavouring as mucli as possible to soften a refusal, which
which she perceived, by the lowering gloom of his brow, and the sudden paleness of his check, at once offended and distressed him, ' ' consent to such a measure ; the dangers I so recently and narroAvly escaped, have made too strong an impression upon my mind, to permit me again to act contrary to my conviction of right, by doing which they alone were incurred. I should think myself inexcusable if I attempted to act in opposition to the Avnhes of a parent, who has ever manifested the strongest—the tenderest anxiety formy welfare and happiness." " Then, I suppose," said Egbert, ť i if he expressed a wish to separate us entirely, you would think yourself bound to obey it." " No," replied Jacintha; " because I think no child is bound to commit an action inconsistent Avith her ideas of honour,
^'
lt.' ** í . «r ' honour, even for a parent ; but every thing shqrt of that, I-think a parent, such as mine particularly, has a right to expect. " The importunities of Egbert were not to be silenced by what Jacintlm said. He renewed his arguments ; he talked of the shortness of life; the folly, therefore, of delaying happiness when there was so very limited a time for enjoying it. Jacintha, however, continued inflex¬ ible; and he parted from her, as he had done from her father, abruptly, and in displeasure. «** - EA'ery day increased tbe unhappiness of Egbert ; for every day tended to increase the apprehensions which' had taken possession of his mind. ■г With that promptitude which so many
гЛ , ~ Ч NOCTURNAL VISIT. S07 many of us have to torment ourselves, he conjured up a thousand images to torture and affright. He began to fear that Mr. Greville was forming designs inimical to his peace ; his long and fre- quent visits to the Castle, the cause of which was never revealed, the mild and forgiving manner in which he spoke òf Lord Gwytherin, the severity with which he checked any expression of disrespect against him, particularly if it came from the lips of Jacintha, all these circumstances suggested this tor¬ menting fear, and persuaded him into a thorough belief that Lord Gwytherin had made an honourable proposal for Jacintha, if that could be called ho¬ nourable, which was made in defiance of her solemn engagement to another person ; and that her father, swayed by the powerful charms of ambition, had yielded to it, notwithstanding his probity and humility, md was con* certinsr
certing measures to bring about an alliance between them. J- Egbert well knew the hold he had of Jacintha's heart, but he also well knew the influence her father had overit; and he dreaded to think of the conse¬ quences which might result from his exerting that influence. After some deliberation, therefore, he resolved not to trust his jhappiness to «o doubtful an issue ; but at once terminale his dis¬ quietude concerning her, and prevent * '- ii her constancy being put to any test, by carrying her off to Scotland. This resolution was.no sooner formed, than imparted to Woodville, who (as he did not deem the suspicions of Egbert ill-founded) not only highly approved of it, but promised to assist him in putting it into execution, and also to accompany him in his journey, Preparations
Preparations were accordingly made for it without delay ; and the heart of Egbert dilated with ecstacy at the pro¬ spect he beheld of speedily binding Jacintha to himself by a bond too. sacred to be broken.
I í
> í
ENO OF VOL. I.
&
t At* MIHI«? A F*«$, ¿CAOXNHAll-fTBXXT*
