Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Frankenstein: or, The modern Prometheus
FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, TUE MODERN PROMETHEUS.
CHAPTER L Nothing is more painful to the human mind, than, after the feelings have been worked up by a quick suc¬ cession of events, the dead calmness of inaction and certainty which follows, and deprives the soul both of hope and fear. Justine died ; she rested ; and I was alive. The blood flowed freely in my veins, but a weight of despair and remorse pressed on my heart, whieh VOL. II. в
nothing could remove. Sleep fled from my eyes ; I wandered like an evil spirit, for I had committed deeds of mischief beyond description horrible, and more, much more, (I persuaded myself) was yet behind. Yet my heart overflowed Mİth kindness, and the love of virtue. I had begun life-with benevolent in¬ tentions, and thirsted for the moment мЬеп I should put them in practice, and make mvself usefuľ to my fellow- beings. Now all was blasted: instead of that serenity of conscience, which allowed me to look back upon the past M'ith self-satisfaction, and from thence to gather promise of new hopes, I was seized by remorse and the sens*) of guilt, which hurried me away to a hell of intense tortu resi, such as np language сад describe. This, state of mind preyed upon my he&lth,, which had entirely recovered
from the first shock it had sustained. I shunned the face of man ; all sound of joy or complacency was torture to me; solitude was my only consolation— deep, dark, death-like solitude. My father observed with pain the alte¬ ration perceptible in my disposition and habits, and endeavoured to reason with me on the folly of giving way to immo¬ derate grief. u Do you think, Victor," said he, " that I do not suffer also ? No one could love a child more than I loved your brother ;" (tears came into his eyes as he spoke) ; " but is it not a duty to the survivors, that we should refrain from augmenting their unhap¬ piness by an appearance of immoderate grief? It is also a duty owed to your»» self; for excessive sorrow prevents im¬ provement or enjoyment, or even the discharge of daily usefulness, without which no man is fit for society/' в 2
This advice, although good, was to¬ tally inapplicable to my case; I should have been the first to hide my grief, and console my friends, if remorse had not mingled its bitterness with my other sensations. Now I could only answer my father with a look of despair, and en¬ deavour to hide myself from his view. About this time we retired to our house at Belrive. This change was particularly agreeable to me. The shutting of the gates regularly at ten o'clock, and the impossibility of remaining on the lake after that hour, had rendered our residence within the walls of Geneva very irksome to me. I was now free. Often, after the rest of the family had retired for the night, I took the boat, and passed many hours upon the water. Sometimes, with my sails set, I was car¬ ried hy the wind ; and sometimes, after rowing into;the middle of the lake, I
left the boat to pursue its own course, and gave way to my own miserable re¬ flections. I was often tempted, м hen all was at peace around me, and I the only unquiet thing that wandered restless in a scene so beautiful and heavenly, if I except some bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and interrupted croaking was heard only M'hen I approached the shore—often, I say, I ivas tempted to plunge into the silent lake, that the waters might close over me and my ca¬ lamities for ever. But I was restrained, when I thought of the heroic and suf¬ fering Elizabeth, whom î tenderly loved, and M'hose existence Mas bound up in mine. I thought also of my father, and surviving brother: should I by my base desertion leave them exposed and unprotected to the malice of the fiend whom I had let loose among them? At these moments l Mept bitterly, lì t>
and wished that peace would revisit roy mind only that I might afford them consolation and happiness. But that could not be. Kemorse extinguished every hope. I had been the author of un- alterable evils; aud ï lived in daily fear, lest the monster whom I had created should perpetrate some new wicked¬ ness. I had an obscure feeling that all was not over, and that he would still commit some signal crime, which by its enormity should almost efface the recollection of the past. There was always scope for fear, so long as any thing I loved remained behind. Mv abhorrence of this fiend cannot be con¬ ceived. When I thought of him^ I gnashed my teeth, my eyes became in¬ flamed, and I ardently wished to extin¬ guish that life which I had so thought¬ lessly bestowed. When I reflected on his crimes and malice, my hatred and,
revenge burst all bounds of moderation. I would have made a pilgrimage to the highest peak ofthe Andes, could I, м hen there, have precipitated him to their base. I wished to see him again, that I might мгеак the utmost extent of anger on his head, and avenge the deaths of William and Justine. Our house was the house of mourn¬ ing. My father's health Mas deeply shaken by the horror of the recent events. Elizabeth was sad and despond¬ ing; she no longer took delight in her or¬ dinary occupations; all pleasure seemed to her sacrilege tow ard the dead ; eter¬ nal woe and tears she then thought was the just tribute she should pay to inno¬ cence so blasted and destroyed. She was no longer that happy creature, who in earlier youth Mandered with me on the banks of the lake, and talked with ecstacy of our future prospects. Sbe ß 4
had become grave, and often conversei! of the inconstancy of fortune, and the instability of human life. " When I reflect, my dear cousin," said she, " on the miserable death of Jus¬ tine Moritz, ! no longer see the world and its works as they before appeared to me. Before, I looked upon the ac¬ counts of vice and injustice, that I read in books or heard from others, as talcs of ancient days, or imaginary evils; at least they were remote, and more fami¬ liar to reason than to the imagination ; but now misery has come home, and men appear to me as monsters thirst¬ ing for each other's blood. Yet I am certainly unjust. Every body believed that poor girl to be guilty ; and if she could have committed the crime for which she suffered, assuredly she would have been the most depraved of human creatures. For the sake ofa few jewels,
to have murdered the son of her bene¬ factor and friend, a child whom she had nursed from its birth, and appeared to love as if it had been her own ! I could not consent to the death of any human being; but certainly I should have thought such a creature unfit to remain in the society of men. Yet she Mas innocent. I know, I feel she was innocent; you are of the same opinion, and that confirms me. Alas! Victor, when falsehood can look so like the truth, who can assure themselves of certain happiness? I feel as ifl were walking on the edge of a precipice, to¬ wards which thousands are crowding, and endeavouring to plunge me into the abyss. William and Justine меге assassinated, and the murderer escapes ; he walks about the world free, and per¬ haps respected. But even if I were condemned to suffer on the scaffold в 5
for the same crimes, I would not change places with such a wretch." I listened to this discourse м ith the extremest agony. I, not in deed, but in effect, was the true murderer. Eli¬ zabeth read rny anguish in my coun¬ tenance, and kindly taking my hand said, " My dearest cousin, you must calm yourself. These events have affected me, God knows how deeply; but I am not so M'retched аз you are. There is an expression of despair, and sometimes of revenge, in jour counte¬ nance, that makes me tremble. Be calm, my dear Victor ; I Mould sacrifice my life to your peace. We surely shall be hapjry: quiet in our native country, and not mingling in the world, what can dis¬ turb cur tranquillity?" She shed tears aâ she said this, dis¬ trusting the very solace that øhe gave ; but at the same time she smiled, that
she might chase away the fiend that lurked in my heart. My father, who saw in the unhappiness that was painted iu tny face only an exaggeration ofthat sorrow which I might naturally feel, thought that an amusement suited to my taste would be the best means of restoring to me my wonted serenity. It was from this cause that he had re¬ moved to the country; and, induced by the same motive, he now proposed that we should all make an excursion to the valley of Chamounix. I had been there before, but Elizabeth and Ernest never had ; and both had often expressed an earnest desire to see the scenery of this place, which had been described to them as so wonderful and sublime. Accordingly we departed from Geneva on this tour about the middle of the month of August, nearly two months after the death of Justine.
The weather was uncommonly fine; and if mine had been a sorrow to be chased away by any fleeting circum¬ stance, this excursion would certainly have had the effect intended by my fa¬ ther. As it was, I Mas somewhat inter¬ ested in tlie scene ; it sometimes lulled, although it could not extinguish my grief, During the first day we tra¬ velled in a carriage. In the morning we had seen thé mountains at a dis¬ tance, towards which we gradually ad¬ vanced. We perceived that the valley through which we wound, and which was formed by the river Arve, whose course we followed, closed in upon us by degrees ; and M'hen the sun had set, we beheld immense mountains and pre¬ cipices overhanging us on every side, and heard the sound ofthe river raging among rocks, and the dashing of water¬ falls around.
The next day we pursued our jour¬ ney upon mules ; and as we ascended still higher, the valley assumed a more magnificent and astonishing character. Ruined castles hanging on the precipices of piny mountains; the impetuous Arve, and cottages every here and there peeping forth from among the trees, formed a scene of singular beauty. But it was augmented and rendéred sublime by the mighty Alps, whose white and shining pyramids and domes towered above all, as belonging to ano¬ ther earth, the habitations of another race of beings. We passed the bridge of Pelissier, where the ravine, which tbe river forms, opened before us, and we began to as¬ cend the mountain that overhangs it. Soon after we entered the valley of Chamounix. This valley is more won¬ derful and sublime, but not so beautiful
and picturesque as that of Servox, through which we had just passed. The high and snowy mountains were its immediate boundaries ; but we saw no more ruined castles and fertile fields. Immense glaciers approached the road ; we heard the rumbling thunder of the falling avelanche, and marked the smoke of its passage. Mont Blanc, the supreme and magnificent Mont Blanc, raised itself from the surround¬ ing aiguilles, and its tremendous dome overlooked the valley. During this journey, I sometimes joined Elizabeth, and exerted myself to point out to her the various beauties of the scene. I often suffered my mule to 1щг behind, aad indulged in the misery of reflection. At other times I spurred on the animal before my companions, that ï might forget them, the world, and, more than all, myself. When at
a distance, I alighted^ and threw my¬ self on the grass, weighed down by horror and despair. At eight in the evening I arrived at Chamounix. My father and Elizabeth were very much fatigued ; Ernest, who accompanied us, was delighted, and in high spirits ι the only circumstance that detracted from his pleasure was the south wind, and the rain it seemed to promise for the next dav. We retired early to our apartments, but not to sleep; at least I did not. I remained many bours at tbe window* watching the pallid lightning that play¬ ed above Mont Blanc, and listening tø the rushing of the Arve, which ran below my window.
CHAPTER II.
The next day, contrary to the prognos¬ tications of our guides, was fine, al¬ though clouded. We visited the source of the Arveiron, and rode about the valley until evening: These sublime and magnificent scenes afforded me the greatest consolation that I was capable of receiving. They elevated me from all littleness of feeling ; and although they did not remove my grief, they subdued and tranquillized it. In some degree, also, they diverted my mind from the thoughts over which it had
brooded for the last month. I returned in the evening, fatigued, but less un¬ happy, and conversed with my family with more cheerfulness than had been my custom for some time. My father was pleased, and Elizabeth overjoyed. ** My dear cousin," said she, " you see what happiness you diffuse when you are happy; do not relapse again 1" The following morning the rain poured down in torrents, and thick mists hid the summits of the moun¬ tains. I rose early, but felt unusually melancholy. The rain depressed me; my old feelings recurred, and I was miserable. I knew how disappointed my father would be at this sudden change, and I wished to avoid him un¬ til I had recovered myself so far as to be enabled to conceal thoâe feelings that overpowered me. I knew that they would remain that day at the inn ;
and as I had ever inured myself to rain, moisture, and cold, I resolved to go alone to the summit of Montanvert. I remembered the effect that the view of the tremendous and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first saM' it. It had then filled roe with a sublime ecstacy $! .* viive wings to tbe soul, and allowed it to soar from the obscure world to hght and joy. The sight of the awful and majestic in nature had indeed always the effect of solemnizing my mind, and causing me to forget the passing cares of life. I determined to go alone, for I was well acquainted with the path, and the presence of another wouid destroy the solitary grandeur of the scene. The ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continual and short windings, which enable you to sur¬ mount the perpendicularity of the
mountain. It is a scene terrifically desolate. In a thousand spots the traces of the winter avelanche may he per¬ ceived, where trees lie broken and strewed on the ground ; some entirely destroyed, others bent, leaning upon the jutting rocks of the mountain, or trans¬ versely upon other trees. The path, as you ascend higher, is intersected by ra¬ vines of snow, down which stoues ¡ссш- tiuuallv roll from above ; one of them is particularly dangerous, as the slight¬ est sound, such as even speaking in a loud voice, produces a concussion of air sufficient to draw destruction upon the bead of the speaker. The pines are not tall or luxuriant, but they are sombre, and add an air of severity to the scene, I looked on the valley be¬ neath ; vast mists were rising from the rivers which ran through it, and curl¬ ing iq thick wreaths around the oppo-
site mountains, whose summits were hid in tbe uniform clouds, while rain poured from the dark sky, and added to the melancholy impression I received from the objects around me. Alas ! why does man boast of sensibilities su¬ perior to those apparent in the brute ; it only renders them more necessary beings. If our impulses меге confined to hunger, thirst, and desire, we might be nearly free ; but now м e are moved by every wind that blows, and a chance word or scene that that word may con¬ vey to us. We rest ; a dream has power to poison sleep. We rise ; oue waoďring thought pollutes the day. We feel, xonceive, or reason ; laugh, or weep, Embrace fond woe, or cast оцг cares away ; It U the same: for, be it joy or sorrow, The path of its departure still is free. Man's yesterday may ne'er be like his morrow; Nought may endure but mutability !
it was nearly noon M'hen I arrived at the top of the ascent. For some time I sat upon the rock tbat overlooks the sea of ice. A mist covered both that and the surrounding mountains. Pre¬ sently a breeze dissipated the cloud, and I descended upon the glacier. The surface is very uneven, rising like the waves of a troubled sea, descending low, and interspersed by rifts that sink deep. The field of ice is almost a league in width, but I spent nearly two hours in crossing it. The opposite mountain is a bare perpendicular rock. From the side where I пом' stood Mont¬ anvert M'as exactly opposite, at the dis¬ tance of a league ; and above it rose Mont Blanc, in awful majesty. I re¬ mained in a recess of the rock, gazing on this wonderful and stupendous scene. The sea, or rather the vast river of ice, wound among its dependent mountains»
whese aerial summits hung over its re¬ cesses. Their icy and glittering peaks shone in the sunlight over the clouds. My heart, which was before sorrowful^ now swelled witb something like joy ; 1 exclaimed—" Wandering spirits, if indeed ye wander, and do not rest in your narrow beds, allow me this faint happiness, or take me, as your com¬ panion, away from the joys of life." As I said this, I suddenly beheld the figure of a man, at some distance, ad¬ vancing towards me with superhuman speed. He bounded over the crevices in the ice, among which I had walked with caution ; his* stature also, as he approached, seemed to exceed that of man. Γ was troubled : a mist came over my eyes, and I felt a faintness seize me ; but I was quickly restored by the cold gale of the mountains. I per¬ ceived, as the shape came nearer, (sight
tremendous and abhorred !) that it was the wretch whom I had created, I trembled with rage and horror, resol¬ ving to wait his approach, and then close with him in mortal combat. He approached ; his countenance bespoke bitter anguish, combined with disdain and malignity, while its unearthly ug¬ liness rendered it almost too horrible for human eyes. But I scarcely ob¬ served this; anger and hatred had at first deprived me of utterance, and I recovered only to overwhelm him with words expressive of furious detestation and contempt. 44 Devil!" I exclaimed, " do you dare approaclmne? and do not you fear the fierce vengeance of my arm wreaked on your miserable head ? Begone, vile insect ! or rather staj r , that I may tram¬ ple you to dust ! and, oh, that F could, with the extinction of your miserable
existence, restore those victims whom you have so diabolically murdered !" " I expected this reception/' said the dæmon. " All men hate the wretched ; how then must I be hated, who am mi¬ serable beyond all living things î Yet you, my creator, detest and spurn me, thy creature, to whom thou art bound by ties only dissoluble by the annihilation of one of us. You purpose to kill me. How dare you sport thus M'ith life ? Do your duty towards me, and I will do mine towards you and the rest of mankind. If you м ill comply with my conditions, I will leave them and you at peace ; but if you refuse, I will glut the maw of death, until it be satiated with the blood of your remaining friends/' " Abhorred monster ! fiend that thou art! the tortures of hell are too mild a vengeance for thy crimes.
Wretched devil ! you reproach me with your creation ; come on then, that I may extinguish the spark which 1 so negligently bestowed/ 5 My rage Mas without bounds; I sprang on him, impelled by all the feelings which can arm one being against the existence of another. He easily eluded me, and said, " Be calm ! I entreat you to hear me, before you give vent to your hatred on my devoted head. Have I not suffered enough, that you seek to increase my misery? Life, although it may only be an accumulation of anguish, is dear to me, and 1 Mill defend it. Remember, thou hast made me more powerful than thyself; my height is superior to thine; rny joints more supple. But I will not be tempted to set myself in opposition to thee. I am thy creature, аж! I will be even mild and docile to my natural vol, u. v
lord and king, if thou wilt also perform thy part, the which thou owest me. Oh, Frankenstein, be not equitable to every other, and trample upon me alone, to m horn thy justice, and even thy clemency and affection, is most due. Kemember, that I am thy crea¬ ture : I ought to be thy Adam ; but I am rather the fallen angel, whom thou drivest from joy for no misdeed. Every where I see bliss, from which I alone am irrevocably excluded. 1 Mas bene¬ volent and good ; misery made me a fiend. Make me happy, and I shall again be virtuous." " Begone ! I will not hear you. There can be no community between 5 ou and me ; we are enemies. Begone, or let us try our strength in a fight, in m hich oue must fall." " How can I move thee? Will no entreaties cause thee to turn a favour-
able eye upon thy creature, who im¬ plores thy goodness and compassion. Believe mc, Frankenstein : I Mas bene¬ volent; my soul glowed with love and humanity : but am I not alone, mise¬ rably alone ? You, my creator, abhor me ; м hat hope can I gather from your fellow-creatures, м1ю owe me no¬ thing? they spurn and hate me. The desert mountains and drearv glaciers are my refuge. I have wandered here many days; the caves of ice, which I only do not fear, are a dwell¬ ing to me, and the only one which man does not grudge. These bleak skies I hail, for they are kinder to me than your fellow-beings. If the mul¬ titude of mankind knew of my exist¬ ence, they Mould do as you do, and arm themselves for my destruction. Shall I not thon hate them who abhor me? I Mill keep no terms with my
enemies. 1 am miserable, and they shall share my wretchedness. Yet it is in your power to recompense me, and deliver them from an evil which it only remains for 30u to make so great, that not only you and your fa¬ mily, but thousands of others, shall be swalloMcd up in the whirhvinds of its rage. Let your compassion be moved, and do not disdain me. Listen to my tale: мЬеп you have heard that, aban¬ don or commiserate me, as you shall judge that I deserve. But hear me. The guilty arc alloMed, by human Jaws, bloody as they may be, to speak in their ом -u defence before thev are con- demned. Listen to me, Frankenstein. You accuse me of murder ; and yet vou Mould, with a satisfied conscience, destroy your ом n creature. Oh, praise the eternal justice of man ! Yet ï ask you not to spare nie : listen to me ; and
then, if you can, and if jou will, destroy the work of your hands." " Why do j ou call to my remem¬ brance circumstances of which I shud¬ der to reflect, that I have been the mise¬ rable origin and author ? Cursed be the day, abhorred devil, in which you first saw light ! Cursed (although I curse myself) be the hands that formed you ! You have made me wretched beyond expression. You have left me no power to consider whether I am just to you, or not. Begone ! relieve me from the sight of your detested form." iC Thus I relieve thee, my creator/' he said, and placed his hated hands before my eyes, which 1 flung from me with violence; " thus 1 take from thee a sight which you abhor. Still thou canst listen to me, and grant me thy compassion» By the virtues that I ν 3
once possessed, Idemand this from yon. Hear my tale ; it is long and strange, and the temperature of this place is not fitting to your fine sensations ; come to the hut upon the mountain. The sun is jet high in the heavens; before it de¬ scends to hide itself behind yon snowy precipices, and illuminate another world, you will have heard my story, and can decide. On you it rests, м -he- ther I quit for ever the neighbourhood of man, and lead a harmless life, or become the scourge of your fellow- creatures, and the author of vour own speedy ruin/* As he said this, he led the way across tbe ice: I followed. My heart was full, and I did not answer him ; but, as I proceeded, 1 weighed the various arguments that he had used, and deter* mined at least to listen to his tale. I was partly urged by curiosity, and
compassion confirmed my resolution. I had hitherto supposed him to be the murderer of my brother, and I eagerly sought a confirmation or denial of this opinion. For the first time, also, I felt what the duties of a creator to¬ wards his creature меге, and that I ought to render him happy before I complained of his M'ickedness. These motives urged me to comply with his demand. We crossed the ice, there¬ fore, and ascended the opposite rock. The air Mas cold, and the rain again began to descend : we entered the hut, the fiend Mİth an air of exultation, I with a heavy heart, and depressed spi¬ rits. But I consented to listen ; and, seating myself by the fire which my odious companion had lighted, he thus began his tale.
с 4
CHAPTER Hf.
" Ir is with considerable difficulty that I remember the original æra of my be¬ ing : all the events of that period appear confused and indistinct. A strange mul¬ tiplicity of sensations seized me, and I saw, felt, heard, and smelt, at the same time ; and it was, indeed, a long time be¬ fore I learned to distinguish between the operations of my various senses. By degrees, I remember, a stronger light pressed upon my nerves, so that I Mas obliged to shut my ej es. Darkness then came over me. and troubled me ; but
hardly had I felt this, when, by opening my eyes, as I now suppose, the light poured in upon me again. I walked, and, I believe, descended ; but I pre¬ sently found a great alteration in my sensations. Before, dark and opaque bodies had surrounded me, impervious to my touch or sight ; but I now found that I could wander on at libertv, with no obstacles which I could not either surmount or avoid. The light became more and more oppressive to me ; and, the heat wearying me as I walked, I sought a place where I could receive shade. This was the forest near In- goldstadt ; and here I lay by the side of a brook resting from my fatigue, until 1 felt tormented by hunger and thirst. This roused me from my nearly dormant state, and I ate some berries which I found hanging on the trees, or lying on the ground. I slaked my с 5
thirst at the brook; and then lying down, Mas overcome by sleep. " It was dark wdien I awoke; I felt cold also, and half-frightened as it were instinctively, finding myself so deso¬ late. Before I had quitted your apart¬ ment, on a sensation of cold, I had co¬ vered myself with some clothes ; but these меге insufficient to secure me from the dews of night. I was a poor, helpless, miserable wretch ; I knew, and could distinguish, nothing ; but,. feeling pain invade me on all sides, I sat down and w ept. " Soon a gentle light stole over the heavens, and gave me a sensation of pleasure. I started up, and beheld a radiant form rise from among the trees. I gazed with a kind of wonder. It moved slowly, but it enlightened my path; and 1 again Ment out in search of berries. I was still cold, wheu under
one of the trees I found a huge cloak, with which I covered myself, and sat down upon the ground. No distinct ideas occupied my mind ; all was con¬ fused. I felt light, and hunger, and thirst, and darkness; innumerable sounds rung in my ears, and on all sides various scents saluted me: the only object that I could distinguish was the bright moon, and I fixed my eyes on that with pleasure. " Several changes of day and night passed, and the orb of night had greatly lessened when I began to distinguish my sensations from each other. I gra¬ dually saw plainly the clear stream that supplied me with drink, and the trees that shaded me with their foliage. I was delighted when I first discovered that a pleasant sound, which often saluted my ears, proceeded from the tliroats of the little winged animals who
? had often intercepted the light from my eyes. I began also to observe, with greater accuracy, the forms that sur- rouuded me,and to perceive the bounda¬ ries of the radiant roof of light M'hich canopied me. Sometimes I tried to imi¬ tate the pleasant songs ofthe birds, but was unable. Sometimes I wished to ex¬ press my sensations in my own mode, but the uncouth and inarticulate sounds which broke from me frightened me into silence again. " The moon had disappeared from the night, and again, with a lessened form, shewed itself, while I still re¬ mained in the forest. My sensations had, by this time, become distinct, and my mind received every day additional ideas. My eyes became accustomed to the light, and to perceive objects in their right forms; 1 distinguished the insect from the herb, and, by de-
grees, one herb from another. I found that the sparrow uttered none but harsh notes, whilst those of the black¬ bird and thrush were sweet and en¬ ticing, 44 One day, when I was oppressed by cold, I found a fire which had been left by some wandering beggars, and was overcome with delight at the warmth I experienced from it. In my joy I thrust my hand into the live embers, but quicklv drew it out again with a cry of pain. How strange, I thought, that the same cause should produce such oppo¬ site efiects ! I examined the materials of the fire, and to my joy found it to be composed of wood. I quickly collected some branches; but they were wet, and would not burn. I was pained at this, and sat still watching the operation of the fire. The wet wood which I had placed near the heat dried, and itself
became inflamed. I reflected on this г and, by touching the various branches, I discovered the cause, and busied my¬ self in collecting a great quantity of wood, that I might dry it, and have a plentiful supply of fire. When night came on, and brought sleep with it, t was in the greatest fear lest my fire should be extinguished. I covered it carefully with dry wood and leaves, and placed wet branches upon it ; and then 5 spreading my cloak, I lay on the ground, and sunk into sleep. " It M r as morning when I awoke, and my first care M'as to visit the fire. I uncovered it, and a gentle breeze quickly fanned it into a flame. I ob¬ served this also, and contrived a fan of branches, м / ich roused the embers when they were nearly extinguished. When night came again, I found, with pleasure, that the fire gave light as,
well as heat; and that the discovery of this element was useful to me in my food ; for I found some of the offals that the travellers had left had been roasted, and tasted much more savoury than the berries I gathered from the trees. I tri etl, therefore, to dress my food in the same manner, placing it on the live embers. I found that the ber¬ ries меге spoiled by this operation, and the nuts and roots much improved. " Food, however, became scarce ; and I often spent the whole day searching- in vain for a few acorns to assuage the pangs of hunger. When I found this, I resolved to quit the place that I had hitherto inhabited, to seek for one where the few wants I experienced would be more easily satisfied. In this emigration, I exceedingly lamented the loss of the fire which I had obtained through accident, and knew not how tø
re-produce it. 1 gave several hours to- the serious consideration of this diffi¬ culty ; but I was obliged to relinquish all attempt to supply it; and, wrapping myself up in my cloak, í struck across the wood towards the setting sun. I passed three days in these rambles, and at length discovered the open country. A great fall of snow had taken place the night before, and the fields were of one uniform white ; the appearance was disconsolate, and I found my feet chilled by the cold damp substance that covered the ground. 44 It was about seven in the morn¬ ing, and I longed to obtain food and shelter; at length I perceived a small hut, on a rising ground, which had doubtless been built for the convenience of some shepherd. This was a new sight to me; and I examined the structure with great cu-
riosity. Finding the door open, I en¬ tered. An old man sat in it, near a fire, over which he was preparing his breakfast. He turned on hearing a noise; and, perceiving гае, ь eked loudly, and, quitting the hut, i ãn a- cross the fields with a speed of which his debilitated form hardly appeared capable. His appearance, different from any I had ever before seen, and his flight, somewhat surprised me. But I was enchanted by the appearance of the hut: here the snow and rain could not penetrate; the ground waa dry; and it presented to me then as exquisite- and divine a retreat as Pandæmonium appeared to the dæmons of hell after their sufferings in the lake of fire. * greedily devoured the remnants of the shepherd's breakfast, which consisted of bread, cheese, milk, and wine; the latter, however, I did not like.
overcome by fatigue, I lay down among some straw, and fell asleep. " It was noon when I awoke; and, allured by the warmth ofthe sun, which shone brightly on the white ground, I determined to recommence my travels ; and, depositing the remains of the pea¬ sant's breakfast in a wallet I found, I proceeded across the fields for several hours, until at sunset I arrived at a village. How miraculous did this ap¬ pear 1 the huts, the neater cottages, and stately houses, engaged my admiration by turns. The vegetables in the gar¬ dens, the milk and cheese that I saw placed at the windows of some of the cottages, allured my appetite. One of the best of these I entered ; but I had hardly placed my foot within the door, before the children shrieked, and one of the women fainted. The whole vil¬ lage waa roused ; some fled, some at-
tacked me, until, grievously bruised by stones and many other kinds of missile weapons, I escaped to the open coun¬ try, and fearfully took refuge in a low hovel, quite bare, and making a wretch¬ ed appearance after the palaces I had beheld in the village. This hovel, hoM ever, joined a cottage of a neat and pleasant appearance ; but, after my late dearly-bought experience, I dared not enter it. My place of refuge was con¬ structed of wood, but so low, that I could with difficulty sit upright in it. No wood, hoMever, was placed on the earth, which formed the floor, but it was dry; and although the wind en¬ tered it by innumerable chinks, I found it an agreeable asylum from the snow and rain. 44 Here then I retreated, and lay down, happy to have found a shelter, however miserable, from the inclemency
of the season, and still more from the barbarity of man. " As soon as morning dawned, I crept from my kennel, that I might/view the adjacent cottage, and discover if I could remain in the habitation I had found. It was situated against the back of the cottage, and surrounded on, the sides which were exposed by a pig-stye and a clear pool of water. One part waa open, and by that I had crept iu; bufe now I covered every crevice by м -hich I might be perceived with stones and wood, yet in such a manner that Γ might move them on occasion ta passk out: all the light I enjoyed came through the ştye, and that was sufb> cient for me. " Having thus arranged my dwell· ing, and carpeted it with clean straw, I retired; for I saw the figure of a man at a distance, and I remembered tod
well my treatment the night before, to trust mjself in his power. I had first, however, provided for my sustenance for that day, by a loaf of coarse bread, which I purloined, and a cup with which 1 could drink, more conveniently than from my hand, of the pure water which flowed by my retreat. The floor was a little raised, so that it was kept perfectly dry, and by its vicinity to the chimney of the cottage it was tolerably warm. 44 Being thus provided, I resolved to reside in this hovel, until something «houid occur which might alter my de¬ termination. It was indeed a paradise, compared to the bleak forest, my former residence, the rain-dropping branches, and dank earth. I ate my breakfast with pleasure, and was about to reuiove a plank to procure myself a little water, when I heard a step, and, looking
through a small chink, I beheld a young- creature, with a pail on her head, pass¬ ing before my hovel. The girl was young and of gentle demeanour, unlike what I have since found cottagers and farm-house servants to be. Yet she was meanly dressed, a coarse blue pet¬ ticoat and a linen jacket being her only garb; her fair hair was plaited, but not adorned; she looked patient, yet sad. I lost sight of her; and in about a quarter of an hour she return¬ ed, bearing the pail, which was now partly filled with milk. As she walked along, seemingly incommoded by the burden, a young man met her, whose countenance expressed a deeper de¬ spondence. Uttering a few sounds with an air of melancholy, he took the pail from her head, and bore it to the cot¬ tage himself. She followed ? and they disappeared. Presently I saw the young
man again, Mİth some tools in his hand, cross the field behind the cottage ; and the girl Mas also busied, sometimes in the house, and sometimes in the vard. <c On examining my dMelling, 1 found that one of the windows of the cottage had formerly occupied a part of it, but the panes had been filled up 4vith wood. In one of these was a small and almost imperceptible chink, through which the eye could just penetrate. Through this crevice, a small room was visible, wfâte-washed and clean, but very bare of furniture. In one corner, near a small fire, sat an old man, leaning his head on his hands in a disconsolate attitude. The young girl was occupied in arranging the cottage; but presently she took something out ofa drawer, which employed her hands, and she sat down beside the old man, who, taking up an instrument, began
to play, and to produce sounds, sveeter than the voice of the thrush or the nigh* tingale* It was a lovely eight, even to me, poor wretch ! who had never beheld aught beautiful before. The silver hair and benevolent countenance of the aged cottager, won my reverence; while the gentle manners of the girl enticed my love. He played a sweet mournful air, which I perceived drew tears from the eyes of his amiable com¬ panion, of which the old man took no notice, until she sobbed audibly; he then pronounced a few sounds, and the fair creature, leaving her work, knelt at his feet. He raised her, and smiled with sach kindness and affection, that í felt sensations of a peculiar and over¬ powering nature : tliey were a mixture of pain and pleasure, such as I had never before experienced, either from hunger or cold» warmth or food ; and I
withdrew from the windoM', unable to bear these emotions. u Soon after this the у оштд' rnan re¬ turned, bearing on his shoulders a load of M'ood. The girl met him at the door, helped to relieve him of his burden, and, taking some ofthe fuel into the cottage, placed ¡t on the fire; then she aud the youth went apart into a nook of the cottage, and he shewed her a large loaf and a piece of cheese. ¡Slip seemed pleased; and went into the garden for some roots and plants, м hich she placed in water, and then upon the fire. .She afterM'ards continued her work, Mİıilst the young man Ment into the garden, and appeared busily employed in dig¬ ging and pulling up roots. After he had been employed thus about an hour, the young woman joined him, and they entered the cottage together. " The old man had, hi the mean time, VOL. II. D
been pensive; but, on the appearance of his companions, he assumed a more cheerful air, and they sat down to cat. The meal was quickly dispatched. The young woman was again occupied in arranging the cottage; the old man walked before the cottage in the sun for a ^ew minutes, leaning on the arm ofthe }outh. Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between these two excellent creatures. One was old, with silver hairs and a countenance beaming with benevolence and love: the young¬ er was slight and graceful in his figure, and his features were moulded with the finest symmetry; yet his eyes and atti¬ tude expressed the utmost sadness and despondency. The old man returned to the cottage ; and the youth, with tools different from those he had used in the morning, directed his steps across the fields.
tc Night quickly shut m; but, to my extreme wonder, I found that the cottagers had a means of prolonging light, by the use of tapers, and was delig hied to find, that the setting of the sun did not put an end to the pleasure I experienced in watching my human neighbours, in the even¬ ing, the joung girl and her companion were employed in various occupations which I did not understand; and the old man again took up the instrument, which produced the divine sounds that had enchanted me in the morning. So soon as he had finished, the }outh began, not to play, but to utter sounds that Mere monotonous, and neither re¬ sembling the harmony ofthe old man's instrument or the songs of the birds; I since found that he read aloud, but at that time I knew nothing of the science of words or letters. d 2
" The family, after having been thus occupied for a short time, extinguished their lights, and retired, as I conjec¬ tured, to reist.
CHAPTER IV.
ίς I lay on my straw, but 1 could not sleep. 1 thought of the occurrences of the day. What chiefly struck ine was the gentlemanners of these people; and I longed to join them, but dared not. I remembered too well the treatment I had suffered the night before from the barbarous villagers, and resolved, what¬ ever course of conduct I might hereafter think it right to pursue, that for the present 1 would remain quietly in my hovel, watching, and endeavouring to discover the motives which influenced their actions. D 3
" The cottagers arose the next morn¬ ing before the suu. The young woman arranged the cottage, and prepared the food; and the youth departed after the firbt meal. " This day was passed in the same routine as that which preceded it. The y oung man Mas constantly employed out of doors, and the girl in various labo¬ rious occupations Mithin. The old man, whom 1 soon perceived to be blind, employed his leisure hours on his in¬ strument, or in contemplation. Nothing could exceed the love and respect which the younger cottagers exhibited towards their venerable companion. They per¬ formed towards him every little orlice of affection and duty with gentleness; and he rewarded them bv his benevolent smiles. " They меге not entirely happy. The young man and bis companion often
Ment apart, and appeared to weep. I saw no cause for their unhappiness; but I was deeply affected by it. If such lovely creatures were miserable, it was less strange that I, an imperfect and so¬ litary being, should be wretched. Yet why меге these gentle beings unhappy? They possessed a delightful house (for such it was in my eyes), and every luxury; they had a fire to warm them мЬеп chill, and delicious viands when hungry ; they меге dressed in excellent clothes; and, still more, they enjoyed one another's company and speech, interchanging each day looks of afiec¬ tion and kindness. V* hat did their tears imply? Did they really express pain? I Mas at first unable to solve these questions; but perpetual atten¬ tion, and time, explained to me many appearances Mİıich меге at first enig¬ matic. d 1
" A considerable period elapsed before I discovered oue of the causes of the un¬ easiness of this amiable farnih ; it was poverty: and they suffered that evil in a verv distressing degree. Their nourish- ment consisted entirely ofthe vegetables of their garden, and the milk of one cow, M'ho gave very little during the winter, when its masters could scarcely procure food to support it. Ί hey often, I believe, suffered the pangs of hunger very poignantly, especially the two younger cottagers; for several times they placed food before the old man, when they reserved none for them¬ selves. " This trait of kindness moved me sensibly. I had been accustomed, during the night, to steal a part of their t to re for mv own consumption; but мЬеп 1 found that i u doing this I inflic¬ ted pain ou the cottagers, I abstained,
and satisfied myself with berries, nuts, and roots, which I gathered from a neighbouring wood. " I discovered also another means through which I was enabled to assist their labours. I found that the youth spent a great part of each day in collect¬ ing wood for the family fire ; and, during the night, I often took his tools, the use of which I quickly discovered, and brought home firing sufficient for the consumption of several days. *' I remember, the first time that I did this, the young woman, when she opened the door in the morning, ap¬ peared greatly astonished on seeing a great pile of wood on the outside. She uttered some words in a loud voice, and the youth joined her, who also expressed surprise. I observed, with pleasure, that he did not go to the forest that day, but spent it in repair- d 5
ing the cottage, and cultivating the garden. " By degrees I made a discovery of still greater moment. I found that these people possessed a method of communicating their experience and feelings to one another by articulate sounds. I perceived that the words- they spoke sometimes produced plea¬ sure or pain, smiles or sadness, in the minds aad countenances ofthe hearers. This was indeed a godlike science, and I ardently desired to become acquainted with it. But í was buffied in every at¬ tempt I made for tlrs purpose. Their pronunciation Mas quick ; and the MOrds thev uttered, not having any apparent connexion with visible ob¬ jects, I was unable to discover any clue by which I could unravel the mystery of their reference. By great applica¬ tion, however, and after having re-
mained during the space of several revolutions ofthe moon in my hovel, I discovered the names that were given to some of the most familiar objects of discourse : I learned and applied the words ßrc, milk, bread, and roood, I learned also the names of the cottagers themselves. The youth and his com¬ panion had each of them several names, but the old man had only one, which was father. The girl was called sister, or Agatha; and the youth Felix, brother, or sow. I cannot describe the delight 1 felt when I learned the ideas appro¬ priated to each of these sounds, and was able to pronounce them. I distin¬ guished several other words, without being able as jet to understand or ap¬ ply them ; such as good, dearest, un* happy. " I spent the winter in this manner. The gentle manners and beauty of the
cottagers greatly endeared them to rne; when they were unhappy, I felt depress¬ ed; when they rejoiced, 1 sympathized in their joys. 1 saw few human beings beside them ; and if any other happened to enter the cottage, their harsh manners and rude gait only enhanced to me the superior accomplishments of my friends. The old man, 1 coidd perceive, often endeavoured to encourage his children, as sometimes I fouud that he called them, to cast off their melancholy. He would talk in a cheerful accent, with an expression of goodness that bestowed pleasure even upon me. Agatha list¬ ened with respect, her eves sometimes filled with tears, which she endeavoured to wipe awav unperceived ; but 1 gene¬ rally found that her countenance and tone were more cheerful after having listened to the exhortations of her fa¬ ther. It was not thus with Felix* He
was always the saddest of the groupe ; and, even to my unpractised senses, he appeared to have suffered more deeply thau his friends. But if his counte¬ nance Mas more sorrowful, his voice was more cheerful than that of his sis¬ ter, especially Mİıen he addressed the old man. " 1 could mention innumerable in¬ stances, Mİıich, although slight, marked the dispositions of these amiable cot¬ tagers. In the midst of poverty and want, Felix carried with pleasure to his sister the first little white flower that peeped out from beneath the snowy ground. Early in the morning before she had risen, he cleared awav the snow that obstructed her path to the milk-house, drew water from the well, and brought the wood from the out¬ house, w here, to his perpetual astonish¬ ment, he found his store always reple-
nished by an invisible hand. In the day, I believe, he worked sometimes for a neighbouring farmer, because he often went forth, and did not return until dinner, yet brought no wood with him. At other times he worked in the garden ; but, as there was little to do in the frosty season, he read to the old man and Agatha. " This reading had puzzled me ex¬ tremely at first ; but, by degrees, I dis¬ covered that he uttered many of the same sounds when he read as when he talked. I conjectured, therefore, that he found on the paper signs for speech which he understood, and I ardently longed to comprehend these also ; but how was that possible, when I did not even understand the sounds for which they stood as signs? I improved, how¬ ever, sensibly in this science, but not sufficiently to follow up any Ľud of
conversation, although I applied my whole mind to the endeavour: for I easily perceived that, although I ea¬ gerly longed to discover myself to the cottagers, I ought not to make the at¬ tempt until I had first become master of their language ; which knowledge might enable me to make them over¬ look the deformity of my figure; for Mİth this also the contrast perpetually presented to my eyes had made me acquainted. " I had admired the perfect forms of my cottagers—their grace, beauty, and delicate complexions: but how M'as 1 terrified, when I vieM-ed myself in a transparent pool ! At first I started back, unable to believe that it was in¬ deed I Mho м -as reflected in the mirror; and M'hen 1 became fully convinced that I was in reality the monster that I am, I ма» filled with the bitterest sen-
sations of despondence and mortifica¬ tion. Alas! I did not yet entirely knov the fatal effects of this miserable defomnity r . " As the sun became warmer, and the light of day longer, the snow va¬ nished, and I beheld the bare trees and the black earth. From this time Felix M'as more employed ; and the heart- moving indications of impending fa¬ mine disappeared. Their food, as I afterwards found, was coarse, but it was wholesome ; and they procured a sufficiency of it. Several new kinds of plants sprung up iu the garden, which they dressed ; and these signs of ľomfott increased daily as the season id vaneed. " The old man, leaning on his son, valked each day at noon, when it did »ot rain, as I found it was called when he heavens poured forth its waters.
This frequently took place ; but a high wind quickly dried the earth, and the season became far more pleasant than it had been. " My mode of life in my hovel Mas uniform. During the morning- I ett- tended the motions of the cottagers ; and Mİıen they were dispersed in va¬ rious occupations, I slept : the remain¬ der of the day Mas spent in observing my friends. When they had retired to rest, if there Mas any moon, or the night was star-light, I Ment into the woods, and collected my own food and fuel for the cottage. When I returned, as often as it Mas necessary, I cleared their path from the snow, and performed those offices that I had seen done by Felix. I afterwards found tbat these labours, performed by an invisible hand, greatly astonished them ; and once or tw ice I heard them, on these
occasions, utter the words good spirit, wonderful; but I did not then under¬ stand the signification of these terras. " My thoughts now became more active, and I longed to discover tbe motives and feelings of these lovely creatures ; I was inquisitive to know why Felix appeared so miserable, and Agatha so sad. I thought (foolish wretch !) that it might be in my power to restore happiness to these deserving people. When I slept, or was absent, the forms ofthe venerable blind father, the gentle Agatha, and the excellent Felix, flitted before me. I looked upon them as superior beings, who would be the arbiters of my future destiny. 1 formed in my imagination a thousand pictures of presenting myself to them, and their reception of me. I imagined that they would be disgusted, until, by my gentle demeanour and conciliating*
words, I should first win their favour, and afterwards their love. " These thoughts exhilarated me, and led me to apply with fresh ardour to the acquiring the art of language. My organs were indeed harsh, but sup¬ ple ; and although my voice was very unlike the soft music of their tones, yet I pronounced such words as I un¬ derstood with tolerable ease. It wae as the ass and the lap-dog ; yet surely the gentle ass, whose intentions were affectionate, although his manners were rude, deserved better treatment than blows and execration. " The pleasant showers and genial warmth of spring greatly altered the aspect of the earth. Men, who before this change seemed to have been hid in caves, dispersed themselves, and меге employed in various arts of culti¬ vation. The birds sang in more cheer*
ful notes, and the leaves began to bud forth on the trees. Happy, happy earth î fit habitation for gods, which, so short a time before, was bleak, damp, and unwholesome. My spirits were elevated by the enchanting appearance of nature; the past was blotted from my memory, the present was tranquil, and the future gilded by bright rays of hope, and anticipations of joy.
CHAPTER V.
" 1 now hasten to the more moving part of my story. I shall relate events that impressed me with feelings whicb, from what I was, have made me what 1 am. 44 Spring advanced rapidly; the wea¬ ther became fine, and the skies cloud¬ less. It surprised me, that M'hat before Mas desert and gloomy should now bloom with the most beautiful flWers and verdure. My senses were gratified and refreshed by a thousand scents of delight, and a thousand sights of beauty.
" It was on one of these days, when my cottagers periodically rested from labour—the old man played on his guitar, and the children listened to him—I observed that the countenance of Felix Mas melancholy beyond expres¬ sion : he sighed frequently; and once his father paused in his music, and I conjectured by his manner that he in¬ quired the cause of his son's sorroM-, Felix replied in a cheerful accent, and the old man was recommencing his music, M'hen some one tapped at the door. " it was a lady on horseback, accom¬ panied by a countryman as a guide. The lady was dressed in a dark suit, and covered with a thick black veil. Aga¬ tha asked a question ; to which the stran¬ ger only replied by pronouncing, in a sweet accent, the name of Felix. Her voice was musical, but unlike that of
cither of my friends. On hearing this word, Felix came up hastily to the lady ; who, when she saw him, threw up her veil, and I beheld a countenance of an¬ gelic beauty and expression. Her hair ofa shining raven black, and curiously braided ; her eyes were dark, but gentle, although animated ; her features of a regular proportion, and her complexion: wondrously fair, each cheek tinged with a lovely pink. " Felix seemed ravished with de¬ light when he saw her, every trait of sorrow vanished from his face, and it instantly expressed a degree of ecstatic joy, of which I could hardly have believed it capable; his eyes sparkled, as his cheek flushed with pleasure; and at that moment I thought him as beautiful as the stranger. She appeared arľected hy different feelings ; wiping a few tears from her lovely eyes^
she held out her hand to Felix, who kissed it rapturously, and called her, as well as I could distinguish, his sweet Arabian. She did not appear to under¬ stand him, but smiled. He assisted her to dismount, and, dismissing her guide, conducted her into the cottage. Some conversation took place between him and his father ; and the young stranger knelt at the old man's feet, and would have kissed his hand, but he raised her, and embraced her affectionately. " I soon perceived, that although the stranger uttered articulate sounds, and appeared to have a language of her own, she Mas neither understood by, or herself understood, the cottagers. They made many signs which I did not com¬ prehend; but I saw that her presence diffused gladness through the cottage, dispelling their sorrow as the sun dissi¬ pates tbe morning mists. Felix seemed
peculiarly happy, and with smiles of delight welcomed his Arabian. Agatha, the ever-gentle Agatha, kissed the hands ofthe lovely stranger ; and, pointing to her brother, made signs which appeared to me to mean that he had beeu sorrow¬ ful until she came. Some hours passed thus, while they, by their countenances, expressed joy, the cause of which I did not comprehend. Presently I found, by the frequent recurrence of one sound which the stranger repeated after them, that she was endeavouring to learn îheir language; and the idea instantly occurred to me, that I should make use of the same instructions to the same end. The stranger learned about twenty MOrds at the first lesson, most of them indeed меге those M'hich I had before understood, but I profited by the others. " As night came on, Agatha and the VOL. II. Ľ
Arabian retired early. When they se¬ parated, Felix kissed the hand of the stranger, and said, ' Good night, sweet Safie/ He sat up much longer, con¬ versing M'ith his father; and, by the fre¬ quent repetition of her name, I conjec¬ tured that their lovely guest was the subject of their conversation. I ar¬ dently desired to understand them, and bent every faculty towards that purpose, but found it utterly impossible. 44 The next morning Felix Ment out to his work; and, after the usual occu¬ pations of Agatha меге finished, the Arabian sat at the feet of the old man, and, taking his guitar, played some airs so entrancingly beautiful, that they at once drew tears of sorrow aud delight from my eyes. She sang, aud her voice flowed in a rich cadence, swelling or dying away, like a nightingale of the woods.
When she had finished, she gave the guitar to Agatha, who at first declined it. She played a simple air, and her voice accompanied it in sweet accents, but unlike the wondrous strain of the stranger. The old man appeared en¬ raptured, and said some words, which Agatha endeavoured to explain to Safie, and by Mİıich he appeared to uish to express that she bestowed on him the greatest delight by her music. The days now passed as peaceably as before, with the sole alteration, that joy had taken place of sadness in the coun¬ tenances of my friends. Safie was al- ways gay and happy; she and I im¬ proved rapidly in the knowledge of language, so that in tuo mouths I be¬ gan to comprehend most of the words uttered by my protectors. In the meanwhile also the black ground Mas covered with herbage, and E 2
Mie green banks interspersed with In¬ numerable flowers, sweet to the scent and the ejes, stars of pale radiance among the moonlight woods; the sun became warmer, the nights clear and bal m ν ; and mv nocturnal rambles were an extreme pleasure to me, although they were considerably shortened by the late setting and early rising of the sun ; for 1 never ventured abroad during day¬ light, fearful of meeting with the same treatment as I had formerly endured iu the first village which 1 entered. ' ; My days were-spent in close atten¬ tion, that I might more speedily master tbe language ; and I may boast that I improved more rapidly than the Ara¬ bian, who understood very little, and conversed in broken accents, whilst I comprehended and could imitate al¬ most every word that was spoken. While I improved in speech, I aïs©
learned the science of letters, as it was taught to the stranger ; and this opened before me a uhle field for Monder and delight.. 44 The book from which Felix instruct¬ ed Safie was Vol ney 's Лш ws of Empires*. I should not have understood the pur¬ port of this book, had not Felix, in read¬ ing it, given very minute explanations. He had chosen this work, he said, be¬ cause the declamatory style was framed in imitation of the eastern authors; Through this work I obtained a cursory knowledge of history, and a view of the several empiresat present existing in the world ; it gave me an insight into the manners, governments, and reli¬ gions of the différent nations of the earth. I heard of the slothful Asiatics; of the stupendous genius and mental ac¬ tivity ofthe Grecians; of the Mars and wonderful virtue of the early Komans— ι: 3.
oftheirsubseqnentdegeneration — ofthe decline of that mighty empire; of chi¬ valry, Christianity, mid kings. ï heard of the discovery ofthe American hemi¬ sphere, and Mept with Safie over the hapless fate of its original inhabitants. " These wonderful narrations inspired me with strange feelings. W as man, in¬ deed, at once so powerful, so virtuous, and magnificent jet so vicious and base ? He appeared at one time a mere scion of the evil principle, and at ano¬ ther as all that can beconcei ved of noble and godlike. To be a great and vir¬ tuous man appeared the highest honour that can befall a sensitive being; to be base and vicious, as many on record have been, appeared the lowest degra¬ dation, a condition more abject than that of the blind mole or harmless worm. For a long time I could not conceive how oue man could go
forth to murder his fellow, or even why there меге laMs and governments; but when I heard details of vice and bloodshed, my м onder ceased, aud I turned ам'ау with disgust and loathing. u Every conversation ofthe cottagers now opened new u'onders to me, While I listened to the instructions which Fe¬ lix bestowed upon the Arabian, the strange system of human society was explained to me. I heard of the divi¬ sion of property, of immense wealth and squalid poverty; of rank, descent, and noble blood. " The words induced me to turn to- wards myself. I learned that the pos¬ sessions most esteemed by your fellow- creatures меге, high and unsullied de¬ scent united with riches. A man might be respected with onh one of these acqui¬ sitions 4 , but without either he Mas con¬ sidered, except i u very rare instance«, E 4
г us a vagabond and a slave, doomed to Maste his powers for the profit of the Chosen few. And what was I? Of my creation and creator I was absolutely ignorant; but I knew that I possessed no money, no friends, no kind of pro¬ perty. I Maş, besides, endowed with a figure hideously deformed and loath¬ some; I Mas not. even of the same na¬ ture as man. I м -as more agile than tbey, and could subsist upon coarser diet; 1 bore the extremes of heat and cold with less injury to my frame; my sta¬ ture far exceeded their's. When ) looked around, I saw and heard of none like me. Was I then a monster, a blot upon the earth, from which all men fled, and whom all men disowned? 44 I cannot describe to you the agony that these reflections inflicted upon me; I tried to dispel them, but sorrow only increased with knowledge. "Oh, that
I»had for ever remained in m> native wood, nor known or felt beyond the sensations of hunger, thirst, and heat Ì " Of what a strange nature is know¬ ledge ! It clings to the mind, when it has once seized on it, like a lichen on the rock. I wished sometimes to shake off all thought and feeling ; but I learned that there was but one means to over¬ come the sensation of pain, and that ivas death—a state which I feared \et did not understand. 1 admired virtue and good feelings, and loved the gentle manners and amiable- qualities of my cottagers; but 1 was shut out from in¬ tercourse with them, except through means which I obtained bv stealth, л hen I was unseen and unknown, and which rather increased than satisfied the desire 1 had ν of becoming one among my fel* lows. Tlie gentle 4 words of Agatha, E 5.
and the animated smiles of the charm¬ ing Arabian, were not for me. The mild exhortations of the old man, and the lively conversation of the loved Felix, were not for me. Miserable, un¬ happy wretch ! " Other lessons were impressed upon me even more deeply. I heard of the difference of sexes; of the birth and growth of children ; how the father doated on the smiles of the infant, and the lively sallies of the older child ; how all the life and cares of the mother Were wrapt up in the precious charge; how the mind of youth expanded and gained knowledge; of brother, sister, and all the various relationships whicb bind one human being to another in mutual bonds. 44 But w here were my friends and re¬ lations? No father had watched my infant days, no mother had hlessed me
with smiles and caresses; or if they had, all my past life was now a blot, a blind vacancy in which I distinguished no¬ thing. From my earliest remembrance I had been as I then was in height and proportion. I had never yet seen a being resembling me, or who claimed any intercourse Mİth me. What was I? The question again recurred, to be an¬ swered only with groans. u I will soon explain to what these feelings tended ; but allow me now to return to the cottagers, whose story ex¬ cited in me such various feelings of in¬ dignation, delight, and wonder, but which all terminated in additional love and reverence for my protectors (for so I loved, in an innocent, half painful self-deceit, to call them).
K
CHAPTER vi.
ct Some time elapsed before I learned tjie history of my friends. It M'as one which, could not faiL to impress itself deeply on my mind, unfolding as it did. a.number of circumstances each inte¬ resting and wonderful to one so utterly. inexperienced as 1 Mas. 44 The name of the old man was De It.acey. He Mas descended from a good family in France, where he had lived for many years in affluence, respected by his superiors, and beloved by his equals. Ilis son was bred in the ser-.
vice of his country ; aud Agatha bad ranked Mİth ladies* of the highest dis· tinction. A few months before my arrival, they had lived in a large and luxurious city, called Paris, surrounded by friends, and possessed of every en^ joyment Mİıich. virtue, refinement of intellect, or taste*, accompanied by a moderate fortune, could affords " The father of Safie had been the cause of their ruin. He was a Turkish merchant, and had inhabited Paris for, many years, м*Ьеп 9 . for some reason. M'hich I could not, learn, he became obnoxious to,·the government. He vvas seized and cast into prison the very day. that Safie arrived from Constantinople to. join him.. He was tried, and con^ demned to death. The injustice of his sentence Maş very flagrant; ail Paris was indignant ; and. it Mas judged that his religion aad wealth, rathçK than the
crime alleged against him, had been the cause of his condemnation. " Felix had been present at the trial ; his horror and indignation M'ere uncon¬ trollable, when he heard the decision of the court. He made, at that moment, a solemn vow to deliver him, and then looked around for the means. After many fruitless attempts to gain admit¬ tance to the prison, he found a strongly grated window in an unguarded part ofthe building, which lighted the dun¬ geon of the unfortunate Mahometan ; who, loaded w itli chains, waited in de¬ spair the execution of the barbarous sentence. Felix visited the grate at night, and made known to the prisoner his intentions in his favour. Tlie Turk, amazed and delighted, endeavoured to kindle the zeal of his deliverer by pro- mises of reward and wealth. Felix rejected his offers with contempt; yet
when he saw 7 the lovely Safie, who was allowed to visit her father, and who, by her gestures, expressed her lively gra¬ titude, the youth could not help own¬ ing to his own mind, that the captive possessed a treasure which would fully reward his toil and hazard. " The Turk quickly perceived the impression that his daughter had made on the heart of Felix, and endeavoured to secure him more entirely in his inte¬ rests by the promise of her hand m marriage, so soon as he should be con¬ veyed to a place of safety. Felix was too delicate to accept this oifer ; yet he looked forward to the probability Of fchat event as to the consummation of his happiness. " During the ensuing days, while the preparations were going forward for the escape ofthe merchant, the zea! of Felix was warmed by several letters
that he received from this lovely girl* vtho found means to express her thoughts in tlie language of her lover by the aid of an old man, a servant of her father's, who understood French» Slie thanked him in the most ardent terms for his intended services towards her father ; and at the same time she gently deplored her own fate. u I. have copies of these letters ; for I found means, during my residence in the hovel, to procure the implements of writing ; and the letters were often in the hands of, Felix or Agatha. Be¬ fore 1 depart, I will give them to you, they will prove the truth of my tale ; but at present, as tbe sun is-already far declined, I shall only have time to re¬ peat the substance of tbem to you. " Safie related, that her mother waa a Christian Arab, seized and made a slave, by tbe Turks ; recommended by
her beauty, she had won the heart of the father of Safie, who married her. Tlje young girl spoke in high and enthusiastic terms of her mother, who, born in freedom spurned the bondage to Mİıich she Mas now reduced. She instructed her daughter in the tenets of her religion* and taught her to aspire to higher powers of intellect, apd ац independence of spirit, forbidden to the female followers of Mahomet. This lady died ; but her lessons were inde r libly impressed on the mind of Safie, who sickened at the prospect, of again returning to Asia, and the being im¬ mured within the walls of a haram, allowed only to occupy herself with puerile amusements, ill suited to the temper of her soul, now accustomed tp grand ¡deas and a noble emulation for virtue. The prospect of marrying a Christian, and remaining in a country
where women were allowed to take a rank in society, was enchanting to her. " The day for the execution of the Turk was fixed ; but, on the night pTevious to it, he had quitted prison, and before morning was distant many leagues from Paris. Felix had pro¬ cured passports in the natne of his fa¬ thei*, sister, and himself. He had pre¬ viously communicated his plan to the former, who aided the deceit by quit¬ ting his house, under the pretence of a journey, and concealed himself, with his daughter, in an obscure part of Paris. " Felix conducted the fugitives tbrough France to Lyons, and across Mont Cenis to Leghorn, where the merchant had decided to wait a favour¬ able opportunity of passing into some part ofthe Turkish dominions. t£ Safie resolved to remain with her father until the moment of his depar-
ture, before which time the Turk re¬ newed his promise that she should be united to his deliverer ; and Felix re¬ mained with them in expectation of that event ; and in the mean time he enjoyed the society ofthe Arabian, who exhibited towards him the simplest and tenderest affection. They conversed with one another through the means of an interpreter, and sometimes with the interpretation of looks; and Safie sang to him the divine airs of her native country. " The Turk allowed this intimacy to take place, and encouraged the hopes of the youthful lovers, while in his heart he had formed far other plans. He loathed the idea that his daughter should be united to a Christian; but he feared the resentment of Felix if he should appear lukewarm ; for he knew that he vías still in the power of his deliverer, if he should choose to betray
him to the Italian state which they i Kir habited. He revolved a thousand plans by which he should be enabled to pro¬ long the deceit until it might be no lon¬ ger necessary, and secretly to take his daughter with him when he departed. Ilis plans меге greatly facilitated by the news which arrived from Paris. " The government of France were greatly enraged at the escape of their victim, and spared no pains to detect and punish his deliverer. The plot of Felix Mas quickly discovered, and De Lacey and Agatha меге thrown into prison. The news reached Felix, and roused him from his dream of pleasure. Ilis blind and aged father, and his gen¬ tle sister, lay in a noisome dungeon, while he enjoyed the free air, and the society of her whom he loved. This idea Mas torture to him. He quickly arranged with the Turk, that if the lat
ter should find a favourable opportun nity for escape before Felix *could re¬ turn to Italy, Safie should remain as a boarder nt a convent at Leghorn ; and then, quitting the lovely Arabian, -he hastened to Paris, and delivered him¬ self up to the vengeance of the law, hoping to free De Lacey and Agatha by this proceeding. " He did not succeed. Thev Te* mained confined for ñve months before the trial took place; the result of which deprived them of their fortune, and condemned them to a perpetual exile from their native country. u They found a miserable asylum in the cottage in Germany, where 1 discovered them. Felix soon learned that the treacherous Turk, for uhom he and his family endured such unheard-of oppression, on discovering that his de¬ liverer was thus reduced to poverty atid
impotence, became a traitor to good feeling and honour, and had quitted Italy with his daughter, insultingly sending Felix a pittance of money to aid him, as he said, in some plan of future maintenance. " Such were the events that preyed on the heart of Felix, and rendered him, when I first saw him, the most miserable of his family. He could have endured poverty, and when this distress had been the meed of his vir¬ tue, he would have gloried in it : but the ingratitude of the Turk, and the loss of his beloved Safie, were misfor¬ tunes more bitter and irreparable. The arrival ofthe Arabian now infused new life into his soul. " When the news reached Leghorn, that Felix was deprived of his wealth and rank, the merchant commanded his daughter to think no more of her
lover, but to prepare to return with him to her native country. The gene¬ rous nature of Safie Mas outraged by this command; she attempted to ex¬ postulate Mİth her father, but he left her angrily, reiterating his tyrannical mandate, <£ A few days after, the Turk entered bis daughter's apartment, and told her hastily, that he had reason to believe that his residence at Leghorn had been divulged, and that he should speedily be delivered up to tlie French govern¬ ment; he had, consequently, hired a vessel ţo convey him to Constantinople, for which city he should sail in a few hours. He intended to leave hie daugh¬ ter under the care of a confidential servant, to го11ом г at her leisure nitb the greater part of his property, whieh had uot yet arrived at Leghorn, " When alone, Safie resolved in ber
own mind the plan of conduct that ft would become her to pursue in this emergency. A residence in Turkey was abhorrent to her ; ber religion and feelings were alilce adverse to it. By some papers of her father's, which fell into her hands, she heard of the exile of her lover, and learnt the name of the Spot where he theii resided. She hesitated some time, but at length she formed her determination. Taking with her some jewels that belonged to her, and a small sum of money, she quitted Italy, with an attendant, a na¬ tive of Leghorn, but who understood the commoti language of Turkey, and departed for Germany. " She arrived in safety at a town about twenty leagues from the cottage of De Lacey, when her attendant fell dangerously ill. Safie nursed her with the most devoted affection ; but the
poor girl died, and the Arabian was left alone, unacquainted Mİth the lan¬ guage ofthe country, and utterly igno¬ rant of the customs of the world. She fell, however, into good hands. The Italian had mentioned the name of the spot for which they were bound; and, after her death, the woman ofthe house in Mİıich they had lived took care that Safie should arrive in safety at the cot¬ tage of her lover.
rot. ft. F
CHAPTER VII.
* c Such was the history of my beloved cottagers. It impressed me deeply. I learned, from the views of social life which it developed, to admire their vir¬ tues, and to deprecate the vices of man¬ kind. As \et I looked upon crime as a dis¬ tant evil ; benevolence and generosity were ever present before me, inciting within me a desire to become an actor in the busy scene where so many ad¬ mirable qualities were called forth and displayed. But, in giving an account of the progress of my intellect, I must
not omit a circumstance which occur¬ red in the beginning of the month of August of the same year. " One night, during my accustomed visit to the neighbouring wood, where I collected my ou n food, and brought home firing for my protectors, I found on the ground a leathern portmanteau, containing several articles of dress and some books. I eagerly seized the prize, and returned with it to my hovel. Fortunately the books were written in the language the elements of which I had acquired at the cottage ; they con¬ sisted of Paradise Lost, a volume of Plutarch's Lives, and the Sorrows of Werter, The possession of these trea¬ sures gave me extreme delight ; I now continually studied and exercised my mind upon these histories, whilst mjr friends were employed in their ordinary occupations. ι 2
" I can hardly describe to you the effect of these books. They produced in me an infinity of new images and feelings, that sometimes raised me to ecstacy, but more frequently sunk me into the lowest dejection. In the Sorrows of Werter^ besides the interest of its simple and affecting story, so many opinions are canvassed, and so many lights thrown upon what had hitherto been to me obscure subjects, that I found in it a never-ending source of speculation and astonishment. The gentle and domestic manners it de¬ scribed, combined with lofty senti¬ ments and feelings, which had for their object methi ng out of self, accorded well with my experience among my protectors, and with the wants which were for ever alive in my own bosom. But I thought Werter himself a more divine being than I had ever beheld or
imagined ; his character contained no pretension, but it sunk deep. The disquisitions upon death and suicide were calculated to fill me with wonder. I did not pretend to enter into the me¬ rits of the case, yet 1 inclined towards the opinions of the hero, whose extinc¬ tion I wept, without precisely under¬ standing it. " As I read, hoM'ever, I applied much personally to my own feelings and condition. I found myself similar, yet at the same time strangely unlike the beings concerning whom I read, and to whose conversation Л Mas a listener. I sympathized Mİth, and partly understood them, but I wm unformed in mind ; 1 Mas dependent on none, and related to none. * The path of my departure Mas free / and there was none to lament my annihi- bilation. My person м as hideous, and ι 3
my stature gigantic: what did this mean? Who was I? What was I? Whence did İ come ? What was my destination ? These questions conti¬ nually recurred, but I was unable to solve them. " The volume of Plutarch*$ Lives which I possessed, contained the his¬ tories of the first founders of the an¬ cient republics. This book had a far different effect upon me from the S or¬ rars of Werter. 1 learned from Wer- ter's imaginations despondency and gloom: but Plutarch taught me high thoughts: he elevated me above the wretched sphere of my own reflections, to admire and love the heroes of past ages. Many things I read surpassed my understanding and experience. I had a very confused knowledge of king¬ doms, wide extents of country, mighty rivers, and boundless sea,»· But 1 was
perfectly unacquainted with towns, and large assemblages of men. The cot¬ tage of my protectors had been the only school in which I had studied human nature; but this book developed new and mightier scenes of action. I read of men concerned in public affairs go¬ verning or massacring their species. I felt the greatest ardour for virtue rise within me, and abhorrence for vice, as far as I understood the signification of those terms, relative as they were, as I applied them, to pleasure and pain alone. Induced by these feelings, I was of course led to admire peaceable la u -givers, Numa, Solon, and Lycurgus, in pre¬ ference to Romulus and Theseus. The patriarchal lives of my protectors caused these impressions to take a firm hold oti my mind; perhaps, if rn\ first introduc¬ tion to hurnauitv had been made bv a young soldier, burning for glory and F 4
slaughter, I should have been imbued with different sensations. " But Paradise Lost excited different and far deeper emotions. I read it, as I had read the other volumes which had fallen into my hands, as a true history. It moved every feeling of wonder and awe, that the picture of an omnipotent God warring with his creatures was capable of exciting. I often referred the several situations, as their similarity struck me, to my own. Like Adam, I was created apparently united by no link to any other being in existence; but his state was far different from mine in every other respect. He had come forth from the hands of God a perfect creature, happy and prosperous, guard¬ ed by the especial care of his Creator ; he was allowed to converse with, and acquire knowledge from beings of a superior nature: but I was wretched,
helpless, and alone. Many times I considered Satan as the fitter emblem of my condition; for often, like him, 'rhen ï viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter gall of envy rose Mithin me. " Another circumstance strengthen^/ and confirmed these feelings. Soon after my arrival in the hovel, I dis¬ covered some papers in the pocket of the dress which I had taken from your laboratory. At first I had neglected them; but now that I was able to de- cypher the characters in м -hieh they were written, I began to study them with diligence. It Mas your journal of the four months that preceded my crea¬ tion. You minutely described in these papers every step you took in the pro¬ gress of your vvork; this history was mingled with accounts of domestic oc¬ currences. You, doubtless, recollect these papers. Here they are. Every r 5
thing is related in tliem Mİıich bears reference to mv accursed origin; the whole detail of that series of disgusting circumstances m hich produced it is set in view'; the minutest description of my odious and loathsome person is given, in language Mİıich painted your own horrors, and rendered mine in¬ effaceable. I sickened as I read. ' Hate¬ ful day мЬеп I received iife!' I ex¬ claimed in agony. ' Cursed creator ! W hy did you form a monster so hideous that even лой turned from me in dis¬ gust? God in pitj made man beauti¬ ful and alluring, after his own image; but my form is a filth} type of your's, more horrid from its very resemblance. Satan had his companions, fellow- devils, to admire and encourage him; but I arn solitary and detested/ " These were the reflections of my hours of despondency and solitude;
but M'hen I contemplated the virtues of the cottagers, their amiable and bene¬ volent dispositions, I persuaded myself that when they should become ac¬ quainted with my admiration of their vir¬ tues, they would compassionate me, and overlook my personal deformity. Could they turn from their door one, however monstrous, who solicited their compas¬ sion and friendship? I resolved, at least, not to despair, but in every way to fit myself for an interview with them Mİıich Mould decide my fate. I post¬ poned this attempt for some months longer ; for the importance attached to its success inspired me Mİth a dread lest I should fail. Besides, I iound that my understanding improved so much with every day's experience, that I was unwilling to commence this un¬ dertaking until a few more months should have added to my wisdom.
46 Several changes, in the mean time, took place in the cottage. The pre¬ sence of Safie di fl used happiness among its inhabitants; and I also found that a greater degree of plenty reigned there^ Felix and Agatha spent more time in amusement and conversation, and were assisted in their labours by servants. They did not appear rich, but they were contented and happy; their feel¬ ings were serene and peaceful, while mine became every day more tumul¬ tuous. Increase of knowledge only discovered to me more clearly Mhat a M'retched outcast I M'as. I cherished hope, it is true ; but it vanished, when I beheld my person reflected in water, or my shadow in the moon-shiiie, even as that frail image and that inconstant fchade. " I endeavoured to crush these fears, and to fortify my self for the trial which
in a few months I resolved to undergo; and sometimes I allowed my thoughts, unchecked by reason, to ramble in the fields of Paradise, and dared to fancy amiable and lovely creatures sympa¬ thizing with my feelings and cheering my gloom; their angelic countenances breathed smiles of consolation. But it Mas all a dream: no Eve soothed my sorrows, or shared my thoughts; I was alone. í remembered Adam's supplica¬ tion to hisCreator; but where was mine? he had abandoned me, and, in the bit¬ terness of my heart, I cursed him. " Autumn passed thus. I saw, Mİth surprise and grief, the leaves decay and fall, aud nature again assume the barren and bleak appearance it had worn мЬеп I first beheld the woods and the lovel) moon. Yet I did not heed the bleakness of the weather; I Mas better fitted by my conformation for the en¬ durance of cold than heat. But my chief
delights were the sight of the flowers, the birds, and all the gay apparel of summer; when those deserted me, 1 turned with more attention towards the cottagers. Iheir happiness was not decreased by the absence of summer* They loved, and sympathized with one another; and their joys, depending on each other, w^re not interrupted by the casualties that took place around them. The more I saw of them, the greater became my desire to claim their protection and kindness; my heart yearned to be known and loved by these amiable creatures: to see their sweet looks turned towards me with affection, was the utmost limit of my ambition. I dared not think that they would turn them from me with disdain and horror. The poor that stopped at their door were never driven away. I asked, it is true, for greater treasures than a little food or rest ; I required
kindness and sympathy ; but I did not believe myself utterly unworthy of it. 46 The winter advanced, and an en¬ tire revolution of the seasons had taken place since I awoke into life. My at¬ tention, at this time, was solely directed towards rny plan of introducing myself into the cottage of my protectors. I re¬ volved many projects; but that on which I finally ñxed was, to enter the dwelling when the blind old man should be alone. 1 had sagacity enough to discover, that the unnatural hideons- ness of my person was the chief object of horror with those who had formerly beheld me. My voice, although harsh, had nothing terrible in it; I thought, therefore, that if, in the absence of his children, I could gain the good-will and mediation of the old De Lacy, I might, by his means, be tolerated by my younger protectors.
" One day, when the sun shone ott the red leaves that strewed the ground, and diffused cheerfulness, although it denied warmth, Safie, Agatha, and Fe¬ lix, departed on a long country walk, and the old man, at his o\ui desire, was left alone in the cottage. M hen his children fiad departed, he took up his guitar, and played several mournful, but sweet airs, more sweet and mourn¬ ful than I had ever heard him play be¬ fore. At first his countenance was il¬ luminated with pleasure, but, as he continued, thoughtfulness and sadness succeeded; at length, lading aside the instrument, he sat absorbed in reflection. *' My heart beat quick ; this was the hour and moment of trial, which would decide my hopes, or realize my fears. The servants were gone to a neighbour¬ ing fair. All was silent in and around the cottage : it was an excellent oppoi-
tunity; yet, when I proceeded to exe¬ cute my plan, my limbs failed me, and I sunk to the ground. Again I rose; and, exerting all the firmness of мЬлеЬ I was master, removed the planks which 1 had placed before my hovel to conceal my retreat. The fresh air revived me, and, Mİth renewed determination, I ap¬ proached the door of their cottage. " I knocked. ' Who is there?' said the old man—' Come in/ " 1 entered; 4 Pardon this intrusion/ said I, ' I am a traveller in want of a little rest; you Mould greatly oblige me, if you m ould allow me to remain a few minutes before the fire/ 44 4 Enter/ said De Lacy ; ' and I will try in Mhat manner I can relieve your wants; but, unfortunately, my children are from home, and, as Ì am blind, I am afraid I shall find it difficult to pro¬ cure food for you/
" ' Do not trouble yourself, my kind host, I have food ; it is warmth and rest onlv that I need/ u I sat down, and a silence ensued. I knew that every minute was precious to me, vet I remained irresolute in what manner to commence the interview; when the old man addressed me— " c By your language, stranger, I suppose you are my countryman ;—are you French ?' " c No ; but I was educated by a French family, and understand that language only. I am now going to claim the protection of some friends, whom I sincerely love, and of whose favour I have some hopes/ 44 4 Are these Germans?' " * No, tbey are French. But let us change the subject. I am an unfortu¬ nate and deserted creature ; I look around, and 1 have no relation or friend
upon earth. These amiable people to whom I go have never seen me, and know little of me. I am full of fears ; for if 1 fail there, I am an outcast 'm the world for ever/ " c Do not despair. To be friendless is indeed to be unfortunate; but the hearts of men, when unprejudiced by any obvious self-interest, are full of bro- therlv love and charitv. Relv, there- fore, on your hopes ; and if these friends are good and amiable, do not despair/ " e They are kind—they are the most excellent creatures in the world ; but, unfortunately, they are prejudiced against me. I have good dispositions ; my life has been hitherto harmless, and, in sorne degree, beneficial ; but a fatal prejudice clouds their eyes, and where they ought to see a feeling and kind friend, they behold only a detestable monster/
" ' That is indeed unfortunate ; but if you are really blameless, cannot you undeceive them ?' " ť I am about to undertake that task ; and it is on that account that I feel so many overwhelming terrors. I tenderly love these friends ; 1 have, un¬ known to them, been for many months in the habits of daily kindness towards them ; but they believe that I wish to injure them, and it is that prejudice which I wish to overcome/ " ' Where do these friends reside ?* " ' Near this spot/ " The old man paused, and then continued, c if you will, unreservedly coufide to me the particulars of jour tale, I perhaps may be of use in un¬ deceiving them. I am blind, arid can¬ not judge of your countenance, but there is something in your words which persuades me that you are sincere. 1
am poor, and an exile ; but it will afford me true pleasure to be in any way ser¬ viceable to a human creature.' " ' Excellent man ! 1 thank you, and accept your generous offer. You raise me from the dust by this kindness; and I trust that, by your aid, I shall not be driven from the society and sympathy of \ ou r fellow-creatures/ " ς Heaven forbid ! even if you were really criminal ; for that can only drive you to desperation, and not instigate you to virtue. I also am unfortunate ; I and my family have been condemned, although innocent: judge, therefore, if I do not feel for your misfortunes/ * " 4 How can 1 thank you, my best and only benefactor? from your lips first have I heard the voice of kind¬ ness directed towards me; İ shall be for ever grateful ; and your pre¬ sent humanity assures me of success
with those friends whom I am on the point of meeting/ " ' May 1 know the names and resi¬ dence of those friends ?' 44 I paused. This, I thought, was the moment of decision, which was to rob me of, or bestow happiness on me for ever* I struggled vainly for firm¬ ness sufficient to answer him, but the effort destroyed all my remaining strength ; I sank on the chair, and sobbed aloud. At that moment I heard the steps of my younger protectors. I had not a moment to lose ; but, seizing the hand ofthe old man, 1 cried, ' Now is the time!—save and protect me! You and your family are the friends whom I seek. Do not you desert me in the hour of trial ľ " * Great God ľ exclaimed the old man, * who are you ?* u At that instant the cottage door
Mas opened, and Felix, Safie, and Aga¬ tha entered. W ho can describe their horror and consternation on beholding me ? Agatha fainted ; and Safie, unable to attend to her friend, rushed out of the cottage. Felix darted forward, and with supernatural force tore me from his father, to м hose knees I clung: in a transport of fury, he dashed meto the ground, and struck me violently with a stick. I could have torn him limb from limb, as the lion rends the antelope. But my heart sunk Mithin me as with bitter sickness, and 1 refrained. 1 saw him on the point of repeating his blow, when, overcome by pain and anguish, I quitted the cottage, and in the gene¬ ral tumult escaped unperceived to my hoveL
CHAPTER VIIL
" Cursed, cursed creator! Why did I live ? Why, in that instant, did I not extinguish the spark of existence which you had so wantonly bestowed ? I know not ; despair had not yet taken possession of me; my feelings were those of rage and revenge. I could with pleasure have destroyed the cot¬ tage and its inhabitants, and have glut¬ ted myself with their shrieks and mi¬ sery. " When night came, I quitted my retreat, and wandered in the wood ; and now, no longer restrained hy the
fear of discovery, I gave vent to my anguish in fearful bowlings. I was like a wild beast that had broken the toils ; destroying the objects that obstructed me, and ranging through the wood with a stag-like swiftness. Oh ! what a mi¬ serable night I passed í the cold stars shone in mockery, and the bare trees waved their branches above me: now and then the sweet voice ofa bird burst forth amidst the universal stillness. AH, save I, were at rest or in enjoyment: I, like the arch fiend, bore a hell within me; and, finding myself unsympa- thized with, wished to tear up the trees, spread havoc and destruction around me, and then to have sat down and enjoyed the ruin. " But this was a luxury of sensation that could not endure; 1 became fa¬ tigued with excess of bodily exertion, and sank on the damp grass in the VOL. II. G
»ick impotence of despair. There was none among the myriads of menthat existed who would pity or assist me ; aud should I feel kindness towards my enemies? No: from that moment 1 declared everlasting M'ar against the species, and, more than all, against him who had formed me, and sent me forth to this insupportable misery. " The sun rose ; I heard the voices of men, and knew that it was impos¬ sible to return to mv retreat during that day. Accordingly I hid myself in some thick underwood, determining to devote the ensuing hours to reflection on my situation. 44 The pleasant sunshine, and the pure air of day, restored me to some degree of tranquillity ; and when I considered what had passed at the cot¬ tage, I could not help believing tbat I had been too hasty in my concluşicms.
I had certainly acted imprudently. It was apparent that my conversation had interested the father in my behalf, and I was a fool in having exposed my person to the horror of his children. I ought to have familiarized the old De Lacy to me, and by degrees have discovered myself to the rest of liis family, M'hen they should have been prepared for my approach. But I did not believe mv errors to be irretrie- vable; and, after much consideration, I resolved to return to the cottage, seek the old man, and by my representa¬ tions win him to my party. ^* ? " These thoughts calmed me^ and in the afternoon I sank into a profound sleep ; but the fever of my blood did not allow me to be visited by peaceful dreams. The horrible scene of the preceding day was for ever acting be¬ fore my eyes ; the females were flying, u 2
and the enraged Felix tearing me from his father's feet. I awoke exhausted; and, finding that it Mas already night, I crept forth from my hiding-place, and M'ent in search of food. " When my hunger was appeased, I directed my steps towards the M'ell- known path that conducted to the cot¬ tage. AH there M'as at peace. I crept into my hovel, and remained in silent expectation of the accustomed hour w hen the family arose. That hour past, the sun mounted high in the heavens, but the cottagers did not appear. I tremt)len r violently, apprehending some dreadful misfortune. The inside of the cottage M'as dark, and I heard no motion ; I cannot describe the agony of this suspence. " Presently two countrymen passed by ; but, pausing near the cottage, they entered into conversation, using violent
gesticulations; but I did not under* stand what they said, as they spoke the language ofthe country, which differed from that of my protectors. Soon after, however, Felix approached with ano¬ ther man : I was surprised, as I knew that he had not quitted the cottage that morning, and waited anxiously ta discover, from his discourse, the mean¬ ing of these unusual appearances. " * Do you consider/ said his com¬ panion to him, 4 that you will be obliged to pay three months* rent, and to lose the produce of ^our garden? 1 do not wish to take any unfair advan¬ tage, and I beg therefore that 3 ou will take some days to consider of your determination/ " * It is utterly useless/ replied Felix, ' we can never again inhabit your cottage. The life of my father is in the greatest danger, owing to the q 3
dreadful circumstance that I have re^ lated. My wife and my sister will Uever recover their horror. I entreat you not to reason with me any more. Take possession of your tenement, and let me fly from this place/ " Felix trembled violently as he said this. He and his companion entered the cottage, in which they remained for a few minutes, and then departed. I never sat w any of the family of De Lacy more* " I continued for the remainder of the day in my hovel in a state of utter and stupid despair. My protectors had departed, and had broken the only link that held me to the world. For the first time the feelings of revenge and hatred filled my bosom, and I did not strive to controul them ; but, allowing myself to be borne away by the stream» I bent my mind towards injury and
death. When I thought of my friends, of the mild voice of De Lacy, the gentle eyes of Agatha, and the ex¬ quisite beauty of the Arabian, these thoughts vanished, and a gush of tears somewhat soothed me. But again» when I reflected that they had spurned and deserted me, anger returned, a ragé of anger; and, unable tö injure any thing human* I turned my fury towards inanimate objects. As night advanced, I placed a variety of combustibles around the cottage; and, after having destroyed every vestige of cultivation in the garden, 1 waited with forced impatience until the rnoon had sunk to commence my operations. "As the night advanced, a fierce wind arose from the woods, and quickly dispersed the clouds that had loitered in the heavens : the blast tore along like a mighty avelanche, and produced g 4
a kind of insanity in my spirits, that burst all bounds of reason and reflec¬ tion. I lighted the dry branch of a tree, and danced with fury around the devoted cottage, my eyes still fixed on the M'estern horizon, the edge of which the moon nearly touched. A part of its orb was at length hid, and I waved my brand ; it sunk, and, with a loud scream, I fired the straw, and heath, and bushes, m hich I had collected. The wind fanned the fire, and the cottage was quickly enveloped by the flames, which clung to it, and licked it with their forked and destroying tongues. " As soon as I was convinced that no assistance could save any part of the habitation, I quitted the scene, and sought for refuge in the woods. " And пом-, with the world before røe, whither should I bend my steps? I resolved to fly far from the scene of my
misfortunes; but to me, hated and de¬ spised, every country must be equally horrible. At length the thought of you crossed my mind. I learned from your papers that you were my father, my creator; and to whom could I apply with more fitness than to him who had given me life ? Among the lessons that Felix had bestowed upon Safie geography had not been omitted : I had learned from these the relative situations ofthe different countries of the earth. Your had mentioned Geneva as the name of your native town ; and towards this place I resolved to proceed. " But how was I to direct myself? I knew that I must travel in a south¬ westerly direction to reach my destina¬ tion ; but the sun w as my only guide. I did not know the names ofthe towns that I was to pass through, nor could I ask information from a single human α 5
being; but I did not despair. From you only could I hope for succour, al¬ though toM'ards you I felt no sentiment but that of hatred. Unfeeling, heart¬ less creator! you had endowed me with perceptions and passions, and then cast me abroad an object for the scorn and horror of mankind. But on you only had I any claim for pity and re¬ dress, and from you I determined to sÄk that justice which I vainly at¬ tempted to gain from any other being tbat wore the human form. " My travels were long, and the suf¬ ferings I endured intense. It M'as late in autumn when I quitted the district where I had so long resided. I tra¬ velled only at night, fearful of encoun¬ tering the visage of a human being. Nature decayed around me, and the sun became beatless; rain and snow poured around me ; mighty rivers were
frozen ; the surface of the earth was hard, and chill, and bare, and I found no shelter. Oh, earth ! how often did I im¬ precate curses on the cause of my being! The mildness of my nature had fled, and all within me was turned to gall and bitterness. The nearer I approached to your habitation, the more deeply did I feel the spirit of revenge enkindled in my heart. Snow fell, and the waters were hardened, but I rested not. A few incidents now and then directed me, and I possessed a map of the coun¬ try; but I often vvandered wide from my path. The agony of my feelings allowed me no respite: no incident occurred from which my rage and mi¬ sery could not extract its food ; but a circumstance tbat happened when I arrived on the confines of Switzerland, when the sun had recovered its warmth, and the earth again began to look
green, confirmed in an especial man¬ ner the bitterness and horror of my feelings. " I generally rested during the day, and travelled only when I was secured by night from, the view of man. One morning, however, Unding that my path lay through a deep wood, I ven¬ tured to continue ray journey after the sun had risen ; the dav, w hieb was one of the first of spring, cheered even me by the loveliness of its sunshine and the balmitiess of the air. I felt emo¬ tions of gentleness and pleasure, that had long appeared dead, revive within me. Half surprised by the novelty of these sensations, 1 allowed myself to be borne away by them ; and, forgetting my solitude and deformitj', dared to be happy. Soft tears again bedewed my cheeks, and 1 even raised my humid eyes with thankfulness towards the
blessed sun which bestowed such joy upon me. 44 I continued to wind among the paths of the wood, until 1 came to its boundary, which was skirted by a deep and rapid river, into which many ofthe trees bent their branches, now budding with the fresh spring. Here I paused, not exactly knowing what path to pur¬ sue, when 1 heard ithe sound of voices, that induced me to conceal myself un¬ der the shade of a cypress. I was scarcely bid, when a young girl came running towards the spot where I was concealed, laughing as rf she ran from some сне in sport. She continued her course along the precipitous sides, of the river, when suddenly her foot şlipt, and she fell into the rapid stream. I rushed from my biding place, and, with extreme labour from the force of the current, saved her, and dragged her
to shore. She was senseless ; and I en¬ deavoured, by every means in rny power, to restore animation, when I was suddenly interrupted by the ap¬ proach of a rustic, who was probably the person from whom she had play¬ fully fled. On seeing me, he darted towards me, and, tearing the girl from my arms, hastened towards the deeper parts ofthe wood. I followed speedily, I hardly knew why ; but when the man saw me draw near, he aimed a gun, whieh he carried, at my body, and fired. [ sunk to the ground, and my inj u rer, with increased swiftness, escaped into the wood. '" This was then the reward of my benevolence ! I had saved a human being from destruction, and, as a re¬ compence, ï now writhed under the miserable pain of a wound, which shattered the flesh and bone. The
feelings of kindness and gentleness, which I had entertained but a few mo¬ ments before, gave place to hellish rage and gnashing of teeth. Inflamed by pain, I vowed eternal hatred and vengeance to all mankind. But the agony of my wound overcame me ; my pulses paused* and I fainted. " For some weeks I led a miserable life in the woods, endeavouring to cure the wound which I had received. The ball had entered my shoulder, and I knew not whether it had remained there or passed through ; at any rate I had no means of extracting it. My sufferings меге augmented also by the oppressive sense of the injustice and ingratitude of their infliction. My daily vows rose for revenge—a deep and deadly revenge, such as would alone compensate for the outrages and anguish I had endured.
" After some weeks my wound healed, and I continued my journey. The labours I endured were no longer to be alleviated by the bright sun or gentle breezes of spring; all joy was but a mockery, which insulted my de¬ solate state, and made me feel more painfully that I was not made for the enjoyment of pleasure, " But my toils now drew near a close ; and, two months from this time, I reached tlie environs of Geneva. " It was evening when 1 arrived, and I retired to a hiding-place among the fields that surround it, lo meditate in what manner I should apply to you. I was oppressed by fatigue and hunger, and far too unhappy to enjoy the gentle breezes of evening, or the prospect of the sun setting behind the stupendous mountains of Jura. " At this time a slight sleep relieved
me from tbe pain of reflection, which was disturbed by the approach of a beautiful child, who came running into the recess 1 had chosen with all the spòrti veness of infancy. Suddenly, as I gazed on him, an idea seized me, that this little creature was unprejudiced, and had lived too short a time to have imbibed a horror of deformity. If, therefore, I could seize him, and edu¬ cate him as my companion and friend, I should not be so desolate in this peo¬ pled earth. " Urged by this impulse, I seized on the boy as he passed, and* drew him to¬ wards me. As soon as he beheld! my form, he placed his hands before his eyes, and uttered a shrill scream: I drew his hand forcibly from his face, and said, ' Child, what is the meaning of this? 1 do not intend to hurt you ; listen to me/
ťí He struggled violently; 4 Let me" go/ he cried ; 4 monster ! ugly wretch ! you Mish to eat me, and tear me to pieces—You are an ogre—Let me go, or I will tell my papa/ " ' Boy, you will never see your father again ; you must come with me/ " 4 Hideous monster ! let me go ; My papa is a Syndic—he is M. Fran¬ kenstein—he would punish you. You dare not keep me/ " * Frankenstein ! you belong then to my enemy—to him towards whom I have sworn eternal revenge ; you shall be my first victim.' " The child still struggled, and loaded me with epithets which carried despair to my heart: I grasped his throat to silence him, and in a moment he lay dead at my^feet. *' I gazed on my victim, and my heart swelled with exultation and hell-
ish triumph : clapping my hands, I ex¬ claimed, ' I, too, can create desolation 5 my enemy is not impregnable ; this death will carry despair to him, and a thousand other miseries shall torment and destroy him/ 44 As I fixed my eyes on tbe child, I saw something glittering on his breast. I took it ; it was a portrait of a most lovely woman. Ih spite of my ma«* lignity* it softened arid attracted me* For a few moments I gazed with delight on her dark eyes, fringed by deep lashed, and her lovely lips ; but presently my rage returned: I remembered that I was for ever deprived of the delights that such beautiful creatures could be¬ stow; and that she whose resemblance 1 contemplated would, in regarding roe, have changed that air of divine benig¬ nity to one expressive of disgust aad affright.
" Cau you wonder that such thoughts transported me with rage? I only wonder that at that moment, instead of venting my sensations in exclamations* and agony, I did not rush among man¬ kind, and perish in the attempt to de¬ stroy them. . " While I was overcome by these feelings, í left the spot where I had committed the murder, and was seek¬ ing a more secluded hiding-place, when I perceived a woman passing near me. She was young, not indeed so beautiful as her whose portrait I held, but of an agreeable aspect, and bloomiug in the loveliness of youth and health. Here, I thought, is one of those whose smiles are bestowed on all but me ; she shall not escape: thanks to the lessons of Felix, and the sanguinary laws of man, I have learned how to work mischief. I approached her unperceived, and placed
the portrait securely in one of the folds of her dress. " For some days I haunted the spot where these scenes had taken place; sometimes wishing to see you, some¬ times resolved to quit the world and its miseries for ever. At length I wan¬ dered towards tbese mountains, and have ranged through their immense re¬ cesses, consumed by a burning passion which you alone can gratify. We may not part until you have promised to comply with my requisition. I am alone, and miserable ; man will not as¬ sociate with me; but one as deformed and horrible as myself would not deny herself to me. My companion must be ofthe same species, and have the same defects. This being you must create/*
CHAPTER IX.
The being finished speaking, and fixed his looks upon me in expectation of a reply. But 1 was bewildered, perplexed, and unable to arrangé my ideas sufficientlv to understand the full extent of his proposition. He con¬ tinued— " You must create a female for me, with whom I can live in the inter¬ change of those sympathies necessary for my being. This you alone can do ; and I demand it of you asa right which you must not refuse." The latter part of his tale had kin¬ dled anew in me the anger that had
died away while he narrated his peace¬ ful life among the cottagers, and, as lie said this, I could no linger suppress the rage that burned within me. " I do refuse it," I replied; " and no torture shall ever extort a consent from nie. You may render me the most miserable of men, but vou shall never make me hase in my own eyes. Shall I create another like yourself, whose joint wickedness might desolate the world. Begone ! I have answered you ; you may torture me, but I will never consent." 44 You are in the wrong/ replied the fiend; " and, instead of threatening, I am content to reason with you. lam malicious because I am miserable ; am I not shunned and hated by all man¬ kind ? You, my creator, would tear me to pieces, and triumph ; remember that, and tell me why I should pity man
more than he pities me? You would not call it murder, if you could precipi¬ tate me into one of those ice-rifts, and destroy my frame, the work of your own hands. Shall I respect man, when lie contemns me ? Let him live* with me in the interchange of kindness, and, instead of injury, I would bestow every benefit upon him with tears of grati¬ tude at his acceptance. But that can¬ not be ; the human senses are insur¬ mountable barriers to our untou. Yet mine shall not be the submission of ahject slavery. I will revenge my in¬ juries: if I cannot inspire love, 1 will cause fear; and chiefly towards you my arch-enemy, because my creator, do I swear inextinguishable hatred. Have a care : I will work at your destruc¬ tion, nor finish until I desolate your heart, so that you curse the hour of your birth. w
A fiendish rage animated him as he said this; his face was wrinkled into contortions too horrible for human eyes to behold ; but presently hè calmed himself, and proceeded— " I intended to reason. This passion is detrimental to me : for you do not reflect that you are the cause of its excess. If any being felt emotions of benevolence towards me, I should re¬ turn them an hundred and an hundred fold ; for that one creature's sake, I would make peace with the whole kind ! But I now indulge in dreams of bliss that cannot be realized. What I ask of you is reasonable and moderate ; I demand a creature of another sex, but as hideou3 as myself: the gratification is small, but it is all that I can receive, and it shall content me. It is true, we shall be monsters, cut off from all the world ; hut on that account we shall be vol. n. h
more attached to one another. Our lives will not be happy, but they Mill be harmless, and free from the misery I now feel. Oh ! my creator, make me happy; let me feel gratitude towards you for one benefit ! Let me see that I excite the sympathy of some existing thing ; do not deny me my re¬ quest!" I was moved. I shuddered when I thought of the possible consequences of my consent ; but I felt that there Mas some justice in his argument. His tale, and the feelings he now expressed, proved him to be a creature of fine sen¬ sations; and did I not, as his maker, owe him all the portion of happiness that it M'as in my ром er to bestow ? He saw my change of feeling, and con¬ tinued— " If you consent, neither you nor any other human being shali ever see us
again : I will go to the vast wilds of South America. Mv food is not that of man ; I do not destroy the Jamb and the kid, to glut my appetite ; acorns and berries afford me sufficient nourish¬ ment. My companion will be of the same nature as myself, and will be con¬ tent with the same fare. We shall make our bed of dried leaves; the sun will shine on us as on man, and will ripen our food. The picture I present to you is peaceful and human, and you must feel that you could deny it only in the wantonness of power and cruelty. Pitiless as \ou have been towards me, I now see compassion in your eyes; let me seize the favourable moment, and persuade you to promise what I so ardently desire." " Vou propose/* replied I, " to fly from the habitations of man, to dwell in those wilds where the beasts of the h 2
ñelá will be your only companions. How can you, who long for the love and sympathy of man, persevere in this exile? You wiil return, and again seek their kindness, and you will meet with their detestation ; your evil pas¬ sions will be renewed, and you will then have a companion to aid you in the task of destruction. This may not be; cease to argue the point, for I cannot consent." ·* How inconstant are your feelings ! but a moment ago jou were moved by my representations, and why do you again harden yourself to my com¬ plaints ? I swear to you, by the earth which 1 inhabit, and by you that made me, that, with the companion you bestow, I will quit the neighbour¬ hood of man, and d wdl, as it may chance, in the most savage of places. My evil passions will have fled, for
I shall meet with sympathy; my life will flow quietly away, and, in my dying moments, I shall not curse my maker." His words had a strange effect upon me. I compassionated him, and some¬ times felt a wish to console him ; but when I looked upon him, when I saw the filthy mass that moved and talked, my heart sickened, and my feelings were altered to those of horror and hatred. I tried to stifle these sensa¬ tions; I thought, that as I could not sympathize with him, I had no right to withhold from him the small portion of happiness which was yet in my power to bestow, " You swear," I said, " to be harm. less ; but have you not already shewn a degree of malice that should reason¬ ably make me distrust you ? May not even this be a feint that ΛνϋΙ inerease η 3
your triumph by affording a wider scope for your revenge ?" " How is this? I thought I bad moved your compassion, and yet you »till refuse to bestow on me the only benefit that can soften ray heart, and render me harmless. If I have no ties and no affections, hatred and vice must be my portion ; the love of ano¬ ther will destroy the cause of my crimes, and I shall become a thing, of whose existence every one will be ignorant. My vices are the children of a forced solitude that I abhor ; and my virtues will necessarily arise when I live in communion with an equal. I shall feel the affections of a sensitive being, and become linked to the chain of ex¬ istence and events, from which I am now excluded." I paused some time to reflect on all he had related, and the various argu-
ments which h$ had eHipIoyed,^ I thought ofthe promise çf virtues which he had displayed on the. opening of Ы& existence, and the subsequent blight of all kindly feeling by the loathing and seorn which his protectors had mani¬ fested towards him. His power and threats were not omitted in my calcu¬ lations : a creature who could exist in the ice caves of the glaciers, and hide himself from pursuit among tbe ridge» of inaccessible precipices, Mas a being possessing faculties it woutd be vaia to cope with. After а long pause of re¬ flection, I concluded, that the justice due both to him and my fellow-crea* lures demanded of me that I should comply with his request. Turning tø him, therefore, I said— " I consent to your demand, on your solemn oath to quit Europe for ever, and every other place in the neighbour-
1юо<! of man, as soon as I shall deliver into* your hands a female who will ao company you in your exile." " I swear," he cried, " by the sun* and by the blue sky of heaven, that if you grant my prayer, while they exist you shall never behold me again. De* part to your home, and commence your labours: I shall watch their pro* gress with unutterable anxiety ; and fear not but that when you are ready I shall Appear." * Saying this, he suddenly quitted me, fearful, perhaps, of any change in my sentiments. I saw him descend thé mountain with greater speed than ihe flight of an eagle,ahd quickly lost him among the undulations of the sea of ice. - His talé had occupied the whole day; and the sun was upxm the verge of the horizon when hé departed. I knew.
that I ought to hasten toy descent to* wards the valley, as I should soon be encompassed in darkness; but my beart was heavy, and my steps slow. The labour of winding among the little paths of the mountains, and fìxing my feet firmly as I advanced, perplexed me, occupied as I was by the emotions which the occurrences of the day had produced. Night was far advanced, when I came to the half-way resting- place, and seated myself beside the fountain. The stars shone at intervals» as the clouds passed from over them ; the dark pines rose before me, and every here and there a broken tree lay on the ground : it was a scene of won¬ derful solemnity, and stirred strange thoughts within me. I wept bitterly ; and, clasping my hands in agony, I exclaimed, " Oh! stars, and clouds, and winds, ye are all about to mock
me : if ye really pity me, crush stnsa- tion and memory; let me become as nought ; but if not, depart, depart and leave me in darkness." These were wild and miserable thoughts; but 1 cannot describe to you how the eternal twinkling of the stars weighed upon me, and how I listened to every blast of wind, as if it were a dull ugly siroe on its way to consume me. Morning dawned before I arrived at the village of Chamounix; but my pre¬ sence, so haggard and strange, hardly calmed the fears of my family, who had waited the whole night in anxious ex¬ pectation of my return. The following day we returned to Geneva. The intention of my father in coming had been to divert my mind, and to restore me to my lost tranquillity; but the medicine had been fatal. And, unable to account for the excess of
misery I appeared to suffer, he hastened to return home, hoping the quiet and monotony of a domestic life would by degrees alleviate my sufferings from whatsoever cause they might spring. For myself, I was passive in all their arrangements; and the gentle afiection of my beloved Elizabeth Mas inade- quate to draw me from the depth of my despair. The promise I had made to the dæmon weighed upon my mind, like Dante's iron cowl on the heads of the hellish hypocrites. All pleasures of earth and sky passed before me like a dream, and that thought only had to me the reality of life. Can you wonder, that sometimes a kind of insanity pos¬ sessed me, or that I saM f continually about me a multitude of filthy ani¬ mals inflicting on me incessant torture, that often extorted screams and bitter groans ?
By degrees, however, these feelings became calmed. I entered again into the every-day scene of life, if not with interest, at least with some degree of tranquillity.
END OF VOL. II.
