Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Frankenstein: or, The modern Prometheus
FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, THE MODERN PROMETHEUS.
CHAPTER I. Day after day, week after week, passed away on my return to Geneva; and I could not collect the courage to recom¬ mence my work. I feared the vengeance of the disappointed fiend, yet I was unable to overcome my repugnance to the task which was enjoined me. I found that I could not compose a fe¬ male without again devoting several months to profound study and labo- tol. in. в
rious disquisition. I had heard of some discoveries having been made by an English philosopher, the knowledge of which was material to my success, and I sometimes thought of obtaining my father's consent to visit England for this purpose ; but I clung to every pretence of delay, and could not resolve to interrupt my returning tranquillity. My health, which bad hitherto declined, was now much restored ; and my spi¬ rits, when unchecked by the memory of my unhappy promise, rose proportion- ably. My father saw this change with pleasure, and he turned his thoughts towards the best method of eradicating the remains of my melancholy, which every now and then would return by fits, and with a devouring blackness overcast the approaching sunshine. At these moments I took refuge in the most perfect solitude. I passed whole
davs on the lake alone in a little boat, watching the clouds, and listening to the rippling of the waves, silent and listless. But the fresh air and bright sun seldom failed to restore me to some degree of composure ; and, on my re¬ turn, I met the salutations of my friends with a readier smile and a more cheer¬ ful heart. It was after my return from one of these rambles that my father, calling me aside, thus addressed me :—* " I am happy to remark, my dear son, that you have resumed your former pleasures, and seem to be returning to yourself. And yet you are still un¬ happy, and still avoid our society. For some time I was lost in conjecture as to the cause of this ; but yesterday an idea struck me, and if it is well found¬ ed, I conjure you to avow it. Reserve on such a point would be not oöly в 2
useless, but draw down treble misery on us all." I trembled violently at this exordium, and my father continued— * " 1 confess, my son, that I have al¬ ways looked forward to your marriage with your cousin as the tie of our do¬ mestic comfort, and the stay of my de¬ clining years. You were attached to each other from your earliest infancy; you studied together, and appeared, in dispositions and tastes, entirely suited to one another* But so blind is the experience of man, that what I con¬ ceived to be the best assistants to my .plan may have entirely destroyed it. You, perhaps, regard her as your sister, without any wish that she might be¬ come your wife. Nay, you may have met with another whom you may love ; and, considering yourself as bound in honour to your cousin, this struggle
may occasion the poignant misery which you appear to feel." " My dear father, re-assure yourself. I love my cousin tenderly and sincerely. I never saw any woman who excited, as Elizabeth does, my warmest admi¬ ration and affection. My future hopes and prospects are entirely bound up in the expectation of our union." " The expression of your sentiments on this subject, my dear Victor, gives me more pleasure than I have for some time experienced. If you feel thus, we shall assuredly be happy, however present events may cast a gloom over us. But it is this gloom, which ap¬ pears to have taken so strong a hold of your mind, that I wish to dissipate. Tell me, therefore, whether you object to an immediate solemnization of the marriage. We have been unfortunate, and recent events have drawn us frii^a в 3
that every-day tranquillity befitting my years and infirmities. You are younger ; yet I do not suppose, possessed as you are of a competent fortune, that an early marriage would at all interfere with any future plans of honour and utility that you may have formed. Do not suppose, however, that I wish to dictate happiness to yon, or that a delay on your part uould cause me any se¬ rious uneasiness, interpret my words with candour, and answer me, I con¬ jure you, with confidence and since¬ rity." I listened to my father in silence, and remained for some time incapable of offering any reply. 1 revolved rapidly in my mind a multitude of thoughts, and endeavoured to arrive at some con¬ clusion. Alas ! to me the idea of an immediate union with my cousin was one of horror and dismay. I was bound
by a solemn promise, which I had not yet fulfilled, and dared not break; or, if I did, what manifold miseries might not impend over me and my devoted family ! Could I enter into a festival with this deadly weight }et hanging round my neck, and bowing me to the ground. I must perform my engage¬ ment, and let the monster depart with his mate, before I allowed myself to enjoy the delight of an union from which I expected peace. I remembered also the necessity im¬ posed upon me of either journeying to England, or entering into a long corre¬ spondence with those philosophers of that country, ν hose knowledge and dis¬ coveries were of indispensable use to me in my present undertaking. The latter method of obtaining the desired intelligence was dilatory and unsatis¬ factory: besides, any variation was n 4
agreeable to me, and I was delighted with the idea of spending a year or two in change of scene and variety of occu¬ pation, in absence from my family; during which period some event might happen whkh would restore me to them in peace and happiness: my promise might be fulfilled, and the monster have departed ; or some accident might occur to destroy him, and put an end to my slavery for ever. These feelings dictated my answer to my father. I expressed a wish to visit England ; but, concealing the true rea¬ sons of this request, I clothed my de¬ sires under the guise of wishing to travel and see the world before 1 sat down for life within the walls of my native town. I urged my entreaty with earnest¬ ness, and my father was easily induced to comply; for a more indulgent and
less dictatorial parent did not exist upon earth. Our plan was soon ar¬ ranged. I should travel to Strasburgh, where Clerval would join me. Some short time would be spent in the towns« of Holland, and our principal stay would be in England. We should re¬ turn by France; and it was agreeòV that the tour should occupy the space of two years. My father pleased himself with the reflection, that my union with Elizabeth should take place immediately on my return to Geneva. " These two years," said he, " will pass swiftly, and it will be the last delay that will oppose itself to your happiness. And, indeed, I earnestly desire that period to arrive, when we shall all be united, and nei¬ ther hopes or fears arise to disturb our domestic calm/' " I am content/* I replied* " witfo в 5
your arrangement. By that time we shall both have become wiser, and I hope happier, than we at present are/* I sighed ; but my father kindly forbore to question me further concerning the cause of my dejection. He hoped that new scenes, and the amusement of tra¬ velling, would restore my tranquillity. 1 now made arrangements for my journey; but one feeling haunted me, which filled me with fear and agitation. During my absence I should leave my friends unconscious of the existence of their enemy, and unprotected from his, attacks, exasperated as he might be by my departure. But he had promised to follow me wherever I might go ; and would he not accompany me to Eng¬ land ? This imagination was dreadful in itself, but soothing, inasmuch as it supposed the safety of my friends. I was agonised with the idea of the pos-
sibility that the reverse of this might happen. But through the whole period during which I was the slave of my creature, I allowed myself to be go» verned by the impulses of the moment; *and my present sensations strongly in¬ timated that the fiend would follow вде, and exempt my family from the danger of his machinations. It was in the latter end of August that I departed, to pass two years of exile. Elizabeth approved of the rea¬ sons of my departure, and only re¬ gretted that she had not the same op¬ portunities of enlarging her experience, and cultivating her understanding. She wept, however, as she bade me fare¬ well, and entreated me to return happy and tranquil. " We all/' sair 1 she, " depend upon you; and if you are miserable, what must be our feel¬ ings ?"
I threw myself into the carriage tha# was to convey me away, hardly know¬ ing whither I was going, and careless* of what was passing around. I re¬ membered only, and it was with a bitter anguish that I reflected on it, to order that my chemical instruments should be packed to go with me : for I resolved to fulfil my promise while abroad, and return, if possible, a free man. Filled with dreary imaginations, I passed through many beautiful and majestic scenes; but my e}es were fixed and unobserving, I could only think of the bourne of my travels, and the work which was to occupy me whilst they endured. After some da} s spent in listless indo¬ lence, during which I traversed many^ leagues, larri ved at Strasburgh, where Γ waited two days for Clerval. He came-. Alas, how great was the contrast between»
us 1 He was alive to every new scene ; joy¬ ful when he saw the beauties of the set- tingsun, and more happy w hen he beheld it rise, and recommence a new day. He pointed out to me the shifting colours of the landscape, and the appearances of the sky. " This is what it is to, live ;" he cried, " now I enjoy existence ! But you, my dear Frankenstein, where¬ fore are you desponding and sorrow¬ ful ?" In truth, I was occupied bj r gloomy thoughts, and neither saw the descent of the evening star, nor the golden sun-rise reflected in the Rhine.— And you, my friend, would be far more amused with the journal of Clerval, who observed the scenery with an eye* of feeling and delight, than to listen to my reflections. I, a miserable wretch,. haunted by a curse that shut up every avenue to enjoyment. We had agreed to descend the Rhine*
in a boat from Strasburgh to Rotter¬ dam, whence we might take shipping for London. During this voyage, we passed by many willowy islands, and saw several beautiful towns. We staid a day at Manheim, and, on the fifth from our departure from Strasburgo arrived at Mayence. The course of the Rhine below Mayence becomes much more picturesque. The river descends rapidly, and winds between hills, not high, but steep, and of beautiful forms. We saw many ruined castles standing on the edges of precipices, surrounded by black woods, high and inaccessible. This part of the Rhine, indeed, pre¬ sents a singularly variegated landscape. In one spot you view rugged hills, ruined castles overlooking tremendous precipices, with the dark Rhine rushing beneath ; and, on the sudden turn of a promontory, flourishing vineyards, withi
green sloping banks, and a meandering river, and populous towns, occupy lhe scene. We travelled at the time of the vin¬ tage, and heard the song of the la¬ bourers, as we glided down the stream. Even I, depressed in mind, and my spirits continually agitated by gloomy feelings, even I was pleased. I lay at the bottom of the boat, and, as I gazed on the cloudless blue sky, I seemed to drink in a tranquillity to which I had long been a stranger. And if these were my sensations, who can describe those of llehrv ? He felt as if he had been transported to Fairy-land, and en¬ joyed a happiness seldom tasted by man. " I have seen," he said, " the most beautiful scenes of my own country ; I have visited the lakes of Lucerne and Uri, where the snowy mountains descend almost perpendicu-
îarly to the water, casting black and im¬ penetrable shades, which would cause э gloomy and mournful appearance, were it not for the most verdant islands that relieve the eye by their gay appear¬ ance ; I have seen this lake agitated by a tempest, when the wind tore up whirlwinds of water, and gave you an idea of what the water-spout must be on the great ocean, and the waves dash with fury the base of the mountain, where the priest and his mistress were overwhelmed by an avalanche, and where their dying voices are still said to be heard amid the pauses of the nightly wind; I have seen the moun¬ tains of La Valais, and the Pays de Vaud : but this country, Victor, pleases me more than all those wonders. The mountains of Switzerland are more majestic and strange ; but there is a charm in the banks of this divine river^
that I never before saw equalled. Look at that castle which overhangs yon pre¬ cipice ; and that also on the island, al¬ most concealed amongst the foliage of those lovely trees ; and now that group of labourers coming* from among their vines ; and that village half-hid in the recess of the mountain. Ob, surely, the spirit that inhabits and guards this place has a soul more in har¬ mony with man, than those who pile the glacier, or retire to the inaccessible peaks of the mountains of our own country/' Clerval ! beloved friend ! even now it delights me to record your words, and to dwell on the praise of which you are so eminently deserving. He was a being formed in the " very poetry of nature*." His wild and enthusiastic imagination was chastened by the sen*
sibility of his heart. His soul over¬ flowed with ardent affections, and his friendship was of that devoted and won¬ drous nature that the worldly-minded teach us to look for only in the imagi¬ nation. But even human sympathies were not suÉBcient to satisfy his eager mind. The scenery of external natim, which others regard only with admira¬ tion, he loved with ardour : ■■ » ..... ■-------- " Tile soundini; cataract Haunted him like a passton : the tall rock, The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood, Their colours and their forms, were then to him* An appetite ; a feeling, and a love, That had no nord of a remoler charm, By thought supplied, or any interest Unborrowed from the eye*." And where does he now exist? Is this gentle and lovely being lost for ever ? Has this mind so replete w r ith,
ideas, imaginations fanciful and mag¬ nificent, which formed a world, whose existence depended on the life of its creator; has this mind perished ? Does it now only exist in my memory ? No, it is not thus; your form so divinely wrought, and beaming with beauty, has decayed, but your spirit still visits aLd consoles your unhappy friend Pardon this gush of sorrow ; these ineffectual words are but a slight tri¬ bute to the unexampled worth of Henry, but they soothe my heart, overflowing with the anguish which his remem¬ brance creates. I w r il! proceed with my tale. Beyond Cologne we descended to the plains of Holland ; and we resolved to post the remainder of our way ; for the wind was contrary, and lhe stream of the river was too gentle to aid us. Our journey here lost the interest
arising from beautiful scenery ; but we arrived in a few days at rtotterdam r whence we proceeded by std to Eng¬ land. It was on a clear morning, in the latter days of December, ihat I first saw the white cliffs of Britain. The banks of the Thames presented a new scene ; they were flat, but fertile, and almost every town was marked by the remembrance of some story. We saw Tilbury Fort, and remembered the Spanish armada; Gravesend, Woolwich, and Greenwich, places which I had heard of even in my country. At length we saw the numerous steeples of London, St. Paul's towering- above all, and the Tower fanaed ia English history.
CHAPTER II. London was our present point of rest; we determined to remain several months in this wonderful and celebrated city. Clerval desired the intercourse of the men of genius and talent who flou¬ rished at this time; but this was with me a secondary object; I was princi¬ pally occupied with the means of ob¬ taining the information necessary for the completion of my promise, and quickly availed myself of the letters of introduction that I had brought with me, addressed to the most distinguished natural philosophers. If this journey had taken place during
my days of study and happiness, it would have afforded me inexpressible pleasure. But a blight had come over my exist¬ ence, and I only visited these people for the sake of the information they might give me.on the subject in which my interest was so terribly profound. Com¬ pany was irksome to me ; when alone, I could fill my mind with the sights of heaven and earth ; the voice of Henry soothed me, and I could thus cheat my¬ self into a transitory peace. But busy uninterestingjoyous faces brought back despair to my heart. I saw an insur¬ mountable barrier placed between me and my fellow-men ; this barrier was sealed with the blood of William and Justine; and to reflect on the events connected with those names filled my soul with anguish. But in Clerval I saw the image of my former self; he was inquisitive, and an-
xious to gain experience and instruc¬ tion. The difference of manners which he observed was to him an inex¬ haustible source of instruction and amusement. He was for ever b usv; and the only check to his enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mien. I tried to conceal this as much as pos¬ sible, that I might not debar him from the pleasures natural to one who was entering on a new scene of life, undis¬ turbed by any care or bitter recollec¬ tion. I often refused to accompany him, alleging another engagement, that I might remain alone. 1 nor/ also be¬ gan to collect the materials necessary for my new creation, and this was to me like the torture of single drops of water continually falling on the head. Every thought that was devoted to it w r as an extreme anguish, and every word that I spoke in allusion to it
caused my lips to quiver, and my heart to palpitate. After passing some months in Lon¬ don, we received a letter from a person in Scotland, who had formerly been our visitor at Geneva. He mentioned the. beauties of his native country, and asked us if those were not sufficient allurements to induce us to prolong our journey as far north as Perth, where he resided. Clerval eagerly desired to accept this invitation ; and I, although I abhorred society, wished to view again mountains and streams, and all the wondrous works with which Nature adorns her chosen dwelling-places. - W^e had arrived in England at the beginning of October, and it was now February. We accordingly determined to commence our journey towards the north at the expiration of another month. In this expedition we did not
intend to follow the great road to Edin¬ burgh, but to visit Windsor, Oxford, Matlock, and the Cumberland lakes, resolving to arrive at the completion of this tour about the end of July. I packed my chemical instruments, and the materials I had collected, resolving to finish my labours in some obscure nook in the northern highlands of Scot¬ land. We quitted London on the 27th of March, ana remained a few days at Windsor, rambling in its beautiful fo¬ rest. This was a new scene to us moun¬ taineers ; the majestic oaks, the quan¬ tity of game, and the herds of stately deer, were all novelties to us. From thence we proceeded to Ox¬ ford, As we entered this citv, our minds were filled with the remembrance of the events that had been transacted there more than a century and a half VOL. III. €
before. It was here that Charles I„ had collected his forces. This citv had remained faithful to him, after the whole nation had forsaken his cause to join the standard of parliament and liberty. The memory of that unfortunate king, and his companions, the amiable Falk¬ land, the insolent Gower, his queen, and son, gave a peculiar interest to every part of the city, which they might be supposed to have inhabited. The spirit of elder days found a dwelling here, and we delighted to trace its footsteps. If these feelings had not found an imaginary gratification, the appearance of the city had yet in itself sufficient beauty to obtain our admira¬ tion. The colleges are ancient and picturesque ; the streets are almost mag¬ nificent; and the lovely bis, which flows beside it through meadows of ex¬ quisite verdure, is spread forth into a
placid expanse of waters, which reflects its majestic assemblage of towers, and spires, and domes, embosomed among aged trees. I enjoyed this scene ; and yet my en¬ joyment was embittered both by the memory of the past, and the anticipa¬ tion of the future, I was formed for peaceful happiness. During my youth¬ ful days discontent never visited my mind; and if I was ever overcome by ennui, the sight of what is beautiful in nature, or the study of what is excellent and sublime in the productions of man, could always interest my heart, and communicate elasticity to my spirits. But I am a blasted tree; the bolt has entered my soul ; and I felt then that I should survive to exhibit, what I shall soon cease to be—a miserable spectacle of wrecked humanity, pitiable to others, and abhorrent to myself. с 2
We passed a considerable period at Oxford, rambling among its environs, and endeavouring to identify every spot which might relate to the most ani¬ mating epoch of English history. Our little voyages of discovery were often prolonged by the successive objects that presented themselves. We visited the tomb of the illustrious Hampden, and the field on which that patriot fell. For a moment my soul was elevated from its debasing and miserable fears to con¬ template the divine ideas of liberty and self-sacrifice, of which these sights were the monuments and the remembrancers. Foran instant I dared to shake off my chains, and look around me with a free and lofty spirit ; but the iron had eaten into my flesh, and I sank again, trem¬ bling and hopeless, into my miserable self W r e left Oxford with regret, and pro-
ceeded to Matlock, which was our next place of rest. The country in the neighbourhood of this village resem¬ bled, to a greater degree, the scenery of Switzerland ; but every thing is on a lower scale, and the green hills want the crown of distant white Alps, which always attend on the piny mountains of my native country· We visited the wondrous cave 9 and the little cabinets of natural history, where the curiosities are disposed in the same manner as in the collections at Servox and Chamounix. The latter name made me tremble, when pronounced by Henry; and I hastened to quit Matlock, with which that terrible scene was thus as¬ sociated* From Derby still journeying north¬ ward, we passed two months in Cum¬ berland and Westmoreland. I could now almost fancy myself among the с 3
Swiss mountains. The little patches of snow which yet lingered on the northern sides of the mountains, the lakes, and the dashing of the rocky streams, were all familiar and dear sights to me. Here also we made some Acquaintances, who almost contrived to cheat me into happiness. The delight of Clerval was proportionably greater than mine ; his mind expanded in the company of men of talent, and he found ki his own nature greater capacities and resources than he could have imagined himself to have possessed while he asso¬ ciated with his inferiors. " I could pass my life here,"said he to me ; M and among these mountains I should scarcely re¬ gret Switzerland and the Rhine." But he found that a traveller's life is one that includes much pain amidst its enjoyments. His feelings are for ever on the stretch ; and when he be-.
gins to sink into repose, he finds him¬ self obliged to quit that on which he rests in pleasure for something new, which again engages his attention, and which also he forsakes for other no¬ velties. We had scarcely visited the various lakes of Cumberland and Westmore¬ land, and conceived an affection for some of the inhabitants, when the pe¬ riod of our appointment with our Scotch friend approached, and we left them to travel on. For my own part I was not sorry. I had now neglected my promise for some time, and 1 feared the effects of the dæmon 's disappointment. He might remain in Switzerland, and wreak his vengeance on my relatives. This idea pursued me, and tormented me at every moment from which I might other¬ wise have snatched repose and peace. I waited for my letters with feverish im- с 4
patience : if they were delayed, I was miserable, and overcome by a thousand fears; and when the) arrived, and I saw the superscription of Elizabeth or my father, I hardly dared to read and ascer¬ tain my fate. Sometimes I thought that the fiend followed me, and might expedite my remissness by murdering my companion. When these thoughts possessed me, I would not quit Henry for a moment, but followed him as his shadow, to protect him from the fancied rage of his destroyer. I felt as if I had committed some great crime, the consciousness of which haunted me. 1 was guiltless, but I had indeed drawn down a horrible curse upon my head, as mortal as that of crime. 1 visited Edinburgh with languid eyes and mind ; and ) et that city might have interested the most unfortunate being. Clerval did not like it so well
Us Oxford ; for the antiquity of the lat¬ ter city was more pleasing to him. But the beauty and regularity of the new town of Edinburgh, its romantic castle, and its environs, the most delightful in the world, Arthur's Seat,. St, Ber* nard's Well, and the Pentland Hills, compensated him for the change, and filled him with cheerfulness and ad¬ miration. But 1 was impatient to arrive at the termination of my jour¬ ney. We left Edinburgh in a week, pass¬ ing through Coupar, St. Andrews, and along the banks of the Tay, to Perth, where our friend expected us. But 1 was in no mood to laugh and talk with strangers, or enter into their feel¬ ings or plans with the good humour expected from a guest; and accord¬ ingly I told Clerval that I wished to make the tour of Scotland alone. " Do с 5
you," said I, " enjoy yourself, and let this be our rendezvous. Î may be ab¬ sent a month or two; but do not interfere with my motions, I entreat you : leave me to peace and solitude for a short time; and when I return, I hope it will be with a lighter heart, more congenial to your own temper/' Henry wished to dissuade me ; but, seeing me bent on this plan, ceased to remonstrate. He entreated me to write often. " I had rather be with you/* he said j " in your solitary rambles, than with these Scotch people, whom I do not know : hasten then, my dear friend, to return, that I may again feel myself somewhat at home, which I cannot do in your absence." Having parted from my friend, I determined to visit some remote spot of Scotland, and finish my work in soli¬ tude, I did not doubt but that the
monster followed me, and would dis¬ cover himself to me when I should have finished, that he might receive his companion. With this resolution I traversed the northern highlands, and fixed on one of the remotest of the Orkneys as the scene labours. It was a place ñtted for such a work, being hardly more than a rock, whose high sides were continually beaten upon by the waves. The soil was barren, scarcely affording pasture for a few miserable cows, and oatmeal for its inhabitants, which consisted of ňwe persons, whose gaunt and scraggy limbs gave tokens of their miserable fare. Vegetables and bread, when they indulged in such luxuries, and even fresh water, was to be procured from. the main land, which was about ñve miles distant. On the whole island there were but
three miserable huts, aud one of these was vacant when I arrived. This I hired. It contained but two rooms, and these exhibited all the squalidness of the most miserable penury. The thatch had fallen in, the walls were unplas- tered, and the door was off its hinges. I ordered it to be repaired, bought some furniture, and took possession ; an incident which would, doubtless, have occasioned some surprise, had not all the senses of the cottagers been be¬ numbed by want and squalid poverty. As it was,. 1 lived ungazed at and unmo¬ lested, hardly thanked for the pittance of food and clothes which I gave ; so much does suffering blunt even the coarsest sensations of men. In this retreat I devoted the morning to labour; but in the evening, when the weather permitted, I walked on the stony beach of the sea, to listen to the
THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. waves as they roared, and dashed at my feet. It was a monotonous, yet ever-changing scene. 1 thought of Switzerland ; it was far different from this desolate and appalling landscape. Its hills are covered with vines, and its cottages are scattered thickly in the plains. Its fair lakes reflect a blue and gentle sky; and, when troubled by the winds, their tumult is but as the play of a lively infant, when compared to the roarings of the giant ocean. In this manner I distributed my oc¬ cupations when I first arrived ; but, as I proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and irksome to me. Sometimes 1 could not pre¬ vail on myself to enter my laboratory for several days; and at other times I toiled day and night in order to com¬ plete my work. It was indeed a filthy process in which I was engaged. During
my first experiment, a kind of enthusi¬ astic frenzy had blinded me to the hor¿ ror of my employment ; my mind was intently fixed on the sequel of my la¬ bour, and my eyes were shut to the horror of my proceedings. But now I went to it in cold blood, and my heart often sickened at the work of my hands. Thus situated, employed in the most detestable occupation, immersed in a solitude where nothing could for an in¬ stant call my attention from the actual scene in which I was engaged, my spirits became unequal*; I grew restless and nervous. Every moment I feared to meet my persecutor. Sometimes I sat with my eyes fixed on the ground, fearing to raise them lest they should encounter the object which I so much dreaded to behold. I feared to wander from the sight of my fellow-creatures,
Test when alone he should come to claim his companion. In the mean time I worked on, and my labour was already considerably ad¬ vanced. I looked towards its com¬ pletion with a tremulous and eager hope, which I dared not trust myself to question, but which was intermixed- with obscure forebodings of evil, that made my heart sicken in my bosom..
CHAPTER HI.
I sat one evening in my laboratory ; the sun had set, and the moon was just rising from the sea ; I had not sufficient light for my employment, and I remained idle, in a pause of consideration of whe¬ ther I should leave my labour for the night, or hasten its conclusion by an unremitting attention to it. As I sat, a train of reflection occurred to me, which led me to consider the effects of what I was now doing. Three years before I was engaged in the same man¬ ner, and had created a fiend whose un¬ paralleled barbarity had desolated my,
heart, and filled it for ever with the bit¬ terest remorse. I was now about to form another being, of whose disposi¬ tions I was alike ignorant ; she might be¬ come ten thousand times more malig¬ nant than her mate, and delight, л г its own sake, in murder and wretcht aess. He had sworn to quit the neighbourhood of man, and hide himself in deserts ; but she had not ; and she, who in all pro¬ bability was to become a thinking and reasoning animal, might refuse to com¬ ply with a compact made before her creation. They might even hate each other ; the creature who already lived loathed his own deformity, and might he not conceive a greater abhorence for it when it came before his eyes in the female form? She also might turn with disgust from him to the superior beauty of man ; she might quit him, and he be again alone, exasperated by the fresh,
provocation of being deserted by one of his own species. Even if they were to leave Europe, and inhabit the deserts of the new world, yet one of the first results of those sympathies for which the dæmon thirsted would be children, and a race of devils would be propagated upon the earth, who might make the very ex¬ istence of the species of man a condi¬ tion precarious and full of terror. Had I a right, for my own benefit, to in¬ flict this curse upon everlasting gene¬ rations ? I had before been moved by the sophisms of the being 1 had created ; i had been struck senseless by his fiendish threats : but now, for the first time, the wickedness of my promise burst upon me ; I shuddered to think that future ages might curse me as their pest, whose selfishness had not hesitated to buy its own peace at
the price perhaps of the existence of the whole human race. I trembled, and mv heart failed with- in me ; when, on looking up, I saw, by the light of the moon, the dæmon at the casement. A ghastly grin wrinkled his lips as he gazed on me, where I sat fulfilling the task which he had allotted to me. Yes, he had followed me in my travels ; he had loitered in forests, hid himself in caves, or taken refuge in wide and desert heaths; and he now came to mark my progress, and claim the fulfilment of my promise. As I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost extent of malice and treachery. I thought with a sen¬ sation of madness on my promise of creating another like to him, and, trem¬ bling with passion, tore to pieces the thing on which I was engaged. The wretch saw me destroy the creature on.
whose future existence he depended for happiness, and, with a howl of devilish despair and revenge, withdrew. ì left the room, and, locking the door, made a solemn vpw in my own heart never to resume my labours ; and then, with trembling steps, I sought my own apartment. I was alone ; none were near me to dissipate the gloom, and relieve me from the sickening pp- presion of the most terrible reveries. Several hours past, and I remained near my window gazing on the sea; it was almost motionless, for the winds were hushed, and all nature reposed under the eye of the quiet moon. A few fishing vessels alone specked the water, and now and then the gende breeze wafted the sound of voices, as the fishermen called to one another. I felt the silence, although I was hardly conscious of its extreme profundity^
until my ear was suddenly arrested by the paddling of ears near the shore, and a persen landed close to my house. In a few inihutes after, I heard the creaking of my door, as if some one endeavoured to open it softly. I trem¬ bled from head to foot ; I felt a presenti¬ ment of who it was, and wished to rouse one of the peasants who dwelt in a cottage not far from mine ; but I was overcome by the sensation of helpless¬ ness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you in vain endeavour to fly from an impending danger, and was rooted to the spot. Presently I heard the sound of foot¬ steps along the passage; the door opened, and the wretch whom ï dreaded appeared. Shutting the door, he ap¬ proached me, and said, in a smothered voice— <* You have destroyed the work
which you began ; what is it that you in¬ tend ? Do you dare to break your pro¬ mise ? I have endured toil and misery : I left Switzerland with you ; I crept along the shor^ of the Rhine, among its w T iliow islands, and over the sum¬ mits of its hills. I have dwelt many month» in the heaths of England, and among the deserts of Scotland. I have endured incalculable fatigue, and cold, and hunger; do you dare destroy my hopes ?" " Begone ! I do break my promise ; never will I create another like vour- self, equal in deformity and wicked¬ ness." " Slave, I before reasoned with you, but you have proved yourself unworthy of my condescension, remember that f have power; you believe yourself miserable, but I can make you so wretched that the light of day will be
hateful to you. You are my creator* b«t I am your master ;—obey!" " The hour of my weakness is past, and the period of your power is ar¬ rived. Your threats cannot move me to do an act of wickedness ; but they confirm me in a resolution of not creating you a companion in vice. Shall 1, in cool blood, set loose upon the earth a dæmon, whose delight is in death and wretchedness. Begone ! I am firm, and your words will only exasperate my rage/' The monster saw my determination in my face, and gnashed his teeth in the impotence of anger. " Shall each man," cried he, " find a wife for his bosom, and each beast have his mate, and I be alone ? I had feelings of affection, and they were requited by detestation and «corn. Man,you may hate; bnt beware! Your hours will pass in dread and
misery, and soon the bolt will fall which must ravish from you your hap* piness for ever. Are you to be happy, while I grovel in the intensity of my wretchedness? You can blast my other passions ; but révenge remains— revenge, henceforth dearer than light or food ! I may die ; but first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the sun that gazes on your miseiy. Beware; fori am fearless, and therefore powerful. I will watch with the wiliness of a snake, that I may sting with its venom. Man, you shall repent of the injuries you inflict." " Devil, cease; and do not poison the air with these sounds of malice. I have declared my resolution to you, and I am no coward to bend beneath words. Leave me ; I am inexorable." " It is well. I go ; but remember, I shall be with you on your wedding-night. ,,
I started forward, and exclaimed, " Villain ! before you sign my death- warrant, be sure that you are yourself safe," I would have seized him ; but he eluded me, and quitted the house with precipitation : in a few moments I saw him in his boat, which shot across the waters with an arrowy swiftness, and was soon lost amidst the waves. All vas again silent; but his words rung in my ears. İ burned with rage to pursue the murderer of my peace, and precipitate him into the ocean. I walked up and down my room hastily and perturbed, while my imagination conjured up a thousand images to tor¬ ment and sting me. Why had I not followed him, and closed with him in mortal strife? But I had suffered him to depart, and he had directed his course towards the main land. I shucl- vol. in. d
dered to think who might be the next victim sacrificed to his insatiate re¬ venge. And then I thought again of his words—" I will be with t/ou on your leedding-nighl." That then was the period fixed for the fulfilment of my destiny. In that hour I should die, and at once satisfy and extinguish his malice. The prospect did not move me to fear ; yet when I thought of my beloved Elizabeth,—of her tears and endless sorrow, when she should find her lover so barbarously snatched from her,—tears, the first I had shed for many months, streamed from my eyes, and I resolved not to fall before my enemy without a bitter struggle. The night passed away, and the sun rose from the ocean ; my feelings be¬ came calmer, if it may be called calm¬ ness, when the violence of rage sinks into the depths of despair. I left the
house, the horrid scene of the last nighťs contention, and walked on the beach of the sea, which I almost re¬ garded as an insuperable barrier be¬ tween me and my fellow-creatures ; nay, a wish that such should prove the fact stole across me. J desired that I might pass my life on that barren rock, wearily it is true, but uninterrupted by any sudden shock of misery. If I re¬ turned, it was to be sacrificed, or to see those whom I most loved die under the grasp of a dæmon whom I had myself created. I walked about the isle like a rest¬ less spectre, separated from all it loved, and miserable in the separation. When it became noon, and the sun rose higher, I lay down on the grass, and was overpowered by a deep sleep. I had been awake the whole of the pre¬ ceding night, my nerves were agitated^ d 2
and my eyes inflamed by watching and misery. The sleep into which I now sunk refreshed me ; and when 1 awoke, I again felt as if I belonged to a race of human beings like myself, and I began to reflect upon what had passed with greater composure ; yet still the words of the fiend rung in my ears like a death-knell, they appeared like a dream, yet disti uct and oppressive as a reality. The sun had far descended, and I still sat on the shore, satisfying my ap¬ petite, which had become ravenous, with an oaten cake, when I saw a fishing- boat land close to me, and one of the men brought me a packet ; it contained letters from Geneva, and one from Clerval, entreating me to join him. He said that nearly a }ear had elapsed since we had quitted Switzerland, and France was yet unvisited. He en-
treated me, therefore, to leave my solitary isle, and meet him at Perth, in a week from that time, when we might arrange the plan of our future pro¬ ceedings. This letter in a degree re¬ called me to life, and I determined to quit my island at the expiration of two days. Yet, before I departed, there was a task to perform, on which I shuddered to reflect: I must pack my chemical instruments; and for that purpose I must enter the room which had been the scene of my odious work, and I must handle those utensils, the sight of which was sickening to me. The next morning, at day-break, I summoned sufficient courage, and unlocked the door of my laboratory. The remains of the half-finished creature, whom 1 had destro} ed, lay scattered on the floor, and I almost felt as if I had man- D 3
gled the living flesh of a human being. I paused to collect myself, and then entered the chamber. With trembling hand I conveyed the instruments out of the room ; but I reflected that I ought not to leave the relics of my work to excite the horror and suspicion of the peasants, and 1 accordingly put them into a, baskets with a great quantity of stones, and la} ing them up, determined to throw them into the sea that very night ; and in the meantime I sat upon the beach, employed in cleaning and arranging rny chemical apparatus. Nothing could be more complete than the alteration that had taken place in my feelings since the night of the appearance of the dæmon. I had before regarded my promise with a gloomy despair, as, a thing that, with whatever consequences, must be ful¬ filled ; but I now felt as if a film had
been taken from before my eyes, and that I, for the first time, saw clearly. The idea of renewing my labours did not for one instant occur to me; the threat I had heard weighed on my thoughts, but I did not reflect that a voluntary act of mine could avert it. I had resolved in my own mind, that to create another like the fiend I had first made would be an act of the basest and most atrocious selfishness; and I ba¬ nished from my mind every thought that could lead to a different conclusion. Between two and three in the morn¬ ing the moon rose ; and I then, putting my basket aboard a little skiff, sailed out about four miles from the shore. The scene was perfectly solitary: a few boats were returning towards land, but I sailed away from them. I felt as if I was about the commission of a dread¬ ful crime, and avoided with shuddering d 4
anxiety any encounter with my fellow- creatures. At one time the moon, which had before been clear, was sud¬ denly overspread by a thick cloud, and I took advantage of the moment of darkness, and cast my basket into the sea; I listened to the gurgling sound as it sunk, and then sailed away from the spot. The sky became clouded ; but the air was pure, although chilled by the north-east breeze that was then rising. But it refreshed me, and filled me with such agreeable sensations, that I resolved to prolong my stay on the water, and fixing the rudder in a direct position9 stretched myself at the bottom of the boat. Clouds hid the moon, every tbimr was obscure, and I heard only the sound of the boat, as its keel cut through the waves; the murmur lulled me, and in n short time I slept soundly.
I do not know how long I remained in this situation, but when I awoke I found that the sun had already mounted considerably. The wind was high, and the waves continually threatened the safety of my little skiff. 1 found that the wind was north-east, and must have driven me far from the coast from which 1 had embarked. I endeavoured to change my course, but quickly found that if I again made the attempt the boat would be instantly filled with water. Thus situated, my only resource was to drive before the wind. I confess that I felt a few sensations of terror. I had no compass with me, and was so little acquainted with the geography of this part of the world that the sun was of little benefit to me. I might be driven into the wide Atlantic, and feel all the tortures of starvation, or be swallowed up in the immeasurable d 5
waters that roared and buffeted around me. I had already been out many hours, and felt the torment of a burning thirst, a prelude to my other sufferings. I looked on the heavens, which were covered by clouds that flew before the wind only to be replaced by others : I looked upon the sea, it was to be my grave. " Fiend/' I exclaimed, ' ( your task isalready fulfilled !" I thought of Elizabeth, of my father, and of Clerval ; and sunk into a reverie, so despairing and frightful, that even, now, when the scene is on the point of closing before ще for ever, I shudder to reflect on it. Some hours passed thus ; but by de¬ grees, as the sun declined towards the horizon, the wind died away into a gentle breeze, and the sea became free from breakers» But these gave place to a heavy swell ; I felt sick, and hardly üble to hold the rudder, when suddenly
I saw a line of high land towards the south. Almost spent, as I was, by fatigue, and the dreadful suspense I endured for several hours, this sudden certainty of life rushed like a flood of warm joy to my heart, and tears gushed from my eyes. How mutable are our feelings, and how strange is that clinging love we have of life even in the excess of mi¬ sery! I constructed another sail with a part of my dress, and eagerly steered my course towards the land. It had a wild and rocky appearance ; but as I approached nearer, I easily perceived the traces of cultivation. I saw ves¬ sels near the shore, and found myself suddenly transported back to the neigh¬ bourhood of civilized man. I eagerly traced the windings of the land, and hailed a steeple which I at length saw
issuing from behind a small promon¬ tory. As I was in a state of extreme debility, I resolved to sail directly to¬ wards the town as a place where I could most easily procure nourishment. Fortunately 1 had money with me. A» I turned the promontory, I perceived a small neat town and a good harbour r which I entered, my heart bounding· with joy at my unexpected escape¿ As I was occupied in fixing the boať and arranging the sails, several people crowded towards the spot. They seemed very much surprised at my appearance; but, instead of offering me any assist¬ ance, whispered together with gestures- that at any other time might have pro¬ duced in me a slight sensation of alarm. As it was, I merely remarked that they spoke English ; and 1 therefore ad¬ dressed them in that language : " My good friends," »aid I, " wijl you be so»
kind as to tell me the name of this town, and inform me where I am У " You will know that soon enough," replied a man with a gru if voice. " May be you are come to a place that will not prove much to >our taste ; but you will not be consulted as to your quarters, I promise you." I was exceedingly surprised on re* ceiving so rude an answer from a stranger; and I was also disconcerted on perceiving the frowning and angry countenances of his companions. u Why do you answer me so roughly ?" I re¬ plied : " surely it is not the custom of Englishmen to receive strangers so in¬ hospitably/' " I do not know," said the man, " what the custom of the English may be ; but it is the custom of the Irish tó¬ bate villains." While this strange dialogue conti-
nued, I perceived the crowd rapidly increase. Their faces expressed a mix¬ ture of curiosity and anger, which an¬ noyed, and in some degree alarmed me. 1 inquired the way to the inn ; but no one replied. I then moved for¬ ward, and a murmuring sound arose from the crowd as they followed and surrounded me; when an ill-looking man approaching, tapped me on the shoulder, and said, " Come, Sir, you must follow me to Mr. Kirwin's, to give an account of yourself." " W T ho is Mr. Kirwin ? Why am I to give an account of myself? Is not this a free country ?" * e Aye, Sir, free enough for honest folks. Mr. Kirwin is a magistrate ; and you are to give an account of the death of a gentleman who was found murdered here last night." This answer startled me ; but 1 pre-
sently recovered myself. I was inno¬ cent ; that could easily be proved : ac¬ cordingly I followed my conductor in silence, and was led to one of the best houses in the town. I was ready to sink from fatigue and hunger; but, being surrounded by a crowd, I thought it politic to rouse all my strength, that no physical debility might be construed into apprehension or conscious guilt. Little did I then expect the calamity that was in a few moments to over¬ whelm me, and extinguish in horror and despair all fear of ignominy or death. I must pause here ; for it requires all my fortitude to recall the memory of the frightful events which I am about to relate, in proper detail, to my recol¬ lection.
CHAPTER IV.
I w T AS soon introduced into the pre¬ sence of the magistrate, an old benevo¬ lent toan, with calm and mild manners. He looked upon me, however, with some degree of severity ; and then, turning towards my conductors, he asked who appeared as witnesses on this occasion. About half a dozen men came for¬ ward ; and one being selected by the magistrate, he deposed, that he had been out fishing the night before with his son and brother-in-Iaw T , Daniel Nu¬ gent, when, about ten o'clock, they ob-
served a strong northerly blast rising, and they accordingly put in for port. It was a very dark night, as the moon had not yet risen ; they did not land at the harbour, but, as they had been ac¬ customed, at a creek about two miles below. He walked on first, carrying a part of the fishing tackle, and his companions followed him at some dis¬ tance. As he was proceeding along the sands, he struck his foot against some¬ thing, and fell all his length on the ground. His companions came up to assist him ; and, by the light of their lantern, they found that he had fallen on the body of a man, who was to all appearance dead. Their first suppo¬ sition was, that it was the corpse of some person who had been drowned, and was thrown on shore by the waves; but, upon examination, they found that the clothes were not wet, and even that
the body was not then cold. They in¬ stantly carried it to the cottage of an old woman near the spot, and endea¬ voured, but in vain, to restore it to life. He appeared to be a handsome young man, about five and twenty years of age. He had apparently been strangled ; for there was no sign of any violence, ex¬ cept the black mark of fingers on his neck. The first part of this deposition did not in the least interest me ; but when the mark of the fingers was mentioned, I remembered the murder of my bro¬ ther, and felt myself extremely agitated; my limbs trembled, and a mist came over my eyes, which obliged me to lean on a chair for support. The magis¬ trate observed me with a keen eye, and of course drew an unfavourable augury from my manner. The son confirmed his father's ac-
count: but when Daniel Nugent was called, he swore positively that, just before the fall of his companion, he saw a boat, with a single man in it, at a short distance from the shore ; and, as far as he could judge by the light of a few stars, it was the same boat in which I had just landed. A woman deposed, that she lived near the beach, and was standing at the door of her cottage, waiting for the return of the fishermen, about an hour before she heard of the discovery of the body, when she saw a boat, with only only one man in it, push off from that part of the shore where the corpse was afterwards found. Another woman confirmed the ac¬ count of the fishermen having brought the body into her house ; it was not cold. They put it into a bed, and rubbed it; and Daniel went to the
town for an apothecary, but life was quite gone. Several other men were examined concerning my landing; aud they agreed, that, with the strong north wind that had arisen during the night, it was very probable that I had beaten about for many hours, and had been obliged to return nearly to the same spot from which I had departed. Be¬ sides, they observed that it appeared that I had brought the body from ano¬ ther place, and it was likely, that as I did not appear to know the shore, I might have put into the harbour igno¬ rant of the distance of the town of --------- from the place where I had de¬ posited the corpse. Mr. Kirwin, on hearing this evi¬ dence, desired that I should be taken into the room where the body lay for interment, that it might be observed
what effect the sight of it would pro¬ duce upon me. This idea was proba¬ bly suggested by the extreme agitation I had exhibited when the mode of the murder had been described. I was ac¬ cordingly conducted, by the magistrate and several other persons, to the inn. I could not help being struck by the strange coincidences that had taken place during this eventful night; but, knowing that I had been conversing w 7 ith several persons in the island I had inhabited about the time that the body had been found, I was perfectly tranquil as to the consequences of the affair. I entered the room where the corpse lay, and was led up to the coffin. How can I describe my sensations on be¬ holding it ? I feel yet parched with horror, nor can I reflect on that terrible moment without shuddering and agony,
that faintly reminds me of the anguish of the recognition. The trial, the presence of the magistrate and wit* nesses, passed like a dream from my memory, when I saw the lifeless form of Henry Clerval stretched before me. I gasped for breath ; and, throwing myself on the body, I exclaimed, 4S Have my murderous machinations deprived you also, my dearest Henry, of life ? Two I have already destroyed ; other victims await their destiny : but you, Clerval, my friend, my bene¬ factor"------ The human frame could no longer support the agonizing suffering that I endured, and I was carried out of the room in strong* convulsions. A fever succeeded to this. I lay for two months on the point of death : my ravings, as I afterwards heard, were frightful ; I called myself the murderer
of William, of Justine, and of ClervaL Sometimes I entreated my attendants to assist me in the destruction of the fiend by whom I was tormented ; and* at others, I felt the fingers of the mon¬ ster already grasping my neck, and screamed aloud with agony and terrón Fortunately, as I spoke my native lan¬ guage, Mr. Kirwin alone understood me ; but my gestures and bitter cries were sufficient to affright the other witnesses. Why did I not die ? More misera¬ ble than man ever was before, why did I not sink into forgetfulness and rest? Death snatches away many blooming children, the only hopes of their doat- ing parents : how many brides and youthful lovers have been one day in the bloom of health and hope, and the next a prey for worms and the decay of the tomb ! Of what materials was
1 made, that I could thus resist so many shocks, which, like the turning of the wheel, continually renewed the tor¬ ture. But I was doomed to live ; and, in two months, found myself as awaking from a dream, in a prison, stretched on a wretched bed, surrounded by gaolers, turnkeys, bolts, and all the miserable ap¬ paratus of a dungeon. It was morning, I remember, when I thus awoke to un¬ derstanding: I had forgotten the par¬ ticulars of what had happened, and only felt as if some great misfortune had suddenly overwhelmed me ; but when I looked around, and saw the barred windows, and the squalidness of the room in which I was, all flashed across my memory, and I groaned bit¬ terly. This sound disturbed an old woman who was sleeping in a chair beside me.
She was a hired nurse, the wife of one of the turnkeys, and her countenance expressed all thožse bad qualities which often characterize that class. The lines of her face were hard and rude, like that of persons accustomed to see with¬ out sympathizing in sights of misery. Her tone expressed her entire indiffe¬ rence; she addressed me in English, and the voice struck me as one that í had heard during my sufferings : " Are you better now, Sir?" said «he. I replied in the same language, with a feeble voice, " 1 believe I am ; but if it be all true, if indeed 1 did not dream, 1 am sorry that I am still alive to feel this misery and horror," " For that matter," replied the old woman, " if you mean about the gen¬ tleman you murdered, I believe that it were better for you if you were dead* VOL. III. E
for I fancy it will go hard with you ; but you will be hung when the next sessions come on. However, that's none of my business, I am sent to nurse you, and get }ou Meli ; I do my duty with a safe conscience, it were well if every body did the same/' 1 turned vi ith loathing from the wo¬ man who could utter so unfeeling a speech to a person just saved, on the very edge of death ; but I felt languid, and unable to* reflect on all that had passed. The whole series of my life appeared to me as a dream ; 1 some¬ times doubted if indeed it were all true, for it never presented itself to my mind with the force of reality. As the images that floated before me became more distinct, I grew feverish ; a darkness pressed around me ; no one was near me who soothed me with the gentle voice of love ; no dear hand sup-
ported me. The physician came and prescribed medicines, and the old wo¬ man prepared them for me ; but utter carelessness was visible in the first, and the expression of brutality was strongly marked in the visage of the second. W ho could be interested in the fate of a murderer, but the hangman who would gain his fee? These were my first reflections ; but I soon learned that Mr. Kirwin had shewn me extreme kindness. He had caused the best room in the prison to be prepared for me (wretched indeed was the best) ; and it was he who had provided a physician and a nurse. It is true, he seldom came to see me ; for 3 although he ardently desired to relieve the sufferings of every human creature, he did not wi&h to be present at the agonies and miserable raviugs of a murderer. He came, therefore, some-
times to see that I was not neglected ; but his visits were short, and at long intervals. One day, when í was gradually reco¬ vering, I was seated in a chair, my eyes half open, and my cheeks livid like those in death, 1 was overcome by gloom and misery, and often reflected 1 had better seek death than reumi и miserably pent up only to be let loose in a world replete with wretchedness. At one time I considered whether I should not declare myself guilty, and suffer the penalty of the law, less inno¬ cent than poor Justine had heen. Such were my thoughts, when the door of my apartment was opened, and Mr. Kirwin entered. His countenance ex¬ pressed sympathy and compassion ; he drew a chair close to mine, and ad- ds-essed me in French·— *' I fear that this place is very shock-
ing to you ; can I do any thing to make you more comfortable ?" " I thank vou ; but all that you mention is nothing to me : on the whole earth there is no comfort which I am capable of receiving/* " I know that the sympathy of a stranger can be but of little relief to one borne down as you are by so strange a misfortune. But you will, I hope, soon quit this melancholy abode ; for, doubtless, evidence can easily be brought to free you from the criminal charge." * fc That is my least concern : I am by a course of strange events, become the most miserable of mortals. Perse¬ cuted and tortured as 1 am and have been, can death be any evil to me ?" " Nothing indeed could be more unfortunate and agonizing than the strange chances that have lately occur- JE 3
red. Vou were thrown, by some sur¬ prising accident, on this shore, re¬ nowned for its hospitality; seized im¬ mediately, and charged with murder. The first sight that was presented to your eyes was the body of your friend, murdered in so unaccountable a man¬ ner, and placed, as it were, by some fiend across your path." As Mr. Kirwin g : d this, notwith¬ standing the agitation I endured on this retrospect of my sufferings, I also felt considerable surprise at the know¬ ledge he seemed to possess concerning me. í suppose some astonishment was exhibited in my countenance; for Mr. Kirwin hastened to say— " It was not until a day or two after your illness that 1 thought of examining jour dress, that 1 might discover some trace by which i could send to your re¬ lations an account of vour misfortune
and illness. I found several letters, and, among others, one which I discovered from its commencement to be from your father. I instantlv wrote to Geneva: nearly two months have elapsed since the departure of my letter.—But you are ill ; even now you tremble : you are unfit for agitation of any kind." '* This suspense is a thousand times worse than the most horrible event: tell me what new scene of death has been acted, and whose murder I am now to lament." " Your family is perfectly well," said Mr. Kirwin, with gentleness; " and some one, a friend, is come to visit you." I know not by what chain of thought the idea presented itself, but it instantly darted into my mind that the murderer had come to mock at my misery, and taunt me with the death of Clerval, as e 4
a new incitement for me to comply with his hellish desires. I put my hand be¬ fore my eyes, and cried out in agony— , " Oh ! take him away ! I cannot see him; for God's sake, do not let him enter!** Mr. Kirwin regarded me with a troubled countenance. lie could not help regarding my exclamation as a presumption of my guilt, and said, in rather a severe tone— " I should have thought, young man, that the presence of your father would have been welcome, instead of inspiring such violent repugnance/' " My father!" cried I, while every feature and e\ery muscle was relaxed from anguish to pleasure. " Is my father, indeed, come? How kind^ how very kind. But where is he, why does he not hasten to me ?" Hay change of manner surprised and
pleased the magistrate ; perhaps he thought that my former exclamation was a momentary return of delirium, and now he instantly resumed his former benevolence. He rose, and quitted the room with my nurse, and in a moment my father entered it. Nothing, at this moment, could have given me greater pleasure than the ar¬ rival of my father. I stretched out my hand to him, and cried— " Are you then safe^—and Eliza¬ beth—and Ernest?" My father calmed me with assurances of their welfare, and endeavoured, by dwelling on these subjects so interest¬ ing to my heart, to raise my desponding spirits ; but he soon felt that a prison cannot be the abode of cheerfulness. '* What a place is this that you inhabit, my son!" said he, looking mournfully at the barred windows, and wretched. m 5
appearance of the room. " You tra¬ velled to seek happiness, but a fatality seems to pursue }ou. And poor Cler¬ val— " The name of my unfortunate and murdered friend was an agitation too great to be endured in my weak state; I shed tears. - " Alas ! yes, my father," replied I ; " some destiny of the most horrible kind hangs over me, and I must live to fulfil it, or surely I should have died on the coffin of Henry." We Mere not allowed to converse for any length of time, for the precarious state of my health rendered every pre¬ caution necessary that could insure tranquillity. Mr. Kirwin came iu, and insisted that my strength should not be exhausted by too much exertion. But the appearance of my father was to me like that of my good angel, and I gradu¬ ally recovered my health.
As my sickness quitted me, I was ab¬ sorbed by a gloomy and black melan* choly, that nothing could dissipate. The image of Clerval was for ever before me, ghastly and murdered. More than once the agitation into which these reflections threw me made my friends dread a dangerous relapse. Alas ! why did they preserve so miser¬ able and detested a life ? It was surely that I might fulfil my destiny, which is now drawing to a close. Soon, oh, very soon, will death extinguish these throb¬ bings, and relieve me from the mighty weight of anguish that bears me to the dust; and, in executing the award of justice, I shall also sink to rest. Then the appearance of death was distant, although the wish was ever present to my thoughts ; and I often sat for hours motionless and speechless, wishing for some mighty revolution that might
bury me and my destroyer in its ruins. The season of the assizes approached. I had already been three months in prison ; and although 1 was still weak, and in continual danger of a relapse, I was obliged to travel nearly a hundred miles to the county-town, where the court was held. Mr. Kirwin charged himself with every care of collecting, witnesses, and arranging my defence. I was spared the disgrace of appearing publicly as· a criminal, as the case was not brought before the court that de¬ cides on life and death. The grand jury rejected the bill, on its being proved that 1 was on the Orkney Islands at the hour the body of my friend was found, and a fortnight after my re¬ moval I was liberated from prison. My father was enraptured on finding me freed from the vexations of a cri-
minai charge, that I was again allowed. to breathe the fresh, atmosphere, and allowed to return to my native country. 1 did not participate in these feelings ; for to me the walls of a dungeon or a palace were alike hateful. The cup of life was poisoned for ever; and al¬ though the sun shone upon me, as upon the happy and gay of heart, 1 saw around me nothing but a dense and frightful darkness, penetrated by no light but the glimmer of two eyes that glared upon me. Sometimes they were the expressive eyes of Henry, languish¬ ing in death, the dark orbs nearly covered by the lids, and the long black lashes that fringed them ; sometimes it was the watery clouded eyes of the mons¬ ter, as I first saw them in my chamber at Ingolstadt. My father tried to awaken in me the feelings of affection. He talked of
Geneva, which I should soon visit—of Elizabeth, and Ernest; but these words only drew deep groans from me. Some¬ times, indeed, I felt a wish for happi¬ ness-, and thought, with melancholy de¬ light, of my beloved cousin ; or longed, w ; ith a devouring maladie du pays, to see once more the blue lake and rapid Rhone, that had been so dear to me in early childhood : but my general state of feeling was a torpor, in which a prison was as welcome a residence as the divinest scene in nature ; and these fits were seldom interrupted, but by paroxysms of anguish and despair. At these moments I often endeavoured to put an end to the existence I loathed ; and it required unceasing attendance and vigilance to restrain me from committing some dreadful act of vio¬ lence. I remember, as I quitted the prison,
I heard one of the men say, " He may be innocent of the murder, but he has certainly a bad conscience." These words struck me. A bad conscience! yes, surely I had one. William, Jus¬ tine, and Clerval, had died through my infernal machinations ; " And whose death," cried I, " is to finish the tra¬ gedy ? Ah ! my father, do not remain in this wretched country ; take me where I may forget myself, my ex¬ istence, and all the world." My father easily acceded to my de¬ sire; and, after having taken leave of Mr. Kirwin, we hastened to Dublin. I felt as if I was relieved from a heavy weight, when the packet sailed with a fair wind from Ireland, and I had quitted for ever the country w hich had been to me the scene of so much misery. It was midnight. My father slept in
the cabin ; and I lay on the deck, look¬ ing at the stars, and listening to the dashing of the waves. I hailed the darkness that shut Ireland from my sight, and my pulse beat with a feverish joy, when I reflected that I should soon see Geneva. The past appeared to me in the light of a frightful dream; yet the vessel in which I was, the wind that blew me from the detested shore of Ireland, and the sea which surrounded me, told me too forcibly that I was de¬ ceived by no vision, and that Clerval, my friend and dearest companion, had fallen a victim to me and the monster of my creation. I repassed, in my memory, my whole life ; my quiet hap¬ piness while residing with my family in Geneva, the death of my mother, and my departure for Ingolstadt. I remem¬ bered shuddering at the mad enthu¬ siasm that hurried me on to the crea*
tion of my hideous enemy, and I called to mind the night during which he first lived. I was unable to pursue the train of thought ; a thousand feelings pressed upon me, and I wept bitterly. Ever since my recovery from the fever 1 had been in the custom of taking every night a small quantity of laudanum; for it was by means of this drug only that I was enabled to gain the rest necessary for the preservation of life. Oppressed by the recollection of my various misfortunes, I now took a double dose, and soon slept profoundly. But sleep did not afford me respite from thought and misery ; my dreams presented a thousand objects that scared me. Towards morning I was possessed by a kind of night-mare; I felt the fiend's grasp in ray neck, and could not free ni} self from it; groans and cries rung in my ears. My father, who was.
watching over me, perceiving my rest¬ lessness, awoke me, and pointed to the port of Holyhead, which we were now entering.
CHAPTER V.
We had resolved not to go to London, but to cross the country to Portsmouth, and thence to embark for Havre. I preferred this plan principally because I dreaded to see again those places in which I had enjoyed a few moments of tranquillity with my beloved ClervaK I thought with horror of seeing again those persons whom we had been ac¬ customed to visit together, and who might make inquiries concerning an event, the very remembrance of which made me again feel the pang I endured
when I gazed on his lifeless form in the inn at------------. As for my father, his desires and ex¬ ertions were bounded to the again see¬ ing me restored to health and peace of mind. His tenderness and attentions were unremitting; my grief and gloom was obstinate, but he would not despair. Sometimes he thought that I felt deeply the degradation of being obliged to answer a charge of murder, and he en¬ deavoured to prove to me the futility of pride. " Alas! my father/' said I, " how little do you know me. Human beings, their feelings and passions, would in¬ deed be degraded, if such a wretch as 1 felt pride. Justine, poor unhappy Justine, was as innocent as I, and she suffered the same charge ; she died for it; and I am the cause of this—I murdered her. William, Justine,
and Henry—they all died by my bands." My father had often, during my im¬ prisonment, heard me make the same assertion ; when I thus accused myself, he sometimes seemed to desire an ex¬ planation, and at others he appeared to consider it as caused by delirium, and that, during my illness, some idea of this kind had presented itself to my imagination, the remembrance of which 1 preserved in my convalescence. I avoided explanation, and maintained a continual silence concerning the wretch I had created. I had a feeling that I should be supposed mad, and this for ever chained my tongue, when I would have given the whole world to have confided the fatal secret. Upon this occasion my father said> with an expression of unbounded wonder, " What do you mean, Victor?
are you mad ? My dear son, I entreat you never to make such an assertion again." " I am not mad," I cried energeti¬ cally ; " the sun and the heavens, who have viewed my operations, can bear witness of my truth. I am the assassin of those most innocent victims; they died by my machinations. A thousand times would I have shed my own blood, drop by drop, to have saved their lives; but I could not, my father, indeed I could not sacrifice the whole human race." The conclusion of this speech con¬ vinced my father that my ideas were deranged, and he instantly changed the subject of our conversation, and en¬ deavoured to alter the course of n?) thoughts. He wished as much as pos¬ sible to obliterate the memory of the scenes that had taken place in Ireland,
and never alluded to them, or suffered me to speak of my misfortunes. As time passed away I became more calm: misery had her dwelling in my heart, but I no longer talked in the same incoherent manner of my own crimes ; sufficient for me was the con¬ sciousness of them. By the utmost self-violence, I curbed the imperious voice of wretchedness, which sometimes desired to declare itself to the whole world; and my manners were calmer and more composed than they had ever been since my journey to the sea of ice. We arrived at Havre on the 8th of May, and instantly proceeded to Paris, where my father had some business which detained us a few weeks. In this city, I received the following letter from Elizabeth :—
" To Victor Frankenstein, <ч MY DEAREST FRÍEN П, " It gave me the greatest pleasure to receive a letter from my uncle dated at Paris ; you are no longer at a formi¬ dable distance, and I may hope to see you in less than a fortnight. My poor cousin, how much vou must have suf- fered ! 1 expect to see 5 ou looking even more ill than when you quitted Geneva. This winter has been passed most miserably, tortured as I have been by anxious suspense ; yet I hope to see peace in your countenance, and to find that your heart is not totally devoid of comfort and tran¬ quillity. " Yet I fear that the same feelings now exist that made you so miserable a year ago, even perhaps augmented by
time. I would not disturb you at this> period, when so many misfortunes weigh upon you ; but a conversation that I had with my uncle previous to his de¬ parture renders some explanation ne¬ cessary before we meet. " Explanation! you may possibly say; what can Elizabeth have to ex¬ plain ? If you really say this, my ques¬ tions are answered, and I have no more to do than to sign myself your affec¬ tionate cousin. But vou are distant from me, and it is possible that you may dread, and yet be pleased with this explanation ; and, in a probability of this being the case, I dare not any longer postpone writing what, during your absence, I have often wished to express to you, but have never had the courage to begin. " You well know, Victor, that our union had been the favourite plan of VOL. III. F
your parents ever since our infancy. We were told this wïien yoüng, and taught to look forward to it as an event that would certainly take place. We were affectionate playfellows during childhood, and, I believe, dear and valued frieuds to one another as we grew older. But as brother and sister often entertain a lively affection to¬ wards each other, without desiring a more intimate union, may not such also be our case ? Tell me, dearest Victor. Answer me, I conjure you, by our mu¬ tual happiness, with simple truth—Do vou not love another r " You have travelled ; vou have spent several jears of your life at In¬ golstadt; and I confess to you, my friend, that when I saw you last au¬ tumn so unhappy, flying to solitude, from the society of every creature, I could not help supposing that you
might regret our connexion, and be¬ lieve yourself bound in honour to fulfil the wishes of your parents, although they opposed themselves to your in¬ clinations. But this is false reasoning. I confess to you, my cousin, that I love you, and that in my airy dreams of futurity you have been ray constant friend and companion. But it is your happiness I desire as well as my own, when I declare to you, that our marriage would render me eternally miserable, unless it were the dictate of your own free choice. Even now I weep to think, that, borne down as you are by the cruelest misfortunes, you may stifle, by the word honour, all hope of that love and happiness which would alone re¬ store you to yourself. I, who have so interested an affection for you, may in¬ crease your miseries ten-fold, by being an obstacle to your wishes, Ah, Vi*> ¥ 2
tor, be assured that your cousin and playmate has too sincere a love for you not to be made miserable by this sup¬ position. Be happy, my friend ; and if you obey me in this one request, remain satisfied that nothing on earth will have the power to interrupt my tran¬ quillity. " Do not let this letter disturb you ; do not answer it to-morrow, or the next day, or even until you come, if it will give you pain. My uncle will send me news of your health; and if I see but one smile on your lips when we meet, occasioned by this or any other exertion * " aine, I shall need no other happiness. 64 Elizabeth Lavenza. " Geneva, May 18th, 17—-" This letter revived in my memory what I had before forgotten, the threat
of the fiend— (i / will be with yon on your wedding-night ľ' Such was my sentence, and on that night would the dæmon employ every art to destroy me, and tear me from the glimpse of happi¬ ness which promised partly to console my sufferings. On that night he had determined to consummate his crimes by my death. Well, be it so; a deadly struggle would then assuredly take place, in which if he was victorious, I should be at peace, and his power over me be at an end. If he were van¬ quished, I should be a free man. Alas! what freedom? such as the peasant enjoys when his family have been mas¬ sacred before his eyes, his cottage burnt, his lands laid waste, and he is turned adrift, homeless, pennyless, and alone, but free. Such would be my liberty, except that in ray Elizabeth I possessed a treasure; alas! balanced ι 3
by those horrors of remorse and guilt, which would pursue me until death, Sweet and beloved Elizabeth ! I read and reread her letter, and some softened feelings stole into my heart, and dared to whisper paradisaical dreams of love and joy ; but the apple was already eaten, and the angels arm bared to drive me from all hope. Yet I, would die to make her happy. If the ïnonster executed his threat, death was inevitable; yet, again, I considered whether my marriage would hasten my fate. My destruction might indeed arrive a few months sooner ; but if my torturer should suspect that I post¬ poned it, influenced by his menaces, he would surely find other, and per¬ haps more dreadful means of revenge. He had vowed to be with me on my wedding-night, yet he did not consider that threat as binding him to peace 'm
the mean time; for, as if to shew me that he was not yet satiated with blood, he had murdered Clerval immediately after the enunciation of his threats. I resolved, therefore, that if my imme¬ diate union with my cousin would con¬ duce either to her's or my father's hap¬ piness, my adversary's designs against my life should not retard it a single hour. In this state of mind I wrote to Eliza¬ beth. My letter was calm and affec-r tionate. " 1 fear, my beloved girl," I said, " little happiness remains for us on earth ; yet all that I may one day enjoy is concentered in you. Chase away your idle fears ; to you alone do I consecrate my life, and my endeavours for contentment. I have one secret, Elizabeth, a dreadful one; when re¬ vealed to you, it will chill )our frame with horror, and then, far from being f 4
surprised at my misery, \ou will only wonder that I survive what I have en¬ dured. I will confide this tale of misery and terror to you the day after our marriage shall take place; for, rc>y sweet cousin, there must be perfect con¬ fidence between us. But until then> I conjure you, do not mention or allude to it. This I most earnestly entreat, and I know you will comply." л In about a week after the arrival of Elizabeth's letter, we returned to Ge¬ neva. My cousin welcomed me with warm affection ; yet tears were in her eyes, as she beheld my emaciated frame and feverish cheeks. 1 saw a change in her also. She was thinner, and had lost much ofthat heavenly vivacity that had before charmed me ; but her gen¬ tleness, and soft looks of compassion, made her a more fit companion for one blasted and miserable as I was.
The tranquillity which I now enjoyed did not endure. Memory brought madness with it ; and when I thought on what had passed, a real insanity pos¬ sessed me; sometimes Ï was íu. ; od« j and burnt with rage, sometimes low and despondent. I neither spoke or looked, but sat motionless, bewildered by the multitude of miseries that over¬ came me. Elizabeth alone had the power to draw me from these fits; her gentle voice would soothe me when trans¬ ported by passion, and inspire me with human feelings when sunk in torpor. She wept with me, and for me. When reason returned, she would remonstrate, and endeavour to inspire me with re¬ signation. Ah! it is well for the un¬ fortunate to be resigned, but for the guilty there is no peace. The agonies of remorse poison the luxury there is f 5
otherwise sometimes found in indul¬ ging the excess of grief. Soon after my arrival my father spoke of my immediate marriage with. my cousin. I remained silent. " Have you, then, sqme other attach¬ ment ?" " None on earth. I love Elizabeth, and look forward to our union with de¬ light. Let the day therefore be fixed ; and on it I will consecrate myself, in life or death, to the happiness of my cousin /* " My dear Victor, do not speak thus* Heavy misfortunes have befallen us; but let us only cling closer to what re¬ mains, and transfer our love for those whom we have lost to those who yet Иче, Our circle will be small, but bound close by the ties of affection and mutual misfortune. And when time ühall have softened your despair, new
and dear objects of care will be hom to replace those of whom we have been so cruelly deprived.^ Such were the lessons of my father. But to me the remembrance of the threat returned: nor can you wonder, that, omnipotent as the fiend had yet been in his deeds of blood, I should almost regard him as invincible; and that when he had pronounced the words» " I shall be with you on your wedding- night" I should regard the threatened fate as unavoidable. But death was no evil to me, if the loss of Elizabeth were balanced with it; and I therefore, with a contented and even cheerful ^o'ıüte* Rance, agreed with my father, that if my cousin would consent, the cere¬ mony should takeplace in ten days, and thus put, as I imagined, the seal to my iate. Great God! if for one instant I
had thought what might be the hellish intention of my fiendish adversary, I would rather have banished myself for ever from my native country, and wan¬ dered a friendless outcast over the earth, than have consented to this miserable marriage. But, as if possessed of magic powers, the monster had blinded me to his real intentions;, and when I thought that I prepared only my own death, I hastened that of a far dearer victim. As the period fixed for our marriage drew nearer, whether from cowardice or a prophetic feeling, I felt my heart sink within me. But I concealed my feelings by an appearance of hilarity, that brought smiles and joy to the coun¬ tenance of my father, but hardly de¬ ceived the e ver- watchful and nicer eye of Elizabeth. She looked forward to our union with placid contentment, not
unmingied with a little fear, which past misfortunes had impressed, that what now appeared certain and tangible happiness, might soon dissipate into an airy dream, and leave no trace but deep and everlasting regret. Preparations were made for the event; congratulatory visits were - received ; and all wore a smiling appearance. I shut up, as well as I could, in my own heart the anxiety that preyed there, and entered with seeming earnestness into the plans of my father, although they might only serve as the decorations of my tragedy. A house was purchased for us near Cologny, by which we should enjoy the pleasures of the country, and yet be so near Geneva as to see my father every day ; who would still reside within the walls, for the benefit of Ernest, that he might follow his studies at the schools..
In the mean time I took every precaution to defend my person, in case the fiend should openly attack me. I carried pistols and a dagger constantly about me, and was ever on the watch to prevent artifice ; and by these means gained a greater degree of tranquillity. Indeed, as the period approached, the threat appeared more as a delusion, not to be regarded as worthy to disturb my peace, while the happiness I hoped for in my marriage wore a greater appear¬ ance of certainty, as the day fixed for its solemnization drew nearer, and I heard it continually spoken of as an occurrence which no accident could possibly prevent. Elizabeth seemed happy; my tran¬ quil demeanour contributed greatly to calm her mind. But on the day that was to fulfil my wishes and my destiny, she was melancholy^ and
a presentiment of evil pervaded her; and perhaps also she thought of the dreadful secret, which I had promised to reveal to her the following day. My father was in the mean time overjoyed, and» in the bustle of preparation, only observed in the melancholy of his niece the diffidence of a bride. After the ceremony was performed, a large party assembled at ray father's ; but it was agreed that Elizabeth and I should pass the afternoon and night at Evian, and return to Cologny the next morning. As the day was fair, and the wind favourable, we resolved to go by water. Those were the last moments of my life daring which I enjoyed the feeling of happiness. We passed rapidly along : the sun was^hot, but we were sheltered from its rays by a kind of canopy, while we enjoyed the beauty of the scene,.
sometimes on one side of the lake, where we saw Mont Salêve, the plea¬ sant banks of Montalegre, and at a dis¬ tance, surmounting all, the beautiful Mont Blânci and the assemblage of snowy mountains that in vain endea¬ vour to emulate her ; sometimes coast¬ ing the opposite banks, we saw the mighty Jura opposing its dark side to the ambition that would quit its native country, and an almost insurmountable barrier to the invader who should wish to enslave it. I took the hand of Elizabeth : " You are sorrowful, my love. Ah ! if you knew what I have suffered, and what I may yet endure, you would endeavour to let me taste the quiet, and freedom from despair, that this one day at least per¬ mits me to enjoy." " Be happy, my dear Victor," re¬ plied Elizabeth; " there is, I hope,
nothing to distress you ; and be assured that if a lively joy is not painted in my face, my heart is contented. Something whispers to me not to depend too much on the prospect that is opened before us ; but I will not listen to such a si¬ nister voice. Observe how fast'we move along, and how the clouds which sometimes obscure, and sometimes rise above the dome of Mont Blanc, render this scene of beauty still more interest¬ ing. Look also at the innumerable fish that are swimming in the clear waters, where we can distinguish every pebble that lies at the bottom. What a divine day ! how happy and serene all nature appears !" Thus Elizabeth endeavoured to di¬ vert her thoughts and mine from all re¬ flection upon melancholy subjects. But her temper was fluctuating; joy fora few instants shone i u her eyes, but fct
continually gave place to distraction and reverie. The sun sunk lower in the heavens ; we passed the river Drance» and ob¬ served its path through the chasms of the higher, and the glens of the lower hills. The Alps here come closer to the lake, and we approached the am¬ phitheatre of mountains which forms its eastern boundary. The spire of Evian shone under the woods that surrounded it, and the range of mountain above mountain by which it was overhung. The wind, which had hitherto carried us along with amazing rapidity, sunk at sunset to a light breeze; the soft air just ruffled the water, and caused a plea¬ sant motion among the trees as we ap¬ proached the shore, from which it wafted the most delightful scent of flowers and hay. The sun sunk be^
neath the horizon as we landed; and as I touched the shore, I felt those cares and fears revive, which soon were to clasp me, and cling to me for ever.
CHAPTER VI.
It was eight о clock when we landed ; we walked for a short time on the shore enjoying the transitory light, and then retired to the inn, and contemplated the lovely scene of waters, woods, and mountains, obscured in darkness, yet still displaying their black outlines. The wind, which had fallen in the south, now rose with great violence in the west. The moon had reached her summit in the heavens, and was begin¬ ning to descend ; the clouds swept across it swifter than the flight of the vulture, and dimmed her rays, while
the lake reflected the scene of the busy heavens, rendered still busier by the restless waves that were beginning to* rise. Suddenly a heavy storm of rain descended. I had been calm during the dav ; but so soon as night obscured the shapes of objects, a thousand fears arose iri my mind. I was anxious and watchful, while my right hand grasped a pistol which was hidden in my bosom; every sound terrified me ; but I resolved that I would sell my life dearly, and not re¬ lax the impending conflict until my own life, or that<of my adversary, were extinguished. Elizabeth observed my agitation for some time in timid and fearful silence; at length she said, " What is it that agitates you, my dear Victor ? What is it you fear ?" " Ohi peace, peace, my love/' re-
plied I, " this night, and all will be safe: but this night is dreadful, very dreadful." I passed an hour in this state of mind, when suddenly I reflected how dreadful the combat which I moment¬ arily expected would be to my wife, and I earnestly entreated her to retire, resolving not to join her until I had obtained some knowledge as to the situation of my enemy. She left me, and I continued some time w alking up and down the passages of the house, and inspecting every cor¬ ner that might afford a retreat to my adversary* But I discovered no trace of him, and was beginning to conjec¬ ture that some fortunate chance had intervened to prevent the execution of his menaces; when suddenly I heard a shrill and dreadful scream. It came from the room into which Elizabeth
had retired. As I heard it, the whole* truth rushed into my mind, my arms dropped, the motion of every muscle and fibre was suspended ; I could feel the blood trickling in my veins, and tingling in the extremities of my limbs. This state lasted but for an instant ; the scream was repeated, and I rushed into the room. Great God ! why did I not then ex¬ pire ! Why am I here to relate the destruction of the best hope, and the purest creature of earth. She was there, lifeless and inanimate, thrown across the bed, her head hanging down, and her pale and distorted features half covered by her hair. Every where I turn I see the same figure—her blood¬ less arms and relaxed form flung by the murderer on its bridal bier. Could I behold this, and live? Alas! life is obstinate, and clings closest where it
İs most hated. For a moment only did I lose recollection ; I fainted. When I recovered, I found myself surrounded by the people of the inn ; iheir countenances expressed a breath¬ less terror: but the horror of others appeared only as a mockery, a shadow of the feelings that oppressed me. I escaped from them to the room where lay the body of Elizabeth, my love, my wife, so lately living, so dear, so worthy. She had been moved from the posture in which I had first beheld her; and now, as she lay, her head upon her arm, and a handkerchief thrown across her face and neck, 1 might have supposed her asleep. I rushed towards her, and embraced her with ardour; but the deathly languor and coldness of the limbs told me, that what I now held in my arms had ceased to be the Elizabeth whom I had loved and cherished. The
murderous mark of the fiend's grasp was on her neck, and the breath had ceased to issue from her lips. While I still hung over her in the agony of despair, I happened to look up. The windows of the room had before been darkened; and I felt a kind of panic on seeing the pale yellow light of the moon illuminate the cham¬ ber. The shutters had been thrown back ; and, with a sensation of horror not to be described, I saw at the open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred. A grin was on the face of the monster; he seemed to jeer, as with his fiendish finger he pointed towards the corpse of my wife. I rushed tovvards the window, and draw ing a pistol from my bosom, shot; but he eluded me, leaped from his station, and, running* with the swiftness of lightning, plunged mto the lake. VOL. III. G
The report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room. I pointed to the spot where he had disappeared, and we followed the track with boats ; nets were cast, but in vain. After passing seve¬ ral hours, we returned hopeless, most of my companions believing it to have been a form conjured by my fancy. After having landed, they proceeded to search the country, parties going in different directions among the woods and vines. I did not accompany them ; I was exhausted : a film covered my eyes, and my skin was parched with the heat of fever. In this state I Jay on a bed, hardly conscious of what had hap¬ pened ; my eyes wandered round the room, as if to seek something that I had lost. At length I remembered that my fa« tber would anxiously expect the return
of Elizabeth and myself, and that I must return alone. This reflection brought tears into my eyes, and I wept for a long time ; but my thoughts ram¬ bled to various subjects, reflecting on my misfortunes, and their cause. I was bewildered in a cloud of wonder and horror. The death of William, the execution of Justine, the murder of Clerval, and lastly of my wife; even at that moment I knew not that my only remaining friends were safe from the malignity of the fiend; my father even now might be writhing under his grasp, and Ernest might be dead at his feet. This idea made me shudder, and recalled me to action. 1 started up, and resolved to return to Geneva with all possible speed. There were no horses to be pro- eured, and I must return by the lake ; but the wind was unfavourable, and G 2
the rain fell in torrents. However, it was hardly morning, and I might rea¬ sonably hope to arrive by night. I hired men to row, and took an oar myself, for I had always experienced relief from mental torment in bodily exercise. But the overflowing misery I now felt, and the excess of agitation that I endured, rendered ше incapable of an ν exertion. 1 threw down the oar ; and, leaning my head upon my hands, gave way to every gloomy idea that arose. If I looked up, I saw the scenes which were familiar to me in my hap¬ pier time, and which 1 had contem¬ plated but the day before in the com¬ pany of her who was now but a sha¬ dow and a recollection. Tears streamed from mv eves. The rain had ceased for a moment, and 1 saw the fish play in the waters as they had done a few hours before; they had then been observed
by Elizabeth. Nothing is so painful to the human mind as a great and sud¬ den change. The sun might shine, or the clouds might lour; but nothing could appear to me as it had done the day before. A fiend had snatched from me every hope of future happiness: no creature had ever been so miserable as I was ; so frightful an event is single in the history of man. But why should I dwell upon the in¬ cidents that followed this last over¬ whelming event. Mine has been a tale of horrors ; I have reached their acme, and what I must now relate can but be tedious to you. Know that, one by one, my friends were snatched away; I was left desolate. My own strength is exhausted ; and I must tell, in a few words, what remains of my hideous narration. I arrivedat Geneva. My father and
Ernest yet lived ; but the former sunk under the tidings that I bore. I see him now, excellent and venerable old man ! his eyes wandered in vacancy, for they had lost their charm and their de¬ light—his niece, his more than daugh¬ ter, whom hedoatedon with all that af¬ fection which a man feels, who, in the de¬ cline of life* having few affections, clings more earnestly to those that remain. Cursed, cursed be the fiend that brought misery on his grey hairs, and doomed him to waste in wretchedness! He could uot live under the horrors that were accumulated around him ; an apoplectic fit was brought on, and in a few da\s he died in my arms. What then became of me? I know not; I lost sensation, and chains and darkness were the only objects that pressed upon me. Sometimes, indeed, 1 dreamt that I wandered in flowery
meadows and pleasant vales with the friends of my youth ; but awoke, and found myself in a dungeon. Melan¬ choly followed, but by degrees I gained a clear conception of my miseries and situation, and was then released from my prison. For they had called me mad ; and during many months, as I understood, a solitary cell liad been my habitation. But liberty had been a useless gin to me had I not, as I awakened to rea¬ son, at the same time awakened to re¬ venge. As the memory of past mis¬ fortunes pressed upon me, I began to reflect on their cause—the monster whom I had created, the miserable dæ¬ mon whom 1 had sent abroad into the world for my destruction. I was pos¬ sessed by a maddening rage when I thought of biro, and desired and ar¬ dently prayed that I might have him g 4
within my grasp to wreak a great and signal revenge on his cursed head. Nor did my hate long confine itself to useless wishes ; I began to reflect on the best means of securing him ; and for this purpose, about a month after my release, I repaired to a criminal judge in the town,, and told him that I had an accusation to make ; that I knew the destro} er of my family; and that 1 required him to exert his whole au¬ thority for the apprehension of the inurderer. The magistrate listened to me with attention imd kindness: " Be assured, sir/' said he, " no pains or exertions on my part shall be spared to discover the villain." " I thank you/' replied I; "listen, therefore, to the deposition that I have to make. It is indeed a tale so strange, that I should fear you would not credit
it, were there not something in truth which, however wonderful, forces con** viction. The story is too connected to be mistaken for a dream, and I have no motive for falsehood." My manner, as I thus addressed him, wa& impressive, but calm ; I had formed in my own heart a resolution to pursue my de¬ stroyer to death ; and this purpose quieted niy agony, and provisionally reconciled me to life. I now related my history briefly, but with firmness and precision, marking the dates with accuracy, and never deviating into in* vective or exclamation. The magistrate appeared at first per¬ fectly incredulous, but as I continued he became more attentive and in¬ terested ; I saw him sometimes shudder with horror, at others a lively surprise, unmingied with disbelief, was painted on his countenance. g 5
When I had concluded my narration» I said. " This is the being whom I ac¬ cuse, and for whose detection and pu¬ nishment I call upon you to exert your whole power. It is your duty as a ma^ gistrate, and I believe and hope that your feelings as a man will not revolt from the execution of those functions on this occasion." This address caused a considerable change in the physiognomy of my auditor. He had heard my story with ihat half kind of belief that is given to a tale of spirits and supernatural events; but when he was called upon to act officially in consequence, the whole tide of his incredulity returned. He, liowever, answered mildly, 6 * I would willingly afford you every aid in your pursuit ; but the creature of whom you speak appears to have powers which would put all my exertions to defiance*
Who can follow an animal which can traverse the sea of ice, and inhabit caves and dens, where no man would venture to intrude ? Besides, some months have elapsed since the com¬ mission of his crimes, and no one can conjecture to what place he has wan¬ dered, or what region be may now inhabit." " I do not doubt that he hovers near the spot which I inhabit; and if he has indeed taken refuge in the Alps, he may be hunted like the chamois, and destroyed as a beast of prey. But I perceive your thoughts: you do not credit my narrative, and do not intend to pursue my enemy with the punishment which is his desert." As I spoke, rage sparkled in my eyes ; the magistrate was intimidated ; " You are mistaken," said he, " I wilb
exert myself; and if it is in my power to seize the monster, be assured that he shall suffer punishment proportion¬ ate to his crimes. But I fear, from what you have yourself described to be his properties, that this will prove impracticable, and that, while every proper measure is pursued, you should endeavour to make up your mind tö disappointment." " That cannot be ; but all that I can say will be of little avail. My re¬ venge is of no moment to you; yet, while I allow it to be a vice, I confess that it is the devouring and only pas¬ sion of my soul. My rage is unspeak¬ able, when I reflect that the murderer, whom I have turned loose upon so¬ ciety, still exists. You refuse my just demand : I have but one resource ; and 1 devote myself, either in my life or death, to his destruction,"
I trembled with excess of agitation as I said this ; there was a phrenzy in my manner, and something, I doubt not, of that haughty fierceness, which the martyrs of old are said to have pos¬ sessed. But to a Grevau magistrate, whose mind was occupied by far other ideas than those of devotion and heroism, this elevation of mind had much the appearance of madness. He endeavoured to soothe me as a nurse does a child, and reverted, to my tale as the effects of delirium. " Man/' Î cried, 4i how ignorant art thou in thy pride of wisdom! Cease; you know not what it is you say/' í broke from the house angry and disturbed, and retired to meditate oa some other mode of action.
CHAPTER VI*. My present situation was one in which all voluntary thought was swal¬ lowed up and lost. I was hurried away by fury ; revenge alone endowed me with strength and composure ; it modelled my feelings, and allowed me to be calculating and calm, at periods when otherwise delirium or death would have been my portion. My first resolution was to quit Geneva for ever; my country, whkh, when I was happy and beloved, was dear to me, now, in my adversity, be¬ came hateful. I provided myself with.
a sum of money, together with a few jewels which had bekmged to my mother, and departed. ^ And now my wanderings began, which are to cease but vrlth life. I have traversed a vast portion of the earth, and have endured all the hard¬ ships which travellers, in deserts and barbarous countries, are wont to meet. How 1 have lived I hardly know; many times have I stretched my failing limbal· upon the sandy plain, and prayed for death. But revenge kept me alive ; I dared not die, and leave my adversary in being. When I quitted Geneva, my first labour was to gain some clue by which I might trace the steps of my fiendish enemy. But my plan was unsettled \ and I wandered many hours around the confines of the town, uncertain what path I should pursue. As night
approached, I found myself at the en¬ trance of the cemetery where Wil¬ liam, Elizabeth, and my father, re¬ posed. I entered it, and approached the tomb which marked their graves. Every thing was silent, except the leaves of the trees, which were gently agitated by the wind; the night was nearly dark ; and the scene would have been solemn and affecting even to an uninterested observer. Thè spirits of the departed seemed to flit around, and to cast a shadow, which was felt but seen not, around the head of the mourner. The deep grief which this scene had at first excited quickly gave way to rage and despair. They were dead, and I lived; their murderer also lived, and to destroy him I must drag out my weary existence. I knelt on the grass» and kissed the earth, and with quiver/»
ing lips exclaimed, " By the sacred earth on which I kneel, by the shades that wander near me, by the deep and eternal grief that 1 feel, 1 swear; and by thee, О Night, and by the spirits that preside over thee, I swear to pur- -sue the dæmon, who caused this misery, until he or I shall perish in mortal con¬ flict. For this purpose I will preserve my life: to execute this dear revenge, will I again behold the sun, and tread the green herbage of earth, which otherwise should vanish from my eyes for ever. And í call on you, spirits of the dead; and on you, wandering mi¬ nisters of vengeance, to aid and con¬ duct me in my work. Let the cursed and hellish monster drink deep of agony; let him feel the despair that now torments me." I had begun my adjuration with lolemnity, and an awe which almost
assured me that the shades of my murdered friends heard and approved my devotion ; but the furies possessed me as I concluded, and rage choaked my utterance. I was answered through the stillness of night by a loud and fiendish laugh. It rung on my ears long and heavily; the mountains re-echoed it, and I felt as if all hell surrounded me* with mockery and laughter. Surely in that moment I should have been possessed by phrenzy, and have destroyed my miserable existence, but that my vow was heard, and that İ was reserved for vengeance. The laughter died away; when a well-known and abhorred voice, apparently close to my ear, addressed me in an audible whisper—" I am satisfied : miserable wretch ! you have determined to live, and I am satis- #ed. w
I darted towards the spot from which the sound proceeded; but the devil eluded my grasp. Suddenly the broad disk of the moon arose, and shone full upon his ghastly and distorted shape, as he fled with more than mortal speed. I pursued him ; and for many month» this has been my task. Guided by a slight clue, I followed the windings of the Rhone, but vainly. The blue Mediterranean appeared; and, by a strange chance, I saw the fiend enter by night, and hide himself in a vessel bound for the Black Sea. I took my passage in the same ship; but he es¬ caped, I know not how. Amidst the wilds of Tartary and Russia, although he still evaded me, 1 have ever followed in his track. Sometimes the peasants, scared by this horrid apparition, informed ще o£ hm.
path ; sometimes he himself, who feared that if I lost all trace I should despair and die, often left some mark to guide me. The snows descended on my head, and I saw the print of his huge step on the white plain. To you first entering on life, to whom care is new, and agony unknown, how can you un¬ derstand what I have felt, and still feel ? Cold, want, and fatigue, were the least pains which I was destined to endure ; I was cursed bv some devil, and carried about with me my eternal hell; yet still a spirit of good followed and directed my steps, and, when I most murmured, would suddenly extricate me from seemingly insurmountable difficulties. Sometimes, w r hen nature, overcome by hunger, sunk under the exhaustion, a repast was prepared for me in the desert, that restored and inspirited me. The fare was indeed
coarse, such as the peasants of the country ate; but I may not doubt that it was set there by the spirits that 1 had invoked to aid me. Often, when all was dry, the heavens cloudless, and I was parched by thirst, a slight cloud would bedim the sky, shed the few drops that revived me, and vanish. 1 followed, when I could, the courses of the rivers ; but the dæmon generally avoided these, as it was here that the population of the country chiefly col¬ lected. In other places human beings were seldom seen ; and I generally sub¬ sisted on the wild animals that crossed my path. I had money with me, and gained the friendship of the villagers by distributing it, or bringing with me some food that I had killed, which, after taking a small part, I always presented to those who had provided me with fire and utensils for cooking.
My life, as it passed thus, w r as indeed liateful to me, and it was during sleep alone that I could taste joy. О blessed sleep ! often, when most mise¬ rable, I sank to repose, and my dreams lulled me even to rapture. The spirits that guarded me had provided these moments, or rather hours, of happiness, that I might retain strength to fulfil my pilgrimage. Deprived of this re¬ spite, I should have sunk under my hardships. During the day I was sus¬ tained and inspirited by the hope of night: for in sleep I saw my friends, my wife, and my beloved country ; again I saw the benevolent counte¬ nance of my father, heard the silver tones of my Elizabeth's voice, and be¬ held Clerval enjoying health and youth. Often, when wearied by a toilsome march, I persuaded myself that I was dreaming until night should come, and
that I should then enjoy reality in the arms of my dearest friends. What agonizing fondness did I feel for them ! how did I cling to ¿heir dear forms, as sometimes they haunted even my waking hours, and persuade myself that they still lived ! At such moments ven¬ geance, that burned within me, died in my heart, and I pursued my path towards the destruction of the dæmon, more as a task enjoined by heaven, as the mechanical impulse of some power of which I was unconscious, than as the ardent desire of my soul. What his feelings were whom I pur¬ sued, I cannot know. Sometimes, in¬ deed, he left marks in writing on the barks of the trees, or cut in stone, that guided me, and instigated my fury. " My reign is not} et over," (these words were legible in oue of these inscrip¬ tions) ; u you live, and my power is
complete. Follow me; I seek the everlasting ices of the north, where you will feel the misery of cold and frost, to which I am impassive. You will find near this place, if you follow not too tardily, a dead hare ; eat, and be re¬ freshed. Come on, my enemy ; we have yet to wrestle for our lives ; but many hard and miserable hours must лой endure, until that period shdll arrive." Scoffing devil i Again do I vow r ven¬ geance ; again do I devote thee, mise¬ rable fiend, to torture and death. Never will I omit my search, until he or I perish ; and then w ith what ecstacy shall I join my Elizabeth, and those who even now prepare for me the reward of my tedious toil and horrible pilgrimage. As I still pursued my journey to the northward, the snows thickened, and the cold increased in a degree almost too severe to support. The peasants
were shut up in their hovels, and only a few of the most hardy ventured forth to seize the animals whom starvation had forced from their hiding-places to seek for prey. The rivers were covered with ice, and no fish could be procured ; and thus I was cut off from my chief article of maintenance. The triumph of my enemy increased with the difficulty of my labours. One inscription that he left was in these words: " Prepare! your toils only be¬ gin : wrap yourself in furs, and pro¬ vide food, for we shall soon enter upon a journey where your sufferings will satisfy my everlasting hatred. 1 * My courage and perseverance were invigorated by these scoffing words; I resolved not to fail in my purpose; and, calling on heaven to support me, 1 continued with unabated fervour to traverse immense deserts, until the vol. in. и
ocean appeared at a distance, and formed the utmost boundary of the ho¬ rizon. Oh! how unlike it was to the blue seas of the south ! Covered with ice, it was only to be distinguished from land by its superior wild ness and rug- gedness. The Greeks wept for joy when they beheld the Mediterranean from the hills of Asia, and hailed with rapture the boundary of their toils. I did not weep ; but 1 knelt down, and, with a full heart, thanked my guiding spirit for conducting me in safety to the place where I hoped, notwithstand¬ ing my adversary's gibe, to meet and grapple with him. Some weeks before this period I had procured a sledge and dogs, and thus traversed the snows with incon¬ ceivable speed. I know not whether the fiend possessed the same advan¬ tages ; but I found that, as before I had
'daily lost ground in the pursuit, I now gained od him ; so much so, that when I first saw the ocean, he was but one day's journey in advance, and I hoped to intercept him before he should reach the beach. With new courage, there¬ fore, I pressed on, and in two days ar¬ rived at a wretched hamlet on the sea¬ shore. I inquired of the inhabitants con¬ cerning the fiend, and gained accurate information. A gigantic monster, they said, had arrived the night before, armed with a gun and many pistols ; putting to flight the inhabitants of a solitary cottage, through fear of his terrific ap¬ pearance. He had carried off their store t>f winter food, and, placing it in a sledge, to draw which he had seized on a numerous drove of trained dogs, he had harnessed them, and the same night, to the joy of the horror-struck Villagers, had pursued his journey и 2
across the sea in a direction that led to no land ; and they conjectured that he must speedily be destroyed by che breaking of the ice, or frozen by the eternal frosts. On hearing* this information, I suf¬ fered α temporary access of despair. He had escaped me ; and I must commence a destructive and almost endless jour¬ ney across the mountainous ices of the ocean,—amidst cold that few of the in¬ habitants could long endure, and w hich 1, the native of a genial and sunny cli¬ mate, could not hope to survive. Yet at the idea that the fiend should live and he triumphant, my rage and ven¬ geance returned, and, like a mighty tide, overwhelmed every other feeling. After a slight repose, during which the spirits of the dead hovered round, and instigated me to toil and revenge, I prepared for my journey.
I exchanged my land sledge for one fashioned for the inequalities of the frozen ocean ; and, purchasing a plen¬ tiful stock of provisions, í departed from land. I cannot guess how many days have passed since then ; but I have endured misery, which nothing but the eternal sentiment of a just retribution burning within my heart could have enabled me to support. Immense and rugged mountains of ice often barred up my passage, and I often heard the thun¬ der of the ground sea, which threat¬ ened my destruction. But again the frost came, and made the paths of the sea secure. By the quantity of provision which I had consumed I should guess that I had passed three weeks in this jour¬ ney ; and the continual protraction of hope, returning back upon the heart, h 3
often wrung bitter drops of desponds ency and grief from my eyes. De¬ spair had indeed almost secured her prey, and I should soon have sunk be¬ neath this misery ; when once, after the poor animals that carried me had with incredible toil gained the summit of a sloping ice mountain, and one sink¬ ing under his fatigue died, I viewed the expanse before me with anguish, when spddenly my eye caught a dark speck upon the dusky plain. 1 strained my sight to discover what it could be, and uttered a wild cry of ecstacy when I distinguished a sledge, and the distorted proportions of a well-known form within. Oh! with vtliat a burning gush did hope revisit my heart! warm tears filled my eyes, whkh I hastily wiped ама), that they might not inter¬ cept the view 1 had of the dæmon ; but still my sight was dimmed by the burn-
ing drops, until, giving way to the emo¬ tions that oppressed me, 1 wept aloud. But this was not the time for delay ; I disencumbered the dogs of their dead companion, gave them a plentiful por¬ tion of food ; and, after an hour's rest, which was absolutely necessary, and yet which was bitterly irksome to me, I continued my route. The sledge was still visible ; nor did I again lose sight 1 of it, except at the moments when for a short time some ice rock concealed it with its intervening crags. I indeed perceptibly gained on it; and when, after nearly two da) s'journey, I beheld my enemy at no more than a mile dis¬ tant, my heart bounded within me. But now, when I appeared almost within grasp of my enemy, my hopes were suddenly extinguished, ami I lost all trace of him more utterly than I had ever done before. A ground sea ii 4
was heard ; the thunder of its progress, as the waters rolled and swelled beneath me, became every moment more omi¬ nous and terrific. I pressed on, but in vain. The wind arose ; the sea roared ; and, as with the mighty shock of an earthquake, it split, and cracked with a tremendous and overwhelming sound. The work was soon finished: in a few minutes a tumultuous sea rolled be¬ tween me and my enemy, and I was left drifting on a scattered piece of ice, that was continually lessening, and thus preparing for me a hideous death. In this manner many appalling hours passed ; several of my dogs died ; and I myself was ahout to sink under the accumulation of distress, when I saw your vessel riding at anchor, and hold¬ ing forth to me hopes of succour and life. I had no conception that vessels ever came so far north, and was
astounded at the sight. I quickly de¬ stroyed part of my sledge to construct oars; and by these means was enabled, with infinite fatigue, to move my ice- raft in the direction of your ship. I had determined, if you were going southward, still to trust myself to the mercy of the seas, rather than abandon my purpose. I hoped to induce you to grant me a boat with which I could still pursue my enemy. But your direc¬ tion was northward. You took me on board when my vigour was exhausted, and I should soon have sunk under my multiplied hardships into a death, which I still dread,—for my task is unfulfilled. Oh ! when will my guiding spirit, in conducting me to the dæmon, allow me the rest I so much desire; or must 1 die, and he yet live ? If I do, swear to me, Walton, that he shall not escape; that you will seek him, and satisfy my h 5
vengeance in his death. Yet, do l : dare ask you to undertake my pilgri¬ mage, to endure the hardships that I bave undergone ? No ; I am not so selfish;. Yet, when I am dead, if he should appear ; if the ministers of ven¬ geance should conduct him to you, swear tbat he shall nob live—*-swear that he shall not triumph over my accumulated woes, and live to make another such a wretch as I am. He is eloquent and persuasive; and once bis words had even pou er over my heart: but trust him not. His soul is~ as hellish as his.form, full of treachery and fiend-like malice. Hear him not ; call on the manes of William, Justine, Clerval, Elizabeth, my father, and of the wretched Victor, and thrust your- sword into his heart. I will hover near,. апй direct the steel aright.
Walton, in continuation, August 20th, 17—» You have read this strange and ter¬ rific story, Margaret ; and do you not feel your blood congealed with horror, like that which even now curdles mine? Sometimes, seized with* sudden agony, he could not continue his tale; at others, his voice broken, yet piercing, uttered with difficulty the words so replete with agony. His fine and lovely eyes were now lighterf np with indig¬ nation, now subdued to downcast sor¬ row, and quenched in infinite wretched¬ ness. Sometimes he commanded his countenance and tones, and related the most horrible incidents with a tranquil voice, suppressing every mark of agi¬ tation; then, like a volcano bursting
forth, his face would suddenly change to an expression of the wildest rage, as he shrieked out imprecations on his persecutor. His tale is connected, and told with an appearance of the simplest truth; yet I own to you that the letters of Felix and Safie, which he shewed me, and the apparition of the monster, seen from our ship, brought to me a greater conviction of the truth of his narrative than his asseverations, how¬ ever earnest and connected. Such a monster has then really existence; I cannot doubt it ; yet I am lost in sur¬ prise and admiration. Sometimes I endeavoured to gain from Frankenstein the particulars of his creature's forma¬ tion ; but on this point he was impe¬ netrable. " Are you mad, my friend ?" said be» " or whither does your senseless curio-
si ty lead you ? Would you also create for yourself and the world a demoniacal enemy ? Or to what do your ques¬ tions tend? Peace, peace! learn my miseries, and do not seek to increase your OWIk" Frankenstein discovered that I made notes concerning his history : he asked to see them, and then himself corrected and augmented them in many places; but principally in giving the life and spirit to the conversations he held with his enemy. " Since you have pre¬ served my narration," said he, " I would not that a mutilated one should go down to posterity." Thus has a week passed away, while I have listened to the strangest tale that ever imagination formed. My thoughts, and every feeling of my soul, have been drunk up by the interest for my guest, which this tale, and his own
elevated and gentle manners have cre¬ ated. I wish to soothe him; yet can I counsel one so infinitely miserable, so destitute of every hope of consolation, to live ? Oh, no ! the only joy that he can now know will be when he composes his shattered feelings-to peace and death. Yet he enjoys one comfort, the offspring of solitude and delirium : he believes, that, when in dreams he holds converse with his friends, and derives from that communion consola* tion for his miseries, or excitements to bis vengeance, that they are not the- creations ôf his fancy, but the real beings who visit him from the regions* of a remote wørld. This faith gives a solemnity to his reveries that render them to me almost as imposing and interesting as truth. Our conversations are not always confined to his own histony and mi&*
fortunes. On every point of general literature he displays unbounded know¬ ledge, and a qnick and piercing appre¬ hension. Hi» eloquence is forcible and touching; nor can I hear him, when, he relates a pathetic incident, or en¬ deavours to move the passions of pity or love, without tears. What a glo¬ rious creature must he have been in the days of his prosperity, when he is thus noble and godlike in ruin. He seems to feel his own worth, and the greatness of his fall. u When younger," said he, " I felt as if I m ere destined for some great en¬ terprise. My feelings are profound;. but I possessed a coolness of judgment that fitted me for illustrious achieve¬ ments. This sentiment of the worth* of my nature supported me, when others would have been oppressed ; fori deemed it criminal to throw away in useless-
grief those talents that might be useful to my fellow-creatures. When I re¬ flected on the work I had completed, no less a one than the creation of a sen¬ sit! ve and rational animal, I could not rank myself with the herd of common projectors. But this feeling, w hich sup¬ ported me in the commencement of my career, now serves only to plunge me lower in the dust. All my speculations and hopes are as nothing; and, like the archangel w ho aspired to omnipotence, I am chained in an eternal hell. My imagination was vivid, yet my powers of analysis and application w ere intense ; by the union of these qualities I conceived the idea, and executed the creation of a man. Even now I cannot recollect, without passion, my reveries while the work was incomplete. I trod heaven in my thoughts, now exulting in my powers, now burning with the idea of
their effects. From my infancy I was imbued with high hopes and a lofty ambition ; but how am I sunk ! Oh ! my friend, if yon had known me as I once was, you would not recognize me in this state of degradation. Despond¬ ency rarely visited my heart; a high destiny seemed to bear me on, until I fell, never, never again to rise." Must I then lose this admirable being ? I have longed for a friend ; 1 have sought one who would sympathize with and love me. Behold, on these desert seas í have found such a one ; but, I fear, I have gained him only to know his value, and lose him. I would reconcile him to life, but he repulses the idea. u I thank you, Walton," he said, " for your kind intentions towards so miserable a wretch; but when you speak of new ties, and fresh affections,
think you that any can replace those who are gone ? Can any man be to me as Clerval was; or any woman another Elizabeth ? Even where the affections are not strongly moved by any superior excellence, the companions of our childhood always possess a certain power over our minds, which hardly any later friend can obtain. They know our infantine dispositions, which, however they may be afterwards mo* dified, are never eradicated ; and they can judge of our actions with more certain conclusions as- to the integrity of our motives. A sister or a brother can never, unless indeed such symp¬ toms have been shewn early, suspect the other of fraud or false dealing, when another friend, however strongly he may be attached, may, in spite of himself, be invaded with suspicion. But I enjoyed friends, dear not only
through habit and association, but from their own merits; and, wherever I am, the soothing voice of my Elizabeth, and the conversation of Clerval, wilL be ever whispered in my ear. They are dead ; and but one feeling in such a solitude can persuade me to preserve my life. If 1 were engaged in any high undertaking or design, fraught with extensive utility to my fellow- creatures, then could I live to fulfil it. But such is not my destiny ; I must pur-* sue and destroy the being to whom I gave existence; then my lot on earth wijl be fulfilled, and I may die." September 24« MY BELOVED SISTER* I write to you, encompassed by peril, and ignorant whether I am ever doomed to see again dear England, and the dearer friends that inhabit it. I
am surrounded by mountains of ice, which admit of no escape, and threaten every moment to crush my vessel. The brave fellows, whom 1 have persuaded to be my companions, look towards me for aid ; but I have none to bestow. There is something terribly appalling in our situation, yet my courage and hopes do not desert me. We may survive ; and if we do not, I will repeat the lessons of my Seneca, and die with a good heart. Yet what, Margaret, will be the state of your mind ? You will not hear of my destruction, and you will an¬ xiously await my return. Years will pass, and you will have visitings of despair, and yet be tortured by hope. Oh ! my beloved sister, the sickening failings of your heart-felt expectations are» in prospect, more terrible to me than my own death. But you have a
husband, and lovely children; you may be happy; heaven bless you, and make you so ! My unfortunate guest regards me with the tenderest compassion. He endeavours to fill me with hope; and talks as if life were a possession which he valued. He reminds me how often the same accidents have happened to other navigators, who have attempted this sea, and, iu spite of myself, he fills me with cheerful auguries. Even the sailors feel the power of his eloquence: w hen he speaks, they no longer despair; he rouses their energies, and, while they heai his voice, they believe these vast mountains of ice are mole-hills, which will vanish before the resolutions of man. These feelings are transitory ; each day's expectation delayed fills them with fear, and I almost dread a mutiny caused by this despair.
September 5tb. A scene has just passed of such uncommon interest, that although it is highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet I cannot forbear recording it. We are still surrounded by moun¬ tains of ice, still in imminent danger of being crushed in their conflict. The cold is excessive, and many of my unfortunate comrades have already found a grave amidst this scene of desolation. Frankenstein has daily declined in health! a feverish fire still glimmers in his eves ; but he is ex¬ hausted, and, when suddenly roused to any exertion, he speedily sinks again into apparent lifelessness. I mentioned in my last letter the fears I entertained of a mutiny. This morning, as I sat watching the wsn countenance of my friend-*»his eyes
lıaîf closed, and his limbs hanging listlessly,—I was roused by halfa dozen of the sailors* who desired admission into the cabin. They entered; and their leader addressed me« He told me that he and his companions bad been chosen by the other sailors to come in depu¬ tation to me, to make me a demand» which, in justice, I could not refuse. We were immured in ice, and should probably never escape ; but they feared that if, as was possible, the ice should dissipate, and a free passage be opened, I should be rash enough to continue my voyage, and lead them into fresh dangers, after they might happily have surmounted this. They desired, there* fore, that I should engage with a so* lemu promise, that if the vessel should be freed, I would instantly direct my course southward. This speech troubled me· I had
not despaired ; nor had I yet conceived the idea of returning, if set free. ~ Yet coukï í, in justice, or even in possi¬ bility, refuse this demand ? I hesitated before I answered ; when Frankenstein, who had at first been silent, and, in¬ deed, appeared hardly to have force enough to attend, now roused himself; his eyes sparkled, and his cheeks flushed with momentary vigour. Turn¬ ing towards the men, he said— u What do you mean ? What do you demand of your captain ? Are you then so easily turned from your design ? Did you not call this a glo¬ rious expedition ? and wherefore was it glorious? Not because the way was smooth and placid as a southern sea, but because it was full of dangers and terror; because, at every new incident, your fortitude was to be called forth, and your courage exhibited; because
danger and death surrounded, and these dangers }ou were to brave and over¬ come. For this was it a glorious, for this was it an honourable undertaking. You were hereafter to be hailed as the benefactors of your species; your name adored, as belonging to brave men who encountered death for honour and the benefit of mankind. And now, behold, with the first imagination of danger, or, if you will, the first mighty and terrific trial of your cou¬ rage, you shrink away, and are content to be handed down as men who had not strength enough to endure cold and peril ; and so, poor souls, they were chilly, and returned to their warm fire-sides. Why, that requires not this preparation; ye need not have come thus far, and dragged your captain to the shame of a defeat, merely to prove yourselves cowards. Oh ! be men, or VOL. III. ι
be more than men. Be steady to j our purposes, and firm as a rock. This ice is not made of such stuff as your hearts might be; it is mutable, cannot with¬ stand you, if you say that it shall not. Do not return to your families with the stigma of disgrace marked on your brons. Return as heroes who have fought and conquered, and who know not what it is to turn their backs on the foe." He spoke this with a voice so modu¬ lated to the different feelings expressed in his speech, with an eye so full of lofty design and heroism, that can you wonder that these men were moved. They looked at one another, and were unable to reply. I spoke; 1 told them to retire, and consider of what had been said : that I would not lead them further north, if they strenuously de¬ sired the contrary; but that I hoped
that, with reflection, their courage would return. They retired, and I turned towards my friend ; but he was sunk in languor, and almost deprived of life. How all this will terminate, I know not; but I had rather die, than return shamefully,—my purpose unfulfilled. Yet I fear such will be my fate ; the men, unsupported by ideas of glory and honour, can never willingly con¬ tinue to endure their present hard¬ ships. September 7th. The die is cast ; I have consented to return, if Ave are not destroyed. Thus are my hopes blasted by cowardice and indecision ; I come back ignorant and disappointed. It requires more philo* sophy than I possess, to bear this in¬ justice with patience. ι 2
September lath. It is past ; I am returning to Eng¬ land, I have lost my hopes of utility and glory; — 1 have lost my friend. But I will endeavour to detail these bitter circumstances to you, my dear sister; and, while lam wafted towards England, and towards you, I will not despond. September 19th, the ice began to move, and roarings like thunder were heard at a distance, as the islands split and cracked in every direction. We w r ere in the most imminent peril; but, as we could only remain passive, my chief attention was occupied by my unfortunate guest, whose illness in¬ creased in such a degree, that he rcas entirely confined to his bed. The ice cracked behind us, and \*as driveu with force towards the north; a breeze sprung from the west, and on the 11th
the passage towards the south became perfectly free. When the sailors saw this, and that their return to their native country was apparently assured, a shout of tumultuous joy broke from them, loud and long-continued. Fran¬ kenstein, who was dozing, awoke, and asked the cause of the tumult. u They shout," I said, " because they will soon return to England." " Do you then really return ?" tc Alas ! 3 es ; I cannot withstand their demands. I cannot lead them unwil* lingly to danger, and 1 must return." " Do so, if 30U will ; but I will not. You may give up your purpose ; but mine is assigned to me by heaven, and I dare not. I am weak ; but surely the spirits who assist my vengeance will endow me with sufficient strength." Saying this, he endeavoured to spring from the bed, but the exertion was 1 3
too great for him ; he fell back, and fainted. It was long before he was restored ; and í often thought that life was entirely extinct. At length he opened his eyes, but he breathed uilh difficulty, and was unable to speak. The surgeon gave him a composing draught, and ordered us to leave him undisturbed. In the mean time he told me, that my friend had certainly not many hours to live. His sentence was pronounced ; ^nd I could only grieve, and be patient. I sat by his bed watching him ; his eyes were closed, and I thought he slept ; but presently he called to me in a feeble voice, and, bidding me come near, said — " Alas! the strength I re¬ lied on is gone; I feel that I shall soon die, and he, my enemy and per¬ secutor, may still be in being. Think
not, Walton, that in the last momen is of my existence 1 feel that burning hatred, and ardent desire of revenge, I once expressed, but 1 feel myself jus¬ tified in desiring the death of my adver¬ sary. During these last days I have been occupied in examining my past conduct; nor do I find itblameable. In a fit of enthusiastic madness I created a rational creature, and was bound to¬ wards him, to assure, as far as was in my power, his- happiness and well- being. This was my duty ; but there was another still paramount to that. My duties towards my fellow-creatures had greater claims to my attention, be¬ cause they included a greater propor¬ tion of happiness or misery· Urged by this view r , I refused, and I did right in refusing, to create a companion for the first creature. He shewed un¬ paralleled malignity and selfishness, iu ι 4
evil: he destroyed my friends ; he de¬ voted to destruction heings who pos¬ sessed exquisite sensations, happiness, and wisdom; nor do I know where this thirst for vengeance may end. Miserable himself, that he may render no other wretched, he ought to die. The task of his destruction was mine, but I have failed. When actuated bv selfish and vicious motives, I asked you to undertake íny unfinished work; and I renew this request now, when I am only induced by reason and virtue. " Yet I cannot ask you to renounce your country and friends, to fulfil this task ; and now, that you are returning to England, }ou will have little chance of meeting with him, But the con¬ sideration of these points, and the well- balancing* of what ¿ou may esteem your duties, I leave to you ; my jud^-
ment and ideas are already disturbed by the near approach of death. I dare not ask you to do what I think right, for 1 may still be misled by passion. is That he should live to be an instru¬ ment of mischief disturbs me ; in other respects this hour, when I momentarily expect my release, is the only happy one which I have enjoyed for several years. The forms of the beloved dead flit before me, and 1 hasten to their arms, fare«ell, Walton I Seek hap¬ piness in tranquillity, and avoid am¬ bition, even if it be only the apparent!) innocent one of distinguishing your¬ self ín science and discoveries. Yet why do I say this ? 1 have myself Ыч a blasted in these hopes, yet another п.лу succeed/' His voice became fainter as be¬ spoke; and at length, exhausted by t 5
bis effort, he sunk into silence. About half an hour afterwards he attempted again to speak, but was unable; he pressed my hand feebly, and his eyes closed for ever, ubile the irradiation of a gentle smile passed away from his lips. Margaret, uhat comment can I make on the untimely extinction of this glo¬ rious spirit ? Y» hat can I say, that will enable \ou to understand the depth of my sorrow ? All that I should express would he inadequate and feeble. My tears flow; m ν mind is overshadowed by a cloud of disappointment. But I journey towards England, and I may there find consolation. I am interrupted. What do these sounds portend ? It is midnight ; the breeze blows fairly, and the watch on deck scarcely stir. Again ; there is a sound as of a human voice, but
hoarser; it comes írom the cabin where the remains of Frankenstein still lie. I must arise, and examine. Good night, my sister. Great God í what a scene has just taken place ! I am yet dizzy with the remembrance of it. I hardly know whether 1 shall have the power to de¬ tail it; yet the tale which I have re¬ corded would be incomplete without this final and wonderful catastrophe. I entered the cabin, where Jay the remains of my ill-fated and admirable friend. Over him hung a form which I cannot find words to describe; gi¬ gantic in stature, yet uncouth and dis¬ torted in its proportions. As he hung over the coffin, his face was concealed by long locks of ragged hair; but one vast hand was extended, in colour and ap¬ parent texture like that of a mummy. When he heard the sound of my ap-
proach, he ceased to utter exclamation« of grief and horror, and sprung to* 4 wards the window. Never did I behold a vision so horrible as his face, of such loathsome, yet appalling hideousness. I shut my eyes involuntarily, and en¬ deavoured bo recollect what were my duties with regard to this destroyer. I called on lì i m to stay.. He paused, looking on me with won¬ der; and, again turning towards the lifeless form of his creator, he seemed to forget my presence, and every fea¬ ture and gesture seemed instigated by the wildest rage of some uncontrollable passion. " That is also my victim !" he ex¬ claimed; in his murder my crimes are consummated ; the miserable series of my being is wound to its close ! Oh, Frankenstein! generous and self-de¬ voted being ! what does it avail that
I now ask thee to pardon me ? I, who irretrievably destroyed thee by destin¬ ing all thou lovedst. Alas ! he is cold ; he may not answer me." His. voice seemed suffocated; and my first impulses, which had suggested to me the duty of obeying the dying request of my friend, in destroying his enemy, were now suspended by a mix¬ ture of curiosity* and compassion. I approached this tremendous being ; I dared not again raise my looks upon his face, there was something so sca¬ ring and unearthly in his ugliness. I attempted to speak, but the words died away on my lips. The me ister conti¬ nued to utter wild and incoherent self- reproaches. At length I gathered reso¬ lution to address him, in a pause of the tempest of his passion : " Your repent¬ ance," I said, " is now superfluous. If you had listened to the voice of con*-
science, and heeded the stings of re¬ morse, before you bad urged your dia¬ bolical vengeance to this extremity, Frankenstein would yet have lived/' ** And do you dream ?" said the dæ¬ mon ; " do you think that I was then dead to agouy and remorse ?-~He," he continued, pointing to the corpse, " he suffered not more in the consummation of the deed ;—oh ! not the ten-thou¬ sandth portion of the anguish that was mine during the lingering detail of its execution. A frightful selfishness hur¬ ried me on, while my heart was poi¬ soned with remorse. Think ye that the groans of Clerval were music to my ears ? My heart was fashioned to be susceptible of love and sympathy ; and, when wrenched by misery to vice and hatred, it did not endure the vio¬ lence of the change without torture, such as you cannot even imagine.
u After the murder of Clerval, I re* turned to Switzerland, heart-broken and overcome. I pitied Frankenstein; my pity amounted to horror : I abhor¬ red myself. But when I discavered that he, the author at once of my ex¬ istence and of its unspeakable torment», dared to hope for happiness; that while he accumulated wretchedness and de¬ spair upon me, he sought his own en¬ joyment in feelings and passions from the indulgence of which t was for ever barred, then impotent envy and bitter indignation filled me with an insatiable thirst for vengeance, f recollected my threat, and resolved that it should be accomplished. I knew that Ï was pre¬ paring for myself a deadly torture ; but I was the slave, not the master of an impulse, which I detested, yet could not disobey. Yet when she died !—nay, then 1 was not miserable. I bad cast
off ali feeling, subdued all anguish tò riot in the excess of my despair, Evil thenceforth became my good. Urged thus far, I had no choice but to adapt my nature to an. element which I had willingly chosen. The comple¬ tion of my demoniacal design became an insatiable passion. And now it is ended ; there is my last victim !" I waa at first touched by the expres· sions of his misery ; yet when I called to mind what Frankenstein had said of his powers of eloquence and persua¬ sion, and when I again cast my eyes on the lifeless form of my friend, indig¬ nation was re-kindled within me. « Wretch!" I said, " it is well that you come here to w hine over the deso¬ lation that you have made. You throw a torch into a pile of buildings, and when they are consumed you sit among the ruins, and lament the fall. Hypo·
critical fiend ! if he whom you mourn still lived, still would he be the object, again would he become the prey of your accursed vengeance. It is not pity that you feel ; you lament only be¬ cause the victim of your malignity is withdrawn from your power." Êí Oh, it is not thus—not thus," in¬ terrupted the being; " yet such must be the impression conveyed to you by what appears to be the purport of my actions. Yet 1 seek not a fellow-feel¬ ing in my misery. No sympathy may I ever find. When I first sought it, it was the love of virtue, the feel¬ ings of happiness and affection with which my whole being overflowed, that I wished to be participated. But now, that virtue has become to me a sha¬ dow, and that happiness and affection are turned into bitter and loathing de¬ spair, m what should I seek for syra-
pathy? I am content to suífer alone, while my sufferings shall endure: when I die, I am wel! satisfied that abhor¬ rence and opprobrium should load my memory. Once my fancy was soothed with dreams of virtue, of fame, and of enjoyment. Once I falsely hoped to meet with beings, who, pardoning my outward form, would love me for the excellent qualities which I was capable of bringing forth. I was nourished with high thoughts of honour and de¬ votion. But now vice has degraded me beneath the meanest animai. No crime, no mischief, no malignity, no misery, can be found comparable to mine. When I call over the frightful catalogue of my deeds, I cannot be¬ lieve that 1 am he whose thoughts were once filled with sublime and transcend¬ ant visions of the beauty and the ma« jesty of goodness. But it is even so ;
the fallen angel becomes a malignant devil. Yet even that enemv of God and man had friends and associates in his desolation ; 1 am quite alone. " You, who call Frankenstein your friend, seem to have a knowledge of my crimes and his misfortunes. But, in the detail which he gave you of them, he could not sum up the hours and months of misery which I endured, wasting in impotent passions. For whilst I destroyed his hopes, I did not satisfy my own desires. They were for ever ardent and craving ; still I desired love and fellowship, and I was still spurned. Was there no injustice in this? Am I to be thought the only criminal, when all human kind sinned against me? Why do you not hate Felix, who drove his friend from his door with contumely? Why do you not execrate the rustic who sought ta
destroy the savioüf of his child ? Nay^ these are virtuous and immaculate be¬ ings! I, the miserable and the aban¬ doned, am an abortion, to be spurned at, and kicked, and trampled on. Even now my blood boils at the recollection of this injustice. " But it is true that I am a wretch* I have murdered the lovely and the helpless ; I have strangled the inno¬ cent as they slept, and grasped to death his throat who never injured me or any other living thbg. I have devoted my creator, the select specimen of all that is worthy of love and admiration among men, to misery; I have pursued biîTâ even to that irremediable ruin. There he lies, white and cold in death. You hate me ; but your abhorrence cannot equal that with which I regard myself. 1 look on the hands which executed the deed ; I think on the
heart in which the imagination of it was conceived, and long for the mo¬ ment when they w ? ill meet my eyes, when it will haunt my thoughts, no more. " Fear not that I shall be the instru¬ ment of future mischief. My work is nearly complete. Neither your's nor any man's death is needed to consum¬ mate the series of my being, and ac¬ complish that which must be done; but it requires my own. Do not think that 1 shall be slow to perform this sa¬ crifice. 1 shall quit your vessel on the ice-raft which brought me hither, and shall seek the most northern extremity of the globe ; I shall collect my funeral pile, and consume to ashes this mi¬ serable frame, that its remains may afford no light to any curious and un¬ hallowed wretch, who would create such another as I have been. I shall
die. I shall no longer feel the agonies which now consume me, or be the prey of feelings unsatisfied, yet un- quenched. He is dead who called me into being; and when I shall be no more, the very remembrance of us both will speedily vanish. I shall no longer see the sun or stars, or feel the winds play on my cheeks. Light, feel¬ ing, and sense, will pass away ; and in this condition must I find my happi¬ ness. Some years ago, when the images which this world affords first opened upon me, when I felt the cheer¬ ing warmth of summer, and heard the rustling of the leaves and the chirping of the birds, and these were all to me, I should have wept to die ; now it is my only consolation. Polluted by crimes, and torn by the bitterest re¬ morse, where can I find rest but in death ?
" Farewell ! I leave you, and in you the last of human kind whom these eyes will ever behold. Farewell, Fran¬ kenstein ! If thou wert yet alive, and yet cherished a desire of revenge against me, it would be better satiated in my life than in my destruction. But it was not so ; thou didst seek my extinction, that I might not cause greater wretch¬ edness; and if yet, in some mode un¬ known to me, thou hast not yet ceased to think and feel, thou desirest not my life for my own misery. Blasted as thou wert, my agony was still superior to thine; for the bitter sting of remorse may not cease to rankle in my wounds until death shall close them for ever. " But soon," he cried, with sad and solemn enthusiasm, " I shall die, and what I now feel be no longer felt. Soon these burning miseries will be extinct. I shall ascend my funeral
pile triumphantly, and exult in the agony of the torturing flames. The light of that conflagration will føde away; my ashes will be swept into the sea by the winds. My spirit will sleep in peace»; or if it thinks, it will not surely think thus. Farewell/' He sprung from the cabin-window, as he said this, upon the ice-raft which lay close to the vessel. He was soon borne away by the waves, and lost in darkness and distance.
THE END.
ľrinted by Macdouaid & Sod, Cloth ťair, London.
