Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Pyrenean banditti: a romance
which the breeze wafted sweetly to her ear, or the low tinkling of the sheep bell, till the sun had left the scene, when she hastened back toward the chateau. Ere she had arrived at the avenue, she came to á shady path she had never be¬ fore observed ; and curious to know whi¬ ther it led, she advanced hastily beneath. the branches of overhanging trees, till she arrived at a gloomy little glade in ' . . .* " front of the door of the chapel, which stood nearly open. The deep solitude of thè place, encreased by the twilight of the evening hour, was in unison with her feelings, and she entered it. 'V Wrapt in mournful contemplation, she gazed with awe on the shrines and images that adorned jts altar, now forsaken and despoiled ; the cross, the stones " which bòiy knees had worn/* the monuments, > : ' iW ' ' .■■■:■■■■ : - v the
the tombs, with figures piously recum¬ bent, now mouldering into ruins, and discoloured with the damps. While she gazed, she reficcted on her own melan¬ choly condition, remote, unfriended, so¬ litary, at an age too when she needed the r.clvice and protection of kind relations; tbe impression was deeply affecting, and tears streamed fast from her eyes— " To you, whose remains are here deposited," said she with a sigh, " the call of death was perhaps an unwelcome summons; for you had friends to love and to pro¬ tect you. The crimes of a father never tinged your cheek with the blush of shame; you w r ere not compelled, like me, to seek an asylum amongst strangers, and depend upon them for that support and succour which those bound by the ties of blood ought to have afforded/' в 2 Thus,
memory,, convinced her she was not mis¬ taken. The blood faded from her check, as rie addressed her by a name she had now relinquished ; and she stood trem¬ bling and abashed. Montroi, for it was Montroi that stood before her, viewed ber with looks of mingled joy and astonishment; for he knew not that, in Aíademoiselle D'Ain- ville (tbe young lady of whom Genifrede had spoken), he should behold the ob¬ ject of bis former curiosity, of his admi¬ ration, of his enthusiasm, of his love; if be couîd have allowed himself to have indulged a sentiment so tender and im¬ passioned for one situated like Adelaide, surrounded, as she was, with mystery, and in whose storv, as far as he could in- form himself of if, there wxre circum¬ stances so suspicious as to justify almost any
any unfavourable opinion he might form. The admiration he felt for Adelaide bad induced him to make the inquiries wbich had so much alarmed her; and the result of these inquiries had determined him to overcome those feelings by which they had been prompted, and forget, if pos· sible, a beautiful young creature, who, from her connexions, and probably her habits, must be unworthy of his regard. From his conversations with Jacques he hnd gained nothing satisfactory ; but, on the night previous to his quitting Au¬ boigne, was informed by his servant, who had obtained his intelligence of the hos¬ tess of the auberge, that Adelaide had arrived at the inn, seemingly after a long journey, in the middle of the night, wrap¬ ped up in a horseman's coat, and with a hat napped over her face, evidently for в i the
*ΥΒΒΚΕΑΝ BAKDITTI. the purpose of concealment, in \\ompany "with a man of a very suspicious appear¬ ance, and believed to belong to tlte ban¬ ditti of the mountains; that bothţAde- laide and hçr companion lived wnh a person "of the name of St. Clair, a Vo¬ rnan who had just come from Paris, ar\d was known to have led an irregular anc* even vicious course of life; and this left no reason to doubt that the young lady had eloped with the fellow, to whom, however, though she had surrendered herself, she certainly was not married. Thus did the hostess, without knowing scarcely any thing of our heroine, patch tip a complete history of her, and sullied hér with the darkest .shades of obloquy ; - and thus Adelaide, though beautiful as the Grecian Hebe, graceful as the airy sylph/ correct in principle, refined ia sentiment,
sentiment, and in mind so pure as to shrink with delicate apprehension from even the shadow of wrong, was trans¬ formed, by the venomed breath of slan¬ der, from the most innocent and lovely, to one of the most depraved and worth¬ less of human beings. The surprise and agitation experien¬ ced by Montroi,, at a rencontre so- unex¬ pected and extraordinary, produced in him an embarrassment not less apparent than was that of Adelaide : he addressed her, and it was with more warmth and tenderness in his look and manner than he had ventured to express at any former interview—" To what happy accident,'* said he, " am I indebted for the pleasure ' of a renewal of so interesting an acquain¬ tance? for, when my good old Genifrede в 5 informed
informed me that she had afforded an asy¬ lum to a lady of the name of D'Ainville, she did not in any way hint, that the fair Adelaide St. Clair had become one of her inmates also/* " 'Í Circumstances of a very extraordi¬ nary nature, Sir," said Adelaide^ with a look indicating a sensation of distress, " have obliged me to assume a name to which 1 have no legal claim; and Geni- frede knows me only by that of D'Aiıı- vffle." " Your name then, Madam," resumed Montroi, €C is, I presume, St. Clair?" Adelaide hesitated, and at length an¬ swered in the negative. " Neither D'Ainville nor St. Clair!" exclaimed Montroi, much astonished. He paused, still looking at her, in the expectation
expectation that she would mention her real name; but she was silent, and con¬ fused. By this time they had reached tbe door of the chape!, toward which Adelaide had been moving during this romcrsation. They passed out in silenci-, occasioned by a mutual per;de.\itv, and an almost equal embarrassment; and Adelaide was preparing to take her leave, when the chevalier proceeded— " it is late for you to ramble abroad, thus unattended ; per¬ mit me to conduct you to the chateau."" As he spoke, he took her hand, which he pressed tenderly ; and drawing it within bis a/m, while she gently strove to dis¬ engage it, said—" Nay, you must, you shall allow me to attend you home :'" and then, scarce knowing what he utter¬ ed, he began to expatiate on the honour» в о the
12 PYRENEAN BAKDITTI. the joy, the happiness he felt on seeing her again—" Little did I expect," said he, u when I came hilher, to find, in my chateau, so lovely an inhabitant as Ma¬ demoiselle—=—" He stopped, not know¬ ing what name to annex. te And Ín the stranger I bad the ho¬ nour of meeting at Auboigne," said Ade¬ laide, " I as little expected to find the owner of this mansion, and the person to whoml ani thus signally obliged." " Is it then to accident, to chance only, that I owe my present happiness ?" continued Montroi significantly. "Yes, Sir; a combination of strange unhappy events," cried Adelaide, en¬ deavouring lo recollect her se· ered thoughts, *' has rendered me unexpect¬ edly and unavoidably dependent upon the protection of slrangcrs/of whose be¬ nevolence,
nevolence, I thank Heaven, I have al¬ ready had repeated proofs, and in whose honour I may, I trust, fearlessly confide." She pronounced these last words with more energy than she had before ex¬ pressed; but, ere she had finished, her voice faltered ; and as Montroi gazed earnestly in her face, he saw her eyes were filled with tears. "I will not allow you to call them un¬ fortunate," said he, " since they have been the cause of such exquisite, such unlooked-for felicity." '·' To me, Sir," cried Adelaide, inter¬ rupting him, " they have been most un¬ fortunate; and but for the protection your house affords me ; -----" " III should I deserve the noble confi¬ dence you repose in me," exclaimed Montroi, with warmth and earnestness, '* nav,
" nay, I should be unfit to live, were Γ to refuse you that protection yon, rVfa- dam, have a right to claim : think, nay, believe me to be your friends" Again-he pressed her hand, again fixed hîs eyes upon her now pale but lovely face, with a look so expressive and full of generous feeling, as awakened all the tenderness of her soul, all the gratitude of her overflowing heart: she wept, but could not speak. In an instant, all he had heard to her prejudice was forgotten, or, if remembered, remembered only with the contempt it. really merited; and Adelaide, as she seemed the most beauti¬ ful, so also did she appear, to the eye of the delighted, the almost adoring Mon¬ troi, the most interesting and amiable of human beings. She was come, how antj why he knew % not,
not, but she was come, to claim his pro¬ tection as a man, his compassion as a suffering, if not an injured fellow-crea¬ ture. She was deprived, it appeared, of friends, or why else had she flown to ask protection of strangers ? of a home, or wherefore sought she an asylum ?—To a heart like that of Montroi, the single cir¬ cumstance of having been unfortunate was a sufficient recommendation to its favour ; and when, added to this, he be¬ held so much beauty, such sweetness and apparent refinement, the claim became altogether irresistible; and he resolved, by a behaviour the most respectful, to encourage her to repose in him sufficient confidence to communicate to him all her griefs, and explain her story, which had so much surprised, and still greatly per¬ plexed him. Every word, every look, encreased
derived, however, some degree of satis¬ faction from the confession, that she had no legal claim to either: but still this had onty changed the nature of her em¬ barrassment; for, while the declaration naturally led him to expect to hear her real name, necessity still compelled her to conceal not onIy r that by which she had formerly been known, but that to which, as the daughter of De Latiné, she was now entitled. The distress she felt from this occasion, was encreased by the recollection that, as she was now circum¬ stanced, it would be improper, because highly dangerous to her father, to make any disclosure to Monsieur Montroi of the real incidents of her story ; and this determined her to remain verv close in ber apartments, and to avoid, as much as possible,, all conversation with bini« Such
Such was her resolve; but Montroi, to whom every hour seemed an age, till be could açain behold and converse with his lovclv and interesting visitor, and who had waited with extreme impatience, watching every avenue from the chateau, in the hopes of seeing her, sent a mes¬ sage at length by Gcnifredc, soliciting permission to pay her his respects. Ade¬ laide felt uneasy at the request, jet she knew not how to refuse it ; and she sent an answer, that she should be happy to sec him ; but desired that Gcnifredc would continue with her, in whose presence she hoped Montroi would make no partim* lar inquiries, and that their conversation would necessarily be general· Geni frede almost instantly returned; and Montroi soon a ft enva rds entered the room. Reassured by the continuance of Gcnifredc,
Geni frede, Adelaide received hiiri with less embarrassment than she had ever be¬ fore feh in his presence; his manners were even more engaging and fascinating than at any former interview; and every sentiment H expressed was so entirely her own, every remark he made so ex¬ actly what she would herself have uttered, ihat she was astonished at the congenia¬ lity of their tastes and feelings. In the course of their conversation, he spoke of the evening when he had last seen herat Auboigne: he informed her that, in pursuance of his engagement, he had, the next day, set off to accompany his Colonel, the Marquis de Ponteville, in his route through Gascony ; and that, in the evening, on the borders of a wood, the party had been attacked by a troop of banditti, who overpowering them with their
their numbers, had left two of the Mar¬ quis's servants dead upon the spot; the Marquis himself having narrowly escaped with life, being dangerously, but not mortally wounded. It was with the utmost difficulty that Adelaide could command her feelings during this recital: she feared to look up, or speak, lest her countenance, or the tremulous tone of her voice, might betray the painful interest she took in it; for that her father and Perouse were among the banditti he had described, the intelligence she had obtaineJ from Jacques did not suffer her to doubt. " it is unnecessary," resumed Montroi, " to add, I escaped unhurt. Would to God the rest of them had been as fortu¬ nate !" t( It would have been a most happy circumstance,"
circumstance," said Adelaide falteringîy, and with an abstracted air, while her eyes were bent downward, and fixed, with a seeming earnestness, upon some object she was unconscious оГ regarding. " The Marquis is however dejermuied to pursue the most active measures for the detection of the leaders of this fero¬ cious and lawless gang," resumed Mon¬ troi ; " detached parties are already em¬ ployed to explore thoroughly that purt of the countrv ; and, should their place of rendezvous be discovered, I am per- suaded they cannot escape the arm of justice." At these words, Adelaide became more and more agitated; for she thought οΐ her father; and her terrified imagination already suggested him in the hands of the marechaussee, and about to atone for his о (fences,
offences, by a painful and ignominious death. Montroi observed her agitation, with surprise and wonder; buf unwilling to distress her, by seeming lo perceive if, or by continuing the subject, immedi¬ ately turned the comcrs.uion. Ilis visit lasted about an hour, during which Ge¬ nifrede remained in the room ; and he therefore forbore fo make anv reference to what had passed on the preceding night, a subject which Adelaide dreaded of course, and anxiously wished by all means to avoid·
», » * T . i * ix· L· CHAP.
sr
CHAP. Ш. Could any thing have afforded consola¬ tion to the unhappy Adelaide, whilst un¬ der the iniluence of these apprehensions for the fate of the wretched De Laune, it would have been the society of Montroi, could she have enjoyed it without the re¬ straints which, delicacy imposed, and by a candid avowal of her reasons for adopt¬ ing such a mysterious line of conduct, <ram hk friendship and esteem— " Oh could í tell hun," exclaimed she, <c could 1 tell him my sad eventful history ! how would
would his generous breast have glowed with tender commiseration for the suffer¬ ings which have driven me to seek a re¬ fuge beneath his roof! Yes, he would pity, he would not condemn. But amongst the gentlest feelings of compas¬ sion, would he not reject with disdain the daughter of—Oh, let me not speak of him, let me not name him, whom I must ever blush to call my father—a companion of banditti, a robber, and a murderer ! No, buried for ever in my heart, shall remain the sad secret of my disgraceful birth. Fear not, unworthy parent, if I must call you so, your Ade¬ laide will not betray you ; she will mourn and weep for the crimes you hourly com¬ mit, and of which your hardened unre¬ lenting nature yet suffers you not to think with remorse ; she will pray ti ли VOL. Ill, c r; e
ere punishment overtake you, repent¬ ance may have worked its way to your heart, and so have changed your nature; that, ere the mandate of death arrives, your pardon may be sealed in Heaven, that Heaven whom you daringly thus of¬ fend, while you violate the order of so¬ ciety, and the peace and welfare of man¬ kind." While her heart was thus tom by the most painful sensations and apprehend sions on account of her father, it had others not less distressing, arising from the reflection of the agitation she had shewn while Montroi was speaking of the banditti of the mountains. She could not doubt but he had observed the emo¬ tions she had endeavoured to conceal; and how, should he desire another inter¬ view, or should accident again throw hißt
him in her way, was she to evade an ex¬ plicit account of the circumstances un¬ der which she had entered her present abode? Would he not think that fear alone prevented her from entering upon the explanation necessary to convince him he was not harbouring a person un¬ deserving of his protection ? and what but guilt (for such must be his conclu¬ sion) could hinder the communication he sought ? Montroi, as we have before observed, had certainly imbibed some suspicions respecting his guest, from the intelli¬ gence of the hostess of the auberge at Auboigne, who, like most other women of her description and rank in life, had a particular penchant for the marvellous; and was not less disposed than others of her profession, to cast an eye of scruti- c S niziiiíT
ntzing inquiry upon the travellers who occasionally stopped at her house : the incident of Adelaides arrival with Pe¬ rouse was remarkable, and she failed not to make upon it such comments as the singularity of it would admit of. But whatever attention might have been paid by Montroi to the representations made in consequence of it, he was soon charm¬ ed into a state of disbelief, or rather of forgetfulness, by the impressions pro¬ duced during his conversation with Ade¬ laide in the chapel of the chateau : at this meeting, as it may be remembered, his manners were more tender and impas¬ sioned than at his former interview with her at Auboigne. Joy, on thus behold¬ ing one whom he hardly dared to think he ought ever ю hope to see again, but whose beautifui image still haunted and troubled
troubled his repose, was perhaps the pre¬ dominating emotion of his heart, 'as his eyes again met those of Adelaide de Launé ; joy, accompanied by an admira¬ tion not less ardent than when he had before viewed her, but un mingled with* that chaste esteem which he was never¬ theless desirous to indulge for her, gave a sort of wild hilarity to his air and man-' ners, verv different from their usual cha- Tir racter. He had taken her hand, that band, than which no alabaster could be whiter: it trembled as he held it; yet he grasped it still. The tremor encreased. As he felt it tremble, his heart smote him : he had caused alarm, he had ad¬ dressed, with the warmth of a lover, in¬ stead of the respectful freedom of a friend, a fair young creature, whom, he kit, at that moment he could have de- c 3 fended
fended from any similar rudeness, at the risk even of life. As they quitted the deep covert οΐ the trees around the chapel, he had been en¬ vied to observe the expression of a countenance, at all times too full of meaning to be misunderstood .* he gazed, and saw " a thousand blushing appari¬ tions/* which seemed to refute accusa¬ tion, and confirm her innocence and trufii— " She may be mysterious," said he, as he mused on these particulars, ' s but she is not guilty even of uninten¬ tional error. She has been slandered, cruelly slandered ; but her heart, if the countenance is a true index, is as pure as heaven itself. She is—she must he innocent !" The unaffected delicacy of her man¬ ners, the justness of her sentimente, and the
the graces of her conversation, when the embarrassment produced by hk first en* trance, on his next interview with her, had subsided, were considered by him ai further testimonies of her worth and goodness, as also of the respectability of her birth and connexions : he percei ve<$ she was not only easy and elegant in her general deportment, but thai her mind was highly cultivated and accomplished'; her birth, therefore, could not, he thought, be mean. How strange then, that she should be left thus destitute and unpro¬ tected ! The curiosity he had before felt was now encreased to a degree almost pain¬ ful, and he resolved to spare no efforts of the most obliging respect and attention, to induce her to repose in him the con fidence so necessary to his happiness; с 4 ior,
for, with Montroi, the idea of happiness and Adelaide were already so united, as to have become inseparable in his imagina¬ tion. To him, the accidental advantages of rank and fortune appeared as consi¬ derations wholly unworthy of his regard; and so tender and warm was the admira¬ tion he now felt for her, that he waited only till he should have obtained a satis¬ factory explanation of that part of her story which appeared at present so ex¬ traordinary and unaccountable, to dis¬ close the real state of his heart; and, Âhould his love meet a return of the same ardent affection which glowed in his breast, to attach her to himself, by the most holy and indissoluble of all ties,
CHAP.
CHAP. IV. The next day, Montroi sent a message by Genifrede, to inquire after Adelaide's health, and solicit the favour of her com¬ pany at dinner. Delicacy, and a high sense of female decorum, prevented Ade¬ laide from accepting the invitation ; and Montroi, though disappointed by her re¬ fusal, forbore repeating fhe invitation. But what pained him with disappoint¬ ment, encreased his esteem and admira¬ tion, and caused him to reject, with fresh indignation,, what he considered as a с 5 wicked
wicked slander of the object he adored. He grieved to be denied her company, but he reproached himself for having either forgotten or overlooked the im¬ propriety that would have attended the acceptance of his request, and of which, he feared; and the thought filled his eyes with tears, Adelaide might be painfully sensible— ( ' Sure," said he, r ' the lovely angel cannot think I mean to take ad¬ vantage of her defenceless situation, to treat her with unbecoming boldness and familiarity ? she will not, I hope, think me so devoid of principle, so regardless of the dictates of honour, as to be ca¬ pable of such a conduct ?—But she does not yet know me; and, if she did, she has perhaps only acted agreeably to the yules of female delicacy and prudence. Yet," added he, " í am to blame—I ought
ought not to have made the request, not, however, till our friendship had been ce¬ mented by a longer intimacy." The apprehension that he might have wounded her feelings, by seeming to presume upon her situation, was the oc¬ casion of another message, in which Montroi apologized for the liberty he had taken, and solicited the favour of being sometimes allowed to see her in her apartment. Adelaide's reply, which was couched in terms of the most-delicate politeness, released Montroi from the tyranny of uneasy fears; and he gave orders that; she should be treated with the respect· due to a female visitant i of the highest * rank, that her table should be furnished* with every delicacy* that-could be pro¬ cured, and that the daughter of one of» c Q the
the villagers should be immediately eft- gaged as her femme de chambre. Adelaide, although highly gratified and flattered by these acts of kindness arid liberality, would have declined them, as inconsistent with her birth and condi¬ tion, which, she observed, was too hum¬ ble to allow her to take place, even of those to whose services she was obliged. Geni frede, who, from the first moment she had seen Adelaide, had declared that she was a gentlewoman bred and born, was astonished at this declaration ; and Montroi, when informed by her of what Adelaide had said, heard it with surprise, and could not credit the assertion. In the evening, as soon as Adelaide had dined, Genifrede entered, and in¬ formed her that one of Jannette's young¬ est boys, a child of about eighteen months old,
old, was taken suddenly ill, and thought to be in great danger. Adelaide, who sometimes visited Jannette, and hâd of¬ ten nursed little Claude, which was the name of the infant, no sooner heard of his illness, than she set off for the cot¬ tage, where she found Jannette weeping immoderately, with the child in her arms: it seemed to be convulsed, and to respire with difficulty. Adelaide seated herself beside the distressed mother, upon a low bench by the fire; and was making some attempts to console her, when the village doctor, a respectable looking middle- aged man, entered with Guillaume, who had been dispatched to procure assist¬ ance. The doctor having examined his liftle patient, pronounced his complaint to be spasms, arising from indigestion ; but said there
there was little cause for apprehension : and having given him a cordial, which- seemed fo revive him, and a- few direc¬ tions to Jannette, respecting her treat¬ ment of him, said he had little doubt but; he would soon be well, and departed. Adelaide, who was a general favourite at the cottage, continued there till little Claude was nearly well, and then return¬ ed to the chateau. She had scarce en* tered the grounds, when she was met by Montroi, whose eyes sparkled with the transport he felt on seeing her—" í wilL not say this meeting is accidental," said, he, colouring highly—■" I learnt you» were absent, and knowing the occasion* of your walk, expected, or rather hoped 4 to meet you. How is the poor infant > is its situation as dangerous^ as lias been. described?" " I believe
" I beheve not, Sir," said Adelaide, over whose cheek a blush had mantled, on being thus surprised by Montroi—» " I am happy in saying the child is al¬ ready very much better ; I should grieve indeed were he to die, for he is a sweet infant, and the darling of his mother." " It is then a favourite of yours, I pre¬ sume," said Montroi, gazing tendcriy in* her face—" Fortunate little fellow ! Who, were he sensible of it, would not envy him the happiness of engaging the fa¬ vour of Mademoiselle D'Ainville ?" These words, and the ardent look of admiration that had accompanied them, were ill calculated to relieve Adelaide from he*· embarrassment ; a deeper glow· now took possession of her cheeks, she cast her eyes to the ground, and was silent. " Have
" Have I your pardon," at length re¬ sumed Montroi, *' for the liberty I took this morning ? Your answer convinced me I had been guilty of an act of pre¬ sumption, of which I was not, till then, aware." Adelaide, scarcely knowing what she said, replied, she was highly obliged by his request; but that she had reasons for remaining as much retired as possible, while she continued at the chateau, or till she had heard, as she hoped she soon should, from a dear friend, to whom she had applied for advice and assistance. " Oh why," said Montroi, " can it be necessary that you should, even for the shortest interval, live thus secluded and unknown, and hid under a borrowed name ?" He paused-—" Am I too bold," said he at length, " when I say I would claim
claim the privilege of a friend, and be informed of the reasons which induce you to adopt a line of conduct seem¬ ingly so extraordinary ? Speak, Made¬ moiselle D'Ainville, speak," with falter¬ ing voice, " dearest Adelaide; to this feeling, this sympathizing heart, unbo¬ som all your cares, all your sorrows; and if any communication mnde to your Montroi should enable him to contri¬ bute, in any degree, to the peace of one so lovely and excellent as yourself, how highly would he value, how would he delight in such communications, even though it subjected him to the most painful difficulties, the most dreadful dangers ! These, any, or every thing, he would gladly encounter, for the sake of the pleasure such sweet confidence would afľord." " Had
" Нэн! I the power, Sir/* said Ade¬ laide, with almost breathless confusion, " to make the communication you thus honour me by soliciting, I should not withhold it a moment from one so de¬ serving of my confidence, and to whom I am so highly obliged. But know, Sir, there are objections which are indeed insurmountable; be assured also, that it is not in the power of any one, not even yourself, warmed, as 1 perceive you are* by fhe most honourable and generous- friendship, to afford me any other assist¬ ance than a continuation of the benevo¬ lent protection you now aíFord me m your house, till 1 have received advice and instruction how I ought to act, from the lady to whom î have applied." " And will you then cruelly refuse to afford me any share of that confidence you
you so readily give another ?" said Mont¬ roi, with a reproachful glance— " Oh why, why all this secrecy, this unkind, I weuld almost add, this ungenerous res¬ serve ?" " Oh, do not say ungenerous," sakt Adelaide» bursting into tears; " rather candidly conclude, that there are circum¬ stances which, if known, would reflect dishonour upon——" She paused. " Dishonour !" faintly reiterated Mont¬ roi. " That, in short, there are certain inci¬ dents of my life that I cannot unfold without injury to others, or without in¬ volving myself in some disgrace by the communication." i( Heavens ľ* exclaimed he mentally, " what can this mean ?" i( Yet think me not ungrateful," re¬ sumed
sumed Adelaide, " or that I am insensible of the honour your friendship, Sir, would confer ирэп me, by desiring to become the sharer of my heart's sorrows : strange as the assertion may appear, especially when made by one who has known the sweets of confidential intercourse, yet I must add, that any endeavour to lighten them by participation, would only add to their weight. Seek not then, with kind concern, to know the cause of my concealments and my griefs; the one is necessary to my situation, the other is the consequence of events unforeseen, and not to be prevented. To a mind unaccustomed, till of late, even to the shadow of disguise, the single circum¬ stance of being compelled to assume the mantle of mysterious secrecy, must be attended with a sensation painfully acute. Believe
Believe me, Sir, that 1 lament the silence 1 must preserve, even towards you ; but, could you know my reasons, 1 am certain you would agree that 1 am impelled by a necessity which is indeed insuperable." "Aftersuch a declaration,"said Mont¬ roi, (t I am content to cease from all in¬ quiries. But is it necessary that this si¬ lence should be for erer maintained ? Can I never be able to tender with effect my most zealous services? and may not time allow you to unfold these myste¬ ries?—But to this question 1 do not ask an answer. In the meantime, however," added he, tenderly taking her hand,, " permit me to assure you, that there is a heart ia this breast," laying his hand upon his own, ff which sympathizes with your cares or misfortunes, whatever they may
may be, with the sincerest, purest afTec- tion; and this hand, and all the means which it can use, will be ever ready to be exerted in the cause of beauty, merit, virtue, such as yours." The honest earnestness with which these words were uttered, produced the deepest impression on the heart of Ade¬ laide ; but they rendered her fully alive to all the misfortunes of her situation. She looked the look of gratitude on Montroi, which she could not utter—she was for a moment unable to speak; at length, perplexed, distressed, bewildered by confusion, and forgetting, in the agi¬ tation of her feelings, that he had re¬ solved to desist from further inquiry, she exclaimed, with tears—«'* Urge me. Sir, no further, I conjure you—I am wretch¬ ed,
ed, very wretched; and, most of all, un¬ fortunate, in having excited a curiosity I am utterly unable to gratify." " Curiosity ! call it not curiosity," exclaimed Montroi, pressing her hand to his lips— " it is friendship, it is affec¬ tion; it is an eager wish, arising from the hope of being able to extricate you from all your difficulties and distresses, and to make you happy. Oh that it were indeed in my power to bestow felicity on one so loved, so honoured !—But I have been too busy with inquiries—I ought not to have been thus importu¬ nate; I have distressed, I have afflicted you—those tears reproach me. Oh that 1 should have been the cause of them, I that would give worlds- ----- Forgive me, charming Adelaide, forgive the rash, the inconsiderate Montroi ; he will »ot again 0 offend,
offend, he will not wound your feelings by a repetition of his former fault. Yet, ns the dearest treasure he could retain, he will not relinquish the hope, that you may one day relax from your reserve: and as a proof that he is not hateful to you, honour him with, at least, some share of your confidence; and impose upon him some task, some arduous task, in which he may promote your interest, youi' welfare, your happiness," Adelaide, sensibly affected by Mont¬ rons manner, which shewed how greatly he was disappointed and perplexed by her refusal to impart what he was thus anxious to learn, returned an answer, which did not absolutely forbid him to hope that an alteration of circumstances might enable her fo act as he now wished. By.this time they hud reached the j great
great steps of the principal entrance into the chateau ; and, from the hall, each took the different corridors leading to their respective apartments.
vor,, ш.
CHAP.
CHAP. V. Montroi loved too tenderly not to avail himself of every possible opportunity of meeting and conversing with Adelaide. She felt uneasy and disturbed by his con¬ stant attentions; for her heart told her his society might be dangerous to her future peace, and even sometimes sug¬ gested, that she ought not long to re¬ main an inmate in his house. It was im¬ possible for Adelaide not to perceive that, to Montroi, she was already an ob¬ ject Qf the most tender love, as well as the
the most anxious curiosity : the soft me¬ lancholy that sometimes overspread his countenance, convinced her that, though blessed with affluence, and in the posses¬ sion of every thing which might seem to constitute felicity, he was yet far from happy. But it was when discoursing upon the delight resulting from the in¬ tercourses of a refined friendship, or up¬ on the painful sensations occasioned by the sufferings of amiable and respected relatives, that this expression was msst observable ; and often then, his eyes filled with tears, he would hastily draw from his bosom a miniature, which! he constantly wore, and ga2e upon it, or press it to his lips; then heaving a deep sigh, remain for a while immersed in thoughtfulness and abstraction. Some¬ times, after these fits of melancholy mu- d l 2 SÎI1£
sing and saddening recollection, he would take his oboe, and strive to dissipate his sorrows with the charms of music ; and would often attempt a transition from moody care to blithsome gaiety, by ţa- rying from notes of tender woe, to those pf some light and popular air of his na¬ tive province. When, as was now usually the case, though she had sometimes strove to pre¬ vent it, he accompanied Adelaide in her walks, he would tate with him his instru¬ ment, and at the foot of an overhanging clifif, or on the margin of some lake, perform, with exquisite taste and pa¬ thos, one of his most favourite composi¬ tions. At other times, he would amuse himself in sketching the features of the landscape ; one of these, in particular, he finished; it was a view of the chateau, with
with the shady mount on which Adelaide loved to sit. This he presented to her, and she reserved it as a treasure, which she might preserve as a memento of him from whom she was soon to be separated, and, in all probability, for ever; yes, for ever; for how was it possible to ima¬ gine that Montroi, notwithstanding the diligence with which he sought her so¬ ciety, and the thousand little elegant gal¬ lantries he daily practised towards her, would ever think of her as of one whom he could make his wife? This was im¬ possible. Propriety, therefore, strongly urged the necessity of that separation, which she at once dreaded and desired, and which must seemingly be the act of herself, since Montroi appeared not to have any intention of leaving the cha¬ teau, or of discontinuing, ór abating his d 3 attentions
attentions to her. But although steady in her opinion on this point, she was yet unable to take any step, till the return of Jacques from his journey into Gas¬ cony, of which, however, she was now in daily expectation, for Jacques had set off before Montrons arrival at the chateau. Montroi had now been many times in the company of Adelaide; nota day in¬ deed passed, in which he did not visit her, or overtake her in her rambles about the grounds, or attend her to the cot¬ tage of Jannette, whither she frequently took a stroll, or along the side of the woods and thick plantations of olive groves, which almost surrounded the vil¬ lage, and nearly hid it from view. But, in all his walks, in all his conversations, no word, or even the most distant hint, was
was dropped by Adelaide on the subject of his former curiosity: he had already urged that subject as far as politeness would allow; indeed he had even pro¬ mised not to touch upon it again.-— Though she was sensible that she must appear reserved and disingenuous, and the idea of this was most painful, yet Adelaide continued firm in her purpose of concealing her name and birth, and especially the late events of her life. This her resolution was chiefly, as she supposed, owing to a sense of duty to¬ wards her father, since a disclosure of these particulars might expose him to the greatest dangers; and partly, and in¬ deed in a greater degree than she was perhaps fully aware of, to a lively sensa¬ tion of shame, at being born of parents who were dishonest, and consequently n 4 far
far more disreputable than poverty alone could possibly have rendered them. These reasons operating powerfully on the mind of Adelaide, and confirming her purpose, grievously disappointed the ex¬ pectations of Montroi ; for he had hoped that time, and a nearer intimacy, would have induced her to lay aside that impe¬ netrable veil of mystery in which she had hitherto been involved : but finding that it still continued, torturing as was the idea, he began to suspect there must be something in her story highly disho¬ nourable, which could induce one so young to wear so deep a disguise. Again he thought of the tale told his servant by the woman at the auberge. But could Adelaide, the correct, the lovely, the at¬ tractive, the delicate, the bewitching Ade¬ laide, be the character the hostess had described ?
described? Impossible!—Yet, who wa$ she ?—Twice already had she. changed her name ; and according to her own de¬ claration, on the night he had met with her at the chapel, neither of the names she had assumed was that of her family. The uneasiness experienced by Mont¬ roi, while ruminating upon these circum¬ stances, was excessive; it preyed upon his health, and became too éviden ι to pass unobserved by Genifrede, with whom Montroi sometimes conversed concern¬ ing Adelaide ; and Genifrede had soon penetration enough to discover, that no¬ thing but this unfortunate, and, to her, seemingly unnecessary concealment, pre¬ vented him from declaring his passion for her, and making her, as she conceived, the happiest and most envied among wo¬ men— ff You know not what you are η 5 about,
about, my dear Ma*moiselle, M said she one day to Adelaide— a Monsieur Mont¬ roi loves you : he has as good as told me so himself, though I should have found it out, if.he had not; or why does he look at you so, and talk of you thus con¬ tinually ; and go sighing about the cha¬ teau, as he did this morning, as if his poor heart was breaking ? and all for no¬ thing, but because you won't out with it, and tell him who you are. What need of all this secrecy, and these mysteries, as lie calls 'em > Why cannot you make a friend of him at once, and be the happy lady of this chateau ?— ' Genifrede/ says he, * I have no one to controul me in my inclinations; my fortune is large, it is even larger than my wishes; and with such a woman as Mademoiselle D'Ain- Vdle, I could be the happiest of men. But
But how can I offer her my hand, when I know not even her name ?'—Dear Ma'¬ moiselle, do but consider what you are a doing ; and don't stand in your own light, and distress him so any longer. I'm sure, so good as you seem, you can have done nothing amiss; and who can tell what he may think of you ?" "Genifrede," cried Adelaide, " I am the most wretched, the most unfortunate of human beings.' 1 " God forbid, Ma'moiselle ! God for¬ bid !" exclaimed Genifrede. " And wbatever may be the nature of the regard with which Monsieur Montroi condescends to honour me," resumed she, " it is impossible I can ever be ------" A stream of tears suppressed her utter¬ ance. " Mercy on us!" exclaimed Geni* d б frede;
frede; "so fine a chance, and all to be lost, for want of a little courage to speak out, and tell the truth !" " Was Monsieur Montroi to be made acquainted with the events I am deter¬ mined to conceal," continued Adelaide, " he would never see me more ; he would abhor, he would detest me ; and oh î never, never will I deceive him !" Genifrede shook her head, and looked earnestly at Adelaide— íť I fear I under¬ stand you but too well/* cried the good old creature feelingly, and with a deep sigh—" But don't cry so, Ma'moiselle; it will make your head ache; and all, you know, can do no good now.—Oh, who ever could have believed it, so good, so innocent as she looks?" thought Geni- frede, rising to depart—" Alack, alack ! poor Monsieur Montroi ! what news will this
this be for him !— It is all over then, and she can never be my Lady." " What is the matter, Genifrede ?" said Montroi, who met her as she was passing through the last room in the suit, on her way from Adelaide's apartment. " Nothing much, your Honour," re¬ plied Genifrede; " only—only------" " Only what, my good woman ?" said Montroi eagerly—" How is your charge? how is Mademoiselle D'Ainville?" " Well, very well, your Honour," an¬ swered Genifrede ; and was passing on, when Montroi, looking steadily in her face, said— " Are you sure, Genifrede, that nothing is the matter ?" " Nothing," replied she; tf only I have just been having a little talk with Ma'moiselle, and she has confessed-------" " What,
"What, what, my good Genifrede?" interrupted Montroi, ' c Oh, I can't tell your Honour what she says; it grieves me to the very heart but to think of it." (S Speak, Genifrede," said Montroi; fi í am all anxiety, all impatience. Ilas the dear lovely creature made you the confidant of her misfortunes ? has she—" " Yes, she has had a misfortune, a chance, I warrant; for what else couìd ííhe mean ? Alack, alack, poor soul ! and so young too ! and now to be left all for¬ lorn, with not a soul to care for her— Ah, weli-a-day ! it's a hard case." " Has she told you/' resumed Mont¬ roi, to whom the terms, a misfortune and a chance, thus used, were wholly unin¬ telligible, " of those sorrows which un¬ happily
happily prey upon her spirits, and, I fear, injure her health ?—Oh tell me ! let me fly to her, and pour into her gentle bo¬ som all the consolation my tenderness can afford ! Be quick, Genifrede, and in* form me—What is it she has confessed ?" ff She says, your Honour, that she is the most unhappy woman in the world; and so, in truth, I think she is. But she can never tell your Honour her story, or any part of it, nor even her name ; and she says besides, if your Honour was to know how she came to be so unfortunate, and all about it, you would never see her again, and that you would hate her; but, for all that, she scorned to deceive you : and then she cried sadly, and sobbed, till I thought her poor heart would have broke. Alack ! it is a pity so sweet a young lady—But men are very wicked ; Ь and
and when people have no friends to look after 'em— í had a sister once, God bless her! for never was a sincerer penitent; but she died, as one may say, by inches, of a broken heart; all for grief at having been led astray, and brought to shame, by a cruel falbe- h ear ted man. Oh it was a grievous sight to see her in her last days, wasted to skin and bone, and-«----- '* " Eternal and merciful Powers!" ex¬ claimed Montroi, striking his forehead with vehemence, r< all then is true, too, too true !" ft ï doubt it is," resumed Genifrede, though without knowing to what he al¬ luded ; tr I doubt it is all very true." Montroi made no reply, but hastening down stairs, entered one of the apart¬ ments ; and throwing himself on a set¬ tee, remained for several hours alone, a prey
prey to sorrow and despair. In the even¬ ing, being somewhat more composed, he informed Genifrede that it was his inten¬ tion to leave the chateau, at an early hour on the following day; and that it was probable he should not return for several days : That, during his absence, it was his desire that Adelaide should continue to receive every possible attention, and all the accommodation his house could af¬ ford; and that it was also his wish, that she (Genifrede) would use all her efforts to persuade her to disclose the most ma¬ terial events of her life, as, without such a disclosure, it was impossible for him to render her any actual service : above all things, he observed, it was necessary he should know the name of her friends, and learn the reason why they had thus aban¬ doned her. #r And
" And does your Honour mean to de¬ part without seeing Ma*moiselle again ?" eagerly asked Genifrede. 4C Were í to follow the impulse of my feelings, Geni frede/' said Montroi, sigh¬ ing heavily as he spoke, te I should see her again ; but propriety tells mel oti&ht not, at least fox the present. 1 do not say I will see her no more ; she may want му services, and they are hers whenever she may require them. Oh that she hap! deserved—But, no more ; I must not, dare not think," said he, softening, as he spoke, into tears of the tenderest regret ~^- if she is lost to me, for ever lost; and I must not give way to these unmanly expressions of distress. Oh, Adelaide, were you but as you seemed !" -" Ah, weli-a-day!" cried Genifrede piteously— " But what excuse/' added she,
she, " must I make for your Honour's going away, and not seeing her?" (i Tell her I am gone unexpectedly, and in haste," said Montroi ; u and that, after an absence of about a week, I mean to be here again/* Genifrede promised to execute these orders faithfully; and the next day, at the appointed hour, Montroi, who had passed a night of extreme anguish, and the most painful irresolution respecting his purpose of departing without again seeing Adelaide, a resolution which he was more than once on the eve of vio¬ lating, attended by the steward and his own valet, set off from the chateau.
CHAR
■ Ill НИ ! 'ИЦИ МЦГ
CHAP. VL Adelaide was surprised, and cut almost to the heart, when she found that Mont¬ roi had departed, even though in great haste, without bidding her adieu : a con¬ duct so extraordinary could not fail to occupy her thoughts, and awaken all her solicitudes. Did this agree with what Gen i frede had so lately told her, and with what she had herself observed ? Was this his friendship, his tenderness, his love?—" If he had regarded me with those feelings of affection which I, alas ! indulge
indulge for him,'* said she, " never, ne\er could he have left me thus un¬ kindly, without once bidding me fare- wclì. ,, She questioned Genifrede, but of Ge¬ nifrede she could learn only what she had been desired to sav, which was, that he was gone unexpectedly from the cha¬ teau on business, which would detain him about a week, when he should return, and would then see her again. The coldness of this message struck 1'ke ice upon the heart of Adelaide ; she turned away, to hide the emotions of'mortified tenderness that pained and agitated her bosom, and to wipe away, unobserved, the tear that trembled in her eye. Scarcely had Montroi departed, when a messenger arrived at the chateau, and desired to speak with Mademoiselle D'Ainville.
D'Ainville. The person who appeared, and was shewn into the apartment of Adelaide, was the junior partner of Mon¬ sieur Barreux, the jeweller, at Aries, at whose house Jacques had left the ring given to Adelaide by De Launé. He introduced himself as the person in whose hands it had been deposited, and had brought a letter for Adelaide from Monsieur Barreux, requesting informa¬ tion as ίο the manner in which she had become possessed of it, and demanding *an immediate and.unequivocal answer. There was something in the style of the letter, and in the request it con¬ tained, calculated to excite apprehen¬ sion and uneasy suspicion in the mind of Adelaide. Thé circumstance of her hav¬ ing received it from her father, was of itself sufficient to authorise the sugges¬ tion,
lion, that the ring might have been un¬ fairly obtained: but that Monsieur Bar¬ reux should be informed of this, suppo¬ sing it to be really the case, seemed ex¬ traordinary ; and she demanded if any person had seen the ring, or if he knew Monsieur Barreux's reasons fora requisì- ч tion she.considered as inconsistent with the laws of politeness, and which she was, therefore, not bound to answer ? The young man, who either was, or affected ίο be wholly ignorant of Mon¬ sieur Barreux's reasons for making the above application to Adelaide, said he was not to depart without an answer; and Adelaide was therefore obliged to return one, which she did in writing. In this she briefly informed him, that she had received the ring from a friend, whose name she was not at liberty to mention.
mention. She desired, in case Monsieur Barreux meant to buy the ring, he would let her hear from him as soon as possible; but, should he determine to decline the purchase, that he would return it imme¬ diately on the receipt of her letter. This somewhat singular event em¬ ployed her surmises, though without ex¬ citing any extraordinary degree of fear respecting its consequences, till she was awakened to other apprehensions, and fears not less distressing than any her imagination had yet suggested. The time appointed by Jacques for his return from Gascony had transpired some days since, and the punctuality with which he usually performed whatever he under¬ took, rendered it but too probable that he had fallen into some unexpected diffi¬ culty or danger ; for that he should have staid
staid at the Castle longer than he had- first proposed, seemed unlikely ; though it was possible, at such a distance,* he might have met with some unexpected delays. The length of hrs absence appeared, to Adelaide, to be prolonged, by the eagerness with which his return had been anticipated; for nothing could have af¬ forded her more joy and satisfaction than to hear from the Countess, between whom and herself she had no doubt, on Jacques's introduction by means of Bertha, who was always about her Lady, a regular corre¬ spondence might be established, unknown ίο the Count. To the affectionate and sympathizing bosom of her more than mother, Adelaide could have confided every sorrow; and her heart, by such friendly communication, would have been vol. iii. e eased
eased òf thfe heavy burthen that oppres¬ sed it. Another, and another day passed, and still he did not return ; and Adelaide had now not only to sustain her own surmises ahd uneasiness, which became every hour more painful, but those also of Genifrede and Jannette, each of whom betraved the utmost anxiety, and indulged various dis¬ tressing apprehensions for his safety.
CHAP.
■"' "■"■ , ■.......—
CHAP. VIL Jacques had not yet arrived, nor had any thing been heard of him, when one day, as Adelaide and Genifrede were sitting pensively at a window in one of the lower rooms İn the chateau, talking of him, and hoping for his return, they were surprised by the appearance of a cabriolet drawn by a single mule, driving through the inner court, followed by two horsemen, armed in the manner of the maréchaussée. Before thev had time to conjecture who they could be, or what e 2 could
could be their business, a middle-aged man, genteelly dressed, alighted from the carriage, and came up to the window, and addressing Adelaide, said—" I pre¬ sume, Madam, you are Mademoiselle D'Ainville?" She was surprised, but immediately an¬ swered—" Yes, Sir, my name is D'Ain¬ ville." In the meantime the two horsemen, who had dismounted and entered the house, burst into the room, and seizing her by each arm with the most violent roughness, cried out together—" You are our prisoner, Madam, and must go with us." Their words and manner convinced the unfortunate Adelaide that they were the officers of justice : she shrieked, and fainted ; but this did not for a moment delay
delay their purpose; and utterly regard¬ less of her condition, and of the entrea¬ ties, the tears and remonstrances of the astonished and terrified Genifrede, they forced her into the carriage. The per¬ son who had alighted from it, placed himself by her side; and either touched by her distress, or moved to admiration by the youth and beauty of his prisoner, insisted that means should be used for her recovery before they proceeded. The attendants reluctantly consented; for they were preparing to set off, with¬ out attending to the state in which they had carried her to the carriage. When she recovered, he said something which he seemed to intend as a kind of apology for the force employed against her; pleading, however, the necessity of doing their duty. He then informed heir к 3 that
that hh name Was Barreux, and that she was arrested on the information of the Marquis de Ponteville, for having in her possession a ring, which, together with a diamond star and some other valuables, was taken from his Lordship by a set of banditti infesting the Pyrenees, who had attacked his party as they were crossing the pass of Mount St. Andero, and killed two of his servants, the Marquis himself being dangerously wounded. Adelaide listened to this account with á look of terror ; and when she heard of the murder of the attendants, burst into tears. Monsieur Barreux observed her nar¬ rowly, and proceeded— Jt The ring I well know ; it contains a device with hair, and is set round with diamonds of the finest water. ît was committed to my hands
hands not many weeks before the rob¬ bery, to be altered in the setting ; and, of course, it was impossible for me not to know it immediately ta be the pro* perty of the Marquis. I accordingly sent it to his Lordship, with an account of the manner in which I hed become possessed of it ; and the Marquis, on re* ceiving it, said he was sure the person having it must be connected with the robbers, and ordered that proper mea¬ sures should be immediately taken to apprehend you, Madam ; and now you will be considered as an accomplice, and exposed to the utmost rigours of the law, unless, by a clear confession of the man¬ ner in which you got the ring, and alf particulars, you direct the marechaussee to discover the offenders, and bring them to justice." e 4 " Anã
"And whither am î tobe conveyed?" said Adelaide. « *' To prison, Lady/* returned Mon¬ sieur Barreux. Adelaide shuddered, but made no reply. tf în a few days," pursued Monsieur Barreux, " your examination will be taken ; and if you will confess the truth, you will obtain your enlargement with¬ out much trouble, and probably with little or no expence. And should it ap¬ pear, on inquiry, that you had no com¬ merce or connexion of any kind with the persons concerned in the robbery and murders, you will be discharged with¬ out punishment." (t What if I refuse to give any evl· dcnce whatever?" said Adelaide. " You will he put ίο the torture, Ladv," returned Monsieur Barreux—· (l The
** The safest way will be, to give a plain and honest account of the manner in which you became possessed of the ring r if you prevaricate, you are undone; you will be considered as an accomplice, and your punishment will be proportioned to the degree of guilt of which you are suspected- Do you intend to adopt the plan I prescribe ?" " No, I will not confess from whom î had the ring." " You will not? Astonishing !—This* îs a desperate resolution, young lady," at length he added— ff How then do you< mean. to> act ?" tc There are but two wavs in which Γ can act," said Adelaide— (i I have already said I will not declare from whom í had the ring. The consequences may be к 5 dreadful,
dreadful, but I am determined to abide them." " Good God, you cannot be in ear¬ nest !—-Are you aware of the penalty which the Jaw exacts in such cases?" at length he added. " I will prepare myself to endure its utmost severities," said Adelaide, " ra¬ ther than make the confession required." '* You amaze me," said Monsieur Bar- теих —" Is it possible that you, Madam, can have been concerned in this daring and horrible transaction ?" " It is impossible that I should," said Adelaide—" I have not ; but it is pos¬ sible, at the same time, that I may have my reasons for withholding the informa¬ tion you, Sir, seem to consider, and which is perhaps necessary to my own safety : such
such I have; and while these reasons exist, whatever may be my fate, I shall persist in withholding it." " Wilf« you not take sdyice how to: proceed ?" " Yes; but Γ will take it of my owr* heart, which, while it acquits me of in¬ tentional wrong, exhorts me how I ought to act in this arduous and trying case." c ' Do you intend to employ an advo¬ cate ?" <£ Ir h proper I should have some one to plead my cause," " Allow me then to recommend a friend of mine, a man of profound judg¬ ment and proved integrity, now resident ai Arles, and vy it hiu a street or two of the plaie where I li\e. Shall I call upon bim ? Will you permit me to engage his e G interest
interest in your defence?—Depend lip¬ on it, he will do you justice." Adelaide received Monsieur Barreux's proposal with thankfulness ; adding, she was a stranger, and without friends, and knew not herself where to apply for counsel. Extraordinary as it may appear, Mon¬ sieur Barreux, notwithstanding Adelaide':» words contained as full an evidence as could be required, that she was engaged in some connexion'with the persons by whom the robbery had been committed, felt the deepest interest in the welfare of his fair unfortunate prisoner. Her beauty, her youth, the sweet, yet energetic tones of her voice, the tender melancholy that overspread her charming features, con¬ spired, with a high degree of pity for her
her, situation, to awaken in his breast feelings of which he was perhaps hardly ever before conscious; and the senti¬ ment of compassion, mingled thus with admiration, he now indulged for her, led him to state, with renewed urgency, the necessity of her giving up the name and residence of the person from whom she had received the· ring, and thus to escape the dangers which ohe must otherwise incur. Perceiving all he could urge was of no avail, he threw himself back in the cabriolet, which, on the arrival of the orders for Adelaide's arrest, he had hired at his own expence, and fell into a pro¬ found rumination, which Adelaide, oc¬ cupied by her own melancholy reflec¬ tions, was not disposed to interrupt, till, after some hours' travelling, they reached the
the town of Aries ; and driving through two or three of the principal streets, stopped at the gate of a high building, whose massive architecture and graied windows- marked the entrance of the prison. As soon as they arrived, the officers, one of whom had preceded the carriage, the other followed it, dismounted from· their horses : the door of the cabriolet was opened, and Adelaide assisted to alight. She uttered a deep sigh, as she surveyed the gloomy structure of the place, its high and ponderous walls, and heard the large key turned in the sound¬ ing bolt of the door; and started, with a look of horror, as the rattling of chains in the prison-yard below caught her ear, and told her she was entering the abodes of vice and misery. When
When they bad entered the outer gate, Monsieur Barreux conversed a few mi- mites apart with the warder, who looked at Adelaide with surprise, and then turn¬ ing to the right, led them through a grated door, across a yard, into a more private area ; and afterwards up a stone staircase, in s tower belonging to the keep, or central building of the prison, and looking into the courts or wards be¬ low. The room, though small and with bare walls, was yet clean, and decently, indeed almost comfortably furnished, having a bed, a table, and a few chairs, with some other articles of convenience. But the massive thickness of the door, and the extreme height of the windows, with the heavy stanchions of iron fixed across, gave it, with the security, all the dreariness of a prison. This room, which was
PYRENEAN BANDÏTTF. was superior, in point of comfort, to» most in the building, had been procured for her, she was told, by the mtcrest of Monsieur Barreux, who had desired she might not be put with the rest of the criminals, and that her situation should be rendered as easy as circumstances would allow. Adelaide was highly sensible of this indulgence; and she pressed the hand of Monsieur Barreux presentedon parting* in token of the gratitude she felt for this kindness— ft I am not," said she mentally, " to accuse him as the cause of my mis¬ fortunes; he is performing only what his duty requires from him, both as a ci¬ tizen and a man. The guilty ought to undergo the punishment due to their crimes; but it is not for a daughter to arraign a father at the tribunal of justice- there
there is a moral obligation, even though there shall be no filial respect to strength¬ en the bonds of union, which cannot, without sin, be violated. I may suffer, but I will suffer unworthily, and endea¬ vour to endure wiih patience a destiny I cannot alter."
CHAP.
CHAP. VIII. When Monsieur Barreux had departed, and Adelaide was left alone in her pri¬ son, her feelmgs, notwithstanding all the efforts of her resolution, partook of the melancholy of her situation ; but, after some further trials of exertion, a philo¬ sophic calm took possession of her spirits, and she became thoughtful, but com¬ posed. It is the property of some minds, and perhnps, in some measure, natural to all, to yield to trifling e\ils, and rise superior to
to great calamities. Adelaide's was per¬ haps of this cast, or probably a long course of sufferings had rendered her less susceptible of their influence. By a habit of enduring misfortunes, she had learned to endure them patiently : she had been taught, however, to bear them without that impatience of distress in which some are too apt to indulge, and which serves only to render them more sensible of the miseries under which they labour. There is something flattering to our feelings as human beings, in the idea of being engaged ín the performance of some difficult duty, something, if we may be allowed the expression, that aggran¬ dizes the mind, calls forth its latent ener¬ gies, and makes us feel that we have powers of which we were not perhaps before fully sensible. It was her duty, she
she was persuaded, not to assist in crimi¬ nating her father, even though her own life should fall a sacrifice to her perseve¬ rance in this opinion: it might be said to be a duty difficult to perform, because she had no motive of affection and reve¬ rence to induce her to skreen him from punishment, at the expence of her our. character and life; but yet this difficulty w^s overcome, by the operation of a principle, with her very powerful—a high sense of moral rectitude and filial ' obligation, which, she felt, she ought not to violate : from this principle, and this only, she now resolved to act. It was impossible that for De Launé she Could entertain any feelings of respect or ten¬ derness ; for his conduct towards her had been marked with deeds of cruelty, even at the moment when he had affected to be
he-most kind, and to receive and think of her as a daughter; throughout the whole, it had been unnatural, unfeeling, or at least highly culpable. As a mem¬ ber of society, he was a being to be feared, abhorred, and avoided~-danger- ous in his habits, and hateful in his cha¬ racter-—" Who is there," said she, " that can, or ought to love De Launé? —But he is mv father:" and she was firm. The advocate recommended by Mon¬ sieur Barreux had sent word that he would call upon her on the following morning. Adelaide passed an easy, though, for the most part, a sleepless night: she prayed often, and fervently, that her father might repent of his law¬ less and guilty course of life ; " and then," said she, " ï shall never think I can have suffered too much for him." Tears
Tears would sometimes flow from her eyes, but it was when <Ы image of Mont¬ roi was presented to her fancy, who had left her so hastily, so unexpectedly, and %o abruptly, that she knew not whether she might hope he would ever think of her again—" Oh, would he grieve," said she, " was he to see me here ? Will he pity me, when he shall know I am a pri¬ soner ?"—To be pitied, to be loved, by one so highly revered, so tenderly be¬ loved, seemed, at this instant, a more than sufficient recompence for any suf¬ ferings she could undergo; for, to Ade¬ laide, Montroi seemed the best, the most perfect of human beings : and when she thought how she must have suffered in his opinion, from the mysterious secresy she had been obliged to observe relative to her family aad name, and it occurred to
to hej^ that this might probably be the reason of his 6 udd en and abrupt depar¬ ture, it was then that Adelaide was most wretched. To have lost the affections of the most esteemed and beloved of men, seemed the very acmé of misery : compared to this, the rack, the wheel, pain, agony, even the pangs of death, were but inferior calamities, unworthy of a sigh, a tear. "Vet Montroi did believe her guilty; and this suspicion would be corroborated and confirmed by the circumstance of her arrest, and detention in the public pri¬ son : her former reserve would now be rendered intelligible. He would con¬ demn her, for he must think her an ac¬ complice with those desperate criminals, of whose outrages be had himself been an
an eye-witness, and by which hé had^ in* deed nearly fallen. Agamst such strong presumptions of guilt, her own innocence could avaii no¬ thing ; and even should she be acquitted of the crime of which she stood charged, could he think of regarding with feelings of affection, or any feelings but those of a contemptuous pity, one who had been rendered, not indeed by her faults, but her misfortunes, an object of distressing and disgraceful publicity ? or, could he know every incident in her unhappv storv, would he ally himself with the daughter 0 f a robber and a murderer? It was fortunate perhaps for Adelaide, if any thing in her situation could be deemed deserving of the epithet, that she had never been deluded by her hopes into
into that fairy field of love and joy, to which the declared admiration of Mont¬ roi might have led her : she saw at once the utter impossibility of his marrying a woman so situated, and with a virtuous energy of which few minds are perhaps capable, resolved to combat those feel¬ ings of refined affection, which agonized, but could not sooth. She therefore shun¬ ned rather than sought his acquaintance; though his society, had it been less dan¬ gerous, would have been the sweetest solace she could have known. But it was not till he had left her, that she knew how dear Montroi was to her heart; and in proportion as he was be¬ loved, the idea of his being lost to her for ever became more and more into¬ lerable, and her feelings were more acute and agonizing. Could she have preser- vol. m. f \cd
ved his esteem, she believed, even now, she could be happy ; at least this dear, this exhilarating hope, would have added a portion of sweet to have assuaged the bitterness of her present cup of afflic¬ tion : but this, even this was denied ; and her condition became altogether wretched.
CHAP.
CHAP. IX. ín the course of the morning, at the hour appointed by Monsieur Barreux, Monsieur Monét, the advocate, arrived at the prison, and was shewn into the apartment of Adelaide. She was sitting pensively by the side of the bed, her hair dishevelled, and her cheek leaning upon her hand, in an attitude of deep reflec¬ tion, when the door of the prison was unlocked, and starting from her posture, she beheld the man of law, who having announced himself as the person sent f 2 thither
thither by Monsieur Barreux, bowed profoundly, and seemed to await her orders. Adelaide inquired if he had been in¬ formed of the reason of her arrest ? and being answered that he had, Monsieur Monéf, as if desirous to give Adelaide a specimen of his professional abilities, entered into a tedious harangue, inter¬ spersed with so many law terms and phrases, that it was with difficulty she could understand a single sentence that he said. Adelaide, more wearied than instructed, and certainly not comforted with this technical jargon, interrupted it, by simply stating the case, as to the manner of her having received the ring, now known to be the property of the Marquis de Ponteville ; persisting, how¬ ever, in her refusal not to mention the name
name and abode of the person by whom it had been given her. The advocate assured her, that unless such particulars were declared, she would be subjected to an indictment, as an ac¬ complice of the persons who had com¬ mitted the robbery ; and if she refused to confess all she knew, she must at least offer some reason, which might have weight and influence with the court; otherwise her allegation relative to the means by which she had obtained it, would be considered as an idle defence, and she would be judged and treated ac¬ cordingly—" You, I presume/' said he, " Madam, mean solemnly to declare, that you were not engaged, either di¬ rectly or indirectly, in the robbery ?" Adelaide answered she did. C( You have some strong reasons, I un- f 3 derstand,
derstand, Madam," resumed he, " for concealing the name and residence of the person from whom you received the ring,- and who, you do not deny, is one of the perpetrators ?" Adelaide replied, that the person who gave it her said he had taken it in pay¬ ment of a debt: it did not therefore, she observed, necessarily follow that this person was one of the robbers. " Not absolutely, Madam," said Mon¬ sieur Monét, " not absolutely; yet, con¬ sistent with your resolution of not giving up his name, a strong presumption—An extraordinary affair, a very extraordinary affair indeed ; I never, I think, met with one so peculiar in all my practice : a lady, too, of your appearance—The person, Madam, I presume then, is—has the hap¬ piness—in short, Madam, I suppose there is
îs some acquaintance, some attachment— very extraordinary else, very unaccount¬ able indeed; and unless you make the confession the court requires, it will be very difficult—I will fry what I can do, certainly try ; but it is a very great un¬ dertaking, Ma'am, a very great one. You mean to stick to this declaration about the debt and the ring indeed ; but this, I fear, will do little, very little, unless you can get somebody to speak for your character. Have you no friend, Ma'am, no evidence of any kind, to appear, and speak in your behalf?" " None that I know of, none, however, that can be of any use to me in this bu¬ siness/' said Adelaide; " none indeed that------" " Wonderful!-—Good God, Madam, there must be something surely very ex- p 4 traordinary
traordinary in your history !— No friends! I am sorry to say it, but, upon my word, Madam, your situation seems very hope¬ less. I'll try what I can do, as I said be¬ fore ; but really——" tc Heaven is my witness/' interrupted Adelaide, " I have done nothing which ought to have placed me in the predica¬ ment in which I now stand, a predica¬ ment which you. Sir, think, and I myself conceive, to be very awful. You know my resolution, it is unnecessary there¬ fore that I bhould repeat it : the law must have its course. I am well aware of the consequences which may ensue on my refusal to answer all the questions con¬ cerning the ring which will be put to me; I am therefore prepared to meet them. The world, Sir, of late, has offered to me little else thanadverse circumstan-
ces,
ces, and scenes of sorrow and persecu¬ tion ; and there are times when I think I could leave it, even without a sigh. My destiny is not, however, in my own hands; I await the decree of Him on whom I rely, the decree of a wise unerring Pro¬ vidence; I trust in him in life, I will con¬ fide in him in death. It is in his power, and perhaps in his only, though he may choose to accomplish his purposes by means seemingly accidental, to release me from my present most calamitous condition : he may please, on the con¬ trary, to take me hence, and make me everlastingly happy, in a state of eternal blessedness." ' ť You astonish me, Lady—such senti¬ ments; and yet-------" " The forlorn, despised inmate of a prison," said Adelaide. f 5 "You
" You deserve,, or I greatly mistake, a better fate.—She is, she must be inno- cer ' thought he ; " yet how very won¬ derful!" " I have now, Sir, I believe/* said Ade¬ laide, " mentioned all that can be neces¬ sary to my case: it is perhaps, as you say, most hopeless; I fear—I think it is.'* " Could 1 be acquainted with your reasons, Madam ; or would you but af¬ ford me some hint or clue, by which ï might understand, and which might serve——" * f Simply then, Sir, they are these/' said Adelaide : " 1 must not even run the risk of criminating the person by whom that ring was given me—it would be a sin, a sort of parricide, an act by which I should incur more positive guilt, than, were 1 utterly unconnected* in conceal¬ ing
ing the perpetrators of this daring out¬ rage." " Ah, that alters the case a little. A relation," said Monsieur Monét, * f or some near friend— a sort of parricide; not, I presume, exactly a father, but—-" " What I have said, Sir/' said Adelaide, " must suffice. You will plead what you can in my defence." " Certainly, certainly." She then inquired of Monsieur Monét whether he knew when the trial was to come on ?—He answered, that the advo¬ cate for the prosecution was already en¬ gaged, and he believed it would be brought forward early in the following week, but that her examinatTon would be taken in a few days, when he would not fail to attend. Adelaide again observing to the advo- F б cate
cate that she had nothing further to add, desired she might no longer detain him ; and Monsieur Monét, with a promise that he would exert all his power in her cause, arose, and bowing most profoundly, with¬ drew. Leaving Adelaide to prepare for her public examination, and the trial that was soon afterwards to ensue, we return to Montroi, whose object in thus hastily quitting the chateau, was to solicit the advice and assistance of Father Athanasa, a monk of exemplary character, and of a most amiable disposition (who had acted as chaplain to the regiment to which Montroi belonged, and was then in a monastery at Aix, in Provence), to whom he resolved to mention every cir¬ cumstance concerning Adelaide, and to bring him back with him to the chateau ; for
for such an entire confidence and affec¬ tion subsisted between Montroi and Fa¬ ther Athanasa, though the latter was more than twenty years older than him¬ self, that Montroi consulted him on all occasions; and from the friendly sympa¬ thy of the benevolent monk, he hoped to find a soothing consolation for the painful perplexities under which he now laboured. Adelaide, since the day he had first s^en her, had been making a constant progress in his affections; nor could *he very suspicious circumstances under which he had met with her, or the re¬ serve she maintained at his chateau, re¬ specting her real name and connexions, however perplexing, and calculated to fili the mind with uneasy doubts and sur¬ mises, check the progress of his love, or lessen
lessen the persuasion he entertained of her innocence and virtue. The declara¬ tions of Genifrede were, however, too forcible not to open the eyes, and pro¬ duce conviction even in a lover; and he owned with sorrow, that they annihilated his hopes, and overshadowed his future views with clouds of wretchedness and despair. To Father Athanasa he gave an undis¬ guised relation of all that had occurred since his acquaintance with Adelaide; and the good monk easily perceived that Montroi, even while he confessed she was unworthy of his love, felt the fondest affection for this unfortunate and mvste- rious girl, an affection which, as it had no longer esteem for its basis, he at once pitied and reproved. That universal be¬ nevolence for which he was distinguish¬ ed,
ed, rendered him nevertheless ready to engage in any plan which might pos¬ sibly be serviceable to an erring fellow- creature, perhaps, as he imagined, less guilty than unfortunate ; and he willingly agreed to accompany Montroi into Rous* sillon, to see and consult with him con¬ cerning the object of his seemingly ill- placed affection, in hopes, if not already penitent, he might reclaim her from the path of vice; and if sensible of her fol¬ lies, confirm and strengthen her in her purposes and habits of virtue. But the principal motive which determined him to accept the chevalier's urgent invita¬ tion to accompany him to the Chateau de Montroi, had its origin in the purest friendship : he dreaded the effects of this unhappy attachment upon the mind of his
his young friend, for whom he felt the affection of a father, and all those anxie¬ ties which belong to the paternal charac¬ ter; he knew the purify of his heart, but he knew also the power of temptation and the force of passion upon the con¬ duct of youth and inexperience. From the portrait Montroi had given of Ade¬ laide, she seemed to be possessed of every thing but that which İs most estimable in the female character; her beauty, her ac¬ complishments, the apparent sweetness of her disposition, even her modesty, if but assumed, seemed as so many lures held out for his destruction : he feared not only for the happiness, but the honour of his friend ; and resolved, by endea¬ vouring to render him sensible of the dangers to which so unfortunate an at¬ tachment
tachaient might expose him, to convince him of its impropriety, and persuade him to use his utmost erTorts to surmount it. Montroi had hoped that, before they should have reached the chateau, Geni- frede would have obtained some insight into Adelaide's history ; and the eager¬ ness with which he entered upon his in¬ quiries, on his return with Father Atha¬ nasa, shewed how much he hoped for the intelligence he thus anxiously solicited. But who may express his astonishment, his grief, and his despair, when told that Adelaide had been taken from the cha¬ teau under an arrest, and that she was now in the prison at Aries ! To his eagerly-vociferated interroga¬ tories, Geni frede could afford no answers at all satisfactory; she had sent Guil¬ laume, her grandson, bhe said, to Aries, to
to inquire after Ma'moiselle; and but that she was old and hobbling, she would have gone thither herself—" Alack, alack!" said Genifrede, weeping, " I have had nothing but troubles and mis¬ fortunes ever since your Honour left the chateau. There is my other grandson, poor Jacques, the Lord knows what has become of him : he went to see his sister in Gascony, and was to have been back a week ago, and he is not come yet : and so, what with one thing and what with another, I have well nigh gone beside myself." " But what said Guillaume about Ma- moisille D'Ainville ?" hastily interrupted Montroi. * f Why he said, your Honour, when be got to the prison, he asked to speak with the warder, who looked very surly at
at him, and would hardly give him an answer; but on his saying he must not go home till he knew what Ma'moiselle had done to be put into prison, he said she had committed a robbery, or was colleagued with those that had, which was the same thing; upon which Guil¬ laume said he stared with all his eyes, and said he would never believe it. * Won't you ?' said the warder—* But I reckon you'll be made to believe ir, or she will, which is as good ; for the trial is to come on to-morrow, and they say there's not a chance but she'll suffer." Montroi waited not to hear more— (c Let us go/* said he to Father Athanasa, ff let us fly. It is false— I'll gage my life upon it. A robbery ! —Fools ! villains !—· Can they look at her, and believe ------" t( Be calm, my son," said Father Atha¬ nasa,
nasa, " nor suffer your rage to transport you thus beyond the bounds of reason and discretion. Whither would you go?" " To Aries—to the prison ! Oh do not stay me !—This instant, yes, this instant, í will see her, í will know all, I will force her into explanations!" Saying this, he ran out, and mounting his horse, never thinking or asking whether Father Atha¬ nasa would follow hira, galloped off for Aries.
CHAP.
CHAP. Χ. Adelaide had undergone her first exami¬ nation, and the next day was fixed for the trial. Having been to!d she had but little to hope, she had desired to be attended by a confessor : her request was rcadPy granted. The holy priest had been with her at her devotions for near an hour, and was departing, when Montroi armed at the prison : she was kneeling at the side of the bed, with her hands clasped, and her eyes raised toward Heaven, with a look of earnest supplication and saint¬ like
like devotion, when he rushed into the room. She screamed—he caught her in his arms—she looked at him, almost doubting—Could it be Montroi, Mont¬ roi who, with all the fondness of affec¬ tion, clasped her to his throbbing, burst¬ ing heart, who wept over her, like a fa¬ ther over a fondly-beloved child, calling wildly upon her name, and entreating her to confide in him all her sorrows, all her m is fort unes, and above all, the cause of her present calamity ? From the warder he learnt the reason of her arrest ; and he hoped, by his inte¬ rest with the Marquis de Ponteville, who was then at Aries, to stop the proseai' tion. With this view, as there was no time to be lost, he flew from her cham¬ ber as precipitately as he had entered it, leaving Father Athanasa, who had just 5 arrived,
arrived, to console and question Ade¬ laide in his absence, and went in quest of the Marquis. He found him at an hotel in the next street, and immediately informed him of the reason of his haste and intrusion. From the Marquis he learnt further particulars of the case ; and he heard with agony the declaration of the Marquis, that he was determined to proceed with the prosecution ; nor would he assent to a proposal made by Montroi, that he would visit Adelaide in her prison; fearing, perhaps, lest the sight of so much beauty in distress, should shake the resolution he had made of bringing the offenders, whoever they might be, to justice. The trial, however, the Marquis observed, must necessarily be postponed a day later, a man, sup¬ posed to be one of the gang of the ban¬ ditti
ditti by whom they had been attacked and rohbed, having been seized and taken into custody, for having in his possession a horse belonging to the Mar¬ quis, which had been taken from his party by the banditti, at the time of the robbery, and had been claimed by one of his attendants, who had accidentally met him on his way through a part of Gascony. The man, he said, who had been in confinement about a week, was to have been at Aries that evening; but, owing to an unexpected delay, he could not be conveyed thither till a late hour on the following day. It was therefore judged proper, that the trial should be postponed till his arrival, when the pri¬ soners would be confronted together—a measure which, he observed, was the more necessary, as the woman had refused to impeach.
Impeach, or give any evidence about the matter, even though she had been told thať h<er silence would be interpreted into the strongest proofs ôf her guilt, and that she would be judged and con* demiied asan accomplice in the robbery. This extraordinary firmness on the part of Adelaide^ Montroi pleaded as an evi¬ dence of her innocence f which indeed the utter impossibility of her taking a part in an outrage such as this, rendered sufficiently clear. These, and other like arguments of Montroi, though followed by entreaties the most urgent, were not able to make any impression upon the Marquis, in the husiness upon which he had entered, and he determined that the prisoner should be tried ; when, if inno¬ cent, he said, she would be ncquitted ; if vol. m. g guilty,
guilty, she ought to suffer the f>enaky oF the law. The Marquis being thus inexorable, Montroi, almost distracted at the utter fail tue of his hopes, retraced, with me¬ lancholy pace, his way back to the pri¬ son, where he found Adelaide attentively listening to the discourse of Father Atha¬ nasa, whose eyes beamed pity upon the «hapless sufferer, while he inculcated the .duties of her present situation, formed upon the principles of bis holy religion; imd endeavoured so to fortify her mind, ihat «he might be enabled to bear with ^becoming ürmnesş, the trial she was shortly to undergo. The presence of Montroi, of Montroi whom she so dearly loved, and whose at¬ tentions to her in her present fallen state made
smäde him appear more amiable in her eyes than ever, imparted a gleam of joy almost amounting to rapture, to the sor¬ row-softened heart of Adelaide; nor were the emotions ôf Montroi, occasioned by the present circumstances, less agitating and affecting, when, gazing on her lovely form, he perceived the havoc which grief, and the exhausting efforts of resolution, had already made on it ; when he saw her pallid cheek, her sunken eye, so very, very different from what she was when rosy health, associating with innocence, or what then appeared such, and sup¬ posed serenity, gave more than human splendour to her beauty, and exhibited her to his enraptured fancy as something •truly angelic ; when he beheld her in her present languid state, although it render¬ ed her a thousand times more interesting r. '2 than
than before, his heart was unable to bear the pang that tortured it; the big tear glUtened in his eye, yet even this gave no relief, but left him in silent misery, to feci all the anguish of despair. Thus afflicted, he continued rivetted by his attention to the conversation of Father Athanasa, and the beautiful,- yet patient prisoner; nor did he or the fa¬ ther think of their departure, till the warder entered to inform them, that the doors of the prison were about to be shut for the night. They then, with many mournful adieus, took their leave, and retired to an hotel, where they passed the night, and where they resobed to continue till after the trial, and till Ade¬ laide's fate should be determined. The distressing state of Montroľs mind during this momentous period, can only be
be imagined by those who ha\e experi¬ enced similar distresses. Not satisfied with the advocate recommended by Mon¬ sieur Barreux, he engaged an eminent pleader to takí the lead in the defence; but this advocate did not afford him much. food for hope, white Adelaide continued steady in her resolve of withholding the necessary information ; and he passed the night in the most gloamy apprehen* sion, and in the morning arose from his bed, without having once dosed his eye» in sleep»
G 3
CHAP,
^«¡■«■»Д ЦИИ МИ«!— »»j
CHAP. XL The day appointed for the trial at length arrived ; and Adelaide, attended by the tarder of the prisoa. and & few officers with staves^ was conducted from the pri¬ son through the streets, to the hall of justice. The feeble frame of Adelaide, so long harassed by grief and anxiety,. almost sunk under the agitation of her feelings, when, placed at the bar, she saw herself standing, a conspicuous object, in front of the grave and venerable judges of the parliament of the district, and
and surrounded by a large concourse of spectators assembled to witness the trials and'who seemed to regard her with looks* of particular interest; The trial now commenced; after the? usual formalities г and the Marcruis earner- forward to afford his evidence- on the* case. He deposed thar, in crossing the- pass of St. Andero^ in the mountains, ac¬ companied by a party of about fifteen friends and attendants, he was attacked by a gang of banditti, whose number he.* «ould not ascertain ; that two persons,. his servants, were slain in the conflict, and several, together with himself, wound¬ ed ; that, unable longer to withstand the attack» they had fied, leaving their bag¬ gage to be plundered ; that many ar¬ ticles of value were taken from him, and amongst others, a diamond ring, which« с 4 had
had long been the property of his ftimily ; that this Eing had been traced to the pri¬ soner ; but farther he could not speak. Monsieur Barreux deposed, that the ring was offered to him for sale, by & person who affirmed that it was the pro.*· perty of a lady, calling herself MademoU selle D'Ainville ; that he knew it to have been the property of the Marquis de Pon¬ teville, for that it had been entrusted tc+ his care fot the purpose of some alterai tion, and that he suspected it was the one which had heen taken from the Marquis by the banditti of the mountains; he therefore detained it under a pretence : and bis opinion respecting the ring be¬ ing abundantly confirmed by the Mar* quis, he proceeded to the place of the abode of Mademoiselle D'Ainville, and assisted in apprehending her person. This
This part of the evidence being closed, the advocate for the prosecution arose to observe, that the prisoner musí neces¬ sarily be guilty ; for unless she could prove that she had obtained honestly what had been dishonestly taken from* the noble Marquis, she must be presumed^ t© have obtained the articles dishonestly^, in which Gase it was evident she stood im lhe situation of an accomplice, and was- guilty of the crime by implication : and although it might not he just to condemn^ her, upon such implication, to the hea¬ viest punishment; as though she were at principal, yet the prisoner ought not ton be discharged as ianacent, when it was evident she was guilty to* a certain ex* tent, by withholding such eom-m unica- tion : thnt the perverse silence of the- prisoner in this respect, was an offence. & u u í
of the highest degree, not only as it ob¬ structed· the proper cQurseof justice,but as it could not be owing to any worthy* motive ; since no private obligation, at¬ tachment, or tie of blood, could justify the aiding, abetting, or concealing a crime like the outrage committed upon the per¬ son and followers of the honourable Mar¬ quis, which being perpetrated by abody of men in arms, was of a deeper dye thstn robberies committed by one or two per*» sons only, and amounted, ia effect, to- the crime of léze majesti. On these grounds it was to be maintained, that the offence of the prisoner was such as justly subjected her to the question; and that the force of torture ought to be ap¬ plied, to draw from her such a confession or declaration as might promote *he peace »Bd security of the subject, by enabling. justice
justice to discover, overtake, and punish* offenders, so atrocious as to dare to asso¬ ciate in bands against the public peace, , and to raise the weapoa of death against ι the life and honour of a person who oc¬ cupied a rank and station but little infe» rior to that of the monarch himself. That these observations were síricŕly. agreeable to the established, law of the land, he knew the august court would not gainsay ; he therefore left the cause for which hs pleadec! to the judgment of tbe coin*,, humbly praying that justice nwght .be.done, as he had said, upon ther person, of the prisonen. During the delivery of this speech by the advocate for the prosecution, the at¬ tention, of a very crowded court was al¬ ternately directed to the animated speaker aad the beautiful prisoner, against whom g б these
these observations were directed ; some of them had indeed excited considerable emotion in her feeling mind. The argu¬ ments respecting the principle of duty by which she was actuated, in her refusal to make any.confession respecting the person from whom she had obtained the ring, were heard with astonishment, since she had never doubted the solidity and truth of the principle upon which she· acted; and her habit of considering it a duty on the part of a child to support the ißteresls of the parent, ia all circum¬ stances and о п. all occasions, led her to consider the whole of this speech as an artful piece of chicanery, intended to shut from her the mercy of the eoort, or to draw from her those declarations she had resolved not to. make : her looks of surprise, therefore, soon subsided into a steady
^ steady indifference to thesef arguments, which the mention of the torture scarcely altered ; for she expected, and was pre¬ pared to endure that punishment. Yet when, in energetic language, the advo¬ cate prayed, at the conclusion of his speech, for punishment to be inflicted upon her as a cui prit, she considered herself as already under sentence of con¬ demnation, though innocent of the in¬ tention of any crime : she was affected, but not moved; and only cast her eyes for a moment up to Hearven, as if in re¬ signation to her fate, and looking there for that comfort and support, whicb, guileless a^ she wæs, she no longer ex¬ pected fcQrø her fellövi man, whom now she considered as deluded into hostility against her, and as regarding hér, with¬ out exception, as infamous, and a felon. The
The speech of the advocate had ρτσ- dnccd a very considerable effect upon the mind« of alt present»; and it was fol¬ lowed by a pause of some moments, during wbich the eyes of all were fixed intently upon the person of our heroine. They had been taught to consider her as gnilty, though they yet-kn^v« not to what extent; but the thoughts of censure were* in an instant, changed to pity and to tears, when they beheld her beauty, clothed ia. a dignified simplicity and elegance. At length the clerk of the court, on arr » intimation from the president, proceeding to the discharge of his office, loudly cried , —" You, Adelaide D'Ainville, have heard . the charges alledged against you, and also> the evidence by which they are support¬ ed ; what have you to plead why sentence should not be pronounced upon you V* These
» These words seemed to sound like thunder in the ear of the unfortu»afe arraigned : she heard them» with an in¬ ward shudder,.but was firm ; and bowing with modest timidity, replied, that she begged the iivour of the courts and left her defence to her advocate. The clerk the» cried—" Let the de¬ fence of the prisoner proceed ; and first let the evidence in her favour be heard/* At these words the Chevalier de Most¬ rei came forward, and having been sworn ©n the holy evangelists, proceeded to de¬ clare, that, on his unexpected arrivar, a few weeks since, at the Chateau de Mont¬ roi, he had found Mademoiselle D'Ain·* ville an inmate with the aged house¬ keeper left there by his^ predecessore ta take care of the mansion : that he learned from that faithful domestic, that Made·?, moiselle
moiselle D'Ainville had been broughť thither only a few days before, by the grandson· of his old servant, who had acted toward the young lady, the pri¬ soner, as' vakt: that he himself had held* but little conversation with her, she al¬ ways acting towards him with, the great¬ est reserve, but yet conducting herself with the utmost delicacy and propriety, which produced in his mind the highest opinion of her virtue, and rendered it impøssibie for him to doubt her honour and integrity* The chevalier having concluded his evidence, the advocate for the prisoner arose, and looking first at Adelaide, and then bowing fo the president and seated judges, thus began:—" Most honourable Seigneur the Prebidenr, and you right honourable Seigneurs the Fellow Judges, * in
tn this ancient md high court, í úm to plead the cause of one who stands here charged with the erime o,f lém majesté, and u^pcuj wtom my ЬгодЬег advocate ha^ juM- now flayed, that judgrøciat may be done г yes, judgment may be done.. But, with submission to this high and ve¬ nerable court* I ask, judgment for what? 1 and on whom ?—It appears cleariy from the undisputed evidence of the noble Marquis, that a certain ring, I will allow- of value, hvd been taken from bispersan· hy а party af outlaw», who infèst the; passes of the* maun tains* ãnè had at¬ tacked the Marquis, and his followers i& the vicinity of their wonted haîıuTs: it appears also, from the testimony of Moubieur Barreux, a jeweller of known ay d acknowledged respectability, that this ring was offeced to him. for sale, by a persoa
st person confessedly sent by this lady, the prisoner; for it was sent without any attempt at secresy, and the lady herself does not even wish to* deny it—all· i& open, fair, and candid, and bearc the stamp of honesty and integrity. Had the case been otherwise, the ring would have been sent under some colour of se-« cresy, some pretence would, have been. made when it was oíľered for sale, some· evasion, to the inquiries likely to be made by the merchant, would have been planned, and the name of the seller ands the place of her abode, and that' a near- place, would nc6\er. have been given: indeed, had the ring been- dishonestly obtained, it would nothave been offered for sale in a provincial town, as Aries is~ and to an honest trader, but would have been.seat to.same af those marts of vil* Ia ny.
la-ny with which Paris abounds ; or might have been hurried beyond the limits of the kingdom to some foreign city, where detection would be impossible, and ou» laws do not reach. Or again, had cir¬ cumstances rendered this impossible, or inconvenient to the lady who sent the ring to Monsieur Barreux, yet, had she felt any, even the slightest guilt, attach¬ ing itself to the possession of the ring* neither herself, or the person (her valet) who offered it for purchase, would have left it in the hands of a man of Monsieur Barreux's extensive acquaintance with articles of such value, subjecting them?- selves to an almost certain discovery;. assuredly not: they would either have* parted with it.at any price, to be paid in ready money, or they would have sold it to some petty dealer, some itinerant. chapman,
chapman^ who coutd neither trace them, or be traced, perhaps, himself. And what conclusion are we to make from these obvious undeniable circumstances? Why certainly, that the lady for whom í plead h innocent, and ought to be acquitted; yes, with all due deference to the ho¬ nourable judges here assembled, I say she ought to be discharged, without pain or penalty. Observe her, and consider whom it is you would condemn as a rob¬ ber and a« assassin ; behold her, mark her well, and see if there be any trait of villany or depravity in that fair and graceful form; observe her intelligent, hei* sweet and animated face—»She holds d^wn her head ; her modesty will not S&fifer her beauty to plead for her deli¬ verance. Ы this the part of one cor¬ rupted with vice, a profligate, a robber ŕ 4 - She
She seems willing to die, rather than do any thing inconsistent with the modesty of her sex, or else she would display, to obtain the compassion of the court, eyes beaming with all the lustre of life, joy, ancl benevolence; lips fair, and softly fitted to speak words of kindness and love; features from which an Apelles might gladly study how to draw the li¬ neaments of an Helen ; a complexion which might make Hebe herself blush for envy, while she administers the cup of nectar to celestial Jove. " But my respect for the court bids me restrain a zeal which, old as I am, and !on# unused, as 1 have been, to con¬ template beauly with rapture, animates me on the present occasion ; and while í crave indulgence, I am sure it will be granted m φ for 1 am persuaded that there is
ıs not one in this crowded court, wh© does not sympathize in the sufferings of this interesting unknown : and yet thk is her whom you say is an accomplice with the banditti who assaulted the Mar¬ quis and his train of followers at the pass of Mount St. Andero; and public safety requires that a lady (blush, ye men of gallantry, while I go on), a lady, young, beautiful, and virtuous, should be torn by the rack, buried in a dungeon, or broke upon the wheel; and for what?— She has had a ring, you say, in her pos¬ session, which once belonged to the Mar¬ quis, or rather, she does not choose to declare how she obtained it; although it is evident she never could suspect, for a moment, that it was wrongly procured. The great Judge above alone can see our hearts; and ï am persuade*! that some great
^reat judge sees now that she withholds the declaration, which, T am sure, might in an instant effect her discharge, from some honourable motive; yes, the vene¬ rable judges will see that her silence can¬ not proceed from personal gnik, but from personal virtue ; and with this per¬ suasion upon the public mind (for I can¬ not doubt but that it is impressed deeply and strongly upon all present), I con¬ clude my pleadings in the cause of one whose innocence can scarce, I think, have needed it ; and -with full confidence in the integrity of the fair prisoner, leave her cause to the wisdom of the court, humbly mo\ing that she be immediately •ordered to be discharged." As the advocate concluded his ha¬ rangue, a buzz of approbatirn sounded /rom every part of the court, and *dl confidently
confidently expected the acquittal of th$ prisoner. The pleadings ended, the judges con¬ sulted together respecting the sentence: to the surprise of all present, they conti¬ nued long in deliberation, which augured no good to the unfortunate Adelaide. At length the president thus addressed her— " Prisoner, were the court to re¬ gard your appearanre, or the general circumstances in which you stand, ther would instantly give orders for your dis¬ charge,· for they are inclined to believe thnt, however von mav have obtained the rins:, vou could not have been ac- tively instrumen t al in the robbery and assault of the Marquis de Ponteville, nor criminal in the means by which you ob¬ tained it. They therefore are persuaded that vou can, and the-laws of the coun* Ò trv
try say you ought to explain how it came into your hands, so that the offend¬ ers may be traced, and brought to con¬ dign punishment., Are you willing to make the confession the court requires ? This done, you have your discharge. An interval of three hours is graciously al¬ lowed you, to determine upon your re¬ ply ; when, if your answer be not such as the law requires, the sentence of the judges will be passed upon you : this is, thrice to undergo the severities of the question within ten daysj after which, should you persevere in your resolution of skreening the offenders from the just judgment of the law, you are to undergo a solitary imprisonment of seven years, in one of the castles on the shores of the Mediterranean Sea. Your answer is ex¬ pected.'* vol. ni. и Monsieur
Monsieur Monet, now leaning towards the resigned, yet firm Adelaide, pressed her to fhe declaration ; Monsieur Bar¬ reux also came, and with friendly solici¬ tude urged her to compliance ; a message rrom the Marquis was to the same effect; for all were persuaded of her innocence: but Adelaide, more than ever convinced that, if she confessed from whose hands she had obtaîöed the ring, she should convict and condemn De Launé, did not falter in her purpose, resolving rather to sacrifice her own life than endanger that of her father. At the idea of the dread¬ ful suffering that was preparing for her, she shuddered, but endeavoured to as¬ sume fortitude fo meet her approaching fate with resolution and firmness. But when, casting her eyes to the opposite side of the court, she perceived Montroi leaning
leaning for support on the arm of Father Athanasa, pale and agitated, and saw him gazing upon her with looks of indescrib¬ able agony, the anguish occasioned by the view of his sufferings pierced her to the soul ; and no longer able to struggle with the tumult of emotions that now rushed upon her heart, she heaved a deep sigh, and fainted.. When the confusion occasioned by thjs circumstance had subsided, the court ne^t proceeded to the trial of another prisoner, who was put to the bar, and arraigned by the name of Jacques du Bois, ivho had been apprehended about a week before, on his return from Gascony, and had been brought, the preceding evening, to the prison at Aries, under a charge of having stolen the borse he rode on, which had belonged to one of the attendants of и '2 the
the Marquis, who was slain in the ren¬ counter with the banditti. In this person the reader will, of course, recognize the identical Jacques, to whom Adelaide owed her preservation and escape from the house of Madame St. Clair, and her reception in the Chateau de Montroi. A similar misfortune, arising from the same cause, had involved them both ; but Jacques had the advantage of being known in the neighbourhood, and in the few hours he had been at Aries, he had gained several persons of respectability to appear and bear testimony to his for¬ mer character and good behaviour. On seeing him, a flush of surprise passed over the cheek of Adelaide, as she was seated in the prisoners* box ; but it in¬ stantly yielded to the paleness of fear, when, on entering upon his deposition, she
she found il would necessarily involve her father. It is needless to recapitulate the forms of the trial, which were the same as those just described; suffice it to observe, that Jacques, who had felt no small degree of terroron being apprehended and brought before a court of justice, though to an¬ swer to a charge of which he was con¬ fessedly innocent, felt his courage revive on seeing Adelaide, whom he viewed with looks of joy and astonishment. On being asked whether he had ever before seen the prisoner? he answered that he had, having known her several weeks. He then proceed 2d to give an account of the manner in wbich she had been brought to the house of his late mistress, Madame St. Clair, by a person of the name of Perouse ; of the arrival и 3 of
of De Launé, Adelaide*« father; and re¬ lated the substance of the conversation Ke had overheard between him, Perouse, and Madame St, Clair; by which it ap* peared they were connected with a party ef banditti ; and that Madame St. Clair was an auxiliary in a scheme, which was to force Adelaide, contrary to her incli¬ nations, te> marry the man called Pe¬ rouse ; to escape which marriage, she, on the discovery of their measures, and the characters of fhe persons in whose power she was placed, determined to quit Madame St Clair's house ; and had persuaded him (Jacques) to accompany her. in pursuance of this plan, as their object was to escape secretly and with¬ out delay, they had been obliged to take a horse out of Madame St. Clair's stable, brought thither either by Perouse or De Launé,
Laune, which, except a ring given by De Laune to his daughter, the same whjch he had lately offered to sale at the shop of ţiotwţur Barreu,*, was all the, property they had between them. Of Perouse and De Laune' he could give no account, except that they were occasionally at Madame St. Clair's house, which was at tbe village of Auboigne, in Gaşcony. The junior partner of Monsieur Bar- re u x, the регяоп to whom Jacques, hatţ offered the ring, was then called to give evidence, and he deposed, that Jacques was the person from whom he had re¬ ceived it. The punishment of Adelaide, who was now publicly acquitted, if the testimony of Jacques should prove true, was imme¬ diately suspended ; and though she wa» discovered to be the daughter of one of h 4 the
fhe gang, yet she was only remanded to prison as before; and, together with Jacques, was to remain in custody till Madame St. Clair should be apprehended, and other measures taken to ascertain the truth of his testimony, of whiclv there was little doubt, for the Chevalier Mont¬ roi had confirmed it in many particulars. Adelaide was t© remain in the town of Arle*, but with liberty togo abroad, un¬ der certain restrictions, attended by a guard; and was to be considered as » prisoner at large.
CHAP,
CHAP. Xli. J Montroi, who had awaited, in terrified expectation, the event of the trial, was overwhelmed with joy, when he found Adelaide was acquitted of the charge which had been brought against her. Qf her innocence he had ever been per¬ suaded ; nor could the circumstance of her being proved to be the daughter of a robber, alienate her from his affections; for it convinced him she possessed a sense of filial obligation, which, though exer¬ cised, in ihe late instance., on an erroné-* u ă ous
ous principle, was yet utterly inconsis¬ tent with any moral depravity ; and when he found she would have sacrificed her own innocent life rather than endanger that of her father, even though she had been obliged tojly from him, to escape the prosecution of the treacherous and hateful scheme which had been devised for her destruction, she seemed to him more than woman. All that had appear¬ ed mysterious in her conduct, was now fully explained ; though, that she could really be the daughter of such a father, and yet have imbibed principles so noble and truly honourable, seemed so extra¬ ordinary as to mock all belief; and he would often exclaim—" It is impossible the can be the daughter of that De launé!' 4 On the day after the trial, Adelaide was
was removed from the prison to an hotei in the suburbs, where neat and handsome apartments were provided f° r ber. Ge- nifrede, by Montroi's orders,, was sept for to attend upon her. ín the nieantirsie, Adelaide was impa¬ tient for intelligence from Jacques; and she resolved, as soon as Genifrede should arrive, to send her to такс inquiries concerning the success of his late jour¬ ney, in hopes of hearing something of the Countess, who, site thought, if yet living, would certainly write to her. Montroi, who was npw almost conti¬ nually in, the society of his Adelaide, ap¬ peared more tender ţ^nd affectionate thar* ever, 'Bßt, though a faint ray of hepe seemed npw to beam upon Iter prospects, yet the situation of her father ulied her with the most anxioiţş fears for. his safety; в <> and
and she reflected with tears upon her hard condition in being thus unhappily allied» and the sorrow to which this alliance might one day expose her. One evening, while she was sitting in conversation with Montroi and Father Athanasa, a carriage stopped at the hotel: as she looked from the window, she saw a lady in deep mourning, and covered with a black veil, which entirely con¬ cealed her features, enter the court. In a few moments, the door of her apart¬ ment was thrown open, and a female, the same which had just alighted from the carriage, rushed into the room, and Ín as instant was in her arms. The tide of joy which rushed irresist¬ ibly through the heart of Adelaide, al¬ most deprived her of sense, when she heard the well-known voice of the Coun¬ tess
tess St. Angouleme, and, her veil thrown back, beheld that countenance, lovely, though pale with suffering, which she had so often contemplated with delight and affection truly filial. But the feel¬ ings of transport which burst forth at this, unexpected and happy incident of her arrival, soon yielded to sensations of wonder-struck astonishment, when the Countess, turning from her embrace, ut¬ tered a loud shriek, and fainted in the arms of Montroi, who caught her ere she fell, exclaiming—' r Great Heaver»! can it be possible ? Do I indeed behold her ^whom I have so long mourned as lost to me for ever ? My friend Ì my more than parent !" "Theodore! Theodore!" repeated the "Countess. She could add no more—the sudden emotion of joy tiiat darted through her
her frante, was too exquisite for feeble nature to support. She reiterated his name, but it vas faintly; snatched ano¬ ther hasty gaze,,as if doubting the reality of whatshe saw; and then sinking again into his arms, rested her head upon his shoulder, and sobbed and wept in ecstacy. The name of Theodore, thus uttered by the Countess, explained what would otherwise have appeared strangely mys¬ terious both to Adelaide and Father Athar nasa. The latter had been acquainted with Theodore St. Leon before he took the name of Montroi ; but he had never seen the Countess St. Angouleme, though .he had frequently heard Theodore $peak of her; and having heard she was 1пщт> and constilo tly e'onfme^ fo>an apartment in the Castle, where she saw no one bat her tøeper* M hâd тчвъШ äqw, e<#nr- ] i 6 red
Ved to him, that the stranger could be the amiable and long-lamented aunt of his beloved friend. But to Adelaide, who had believed that Theodore had· died abroad (for so art¬ fully and so successfully had the Count spread the report of his death, in order to obtain the residue of his wife*s pro* perty, that no suspicion was entertained as to the truth of it), what she saw and heard appeared most wonderful. But every thought and every feeling was ar* rested and suspended in her care and anxiety for the Countess, whom this sud¬ den emotion of joy had so completely overpowered, that, when she spoke, it was only in half-formed words, which aeemed rather like the utterings of an¬ guish, than the expressions of delight and rapture. . , By
By degrees, however, the violence of these emotions subsided, and she enjoyed a cool, yet lively perception of her hap¬ piness. Theodore was alive, and all she had felt and suffered for his sake was effectually done away, by the discovery that he had survived the accidents to which, it had been reported, he had fallen a saciifice. But she had still to learn that he was no longer the indigent youth, with no other dependance but his sword, as when he left her, but the pos^ sessor of a noble fortune ; what she had once suggested as possible, had really happened ; and if any thing could have increased the happiness she felt on see¬ ing the adopted child of her affections restored to her, as from the grave, it would have been the intelligence ob¬ tained from Father Athanasa, of this unexpected
unexpected change of fortune in his favour, How the Countess came to be unac¬ quainted with the death of the late heir, to whom she was herself distantly re¬ lated, may seem somewhat extraordinary ; this, however, wiU be accounted for, when we proceed* to give a ireîatiori of such events as' occurred at the Castle de Sţ. Angoulekne* ftftcr-the departure of Ade¬ laide. When the necessary explanations were over, and the Countess's spirits somewhat tranquillized, she arose, and taking Ade¬ laide's hand, said—" Let me not, in the joy I now feel, forget the important commission on which ï came. You will guess, by my appearance, that I am now a widow : Count St. Angouleme, my un¬ happy
happy Lord, expired about a week since. The circumstances of his death are ex¬ tremely melancholy—1 shall not describe them at present. Conscious;, my dearest Adelaide, that he had deeply injured you, he desired rae to solicit your pardon, ancl also to request your prayers for the re¬ pose of his soul, that soul which, as it quitted its earthly habitation, .sent you," delivering to her bands-a writings " thi& his dying bequest." Adelaide opened the writing, which was folded up> and sealed: she readj started, and turned pale—it was a formal renunciation of all right and claim to the estates and otherproperty of bigi deceased brother, the late Julien St. Aiigouléme, in favour of Adelaide St. Angoutéme, Ы$ daughter and only heir; and contained a document
document of her birth, sufficient to rein- state her in her possessions without the interference of the parliament. The surprise and joy of thi« discovery deprived her, forsorne moments, of ihei power of utterance ; at length she ex* claimed— " I thank thee, Heaven, for. having relieved me from so grievous a burden of obligation, by informing me (Oh most happy intelligence!) that I am not the daughter of a robber and a murderer : and thanks be to thee also, oh most gracious Power ! for having given me him for a father, whom I always re¬ vered as a father.' Oh this, this is indeed happiness ! and, but for my unfortunate uncle, whose death presents a subject for melancholy regret, i should say I had not a wish ungratified." " The remorse he expressed, and the truly
truly penitential tears he shed in the pre¬ sence of his confessor, who administered to him the last holy oiHccs/' said the Countess, " will, î hope, with the prayers and masses which 1 have ordered to be performed weekly for the repose of his departed soul, be accepted as an atone¬ ment for hh past faults." '* 1 hope—I trust they will," said Ade¬ laide, as she gave a sigh to the memory ©f her unworthy relative. Theodore, although previously pre¬ possessed with the idea that Adelaide was not the daughter of De Launé, was ne¬ vertheless overcome with amazement, when informed she was the niece of Count St. Angouleme. The Countess then related the most important events which had taken place at the Castle since the departure and supposed
supposed death of Theodore. Pity, how¬ ever, if not respect, for the memory of her late Lord, induced her to suppress some particulars which might have been introduced, and to touch upon others so lightly, that her narrative was, in many parts, imperfect. The real occurrences were more accurately as follow.
CHAP.
CHAP. XIII. When Adelaide, by the will of her father, was committed to the joint guardianship of the Count and Countess, extravagance, and an indulgence of the pernicious pas¬ sion of gaming, had rendered the Count's situation and his future prospects alarm¬ ing, even to himself, thoughtless as he was of those expences into which his li¬ bertine inclinations constantly led him, and the consequences which must inevi¬ tably ensue. He had, by a daring act of falsehood, imposed upon the Countess*, and
and gained from her that portion of hec fortune which she had reserved for her nephew ; but this acquisition, instead of satisfying'the craving passion it was in¬ tended to gratify, served only to lead him into deeper schemes of desperate and wicked policy; and the success which attended his first enterprizes, lured him to attempt the commission of another, if possible more atrocious than that he had already practised. The guardianship of his niece, a minor, with which he was in¬ vested by the will of the chevalier, offered another immediate supply of wealth, of which he availed himself to the utmost of his power. But even this supply, though ample, was insufficient for the gratifica¬ tion of his increasing avarice, and pas¬ sion for expence : it was not till he vi¬ sited
sited Avignon, iu order to arrange the affairs o* tl·? Chevalier Julien St. An¬ gouleme, that he formed the daring de¬ sign of seizing for his own use the estates of his deceased brother; and perhaps he would not have had courage to have un¬ dertaken an act so replete with difficulty and danger, had not accident thrown in his way a person fitted, as it should seem, by Nature, for deeds of villany and op¬ pression : this person was De Launé : the Count had met him accidentally in the streets of Avignon. On looking at him somewhat particularly, he perceived his features were not unknown to him ; and at length recognized him as a man who, some years before, had been a servant in his establishment at the Castle ; but had absconded from his service, and had car¬ ried
ï*ied offa considerable quantity of plate, and several jewels of considerable value, the property ol the Count. The fellow appeared confused at the sight of the Count, and endeavoured to fetire from observation. The Count, percei ing his embarrassment, passed on, without seeming much to regard him : he, however, made inquiries concerning the man, and learnt that he had resided at Avignon some years, and had married, for his second wife, a young woman, ■once a servant in the family of the Che¬ 's alier St. Angouleme, to whom Made¬ moiselle Adelaide had been sent to nurse, almorí immediately after her birth. The woman had died but a short time before the Count met De Launé, without leav¬ ing him any children, she never having vol. ui. ι had
had more than one child, a daughter,, "born ai the same time nearly as Adelaide, but which died soon after the Chevalier .St. Angouleme had placed his infant un¬ der her care. The Count ruminated upon this intel¬ ligence, and devised at length a scheme, from the very thought of which a mind .endowed with the smallest sense of rec¬ titude would have shrunk with abhor¬ rence and self-reproach ; he resolved to have it proved, that the daughter of the Chevalier, and not that of the nurse, had died; and that she had imposed upon the family of St. Angouleme her own .daughter, as the real heiress ofthat house. ^—The £3sisrance of De Launé was indis¬ pensable to this plan ; but of this assist¬ ance he entertained no doubt, for the mau
man was already in his power; and it was easy, by bribes and threats, to bend him to his purpose. lie succeeded but too well in the scheme he had formed, which was art¬ fully carried into execution. At first it wae thrown into circulation, that the present wife of De Launé (for he had been three times married) had, in a quar- iľ*l with her husband, charged him with such an imposition. This the Count pretended to notice with anger, and a •determination to resent the falsehood, and vindicate the birth of his niece; but his noisy measures were stopped, by the discovery of what was merely a forged confession of his former wife, said to be her dying ''^claration, made in the pre¬ sence of a neighbour, who was also since ι '2 dead,
dead, and committed by herself to writ« ing, in the last sîage of a lingering illness. De Laune affected a wish to conceal this instrument, which the Count com¬ pelled him to produce; and at last, with much difficultv, as was pretended, the man owned the circumstance, which, though uncommon, was not altogether unprecedented ; and the tattling gossips of the city, more eager for the marvel¬ lous than the acquisition of truth, anxi¬ ous to tell the story in the most wonder¬ ful way, represented the circumstance of Adelaide's being changed at nurse as a Tact ; and in a short time, nobody seemed to doubt but she was a changeling, and •certainly the daughter of De Laune. — What perhaps promoted the almost ge¬ neral delusion was, that Adelaide had been
leen educated in a convent at Marseilles* and, owing to the retirement in which the Chevjlicr lived after the death uf his liady, had been but \itt\e seen and known. in the neighbourhood of her late resi¬ dence. Bv these means, the villany of the Count and the roguery of De Launá succeeded with the public; and the Countess with sorrow, and poor Adelaide/ with resignation, submitted to the gene¬ ral opinion, neither of them having any suspicion of tho fraud. Adelaide, being thus lowered from the* rank of nobility to the condition of a. domestic, would have been allowed to* remain with the Countess (for the Caunfe had not the least fear or apprehension, that the forgery would be detected, an& brought to light), and, as such, £>he was. detained« till the Catuţt wa> inform ed by i3 De
De Laune, that a woman, who had lived servant in the family of the Chevalier at the time of Adelaide's birth, had de¬ clared that she should know the real « hììd of St. Angouleme, by a particular mark on her left arm. This assertion, the Count was told, had been made so publicly, as to endanger the success of his scheme, and threatened to involve him, in the issue, in disgrace, and even punishment. The Count was alarmed at this intelli¬ gence, and much embarrassed, for he knew not how to avert the consequences^ in his fright, he condescended to r,sk De Launé what could be done ? for his situ¬ ation seemed now highly perplexing, and full оГ danger. De Launé, after much apparent deliberation, observed, that it was new toe late to recede ; and that
Ша1 there was but one way in which he could escape the consequences which, on the discovery of the cheat, would certainly ensue. The Count desired him* to explain himself. DeLauné hesitated, and was for some time silent; but at' length, on the repeated inquiries of the Count what he meant? and how the- dreaded evil might be avoided ? he said it would be better, as they had proceeded' so far, to go through with the business; and as things had since fallen out, the ' safest way was to do something with the girl, to prevent her from being trouble¬ some in future. The Count looked earnestly in De Launé 's face, as if doubtful whether he understood his meaning—" I see the ne¬ cessity," said he, at length, " and would > 1 4 dispose
dispose of her, if I could; but I know not how." <c There are sure and easy ways," said De Lanne. * f Ah! what are they?" cried the Count. ,r She would die some time," said De Laune. The Count staged-—" To what/' şaj4 he, " would уоц urge me ?" " Xou are aj^rmed at my measures, f, see," ççiç4 Be Launé —" tţiey are des^· perata, ^ut I see no other* way b,y w^iťhj уоц сад escape the disgrace that щ\\ at¬ tach to you, when------" " I see it-all," said $щ Cou^t, " I see it all very plakly-r-it was ^ rash, impru¬ dent act : would to Heaves I had not entered upp» it so hastily !—But is thei^e no
no way to silence this woman ?—A mark on the left arm, say you ?" cf She is said to havo declared so, my Lord," cried De Laune. ' f Cannot we bribe her to our inte*- rests?" " The attempt w t qu1& be hazardous,, шу Lord ; shje is attached, they say f , ta>> the family, and eager to assist the claims- ©f ihe young heiress. She says, too, shee has other proofs." " She must die some time, as you ob*~ serve," said the Count. " These mountains are the haunts of banditti," cried De Laune. " I understand you/' said the Count tremulously^·" You are willing then—" ff Not I, my Lord ; hut ------" " 1 would not employ authird persoa io« a.bubiness of this kind/' said liie Count. ι Ò " \ л
u You may do it safely, my Lord.'* "How safely?" €{ Robberies and murders are not \\n~ frequent among these mountains," said De £auné — (i I know a man—When she is rambling abroad------ "" " I will trust no one but yourself/' cried the Count— u Will you undertake the business? If so, name your terms.*' De Launé hesitated—" My Lord/' said he, at length, " I am bound to serve you; but—-" " What farther have you to say?" cried the Count—-" Robberies and murders, as you observe, are not unfrequerrt amongst these mountains ; yet/' said 'the- Count, t( î have traversed them often, and have never met with any accident; it will, of course, rvot easily be believed ------" " W r e must then employ some strata¬ gem,
gem, that may serve to render the event ' which is to follow less extraordinary,"' cried De Launé. " How ? what stratagem ?" De Launé paused, and looked thought¬ fully, as if meditating some plan : after a few minutes deliberation, he proposed that the Count should pretend to have · been assaulted, as he was travelling along the mountains, by one of a gang of ban¬ ditti, who, he must say, had attempted* his life, and but for the interference of his servants, who were tabe ordered to* follow at some distance, would have ef¬ fected his purpose : and as it was neces¬ sary that the farce of this assault should 1 really be performed, De Launé was to act the part of the robber, and be bound, 4 and brought by the Count's servants' io i G the
the Castle. This, be said, would 4 t^ke from the improbability of Adelaide's be¬ ing seized and carried away, as it would be supposed, by banditti ; for as the pre¬ tended attack upon the Count would pass almost under the eye of his servants, who were to be near enough, on his call¬ ing out to them, to gallop to his assist¬ ance, no suspicion would be entertained as to the reality of the event ; and while in seeming custody at the Castle, he (De Laune) and the Count could meet, and consider what was farther to be done; after which, the latter was to contrive some way of dismissing his prisoner, be¬ fore he was delivered up to justice. The Count observed, that De Laune had been seen at the Castle; it was there¬ fore necessary that he should assume some 5 disguise,
disguise, which would prevent his being known as the person who had lately ap« peared as Adelaide's father. ** Although De Launé had persuaded the Count to consent to the death of his iviece, who, according to their plan, was, in one of her usual rambles amongst the mountains, to be seized and murdered by Be Launé, in a forest about two leagues distance from the Castle, nothing was farther from the intentions and wishes of this villain, than the actual accomplish¬ ment of the horrid deed he had recom-s mended ; he had a scheme, from which he promised himself a much higher ad¬ vantage than he could possibly gain by¬ lter death : this was, to marry Adelaide to his son, young De Launé, who has been better known tø our readers by the flame of Perouse, the same who had pre·» tended
tended to rescue her from the power of the Marquis de Ponteville, and by whom she was afterwards conveyed to a house which had been hired for her reception by De Launé, who had previously taken· all measures preparatory to his projected enterprize : he, too, had placed in that house the woman called Madame St. Clair, whom he had brought from the brothels of Paris—she was, of course, base and profligate; and being clever, was equally versed in all the arts- of in¬ trigue, or rather wickedness. Perouse was one of the ruffians by whom Adelaide was seized and conveyed* to the Castle of Ponteville; 1>е LauneV was the other: they were both of them» masked ; and as they seldom spoke, and then only in feigned voices, Adelaide, in the characters in which they afterwards appeared.,
appeared, did not recognize them as the banditti by whom she had been surprised and carried off to her horrid place of captivity in the Castle of Ponteville. Perouse, or, as we shall now call him, young De Laune, had formerly served the office of valet to a young noblemanr of loose principles and a debauched life, with whom he resided some years—a cir¬ cumstance which may perhap3 account for his manners being less disgustingly vulgar than those of the elder De Latiné. He left his service to join a party of gamblers, and entered afterwards into some swindling transactions with a set of wretches, who rambled 4 about the coun¬ try acquiring money by various rogue¬ ries; and at last, gradually proceeding in his career of vice and guilt, had sub¬ jected
jected himself to various criminal charges^ and the officers of justice had long sought to apprehend him. To avoid these, he entered into a troop of banditti, infest¬ ing the Pyrenees-— De Lamie had not, for some years, scen Sns son, nor did he know where he was, till he accidentally met with him on his way through Gas¬ cony, when he learnt his profession, and the principal place of the rendezvous of the gang, lie described the Yifc he led· in such glowing colours, that he easily persuaded his father fo join the troop. It was after this step that he formed the golden scheme of uniting hh son, now called Perouse, to the wealthy and beauti¬ ful heiress of the house of Angouleme— a scheme which, under all the advantages which, the aligns of the Count and his connexion
connexion wiih the banditti afforded, he imagined would be accomplished almost without difficulty. The place of rendezvous for the ban¬ ditti, was a large, castellated, and now ruined mansion, belonging to the Mar¬ quisate oi Ponteville: it had been long abandoned by the owners to neglect, and the artifices of the robbers effectually prevented the intrusion of all prying vU sitars, by the practice of tricks,, whicb established the belief thai it was haunted by horrible and dangerous spectres. To this place Adelaide was brought, as above described ; not to be murdered, as the Count had agreed, but to be practised upon in a manner likely to persuade her to accept, with ioy and gratitude, the protection of her pretended friend and deliverer; and finally, by the united in¬ fluences
ñuences of terror and apprehension from* the feigned pursuit of the Marquis, to- consent to a marriage with the young' De Laune, the pretended nephew of Ma¬ dame St. Chir, whom she had been taught to consider as a man of fortune and re¬ spectability, and her superior, both as to birth and connexions. Should artifice* and persuasions fail in their effect upon Adelaide, actual force was to have been* employed, to oblige her to become the* wife of De Launö.
«
CIIAFo
CHAP. XIV. ΤϊίΕ Count, as it will be remembered, had 1 for several days previous to the time in which Adelaide had been yielded into the power of these ruffians, betrayed va¬ rious symptoms of an uneasy and distem¬ pered mind': bad as he was, he could not reflect upon the guilty part he had acted to one so innocent and lovely, one, too, so nearly connected with him by the ties of blood, and whose general behaviour' had been so unifor Jy affectionate, and void even of just suspicion, without hor¬ ror
ror and self-reproach : thought was ago«y; und he sought to silence that busy moni¬ tor within, which was continually pictur¬ ing his cruelty and wickedness in the most terrifying colours, by plunging anew into scenes of pleasure and de¬ bauchery : but, even in his* wildest hours of riot and exec-is, the image of the un¬ happy victim of his ambition and avarice- would start up before his maddening fancy, and involve hiin in alî the horrors. qf guilt and shame* . Hk pantes of friends;, as he called the heterogeneous sets of visitors at the* Castlp, were щоге frequent and nume¬ rous than ever ; but they were composed of the raost licentious of both sexes, før persons of honour and respectability re¬ fused to mingle with the motley groups,. Sügtiojra, Violanta Sforza, who. was one of. the-
lhe moït unprincipled and profligate of his female favourites, after repeated visits to the Count, became a constant inmate in the Castle : she presided in the place of the Countess, and was soon publicly recognized as his mistress. This woman, by her wily arts and cun- ïtinsr fascinations, had so insinuated her- -self into the affections of the Count, that «he was enabled to exercise over him an almost boundless dominion. She detested the Countess, because she easily perceived she was considered by her rather as an -object of contempt than jealousy: this was agonizing to her pride, and she ex¬ erted all the blandishments of her beauty, and all the witchery of her charms, to in¬ volve in deeper wretchedness an unhap¬ py, persecuted woman, whose severest misfortunes
misfortunes had originated in one single fault, that of having suffered herself to be persuaded to an alliance with a man every way unworthy of her, and who had ever since treated her with almost every species of cruelty and unkindness. In a mind like that of the Count, un¬ principled, and destitute of every feeling •of humanity, к was easy-to convert in¬ différence into absolute aversion; and he became in this, as in various other in» etances, a mere instrument in the hands of his insidious and haughty mistress. Through the deadly hatred of the Sig¬ nora, the Countess was confined to an apartment in the Castle : nor was this all ; a report was spread in the neigh¬ bourhood, that she was insane. The story of her derangement was managed with sufficient
sufficient art to gain universal credit, •and she was considered and treated as a maniac. Such was the situation of the unhappy Countess, when Theodore's regiment re¬ turned to Fiance, an event which took place almost immediately after the death of the late heir of the house of Montroi, to whose estates he succeeded. Ilis first inquiry, when he reached the borders of Gascony, ^as for his aunt, who, he was told, was in a state of mental derange¬ ment, and was to be seen by no one ex¬ cept her keeper. Theodore, who had anticipated with delight the hour of his return, and who was already, in imagination, locked in -the maternal embrace of his beloved and .honoured relative, who, if not allowed to
to invite him to the Castle, would, he was persuaded, contrive soine means of seeing him unknown to her Lord, was almost frantic at this intelligence. He wrote to the Count, who having pre¬ tended to believe that he had fallen in battle, afľected great surprise on hearing he was yet living. He had requested an interview with his aunt, but all access to her was positively denied ; and he was commanded not to attempt to see her, or even to visit the Castle. The circumstance of Theodore's return was cautiously concealed from every member of the family at the Castle; the Count being apprehensive, if the secret was known, it would in some manner be conveyed to the Countess, who might avail herself of his assistance to escape from
írom her confinement, and thus publish ίο the world the story of her wrongs and her husband's perfidy. Theodore, weaned out and baffied în all his endeavours to obtain an interview with the Countess, and believing her to» be, as she was represented, really insane, after loitering for some time about the C.!&*le, he, with many tears, and imuh heartfelt regret for the fate of bib re- tercel friend, quitted the neighbourhood, and pursued his way in solitary rambllngs amonas the Pyrenees. Chance, or rather perhaps the romantic style of the coun¬ try, and the profound retirement of the reposing* scenes, congenial to the pre¬ sent temper of his feelings, thus saddened by disappointment, directed him to the tillage of Auboigne, where, under fhe vol. πι. к name
•name of St. Clair, he first met with the ■interesting, .the mysterious Adelaide. The arrival of Theodore in France, and a knowledge of the consequence ■which he had acquired as heir of the house of Montroi, were -circumstances little cabida ted to calm the perturbed mind of the Count ; he dreaded him as an enemy, because he had never deserved that he should be his friend, and was in perpetual fear lest the artfully-fabricated tfaleof the Countess's derangement should be discovered to be false, when he well knew that «the chevalier would interpose in her behalf. But, in the unsuspiciois nature of Theodore, he had a security of 'which he was himself quite unconscious; for however circumstances might seem lo favour such a surmise,, the thought never
Tiever once occurred to Theodore, that the Count, or any man, would be base enough to confine, under a false pretext, an amiable and still-lovely woman, whose unoffending manners, and almost un¬ equalled sweetness of disposition, had rendered heran object of affection to all who knew her.
к 2
CHAP.
PYRENEAN BANDITTI.
СНЛР. XV. W T HiLE the Count war» thus brooding over the numerous evils which might befal him in consequence of his own folly and wickedness, he was soon roused to thoughts of the most awful vengeance, by the perfidy of the woman at whose base suggestion he had ventured upon an act of cruelty almost unparalleled, an act for which conscience, when not deadened by the inebriating potion em¬ ployed to lull it to repose, assailed him with its most poignant sting. Amongst
Amongst his most frequent visitors at the Castle, was Count Rovine, a \oung nobleman, who possessed^ beside the usual qualifications of a man of gallantry, a person more than ordinarily elegant, a fine voice, with some skill in music, and a most insinuating address. The Count's health had been forsorne weeks declining, though so gradually as not to create alarm ; and he often rode abroad, usually accompanied by the Sig¬ nora, but sometimes alone. He had set out one morning for Barrege, meaning to try the effect of the waters of that sa¬ lubrious spring, wbich had been recem*» mended to him by 4s physician : he had pot proceeded far, when, finding himself suddenly indisposed, he resolved to re¬ turn home. On arriving at the Castle, he inquired for the Signora, who, he wa* к. S told,,
told, was in her chamber. Thither he was going, when he was stopped by Sig¬ nora Violanta's woman, who informed him her lady could not then be seen, but that she would go and tell her of his Lordship's return. Her. agitation, and the embarrassed tone in which she spoke, led the Count to suspect some mystery in the business, and he rushed forward, in spite of her remonstrances. He entered an anti-rc 7m, and was proceeding to the Sign ora 's chamber, when he stopped, on distin¬ guishing the voice of a imn ; and he soon discovered it was that of Count Rovine, in conversation with the Signora Violanta. Ile li: ened, and caught the following words.—" Is it possible you can conceive you have a rival in my affec¬ tions? Do me not the injustice to be¬ lieve
lleve it, even for a moment. You know my heart—its best feelings are yours: wait but till I obtain possession of the Ansoille me* estates, when we will revel together in every luxury which art can- furnish or wealth procure." " You have never loved," said the other, who was Count Rovine, " if you know not the anguish of protracted hope, and the miseries of suspense. May he not, even now, live to prove that the sweetest hopes may. prove fallacious, and to sadden the present with the dread of future disappointment ?" " It is impossible," rejoined the Sig* nora, fr that he can survive many weeks; and immedintely on his death, a deeci of gift puts me in undisputed possession of what I have long panted to enjoy." *4 "But
"But what do you propose to do with ehe Countess?" inquired Rovine. " Why need you ask?" said the Sig¬ nora—" Are you not already acquainted with my plans?" " How !" cried Rovine—" have you courage to do what í once suggested ?" " Courage! Am í not an Italian?" exclaimed the Signora ; " and think you, after the professions of attachment I have already made, I have so little enterprize in щу nature, so little of the Roman energy in my soul, that I would not, Cæsar-like, wade through seas of blood, rather than abandon any purpose of am¬ bition I had once formed ? Nay, start not; if I have meditated her death, : t is. to be accomplished by the same gradual means—You understand me ?" " Speak
et Spe«Ä low/' said Rovine. " You are a fool, if it needs thaï I say more," cried the Signora-—" Mark you how thin he looks, and what a jaundiced blackness steals round his sunken eye. How now ? You are pale !—Think of what may follow, not of the present, my dear Kovine." <c Ah ! think indeed of what may fol¬ low !" reiterated the Count, in a tone like thunder. He rushed forward—the Signora shrieked; her guilty paramour, urged by his terrors, leaped from the balcony, and escaped. * f Wretch," cried the Count, seizing the Signora 's arm, " think not to escape my vengeance, and the punishment }our crimes deserve ! I convict you, on your own words, of an attempt upon my life, and that, too, of my innocent and znuch- K 5· abused
abused Countes*." With these words, hs rang a bell violently ; and a servant ap¬ pearing, he commanded the astonished attendams ίο convey the Signora thence, and confine her in the north tower, till they should have fürther orders. He then sent for his physician, and informed him he had reason to suspect that he had taken a slow poison, which mioht be the cause of his present illness, and desired that he would immediately supply him with something by way of antidote. The physician felt his pulse ; he looked earnestly at the Count—" Your disor¬ der, my Lord," said he, " has for some time baffled all my skill." He then, with evident marks of apprehension for the fate of his patient, wrote a hasty pre¬ scription: the necessary drug was pro¬ cured, but it was ineffectual for the pur¬ pose
pose for which it was employed ; he lan¬ guished through two or three days, in the interval of which he desired that the Signora might be brought, forth, and examined. She refused to confess that she had ad¬ ministered poison to the Count, or that her words would bear that import : she was nevertheless committed to* close cus¬ tody,, till the event of the Count's illness * should be determined, when the affair was to undergo an examination in a court of justice. The Count's disorder increased daiîv, death seemed to approach with rapid strides: the horror of his feelings while he contemplated this event, surpass all v the powers of description. Dreadful to him was the retrospect of a life marked - with such deeds of guilt, as seemed now- x 6 on
on reflection, to harrow up his soufr hardly dared he to hope for mercy, hardly did he venture to lift an imploring eye to the Author of his existence, or endea¬ vour to deprecate his just vengeance; conscience-struck and appalled, it seemed as though the gates of mercy were now for ever closed against him : his looks, his words, eyery gesture bore testimony to the agony of his feelings. Let us draw a veil over the horrid scene ; suffice it, that, all hopes of recovery at an end, he was solicitous, as far as was in hia power, to make amends to those he had injured: with this view he sent to the Countess, requesting to see her ere he •departed. The summons of a dying, though im- worthy husband, was not to be -cMUed by a being generous, noble, and í orgi v-
îng, like the ill-treated Countess—a sense ©f his condition had obliterated from her heart all former resentments: she flew to his bedside, gazed with pity on a coun¬ tenance now almost stiffened in death, pressed his hand to her lips, and uttered a blessing on the pale conscience-tor¬ tured wretch, who now solicited her par¬ don and compassion. The name of Adelaide faltered on his quivering lip. te She lives !" exclaimed the Countess, who had that day, by a contrivance of Bertha's, received Ade¬ laide's letter. A flush of joy passed over the pallid cheek of the sufferer, as he faintly csaught the sound— she lives ƒ He looked doubtingly and i n treat ingly at the Countess : she repeated her words with energy. As she spoke, he clasped his hands, arid turning his eyes upwards, seemed
seemed for some moments as though en¬ gaged in mental prayer. He then made a sign for ink and paper, and desiring the Countess to sit down, dictated the paper already mentioned ; as also a short deed,, hy which he gave all the property he died possessed of to the Countess. By this act the deed of gift, then irr the possession of the Signora Violanta, was. rendered utterly useless, even should ahe- escape the ignominious punishment due to her crimes. This done, overcome with the fatigue. of his exertion, he remained for several minutes in a state of stupor. The. phy¬ sician, who, during his interview with. the Countess, had retired, now re-en¬ tered the chamber. The Countess was ordered to withdraw. A medicine was administered-—it revived him. He inr quired
quired for his confessor, who was sum¬ moned to attend him, and he continued alone with him for some time. In the course of a few hours, he be¬ trayed symptoms of approaching dissolu¬ tion. A servant was dispatched in haste for the Countess, who, on entering the room, found him already dying. She pressed his hana —it was cold, and almost lifeless, lie looked wistfully in her face,, faintly articulated the name of Theodore, and seemed struggling to unburthen his mind cf something which still obstructed its quiet: the effort to speak was inefïëc- tual—he heaved a deep groan, and soon afterwards expired. His remains were deposited in the cha¬ pel of the Castle : the Countess and her domestics attended them, in solemn pro¬ cession, to the place of interment. This
This duty performed, ih cómplìancè- with the request of her dying Lord, the Countess set off for the Chateau de Montroi, to perform the act of restitu¬ tion of the estates of the house of St. Angouleme to their rightful heir—an act of justice which, she felt, ought not longer to be delayed ; nor was she lesa verged to hasten her journey thither, by an eager wish to behold, and clasp to her maternal bosom, the child of her adop¬ tion, her beloved and long-regret ted Adelaide. On her arrival at the Chateau de Mont« roi, she learnt from the weeping Gcni- frede of the extraordinary event of Ade¬ laide's imprisonment, and the cause of her arrest; and the rest of the circum¬ stances of her situation, as far as the old woman was herself acquainted with them. This
This intelligence seemed like a dreadful dream to the astonished Countess, who, hoping to prevent any future evil that might threaten the injured and lovely heiress of the house of Angouleme, by producing a document of her birth, and appearing as an evidence in her behalf, should circumstances require her pre¬ sence, immediately set off for Aries. On inquiring at the prison, she was informed of the event of the trial, and directed fo the hotel at which Adelaide lodged. The joyful discovery that await¬ ed her in that place, and the scene that followed it, has already been described.
CHAP.
=№
CHAP. XVI. Adélaïde, on discovering that she was indeed the daughter of the Chevalier St. Angouleme, and consequently the niece of the late Count, put on mourning for her deceased uncle. Theodore paid the same respect to his memory; and, with Adelaide, often heaved a sigh of gene¬ rous commiseration for the fate of his cruel but unfortunate relative. Meanwhile the most active measures were employed by the court for the dis¬ covery of the two De Launés. Madame St*
St. Clair's house was searched; and she was seized, and brought to Aries. Ade¬ laide and Jacques du Bois were cited to appear, in order to certify the identity of her person. The circumstance of the horse having been taken from her stable, was sufficient to convict her of having been an accomplice :n the robbery; and she was ordered either to confess, and yield the culprits into the hands, of juş- tice, or surfer the torture. The wretched woman, finding she could not, in anv other wav, extricate herself from the horrors с Γ her situation, than by giving up her accomplices, answered, without reserve, all the questions that were put to her ; and the De Launés, with the rest of the gang, were accord¬ ingly seized at their place of rendezvous, and after a short trial, their guilt being fully
ri' PYRENEAN BANDITTI. fully e\ident, were condemned and exe¬ cuted. The Castle de Ponteville, long distin¬ guished by the appeìhtion of the Haunt¬ ed Castle, was, from thence, known to* Ьгле been the resort of a br.nd : tti, who, by the trick of the spectres above men¬ tiu ned, had ensured to themselves a re¬ treat, where they had long lived undis¬ covered and unmolested. As they gained admission into the Castle by means of a subterranean passage, terminating in the valley below, and not easily disco¬ verable, they were never seen to enter it : this favoured the success of the vari¬ ous artifices employed to establish the belief of its being subjected to superna¬ tural visitations. Lights were placed at midnight in the western side of the build¬ ing, which might be seen at a distance ; and
^and tapers carried by the banditti, were seen flitting, meteor-like, as has already been described, from window to window. Whenever any persons approached the place, to examine into fhe cause of these appearances, some of the gang acted the part of a spectre ; and, wrapt in a bloody sheet, generally prevented any from en¬ tering, by the terror they seldom failed to excite. But if any more daring, or trusting to numbers, did enter, they were lured along, and bewildered among in¬ ii ¡cate passages; and were often struck and wounded by invisible hands; and if they did escape, which was not alwajs the case, they never failed to relate with exaggerations, tho terrors and dangers of the Haunted Castle. Such were the prac¬ tices which had long alarmed, and were now
now made known to the surrounding neighbourhood. Shortly after the trial and execution of the De Launés, Signora Violanta was led to the bar of justice, on a charge of having administered a poison to Count St. Angouleme, which, though given only in small potions, and at different periods, was supposed to be the cause of his death. 'She was acquitted, for want of sufficient evidence to prove the crime, of which she was nevertheless believed to be guilty : but she did not live long to enjoy her fortunate escape from public ignominy and a disgraceful death ; for, riding out one day in a carriage with Count Rovine, her paramour, theborses suddenly took fright, and she was thrown ou't ; and being dashed against a rock, received
received a contusion on the forehead, of which she almost instantly expired. Count Rovine escaped with life, but his leg was fractured near the hip ; and that beautiful person, of which he wavso vain, became, from thenceforth, crippled and deformed. In the lives and fortunes of the per¬ sons of this historv, it is easv to discover how great are 'the miseries that attend those who venture into the paths of vice, and how certain is the punishment that never fails fo overtake them. The Count, from the moment when he conceived the horrible design of sacrificing his niece to obtain her possessions, had never enjoyed the calm comforts of a peaceful hour; and he fell, like many others, a sacrifice to the unrestrained indulgence of an overruling passion. The De Launés pre- 2 sent
sent an awful example of the power of a dcpra\^d principle leading, by imper¬ ceptible ¿cgrecs, to the commission of crimes of the blackest dye. In Afadamc St. CL * we rune an example of the force of habit, and the tendency of cor¬ rupt communication to deaden all the gentler feelings of the hear!, all that hu¬ manizes and ennobles the mind, Signora Violanta presents to our reflection a cha¬ racter nearly of the same stamp, but somewhat altered, from the different cir- ŕumsíances under which they acted. Let us turn from these t.ith the abhor¬ rence they so justly incur, ?nd shew that the good are ever the peculi ι care of Proudence, by describing th » ι ni η ess of those who, haviig pa^ d s t ite¬ ni ity through scenes of in < ri i < α ρ >*- tution, and arriving at * ou .* * io.
rcceixc the rewards which virtue only can desene, or enjoy; let us behold Mont- loi and Adelaide blessed with reciprocal affection, founded on the purest esteem, ennobled by fiiendship, enjoying toge¬ ther all the felicity which an attachment so fen en t and so cle\ated ¡ь calculated to afford. The life of Adelaide, since the death of her father, presents little else than scenes of sorrow and persecution. How auspicious then appeared the present ! how bright on the horizon of her pro¬ spect, arose the star of hope, which, till now, had seemed to set in thick clouds, portentous only of future evils ! The storm which had been gathering over it was now dispersed—all is serene and cloudless. She had heaved a sigh of commiseration and tender regret for the voi. in. i. death
death of her unnatural but repentant uncle; she had even dropped a tear of pity for the fate of the unfortunate De Launés, not that she deemed them wor¬ thy of such a tribute, but because she had known them, and it was by her means, although innocent of such inten¬ tion, that they had been brought to the wheel, to answer, by the commission of a single crime, for a long list of enor¬ mous and atrocious offences. But the tear that gemmed her cheek was soon chased by the smile that glowed over it ; for Montroi, the enraptured, the adoring Montroi, was her companion ; and could Adelaide, in the full possession of his love, be otherwise than happy ?—The Countess, too, her beloved aunt, was now always her companion. Accompanied by her delighted lover, the
the Countess, and Father Athanasa, she left the town of Aries, and repaired to the Chateau de Montroi, About a week after the arrival of the party at the cha^ teau, they received a visit from the Mar¬ quis de Ponteville, whose admiration and esteem for Adelaide had been the cause. of various uneasy sensations, and even those of self-reproach, in thus bringing her to a public trial ; and he sought to lessen the remembrance of the prosecu¬ tion he had instituted, and which was too recent to be as yet forgotten, partly by apologies, but chiefly by availing himself of every opportunity to testify the high respect he felt for her character, and his admiration of the filial piety she had dis¬ played in her conduct towards her sup¬ posed father, in risking her reputation, her liberty, and perhaps her life, for hia ĺ 2 preservation*
preservation. He congratulated Theo¬ dore on having found a woman of such superlative excellence; and resolved to remain at the Castle, to witness the cele¬ bration of the marriage, an event which he desired might not be unnecessarily delayed. From Adelaide he heard of the extra· ordinary circumstance of his having been represented to her as her persecutor, whom she was instructed always care¬ fully to avoid ; and also of the astonish¬ ing appearances she had seen during her imprisonment in the turret at the Castle de Ponteville. With the stratagems that had been employed by the banditti to impose upon the fears and credulity of the public, the Marquis was already ac¬ quainted.
CHAP.
CHAP. XVII. In the course of a few weeks after the death of Count St. Angouleme, Theo¬ dore received at the altar the hand of his beloved Adelaide : Father Athanasa offi¬ ciated at the ceremony, the Countess and the Marquis de Ponteville attending. Immediately after the celebration of the nuptials, a liberal entertainment was given to the neighbouring poor, who were feasted at the chateau in the true baronial style. In the festivity of these scenes, none partook more largely than ĺ 3 the
BANDITTI.' the kind-hearted Genifrede, who, old as she was, joined the dance in an avenue of chesnuts, with her children and grand¬ children, among whom Jacques was most forward to express the exultation of his feelings on the happy occasion of Ade¬ laide's marriage with his young master—· <( Who would have thought," said he, shrugging up his shoulders, and dancing about for joy, " that, when Ma'moiselle and î left Madame's house with our stolen horse, I should ever live to see her the Lady of this chateau ?—Oh la ! oh la ! what odd things come to pass ! and after we had both been put in prison too !— Well, who knows but I may be a Lord myself some time? stranger things me¬ thinks have happened." Adelaide, in her present good fortune, did not overlook the services she had re¬ ceived
ceived from Jacques and his family, all of whom, by her bounty, were placed in what, by them, was deemed affluence : but Genifrede and Jacques earnestly re¬ quested to continue at the chateau, and were retained in the service of their noble master. So many claims had been made by his creditors upon the property of Count St. Angouleme, that, when his affairs were arranged and settled, but little re¬ mained for the Countess. The deficiency was, however," amply supplied by a splen¬ did present from Theodore, whose for¬ tune, with the addition of the estates of the house of Angouleme, on his marriage with its heiress, might now be called im¬ mense. The Countess, in the union of her adopted children, who seemed formed for
for each other's happiness, found every wish of her heart fulfilled ; and so dear to her were both of them, that it was dif¬ ficult to determine which were pre-emi¬ nent in her affections. Father Athanasa, after a visit of several months, returned to his convent, having previously pronounced a blessing upon the happy pair, who placing their felicity upon the surest foundations, those of piety and virtue, felt that every revol¬ ving year brought a fresh accession of happiness; for, constantly engaged in acts of real benevolence, and consider¬ ing such employment as their chief good, every year contributed something to theiv general stock of enjoyment. They dis¬ dained to pass their time in frivolous amusement, or in courting the pleasures, or rather the pains of idleness and folly : 6 their
their affluence was not lavished in the purchase of luxuries, and the mean, un¬ worthy gratifications of the table, or of unnecessary splendour and equipage ; it was employed in the encouragement of industry, and the relief of helpless indi¬ gence: it was used, not to oppress, but to support ; not to mortify, but to con¬ sole. It comforted the afflicted, when languishing under the sufferings of po¬ verty and sickness; it dried the tear of the orphan, it made the widow's heart to sing f or joy. Such were their objects, such their occupations, such their plea¬ sures. May all, who, like Theodore and Adelaide, possess the means of diffusing happ. ness in the possession of wealth, go and do likewise ! FINIS.
Lane, Ddiling, and Co. Leadenhall-sticet.
